TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
The Society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and
scientific undertaking: the study of man’s past in Texas and contiguous areas.
The Bulletin offers an outlet for the publication of serious research on history,
prehistory, and archeological theory. In line with the goals of the Society, it
encourages scientific collection, study, and publication of archeological data.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to the members of the
Society. Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers and do not
necessarily represent the views of the Society or editorial staff.
Officers of the Society 1982-1983
President: Kathleen Gilmore (Dallas)
President-Elect: Roy Dickinson (Wichita Falls)
Secretary-Treasurer: C.K. Chandler (San Antonio)
Bulletin Editor: Robert J. Mallouf (Austin)
Bulletin Editor-Elect: Wayne R. Roberson (Manor)
Newsletter Editor: Anita L. McCulloch
Immediate Past President: William L. Richmond (Austin)
Directors 1982-1983 (in addition to the above): Texas Anderson
(Houston), Jim Couzzourt (Canyon), Norman Flaigg (Austin), Grant Hall
(San Antonio), Wm. L. McClure (Houston), Jane Schweitzer (Midland).
Regional Vice Presidents 1982-1983: Claude Brown (Lubbock), Meeks
Etchieson (Canyon), Doyle S. Granberry (Dallas), James D. Hall (San
Angelo), Sheldon Kindall (Seabrook), Samuel D. McCulloch (Austin),
Jimmy Mitchell (Converse), W.E. (Gene) Rainwater (Fort Worth), Rose
Mary Rogers (Iraan), John H. Stockley, Jr. (Quemado), John Rex Wayland
(Corpus Christi).
Memberships and Publications
Membership in the Society is for the calendar year. Dues (current 1985)
are as follows: Individual (regular), $15.00; Family, $20; Student, $10;
Contributing, $30; Chartered Societies and Institutional, $15; Life, $300. All
members of the Society receive the Bulletin, published annually, and Texas
Archeology, a newsletter issued about four times a year. A monograph series,
Special Publications, also is published by the Society. Back issues of the
Bulletin are available, and price lists can be obtained from the SecretaryTreasurer.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78285.

©

Copyright 1985 by the Texas Archeological Society.

Bulletin of the

TEXAS

HEOLOGICAL
Volume 54/I983

Robert J. Mallouf, Editor
Beth O. Davis and Helen Simons, Assistant Editors
Kerza Prewitt, Editorial Assistant

Cover design by Ed Aiken

PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY AT AUSTIN TEXAS
1985 (for 1983)

This volume of the Bulletin is dedicated to
DR. J. CHARLES KELLEY
a courageous scholar, a gentleman, and a pioneer
in Texas archeology and ethnohistory

Contents
Papers
A Technological Analysis of Lithic Assemblages from
Guadalupe Mountains National Park, Texas
Richard Boisvert
................

1

Texas Archeological Society Field Schools, 1962-1982
Jean A. Richmond, W. L. Richmond,
and John W. Greet
...............

105

Late Caddoan Social Group Identifications and Sociopolitical
Organization in the Upper Cypress Basin and Vicinity,
Northeastern Texas
J. Peter Thurmond
...............

185

From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas Chronology
Elton R. Prewitt
................

201

Dating the Past in Western Trans-Pecos Texas
Michael E. Whalen
...............

239

Prehistoric Settlement and Technological Patterns in Southeast Texas
L. W. Patterson
................

253

An Archeological Review of the Central Texas Coast
Harry J. Sharer and Clell L. Bond
¯ . : ........

271

Archeological Investigations of Seven Prehistoric Sites
along Oso Creek, Nueces County, Texas
D. Gentry Steele and E. R. Mokry, Jr ..........

287

Archeology of the Sheldon Site, Hidalgo County, Texas
Joel L. Shiner
.................

309

Diet and Medicinal Plant Usage of a Late Archaic Population
from Culberson County, Texas
Richard G. Holloway
........ .......

319

Laboratory Procedures for the Care of Prehistoric Ceramic Collections
Elaine R. Hughes
.................

331

Review
Historic Indian Groups of the Choke Canyon Reservoir and
Surrounding Area, Southern Texas, T. N. Campbell and T. J. Campbell
LeRoy Johnson, Jr ................
Authors

...................

345
357

A Technological Analysis of Lithic Assemblages from
Guadalupe Mountains National Park, Texas

Richard Boisvert

ABSTRACT
This report concerns the analysis of lithic artifacts collected during the 1970
Texas Archeological Society Field School from 120 prehistoric sites in Guadalupe
Mountains National Park, Texas. Research is focused upon three topics: the role of
raw material selection in chipped stone tool manufacture, assessment of flaking
behavior on the basis of an attribute analysis of the debitage, and identification of
potential cultural-temporal-ecological significance of the individual chipped stone
tool assemblages. Significant patterns of raw material utilization are noted in the
assemblage at large. The debitage study has revealed that certain stages of chipped
stone tool manufacture can be identified. Analysis of the tool assemblages revealed no
significant cluster of tool forms with the exception of one apparent tool kit that
appears to have temporal and ecological significance. An assessment of the quality of
the research methodologies is also presented.

INTRODUCTION
This report presents the results of an analysis of the lithic assemblage
gathered from more than 100 archeological sites in or adjacent to the
Guadalupe Mountains of Trans-Pecos Texas. Three research problems are
defined and analyzed in detail. They are:
1) What were the raw materials selected to make chipped stone tools, and
were there significant relationships between these materials and the
forms into which they were processed?
2) What were the techniques applied in the manufacture of chipped stone
tools?
3) What were the variations through time and space of these artifacts and
of the assemblages they constituted?
These are interrelated problems and they incorporate the premise that the
form of an implement is determined by (1) the kind of material used, (2) the
techniques applied to fashion it, and (3) the use(s) for which it was intended
and employed.
The data for this study were collected by the Texas Archeological Society
(TAS) during its 1970 field school. Harry Shafer and Dessamae Lorrain
Revised version of a thesis submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree
of Master of Arts at the University of Kentucky.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54 (1985 for 1983)

2

Texas Archeological Society

directed the survey in parts of Hudspeth and Culberson counties, Texas, in
anticipation of the area’s development into a national park. The data on the
ceramics and rock art have been analyzed and published by Phelps (1974) and
Clark (1974), respectively, and a study of the historic sites also has been
undertaken.
The purpose of this study is to increase our knowledge of the culture
history of the area that is now Guadalupe Mountains National Park. The
survey conducted there by the TAS accumulated a collection of artifacts
dominated by lithics, primarily cores, flakes, unifaces, and numerous chipped
stone implement fragments. Although the majority of these artifacts are
nondiagnostic, they furnish a significant data base for the study of lithic
technology.
Another goal is to explore the potential of debitage analysis as an aid to
obtaining insights into prehistoric behavior and to discover what can be
learned from, and what are the limitations of, this kind of data.
The systematic analysis of chipped stone artifacts has been of interest to
archeologists for many years. William H. Holmes, second director of the
Smithsonian Institution, devoted much of his research to the investigation of
prehistoric quarry and workshop sites, first in the Potomac Basin area around
Washington, D.C., and later in other parts of North America (Holmes 1897).
He pioneered the study of lithic technology in North America and laid the
groundwork for later studies. He roughly outlined the stages of reduction and
shaping required for the manufacture of bifacial artifacts. His best-known
contribution was the definition of the intermediate stage of biface manufacture
that is usually termed the preform or blank. He accomplished this by
systematically analyzing the broken bifaces at quarry and workshop sites.
However, in order to arrive at his conclusions, Holmes did not analyze the
flakes removed from the cores and preforms; rather, he inferred the flaking
process from study of both intact and broken bifaces from the sites.
Another benchmark in the study of American lithic technology is the
work of William H. Ellis (1940), who, elaborating on the work of Holmes,
systematically carried out a series of replicative experiments in flint knapping
aimed at defining the techniques of stone tool manufacture. He identified
various techniques of direct and indirect percussion and pressure flaking, and
he commented on their effectiveness for performing various tasks in the
manufacture of chipped stone tools. He described in some detail the chippage
that results from the different fabricating techniques (Ellis 1940:1 !-39). His
work was almost tota!ly based upon replicative experiments, and he made
only peripheral reference to ethnographic analogies, except to mention that
the techniques he found most suitable were not always chosen by the
aborigina! knappers (Ellis 1940:61). Curiously, Ellis never applied his
findings to archeologically derived data bases.
Subsequently many other researchers have taken up this neglected task
and have begun to study not only the products of chipped stone tool
manufacture, but also the by-products. Interpretations of prehistoric lithic
technologies that draw from the experimental base have been initiated and
are typified by the work of M.B. Collins (1974) and Don E. Crabtree (1972).
Both men are experienced knappers, and both have applied their findings to

Boisvert--Guadalupe Mountains

3

the interpretation of the archeological record. It is with this intent that the
debitage analysis component of this report has been undertaken.
This report is a technological analysis of chipped stone artifacts. It is an
attempt to bring together several lines of inquiry in the hope of discovering
the ways in which certain prehistoric peoples made their stone tools. The
study is also an attempt to formulate, utilize, and assess certain methodological
approaches toward the analysis of chipped stone technology, especially as it
relates to assemblages drawn from surface collection surveys.
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
Guadalupe Mountains National Park is in northeastern Trans-Pecos
Texas in parts of Hudspeth and Culberson counties (Figure 1). The park
includes the southernmost part of the Guadalupe Mountains, which extend
southward into Texas from New Mexico, as well as parts of the adjacent
Patterson Hills and surrounding desert and salt flats, covering 31,371 ha
(77,518 acres) and varying in elevation from 1112 meters (3,650 ft.) at the base
of the western escarpment to 2667 meters (8,751 feet) atop Guadalupe Peak
(Figure 2). Geologically the mountains are part of the Permian Reef complex
of Texas and New Mexico and are composed mainly of limestone, dolomite,
and sandstone. The environmental and ecological variations that result from
the extremes in elevation make this area unique. The high reef escarpment,
rising from the scorched and desiccated desert, is penetrated by steep-sided
canyons and supports a perennially green conifer forest.

Car

.......

..... °,, 0,o

T

I sbad O

,,

!

....

Figure 1. Map of part of Texas and New Mexico showing location of Guadalupe
Mountains National Park.

4

Texas Archeological Society
Geology

The present-day nature of the Guadalupe Mountains region is the result
of geologic processes. In the early part of the Permian period, the Delaware
Basin developed in what is now Trans-Pecos Texas and southeastern New
Mexico. On the margin of the basin a series of reefs--the Permian Reef
complex--formed. Parts of this reef have survived essentially intact as the
Glass, Apache, and, most notably, Guadalupe mountains.
The Guadalupe Mountains are a great wedge that protrudes southeastward into Texas from New Mexico, terminating abruptly at the
spectacular promontory E1 Capitan. The mountains make up the northern
half of an eastward-tiIting block of the earth’s crust that measures about 160
km (100 miles) from north to south by 80 km (50 miles) from east to west.
The southeastward facing Reef Escarpment... extends diagonally across the
tilted surface, following an ancient tectonic and stratigraphic axis, along which
the limestones of the Guadalupe Mountains come to an end .... On the west side
of the tilted block, the mountains break off in steep escarpments .... The
escarpments slope toward the Salt Basin, a depression with no outlet to the sea,
whose lower part stands at an altitude above 3,600 feet, or nearly a mile below
the summit of Guadalupe Peak not far away. Extending westward from the
lowest benches of the basin is a great alluvial apron composed of detritus
washed down from the mountains. Rising from the alluvium in places are low
rock ridges, such as the Patterson Hills southwest of E1 Capitan [King 1948:5].

Figure 2. Map of Guadalupe Mountains National Park showing places referred to in
this report.

Boisvert--Guadalupe Mountains

5

The Guadalupe Mountains consist principally of limestone and sandstone
and occasional shale formations. The thick, massive Capitan and Carlsbad
limestones make up more than 90 percent of the Guadalupes and the
Patterson Hills (Figure 2), which adjoin the mountains on the southwest.
Underneath these limestones are other formations ofinterbedded limestones,
sandstones, shales, and quartzites. These are found on the south and east
edges of the Guadalupe Mountains and along the east side of the Patterson
Hills. The few cherts that are found in the southern Guadalupes are in these
rocks, principally on the eastern escarpment in the Manzanita Member of the
Brushy Canyon Formation. The floors of Dog Canyon, West Dog Canyon,
and the desert surrounding the mountains are of alluvium. These alluvial
deposits vary from fine-grained bolson deposits and sand dunes west of the
mountains to slope deposits and gravels on the flanks of the mountains and
on the desert to the east.
A brief survey turned up poor-grade cherts cropping out in the
Manzanita Member of the Brushy Canyon Formation and small nodules
(about 10 cm in diameter) of higher quality cherts in the gravels below the
southeast escarpment. Less than two days were spent in the attempt to locate
sources of chippable stone in the region, so it is likely that further
investigations might result in the discovery of deposits of higher quality
chippable stone that would have been available to the prehistoric residents of
the Guadalupes (see Boisvert 1980: Appendix I for a more detailed discussion
of the geology of the park area).
Climate
The National Park Service describes the climate in the park as variable
and often extreme.
Summertime temperatures may be disagreeably hot at lower elevations while
the highlands and moist canyons are cool by contrast. The western escarpment
produces a reflector-oven effect on the west side lowlands which creates
pleasant conditions during cool winter months. At the same time, the highlands
can be bitterly cold and snowy [National Park Service 1974:34].

The officially recorded extremes of temperature at the 1524-meter (5,000 ft.)
elevation are -200 C. (-60 F.) in January and 350 C. (960 F.) in July. Annual
precipitation in the park is 56 cm (22.23 in.), but most of it falls in the higher
elevations, especially above 2000 meters (7,000 ft.). High winds are common,
especially from late fall to early spring, often reaching 95 to 130 kph (60-80
mph). The record high wind is 180 kph (110 mph) on January 25, 1967
(National Park Service 1974:34-35).
Life Zones
Four life zones are recognized in the park: the Lower Sonoran arid
division of the Lower Austral zone, the Upper Sonoran arid division of the
Upper Austral zone, the Transition zone, and the Canadian zone (Bailey
1928:16-18). The Lower and Upper Sonoran divisions and the Transition
zone each cover about a third of the park, but the Canadian zone covers only a
very small area at the highest elevations (Figure 3). The division between the
Lower and Upper Sonoran zones is usually at the 1400 meter (4,500 ft.)

6

Texas Archeological Society

elevation, with variations resulting from local topography. The Upper
Sonoran zone tends to extend down below 1400 meters (4,500 ft.) on
eastward-facing canyons and slopes, and tends to retreat above 1400 meters
(4,500 ft.) on westward-facing slopes. This difference is the result of the
desiccating effect of the prevailing winds, which blow across the salt flats
toward the mountains. The Upper Sonoran and Transition zones meet at
about 2000 meters (7,000 ft.). The dividing line between the Transition and
Canadian zones can be fixed at about 2600 meters (8,500 ft.), restricting the
Canadian to the top of the highest mountains in the park (Burns 1967:8).
Although there is an overlap in the life forms that inhabit these zones, each
zone has its own floral and faunal assemblages.
Lower Sonoran Life Zone
The Lower Sonoran life zone covers the western and southern parts of
the park, where it is interrupted only by the Patterson Hills (Figure 3). Most
of the area is situated in the sand dune region between the salt flats and the
western escarpment. The southern part of the zone is east of the Patterson
Hills and has somewhat more relief where low sandstone ridges of the Brushy
Canyon and Cherry Canyon formations protrude through the alluvia!
deposits.
A survey of the flora and fauna of the park was made by the TAS field
school in conjunction with the archeological survey. The predominant plants
recorded in the Lower Sonoran zone were creosote bush, mesquite (which
were bearing many beans at the time), prickly pear and cholla cacti, sotol,
agave, lechuguilla, and narrow leaf yuccas. Pincushion, barrel, bear, small
spine, and Englemann’s cacti also were seen, as were althorn, catclaw, grama
grass, and a variety of other grasses and small plants, making up a typical
xerophytic plant community.
The fauna recorded during the survey in the Lower Sonoran zone
included jackrabbits, cottontails, various species of small rodents and lizards,
mockingbird, and quail. In addition, a variety of snakes were recorded:four
kinds of rattlesnakes, garter snakes, hognose snakes, and racers or whipsnakes
(Gehlbach 1964:1-10). Skunks, roadrunners, orioles, cactus woodpeckers,
Texas nighthawks, and white-necked ravens also are found in this area of the
Chihuahuan Desert (Bailey 1928:11-12).
Upper Sonoran Life Zone
The Upper Sonoran zone occupies a broad belt along the western and
southeastern escarpments of the Guadalupes. With few exceptions the zone is
hilly, with steep-sided canyons cutting into the massif. The few level areas that
do exist, between 1400 and 2000 meters (4,500 and 7,000 ft.) are dissected by
numerous and often deep arroyos, which originate in the canyons above. Due
to its higher elevation and proximity to the areas of higher rainfall in the
mountain interior, this zone tends to be more moist than the Lower Sonoran
zone. In addition, many springs are scattered along the front of the reef.
The flora recorded in the Upper Sonoran zone include all of the yuccas
and cacti of the Lower Sonoran zone with the addition of pitaya and

Boisvert--Guadalupe Mountains

7

Lower Sonoran Arid
District of the Upper
~ Austral
Life Zone
~
Transition Zone

Upper Sonoran Arid
~District of the Lower
Austral Life Zone
[-~-]Canadian Life Zone

Figure 3. Map showing life zones in Guadalupe Mountains National Park. (Constructed from data of Bailey 1928.)

mammillaria cacti. Trees are more common in the Upper Sonoran, especially
on the canyon floors and at the springs. Among the trees are bigtooth maple,
five varieties of oak, juniper, spruce, mountain spout mahogany, ponderosa
pine, and, occasionally, pinyon pine, Texas walnut, willow, and ironwood.
Added to the small xerophytic plants and grasses of the Lower Sonoran that
are duplicated here are such plants as Nolina texana, or basket grass.
The fauna supported in the Upper Sonoran zone are varied. Bailey
(1928:16) reports "Texas mountain sheep, grey mule deer, rock squirrel,
Rowles white footed mouse, white throated rat, gray fox, horned lark, raven"
and many other birds. Also in the area are porcupines, jackrabbits, desert
cottontails, kangaroo rats, wood rats, numerous small rodents, and owls
(Lundelius 1979). Burns (1967:10) reports that reptiles occur less frequently
here than in the Lower Sonoran.

8

Texas Archeological Society

Transition Life Zone
The Transition zone occupies the central and north central part of the
park. The region is cut by canyons and is marked by high, rugged mountains,
woods, and parklands, and a wide variety of trees and plants thrive. Surviving
in the Bowl (Figure 2) is a mixed mesophytic Pleistocene relic forest, one of
the unique ecological aspects of the park.
The TAS spent little survey time in the Transition zone, and no records
were made on the flora and fauna, but the area has been described by Bailey.
This zone is strongly marked by the yellow pine, with huge scaly trunks in wide
stretches of beautiful open forest, clear, and grassy underneath. Douglas spruce,
southern white pine, large-leaved maple, New Mexico oak and locust occupy
secondary places in the forest. Extensive open parks or grassy glades appear ....
The characteristic mammals are white-tailed and mule deer, two species of
chipmunks, a small form of the thirteen-lined ground squirrel, the Colorado
wood rat, Guadalupe meadow mouse, fulvous pocket gopher, mountain
cottontail and brown bat [Bailey 1928:18].

The avifauna include Merriam’s wild turkey, band-tailed pigeon, spotted owl,
screech owl, woodpecker, scaled quail, dove, and a variety of smaller birds.
Burns (1967) also reports that the red-tailed hawk and golden eagle are found.
The faunal inventory includes the cottontail, squirrel, badger, fox, bobcat,
coyote, and porcupine.
Canadian Life Zone
The Canadian zone is restricted to the summits of Brush Mountain,
Bartlett Peak, Shumard Peak, and Guadalupe Peak (Figure 3). Bailey
(1928:18) reports that the flora consists of spruce, fir, and aspen forests with
many other Rocky Mountain plant species. Among the rare and endangered
flora of the park is a stand of no more than a hundred quaking aspens on a
hillside with a northeast exposure southeast of Brush Mountain. The stand is
not reproducing and is steadily diminishing in size (National Park Service
1974:90).
The fauna once included the now extinct Merriam elk; mountain lion
and big horn sheep, now very rare, were also present. This small zone is
relatively unimportant today, except as an ecological isolate, but it was once
much more widespread in the southern Guadalupes.

Summary
Environmentally, the Guadalupe Mountains National Park area is
extremely diverse. Confined within its 200 square kilometers (120 square
miles) are four major life zones that include isolated relics of a verdant
Pleistocene forest, permanent flowing streams, and alkali flats. The elevation
ranges between 1100 and 2700 meters (3,650 to 8,750 ft.) within a distance of
11 km (7 miles). Some areas are nearly level and are covered with sand dunes;
others have deep arroyos with precipitous clifflike sides, the products of
furious flash floods. At first glance the region seems barren and devoid of life,
but upon further inspection even the burnt umber landscape of the desert
discloses a wide range of plant and animal life.

Boisvert-- Guadalupe Mountains

9

ARCHEOLOGICAL AND ETHNOHISTORICAL BACKGROUND
Halfa century has passed since publication of the first archeological field
report from the Guadalupe Mountains. Investigations have been conducted
intermittently there since that time, yet the region is by no means well known
or understood. The four cultural-historical stages--Paleo-Indian, Archaic,
Neo-American (also called Late Prehistoric), and Historic--of Suhm,
Krieger, and Jelks (1954) are all recognized in the region. The information
available for each of these stages from the southern Guadalupes is summarized
below.
Paleo-lndian Stage
The Paleo-Indian stage, a late Pleistocene and early post-Pleistocene
hunting and gathering adaptation, has at least two manifestations in North
America, distinguished by both geographical and cultural factors. On one
hand is the big-game-hunting Paleo-eastern tradition, and on the other, the
gathering-oriented Paleo-western tradition (Wormington 1957:21). Paleoeastern materials, generally found east of the Rocky Mountains, are typified by
distinctive, often fluted, lanceolate projectile points. The well-known associations between these points and extinct Pleistocene fauna have been
responsible for the identification of big game hunting as part of the culture
pattern, but a paucity of excavated Paleo-Indian habitation sites (as opposed
to kill sites) has made it difficult to assess the significance of the gathering and
small-game-hunting aspects of Paleo-eastern subsistence. Although the
evidence is meager, there is a consensus among investigators in the field that
plant collecting played a significant role in the Paleo-eastern life-style (Irwin
1971:46).
The Paleo-western tradition is less clearly defined than is the Paleoeastern. The rarity of associations between recognized western Paleo-Indian
projectile points and Pleistocene fauna suggests that big game hunting was
not especially important. Irwin (1971:58) has suggested that some big game
hunting may have taken place early in the Paleo-western tradition, but it gave
way to a more diverse gathering economy.

Archaic Stage
The term Archaic stage was first used by William Ritchie (1932) to
describe adaptations in New York. The definition has been modified to
include a large part of North America, including Texas (Suhm, Krieger, and
Jelks 1954:18). The Archaic, which overlaps the Paleo-Indian, is a generalized
hunting and gathering subsistence pattern that persisted for several millennia.
There is ample evidence in terms of both tool kits and botanical remains that
plant food collecting played a major role in Archaic stage subsistence. Pottery
and indications of agriculture are absent, except during the final part of the
stage, when they appear as either products of internal development or, more
commonly, results of diffusion. In a broad sense, the Archaic stage can be
equated with the Old World Mesolithic in that it exemplifies a broad-based
hunting and gathering post-Pleistocene adaptation.

10

Texas Archeological Society

Neo-American Stage
According to the terminology of Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954), the
next prehistoric stage in Texas is the Neo-American. Subsistence in this stage
includes agriculture, but the presence of the bow and arrow shows that
hunting was still practiced. Ceramic technology is another hallmark of the
Neo-American. Permanent settlements were larger; some even approached
urban levels. However, Krieger reports that the two new traits--ceramics and
agriculture--do not necessarily appear simultaneously; consequently, NeoAmerican is applied to any group that had two of the traits (Suhm, Krieger,
and Jelks 1954:20).

Historic Stage
The Historic stage is defined as beginning when European artifacts are
found associated with native American sites. At the time of contact between
the Spanish and the native populations, groups having both Archaic and
Neo-American lifeways were living in Trans-Pecos Texas. This was a
dynamic period in which groups underwent rapid change and, in some cases,
extinction. Records left by the early Spanish adventurers and chroniclers not
only describe the fate of these people but also provide some information on
their life-styles. For this reason the Historic stage is especially important in
the interpretation of Trans-Pecos archeology.
Cultural-Historical Stages in the Park Area
The Guadalupe Mountains are on the southeastern periphery of the
Rocky Mountains, with the southern Plains, including the Llano Estacado,
on the east, and an arid basin and range system of the American Southwest on
the west. South of the Guadalupes is the extensive Chihuahuan Desert, which
stretches deep into Coahuila and Chihuahua, Mexico. Culturally, the
Guadalupes are in the Northeastern district of the Trans-Pecos region as
defined by Lehmer (1958:110). The other districts are E1 Paso at the western
extreme of Texas, La Junta along the Rio Grande below E1 Paso, and
Southeastern along the lower Pecos River (Figure 4).
This subdivision unfortunately belies the actual interrelationship of the
Trans-Pecos to major culture areas. Lehmer’s E1 Paso and, possibly, La Junta
districts (at least during the first millennium A.D.) should be included in the
Southwest culture area, and his Southeastern district is in the Northeastern
Mexico culture area (Willey 1966:329). Lehmer’s Northeastern district should
be viewed as transitional between the Southwest, Plains, and Northeastern
Mexico culture areas (Figure 4). Indeed the existence of the Trans-Pecos
region is a result of modern investigators’attempts to fit that part of a modern
geopolitical unit into an existing archeological framework. As work in the
area progresses and relations are clearly established with other culture areas
it may become advisable to abandon Trans-Pecos as an archeological
subdivision. However, until that happens, the Trans-Pecos is useful for
identifying a geographical study area,
Following is a review of the cultural-historical stages within the
Northeastern district of the Trans-Pecos of Texas, with emphasis on the
southern Guadalupe Mountains and the relationship between this area and
adjacent regions.

Boisvert-- Guadalupe Mountains

11

\

KEY

D Southwest culture

~
~

A rea belonging to the
Northeastern Mexico
culture area

MEXICO

Area of transitlon between
the Southwest, Northeastern
MeXIco, and Plains culture areas

0
~
I
I

~ Miles
~Kllome#ors

Figure 4. Map showing culture areas in the Trans-Pecos region of Texas. (After
Lehmer 1958.)

Paleo-lndian Sites
The best evidence of Paleo-Indian occupation in the Guadalupe
Mountains is outside the park in Burnet Cave, a dry cave in New Mexico
about 30 km (20 miles) north of the Texas-New Mexico border and 50 km (30
miles) west of Carlsbad. There, in an essentially undisturbed deposit, E.B.
Howard (1932) uncovered, at depths from I to 2.5 meters (3 to 8 ft.) below the
surface, the remains of more than ten extinct animals or animal species that
are no longer found in the region. The faunal inventory consisted of "an
extinct four horned antelope (Tetrameryx), two extinct horses (Equus
fraternus and E. complicatus), extinct bison (Bison alleni), extinct musk-ox
(Bootherium sp), a large extinct camel, extinct California condor, and a
number of other bird bones, including those of the wild turkey" (Howard
1932:15). Howard also found the remains of marmots (Marmotafalviventris),
which have been significant in the interpretation of the Paleo-environment
(Murray 1957; Antevs 1954).
In addition to the faunal material, Howard (1932:13) also found a Clovis
point: "The depth at which our spear-point was found was five feet seven
inches below the surface and about four feet below the level of the Basket
Maker burial. As I mentioned we had to move a large rock which was directly
over the hearth, which contained the point." Howard proposed that the
location of the hearth below the Basketmaker level and the quantity of broken
horse, bison, and camel bones indicated that these animals were hunted by the
makers of the Clovis point. He admitted that the fractured condition of the

12

Texas Archeological Society

bones could be explained by roof fall, but at this time, with the benefit of
hindsight, his suggestion that the animals were hunted by the makers of the
Clovis point seems more likely to be the correct interpretation.
In the early 1950s a sample was taken from Burnet Cave materials for
radiocarbon dating, and a date of 7432+_ 300 years B.P. was obtained
(Wormington 1957:33). However, the composition of the faunal inventory
and the much earlier dates for Clovis material in the Southwest have
prompted Wormington (1957:33) to suggest that this date is too recent.
Within the park there have been several finds of Paleo-Indian projectile
points. Paul and Susanna Katz (1974:54-55) report the base of a probable
Plainview point from a site on a bench on the southeast reef front at the north
end of the Patterson Hills, and the base of a probable Midland point from a
ridge in the northwestern part of the park. They also found a biface fragment,
which they attribute to the Paleo-Indian stage, at a site (41CU31) in Pine
Spring Canyon (Figure 2). These artifacts are the only signs of Paleo-Indian
occupation in the extreme southern part of the Guadalupe Mountains.
Joe Ben Wheat (n.d.) has studied extensive deposits of Paleo-Indian
materials from a multicomponent site in the Van Horn area, 96 km (60 miles)
south of the park. Occupation of the site extends from early Paleo-lndian
through late Paleo-Indian, Archaic, and Neo-American stages; the site covers
about 3 ha (9 acres) and was once probably stratified (Wheat n.d.), although
most of the material is now on the surface. Wheat reports that the inventory of
Folsom materials includes 100 Folsom points, 425 end scrapers, 400 side
scrapers, 52 gravers, 11 burins, 16 notches, and 80 channel flakes. In addition,
San Jon, Plainview, Agate Basin, and possibly Milnesand points have been
recovered. The site is on a chain of late Pleistocene playa lakes and alkali fiats
in a setting that resembles the physiography to the west of the Guadalupes.
All of the Paleo-Indian materials that have been discovered thus far
relate to the Paleo-eastern tradition; no Paleo-western (gathering-oriented)
Paleo-Indian materials have been identified in the southern Guadalupes,
although some may yet be found. Collins (1976) has proposed that such a
gathering-oriented (Paleo-western) terminal Pleistocene adaptation existed
on the lower Pecos River some 482 km (300 miles) to the southeast in
Lehmer’s Southeastern district (Figure 4). He has further proposed that there
was no cultural continuity between the terminal Pleistocene big-gamehunting peoples and the earliest Archaic cultures (Collins 1976:22). This
raises the question that there may be as yet unidentified non-big-gamehunting Paleo-Indian cultures in the Pecos River region and adjacent areas.
A rchaic Sites

The Archaic of northeastern Trans-Pecos Texas is still poorly understood.
Radiocarbon dates are rare because few excavations, especially of stratified
sites, have been carried out since the introduction of the technique.
Consequently, it is difficult to make precise statements about the nature and
chronology of Archaic manifestations in the area. The presence of many
Archaic stage projectile points and other coeval artifacts does suggest that a
wide range of Archaic manifestations may be present.

Boisvert-- Guadalupe Mountains

13

Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954:31) consider the Cochise culture, defined
by Sayles and Antevs ( 194 I), as the ultimate source for the Archaic cultures of
the region. Cochise has considerable antiquity; its earliest phase has
associations with now extinct Pleistocene fauna. Irwin-Williams (1967:454)
reports some radiocarbon dates that range between 9300 and 8300 B.P. for
the Sulphur Springs (earliest) phase. The San Pedro (latest) phase, dates
between 4000 and 2000 B.P. The Cochise culture thus covers an immense span
of time. Sayles and Antevs interpreted the Cochise as having a gatheringoriented subsistence base, with hunting playing only a minor part. Milling
stones dominate the artifact assemblage, especially in the first two stages, with
chipped stone becoming frequent only during the last stage. Most of the
Cochise finds come from Arizona and New Mexico and may not have a direct
application to the Trans-Pecos.
To the southeast, in the Lower Pecos region, is another cluster of sites
that contain evidence of gathering-oriented Archaic cultures. Collins has
synthesized data from 20 components in seven sites that range in time between
14,500 and 5000 B.P. On the basis of his analysis, "the beginnings of a long
Archaic tradition of plant food gathering, fishing, and small game hunting
occur around 9000 years ago" (Collins 1976:22). In the early part of the
Archaic, from 9000 to 5500 B.P., rabbits and rodents were the basic animal
foods; deer were hunted regularly only after 5500 B.P. Direct evidence for
exploitation of plant food was not preserved in most cases, but the artifact
inventory of bifaces, choppers, and grinding stones makes it reasonable to
assume that plant foods were probably quite important.
The subsistence strategy for the early Archaic, and quite possibly for
most of the Archaic, seems to be oriented more toward gathering than
hunting. This is inferred from patterns of the Cochise culture to the west and
the Lower Pecos River culture to the southeast. These patterns may not be
applicable to the southern Guadalupes, but the environmental similarities
and comparable artifact inventories from at least a few sites indicate that the
analogy may in fact be appropriate.
There is a nearly total lack of information on the early Archaic in the
vicinity of the southern Guadalupes, but there is not quite such a void on the
later Archaic. Lehmer (1948) defines the Hueco phase as the precursor of the
Jornada branch of the Mogollon, a Neo-American stage culture. The Hueco
phase was originally described by Sayles (1935) as the Hueco Cave Dweller
phase. The Hueco seems to have had a broader material culture than did the
previous Cochise or Cochise-like culture and may represent some degree of
specialization in subsistence. The Hueco phase has been summarized as
having
... unhafted choppers, leaf blades, drills, flake knives, several kinds of projectile
points, core scrapers and grinding tools, including manos and metates, and
mortars and pestles. Mortar holes are deep and cylindrical with rounded
bottoms and are found in boulders and rock outcrops. Pestles are long and
tapered to the top from a point justabove the grinding surfaces which are flat or
convex along the axis; occasionally wedge-shaped cross sections occur ....
Metates have flat grinding areas or oval bowls. The trough variety is not known
[Lehmer 1948:72].

14

Texas Archeological Society

The atlatl was in use, but apparently not the bow and arrow or ceramics,
except in the very latest adaptations.
There are at least two excavated Hueco phase sites in the southern
Guadalupes. Williams Cave (or Indian Cave) (41CU16), was excavated by
Mary Youngman Ayer in the 1930s under the aegis of E.B. Howard.
Although the site was quite deep, Ayer did not indicate whether it was
stratified or even dug in arbitrary levels. She recovered an unspecified number
of manos--both convex and wedge shaped--fiat metates, scrapers, sotoldigging sticks, shafts and foreshafts (presumably ofatlatl darts), at least three
varieties of sandals, and a wide variety of other basketry and cordage. Under
plant remains she reported "primitive flint corn, ears 1½-3 inches long,
average 12 rows of kernels, mesquite beans, pifion cones, prickly pears, sotol
seeds, bundles of grass (use problematical)" (Ayer 1936:604).
The fauna from the cave consisted of a variety of small rodents, three
species of deer (including white-tailed deer), wapati, pronghorn antelope,
bobcat, cougar, grizzly bear, and gray fox. A yellow-haired porcupine was
noted, and Ayer commented that its natural habitat was in the Transition or
Canadian zone. Extinct faunal remains from the cave included direwolf,
horse, bighorn sheep, and ground sloth. All of the extinct faunal materials
were recovered between 1 and 1.5 meters (4 to 5 feet) below the surface (Ayer
1936:604-617). With the exception of these faunal remains, Ayer does not
furnish provenience for any of the faunal or artifactual materials excavated.
Three burials were excavated from the cave, a basket burial of two
children and an adult, a cradle burial, and a bag burial of an adult. Ayer
reports that the multiple burial was at a depth of 46 cm (18 in.) in the rear of
the cave, and the cradle burial was near the innermost wall; no mention was
made of the location and depth of the third burial. No evidence of occupation
was found more than 1 meter (3 ft.) below the undisturbed surface (Ayer
1936:600-601).
The artifact inventory, nature of the burials, and lack of pottery
corresponded to Sayle’s Hueco Cave Dweller culture (Ayer 1936:604). Since
there were no tabulations of artifact frequencies, faunal materials, or
provenience, it is difficult to assess the significance of the site. Clearly, a
hunting and gathering subsistence is indicated, probably with emphasis on
gathering, since most of the faunal remains represent only one individual per
species. Unfortunately, we have no idea how many milling stones or sotol
digging sticks were recovered; this data might have given us a better
indication of the subsistence emphasis. There is a suggestion of stratigraphic
separation of the cultural materials and the Pleistocene fauna, appearing to
rule out a late Paleo-Indian or early Archaic occupation. No dates have been
suggested for this site, but it is conceivable that some of the organic cultural
materials could be used for radiocarbon analysis.
Pratt Cave is on the northeast edge of the park, on the south side of
McKittrick Canyon. In 1961 a cache of artifacts was discovered in the cave,
and in 1965 excavations were initiated under the direction of Albert
Schroeder (Katz and Katz 1974:7). The results of the archeological investigations have recently been published (Schroeder 1983), and the pollen
analysis (Bryant 1983) and faunal analysis (Lundelius 1979) are available.

Boisvert-- Guadalupe Mountains

15

Two radiocarbon dates of perishables in the cache were: TX-1021--wood
slab, 1420 _+ 60 B.P. (ca. A.D. 530); and TX-1022--basketry, 1840,2-_ 60 B.P.
(ca. A.D. 110) (Valastro et al. 1979:262). These dates indicate that the cache is
probably late Hueco.
In addition to the excavations at Pratt Cave described above, H.P. Mera
investigated 13 sites in the Guadalupes (Mera 1938). Originally he had
planned to work only in caves because they were being destroyed at an
alarming rate by relic collectors, but he decided to include some open
campsites as well. Although his report contains a wealth of information, it
includes neither descriptions of the excavation techniques nor the provenience
of the materials recovered, except by site. It is apparent that many of the sites
yielded artifacts from the Archaic stage, as well as some evidence of NeoAmerican occupations. In High Cave, now known as Higher Sloth Cave
(Katz and Katz 1974:6), Mera excavated a midden ring, and from this and
other excavations in the cave he recovered mescal quids, 46 sandals, a section
of net, and a large hardwood projectile point, but no ceramics (Mera 1938:3435). It is quite possible that this site may date to the Archaic.
Further documentation of Archaic occupations in the southern Guadalupes comes from the recent work of Paul and Suzanna Katz. In their
survey of the park subsequent to the TAS survey, they compared many of
their projectile points to those in a typology established by LeRoy Johnson
(1967). They identified Johnson’s C-, D-, and E-group points among ones
they recovered from lithic and ceramic-and-lithic scatter sites in the
Guadalupes. Johnson’s chronology, which the Katzes tentatively adopted,
dates these projectile points from 6000 B.C. to A.D. 1. The Transitional
period, according to Johnson’s scheme, dates from A.D. 1 to A.D. 800 and is
represented by H- and I-group points. Transitional period sites are also
characterized by brown ware ceramics (presumably Jornada Brown, E1 Paso
Brown, and South-Pecos Brown, all of which are found in the park). The
Texas Tech survey conducted by the Katzes, like the TAS survey, dealt only
with surface collections; therefore, assignment of Archaic stage dates to their
sites is by typological comparison only.
Although Archaic manifestations in the southern Guadalupes have been
studied more thoroughly than have any other stages, our understanding of the
Archaic is still rudimentary. The existence in the mountains of several caves
with Archaic components, as well as many Archaic style points in open sites,
indicates a substantial occupation during the Archaic, but there are no clear
associations of Archaic materials with extinct fauna, leaving an early Archaic
occupation an open question. The single set of radiocarbon dates for the
southern Guadalupes confirms a late Archaic presence. The available floral
and faunal inventories from the dry caves and shelters indicate that gathering
was more important than hunting. It is apparent that there was some variety
of generalized Archaic hunter-gatherer culture in the region. Typologically it
seems to resemble the Hueco phase most closely.
Neo-A merlcan Sites
The Neo-American stage is represented in Trans-Pecos Texas by the
Jornada branch of the Mogollon, defined by Donald H. Lehmer (1948). Since

16

Texas Archeological Society

ceramics are an integral part of the Jornada inventory, it has been possible to
define rather precisely the spatial and temporal limits of the various phases of
the Jornada branch. Lehmer was able to date three phases on the basis of a
series of Jornada ceramics and the association with them of various
previously dated intrusive wares. Below is a brief description of sites in the
Guadalupes and adjacent regions that have Jornada branch materials.
Lehmer believes that the Neo-American stage in the Trans-Pecos
developed out of a blending of the Hueco culture with influences from the
Mogollon pueblos of San Maricial. Since the subsistence pattern already
focused on plant gathering, the shift to plant food production was not a
drastic change. According to Lehmer (1948:73), "the transition from the
earlier gathering economy to a horticultural one was apparently gradual and
without marked disturbing effect on the rest of the pattern." The large
projectile points of the Hueco continued to be used in the early phases of the
Neo-American, especially in the more marginal (i.e., mountainous) areas
(Lehmer 1948:38).
Lehmer (1948) defines the Jornada branch of the Mogollon as having
northern and southern variants, each subdivided into three phases. The
phases of the southern variant (Mesilla, Dona Ana, and E1 Paso), which are
more pertinent to the Guadalupe Mountains, will be discussed here.
Briefly, the Mesilla phase lasted from about A.D. 900 to 1000. Both
rectangular and circular pithouses were used during this time, and ceramics
were introduced into the region, apparently derived from Alma Plain
(Lehmer 1948:74). E1 Paso Brown is the only ceramic type associated with the
Mesilla phase. The subsistence base included some agriculture--probably
maize and squash--but hunting and gathering continued to play a significant
role (Lehmer 1948:75-78).
The Dona Ana phase (A.D. 1000-1200) is a transitional phase between
the Mesilla and E1 Paso phases. The use of pithouses continued, but Pueblostyle houses also appeared. E1 Paso Polychrome was added to the E1 Paso
Brown warealready in use. There was probably no significant change in the
subsistence pattern (Lehmer 1948:78-80).
The E1 Paso phase (A.D. 1200-1400) had the most sophisticated
development of the Jornada branch. The people lived in pueblos that were
often arranged either in simple rows or in squares with interior plazas. Both E1
Paso Brown and E1 Paso Polychrome ceramics continued to be used,
although the brown wares declined in relative frequency. Also at this time,
intrusive potteries, most commonly Chupadero Black on White, became
more frequent than at any other time. By this time agriculture had become
more important, displacing hunting (Lehmer 1948:30-84).
There are several reported Neo-American sites in the Guadalupe
Mountains. Mera (1938) discovered two caves, Goat Cave and Wild Horse
Cave, with Neo-American components. In Goat Cave he found a burial, a
great deal of vegetable matter, wooden projectile points, dart foreshafts, cane
shafts, rabbit sticks (small hardwood sticks presumably used to kill rabbits), a
fragment of rabbit-skin robe, and E1 Paso Polychrome and Chupadero Black
on White pottery. His report does not indicate whether all of the materials
from the cave came from the same archeological component, or whether they

Boisvert-- Guadalupe Mountains

17

came from stratified deposits. At Wild Horse Cave, Mera found bits of
weaving, a scraper, a knife, and 10 potsherds (nine Jornada Brown and a
single sherd of Chupadero Black on White), and a midden circle was close by.
Mera also commented that in all of the caves where he found vegetable
material there were many mescal quids and occasional remains of opuntia
fruits (tunas), but he found no mesqite beans or corn.
Another cave in the park with a Neo-American component is Hermit’s
Cave, excavated by Edwin Ferdon, Jr. (1946). The site had three levels, of
which only the uppermost had ceramics. The pottery consisted of Chupadero
Black on White, Lincoln Black on Red, and Classic Pueblo, or Pueblo III.
Ferdon noted that changes in projectile point types indicated a shift from the
use of atlatls in the lower levels to bows and arrows in the upper level. He did
not find evidence of agriculture (Ferdon 1946:24-28). The ceramics at the site
suggest a date of about A.D. 1350 (Breternitz 1966:72, 82).
About 160 km (100 miles) northeast of the park is the Merchant site, an
open site excavated by the Lea County Archeological Society (LCAS) (Leslie
1965). The site was on the edge of a ridge overlooking a dry lake bed. Fourteen
permanent structures were found there, including two pitrooms and twelve
surface houses. Corely and Leslie report that the walls of the pitrooms were
independent of the pit sides (Lehmer 1948:128). However, Collins suggests
that they were indeed semisubterranean pithouses. The surface structures
were made of caliche stones mortared with clay. An impressive number of
projectile points--some 7,000--were recovered from the site (Leslie 1965:28).
A few were Archaic dart points, but most were small arrow points. More than
7,000 sherds were recovered, 98 percent of which were made locally; the other
2 percent were intrusive decorated wares. On the basis of the intrusive types,
an occupation date of about A.D. 1400 was established (Leslie 1965:29). The
subsistence base seems to have been hunting, as "many large and small animal
and fowl bones appeared in most all trash and refuse" (Leslie 1965:28). No
evidence of agriculture was found, and the investigators suggested that
acorns, which were found in small quantities at the site, were substituted for
maize in the diet.
The E1 Paso Archaeological Society has reported on the excavation of a
single-room house at the Hot Well site (Shultz 1966) in the Hueco Bolson west
of the park. The excavators recovered 388 potsherds from the structure, 95
percent of which were local E1 Paso Polychrome. The identifiable intrusives
from the house were Chupadero Black on White and Lincoln Black on Red.
The overlap of the approximate time spans of the wares (Breternitz 1966:72,
74, 82) suggests an occupation date of about A.D. 1350. Stone artifacts were
rare at this site; they consisted of a minor amount ofchippage, one limestone
chopper or hoe, and a hammerstone or anvil. The Hot Well site was an open
site with little potential for the preservation of perishables, so no vegetable
materials were recovered. No positive evidence for the subsistence base was
found, but cultigens were probably a significant factor in the diet.
The nature of the Neo-American occupation of the southern Guadalupes
is still poorly known. We know little more than that the region was indeed
occupied during that time period. Data on subsistence orientation and
possible cultural affinities to nearby regions are totally lacking.

18

Texas Archeological Society

Historic A ccounts
The brief Historic stage in the Guadalupes was the final episode of
aboriginal occupation. Our knowledge of this era is derived not so much from
the study of historic sites as from the study of historic documents, although
there are few ethnohistoric accounts concerning residents of the southern
Guadalupes (Hammond and Rey 1966). None of the early Spanish expeditions
actually entered the mountains; rather, they passed nearby (Figure 5).
Nowhere in the historic documents is there any report of agriculture in or near
the Guadalupe Mountains. The groups mentioned in the ethnohistories of the
area seemed intent upon hunting and gathering, supplementing their needs
and wants by trade or raiding. It is the raiding that eventually brought about
the final defeat and subjugation of the last Indian residents of the Guadalupes.
At the time of contact with the Spanish, the Trans-Pecos region was an
area of great cultural diversity, with representatives of three different cultural
adaptations existing in rather close proximity. The Cabris Indians, including
the Rayas and Conchos, were representative of the hunter-gatherers who
occupied the northeastern region of Texas. They were organized in fairly
small bands and apparently subsisted on small game and wild plants. Pueblo
influence was manifested in the form of the sedentary villages in the La Junta
area, which were described by the Spaniards as pueblos. These people, such as
the Patarabueye, cultivated large amounts of maize, beans, and squashes.
There were Plains Indians collectively identified as Jumanas or Jumanos.
They too were hunter-gatherers, but they focused on large game--bison, deer,
and antelope. There was certainly contact between these groups, and some
northeastern Mexicans were cultivating a few crops, apparently diffused
south from the Pueblo region. The settled Patarabueyes carried on a lively
intercourse with the Jumanos and obtained from them bison hides and sturdy
Plains bows. In return the Jumanos probably received corn, other foods, and
cotton cloth.
Given the environmental and geographical situation of the Guadalupe
Mountains, it is likely that all three life-sty!es--simple hunter-gatherer,
Plains hunter-gatherer, and sedentary agriculturalist--played roles in the
cultural history of the region.
During the seventeenth century, the Apachean groups became established
in this area and put heavy pressure on the southernmost Pueblo towns.
During this time groups like the Mansos, Sumas, and Jumanos faded from
the records, absorbed or replaced by the Apaches (Schroeder 1974). From
this time until their final subjugation late in the 19th century, Apachean
groups under a variety of names--Siete Rios, Natage, and Mescalero
(Schroeder 1974)--inhabited the mountainous areas between the Pecos River
and the Rio Grande, with the Sacramento and Guadalupe Mountains as their
heartland. They raided the Spanish and Anglos for livestock and captives
during this period. Unfortunately, most accounts of this later period are also
meager, limited to short descriptions of military actions taken against the
Apachean groups. When these groups were expelled in the nineteenth
century, more than I0,000 years of aboriginal occupation in the southern
Guadalupe Mountains was abruptly ended.

Boisvert--Guadalupe Mountains

19

Pueb Io
I nd i ans

NEW MEXI CO
TEXAS

NEW MEXI CO

Figure 5. Map showing relation of routes ofearly Spanish explorers to the Guadalupe
Mountains National Park area. The names and general locations of reported Indian
groups also are shown. (After Hammond and Rey 1966.)

20

Texas Archeological Society

Although ethnohistorical accounts are limited, the documents that are
available do provide information on the life-styles practiced in the area. The
diversity of life-styles observed indicates that the southern Guadalupes were
an area of cultural transition.

THE DATA BASE
Presented here are descriptions of the survey methodology of the TAS,
the kinds of data collected by the survey, and a discussion of the inherent
limitations of the data. Following this are descriptions of the artifact
categories that were established and used for the analysis, with particular
attention to the projectile points, since they constitute the bulk of the
culturally and temporally diagnostic artifacts recovered. The flake forms are
described, and the process used to define and select them is explained.
The archeological survey conducted by the TAS in 1970 gathered data
with the objective of providing solutions to two problems. The first was to
establish a relative chronology and to outline the culture history of the park
area; the second was to ascertain, if possible, the distribution of various
archeological materials with respect to the ecological zones in the park
(Shafer 1971:11). The survey focused on the southern and western parts of the
park. National Park Service officials requested that the survey be initiated
there because they expected these areas to suffer the greatest immediate
impact from development and use of the park (Roger Reich, National Park
Service, personal communication).
The survey was carried out by about 200 members of the TAS consisting
of school children, high school and college students, graduate students in
anthropology, and avocational archeologists. Participants in the survey were
organized into crews, each under the supervision of a crew chief who had had
previous training or experience in archeological field work. The crews
alternated a day in the field with a day in camp, cleaning, sorting, and
cataloging the materials collected on the previous day.
The surveying was done on foot, and about 10 percent (19 sq km, or 12
square miles) of the park was covered. The survey methodology was designed
to ensure recovery of a representative sample of materials from each site
visited.
Collecting techniques allowed for adequate artifact samples from most sites.
Crews were discouraged from wandering about the sites looking only for
projectile points and pottery. Rather, intensive collection from one or more
areas of the site was encouraged with an emphasis on getting a sample of all
kinds of artifacts [Shafer 1971:16].

The survey directors attempted to standardize the collecting techniques
and to a great extent, but not entirely, they were successful. Some site notes
were accompanied by detailed maps of collecting loci, but others gave only
the site locations. For example, one site (41CU31) was surveyed by means of a
controlled surface collection, a deviation from the standard methodology.
Although the crew chiefs occasionally deviated from the prescribed survey
approach in order to adapt to the particular conditions at various sites, the

Boisvert-- Guadalupe Mountains

21

actual collection of samples from the sites was generally adequate and
comparable from site to site. In most cases there is reasonable assurance that a
representative collection of material was taken and the rest left in place for
further work. A total of 146 sites were surveyed, including two historic sites.
(A description of each is included in Boisvert 1980:Appendix 2.)
Before artifacts were analyzed, they were sorted into typological
categories. The organization and construction of a typology must be
appropriate to the purposes for which it is intended. One eminent archeologist
has stated that "the major goal of classification in most present-day
archaeological studies is to use type as a measurement of culture history in
time and space" (Ford 1949:44), but an equally eminent one subscribes to
other views:
The artifact type is here viewed as a group of artifacts exhibiting a consistent
assemblage of attributes whose combined properties give a characteristic
pattern. This implies that, even within a context of quite similar artifacts,
classification into types is a process of discovery of combinations of attributes
favored by the makers of the artifacts, not an arbitrary procedure of the
classifier [ Spaulding 1953:305].

This report encompasses both kinds of problems, i.e., descriptions of
cultural-historical phenomena and the elucidation of behavioral patterns. To
this end the artifact typology is a construct of the author, whose avowed goal
was to create the most meaningful and succinct means of describing and
defining the artifacts found by the TAS survey. Once categorizing was
accomplished, the artifacts were analyzed by various means in order to
provide solutions to the stated problems.
The artifacts were classified primarily on a morphological basis, by
dividing and subdividing them into increasingly smaller and less heterogeneous
groups. The criteria for making these divisions were largely subjective, but in
general follow the conventional typological procedures of American archeology. The objective was to arrive at artifact categories defined by
morphological attributes, without reference to functional qualities. In several
cases, however, functional names were used when morphological attributes
coincided with artifact categories such as drills, projectile points, and
chopping tools, to which functional significance is attached by most
American archeologists. The artifact categories used to describe the survey
collection from the park are (1) ground and pecked stone; (2) chipped stone,
which is subdivided into the basic categories, cores, flakes, unifaces, and
bifaces; and (3) miscellaneous artifacts. Special typological consideration has
been given to the projectile points (26 types) and flakes (29 attribute
combinations or types). (Boisvert 1980:Appendix 2 contains a site-by-site
distribution of materials recovered by the survey.)
Ground and Pecked Stone
Battered Stone
These stones, primarily chert and quartzite, have one or more battered
areas that indicate, from placement and quality, that the battering was not

22

Texas Archeological Society

naturally derived. The stones have functioned as hammerstones, pounders, or
anvils for stoneworking, for plant or pigment processing, or for some other
process.
Flat Manos

Flat manos show evidence on one or both planar surfaces of use as
grinding stones. All complete specimens in the collection can be held and used
with one hand, although a few could have been used with two hands. Their
size and shape are identical to artifacts normally termed manos in the
Southwest.
Convex Mano$

The convex manos are similar to the flat manos, except that the ground
surfaces are distinctively convex.
Metates

Metates are slablike stones that have flat or slightly concave ground
surfaces. They are thinner than manos and have broad grinding areas that
cover most of their surface areas. No complete metates were recovered by the
survey, but large metate fragments were collected. As with the manos, the
term by which they are most commonly recognized in the Southwest has been
adopted for use in this study.
Chipped Stone
A morphous Cores
Amorphous cores are pieces of chippable stone from which flakes have
been removed in seemingly random patterns. They tend to be globular, and
apparently they have not been specifically shaped for use as tools or for the
production of specialized flakes.
Single Platform Cores
Single platform cores are cores with a number of flakes removed from a
single surface or facet. They are prismatic or cone shaped, and at least some
are the sources of blades (flakes with prismatic cross section and parallel
sides, which are at least twice as long as they are wide).
Flakes
Flakes are the by-product of chipped stone tool manufacture and are
collectively termed chippage. Crabtree’s succinct definition is followed in this
report: "Any piece of stone removed from a larger mass by the application of
force--either intentional, accidental or by nature. A portion of isotropic
material having a platform and bulb of force at the proximal end (end at
which the force was applied)" (Crabtree 1972:64). Included in this category
are both fragmentary and complete flakes.
Core Fragments
Core fragments are small, angular pieces of stone similar to flakes, but
whose identifying characteristics, platforms and bulbs of force, are missing.

Boisvert-- Guadalupe Mountains

23

They tend to be larger and, especially, thicker than most flakes, but they are
too small to be used as cores. They are artifacts that show evidence of
modification by man but that cannot be classed as flakes, cores, or
implements. It is probable that they are the remains of shattered cores.
Utilized Flakes
Utilized flakes are flakes modified by use and exhibiting polish, use
retouch, or striations on one or more edges. All artifacts identified as utilized
flakes in this study were examined under a binocular microscope before being
so classified.
Unifaces

Unifaces are flakes or cores that have a planar surface; they have been
modified by the removal of a series of flakes at one or more places along the
edge of one surface only. A wide variety of shapes can result from such
unifacial flaking; some unifaces may have been purposely shaped for specific
uses. Listed below are the types of unifaces, defined on the basis of
morphology.
Type I unifaees are semicircular, with trimming only along the curbed
edges.
Type H unifaees have a semicircular notch on an edge. The notch is
produced by unifacial flaking, and parts of the remaining edge may or may
not be flaked as well. Artifacts of this type have been called spokeshaves.
Type IIIa unifaees are flaked only along the short axis of the parent flake
or core, the worked edge of which is incurvate.
Type IIIb unifaees are flaked only along the short axis of the parent flake
or core, the worked edge of which is straight.
Type IIIe unifaees are flaked only along the short axis of the parent flake
or core, the worked edge of which is excurvate.
Type IVa unifaees are flaked only along the long axis of the parent flake
or core, the worked edge of which is incurvate.
Type IVb unifaees are flaked only along the long axis of the parent flake
or core, the worked edge of which is straight.
Type IVe unifaees are flaked only along the long axis of the parent flake
or core, the worked edge of which is excurvate.
Type V unifaees are artifacts on which the flaking is not restricted to a
particular long or short axis, nor is the shape of the flaked edge readily
classifiable as being straight or curved. They are best described as unshaped
(amorphous) unifaces.
Type VI unifaees are flakes with minute unifacial retouch along one or
more edges. The flake scars are rarely more than 2 mm long. Such flaking
could result from use as an implement (intentional retouch) or from
unintentional retouch prehistorically (ground wear) or during contemporary
times (bag retouch).
Unifaeefragments are the broken parts of any of the unifaces described
above. Their typically small size, in addition to their fragmentary nature,
precludes further classification.

24

Texas Archeological Society

Bifaces
Biface-Uniface Composites
Biface-uniface composite artifacts are any flakes or cores with both
unifacially and bifacially flaked edges.
Bifa ces
Bifaces are flakes or cores that have been flaked along one or more edges
by blows originating from opposing directions, resulting in edges that are
formed by the intersection of two planes or surfaces, both bearing negative
flake scars.
Utihafted Bifaces
Unhafted bifaces are bifaces with no evidence of modification for the
attachment of handles or shafts. This does not necessarily mean that none of
these artifacts were ever hafted, but only that they lack hafting modifications.
Four specimens that very closely resemble recognized projectile point types
are not included in this part of the typology, but are listed with the projectile
points.
Marginal bifaces are flakes with retouch similar to Type VI unifaces,
except that the retouch is bifacial. Marginal bifaces typically have limited
areas of small, irregular bifacial retouch.
Single-edge heavily retouched bifaces are cores or large flakes that have
been flaked by percussion along only one edge, thus producing a single crude
sinuous edge.
Chopping tools are similar to the single-edge heavily retouched bifaces
described above except that they are made exclusively on large pebbles, and
the flaked edges are made by removing broader, somewhat flatter flakes. The
term chopping tools has been adopted because of the similarity between these
artifacts and those Old World artifacts called chopping tools (see Bordes
1968:242, 243).
Ovate bifaces are bifacial implements, oval or slightly rectangular, with
well-rounded corners, biconvex in cross section. The artifacts are flaked all
the way around, generally a result of soft hammer percussion, with some
secondary retouch.
Tabular bifaces (Figure 6), made from naturally tabular material, have
percussion-flaked edges. They are usually shaped like right triangles with the
longest sides usually excurvate and the shorter sides straight and untrimmed.
They are relatively large artifacts, measuring from 76 to 221 mm in length,
from 54 to 116 mm in width, and from 8 to 20 mm in thickness. All of the
specimens collected by the survey were of limestone.
Planoconvex bifaces are defined on the basis of their cross sections,
which, as the name indicates, are planoconvex. Most specimens resemble
Type IIIc and IVc unifaces and may in fact be rejuvenated versions of the
same.
Preforms, or blanks, are unfinished bifacially worked artifacts that have
been subjected to primary trimming and shaping but have not yet received the
final shaping and such finishing touches as modifications for hafting. They

Boisvert--Guadalupe Mountains

5
I
CM

25

10
I

Figure 6. Tabular bifaces.

are usually oval or roughly triangular in outline, with relatively thick cross
sections. Percussion flaking is evident on the artifacts, but pressure flaking is
not.
Snap fragment bifaces are fragments of bifaces for which the specific
cause of breakage could not be determined. All biface fragments except those
with hafting modifications fall into this category; it includes tips, large edge
sections, midsections, and squared or rounded bases.
Transverse fractured bifaces are similar to the snap fragment bifaces
described above, except that the breakage could be related to the manufacturing process. A bulb of percussion, either positive or negative, and radial
shatter lines can be seen originating at one of the bifacial edges and continuing
across the exposed transverse section of the biface. The particular location of
the break is usually associated with other flaking problems such as knots or
collapsed edges from unsuccessful shaping.
Hafted Bifaces
All hafted bifaces except drills are considered projectile points. This
interpretation is made with the realization that some of the artifacts may have
been used as knives, but since many have been found in dry caves or
rockshelters hafted to projectile shafts or foreshafts, in most cases their

26

Texas Archeological Society

1800

IllI
1000

I

,A.D

i000

2000

4000

iI

6000

8000

I0000

g

2

~

"

o

’~

3

-

Figure 7. Time spans of identifiable projectile points.

identification as projectile points is probably accurate. The types of projectile
points recovered by the survey are described below. Comparisons with
previously defined types are made and cultural-temporal affiliations are
indicated when possible (Figure 7). Table 1 shows the distribution of the
points by site; Table 2 shows the range of metric attributes.
Projectile Points
Type 1--Livermore points (Figure 8, A-D); narrow, spikelike blades
with wide shoulders that are more than double the blade width; expanded
stems, and rounded bases that may be as wide as the shoulders; made from
thin flakes that often retain the original curvature of the flake. They conform
well to the type description provided by Suhm and Jelks (1962:279-280),
except that in some cases the bases of the points in the survey collection are
wider.

Boisvert--Guadalupe Mountains

27

’,:z’-

--/.q

t"q
--t"q

28

Texas Archeological Society
Table 2. Metric Attributes of the Projectile Points
(Measurements in Millimeters)
Name

Type

Length

Livermore
Perdiz
Bonham?

I
2
3
4
5
’6
7
8
9
I0
II
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26

39*
23*
20
21-31
23-31
32*
32**
32-40~
35*
50*
31-45"*
42"*~
28"*~
29-31
42-50
42*
27-36
29

Ellis?
Darl?
Shumla

Ensor
Meserve
Talco/Maud
Scallorn
Fresno
Harrell
Toyah
Young
Catan
Tortugas
TOTAL

28
21
19
20
33
39-44
56

Width
12-14
18-15
14-15
13-14
20-21
13-17
24-25
20-27
(29)
35*
17-19
19-26
25-27
15-16
25-38
20.5-23
36*
17
14
15.5
14
15
12
24
29-30
31

Thickness
3.0
3.0
3.0
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.0
5.0
4.0
5.5
5.0
4.0
5.0
7.0
6.0
4.0

Total

-

4.5
4.0
4.0
5.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
7.0
8.0
6.0
6.0
- 9.0
- 6.0
- 6.0
-I0.0
- 7.0
- 5.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
3.0
4.0
3.0
5.0
7.0
I0.0

I0
2
2
2
3
3
3
9
12
4
3
4
3
2
3
4
3

82

*One specimen only.
**Measurement taken on largest of fragmentary specimens.
~Measurement estimated from fragmentary specimen.

Type 2--Perdiz points (Figure 8, E, F); triangular blades with nearly
straight sides; shoulders are straight, making the blade shape very nearly an
equilateral triangle; stems are slightly contracted, and bases are rounded.
Compared to the shoulders, the stems are fairly narrow, about one-third of
the total width.
Type 3--Thin, triangular blades, nearly twice as long as they are wide
(Figure 8, G, H); thin and finely serrated edges; shoulders are barbed
asymmetrically; stems are parallel sided, with slightly rounded bases. These
points resemble Bonham points (Suhm and Jelks 1962:267-268), except that
stems are not as straight sided and straight based as the type specimens.
Type 4--Small points (Figure 9, A, B), somewhat crudely made
compared to other points of similar size in the survey collection; thick relative
to their length and width; triangular blades with asymmetrically barbed
shoulders; expanded stems; excurvate bases.

Boisvert--Guadalupe Mountains

29

Type 5--Triangular blades, as long as they are wide (Figure 9, C-E);
blade edges are excurvate or slightly recurvate; stems are broad, almost as
wide as the shoulders; expanded stems and slightly barbed shoulders formed
by shallow corner notching; basal edges are excurvate; closely resemble Ellis
points (Suhm and Jelks 1962:187-188), but are consistently shorter.
Type 6--Triangular blades, slightly longer than they are wide (Figure 9,
F,G); blade edges are excurvate; shoulders taper down into the stems, which
are relatively broad, over half the width of the point, and have rounded bases.
Type 7--Fairly large (the tips are missing from all specimens) with
slightly asymmetrical shoulders (Figure 10, A-C); parallel-sided stems with
incurvate bases; resemble Darls (Suhm and Jelks 1962:179-180), but, since all
specimens are fragmentary, they are not confidently identified as such.
Type 8--Medium-to-large points with triangular bases nearly as wide as
they are long (Figure 10, D-F); blade edges are straight to slightly excurvate
and may be slightly serrated; shoulders are usually barbed, but in some cases
are rounded yet prominent; stems are expanded and make up about onefourth of total length. They are also broad, nearly three-fourths of the width
at the shoulder; bases are excurvate. Both Type 8 and Type 9, described
below, are identical to some of the Group H points in Johnson’s typology
(1967). Katz and Katz (1974) use Johnson’s typology and illustrate points of
this type that were recovered in the park during their survey for Texas Tech
University.
Type 9--Similar to Type 8 points except that the shoulders are not
usually barbed, although they are quite prominent (Figure 10, G-J); blade
forms are similar, but serrations are less common; stems are expanded and
bases are straight, rather than excurvate.
Type 10--Larger than most other points recovered in the survey (Figure
11, A-D); triangular blades with straight or nearly straight edges; bases have
been notched, producing straight or nearly straight stems, and long barbs are
either curved or straight. Type 10 corresponds to the Shumla as defined by
Suhm and Jelks (1962:247-248). Dibble (1967:35) has subdivided the type on
the basis of the shape of the barbs; at Arenosa Shelter the straight-barbed
Shumla-like points occur earlier in the stratigraphic sequence than do the
curved-barbed Shumlas. Figure 11 C resembles the Shumla-like variety.
Type//--Elongated blades as much as twice the width (Figure 11, E-G);
blade edges are excurvate; shoulders are rounded; stems are rounded and
make up about one-fourth of the total length.
Type 12--One of the largest points in the assemblage (Figure 11, H-K);
stems are long (13 to 17 mm) and stem sides are incurvate with excurvate
bases; shoulders are rounded or slightly barbed; blade edges near the
shoulders are often triangular or nearly parallel. There are no complete
specimens in the collection.
Type 13--Basal fragments only (Figure 12, A-C); blade edges are
serrated and essentially straight where observable; points are broadly side
notched, resulting in moderately barbed or rounded shoulders; stems are
expanded, with rounded corners that are as wide as the maximum width of
the shoulders; bases are slightly incurvate.

30

Texas Archeological Society

5
I

Figure 8. Projectile points: (A-D) Type 1; (E,F) Type 2; (G,H) Type 3.

Boisvert-- Guadalupe Mountains

Figure 9. Projectile points: (A-B) Type 4; (C-E) Type 5; (F, G) Type 6.

31

32

Texas Archeological Society

o

CM
Figure 10. Projectile points: (A-C) Type 7; (D-F) Type 8; (G-J) Type 9.

Boisvert-- Guadalupe Mountains

5
I

I

I

I

CM
Figure 11. Projectile points: (A-D) Type 10; (E-G) Type 11; (H-K) Type 12.

33

34

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 12. Projectile points: (A-C) Type 13; (D,E) Type 14; (F-H) Type 15.

Boisvert-- Guadalupe Mountains

Figure 13. Projectile points: (A-D) Type 16; (E-G) Type 17; (H-J) fragments.

35

36

Texas Archeological Society

!

I

!

I

!

Figure 14. Projectile points: (A) Type 18; (F) Type 19; (E) Type 20; (D) Type 21; (C)
Type 22; (B) Type 23.

Boisvert--Guadalupe Mountains

37

Type 14--Blade outlines are triangular with rather acute tips (Figure 12,
D, E); bases are weakly side notched to straight, with rounded shoulders and
expanded stems; somewhat crudely flaked compared to the rest of the
collection.
Type 15--Large, broad, triangular points (Figure 12, F-H) with
excurvate sides; corners have been removed, forming very short, broad stems
with straight or slightly contracting sides and straight bases. All of the points
in this type are made of quartzite.
Type 16--Ensor points (Figure 13, A-D); lateral notches, shoulder
forms, and blade outlines conform to the type description provided by Suhm
and Jelks 1962:189, 190).
Type 17--Relatively thin, small points (Figure 13, E-G); recurvate blade
outlines may be the result of some reworking; shoulders are straight or
barbed; both stems and bases are straight or slightly excurvate. The points are
made on thin flakes, and the original curvature of the flake is still evident on
some specimens.
Type 18--A single point (Figure 14, A) closely resembling the Meserve
point (Suhm and Jelks 1962; 217,218); rather small (28.7 mm long, 17.1 mm
wide at the base, and as much as 4.7 mm thick at the midsection); serrated
triangular blade; base is broader than the blade at its widest part; sides are
slightly incurvate; base too is incurvate, having been produced by short
flakes--but not fluting flakes--running parallel to the long axis of the point;
point has secondary retouch, which enhances the incurvate nature of the base;
point is ground at the sides and bottom of the base. It is an exceptionally small
example of a Meserve point.
Type 19--A single point (Figure 14, F) that has similarities with both
Maud and Talco (Suhm and Jelks 1962:281,282, 289-293) points; tip of point
is broken and blade outline was almost surely recurvate, making it more like
Talco; length of the broken point is 2 cm, and the estimated length of the
complete point is 3 or 4 mm longer; base is slightly flared and incurvate. Since
this point is fragmentary, it is difficult to assess its similarity to the established
point types; however, it is likely a variant of either the Talco or the Maud type,
both of which have similar temporal and spatial ranges.
Type 20--Small, fairly well-made point (Figure 14, E) closely resembling
the Scallorn point (Suhm and Jelks 1962:285-286); made from a flake; blade
edges are essentially straight and evenly pressure flaked; blade edges extend to
the notches to form slight barbs. The corners of the base have been broken,
making an assessment of the hafting morphology difficult; however, it
appears to have been diagonally notched, producing an expanded stem.
Type 21--Closely resembles the Fresno point (Figure 14, D) (Suhm and
Jelks 1962:273-274); slightly more than 2 cm long and may have measured 1.5
cm in width (exact width cannot be determined because one corner is broken);
point was made from a flake and has a smooth interior surface that has been
modified by a series of small, relatively crude retouch flakes; opposite surface
of point has several small retouch flakes and has evidence that several flakes
were removed from the core prior to the removal of the flake from which the
point was made; base is essentially straight, with a series of small nibbling

38

Texas Archeological Society

flakes along its margin (these flakes could have been produced quite easily by
superficial grinding or rasping with an abrader); point is planoconvex in cross
section.
Type 22--Triangular blade with straight sides, side-notched with a short,
relatively wide, straight stem; base is incurvate and slightly thinned on one
face; point is biconvex in cross section, finely pressure flaked on both
surfaces, and made from a mottled, honey-colored, jasperlike (probably
nonlocal) material (Figure 14, C); assigned to the Harrell type (Suhm and
Jelks 1962:275-276); length is estimated at 2.2 cm, well within the Harrell
range, and the width at the base is 1.5 era; maximum thickness is 0.4 cm.
Type 23--Toyah, the only example of a very late prehistoric, possibly
protohistoric, point (Suhm and Jelks 1962:289-290); small (Figure 14, B),
basically triangular, with excurvate blade edges; point is both side and basal
notched, so the hafting area resembles two constricted lobes protruding from
the blade area; point is biconvex and finely pressure flaked.
Type 24--Conforms to the description of the Young point (Suhm and
Jelks 1962:295-296); essentially triangular with excurvate blade outline and
slightly incurvate base (Figure 15, B); made from a flake of banded cherty
limestone; multifaceted striking platform is plainly visible on one corner of
the point, with a moderate lip overhanging the bulb; nearly half of exterior
part of point is covered by flake scars made prior to removal of the flake from
the core; rest of chipping is light retouch, apparently for shaping point. This
point bears a remarkable resemblance to the specimen pictured in Suhm and
Jelks (1962:Plate 148 H).
Type 25--Two bifaces (Figure 15, C, D) resemble the Catan point (Suhm
and Jelks 1962:175-176), which lacks specific hafting modifications; triangular
(teardrop shaped), with excurvate blade edges and rounded bases.
Type 26--Biface (Figure 15, A) resembling a Tortugas point (Suhm and
Jelks 1962:294-295); triangular bordering on pentagonal, as the lower blade
edges are nearly parallel; one edge roughly excurvate; the other has a slight
angle; one face fairly flat and may retain part of unmodified interior face of a
large flake; opposite side beveled, with many flake scars; made from a very
grainy purple quartzite, which accounts for its rather crude outline and
surface treatment; straight base with no evidence of grinding.
Projectile Point Fragments
As the name implies, these are the pieces of broken projectile points.
Usually some part of the hafting area is identifiable, but in most cases there is
no possibility of identifying the point type (Figure 13, H-J).
Drills

These artifacts are hafted bifaces with slender spikelike blades. In cross
section the blades are either rhomboidal or nearly circular. The bases are
generally broad, occasionally shouldered, and typically resemble straightstemmed or expanding-stemmed projectile points. In some cases they may
have been recycled from broken projectile points. The functional term drill
has been adopted for use in this typology, since these forms are inevitably
identified as drills or perforators in the literature of North American
archeology.

Boisvert--Guadalupe Mountains

Figure 15. Projectile points: (B) Type 24; (C,D) Type 25; (A) Type 26.

39

40

Texas Archeological Society
Miscellaneous Artifacts

Some of the artifacts and items collected by the TAS survey do not fit
into the lithic artifact typology described above; they are presented here, but
they have not been included in the computer-assisted analyses because they
are dubious artifacts (i.e., there is some doubt that they were man made) or
are so unique in shape, function, or occurrence that no meaningful
comparisons could be made. Table 3 shows the distribution of these artifacts,
which are described below.
Parallel-sided Bifaces
Parallel-sided bifaces are essentially pentagonal, relatively long and
.narrow, with essentially parallel sides and biconvex cross sections. This
artifact type and the two directly below are similar in some respects to some
projectile points; however, no satisfactory comparisons could be made
between any of these specimens and point types described in the archeological
literature.
Triangular Rounded-base Bifaces
Triangular rounded-base bifaces are biconvex in cross section, with
excurvate edges, the bases being defined as the shortest of the three edges.
Triangular Straight-base Bifaces
Triangular straight-base bifaces are similar to the rounded-base bifaces,
differing in that the shortest edges are straight rather than rounded or
excurvate.
A morphous Bifaces
Amorphous bifaces constitute a troublesome category. Their crude,
irregular shapes defy description or explanation. Some specimens could be
abandoned cores, aborted bifacial tools, or even finished implements whose
form and function could not be surmised. Rather than adding these artifacts
to one of the existing categories, it was decided to leave them out of the
analysis altogether.
Hematite
Four specimens of hematite were collected in the survey. Two are ground
and gouged and were possibly a source of pigment.
Burins
In the collection are two burins, one from CU19 and one from CU25,
both made on broken bifaces. The working edges of the burins were made by
removing flakes from the broken surfaces parallel to the bifacial edges.
Hailed Scraper
This scraper was probably made from a broken projectile point. The
scraping edge was made by beveling the fracture plane. The hafting area
consists of a straight stem with parallel sides and a slightly excurvate base.

Boisvert-- Guadalupe Mountains

41

t’M

<
o

eq

t¢3

o
0

"r.

c-4

,
-g

L
=

"c~

---

Q)

"u~

~

"-

~a

-~_ t~ ~ 2 ~

1~

~
0

c

~

0
l-

~
*-

_~

(D+-

--~1-

~
.o

U
.--

0
-t-

to

~

~

__1

42

Texas Archeological Society

Beveled Knives

Two bifaces have been identified as alternately beveled knives. The
pointed ends of the bifaces were produced by flaking along one edge of each
side to produce a bevel on each edge. One knife is made from a local gray
quartzite and measures 78 mm long, 29 mm wide, ad 9 mm thick. The other is
made from honey-colored chert and is 64 mm long, 31 mm wide, and 9 mm
thick.
Pick
A long, nearly cylindrical limestone rock in the collection may be a pick.
The removal of several flakes from one end is interpreted as an attempt to
make a working point. However, the flakes were crudely removed and could
also have been fortuitous. The specimen measures 23 cm in length and 5 cm in
diameter.
Large Triangular Biface
This specimenis 6 cm wide at the base, 10 cm long, and approximately 9
mm thick, and is probably a knife. The long edges are excurvate and slightly
asymmetrical; the base is slightly incurvate. The biface is exceptionally well
flaked and is made from local limestone. It is the largest and best-flaked
limestone biface in the collection.
Tabular Limestone Unifaces
These are thin limestone slabs from which series of flakes have been
removed at one or more places on an edge. They may be unifacial versions of
the tabular limestone bifaces also collected on the survey. However, the
unifacial flaking may be fortuitous. These specimens cannot confidently be
identified as artifacts.
Limestone Bar
Another limestone artifact in the collection is from an area designated as
Random Surface #2, in Hudspeth County. The exact location is not specified
in the field notes, but it is presumed to have come from the sand dune area of
the western part of the park, where most of the Hudspeth County sites are
located. It is a narrow, bar-shaped, tabular limestone artifact. It is about 48
cm long, 5.5 cm wide, and 3 cm thick. The corners come to right angles, and
the broadest surface has been ground smooth. It may have functioned as a
kiva bell, for if it were supported by a leather thong and struck with a stick, it
would produce a musical tone. Or, it may be a modern whetstone fashioned
by a contemporary rancher from local material. Since its precise provenience
is not known and there are no known associations of this artifact with
prehistoric materials, theories as to its age and function are speculative.
Engraved Stone
The only work of art recovered by the survey is an engraved limestone
tablet (Figure 16), 7.4 cm long, 3.9 cm wide, 0.9 cm thick, and rectangular in
shape with nearly square corners. A geometric pattern is engraved on one
side. The central part of the design is linear and runs nearly the length of the

Bo&vert--Guadalupe Mountains

43

Figure 16. Engraved tablet.

tablet. It is a centipedelike design consisting of four zigzag parallel lines
between two series of short lines that are perpendicular to the long axis of the
tablet.
Flake Typology
The typology of the artifacts presented above follows the Ford (1949)
approach and is useful as a means of defining cultural and temporal limits.
However, the analysis of chippage and biface fragments necessitates further
subdivision. A description of these two data categories and a discussion of the
manner in which they have been manipulated follows.
Analysis of the flakes necessitated construction of a typology. The
methods employed here have been taken in large part from the work of M.B.
Collins, who has emphasized the isolation of specific attributes of chipping
debris obtained from replicative experiments and the observation of their
combinations and distribution in archeological assemblages (Collins 1974).
The first step in this flake analysis was to separate the chippage from the
rest of the collection while maintaining site-by-site provenience. Pieces of
nonartifactual material and occasional tools or tool fragments also were
culled. Once the chippage was isolated, observations were made on each
flake. All complete flakes and broken flakes that retained at least part of ther
platform ends were subjected to further analysis. Once the culled flake
fragments (i.e., those parts of flakes without platform ends) were counted and
their material types were recorded, they were given no further attention.
These fragments were not included in the complete analysis for three reasons:
(1) although each flake has only one platform (except in the rarest

44

Texas Archeological Society

circumstances), a single flake may consist of many fragments; (2) statistically,
assuming that there are no significant sampling errors, any information
available from the fragments (such as presence or absence of cortex, flake
thickness, and nature of the bulb of percussion) should have been acquired
already from the sample; and (3) the breakage might have occurred under
circumstances totally unrelated to, and possibly long after, the removal of the
flake from the core.
A total of 2,897 flakes from 103 sites (i.e., all sites with flakes) were
analyzed. Frequency of flakes per site ranged between I and 383. An analysis
using research methods similar to those employed in this report (Goodell
1973) has already been conducted on part of the flake assemblage from
Guadalupe Mountains National Park. However, the results of this work
could not be used in this study for both methodological and practical reasons.
Goodell used some different observational criteria, so it would be difficult to
adjust his findings to the ones based on this system. In addition, the flakes
studiedwere remixed with the unanalyzed flakes,creating a curatorial problem
of immense magnitude. It was more efficient and consistent to analyze all of
the flakes by one process. About a third of the analysis was done by an
experienced student and the remainder was done by the writer. To minimize
bias, the collections were not analyzed in a predetermined order, nor were
specific blocks of sites assigned to either analyst. Many collections from the
larger sites consisted of several lots, and each of these lots was treated
separately. Consequently, the skewing due to differences between observers
or changes in judgment of either of the observers over time was minimized.
Table 4 presents five sets of attribute observations made on each flake:
platform, bulb, body, size, and material. Each set is independent--i.e.,
mutually exclusive in its definitional characteristics--from all other sets. The
Appendix has a description of each of the attributes in the categories.
Once the flakes were analyzed and the attributes for each of the
categories were recorded and coded, the data were keypunched. The
keypunched data were then used as the raw data for further analyses, using an
IBM 370-165/II computer.
The analyais of the flake morphology is a modified version of the one
made by M.B. Collins and uses the IFREQ program written by J. Watts
(Collins 1975). IFREQ is a sorting program that allows the investigator to
identify and count the number of flake types (attribute state combinations) in
a sample. Both expanded and abbreviated versions of the program were used,
but these variations did not change the basic operations; rather, they lent
more flexibility of analysis by permitting greater or lesser numbers of
variables to be sorted and counted.
The number of possible combinations of the 46 attributes observed
formed a five-dimensional matrix of 21,600 cells, each one constituting a
unique combination of attribute states. Of this number, 760 were actually
represented in the collection in frequencies ranging between 1 and 115. The
extremely low frequency of most combinations forced a reduction in the
number of attribates to be analyzed. Therefore, the size and material
categories were deleted from the clustering analysis of the flake morphology,
and the resulting abbreviated set of attributes, which emphasizes flake shape,

Boisvert-- Guadalupe Mountains

--

t’M

cO

¯

~

lr~

¯

0
q-

tO

r~

6

0

I
0

o

e

"-

+

+"

"-

L.

g

o

=~

6

,--

_~

~-

¯

-o 0
OZ
C.)

--

c-,I

~

~

LCh

°_

=

<

8
X
¯

¯

0

~

"o

b~.-=-8g

~ =.-=-~-~

~ x ~.-=-8s

L

¯
09

¯
(/3

x
t~

n

0
.
"o 0
OZ
0

--

0
tD

t ~.-=-8s
0
Z

Oq

+-

"o

g

X
Lid

0
Z

Z
-b-

4--

-i-

.+-

¯ -- 0

"-- ¯

"-- ¯

L ~ O~X

8

~

C

C

U~

u~X

~

o

~

4--

tax

--’-- ¯
--

u~

~X

tO

.,=

o

.

~)

45

46

Texas Archeological Society

was used. The platform, bulb, and body attributes totaled 34 and rendered a
three-dimensional matrix of 720 possible combinations of attributes. Of
these, 147 were present in the collection in frequencies varying from 1 to 254.
This number of flake forms was also considered too great for the purposes of
cluster analyses, not only because it made it difficult to establish a cognitive
framework in which to conceptualize the data, but also because it exceeded
the capacity of the clustering program and the computer. Furthermore, a
large number of attribute combinations occurred only at very low frequencies,
suggesting that they were aberrant flakes and their interpretation would
coritribute little to a study aimed at eliciting overall patterns of knapping
behavior.
Eighty-seven of the recorded combinations occurred only once or twice
in the entire collection; that is, 57 percent of the variation in flake types
occurred in slightly less than 3 percent of the actual flakes.
For more meaningful analysis of the flake morphology, a smaller
number of attribute combinations had to be selected, so a companion
program to IFREQ, IFREQ 3 PCT, was written. This program expresses the
occurrence of flakes by attribute combinations in terms of their relative
percentages in the sample, as well as in terms of their raw frequencies (Table
5). The final number of flake forms was determined by selecting those
attribute combinations that accounted for at least 0.76 percent of the flakes in
the collection. Using this program, 29 flake types were established, totaling
2,194 flakes; that is, slightly less than 20 percent of the morphological
variability accounted for over 75 percent of the flakes.

STONE TYPE ANALYSIS
The production of stone tools begins with the selection and acquisition of
suitable materials. Consequently, a comprehensive analysis of lithic technology takes into account the raw materials from which the artifacts have
been fashioned. This section investigates the relation between the raw
materials used and the forms into which these materials were processed by the
prehistoric residents of the southern Guadalupes.
Six raw material categories have been identified in the survey collection.
They are greenstone, quartzite, cherty limestone, limestone, chert, and
miscellaneous materials; a description of each is presented below. (The
geology of the park, with special emphasis on chert, is described in Boisvert
1980:Appendix 1.)
Greenstone is conspicuous but not abundant in the collection. It is bright
apple green, although it may weather to a bluish slate gray. It is found in
several geologic strata in the Guadalupe Mountains, primarily in the
Manzanita Limestone and other members of the Cherry Canyon Formation.
It is volcanic ash that has settled into still waters, forming bentonite, a clayey
rock that is normally quite friable and has the ability to absorb water, swelling
when it is wet. In the Guadalupes this rock has been metamorphosed into
greenstone, a chertlike rock with conchoidal fracture. Its structure is platy to
blocky, and it occurs in chunks varying from walnut-sized pebbles to blocks
of several cubic meters. It erodes out of the southeast escarpment from the
Pine Springs area northeastward toward the Texas-New Mexico border
(King 1948:37), and in all likelihood it occurs in other areas of the mountains.

Boisvert-- Guadalupe Mountains
Table 5. Flake Forms Selected for Cluster Analysis,
with Codes, Frequencies, and Percentages
Code

Platform

Bulb

Body

Freq.

Percent

I

14

St cortex

normal

noncortex, medium

29

1.00

I

15

St cortex

normal

noncortex, thick

22

0.76

4

7

St single

normal

sec cortex, thin

28

0.97

4

13

St single

normal

noncortex, thin

45

1.55

4

14

St single

normal

noncortex, medium

254

8.76

4

15

St single

normal

noncortex, thick

200

6.89

42 14

St single

noncortex, medium

36

1.24

4215

St single

noncortex

26

0.90

436

St single

exuberant
exuberant
flat

sec cortex

medium

26

0.90

43

flat

sec cortex

thick

33

1.14

thick

7

St single

4313

St single

flat

noncortex

thin

59

2.03

4314

St single

flat

noncortex

medium

277

9.55

4315

St single

flat

noncortex

thick

139

4.79

5114

Seq single

normal

noncortex

thick

23

O. 79

5314

Seq single

flat

noncortex

thick

26

0.90

71 14

St double

normal

noncortex

medium

45

I

7115

St double

normal

noncortex

thick

22

0.76

7314

.55

St double

flat

noncortex

medium

37

1.28

I0 1 13

St multiple

normal

noncortex

thin

45

1.55

I0 1 14

St multiple

normal

noncortex

medium

143

4.93

I0 1 15

St multiple

normal

noncortex

thick

53

1.83

103 6

St multiple

flat

sec cortex

24

0.83

103 13

St multiple

flat

noncortex

thin

III

3.83

I0 3 14

St multiple

flat

noncortex

medium

228

7.86

I0 3 15

medium

St multiple

flat

noncortex

thick

57

1.96

13 I 13

Shattered

normal

noncortex

thin

51

1.76

13 1 14

Shattered

normal

noncortex

medium

91

3.14

14 1 14

Broken

normal

noncortex

medium

39

1.34

14 1 15

Broken

normal

noncortex

thick

24

0.83

St=Straight

Seq=Sequent

sec=secondary

47

48

Texas Archeological Society

Quartzite is extremely common in the Guadalupe Mountains and
constitutes major outcrops in the Cherry Canyon and Bell Canyon formations.
It varies in color from light tan through buffto reddish brown and sometimes
has a greenish tinge. The texture varies from coarse and somewhat friable to
sugary and dense to fine grained and quite dense. It is found in the park along
the southern periphery of the mountains from below Shumla Peak to the
northeast corner of the park (Figure 2). It constitutes the bulk of the Delaware
Mountains and the southeast parts of the Patterson Hills (King 1948:Plate 3).
Large exposures of quartzite can be seen, and great quantities of boulders,
cobbles, and fragments litter the ground in many areas. Quartzite is second
only to limestone in abundance in the region.
Cherty limestone was isolated as a separate material after several
frustrating attempts to identify it as chert or as limestone. Some specimens
made from cherty limestone have very glossy surfaces, are extremely fine
grained, and are comparable to what is usually called chert by archeologists
and lithic technologists. However, the material grades into a much duller
substance that is coarse grained and more closely resembles limestone. It is
generally dark, ranging from brownish black to light brown, often with
light-and dark-brown banding. Such grading of quality from one end of the
spectrum to the other can be found in several samples. Instead of arbitrarily
dividing the material into chert and limestone, it was deemed more
appropriate to recognize it as having qualities of both and to put it into a
separate category. The geologic distribution of the cherty limestone is not
precisely known at this time; according to regional experts, it is common in
the area from E1 Paso to Van Horn and into New Mexico (John Hedrick,
personal communication), and an outcrop may exist within the park.
Limestone is ubiquitous in the Guadalupe Mountains. Indeed, in most
areas it is the Guadalupe Mountains. It ranges from white, platy, friable stone
in the Capitan Formation to a dark, hard, fine-grained material in the Bone
Spring Formation. With the exception of the mainly quartzite south and
southeast reef escarpments, as noted above, virtually all of the exposed rock
in the Guadalupes is limestone. Boulders, cobbles, pebbles, and fragments of
every size litter the canyons, arroyos, and flats. Its quality is highly variable,
but significant supplies of material suitable for flaking are available.
Limestone is second only to chert in the amount of chippage recovered.
Chert is the material most frequently used by the aboriginal knappers in
the southern Guadalupes. It is a very fine-grained cryptocrystalline material,
composed for the most part of silica and variable amounts of impurities. Its
most notable and desirable quality, from the standpoint of the knapper, is its
conchoidal fracture. An attempt was made to identify the varieties of chert
used on the basis of macroscopic sorting, but the task proved to be too
complex and subject to error, since there were no available comparative
collections of cherts from the park or the southern Guadalupes. For the
purpose of analysis, all varieties of chert were treated alike, and no attempt
was made to distinguish between them.
The miscellaneous category comprises a group of rocks that do not
belong in any of the other groups. Some of these materials are specific
nonchert stones such as obsidian. Others are cryptocrystalline silicates such

Boisvert--Guadalupe Mountains

49

as chalcedony and jasper. They are of extremely high quality and in thin
sections are translucent to transparent. The high quality, low frequency (26 in
the entire collection), and lack of similarity to most of the cherts in the
collection suggests that they were obtained outside the park region, as
certainly must be true for the obsidian. The chalcedony and jasper artifacts
are the smallest of the six groups and account for less than 1 percent of the
sample. Included in the miscellaneous category is a white quartzite material
that differs significantly in color and texture from the quartzites known to
exist in the park region. This quartzite is found only in the metate artifact
category.
Artifact Classes and Raw Material Type
Methodology
In order to provide explanations for the selection of particular kinds of
stone for the various kinds of artifacts, a methodology was developed that
included a statistical test to determine the degree of nonrandom distribution
of material types in the artifact classes. First, the frequency of all the artifacts
was tabulated by material type and artifact class. Then a Chi Square
Goodness of Fit Test was run on each artifact category; this was accomplished
by using a WATFIV program written for testing these data.
Data
The data used for the analysis consist of a distribution matrix of the
artifact classes and material types. The artifact classes correspond to the
typological categories defined above in the section describing the data base,
with the exception of two categories, worked hematite and miscellaneous
artifacts. Worked hematite was deleted because the artifact was defined in
terms of its material type, and miscellaneous artifacts were excluded because
the category is not a type of artifact.
A nalysis
The tabulated data were keypunched and processed with the Chi Square
program. The initial test was based on an analysis of the distribution of all six
material types. A preliminary inspection of the output suggested that the very
low frequency of greenstone and miscellaneous stone had caused an upward
skew in the significance values generated by the test. Consequently, an
additional test was run that eliminated the scarce material types from
consideration and compared only quartzite, cherty limestone, limestone, and
chert.
Results and Interpretation
Table 6 presents the significance values generated by both the Chi Square
tests and the distributional data. As expected, there were some changes in the
probabilities of nonrandom distribution when greenstone and miscellaneous
stone were removed from consideration. In two cases, Type Ilia and Type IVa
unifaces, the change in probability that the material type selection was
nonrandom changed from less than an .01 to a greater than .05 confidence
level. In four other cases--Type I and Type Illb unifaces, marginal bifaces,

50

Texas Archeological Society

Table 6. Artifact Categories* by
Stone Type Chi-Square Goodness of Fit Tests
Probabi I ity of
Random
Distribution

Stone Type

Artifact Category

o

I Battered stone
2 Amorphous cores
3 Single platform cores
4 Chippage
5 Utilized flakes
6 Unifaces Type I
7 Unifaces Type II
8 Unifaces Type llla
9 Unifaces Type lllb
i0 Unifaces Type lllc
II Unifaces Type IVa
12 Unifaces Type IVb
13 Unifaces Type IVc
14 Unifaces Type V
15 Unifaces Type VI
16 Uniface fragments
17 Biface-uniface composites
18 Marginal bifaces
19 Single-edge heavily retouched bifaces
2o Chopping tools
21 Ovate bifaces
22 Tabular bifaces
23 Parallel-sided bifaces
24 Triangular biface, round base
25 Triangular bifacep straight base
26 Planoconvex biface
27 Preforms
28 Drills
29 Biface fragments, snap fractures
3o Biface fragments~ transverse
31 Manos, flat
32 Manos, convex
33 Metate fragments
34 Core fragments
36-52 Projectile points (all types)
53 Projectile point fragments
54 Miscellaneous projectile points

~

E

~

LS

o=m

~

23
3
15
I
4
94 5 280
9 49 67 156
7
29
4
7
I0
I
83 163 404 719 1501 26 2986
49
I0
I
4
I 33
13
I
3
3 6
I
6
2
3
9
27
4
II
3
14
4
2
2
6
2
3
5
46
14
14
13
5
52
14
22 3
3
2
8
38
8
20
2
3
5
44
48
144
2 24 26
64
46
168
1 24 33
68
4
61
3
II
2
2
2
5
12
6
5
I
2
5
5
I
I0
7
27
27
3
3
3
3
2
I
14
4
3
5 I
60 4 155
52
3
3 44
4
6
2
25 182 6 239
8 18
40
1
68
5 16
5
7
25
18
5
18
13
I
9
20
I0
I
20
21
27
I
60
23
23
15
15

All
Types

Four
Types

X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X X
X
X
X
X
X X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
X

X

*Artifact Category 35 was not included, since it consisted of hematite lumps.

Boisvert-- Guadalupe Mountains

51

and drills--there was a similar change in probability that the material type
selection was nonrandom, from an .01 to a less than .05 confidence level.
Interpretations of the test results show that although greenstone of
chippable quality occurs within the park area and is conspicuous where it is
found, it was never extensively utilized. Isolated cores and flakes constitute
the bulk of the greenstone artifacts, with only seven finished tools--all
unifaces--and four unfinished tools--three preforms and a biface broken
during manufacture. The greatest amount of greenstone occurs at site CH31,
adjacent to an outcrop of the material, where 39 flakes, a core, and three
unifaces were collected. The use of greenstone may represent opportunistic
exploitation of a convenient but inferior resource.
In contrast to greenstone, quartzite was locally available and was
frequently used by the prehistoric residents of the southern Guadalupes.
Cores are common in the quartzite assemblage, and in numbers rank second
only to flakes. However, the ratio of flakes to cores--slightly less than three to
one--is the lowest for any material type. This may represent a sampling bias
in the data-collecting process. Since quartzite is native to the region and
abundant in some areas, many flakes, particularly the smaller ones, could be
easily overlooked or dismissed by the field collectors as natural spalls,
especially since flake features such as bulbs and ripple marks are almost
indiscernible in quartzite.
Four artifact categories have statistically significant numbers of quartzite
artifacts, consisting of utilized flakes, both varieties of manos, and metates.
The utilized flakes are mainly large to very large, and 20 of the 33 can be
described as blades. They are long, relatively thin, often narrow flakes, with
relatively straight edges and prismoidal cross sections. Although blades are
found at only one site--CU 19--there is no indication that prismoidal cores
were being systematically fabricated and maintained for the production of
blades. Examination of these artifacts indicates that the knappers were
exploiting the natural shape of the quartzite, which occurs in blocks, making
it a simple matter for the knappers to produce big, long flakes by following the
natural ridges on the stone. The flakes were sequentially removed, thus
producing blades. Areas of cortex on the flakes are common, and some have
cortex covering not only their exterior sides but also their platforms and
terminal ends. A blade-core technology is not evident in the Guadalupes,
since the only tools made on blades were utilized flakes. There were no
projectile points, unifaces, or burins made on blades.
Microscopic examination of the utilized flakes indicated that they were
probably used for cutting purposes, since the edges are rounded and the
polish extends up both sides. Some flakes have massive amounts of polish,
which could have occurred only as a result of long or hard use.
Quartzite was also the favored material for grinding stones. Flat and
convex manos and metates are mainly of quartzite. In three cases an
apparently nonlocal quartzite was used for the grinding slab, and because the
material--a rather coarse white quartzite--bears no resemblance to the
known local varieties, it is tabulated under the miscellaneous heading.
Limestone was also used, but not as extensively as quartzite.

52

Texas Archeological Society

Quartzite also would have been an ideal choice for hammerstones, but
the battered stone artifact category has only four possible examples. In all
likelihood, quartzite pebbles were used as hammerstones; their abundance in
the area suggests that they may not have been retained and used repeatedly.
Furthermore, it would be extremely difficult to discriminate between
quartzite hammerstones and natural pebbles in the field, especially if the
hammerstone was not used extensively.
Cherty limestone is common in the collection, constituting nearly 13
percent of the chippage and 19 percent of the other artifacts. However, it is the
predominant material in only one artifact category--Type I unifaces. It
occurs in relatively high proportions in Types V and VI unifaces as well as in
preforms and both varieties of biface fragments. With one significant
exception--projectile points--cherty limestone generally parallels the distribution of chert artifacts. Only two points, a Type 7 point recovered from a
random surface and a Type 24 (Young) point, were made from cherty
limestone. The relatively large numbers of artifacts in the preform category is
perplexing, in view of the fact that so few finished bifaces of cherty limestone
are reported. It is possible that some of the cherty limestone preforms may be
finished implements, ones for which no secondary trimming was intended,
but no satisfactory explanation for this situation can be found.
Limestone artifacts are common on sites in the Guadalupes, reflecting
the abundance of the material in the area. Although second to chert in most
artifact categories, it is predominant in several. It accounts for 41 percent of
the amorphous cores-- 16 percent more than chert. This figure may be too low
considering that many limestone cores and flakes may not have been collected
due to their resemblance to natural pebbles and spalls. Many pebbles and
spalls were collected as artifacts during the survey, a fact that attests to the
difficulty in discriminating between artifacts and nonartifacts in the field.
Indeed, this is often a difficult task even under more favorable laboratory
conditions.
Limestone and chert are the dominant material type for Type V and VI
unifaces. These are the most generalized forms of unifaces, and little cultural
or temporal significance can be attached to them. Examination of the
collection shows that virtually any material was used for these artifacts, and
that limestone was used nearly as often as chert.
Limestone is significant in the manufacture of three other kinds of
artifacts. Two, the chopping tool and the ovate bifaces made from rather large
pebbles, are quite similar. Limestone pebbles occur in sizes and shapes
convenient for the manufacture of these implements; the only other material
that consistently has these characteristics is quartzite. The preference for
limestone over quartzite might be explained by the overall suitability of
limestone to flaking. Limestone is softer and lighter than quartzite; consequently it would be easier to flake with the quartzite hammerstone.
Replicative experiments using materials native to the Guadalupes might
confirm this hypothesis or suggest other avenues of explanation. At this
point, however, it is not possible to explain further the preference for
limestone over quartzite for the production of the large bifaces. The third

Boisvert-- Guadalupe Mountains

53

artifact category in which the use of limestone is significant is tabular bifaces.
The use of limestone to produce the tabular bifaces is environmentally
determined, since limestone is the only material available that naturally
occurs in thin sheets. Manufacture of implements from this material is simple
and requires only an appropriate source and virtually any kind of percussor.
The stone knappers of the Guadalupes exploited the tabular limestone to
produce tools with exceptionally long (some as much as 20.8 cm) bifacial
edges.
Chert was the most widely used chippable stone in the Guadalupe
M ountains. It was the preferred material for four varieties of unifaces--Types
IVb, IVc, V, and VI--and for the production of small bifaces, especially
projectile points. The preference for chert in the production of thinned bifaces
can be viewed as an interplay between the inherent qualities of the material
and the desired attributes of the implement. Very hard, sharp edges can be
fashioned in chert, and these are qualities desirable in tools designed for
piercing, cutting, and scraping. The cryptocrystalline quality of chert is
eminently suited to the removal of the thin, flat flakes that are required in the
final stages of reduction and shaping of most bifaces. Such final stages of
reduction produce relatively large quantities of flakes, especially in proportion
to the mass of material involved; this would explain the high number of chert
flakes compared to flakes of other materials.
In general, the use of stone for tool manufacture in the Guadalupes can
be described as follows. Very specialized chipped stone tools, such as
projectile points, were made almost exclusively from chert. Grinding tools
were made mainly from quartzite, but occasionally from limestone. Tools
with large mass or cutting or scraping edges were commonly made from
limestone. Most unifaces were made from chert or limestone, although all
kinds of materials were used. Flake knives were usually made from quartzite
or, to a lesser degree, chert. The miscellaneous category is made up of
high-quality silicates such as obsidian, jasper, and chalcedony. These
materials are presumably exotic in origin, and their usage tends to parallel
that of chert.
Flake Size and Material Type
This section deals with the interrelations between the material types and
the chippage. It has been implicitly assumed that the use of different kinds of
raw material in the manufacture of different kinds of artifacts will result in
patterned distributions of different flake sizes. The validity of the assumption
was tested by flake-size analysis.
The Data
The data selected for the study of this problem were based on all of the
flakes in the survey collection, and derived through observations of flake size
and material type, which were encoded together with platform, bulb, and
body states. Frequencies for each combination of flake size and material type
were obtained.

54

Texas Archeological Society

Methodology
The method of analysis entailed arranging the frequency data in matrix
form and comparing the relative frequencies of the sizes and raw material
types of the flakes. The objective of this inductive approach was to describe
and quantify the patterns of flake size and material type. The interpretations
of this information were then compared to findings concerning the raw
materials available and the forms into which these materials were processed
(Figures 17, 18).

Smal!

Very
Small

Medium

Very
Large

Large

Total

Chert

1502

Quartzite

~37

163

83

Greenstones

8

Misc.

Total
67
"61 Raw Frequency

1353

raw percentage

.

16

1196

2

267

raw count
for each category

Figure 17. Distribution of flake s:,zes and material types

.

26

13

column percentage

2897

Boisvert-- Guadalupe Mountains

55

FLAKE SIZE

£
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\

\

\
\
\

\

Small

m

Large

Greensfone

~;~

__ Miscellaneous

~

Limest’one

~

Cher,y

Limes,one

~

Quartzite

Cher,

Figure 18. Relative frequency of flakes of size and material type.

The frequency of the flake sizes for each of the material types and the
relative percentages are presented in Figure 17. The raw count for each
category is in the upper left part of the cell, the raw percentage is in the right
side of the cell, and the column percentage is at the bottom of the cell. For
example, the raw frequency for small chert flakes is 61, which constitutes 4
percent of all chert flakes and 91.3 percent of all small flakes. Figure 18
presents the same data in a cumulative histogram.
A nalysis and Interpretations
It is apparent from the distributions that there is a consistent trend in
flake sizes according to material types. The chert flakes are consistently small;
greenstone flakes are almost equally divided between small and medium;
cherty limestone flakes are consistently medium to small; limestone flakes fall
into the medium category, although nearly a quarter of them are large; and
quartzite flakes are the largest. Flakes of miscellaneous materials tend to be
medium to small, but they are so few in number that size comparisons to
flakes of other material types may not be valid.

56

Texas Archeological Society

The interpretation of these distributions incorporates several factors,
one of which is sampling error. Limestone and quartzite flakes probably were
not recognized in the field as frequently and consistently as were chert and
cherty limestone. The escarpment and foothill areas are littered with
boulders, cobbles, and spalls of both quartzite and limestone, and their
abundance probably masked the presence of the culturally derived quartzite
and limestone debitage. Flakes of those materials are probably underrepresented in the collection, especially in the smaller-sized specimens.
Another factor in the distribution of the samples is the size of the raw
materials as they occur in nature. Cherts have not been found, and greenstone
has been found only rarely, in the Guadalupes in large blocks. However, large
cobbles or boulders of limestone and quartzite are commonly found. Thus,
certain parameters are imposed on the flake sizes by the form in which the raw
materials naturally occur.
Other factors that would bias the distribution of flake sizes are the
method of flaking and the definite preferences for certain materials for the
manufacture of specific artifact types. Logically, the manufacture of small
bifaces, which were made from chert, would entail the production of small
flakes, and the manufacture of large bifaces, which were made from
limestone, would probably entail the production of a large number of
medium-to-large flakes. Furthermore, an important factor in the choice of
material for the manufacture of a given tool is its potential for producing
certain kinds of flakes. The cryptocrystalline silicates are much more likely to
produce small, thin flakes than are the coarser, less glassy, limestones and
quartzites.
The distribution of flake sizes and material types results not from any
one variable, but from the interplay of several variables. The size and quality
of the raw material, the forms into which it was processed, and the techniques
utilized in that process all contribute to the distribution of flakes of different
sizes and materials. The tool makers in the Guadalupes clearly recognized the
limiting factors of their lithic resources and adapted their tool-making
behavior accordingly.
Flake Form and Material Type
A logical next step after the flake-size and material-type analysis is
consideration of the relations between flake forms and materials. Because
specific interrelations exist among material types, artifact forms, and flake
sizes within the assemblages analyzed, patterns of distribution of flake forms
in the various material can be expected. Analysis of the flake forms should
therefore provide some degree of confirmation of the findings presented
above, and it is hoped that it will also provide some unique insights into the
flaking of the different material types.
Methodology
The 29 flake morphologies that have been described above were
subjected to a hierarchical clustering analysis in order to determine the most
frequently co-occurring groups of flake forms. One interpretation of these
clusters resulted in the ordering of the flake forms along one axis of a

!

Boisvert-- Guadalupe Mountains

57

cumulative percentage graph, which was used to compare the frequencies of
the flake forms for the various material types.
The percentage of each form was computed for each material type, and
from a cumulative total of these percentages a cumulative line graph (Figure
19) was prepared for the flake forms of the five material types. Using these
data, the percentages, and the graphic display, correlations of material types
with flake forms could be made.
A nalysis and Interpretations
From Table 7 and Figure 19 it can be seen that some overall patterns are
evident for the flakes as a whole and for particular aspects of certain types of
materials.
Certain attribute combinations are more common in some material types
than in others. Limestone flakes have more single-faceted platforms with
thick to angular decorticated bodies. Chert flakes are much more likely to
have complex, or multifaceted, platforms with thin-to-medium noncortex
bodies. Cherty limestone falls between limestone and chert, with substantially
fewer angular body flakes than limestone and somewhat fewer thin-tomedium noncortex body flakes than chert. Quartzite also falls between
limestone and chert but diverges from their distributions, with a greater
percentage of flakes with cortex and a decidedly smaller percentage of
complex-platformed flakes, especially when compared with chert. The
greenstone flake sample is much smaller than the other raw material samples

Percent

LS
CLS

.’t

Figure 19. Relative frequency of flake forms by material types. CH, chert; CLS,
cherty limestone; LS, limestone; QTE, quartzite; GS, greenstone.

58

Texas Archeological Society

.~

~o~~.o~o~

~

--

°°°..°°°°°°°°°,°..°.,.°.oooo.

_

~°~g~~~
~ ~

.°..°,....°,,...°°°.,°...°..o

°°°.,°

5~o~~o~5~z~°~’~~__~
~
~
-

°°°°°..°°°°°°°,°°°°°°°
0~------~0~--~--0000~0

~o~-~
~ ~-~5 ~
~~
~~
~M5~8°°~~

°°°°°°.°°°°°°.°°.,°°°

o: _o

If~C’JOOO--’,DO

~-o~~~~~~
~ ~~
.°°°°°°°..°°°°°°°°.°°°°

......

~~-~-~-~~~~___~
~ ~5~
......... ~$66s64~4G

~--000 ....

O0

~

--0

6 ---" "4s

--~

----~0~~~00~0~000

Boisvert--Guadalupe Mountains

59

but is notable for the relatively large proportion of flakes with shattered and
broken platforms. Newell et al. (1953:64) report that the siliceous content of
greenstone is low--51 to 61 percent--and that the clay content is fairly
high--20 to 24 percent. The green color is the result of finely disseminated
grains of minerals of the chlorite group, alteration products of volcanic ash
(Newell et al. 1953:64), which apparently cause the material to lack the
hardness and strength of chert. This weakness may account for the high
proportion of greenstone flakes with broken platforms (8.41 percent)
compared to flakes of limestone (1.98 percent), and chert (1.66 percent). The
generally low silica content, together with the decomposed nature of the
original ash structures, may explain the preponderance of broken platforms
on the greenstone flakes.
Quartzite is also a local material, but its pattern of flake-form
frequencies and distributions differs from greenstone. Not only are cortical
areas frequent, but quartzite seems to be an exceptionally strong material.
Shattered and broken platforms are relatively rare, a fact which, together
with the low frequency of complex platforms, strengthens the premise that the
material was selected for the production of cutting blades because of its
naturally large size, availability, and overall strength and durability.
The dominant feature of the chert flake forms is their large proportion of
multifaceted, flat, medium-to-thin, noncortex flakes. In addition, similar
flakes with straight platforms are also quite common. This particular
distribution attests to the fact that chert was the material most frequently
selected for the manufacture of small, morphologically complex bifaces. Two
of the flake forms--thin and medium noncortex flakes that are multifaceted
and thin bulbed--are usually interpreted as typical flakes associated with
final trimming and maintenance of bifaces. This interpretation is supported
by the fact that in cherty limestone, which has a low frequence of bifaces, there
is a very low percentage of such flakes.
Summary and Conclusions
The analysis of flake forms based on material type tends to confirm the
interpretations developed from the analyses correlating material type with
artifact type and flake size with material type. Chippage associated with the
production and maintenance of bifaces and other morphologically complex
artifacts tends to be chert. Chipped stone artifacts that require long, durable
edges are made from quartzite, and the nature of the quartzite chippage
affirms the contention that it is indeed a strong and durable material.
Limestone is a ubiquitous material in the region, and its distribution in both
the artifacts and flake assemblages suggests that it was most suitable for the
manufacture of simple tools such as unifaces or large tools that would have
required large cores. The distribution of cherty limestone chippage and
artifacts parallels that of limestone, with the exception of large bifaces. One
might speculate for that reason that large pieces of cherty limestone do not
occur in nature. Greenstone was not a popular material of the prehistoric
knappers of the Guadalupes, as the flake study suggests, because its platforms
have a tendency to break, although it appears to be suitable at first glance.
The sample of miscellaneous material is both too diverse and too small to
warrant any detailed analysis.

60

Texas Archeological Society
DEBITAGE ANALYSIS

For the purposes of this report, debitage includes not only waste flakes,
but also implements broken prehistorically by use, during manufacture, or by
accident, and subsequently abandoned or discarded. Also included in
debitage are implements abandoned during manufacture because of problems
such as failure to thin, excessive hinge fracturing, and edge collapse. Not
included in debitage are implements that were broken intentionally or broken
by farm equipment or by excavators after they had been committed to the
archeological record as completed tools. The study of debitage, rather than
complete implements, is the focus of this report for two reasons. First, the
finished products usually reflect only the final stages of manufacture, whereas
the debitage reflects all stages. Second, the completed implements in the
survey collection constitute a very small sample when compared to the
debitage. The analysis of the debitage is divided into two parts: first, a
hierarchical clustering analysis of the chippage, the purpose of which is to
provide an empirical definition of flake types and to explain from a
technological standpoint the relative distribution of different flake forms; and
second, an analysis of the broken and unfinished implements. The analysis of
broken and unfinished implements provides some insights into the modes of
chipped stone tool manufacture and tool use in the southern Guadalupes. In
other words, two questions are considered: "What can the site collections tell
us about flake assemblages?" and "What can flake assemblages tell us about
the sites?" It has been important throughout this analysis to maintain the
distinction between these two questions in order to avoid a tautology.
Hierarchical Clustering of Flake Attribute Combinations
The first step in the cluster analysis was to determine the natural
groupings of flake forms found on the sites, then to use the same data base to
determine which sites have the most similar flake assemblages. The eventual
goal was to elucidate at least some facets of tool-making behavior.
The Data
The flake clustering analysis used flake morphology data drawn from the
output of IFREQ 3 PCT as described in the section on Flake Typology. Each
case was defined as one of the 29 attribute combinations (see Table 5). The
variables were defined as the distribution of the frequencies of the flake forms
at each site (Table 8).
The sites selected for analysis had to satisfy certain criteria. They had to
have at least 20 analyzable flakes. The total number of flakes on the site,
regardless of whether or not they were included in the 29 flake forms selected
for analysis, was used. Another criterion was that the collection of artifacts at
the sites, as could be determined from the field notes, was not overly biased.
The field notes for some sites indicated that chippage was generally ignored or
that no attempt was made to gather representative samples. For that reason,
sites were reviewed individually before being included in the analysis.

£LZH

00000~0--000~--0----000~00--~0--00

ILZH

0000~----000~--000000~000000----0

89ZH

~01~--10~00~0~00~~0

~ZH

--o~--oo-~o-om-m~~-o_
_
_

~gZH

~~~-~o~o~o~_ ....
-~-

9~ZH

000~0~00----~00--000000~00--00

~ZH

000--~0~000~--~00--0~--~--0~000~

~ZH

0000--~--~00--~000--000000~--000~--

~ZH

----000--00--000~0000--0000~000--0

~ZH

0000~00000~000000~00~----000

6~ZH
££ZH
~ZH

O000~O00II~O00~O0~O0000

6~ZH
OIINO

00--0~--000--0~0000000~00~0000

801NO

66no

0000~0~000~--0--~0--~000--0~--0--

96N0

o

16NO

000----0--0000--000--000----0~00000

ggno

0000~----000~--000--00~00--0000~--

ggNO

0

~--~--~00~00000--~--~0~00
69N0

00000----0000----00--0--0~0001--000~

@9NO

IO~O~O~O0~O00000~O0000~iO0~

L9NO

oIoo~ooo~--IOOOO~----o--~oo~o

~NO

--ooo~--oo~oo--oooo--oooooo~oo~oo

~NO

o~o~ooo--~o~--o~--o~o--~o--oo

g~nO

o--oo--~o--o~o~oooooo--oo~oo~oo

~NO

------oo--oooo1--oooo--ooo--oooooooo

~NO

o~--o~--oo~o~--~oooo~ooooo

I~NO

-~N~--~~o~~-~-~

LgnO

o--oo~oo----oo~--~ooo--o--o--o--oooo

OgNO

oooo~ooo----~o~--ooo--o--~oo

61NO
gINO

@0

oo~o~oo~o~--~o~----~--~oo0

Texas Archeological Society

62

Methodology
The cluster analysis used MATRIX, HCLUS, and PLINK computer
programs gathered together and articulated by Don W. Graybill (1975).
Clustering programs available from the Bimed series (BMDP 2M) (Dixon
1975:323-330) and the H Group clustering program described by Veldman
(1967:308-319) were also tested.
The Bimed and Veldman cluster programs were used to verify the results
of the HCLUS program. All three programs produced essentially the same
results, but with slightly different output displays. The HCLUS version was
chosen because it not only displayed the clusters in the form of more clearly
understood dendrograms, but it also printed the correlation matrix of all
possible comparisons between cases that allowed for specific case-by-case
comparisons.
The HCLUS program offers eight options with which to perform
clustering operations, and a choice of two kinds of matrices, each of which
can be derived from one of four possible combinations of standardizations of
the data. The options for performing the clustering are
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)
7)
8)

Nearest Neighbor
Furthest Neighbor, complete linkage
Weighted Pair group arithmetic averages
Unweighted Pair group arithmetic averages
Median, weighted centroid
Centroid, unweighted centroid
Lance Williams Flexible Method
Ward’s Method

The distance similarities matrix is offered as appropriate for methods 1
through 4 and the correlation similarities matrix is recommended for
methods 5 through 8. Standardization options are offered for both columns
(variables) and rows (cases to be clustered).
Following the work done by Graybill (1975), Ward’s method was chosen
for analysis. Briefly, the program creates the clusters by calculating a distance
that expresses the degree of similarity between any two cases in the sample. It
then merges the two cases that are most similar and treats them as one case
from then on. It then selects the next two cases that are most similar and
merges them. This procedure is continued until all cases are merged into one.
The end result is displayed as a dendrogram with N-1 mergings when N equals
the number of cases.
In all tests, standardization by column (variables) was applied. This was
accomplished by expressing the frequencies in terms of percentage rather
than raw count. This operation has the effect of giving each variable equal
weight of significance, thus preventing abundantly represented variables
from obscuring relatively rare variables. Each cluster analysis was run both
with and without the option for standardization by row (cases). This
operation would have the same kind of effect as standardization by column.
The applicability of these options is discussed and evaluated for each of the
cluster analyses in the section to follow. In all, four clusterings were
generated, two clusterings of flake forms using site flake assemblages as

Boisvert--Guadalupe Mountains

63

variables (standardized and nonstandardized) and two clusterings of the site
flake assemblages with the flake forms as variables (again, standardized and
nonstandardized).
A nalysis and Interpretation, Cases Not Standardized
The clustering of the flake forms without the standardization by case is
presented in dendrogram form (Figure 20). It indicates that there are two
distinct blocks within the flake sample. A comparison with Figure 17 reveals
that Cluster II contains the seven most abundant flake forms, accounting for
70.99 percent of all flakes in the sample. The rest of the sample accounts for
29.01 percent of the flakes chosen for analysis. Raw frequency is the
determining factor in differentiating between these two groups of flakes.
However, within each cluster, the size of each case (i.e., frequency of each
flake form) does not seem to be significant.
The clusters can be viewed as two separate, though similar, dendrograms.
Cluster I is composed of six subclusters. Cluster Ia reflects activities involved
I0314
I0314 !
I0114
I
4315
4314
4115
4114
[3114
13113
14 i 14

IIc
IIb
lla

Id

14 1 15
7314
7114
4214
10 315

/

"-1

i0 1 15
4 3

me

If

7

103 6
5314
5114

Ic

4215

4313
i0113
4113

3

Ib

6

7115
1115

4 1

7

1114

I

I

16.8

14.7

12.6

I

I

I

10.5

8,4

6.3

4.2

Figure 20. Flake clusters, not standardized by site.

I

I

2.1

0.0

Ia

64

Texas Archeological Society

with the initial reduction of cores. It contains four of the six flake forms that
have cortical areas either on their platforms or bodies. The fifth case has no
cortex, but it does have a double-faceted platform and a thick body,
suggesting vigorous percussion flaking with the intention of removing a large
flake. Experimental studies suggest that double platforms are especially
strong and resist shattering. Otherwise the platforms are simple and the
bodies are medium to thick in cross section.
Cluster Ib probably relates to the thinning or rejuvenation of bifaces.
The flakes are uniformly thin, with normal and flat bulbs and straight and
multifaceted platforms. The exteriors of the flake bodies lack any evidence of
cortex.
Cluster Ic contains five flake forms that are commonly produced by the
secondary reduction of cores. The remaining two varieties of flakes with
cortical areas are included in the group, together with both examples of
sequent flakes and a flake with a straight platform, exuberant bulb, and thick
cross section. The exuberant bulb suggests hard hammer percussion, or at
least vigorous soft hammer percussion. The sequent flakes indicate that at
least some flakes have already been removed from the core.
Cluster Id contains only two varieties of flakes, flakes with normal bulbs
and flakes with flat bulbs. Both have complex (multifaceted) platforms and
thick noncortical bodies. The combination of multifaceted platforms and
thick cross sections suggests that these flakes were produced by soft hammer
shaping of partially finished bifaces.
Cluster Ie contains flakes that are predominantly of medium thickness.
Both varieties of flakes with broken platforms are in this group, as are two of
the three kinds of flakes with double-faceted platforms. The third form is one
of the two exuberant-bulbed flakes and has a straight platform. This cluster
shows evidence of having been produced either by hard hammer or vigorous
soft hammer flaking which often produces bulbs and broken platforms.
Cluster If consists exclusively of flakes with shattered platforms. These
flakes usually result from poor platform preparation or selection, or from
inappropriately delivered blows. Their thin-to-medium thickness and normal
bulbs suggest that they are products of soft hammer percussion, possibly in
the thinning of bifaces or the manufacture of unifaces.
Cluster II is represented by only seven flake forms, each of which is quite
numerous in the collection. Cluster IIa consists of three flake forms, each of
which has a straight single-facet platform with normal-to-flat bulb and
medium-to-thick body. These flakes would be by-products of core preparation
or initial biface reduction done prior to fracture. In either case, they are not
the result of bifacial shaping, as the platforms are not multifaceted. The
thickness of the flakes and the nature of bulbs suggest fairly strong soft
hammer percussion.
Cluster lib is composed of two flake forms. One has a complex platform,
normal bulb, and medium thickness; the other has a simple platform, flat
bulb, and thick cross section. Both lack cortex on their bodies. This cluster
may represent the result of further soft hammer core reduction with the
beginnings of bifacial shaping.
Cluster IIc also is composed of two flake forms, both of which have
multifaceted platforms and flat bulbs. They differ in the presence of medium-

Boisvert--Guadalupe Mountains

65

to-thin noncortical body states. These varieties of flakes are typical results of
the final stages of bifacial manufacture and trimming, and of biface
rejuvenation.
These nine attribute clusters can be interpreted as representing the
by-products of chipped stone tool manufacture. This process may be
conceptualized as containing several steps, each with characteristic products
and by-products. The scheme illustrated below is an attempt to isolate several
activity sets, some of which are optional in the manufacture of chipped stone
tools. This is presented in the full realization that such behavior actually
constitutes a continuum and that divisions between activities are in large part
arbitrary. However, since chipped stone tool manufacture is of necessity a
reductive process in which the tool becomes smaller as the process continues,
it is legitimate to assume that certain activities must precede others. A biface
cannot be rejuvenated until it has been finished, and the secondary trimming
of an implement, if it occurs at all, must follow the primary trimming.
Figure 21 presents an outline of the steps or activity sets that have been
defined by Collins (1975:25) in the overall process of chipped stone implement
Table 9. Association of Flake-type Clusters
and Product Groups
Product
Group

Products and By-Products

Clusters
(Flake Forms)

Unaltered raw material

iii

iv

vi

vii

Amorphous and prepared cores,
primary and secondary cortex
flakes, core fragments

la

Secondary and edge cortex
flakes, large noncortex
flakes, preforms, unfinished
implements, fragments

Ia, Ic, le, IIa

Noncortex flakes, preforms,
unfinished implements,
fragments

Ib, Id, le, If,
lib

Finished implements, trimming
and retouching flakes, unaltered
flake implements*

Ib, If, IIc

Reworked implements, resharpened
implements, implement fragments,
retouching flakes

Ib, If, IIc

Grave furniture, specialists’
caches, ritual offerings

*Hypothetically any flake could be chosen. Flake clusters
presented are mainly those derived from the other artifact
categories in product group v.

66

Texas Archeological Society

~

ARCHEOLOGICAL CONTEXT

CULTURAL ACTIVITIES

NATURAL RESOURCES

Raw Material x)
I
(silicates in gravels,}----.----~
I
outcrops, etc.)
ii~

Lithic

!
[

Acquisition of Raw
Material

I
/ Oro 1

~-./Raw Material

/

(nodules, cobbles, etc.

(core preparation and
beginning of shaping)

Group

2
(cores, crude
bifaces, flakes)

,,

<
Primary

/
Flaking

(unifacial flaking,
crude biface
impletaents, preforms)

./Group
>/

(unifaces, bifaces,

flakes)

<
Secondary Flaking

/

]

(thinned bifaces,
hafted bifaces)

~(p

GrOup 4
rojectile points,

/
/

7drills, knives, flakes)/
Use
(cutting, scraping,
piercing, etc.)
’,’]

,’~

Group 5
(worn and
use broken tools)
/

(recycled or
rejuvenated)

~po(G

roup

6

reworked projectile

/

/

ints, halted scrapers,/
etc.)

/

Figure 21. The lithic reduction process. (After Collins 1975.)

manufacture. Table 9 presents the relationship between the flake clusters and
the product groups. Some categories, such as preforms, are general categories
and are found in more than one product group. In a sense, a piece of raw
material that fortuitously resembles a finished or near-finished tool is also a
preform. However, for the purposes of this study a preform is a generalized
bifacial form that is produced after the initiation of chipping and before the
final shaping and thinning of the tool.
Some flake clusters crosscut product groups. This is due in part to the
lumping nature of the clustering program; however, activities associated with
different stages of chipped stone tool manufacture do produce similar flakes.

Boisvert--Guadalupe Mountains

67

Product groups iii through vi are well represented in the collection in
terms of both raw frequency and variety of flake clusters. Product group i
does not usually have flakes associated with it; consequently, no clusters
would be associated with it. Product group ii has only Cluster Ia assigned to
it. Although 5 of the 29 attribute combinations make up this cluster, its total
frequency is quite low. This may be due to three factors: (1) sampling error, (2)
low production of such flakes in the normal sequence of lithic reduction, or
(3) the infrequent incidence of behavior that would result in the production of
flakes that form this cluster. In addition, the relative frequency of the major
component of this cluster, flakes with cortical platforms or bodies, would be
influenced by the nature of the raw material. Essentially identical activities by
the same knappers with different materials would result in entirely different
ratios of cortex- to noncortex-bearing flakes. These data indicate that the
acquisition and initial reduction of cores was not a major activity on the sites
surveyed.
Product group vii is not represented at all in the survey collection, since
such materials would come only from excavated site contexts.
The relationship of the clusters of flake forms to the product groups is
incorporated into the arrangements of the cumulative percentage graphs in
Figures 25 through 31.
The flake forms are organized according to their clusters (Figure 22)
which are arranged in the order of the assigned product groups. The forms
associated with the earliest stage (product group ii) are at the lower end of the
scale, and those associated with the final stages (product groups v and vi) are
at the top. The part of the horizontal axis of the graph specific to each
subcluster is shown, indicating the overlap between product groups.
A nalysis and Interpretations, Standardized Data
Analyzing the same data but applying standardization by rows (sites)
produces a dendrogram that is different, although it is somewhat similar
(Figure 23) to the one generated without the row percentages. Three major
blocks of clusters are recognizable. Cluster I consists of either very rare flake
types or flakes that are best described as fragmentary, such as flakes with
missing platforms. Cluster II contains a variety of flakes that tend to be
thinner than the rest of the sample. Cluster III is composed of flakes similar to
those in Cluster II, but thicker than average.
The organization of the standardized flake clusters could also suggest
that there are two modes of flaking within the samples, in addition to a group
of rare or essentially unclassifiable flake forms that have little relevance to
either of the apparent activities.
Cluster I contains six flake forms, all of which are merged at a relatively
high order, indicating dissimilar distributions in the sample (i.e., sites). They
include both varieties of flakes with broken platforms, both examples of
flakes with exuberant bulbs, and two of the three flake forms with straight
double platforms. Both medium and thick forms are represented in the
cluster, with indications of an internal differentiation between the two. This
cluster reflects hard hammer percussion. Large bulbs of percussion and
broken platforms are phenomena usually, although not exclusively, associated
with hard hammers. Replicative experiments also suggest that double-faceted

68

Texas Archeological Society
Misc.
"l--

...t-

T
A..

1o 3 13
1o 3 14
I0 113
4313
4113

-r-

13 i 13

..h.

13114

IO 1 14
_L.
-T-

>

lO 1 15

T

7318.

/
_!_

T
o

T
¢a

Groups

315

..1_

q-

Product

4315
10

±

Clusters

7114

4214
14 114
14 1 15

4314
4114
4115

5314
5114

42 15
IO 3 6
~3 7
7115
43 6
41 7
1115
1114
Flake

Forms
Figure 22. Flake clusters ordered by stages of reduction (product groups).
platforms are significantly stronger than simple platforms and are less likely
to break, crush, or shatter when percussion flaking is applied. Significantly,
no flake forms with cortical areas are included in this cluster, which suggests
that these flaking activities are not related to the acquisition of raw materials
or the preparation of the cores (product group i or ii). In addition, there are in
this cluster no flakes with thin cross sections and complex platforms. The
inference is that these flakes are the result of the primary trimming of cores
(product group iii). Cluster I, the final merging accomplished in the clustering
process, is distinct from the two other major clusters, suggesting that the
flakes were produced at sites different from the ones where the materials were
acquired and processed.
Cluster 11 can be subdivided into at least two subclusters. Cluster lla
comprises thin flakes with either flat or medium bulbs and either single or

Boisvert-- Guadalupe Mountains

69

multifaceted platforms. Cluster lib contains flakes with shattered platforms
and a multifaceted flat flake with secondary cortex body. Six of the seven
flake forms of the cluster are thin, all of the bulbs are either flat or medium,
and only two of the seven forms have single-faceted platforms. Therefore,
these two clusters are believed to represent the secondary trimming and final
shaping of thin bifaces, probably by soft hammer percussion and possibly by
pressure flaking. The occurrence of a flake form with cortex on part of its
body is somewhat anomalous, although certainly not unexpectable. This
form is rare in the assemblage, accounting for only 24 specimens (0.83
percent) in the total sample, and 22 specimens in the sample from sites
selected for clustering. The nature of the present sample makes it impossible
to explain this situation adequately.
Cluster III is subdivided into three or possibly four subclusters. Cluster
Ilia consists of the six forms that occur most frequently in the typology. Two
multifaceted forms merge at a low order and are then joined by four forms

14115
7115
4215
14 114
7314
4314
13113
13114
i03 6
lO 113
i0313
4313
4 113
5314
5114
10314
i0114
4315

lib

IIa
llld

IIIa

4115
4314

4114
10115
7114

i0315
4 I 7
43 7
1115
43 6
1114

I
6.2

5.6

5.0

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

4.3

3,7

3,1

2.5

1.9

1,2

0.8

0.0

Figure 23. Flake clusters standardized by site.

!lllb

70

Texas Archeological Society

with simple platforms that are also merged at a low order. Most of the body
states are medium, but two are thick noncortical types. Medium and flat
bulbs are evenly distributed.
Cluster IIIb is composed of four flake forms. Two are multifaceted, thick
noncortical flakes, one is double-faceted medium, and one is single-faceted
secondary cortical. The constituents of the subcluster are more diverse than
those of Ilia and do not form as tight a cluster.
Cluster Illc comprises only two forms, both of which are thick and have
cortex either on their bodies or on their platforms, which are essentially
simple and unmodified. These atributes seem to relate them to the earlier
stages of either reduction.
Cluster IIId also is composed of only two forms. This subcluster contains
the only flake forms with sequent platforms. They differ only in the bulb
attributes, which are either flat or normal. This subcluster combines with the
rest of Cluster III at a very high order. Since flakes of this subcluster represent
less than 1.7 percent of the total sample, their association with the rest of the
flakes in Cluster II may not be significant. The nature of the sample and its
size is the source of the uncertainty.
Cluster IV is formed of only two flake forms and by default is defined as a
separate cluster. It is quite distinct from the other clusters and is one of the
final mergings accomplished in the hierarchical grouping. Both flake forms
are rare and number more than two at only one site, HZ52, the site with the
largest assemblages of chippage.
Cluster IIIc can be interpreted as the result of initial reduction of cores.
The thick bodies and cortical areas on the flakes are an argument for
assigning this cluster to product group ii. Cluster Ilia probably relates mainly
to the primary trimming of cores, with some suggestion that the forms with
multifaceted platforms may be the products of secondary trimming.
Both Clusters IIa and lib seem to be derived from activities associated
with the secondary trimming processes, with a suggestion of some primary
trimming related to Cluster lib. The chippage is thin, with a preponderance of
complex and shattered platforms. The trend toward flatness of the bulbs and
the thin flakes suggest soft hammer percussion.
One interpretation of the pattern of clustering derived from this analysis
is that there are two distinct flaking activity sets represented in the sample.
Clusters I, IV, and IIIc stand essentially isolated from the rest of the clusters.
They represent the earliest stages of flaking--basically core preparation and
the primary shaping of the core. All of the flake forms from these clusters are
relatively scarce in the sample, casting some doubt on their exact relationship
to the rest of the flake forms. However, it is apparent that they do stand apart
from the main constituents of Clusters II and III.
Cluster III contains subclusters that represent flaking activities from
core preparation (IIIb) through primary trimming (Ilia) and possibly some
secondary trimming (the multifaceted forms of IIIa). These activities may
reflect the production and maintenance of unifacial and, possibly, bifacial
scrapers. The dominance of thick flakes and a large proportion of straight
platforms tend to confirm this interpretation. Straight platforms reasonably

Boisvert-- Guadalupe Mountains

71

would be associated with uniface manufacture and maintenance. Thick flakes
are more likely to occur as a result of primary trimming than secondary.
Cluster II contains flake forms in its subclusters which seem to relate
most consistently to the secondary flaking and maintenance of bifacial
implements. It is possible that partially finished forms were imported to sites
and then finished, or that completed tools were being resharpened or
recycled. This is not to suggest that these are the only activities concerning
biface production that were carried out on the sites included in the sample.
Since the manufacture of bifaces also included those stages necessary for the
production of unifaces, it is reasonable to assume that in some cases chippage
associated with Cluster III resulted from the production of bifaces as well.
The two methods of treating the flake data--standardizing or not
standardizing by cases--have produced two interpretations. The first attempt
at clustering without standardization generated a dendrogram that defined
two major groups subdivided into nine subclusters. The composition of these
subclusters coincides closely to flake forms that might be expected to occur
during various stages in the process of lithic reduction.
The second attempt at clustering utilized the option to standardize the
data by case. This meant that the clustering of flakes would be less sensitive to
the number of flakes in each case. This clustering produced a dendrogram
with three major clusters and one minor cluster. The three major clusters were
subdivided into eight subclusters, which have been interpreted as representing
two different varieties of flaking: one oriented toward the manufacture of
unifaces, the other toward the manufacture and maintenance of bifacial
implements.
Hierarchical Clustering of Sites
The application of hierarchical clustering techniques in order to
delineate the clusters of sites that are most alike on the basis of their flake
assemblages uses the same data and methodology but inverts the data matrix
so as to render the sites as cases and the flake forms as variables.
A nalysis and Interpretations, Cases Not Standardized
The cluster analysis of sites, derived from the flake data, used options for
both standardizing and not standardizing the cases (sites). Cluster analysis
using the data nonstandardized by case yielded inconclusive results, since the
dendrogram that was generated simply merged sites on the basis of their
sample size only. For the purpose of interpreting the site clusters, the
standardized data is considered to be more appropriate.
A nalysis and Interpretations, Cases Standardized
The dendrogram for the site clustering analysis of standardized cases
reveals four major divisions, which have been termed Clusters I, II, III, and
IV (Figure 24). Several of the subclusters within the major divisions are the
result of the pairing of two sites with small sample sizes, usually 40 or fewer
flakes. Although these subclusters may represent actual patterns within the
overall scheme, their small sample size casts doubt on their validity. More
confidence can be placed in clusters with more than two sites, or with sites that
have a significantly larger number of flakes.

72

Texas Archeological Society
Cu 34 (27)
Cu 68 (21)

Cu 52 (17)
Hz 46 (23)
az 53 (207)

[~

Bz 29

(104)

Cu 96 (80)
Cu 91 (20)

Cu 85 (94)

[

Cu 20 (39)
Cu 99 (41)

IVa

I

Hz 44 (25)
az 71 (24)

[

..... l__ Cu 88 (23) I llla

..........

~z 43 (20)
Cu 69 (17)
Hz 33 (34)
~z

45

(55)

az 39 (33)

lla

r--------- Hz 68 (147)

0ui08 (58)
Cu 67 (33)

Bz 32 (28)
Cu 27 (37)
az 73 (20)
Cull0 (19)
Cu 38 (32)

{

[

Cu 33

Hz
Hz
Cu
Cu
Cu
[~ Cu
Cu

I

1

I

I

5.3

4.7

4.0

3.5

2.7

2.0

I

!

I

1.3

0.7

0.0

42
52
83
43
31
19
18

(72)

(26)
(383)
(137)
(76)
(262)
(113)
(148)

I

I

t

Ic

Ib
Ia

Figure 24. Clusters standardized by flake forms.

Before discussing the result of the clustering analysis, it should be noted
that CU34 is unique in that of the 27 flakes that could be analyzed fewer than
30 percent corresponded to one of the 29 flake forms chosen for further
analysis. Significantly, all but 8 of the 27 flakes had cortex on their bodies or
platforms, and of these 8, 5 were classed as either thick or angular in body
thickness. The initial stages of lithic reduction were carried out here, probably
by hard hammer percussion.
Seven subclusters were selected for interpretation, three from Cluster I,
two from Cluster IV, and one each from Clusters II and III. In the discussion
that follows, each cluster is accompanied by a site location map and a
cumulative percentage line graph that shows the percentage of each flake
form for each site in the cluster.
It should be noted that the cumulative percentage graphs in Figures 25
through 31 differ from the one in Figure 19 in the order in which the flakes are
listed. Figure 19 reflects clustering without standardization of the flake
frequencies; however, the clustering of sites based upon their flake assemblages

Boisvert-- Guadalupe Mountains

73

incorporates standardization of the flake frequencies. Consequently, the
cumulative percentage graphs use the clustering of flake forms standardized
by case (flake forms), as shown in Figure 23.
Cluster Ia (Figure 25) is made up of four sites, with sample sizes ranging
between 76 and 262. Flakes with straight platforms account for a large part of
the variation in this group; only a few flakes have complex, shattered, or
broken platforms. Flakes with cortex are relatively abundant when compared
to other clusters. This cluster has no temporal significance, as all ceramic
periods are represented; however, only one sherd was found at CU43, casting
doubt on the assignment of a ceramic date to that site. All of the sites are fairly
large; two (CU31 and CU43) are near springs and the other two are in an area
where there are many other sites. Product group ii and iii flakes are very well
represented, and the absence of product group iv and v flakes suggests that
unifaces were being produced in considerable numbers. If this is the case, it is
likely--assuming that the unifaces were used as scrapers in domestic
situations--that Cluster Ia represents a group of sites where domestic activity
was the dominant behavior. Unifaces and hearths are common, especially at
CU18 and CU19.
Cluster Ib (Figure 26) is in many respects similar to Cluster Ia. Three sites
compose this cluster, and the sizes of the flake samples range between 26 and
383. It is questionable that the smallest site, HZ42, should be included, due to
the possibility of chance or sampling error. Like Cluster Ia, the collections
from the other sites are fairly large, and these sites were called campsites by
the field crews. HZ52 is a well-dated early ceramic site, and the other sites,
Percent
loo
90

Sites in Cluster la

¯

80-

CU 43

..........
:- "I

7060.
5040-

/
.’ill
./
~ ’
.

30
zo

1/i/~i,

lo
i

,

i

,

l

t

Figure 25. Flake forms in Cluster Ia.

t

,

,

,

,

~

74

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 26. Frequency of flake forms in Cluster lb.

HZ42 and CU83, are aceramic, suggesting a late preceramic to early ceramic
period occupation. The difference between these sites and Cluster Ia is the
larger proportion of bifacial retouching flakes (flake Cluster IIc). Although
there are indications of a slightly larger component of product group iv flakes
(flake Cluster lib), flakes with straight platforms predominate. The evidence
indicates that there was some manufacture of bifacial implements here and, at
least at sites HZ52 and CU83, probable manufacture of a considerable
number of unifaces.
Cluster Ic (Figure 27) also is similar to the other subclusters, although
sites CU33 and CU38 yielded only 72 and 32 flakes, respectively. Much of the
materials from these sites, including the chippage, was limestone, which may
account in part for the configuration of the curves. The margin of difference
between this cluster and Clusters Ia and Ib results from the smaller
proportion of straight-platformed flakes. In part, the difference is made by
flakes with cortex and, at CU38, a larger number of bifacial trimming flakes.
Because there are only two sites in this cluster, they are difficult to assess.
Since no ceramics are present at either site, they may have been preceramic
occupations or peripheral occupations by later peoples. The flaking technique
suggested for these sites relates most strongly to the earlier stages of
implement manufacture, for at only one of the sites (and there probably only
one item) was there a possibility of some final reduction.
Five of the eight sites in Cluster II form a Subcluster that is suitable for
interpretation (Figure 28). The sample size in Cluster IIa varies from 33 to 68,

Boisvert-- Guadalupe Mountains

75

Percent
tO0

8070-

Figure 27. Frequency of flake forms in Cluster Ic.

Percent
Sites in Cluster l la~¢.~

°°-

"~_-"

~i.rx’~"

HZ39

~~
.... ’ ..... r’T’::"

,~XHZ 68.../

CU 67.

~-\J,’t
,.

Figure 28. Frequency of flake forms in Cluster IIa.

76

Texas Archeological Society

indicating that the sites have little chippage. The curves in the cluster all reveal
the same trend; a very low percentage of flakes associated with product
groups ii and iii, but fairly high and consistent percentages of flakes
associated with product groups iv, v, and vi. The activity suggested here is the
processing of bifaces that have been started at another place. The evidence is
clear that the later stages of implement (probably bifaces) manufacture were
carried out at these sites. There does not seem to be any temporal loading to
this cluster, since two sites are ceramic, two are early ceramic, and one is late
ceramic.
If Cluster II represents later stages of lithic reduction, then Cluster III
certainly represents earlier stages (Figure 29). Product group iii flakes,
especially flake Cluster Ia, account for the bulk of the flakes. The manufacture
of unifaces seems to have been the prime activity at the sites in Cluster III,
since evidence for further artifact reduction is lacking. Too, there are very few
flakes with cortical areas, implying that initial reduction of cores was not
being done in any quantity.
Cluster IV contains two subclusters suitable for interpretation. Cluster
IVa has two sites, CU20 with 39 flakes and CU85 with 94 flakes (Figure 30),
but there is little apparent similarity between the sites. Site CU20 has a much
larger percentage of flakes with shattered platforms and with straight
platforms than does CU85. Sites CU20 and CU85 are, however, more similar
in their proportion of Cluster IIIc flakes. This seems to be a poor cluster and
may be an indication of inadequacies in the clustering program and the data
base.
Cluster IVb appears to be more cohesive than IVa (Figure 31). Three
sites, CU96, HZ29, and HZ53, compose the core of the cluster. Two other
sites with much smaller sample sizes (20 flakes each) were tentatively added to
the cluster. Their curves resemble those of the core sites, although they run
above and below the larger sites. Sample size is again a problem. The
interpretations of this subcluster apply primarily to the larger sites, and may
or may not apply to the other two. In many respects Cluster IVb resembles
Cluster lib, with a high proportion of final shaping flakes and a fair number
of intermediate flakes, but there is a decided scarcity of flakes with broken
platforms and a higher proportion of Cluster IIIc flakes. The flaking was
apparently more successful at the Cluster IVb sites than at the lib sites. Two
of the sites are aceramic (CU91 and CU96), two (HZ46 and HZ53) have
intermediate period ceramics, and one (HZ29) has early period ceramics.
Thus there is no obvious temporal loading in this cluster.
Summary of Site Clustering
The cluster analysis of the sites with at least a fair representation of
chippage provides some interesting insights into stone tool manufacture in
the southern Guadalupes. No particular patterns were related to temporal
manifestations; indeed, many of the activities that produce chipped stone
implements occur in all time periods, thus masking any sensitive indicators.
Knappers had to meet and solve a variety of problems with a limited number
of solutions, and it is not surprising that many of the same methods were used
over long periods of time.

Boisvert--Guadalupe Mountains

77

Percent

in Cluster III

90-~

rI

°ot

"

70

CU 99

S

""

- 5
"01

/

,f

.~F/,’’"

.

/./"\HZ 44

"
/../.--.-."
........
I IV..’

’°i
~°I
,o!

,/.,,/,..,
t.tj,

Figure 29. Frequency of flake forms in Cluster III.
Percent
ites in Cluster IVa

gO

8O

~ ¯ I

/~

cu 20_

l

Figure 30. Frequency of flake forms in Cluster IVa.

78

Texas Archeological Society

Percent
!00--

"
!

90

HZ 463’

80.

CU 96\
7060-

CU 91

5040-

30
20
10-

Figure 31. Frequency of flake forms in Cluster IVb.

The clustering analysis does successfully isolate sites at which similar
stages of lithic reduction were carried out. Cluster Ib is the closest
representation of start-to-finish bifacial implement manufacture. Cluster Ia is
similar, but there was probably less final biface trimming. At the sites that
constitute Clusters IIa and IVb we find the processing of implements that
seem to have been brought to the site in partially finished form. Artifacts with
primary trimming or shaping were produced at sites of Cluster III. Whether
these artifacts were unifaces or only a stage in the production of bifaces is
uncertain.
Biface Fragment Analysis
The second largest category of artifacts in the typology is biface
fragments. As the name implies, these are pieces of bifaces that lack
diagnostic features assignable to one of the more specific categories.
The Data
The data for this aspect of the study are drawn from the tabulation of
nearly 400 bifaces and biface fragments collected by the TAS survey. As part
of the initial sorting of the artifacts into the typological categories, the biface
fragments and bifaces that were identified as discards during manufacture
were set aside for separate analysis. Biface fragments, except for those that
were heat damaged, were divided into two basic types: those with transverse
fractures, which presumably occurred during manufacture and caused the

Boisvert-- Guadalupe Mountains

79

biface to split transversely along the cross section; and those with snap
fractures, which are clean breaks and give no hint of origin.
Eleven criteria for assessing the nature and degree of biface breakage
and/or discard were chosen for analysis. Although these criteria do not
encompass all possible kinds of chipping errors or problems, they are the ones
that occur frequently in replicative experiments and in the archeological
record (Collins 1975) and can be identified without elaborate and costly
laboratory facilities. All of the features described below could be detected
macroscopically or with the aid of a hand lens. Described below are the most
frequently encountered causes of broken bifaces.
Heat Damage
Heating can cause a change in the flaking quality of a piece of chert. This
is often desirable, but extreme heat causes a considerable amount of damage
and breakage. Heat can produce small round spalls, commonly called potlids,
on the surface of an artifact and can change the internal structure of the
material, causing it to lose its smooth conchoidal fracture and to break
irregularly with granular texture. In addition, excessive heating may cause the
artifact simply to shatter, presumably along preexisting flaws or stress planes.
Often the fracture surfaces on heat-damaged artifacts are indistinguishable
from snap fractures, and the heat-damaged pieces are recognizable only from
potlids or granular fracture surfaces.
Transverse Fracture

A break that can be identified as the result of an ill-delivered blow to the
artifact during manufacture is called a transverse fracture. Either singly or in
combinations, a bulb of percussion, ripple marks, or radial shatter lines will
occur on some bifaces that have been broken during manufacture. The term
manufacturing break is avoided here because experimental knapping indicates
that breakage during manufacture does not necessarily produce recognizable
attributes on the fracture plane of the broken biface. To use such a term would
suggest that all manufacturing breaks can be recognized.
Snap Fracture
A smooth, clean break across the midsection ofa biface is termed a snap
fracture. The origin of such a break can be manufacturing, usage, or
accidental causes (such as dropping or trampling), and in most cases cannot
be determined. Occasionally such a fracture will have a lip or hinge on one of
the broad surfaces of the biface, usually along the medial axis, indicating that
the force causing the breakage was delivered from the opposite face of the
artifact directly through the smallest dimension of the piece. It is unlikely that
such a blow would be delivered during manufacture.
Overshot Fracture
A biface
that extends
resulting in a
platform and

can be ruined by an overshot fracture: the removal of a flake
across the breadth of the biface, over the opposing edge,
flake with remnants of the bifacial edge on both the strikingterminal ends. In some cases an overshot fracture results in the

80

Texas Archeological Society

breakage of the artifacts, and in others, an overreduction of thickness and
width so that the artifact is useless. In still other cases the artifact can be
salvaged and further processed. Overshot flaking differs from transverse
flaking in that the striking platform, location of bulb, ripple marks, and radial
shatter lines occur in the plane defined by the intersection of the length and
breadth of the artifact (that is, across the face) rather than on the cross section
of the artifact (or perpendicular to the face).
Edge Collapse
If an overshot fault in flaking can be considered an overly successful
attempt to remove a flake, edge collapse can be considered its reverse. An
edge collapse flake is one that is composed essentially of a platform area only,
with no appreciable length to its body. The effect of a single edge collapse on a
biface is a noticeable notch in the edge.

Hinge Fracture
A hinge fracture is a common error or problem in flaking. A hinge
fracture flake differs from a normal flake only in that the end of the flake
opposite the striking platform terminates in a smooth edge, which rolls back
onto the exterior surface of the flake, rather than in a sharp or feathered edge.
The result on the parent piece is a concavity or lip in the medial area of the
artifact’s surface (Crabtree 1972:68). The effect of this flaking error varies
greatly, depending upon its size and placement, and a hinge fracture can be of
little concern to the knapper. Hinge fractures can be found on finished
artifacts that are apparently perfect in shape and outline.
Knot

A knot is a lump of unremoved material that has been left on the surface
ofa biface by several hinge fractures originating from different directions, all
terminating in one spot. Thus a knot is not one flaking error, but isthe end
product of several flaking errors--unsuccessful attempts to remove material
from the surface of the biface. Knots normally occur in the medial part of a
biface, but they can occur near the edges.
Edge Crushing
Edge crushing, as the term implies, occurs when, rather than successfully
removing a flake from the surface ofa biface, the knapper crushes or shatters
the platform area, effectively blunting the edge and reducing the width of the
artifact without succeeding in reducing the thickness.
Flaw
Flaws result from circumstances that are often beyond the control of the
knapper. Very few cryptocrystalline materials are without impurities, fossil
inclusions, or fracture planes either preexistant or the by-products of
previously delivered blows to the stone. Otherwise well-struck blows can
result in the breakage of the entire piece at the point of the flaw. Occasionally
a flaw plane can be detected by a slight patina where it has weathered when a
thin fissure existed for some time. In such an instance the knapper might
recognize the flaw and abandon the project.

Boisvert-- Guadalupe Mountains

81

Unsuccessful Shaping
This problem faces all knappers, especially those who are inexperienced
and inept. Often the best efforts of the knapper fail to shape or thin the artifact
successfully, leaving it an irregular, unshaped mass. Usually such pieces will
have other errors. Failure to remove a knot is a relatively rare but
recognizable case of unsuccessful shaping. It is difficult at best to determine
that a piece is improperly shaped, because the analyst can hardly judge what
was in the mind of the prehistoric tool maker.

Methodology
A total of 386 bifacial artifacts, including all the biface fragments and
bifaces identified as being unsuccessfully shaped, were examined for the
presence or absence of various flaking problems, and these data were
recorded for each artifact (Table 10). The flaking errors were subdivided
according to the kinds of fractures, and the distribution of the unsuccessfully
shaped and discarded or aborted bifaces was tabulated. The number of
recorded problems for each category naturally exceeds the number of
artifacts in the category, since there is often more than one flaking problem on
an artifact. In addition, the number of artifacts exhibiting only fractures and
no other flaking problems is also presented. For purposes of comparison, the
figures for each cell in the display have been standardized by computing the
raw percentage of occurrence of the flaking problem.
Overshot failures were not put into the same category as transverse
fractures because they are not morphologically the same as transverse
fractures. However, they are a variety of manufacturing break, and, since they
are included among the broken bifaces, they are incorporated into this part of
the study.
Results and Interpretations
The distribution of the various kinds of flaking problems reveals certain
patterns that may be significant in the interpretation of lithic technology in
the southern Guadalupes. The category defined as abortion has the highest
proportion of knapping errors and .problems. Unsuccessful shaping (on 44
percent) and edge collapse (on 43 percent) are two of the most frequent
problems occurring on the aborted specimens. Hinge fracturing (on 39
percent) and edge crushing (on 27 percent) are also quite common. Knots are
relatively rare, but they occur more than four times as frequently on aborted
bifaces as on fractured bifaces of either type. The unsuccessful flaking
category is an end result of combinations of other flaking errors, especially
edge collapse, hinge fractures, knots, and edge crushing, and as such it is not a
truly independent variable. Knots in particular are produced by a variety of
flaking errors. Furthermore, continued edge collapsing, hinge fracturing, and
edge crushing make bifaces increasingly difficult to flake effectively. Flaws
are relatively rare in aborted bifaces.
Aborted bifaces are most likely to have both a variety and a high
frequency of flaking errors, which illustrate in large part the major reasons for
discard. They were inappropriately shaped for either further flaking or use.

82

Texas Archeological Society

--’4-

!

t~

CD
t.
tr~
tr~
toO
L
LL

o
e,l

B

-5
qm

tD

~

0

mu’~
r-

~

o’~ ..c

Ix_

L
k~
.t--

C

--

O’x

04

~

’,.0

0

+--

fO
O3

L

0-"r

~
L~
O-J

~

0"4

-0
+.

I1)

o

CI) 113

m

--

--

~

0,1

CO

~,1

O~

--

klA--

o~
C)

+..

m

E
o_

~

O4
t~
c

O

~ ~
u_a.

cO

~0

Boisvert-- Guadalupe Mountains

83

The snap and transverse biface fragments have both similarities and
differences. In some categories, the percentages of flaking errors are close, if
not virtually equal. Edge collapse and edge crushing differ by 2 percent or less
when transverse and snap fractures are compared. The frequency of knots is
very low--only four in 310 fragmentary specimens--and the significance of
the similarity or difference is questionable. The same is also true of flaws.
However, hinge fracturing and unsuccessful shaping do appear to vary
significantly. Hinge fractures occur on 35 percent of the transverse biface
fragments and on 26 percent of the snap fractures. In addition, 22 percent of
the transverse fracture bifaces and 16 percent of the snap fractures were
defined as unsuccessfully shaped. Thus artifacts that were broken, presumably
during manufacture, seem to have more problems with hinge fracturing and,
as a result, a somewhat higher frequency of unsuccessful shaping. The further
fracturing of the bifaces may have resulted from unsuccessful attempts to
correct the problems arising from the hinge fractures and unsuccessful
shaping of the artifact.
The most significant variable found in comparing the transverse and
snap fractures is the frequency of specimens with no apparent errors or
problems other than the fracture. Only 20 percent of the transverse fractures
fall into this category, but the fracture is the only problem in 46 percent of the
snap fractures. This indicates that there is significant difference between the
two groups in distribution of flaking problems.
The most probable explanation is that the snap fracture category
includes not only the completed and perfect, or nearly perfect, bifaces that
have been snapped by lateral stress, but also bifaces broken during
manufacture, which do not have the characteristic attributes of transverse
fractures. This would result in an assemblage of artifacts with similar kinds of
fracture planes across their midsections and a distribution of flaking
problems suggestive of both well-flaked and finished forms broken after
completion of flaking, and forms broken during manufacture. Replicative
experiments demonstrate that bifaces broken in manufacture can have the
attributes of snap fracture.
Analysis of the biface fragments and aborted bifaces from the southern
Guadalupe Mountains and adjacent desert has revealed a patterned distribution of flaking errors and problems. Biface fragments with transverse
fractures had a higher frequency of flaking problems, with hinge fractures and
unsuccessful shaping particularly common, than did the snap fractured
bifaces. Aborted bifaces, as expected, also had a high frequency of flaking
problems. This overall pattern suggests that there may be even more
patterning of flaking errors that might be recognized in larger collections and
in collections with better contextual information. These patterns could be
related to the kinds of material used, intended form of the artifacts, or the
knapping tradition used by the tool maker.
Summary and Conclusions
Within the limits of accuracy of the interpretations of the flake clusters
set forth above, it is possible to isolate some specific activities that went on at
sites in the survey area. It is apparent that the process of manufacturing

84

Texas Archeological Society

chipped stone tools, particularly bifaces, was not continuous. Segments of the
process are evident at different sites. More comprehensive studies of the
region may reveal patterns of chippage distribution that suggest movement
among the sites.
In addition, it is possible to isolate stages in the reductive process.
Replicative experiments can generate data concerning knapping behavior
and tangible by-products that are applicable to the archeological data base,
with tremendous implications for the study of lithic technology and
archeology. We can now isolate with some precision certain activities relating
to the manufacture of chipped stone tools. Since it is rare that chippage debris
is transported great distance from the point of production, we can pinpoint
the locations of these activities. Analysis of chippage debris, in conjunction
with other archeological data, greatly increases the potential for describing
and, it is hoped, explaining the mechanisms of stone knapping behavior.
Two conclusions can be reached from this study of biface fragments and
aborted bifaces. First, the categorization of the three basic groups, snap
fractures, transverse fractures, and aborted bifaces, is accurate and meaningful. Aborted bifaces have a very high percentage of flaking problems, which
seem to combine to make the bifaces either unworkable or unusable. Second,
there is a difference between the transverse and snap fractured bifaces, not so
much in the relative percentage of flaking problems observed as in their
distribution.
THE IMPLEMENTS

Methodology
The objective of this section is to isolate meaningful groups of artifacts,
with the goal of defining both their functional and temporal significance. To
do this, the HCLUS clustering program was again used, but the ever-present
problem of differential sample size was compounded by the fact that many
artifact types were rare, and missing data were quite common, even on sites
with large artifact assemblages. Consequently, the cluster analysis of this data
has met with only limited success.
The Data

The data input consisted of implement frequencies from the sites
surveyed by the TAS. In many cases the site inventories were extremely small
or nonexistent, especially when the debitage and preforms were removed. An
arbitrary cutoff of seven artifacts was established, and sites with biased
samples, as determined by the same criteria used for the sites in the debitage
analysis, were withdrawn. The correspondence between the two groups of
sites is close, with a few additional sites unique to each analysis. (Artifact
frequencies for all sites are tabulated in Boisvert 1980:Appendix 2.)
Analysis and Interpretation, the Artifacts
The artifact clusters were generated (Figures 32 and 33) both with and
without standardizing each case (artifact class). In all runs, each variable (site)
was standardized. Standardization in both situations was accomplished by

Boisvert-- Guadalupe Mountains

85
ltz 68

Cu 83
Cu 43
Cu 31

Hz 52
Cu 19
Hz 53
Hz 29
Cu 18
HZ 49

-- ffz 58
-- HZ 33
H= 47

HZ

43

HZ 42
Hz

32

CullO
Cu 67
Cu 45
Cu 99
Cu 56
Cu 75
Hz 36

Cu 58
Cu 38
H=

39

[tz 6l
ILl 30

-- Cu 80
az

78

-- az 65
Cu 59

-- Ca 33
-- Cu 90
Cu 25

-- Cul08

---

Cu 93
Cu 68
Ca 88

-- Ca 66
-- Cu 63
-- Cu 41
--

CU

34

__ ltz 6;’

-- Cu

67

-- Hz 64
-- Cu 53
-- Ca 85
Cu

42

-- Cu 61
-- az71

Cu111
Cu 76
Hz 46

I

[

t

f

I.

27.6

2q.7

22.0

19.2

t6.5

I
3

?

I

r

f

f

I

I1..6

6.2

5.5

2.7

0.0

Cu 15

Figure 32. Site clusters standardized by artifact type.

expressing the distribution of artifacts in terms of their (relative) percentages
by column or row (variable or case).
The clustering of artifacts was not much altered by the standardization of
cases, although some improvement of cluster definition was apparent. The
basic problem evident in both versions of HCLUS with this data set was the
many instances of missing data. The artifact cluster based upon raw
frequency shows an unmistakable skew toward artifact classes with larger
frequencies (especially implement fragments and some types of unifaces).
Some redefinition was achieved by standardizing the size of the artifact
classes, but the same basic patterns prevailed.

Texas Archeological Society

86

Hz
Cu
Hz
Cu
Cu
Cu
Cu
Cu
Cu
Cu

{

....

68
96
52
83
43
31
19
18
80
90

Cu 56

Cul08
CullO
Cu 67
[Iz 78
It=: 49
It=: "3
--

Hz 33
Hz 53
az 29
Cu 25
tt= 52
Cu 93

Cu 75
--

Cu 68
Cu 33
1t= 46
HZ 61

Hz 39
Hz 30
az 47

az 58
Cu 59

Cu 41
Hz 71
Hz 63
Cu 38

HZ
HZ
az
Cu
Cu

34
42
45

67
99

Cu 27

Cu 88
-- ¢u 66
Ctt 65
Cu 53
Cu 63

Cu 61
Cu 85

CulII
Cu 42
Cu 76
HZ 46
Cu 15

t
19.9

17.9

15.9

13.9

11.9

1

I

1

l

[

9.9

8.0

6.0

q.O

2.0

0.0

Figure 33. Site clusters, not standardized by artifact type.

Some of the lower order mergings remained the same. Type I unifaces
merged with ovate bifaces: Types IVb and IVc unifaces retained their close
association, as did marginal bifaces and convex manos. Two projectile styles,
Types 8 and 9, continued to show a close association. This is most interesting,
since both fall into Johnson’s Group H points.
One cluster seems to be especially significant, the grouping of battered
stone, flat manos, tabular limestone bifaces, and metate fragments. This
cluster may represent an activity set or a functionally related group of
implements. The mano and metate indicate plant grinding activity, but the
function of the tabular limestone bifaces is conjectural. The battered stones

Boisvert--Guadalupe Mountains

87

Table 11. Artifact Distribution, Cluster I

Site

Life
Zone

Ceramic
Age

Battered
Stone

CUI5
CUI8
CUI9
CU27
CU29
CU53
CU60
CU61
CU68
CU69
CU75
CU80
CU84"
CU85
CU96
CU99
CUI08
HZ29
HZ33
HZ41*
HZ43
HZ44*
HZ46
HZ49
HZ52
HZ53
HZ64
HZ67*
HZ68
HZ73*
HZ77
HZ78

LS
LS
LS
LS
LS
US
LS
LS
US
LS
LS
T
US
LS
US
US
LS
LS
LS
LS
LS
LS
LS
LS
LS
LS
LS
LS
LS
LS
LS
LS

L
E
I
-

3
2

I
E
I
I
E
E
L
I
E/L
L
I
E/L
E
I
I
L
L
I
E
E

*Overall sample size too
analysis.
LS = Lower Sonoran
E
US = Upper Sonoran
I
T = Transitional
L

Flat
Mano

I

Tabular
Limestone
Biface

Metate
Fragments

I
4
2
2
2
I

I
I
I
I
I
4
I
I
3
I
I
2

I
I
8

2
I
2
I

I
5
2

small for inclusion in clustering
=
=
=
=

Aceramic
Early
Intermediate
Late

may have been used to pound foodstuffs or to pound leaves for fibers, or they
may have been used to produce the tabular limestone bifaces.
There is also a significant distribution of sites with artifacts from this
cluster in terms of their spatial distribution. Table 11 lists the sites on which
were found one or more artifacts from the cluster. Figure 34 shows their
distribution within the park. Of the 32 sites, 26 are in the Lower Sonoran arid
division of the lower Austral life zone; 5 are in the Upper Sonoran, and 1 is in
the Transition zone. One site, CU68, is at the lower edge of the Upper

88

Texas Archeological Society

Intermediate Ceramic
& Late Ceramic
OAceramic
q-Multi-component

Ceramic
Figure 34. Map of Guadalupe Mountains National Park showing distribution of sites
with one or more battered stone, tabular limestone biface, flat mano, and metate
fragment.

Sonoran life zone and could conceivably be included in the Lower. The
boundary definition of these zones is arbitrarily tied to elevations and
fluctuates somewhat. If this association of the artifact cluster is indeed related
to the processing of plants, this correlation with the Lower Sonoran zone
suggests that this is an area where such plants could be found.
There are also indications of temporal significance for this cluster. Using
the presence or absence of ceramics on these sites and the probable age of the
ceramic assemblages with reasonable numbers of potsherds, a fairly late date
is inferred for the artifacts (Table 11). There is a definite loading for
intermediate and late ceramic sites. Other typologically late artifacts are
found in loose association with this group. All five sites where Livermore
projectile points were found also contain artifacts from the cluster. The
frequency of projectile points in the Guadalupes is low (due in part to the
activities of relic collectors), making it unlikely that they would cluster with
many other artifacts.
The flat manos, metates, tabular limestone bifaces, and battered stones
seem to represent tool kits or activity sets used fairly late in the prehistoric

Boisvert-- Guadalupe Mountains

89

occupation of the Guadalupe Mountains. They were found predominantly on
the south and west flanks of the mountains in the Lower Sonoran zone. If they
were associated with the exploitation of plants from this zone, identification
of the plants should shed light on some aspects of subsistence and possibly
settlement patterns.
A closer look at the other distinctive clusters in the dendrograms makes it
clear that they are made up of the most ubiquitous and least typologically
specialized artifacts in the collections. This is most evident in the cluster
produced through standardization by case. Here all of the implement
fragments--the two kinds of biface fragments and uniface fragments--are
clustered together, and the three most frequent uniface types (IVa, V, and VI)
are also clustered together. These artifact forms are widespread both in time
and space, so no temporal significance can be attached to them.

Analysis and Interpretations, the Site Clustering
The attempt to cluster the sites in terms of their artifact assemblages was
disappointing. The dendrograms in Figures 35 and 36 were generated using
Bif frag TF

Bif rrag SF
Unif frag
V Unlf
V! Unif
IVa Unif
9 PP

8 PP
Drill
PP
~opping tool
-- Tri Rif, Rd Bs
16 PP
// Sided bif
SE, HR bif
12 PP

4 PP
15 PP
i0 PP

Hematite

Ii PP

P,F
PP
17

6 PP
3 PP
Tri Bif, St BS

5 PP

lllc Unlf
II Unlf
IVc Unif
IVb Unif
Ilia Unif

PP frays
-- Ovate Bif
I Unif

-- Mano, convex
Marg Bif
~l~oconvex

bif

Bif/Unlf
lllb Unlf

SS
Metate frags
Utl Flk

t

I

I

t

I

15.4

13.9

12.3

10.8

9.2

I
7,7

6.2

Figure 35. Artifact clusters standardized by sites.

Tab LS Bif
Mano, flat
Battered Stone

Texas Archeological Society

90

both standardized and nonstandardized data and reveal a significant
skewing, which can be attributed to sample sizes. The eight sites with the
largest inventories (CU18, CUI9, CU31, CU43, CU83, CU96, HZ52, and
HZ68) are grouped together in both dendrograms. All of the other sites merge
at a very low order, due to the common lack of artifacts in most categories.
There is one subcluster consisting of the essentially aceramic sites CU31,
CU43, and CU83 (Figure 37) that might have some significance. The sites
have proportionately large numbers of unifaces, especially Type V unifaces.
Sites CU31 and CU43 have ring middens, and the debitage analysis indicates
that CU83 is a lithic workshop.
These three sites may represent primarily Archaic occupations in the
southern Guadalupes. Types 7, 8, and 9 projectile points, which resemble
Johnson’s Type H Archaic points, and a Meserve point were found at CU31,
and Type 10 (Shumla point) was found at CU43. These sites are also near

Bif frog SF
VI Unxz

V Unif
Bif frag, TF
IVe Unl~
IVb Unif
IVa Unif
Unlf frag
IIIa Uni~
PP frags
15 PP
13 PP
Chopping tool
Ovate Bif
I Unif
Mano, convex

Marg Bif
Drill
12 PP
4 PP
Bif/Unif
ss

Planoeonvex blf
16 PP
SE, HR bif

17 PP
6 PP

1 PP
Ii PP

Hematite

7 PP
5 PP

Tri Bif, St Bs
lllc Unif

3 PP
II Unif
Tri Bif, Rd Bs

Utl Flk

I

I

I

!

I

34.3

30.9

27.4

24.0

20.6

17.2

1

!

I

1

t

13.7

10,3

6.9

3.4

0,0

Figure 36. Artifact clusters, not standardized by site.

Meta~e frags
Tab LS Bif
Mano,flat
Bid Stone

Boisvert-- Guadalupe Mountains

91

N

J

,,,,1’

°Cu 8

K~

Figure 37. Map of Guadalupe Mountains National Park showing probable Archaic
intensively utilized sites.

three of the largest springs in the park: Guadalupe (CU43), Pine (CU31), and
Bone springs (CU83). If they were habitation sites that were used repeatedly,
that would explain the high proportion of unifaces if the unifaces were
assumed to be scrapers associated with domestic activities.
The results of the implement analysis are not as extensive as are the
results of the debitage analysis, but one possible activity set that may have
temporal and spatial significance has been tentatively isolated. In addition,
one small group of sites that may be Archaic base camps has been tentatively
defined. However, the goal of isolating well-defined clusters of sites that cover
a spectrum of temporal and spatial variation has not been attained, mainly
because the methodology applied was not compatible with the data at hand.
The sample (case) sizes were too small to produce meaningful clusters, and it
is unlikely that additional manipulation of the data by combining artifact
categories and increasing minimum sample size would result in any significant
improvement. The collection acquired by the TAS survey is not large enough
to permit a comprehensive understanding of the cultural and historical
sequence in Guadalupe Mountains National Park.

92

Texas Archeological Society
CONCLUSIONS

The analysis of the lithic assemblages recovered by the TAS survey in
Guadalupe Mountains National Park was aimed at determining what lithic
technologies were practiced there and interpreting their meaning in terms of
the culture history of that region. Although it has not been possible to wring
this information from the data with the research methods at hand, several
conclusions can be drawn.
The best-quality materials, that is, the fine-grained silicates such as chert,
were most frequently used to produce morphologically complex bifaces,
especially projectile points and drills. These materials were also used for other
artifacts, but less frequently.
The local limestones are ubiquitous in the park and may have some
degree of conchoidal fracture. They were used primarily for simple tools by
the prehistoric inhabitants. The bulk of the limestone artifacts were unifacial
forms, presumably scrapers, and indeed some limestone flakes that were used
for resharpening unifaces have been identified in the collection. Among the
bifaces produced from limestone were the morphologically unique, if not
overly complex, tabular limestone bifaces. When they are found unbroken
they are relatively large and subtriangular.
Cherty limestone occupies a curious position in the lithic inventory of the
southern Guadalupe Mountains. Occurring with frequency at only a few sites,
it has qualities of both chert and limestone, as the name implies. Not only was
it used in a manner somewhat similar to both, but its reaction to flaking, as
demonstrated by the flake analysis, is also intermediate between chert and
limestone.
Quartzite was used to make two fundamentally different kinds of tools.
On the one hand, it was used for the manufacture of manos and metates,
presumably because of its durability, convenient size, shape, and availability.
On the other hand, it was chosen for flake knives, often similar in form to Old
World blades.
Greenstone was quickly isolated in the collection, but, in spite of its
abundance, it does not seem to have been heavily used. Analysis of the
greenstone debitage revealed that it had an exceptionally high proportion of
broken platforms,, which must reflect failed attempts to shape it into usable
implements.
The choice of raw materials by the prehistoric flint knappers of the
Guadalupes can be viewed as a balance between convenient and abundant
local sources (limestone, quartzite, and possibly cherty limestone) and highquality chippable stones (exotic silicates and imported cherts), which were
apparently less abundant and were probably imported. When morphological
complexity was desired, the higher-quality materials were used almost
exclusively; when less complexity was desired, a much wider variety of
materials was utilized. However, it should not be assumed that chert was an
exceptionally scarce resource, for it was frequently used for simple tools that
could easily have been made from other materials. For certain implements,
local materials were apparently deemed most appropriate, either because of
their basic nature (hardness and texture for groundstone tools) or because of
natural shapes that facilitated manufacture of particular implements (tabular
limestone for specialized bifaces and blocky quartzite for blades). Greenstone,

Boisvert-- Guadalupe Mountains

93

which seems at first glance to have great potential, was generally avoided by
knappers.
The difference in sample sizes and a dearth of sites with large artifact
assemblages hindered analysis of the artifact clusters, but one group of artifacts-tabular limestone bifaces, flat manos, metates, and battered stones-seem to have both temporal and ecological significance. These artifacts mostly
come from the late ceramic period identified by Phelps (1974) as from A.D.
1200 to 1350, and they are found in the Lower Sonoran zone. The functions
and interrelations of this group of artifacts should be an avenue for future
research in this region. They may represent activity sets or tool kits for
particular activities. It is also possible that the people who used these
implements were carrying out a variety of essentially unrelated activities, and
that this assemblage contains an unrelated set of artifacts from the material
culture of a particular group or groups of people. The mano and metate are
obviously related, but the interrelationship of the tabular limestone bifaces
and the battered stone is not clear.
The place of agriculture in the southern Guadalupes is still an open
question. Several sites in the Lower Sonoran arid division, especially along
the west flank of the mountains, have many ceramics and food grinding tools,
but livestock management practices have significantly altered the availability
of water in the region, and it is difficult to determine if sufficient moisture was
present to support the cultivation of maize, squash, or beans. Evidence from
the H ot Well site about 160 km ( 100 miles) to the west (Schultz 1966) indicates
that the area might have supported agriculture. The association of the tool kit
with the sites in the Guadalupes isolated by the clustering analysis remains an
intriguing problem.
Analysis of the projectile points suggests a fairly long occupation
extending from late Paleo-Indian times into Late Prehistoric times. Continuity
with the historic tribes of Jumano and Apache cannot be demonstrated from
the TAS collections, but the Trans-Pecos seems to follow the previously
defined culture history sequence in West Texas and southern New Mexico.
The TAS collection, insofar as the projectile point typologies are accurate and
meaningful, contains no particular surprises; indeed the varieties of projectile
points are just what would be expected in the Guadalupes.
It had been hoped that analysis of the debitage recovered by the TAS
survey would identify the techniques used in manufacturing stone implements
in the Guadalupes, but the limited size of the data base and the nature of the
collection caused serious problems. Many sites that were reported as having
large amounts of lithic material were undercollected; in other instances
collections were biased, making the samples from those sites unsuitable for
analysis, and many of the sites produced samples that were too small for
analysis. Furthermore, the fact that many sites obviously had several
components made intersite comparisons difficult to interpret.
Analysis of the chippage reveals that seemingly similar kinds of flakes,
when subjected to attribute analysis and hierarchical groupings, fall into
constellations of flake forms that may be indicative of the production of
bifaces or unifaces. Although biface and uniface production in the early
stages can produce quite similar chippage, the results of this study suggest
that it may be possible to distinguish between the two activities.

94

Texas Archeological Society

That implements were being produced in quantity in the Guadalupes is
evidenced not only by the chippage recovered, but also by recovery of
partially finished bifaces in both whole and broken (during manufacture)
states. With one possible exception, no sites were identified as loci of activities
at or near natural sources of raw material. This is in part a result of the limited
area of the TAS survey, an area that does not have substantial chert-bearing
deposits, although chert deposits are indeed available in the southern
Guadalupes of New Mexico.
As with most scientific endeavors, more questions have been raised than
answered in this study, and unsuspected pieces of information surfaced while
specifically selected problems remained unsolved. Perhaps the most significant
conclusions to be drawn from this study lie in the area of the analytical
techniques applied--specifically their utility and limitations. The flake study,
based upon an attribute analysis, identified at least some aspects of chipped
stone tool manufacture. The fact that specific stages in the reduction of lithic
material can be isolated has implications for identification of lithic technologies as practiced by different groups during different cultural-temporal
periods, and might even provide some information as to the nature of
prehistoric transhumance patterns. In addition, it may be possible to identify
the manufacturing debris from different kinds of artifacts. Although such
determinations are now only crude and are limited to unifaces and thinned
bifaces, the potential exists to further refine the techniques.
In line with the suggestions offered above, it is apparent that hierarchical
clustering, such as HCLUS, is useful for eliciting natural groupings of
artifacts and sites. However, it is severely limited by the constraints of smal!
sample size and samples with a high proportion of missing data. When used
with caution and finesse it can be very helpful.
The IFREQ package, in conjunction with HCLUS, has great potential for
investigating variation and patterns in chippage assemblages. The scope of
attribute analysis is now limited only by the imagination of the lithic analyst
and the capabilities of the computing apparatus. Indeed, other areas of
research such as ceramics, folk taxonomies, folklore, and even descriptive
linguistics might find useful the techniques presented in this study.
As a result of this study we now know something of the techniques and
choices exercised by the prehistoric flint knappers of the Guadalupe
Mountains of Texas. Intriguing bits of information have been brought to
light and presented, if not as answers to great problems, at least as suggestions
that may lead to a greater understanding of the region.

APPENDIX
Flake

Morphology

This Appendix describes the various morphological characteristics defined and
used for analysis o~" the flakes. The system employed is an adaptation of the one used
by M.B. Collins (1975:161-172) in his analysis of debitage from sites in Texas and
southwestern France. Five categories, or attribute states, were defined and incorporated into a coding scheme. These attributes are platform, bulb, body, length, and
material type.

Boisvert--Guadalupe Mountains

95

The changes from Collins’ system are the substitution of a new set of material
types and the elimination of any distinction between blades and flakes. Each of the
attribute states is given its own code (see Table 4).
Platform
Platforms are defined in terms of two aspects, shape and surface treatment, with a
total of 15 states (see Table 4). Collins defines the platform variable as follows:
Basically, platforms were either straight or recurved when viewed from the top. Each of
these shapes, plus any miscellaneous shapes which might be observed, could be placed in
one of four categories of degree of treatment: cortex remaining, single-faceted, doublefaceted, and multi-faceted. Also noted were those platforms which were either shattered,
broken, or ground. A given platform, then, could be described as "straight, singlefaceted," or "straight, cortex," etc. Coding standards for these variables were as follows:
the recurvate platform shape, designated "sequent,~’ refers to the shallow, U-shaped
platform which results from the sequent removal of a flake directly in line with the
negative scar left by the removal of a former flake. When the platform is viewed from
above, the edge which intersects the exterior of the flake exhibits an inward curve caused
by the concavity of the previous negative bulb; the opposite edge curves outward--usually
strongly--with the positive bulb of the flake. The category "straight" includes all platform
shapes that are rectanguloid or biconvex. A third category, "other," was used to designate
platforms whose shape was neither "straight" nor "sequent," such as triangular. Cortex
platforms are those which retain the weathered surface of the raw material and indicate
that no preparation of that surface was made prior to flake removal, lfthe platform has
been altered by flaking, it may be described as exhibiting one, two, or more facets. These
do not necessarily indicate the number of facets produced in preparation of the platform,
but they do indicate the nature of the surface area to which force was applied. For
example, in experiments the gable-like intersection of two facets is often found to be an
advantageous point for the application of force. Shattered platforms are those whose
position is observable, but whose form is not (due to crushing or shattering under the force
which removed the flake). Broken platforms are similar in that the position of the
platform can be determined, but its form is not observable due to breakage (presumably
after removal). These two categories are not to be confused with the "broken flake"
category which includes flakes with the platform or another edge completely missing.
Ground platforms are generally small and "straight" (usually biconvex) with striations
across most of the surface. Although these are generally considered to be intentionally
ground in platform preparation, the possibility that some represent use wear cannot be
overlooked [Collins 1975:161-165].

See Figure 38 for illustration of platform characteristics.
Bulb
Bulbs are classified according to three attribute states: normal, exuberant, and
flat. Collins defines the bulb category as follows:
Under "normal" are recorded flakes which exhibit a bulb of percussion of average
properties, i.e., noticeable but not greatly protuberant. "Exuberant" bulbs are those
which protrude strongly and are decidedly rounded when viewed either from the side
(perpendicular to the axis of flaking) or from either end (parallel to the flaking axis)
[Collins 1975:165].

See Figure 39 for bulb characteristics.
Body
The body attribute category encompasses two aspects, the nature and extent of
cortex on the flake exterior and the shape of the flake in cross section. Sixteen body
states are defined by Collins as follows:

96

Texas Archeological Society

Straight cortical
Coded 1

Straight single facet
Coded 4

Sequent cortical
Coded 2

Straight double facet
Coded 7

Straight multi facet
Coded i0

Broken
Coded 14
Figure 38. Platform characteristics and their codes.

Shattered
Coded 13

Ground
Coded 15

Boisvert-- Guadalupe Mountains

\
\

Jj

\

Normal
Coded I

Exhuberant
Coded 2

)
Flat
Coded
Figure 39. Bulb characteristics and their codes.

97

98

Texas Archeological Society

J
Primary cortex thin
Coded 1

!

Primary cortex thick
Coded 3

(

Secondary cortex medium
Coded 6

u

Non cortex medium
Coded 14

Non cortex angular
Coded 16

Figure 40. Cortex characteristics and their codes.

Boisvert-- Guadalupe Mountains

99

Primary cortex flakes exhibit cortex over the entire exterior and along any edges which
are not the sharp intersection between the interior and exterior surfaces. Secondary cortex
flakes have cortex on greater than 10 percent of their exterior and may or may not have
cortex on any edges. Secondary edge cortex flakes have cortex only along one or more
edges, and noncortex flakes lack cortex (or exhibit small patches on less than 10 percent of
their exterior). The shape categories are relative. Thin flakes are relatively very thin to
length and width, medium ones are intermediate in this regard, and thick ones are
relatively thick. Flakes which are thick and have facets on their exterior surface which
intersect in an acute angle are recorded as "angular" [Collins 1975:167].

See Figure 40 for illustrations of cortex characteristics.
Length
The length variable was expressed as a discontinuous variable represented by five
classes. The length was measured by obtaining the maximum length of the flake
perpendicular to the striking platform. The lengths defined are as follows: (1) very
small, less than 12 mm; (2) small, 12 to 25 mm; (3) medium, 26 to 50 ram; (4) large, 51 to
100 mm; and (5) very large, more than 100 mm (Collins 1975:169).
Material Type
The material-type variable incorporates the six types defined in the section on
stone type analysis. Originally, seven types were. defined, including two varieties of
limestone. However, after the coding was initiated these two types were combined.
Instead of reassigning variable state labels, it was decided simply to combine all
limestone under one code number, leaving the other unused.
Each flake in the collection, unless it came from a random surface find, was
analyzed according to the five variable states. Site provenience and the attribute state
code were recorded on Fortran coding sheets, then keypunched onto cards. These
cards provided the basic data, which were processed by the IFREQ and HCLUS
programs.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This report would not have been completed if it were not for the support and
assistance which 1 have received from many different quearters, and it is to these
people that I wish to extend my most sincere thanks and appreciation. First among
those who should be recognized are the members of the Texas Archeological Society
who, in the summer of 1970, conducted a survey of Guadalupe Mountains National
Park and thus brought together the data that is the focus of this report. Their hard
work and diligence is clearly reflected in their copious field notes. Special appreciation
is due Harry Shafer, who supervised the survey and who graciously allowed me to use
part of the project data. I would like to express my thanks to the University of
Kentucky Graduate School, which provided funds to defer travel and subsistence
expenses, thus allowing me to travel to the Guadalupe Mountains and conduct my
survey oflithic resources. My thanks also go to Roger Reich, park ranger, who offered
his advice and assistance to this desert novice during that survey.
The excitement that can be obtained from conducting archeological fieldwork is
exceeded only by the tedium that must be endured if anything resembling science is to
be obtained from it. Two individuals stand out as ones who shared in that trial and
without whose help completion of this report would have been vastly more difficult.
Dolores DeCorsey assisted in the coding of flake attributes and relieved me of the task
of coding about a third of the assemblage. Carol Straus went far beyond her normal
responsibilities as a consultant at the University of Kentucky Computing Center and
spent seemingly endless hours, over a period of several months, to bring order out of

100

Texas Archeological Society

the chaos of programs. I am deeply indebted to her for for making it possible to utilize
the cluster program upon which I have so heavily depended. I also wish to extend my
thanks to Don Graybill, who provided me with the clustering program, and to the
University of Kentucky Department of Anthropology, which acquired the necessary
computer time for me to carry out my research. I am also grateful to Virginia Slattery,
who not only typed the manuscript but also caught and corrected many small errors
and inconsistencies, thus saving me a tremendous amount of time and worry.
I am sincerely grateful to the members of my thesis committee: to Eugenic Scott
for her contributions in the area of statistical application of computers; to Lathel
Duffield for his insightful criticisms and appraisal of my methodology and findings;
and especially to Michael Collins, chairman, who has guided me through the maze of
problems that beset me in my attempt to use lithic technological data in order to
understand the behavior behind artifacts. To the extent that this goal has been
obtained, Michae! Collins shares in the achievement.
Without question this report is as much an accomplishment of my wife Deborah
as it is mine. She has patiently endured countless lonely nights as I conducted the
analysis and writeup, and she actively encouraged and motivated me to continue when
it would have been easier for me to quietly abandon efforts.

REFERENCES CITED
Antevs, Ernst
1954 Climate of New Mexico during the last glacio-pluvial. Journal of Geology
62:182-191.

Ayer, Mary Youngman
1936 The archeological and faunal material from Williams Cave, Guadalupe
Mountains, Texas. Proceedings of the Academy of Natural Sciences of
Philadelphia 88:599-618.
Bailey, Vernon
1928 Animal life of the Carlsbad Caverns. Monographs of the American Society of
Mammalogists, No. 3.

Boisvert, Richard
1980 A technological analysis of lithic assemblagesfrom the Guadalupe Mountains
National Park, Texas. Unpublished master’s thesis, University of Kentucky
at Lexington.
Bordes, Francois
1968 The Old Stone Age. World University Library, McGraw-Hill, New York.
Breternitz, David A.
1966 An appraisal of tree ring dated potteo’ in the Southwest. University of
Arizona Press, Tucson.
Bryant, Vaughn M. Jr.
1983
Pollen analysis of Pratt Cave. The Artifact (Journal of the El Paso, Texas,
Archaeological Society) 21 ( 1-4): 161-166.

Burns, Barney T.
1967 The archaeology of the Carlsbad district, southeastern New Mexico. Unpublished master’s thesis, Dept. of Anthropology, University of Arizona, Tucson.
Clark, John W.
1974. Rock art of the Guadalupe Mountains National Park area. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 45:97-119.

Boisvert--Guadalupe Mountains

101

Collins, Michael B.
1974 A functional analysis oflithic technology amongprehistoric hunter-gatherers
of southwestern France and western Texas. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation,
University of Arizona, Tucson.
1975

Lithic technology as a means of processual inference. In Lithic Technology:
making and using stone tools, edited by Earl Swanson, pp. 14-34. Mouton,
The Hague.

1976

Terminal Pleistocene cultural adaptations in southern Texas. Paper presented
at International Association for Quarternary Research (INQUAO), 10th
Congress, Nice.

Crabtree, Don E.
1972 An introduction to flintworking. Occasional Papers of the Idaho State
University Museum 28. Pocatello.

Dibble, David S.
1967 Excavations at Arenosa Shelter 1965-66. Unpublished report submitted to the
National Park Service by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Dixon, W.J. (editor)
1975 Biomedical computer program. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Ellis, William H.
1940 Flint-working techniques of the American Indians: an experimental stud),.
Unpublished master’s thesis, Ohio State University, Columbus.
Ferdon, Edwin N. Jr.
1946 An archeological excavation of Hermit’s Cave, New Mexico. School of
American Research Monograph 10. Santa Fe, N.M.
Ford, James A.
1949 A surface survey of the Viru Valley, Peru. Anthropological Papers of the
American Museum of Natural History 48, Pt. I.
Gehlbach, Frederick R.
1964 Amphibians and reptiles of Carlsbad Caverns National Park, New Mexico,
and adjacent Guadalupe Mountains. National Park Service, Carlsbad, N.M.
Goodell, Kent
1973 An analysis of waste flakes from the Guadalupe Mountains National Park
Texas. Unpublished manuscript.
Graybill, Don
1975 Comparative dimensional analysis of middle Paleolithic assemblages from
North Africa, the Levant and S.W. Europe. Paper presented at the 3rd
biannual meeting of Africanist Archaeologists, Boston.
Hammond, George P., and Agapito Rey
1966
The rediscover), of New Mexico 1580-1594. University of New Mexico Press,
Albuquerque.
Holmes, William H.
1897 Stone implements of the Potomac-Chesapeake Tidewater Province. Bureau
of American Ethnology, 15th Annual Report, 1893-94.
Irwin, Henry
1971
Developments in early man studies in western North America, 1960-1970.
Arctic Anthropology 8(2):42-67.

102

Texas Archeological Society

Irwin-Williams, Cynthia
1967 Picosa: the elementary Southwest culture. American Antiquity 32:441-457.
Johnson, Leroy Jr.
1967 Toward a statistical overview of the Archaic cultures of central and
southwestern Texas. Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin 12. Austin.
Katz, Paul, and Susanna R. Katz
1974 An inventory and interpretation of prehistoric resources in Guadalupe
Mountains National Park, Texas. Unpublished manuscript submitted to the
National Park Service; on file, Dept. of Anthropology, Texas Tech University,
Lubbock.
Kenner, Charles I.
1969 A history of New Mexico’s Plains Indian relations. University of Oklahoma
Press, Norman.
King, Philip B.
1948 Geology of the southern Guadalupe Mountains, Texas. U.S. Geological
Survey Professional Paper 215.
Lehmer, Donald J.
1948 The Jornada branch of the Mogollon. University of Arizona Bulletin 19 (4).
1958

A review of Trans-Pecos Texas archeology. Bulletin of the Texas A rcheological
Society 29:109-144.

Leslie, Robert H.
1965 The Merchant site (a Mogollon site). Bulletin, Lea County Archeological
Society No. I, pp. 23-29.

Lundelius, Ernest L. Jr.
1979 Post-Pleistocene mammals from Pratt Cave and their environmental significance. In Biological investigations in the Guadalupe Mountains National
Park, Texas, edited by H.H. Genoways and R.J. Baker. National Park
Service Proceedings and Transactions, Series 4, pp. 239-258.
Mera, H.P.
1938 Reconnaissance and excavations in southeastern New Mexico. American
Anthropological Association, Memoir 51.
Murray, K.F.
1957 Pleistocene climate and the fauna of Burnet Cave, New Mexico. Ecology
38:129-132.
Newell, Norman, J. Keith Rigby, Alfred G. Fischer, A.M. Whitman, John Hickox,
and John S. Bradley
1953 The Permian Reef complex of the Guadalupe Mountain region, Texas and
New Mexico: a stud), in paleoecology. W.H. Freeman, San Francisco.
National Park Service
1974 Draft Environmental Statement, Master Plan. Santa Fe, N.M.
Phelps, Alan L.
1974 An analysis of the Guadalupe Mountains National Park ceramics. Bulletin of
the Texas A rcheological Society 45:121-150.
Ritchie, William A.
1932 The Lamoka Lake site. Researches and Transactions of the New York State
Archeological Association, Lewis 1t. Morgan Chapter 7(4):79-134. Rochester,
N.Y.

Boisvert-- Guadalupe Mountains

103

Sayles, E.B.
1935 An archaeological survey of Texas. Medallion Papers 17. Gila Pueblo, Globe,
Arizona.
Sayles, E.B., and Ernest Antevs
1941 The Cochise culture. Medallion Papers 24. Gila Pueblo, Globe, Arizona.
Schroeder, Albert H.
1974 The Mescalero Apaches, Part I II. In A Stud)’ of the Apache Indians I (3 parts).
Garland Publishing, New York.
1983

The archeology of Pratt Cave. In The Pratt Cave Studies, assembled by Albert
H. Schroeder. The Artifact 21(1-4):25-107. E! Paso Archeological Society, El
Paso, Texas.

Schultz, Robert E.
1966 Excavation of a single room at Hot Well in the spring of 1966. The Artifact
(Journal of the E1 Paso, Texas, Archaeologica! Society), Vol. 4.
Shafer, Harry J.
1971 A preliminary report of an archeotogical survey in the Guadalupe Mountains
National Park. Texas Archeology 19:10-18.
Spaulding, Albert C.
1953 Statistical techniques for the discovery of artifact types. American Antiquity
18:305-313.
Suhm, Dee Ann, and Edward B. Jelks
1962 Handbook of Texas archeology: type descriptions. Texas Archeological
Society Special Publication I and Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin 4.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954 An introductory handbook of Texas archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, vol. 25.
Valastro, S. Jr., E. Mott Davis, and Alejandra Varela
1979 University of Texas radiocarbon dates XIII. Radiocarbon 21(2):262.
Veldman, Donald J.
1967 Fortran programming for the behavioral sciences. Holt, Rinehart and
Winston, New York.
Wheat, Joe Ben
n.d. Notes on a Paleo Indian site near Van Horn, Texas. Personal communication
in the files of M.B. Collins, University of Kentucky, Lexington.
Willey, Gordon R.
1966 Introduction to American archaeology, vol. 1: North and Middle America.
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
Winship, George P.
1896 The Coronado expedition, 1540-1542. Fourteenth Annual Report of the
Bureau of American Ethnology, Part I. Washington, D.C.
Wormington, H. Marie
1957 Ancient man in North America. Denver Museum of Natural History, Popular
Series 4.

Texas Archeological Society Field Schools
1962 - 1982
Jean A. Richmond, W. L. Richmond,
and John W. Greer

ABSTRACT
TAS field schools have grown from a small group of TAS members gathered fora
summer dig to a highly organized educational activity for avocational and vocational
archeologists. We have attempted to trace this development, presenting the philosophy
behind, and the goals for, the annual field schools. The descriptions of 21 field schools
at 19 different locations include brief summaries of archeological accomplishments
and field school activities.

INTRODUCTION
The 1982 Texas Archeological Society (TAS) annual field school at
Rowe Valley marked the twentieth anniversary of the collaboration of Texas
archeologists--vocational and avocational--for the improvement of archeological practices and recovery of archeological information.
Our original intent was to focus on 20years of specific contributions that
the TAS field school has made to Texas archeology. As we examined source
materials, it became evident that detailed archeological information was
available for only a few field schools. As a result, we elected to expand the
scope of the article to include details of field school development and training
in archeological skills. Briefly stated, we have attempted to: (I) present the
specific contributions of TAS field schools to the archeological data pool for
Texas; (2) outline the structural development for a hands-on training
program in archeology and archeologically related areas; and (3) trace the
growth of the TAS field school in education and information dissemination.
The authors have long been interested in, and participants at, the field
schools, and it was difficult to exclude many items of personal interest;
however, it was felt that anecdotal accounts, for the most part, are best
included in the newsletter.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54 (1985for 1983)

106

Texas Archeological Society
HISTORY AND DEVELOPMENT
"ANNOUNCING: A SUMMER DIG IN WHICH
YOU CAN PARTICIPATE

When this invitation to Texas Archeological Society members appeared in
1962 in Texas Archeology 6(1), neither the organizers of the "dig," the
sponsors (the Texas Archeological Society, the Dallas Archeological Society,
and the University of Texas in Austin), nor the members of TAS who sent in
their applications realized that they were establishing the basis for one of the
outstanding programs in Texas archeology--the Texas Archeological Society
Annual Field School.
The early field schools were occasions for a group of people who shared
an interest in archeology to get together for a dig and to socialize. The dig
provided an opportunity to learn a little about archeological methods, but
mostly it was an opportunity to help excavate a site that was archeologically
exciting, a chance to recover and handle archeological remains, and a chance
to share experiences and perhaps exchange archeological information about
work being done in various parts of the state. It was a vacation from the
workaday world for most of the participants. And, it was a chance to
contribute in a small way to the science of archeology.
As reported in Texas Archeology 6(3), 1962, the "first T.A.S. excavation
project" was a "smashing success socially as well as archeologically." Ed
Jelks, director of the dig, reported at the TAS Annual Meeting, November 2,
1962, on the "first field school held for TAS members" at the Gilbert site in
Rains County (Figure 1). TAS members were enthusiastic, and a motion was
made and carried that another field school be sponsored by the society, a host
institution, and the university. It was also decided that a director would be
appointed from the staff of the university to arrange for the site and the loca!
(cooperating) group, and to make other necessary arrangements.

Administrative Structure
At the time of the inception of the field school in 1962, there were no
provisions in the Texas Archeologica! Society Constitution and By-Laws for
sponsored activities. Nevertheless, the program continued and in April 1963
plans for the "Second Annual Texas Archeological Society Summer Field
School" were announced in Texas Archeology 7(1). In 1964 the board of
directors voted to conduct a third field school.
The director for the 1962 and 1963 field schools was the archeologist who
had volunteered to be in charge of the dig. By 1964 it was evident that the
professional archeologist could not both direct the field school and attend to
the many incidental problems associated with running a field camp. At the
October 1964 TAS board meeting, Ed Jelks was appointed chairman of the
new three-person field school committee, which was given the responsibility
of choosing a field school director and making all necessary arrangements for
the project.
In December 1964 the board of directors approved a suggestion by Isabel
Lobdel that the approach to the summer dig should be that of a school rather
than a project. At the same time, it was decided the best time for the school
would be two weeks in the middle of June.

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer--TAS Field Schools

>~

L O

oo

-~>>.8
~8~+-o_

~0

¯ -L

>-

c

0

~

:g

~

C.~

"-- J::: O O (~ L

~

..t- -.t- 0 0

C >- :>"I-4--

o8

o~
=oo

+-

4-

0~

u) L L J O

::3

> c4- c ~’,/:E (~

~

O
C) O

u~ -t- +-

>-O.-

o =---~

>-+- (~(D

c

+-

c

4-

¯

0

m

LLLO0

o o~ c m~mmo ._~_

8~--E

"L ~
£L t..r)

~

-:3
(D

0

0

0

0

0

l~]

c

O0

o

tn

0

",~ ",~ < ~

-u_

0
(D
c

o
O
E
--c40 O.--

z >..~ .

0
0

g

c:

"o
C C

>

(~ZZ

~o 0 0 ~ ~ cO-- O 0 0

~ 0 O O:E czz
Od

+

0
-t-

~ ~ ~: ~0

~

tO<

C

~,-

~
4.--

>-

107

~

C

oo

C

>-C

>¯

o~-,~8~g--°c

~ (0
5-09

¯

¯

~ ::} ::3 JC:
(.D W W 0

O

r,-"

O

o

"6
g

O
.I=

f,
°
0
o

(

f
T

x l

I

108

Texas Archeological Society

It was recognized that the annual field school had become part of the
society’s regular activities, and, at the November 1965 annual meeting, the
Texas Archeological Society Constitution and By-Laws were amended to
include under Article I: Membership and Dues, the privilege of attending and
participating in the summer field school. The following provision (Article VI:
Field School) was added to the by-laws: "A field school may be conducted
when practicable, to train members of the Society in disciplined archeological
techniques. The time, place, duration, and administration of the field school
shall be at the discretion of the Field School Director, who will be appointed
by the President."
Members attending the field schools recognized that logistical problems
existed in the operation of the school and the camp. At the October t966
board meeting, Nancy McClurkan (who had experience in management and
public relations and had assisted at the 1966 field school in West Texas)
presented a report on analysis and structure of TAS field schools with specific
suggestions for future operations. On the basis of her report it was decided
that, in addition to the field school director, a camp director should be
appointed to take charge of setting up and running the camp. It was also
recommended that a general camp mess, using professional cooks instead of
volunteers, be established. Other suggested improvements included the
following: (1) that a good curriculum for the field school be established well in
advance of the session; (2) that performance evaluations of participants be
made by crew chiefs; (3) that a strong field school structure be devised to
ensure a smooth transition from one TAS administration to another; and (4)
that registration forms contain a list of personal equipment that each
participant should provide. It was suggested that field school costs be covered
by an increase in registration fees. The majority of these suggestions were
received favorably, and the budgetary field school allotment was increased
from $100 to $200.
Increases in field school registration and meal costs were the result of a
formal move in 1968 to make the field school self-supporting. It was decided
that any surplus funds would be placed in a special escrow account to be used
for field school purposes.

Field School Committee
From 1965 to 1968 the field school committee had consisted of three
members appointed annually. In !969 the committee was increased to
include, besides the chairman, five members (two of these to be the
archeologist and the camp director) to be appointed annually. Stipends for
the archeologist and the camp director were discussed, but no action was
taken.
A major change was made in the structure of the field school committee
in November 1979. A proposal was presented to the board of directors that a
standing field school committee be appointed and that the committee consist
of six members with staggered three-year terms. The overlapping terms of
committee members would provide a continuity and capability for long-range
planning not possible with the annually appointed committees. After a trial
period to determine the feasibility of the proposed change, a formal revision

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer--TAS Field Schools

109

of the TAS By-Laws was proposed and passed at the annual meeting in
October 1981. Article III was revised to add the following to Section 2,
Standing Committees, paragraph (5) Field School Committee:
The Field School Committee shall consist of six members who shall serve
three-year terms on a rotating basis, with two members retiring annually. The
initial committee shall be appointed by the President and draw lots to determine
two each of one-, two-, and three-year terms. Thereafter, the President shall
appoint two members annually to replace those who are retiring. The duties of
the committee shall be to carry out the directives of Article VI of these bylaws, to
solicit and investigate potential field school projects, and to oversee the
maintenance and acquisition of Society properties relating to field school
operations.

Field Camp and Equipment
Originally an associated institution, such as the University of Texas
in Austin, provided most of the field equipment needed for the TAS field
schools. Screens, shovels, buckets, line levels, trowels, and wheelbarrows
could be borrowed for the short duration of the field school. As archeological
work at various universities in Texas increased with governmental requirements for surveys around planned water-impoundment areas, direct alliance
of TAS with universities ceased. As a result, TAS members were asked to
provide personal field items--clipboards, compasses, trowels, line levels,
writing equipment, and, sometimes, buckets and screens. As members added
to their personal archeological kits, so, too, did TAS. Gradually the society
purchased field equipment, large screens, a portable laboratory, and laboratory supplies.
Purchase of a kitchen trailer, which had been recommended and
discussed previously, was approved in January 1970 by the board, and by
May a trailer was ready for use at the Guadalupe Mountains National Park
field school.
Camp facilities, although still relatively primitive by some standards,
have improved (Figure 2). At early field schools it was necessary for teams of
volunteers, usually from the local sponsoring society, to work at the camp site
during the two weeks before field school. The volunteers dug latrines,
gathered or provided field and camp equipment and supplies, erected the
large army squad tent that was borrowed from the University of Texas in
Austin and that served as a cooking-dining-lab shelter (Figure 3), cleared the
proposed camp area, and, in a few cases, constructed access roads--or at least
made existing roads passable. Today, equipment other than individual gear is
provided by the society. Portable toilets are rented and serviced by the
supplier. Electricity and water sources are available and merely have to be
connected to the kitchen trailer (Figure 4) and showers. Costs of necessary
services and supplies are provided through the registration fees paid by the
participants. Local supporting societies and volunteers from among the early
arrivals provide the labor required to set up the camp and field laboratory.
Members furnish their own camp gear--tents or trailers, ice boxes, chairs,
plates and utensils, and tables. The planning, maintenance, and success of the
camp is the direct responsibility of the field school chairman and the camp
boss.

110

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 2. Over the years field camp has grown from a few tents to a small town of 300
people. (Photo: E. Mott Davis)

Figure 3. The squad tent served as lab, serving, and conference area. (Photo: E. Mott
Davis)

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer--TAS Field Schools

111

Figure 4. TAS members put up power lines for the cook trailer
and for projectors at the evening program. (Photo: Bill Richmond)

Attendance at field schools gradually increased. In 1962 at the Gilbert
site, about 77 members participated during the 24-day dig; in 1969 at Sanford,
204 were present; and in 1970, the 245 participants at the Guadalupe
Mountains field school far exceeded the anticipated number and taxed the
facilities and limited camping area. As a result, at the July 1970 board meeting
it was decided that a ceiling should be put on the number of field school
participants and that field school planning must begin earlier than the spring
before the June field school.
At the August 1970 board meeting it was ruled that the archeologist
should be relieved of all duties not directly associated with archeology and
archeological planning and theory.
Educational Emphasis
Ed Jelks, director of the first field school at the Gilbert site stated: "It was
not a field school, nor was its purpose to train amateurs how to dig; whatever

112

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 5. A talk on tool-making techniques is part of the instruction of field school
participants. (Photo: Bill Richmond)

Figure 6. Glen Goode demonstrates a variety of flint knapping techniques. (Photo: E.
Mott Davis)

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer--TAS Field Schools

113

was learned about field techniques by the participants was incidental to the
primary objective of getting the site excavated" (Jelks 1967:iii).
Although the first few field schools were conducted primarily as digs, an
educational format soon began to take shape (Figure 5). Participants
gathered in the afternoons and evenings to discuss not only what they were
doing, but also archeological theory, methods, discoveries, and contributions.
Vocationa! archeologists, always present at these gatherings, openly shared
their wide variety of archeological experiences.
With the suggestion by Isabel Lobdel at the December 1964 board
meeting that the "approach be that of a school rather than a project," the
direction in which the summer digs had been moving became formalized.
Field school participants received instruction in a variety of field techniques:
site survey; excavation of burned rock middens, terrace sites, historic and
prehistoric structures, and rockshelters; recording rock art; and laboratory
work, including washing and cataloging artifacts. Afternoon instruction,
when it occurred, often included activities such as flint knapping (Figure 6),
floral and faunal identification, and pottery making. Evening programs
became regular events and involved not only the professional archeologists
attending the field school, but also invited speakers with expertise in specific
aspects of archeology, geology, geography, ethnology, and other fields of
related interest.
Conditions and Operations
A committee appointed in 1969 for study of field school conditions and
operations reported in January 1971 to the board and recommended that the
field school be a continuing program. Specific suggestions were made for the
school, including:
I) The field school is for teaching and should be planned in terms of teaching.
2) Curriculum should include theory and technique.
3) The field school should include an awareness of other archeological
programs in the state.
4) Teaching methods should include specific topic lectures.
5) The field school committee should consider having the school in the same
location for two or three years.
6) There should be an increase in the archeological staff, possibly to include
archeological assistants.

The Guadalupe Mountains field school in 1970, which resulted in
limiting the number of participants, also brought the realization that the field
school needed careful and detailed planning as well as financial assistance for
certain staff members. The board of directors allotted $50 to the archeologist
for the preparation of a preliminary report. For the first time there was
official recognition of the time required of, and expenses incurred by, the
archeologist.
In 1971 the board granted a fee of $750 for the archeologist in charge, this
fee to compensate for field expenses and to defray costs of preparing a formal
archeological report. At the June 1974 board meeting a motion was made and
passed to pay the archeologist $1500 on the receipt of a 50- to !00-page

114

Texas Archeological Society

print-ready manuscript. However, changes were suggested in the payment
schedule at the January 1975 board meeting. Alan Skinner suggested that the
archeologist receive $500 at the completion of field school, $200 for a
summary report as soon after the field school as possible, and a remaining
balance of $700 to be paid on receipt of a final report manuscript for
publication. This suggestion was approved by the board in March 1975.
In addition to setting partial compensation to the archeologist for report
preparation, board members and the field school committee felt that a
contract outlining What the TAS expected of the archeologist was needed. At
the January 1977 board meeting, a formal contract was proposed to protect
the interests of both the archeologist and TAS.
Field Training and Site Selection
Education of participants in archeological field methods has been a
primary goal of the field school. As various individuals became adept in field
techniques, they were asked to assume the role of crew chiefs and to train less
experienced members (Figure 7). In June 1966 the recommendation was
made that the crew chiefs make specific performance evaluations of their
crews and that these evaluations be used in selecting future crew chiefs. In
actual practice, the use of formal evaluation forms has not been accepted;
personal, informal evaluations are preferred.
In the mid-1970s an appointed committee worked for over a year on a
field school manual that would outline general goals and specific procedures
for crew chiefs. It was expected that the manual would provide consistency in
the quality and performance of instructional activities. In March 1975, 30
copies of the first manual for crew chiefs were delivered for distribution and
use at field school.
In addition to training field crews, crew chiefs submit to the project
archeologist written reports (Figure 8) on daily and overall activities. This
information is used in a variety of ways, including the preparation of the
preliminary and final archeological reports.
A list of suggested readings is published in the spring issue of Texas
Archeology preceding the field school. The readings enable prospective field
school participants to become familiar with regional archeological research
relevant to the site of the forthcoming field school. Although bibliographies
of suggested readings had been published for several years, the practice was
formalized by a recommendation of the board of directors in April 1969.
The successful, basically unsupervised work of the young people at the
Oblate site (1963) laid the groundwork for the early "Beaver Patrol" and
current Youth Program. Under this program, young people under the age of
14 who have had no field experience are instructed in many aspects of field
work through limited excavation and other activities that are specifically
planned for their interests and abilities. Participants in the Youth Program
have made positive contributions to the school through surveying, excavation,
and ecological studies. Other activities vary with the interests of the group’s
leaders and have included field trips and experiments in pottery making, rock
art, lithic manufacture, cooking, fishing, and construction of habitation

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer-- TA S Field Schools

115

Figure 7. Crew chiefs are briefed on field school plans. (Photo: Bill Richmond)

Figure 8. Crew chief E. Mott Davis keeps daily notes, which are filed for reference.
(Photo: Rosanne Henna)

116

Texas Archeological Society

structures. Many archeologists in Texas and elsewhere can trace their early
interest in archeology to this program.
TAS field school participants represent a wide variety of occupations
and talents: farmers, ranchers, oil field workers, teachers, secretaries,
surveyors, artists, photographers, doctors, lawyers, homemakers, and students
are a few examples. Except for the very young, there are ways in which each
person may contribute to the field school. Members with physical restrictions
of mobility, sight, hearing, or age participate in activities such as screening,
washing and cataloging artifacts, record keeping, and, depending on the
member’s experience, assisting and instructing newcomers.
It has been the practice of the board and of the field school committee to
select field school sites that offer a variety of experiences to participants, not
only in the type of field work to be done but in location within the state and
kind of site. As a result, field school participants have experienced site surveys
and excavations in the Hill Country; excavations at a historic presidio in
southeast Texas; excavation of Caddoan burial sites in deep East Texas; site
survey and excavation of prehistoric and historic sites on Galveston Island;
excavation of a Panhandle aspect site near Amarillo; area survey and
excavations of burned rock middens and rockshelters near the Pecos River;
and site survey and rock art recording in Guadalupe Mountains National
Park on the Texas-New Mexico border. In all, 19 different areas of Texas (see
Figure 1), each with its unique archeological puzzles and natural setting, have
been investigated. The profusion of potential archeological data and the
variety of field experiences offered, in addition to the hospitalit’¢ of the
landowners, have enabled TAS to conduct field schools for two successive
years at each of two locations (Eubank Ranch in Brown County and Paris
Ranch in Kerr County) and for three successive years at one location (Rowe
Valley in Williamson County).
That TAS is recognized foi" its professional level of training is evidenced
by the collaboration with TAS of both state and federal agencies: the
National Park Service at Sanford Reservoir (Figure 9) and Guadalupe
Mountains National Park; the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department at
McKinney Falls State Park and Galveston Island; and the Texas Highway
Department at Musk Hog Canyon and in Kerr County.
Since the beginning of the field school, college students interested in
archeology have participated on an informal basis. Occasionally students of
the cooperating archeologist have attended for the purpose of gathering data
for a report or publication. For example, several students from Texas Tech
University attended the Sabina Mountain No. 2 field school near E1 Paso as
part of their field training. Formal academic recognition of the TAS field
school came in 1982 at Rowe Valley when Dr. John Fox, director of the
anthropology program at Baylor University, accepted student Carol Kehl’s
plan for an individual study program (Carol Kehl: personal communication).
The plan, as outlined, required attendance at the TAS field school, reading
and reporting on the suggested readings published with the field school
announcement, and a detailed oral report at the end of the summer semester.
The course carried three hours of undergraduate credit. Elton Prewitt,
archeologist, and Jane Schweitzer, coordinator for the field crews, designed a
program that allowed Kehl to experience all phases of field school.

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer-- TA S Field Schools

117

Figure 9. At Sanford Reservoir, TAS had the support of the National Park Service.
(Photo: E. Mott Davis)

Figure 10. Norma Hoffrichter and Carroll Hedrick work on the writing project at
Brownwood. (Photo: Bill Richmond)

118

Texas Archeological Society

Site selection is the prerogative of the field school committee and is based
on the availability of an archeologist with the time and interest to conduct the
school at a particular site or area, on the suitability of a location and facilities
for camping, on the location as related to previous field schools, and on the
support of local TAS members.
In 1970 TAS members were asked to evaluate the value and effectiveness
of the field school program. The results of the questionnaire were presented at
the February 1971 board meeting. Responding members considered the most
valuable aspects of field school to be the archeological training they received
and the chance to meet and associate with other people interested in
archeology. Less than 5 percent of the respondents suggested that the evening
lectures needed to be better organized. Responses to a question about the
overall effect of the field school were almost unanimous in stating that
personal improvement in archeological techniques resulted from participation
in field schools.

Information Dissemination
Archeological data, like any other scientific information, is of little use
unless it is disseminated. For this reason, TAS members have been
encouraged to publish their work (whether resulting from field school or from
other areas of study) either as articles in the TAS Bulletin or newsletter, as
papers at the annual meeting, or as articles in regional archeological society
publications, such as La Tierra (San Antonio), The Artifact (El Paso), and the
Bulletin of the South Plains Archeological Society (Floydada).
The archeologist’s report, one of the most important sources of specifc
field school data, may not be published for several years after the date of the
field work. Reasons for delays include the lack of funds for special analyses
and the lack of available time for the archeologist to work on the report. TAS
members often volunteer to analyze data and write sections for the final
report. Extenuating circumstances, such as illness, may prevent the completion
of a report. In these cases it becomes necessary to find an alternate analyst and
author.
One of the more difficult projects undertaken in conjunction with a TAS
field school was the writing assignment and report compilation for the first of
the two field schools at Eubank Ranch near Brownwood (Figure 10).
Emphasis was placed on daily records and summaries of work accomplished,
and crew chief Norma Hoffrichter was placed in charge of instruction on daily
recording and compilation of the report. The writing experiment proved a
much more time-consuming and difficult project than was first contemplated.
The final result, compiled and edited by Norma Hoffrichter and Beth Ogden
Davis (1981), was issued as a TAS special publication and is an excellent
source of data and general information on the 1979 field school. To date, this
publication and an article in Texas Archeology (G. Humphreys 1979:3) are
the only published reports of the 1979 Eubank Ranch school.
The TAS field schools are unique in that vocational and avocational
archeologists work together to attain common goals. The success and interest
generated by the TAS program has encouraged at least one other state group

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer--TAS Field Schools

119

to initiate a field school program. E. Mott Davis reported to the board at the
March 1972 meeting that the Arkansas Archeological Society planned to
institute a field school for amateur archeologists. Their interest was generated
by the national publicity which the TAS field school had received.
An avocational certification program is incorporated into the field
school programs of both Arkansas and New Mexico. In response to
membership interest in a similar program for Texas, a TAS committee was
appointed to study the Arkansas and New Mexico programs. At the board of
directors meeting in October 1973, the committee reported that TAS should
not incorporate a certification program since it was not considered necessary
or advantageous.
Media coverage of field schools has long been recognized for its value in
increasing public awareness of the value of archeological and historic
resources. However, media coverage of archeological projects can result in a
crowd of visitors who may unintentionally impede or disrupt fieldwork or
damage sites. For some field schools, such as the Sanford Reservoir project,
the traditional press conference was scheduled on the day before the end of
field school, with the agreement that the locations of sites and field camp not
be identified. In later years, however, the positive value of widespread media
coverage has been recognized, and media personnel have been welcome to
visit the sites and the camp activities during the field school. To date,
disruption of archeological work and other field school activities has been
minimal.
Together with articles in the TAS Bulletin and newsletter and formal
archeological presentations at the annual meeting, media coverage has
assisted the TAS field school program by making the people of Texas aware
of the diversity and significance of their historic and prehistoric heritage.

SUMMARY OF TAS FIELD SCHOOLS, 1962-1982
The following summaries are intended as descriptions of field school
activities, with emphasis on archeological aspects. Field school summaries
are presented in chronological order and include information on the project
archeologist, archeological sites investigated, and work accomplished. Administrative information is summarized in Table 1; report information, in
Table 2; and archeological work, in Table 3.
Most site numbers are the trinomial numbers (Smithsonian system)
assigned by the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Austin (e.g.,
41TV 12, with 41 indicating Texas; the next two letters, the county designation;
and the final number, the site). Southern Methodist University numbers are
preceded with an X (e.g., X41LR8). Some national recreation areas do not
use the trinomial system and their numbers are preceded with area letter
designations (e.g., Sanford Recreation Area sites are preceded with SARE).

120

Texas A rcheological Society

o6
0
t_

tnl
c
OI

o,

....

o

t~

c

~

~3

&
o

t..’o
o
.O O
E+-

00

u7

Z<

c

o

t

t~

Q

~0

0

o c::
.tz to
o E
u3 t_

6

E~

"_- ~ ~

.o c~

o

<
0
0

c

o~
0

=-

<

o

¯ --

O9

t_

8
..c

,

x"

c;

0

*o

m

t0

o3

~
....~._~

o
-~

o

o~

o~

o~

o ~

O.C:

o

t

>

~

[
~:

_~

~,~

o~

o~

o~

o~

o~

o~

c

o~

o~

o~

o~

o~

~
oo-

~.o

_

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer-- TA S Field Schools

U
I-

C

--{/

g

B
C
.O Q
~+
Z~

04

~

~

~

~
¢’4

04

_

w

°
lxJF-

,_
02

~.)

0
m

~.

U

c

E
L

U-

0

,.2

o

,.0

g

>~

0

g~

W

laJ

C)

o
w

121

122

Texas Archeological Society

g,
t~

g

c

~

._.1

g
g
t_

.oo

g,

m

o

~:

o

¯ .~
,o~,
~-_

~
-,
g

tn
°--

-

~

¯

g

~
_

¯-

g

8~.
~ Y- ~_

y_

-om

g

g

8

C3

o~

-

~=~

-

L

~d

-’:d

o

o

-

2-

"~

f~

8

~

~.

5_

5

-y_
-

~
-A

go

o

~

¯

~=.

-

4-

,c,-

,o,,,

~oo

~= R~ gk

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer-- TA S Field Schools

123

d

0

0

8
"-

o--

B

o

~
t
o

~
o L
~o

o

f.

c "r3
D-

8

O

8
o_

o

~J
~-

8

_

c

0

P

124

Texas Archeological Society

peultuJeSePUR
0081
sod
OlJO~SlH
0081-0091
OIJOSSlH

x

uelPUl
OlJO#SlH

x

x

x

x

x

L~

olJOCSlqeJd
e¢e3

x

x

x

3!eq3jV eseq

x

oleq3Jv elPPt~

x
xxx

x

x

x

o!eqDJv AtJe9

xxxx

x

uetpul
-oeled e¢eq
uelpUl-Oeled

UOl¢3ellOO

x

xxxx

¢sel

x

xxx

x

x

xxxx

x
x

6uldd~

x

/keAanS
keAJns e~l£

x

UOl¢eAeoX3

x

x
x

x

x

x

x

eJn4.onJ4. S

x

x

x

x

xxxx

OlJO4-SlH
eJn4.3nJ4.S
XX><

o!ao4-s lq
-04-OJd

~-gJd

Je4. l eqS~OO~l

lelJn8
q4Jl~H

z_
U

uoppll4
I leqS

uepp 1~4
N3o~

x

x

peudn8
uepPl~q

x

x

x

/puno~l
eeJv 15u I^I’I

xxx

x

/e¢I s dtue3
ae4.4-eo$

314517
o

",I

~

.~

’~

-~,

~o,~o,’°~’~

_.e~_o,~o
.~.,o~o,~"

~

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer-- TA S Field Schools

125

peul~ue~epuN
OOgl

sod

olJOCSlH
OOgl-O091
OlJO~SIH
uelPUl

O~JO~SlH
OIJO~sJqeJd
ece7

x

x

x

Ole4OJV ece7

x

x

x

xx

~l~qoJV elpplw

x

x

x

~--

xxx

x

x

x

~e~xxx

x

x

~-

~-

x

x

~-.

x

~leqOJV klJe3

x
u~IPUl
-ogled ece7

x

uRIPUI-OelRd

x

uol.hoelloO

xxxxxxx

~sel

x

x

6ulddRy~

xx

/~eAJns
~gAJnS

x

e~IS

x

UOt#RAR3X~

x

xxx

x
x

x

xxx

x
x

x

x

xxx

ejrl~.:~r%J¢S
ol JO.l.s |H
eJnj-onJj.S
o|JOj-slq

Je41 eqs~i~o~
I~lJn8
4¢JReH

x

x

x

xxxx

x

xx

uepPlH

I l eqs
uepp IW
>~ookl peuJn8

x

x

ueppll~
IPUnCX~
geav 5UlAI"I
/e¢I sdwRO
Je¢¢RoS

x

314J-17

[-..

~-

~

xx

x

x

x

x

==~==-~=

x

x

xxx

x

~

~

-~
__~

mZ

xxxxx

xx

~d
_

o, .: _
o, ~. ~_~
_

~

T~ ~,

126

Texas A rcheological Society

peulwJecepun
00gl SOd
olJO~SlH

x

x

x

x

xx

x

x

00gl-0091

OlJO~SlH
u~IPUl

x

x

x

OlJOCSlH

OlJOCslqead
e¢~3
Ol~qOJV e ~3

x

ol~qoJv elPPI~

x

ol~qoav

x

x

x

xe-.

,,. o.~ e.. ~--

e--. x e-.

xe-.

xx

xx

x

t’,-

x

kla~

e-.

x

u~IPUl
-Oel~d e ~3
UmlPUl-oel~d
xxxxxxx

UOl4OellOO

xxxx

x

cse±

xxxx

xxx

6uldd~l

xxxx

x
xxxxxxx

x

xxx

x

/keAJns
x

x

x

keA,ans e~l$

x

x

UO!¢~A~OX3
e.m.l.on J.I.S

x

x

x

xxxx

xxxxx

x

x

x

OlJO4.SlH

ean4~nJ.I.S
DIJOCSlq
-o¢oJd m-gJd
JO4.1 ows~IOO~

x

xx

qcJ~eH

x

uepplH
t leqS

uepPl~
~o:~ peuan8

x

xx

uepplH
/puno,4

x

~eav BUI^l’l
/e¢I sd~o

xx

x

xxx

x

x

x

Olq4.1"I

xxx~2

xx

x

t.-o--

og---~

t~Z

--~.~
~

m

~.
r~ ~O

x

x

x

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer-- TA S Field Schools

>~

x

x

x

x

>(

x

xx

>~

0

x

>~

x
x

x

x

x

x

x

0
0
0

xxxxxxx

UOl.l.OellOO

x

x

x

r~
~sa~

x

6ulddetq

x

x

x

x

x

/AeAdnS

"o

~BAJflS

o

x

x

B~|S

UOI~AeOX3

x

eJn.T.~n J4.S

xxxxxx

x

x

x

x

x

OlJO4.SlH

o
gJn4.ond.[.S
OlJO.hS I q
-.O~OJd

~-eJd

Je4. I eqs~too~
o
o
,x:l

lelJnB

<

uaPplH

44..aeeH

I

o

leqs

uepplH
>ioo~ peuJnB
uepPl~l

/puno~
ae.tv 6Ul^l’l

x

x

x

xx

x

x

/ e-I. 1 s d~uwO
ae.hl.goS
olq~.l’l

u~z

.........._~o

~

~~=z

-~

127

128

Texas Archeological Society
1962: Gilbert Site (41RA13)

Rains County, northeast Texas, June 22-July 15
Director: Edward B. Jelks
Site types: encampment or village area
Work done: excavation--5 middens; site survey
Temporal context: Protohistoric (Historic Indian)
Number of participants: 77
The Gilbert site (41RA 13) is located in Rains County in northeast Texas,
about 70 miles east of Dallas. The site consists of a series of low mounds
located on a hill above Lake Fork Creek. The area contains a wide ,~ariety of
animal and plant forms--edible (wild blackberries and persimmon) and
inedible (poison ivy). Soils in the area of the site consist of red and yellow
clays overlain with a fine sand topsoil. Most cultural materials and features
were in the sand layer.
Harold Akins of Sulphur Springs originally noted the site in the spring of
1962. Further investigation by R.K. Harris of Dallas verified that the area was
probably the location of an Indian encampment or village which, based on the
mixture of European and Indian artifacts, predated A.D. 1800.
Tests in two of the site middens produced materials which indicated that
the site was of the Nortefio focus (eighteenth-century Wichita Indians) dating
approximately A.D. 1700-1850 (Jelks 1967:3-4).
The field school camp was located in a loosely designated area near the
site. The number of participants per day during the 24-day survey and dig was
seldom as many as 30, although the total number over the period of the dig
was 77. Meals were prepared by participants (usually two people drew KP for
each meal or, in some cases, for the day). A large tarp held up by small trees
cut for the purpose and guyed by ropes to larger trees served as a cooking,
dining, and lab shelter. Portable stoves and scrounged, donated, and
borrowed pots, pans, and cook gear on homemade tables constituted kitchen
equipment. Considerable good-natured heckling by hungry onlookers often
accompanied preparation of the evening meal.
Work crews of 6 to 10 people during the week and as many as 30 on the
weekends recorded 17 middens in the site area. Additionally, two pits which
apparently had been used for storage were found. No evidence of permanent
structures such as post molds or floors was noted. What appeared to be bits of
wattle-and-daub were observed and might indicate locations of possible
structures (Jelks 1967:14).
Five small middens were excavated by the field school participants. The
number and variety of recovered artifacts contributed to the high morale of
the workers. An unexpected stratigraphic problem appeared in the form of a
clay mound on top of a midden layer (Davis 1962). It was thought that
individual middens represented house structure locations, but no physical
evidence of houses was found (Jelks 1967:13-14).
Artifacts recovered at the Gilbert site, although of both Indian and
European origin, are believed to represent only an Indian occupation. Certain
European materials were adapted by the Indians; for example, arrow points
were crafted from flattened gun barrels, bits of brass, and various decorated
metal gun fittings (Jelks 1967:30). Metal arrow points, referred to as Benton

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer-- TA S Field Schools

129

points, have been found in other sites designated as Nortefio focus sites and
are estimated to date from the mid-eighteenth to mid-nineteenth centuries
(Harris et al. 1967:32). Parts of guns of both English and French origin also
support the 1700-1850 estimated dates for the site.
A wide variety of ornaments are of both Indian and European origin.
Numerous European trade beads were recovered, as well as objects that
apparently were adapted as ornaments, including a coin pendant bearing the
date 1749, and two metal buttons. On the basis of bead style alone, dates for
the Gilbert site could be estimated to be 1740-1770 (Harper et al. 1967:87-104).
Of the Indian artifacts found, 2,221 pottery sherds, representing a large
number of vessels, are certainly the most numerous. The sherds, decorated
and undecorated, also represent a variety of vessel types. The ceramics and
the geographical !ocation of the site imply a Caddoan association, but
diagnostic ceramics to support this conclusion are not present (Story et al.
1967:165).
The final conclusion drawn by Jelks and his associates reflect the success
of the investigations: "knowledge of 18th Century French trade goods on the
southern plains--guns, beads, knives and the like--is enlarged considerably
by the findings at Gilbert" (Jelks 1967:244). To say the least, that was quite an
auspicious beginning for the TAS field schools.

1963: Oblate Site (41CM1)
Comal County, Central Texas, June 22-July 7
Directors: Curtis Tunnell and E. Mott Davis
Site type: rockshelter and terrace
Work done: excavation--rockshelter 41CM 1; deep test on terrace
Temporal context: Archaic-Late Prehistoric
Number of participants: 70
In June 1963 the second annual TAS summer field school was held on
property formerly owned by the Oblate Fathers in Comal County. The
property was located below the anticipated reservoir level of Canyon Dam,
and TAS work was conducted in the anticipation of probable loss of
archeological data as well as loss of any future opportunity to salvage data.
The general purpose of the TAS field school was outlined in Texas
Archeology 7(1), April 1963: (1) to carry out the excavation and analysis of a
significant archeological site (or sites) through the coordinated efforts of the
society membership; and (2) to provide society members with instruction in
scientific methods and techniques of archeological work.
All materials collected were placed under the custodianship of the
University of Texas and the Travis County Archeological Society. It was
formally stated that no specimens would revert to individual collections.
The Oblate site (41CM1) was located on the east side of and above
Spring Creek, a small, intermittent stream which flowed into the Guadalupe
River approximately 300 yards to the north. The area, located 12 miles
northwest of New Braunfels, was subsequently inundated when the Canyon
Dam reservoir was filled.

130

Texas Archeological Society

Archeologist Curtis Tunnell had participated in Canyon Reservoir
archeological work in 1959 and 1960 (see Tunnell 1962) and was considered
the logical director of the field school. Additional archeological supervision,
suggestions, and shovel-handling were offered by E. Mott Davis, Lathel
Duffield, Ed Jelks, Dan Scurlock, and Dee Ann Story (Davis 1963b:6).
The site consisted ofa rockshelter at the base of a limestone bluffabove a
small creek. The northern half of the shelter (75 x 10 feet*) contained about
three feet of deposit. The deposit beyond the shelter overhang was considerably deeper. Excavations were carried out within the shelter and in the deeper
deposits in front of the shelter. The deep test was dug to a depth of 12 feet
during the course of the field school. After the official school closed, some
members continued to work during the next two weeks, but bedrock was
never reached.
Objectives for the field school included an attempt to establish a more
complete temporal/stratigraphic sequence for Central Texas archeology
through diagnostic point types and radiocarbon dating. The occupation/use
area was considered to be Middle Archaic on the basis of Pedernales and
Bulverde points, which were found as deep as 12 feet in the deep-test pit
(Davis 1963b:6). Although no conclusive evidence for a stratigraphic
sequence was established, work done by TAS at the Oblate site confirmed the
results of the initial site investigation (Johnson et al. 1962). Artifacts
diagnostic of Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods included dart and arrow
points, beads, and a variety of tools.
The TAS youth program was initiated at the Oblate field school. The
program originated as activities to keep the youngsters occupied when
parents instructed them to "go play" in the southern portion of the shelter. It
soon became obvious that the young people were capable of much more than
play. They set up a square, excavated it, screened the material, and bagged all
artifacts. They literally worked like beavers, thus earning the name Beaver
Patrol. The names of some of the beavers have been lost to memory, but it is
known that Johnathan and Hugh Davis and Michael and Ann Richmond
were included. Future field schools incorporated more formal educational
programs for young people, and these programs have been the cornerstone of
a career in science for many of the beavers.
The number of daily participants varied from as few as 8 to as many as
30. Participants brought their own camping equipment and camped in an
open area about 200 yards west of the site. Two big squad tents were erected,
and cooking, eating and laboratory chores were conducted under their
shelter. As at the Gilbert site, members took turns with meal preparation and
cleanup. An assessed fee for meals was on a per capita basis (Davis 1963a:2).
Participants were not expected to provide their own digging equipment,
since most materials were provided by the University of Texas in Austin.
Some members, however, did prefer to bring personal items such as trowels,
clipboards, and compasses. Members of the Travis County Archeological

*Editor’s note: Since this article is a historical narrative, rather than a scientific report.
measurements have not been converted to metrics in order to avoid disruption of the narrative.

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer--TAS Field Schools

131

Society assisted in camp preparation, constructed paths to the site, and
mowed and sprayed the camp area.
Informal discussions, lectures, and films or slides were presented in the
evenings. Two films shown were from the Spadework for History series of
archeological films being made by E. Mott Davis and the University of Texas;
a third film in the series was made at the Oblate site after the close of field
school. Backfilling of the excavation area was postponed until after filming.
The need for electricity for the filming activity resulted in a bonus for the field
school, since an electrical line was run to the site and was available for use
(Davis 1963b:6).
A description of the late-evening activities is best given by E. Mott Davis
(1963b:7): "the pickin’ and singin’ began. The small fry included some of the
best ukulele players in the state of Texas .... and with the guitars on hand and
plenty of loud voices, we killed off many railroad engineers, sank the Titanic
innumerable times, and generally made the hills ring with music."

1964: Vinson Site (41LT1)
Near Tehuacana, Limestone County, north-central Texas, June 20-July 4
Director: Dee Ann Story
Site type: habitation area with mounds
Work done: excavation--Vinson site (41LT1)
Temporal context: Late Prehistoric-Historic
Number of participants: Unknown
The Vinson site (41LT1), believed to represent a historic Wichita-possibly Tawakoni--habitation site, was located in a treeless open field in
north-centra! Texas (Davis 1964a: 1). This farming area of plowed fields and
large pastures was once an extensive rolling grassland prairie cut by small
rivers and intermittent streams.
It was recognized that this site would not provide the abudance and
variety of artifacts recovered from the two previous TAS field school sites,
but unique archeological problems presented participants with invaluable
learning experiences (Davis 1964a: 1). Evidence of two house structures and
storage pits was uncovered with great difficulty in the rock-hard dry soil that
could only be worked with picks. The Vinson site was temporally related to
the Gilbert site (41RAI3) (Jelks 1967:4), although at the Gilbert site positive
evidence of habitation structures was lacking. Mounds were suspected to be
either filled pit houses or storage pits at Gilbert (Jelks 1967:14). Features at
Vinson were demonstrated to be habitation remains, one of which had a floor
four feet beneath the ground surface. Three storage pits were excavated, two
of which had !og floors (Davis 1964b: 1).
Under the direction of archeologist Dee Ann Story, the large number of
field school daily participants--often more than 40--were divided into
groups, which were instructed and directed by crew chiefs. Some of the
members had sufficient training and experience to instruct and direct others,
thus enabling the professionals to oversee and guide activities and be
available for consultation, as needed (Davis 1964b:2).

132

Texas Archeological Society

Although the number of artifacts recovered was less than at Gilbert,
morale remained high. One interesting area which was tested was a mound
that produced a mixture of Indian and European artifacts (Davis 1964b: i).
The now officially termed Beaver Patrol, under the direction of Cecil
Calhoun, excavated one of the house features--a round structure with four
center posts and a central fireplace. The positive contributions of the young
people under very difficult working conditions speaks well for their enthusiasm
and the excellent guidance offered by their directors (Davis 1964b: 1).
The field school at 41LT1 lasted for two weeks. Field camp was located
on Lake Mexia, about 10 miles from the site. The lake provided a’place to
swim, and the trees provided much-welcomed shade.
Work usually began at six in the morning and halted at noon so workers
could avoid working in the sun as much as possible. After the participants had
a chance to cool off, work continued until late afternoon. Cataloging and
work with field notes continued after supper. Informal evening archeological
talks and discussions were held on an irregular schedule.
Evening programs were followed by the now traditional pickin’ ’n
singin’, with the vocal participants sometimes numbering in excess of 60.
1965: Gaulding Site (41JF27)
French Island, Jefferson County, upper Texas coast southeast of Beaumont,
June 12-19
Director: Dessamae Lorrain, assisted by Burney McClurkan and Dorris
Olds, archeologists
Site types: shell midden; burial
Work done: excavation--41JF27
Temporal context: Late Prehistoric
Number of participants: 50+
The three previous field scfiools had lasted for two weeks or more and
had been carried out with the cooperation of the University of Texas and local
archeological societies. In 1965 the university was unable to offer material
and personnel to assist field school operations, so archeologist-in-charge
Dessamae Lorrain revised plans for both field school and camp operations.
For the first time participants had to furnish most of their own excavation
equipment, there was no camp mess, and the field school lasted only one week
(Davis 1965a: 1).
The Gaulding site (41JF27), located on French’s Island on the upper
Gulf Coast southeast of Beaumont (Figure 11), offered an opportunity for
TAS members to learn something of the intricacies of coastal archeology. The
site consisted of a large shell midden, up to four feet deep, in an area that had
previously been studied archeologically only through reconnaissance work
during the 1940s (Davis 1965b:4). The field school thus had the potential for a
positive contribution in Texas archeology and for a learning experience in
excavation and evaluation of a shell midden.
The primary aim of the Gaulding field school was to train individuals in
archeological techniques. Detailed instruction in field work and leadership
was offered both at the dig and in daily archeological lectures (Figure 12).
Participants--fluctuating in daily number from a handful to 50--1earned the

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer--TAS Field Schools

133

Figure 11. Jonathan Davis takes field notes at 41JF27, a shell midden. (Photo: E.
Mott Davis)

Figure 12. At Gaulding (41JF27) daily lectures covered a variety of field techniques.
(Photo: E. Mott Davis)

134

Texas Archeological Society

fine points of mapping, gridding, shell midden excavation, feature evaluation,
stratification determination, note taking, and cataloging of artifacts. The site
area was mapped and gridded, and 13 5x5-foot squares were dug, in addition
to trenches and test pits (Davis 1965b:6).
As excavation of the four-foot-deep shell midden proceeded, the layered
structure of the midden became apparent. The primary task for the workers
was to determine stratigraphy within the midden. Artifacts generally were
sparse. Some pottery, a few projectile points, and bones representing turtle
and alligator were found (Davis 1965b:4).
On the last official day of field school, the discovery of a flexed burial
provided excitement and a final flurry of hard work. The bones were too
friable to survive removal intact; however, they were completely recorded,
then removed and wrapped. The shattered skull was jacketed in plaster and
removed. No grave goods were present (Davis 1965b:6).
Field camp was located in a wooded area shaded by tall trees, and a
two-track road led through the rice fields and woods to the camp. In dry
weather the road was passable, but five inches of rain fell immediately before
field school and turned the access into a morass. The mud was deep and
virtually impassable, and with each vehicle that attempted it, the "road"
became worse. Once in, members were not inclined to leave. Fortunately, an
alternate exit route was available at the conclusion of field school (Anne Fox:
personal communication, n.d.).
Despite snakes, mosquitoes, rain, and mud, participants were enthusiastic. Apparently hard work and difficult conditions during the day only
make the evening socializing more enjoyable.
1966: Dunlap Site Complex (41CX5)
Crockett County, southwest Texas, June 18-26
Director: Burney McClurkan
Site types: burned rock middens; rockshelters
Work done: excavations--41CX5 (Dunlap site complex consisting of Red
Mill rockshelter and 2 burned rock middens), 41CX6, 41CX7 (rockshelters); testing--41CX8 (burned rock midden)
Temporal context: Middle Archaic-Late Prehistoric
Number of participants: 150
Signs directing 150 participants to the fifth annual TAS field school site
were posted along the highway between Ozona and Sheffield. The field camp,
a relatively short distance from the road, extended at least one-fourth mile
along a bench near the base of a hill, where cedar trees helped provide shade
(Davis 1966:2-3).
The Dunlap site complex is located in Crockett County at the western
edge of the Edwards Plateau and just east of the Pecos River. It is semiarid,
rugged country with its share of thorny plants, including yucca, sotol, various
cacti, and catclaw. Steep-sided hills with limestone layers harbor rockshelters.
In the valleys below the shelters are burned rock middens. Three of these
areas--two middens and a rockshelter near the field camp--constituted the
primary Dunlap site complex (41CX5). Another midden (41CX8) plus two
rockshelters (41CX6 and 41CX7) on the Owens Ranch also were investigated.

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer--TAS Field Schools

135

The Dunlap site complex (41CX5)--a burned rock midden within the
field camp area (Midden 2), a second midden across the gully (Midden 1), and
a rockshelter above the field camp (Red Mill Shelter)--apparently was
evidence of area use by hunting and gathering peoples during the Middle
Archaic to Late Prehistoric periods (Word 1966:10-12). This area, first visited
in April 1966 by a TAS reconnaissance group, was selected for the field school
because the area offered sufficient work opportunity for participants.
Permission to work on the property was given by owner Basil Dunlap, of
Ozona. Jeff Owens, of Iraan, also granted permission for work on his ranch,
where two shelters were investigated (41CX6 and 41CX7) (McClurkan
1966:5).
The primary purpose of the field school was to provide experience and
training in all phases of field archeology. Because of the large registration,
various activities were planned, including excavation of shelters and burned
rock middens, mapping of sites and instruction in use of mapping instruments
such as transit and alidade, cataloging and other laboratory activities,
recording procedures, and surveying. Crew chiefs and their crews were
assigned specific activities (McClurkan 1966:6). Working crews of 50 to 60
members were present on any single day, and crew assignments and crew size
varied with the archeological activities and individual training needs (A. Fox
1966:7).
An analysis of activities at the completion of each field day determined
any need for improvement in archeological work, training programs, or camp
operation. Archeological record keeping was the responsibility of the crew
chiefs, and they, in turn, assigned specific record-keeping chores to crew
members. In addition, a recorder was assigned to keep a daily log of progress
and to incorporate all individual reports into a permanent file (A Fox
1966:7-8).
Owens No. 1 (41CX6) and Owens No. 2 (41CX7), two rockshelters on the
Owens’ property, were tested. A test trench showed the deposit in Owens No.
1 rockshelter to be 36 inches at its deepest point. The depth of deposit in
Owens No. 2 also was about 36 inches. Deposits were trenched from the back
wall of each rockshelter to the overhang. Artifact yields from both tests were
similar in number and type of material. On the basis of recovered artifacts-including dart points, knives, scrapers, and a few manos--these shelters were
dated to the Late Archaic period (Fullen 1966:15).
Red Mill Shelter, part of 41CX5, is approximately 60 feet wide, 35 feet
deep from the front of the overhang to the back wall at its deepest point, and 7
feet high at the highest point. A large talus slope extends about 100 feet
downhill from the mouth of the shelter. The presence of three pot holes
indicated that the deposit had been disturbed. As excavation progressed, it
was noted that culture-bearing deposits were severely disturbed to a depth of
31 inches, and no stratification could be determined. Artifacts included
Fresno, Alba, and Livermore arrow points and Ensor and Langtry dart
points and indicated a cultural-temporal context of Middle Archaic to Late
Prehistoric periods (Word 1966:10-12).
Excavations at Middens 1 and 2 at the Dunlap site complex have been
described by Calhoun (1966:12-13) and D. Lorrain ( 1966:13-15). Midden No.

136

Texas Archeological Society

1, a circular burned rock midden about 30 feet in diameter, contained 12
slab-lined basins believed to have been used in processing sotol. The basins
were within a layer of organically stained marl with flecks of charcoal and
some burned rock located toward the interior of the 1.5-foot-deep midden.
Some of these basins were superimposed on other, similar basins, and
therefore represented at least three use episodes. Few artifacts were recovered
from the midden. The most numerous were scrapers of various sizes. A small
potsherd was found on the surface beside the midden, and mano and metate
fragments were found in the midden fill. An area containing flint debitage
south of the midden may have represented a habitation area (Calhoun
1966:12-13).
Midden No. 2, a circular mound of burned and cracked limestone rock,
was about 50 feet in diameter and about two feet deep at the center. No
hearths were evident in this midden, although, excavation in the center of the
midden revealed that the bedrock was overlain by a 6-inch-thick layer of
loosely cemented calichelike material. This layer contained typical midden
soil but no burned rock. The majority of the few artifacts found were located
at the edges of the midden; only a few were located near the center, close to the
surface. Artifacts recovered consist of dart points, point fragments, scrapers,
and some flint flakes (D. Lorrain 1966:13-14).
Again, as in the past, the young people made a positive contribution. A
teen-age group with Dan Fox as leader conducted a reconnaissance and
excavation of a burned rock midden (41CX8) on Live Oak Creek. The
midden, which was about 50 feet in diameter, was gridded and trenched, and

Figure 13. Live Oak Creek, Crockett County, a welcome oasis. (Photo: E. Mott
Davis)

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer-- TA S Field Schools

137

the surface of the midden and surrounding area was collected. Most artifacts,
scarce and nondiagnostic, were found on the midden (D. Fox 1966:15-16).
At the time the work was done at the Dunlap field school sites,
knowledge of the archeology in the immediate area was limited. TAS
members experienced an important lesson by observing the destruction pot
hunters can cause to a potentially valuable archeological site.
The day’s work, reviews of West Texas archeology, pictures of various
phases of the work, and crew chief reports were included in discussion periods
each afternoon. Opportunity was provided for question-and-answer sessions.
After the meetings, most people headed for Live Oak Creek, some six miles
away (Figure 13).

1967: Harold Williams Site (41CP10)
Ferrell’s Bridge Reservoir near Pittsburg, Camp County, northeast Texas,
June 17-24
Director: Ned Woodall
Site types: middens, habitation and burial areas
Work done: excavation--Harold Williams site (41CP10)
Temporal context: Late Prehistoric Caddo (Titus focus)
Number of participants: 80-100 average per day
The Harold Williams site (41CP 10) is located on a terrace of Dry Creek,
a tributary of Big Cypress Creek in the Ferrell’s Bridge Reservoir area near
Pittsburg. The slightly undulating low hills and sandy topsoil of the area are
typical of the northeast Texas piney woods.
It was known from previous finds that the area represented a Late
Prehistoric Caddoan (Titus focus) site from which burial vessels and possibly
other materials had been removed (Figure 14). During the field school a
midden zone, several burials, and a circle of stains, possibly representing a
house outline, were found (Davis 1967b: 1).
On the basis of surface evidence, the site was divided into three areas:
Area A (Figure 15), in which a ceramic bottle with a unique engraved
rattlesnake design was found; Area B, a midden area some 200 feet west of
Area A and known to have contained at least 14 burials; and Area C, which
was located at the end of a ridge above the flood plain and appeared to be a
trash pit. Each of these areas produced a variety of features, artifacts, and
problems for field school participants.
The majority of artifacts consisted Of various jars, bowls, bottles, and
vessels of different pottery types, primarily of the Gibson and Fulton aspects
(Woodall 1967: I0). The exact temporal relationships of these pottery types
was not determined.
Four features in Area B contained burials, two of which apparently had
associated pottery grave goods. Other features contained prehistoric pottery
and historic artifacts. The single feature located in Area C appeared to be a
trash pit. The fill contained sherds, flint flakes, and bone and shell fragments
(Woodall 1967:10).
The TAS work presented several archeological problems for future
study, including the presence of Gibson aspect pottery types along with an

138

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 14. Site 41CPI0, a Caddoan site, contained several burials. (Photo: E. Mott
Davis)

Figure 15. Pottery vessels in situ in Area A, site 41CP10, near Pittsburg. (Photo: E.
Mott Davis)

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer-- TAS Field Schools

139

early Fulton aspect pottery; possible differences in periods of occupation at
Area A and Area B, as indicated by pottery types; and apparently two burial
practices, indicated by burials with and without grave goods (Woodall
1967:10).
Field camp was located in an open area adjacent to the site. Heavy
equipment (wheelbarrows, large screens) was provided by TAS and Southern
Methodist University, but members were encouraged to bring personal field
equipment. A common mess was available, as well as a camp cook, and about
70 people were served at each meal (Davis 1967b:2). In addition to socializing
at mealtimes, there were the usual evening song fests, which lasted well into
the night.

1967: Mission San Juan de Capistrano (41BX5)
(Second 1967 field school)
San Antonio, Bexar County, south-central Texas, July 22-30
Director: Mardith Schuetz, assisted by Anne Fox and Jay Wise
Site type: Spanish mission
Work done: excavation--Mission San Juan de Capistrano (41BX5)
Temporal context: Historic Spanish, A.D. 1700-1800
Number of participants: 42
The primary purpose of the second field school held in 1967 was to
provide training in historic archeology (Schuetz 1968a:7). However, the
participants also had an opportunity to contribute to the understanding of
Spanish mission life in Texas.
Missing walls of the original mission complex, a paved plaza, caliche
floors, and cobbled street were located, and Mexican artifacts, including
small pots and lava pestles, were recovered (Figure 16). A lab was set up for
field processing of artifacts. Afternoon seminars were conducted on such
topics as colonial history and buildings, mission life, and identification of
eighteenth- and nineteenth-century artifacts (Schuetz 1968a:8).
The 100° Texas weather caused discomfort for participants, but there
was no noticeable lack of enthusiasm. According to Mardith Schuetz
(1968a:8), "The crew worked like demons and never lost their sense of
humor."
1968: Presidio Loreto (41VT8)
Victoria County, southeast Texas, June 15-22
Archeologist: E. Mott Davis, assisted by Anne Fox and Curtis Tunnell
Site type: Spanish colonial and Indian occupation area
Work done: teaching archeological techniques; excavation--Presidio Loreto
(41VT8); testing--site area; burial removal
Temporal context: Archaic-Late Prehistoric; Historic Spanish, A.D. 16001800
Number of participants: 147
The seventh annual TAS field school was the first administered solely by
the society. Emphasis was placed on instruction in the basic principles of
archeological field techniques rather than on a summer dig. Testing the site to

140

Texas A rcheological Society

Figure 16. Excavations at San Juan de Capistrano, an early Spanish mission. (Photo:
E. Mott Davis)

determine its nature and extent was considered important but secondary to
the teaching aspect (Davis 1968a: 1).
The Presidio Loreto site (41VT8), in Victoria County about 50 miles
from the Gulf Coast, is primarily a Spanish colonial site. Recovered artifacts
and features, however, indicated both Spanish and Indian activities (Davis
1968b:2-3).
Of the 130 people in camp at any one time, some 70 to 80 were on the dig
each day. Crews of 8 were formed for instruction, testing, and excavation.
The school’s goal, emphasis on teaching archeological techniques, was
immediately instigated with an orientation and mapping survey of the site.
The task took all of the first day and provided participants with both skills in
mapping and a chance to become familiar with the site prior to excavation
(Davis 1968b:3).
Area use and occupational evidence was represented by both Indian and
European colonia! artifacts, including ceramics and lithics. Crude sandstone
circular foundations were located in three areas. Although it was theorized
that these might be the remains of four corner structures of a presidio, no
evidence of a fourth structure was found. At the location where it was
assumed such remains would be, a 10x 10 foot test square produced diagnostic
materials ofa Paleo point base and a Bulverde dart point. No evidence of any
structure was found (Davis 1968b:3). In another area, a rock pile appeared to
be the remains of fallen stone walls, but there was no apparent relationship to
the circular foundations.

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer--TAS Field Schools

141

The presence of Spanish colonial and Indian artifacts supported the
hypothesis that the site might be the location of the second La Bahia Presidio
(1726-1749), but no definitive evidence of the presidio or its location was
found (Davis 1968b:3).
There seemed to be a transitional area on the northern part of the site
where the mixture of artifacts changed from predominantly Spanish to a
mixture of predominantly Indian artifacts, including flint artifacts and chips,
native pottery, and animal (cattle or bison) bones, with colonial pottery and
iron nails. During testing of this northern area of the site a partially frozen
flexed burial was uncovered, jacketed, and removed (Davis 1968b:4).
The Beaver Patrol contributed to the overall understanding of the site by
extensive testing of areas around one structural complex. The young people
were able to demonstrate the size and isolation of one area of ruins (Davis
1968b:3).
Lectures and slide shows on various aspects of archeology were
scheduled each evening. Rains, which plagued the field school off and on all
week, interfered with some of the lectures but did not dampen the spirits of the
participants. Unfortunately, the rains also affected the access road, which
became a "mile-long mudbath" to the highway (Davis 1968b:2).
As in past years, the sing-alongs lasted well into the early morning hours.
With wake-up call at 5:30 or 6:00 a.m., lack of sleep became something of a
problem for some individuals. It should be noted, however, that most of the
late-night revelers were on the job early and were diligent workers.

1969: Sanford Recreation Area
Lake Meredith, Canadian River, Hutchinson County, Texas Panhandle,
June 14-21
Archeologist: Jack T. Hughes
Site type: puebloan structure and burial area
Work done: excavation--SARE 145, 146, 147, and 242
Temporal context: Panhandle aspect, A.D. 1300-1400
Number of participants: 204
The stated purpose of the 1969 TAS field school was twofold: to provide
instruction in the basic principles ofarche01ogical field techniques, and to test
a series of Panhandle aspect sites to determine time relationships for a period
of Plains Indian farming activities and their pueblo-like structures on the
Canadian River (Davis 1969a:13). The sites, on the north side of the lake,
were located on the upland overlooking a creek and arm of Lake Meredith.
Pleistocene soils in the area were generously covered with red gravels and
white dolomite (Davis 1969b:7).
Four sites (field numbered SARE 145,146, 147, and 242) were selected
for study and excavation. The numbering system used was that of the
National Park Service, and SARE refers to Sanford Recreation Area.
Assistants to Jack Hughes were given the responsibility of supervising work
at specific locations: E. Mott Davis was in charge at SARE 145, a large,
multiroom site; Dessamae Lorrain was in charge at SARE 146, a scattered
dwelling site; Bill Harrison supervised at SARE 147, an accumulation of

142

Texas Archeological Society

sandstone blocks and a large rock pile; and Cecil Calhoun supervised work at
SARE 242, a burial site (Davis 1969b:9).
Each site provided valuable information as well as training experiences
for the crews. At SARE 242, four burials were found. These were flexed, in
pits, and under concentrations of slabs, with no regular burial orientation
(Davis 1969b: 13).
SARE 145, a comparatively large area, produced numerous artifacts as
well as evidence of habitation structures with remains of walls and floors.
Evidence of a succession of buildings--two to five different structures--was
found under about 3 feet of deposit. The young people worked in a lower area
of the site and located a wall and a trough metate (Southwestern-style but
made of local material). A limited amount of trade pottery was found in the
pueblo area (Davis 1969b: 14).
SARE 146 and 147, both habitation sites, contained different types of
structures. At SARE 147 there was a large rectangular structure with the
remains of a possible circular tower or storage room against the southeast
corner. Excavations at SARE 146 revealed that it was a pithouse village area
with five probable structures; the slab-lined pits extended about 18 inches
below the ground surface. Very few artifacts were recovered here (Davis
1969b: 14).
According to Jack Hughes, three general periods of occupation are
represented: pit-houses as the oldest (SARE 146), then earth lodges (SARE
147), and, most recent, the pueblo-type structures (SARE 145). The need for
additional archeological information, beyond that recovered from previous
work in the area, placed a greater significance on the TAS field school data
(Davis 1969b: 14-15).
Not only did the field school participants become more aware of the
prehistory of the Panhandle, but, thanks to excellent coverage by press, TV,
and radio, residents in the Panhandle became aware of the purpose and work
of the TAS field school. Media coverage was arranged by the National Park
Service as part of their public relations program (Davis t969b: 13).
Camp was located near Lake Meredith and above a mostly dry creek,
about two miles from the area of the sites. Field school daily attendance of
between 150 and 200 people complicated the logistics of running the camp.
The camp director and field school committee, in preparation for the influx of
participants, purchased a 10-burner stove, and two refrigerators, a water
trailer for a portable water supply, and chemical latrines were rented (Davis
1969a: 14, 1969b:7). Experience was proving an excellent teacher.
Again rain proved to be something of a problem. For the first couple of
days, heavy rains and the accompanying cooler weather caused some
discomfort but did not seem to dampen enthusiasm. Evening and night rains
continued into the week during field school, with an especially heavy storm on
Tuesday night. Access roads were all but impassable to anything but fourwheel-drive vehicles.
Work continued at the site during the day despite the rains, but the
weather definitely slowed the work. Crew chiefs were asked to volunteer to
stay on after the field school for a few days to finish some of the work. And
then the sun came out with a vengeance!

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer-- TAS Field Schools

143

1970: Guadalupe Mountains National Park
Culberson and Hudspeth counties, far West Texas, June 13-20
Archeologists: Harry Sharer and Dessamae Lorrain
Site types: lithic scatters, burned rock middens, rockshelters with and
without rock art, Historic-European habitation areas
Work done: area survey--150 sites visited, 139 new sites recorded;
excavation--historic camp and habitation areas, small burned rock
midden; rock art recorded
Temporal context: Archaic-Historic
Number of participants: 245+
The 1970 TAS field school goal of an archeologicat and environmental
survey of Guadalupe Mountains National Park presented an opportunity for
discovery of both prehistoric and historic sites.
Guadalupe Mountains National Park, in far West Texas along the
Texas-New Mexico state line in Culberson and Hudspeth counties, is about
100 miles northeast of E1 Paso and about 60 miles southwest of Carlsbad,
New Mexico. The Guadalupe Mountains rise abruptly above the plains and
fiats to the east and south. Elevations vary from about 3,500 feet to 8,751 feet
at the top of E1 Capitan, the highest point in Texas. The eastern side of the
mountains is cut by deep canyons including McKittrick, Bear, Upper Pine
Springs, Smith, Pine Springs, and Guadalupe. To the south and west are salt
fiats and arid plains, with slopes cut by deep arroyos--topography common
to the Chihuahuan Desert. Vegetation on the lower slopes is the typical
thorny plants and greasewood of West Texas. Pinyon and scrub oak are
found on the upper slopes, where moisture is more abundant.
Archeological work had been done in the area prior to the field school,
but only 11 sites were on record at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory (TARL) in Austin. During the TAS survey, 139 new sites were
recorded and 11 previously recorded sites were visited. Some 10 square miles
were surveyed during the 10 days of TAS work in the area (Sharer 1970a: 1011). Park personnel had requested more intensive coverage in the southern
and western areas of the park; however, Bear, Guadalupe, and Pine Springs
canyons on the east side also were investigated (Shafer 1970a:11).
The stated purpose of the school was to provide training in archeological
survey techniques and, at the same time, to conduct a systematic site survey of
a portion of the park (Davis 1970a:2; Shafer 1970a:10). Although some
survey work had been done by TAS members in other areas in the past, this
was the first field school to emphasize intensive training in survey techniques.
Because environmental conditions, including floral and faunal populations,
topography, and geology, are directly related to area utilization, instruction
in these topics was included.
Field school participants were divided into two major survey groups with
crew chiefs in charge of small crews in each group. Archeologists Harry
Shafer and Dessamae Lorrain each were responsible for one group. One of
the two major groups went into the field each day, and the group that
remained in camp completed lab work from the previous day in the field.
Nightly lectures covered a wide variety of topics (including area geology, rock
art, and Apache ethnohistory) and were well attended.

144

Texas A rcheological Society

Sites in surveyed areas vary in size and shape. The most common
sites--large, open campsites--occur along arroyos, at canyon mouths, and
around springs. Open campsites were found principally in the south and west
flats. Ring midden sites were recorded only at elevations above 4,000 feet,
possibly because this elevation represents the lower elevation limit of the
kinds of plants cooked (sotol, yucca). In contrast to the ring midden sites,
other dome-shaped burned rock midden sites were found only in Pine Springs
Canyon (Shafer 1970a:12). Although ring middens are known to occur at
lower elevations throughout this part of the Southwest and surrounding
areas, in the survey area, specifically, ring middens were found within a rather
restricted topographic range.
Rockshelters, common in the park area, vary in size from shallow,
10-foot-long shelters to large shelters as much as 250 feet long and 100 feet
deep. Some 20 rockshelters were visited (Shafer 1970a: 12). Most shelters on
the east side of the massif are solution caves or cavities near the base of a
limestone formation that forms a cap over thinly bedded strata (Clark
1974:102). Six rock art sites were visited and recorded, four of which
(41CU 15, 41 CU24, 41 CU48, and 41CU70) are within the park area. Rock art
was recorded also at two additional shelters (41CU13 and 41CU14) in the
Delaware Mountains just outside the park. In addition to recording rock art,
TAS members collected any associated artifacts for use in establishing
chronological relationships (Clark 1974:99).
Permanent records of the rock art were made by photography, tracing,
scale drawing, watercolor, and, in the case of petroglyphs, by rubbings.
Shelters 41CU15 and 41CU24 contained pictographs (dots, hands, lines,
curvilinear and circular motifs) all done in red; site 41CU48 contained only
yellow lines, crosses, and a circle form with rays. Site 41CU70 contained
linear petroglyphs as wel! as polychrome pictographs in red, black, and
yellow (Clark 1974:102-105). Rockshelters 41CU13 and 41CU14 contained
petroglyphs in projectile point motifs as well as pictographs. With the
exception of 41CU15, stylistically attributed to the Desert Abstract Style
described by Schaafsma, all rock art motifs examined and recorded
conformed to the Jornada Style, eastern phase (Clark 1974:114-116).
Over 3,000 potsherds were found at a variety of sites, and 70 percent of
these were of the Jornada-Mogollon pottery group (Phelps 1974:121). Based
on ceramic evidence, the surveyed area was occupied from A.D. 850 to 1350
by the Jornada-Mogollon people or, according to Phelps (1974:146), by an
unidentified group dependent on the Jornada-Mogollon for pottery or
technology. The presence of ceramic sherds of the Middle Pecos Valley
indicates interaction with these groups as well. According to Shafer
(1970a: 16) there was a notable lack of pottery dating after A.D. 1400. This
may suggest that, unlike earlier groups, mobile groups known to have
occupied this area of the mountains in the 1700s and 1800s did not use pottery
made in nearby pueblos.
The location of the majority of the 59 pottery-bearing sites on the lower
slopes and fiats in the area indicates a possible agrarian population. People
may have been drawn to the area by the vast and exploitable salt deposits, and
these may have been a determining factor in areal settlement patterns (Phelps
1974:147).

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer-- TA S Field Schools

145

The TAS members participating in site survey in the salt flats of the
southwest part of the park can attest that it is not an optimum habitation area
during the summer months. Lack of water in addition to the dessicating
effects of the salt-sand surfaces indicate a probable seasonal use by earlier
occupants of the area.
Three historic sites were investigated and reported by Kathleen Gilmore
(1970:14-15). These included a bivouac site probably occupied during the
Civil War and again in the 1870s. A house area, north of the bivouac area and
seemingly unrelated, apparently dated from the early twentieth century. The
third site, the Frijole site, is by Manzaneta Springs and is a building formerly
used as a post office for the town of Frijole during the 1930s and 1940s. A
skirmish between an army party and Apaches camped in the area reportedly
occurred in 1869, but no supportive artifactual evidence could be found
(Gilmore 1970:14).
The young people under the supervision of Paul Lorrain tested an eroded
burned rock midden (41CU3 l) in the Pine Springs area. The site was tested in
three areas and collected in a 100-square-foot area north of the midden. The
group obtained a significant sample of 515 stone fragments, five Dad-like
points, and one Meserve point (P. Lorrain 1970a).
The field school camp area was located in Pine Springs Canyon at the
base of the mountains. It was a primitive area--no facilities--but with TAS
members’ ingenuity and the permission of park rangers, a pipeline was run
across a mountain foothill from a spring to the camp, a distance of about a
mile. With this somewhat unreliable water source (the pipeline was constantly
springing leaks), cold showers were available. Three portable latrines were
brought in, completing the "facilities." Since drinking water was scarce,
members were advised to bring at least five gallons of water with them. The
Texas National Guard in E1 Paso provided a 500-gallon water tank, which the
Highway Department filled with water. One innovation in 1970 was the
addition of a cook trailer, which had been built specifically for TAS. Francis
Stickney, camp director, and the Midland Archeological Society managed to
have the camp facilities ready for the arrival of about 221 people by Sunday
evening (the first weekend). About 25 latecomers drifted in during the
following week. As Jerrylee Blaine (1970:19) said, "This was not a simple field
school to manage. Contacts had to be made in many places, from the owner of
the local Texaco station all the way to the Pentagon."
E. Mott Davis (1970b:9) best summarized the effects of the Guadalupe
field school: "As time goes by we should be seeing significant new information
being compiled in many parts of the state because of site survey work done by
people trained at this field school."
1971, 1972: Kerr County
Southwest of Kerrville, Kerr County, west-central Texas, June 12-19, 197 l,
and June 10-17, 1972
Archeologist: S. Alan Skinner; assistant, Alton Briggs
Site types: burned rock middens, rockshelter, lithic scatters
Work done:
survey--165 sites recorded, Turtle Creek watershed; excavation-burned rock middens X41KR1 (Paris site), X41KR42,
X41KRI66 (Real site), and rockshelter X41KR116 (Bushwhack Shelter)

146

Texas A rcheological Society

Temporal context: Paleo-Indian--Late Prehistoric
Number of participants: 1971, 300; 1972, 250+
The tenth and eleventh annual TAS field schools were held in Kerr
County about seven miles southwest of Kerrville in the Edwards Plateau
region of Central Texas. The field school camp and part of the study area were
on property belonging to Andy Paris, a member of the Hill Country
Archeological Society. Archeological work for the 1971 and 1972 field
schools was conducted in the Turtle Creek watershed and on many of the
same sites; therefore, a combined summary for both years is given here.
Much of western Central Texas is hilly, cut by creek drainages between
the hills and broad valleys. The primary survey area covered about 40 percent
of the Turtle Creek watershed. Vegetation on the slopes consists of cedar
(junipers), various kinds of oak, elm, and black persimmon trees, and bunch
and other grasses. In addition, along the creek bottoms sycamore, poplar,
wild pecan, hackberry, and willows may be found, as well as abundant smaller
bushes and plants. The hills are composed of caliche and limestone rock,
while valleys have a sandy, clayey loam topsoil overlying limestone bedrock.
The training and archeological goals included a survey and site study in
three 10-square-mile areas (or, about 30 square miles) in order to locate and
evaluate prehistoric settlement of the area (Skinner 1971a:5, 1974:5). The
Kerr County field schools provided an opportunity for those who had
participated in the Guadalupe Mountains area survey to practice and
improve their skills in a different environmental setting. During the survey,
165 prehistoric sites were located and recorded. Dates for the sites were
estimated from the Paleo-Indian to Late Prehistoric (Neo-American) periods,
based on observed diagnostic materials. Late Paleo-Indian occupation of the area was indicated by Plainview and Angostura point types. In
addition to period determinations, site activities were inferred from distributions and concentrations of flint flakes, discarded tools, and features, such
as hearths and burned rock middens (Skinner 1974:24:3 I).
During the area survey, artifact illustrations were drawn in the field
notes, but artifacts were not collected. However, six sites were carefully
collected for comparative analysis. The following site-use data is compiled
from detailed descriptions of TAS work in Skinner (1974):
X41KR191: an apparent chipping station with at least two different
occupation periods evidenced by the presence of different point technologies;
X41KR184: possible hunting camp as evidenced by tack of ground stone
tools, abundance of lithic debris, and the presence of a burned rock mound;
X41KR70: burned rock mound and surrounding living area--Archaic
period, based on surface artifacts;
X41KR201: lithic scatter terrace site represents occupation during two
separate time periods;
X41KR128 short-term, single occupation site of the Archaic period
represented by Castroville and Marcos-like points;
X41KR94: terrace site with two burned rock mounds and surrounding
lithic scatter areas that may represent a multiple occupation, based on the
presence of dart and arrow points.
Throughout the survey areas, there was a predominance of lithic
workshop sites, while only 63 burned rock mounds were recorded. Sites

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer--TAS Field Schools

147

representing Archaic occupations made up about 80 percent of the recorded
sites. Archaic-Late Prehistoric components were evident at 12 sites, and
uncontaminated Late Prehistoric components were present at 3 sites. Based
on this data, the occupation of the Turtle Creek watershed is considered
basically Archaic (Skinner 1974:56-65).
Excavation was conducted at three different types of sites. At the Paris
site (X41KR 1), a burned rock midden, excavation was directed at testing the
hypothesis that living areas were adjacent to, rather than on, middens, and to
isolate a "pure" Archaic living area floor. The living floors that were located
represented both Archaic and Late Prehistoric use areas which were
horizontally separated. Alton Briggs, then survey archeologist for the Office
of the State Archeologist, directed this excavation (Skinner 1971a:3-4;
1972:6).
A second site, Bushwhack Shelter (X41KR116), is a large rockshelter on
Bushwhack Creek (Figure 17). A 5 x 5-foot test square was excavated in the
54-inch-deep deposit in the center of the shelter. A well-stratified occupational
sequence for the shelter was determined on the basis of the test. The shelter
apparently was occupied before 1000 B.C. and was abandoned before the
Historic period--an inference based, at least in part, on the typology
sequence (Skinner 1974:15).
The Real site (X41KRI66), a burned rock midden in the western part of
the field school area, was selected for excavation for comparison with the
Paris midden site. The tools recovered were attributed to a Late Prehistoric
time period. An Archaic living surface underlay the midden. Prior to the Real
site excavation, midden deposits in the area were generally attributed to
Archaic occupations (Skinner 1972b:6).
Two additional studies were conducted by TAS members. The first was a
specialized environmental study of area resources. The second involved TAS
assistance in a Texas Highway Department archeological survey along a
proposed realignment of FM 480 on Verde Creek. Three sites were recorded
within the highway right-of-way, and the information was provided to the
Highway Department survey personnel (Skinner 197 lc:4).
Young people’s activities included the excavation of X41KR42, a badly
pothunted site for which the depth and type of site, as well as an estimate of
the types of activities conducted during occupation, were needed. In addition
to the site study, Beaver Patrol supervisors Teddy Lou Stickney and Marge
Fullen conducted various activities in plant and fossil studies. The young
people helped to prepare an interesting exhibit of various plants in the area.
The field school camp was in a tree-shaded area, level and dry, which had
been mowed and sprayed for insects and other pests. In spite of precautions,
ticks and chiggers were abundant--especially the tiny seed ticks--so much so
that the meeting area was dubbed the Tick Bowl. Other unwelcome native
residents included coral snakes. The emphasis at field school is respect for the
environment and its residents, so any snakes were caught and released away
from camp, unharmed (Figure 18). Ticks, however, were killed mercilessly.
Turtle Creek runs parallel to the campsite area and provided TAS
personnel with a swimming hole and recreation area. Late-night revellers
gathered on the limestone ledges above the creek for the traditional nightly
singin’ and guitar pickin’.

148

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 17. A stratified occupational sequence was determined for Bushwhack Shelter
(X41KR 116). (Photo: Bill Richmond)

Figure 18. Bill McClure talks about poisonous and nonpoisonous snakes at Kerrville.
(Photo: Bill Richmond)

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer--TAS Field Schools

149

Visitors during the course of the field school included professionals and
students from Southern Methodist University, Texas A&M University, West
Texas State University, Texas State Historical Survey Committee (now
Texas Historical Commission), Texas Archeological Research Laboratories,
and Texas Archeological Salvage Project (now Texas Archeological Survey).
Participants included TAS members from Colorado, Arkansas, and Louisiana, as well as all areas of Texas.
1973: Asa Warner Site (41ML46)
McClennan County, north-central Texas, June 9-17
Archeologist: Alton Briggs; assistant, Robert MaUouf
Site type: alluvial terrace campsite
Work done: excavation--Asa Warner site (41ML46)
Temporal context: Middle Archaic-Late Prehistoric (Caddo)
Number of participants: 200+
The Asa Warner site (41ML46), located about seven miles southeast of
Waco in McClennan County, is situated on an alluvial terrace adjacent to
Branch Creek, which drains into the Brazos River. A general soil profile for
the site area would show an upper plow zone in reddish, sandy clay overlying a
horizon of red clay, which, in turn, overlies a deposit of alluvial sands.
Between the clay and lower alluvial sands is a midden layer (Alton Briggs:
personal communication, n.d.). The site is on the flood plain and could be
destroyed by frequent flooding or construction of flood-control diversions.
Work at the field school included mapping, excavation, and extensive
lab work. Several deep tests were made in the sandy, clayey soil. Since most of
the site area was in a plowed field, there was no shade. As digging progressed,
the heat of the day and the lack of moving air in the bottoms of the pits were
the cause of many caustic comments.
The site appears to consist of two components--a Middle to Late
Archaic open campsite and a very small village, possibly intermittently
occupied, which is either Caddoan or Caddoan influenced. The Caddoaninfluenced occupation, although small, was of sufficient duration for the
formation of a midden. Since the recovered Caddoan ceramics were not made
in the area, the site may have served as a trading outpost (Alton Briggs:
personal communication, n.d.).
The temporal designation of Middle to Late Archaic is based on the
recovery of 38 dart points, including Gary, Fairland, Edgewood, Godley, and
Darl types. During the field school, four burials were located in the Archaic
deposits (Figure 19), and three additional burials were located after the close
of field school. The amount of skeletal material could indicate a possible
cemetery area. Further analysis of the burials and skeletal material may
provide data on the morphological and pathological characteristics of an
Archaic population in Texas, as well as information on Archaic period burial
practices (Alton Briggs: personal communication, n.d.).
The temporal context of the Caddoan-influenced occupation is deduced
primarily from the recovered vessel forms and pottery types, which indicate
an early to late Gibson aspect occupation. Alto and possibly Sanders foci

150

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 19. One of four burials found during the dig at 41ML46. (Photo: Bil!
Richmond)

appear to be represented within the Gibson aspect, along with an early Titus
focus of the Fulton aspect. An analysis of the pottery from the Asa Warner
site was conducted by Bob Turner. Further examination of these materials
may provide comparative information for local ceramics and introduced
types from the northeast (Alton Briggs: personal communication, n.d.).
A preliminary lithic analysis by C.K. Chandler indicates that, in addition
to the Archaic-type dart points, 121 arrow points were recovered, approximately 50 percent of which are Perdiz. Scallorn, Alba, and Clifton types
are also represented. Examination of excavation and lithic analysis data
should provide additional correlations to the projectile point chronology
from the Archaic to the Late Prehistoric period (Alton Briggs: personal
communication, n.d.).
The field school camp area was several miles from the site, where large
trees provided shade for the dining and meeting area. Pests seem to follow the
field school. At Gaulding and Victoria it was mosquitoes, at Kerrville, ticks,
and at Asa Warner, flies. Although it cannot be proved, it is generally believed
flies were the distributors of a "bug" that affected the digestive systems of a
number of field school participants. The situation was serious enough that
some members departed early.
Through it all, the participants retained a sense of humor. After one
particularly frustrating day in the pits, Charlie Bandy’s crew presented him
with a pedestaled, sculpted effigy in their pit. Some avowed the likeness to an
unnamed crew chief was remarkable.

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer--TAS Field Schools

151

Figure 20. The McKinney home, built in 1850-1852, presented a historical challenge
to TAS members. (Photo: Bi!l, Richmond)

1974: McKinney Falls State Park (41TV289)
Austin, Travis County, Central Texas, June 8-16
Archeologists: Michael McEachern, Ronald W. Ralph
Site type: Historic house site, mill, and cisterns; prehistoric campsite
Work done: excavation--McKinney homestead, mill, and cistern (41 TV289);
survey and mapping--homestead area; survey--12 sites recorded
Temporal context: Archaic; Historic, mid-1800s
Number of particcipants: 230+
The thirteenth annual field school, at McKinney Falls State Park in
Travis County, was conducted with the cooperation of the Texas Parks and
Wildlife Department. The area, located on Onion Creek immediately south of
Austin, included the old mill, cisterns, and homesite (Figure 20) of Thomas
McKinney, who lived there in the early 1850s. Since McKinney Falls State
Park was in the process of construction, it was desirable to survey, excavate,
and map historic and prehistoric sites in the park area as soon as possible.
TAS had the personnel and expertise to conduct part of the archeological
investigation.
The goals of the field school as stated by the archeologists were to
illustrate a variety of archeological techniques as well as to appraise the
archeological resources of the McKinney homestead complex. A booklet,
TAS Field School 1974 (McEachern and Ralph 1974), outlined the history,
proposed research plan, field school activities and responsibilities, supplemental activities (including the evening programs and guest speakers),
excavation plan with a detailed explanation of terms and methods, and

152

Texas Archeological Society

examples of various site forms with instructions for completion. This booklet
was made available to field school participants and provided answers to many
of the inevitable questions that arise during any archeological activity. For
the novice, the explanation of terms was especially helpful.
Stone ruins of the two-story McKinney homestead stand on the north
side of Onion Creek immediately east of a low-water crossing of the creek,
where a hundred years of use by wagons and automobiles has left an indelible
record on the limestone creek bed. The lower of the two falls for which the
park is named is 50 to 100 yards downstream from the crossing.
Four experiments in historical archeology were outlined ifi the instructional guide (McEachern and Ralph 1974) and reported by McEachern
and Ralph (1980a:5-127, 1981:5-55) in their two-part review of the Mc Kinney
site work. These experiments included prospecting (examining several
methods of detecting archeological features without resorting to excavation);
conventional excavation in and near the house, using as a guide a simple
predictive model; exploring the value of recent faunal collections from a
cistern excavation; and a long-term study of the rate of environmenta!
processes (McEachern and Ralph 1974:3-4, 1980a:6).
The mill, located on the north edge of Onion Creek about 200 yards east
and south of the McKinney house, was built in 1852. A low dam was built
upstream to divert water to the mill. Drilled holes and cuts in the limestone
bedrock, as well as embedded iron rods, mark the location of the dam and
millrace (McEachern and Ralph 1981:5-7). TAS excavations at the mill site
were done in one-meter squares within a metric grid pattern, and 69 squares
were excavated co varying depths in and around the structura! remains.
Excavated materials were screened and all artifacts and faunal remains were
saved. Metal, glass, and ceramic artifacts were mixed with a variety of soil and
rock deposits within the remaining walls of the mill structure. The ceramics
and some bottle-glass sherds and bases appear to date to the mid-1800s when
the mill was in use (McEachern and Ralph 1981:6, 14-15). Metal artifacts
include cartridges, nails, spikes, bolts, and a variety of broken tools. Nails,
metal construction objects, and some tools seem to date to the time the mill
was in use. Other metal artifacts date from the mid-1800s, the World War I
era, and later. A number of objects have not been dated (McEachern and
Ralph 1981:17-41).
Two cisterns were located to the south and west of the McKinney house,
and one of these was excavated. Analysis of the high artifact yield indicated
the bulk of materials were discarded prior to the mid-1930s, although a few
artifacts dated to post 1940 (McEachern and Ralph 1981:44-45). Before
the cistern was backfilled, a "time capsule" and murals were left for any future
excavators as evidence of the work done by TAS field school members.
The artifact sample recovered from the McKinney site was particularly
important, since it constituted the sample available for analysis. Although
additional work was done after the field school, budgetary restrictions limited
artifact recovery (McEachern and Ralph 1981:6).
Surveying to locate archeological features utilized both the proton
magnetometer (metal detector) and chemical pH and phosphate tests
(McEachern and Ralph 1980a:21-35); Burleigh 1980:162-163). The results of
these tests are not as important to this discussion as is the fact that TAS field

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer-- TA S Field Schools

153

Figure 21. Charles Johns provided much anecdotal history. As a young man he lived
in the McKinney house. (Photo: Bill Richmond)

Figure 22. The swimming hole at McKinney Falls. (Photo: Bill Richmond)

154

Texas Archeological Society

school participants had the opportunity to observe a variety of methods for
determining occupation and occupation density areas. For detailed information see McEachern and Ralph (1980a:21-35) and Burleigh (1980:
162-163).
Jim Calvert and crew conducted an archeological site survey in the
northern one-third of the McKinney Falls State Park. Twelve prehistoric and
historic archeological sites were recorded--41TV302 to 41TV313. Examples
of prehistoric lithic tools and historic artifacts occurred at four sites.
Temporal context for area use inferred from artifactual remains ranges from
Archaic to post A.D. 1900 (Calvert 1981a:56-60).
A get-together of field school participants, local landowners, and others
interested in the work being done is usually held toward the end of the field
school. At McKinney Falls, the evening included exhibits, tours, and
informative talks. Charles Johns (Figure 21), the guest of honor, had lived on
or near the McKinney place most of his life. Johns’ family had worked for
James Smith, the owner of the property after McKinney, and as a young man
Johns had lived in the McKinney stone house. Johns said he was about 88
years old (born 1885 or 1886), and he had a remarkably clear memory. He was
able to provide invaluable historical information about the house, location
and kinds of outbuildings, and history of the area. A summation of an
interview with Johns is included in the report of McEchern and Ralph
(19801:18-20).
Camp was in a field east of and adjacent to the house ruins. For the most
part, all areas investigated were within walking distance of the camp. The
lower falls pool proved a welcome swimming hole (Figure 22). "Young"
people especially enjoyed sliding down the falls. The late evening sing-along
was held on the limestone slab above the falls, and songs occasionally seemed
to echo from the rocks.
As a direct result of the 1974 field school, Wayne Roberson, an
archeologist then with the Parks and Wildlife Department, requested names
of TAS volunteers around the state that he could call on for help with various
types of archeological projects (A. Fox 1974:3).

1975: Floydada Country Club Site
White River Canyon, Floyd County, Texas Panhandle, June 14-21
Archeologist: S. Alan Skinner
Site type: alluvial terrace occupation area
Work done: excavation--X41FL 1, X41 FL2, X41FL3; surface collection and
shovel tests
Temporal context: Late Archaic-Historic European (estimated A.D. 1000-

1850)
Number of participants: 210+
The fourteenth annual TAS field school was held at the Floydada
Country Club, about seven miles south of Floydada in White River Canyon.
The area is in the central Texas Panhandle where the White River has cut
through the caprock to form a broad, meandering canyon (A. Fox 1975:1-2).

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer--TAS Field Schools

155

Jim Word had been studying the site area for about 20 years, testing the
site and making a systematic collection of artifacts. A report of his work in the
South Plains Bulletin (Word 1963) was among the readings recommended to
field school participants.
Two major archeological goals were set for the field school: to develop a
well-controlled chronology for this area based on extensive testing for and
excavation of in situ deposits with appropriate artifact collection, and to
determine any correlations between surface artifact concentrations and
subsurface materials through careful excavation of large areas (Skinner
1975a:2-3).
The country club area was divided into three sites: X41FL 1, X41FL2,
and X41FL3. Each of the sites exhibited different predominant flint sources
as well as separate and distinct pottery and artifact distributions.
Site X41FL1 was the most extensive of the three sites. About 1 percent of
the site was tested. The 61 one-by-one-meter squares indicated no vertical
stratification of the site. Several hearths and bone concentrations were
located. The limited amounts and types of artifacts and cultural features led
to the inference that the site represents an intermittently occupied camp.
Occupation appeared to cover a period from A.D. 1000 to 1800, based on
pottery and other prehistoric and historic artifacts. Approximately 70 percent
of the flint at this site appears to have originated in Central Texas (Skinner
1975b:6-7).
At site X41FL2, a large part of the site area had been removed for fill on
the golf course. About 3 percent of the remaining site was excavated.
Accumulations of bison bone and Southwestern pottery types were revealed.
Pottery types included E1 Paso Polychrome, Chupadero Black on White,
Ochoa Indented, Pueblo III Corrugated, and Jornada Brown. Known
temporal association of the pottery types indicate an estimated occupation
for the period A.D. 1300-1400. At site X41FL2, 90 percent of the flint was of
Alibates or Tecovas (Quitaque) Panhandle varieties (Skinner 1975b:7).
At site X41FL3, few features were located during excavation of 24
squares. Pottery designation, expected to be East Texas types, is pending
analysis. Flint-origin percentages were not as well defined as those calculated
for X41FL 1 and X41FL2; Central Texas and Alibates-Tecovas varieties each
represented 40 percent, and local flints represented 20 percent (Skinner
1975b:7).
The country club remained active during field school--sometimes to the
dismay of both golfers and field school participants. In one case a golfer "lost"
his ball in one of the excavations; in another instance a crew member received
an unexpected blow from a hard-hit golf ball, but damage was done only to
dignity (Blaine 1975:4). Surface surveyors on the high bluffs adjoining the
golf course on the north and west felt like targets as golf balls landed around
them.
The young people were involved in the study of Indian culture and crafts.
Under the direction of Claude Brown, they learned to weave baskets, make
pottery, build traps for game, and identify natural foods.
The work of the TAS field school resulted in the recovery of much
valuable information. Equally important, this investigation indicated that the

156

Texas Archeological Society

Floydada Country Club site "is a good example of the type of site which is
worthy of study over a long period of time" (Skinner 1975b:7).
As usual, evening lecture sessions were well attended with speakers
emphasizing occupation of, and archeology in, the Panhandle South Plains
region. Alan Skinner summarized field school accomplishments in a lecture
and guided tour of the area.
The camp was in a treeless area in the northwest part of the country club
property. Shade was at a premium (Figure 23). The kitchen trailer again saw
duty, and three meals a day were prepared and served to those not wishing to
prepare their own. It should be noted that the majority of field school
participants took advantage of the meal option.
TAS field schools always seem to be plagued with pesky critters. At
Floydada it was mosquitoes and chiggers. The situation was serious, and
arrangements were made for aerial spraying of the area (Figure 24). For some,
this event may have been the highlight of the field school, and enthusiastic
observers cheered the pilot as he maneuvered through the canyon and over
the site.
Late evening sing-along festivities were held on a rise several hundred
yards above camp. Despite the heat of the day, jackets were welcome in the
late evening. Some of the more enthusiastic participants decided a song book
would be helpful, since not all singers knew the words to the older songs, so
the TAS songbook became available. Flashlights cast eerie glows on faces as
singers peered at the dimly lit words.
1976: Musk Hog Canyon
Crockett County, Southwest Texas, June 12-19
Archeologists: Harry Shafer and Gary Moore
Site types: burned rock midderis, rockshelters, lithic scatters, rock art, and
hearths
Work done: excavation--burned rock midden sites 41CX218, 41CX238,
41CX241, and rockshelter 41CX133; survey--435 sites recorded
Temporal context: Paleo-Indian-Late Prehistoric
Number of participants: not recorded (registration limited to 250)
Musk Hog Canyon is a moderate-sized tributary canyon system of the
Pecos River. The area is eroded limestone plateau country with bare rock
landscape on the slopes and tops of the mesas and moderate to deep alluvial
soils in the canyon floors (Sharer and Moore 1976a:2). In the rugged, rocky
terrain and semidesert environment it seemed that all the plants had thorns or
spines and all the animals either bit or stung.
As stated in an informal report of Sharer and Moore (1976b: 1), "the field
school project was conducted in conjunction with plans to construct
Interstate Highway 10 through part of the canyon and to provide data on an
area which was likely to become a National Register District." Earlier surveys
in the area had shown that Musk Hog Canyon contained a large number of
archeological sites.
Two major goals for the field school were the excavation of several
known sites and the survey of the Musk Hog Canyon system. Field school

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer--TAS Field Schools

157

Figure 23. Dot Word and Bobby Speer checking artifacts and records--sometimes
the lab shelter is the only shade in the area. (Photo: Bill Richmond)

Figure 24. Crop duster spraying the camp area to reduce numbers of mosquitos.
(Photo: Bill Richmond)

158

Texas Archeological Society

participants were divided into two large groups: one under Harry Shafer for
excavations, and the other under Gary Moore for the field survey. Within the
large groups, smaller groups were assigned to crew chiefs and crew chief
supervisors for specific excavations or survey areas. A primary teaching goal
was to have each field school participant observe and participate in an
on-going research project (Shafer and Moore 1976b:1).
The number of field school participants enabled the archeologists to
attempt a 100 percent survey of the Musk Hog Canyon drainage system. Of
the 512 documented archeological sites in the area, 435 were documented by
TAS members during the field school (Shafer and Moore 1976b:3). Site types
include burned rock middens, hearths, lithic and burned rock scatters, and 40
rockshelters, some with associated rock art. Previous work in the Lower
Pecos area by the Iraan Archeological Society and other investigators shows
the area was utilized by hunting and gathering groups from the Paleo-Indian
period through the Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods, with the Archaic
sequence spanning some 7000 to 8000 years (Shafer and Moore 1976a:2-3).
Test excavations were conducted at five sites: four burned rock middens
(one each at 41CX218 and 41CX238, and two at 41CX241) (Figure 25), and
one rockshelter (41CX 133). The primary purposes of these excavations were
to define and evaluate use areas, to recover charcoal for radiocarbon dating,
to recover plant material for botanical analysis, and to recover an artifact
sample (Shafer and Moore 1976b:4-6).
The young people were divided into two groups: the 6-to-12-year-olds,
who made a number of field trips as well as participating in nature study and
flint knapping; and the 12-to-17-year-olds, who were termed the Young
Archeologists group. The older group undertook two projects: the excavation
of 41CX103 (a burned rock midden), and the experimental baking--and
consumption--of lechuguilla, yucca, and sotol in rock ovens (hearths). After
24 hours, the sotol and yucca were not done, but the lechuguilla was
thoroughly cooked (Shafer and Moore 1976b:6-7).
An independent study on flotation procedures using soil samples taken
from the excavations was conducted by John Keller and Bruce Fullem (1977)
during the field school. Goals for the flotation experiments--primarily the
collection of a floral sample and an evaluation of flotation methods--were
separate from those of the field school. The primary interest of the researchers
was methodology, and a floral analysis was not included in their report.
Field camp was located at the Jeff Owens ranch house (Figure 26). The
house and yard were off limits for TAS members, but shade from the large
trees in the yard was welcome, especially in the late afternoon. Nearby Live
Oak Creek served for both bathing and recreation, but no detergents were
allowed in the water. At the rancher’s request, certain rules were observed: no
firearms, no motorcycles or motorbikes, no pets in camp or in the field, a
20-mile-per-hour speed limit on ranch roads, use of established roads only,
and avoidance of livestock.
Crews usually left camp before 7:00 a.m. and returned at about noon.
Afternoon activities in camp, which included demonstrations of flint
knapping by archeologists, proved popular with both young and old. The
area was populated by a wide variety of birds because of the abundant water
supply at the stock tanks and in the creek. Bird watching was especially good

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer--TAS Field Schools

159

Figure 25. Jack Hughes and cr, ew trenching a mesa-top burned rock midden
(41CK241). (Photo: Beth Davis)

Figure 26. Headquarters for about 200 TAS members on Owens Ranch near Musk
Hog Canyon. (Photo: Beth Davis)

160

Texas Archeological Society

late in the afternoon. An activity that drew a large audience was Milton Bell’s
demonstration of the construction and use of the atlatl and spear.
Emphasis of the evening programs was on the geology, history,
ethnology, and archeology of West Texas and Northern Mexico. As usual,
speakers were experts in the various fields of study and often included slides
with their presentations. The white side of the cook trailer doubled
satisfactorily as a projection screen.
Several of the field vehicles contained CB radios, and a base station was
set up in camp to monitor the locations of various survey crews and to relay
messages. The survey area was fairly extensive, and the use of CB
communication provided a degree of safety in case of trouble.
It is the exceptional field school that does not have an accident or a near
miss. With over 200 people camping and working in primitive conditions, it is
to be expected. Usually mishaps are minor and require only minimal first aid
and a band-aid. The 1976 field school mishap, unfortunately, was far from
minor. A survey crew ran into a pocket of gas near a buried pipeline, and two
members of the crew were rushed to the Iraan hospital. Fortunately neither
suffered lasting ill effects, and they returned to camp later that evening.
Rattlesnakes were plentiful in the area, but few were seen during the
survey. One exception was the small rock rattler with which crew chief Jimmy
Smith shared a resting place while recording a site.

1977: Sabina Mountain No. 2
Tigua Indian Land, E1 Paso County, far West Texas, June 11-18
Archeologist:
William Mayer-Oakes assisted by Alton Thoms, John
Montgomery, Phil Bandy
Site types: village, Sabina Mountain No. 2; lithic scatters
Work done: instruction at Sabifla Mountain No. 2 in excavation and on-site
survey, laboratory and photographic techniques; off-site survey--37 sites
recorded
Temporal context: E1 Paso phase, Jornada branch, Mogollon culture, A.D.
1300-1400
Number of particcipants: 233
Sabina Mountain No. 2 is a pueblo site located about 22 miles east of E1
Paso near the edge of the Hueco Bolson. It is a desert area (northern
Chihuahuan Desert) with sparse vegetation and sandy soil. The site, an E1
Paso phase agricultural settlement of the Jornada branch of the Mogollon
culture, was probably occupied during A.D. 1300 to 1400 (Mayer-Oakes et al.
1977:1). Such pueblos were built in rows of single-story adobe buildings to
which additional rooms could be added. As indicated by stone tools and
pottery artifacts recovered during the field school investigation, the prehistoric
inhabitants apparently were sedentary agriculturalists who traded with other
communities in Texas, New Mexico, and Northern Mexico (Mayer-Oakes et
al. 1977:1).
The Tigua Indians, on whose lands the field school excavations were
conducted, were congenial and cooperative hosts, and they were interested
visitors to the site.

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer-- TA S Field Schools

161

Emphasis for the sixteenth annual field school was on education in
archeological technique. Innovative procedures to facilitate the basic goal
included pre-field-school workshops, which were held in E1 Paso in May.
Because of distance and time limitations, the pre-field-school work primarily
involved those TAS members living in or near E1 Paso (Fitzgerald 1977:4).
The Sabina Mountain No. 2 field school possibly was, in terms of
teaching goals, the most carefully planned and organized school yet offered to
TAS members. The school was divided into three broad areas of field
activities: on-site excavations (Figure 27), on-site surveys; and off-site survey.
Related activities, such as laboratory and photographic work, were also
undertaken (Mayer-Oaks 1979:13-16). A great deal of time and effort was
expended by Bill Mayer-Oakes, his staff, and students from Texas Tech
University. The staff archeologists were research persons, leaders, and
teachers for the crew chiefs, who did the actual crew instruction. Four
archeologists, assisted by seven Texas Tech University students, constituted
the staff (Mayer-Oakes 1979:4-5). The goal was to ensure that each field
school participant experienced a representative range of archeological
activities, including excavation, on- and off-site surveys, environmental
studies, and laboratory work (Figure 28).
Excavations were conducted in limited portions of the Salsina Mountain
No. 2 site. With the emphasis on teaching, excavation efforts and data
recovery were limited to two rooms that had been excavated previously.
Approximately 100 one-meter-square units were excavated by 122 people
(Mayer-Oakes 1979:5). Several features noted on the surface were not
sampled in excavation (Bandy 1977:2). An area that had been previously
disturbed by relic hunters was enlarged in an attempt to determine site
stratigraphy.
Various aids and techniques for surface survey, recording, and collecting
were demonstrated and taught. On-site survey by 2-meter-wide travel
corridors and later by transects was conducted. Collecting corridors provided
walkways to undisturbed areas. Some of the survey areas were 100 percent
collected; in other cases features were recorded but no collections were made.
Ceramics and chert were the major classes of collected materials, with E1 Paso
Brown and E1 Paso Polychrome the predominant ceramics (Mayer-Oakes
1979:16). For many features, including large lithic and ceramic scatters and a
burned rock feature, the density of surface materials precluded exhaustive
mapping (Montgomery 1977b:3).
Transect surveys were conducted in areas representing a variety of
environmental zones. Roughly 600 acres were covered in the six-day off-site
survey. Emphasis was placed on site identification and recording procedures.
Participants were able to complete several site survey forms at the 37 sites
located, many of which seem to be hunting-gathering campsites. Ceramics of
the Mesilla or E1 Paso phase provided temporal data, as did the variety of
lithic tools (Thoms 1977b:3-4).
In addition to the field work, a carefully planned lecture program series
and trips to the Tigua Indian reservation and to the Hueco Tanks pictograph
site were entertaining as well as informative.

¯

162

Texas A rcheological Society

Figure 27. Excavators staking a grid at E1 Paso, with mapping crew in background.
(Photo: E. Mott Davis)

Figure 28. Washing artifacts prior to cataloging. (Photo: Beth Davis)

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer--TAS Field Schools

163

Field camp was an old Girl Scout camp where there was no shade, plenty
of sand, and a limited water supply. Auxilliary water tanks were supplied
(including one by the Third Cavalry, Fort Bliss) and kept filled by the E1 Paso
County Water Improvement District (Fitzgerald 1977:5). Coping with high
daytime temperatures of over 100 degrees and dessicating winds proved a
challenge to TAS members not used to the West Texas summer. Wind blew
continually, and tents and gear were distributed across the desert in the wake
of the stronger gusts. Other problems were presented by the sand, as vehicles
became stuck and were moved with difficulty. Landmarks were few and
two-track roads numerous, so off-site surveyors at times had difficulty
relocating camp. Although long-sleeved shirts, wide-brimmed hats, and
boots were recommended, some daring excavators and surveyors braved the
desert bareheaded, barebacked, and sandaled.

1978: Galveston Island
Mitchell Ridge, Galveston Island, Galveston County, upper Texas Gulf
Coast, June 10-18
Archeologist: Barbara Bruce Atkins
Site types: prehistoric camp and cemetery sites, early historic occupation
area, historic house site
Work done:
excavation~Mitchell Ridge site (41GV66); testing--Hall
historic house site (41GV70) and Galveston Island State Park; survey-10 sites recorded
Temporal context: Late Prehistoric, Historic European
Number of participants: 326
The history of Galveston Island and the lure of the seashore (especially
after E1 Paso) proved an enticement for some 326 TAS field school
participants from Texas, Louisiana, Oklahoma, and Arkansas. Unfortunately,
there was little shade and a lot of mosquitoes. A large part of the camp area
was located so that it benefitted from a welcome breeze at night, even though
the days were hot and sunny. Participants enjoyed the surf after a hot day of
digging, mapping, or surveying.
Education in archeological techniques and methods was emphasized in a
variety of activities, including location and investigation of prehistoric camp
sites and cemeteries, site surveys of areas of the island and adjacent mainland
by both on-shore and off-shore (flotilla) surveyors, and investigation of the
earliest historic occupation on the west end of Galveston Island. Participants
were introduced to specific field techniques through orientation sessions prior
to field crew assignment (Bruce 1978a:20). Both afternoon and evening
programs were offered; afternoon attendance averaged about 50 and evening
attendance about 230.
Testing at the Warren D.C. Hall site (41GV70), a mansion and its
surrounding grounds, produced both European ceramics, dating to the 1840s,
and Indian materials. One projectile point appears to have been made of
glass, indicating historic Indian occupation (Bruce 1978a:20).
In cooperation with the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, an
investigation of the western portion of the Hall site extending into the
Galveston Island State Park was carried out by field school personnel to

164

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 29. Shovel testing, the only way to do a survey at Galveston
due to ground cover and moving soils. (Photo: Bill Richmond)

determine if the proposed construction of a park maintenance road would
disturb important features in the site. Test work included an intensive survey
of all the site lying within the park boundaries and test excavations in an area
of the site suspected to contain a prehistoric cemetery. The investigation was
authorized by Texas Antiquities Permit No. 176.
Surveys by boat and on foot (Figure 29) located 10 previously
unrecorded prehistoric sites. All were located on the same high ground as the
TAS camp (Bruce 1978a:20).
The Mitchell Ridge site (41GV66) is !ocated toward the west end of
Galveston Island, approximately 11 miles west of the city of Galveston.
Prehistoric living areas on the crest of the ridge were excavated. Fauna!
remains, pottery, projectile points, and possible gaming pieces were among

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer--TAS Field Schools

165

Figure 30. Cataloging artifacts in the lab. (Photo: E. Mott Davis)

the recovered materials cataloged (Figure 30). Two burials, located the last
full day of digging, were of an adult woman and a four- or five-year-old child.
An arrow point found adjacent to the third lumbar vertebra of the adult was
the apparent cause of death. There was no evidence of the cause of death for
the child. The burial was removed by the staff and a few helpers who
continued to work after the close of the formal field school (Bruce
1978a:20-21).

1979, 1980: Eubank Ranch
Cross Cut, north of Brownwood, Brown County, north-central Texas, June
16-23
Archeologist: Gerald Humphreys
Site types: prehistoric burned rock and mound middens, lithic scatters,
quarry (procurement) areas, hearths, open campsites, rockshelter, terrace
and historic sites
Work done: testing, excavation--41 B R9, 41BR 104, 41B R 109 (ring midden
sites); 41BR105, 41BRll0 (mound middens); 41BR165 (rockshelter);
41BR107 (camp area); 41BR 103, 41BR 106, 41BR 108 (house site), 41BR113
(Smith house), 41BR156 (mill site), 41BR159 (house site), 41BR172
(wagon road), 41BR177 (Byrd’s store). Survey and collection--61 sites
recorded; 41BR 112 (lithic scatter), 41BR 147 (burial site). Archival search.
Temporal context: Archaic-Historic European
Number of participants: 1979, 275+; 1980, 200+

166

Texas Archeological Society

The 1979 and 1980 TAS field schools were held at the Eubank Ranch at
the invitation of Bransford Eubank, long-time TAS member and field school
participant. Bransford and Martha Eubank, with Bransford’s sisters Mabel
and Lydia, hosted TAS members and guests during the field schools (for the
sake of brevity, the two field schools are discussed together in this summary).
The ranch, located about 20 miles north of Brownwood near Cross Cut,
apparently was a favorite camp and living area for both prehistoric nomadic
groups and historic settlers, as evidenced by the lithic scatters and burned
rock middens of prehistoric groups and by log houses, outbuildings, and a
stone bridge among the historic remains.
Eubank Ranch is located along both banks of Pecan Bayou, a permanent
water source in northwestern Central Texas. It is a lightly wooded, brushy
area with soils varying from a reddish sandy loam overlying a red clay, to
yellowish caliche and limestone deposits. Grasses are abundant, and in
historic times livestock have been a primary source of income. Even more
recently, the general area has been targeted for oil exploration and
production.
Field school participants were offered a variety of experiences ranging
from walking surveys and boat surveys along Pecan Bayou to midden
excavations, mapping and excavating old house sites and ruins, archival
searches, compilation of an oral history of the area, and lab work. The 1979
field school concentrated efforts on testing the various known prehistoric
sites (primarily burned rock middens), a possible historic Indian site, and the
various historic sites, including Byrd’s store (Figure 31) and the Dick Stone
log house (G. Humphreys 1979:3; Hoffrichter and Davis 1981). Particular
attention was concentrated on the site surveys along Turkey Creek, Red River
(Brown County), and Pecan Bayou, in addition to the midden excavations.
Some 61 sites were located, of which 5 were historic (Figure 32). One
rockshelter (41BR165) was located during the Moore Ranch survey. The
remainder of the reported sites were prehistoric and included burned rock
middens, lithic scatters, quarries (procurement areas), hearths, and buried
camp sites. Aboriginal site dates estimated from observed and recovered
diagnostic materials ranged from Middle Archaic (Nolan and Pedernales
projectile points), to Late Prehistoric (Scallorn, Perdiz, and Washita point
types).
Middens were classified either as mound middens (those without an
obvious depression or hearth) or ring middens (those with an evident or
apparent central depression). Middens were examined primarily to determine
structure, use, and age. In addition it was hoped that any similarities or
differences between midden sites attributable to physical location could be
determined. Generally, middens contained little artifactual information, but
the surrounding living areas were more productive.
At the 1979 field school a serious attempt was made to involve
participants in writing a major portion of the final report. Norma Hoffrichter
chaired the committee that worked with contributors to aid and encourage
the production of a detailed account of the 1979 field work. The final informal
field school report, edited by Norma with Beth Davis as assistant editor
(1981) appeared as a special TAS field school committee publication, The

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer--TAS Field Schools

167

Figure 3!. An old post office may also be the site of Byrd’s store. (Photo: Bill
Richmond)

Figure 32, At the Dick Stone log house site (41BR 102) only the corn crib walls remain
standing. (Photo: Bill Richmond)

168

Texas Archeological Society

TAS Field School, Cross Cut, Texas, 1979. This report provided a source of
archeological information on the accomplished work, pending the publication
of the archeologist’s formal report.
The writing project was intended to educate participants in the
importance of recording daily activities and observations at all archeological
sites. In the past, field school members were indoctrinated in all phases of field
work, but the keeping of daily and detailed field notes received less emphasis
than excavation, survey, and laboratory techniques. Although crew chiefs
had handled the important field note phase of the work in their daily written
reports to the archeologist, it was felt that all participants could ’develop
writing skills and an understanding of the importance of publishing results of
archeological work. Recorders were assigned in each crew and daily reports
were turned in to Norma for typing. As could be expected, some efforts were
excellent, some writers needed more than a little encouragement and
guidance, and some gave up in frustration. Admittedly, writing a report of
what has been done is time consuming and not as interesting as field work, but
without the writing, finding artifacts becomes pothunting and site destruction.
Probably one of the most important aspects of the report writing and
detailed record keeping is that reports provide vital physiographic and
environmental information to the archeologist. The archeologist working
with over 200 field school participants may not have time to make detailed
areal observations. Accurate accounts of topography, flora and fauna, soil
variations, and site locations in relation to geographical variations can be
compiled for the archeologist’s report, thus allowing the archeologist to
concentrate efforts on analysis and evaluation (Gerald Humphreys: personal
communication, n.d.).
Midden testing was completed in 1979. During the 1980 field school,
areas surrounding the middens were investigated. Testing at the Fisk Branch
ring midden (41BRI09) indicated the midden had a depth of 60 to 70
centimeters and contained charcoal, flint flakes, clam shells, and charred
seed. A test square north of the midden in what appeared to be an activity area
produced 53 potsherds, flint flakes, and cobbles. Tests to the south of the
midden located the distal tip of a large biface and a spokeshave (Bugnitz
1981:40-41). Further investigation in 1980 indicated an artifact-rich activity
area surrounded the midden. The substantial lithic inventory, including
projectile points, scrapers, drills, and bifaces, was recovered from a large
hearth containing mussel shells and deer bones (G. Humphreys t980b:2).
Two unique areas of small burned limestone rubble were tested at site
41BR 110, the Gilliam Branch mound midden area. Surface finds in the area
included miscellaneous worked flint, a flint knife, and medial blade fragments.
No projectile points or pottery was reported. Bob Burleson (1981) describes
site 41BR 110 as a camping-living-activity area with slab hearths, cores, chips,
and debris, indicating a core reduction or chipping station. Finds in the
midden include two grinding stones, a mussel shell, flint flakes, a projectile
point midsection, and a possible bead. Areas to the south and east of the
midden were tested. To the south two shallow, basinlike hearths and a
probable third hearth were found. Broken metates and cobbles lined the
basins. A test in the area to the east indicated a work area, with about 95

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer-- TAS Field Schools

169

percent of the debris as core reduction flakes; a hammerstone was found in
association with the flakes.
The discovery in 1979 of at least three buried hearths and various lithic
tools at the Salt Well site (41BR 107), a buried site with eroding burned rock,
indicated further archeological potential. Investigations of the area in 1980
show this apparent camp site may be older than the midden sites (G.
Humphreys 1980b:2).
During the 1980 survey, an additional 49 sites were recorded, the
majority of which were along Pecan Bayou, on the Moore Ranch and near the
TAS camp. The prehistoric sites included a number of lithic scatters, possible
campsite locations. One historic site could be the remains of an old house
structure.
An interesting phase of investigation was the interviewing of older area
residents for a history of the area. An archival search and the extremely
interesting accounts of long-time residents provided an understanding of
what life was like in the late 1800s and early 1900s in what is now Brown
County. About 26 people were interviewed in 1979. Information on the Dick
Stone house (41BR 102) included photographs of the area and the family, as
well as data on the succession of occupants and specific information on the
building construction. Numerous stories and legends about Byrd’s store,
Indians, schools, outlaws, saloons, and cattle rustlers not only provided data
on area life-styles, but were also entertaining. One of the most helpful
accounts was that of Mrs. Allie Byrd Hounshell, who was interviewed in 1980.
She was born in 1889 and spent her early years in a log house about a mile
from the Eubank property (G. Humphreys 1980b:3; S. Humphreys 1981:11).
Bransford Eubank also was a valuable source of historic data. Bransford
was born on the ranch, and, except for the years he spent in the ministry and
as a foreign missionary, has always lived there. As a result of his and his
family’s many years and associations in Brown County, Bransford was able to
recount much of the area history and to suggest area residents who might
supply additional information. Bransford also accompanied a group of area
surveyors and pointed out numerous site locations, thereby saving time as
well as providing valuable information.

1981: Choke Canyon Reservoir
Near Three Rivers, Live Oak and McMullen counties, South Texas, June
6-13
Archeologist: Grant Hall
Site types:
prehistoric campsites, burned rock scatters, two historic
homesites, and one historic dugout homesite
Work done: excavation--prehistoric sites 41LK41, 41LK55, 41LK74,
41MC222, 41MC296, and historic sites 41LK53, 41LK202, 41MC67;
survey--five sites recorded; archival research--house site 41LK53, dugout
site 41 MC67
Temporal context: Early Archaic (3400 B.C.) through Late Prehistoric (A.D.
1300-1500), and Historic (A.D. 1850-1880)
Number of participants: 232

170

Texas Archeological Society

Choke Canyon on the Frio River, now the site of a reservoir, is located in
Live Oak and McMullen counties in South Texas. The area has been the
subject of archeological research by several institutions (including the
University of Texas at Austin, Texas Historical Commission, Texas Tech
University, and Texas A&M University) and since 1977 has been under
intensive investigation by the University of Texas at San Antonio. Approximately 400 sites have been recorded, the majority of which are prehistoric,
representing the Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods. The few historic sites
date between 1850 and 1880 (Hall 1981a:1).
Grant Hall, associated with the Choke Canyon archeological work,
suggested that TAS conduct the 1981 field school in the area. Among the
specific sites proposed for the study were several prehistoric open campsites
and two historic sites--a dugout homesite (41MC67), the only one known in
the area, and a rock-lined well shaft (41LK202) (Hall 198 l a:2).
The 1981 field school will be added to the list of field schools that are
remembered for the rain and mosquitoes. At Choke Canyon mud was deep in
the camp area, and some tenters awoke to find their personal items afloat.
And it rained! A number of camps were moved in hopes of finding
surroundings that were, if not dry, at least less wet and muddy. Mosquito
spray was at a premium.
Despite the conditions, the participants remained cheerful, and work
continued after clean-up operations. The laboratory was set up in an old
gymnasium building. Field crews surveyed and excavated assigned areas,
albeit in the mud. Rain did curtail the amount of work done, but
accomplishments were significant by the time field school ended.
Sites were selected for study on the basis of informational need and
educational value. Eight sites were selected for excavation, five of which
contained prehistoric remains. In addition to the excavations, archival and
site survey crews conducted additional investigations.
Crews surveyed 1600 acres of an upland area of the H.D. House ranch on
what is now the south side of Choke Canyon Lake. Five sites were recorded,
four of which were prehistoric and consisted primarily of burned rock scatters
with associated cores, thick bifaces, tools (including a Clear Fork gouge), and
debitage. The one historic site located contained wall foundation remains,
some scattered whiteware pottery, and glass sherds. The survey has provided
important comparative data about the character and distribution of area sites
(Hall 198 lb:5).
Archival research was conducted primarily at the courthouses in George
West and Tilden. Two historical house sites (41LK53 and 41MC67) were the
focus of a search for ownership and occupation data. The dugout site
(41 MC67), one of the more interesting historical sites, dates to the early to
middle 1800s and may be the earliest historic structure known in the area.
Artifacts recovered include three smoking pipe fragments, ceramics, a musket
ball, buttons, and a dangle from a Spanish-style bridle bit (Hall 198 lb:5).
TAS crews were unable to complete work on historic site 41LK202, a
house structure with an apparently related rock-lined well shaft, which was
exposed in the eroding river bank. Work conditions were difficult and
somewhat hazardous as crews recorded the superstructure of the well. Rain

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer--TAS Field Schools

171

and a rising Frio River forced the crews to abandon work before the
excavation was completed (Hall 1981b:4).
Temporal context for the five excavated prehistoric sites varied. At
41LK51 the upper level deposits yielded Late Prehistoric remains, including
arrow points, pottery, and bone. An important find was a piece of obsidian,
which originated far from Choke Canyon. Most cultural material was in the
upper 30 centimeters and indicated a probable occupation between A.D. 1000
and 1500. A Late Archaic horizon evidenced by materials including Ensor
and Fairland dart points was located in the deeper deposits (Hall 198 Ib:3).
Site 41LK74, a relatively shallow site, revealed Kinney, Tortugas, and
Ensor dart points, as well as a great deal of fire-cracked rock. This site is
attributed to the Middle to Late Archaic (Hall 198 lb:4).
At 41 MC55, the activities of one group of people over a short period of
time during the Late Prehistoric seem to be evidenced by the shallow deposit
and an activity area around a hearth. The Late Prehistoric assignment is
based on Perdiz and McGloin arrow points as well as various other artifacts,
including ceramics and debitage. The McGloin point, commonly found in the
Corpus Christi Bay area, may indicate access to coastal resource areas. Dates
for site 41MC55 are estimated at A.D. 1300-1600 (Hall 1981b:3-4).
The most remote site (some 13 miles from camp) was 41 MC296, a Late
Archaic through Late Prehistoric site as evidenced by diagnostic materials,
including Ensor and Tortugas dart points and Perdiz and Scallorn arrow
points. One Mission point and a hand-forged knife blade suggest the presence
of a historic Indian camp (Hall 198 l b:4).
In addition to the traditional evening programs and speakers, afternoon
short courses were offered on a variety of topics, including use of a Brunton
compass in site mapping, historical artifact analysis, use of a plane table and
alidade, making aboriginal-type ceramics, human skeletal material recovery
and analysis, and flint knapping (Hall 1981b:5-6). These short courses,
although not as well attended as the evening programs, were judged both
interesting and helpful by attendees.
1982: Rowe Valley (41WM437)
Williamson County, Central Texas, June 5-12
Archeologist: Elton Prewitt
Site type: Prehistoric campsite
Work done: Excavation--41 WM437; survey: 18 new sites recorded; archival
research
Temporal context: Late Prehistoric (Toyah phase)
Number of participants: 212+
The Rowe Valley site, located on the San Gabriel River about 14 miles
east of Georgetown and approximately 32 miles north of Austin, is a deep
terrace site on the south side of the river. The valley is owned by the Rowe
brothers, Jack and Lee (now deceased), who hosted the more than 200 TAS
members who camped on their property.
The camp, in a grove of pecan, cedar, and elm trees, was immediately
adjacent to the site. The level, grassy area had been mowed, cleaned, and

172

Texas Archeological Society

sprayed prior to the campers’ arrival. The proximity of the camp to the site
(about 50 yards) allowed participants to walk to work in a matter of minutes.
Laboratory facilities were located at the site, and laboratory questions or
problems usually could be answered promptly by crew chiefs. Probably one
of the more valuable aspects of the proximity of site, laboratory facilities, and
camp was that all field school participants could observe the daily progress of
the investigations. Work areas are often remote and members may never see
the various sites and work areas, with the result that only a limited number of
participants may observe and learn the various research techniques used.
For the first time since Guadalupe, the cook trailer was not used. Meals
were catered for those not choosing to prepare their own.
Preliminary work at the site by Elton Prewitt and the Travis County
Archeological Society indicated a Toyah phase component (Perdiz points)
apparently discretely separated from earlier materials. The original plan was
to expose this occupation area horizontally and reconstruct the camp layout.
In addition to the excavation, an area site survey along two stretches of the
San Gabriel River and historic-sites archival research were planned (Prewitt
1982a:2).
About two weeks before field school, a sterile alluvial deposit over the
central portion of the site area was removed by heavy equipment, including a
Gradall and three dump trucks donated for TAS use and manned by
volunteers. Removal of the overburden allowed the TAS members to begin
work at the top of the first cultural zone. The Gradall operator was able to
detect the slightest change in the surface, as well as any rock, flint, or bone,
and in only one day removed the overburden to within an inch of the deposit.
The depth of sterile deposit was less than anticipated, and in parts of the
site bone and burned rock were revealed. The site adjoins an area that has
been used as a gravel borrow pit. Occupational debris (including flakes, tools,
charcoal, and bone) could be seen in three distinct levels in the pit wall. Since
vertical distribution of cultural materials was evident, field school investigations focused on the horizontal patterning of use areas across the site. Only
the upper cultural zone was excavated during the 1982 field school, and even
that excavation was not completed in the eight working days available.
A variety of features, including stone-lined hearths, rock hearths (Figure
33), stone-tool production areas, and bison and deer processing stations have
been located. Butchering stations are on the northern area of the site toward
the San Gabriel River; hearths are generally to the south. A "plaza" area with
no discernible features is in the center of the exposed area (Prewitt 1982b:4).
Two features require further investigation. An unusual hearth, which
may have post molds adjacent to it (possibly representing remains of a
cooking rack), is located at the west side of the site. A concentration of deer
antlers was found in the same area. This find was made late in the week, and,
since such concentrations have been found in association with burials, their
removal was postponed until the 1983 field school (Prewitt 1982b:4; Elton
Prewitt: personal communication, n.d.).
The dominant diagnostic lithic tools found are Perdiz and Clifton arrow
points, basal- and corner-notched arrow points, four-edge beveled knives,
and end scrapers. A number of ceramic sherds, apparently representing at

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer-- TA S Field Schools

173

Figure 33. One of the hearths located in the upper component of the Rowe Valley
excavation (41WM437). (Photo: Rosanne Henna)

Figure 34. One of two bone pendants recovered at Rowe Valley. Bone beads also were
found. (Photo: Prince McKenzie)

174

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 35. A TAS archival search traced the history of this iron bridge, later
designated a State Historical Landmark. (Photo: Rosanne Henna)

Figure 36. Young people learn about Indian lifeways as they construct a brush hut.
(Photo: Rosanne Henna)

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer-- TA S Field Schools

175

least four vessels (two of which may be reconstructed), were found. Sherds of
one of the vessels have been tentatively identified as Patton Engraved, a
Caddoan-type pottery that has a temporal range from Protohistoric to early
Historic. Other sherds were described as burnished brownware and redware
pottery types typical of Central Texas. Additional artifacts include tubular
bone beads, a large, flat bone pendant (Figure 34), and possible bone tools
(Prewitt 1982b:4; Elton Prewitt: personal communication, n.d.).
Although the major emphasis was on excavation, site survey and
archival research teams made positive contributions to archeological understanding of the area. The survey teams recorded 18 new sites and revisited one
prehistoric site. Site dates based on diagnostic materials ranged from Early
Archaic to Historic, and all newly reported sites had been disturbed to some
degree by farming activities. Sites were limited to the San Gabriel terraces and
flood plain. The uplands were almost totally lacking in prehistoric materials
(Ralph 1982:8).
Access to Rowe Valley from State Highway 29 was across an old iron
bridge (Figure 35) over the San Gabriel River on County Road 369. The
bridge, rusty and paved with worn wooden planks, was one of the historic
sites researched and recorded by the archival crew. It was learned that the
bridge was originally built in 1909, a new part was added in 1914, and the
bridge was rebuilt after a flood in 1921 (Victor 1982:7). Members and visitors
experienced the thrill of driving over the historic one-way bridge (trailers and
heavy trucks were advised of an alternate route). Shortly after field school the
old bridge was retired in favor of a modern structure. The iron bridge has been
retained as a historic landmark.
An outstanding feature of the 1982 field school was the young people’s
program conducted by Bob and Mickey Burleson. Under their direction
brush shelters (Figure 36) and cooking hearths and racks were constructed,
fish were caught, tools made, cooking done, and games played. The Rowes
were impressed with the "village" and asked that it be left for visitors to see.
Media coverage was excellent. Newspaper reporters from Taylor,
Georgetown, and Austin presented both pictorial and narrative accounts of
the site work. Television coverage was given by Temple-Waco and Austin
stations. As a result of media exposure, visitors flocked to the site, where they
were presented a brief introduction to archeology at Rowe Valley.
The usual evening programs included discussions of areal occupation
and history, and other topics related to archeology. On visitors night the local
hosts, dignitaries, and friends were invited to share the evening meal and
participate in an "awards" night. Traditionally, the Titanic was sunk; this year
over 200 people participated in the event, led, as usual by the indomitable E.
Mott Davis and his guitar (Figure 37), with support from the TAS musical
crew.
As usual, work continued to the last day. If a heavy rainstorm had not
occurred on Friday, the work probably would have continued past the end of
field school. The open pits were given time to dry out, and a week after field
school the Travis County Archeological Society helped Elton Prewitt cover
all excavated areas with heavy plastic weighted with sand.

176

Texas A rcheological Society

Figure 37. Mott Davis, Hugh Davis, and friends sink the Titanic at Rowe Valley 1983.
(Photo: Rosanne Henna)

The field school at Rowe Valley in 1983 continues work begun in 1982.
Elton Prewitt continues to serve as archeologist at the site, which holds the
potential for information not previously reported, as well as presenting TAS
members the opportunity to learn and experience a wide variety of
excavations and laboratory techniques.
SUMMARY
The annual field school has progressed steadily over the years since 1962
and the summer dig at the Gilbert site. Early field schools, of necessity,
depended heavily on vocational archeologists for basic and theoretical
instruction, as well as for the more mundane jobs of organization and
direction. A cadre of experienced TAS members grew from the roster of
participants at the first field schools and were able to assume the responsibilities of basic instruction in field archeology. With relief from the responsibilities
of individual instruction, and with the creation of a field school committee to
handle planning and camp arrangements, the archeologists were able to
concentrate on archeological activities.
Competence of field-school-trained members has resulted in suggestions
from state and national agencies (Texas Highway Department, Texas Parks
and Wildlife, National Park Service) that TAS participate in planned
archeological projects. For example, at Musk Hog Canyon, McKinney Falls
State Park, and Guadalupe Mountains National Park, TAS cooperated with
governmental agencies in area site surveys and excavations.

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer--TAS Field Schools

177

Selection of a location for the annual field school is based on
archeological data need, suitability of the area for both teaching and
educational requirements, and the availability of a professional archeologist
able to donate time and energy to a research design, archeological field work
supervision, and writing or supervising the writing of a formal report of the
work. Preference is given site locations that are in danger of destruction by
construction or natural causes.
Accomplishments of the society’s summer field school and its contributions to Texas archeology are numerous and widely recognized throughout
the state. The first official archeological excavation of a shell midden on the
Texas coast was that of the TAS field school at the Gaulding site in 1965. As a
result of TAS work in 19 locations around the state, many sites of significant
cultural importance have been investigated and reported by avocational and
vocational archeologists in TAS and local society publications. Formal
reports have included at least one doctoral dissertation (Skinner 1974) and
two master’s theses (Boisvert 1980; Moore 1982).
The sponsorship by TAS members of young people 17 years old and
younger who have an interest in archeology but would be unable to attend
field school without an adult has encouraged youthful participation and, for
some, the pursuit of archeological careers.
Dissemination of archeological information on various field schools
through media coverage of the activities has helped to make the general public
more aware of local archeological resources and the need for recording
information scientifically.
Field school participation has grown from a handful (often only 6 to 10
people at the site during the week) to 200 to 300 daily participants.
Percentages of the TAS membership attending a field school have varied
from I percent at Oblate to more than 30 percent at Galveston. With this growth
have come improvements in educational procedures and activities, field
school structure, camp management, and equipment. Texas Archeological
Society field schools provide a chance for people of all ages, from all walks of
life and numerous professions, to work in and contribute to the field of
archeology.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to acknowledge the cooperation of those who knowingly or
unknowingly helped us accumulate 21 years of field school information: Shirley
VanderVeer, who is TAS secretary and keeper of the files; Anne Fox, Norma
Hoffrichter, Jane Schweitzer, Kathleen Gilmore, Charles N. Bollich, Grant Hall, Paul
Lorrain, and Francis Stickney, who provided anecdotal information; E. Mott Davis,
Elton Prewitt, and Jim Word, who provided photographs and general information;
and Carolyn Spock (TARL), who assisted in tracking down field school site numbers.

178

Texas Archeological Society
REFERENCES CITED

Atkins, Barbara Bruce. See Bruce, Barbara.
Bandy, Phil
On-site excavations. In TAS field school archeologists’ report. Texas
1977
Archeology 21(3):2.
Bandy, Phil, and Les Davis
Pounding: a useful non-destructive technique for subsurface archeological
1977
exploration. Paper presented at TAS 48th Annual Meeting, Arlington.
Blaine, Jerrylee
1970
A view from camp. Texas Archeology 14(3):18-21.
1975

Country Club Crier. Texas Archeology 19(3):3-5.

Boisvert, Richard
1980
A technological analysis of lithic assemblagesfrom the Guadalupe Mountains
National Park, Texas. Unpublished masters thesis, University of Kentucky,
Lexington.
Bollich, Charles
1965
A preliminary report on the Gaulding site. Paper presented at the TAS 36th
Annual Meeting, Dallas.
Briggs, Alton
1973
Test excavations at the Asa Warner site: TAS annual field school, summer
1973. Paper presented at TAS 44th Annual Meeting, Lubbock.
Bruce, Barbara
1978a Barbara Bruce reports on the field school. Texas Archeology 22(3):19-21.
1978b

Review of 1978 TAS field school on Galveston Island, June 10th to 18th.
Paper presented at TAS 49th Annual Meeting, Corpus Christi, Texas.

Bugnitz, Gus
Fish Branch ring midden site, 41BRI09. In TASfield school Cross Cut,
1981
Texas, 1979, edited by Norma Hoffrichter and Beth Ogden Davis, pp. 40-41.
Texas Archeological Society Special Publication. Austin.
Burleigh, Elaine
Chemical analysis of sediments. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
1980
51:152-163.
Burleson, Bob
1981
Gilliam Branch mound midden. In TASfield school, Cross Cut, Texas,
1979, edited by Norma Hoffrichter and Beth Ogden Davis, pp. 42-45. Texas
Archeological Society Special Publication. Austin.
Calhoun, Cecil A.
Midden No. 1. In A report on the fifth annual field school of the Texas
1966
Archeological Society. Texas Archeology 10(4): 12-13.

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer--TAS Field Schools

179

Calvert, James
1981a Site survey. Appendix A in Archeological investigations at the Thomas F.
McKinney homestead, Travis County, Texas: an experiment in historical
archeology, Part II, by Michael McEachern and Ronald W. Ralph. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 52:56-60.
1981b

Preservation of metal artifacts. Appendix B in Archeological investigations
at the Thomas F. McKinney homestead, Travis County, Texas: an
experiment in historical archeology, Part II, by Michael McEachern and
Ronald W. Ralph. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 52:61-68.

Clark, John W., Jr.
1974
Rock art of the Guadalupe Mountains. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 45:97-119.

Davis, E. Mott
1962
The first TAS summer dig. Texas Archeology 6(3):2.
1963a

Announcement: second annual Texas Archeological Society summer field
school. Texas Archeology 7(1):3.

1963b

The TAS-TCAS-UT summer dig. Texas Archeology 7(2):6-7.

1964a

The summer field school. Texas Archeology 8(2):1.

1964b

The summer field school at Vinson. Texas Archeology 8(3):1-2.

1965a

The summer field school: changes in plans. Texas Archeology 9(3):1.

1965b

Shells, stratigraphy, skeleton, skeeters, snakes, and swamp. Texas Archeology 9(4):3-7.

1966

How it looked at Dunlap. In A report on the fifth annual field school of the
Texas Archeological Society. Texas Archeology 10(4): 105.

1967a

Announcement: sixth TAS summer field school. Texas Archeology 1 I(2): 1-2.

1967b

The 1967 field school at Pittsburg. Texas Archeology 11(3):1-2.

1968a

Announcement of the seventh summer field school. Texas Archeology
12(3): 1-3.

1968b

An informal account of the seventh annual TAS field school, June 1968.
Texas Archeology 12(4):206.

1969a

Announcement of the eighth summer field school, 1969. Texas Archeology
13(1):13-16.

1969b

A diary of the 1969 TAS field school at Lake Meredith in the Panhandle.
Texas Archeology 13(2):7-19.

1970a

Announcement of the ninth summer field school of the Texas Archeological
Society. Texas Archeology 14(2):2-5.

1970b

1970 field school. Texas Archeology 14(3):9.

180

Texas Archeological Society

Davis, E. Mott, and Jay Sharp
Report on the TAS summer field school 1968. Paper presented at TAS 40th
1968
Annual Meeting, Waco.
Davis, E. Mott, B. McClurkan, A. Fox, J. Word, N. Hoffrichter, K. Gilmore, C.A.
Calhoun, D. Lorrain, L. Fullen, and D. Fox
A report on the fifth annual field school of the Texas Archeological Society
1966
at the Dunlap site, Crockett Co., Texas, June 18-26, 1966. Texas Archeology
10(4):1-18.
Fitzgerald, G.
1977
TAS field school. Texas Archeology 21(3):4-9.
Fox, Anne A.
1966
People, places and records. In A report on the fifth annual field school of the
Texas Archeological Society. Texas Archeology 10(4):7-8.
1974

Field school 1974. Texas Archeology 18(3):4-9.

1975

The summer field school. Texas Archeology 19(2):1-2.

Fox, Dan
Live Oak Creek midden. In A report on the fifth annual field school of the
1966
Texas Archeological Society. Texas Archeology 10(4): 15-16.
Fullen, Louis
The Owens shelters. In A report on the fifth annual field school of the Texas
1966
Archeological Society. Texas Archeology 10(4):15.
Gilmore, Kathleen
1970
Historic sites, In A preliminary report of an archeological survey in the
Guadalupe Mountains National Park by the Texas Archeological Society in
June 1970, by Harry J. Shafer. Texas Archeology 14(3):14-15.
Hall, Gant
198 la TAS field school to be held at Choke Canyon Reservoir. Texas Archeology
25(2): 1-2, 4.
1981b

Field school in South Texas rain forest a success. Texas Archeology
25(3):3-6.

Harper, Loyd, Ruby Harper, R.K. Harris, Inus M. Harris, E.B. Jelks, and J. Ned
Woodall
European trade goods: ornaments. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
1967
Society 37:87-104.
Harris, R. King, and I.M. Harris
1969a A study of trade beads from the Vinson site in Limestone County, Texas. MS
on file, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.
1969b

Fossil shell pendant from the Vinson site in Limestone County, Texas. MS
on file, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.

1969c

Metal button from the Vinson site in Limestone County, Texas. MS on file,
Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer-- TA S Field Schools

181

1969d

Metal arrow points from the Vinson site in Limestone County, Texas. MS
on file, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.

1969e

French blanket-bale seal from the Vinson site in Limestone County, Texas.
MS on file, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Harris, R.K., Inus M. Harris, and J. Ned Woodall
1967

European trade goods: tools. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
37:18-32.

Hoffrichter, Norma, and Beth Ogden Davis (editors)
1981

TAS field school Cross Cut, Texas, 1979. Texas Archeological Society
Special Publication. Austin.

Hughes, Martha, and E. Mott Davis
1969

1969 TAS summer field school. Paper presented at TAS 40th Annual
Meeting, Corpus Christi.

Humphreys, Gerald
1979
TAS summer field school. Texas Archeology 23(2)’,3.
1980a

Humphreys discusses field school. Texas Archeology 24(2):1, 3-4.

1980b

A summary of the t980 TAS field school. Texas Archeology 24(3):1-4.

Humphreys, Sherry B.
1981
Oral history. In TAS field school, Cross Cut, Texas, 1979, edited by Norma
Hoffrichter and Beth Ogden Davis, p. 11. Texas Archeological Society
Special Publication. Austin.
Jelks, Edward B. (editor)
1967
The Gilbert site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 37.
Johnson, LeRoy Jr., Dee Ann Suhm, and Curtis Tunnell
1962
Salvage archeology of Canyon Reservoir: the Wunderlich, Footbridge, and
Oblate sites. Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin 5. The University of Texas at
Austin.
Keller, John E., and Bruce B. Fullem
1977
Water separation procedures at the 1976 Texas Archeological Society field
school: an appraisal of results. Bulletin of the Texas Archeologieal Society
48:145-150.
Lorrain, Dessamae
1966
Midden No. 2. In A report on the fifth annual field school of the Texas
Archeologcial Society. Texas Archeology 10(4): 13-15.
Lorrain, Paul
1970a Excavation notes and daily log for 41CU31. On file, Culberson County file,
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Austin.

1970b

Lithic tools from 41VT8. Dallas Archeological Society, The Record
27(2): 1-19.

182

Texas Archeological Society

Mayer-Oakes, William J.
1977
Sabina Mountain No. 2 revisited--a summary of the 1977 TAS field school.
Paper presented at TAS 48th Annual Meeting, Arlington.

1979

Preliminary results of the 1977 TAS field school at Sabina Mountain No. 2.
In Proceedings of the First Jornada Conference, 1979, edited by P.H.
Beckett and R.N. Weisman, pp. 4-16. New Mexico State University, Las
Cruces.

Mayer-Oakes, William J., Phil Bandy, John Montgomery, and Alston Thoms
1977
TAS field school archeologists’ report. Texas Archeology 21(3):1-4.
McClurkan, Burney B.
1966

The Dunlap dig. In A report on the fifth annual field school of the Texas
Archeological Society. Texas Archeology 10(4):5-7.

McEachern, Michael, and Ronald W. Ralph
1974
TASfield school 1974. The Speleo Press, Austin.
1980a

Archeological investigations at the Thomas F. McKinney homestead, Travis
County, Texas, Part I. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 51:5-127.

1980b

Texas Parks and Wildlife Department excavations at the McKinney
homestead (41TV289). Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 51:
146-161.

1981

Archeological investigations at the Thomas F. McKinney homestead, Travis
County, Texas, Part II. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 52:5-55.

Montgomery, John
1977a The 1977 TAS field school: on-site survey. Paper presented at TAS 48th
Annual Meeting, Arlington.
1977b

On-site survey. In TAS field school report. Texas Archeology 21(3):2-3.

Moore, William Edward
Archeological investigations at Musk Hog Canyon, Crockett County,
1982
Texas: A report of the 1976 Texas Archeological Society field school.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 53:13-81.

Phelps, Alan L.
1974
Analysis of the ceramics of the Guadalupe Mountains National Park.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 45:121-150.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1982a TAS field school, Rowe Valley, June 5-12. Texas Archeology 26(2):2.
1982b

The 1982 TAS field school, Rowe Valley, Texas. Texas Archeology
26(3):2-5.

Ralph, Ronald
1982
Report from the survey crew. Texas Archeology 26(3):8.
Schuetz, Mardith
The excavation of Mission San Juan Capistrano. Paper presented at TAS
1967
38th Annual Meeting, Houston.

Richmond, Richmond, and Greer--TAS Field Schools

183

1968a

Archeology at Mission San Juan: the second 1967 field school. Texas
Archeology 12( 1):7-8.

1968b

The history and archeology of Mission San Juan Capistrano, San Antonio,
Texas, Vol. I: Historical documentation and description of the structures.
Office of the State Archeologist, Texas State Building Commission, Report
10.

1969

The history and archeology of Mission San Juan Capistrano, San Antonio,
Texas, Vol. II: Description of the artifacts and ethnohistory of the
Coahuiltecan Indians. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas State Building
Commission, Report 11.

Shafer, Harry J.
1970a A preliminary report of an archeological survey in the Guadalupe Mountains
National Park by the Texas Archeological Society in June, 1970. Texas
Archeology 14(3): 10-17.

1970b

Preliminary statement on the archeology of the Guadalupe Mountain~
National Park. Paper presented at TAS 41st Annual Meeting, Midland.

Shafer, Harry J., and Gary L. Moore
1976a The 1976 TAS field school. Texas Archeology 20(2):2-6.
1976b

1976 TAS field school archeologists’ report. MS on file, Crockett County
files, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

1976c

The TAS Musk Hog Canyon survey. Paper presented at TAS 47th Annual
Meeting, Houston.

Skinner, S. Alan
1971a The archeological program of the tenth TAS field school. Texas Archeology
15(2):3-8.

1971b

Field school; 1971. Paper presented at TAS 42nd Annual Meeting, Fort
Worth.

t971c

Prehistoric settlement of the Turtle Creek watershed. Texas Archeology
15(3):3-6.

1972a

1972 TAS field school in archeology. Paper presented at TAS 43rd Annual
Meeting, Austin.

1972b

The Turtle Creek watershed: a natural archeological study area. Texas
Archeology 16(3):4-8.

1974

Prehistoric settlement of a "natural area. "’ Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation,
Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

1975a

Goals for the 1975 TAS field school. Texas Archeology 19(2):3-5.

1975b

Archeologists’ report. Texas Archeology 19(3):6-7.

1975c

A preliminary analysis of a small sample of glass trade beads from the
Floydada Country Club site (41FLI) in Floyd County, Texas. MS on file,
Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

184
1975d

Texas A rcheological Society
The TAS golf course battle. Paper presented at TAS 46th Annual Meeting,
San Antonio.

Steed, Paul
Various aspects of the 1970 field school. Film presented at TAS 41 st Annual
1970
Meeting, Midland.
Story, Dee Ann, et al.
Indian artifacts: pottery vessels. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
1967
37:112-187.

Texas Archeological Society
1962- Minutes of the Texas Archeo!ogical Society Board of Directors Meetings.
MSS on file, Office of the Secretary, Texas Archeological Society, Center
1982
for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
19631982

Minutes of the Texas Archeological Society Annual Meetings. MSS on file,
Office of the Secretary, Texas Archeological Society, Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Thoms, Alston
1977a The 1977 TAS field school: off-site survey. Paper presented at TAS 48th
Annual Meeting, Arlington.
1977b

Off-site survey. In TAS field school archeologists’ report. Texas Archeology
21(3):3-4.

Tunnell, Curtis D.
Oblate: a rockshelter site. In Salvage archeology of Canyon Reservoir: the
1962
Wunderlich, Footbridge, and Oblate sites, by Johnson, Suhm, and Tunnell,
pp. 76-126. Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin 5. The University of Texas at
Austin.
Victor, Sally S.
1982
Report from the historical/archival crew. Texas Archeology 26(3):7.
Woodall, Ned
The Harold Williams site--a preliminary report. Texas Archeology 11(4):
1967
7-10.
Word, James H.
1963
Floydada Country Club site. Bulletin of the South Plains Archeological
Society 1:37-63.

1966

The Red Mill Shelter. In A report on the fifth annual field school of the
Texas Archeological Society. Texas Archeology t0(4): 10-12.

1967

The Dunlap complex in western central Crockett Co. Paper presented at
TAS 38th Annual Meeting, Houston.

1971

The Dunlap complex in western central Crockett County, Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 42:27 l-318.

Late Caddoan Social Group Identifications
and Sociopolitical Organization
in the Upper Cypress Basin and Vicinity,
Northeastern Texas
J. Peter Thurmond

ABSTRACT
The Late Caddoan culture traditionally referred to as the Titus focus is reconsidered.
A new terminology is proposed for the Titus focus, separating its spatial and chronological aspects. The term Cypress cluster is recommended as a label for the cultural entity
represented by the Titus focus, and the terms Whelan phase and Titus phase are suggested
for its temporal divisions. The boundaries of the Cypress clUster during each phase are
delimited. Four spatial divisions within the Cypress cluster are identified during the Titus
phase on the basis of differences in material culture; these are termed subclusters. It is
suggested that, at least during the Titus phase, one can identify in the archeological record
a major Late Caddoan social group and its constituent subgroups, or in more traditional
terms, a "confederacy" and its component "tribes."

INTRODUCTION
From January 1980 to May 1981, the author performed an inventory and
analysis of recorded archeological sites in the Cypress Creek drainage basin of
northeastern Texas and northwestern Louisiana. A total of 476 sites was included
in the study, the results of which were submitted to The University of Texas at
Austin as a master’s thesis (Thurmond 1981). In the course of that study, the author had the opportunity to analyze artifact collections from 172 of the sites in
the Texas portion of the basin. Certain spatial patterning became apparent in the
distribution of Late Caddoan ceramic attributes and, to a lesser extent, arrow
point forms. The scope of the study was therefore expanded to include a consideration of recorded Late Caddoan components in immediately adjacent parts of
the Sabine and Sulphur basins (Figure 1). The following article summarizes the
spatial patterning suggested by archeological remains of Late Caddoan components in the vicinity of the upper Cypress Basin and explores sociopolitical implications of that patterning.
In making this presentation, the author is climbing out on something of an
academic limb, in that the interpretations which follow are based on the results of
archeological investigations of extremely variable intensity, purpose, and quality
spanning some fifty years. As can be seen in Figure 2, portions of the study area

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54 (1985for 1983)

186

Texas Archeological Society

,¯¯

Thurmond--Caddoan Social Groups

iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiil

187

188

Texas Archeological Society

have been quite carefully surveyed, while other large segments remain virtually
unexplored. Such history of investigation is clearly less than ideal to the student
of spatial distributions. However, every undertaking must have its beginning, and
the tollowing presentation should be construed as nothing more than that.

CHRONOLOGICAL FRAMEWORK
It has become the vogue in recent years to belittle the study of archeological
chronology as prehistorians have expanded the scope of their interests to address
a broader range of research topics, from settlement and subsistence patterning to
paleopathology. As is so often the case, in rejecting the negative characteristics
of earlier archeological research, we have tended to overlook its beneficial aspects. It cannot be overstated that a command of the local chronology is a fundamental precursor to all other archeological studies in any region, in that the assumption of contemporaneity underlies so many processual models. This is
certainly true of models of sociopolitical organization, and so we must first establish some chronological control over the archeological materials.
Ironically, despite all the derision (seldom in print) in recent years of the
concentration upon chronology in the Caddoan area studies of the 1940s and
1950s (c.f. Krieger 1946; Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks 1954), our command of the
chronology of this region remains relatively poor for much of the span of human
occupation. The rarity of preservation of wood samples suitable for dendrochronological research, a dearth of tightly controlled suites of radiocarbon dates,
and the virtual absence of depositional regimes conducive to significant archeological stratification are largely responsible for this state of affairs. However,
chronologies have been constructed for the region and its constituent areas over
the years on the basis of intersite seriation, rare instances of natural or cultural
stratification, and correlation with the chronologies of adjacent regions. Tentative calendric spans have been assigned to the various time periods on the basis
of widely scattered radiocarbon dates, a good deal of inference, and, again, comparison to surrounding areas. Although there is still considerable controversy on
this topic, the author would summarize the chronological periods of the study
area and their diagnostics as follows. Detailed citations tracing the development
of the local chronology may be found in Thurmond (1981:90- 97, 418- 448).
Early Paleo-lndian (10,000 to 8,000 B.C.): fluted projectile points of the types
Clovis and Folsom.
Late Paleo-Indian (8,000 to 6,000 B.C.): projectile points of the types Dalton,
Meserve, Plainview, San Patrice, and Scottsbluff; early side-notched dart points;
and Albany bevelled bifaces.
Archaic (6,000 to 200 B.C.): Perkin bifaces; a high relative incidence of lithic
debitage within a site; most nonprojectile bifacial implements; numerous ground
stone tools; polished stone gorgets, boatstones, and grooved axes; and Clear Fork
gouges.
Early Archaic (6,000 to 4,000 B.C.): dart points of the types Bulverde,
Calf" Creek, Carrollton, Dawson, Morrill, and Wells; and stemless triangular dart points.

Thurmond--Caddoan Social Groups

189

Middle Archaic (4,000 to 2,000 B.c.): dart points of the types Edgewood,
Ellis, Evans, Lone Oak, Palmillas, Trinity, Yarbrough, and Wesley; and
most other straight- or expanding-stem dart points.
Late Archaic (2,000 to 200 B.C.): dart points of the types Ensor, Gary, and
Kent, in the absence of pottery.
Early Ceramic (200 B.C. to A.D.800): Late Archaic dart point styles in association with pottery of the types Williams Plain, Le Flore Plain, Marksville/
Troyville period types of the lower Mississippi Valley, and (rarely) sandy paste
ware (e.g. Bear Creek Plain).

Early Caddoan (A.D. 800 to 1400): dominance of body sherd collections by
plain, incised, punctated, and fingernail-impressed specimens; paste and thickness of utility wares often grade into types Williams Plain and Le Flore Plain;
pottery of the types Hickory Fine Engraved, Carmel Engraved, Crockett Curvilinear Incised, and Pennington Punctated-Incised; Red River ceramic pipes; arrow points of the types Alba, Bonham, Catahoula, Hayes, and Scallorn; and
Gahagan bifaces.
Period 1 (A.D. 800 tO 1200): pottery of the types Davis Incised, Holly
Fine Engraved, Spiro Engraved, and Weches Fingernail Impressed; Coles
Creek Incised and other Coles Creek period types of the lower Mississippi
Valley; major portion of the utility ware exhibits Williams!Le Flore
characteristics.
Period 2 (A.D. 1200 to 1400): pottery of the types Canton Incised, Haley
Engraved, Maxey Noded Redware, Sanders Engraved, and Sanders Plain;
utility ware exhibiting Williams/Le Flore characteristics much less common than during Period 1.
Transitional Early to Late Caddoan (A.D. 1400 to 1500): ceramic assemblages
exhibiting a fusion of Early Caddoan Period 2 and Whelan phase concepts, in
association with arrow points of the types Scal!orn and Perdiz.
Late Caddoan A.D. (1500 to 1700): pottery of the types Bullard Brushed and
Maydelle Incised; relatively high incidence of brushed body fragments in sherd
collections from the eastern half of the study area; ceramic elbow and biconical
pipes; Galt bifaces.
Whelan phase (A.D. 1500 to 1600): Ripley Engraved bowls exhibiting all
motifs other than pendant triangle (Figure 3), with border elements commonly filled by carelessly executed curvilinear hatchures; also pottery of
the types Pease Brushed-Incised, proto-Harleton Applique, McKinney
Plain, and, rarely, Taylor Engraved, and trade vessels of the type Poynor
Engraved; arrow points predominantly of the types Scallorn and Perdiz.
Titus phase (A.D. 1600 to 1700): pottery of the types Bailey Engraved,
Harleton Applique, Johns Engraved, Karnack Brushed-Incised, La Rue
Neck Banded, McKinney Plain, Ripley Engraved, Taylor Engraved, and
Wilder Engraved; Ripley bowls exhibit all but horizontal diamond, bisected diamond, and interlocking diamond motifs (Figure 3), commonly
executed in broad, deep excising and engraving; tradeware of the types

190

Texas Archeological Society

Pendant

Scroll

Scroll and Circle

Scroll and

Continuous

Nested

Bisected

Triangle

Semicircle

Scroll

Triangle

Diamond

Circle and Nested

Interlocking

Triangle

Scroll

Horizontal

Diamond

Interlocking

Dtamond

SHP / 82

Figure 3. Ripley Engraved bowl-rim motifs.

Thurmond--Caddoan Social Groups

191

Avery Engraved, Simms Engraved, Cass Applique, Belcher Engraved,
Belcher Ridged, Cowhide Stamped, Foster Trailed-Incised, Glassell Engraved, Hodges Engraved, and Keno Trailed; arrow points predominantly
of the types Bassett, Maud, Reed, and Talco; European glass beads and
ceramics of the Wichita type Womack Engraved .found as burial associations in a few components.
Happily, the present study concentrates upon the briefest of the chronological subdivisions, the Whelan and Titus phases of the Late Caddoan period, previously defined as the Fulton aspect by Krieger (1946). The definition of the Titus
phase follows that of Krieger’s Titus focus (Krieger 1946), and the separation of
the precedent Whelan phase follows Davis’s (1958) definition of the Whelan
complex. The author employs the term phase as a purely chronological division
within a tightly circumscribed local culture, distinct from the fusion of the concepts of relative contemporaneity and spatial circumscription in the old McKern
(1939) term focus.

SOCIAL GROUP IDENTIFICATIONS AND
SOCIOPOLITICAL ORGANIZATION
Turner (1978) has recently suggested that a chronological subdivision of the
Titus phase can be made on the basis of Ripley Engraved bowl rim motifs and
arrow point types. Specifically, he has suggested that the early Titus phase components are characterized by an absence of the Ripley pendant triangle motif
(Figure 3) and dominance of the arrow point assemblage by the types Perdiz and
Bassett. Late Titus phase components would conversely be indicated by a high
incidence of the pendant triangle motif and arrow points of the types Talco and
Maud. Turner’s interpretations were largely based on his analysis of grave goods
from Titus phase cemeteries at the Tuck Carpenter (41CP5), Tommy Johns
(41CP2), and Alex Justice (41TT13) sites.
The foregoing struck this author as quite reasonable at the time of its publication in 1978, and Turner’s temporal division of the Titus phase was followed
during the data collection of my thesis project. However, as the results were analyzed, it became clear that the geographic distribution of the components so classified was quite markedly biased. The "early" components were all in the
western part of the Cypress Basin, and the "late" components were near its center.
This observation prompted a harder look at the artifacts associated with the
Titus phase components within the Cypress Basin and an expansion of the scope
of the study to examine the collections from, and published reports of, Late Cad:
doan components to the immediate north, west, and south. The collections at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin and the published accounts
of the Lake Tawakoni (Johnson 1957), Lake Carl Estes (Malone 1972), Lake
Fork Reservoir (Bruseth and Perttula 1981; Bruseth et al. 1977), Cooper Lake
(Doehner and Larson 1978; Doehner, Peter, and Skinner 1978), and Lake Texarkana (Jelks 1961) archeological projects were consulted. Data more recently
published by Skiles, Bruseth, and Perttula (1980) also were utilized.
Even on the basis of the rather gross level of classification employed in my
study, it rapidly became clear that many of the geographic limits of the Titus
phase ceramics could be defined on the basis of the present site sample, and that
at least four groups of components should be defined within those boundaries.

192

Texas Archeological Society

The patterning was clear on a descriptive level, and the concept of a "confederacy" composed of "tribes" fi la Swanton (1942) was immediately suggested.
It happened that Dee Ann Story was concurrently working with similar
problems in her reanalysis of the Late Caddoan components in the vicinity of the
Deshazo site near Nacogdoches, Texas (Story and Creel, 1982). Story has formulated a model of Late Caddoan sociopolitical organization for the !ocal cultures defined by Krieger (1946) as the Frankston and Allen foci which the author
believes to be directly applicable to the components at hand. Story interprets the
two foci as the archeological manifestations of a single Late Caddoan social group,
the Hasinai Confederacy, as defined by Swanton (1942). This "confederacy" is
seen as a weakly hierarchical structure with two levels of integration. The terminological equivalent of Swanton’s confederacy, Story’s affiliated group is postulated to represent the highest level of Late Caddoan intergroup sociopolitical
organization. Comprising this maximal group were a number of constituent
groups, the equivalents of Swanton’s tribes, each composed of multiple settlements, cemeteries, and limited use areas (Story and Creel 1982:32-33).
Story predicts that interaction through the mechanisms of intermarriage, economic exchange, joint participation in ceremonies, and visitation would be
"more frequent and intense among the constituent groups than between a
member group and a nonmember group" of the affiliation (Story and Creel
1982:32-33). One would expect to identify the affiliated group archeologically
by means of a pronounced sharing of attributes in the material culture. The predicted archeological manifestation of the model is therefore synonymous with the
McKern system focus, or what we might alternatively refer to as a local culture.
Story terms this spatial expression a cluster, and its temporal divisions are designated phases in harmony with this author’s use of the term (Story and Creel
1982:33-34). She then proceeds to spatially define the Anderson cluster, chronologically divided into the prehistoric Frankston and historic Allen phases. No
equivalent archeological term was proposed by Story on the constituent-group
level, as she feared that their detection by archeologists would be quite difficult
(Story and Creel 1982:33-34).
Again, the author is of the opinion that Story’s model of Late Caddoan
sociopolitical organization can be quite profitably applied to the Late Caddoan
components of the upper Cypress Basin and its vicinity. The term Cypress cluster is proposed as a replacement for the spatial element of Krieger’s Titus focus
and is believed to identify the archeological manifestation of a Late Caddoan affiliated group. Two chronological subdivisions are suggested for the Cypress
cluster, the prehistoric Whelan phase, dating from approximately A.D. 1500 tO
1600, and the protohistorical to early historic Titus phase, estimated to span the
century from about A.D. 1600 to 1700. At the least, this application of Story’s
model provides a terminology for the classification of Late Caddoan components
in the study area which clearly separates the spatial and chronological elements
formerly combined in the term focus. The model can also serve as a useful
framework for the analysis of Late Caddoan social groups and sociopolitical organization in the study area.
Many of the boundaries of the Cypress cluster during both the Whelan and
Titus phases can be identified on the basis of the presently available data. Components exhibiting artifact assemblages characteristic of the Whelan phase of the

Thurmond--Caddoan Social Groups

193

Cypress cluster are not known to occur beyond the bounds of the Cypress Basin
(Figure 4). The recorded components occur only along Big Cypress Creek, from
its confluence with Little Cypress and Black Cypress creeks to its upper reaches
in the northwestern part of the Cypress Basin. It is not known whether Whelan
phase components occur in the adjacent Little Cypress and Black Cypress valleys, as these areas remain unknown archeologically (Figures 1 and 2).
There is a distinct westward expansion in the occurrence of Cypress cluster
components during the Titus phase (Figure 5). Cypress cluster components definitely occur along the eastern reaches of Lake Fork Reservoir, but none were
recorded in its western reaches, nor at Lake Tawakoni or Lake Carl Estes
(Bmseth and Perttula 1981; Bruseth et al. 1977; Johnson 1957; Malone 1972). To
the northwest the University of Texas, in investigations of the 1930s, recorded
Cypress cluster components of the Titus phase along the middle reaches of White
Oak Bayou, but more recent investigations at Cooper Lake on the South Sulphur
failed to identify a single Cypress cluster component (Doehner and Larson 1978;
Doehner, Peter, and Skinner 1978). To the north a single Titus phase component,
41TT2, the W. A. Ford site, was recorded by the University of Texas in the 1930s
on the Sulphur River, but no Cypress cluster components were recorded at Lake
Texarkana (Jelks 1961). It seems likely that Cypress cluster components will be
found in the Black Cypress, Little Cypress, and Big Sandy basins, but this
clearly remains to be tested. Titus phase components of the Cypress cluster definitely do not occur east of the Big Cypress/Little Cypress confluence (Thurmond
1981: Figure 15) or south of the Sabine River (Kleinschmidt 1982:193-211).
Four distinct spatial groups of components can be identified within the Cypress cluster during the Titus phase on the basis of the artifact assemblages. It is
believed that these represent the archeological manifestations of constituent
groups, and the term subcluster is used as the archeological equivalent of the
constituent group. The distribution of the components making up each subcluster
is illustrated in Figure 6. The ceramics and arrow points characteristic of each
subcluster are as follows.
Three Basins subcluster: Ripley Engraved is by far the dominant engraved ware.
Ripley bowls most frequently exhibit the scroll, scroll and circle, and continuous
scroll motifs (Figure 3), and the pendant triangle motif is entirely absent. Wilder
Engraved is virtually the only other engraved ware, barring apparent trade vessels of the types Avery Engraved, Simms Engraved, and, rarely, Womack Engraved. The utility ware is largely classifiable as McKinney Plain, Maydelle Incised, and Harleton Applique, with very little brushed ware present (less than
5 percent of the utility ware). Arrow points are of the types Talco and Maud,
with Perdiz occurring infrequently.
Tankersley Creek subcluster: Ripley Engraved is the most common engraved
ware. Ripley bowls most frequently exhibit the scroll, scroll and circle, and continuous scroll motifs, and the pendant triangle motif does occur rarely. Wilder
Engraved is the only other common engraved ware, but Taylor Engraved is
present at low frequencies. The greatest part of the utility ware is evenly divided
between vessels classifiable as Harleton Applique, Maydelle Incised, McKinney
Plain, and Bullard Brushed. Brushed ware accounts for 20 to 30 percent of the
utility ware. Arrow points are most commonly of the type Maud, but Talco,
Bassett, and Perdiz also occur.

194

Texas Archeological Society

\
\
~7~ f

\

o

\

\
\

I
I

/

-d

/
/
/

r,.)

/

k
\
0

k

0

\

Thurmond--Caddoan Social Groups

195

o
\

o

o

/

/
/

o

o
©

E
0

N

\

196

Texas Archeological Society

Swauano Creek subcluster: Ripley Engraved remains the most common engraved
ware, but Bailey Engraved and Wilder Engraved also are quite common, and
Johns Engraved and Taylor Engraved occur infrequently. The Ripley bowls most
commonly exhibit the pendant triangle, scroll, scroll and circle, and continuous
scroll motifs in roughly equal frequencies. Bullard Brushed is the most common
utility ware, with Harleton Applique and Maydelle Incised present less frequently than in Tankersley Creek components. McKinney Plain vessels are quite
uncommon. Brushed ware accounts for 40 to 50 percent of the utility ware.
Arrow points are predominantly of the type Talco, but Maud and Bassett also are
common, and Reed occurs infrequently.
Big Cypress Creek subcluster: Ripley Engraved and Taylor Engraved are the
dominant engraved wares, occurring at roughly equal frequencies. On the Ripley
bowls, the pendant triangle motif is more common than all others combined.
Bailey Engraved, Wilder Engraved, and Johns Engraved are all relatively minor
types within the engraved ware, but Bailey is the more common of the three.
Brushed ware strongly dominates the engraved ware, with Bullard Brushed and
Karnack Brushed-Incised the most common types. Harleton Applique, Maydelle
Incised, and McKinney Plain are present at lower frequencies than in any other
subcluster. Brushed ware accounts for 50 to 60 percent of the utility vessels.
Trade vessels of the Belcher phase types Belcher Engraved, Belcher Ridged,
Cowhide Stamped, Foster Trailed-Incised, Glassell Engraved, Hodges Engraved,
and Keno Trailed also are common. (It should be noted that vessels of the Texarkana phase types Avery Engraved, Simms Engraved, and Cass Applique are
ubiquitous at low frequencies within Titus phase components of the Cypress
cluster.) Arrow points of the type Talco are by far the most frequent, but Bassett
and Maud also are fairly common.
CONCLUSION
To reiterate, it is herein suggested that the Cypress cluster represents the
archeological manifestation of a series of social groups banded together in a
sociopolitical structure analogous to, and at least partially contemporaneous
with, that of the Hasinai to the south and the Kadohadacho to the northeast. Four
subclusters, the diagnostics of which have been detailed, are believed to represent the individual constituent groups making up this affiliated group. In Swanton’s terms, it appears that we can identify a confederacy and its component
tribes in the archeological records.
There is, as noted above, evidence that the Titus phase extends into the early
historic period. Glass beads were recovered in burial association at the Tracy site
(41CP71) in the Big Cypress Creek subcluster by a private collector (Thurmond
1981:130). Within the Three Basins subcluster, the historic Wichita types
Womack Engraved and Womack Plain have been recovered in burial association
at 41HP1, the Culpepper site (Scurlock 1962), and at 41TT2, the W. A. Ford site
(Thurmond 1981:448). The proximity of the western Titus phase components to
the easternmost recorded Wichita components, the Pearson site (41RA5;
Duffield and Jelks 1961) and the Gilbert site (41RA13; Jelks 1966), can be seen
in Figure 6.

Thurmond--Caddoan Social Groups

197

8

\

\
\
I
I
/
/
/

I

/

I

/

/
I

/

198

Texas Archeological Society

One will be naturally led to wonder if the patterning discernible in the Titus
phase components might not be attributable to diachronic demographic processes rather than synchronic social group differentiation. In short, it is entirely
possible that the discrete sets of Titus phase components identified herein as subclusters are not contemporaneous, but reflect instead a directional shift in the
Cypress cluster population over time. However, the author considers this possibility unlikely for two reasons. First, the artifact assemblages of the components
within each subcluster are strikingly homogeneous, and the assemblages of
neighboring components of different subclusters tend to be quite distinct. This is
a subjective impression, but there is simply not the gradation of traits in any
direction that one would expect to see in a situation of demographic shift. Perhaps even more convincing is the occurrence of apparently early historic components at opposite ends of the Cypress cluster area during the Titus phase, within
the Big Cypress Creek and Three Basins subclusters, as noted above. The evidence would seem to weigh in favor of contemporaneity.
That the Late Caddoan affiliated group postulated herein should have escaped the attention of early European travelers through the Caddoan area, and
thus not become a part of the ethnohistoric record, is not entirely surprising. For
one thing, the dearth of sites exhibiting historic materials, in comparison to the
adjacent Red River (Kadohadacho) and Hasinai areas, is striking. This suggests
that the Titus phase occupations extend only into the very earliest period of
Spanish and French influence. Further, the most direct route between the Kadohadacho and Hasinai areas crosses the Cypress Basin in the vicinity of Caddo
Lake in Harrison and Marion counties. Again, there are no known Titus phase
components east of the lower reaches of Lake o’ the Pines, and Belcher phase
components are not known to occur above the Red River Valley within the Cypress Basin (Thurmond 1981:Figure 15). It therefore seems likely that the area
traversed by early explorers of the seventeenth century in passing between the
Hasinai and Kadohadacho areas, presumed to be the vicinity of Caddo Lake,
held no resident population.
It is intriguing to note in Figure 4 that four groups of Cypress cluster components of the precedent Whetan phase are suggested. The easterly three appear
to be centered on mound sites. These are, ranging from east to west, the Whelan
site (41MR2), the Dalton-Harroun complex (41UR10, 11, and 18), and the Sam
Roberts site (41CP8). There is at least a hint that the four subclusters identified
for the Titus phase were already in existence during the Whelan phase. However,
this apparent pattern could simply be a function of survey bias (see Figure 2),
and the ceramic analysis employed by the author was not sufficiently detailed to
permit a detection of any distinctions that may be present within these compo,
nents. It is highly recommended that any other researcher interested in pursuing
this problem employ a detailed attribute analysis of the ceramics from the relevant components (for an inventory of the known Whelan phase components, see
Thurmond 1981 :Figure 14 and Table 9).
Finally, it should be emphasized that the Big Sandy, Little Cypress, and
Black Cypress valleys are virtually unknown archeologically, and these areas are
clearly vital to an understanding of the Cypress cluster. Major reservoir construction is planned within the latter two drainages by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Figure 1), and a cultural resources overview of the two areas has already

Thurmond--Caddoan Social Groups

199

been performed (Northern and Skiles 1981). It is to be hoped that the more intensive site inventory and mitigation phases of the cultural resource management
investigations presumably slated for the Little Cypress and Black Cypress valleys
will employ techniques of field investigation, analysis, and reporting sufficient to
permit the identification and interpretation of any Cypress cluster components
that may occur.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author would like to express his gratitude to the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory in Austin for the free access granted to their artifact collections, records and
library, and for the office space provided. Dee Ann Story graciously shared her ideas concerning Late Caddoan sociopolitical organization early in the formulation of the model
described in this article. The author is also indebted to James E. Bruseth for the provision
of information regarding the Lake Fork Reservoir components prior to the publication of
the final report in 1981. Darrell Creel, Dee Ann Story, and my wife, Susie, reviewed this
article after it had been first composed and provided much useful criticism. All of the
illustrations were drafted by Sandra and Timothy Price of Austin. The final manuscript
was prepared by Pamela Kauk of Leedey.

REFERENCES CITED
Bruseth, James E.,and Timothy K. Perttula
1981 Prehistoric settlement patterns at Lake Fork Reservoir. Texas Antiquities Permit
Series Report 2. Southern Methodist University, Dallas, and Texas Antiquities
Committee, Austin.
Bruseth, James E., J. T. Bagot, K. M. Banks, and M. A. McKinley
1977 Archaeological research at Lake Fork Reservoir: site inventory and assessment.
Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Research Report 87. Dallas.
Davis, E. Mott
1958 The Whelan site: a Late Caddoan component in the Ferrell’s Bridge Reservoir,
northeastern Texas. Typescript report submitted to the National Park Service by
the Division of Research in Anthropology, The University of Texas, Austin.
Doehner, Karen, and Richard E. Larson
1978 Archaeological research at the proposed Cooper Lake, Northeast Texas, 19741975. Archaeological Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Research Report 108. Dallas
Doehner, Karen, Duane Peter, and S. Alan Skinner
1978 Evaluation of the archeology at the proposed Cooper Lake. Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Research Report 114. Dallas.
Duffield, Lathel F., and Edward B. Jelks
1961 The Pearson site: a historic Indian site at Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains County
Texas. Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin, Archaeology Series 4.
Jelks, Edward B.
1961
Excavations at Texarkana Reservoir, Sulphur River, Texas. Bureau of American
Ethnology Bulletin 179:1-78.

200

Texas Archeological Society

Jelks, Edward B. (editor)
1966 The Gilbert site: a Nortefio focus site in northeastern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 37.
Johnson, Leroy R.
1957 Appraisal of the archeological resources of Iron Bridge Reservoir, Hunt, Rains
and Van Zandt counties, Texas. Typescript report submitted to the National Park
Service by the Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas, Austin.
Kleinschmidt, Ulrich K. W.
1982 Review and analysis of the A. C. Saunders site, 41AN19, Anderson County,
Texas. Unpublished Master’s thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.
McKern, W. C.
1939 The Midwestern Taxonomic Method as an aid to archeological study. American
Antiquity 4(4): 301 - 313.
Malone, James M.
1972 Archeological reconnaissance at the proposed Mineola Reservoir. Office of the
State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission, Survey Report 10. Copublished
by Texas Water Development Board, Austin.
Northern, Martin J., and B. D. Skiles
1981
Cultural resources overview of the proposed Black Cypress and Marshall reservoirs. Environmental Consultants, Inc., Cultural Resources Report 81-I 1.
Dallas.
Scurlock, J. Dan
1962 The Culpepper site: a late Fulton aspect site in northeastern Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 32:285-316.
Skiles, B. D., James E. Bruseth, and Timothy K. Perttula
1980 A synthesis of the upper Sabine River Basin culture history. Dallas Archeological
Society, The Record 36(1.): t - 12.
Story, Dee Ann, and Darrell Creel
1982 The cultural setting. In The Deshazo site, Nacogdoches County Texas, edited by
Dee Ann Story, Vol. 1, pp. 20-34. Texas Antiquities Permit Series 7. Texas Antiquities Committee and Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Austin.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954 An introductory handbook of Texas archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25.
Swanton, John R.
1942 Source material on the history and ethnology of the Caddo Indians. Bureau of
American Ethnology Bulletin 132.
Thurmond, J. Peter
1981 Archeology of the Cypress Creek drainage basin, northeastern Texas and northwestern Louisiana. Unpublished Master’s thesis, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Turner, Robert L.
1978 The Tuck Carpenter site and its relation to other sites within the Titus focus. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 49:1 - 110.

From Circleville to Toyah:
Comments on Central Texas Chronology
Elton R. Prewitt

ABSTRACT
Relatively reliable radiocarbon assays tor the Central Texas region now total at least
147. These assays, when dendrochronologically corrected, support the sequence of temporal phases proposed by Prewitt (1981). The assays are tabulated and the age ranges are
illustrated. Minor adjustments to the beginning and ending dates of some phases are made
to reflect additional radiocarbon dates obtained since 1981. The refined chronology provides a departure point for estimating relative population density through time. Frequency
of component occurrence is tabulated for 147 sites or surveys reported in Central Texas.
These frequencies are then divided by the length of the phases (in years) to obtain a density ratio. Contrary to previous subjective estimates, this method indicates a decrease in
population density in the middle Archaic and a peak in the late Archaic. This is followed
by a sharp decrease in the Neoarchaic Austin phase and a slight increase in the Toyah
phase. Additional discussions are concerned with overlapping ranges of dates between
phases. The Neoarchaic Austin and Toyah phases provide an example to show that each of
these phases occurs earlier in the northern portions of Central Texas. When compared to
the historical incursions of the Apaches, and later the Comanches, a pattern of population
translocations is evident. This suggests that a series of southward movements out of the
Plains began at least a thousand years before the arrival of the Apaches.

INTRODUCTION
Cultural chronology in Central Texas has received a great deal of attention
from archeologists for many years. Refinements of the basic framework continue
to be made by various individuals. This trend can be expected to continue as
additional data for the region are accumulated. Recently, I published a short synthesis detailing my perception of the Central Texas chronological sequence (Prewitt 1981). A major criticism of that article has been the omission of supporting
radiocarbon assays to accompany the age ranges given for the cultural phases.
The purpose of this paper is to provide that supporting documentation. The
chronological data are then used to construct a method for determining index
ratios that may indicate changing relative population densities within the Central
Texas archeological region. Finally, an explanation of overlapping date ranges for
the Neoarchaic stage is provided.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54 (1985for 1983)

202

Texas Archeological Society
THE RADIOCARBON DATA

A listing of the radiocarbon assays used in this paper is given in Table 1.
This compilation of 147 assays has been screened for general contextual integrity. Dates obtained from snail shells are not included because of their demonstrated unreliability (Valastro and Davis 1970a:273). Other sample results are
omitted due to inconsistencies between the known cultural context and the reported age range. The list presented here, then, is not to be regarded as a compilation of all radiocarbon assays that have been obtained for Central Texas.
Rather, a degree of judicious screening has been exercised in the compilation.
However, it should be noted that all samples which reflect probable overlapping
of the age ranges of phases have been retained on the list. No attempt has been
made to ignore assays that do not fall neatly within the stated range of a particular phase.
Table 1 presents a variety of data for each sample. The sample number (e.g.,
Tx 508) is followed by the assay date and range stated in radiocarbon years (e.g.,
490 -+ 80) B.P. (years before present, corrected to A.O. 1950). The samples are
arranged in chronological order of the median date reported by the issuing laboratory. The laboratory date is followed by a corrected date and range derived
from Damon et al. (1974). Assays younger than 350 or older than 5700 radiocarbon years are not corrected. The next column indicates the general provenience of each sample by site name and site number. The final column gives the
source of each assay.
A plot of all the assay ranges is presented in Figure 1. More detailed plots of
the ranges are shown in Figures 2 through 4. It is readily apparent that a large
majority (107 of 147, or 73 percent) of the assays fall within the Late ArchaiC
and Neoarchaic phases. However, it is encouraging to note that of the 33 assays
obtained since the data were compiled for the 1981 article (Prewitt 1981), 20
assays are Middle Archaic or older. This, as expected, has resulted in the minor
adjustment of age ranges for several phases. This procedure can be expected to
continue as more dates are obtained. A comparison of the 1981 and the current
chronological interpretation is presented in Figure 5.

Prewitt--Circleville to Toyah

::n

O

~

0 C::~ ~:::3

:n

0 tm

~

0

0

~

0

~

~-~
8o

¯
I1.

¯
n

~

g

--

oo

oo

-- i_

to ~D (D
:> > ~1_

~ ¯
>0_

C3

0

0 ..... 4-

¯

_~-

----

tm

0 d::~

°~
8.~ o~gg8~g
o ,-

EL
~ 0
F-D-

~o
O

O

tO 0 ~0 tO tO tO tO tO
> --~ > "r :> I-- I-- >

CO
:>

O

L
.
CL

203

------ >---E E

..

¯
-n

p-.

OqCq

O4

~- ~- ~o

~-~o

:-

¯ 0
4-4-

.
4-

o

o

20=2

0

0

~o

~o

-

04

r’n

~- -- ~- :~ ~- -- -- c~

0

~

~

o

1-

0+---+-

0

~-

0

o-o~o---

-

(.3

o3

E >-E’- E >- >’-O
co ~: o") moo v" ~ ::::E

0
CO

>",/

O~O

OOOOO

O

+1 +1

+1

0

~ 0
>--1:2

0

CO

O

..... O~ .... L.

¯ ~
l::Lm

12~

O

~ ~
corn

0

¯

~o

+1

oo

I

+1

o~¢oco

+1 +1

+1

+I

oogo~ggo

o

+1

~

o

0

0

000

O0

~0

0

0~000000

0

0

+1
0

+1+1+1
000

+1+1
O0

+1+1
O0

+1
0

+l+l+l+l+l+l+l+l
00000000

+1
0

+1
0

XX

XX

X

X

I

--~O~

0

0

0

~o

0

E :m
o~E0om

~o

to
-

......
i:~

e~o

O40OO4

X

I

X~

X

X

X

X

204

Texas Archeological Society

r~

r--

L

oo
.p...

o~
._

r~

>

o-,
--

~
~u
0
0
t .- L .~

>+-

>

0
t~

’~

0"3
.X~

0

~),--

L

-- X
>’-0
:~d ::E

O,)
£D

o

0

r--o

o~oo~

~

o~

o~

~

_~°°~°°~

~

&~

&~o_

+1

o~

,--

°o

o°

o

o

I

o

0

g

~°

0

o

X

X

rch
’.0
o~

I
X
0") I.-

X
I--

IXXXXXXXXX
z

X

XX

XXXX

Prewitt--Circleville to Toyah

205

0

E

E

~

E
~

o

> >

7~

--

ZJZ~
0

0

0~"

co

~+-+-~O J:: -c .ct

0

.
L

-.’£+-+-+-

>

L
(~

C ......

){3)O(3

¯

o
0~

0

+1 +1
~00o0

+l
o

¯
¯

~

L
L~

X

¯

¯

0

-~

"-O~

0

L

0
~

~
C O

~0"--~
c >~

L

.-~

+1

+1

+1

+1

+1

+1

+1

_~oR

~+~

~

-- X X

--

0 O~
O>>~O

~0o--~
+1

+1

+1

+1

+1

+1

+1

+1

+1 ~

O)

)O-

o
OO

CO
~v

+,+,+,~

+,

-~

~

0

O0

Oo

+~+~ +~

0

0

~:gooR~
~ +~+~ +l+~ +l+~+l

R+~

0

O0

~£$o~
~ +~ +~

L
i

OI
>-

~

~

~

O~

0

~
#

~£~- ~
~xx

~
x

o~~

g~
~

.~

~~

o

-~.~

o%~
~××

~

, x×o,

Texas Archeological Society

206

=o
O)

~D

:d

oO
cu

E
.I
ru O~
ZZ
+-

,Z

4-

o’)
E

~(3..
+.,
UCI3

0
0,.I

L O)
O4:D rO

C
°
00~
°
LID
rO~
O
0
¯- L

0

oo

+1 +1 +1
000

+1
0

~
~
+l +1
O0

+1 +1
~0

0

0
O0

0
00~

0

O0

O0

+1
0

+1+1
O0

+1+1+1
000

+1
0

+1+1
O0

+1+1
O0

~

~

~

+,+~+,+,~

~

~

0
Oq

0
000
~0~--~0

+1
0

+1+1+1+1+1+1+1
00~000

+1
0

0o~000

~

r,m

ru a)
0~>.-

<

~-o

o~
=o~

~
~

Ca’)

~×~xx~

o~

××

~

~×

××

xx

Prewitt--Circleville to Toyah

207

~D
o
t~

__
to

113liO

>~

04

(1)

>

>0
W7

=o
4--

m ..
L

0"1

L

~o~

o~

.~+-

L 4-

L ..
L

0 ..

.~07

L

>-0~

.~C~

L.

.~+-

~---

I1)

+- "~-- +- r~ +- +- +- +- Oq -- +- yD -- +- O~ +--

--

~)--

~)--

1>---

p,..

E0
t.t5

o

O
N7

o

oo

~:

’~

o

Oq

t’qOq

,,.Q--

--,+-

Oq

x’~ ."~2

-.~_

oe

a)

x~

1)

o

O

o

3
O[3
)0
O~

~:~

oo

’<"~
g=.
d-- 0
"--+-

,_x

Le

0

+1 +1 +1 +1
~0

+1 +1
O0

+l +1
~

0

O0
00~0
+I +I +I +I
0000

O0
~0
+I +I
O0

0
~
+I +I
~0

~

~

~

x×x× -×

~×

CO

z~
g

~
=.

-

0
~-

(D

~3 L
--1133

0
~

mL

~

~

~

.-L X.’5

~_o~=

tOLL
I
c (I) 4¯ 0.0
O..- -..I 0

0
+1
0

+1
~

-- ~ --

+, +, +,

000

0
C

)el

i£
I

>.~

x~

o

~’~’~

5~
)

x 0~

..~

WO--

0
-+I
0

~ 0
+I +I
O0

0
0

0
0
~
~

--0 ~°~

+1

+1

+1

+1

+1 ~

+1

G

.d

Z

~

_

g

~

~

~

~o

<××

×

×

x×x

Texas Archeological Society

208

~

o g,?.
tO

o

~-.-~ ~~

~.~..

L .. ~" ;4 ,° "-o

~D

.o

~

~

~
.¢

!

.......

0

~~
.°°No+_
E---- >’--

tO

--

~g

....

>
.-~s~.-~~.; ;

tO

r--.

y~

,.o

g

,.:

’,o

2

~)

rT’l

@

~:

,:

,3.
Pn

~

u
tO

~-

~

~

Coo

~

P,,

+1

+1

+1

_"’

_’’~’o°~,..-,~

0
0

o
0
cOO0~
~
+1 +l +l ~
0o0~0
0o~

0

°~

0
CD

ffl

<
0

+1

!

_°

0

.o

tO

¢.

+1

A
o

o

0

0

g

+1

+1

~1

~,

,9

,~

$

o

°o

o

o

o
o

o
A

o
o

o
g

o
cO
+1
o

0
~
+l
0
~

~0

~

~,~

~

o

~

X

X

X

X

X

0

0

~0

0

o

--

0

2

o
(’-q

0

X
I--"

+I

+1

0

X
I--

~

’~1

~

+l
0
0

~-~,o,+1

+1

+1

--~cOO

~

~
X

~

~

X

X

o~
X

X

X~

X

Prewitt--Circleville to Toyah

209

0

>~

--~:
¯

0

.m
+-

m
¯
3:

.<I

u~
¯

(1]

Ot~

~o

~

C) (D LU

(D~

~

ooo

oo

~

~

~o

,’-o

0

000

+~

~

:3::

~

o

o~

~

~o

+I+,

O~

~
- L

-

¯
¯

fl)

0

>

~ ,-o ,--oRp~

O--

L

~0

L

"H"

0

+-

+" .3~

:3~

¯

¯

0

~
Ud

~
J

~_a:~

"7"

O0

0

O0

0

+1

+1

--~

b

oo

L~LO

~
~
+1

+1

+1

+1

+1

N~

Oo

O--

O--

~----

0

Texas Archeological Society

210

r~
o~

L

L

L

L

04

L

L

("4

04

¯

¯

¯

¯
-

o~
r--

¯

¯

o~

6~

O~

O~

O~

~___~__~o,

LL

O

L
(D
>

>.LL

>LL

kL-

LL

>- ¯

LL

O~

~

~o,~o~,o

~_2

:>-

Cq

(!)

¯

E
.+-

0
L

D

5
5
r"
(D

+.
O
O

J.~P,
C’q C~

.->
tO
C3

....
O0 (",J
r’-- oo
0~0",

tOO_

0{3-

OI3-

(DO-"

O’,

(90-

O~

O~

O~

(DO-

L
O
4-

0

L)

-IO
O
L

0

O4

O-J

O4

O4

F--C~

O
.c
+O

O4

#O

L)

:Z

:E

0

O

c
O

xz c
u) O

¯

¯

¯

-’£

O

0
-I--

O

O

O

¯

.
-I-

o

>
¯
o
_J

o
r..)

¯ 0
+--I-

-I-

2°

2

L)
u~
O

>

o
o

%v

-~

¯ -- (,9
03.-O--

<
o

65
fU{X

L Q

o
@o

O+
0

o
,.Q

£-U
co~
L)
0 t

o ~

o

+, +,

~
0

"o t
to (
er>

o

0

o

+,

0
0
~.~

oo o
+,+,

O0
o~

o

~
+I +I

+I

~ ~ ~ ~ oo o
0
o

0
~

~

~

~

0

00~
~
oo

--

~

~

0

O0

O
-I- c
O
-t(.)

b~
0

o

+-

~

x
o’)

~

x

~

Z

E,
z

&
6

Z

EL

r2D
L

LkL

,

,

~

~

T,
O

~

x

,

,

~

O~

x

.x
O~

~

x

c
0

C~

o2
.5=
0

0

tn._

2b

Prewitt--Circleville to Toyah

RADIOCARBON
CENTRAL

ASSAY
TEXAS

211

RANGES

REGION

Years B.£
STORIC
TOYAH

500-

AUSTIN IO00DRIFTWOOD

w TWIN

tsoo-

’%%%h’tIl"’"’%’ll~l’J~,ll,,," I, Ili,
’"1

,~ SISTERS
2000UVALDE
SAN MARCOS

’1 It

"lJI,jll,llll,l,,.,.

-.,.j,l,lI

2500-

I ~st
lI

3000ROUND
o ROCK
t--,
3500
-- MARSHALL
FORD

Illll

4000-

il I

CLEAR
(D

FORK

:I::
O
0::

OAKALLA
5000"

4500-

I

5500dARRELL
6000"
~- SAN
6500u GERONIMO
’~
hi

7000-

I

7500CIRCLEVILLE
8000-

Ii

8500 ;

il l

9000-

ilIJI

9500o
w
J

I0,000-

P8 AI/84/EP

hI

Figure 1. Radiocarbon assay ranges, Central Texas region. Assays (except first 9 in Toyah
phase and all of Circleville phase and Paled-Indian stage) have been dendrochronologically corrected (Damon et al. 1974).

212

Texas Archeological Society

NEOARCHAIC and LATE
500
ARCHAIC ASSAYS
Years B.P.
Ol_

N

0"1

£oN
toto
p I¢~1 000
to

625-

to

ii750-

°

TOi

o 875¢0

, ttlEtttititoo._1~~~

1//111,1 ~ ~,~- ~

I000-

11251250
13751500-

A. Toyah
Phase

625

B. Austin
Phase

750co V-875- ~ No
o~

1000n,

u}

1125"

>-

1250 . . .
1375-

1500162517501875-

]i1"
’lttll~lo_ o oR,FTWOOO

Tiiii!’t i-"-°

2000UVALDE
2125"
2250
PB,4//84/EP

ti

C. Late
Archaic
Phases

2575

Figure 2. Neoarchaic and Late Archaic assays. Asterisk (*) indicates dendrochronological
correction not made. Assays are cross-referenced by number to Table 1.

Prewitt--Circleville to Toyah

MIDDLE ARCHAIC and EARLY

ARCHAIC

213

ASSAYS

Years B.R
4375

Years B.P.
;’125
I~- CO 03
000

4500-

250

4625SAN

MARCOS

’.500-

4750-

’.625-

4875-

’.750-

5000-

OAKALLA

ROUND

>_875-

ROCK

5125-

~000-

5250-

5125-

5375-

.~250-

5500-

33754

5625-

e,J

JARRELL

i

5500 ]
56254

57504
3875-

5750-

MARSHALL
_m

FORD

58756000-

6125"

%000-

6250-

4125-

6375-

4250-

6500"

SAN

4375-

GERONIMO

6625"
CLEAR

FORK

4500-

6750-

4625

6875

A. Middle Archaic Phases
PSA//84/EP

B. Early Archaic

Phases

Figure 3. Middle Archaic and Early Archaic assays. Numbers indicate cross-reference to
Table 1.

214

Texas A rcheological Society

EARLY

ARCHAIC 0nd

PALEOINDIAN ASSAYS
B. Paleoindian Stage

A. Circleville Phase

8625

6500.
6625"

8750-

o
ro

n,

o,:
t~

t~

8875-

6750a
e)

o

~- 6875-

>- 9000-

7000’

9125-

7125-

9250-

7250.

9375-

7375.

9500-

7500.

9625-

Z

o

W
d

9750-

7625b..I
J
j

7750’
7875’

w
J
o
n--

8000’

9875I0,00010,12510,250-

8125’
t~

8250’

I O, 375-

8375’

10,500-

8500

I 0,625-

8625.

10,750 -

8750

10,875-

8875.

I 1,000

P ~ A I/84/EP

Figure 4. Early Archaic and Paleo-Indian assays. Asterisk (*) indicates dendrochronological correction not made. Assays are cross-referenced by number to Table 1.

Prewitt--Circleville to Toyah

215

COMPARISON of CHRONOLOGIES
1981 and CURRENT INTERPRETATION
Years B.R
HISTORIC O-

NEOARCHAIC

1981
Toyah

I000-

Current

Years B,P.
2-00"

200

650

650

Toyeh

Austin

Austin

~riftwood
Twin Sisters

1400

1400

2250

2250

2600

2600

2OO0- Uvalde
- San Marcos

Twin Sisters

3400

-2000

San Marcos

Round Rock

Marshall Ford

-I000

Driftwood

Uvalde

3000- Round Rock

-3000

3500
Marshall Ford

4000

4000

(.9

Clear

<
z

Fork

Oakalla

-4000
4100
Clear

4600

4600

5000,
5000

Fork

Oakalla
-5000

5100

darrell

darrell

6000 . . .
6000

-b

Years B,R
-0

6100

- San Geronimo

San Geronimo

70007000

- -~8oo

Circleville

-7000

Circleville

8000-

-8000
85OO

9000-

,-6000

......

85OO
-9000

I0,000-

P8 A 1/84/EP
Figure 5. Comparison of chronologies. Prewitt (198 l) and current interpretation.

216

Texas Archeological Society
RELATIVE POPULATION DENSITIES

The relative prehistoric population density of any given region is a topic
that is difficult to approach. In no case have we totally surveyed a given area,
accurately determined approximate band size for each component of each site,
and then arrived at a maximum population figure for a given period of prehistory.
Recent population estimates have been based on unquantified perceptions rather
than on hard data. At best, these are subjective guesses that reflect individual
experiences. Two examples, Weir (1976) and Skinner (1981), are reviewed to
illustrate this point.
Weir (1976:119-137), in his synthesis of the Central Texas Archaic, includes a general indication of population density to support his assumptions regarding focal or dispersed economic orientations in the subsistence base. This is
summarized (Weir 1976:138) as low for the Early Archaic San Geronimo phase,
increased in the Clear Fork phase, high in the Middle Archaic Round Rock phase,
diminished in the San Marcos phase, and continued diminishing in the terminal
Archaic Twin Sisters phase. This reflects Weir’s personal orientation toward the
Middle Archaic. Since he dealt extensively with that period in his studies (see
Weir 1967, 1976, and 1980), his perception of site densities is subjectively (and
unconsciously) distorted to emphasize the Middle Archaic.
Skinner (1981) argues a slightly different interpretation, but it is similarly
based on subjective dealings with the Late Archaic. He envisions a more-or-less
normal distribution curve where there is a steady population increase beginning
with a low density in the Paleo-Indian stage and peaking with a high density in
the Late Archaic. Population density then decreases steadily through the Neoarchaic until the cultural truncation precipitated by European peoples. Figure 6a
illustrates the generalized population density estimates given by both Weir and
Skinner.
These two estimates provide an interesting contrast in interpretation based
on subjective information. They also provide a point of departure to more realistically discuss generalized population density estimates. While working on the
chronological synthesis of Central Texas in 1981, I blundered across a potentially
useful method of estimating population density. I did not feel that adequate data
had been compiled to effectively support my arguments at the time, so my notes
and scribbled ideas were laid aside. Work on a totally separate subject during
1983 resulted in the accumulation of the appropriate data.
While actual numbers will change as new data are published, the basic idea
was to obtain a ratio of component occurrences to the duration of a component in
years. This should eliminate the subjectivity displayed by Weir and Skinner. The
first step in deriving a density ratio index is to determine the approximate duration of each phase or time period. This has been accomplished to a certain degree
of accuracy in the first section of this paper. This information is graphically
summarized in Figure 6b. As can be seen in this illustration, the duration of
most phases varies markedly, although there is a general trend toward shorter
periods through the Late Archaic.
The second step is to determine the number of times each component occurs
in the region. This is, of course, an impossible task in view of our lack of data
about every site that exists, or has existed, in Central Texas. However, if it is
accepted that published reports represent a relatively accurate portrayal of the

Prewitt--Circleville to Toyah

RELATIVE

217

POPULATION DENSITY ESTIMATES
CENTRAL TEXAS

, =,
n

O\~gx~ I

I

I

I

I

I

s

i
0 ~/ /ix,,. / /,/ / / / /,// /

A. Generalized r~opulahon Densffy ~o~%,b,~o’~%%%\\~,~,,~%x,~.~*~,~
Estimates, Weir (1976)
and Skinner (1981)

~v"~~’~

~,~°%’~’ ,~"4’{’°"

C. Summary of
Occurrences

Component
(n=907)

25oo]

EO007

1
-Medium

laJ
>

I00~

Id
Ld
rr

O-!///\/,.~z/ /// /// /

B. Phase
PSA 1/84/EP

Lengths in Years

D. Relative Population Density

Figure 6. Relative population density estimates, Central Texas. (A) Generalized population density estimates, Weir (1976) and Skinner (1981); phase names follow Weir.
(B) Phase lengths in years. (C) Summary of component occurrences (n=907). (D) Relative population density.

218

Texas Archeological Society

relative occurrence of components, then there is a basis from which a ratio can
be obtained. The data used here are from a statewide projectile point distribution
study I am currently conducting. Over 400 reports have been examined in detail,
and the types (and frequency) of projectile points have been tabulated. Within the
Central Texas region (as defined in 1981), there are 147 reported sites with 907
component occurrences represented (Table 2). These figures cannot be taken as
gospel for several reasons. Variations in the regional boundary through time have
not been taken into consideration. Only those sites that fall within the generalized boundary are included. In addition, all sites included do not necessarily
represent single sites. Surveys are treated as single site occurrences. However, in
some areas, multiple surveys have been reported. Each of these is treated as a
separate site occurrence. Some excavation reports lump artifacts from more than
one site. Where possible, these have been segregated, but in many instances it
has been impossible to effectively sort the materials on the basis of the published
information. In those cases, two or more sites may be treated as a single site
occurrence.
With these caveats in mind, the frequency of component occurrences is
illustrated in Figure 6c. There is a general tendency for the percentage of components to increase through the Late Archaic, then decrease in the terminal Archaic. This is roughly similar to Skinner’s postulations (see Figure 6a). As will be
seen, though, this is an inaccurate representation.
The third step in deriving general population density is to obtain a ratio of
component occurrences to time. This is accomplished by dividing the number of
component occurrences by the length of that specific phase in calendar years.
Figure 6d, which presents the results of these calculations, suggests that general
population densities varied markedly through time. The overall trend is for
steady population increase through the Archaic followed by a sharp decrease in
the Neoarchaic.
A very low ratio is obtained for the Paleo-Indian stage. This is followed by
relatively even increases in the Circleville and San Geronimo phases of the Early
Archaic. However, there is a distinct decrease in the Jarrell phase followed by an
increase in the Oakalla phase and a sharp increase in the Clear Fork phase. Surprisingly, and in contrast to Weir’s perception, there is another distinct decrease
in the Marshall Ford phase followed by further decrease in the Round Rock
phase. This trend is abruptly reversed with a sharp increase in the San Marcos
phase that levels off through the Uvalde phase. The Twin Sisters phase sees
another sharp increase followed by a very marked increase that peaks in the
Driftwood phase. The ratio then drops abruptly in the Austin phase of the
Neoarchaic. In fact, it falls to Middle Archaic levels. The succeeding Toyah
phase shows the beginnings of another increase that is truncated by European
influences.
These ratios must be used with caution, as they indicate only relative population densities, not actual numbers. It must be kept in mind that we are dealing
with component occurrences, not head counts. At this point, our knowledge of
the prehistory of Central Texas does not allow us to calculate the frequency of
group moves from one site to another. Nor are there substantive data available to
indicate the degree of fluctuation in the frequency of movement between phases.
Consequently, groups in one phase that may have moved fewer times will be
represented by a lower ratio than groups in another phase that may have moved
more frequently but had a smaller actual population.

Prewitt--Circleville to Toyah

219

0",
o~
L
0

0

--

,~

X

XX

XX

X

XX

X

XX

X

XXX

X

X

X

XX

XX

XXXX

X

X

X

XX

X

XX

X~

XX

XX

X

X

X

XX

XXXX

XX

X

XXX

XXXXX

X

X

XX

XXXXXXXX

X

X

X

X

X

XXXX

XX

X

X

XX

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

XXX

X

XX

X

XX

X

X

XX

X

XX

XX

XXX

XXXX

X

X

XX

X

XXXX

XXXX

X

XXX

XX

X

X

X

XX

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Texas Archeological Society

220

O4 C’4 r’4
tDtD~

0

C

C

C

gggg

L

o’~ I-- t-- I-c

~_

~7

~

2
u3o’?

O

t--I

X

<r’l

XXXX

c~l

X

X

X

XX

XX

X

XXXXXX

X

XX

X

X

XXX

XXXXXX

XX

XX

XXXXX

XXXX

XXXXX

XXX

X

XXXXX

XXXXXXX

X

XX

X

X

XX

XX

XX

X

X

X

XX

_CI2
,or"

XX

XXXXXXX

X

XX

X

XXXXX

ILL

XX

XXXX

X

X

XXX

:la-

X

~O

0-

XXXXXX

XX

X

X

X

(b

XX

XX

XX

X

X

XXX

XX

X

X

X

x

X

XXX

XX

XX

X

X

X

X

XXXXX

X

XX

X

XXXXXX

XXXX

X

X

XXXX

X

X

X

XX

X XXXXXX

XX

X

O--

XX

XXXX

X

O

X

X

X

X

XX

X XX

X

XXX

XXX

xxx

XX

X

Prewitt--Circleville to Toyah

221

oh

~

.2
L

~o

-~8

~

0

X

X

X

~zf~zdd~Zij~°°

XXX

XX

X

XXX

XX

XX

X

X

XXX

X

0

X

XX

XXX

XX

XXXXX

XXX

O
O

D~

~88°~
~z

X

X

~

XXXXXX

X

XX

X

X

XXXXX

X

XX

XX

XX

XX

X

XX

X

XXXX

XXXXXX

XX

XX

XX

X

XXX

X

X

XX

X

X

X

X

XX

X

©
D~

0

~L~

©

:L
)C

XXXXXX

XXX

X

)C

XXX

X

¢D

13,.

o

E

E
r~

e4
N

O
Z

8
tDi
OI
E
Z
+°_
¢o

X

XX

XX

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

XX

X

X

X

X

X

X

XXXX

X

X

XX

o

x

XXSXXXXX

XX

X

X

XX

X

XXX

XXX

xxxx

Texas Archeological Society

222

OI

~J
O;
L~
0
0-~

~000

0~

&&&&&&£ ~ Q)2 ° ° o °N °~
X

X

X

X

XXXX

XXX

X

XX

X

X

X

X

XXX

XXX

XX

XX

X

XX

X

X

XXX

XXX

XX

XXX

X

XX

XXXXXXXX

X

XXX

XX

X

X

XX

X

XXXXXXXX

XXX

XXX

XX

XX

X

XXXXX

X

XXX

XXX

XX

X

X

X’XXXX

X

XXX

XX

t11,

X

X

XXXXX

X

XXX

XX

: Lt

Lc

X

X

XXXXX

XXXXX

XX

DC

X

X

X

X

XXXXX

XX

XX

X

X

X

XXXXX

X

X

XX

X

XX

X

X

~Z

flU"

Dcr

X

XXX

XX

XX

X

XX

XX

X

x

XXXXX

x

xx

XXX

x

x

X

XX

x

c
Q)

O
c

o,.~- >.~
O~
Or...
"0>4--

mG3

>+-

0
Q)

C L--’-- O’--L

z

~o

a:::: ’~
"0 ~

Prewitt--Circleville to Toyah

223

tO

OJO
LL. >-

0
0

LI--10
¯ II

0
kl_ o-0
L
0

0
4-

i

-r

rY

-tO

II

0
L
0
o

o

0
o

0
0

0
0

X

X

C3

X

0~~
0~

~

+~2~÷

0

.

XXXXX

XX

XXXXX

X

X

X

X

0
__o--

X

XX

XXXXXX

L
L
rO

II

XX

XXXXXXXXXX

XXXX

0

0

S == gg~%%’;

XXXXXXXX

XXXXX

N
¯

X

XXXX

0
.~-t-0 m
E "--

g~
L--(.91--

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

XXX

X

X

X

XXX

X

X

X

XXX

X

X

XX

(D
u3
0

0

g~

X

X

XXX

X

XX

XXX

XX

XXX

O’)UD
FI1

X

X

X

XX

rY

mm

XXXXX

XX

0 >
--22’
U

o

oo

>
XXX

XXX

X

X

X

XX

XX

X

X

X

XX

X

X

X

XX

XX

X

XX

XX

XX

XX

E
O0

"-(D

0
0
L

¯ --

II

~.~
0" "

i=
m
O

6

0

+-

Z

0

0

>

II

+1"0

.~

g~

"L

L

..
m

0

-]

~’~

to
0
E
fo
z
0
4°_

------ u) rn

¯

--

~

¯

O-

L >--- ~/ ~ tO-C: CJZ:-L ¯ LO0-1-- 0-0 >0"o L
.-- (0 .C: U

0 .C:’~"
.-~d O

=
0

o=~
c

v’4-’o

~
¯

N

--’<I"
~

~"

o~-

-¯

J=

0
-J

It= ~

¯

c

0--+- --+---

0
O_

OCO.--

L
~_~
0 0

+- tOC3 LO

0 c~m .....
=.-z

¯ +-

->-~" ~
@-ZE
--

mL~

¯t- x::
~ m
¯ L

O~
L_~ 04-

rO 8 LOg EE
L.c: L L ~ 0 N.t~ O 0 rO 0 ."
r~ u~
-I- 0 to 0 ~I > ~ ~0 .-- j= 4-..I- (0 L 0 E .......

(Dta_

224

Texas Archeological Society

For example, the florescence of burned rock midden use in the Middle
Archaic phases may have precipitated a relatively high degree of sedentism.
Fewer sites would have been occupied by any one group, and group size could
have been relatively large. In contrast, the dispersed foraging and hunting economy of the Late Archaic phases may have forced smaller group sizes, but these
groups could have moved from one site to another more frequently. These situations would yield the kind of ratios illustrated in Figure 6d but would not yield an
accurate estimate of actual population.
However, with these cautions in mind, the data presented in this paper provide quantified indications of relative population density. While it may be argued
that at this point I have shown only site density rather than people density, there
is still some merit to the method in that it avoids unsupported generalizations
such as those made by Weir and Skinner. It provides at least a rudimentary mechanism for comparing ratios of densities between temporal phases even though it is
certain that better and more accurate methods will be devised in the future.
That a more accurate system will be devised is not idle speculation in view
of the increasing attention that is directed toward estimates of generalized population density. For example, Collins and Driskell (1980) have presented a case for
a population peak in the Late Archaic in the Falls of the Ohio River region in
Indiana and Kentucky. While they relied on a simple frequency of component
occurrence to make their case, the idea of examining the data to make such determinations indicates that thought is increasingly being directed toward this problem. Other researchers within the Central Texas region are similarly concerned.
In particular, Carlson and others (1983) present a scenario at Fort Hood that is
consistent with the data presented in this paper. At Fort Hood, component frequency was calculated on the basis of number of occurrences per 1,000 years.
That they used a grosser chronology (Early, Middle, and Late Archaic) does not
detract from the effectiveness of their presentation. Their results are quite compatible with those described here using a more refined chronology. Since Fort
Hood is wholly contained within Central Texas, this provides support for the current data.
A dual system relying on both component frequency and projectile point
frequency is utilized by Howard (Howard and Freeman 1984). Again, the results
are remarkably similar to those described in this paper. Their project involved a
survey of about 1,800 acres in northwestern Travis County, so the compatible
results are not surprising. I suspect that Howard has identified an additional item
to be examined: projectile point tYequency in relation to component occurrence.
I must temper my enthusiasm for this angle of investigation by pointing out
that projectile point frequency alone is insufficient to solve the problem. As I
have discussed previously (Prewitt 1981, 1982), the dependency upon hunting
plays an important role in the frequency of projectile points, and this must be
determined by the relationships of all tools within a given phase. Still, there is a
definite merit to the system Howard has proposed.
However, there is another dimension that needs to be added to the complex
formula under development. This concerns the geographic area encompassed by
any given phase. As indicated in Prewitt (1981), some phases encompass nmch
smaller areas than others. This must be taken into consideration when dealing
with relative population density. I predict that we will have a substantially more
accurate idea of population density when we derive an analytical system based
upon the relationships of the following elements: (1) length of phase in years; (2)

Prewitt--Circleville to Toyah

225

frequency of component occurrence; (3) frequency of projectile point occurrence; (4) ratio of projectile points to all other tools for a given phase; and (5)
area encompassed by each phase. Obviously, this problem will require considerable work to arrive at any reasonable solution. Certainly, the simplified system
illustrated in this paper is an improvement, but there are more improvements to
come. Once the five elements noted above are combined into one mathematical
formula, then we may expect to have a more realistic, although not complete,
grasp upon relative population densities in the Central Texas region.
OVERLAPPING PHASES
A recurrent problem with the manner in which ages of phases are presented
in this paper is the overlapping of.temporal ranges. I prefer to use a median date
to indicate the end of one phase and the beginning of the next. This is not a completely accurate portrayal of the realities involved in the passage of time. As is
obvious in Figure 1, there are several instances where the date ranges for successive phases overlap to some degree. This is particularly true in the Late Archaic and Neoarchaic phases, t will focus on the Neoarchaic to explain my interpretation of this phenomenon.
Phases are not static units designed for pigeonholing relics of the past.
Phases are descriptive tools used to characterize fluid human activities in specific
geographic areas. In this instance, phases are used to characterize a very large
area termed the Central Texas archeological region. Cultural adaptations or expressions cannot be expected to appear suddenly at the same time over the entire
region. Rather, a specific phase must originate, or enter a region, from some
limited area, then spread across the remainder.
If the Neoarchaic phases are viewed in this manner, then the overlap between the ending of the Austin phase and the beginning of the Toyah phase is
clarified. To do this, the succession of phases must be viewed on a north-south
distributional basis along the Balcones fault zone. This is necessary because
most of our radiocarbon dates are from sites along this zone; we do not have
sufficient data for an east-west comparison, nor can we extend the comparison
into the Archaic for the same reason.
Figure 7 presents a graph of the Austin and Toyah phase radiocarbon dates
segregated on a north-south basis. It is clear from this illustration that the Austin
phase appeared somewhere around 1350 B.P. in the northern area that extends
from about Cleburne to Waco. In the middle area that extends from just south of
Waco to about Round Rock, the beginning dates are around 1250 B.P. The Austin phase begins in the southern area (extending from about Austin to San Antonio) at about 1 t00 B.P. Figure 8a illustrates this progression from a geographic
perspective. The ending dates show an analogous pattern. The Austin phase ends
at about 800 B.P. in the northern area, 700 B.P. in the middle area, and 550 ~.P.
in the southern area.
Now, compare these with the beginning dates of the Toyah phase (Figure 7).
The Toyah phase appears at about 700 B.P. in the northern area, at about 600 B.P.
in the middle area, and at about 500 B.P.in the southern area (Figure 8b). The
ending dates are again analogous: 350 B.P. in the northern area, 250 a.P. in the
middle area, and 200 B.P. in the southern area.
The overlap period of about 700 to 550 B.P. is illustrated in Figure 8c. While

226

Texas Archeological Society

NORTH-SOUTH
AUSTIN

YEARS

B.P

0nd

North

o

HISTORIC
200"
eJ

::c
>o

TOYAH

Area

COMPARISON
PHASE

I Middle

Area

ASSAYS

1 S0uth

Area

j[[

400o N’-’
b~
el

600- ~ -

r~
’~
0

800-

t

’t

,,~ 1000-

o !i
-1o

P8 A I/8 4/EP
Figure 7. North-south comparison, Austin and Toyah phase assays. Asterisk (*) indicates
dendrochronological correction not made. Numbers indicate cross-reference to Table 1.

Prewitt--Circleville to Toyah

INTERPRETATION

of

AUSTIN/TOYAH

227

PHASE

RADIOCARBON ASSAY RANGES

A°

B.

Toyah

Austin Phase
1250-650 B.P.
Initial Dates Showing
Southward Progression

Phase

650-200 B.P.
Initial Dates Showing
Southward Progression

Area

TO YAH

C.

Austin/Toyah
Overlap,

Phase

700-550 8.P.

Toyah Phase encroaches
in North, Austin Phase
shifts to South

Pa A 1/8 4/EP

Figure 8. Interpretation of Austin/Toyah phase radiocarbon assay ranges. (A) Austin
phase, 1250-650 B.p.; initial dates showing southward progression. (B)Toyah phase,
650-200 B.P.; initial dates showing southward progression. (C) Austin/Toyah phase overlap, 700-550 B:P.; Toyah phase encroaches in north, Austin phase shifts to south.

228

Texas Archeological Society

the Austin phase still exists in the southern area, the Toyah phase has already
begun in the northern area. Thus, the overlapping date ranges are not only plausible but are expectable if this model is accepted. Further, there are far-reaching
implications to be derived from the model.
It is an accepted fact that major north to south population movements occurred during the early Historic stage. The Apache expansion that swept southward and westward in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries is well documented. This event was followed by a similar movement by the Comanches in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. These historical events are generally attributed to the effects generated by contact with European peoples. Acquisition
of guns and horses is credited for giving these groups the military superiority and
mobility necessary for rapid expansion and movement.
However, if the model presented here for the Austin and Toyah phases is accurate, then this pattern was established at least a thousand years before the Apaches
began their rise to southern Plains domination. What triggered these postulated
prehistoric population or cultural expansions? It is possible that the Austin phase
could have resulted from the early adoption of the bow and arrow by groups that
gained technological superiority over more conservative groups that maintained
a dependency on the atlatl and dart weapons systems. Did this result in a movement of people or just ideas? Was the change violent, or was there peaceful interchange through trade? Certainly there are increased suggestions of violence
during the Austin phase (Prewitt 1974:46-50, 1982:66, 176-178). Could this reflect an event similar to the later Apachean incursions? The possibilities are
there,but I do not think we have sufficient data to answer these questions at the
present time.
What about the Toyah phase? What triggered this change? Did another group
actually move out of the Plains and into the Central Texas region? The primary
changes seem to have been precipitated by the southward expansion of bison. At
least, the subsistence base appears to have been related to bison procurement.
Did a familiarity with bison-procurement methods provide one group with technological superiority over other resident groups to whom bison were previously
unknown? As with the Austin phase, we do not have sufficient data to answer
such questions now.
What is important here is that there is a logical explanation for the radiocarbon dates that have been obtained for the Neoarchaic stage in the Central
Texas region. Further, this small bit of information can provide the basis with
which to examine more detailed questions regarding people and their activities
during a specific period of time.

REFERENCES CITED
Alexander, Herbert L. Jr.
1963 The Levi site: a Paleo-Indian campsite in Central Texas. American Antiquity
28(4):510-528.
Assad, Cristi
1978 An evaluation of archaeological sites in the vicinity of floodwater retarding structure No. 2, Dry Comal Creek, Comal County, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey
Report 50.

Prewitt--Circleville to Toyah

1979

229

Archaeological testing in the Devine Road area north of Olmos Dam, San Antonio, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report 53.

Assad, Cristi, and Daniel R. Potter
1979 An intensive archaeological survey of Enchanted Rock State Natural Area, Llano
and Gillespie counties, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report 84.
Beasley, Tom S.
1978 A site with Edwards points in Bandera County, Texas. Southern Texas Archaeological Association, La Tierra 5(4):23-31.
Benfer, Robert A., and Alice Benfer
1981 The Mason Ranch burial cave, Uvalde County, Texas. Southern Texas Archaeological Association, La Tierra 8(3): 16-26.
Bond, Clell L.
1978 Three archeological sites at Hoxie Bridge, Williamson County, Texas. Anthropological Laboratory, Texas A&M University, Report 43. College Station.
Briggs, Alton K.
1971
An archeological survey of Ingram Reservoir. Office of the State Archeologist
Survey Report 9. Texas Historical Survey Committee and Texas Water Development Board, Austin.
Brown, David, Paul Lukowski, Thomas R. Hester, and Jack D. Eaton
1977 Archeological assessment of two sites in the vicinity of floodwater retarding
structure No. 1 t, Salado Creek watershed, Bexar County, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological
Survey Report 35.
Campbell, Thomas N.
1948 The Merrell site: archeological remains associated with alluvial terrace deposits
in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Areheological and Paleontological Socie~.,
19:7-35.
Carlson, David L., Frederick Briuer, Henry Bruno, and Eli Mishuck
1983 Final report on statistically representative sample of sites at west Fort Hood.
Report submitted to the U.S. Army, Fort Hood, Texas, by Science Applications,
Inc., La Jolla, California.
Chadderdon, Mary Frances
1975 Notes on the Menger Collection, site 41BX272, Bexar County, Texas. Southern
Texas Archaeological Association, La Tierra 2(1): 15-18.
Collins, Michael B.
1973 The Devil’s Hollow site: a stratified Archaic campsite in Central Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 43 (for 1972) :77-100.
Collins, Michael B., and Boyce N. Driskell
1980 Changing valley geomorphology and settlement patterns, 8,000 B.c. to A.D.
1900, Falls of the Ohio area. Paper presented at the 45th Annual Meeting, Society for American Archaeology, Philadelphia.
Cox, David
1977 A preliminary report on "early man" artifacts found in northeast Bexar County.
Southern Texas Archaeological Association, La Tierra 4(3):7-9.
Crawford, Daymond D.
1965 The Granite Beach site, Llano County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 36:71-97.

230
1973

Texas Archeological Society
An archeological survey on Interstate Highway 10. Texas Highway Department
Publications in Archeology, Report 2.

Creel, Darrell
1978 An archeological survey in the South Concho River area, west central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 49: 241 - 307.
Damon, P. E., C. W. Ferguson, A. Long, and E. I. Wallick
1974 Dendrochronological calibrations of the radiocarbon time scale. American Antiquity 39(2):350-366.
Daniels, Roger L.
1976 Preliminary excavations at the Randig site, Williamson County, Texas. Southern
Texas Archaeological Association, La Tierra 3(4):21-28.
Denton, J. T.
1976 Archeology on State Highway 16: No-Name Creek site: a terrace site of the
Middle and Late Archaic period in Gillespie County, Texas. Texas Department of
Highways and Public Transportation Publications in Archaeology, Report 7.
Austin.
Duke, P. L.
1977 Lake Thunderbird site (41BP78), Bastrop, Texas. Southern Texas Archaeological
Association, La Tierra 4(3): 15-26.
Eddy, Frank W.
1973 Salvage archeology in the Laneport Reservoir district, Central Texas. Report
submitted to the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological Survey, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Espey Huston and Associates, Inc.
1981 A cultural resource inventory and assessment of the proposed Stacy Reservoir,
Concho, Coleman, and Runnels counties, Texas, Vol. 3. Espey Huston and Assosociates, Inc., Document No. 81052. Austin.
Fox, Anne A.
1977 An archeological assessment of the San Antonio 201 wastewater treatment project.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report 41.
Fox, Daniel E. 1980
1980 Test excavations at the Classen Rockshelter, northeastern Bexar County, Texas,
1967. Southern Texas Archaeological Association, La Tierra 7(1): 16-23.
Gallagher, J. G., and S. E. Bearden
1976 The Hopewell site: a Late Archaic campsite in the central Brazos River valley.
Southern Methodist University Contributions in Anthropology 19. Dallas.
Green,

1971

L, M.

Notes on the archeology of the Happy Patch site, San Saba County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 42: 319- 333.

Green, L. M., and Thomas R. Hester
1973 The Finis Frost site: A Toyah phase occupation in San Saba County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 44: 69- 88.
Greer~

1976

John W.
Neo-American occupation at the Wheatley site, Pedernales Falls State Park,
Blanco County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 47:89- 169.

Prewitt--Circleville to Toyah

231

Greer, John W., and Robert A. Benfer
1975

Austin phase burials at the Pat Parker site, Travis County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 46: 189- 216.

Griffin, F. Eugene
1976 Summary of S.T.A.A. Bear Creek Reservation site survey. Southern Texas Archaeological Association, La Tierra 3(3):2-6.
Gunn, Joel, and Royce Mahula
1977 Hop Hill: culture and climatic change in Central Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, Special Report 5.
Hall, Grant D.
1974 Leona River watershed, Uvalde County, Texas: an archeological and historical
survey of areas proposed for modification. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin, Research Report 37.
Hays, Thomas R. (editor)
1982 Archaeological investigations at the San Gabriel Reservoir districts, Central
Texas. 4 vols. Report submitted to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth
District, by the Archaeology program, Institute of Applied Sciences, North
Texas State University, Denton.
Hester, Thomas R.
1971 Archeological investigations at the La Jita site, Uvalde County, Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 42:51-148.
Hester, Thomas R., and T. C. Kelly
1976 Archeological investigations at sites near Natalia, Medina County, Texas. Center
for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report 20.
Highley, Lynn, Carol Graves, Carol Land, and George Judson
1977 Archeological investigations at Scorpion Cave (41ME7), Medina County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 49:139-194.
Highley, Lynn, and D. Lengefeld
1978 Preliminary investigations at the Wolf site, Blanco County, Texas. Southern
Texas Archaeological Association, La Tierra 4(4): 16-19.
Howard, Calvin D.
1974 Paleo-Indian surface finds in Bexar County. Southern Texas Archaeological Association, La Tierra 1(3): 14-17.
Howard, Margaret A.
1983 A quantitative study of the Booker site and other burned rock midden sites of the
Lake Travis basin, Central Texas. Unpublished Master’s thesis, Anthropology Department, The University of Texas at Austin.
Howard, Margaret A., and Martha Doty Freeman
1984 Settlement in the upper Bull Creek basin: an inventory and assessment of cultural
resources at the Canyon Creek Municipal Utility District, Travis County, Texas.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Reports of lnvestigations 32. Austin.
Hsu, Dick, and Ron Ralph
1968 An appraisal of the archeological resources of Cibolo Reservoir, Wilson County,
Texas. Office of the State Archeologist, Survey Report 1. Texas State Building
Commission and Texas State Water Development Board, Austin.

232

Texas Archeological Society

Hudson, William R. Jr., Warren M. Lynn, and Dan Scurlock
1974 Walker Ranch: an archeological reconnaissance and excavations in northern
Bexar County, Texas. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission, Report 26. Austin.
Jackson, Marsha F.
1974 Archeological resources of the North Fork Reservoir area: results of survey and
testing--1970 survey. Report submitted to the National Park Service by the
Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Jarvis, R. Whitby, and Daymond D. Crawford
1974 Archaeological excavations on Interstate Highway 10, Sutton County, Texas.
Texas Highway Department Publications in Archaeology, Report 4. Austin.

Jelks, Edward B.
1962 The Kyle site: a stratified Central Texas aspect site in Hill County, Texas. Department of Anthropology, Ttle University of Texas at Austin, Archaeology Series 5.
Jelks, Edward B., and Curtis D. Tunnell
1960 Appraisal of the archeological resources of Proctor Reservoir, Comanche County,
Texas. Report submitted to the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.
Johnson, LeRoy Jr., Dee Ann Suhm, and Curtis D. Tunnell
1962 Salvage archeology of Canyon Reservoir: the Wunderlich, Footbridge, and
Oblate sites. Texas Memorial Museum, The University of Texas at Austin, Bulletin 5.
Katz, Susanna R.
1977 An archaeological test excavation at John James Park, City of San Antonio,
Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report 38.
Keller, John E.
1976a The Crystal Rivers site. Texas Department of Highways and Public Transportation Publications in Archaeology, Report 6.
1976b The Stickleaf site. Texas Department of Highways and Public Transportation
Publications in Archaeology, Report 8. Austin.

Kelley, J. Charles
1947 The Lehmann Rock Shelter: a stratified site of the Toyah, Uvalde, and Round
Rock loci. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
18:115-128.
Kelly, Thomas C.
1961 The Crumley site: a stratified burnt rock midden, Travis County, Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 31 (for 1960):239-272.
Kelly, Thomas C., and Thomas R. Hester
1976a Archaeological investigations at sites in the upper Cibolo Creek watershed, Central Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report 17.
’1976b The McQueeney Municipal Utility District project: an archaeological reconnaissance. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report 19.

Prewitt--Circleville to Toyah

233

Kotter, Steven M., and Linda A. Nance
1980 Archeological assessments at 4 IGL57 and 41GL91, Enchanted Rock State Natural Area, Gillespie County, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Reports of Investigations 10. Austin.

Long, Joseph K. llI
1961 Three Central Texas aspect sites in Hill County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 30 (for 1959):223-252.
Luke, Clive J.
1979 The Cooks Slough site, Uvalde County, Texas. Texas Department of Highways
and Public Transportation Publications in Archaeology, Report 15. Austin.
1980

Continuing archaeology on State Highway 16 in Kerr County, Texas: the excavations of the Shep site (41KRI09) and the Wounded Eye site (41KR107). Texas
Department of Highways and Public Transportation Publications in Archaeology, Report 16. Austin.

Lynn, Warren M., and John R. Fuszek
1981 Wahzut Creek District Park: archeological testing at the Wells site, 41TV368,
City of Austin, Travis County, Texas. Parks and Recreation Planning Associates,
Inc., Austin.
Lynott, Mark J.
1978 An archaeological assessment of the Bear Creek Shelter, Lake Whitney, Texas.
Archaeolugical Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Research Report 115. Dallas.
Lynott, Mark J., and Duane E. Peter
1977
1975 archaeological investigations at Aquilla Lake, Texas. Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Research Report 100. Dallas.
Mallouf, Robert J., and Barbara J. Baskin
1976 Archeological surveys in the Tehuacana Creek watershed, Hill and McLennan
counties, Texas. Q~ice o]’the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission,
Survey Report 19. Austin.
McCormick, Olin, and Roger Filson
1975 Archaeological survey of portions of Hamilton Creek watershed, Burnet County,
Texas. Institute for Environmental Studies, North Texas State University, Denton.
McGraw, A. Joachim, and Fred Valdez, Jr.
1978 Investigation of prehistoric rockshelter and terrace sites along portions of the Salado Creek drainage, northern Bexar County, Texas. Center for Archaeological
Research, The UniversiO’ of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report
55.
McGraw, A. J., F. Valdez, Jr., and W. Cox
1977 Archaeological survey of areas proposed for modification in the Encino Park Development, northern Bexar County, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research,
The University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report 39.

McReynolds, Richard L.
1982 Marine shell artifacts from southwest Bexar County. Southern Texas Archaeological Association, La Tierra 9(4): 13-16.

234

Texas Archeological Society

McReynolds, Richard, and Keith Grunewald
1981 An archaeological sample from an undocumented Edwards site in northern Bexar
County, southern Texas. Southern Texas Archaeological Association, La Tierra
8(1): 15-22.
Miller, E. O., and E. B. Jelks
1952 Archeological excavations at the Belton Reservoir, Coryell County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 23:168-217.
Mitchell, Jimmy L.
1977 41CM52--a salvage site in Comal County, Texas. Southern Texas Archaeological Association, La Tierra 4(4):2-9.
Moore,

1982

Moore,

1976

Bill
Report of testing at the Wells Rockshelter (41RE53): a Middle Archaic site in
Real County, Texas. Southern Texas Archaeological Association, La Tierra
9(4):26-31.
Gary
Archeological test excavations at site 41WM21, Williamson County, Texas. Anthropology Department, Texas A&M Universi~,, Report 37 (Revised). College
Station.

Olds, Dorris L.
1965 Report on materials from Brawley’s Cave, Bosque County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 36:111-152.
Patterson, Leland W.
1974 A multiple rock midden site. Southern Texas Archaeological Association, La
Tierra 1(3):10-13.
1978

An Archaic rock midden site (41BN11), Bandera County, Texas. Southern Texas
Archaeological Association, La Tierra 5(1): 21 - 26.

Patterson, Leland W., and J. H. Adams
1977 An archeological complex in Kendall County, Texas. Southern Texas Archaeological Association, La Tierra 4(2):6-16.
Patterson, Patience E.
1974 Upper San Marcos River watershed, Hays County, Texas: an archeological survey
of areas proposed for modification. Texas Archeological Survey, The University
of Texas at Austin, Research Report 42.
Pearson, F. J. Jr., E. Mott Davis, and M. A. Tamers
1966 University of Texas radiocarbon dates IV. Radiocarbon 8:453-466.
Pearson, F. J. Jr., E. Mott Davis, M. A. Tamers, and R. J. Johnstone
1965 University of Texas radiocarbon dates III. Radiocarbon 7:296-314.

Perkins, J. L.
1956 Tonk Creek Shelter. Central Texas Archeologist 7:41 - 47.
Pollard, J. C., John W. Greer, and H. F. Sturgis
1963 Archeological excavations at the Boy Scout Rockshelter (41TV69), Travis County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 34: 31 - 56.

Prewitt--Circleville to Toyah

235

Preston, Nolan E.
1969 The McCann site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:167-192.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1964 Excavations at the Terri and Lightfoot sites, Proctor Reservoir, Comanche County,

Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Areheological Society 35:143-188.
1974

Archeological investigations at the Loeve-Fox site, Williamson County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin, Research Report
49.

1976

The Rogers Spring site: 1974 investigations. Texas Archeological Survey, The
Universityof Texas at Austin, Research Report 54.

1981

Cultural chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-89.

1982

Archeological investigations at the Loeve-Fox, Loeve and Tombstone Bluff sites
in the Granger Lake district of Central Texas. Vol. 4 of Archeological investigations of the San Gabriel Reservoir districts, Central Texas, edited by Thomas R.
Hays. Report submitted to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District, by the Archaeology Program, Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas
State University, Denton.

Redder, Albert J.
1967 Possum Branch, a forest-buried type midden. Central Texas Archeologist
8:21-26.
Roemer, Erwin Jr., and Steven L. Black
1977 Archaeological survey and testing at the City of Live Oak Park, Bexar County,
Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report 47.
Schuetz, Mardith K.
1957 A report on Williamson County mound material. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 28:135-168.
1969

History and archeology of San Juan Capistrano, San Antonio, Texas, Vol. 2.
Office of the State Archeologist, Texas State Building Commission, Report 11.
Austin.

Shafer, Harry J.
1963 Test excavations at the Youngsport site: a stratified terrace site in Bell County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 34:57-81.
Shafer, Harry J., and Edward Baxter
1976 Archeological investigations at 41CN13 and 41CN14, northwest laterals watershed, Coleman County, Texas. Anthropology Laboratory, Texas A&M University,
Report 30.
Shafer, Harry J., and James E. Corbin
1965 An appraisal of the archeological resources of North Fork, South Fork, and
Laneport reservoirs, Williamson County, Texas. Report submitted to the National
Park Service by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas
at Austin.

236

Texas Archeological Society

Shafer, Harry J., Dee Ann Suhm, and J. Dan Scurlock
1964 An investigation and appraisal of the archeological resources of Belton Reservoir,
Bell and Coryell counties, Texas: 1962. Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
The University of Texas at Austin, Papers 1.
Skelton, D. W., and M. D. Freeman
1979 A cultural resource inventory and assessment at Camp Swift, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin, Research Report 72.
Skinner, S. Alan
1971 Prehistoric settlement of the De Cordova Bend Reservoir, Central Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 42:149-270.
1981

Aboriginal demographic changes in Central Texas. Plains Anthropologist 26(92):
111-118.

Skinner, S.A., and J. Gallagher
1974 An evaluation of the archaeological resources at Lake Whitney, Texas. Southern
Methodist University. Contributions in Anthropology 14. Dallas
Skinner, S. Alan, and Gerald K. Humphreys
1973 The historic and prehistoric archaeological resources of the Squaw Creek Reservoir. Southern Methodist University, Contributions in Anthropology 10. Dallas.
Skinner, S. Alan, and Randel Rash
1969 A Clovis fluted point from Hood County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:1-2.
Smith, Harvey P. Jr., and Kenyon McDonald
1975 An archaeological survey of Friedrich Park, Bexar County, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological
Survey Report 12.
Sollberger, J. B.
1978 A prehistoric rockshelter in Kerr County, Texas. Southern Texas Archaeological
Association, La Tierra 5(4):2-6.
Sollberger, J. B., and T. R. Hester
1972 The Strohacker site: a review of pre-Archaic manifestations in Texas. Plains Anthropologist 17(58): 326- 344.
Sorrow,

1969

William M.
Archeological investigations at the John lschy site: a burnt rock midden in
Williamson County, Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University
of Texas at Austin, Papers 18.

1970

Archeological investigations at the Barker site. Texas Archeological Salvage
Project, The University of Texas at Austin. Research Report 1.

1973

Test excavations in the North Fork Reservoir area. Report submitted to the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Sorrow, William M., Harry J. Shafer, and Richard E. Ross
.1967 Excavations at Stillhouse Hollow reservoir. Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
The University of Texas at Austin. Papers l 1.

Prewitt--Circleville to Toyah

237

Stephenson, Robert L.
1970 Archeological investigations in the Whitney Reservoir area, Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 41:37-286.
Stipp, J. J., E. Mott Davis, John E. Noakes, and Tom E. Hoover
1962 University of Texas radiocarbon dates I. Radiocarbon 4:43-50.
Story, Dee Ann, and Harry J. Shafer
1965
1964 excavations at Waco Reservoir, McLennan County, Texas: the Baylor and
Britton sites. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas at
Austin, Papers 6.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1955 Excavations at the Collins site, Travis County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 26:7-54.
1957

Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis County, Texas. The Texas Journal of
Science 9(t) :26-58.

1959

The Williams site and Central Texas archeology. The Texas Journal of Science
11(2):218-250.

Tamers, M. A., F. J. Pearson, Jr., and E. Mort Davis
1964 University of Texas radiocarbon dates II. Radiocarbon 6: !38-159.
Tunnel!, Curtis D., and Harold P. Jensen, Jr.
1969 Archeological excavations in Lyndon B. Johnson State Park, Summer, 1968.
Office of the State Archeologist, Texas State Building Commission, Report 17.
Austin.
Tunnell, Curtis D., and W. W. Newcomb, Jr.
1969 A Lipan Apache mission: San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz, 1762-1771. Texas Memorial Museum, The University of Texas at Austin, Bulletin 14.
Valastro, S. Jr., and E. Mort Davis
1970a UniversityofTexasatAustinradiocarbondatesVII. Radiocarbon 12(1):249-280.
1970b University of Texas at Austin radiocarbon dates VIII. Radiocarbon 12(2):
617-639.
Valastro, S. Jr., E. Mott Davis, and Craig T. Rightmire
1968 University of Texas at Austin radiocarbon dates VI. Radiocarbon 10(2):384-401.
Vatastro, S. Jr., E. Mott Davis, and Alejandra C. Varela
t975 University of Texas at Austin radiocarbon dates X, Radiocarbon 17(1):52-98.
1977

University of Texas at Austin radiocarbon dates XI. Radiocarbon 19(2):280-325.

1978

University of Texas at Austin radiocarbon dates XII. Radiocarbon 20(2):245-273.

1979

University of Texas at Austin radiocarbon dates XIII. Radiocarbon 21(2):
257-273.

Valastro, S. Jr., E. Mott Davis, Alejandra C. Varela, and Carolyn Ekland-Olson
1980 University of Texas at Austin radiocarbon dates XIV. Radiocarbon 22(4):
1090-1115.
Valastro, S. Jr., F. J. Pearson, Jr., and E. Mott Davis
1967 University of Texas at Austin radiocarbon dates V. Radiocarbon 9:439-453.

238

Texas Archeological Society

Valdez, Fred Jr., and A. Joachim McGraw
1977 An archaeological evaluation of three prehistoric sites, upper Cibolo Creek
watershed, Kendall County, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research. The
University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report 44.
Watt, Frank H.
1965 Notes on the Clark site, McLennan County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 36:99-110.
1967

Lookout Point, Lake Waco. Central Texas Archeologist 8:27-38.

1978

Radiocarbon chronology of sites in the central Brazos valley. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 49:111 - 138.

Wier, Frank A.
1967 The Greenhaw site: a burned-rock midden cluster of the Edwards Plateau aspect.
Unpublished Master’s thesis on file at the University of Texas at Austin.
1976

The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Washington State
University, Pullman.

1979

Greenhaw: an Archaic site in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 50:5-67.

Wesolowsky, A1 B., Thomas R. Hester, and Douglas R. Brown
1976 Archeological investigations at the Jetta Court site (41TV51), Travis County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 47: 25- 87.
Young, Wayne
1979 Test excavations at the Elm Creek site, Uvalde County, Texas. Texas Department
of Highways and Public Transportation Publications in Archaeology, Report 14.
Austin.

Dating the Past in Western Trans-Pecos Texas
Michael E. Whalen

ABSTRACT
Direct dating of archeological materials is less than two decades old in western
Trans-Pecos Texas and vicinity. Dating has increased significantly since 1975 but has been
limited to a few areas, a few time periods, and all too few techniques. This study reports
on the status of absolute dating in the western Trans-Pecos by summarizing and reviewing
several new dating methods, listing all of the region’s dates, commenting on the requirements and limitations of old and new techniques, and identifying promising directions of
inquiry in our continued efforts to refine the region’s prehistoric chronology. Archeologists
are urged to think in terms of a wide range of dating techniques when planning and executing research projects in the western Trans-Pecos.

INTRODUCTION
The purposes of this study are: (1) to report on application of several new
dating methods in western Trans-Pecos Texas; (2) to compile the first catalog of
dates yielded by all methods of absolute dating attempted in the region; (3) to
discuss potentials, limitations, and special requirements of application of these
techniques; and (4) to identify areas, time periods, and dating methods meriting
more attention in our continuing efforts to refine the prehistoric chronology of
the region. More absolute dating techniques than ever before are available to
archeologists. We will not reap full benefit from this availability, however, until
we structure our thinking and planning to maximize recovery of chronological
data in addition to functional, technological, and organizational information. Essential to this end is a clear understanding of available dating techniques, their
requirements and limitations, and their current states of development.
The study area comprises the western part of Lehmer’s (1958) Trans-Pecos
Texas (Figure 1). The region lies in the Southwest’s Basin and Range physiographic zone, where roughly parallel mountain ranges alternate with dry, sandy,
intermontane basins. The Rio Grande is the region’s only major permanent water
source. Strong cultural connections with the southwestern United States characterize the western Trans-Pecos, which is in the Mogollon culture area of the
Southwest (Lehmer 1948). Part of south-central New Mexico is included in this
study because it has cultural affinities with the western Trans-Pecos and because
it provides a few more absolute dates to complement the Texas series. Neighboring areas in Chihuahua, Mexico, have yielded no absolute dates (the Casas Grandes series is too distant to be discussed here).

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54 (1985for 1983)

240

Texas Archeological Society

Guadalupe

Hueco

Mtns.

~"/~"~
~/f!’~

’~(/A B°l?°n~

New Mexico
Texas

0

Van Horn

Chihuahua,
MEXICO

o
KM

[7~

Mountains
Presidio

Figure 1. Map of western Trans-Pecos Texas and southern New Mexico, showing localities mentioned in the text. (After Lehmer 1958.)

The chronological sequence for the western Trans-Pecos and adjacent areas
was established in broad terms in the 1940s by Kelley, Campbell, and Lehmer
(1940) in the Presidio and Big Bend areas, and by Lehmer (1948) in western
Texas and south-central New Mexico. Cultural materials were dated by their
stratigraphic positions and by association with tree-ring-dated ceramics from
better-known parts of the Southwest. This indirect dating provided a basis for
seriation of local material cultures. The resulting sequences were generally accurate, and they have served archeologists for decades. As Kelley, Campbell, and
Lehmer noted, however, "this is merely a relative chronology, and in many instances and at many points is in need of verification" (1940:39).
The first radiocarbon dates derived from western Trans-Pecos assemblages
did not appear until 1968, but their number steadily increased over the next decade. A minor amount of archeomagnetic dating also was carried out. In the late
1970s, the writer began applying untried dating techniques in the western TransPecos. The object of the study was to date a series of cultural features by several
methods, thereby cross-checking the relative efficiencies of different techniques.

Whalen--Western Trans-Pecos

241

The chronometric standard for this operation, radiocarbon dating, utilized both
old and new dates. For the series of new dates, samples for radiocarbon dating
were selected from features that also contained material suitable for ceramic
thermoluminescence and obsidian hydration dating. This cross-checking proved
to be invaluable in assessing the reliability of the dating techniques and the suitability of several methods of sample collection. The results are summarized and
discussed below. Dating techniques considered here are radiocarbon, ceramic
thermoluminescence, obsidian hydration, and archeomagnetism. This study will
not attempt to explain the physiochemical bases of these dating techniques, except as they affect sample-collection procedures or reliability of results. Readers
wishing to learn more about any technique discussed here are advised to consult
Michels (1973).
TECHNIQUES AND RESULTS
Radiocarbon Dating
Radiocarbon dating was the first chronometric technique to be applied
to western Trans-Pecos sites, and it still provides the largest set of dates for the
region. The literature on the region and adjacent parts of south-central New
Mexico lists 79 radiocarbon dates (Table 1). These dates have been corrected by
correlation with tree-ring sequences whenever possible. Damon et al. (1974) discuss dendrochronologic calibration of the radiocarbon time scale and provide a
table for correction of dates. Dates originally published with MASCA corrections are simply copied and identified in Table 1.
In spite of the number of samples processed, radiocarbon dating has not
been widely applied in the western Trans-Pecos. Most dates (72, or 91% of the
total) are from western E1 Paso County and adjacent parts of Dofia Ana County,
New Mexico. where considerable research has been carried out recently under
cultural resource programs. The only other part of the region where radiocarbon
dates have been obtained is the Guadalupe Mountains in Hudspeth and Culberson
counties, Texas, and Eddy County, New Mexico. Seven Guadalupe Mountain
dates constitute 9 percent of the regional total. Perusal of the literature shows that
datable material is present throughout the region in an interesting variety of preceramic and ceramic era contexts. The fact that no dates have been secured,
therelk)re, can be attributed only to the paucity of work done in the region since
radiocarbon dating became available in the late 1950s.
Table 1 shows that radiocarbon dating has not been uniformly applied to
sites of all time periods. There are no Paleo-Indian or Early Archaic period
dates, but this can be attributed to an extreme scarcity of datable remains for
these periods. It is also clear that few radiocarbon dates have been determined
for the area’s numerous Pueblo period remains. Only the last eight entries in
Table 1 (10 percent) are of the Pueblo period. The remaining 90 percent of the
dates come from Late Archaic or Pithouse period contexts. This situation probably arises because the chronologies of these periods are still poorly understood
relative to the Pueblo period. Moreover, chronologically diagnostic artifacts of
the Archaic and Pithouse periods are less common than is the highly visible
painted pottery that characterizes even small Pueblo period sites, so the exact
periods to which Pueblo sites belong are less often in doubt. As a result, archeologists apparently often choose not to invest in Pueblo period radiocarbon dates.

242

Texas Archeological Society
Table 1. Radiocarbon Dates
Area~

Source

Years B.P.

Years B.C./A.D.*
(corrected)

Sample
No.

4100±200
3840±130
3800±140
3640±130
3480±140
3300±140
3190±130
3080±160

2790±310
2370±130
2350±210
1090±90
1910±220
1590±210
1530±160
1400±170

RL-II59
RL-881
RL-II64
RL-II58
RL-II63
RL-II57
RL-885
UTA-3171

EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP

Structure floor
Hearth
Structure floor
House floor
Hearth
Structure floor
Hearth
Hearth

2990±120
2960±120
2930±60
2770±130
2630±140
2430±120
2270±130
2170±120
2060±II0
2050±110
2050±II0
2030±II0
2010±120
1910±II0
1850±120
1830±120
1760±120
1730±120
1700±110
1600±120
1560±120
1560±120
1560±120
1540±110

1290±190 B.C.
1240±210 B.C.
1200±70 B.C.
lOlO±190 B.C.
880±140 B.C.
6T0±180 B.C.
430±210 B.C.
250±180 B.C.
170±220 B.C.
160±220 B.C.
160±220 B.C.
150±220 B.C.
130±230 B.C.
A.D. 30±130
A.D. 140±120
A.D. 150±110
A.D. 220±130
A.D. 250±140
A.D. 270±120
A.D. 380±150
A.D. 410±140
A.D. 410±140
A.D. 410±130
A.D. 423±110
A.D. 440±I00x
A.D. 450±140
A.D. 520±120
A.D. 550±120
A.D. 560±110
A.D. 582±110
A.D. 600±110
A.D. 660±110
A.D. 660±110
A.D. 650±II0
A.D, 660±II0x

RL-892
RL-891
WIS-598
RL-890
RL-893
RL-920
RL-921
RL-896
RL-894
RL-888
RL-1209
RL-895
RL-II60
RL-883
RL-926
RL-929
RL-925
RL-II62
RL-889
RL-II61
RL-927
RL-928
RL-897
RL-657
RL-564
RL-887
RL-1208
RL-12ll
RL-882
RL-655
RL-658
RL-654
RL-659
RL-924
TX-2405

EP
EP
ED
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
DA

Hearth
Hearth
Sandal frag.
Hearth
Hearth
Firepit
Firepit
Hearth
Hearth
Hearth
Firepit
Hearth
Firepit
Hearth
Firepit
Firepit
Firepit
Pit fill
Hearth
Pit fill
Firepit
Firepit
Hearth
Hearth
Hearth
Hearth
Loose charcoal
Hearth
Hearth
Pithouse fill
Pithouse fill
Pithouse fill
Hearth
Firepits
Charcoal layer

1530±110
1450±120
1430±120
1410±110
1390±110
1370±110
1310±110
1310±110
1340±II0

B.C.
B.C.
B.C.
B.C.
B.C.
B.C.
B.C.
B.C.

1285±75

A.D. 690±90

UTA-2356

EP

Hearth

1270±130
1270±100
1270±100

A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D,
A.D.

720±150
720±110
720±II0
730±130x
750±70x
770±150
770±50x

RL-898
RL-886
RL-884
TX-1450
TX-1451
RL-899
TX-2404

EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
DA

Hearth
Hearth
Hearth
Pithouse fill
Pithouse fill
Hearth
Hearth

A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.

790±70x
820±130
840±120
840±60x
857±120
860±100x

TX-695
RL-II66
RL-779
TX-364
RL-656
RL-563

CU
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP

Ring midden
Hearth
Pithouse fill
Roasting pit
Pithouse fill
Hearth

1210±120

1140±I00
I130±II0
III0±II0

Reference

O’Laughlin 1980
Whalen 1980
O’Laughlin 1980
O’Laughlin 1980
O’Laughlin 1980
O’Laughlin 1980
Whalen 1980
Thompson &
Beckett 1979
Whalen 1980
Whalen 1980
Applegarth 1976
Whalen 1980
Whalen 1980
O’Laughlin 1979
O’Laughlin 1979
Whalen 1980
Whalen 1980
Whalen 1980
O’Laughlin 1980
Whalen 1980
O’Laughlin 1980
Whelen 1980
O’Laughlin 1979
O’Laughlin 1979
O’Laughlin 1979
O’Laughlin 1980
Whalen 1980
O’Laughlin 1980
O’Laughlin 1979
O’Laughlin 1979
Whalen 1980
Whalen 1977
Lynn 1976
Whalen 1980
O’Laughlin 1980
O’Laughlin 1980
Whalen 1980
Whalen 1977
Whalen 1977
Whalen 1977
Whalen 1977
O’Laughlin 1979
Beckes et al.
1977
Thompson &
Beckett 1979
Whalen 1980
Whalen 1980
Whalen 1980
Aten 1972
Aten 1972
Whalen 1980
Beckes et al.
1977
Sommer 1968
O’Laughlin 1980
Whalen 1978
Greer 1968
Whalen 1977
Lynn 1976

Whalen--Western Trans-Pecos

243

Table 1. Radiocarbon Dates (Continued)
Years B.P.

Years B.C./A.D.*
(corrected)

Sample
No.

I120±I10
1075±30
I010±120

A.D.
A.D.
A.D.

860±120
890±60
900±120

*RL-II67
WIS-597
UTA-2354

EP
ED
EP

Hearth
Hearth
Hearth

I010±II0

A.D.
A.D.
A.D.

960±II0
980±70x
990±70x

RL-923
TX-647
TX-2343

EP
CU
DA

Firepit
Ring midden
Rockshelter fill

970±II0
890±II0
890±I10
870±120
840±110
815±50
810±55
800±50
760±110
750±II0
730±II0
730±110
710±50

A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.

990±80x
I000±II0
I060±II0
1090±120
1100±120
I130±II0
1130±60
I140±60
I150±50
1200±II0
1200±110
1220±II0
1220±II0
1230±60
1260±70x

TX-362
RL-919
RL-781
RL-922
RL-900
RL-930
WIS-577
WIS-578
TX-1735
RL-932
RL-1210
RL-918
RL-931
TX-2806
TX-2341

EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
ED
ED
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
CU
DA

Roasting pit
Firepit
Pithouse fill
Firepit
Pithouse fill
Firepit
Hearth
Hearth
Pueblo roof post
Firepit
Hearth
Firepit
Firepit
Hearth
Pueblo room fill

400±II0

A.D. 1500±110

RL-II65

EP

Pit fill

Area~

Source

Reference

O’Laughlin 1980
Applegarth 1976
Thompson &
Beckett 1979
O’Laughlin 1979
Sommer 1968
Beckes et al.
1977
Greer 1968
O’Laughlin 1979
Whalen 1978
O’Laughlin 1979
Whalen 1980
O’Laughlin 1979
Applegarth 1976
Applegarth 1976
Kegley 1980
O’Laughlin 1979
O’Laughlin 1980
O’Laughlin 1979
O’Laughlin 1979
Katz 1978
Beckes et al.
1977
O’Laughlin 1980

*Correction notes:
Dates from O’Laughlin (1980) and Whalen (1980) have been MASCA
corrected by the analyzing laboratory.
Dates marked with an x are uncorrected because the B.P. age was not given in their report.
All other dates were corrected
by the writer using the method described in Damon et al. (1974). Both this and the
MASCA correction are based on radiocarbon-dated tree-ring sequences, and both yield
nearly identical results for the time ranges considered here.
tArea abbreviations:
DA is southern Dofia Ana County, New Mexico; ED is southern
Eddy County, New Mexico;
EP is western El Paso County, Texas; CU is northwestern
Culberson County, Texas.

This is unfortunate, as there is still much refinement to be done on the chronology of the Pueblo period in the western Trans-Pecos.

Thermoluminescence Dating
Ceramic thermoluminescence has considerable potential for dating prehistoric materials for several reasons. First, it is a completely independent technique. It is not tied to a radiocarbon sequence as is, for example, archeomagnetic
dating. Second, because the ceramic artifacts themselves are dated, ceramic
thermoluminescence avoids many of radiocarbon’s problems of association, such
as the one between the hearth that yields a charcoal sample and artifacts from a
surface near the hearth. Third, ceramics are common enough to provide large
samples of datable material and fragile enough to preclude long use or reuse before deposition. Fourth, standard errors occurring on thermoluminescence dates
are acceptably small. Aitken, Zimmerman, and Fleming (1968:444) demonstrate this through dating of a series of British ceramics of known age and corn-

244

Texas Archeological Society

paring their resulting thermoluminescence values to their known ages. The results showed an average standard deviation of 10 percent of the mean thermoluminescence age of specimens from the known age, and a standard deviation of 15
percent of individual thermoluminescence dates from known ages. Finally, the
cost of thermoluminescence dating is about the same as radiocarbon dating.
Ceramic thermoluminescence has been applied only recently by the writer
to dating problems in the E1 Paso area. It has not yet been attempted elsewhere in
the western Trans-Pecos, although it should be applicable all over the region.
Most western Trans-Pecos ceramic wares are tempered with sand and crushed
quartz-bearing rock. Sherds of this kind are good specimens for dating because
quartz contributes a substantial part of a ceramic sample’s thermoluminescence
(Aitken, Zimmerman, and Fleming 1968:444). These wares are also fired well
enough (i.e., at temperatures exceeding 400° C) to have completely drained
the naturally acquired radiation from their component materials. Thermoluminescence readings secured from such sherds are therefore accurate measures
of radiation accumulated since the time of firing, a situation essential for reliable
dating (Drover et al. 1979). In addition, ceramics are widespread throughout the
western Trans-Pecos, providing large samples of datable material from a variety
of locations.
Development of a ceramic thermoluminescence chronology in this region of
Texas began with selection of 10 samples from a series of Pithouse and Pueblo
period sites near E1 Paso (see Whalen 1980, Appendix B, for full details of the
dating process). An attempt was made to select ceramic material from the early
part of the Pithouse period (ca. A.D. 200-750), the late Pithouse period (ca.
A.D.750--!000), the transitional and early Pueblo period (ca. A.D. 10001200), and the developed Pueblo period (ca. A.D. 1200-- 1400). As a monitor on
the accuracy of the technique, preference was given to sites that had (or could
provide) radiocarbon dates on ceramic-associated contexts. Unfortunately, very
few sites in the area had been excavated. In most cases, sherds were simply recovered from dense surface scatters. Body sherds were used in this analysis, and
an eflbrt was made to select sherds that were as similar as possible in paste and
surface finish to the chronologically diagnostic rim sherds used to date the sites.
Rim sherds themselves were not used, as thermoluminescence analysis involves
destruction of the sherd sample. Rim sherds of early ceramic times are so few
and so small that it is necessary to preserve them intact tbr other analyses. Temporally later rim sherds are much more common, although body sherds were still
used for thermoluminescence dating in the interest of consistency of technique.
Ideally, the sherds dated should be of the same type, since different types of
pottery can have different thermoluminescent properties due to variation in constituents (Aitken, Zimmerman, and Fleming 1968:444). For the Pithouse period,
sherds of E1 Paso Brown were used; for the Pueblo period, sherds of E1 Paso
Polychrome were used. Both are locally manufactured wares having similar paste
and temper characteristics.
It has been noted that most of the E1 Paso area sherds selected for dating
came from surface scatters, and it was realized at the time that use of surface
ceramics was not theoretically ideal, but one of the project’s aims was to investigate the level of reliability of thermoluminescence dates derived from surface
materials. Potential problems with surface ceramic dates are, first, that one can

Whalen--Western Trans-Pecos

245

never be absolutely certain of the provenience and association of surface sherds
and, second, that unknown burial histories of sample ceramics lead to uncertainty in determination of the radiation dose received by the sample from its soil
matrix. As Zimmerman (I 971 : 818) notes, thermoluminescence readings depend
in part on the gamma radiation dose received by the sherd from radioactive decay
of constituents of the surrounding soil. To control this variable as closely as possible, Aitken, Zimmerman, and Fleming (1968:443) selected sherds from homogeneous soil layers. These authors note that gamma radiation from the British
soil matrix produces 10 to 20 percent of the total radiation dose, and they
observe that this fraction could be larger elsewhere (Aitken, Zimmerman, and
Fleming 1968:444). Collection of local soil samples for determination of background radiation intensity is thus essential when sampling for thermoluminescence dating. Whatever the local soil situation, however, surface sherds, with
their unknown periods of exposure, clearly are not well suited for estimates of
gamma radiation dosages. Since the extent of the errors inherent in thermoluminescence dating of surface sherds is still unclear (David W. Zimmerman,
personal communication, n.d.), researchers wishing to use thermoluminescence
techniques would be safest to date excavated material.
Seven of the thermoluminescence dates obtained in the western Trans-Pecos
(sites 3:010, 3:730, 3:1487, 3:1590, 4:010, 4:018, and 4:132) fall within the
time ranges suggested by ceramic styles (Table 2). The samples from sites 4:132
and 3:730 were excavated: all other dates discussed here are from surfacecollected sherds. The two dates on buried sherds are supported by nearly identical radiocarbon dates. Site 4:132 has a thermoluminescence date of A.D. 868
+ 110 and a radiocarbon date from surrounding matrix of A.D. 890 + 110. The
sample from site 3:739 yielded a thermoluminescence date of A.D. 1057 -- 83
and two radiocarbon dates of A.D. 1060 --+ 110 and A.D. 1150 + 110.
Three other dates are at odds with ceramic styles. Site 3:t070 appeared on
ceramic grounds to belong to the early Pithouse period, although its thermoluminescence date places it in very late Pithouse times. It is not clear whether the
source of this problem is the ceramic seriation, the classification of the site
within this seriation, or the dating technique. Any one, or any combination, of
the three is equally likely at this early stage of inquiry. The major occupation of
site 3:1374 dates on ceramic grounds to the Pithouse-to-Pueblo transition period.
The ceramic assemblage for this period is quite distinctive, and the dating of the
transition period at ca. A.D. 1100 to 1200 is also fairly sound. The thermoluminescence date secured for transitional site 3:1374 is A.D. 748 +-- 100, falling
in the last half of the Pithouse period. This date is substantially at odds with a
fairly well-dated ceramic sequence, but the sherd came from the surface, so its
origin is therefore open to question and it should not be automatically concluded
that the dating technique was at fault.
In another case the thermoluminescence date seems faulty. This is site
3:1642, a late Pueblo period village with a large diagnostic ceramic assemblage
dating to A.D. 1561 --+ 38. This is more than 150 years after the end of the Pueblo
period as determined by all chronological studies done in south-central New
Mexico and western Trans-Pecos Texas. This includes ceramic studies, archaeomagnetic dates, tree-ring dates, and other of the ceramic thermoluminescence
dates discussed here (site 3:1590, for example). All of these studies consistently

246

Texas Archeological Society

Table 2. Thermoluminescence Dates*

Date
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.

798±I00
818±100
838±100
868±100
998±100
1057±83
1057±I00
1233±67
1338±58
1561±38

Sample
No.
77d6
77d8
77d4
77di
77d5
77d3
77d2
77d7
77d9
77di0

EPCM .
Site No.?
3:1374
4:018
3:1487
4:132
3:010
3:730
3:1070
4:010
3:1590
3:1642

Period
Desiqnation#
LPt, T
LPt
LPt
E, MPt
LPt
LPt
EPt
T
Pu
Pu

*All reported in Whalen 1980; all located in western El Paso County,
Texas.
tEl Paso Centennial Museum site numbers.
#E,M,L = early, middle, late; Pt = Pithouse; T = Transitional Pithouse/Pueblo; Pu = Pueblo. Designations based on surface ceramics
except for sites 4:132 and 3739, which are based on radiocarbon
dates. Surface sherds were dated in all cases except 4:132 and
3:739.

produced dates clustering tightly in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. Spanish accounts also indicate that Pueblo societies did not exist in the El Paso area in
the mid-sixteenth century. All of this evidence, then, argues that the thermoluminescence date of A.D. 1561 is unreliable.
Despite some difficulties, this application of ceramic thermoluminescence
dating is sufficiently encouraging to recommend its continued use. It should also
be observed that thermoluminescence researchers are exploring the feasibility of
dating heated stone. Limestone has given uneven results, and attention is now
being directed toward granitic stone. Thermoluminescence dating on various materials will probably become increasingly important in archeological research.

Obsidian Hydration
Several recent studies (O’Laughlin 1979; Whalen 1980) have attempted to
use obsidian hydration dating in the western Trans-Pecos. The technique involves determination of the rate of hydration of local obsidians. This is the rate
at which a newly fractured edge absorbs water molecules from its surroundings.
This rate differs for obsidians from different sources, as it is a function of the
stone’s composition. Local rates of hydration can be determined only by measurement of extent of hydration (or thickness of the hydration band) on many
obsidian samples from locations dated by other methods. Once a loca! rate of
hydration has been determined, it can be used to calculate the amount of time
elapsed since the fracture of a piece of obsidian.
Just over 50 obsidian samples have been measured in the western TransPecos, producing a very small sample of hydration values, which reflects the

Whalen--Western Trans-Pecos

247

paucity of obsidian in local prehistoric deposits. In the El Paso area, obsidian
occurs as small, water-rolled pebbles that seldom exceed 3 cm in their maximum
dimension. These pebbles constitute a minute fraction of the area’s Pleistocene
gravels. There is no known obsidian source anywhere in the western TransPecos, and the abraded condition of the E1 Paso area pebbles implies that they
were transported by water from distant sources. Obsidian is even less common in
the remainder of the western Trans-Pecos, making hydration dating unpractical
except in the E1 Paso area.
Hydration measurements have been made on obsidian samples from a series
of Archaic, Pithouse, and Pueblo period sites aroundE1 Paso. O’Laughlin (1979:
53, Figure 15) reports !3 hydration measurements from Archaic strata, mixed
Archaic-Pithouse period strata, and pure Pithouse deposits at the Keystone Dam
site on the Rio Grande at the western edge of E1 Paso. Both excavated and surface-collected obsidian samples were used. Other hydration measurements come
from the Hueco Bolson, a desert basin directly east of E1 Paso (Whalen 1980:49,
Table 15), where all of the obsidian samples--averaging 5 per site--were collected from sites that have been dated by ceramics from early Pithouse to late
Pueblo times. Samples were also taken from these sites for thermoluminescence
measurements (radiocarbon dates are available for some of the sites). The sites
sampled appeared from their surface ceramics to be single-component occupations. Unfortunately, very little excavation has been done in the area, and little
obsidian was recovered by excavation, so surface finds constitute the bulk of obsidian for study. Thin sectioning of obsidian samples and measurement of hydration-band thicknesses from both the Keystone Dam and Hueco Bolson studies
were done at the Radiocarbon Laboratory at the University of California in
Riverside. Hydration-band thickness values for all samples are provided in the
original reports of the project (O’Laughlin 1979; Whalen 1980).
These measurements can be used in several ways. Michets (1973:209) shows
how a local rate of hydration can be calculated by correlation of hydration-band
thickness with some independent method of dating. Absolute dates in the E1 Paso
area are provided by the radiocarbon and ceramic thermoluminescence dates just
discussed. Ideally, hydration-band thickness decreases from older to younger
specimens; i.e., the older the fracture, the more water molecules have diffused
into the body of the obsidian, thickening the hydrated band. The results of this
analysis were disappointing. The mean values given in Table 3 show no consistent decrease in hydration-band thickness from early to late. In the absence of
such a trend, it is impossible to estimate reliably the rate of hydration of obsidian
from the E1 Paso area, and without this rate. no absolute dates can be calculated.
A significant factor in these disappointing results ma3, very well be the surface origin of nearly all of the samples. Michels (1973:207), in his discussion of
obsidian hydration techniques, notes that temperature is a crucial variable affecting the rate of hydration. Samples from the desert floor of the study area would
have been exposed to substantial fluctuation in day, night, and seasonal temperatures, resulting in considerable variation in the hydration rate. A second factor
may be the variability in the composition of the different obsidian flows from
which the samples originated. The rates of hydration can vary widely for different obsidian sources (Michels 1973:208). Since Hueco Bolson obsidian consists
of waterworn nodules in unconsolidated Pleistocene gravels, the source of the

248

Texas Archeological Society

stone is unclear, and several different obsidian flows could have contributed. However, obsidian from the Keystone Dam site produced hydration values consistently increasing with age from a set of proveniences roughly seriated by associated artifacts. Despite this encouraging result, the paucity of absolute dates for
the obsidian-yielding sites still prohibits determination of the exact rate of hydration of the sample material, which is essential for calculation of precise
sample age.
Nevertheless, obsidian hydration measurements made to date in the E1 Paso
area can still be used for relative chronological ordering (cf. O’Laughlin 1979).
According to data from the Keystone Dam site, hydration bands from Archaic
components are from ca. 7.0 to 10.5 microns thick, and those from components
of the Pithouse period are form 2.8 to 6.0 microns thick. Three of the four
Pithouse values lay between 4.3 and 6.0 microns, the writer’s values from Pithouse and Pueblo periods in the Hueco Bolson confuse this situation somewhat,
coming as they do from uncertain proveniences and from a large number of sites.
The data in Table 3 show no clear distinction between hydration values of the
Pithouse and Pueblo periods, although none of these values overlaps O’Laughlin’s
Archaic range. It must be recalled, of course, that the Archaic hydration values
are separated from those of the Pithouse period by roughly 3,000 years, while as
many as 800 years may separate Pithouse and Pueblo period values. Moreover,
late Pithouse deposits constitute the most common segment of the period, and no
more than a few centuries separate these from the Pueblo period. It is clear,
therefore, that even relative dating of Pithouse and Pueblo remains by obsidian
hydration measurement will require many readings from unmixed proveniences.
Nevertheless, hydration measurements now seem to be a tool for making at least
gross distinction between preceramic and ceramic era contexts. This alone is of
considerable utility in the western Trans-Pecos, where the literature often shows
considerable confusion over what is preceramic and what is simply aceramic.
Archeologists working in the area, especially if they are excavating, are therefore
Table 3. Chronological Ordering of Mean Hydration Band Thickness
Site*

2:033
4:132
3:1374
3:1487
2:033
3:739
3:1070
4:010
3:1590
3:1642

Datet

2790
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.

B.C.
620
800
840
860
1030
1130
1240
1340
1560

Mean Band
Thickenss
(Microns

Standard
Deviation

6.86
3.68
5.37
4.66
4.34
4.84
5.24
3.99
3.34
4.92

0.26
1.26
0.59
3.08
1.59
0.85
0.53
I.II

No. of
Specimens
I
7
5
8
I
3
7
6
7
I0

Reference

O’Laughlin 1979
Whalen 1980
Whalen 1980
Whalen 1980
O’Laughlin 1979
Whalen 1980
Whaien 1980
Whalen 1980
Wha[en 1980
Whalen 1980

*El Paso Centennial Museum site number.
tRadiocarbon and ceramic thermoluminescence dates, rounded to the
nearest decade.

Whalen--Western Trans-Pecos

249

urged to have hydration values determined on all obsidians recovered, even if
samples are too small to yield immediately useful results. Only compilation of a
large body of obsidian hydration data from well-controlled proveniences will ultimately allow refinement of a promising dating technique. Preparation of obsidian samples and measurement of hydration bands are simple, rapid, inexpensive,
and readily available.

Archeomagnetic Dating
The archeomagnetic dating technique has been used in the western TransPecos and vicinity, although its range of application is very limited over both
time and space. The technique relies on precise measurement of the orientation
of magnetic particles, which align themselves toward the earth’s current magnetic
pole upon heating. The magnetic particles retain this orientation when their matrices cool. Using data on the movement of the earth’s magnetic pole over time,
the date of heating can be calculated. Clearly essential for archeomagnetic dating
are samples of severely burned earth, adobe, brick, or ceramics that have not
been moved from the original firing positions. Any severely burned hearth, oven,
or other such feature is a potential source of samples. Especially suitable for this
purpose in the western Trans-Pecos are the adobe-lined firepits often found inside
Pueblo rooms in the E1 Paso and Presidio areas. A limitation on the use of
archeomagnetic dating, however, is that it requires sequences of dates from other
sources for initial chronological placement of the earth’s magnetic fluctuations at
the study locality.

Table 4. Archeomagnetic Dates

Date*
A°D.
A.D.

A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.

1200/1230
1260±18
1270±18
1275±27
1295±13
300±20
300/1320
300/1330
300/1350
320/1340
325/1350
365+-26
390±41

Areat
DA
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
EP
DA
EP
DA
EP
EP

Proven i ence$
Orogrande Pueblo
Hot Wells Pueblo
Hot Wells Pueblo
Hot Wells Pueblo
Hot Wells Pueblo
Hot Wells Pueblo
Hot Wells Pueblo
Sherman Hog Ranch Pueblo
Robledo Mountain Pueblo
Hot Wells Pueblo
Robledo Mountain Pueblo
Sabina Mountain Pueblo
Sabina Mountain Pueblo

Reference
Brook (n.d.)
Brook 1970)
Brook 1970)
Brook 1970)
Brook 1970)
Brook 1975)
Brook 1975)
Brook 1975)
Brook 1975)
Brook 1975)
Brook 1975)
Brook 1975)
Brook 1975)

*Where determined, first and last firing dates are shown as, for
example, 1200/1230.
tArea abbreviations: DA is southern DoRa Ana County, New Mexico;
EP is western El Paso County, Texas.
$Samples were taken from intramural hearths.

250

Texas Archeological Society

At present, 13 archeomagnetic dates have been documented in the E1 Paso
area and in adjacent parts of New Mexico, all from Pueblo period sites. Most
were taken in the course of E1 Paso Archeological Society excavations in the
early and middle 1970s (Table 4). No archeomagnetic dating has been done in
the E1 Paso area in the past 10 years, and none has ever been done anywhere else
in the study area proper (Figure 1). The special equipment and skills required for
taking samples prevent the widespread use of archeomagnetic dating (for a full
discussion of sampling techniques see Tarling 1975). Excavators who are not prepared to take archeomagnetic samples, however, should still make a practice of
recording the exact locations of all heavily burned areas. These areas should also
be left undisturbed, insofar as the necessities of the excavation permit, and their
locations should be included in published reports. Documentation and preservation of heavily burned areas would permit efficient relocation for sampling by
future researchers. These practices are urged in the light of the writer’s conversations with specialists in archeomagnetic dating, who indicate that a major impediment to widespread application of the technique is lack of readily available
samples with which to build and refine regional paleomagnetic variations. The
technique is certainly worth developing, as it should be applicable to all of the
cultural remains in the western Trans-Pecos.
CONCLUSIONS

In conclusion, although it is clear that progress has been made in developing
the chronology of parts of the western Trans-Pecos, it is equally clear that much
remains to be done. Promising new dating techniques are coming into use in the
area, although they are still in early stages of development and application, and
their spatial distribution is very limited. Radiocarbon, ceramic thermoluminescence, obsidian hydration, and archeomagnetic work are all confined entirely to
the E1 Paso area, and our understanding of the chronology of the rest of the region is therefore underdeveloped. To remedy this situation will clearly require a
great deal of time and effort. Archeologists are urged to think in terms of a range
of dating techniques when planning research projects, to collect (or locate)
datable material of many sorts, to date or process as much of this material as
possible, and to include these results, proveniences, and measurements in project
reports. This is a laborious task; it is also an essential one, as large-scale dating
offers the only means of further refining the chronology of the western TransPecos.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Much of the field work upon which this study is based was carried out on lands
owned or leased by the U.S. Army, Fort Bliss, Texas. The work was arranged, financed,
and managed through Fort Bliss as part of that institution’s ongoing cultural resource management program. Additional support was provided by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
and the U.S. Army Training and Documentation Command. The field and laboratory
work was carried out under the auspices of the El Paso Centennial Museum of the University of Texas at E1 Paso and the Environmental Office, Fort Bliss. The writer is especially
grateful for the support and assistance of Rex Gerald, museum director and project principal investigator. Glen DeGarmo, Fort Bliss archeologist, and other of the military and
civilian authorities at Fort Bliss facilitated the work in many ways. Some of the dates used

Whalen--Western Trans-Pecos

251

in this paper were originally collected for a synthesis of the regional prehistory (LeBlanc
and Whalen 1980). Financial support for data collection was provided by the Bureau of
Land Management (Las Cruces, New Mexico, District), the U.S. Army (Fort Bliss,
Texas, and White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico), and the U.S. Forest Service
(Southwest Region, Albuquerque). All of this aid and support is gratefully acknowledged.

REFERENCES CITED
Aitken, M. J., D. W. Zimmerman, and S. J. Fleming
1968 Thermoluminescence dating of ancient pottery. Nature 219:442-445.
Applegarth, Susan M. Riches
1976 Prehistoric utilization of the environment of the eastern slopes of the Guadalupe
Mountains. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of Wisconsin, Madison.
Aten, Lawrence E.
1972 Evaluation of the cultural resources of the Northgate site. Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin, Report 5.
Beckes, Michael R., A. R. Dulaney, J. D. Pigott, R. F. Scott IV, and N. K. Smiley
1977 A cultural resource inventory and assessment of McGregor Guided Missile
Range, Part II: special archeological studies. Texas Archeological Survey, The
University of Texas at Austin, Research Report 65.
Brook, Vernon
1970 Four archaeomagnetic dates from the Hot Wells site (EPAS-3). El Paso Archaeological Society, The Artifact 8(1): 1 - 11.
1975

Development of prehistoric house types in the Jornada branch. Archeological Society of New Mexico, Awanyu 3(4): 16-30.

n.d.

An El Paso phase room at Oro Grande. Unpublished MS.

Damon, P. E., C. W. Ferguson, A. Long, and E. I. Wallick
1974 Dendrochronologic calibration of the radiocarbon time scale. American Antiquio’
39(2): 350- 366.
Drover, C. E., R. E. Taylor, T. Cairns, and J. Ericson
1979 Thermoluminescence determinations on early ceramic materials from coastal
southern California. American Antiquity 44(2):285-294.
Greer, John W.
1968 Notes on excavated ring midden sites, 1963- 1968. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 38:39-44.
Katz, Susanna R.
1978 Test excavations at 41CU97. In An inventory and assessment of archaeological
sites in the high country of Guadalupe Mountains National Park, Texas, by
Paul R. Katz, Appendix III, pp. 81-91. Center for Archaeological Research,
The University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report 36.
Kegley, George
1980 Archaeological investigations at Hueco Tanks State Park, El Paso County, Texas.
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Kelley, J. C., T. N. Campbell, and D. J. Lehmer
1940 Association of archaeological materials with geological deposits in the Big Bend
region of Texas. Sul Ross State Teachers College Bulletin, Vol. 21, No. 3.

252

Texas Archeological Society

LeBlanc, Steven, and Michael E. Whaten
1980 An archaeological synthesis of south-central and southwestern New Mexico.
Office of Contract Archeology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque.
Lehmer, Donald J.
1948 The Jornada branch of the Mogollon. University of Arizona Bulletin 19(2): 1-99.
1958

A review of Trans-Pecos Texas archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 29:109-144.

Lynn, Warren M.
1976 Archeological testing at the Northeast Sewage Treatment Plant, E1 Paso County,
Texas. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission, Survey Report 15. Austin.
Michels, Joseph W.
1973 Dating methods in archaeology. Seminar Press, New York.
O’Laughlin, Thomas C.
1979 Excavations at the Transmountain Campus, E1 Paso Community College, E1 Paso
Texas. El Paso Centennial Museum, The University of Texas at El Paso, Publications in Anthropology 7.
1980

The Keystone Dam site and other Archaic and Formative sites in northwest El
Paso, Texas. El Paso Centennial Museum, The University of Texas at El Paso,
Publications in Anthropology 8.

Sommer, Arnold E.
1968 Parker Ranch ring midden No. 1: 41CX130. Transactions of the Fourth Regional
Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas, pp. 9-17.
Tarling, D. H.
1975 Archaeomagnetism: the dating of archaeological materials by their magnetic
properties. Worm Archaeology 7(2): 185- 197.
Thompson, Marc, and P. H. Beckett
1979 A study of prehistoric campsites in northeast E1 Paso. CRM Division, New
Mexico State University, Report 310. Las Cruces.
Whalen, Michael E.
1977 Settlement patterns of the eastern Hueco Bolson. The University of Texas at El
Paso Anthropological Paper 4.
1978

Settlement patterns of the western Hueco Bolson. The University of Texas at El
Paso Publications in Anthropology 6.

1980

Specialized studies in the Hueco Bolson. The University of Texas at El Paso Publications in Anthropology 9.

1981

Origin and evolution of ceramics in western Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 52:215-229.

Zimmerman, David W.
1971 Uranium distributions in archeologic ceramics: dating of radioactive inclusions.
Science 174: 818- 819.

Prehistoric Settlement and Technological Patterns in
Southeast Texas
L. W. Patterson

ABSTRACT
Prehistoric settlement, subsistence, and technological patterns are discussed for the
upper Texas coast and a western transitional zone between the Brazos and Colorado
rivers. External relationships are considered from the standpoint of technological traits.
Stable settlement patterns are indicated for long spans of time in the inland portions of
these regions.

INTRODUCTION
Settlement and technological patterns are key subjects in the study of prehistoric lifeways. Data for the study of these subjects in Southeast Texas have
increased significantly in the past few years. A general review of the prehistory
of the upper Texas coast has been published previously by the author (Patterson
1979a). This current paper provides more details on settlement and technological
patterns, including some data not previously available.
This study explores differences in prehistoric settlement and technological
patterns in two specific geographical areas of the Southeast Texas coastal plain:
the upper Texas coast, defined as the area between the Brazos and Sabine rivers,
from the coastal margin to approximately 90 miles inland; and the zone between
the Colorado and Brazos rivers, which extends about the same distance inland as
the upper Texas coast (Figure 1).
Many similarities as well as differences are evident in cultural patterns of
the two regions. Settlement patterns seem to be closely tied to available food
resources, while technological patterns may be influenced by several factors,
such as subsistence requirements, cultural preferences, availability of raw materials, and external influences.
CHRONOLOGY
The current literature on archeological research tends to deemphasize studies on prehistoric chronology in favor of more narrowly defined problems. It
should be realized, however, that precise definition of chronology remains an important research goal in most parts of the state, including Southeast Texas. Explicit problem-oriented studies in prehistoric archeology cannot be done properly
without supporting chronological data.
Establishing precise chronological controls for Southeast Texas is difficult.
Few of the materials that are normally recovered are suitable for radiocarbon dat-

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54 (1985for 1983)

254

Texas Archeological Society

/

Sabine River

UPPER TEXAS COAST
Brazos River
-- WESTERN TRANSITIONAL ZONE

Colorado River
Figure 1. Areas of Southeast Texas under discussion.

ing, and neither ceramic nor projectile point studies have as yet yielded definitive
data concerning precise, narrow time periods. In addition, much field work remains to be done before sufficient data to define relative chronologies of artifact
types for all prehistoric time periods is available. Enough data exist, however, to
construct relative chronologies for broad time periods in Southeast Texas. A few
radiocarbon dates are now available, and a fairly good definition of the beginning
dates for ceramics has been established on the coastal margin of the upper Texas
coast.
A large number of prehistoric sites have now been recorded in Southeast
Texas (Patterson 1979a:Table 1); however, most of the data from these sites are
from surface collections. For this large body of information to be useful, it is
necessary to use projectile point and ceramic typologies as time indicators. Although much research remains to be done, tentative projectile point sequences
can be constructed for the two regions under discussion, as shown in Table 1.
These proposed point type sequences are based on data from a few excavated
sites that have long occupation sequences. The principal sites involved are 41AU 1
(Duke 1982) and 41AU36 (Hall 1981) in Austin County, and 41HR5 (Wheat
1953 :Table 5) and 4 ! HR315 (Patterson 1980a) in Harris County. Data from several other excavated sites in the upper Texas coast also are available, mainly for
the Late Archaic and later periods. These include sites in Austin (Hall 1981),
Brazoria (Aten 1971), Chambers (Aten 1979, 1983), Harris (Aten !979, 1983;
O’Brien 1971; Wheat 1953), Liberty (Aten t967), Montgomery (Shafer 1958),

Patterson--Southeast Texas

2

¯-J
F--~

.~~G3
¯ -to

8-c
UDa3
c
<

(D

>‘--

0

~i-

j

w=~ _~
"~
-->-

"-"tD

~.--

--

~

em

mc

13..

0

0

;2-

~

~-~ .V_~

L~

~ ~_o

_o

~ -og
¯00(9

E

(I)
N:

~_~

e--

~D t-

"~

"-- "t-(lJ

"~

o_

.CO-

_~g

(I) 0">

O--

~ "~" ~:

0

~0

"-~..zz.- to

L.C

..t-

L r~

>’-0

>

C

(9 CL F- -t-

~

~

wO

~8
Oto -qc~ aJ
,~

%

o

0

4

=g 2= ~%

it)

4- 0
0(9>0
--

>-

, -_= .- ~,
(2)

3:.-(i) t"--> +-(U >~
.C
~l.c to(Dt

X_
D

"8
>(I)

"Z
>

0
E

"C>‘ ¯

.Coo _-I- ¯
tow
"--

8

~= a_"

"8~ ¯

I 0
~) ~

--0
I 0

(D
--0

0
.-0

O0

"~0

~0

~ T~
-. _
_o,
13_0
0
>-0

--0
I- ~

V-

(1)
GD

¯-~ ~’.
O0

n

to
(I)

0

---°

0
(DO

"I-

~

<,_0_.

~
~
~

x I

>-0

--0
LO

~.’8

_~

< I
0
(DO

-I- If~

=~ o°
O- I
0
(DO

-I- ~ci-

o_

8
(D
to
>-

-C
w
W~

255

256

Texas Archeological Society

and Polk (McClurkan 1958) counties. New data from excavated site 41WH19
(L.W. Patterson field notes, n.d.) in Wharton County also will be discussed here.
The early Paleo-Indian period is not well represented in Southeast Texas.
There are a few surface finds of Clovis fluted points (Long 1977; Suhm and Jetks
1962; Wheat 1953) and a Clovis point associated with the Galena site in Harris
County (Hester 1980). Only one example of a Folsom-type fluted point has been
found in this region (site 41WH19). The early Paleo-Indian period is generally
recognized as extending from 12,000 to 10,000 B.P. (Jennings 1974:Fig. 3.27).
It is now known that side-notched projectile points occur in very early sites
in Central and Southeast Texas. There are three occurrences of side-notched
points earlier than Plainview in these regions. In Central Texas these examples
include a San Patrice point on the upper Brazos River (Watt 1978) and other sidenotched point varieties at the Wilson-Leonard site (41WM235 ; Frank Weir, personal communication, n.d.) north of Austin. In Southeast Texas, at site 41WH 19,
three varieties of side-notched points have been found in levels below a Plainview
point, one at the same level as a Folsom point. The side-notched point at the
Folsom level at site 41WH19 is somewhat comparable in time to the earliest
dates for Dalton side-notched points during the Folsom time period (Goodyear
1982). The scarcity of Folsom points in Southeast Texas may thus be explained in
terms of other point types being used in this region during the period I0,000 to
11,000 years ago.
Since the early Paleo-Indian period is not yet well defined in Southeast
Texas, this article will deal primarily with late Paleo-Indian and later time
periods for which significant data are now available. The late Paleo-Indian period covers an interval of 10,000 to 7,000 years ago, based on the date summary
of Plainview and Golondrina point types given by Johnson and Holliday (1980).
Scottsbluff and Angostura point types fall into this time range (Prewitt 198!:
Figure 4). Other late Paleo-Indian point types found in Southeast Texas include
Dalton, Meserve, and San Patrice. As Story (1981:143) has noted, the San
Patrice point type may date from early in the late Paleo-Indian period on the
upper Brazos River (Watt 1978) and in the Texas Panhandle (Willey et al. 1978).
Distribution of the San Patrice point type in Texas is becoming better known.
This point type has a wide distribution in Southeast Texas (Patterson 1980b), and
more examples are being found in Central Texas (Watt 1978; Weber 1980). A San
Patrice point has been found in situ in late Paleo-Indian context at site 41WH 19
(L. W. Patterson field notes, n.d.) in Wharton County.
A surprising variety of stemmed point types has been found for the late
Paleo-lndian period at site 41WH t 9. Straight-stemmed, site-notched, and cornernotched varieties all occur at this site below an Angostura point and above a
Plainview point. Most of these points have well-ground basal edges. Based on
excavations at site 41HR315 (Patterson 1980a: Table 3), early straight-stemmed
points occur in late Paleo-lndian period contexts in Harris County. Early sideand corner-notched points also may occur in Harris County in late Paleo-lndian
period components, based on excavations by Wheat ( 1953 :Types 7, 14) and surface collections such as those from site 41HR206 (Patterson 1976c:Figure IA-C;
1980d:Figures IE, 2G, 2H).
Using information provided by McCormick (1975) and W. W. Crook, Jr.
(personal communication, n.d.) for north-central Texas, I now feel that the

Patterson--Southeast Texas

257

Carrollton and Trinity point types start in the Early Archaic and continue through
the Middle Archaic period on the upper Texas coast. These point types have not
yet been found in the western transitional zone (Figure 1) but are common in the
upper Texas coast. Bell-like points may date from the Early Archaic period in the
western transitional zone (Patterson and Hudgins 1981 :Figure 1). The Bulverde
point type seems to start in the Early or Middle Archaic in the upper Texas coast
(Patterson 1980a) and in the western transitional zone (site 41AU 1, Duke 1982).
This point type continues into the Late Archaic in the upper Texas coast (Patterson
1980a). The Gary/Kent point series starts in the Middle Archaic period in both
the upper Texas coast and the western transitional zone and continues throughout
all later prehistoric periods (Hall 1981; Patterson 1980a). Other point types associated with the Middle Archaic period in the western transitional zone include
Travis, Pedernales, Marcos, Lange, Ensor, and Wells (Hall 1981). Pedernales
and Williams point types may also be associated with the Middle Archaic in the
upper Texas coast. In contrast to Prewitt’s (1981 :Figure 4) Central Texas chronology, the Pedernales point type continues into the terminal Archaic in the upper Texas coast (Wheat 1975:Table 5) and in the western transitional zone (site
41AU1, Duke 1982). The Early to Middle Archaic period in this region is estimated at roughly 7,000 to 3,500 B.P. (Patterson 1979a: 106). Some unclassified
straight-stemmed points with ground basal edges have been found in the Early
Archaic level of site 41WH19.
The Late Archaic period in the upper Texas coast is defined here as beginning at approximately 3,500 B.P. and ending with the introduction of ceramics at about 1,900 B.P. (Aten et al. 1975:Figure 16). The introduction of ceramics is not well defined in the western transitiona! zone. The Early Ceramic
(Woodland) period starts at about 1,900 B.P. and ends at about 1,400 B.P., when
small bifacial arrow point types become predominant (Aten 1971:Figure 10).
Dart point styles are similar throughout the Late Archaic and Early Ceramic
periods in the study area. These include Gary/Kent, Ellis, Ensor, Ponchartrain,
Palmillas, Darl, Yarbrough, Wells, and Pedernales. Marcos and Fairland point
types also occur during these time periods, but only in the western transitional
zone. Transitional arrow point types occur during these time periods in both
regions (Patterson 1982a).
The Late Prehistoric period is defined here as starting at about 1,400 B.C.
and ending with European contact at 500 B.P. Research to date, except for a
study of ceramic types on the coastal margin (Aten et al. 1976:Figure 16), has
not enabled definition of any subperiods within the Late Prehistoric. Standardized small arrow point types such as Alba, Perdiz, Scallorn, Edwards, and Catahoula are predominant during this time period. It should be noted that the Gary/
Kent dart point series continues into the Late Prehistoric throughout the study
areas (Wheat 1953:Table 5; Hall 1981; Patterson 1980a:Table 3, Aten 1979), especially at inland sites.
Much research remains to be done to obtain more exact ordering of chronologies in these two regions. Few absolute dates are available, and projectile
point sequences are not fully delined. Materials suitable for radiocarbon dating
are not found frequently. Some projectile point types are not suitable for defining
narrow time periods, and there appear to be geographical differences in pottery
type sequences. On the positive side; the amount of data available for the two

258

Texas Archeological Society

regions is increasing rapidly (Patterson 1982b). More research is especially
needed on projectile point sequences in the Paleo-Indian and Early Archaic
periods. Site 4 IWH 19 has the potential to yield radiocarbon dates for a very long
time sequence.
SITE OCCUPATION SEQUENCES
The major prehistoric settlement pattern of the inland coastal plain in the
upper Texas coast and the western transitional zone is the dense occupation
found near all water sources. It has been known for some time that Indian sites
are generally found along stream banks or on the first high terraces above the
stream banks (Patterson 1979a, 1979c). Recent data indicate a large number of
sites on stable landforms that have very long occupation sequences. A number of
sites have initial occupations in the Late Paleo-Indian or Early Archaic periods
with continued intermittent occupations through the Late Prehistoric. A stable
settlement pattern lasting for as long as 10,000 years may be indicated for some
of these sites. One of the reasons for the uniformity in settlement patterns is
the lack of topographical and geological diversity. There were few opportunities
to practice a variety of settlement strategies, such as use of caves or hilltop lookout sites.
A number of sites with long occupation sequences in Wharton County, in
the western transitional zone, have now been reported. Sites 41WH2 (Patterson
and Hudgins 1980a; Patterson 1980c), 41WH7 (Patterson and Hudgins 1980a),
41WH10 (Patterson and Hudgins 1980b), 41WH19 Location A (Patterson and
Hudgins 1981) and 41WH26 (Patterson and Hudgins 1982) have late PaleoIndian components indicated by point types such as San Patrice, Plainview,
Scottsbluff, and Golondrina. With only one exception (41WH7), all of these
sites exhibit intermittent use through the Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods.
Excavations at site 41WH19 Location B have demonstrated a very long occupation sequence, starting with the early Paleo-Indian period (Folsom) and continuing through the Late Prehistoric (L. W. Patterson field notes, n.d.). Other sites of
the western transitional zone having great time depth include sites 41AU1 (Duke
1982), 41AU7 (Patterson 1976a), 41AU 19 and 41AU36 (Hall 1981), and 41WH65
(Patterson and Hudgins 1983).
A number of sites in the upper Texas coast with long occupation sequences
also are known. Long (1977) has shown that the McFadden Beach area in Jefferson County was utilized from the early Paleo-lndian through at least the Late
Archaic periods. Paleo-Indian points here include Clovis, Dalton, San Patrice,
and Scottsbluff. This area was possibly grassland before coastal subsidence.
Most of the recorded sites in the upper Texas coast with long occupation
sequences are in Harris County, mainly because so much archeological work has
been done there. Site 41HR315 (Patterson 1980a) is an excavated site with the
longest occupation sequence found to date (Paleo-lndian through Late Prehistoric). Plainview, Angostura, and San Patrice are the earliest point types of
this site, and Carrollton points from the Early to Middle Archaic constitute a
major component here.
There are a number of repeatedly occupied, but disturbed, sites in Harris
County with surface collections that include late Paleo-Indian and later artifacts.
Site 41HR182 (Patterson 1975a, and field notes, n.d.) yielded a late Paleo-Indian

Patterson--Southeast Texas

259

Golondrina-like point as well as Archaic and Late Prehistoric materials. The occupation sequence at site 41HR206 (Patterson 1980d) begins with a possible
Angostura point and continues through the Late Prehistoric. As noted previously,
notched points with ground basal edges from this site (Patterson 1976c:Figure
1A-C) may be from the late Paleo-Indian period, based on similar point types
from this period at site 41WH19. Aten et at. (1976), Duke (1971), Hester
(1980), McClure (!977, !978, 1981), McGuff and Cox (1973), and Wheat
(1953) have reported sites containing similar long occupation sequences
Excavations by Wheat (1953) at the Doering site (41HR5) in Harris County
have yielded projectile point types of all time periods. Late Paleo-Indian point
types here include Angostura, Scottsbluff, San Patrice, and Plainview. This site
has been difficult to interpret stratigraphically because some point types seem to
be out of sequence. However, one problem with this site, the occurrence of
notched points at the lowest excavation level, may now be solved. These cornerand side-notched points are similar to types found at the late Paleo-Indian level at
Site 41WHI9.
If Carrollton and Trinity points were being manufactured in the Early Archaic in Harris County, some sites can now be classified as having occupation
sequences starting with the Early Archaic and continuing through the late Prehistoric periods. These sites include 41HR184 (L.W. Patterson field notes, n.d.)
and 41HR283 (McClure 1982).
Since it has now been shown that the Gary/Kent point series begins in the
Middle Archaic, it is likely that the lengths of occupation periods have been underestimated in published reports for some sites in the upper Texas Coast, perhaps
including certain sites in Montgomery (Shafer 1968) and in Polk (McClurkan
1968) counties. It should also be noted that McClurkan refers to site 41PK88 as
starting in the Late Archaic, even though San Patrice and lanceolate Paleo-lndian
points were found at this site.
SETTLEMENT PATTERNS
No complex settlement patterns have been identified for inland portions of
these coastal plain areas. The concept of large base camps with smaller related
specialty sites does not seem to apply here. However, the concept of small bands
gathering on a seasonal basis is a possibility that deserves continued research.
There is evidence of more intensive use of the coastal margin of the upper
Texas coast, in the form of shell middens, starting some time in the later part of
the Archaic period. While some of these sites have Late Archaic remains, most
shell middens are post-ceramic, dating after A.D. 100 (Patterson 1979a:Table 2).
There is a trend toward greater exploitation of marine resources during the Late
Prehistoric period in the coastal margin. Since this trend appears to be accompanied by pottery types somewhat related to Louisiana types (Aten and Bollick
1969), this change in settlement and subsistence patterns may be due to influences from the east. Although not regionally uniform, this trend toward greater
utilization of marine food sources occurs also in some inland areas, such as along
the Brazos River (Hall 1981). The relationships of settlement and subsistence
patterns will be discussed in more detail below.
Sites tend to be smaller and more numerous and to contain less pottery in
the inland upper Texas coast in the Late Prehistoric. This trend has previously

260

Texas Archeological Society

been explained as resulting from a more mobile life style (Patterson 1976c). At
the same time, the basic selection of settlement locations along streams did not
change. Thus, the nature of inland sites differs from that of Late Prehistoric sites
in the coastal margin. Some of the late sites in the coastal margin, such as site
41HR74 (Duke 1981) at Laporte, are quite large and contain large quantities of
pottery. Here, a less mobile life style is indicated, although some seasonal movement probably still occurred.
Judging from numbers of sites, there appear to have been continuing population increases in the upper Texas coast from the late Paleo-Indian through the
Late Prehistoric periods (Patterson 1979a:Table 1). As Story (1981:144) notes,
the highest rate in population increase occurred during the Late Archaic. However, this population increase may not have been as sudden as past data have indicated. An increasing number of sites with Middle Archaic components are now
being identified.
Story (1981:148) notes a general lack of settlement pattern data in East
Texas. This is no longer true for the two regions being discussed here. Much of
the archeological data available for these two regions have now been published
(Patterson 1982b) and, including the data from surface collections, are of good
contextual quality. Many of the surface collections constitute quantifiable samples
of archeological remains and do not simply represent isolated surface finds.
While a more detailed picture of settlement patterns in coastal areas may result
from future research, it is now possible to delineate settlement patterns to a large
degree. Future research should concentrate on more uniform surveys of these
regions (Patterson 1979c) and on obtaining a better description of seasonal
movements.
In spite of the available data, some difficulties in the study of settlement
patterns in these regions do exist. Because of the scarcity of absolute dates and
the inaccuracies of radiocarbon dating, quantified data on archeological sites
cannot be used to determine settlement density at any given moment in time.
Therefore, site density data can be used only as an average over selected time
periods. The interpretation of site size is another difficult subject. A horizontally
large site may represent either a short-term occupation by a large group or frequent use by small groups. Some of the larger sites on the upper Texas coast,
such as 41HR206 (Patterson 1980d), appear to represent frequent occupations
over long time periods by small bands. The scarcity of preserved floral and
faunal remains makes the study of seasonal habitation patterns another difficult
problem. Because of difficulties in obtaining solutions to some types of interpretive problems, future research should concentrate on the types of problems
most amenable to solution.
SUBSISTENCE PATTERNS
Settlement patterns alone have little meaning if not related to subsistence
patterns. In hunting and gathering lifeways, the availability of natural food resources is a prime consideration in the location of habitation sites. The location
of sites near freshwater sources provides access to both potable water and plant
and animal food resources. In the upper Texas coast and in the western transitional zone, settlement patterns seem to be tied directly to strategies of maximizing the available food resources. An area resident recalls that early settlers in

Patterson--Southeast Texas

261

Wharton County referred to the nomadic Indians there as "fish eaters," an indication that Indian activities usually concentrated on local creeks and rivers (Joe
Hudgins, personal communication, n.d.).
Prehistoric Indians in these regions followed a very broad-based subsistence
pattern, exploiting practically any natural resource that was edible. Few floral
remains are available for study, and a large number of sites dating from all time
periods have yielded primarily deer and turtle. However, in the few cases where
large samples of faunal remains have been obtained, it is apparent that a wide
variety of animal foods were used (Hall 1981; Dillehay 1975; Wheat 1953:
Table 8; McClure 1983; Duke 1981).
Both large and small animals were exploited. Large animals included bear,
bison, deer, and antelope. Some of the small animals included rabbit, squirrel,
mink, turtle, raccoon, and rat. The foraging Indians appear to have been practically omnivorous, although there were some food types that were either preferred or easier to obtain. Reptile and fish remains are common mainly at coastal
margin sites, although this may be a matter of selective preservation, since the
alkaline conditions of shell middens are conducive to good bone preservation.
Alligator and garfish are examples of marine food remains that have been found
in archeological sites in these regions. An example of Late Prehistoric inland use
of alligator has been found at site 41WH19.
Even though freshwater shellfish are found near many inland archeologica!
sites, this food resource was not an important factor in the subsistence regimes of
prehistoric groups. Parmalee and Klippel (1974) have given reasons why freshwater shellfish would not have been a preferred food resource in terms of available ~bod energy. In some selective inland areas, the use of shellfish was more
important, perhaps because of greater availability. Freshwater shellfish remains
are important at some sites along the Brazos River (Hall 1981; L. W. Patterson
field notes on sites 41WL14 and 41WL15, n.d.). The use of freshwater shellfish
is more common after the Middle Archaic, perhaps because increased population
pressure forced use of less preferred food types or because this food type became
more available at certain locations.
Beginning in the terminal Archaic, shell midden sites become important
along the upper Texas coastal margin (Patterson 1979a:Table 2). These sites contain the remains of brackish-water shellfish (Rangia cuneata) and saltwater shellfish (oyster). Large-scale use of shellfish on the coastal margin may be indicative
of influences that moved progressively west from the Louisiana coast. Data on
ceramic types tend to support this hypothesis (Aten and Bollich 1969). It is
somewhat of a mystery to modern investigators as to why such large quantities
of Rangia shellfish were used. A number of my friends in Louisiana have tried
to eat Rangia without success, using a wide variety of preparation and cooking methods. It is understood that Vietnamese immigrants are currently using
Rangia as a food source in the Galveston Bay area.
Story (1981: 148) notes that two different patterns of adaptation appear to
be represented in Southeast Texas: one which relied solely on interior resources,
and another which depended on inland and coastal types of resources. Dillehay
(1975) and Duke (1981) have shown the large variety of faunal remains that can
be round in coastal margin shell middens. Because of the relatively larger
amounts of pottery found at coastal margin sites, a more sedentary lifeway is

262

Texas Archeological Society

indicated than at inland sites. Pottery is not very portable, and large-scale use of
pottery is not suitable for a nomadic lifeway. The account of Cabeza de Vaca
(Covey 1961) indicates, however, that some seasonal movement of coastal margin people did occur. Archeological investigations have so far been able to add
little detail on this subject.
There seems to have been a mid-Holocene intensification of maritime resource exploitation in the New World, with a higher intensity of energy capture
from foods of this type as certain resources (shellfish, for example) became more
abundant. "In this regard, population growth appears to have played a significant
role in further intensification of maritime adaptation (especially exploitation of
more diversified marine resources) in late Holocene times in many areas" (Yesner
1981:445). With respect to Texas coastal margin adaptations, marine foods may
have been a secondary resource. Perlman (1980) comments that people "locate
in terms of critical resources and then adjust those ’optimal’ locations to allow
for access to secondary resources in order to minimize risk." Clark (1981:444)
further notes that "under normal circumstances, most coastally situated huntergatherers are not dependent upon marine (or estuarien) resources to any significant extent. Exploitation of these niches is usually confined to ’buffer’ resources
like shellfish, and those resources can be exploited with varying degrees of
intensity."
Future progress in research on subsistence patterns in these regions will depend on the discovery of large samples of faunal remainsand on the availability
of qualified analysts. The number of people available to do detailed analyses of
faunal remains is limited.
TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGES AND REGIONAL DIFFERENCES
As MacNeish (1978) points out, much of archeology is not the investigation
of overall culture, but rather the study of prehistoric technologies, since materials
related to technology are most often preserved. General technological changes
that apply to the regions discussed here have previously been described (Patterson 1976c), and it is now possible to note also some technological differences
between and within these two regions.
Regional differences in projectile point types seem to occur as early as the
early Paleo-Indian period. For example, the Folsom point from site 41WH 19, in
the western transitional zone, is the farthest to the southeast that this point type
has been found to date. For the late Paleo-Indian period, both the upper Texas
coast and the western transitional zone should be regarded as a buffer area between Plains and eastern late Paleo-Indian traditions. Plains styles of late PaleoIndian points found here include Plainview, Scottsbluff, and Angostura. Eastern
styles of late Paleo-Indian points include San Patrice, Dalton, and a variety of
side- and corner-notched points with ground basal edges. For the Early and
Middle Archaic, some differences in projectile point types are seen between the
upper Texas coast and the western transitiona! zone. Carrollton and Trinity points
are common on the upper Texas coast but do not seem to occur west of the Brazos
River. Pedernales, Travis, and Lange points are more common in the western transitional zone than in the upper Texas coast. Marcos points occur mainly in the
western transitional zone. There also are some similarities in projectile point
styles of the Early and Middle Archaic in these two regions. Williams, Bulverde,
and the Gary/Kent series occur commonly in both regions.

Patterson--Southeast Texas

263

Projectile point styles in the two regions seem to have been influenced by
cultural contacts along the major river systems. The Brazos and Colorado rivers
originate from the northwest in Central Texas, and the western transitional zone
reflects influences from Central Texas. The Trinity and Sabine rivers originate in
Northeast Texas, and the upper Texas coast shows influences from this area. Despite these different influences, the upper Texas coast and the western transitional
zone were never culturally isolated areas, as illustrated by a number of shared
projectile point styles.
For the Late Archaic and Early Ceramic periods, there are not a large number of differences in projectile point types between the upper Texas coast and
the western transitional zone. Pedernales and Marcos points remain principally
types of the western transitional zone, perhaps showing continued influences
from Central Texas, but some Pedernales points do continue to be found east of
the Brazos River. Fairland points from this period found in the western transitional zone (Hall 1981) are another indication of influences from Central Texas.
As shown in Table 1, however, the two regions share many projectile point types.
Ponchartrain points found in both regions (Hall 1981; McClurkan 1968; Patterson 1980a) show possible contacts with Louisiana to the east. Hall (1981) has
shown that the Late Archaic was a period of geographically widespread trading
contacts. Fine grades of flint were occasionally imported into these two regions
from the Edwards Plateau throughout the Paleo-Indian and Archaic periods. This
provided opportunities for cultural contacts between Central Texas and the Texas
coast. It has previously been noted (Patterson 1975b) that the upper Texas coast
and Louisiana share a large number of Late Archaic projectile point types. Story
(1981:139) has commented that in environment and broad patterns of cultmal
adaptation, the eastern portion of Texas is part of the southeastern United States.
In relation to this, the upper Texas coast represents the western end of the eastern
Gulf Archaic. It should also be noted that point types such as Catan, Matamoros,
and Refugio that occur more commonly in South Texas also are occasionally
found in the upper Texas coast.
For the Late Prehistoric period, there are indications of both technological
uniformity and diversity between the upper Texas coast and the western transitional zone. Some regional arrow point types, such as Perdiz and Scallorn, have
very wide geographical distributions in East and Central Texas. The Edwards
point type of Central Texas seems to be found more frequently in the western
transitional zone than in the upper Texas coast. The Catahoula arrow point type
that is commonly found in the upper Texas coast has a wide geographical distribution to the north and east (Patterson 1976d).
Technological influences from Northeast Texas are apparent on the northern
fringe of the upper Texas coast during the Late Prehistoric. Caddo pottery types
and Northeast Texas arrow point types, such as Friley, have been found in
Montgomery and Polk counties (McClurkan 1968; Shafer 1968). The Early Ceramic period bone-tempered pottery found in inland Harris County (Patterson
1980c) may also indicate an influence from the north (D. A. Story, personal communication, n.d.).
A considerable diversity in pottery types within these two regions (Aten
1979; Patterson 1980a) may indicate increasing cultural diversity in the Late Prehistoric. Rockport pottery styles are commonly found in the western transitional
zone (Patterson and Hudgins 1981) but are found only occasionally in the upper

264

Texas Archeological Society

Texas coast. Leon Plain pottery seems to occur only in the western transitional
zone, and incised pottery decoration is much more common at coastal margin
sites than at inland sites (Aten 1979; Patterson 1980a). Although the introduction
of pottery to the upper Texas coast seems to have been from Louisiana (Aten and
Bollich 1969), there is a possibility of Mexican influence on the development of
Rockport pottery (Corbin 1974:Figure 14).
The distribution of grog-tempered pottery in the Late Prehistoric is not uniform. For example, in Harris County this pottery type is common at late coastal
margin sites but is not common at inland sites. Grog-tempered pottery has been
found inland in the Brazos River valley (Hall 1981), in Austin County. This
might represent seasonal movements of Indians who more frequently inhabited
the coastal margin. The nonuniform distribution of grog-tempered pottery could
be accounted for by people moving inland on a seasonal basis with selective
use of only certain stream systems. In a similar manner, Rockport type pottery
at only a few inland sites in eastern Wharton County, such as 41WH19 (Patterson and Hudgins 1981), might indicate seasonal movements of people from the
coastal margin, using the San Bernard River system. Aten (1979:205) has noted
significant differences in prehistoric ceramic assemblages of the three major river
systems of the upper Texas coast: the Sabine-Neches, the Trinity-San Jacinto, and
the Brazos.
Even though bone-tempered pottery is found in Early Ceramic period components at inland sites of the upper Texas coast (Patterson 1980a), this pottery
type occurs in significant amounts only in components of the later portion of the
Late Prehistoric in the Galveston Bay area (Aten et al. 1976:Figure 16).
Use of the dart and spear thrower in these regions was not uniform in the
Late Prehistoric. Both dart points and arrow points are found concurrently at inland sites (Aten 1967; Patterson 1980a; Wheat 1953:Table 5). Aten (1979:435)
notes that use of the dart and spear thrower may have been abandoned in favor of
the bow and arrow at coastal margin sites. This might be interpreted as a cultural
preference, as both inland and coastal margin peoples were hunting essentially
the same kinds of fauna, such as deer.
The relatively large amounts of pottery used at coastal margin sites, as compared to inland sites, not only indicates a more sedentary seasonal lifeway but
may also reflect differences in subsistence activities involving food storage and/
or processing. The low amounts of lithic materials found at coastal margin sites
is another indication of technological differences between these two areas.
Aten (1983) has proposed archeological evidence for tribal group territories
on the upper Texas coastal margin in the Late Prehistoric period, based on the
geographic distributions of a few artifact types. However, differences in archeological remains of this time period are much greater between inland and coastal
margin areas than are differences in archeological materials that occur parallel to
the coastline. This implies that tribal groups may have been organized in a manner corresponding to local subsistence patterns, which may then have developed
local cultural patterns. The use of a few technological traits to define prehistoric
tribal group boundaries is a rather tenuous concept, especially in view of the
nomadic nature of the Indians being discussed here.

Patterson--Southeast Texas

265

CONCLUSIONS
The following are major conclusions that can be made with currently available data regarding settlement, subsistence, and technological patterns in the
western transitional zone and the upper Texas coast:
1. A stable settlement pattern, utilizing a broad-based subsistence regime,
was characteristic of inland areas from the late Paleo-Indian through the Late
Prehistoric periods. Many sites have very long occupation sequences.
2. Coastal margin sites oriented toward greater use of marine food resources become more important after the terminal Archaic.
3. Differences in projectile point styles between the upper Texas coast
and the western transitional zone begin as early as the early Paleo-Indian period.
These differences may have been caused by external influences.
4. There are several inter- and intra-regional differences in pottery types,
most of them apparent in the Late Prehistoric period. These differences possibly
indicate cultural differences between and within the regions.
5. Some of the differences in cultural traits between inland and coastal margin sites may reflect local development tied to restricted territorial usages.
6. The upper Texas coast represents the western end of a general Archaic
foraging lifeway common to the entire eastern Gulf coastal plain.
7. Technological differences and similarities within the geographic area discussed here show that cultures did not remain static, even though settlement and
subsistence patterns remained stable over long periods of time.
8. There seems to have been a continued population increase from the
late Paleo-Indian to the Late Prehistoric, judging by the relative number of sites
found to date for each time period (Patterson 1979a:Table 1).

REFERENCES CITED
Aten, Lawrence E.
1967 Excavation at the Jameson site, Liberty Co., Texas. Houston Archeological Society Report t.
1971

Archeologlcal excavations at the Dow-Cleaver site, Brazoria County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin, Technical Bulletin 1.

1979

bldians of the upper Texas coast: ethnohistoric and archeological frameworks.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Texas at Austin.

1983

Indians of the upper Texas coast. Academic Press, New York.

Aten, Lawrence E., and C. N. Bollich
1969 A preliminary report on the development of a ceramic chronology for the Sabine
Lake area of Texas and Louisiana. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
40:241-258.
Aten, L. E., C. K. Chandler, A. B. Wesolowsky, and R. M. Malina
1976 Excavations at the Harris County Boys School Cemetery. Texas Archeological
Society Special Publication 3.

¯

266

Texas Archeological Society

Clark, G. A.
1981 On preagricultural coastal adaptations. Current Anthropology 22(4):444-445.
Cole, B., and J. McMichael
1968 Archeological investigations in the Damon Mound area, Brazoria County, Texas.
MS on file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Corbin, James E.
1974 A model for cultural succession for the Coastal Bend area of Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 45:29-54.
Covey, C.
1961 Cabeza de 1/aca’s adventures in the unknown interior of America. Collier Books,
New York.
Dillehay, Tom D.
1975 Prehistoric subsistence exploitations in the lower Trinity River delta, Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin, Research Report
51.
Duke, A. R.
1971
Analysis of lithic material from 41HR73. Houston Archeological Society Newsletter 36:3-6.

1981

41HR74--a Harris County shell site on lower San Jacinto Bay. Houston Archeological Society Newsletter 70:18-30.

1982

The Goebel site (41AUI): an Archaic-Neo American site in Austin Co., Texas.
Journal of the Houston Archeological Society 73:22-25.

Goodyear, A. C.
1982 The chronological position of the Dalton horizon in the southeastern United
States. American Antiquity 47(2) :382-395.
Hall, Grant D.
1981 Aliens Creek: a study in the cultural prehistory of the lower Brazos River valley,
Texas. Texas Archeo!ogical Survey, The University of Texas at Austin, Research
Report 61.
Hester, Thomas R.
1980 A survey of Paleo-lndian archaeological remains along the Texas coast. In Papers
on the Archaeology of the Texas coast, edited by L. Highley and T. R. Hester, pp.
1-12. Center Jbr Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, Special Report 11.

Jennings, J.D.
1974 Prehistory of North America. 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Johnson, Eileen, and V. T. Holliday
1980 A Plainview kill/butchering locale on the Llano Estacado-the Lubbock Lake
site. Plains Anthropologist 25(88):89-111.
Long, R. J.
1977 McFadden Beach. Patillo Higgins Series of Natural History and Anthropology 1.
Spindletop Museum, Lamar University, Beaumont, Texas.

Patterson--Southeast Texas

267

MacNeish, R. S.
1978 The Science of Archaeology? Duxbury Press, North Scituate, Massachusetts.
McClure, W. L.
1977 White Oak Bayou, 41HR89. Houston Archeological Society Newsletter 55:
9-17.
1978

White Oak Bayou, 41HR273. Houston Archeological Society Newsletter 61:
5-8.

1981

White Oak Bayou sites, 41HR282. Houston Archeological Society Newsletter
69:10-13.

1982

White Oak Bayou sites, 41HR283. Journal of the Houston Archeological Society
73: 16-18.

1983

Faunal remains from 41HR6. Journal of the Houston Archeological Society
74:21-23.

McClurkan, Burney B.
1968 Livingston Reservoir, 1965-66: Late Archaic and Neo-American occupations.
Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin, Papers 12.
McCormick, Olin F.
1976 The Archaic period in north central Texas. In The Texas Archaic: a symposium,
edited by T. R. Hester, pp. 39-45. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio, Special Report 2.
McGuff, Paul R., and W. N. Cox
1973 A survey of the archeological and historical resources of areas to be affected by
the Clear Creek flood control project, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, The
University of Texas at Austin, Research Report 28.
O’Brien, Michael J.
1971 The Fullen site, 41HR82. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 42:
335-361.
Parmalee, P. W., and W. Klippel
1974 Freshwater mussels as a prehistoric food resource. American Antiquity 39(3):
421-434.

Patterson, L. W.
¯ 1975a Harris County, Texas, site 4tHR182. Houston Archeological Society Newsletter
50:6-8.
1975b The PovertyPointculture, asseen ~omsoutheasternTexas. Lou~iana Archaeology 2:153-162.
1976a The Hillboldt site, Austin Co., Texas. Southern Texas Archaeological Association, La, Tierra 3(3):23-28.
1976b A predominantly Woodland site, 41HR244, Harris Co., Texas. Houston Archeological Society Newsletter 53:2-7.
1976c Technological changes in Harris County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 47: 17 ! - 188.
1976d The Catahoula projectile point: a distributional study. Louisiana Archaeology
3:217-223.
1979a A review of the prehistory of the upper Texas coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeo-

h)gical Society 50:103 - 123.
1979b Harris County site 41 HR244 revisited. Houston Archeological Society Newsletter

63:2-6.

268

Texas Archeological Society

1979c Archeological surveys and settlement patterns on the upper Texas coast. Houston

Archeological Society Newsletter 65:2-8.
1980a The Owen site, 41HR315: a long occupation sequence in Harris Co., Texas.

Houston Archeological Society Report 3.
1980b The San Patrice point type in Southeast Texas. Louisiana Archaeological Society

Newsletter 8(1) :22-23.
t980c Excavations at site 41WH2, Wharton Co., Texas. Houston Archeological Society

Newsletter 67:33 -34.
t980d 41HR206, a major site in Harris Co., Texas. In Papers on the Archaeology of the
Texas Coast, edited by L. Highley and T. R. Hester, pp. 13-27. Center.for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, Special Report
11.

1982a Initial employment of the bow and arrow in southern North America. Southern
Texas Archaeological Association, La Tierra 9(2): 18-26.
1982b Bibliography of the prehistory of the upper Texas coast. Houston Archeological
Society Special Publication.
Patterson, L. W., and J. Hudgins
1980a Preceramic sites 41WH2 and 41WH7, Wharton Co., Texas. Houston Archeological Society Newsletter 66: 34- 39.
1980b Multi-component site 41WH10, Wharton Co., Texas. Houston Archeological

Society Newsletter 68: 28- 35.
1981

Site 41WH19, a long occupation period in Wharton Co., Texas. Houston Archeological Society Newsletter 70:4-13.

1982

Site 41WH26, another long occupation site in Wharton Co., Texas. Journal of
the Houston Archeological Society 72: 10-15.

1983

A multi-component prehistoric site, 41WH65, Wharton Co., Texas. Journal of
the Houston Archeological Society 74:11 - 16.

Perlman, S.
1980 An optimum diet model, coastal variability, and hunter-gatherer behavior. In Advances in archaeological theory and method, Vol. 3, edited by M. Schiffer. Academic Press, New York.
Prewitt, Elton R.
t981 Cultural chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-89.
Shafer, Harry J.
1968 Archeological investigations in the San Jacinto River Basin, Montgomery County,
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin, Papers 13.
Story, Dee Ann
1981 An overview of the archaeology of East Texas. Plains Anthropologist 26(192):
139-156.
Suhm, D. A., and E. B. Jelks
1962 Handbook of Texas archeology: type descriptions. Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin 4.
Watt, Frank H.
,!978 Radiocarbon chronology of sites in the central Brazos valley. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 49:111 - 138.

Patterson--Southeast Texas

269

Weber, C. D.
1980 Reply to Guderjan. Louisiana ArchaeologicalSocietyNewsletter 8(1):24-27.
Wheat, Joe Ben
1953 The Addicks Dam site. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 154:143-252.
Willey, P. S., B. R. Harrison, and J. T. Hughes
1978 The Rex Rodgers site. In Archeology of the MacKenzie Reservoir, by
J. T. Hughes and P. S. Willey, pp. 49-68. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas
Historical Commission, Survey Report 24. Austin.
Yesner, D. R.
1981 Reply. Current Anthropology 22(4):445-446.

An Archeological Review of the
Central Texas Coast
Harry J. Shafer and Clell L. Bond

ABSTRACT
Archeological research into the prehistory of the Coastal Bend region of Texas is
reviewed in this paper. Attention is focused on the nature and condition of the archeological resources that occur in the region. Distribution of the natural resources and patterning in the archeological record are used as the basis for suggesting a seasonal foraging
pattern for the ancient Coastal Bend populations. Temporal changes in the culture sequence are seen to be due to (1) a shift in the local ecology and (2) a shift in selective
preference by the ancient populations.

INTRODUCTION
This paper reviews the history of archeotogical research and examines the
prehistoric period in the Coastal Bend of Texas, which extends from Corpus
Christi Bay eastward to the mouth of the Brazos River and about 80 km (50
miles) inland (Figure 1). The region is characterized by a low-lying landscape,
many freshwater streams, brackish and saline bays and lagoons, and a generally
temperate environment. Prehistoric aboriginal" populations lived in the area as
early as about 9000 years ago, but the shifting coastline and the coastal ecology
limited these populations to an exclusively foraging lifeway. The ancient cultures
changed their strategies of exploitation from time to time, leaving recognizable
qualitative changes in their artifact assemblages.

ENVIRONMENT
The climate of the area is mild, with hot summers and cool winters, an average annual temperature of about 20° C. (70° F.), and a growing season of about
295 days. Rainfall averages 80 to 90 cm (32 to 36 in.) annually (Arbingast et al.
1976).
Blair (1950) has placed the Texas Coastal Bend in the Tamaulipan Biotic
Province, a region that has close biological relations with the thorn scrub, coastal
marshes, and sand dunes of northeastern Mexico. According to Gould’s (1975)
vegetation zones of Texas, the area lies near the geographic center of the Gulf
Prairies and Marshes zone, a relatively narrow strip of land extending the length
of the Texas coast.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54 (1985for 1983)

272

0

Texas Archeological Society

I00

200 kn3

Figure 1. Map of Texas showing location of Coastal Bend region.

The topography of the Coastal Bend, mainly flat and sloping gently to the
southeast, is typical of the Pleistocene Beaumont Formation, which comprises
most of the coastal plain in Texas (American Association of Petroleum Geologists n.d.). The heavy, clayey prairie soils are not easily permeated and are
droughty in nature. The Gulf Prairies and Marshes zone is a typically mediumto-tall-grass prairie composed of such perennial grasses as tanglehead (Heteropogon cotttortltS), lndiangrass (Sorghastrum elliotii), big bluestem (Andropogon
gerardii), and Trichloris plur([tora, which occupy the well-drained areas; short
grasses such as buffalo grass (Buch/oe dactyloides), 3-awn (Aristida roemeriana),
and silver bluestem (Andropogon saccharoides) occupy the poorly drained clays
(Jones 1975; Gould 1975).
In the vicinity of the Aransas National Wildlife Refuge (Figure 2) the topography of the Beaumont Formation has been altered by coastal geological pro-

Shafer and Bond--Central Texas Coast

273

Figure 2. Map of part of the Coastal Bend region of Texas. Base map from U.S. Army
Map Service 1:250,000; Bay City, Beeville, Corpus Christi, Houston, Seguin.

cesses. A 5-to-13-km-wide (3-to-8-mile) strip of deep sand runs the length of the
Coastal Bend (LeBlanc and Hodgson 1959). This sandy strip, termed the Live
Oak Ridge or Barrier in the Aransas National Wildlife Refuge area, is a Pleistocene barrier island that was formed 100 to 120 thousand years ago (Shepard and
Moore 1955). In the vicinity of the Wildlife Refuge, the Live Oak Barrier, which
includes the Blackjack Peninsula, is paralleled on the landward side by an ancient
filled lagoon termed Ingleside Lagoon by Price (1947). On the seaward side,
Blackjack Peninsula is flanked by two lagoonal bays, Mesquite and Carlos; a bay
of both riverine and lagoonal origin, Aransas; and by a Holocene barrier island,
Matagorda (Figure 2). Spectacular shell ridges, which support thick woody
growth, have been formed along the edge of the peninsula facing these bays. Unfortunately, some of this interesting area has been mined for shell road-building
materials.
The topographic manifestations of these geological features are low, sometimes wooded, sandy ridges alternating with swaley areas on the seaward side,
and the ancient filled lagoon (still occupied in part by St. Charles Bay) on the
landward side. The deep sands support a woody growth of sweet bay (Persea

274

Texas Archeological Society

borbonia) and oaks such as Quercus minina, Quercus fusiformis, laurel oak
(Quercus hemisphaerica), live oak (Quercus virginiana), and blackjack oak
(Quercus marylandica) from which Blackjack Peninsula gets its name. Due to
the sandy, well-drained nature of the soil and the calcareous nature of the shell
ridges, other woody plants in the area are quite reminiscent of the South Texas
and northern Mexico shrublands. These plants include Mexican buckeye (Ungnadia speciosa), granjeno ( Celtis pallida), guayacan ( Forestieria angustifolia),
prickly ash (Xanthoxylum clava-herculis), and the lilly Yucca treculeana.
The swaley areas between the wooded ridges are covered with a dense growth
of cordgrass (Spartina spartinae), gulfdune paspalum (Paspalum monostachyum), and seashore paspalum (Paspalum vaginatum). Other poorly drained soils
near the bays are covered with such salt resistant plants as purslane (Sesuviuprt
portulacastrum), salt heliotrope (Heliotropum curassavicum), seashore saltgrass
(Distichlis spicata), smooth cordgrass (Spartina alterniflora), and shoregrass
( Monanthocloe littoralis).
Migratory birds are perhaps the most spectacular aspect of the fauna, as the
area is on a major North American flyway and is the winter home of the whooping crane (Grus americana). Land mammals occupying the area include pocket
gophers (Cratogeomys castanops), cotton rat (Sigmodon hispidus) and wood rat
(Neotoma floridana), cottontails (Sylvilagus floridanus), swamp rabbits (Syh, ilagus aquaticus), white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus), bobcats (Lynx
rufus), and even black bear (Ursus americanus) as recently as early historic times.
The shallow bays and flats provide shelter for abundant marine life such as
blue crab (Callinectes sapidus), brown shrimp (Crago vulgaris), speckled trout
(Cynoscion nebulosus), redfish (Sciaenops ocellata), drum (Pogonias cromis),
croaker (Micropogon undulatus), and mullet (Mugil cephalus), and also have
extensive oyster (Crassostrea virginica) reefs, all of which could have been
exploited by aborigines (Hedgepeth 1953). Except for the lack of a riverine environment, the area should have been an excellent foraging ground for prehistoric inhabitants. However, from the standpoint of the survey archeologist, the
physiography and vegetation present many difficulties. The stable sands are covered with vegetation, which in most areas is quite thick, severely limiting visibility at ground level. In those areas of shifting sands--all those not covered with
vegetation--wind action greatly alters the ground surface, both covering and destroying sites. In addition, oyster shells have been used extensively for road
building, and, as a result of fires, which are common in the area, the ground in
many places is covered with flecks of charcoal. The widespread charcoal and
oyster shell complicate recognition of sites in this region because charcoal and
oyster shell are abundant in the sites and artifacts are scarce.
HISTORY OF ARCHEOLOGICAL WORK
A brief history of the archeological work in the Coastal Bend of Texas
points out several regional problems. Some of the information provided in syntheses of the area (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks 1954; Campbell 1960; Mallouf, Fox,
and Briggs 1973) is pertinent to the development of awareness of the cultural
diversity in the region.
The first significant attempt to document the archeological remains in the
Coastal Bend area was made by two avocational archeologists, George C. Martin

Shafer and Bond--Central Texas Coast

275

and Wendell H. Potter, in the late 1920s and early 1930s (Martin n.d., 1929,
1930a, 1930b, 1931; Potter 1930). These two men recorded sites between Baffin
and Matagorda bays and provided the beginning of scientific inquiry into this
part of Texas. Although they failed to grasp the evolutionary significance of their
own test excavations (they attributed virtually all materials to the Karankawa Indians), the fact that they were first was not the only contribution they made. Information provided by them, particularly from their test excavations at the
Johnson (Campbell 1947) and Kent-Crane (Campbell 1952) sites was used to
guide the Works Progress Administration (WPA) archeological field work in the
Coastal Bend region and laid the groundwork for a sound body of data for the
establishment of a cultural sequence. Their findings were also used by Sayles
(1935) as a basis for the first synthesis of the archeological assemblages along the
Texas coast. Sayles had conducted a reconnaissance of Texas for Gila Pueblo,
and, considering the time period, his contribution, "Archaeological Survey of
Texas," was remarkable, for he was the first to recognize that the coastal sites
covered considerable time spans. Sayles defined two phases, the Oso and Rockport, as part of what he called the Karankawan pattern; his Rockport phase survives, albeit in modified form, to this day, but the Oso phase has not stood the
test of time.
Campbell’s analysis of materials recovered from excavations at the Johnson
and Kent-Crane sites provided the first definition of the Aransas focus (Campbell
1947, 1952). He also analyzed materials from a number of other sites, including
sites on five islands in Laguna Madre (Campbell 1956) which provided substantiation of the Rockport focus concept. His synthesis of the archeology along the
central and southern Gulf Coast of Texas raised specific questions to aid in guiding future work. Campbell’s synthesis, while dated now, is still a major contribution on Texas coastal archeology. Other significant contributions by Campbell
(1962, 1964) include his hypotheses on the origin of Rockport wares and a survey of Padre Island(1964), which indicates the degree to which the late prehistoric population utilized this barrier island environment.
Corbin (1963) reported on the results of a prolonged survey in the Coastal
Bend. This report is important because several of the sites that Corbin described
no longer exist and because it was on the basis of Corbin’s recommendations that
Story (1968) conducted test excavations at the Ingleside Cove site. Story’s work
provided a significant body of data on the chronology and human ecology of
these prehistoric coastal adaptations. In fact, Story’s investigations at the Ingleside Cove and Anaqua sites mark an important shift in the theoretical orientation
of coastal archeology. Her investigations had a strong bent toward the ecological
approach while at the same time providing excellent and detailed descriptions of
the cultural materials recovered from these sites.
Some of the more informative surveys were those of Fritz (1972, 1975) in
the Matagorda Bay area. In 1972 Fritz conducted a pilot survey of Cox Bay and
Huisache Cove in Calhoun County. This work, conducted under the auspices of
the Texas General Land Office, and part of a multi-disciplinary Matagorda BayEstuarine Resource Management Study, was followed by a more intensive inspection of six "target areas" extending from the eastern end of Matagorda
Island to the eastern end of Matagorda Bay, including sections of the Navidad
Delta, Lavaca, Cox, and Keller bays. The 94 archeological sites recorded during

276

Texas Archeological Society

these surveys added appreciably to our knowledge of types, distribution, and
condition of sites, and of the spatial distribution of ceramic and lithic artifacts.
The objectives of the survey were "to provide a general evaluation of Matagorda
Bay’s archeological resources and to determine as fully as possible, using the limited methods of surficial survey, the potentials of the sites for yielding information concerning the area’s paleoenvironment" (Fritz 1975:1,2). (Certain data
provided by Fritz will be mentioned later.)
Studies along the coast also provided information on the spatial distribution
of some important classes of archeological data. Campbell’s (1956) analysis of
materials from five islands in the Laguna Madre and Hester’s (1969) survey in
Kenedy and Kleberg counties south of Corpus Christi provided information on
the southern extent of the distribution of Rockport assemblage materials. Hester
also published descriptions of the artifacts collected in 1941 by G. C. Arnold, of
the University of Texas. Corbin and Hester conducted limited test excavations at
the Kirchmeyer site, a clay dune site on Oso Creek. Although this work remains
largely unpublished, data on some materials collected from the site by C. A.
Calhoun, Corbin, and Hester were incorporated into a study of blade technology
in Rockport assemblages on the central and southern coast of Texas (Hester and
Shafer 1969).
The Palmetto Bend Reservoir district in Jackson County along the lower
Lavaca and Navidad rivers can be considered inland coastal and has received
much attention in the past decade. The initial Palmetto Bend Reservoir survey
was made by Wakefield (1968) and resulted in the recording of 22 archeological
sites. A more intensive survey and limited testing of this reservoir impoundment
area was conducted by the Texas Historical Survey Committee (Mallouf, Fox,
and Briggs 1973) and an additional 62 sites were added to the inventory. The first
mitigation phase of the Palmetto Bend salvage work was carried out in 1974 by
the Texas Archeological Survey (McGuff et al. 1978). Five sites were excavated.
and data derived from this work have provided a clearer picture of the culture
history of the lower Navidad watershed. However, the authors of this latter report
departed from the standard terminology used by previous archeologists in the
Palmetto Bend area and the Coastal Bend region, so it is difficult to compare their
findings with those of Mallouf et al., Fritz, and Story.
Dering and Ayers (1977) report on archeological work at small shellmidden localities along Oyster Creek in Brazoria County. In this study, Dering
critically reviewed the various approaches to analysis of shell middens around the
world in an effort to establish an appropriate avenue for study of these sites in
Texas. Dering observed that research on shell midden economies has produced a
composite of theoretical approaches that can be applied to shell middens on the
Texas coast.
Only when the results of a Texas midden analysis are placed in the framework
of a clearly stated theory which considers the annual economy of a prehistoric group
will the results be placed into the proper perspective. One of the striking accomplishments of Clark’s (1954) work at Starr Carr was the visibility of each move that was
made in establishing a relationship between the archeological remains and the prehistoric population level. Each step was testable; no intuitive leaps from archeological remains to population size or subsistence patterns were made. As a result,
even though modifications of the theory were necessary, the Starr Carr study still

Shafer and Bond--Central Texas Coast

277

stands as a beautiful example of a scientific approach to prehistoric economy [Dering
and Ayers 1977:16].
Dering also noted that data from previous excavations in Texas shell middens were not fitted into a framework of concise testable hypotheses. Shell
middens offer a unique opportunity to get reliable quantitative information on
prehistoric coastal economy. Several authors have expressed alarm at the rapidity
of destruction of these sites from natural and cultural causes. Dering and Ayers
have demonstrated the validity of an economic approach to shell midden analysis
patterned after Clark’s (1954) classic study. They were able to demonstrate the
transient nature of the occupants of the Oyster Creek shell midden and to point
out that despite the predominance of Rangia shells, qualitative analysis of the
biomass of the Rangia meat showed that shellfish amounted to only a minor part
of the diet of the small band who occupied the site. They also cautioned archeologists to consider the economy of individual sites in the context of the total
annual economy of the prehistoric inhabitants of coastal zones.

CULTURE HISTORY
When Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954) provided a framework for ordering
the archeological materials in Texas, they employed the then-popular stage concept. These stages, Paleo-American, Archaic, Neo-American, and Historic,
were based generally on assumed economic patterns. Texas archeologists continue to view culture history in this four-stage sequence, but, although those concepts initially provided a beginning, continued reliance on them has resulted in a
series of somewhat rigid assumptions. The validity of these concepts needs tO be
thoroughly examined.
We assume that all of the prehistoric populations who inhabited the Coastal
Bend region were foragers, or hunters and gatherers, if we have interpreted the
material remains correctly; however, this should not be taken as proven because
there is much we do not know about the inland adaptations.
One locality, the Buckner Ranch site reported by Sellards (1940), has
yielded artifacts in context with extinct faunal remains, and, although there is
some question about the stratigraphic associations, the early date of the Buckner
Ranch materials cannot be denied. The presence of similar early (what some
would term Paleo-American) materials along Oso and Petronila creeks in Nueces
County (Patterson and Ford 1974) demonstrates that assemblages dating back
about 7,000 to 9,000 years do occur in the inland coastal area.
Very little is known of the foraging adaptations from about 7000 to 3000 B.p.
Many archeologists have assumed that the so-called Archaic populations were
composed of fluid bands Of nomadic or seminomadic foragers, but recent findings at the Ernest Witte site (Hall 1981), a reevaluation of the Morhiss site material, and the excavation by the Texas Department of Public Transportation
(C. Johnson, personal communication, n.d.) of a large cemetery site, 41LK28,
in Live Oak County, northwest of Corpus Christi, illustrate our lack of understanding about the sociocultural systems of the Archaic adaptations in the inlands
bordering the coast. The Ernest Witte and Morhiss sites were largely cemetery
localities, each containing several hundred interments. Artifact associations with
the earlier series of burials at these sites hint at a socioeconomic structure remi-

278

Texas Archeological Society

niscent of, and possibly linked to, the eastern Archaic. The cultural systems involved in the Morhiss culture complex undoubtedly affected or perhaps even incorporated the early Aransas culture. It is indeed unfortunate that the Morhiss
data have never been analyzed and published, because Morhiss is perhaps the
single most important site in this part of the coastal inlands.
As noted earlier, Campbell’s (1947) analysis of the Johnson site data provide
the basis for defining the Aransas focus, an assemblage of hunting and gathering populations who did not use pottery, but had shell, bone, and stone tools.
Campbell notes that Aransas focus sites occur on the shores of bays but not along
the open Gulf sides of the offshore islands. No definite traces of house remains
were found at the Johdson site, but circular pavements of shells about 1.5 meters
in diameter may have served as floors for structures surrounding the midden
proper. Burials were infrequent but occurred in both flexed and extended positions with no surviving grave goods. Campbell notes that these people made extensive use of materials from the coastal environment. Conch shell was used for
hammers, adzes, gouges, scrapers, awls, ornaments, and possibly containers;
clam shells were found chipped along an edge, perhaps as a result of their use as
knives and scrapers. (Also see Steele and Mokry 1985 for aboriginal uses of
shell along the central coast of Texas.) Bone was used extensively t’or awls,
beads, and other tools. Except lor sandstone concretions, stone does not occur
along the outer coastal zone.
Campbell suggests a minimum date for Aransas focus material of A.D. 1500,
since no European goods have been recovered from the Archaic levels. Although
he originally limited the extent of the Aransas focus to the area from Guadalupe
Bay to Corpus Christi Bay, Corbin (1974) notes that it has been extended to include materials from the Colorado River to Baffin Bay and argues that, with this
geographic extension and the inclusion of the Kent-Crane materials, the concept
of the Aransas focus has been, in his words, destroyed. Corbin, reevaluating the
Kent-Crane and Johnson site materials and incorporating materials from other
sites, including the Ingleside Cove site, was able to demonstrate through seriation an evolutionary change in the projectile point forms dating from about
3000 B.c. to A.D. 1200. Palmillas and Bulverde-like forms clustered in the lower
levels of both sites; Ensor and Catan forms were late. Also, he notes that conch
columella gouges and conch adzes were common in the lower zones of KentCrane, but only a few occurred in the lower levels of the Johnson site. Corbin
observes differences in the geographic occurrence of certain dart point forms as
well; south of a line formed by the Nueces River and Corpus Christi Bay, stemless dart points predominate in the Archaic assemblages, whereas north of
that line stemmed forms predominate. These temporal and spatial differences
were sufficient to convince Corbin that the Aransas focus, as it was currently
used, masked the real keys to cultural change archeologists were looking for. He
(Corbin 1974:37) suggests either (1)restricting the term to the most recent
archeological manifestations of Archaic cultural adaptations to coastal environments or (2) rejecting the concept of an Aransas focus but applying the term
Aransas complex to Archaic cultural adaptations to the coastal environment.
Corbin similarly demonstrated the complexity of the Rockport focus when
he critically analyzed and synthesized data associated with the ceramic period
(Corbin 1974). Rockport focus materials stratigraphically overlie the Aransas

Shafer and Bond--Central Texas Coast

279

materials. Sayles originally proposed the name Rockport for ceramic assemblages along the entire Texas coast, but Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954) reduced
the geographic extent from Baffin Bay to the Colorado River. Like the preceding
Aransas focus, the entire ceramic period along the Coastal Bend region was
lumped under one heading and therefore was masking whatever temporal or spatial differences that might exist. Before Story (1968) excavated the Anaqua site,
all of the coastal pottery was thought to belong to the Rockport series. However,
Story found a discrete cultural deposit yielding Scallorn arrow points and sandypaste pottery similar to the Galveston Bay ceramics. Campbell (1962) has theorized that the origin of Rockport ware was to the east in the Galveston Bay area,
and recent explorations in the Trinity River delta have shown that the origin of
the Southeast Texas sandy-paste and Galveston Bay wares was theTchefuncte culture in the lower Mississippi Valley. Corbin, in his examination of the data on
temporal changes within the Coastal Bend ceramic period, has convincingly
shown that there are changes in projectile point form, with Scallorn appearing
before Perdiz. Corbin, together with Story, has suggested that Campbell’s thesis
regarding the origin of Rockport ware is correct, and it is supported by the temporal data. Corbin also points out parallels between Rockport Incised motifs and
motifs found in the Galveston Bay area.
Based on findings at the Anaqua site (Story 1968), Fritz’s surveys of Matagorda Bay (Fritz 1975), and Corbin’s seriation (1974), the post-Archaic sequence
appears to be as follows. From Lavaca Bay eastward perhaps to the Colorado
River, the earliest ceramics are a sandy-paste ware associated with Scallorn arrow
points. Through time, perhaps no more than two centuries, the ceramics evolved
into what we now call the Rockport series, with asphalt painting appearing on
some vessels. These ceramics spread southward, eventually reaching the Baffin
Bay area. The predominant arrow point types are Perdiz, with a few bulbarstemmed triangular forms continuing. It is interesting to observe that shell tools
are virtually absent in the post-Archaic assemblages. Certain sites yielding Rockport series pottery and mostly Perdiz arrow points also contained glass arrow
points and glass beads, artifacts indicative of the Spanish Colonial period. Certainly these associations are convincing enough to tie the materials of the waning
Rockport to historic times, or at least to A.D. 1550. A third ware, Goliad, is
sometimes associated with these late Rockport sites (Campbell 1962).

ARCHEOLOGICAL RESOURCES IN THE COASTAL BEND REGION
From findings of the archeological surveys of Martin (n.d., 1929), Potter
(1930), Corbin (1963), and Fritz (1972, 1975), and of excavations by Campbell
at the Johnson (1947), Kent-Crane (1952), and Live Oak Point (1958) sites, the
predominant archeological sites to be expected in the central coastal area of
Texas are shell middens, lithic scatters, bone and ceramic concentrations, and
cemeteries. Fritz (1975:142, 143) lists nine descriptive categories of sites based
on appearance and content ranging from large and small shell middens to artifact
scatters or artifact concentrations with no shell. The variability in site type may
be due to temporal or functional differences or both. Variability may also simply
reflect the condition of sites that were modified in prehistoric or modern times.
Shell middens, however, once constituted the dominant resources in the region. At excavated shell midden sites such as Johnson and Kent-Crane, the ma-

280

Texas Archeological Society

trix was shell and dark soil. They contained bone refuse, lithic items, shell tools,
ceramics (in the upper levels, which were devoid of shell tools), and occasional
flexed or extended burials. The most common shells at Johnson were principally
oyster, conch, scallop, and moon shell, with oyster predominating (Campbell
1947:45). Interestingly, conch was the predominant shell mentioned at the KentCrane site. Fritz (1975) has provided an important set of data on the spatial distribution of certain economic species of invertebrates. She noted a transition
from middens dominated by Rangia cuneata in the northeastern part of Matagorda Bay to middens dominated by oysters (Crossostrea sp. and Ostrea sp.) in
the southwestern part. In addition to the north-south transition zone, the composition of middens varied according to their positions in relation to the salinity
gradients of the estuaries. Oyster middens were found in primary, secondary, and
tertiary bays, and in stream channels near where they joined these bays. Rangia
middens were found on the shores of brackish freshwater lakes and from a few
hundred meters to a few kilometers up freshwater streams.
As suggested by the lngleside Cove data, the occurrence of conch (Bus~,con) at archeological sites tends to increase southward from Matagorda Bay.
Conch is frequent in the early component at Kent-Crane and other sites (Corbin
1974:37). Its presence at the Johnson site and in the lower levels of the lngleside
Cove site (among others) does not necessarily mean that it was a primary food
source. As Story (1968) notes, the larger conch shells, those most frequently
selected as raw material, are also often inhabited by hermit crabs. Collecting
conch shells may have been an expedient way to collect these crustaceans.
Campbell (1947) may have provided the first tangible data on the structure
of the Coastal Bend settlements themselves in the finding of small circular deposits of shell around the midden at the Johnson site. These circular features averaged about 1.5 meters in diameter and were found as far as 250 meters from the
midden. More recently, similar findings have been documented at the DowCleaver site (Ted Hollingsworth, personal communication, n.d.). Martin (1929)
interpreted these phenomena as the shell debris floors of some kind of temporary
shelters; Campbell (1947) tends to support this view. These features bring to mind
a description of a historic Atakapan settlement in southwestern Louisiana which
notes that the shell midden was reserved for the headman’s house while the other.
families camped in the vicinity, and that in the other huts "fireplaces" were of
oyster shells (Newcomb 1961:325). Dering and Ayers (1977) report several similar small shell features, but warn against attaching a particular function to them.
Lithic items such as projectile points, awls, other biface tools, flake and
uniface tools, and core and flake debitage occur in the sites, but, as several researchers have pointed out, there are no flint deposits along the coast. This absence of local flint was noted by Cabeza de Vaca, who recalled that the Copoques
(probably located in the area of what is now Velasco Peninsula in 1528- 1533).
traded cockles and other seashells to inland tribes for flint, glue, hard cane, and
tassels of deer hair (Bandelier 1905).
An examination by the senior author of the lithic artifacts from the Aransas
and Rockport collections at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory of The
University of Texas at Austin suggests that different approaches were used to re~tuce the pebble-sized and small-cobble-sized flint nodules. The predominant
method of the Aransas flint knappers was the bifacing or random flaking of nod-

Shafer and Bond--Central Texas Coast

281

ules, and some bipolar flaking. The Rockport flint knappers, on the other hand,
tended to prepare a platform and remove a series of flake blades from the nodules, thus maximizing the amount of cutting edge obtained from the imported
resource and producing elongated flakes that were easily transformed into long
Perdiz points, triangular arrow points, and other tools (Hester and Shafer 1969).
The Rockport knappers also engaged in random core reduction, but their knowledge of blade technology is notable. These differences between the reduction
strategies of the Aransas and Rockport knappers undoubtedly were influenced by
the end products desired, but they could also be indicative of differences through
time in social relations with inland groups. Whatever the reasons are for these
differences, thorough analysis of debitage collections may bring to light important temporal and technological differences not indicated by other remains.
The ceramic wares from the Coastal Bend area fall into three basic categories: the thin, sandy-paste Rockport ware, including Rockport Black-on-Gray,
Rockport Incised, and Rockport Plain (Campbell 1962), the sand-and-bonetempered Goliad Ware, including Goliad Plain, Goliad Red-on-Bluff, and Goliad
Black-on-Bluff (Campbell 1962), and a thick, sandy-paste and grog-tempered
ware related to the Galveston Bay series of ceramic types. As noted earlier, the
first example of this ware in the Coastal Bend area was reported by Story (1968).
Story’s findings have been substantiated by Fritz’s survey and indeed Fritz’s
(1975:106) observations are pertinent to research problems in the study area:
Sherds collected during the Matagorda Bay survey provide interesting data for
interpretations of coastal prehistory. First, the presence of unmistakable Goose Creek
and San Jacinto pottery in Matagorda County extends the western limit of these traits
associated with the Galveston Bay Focus almost as far west as the Colorado River.
Second, the presence of two distinct ceramic traditions--Rockport ware in Calhoun
County and Goose Creek-San Jacinto ware in eastern Matagorda County--raises interesting questions concerning territorial ranges of and cultural variation among
groups of coastal Indians. Third, the existence of non Rockport pottery as well as
Rockport pottery along the Lavaca River in Jackson County suggests a previously
undefined ceramic technology which either predates or coexists with the manufacture
of Rockport ware in the inland reaches of the western portion of Matagorda Bay
study area [Fritz 1975: 106].
The vessel forms are predominantly bowls and jars. A question that to our
knowledge has never been raised regarding the function of ceramics along the
coast is why these seminomadic foragers used pottery at all. Particularly obvious
to any viewer of these coastal wares is the coarse, fragile nature of the sandy
paste. Transporting the pottery overland would be a tenuous endeavor and would
likely yield a cluster of sherds somewhere along the journey. Our contention is
that the pottery was made more functional in this nomadic setting as a result of
canoe transportation. Pottery would have been a more versatile container when
safely stored in the hold of a canoe. Canoes were used extensively by historic
groups all along the Texas coast and presumably their use extended into prehistory.
Dering and Ayers (1977) have appropriately cautioned that studies of shell
middens alone will not provide sufficient data to predict the annual economy of
the foragers who inhabited the Texas coast, but careful examination of the size,
volume, and content of shell middens, as Dering has demonstrated, can provide

282

Texas Archeological Society

a valuable body of data that will support predictions regardless of the economic
patterns on a site level. Aten (1977) has provided the tools for determining the
seasonality of harvest of certain species of Rangia cuneata. We hope that similar
predictive tools can be established for other species as well.

DISCUSSION
Past work has indicated that the sites in the Coastal Bend of Texas are the
results of repeated use of specific localities such as low bluffs, bluff remnants,
river levees, and ancient beach ridges. The human ecology of the prehistoric
populations, perhaps dating back to about 2000 to 3000 B.c., was closely tied to
the ecological dynamics of the coastal zone, Changes recognized in the temporal
distribution of certain shell species such as conch, which appears early in the
coastal sequence but tends to drop out rather abruptly as a resource for tools (and
less so as a possible food resource), may represent not so much a shift in cultural
preference as a continual alteration in the geomorphology of the coast itself,
where Hotocene silting constantly alters the depth and therefore the ecology of
the bays and estuaries.
The absence of early Archaic (pre-3000 B.c.) materials along the bays and
estuaries is largely due to late Holocene changes along the coast, and we suspect
that, on drowned landforms of the continental shelf, shell middens occur earlier
than those we have mentioned here. Despite the claim that the present sea level
was reached about 5,000 years ago, modifications of the shoreline and evolution
of the geomorphic features continue. These natural processes, which are still destroying sites occupied by prehistoric populations, are also removing important
sources of data that would be useful for documenting the history of the current
coastal setting. We believe the aboriginal populations had to adapt to a constantly
though perhaps subtly changing environment. Assuming a systemic relation between culture and environment, the changes in the cultural history of the Coastal
Bend can be explained in three ways: (1) a shift in the local ecology to the extent that exploitation of some species was no longer economically feasible; (2) a
shift in culture preference due to sociocultural stimuli; or (3) a shift in human
population.
As Dering and Ayers have noted (1977), it is doubtful that the prehistoric
foragers of the Coastal Bend could have lived along the coast the year around.
Inland resources were needed, and the groups either practiceda kind of transhumance or established social relations that helped them in acquiring the inland
resources. Cabeza de Vaca described just such nomadism in some coastal groups.

REFERENCES CITED
Arbingast, S. A., I. G. Kennamer, et al.
1976 Atlas of Texas. Bureau of Business Research, The University of Texas at Austin.
American Association of Petroleum Geologists
n.d.
Geological highway maps of Texas. H. B. Renfro memorial edition. Tulsa.
Aten, Lawrence E.
1977 Estimating seasonality from shellfish remains. Paper presented at the MidAtlantic Archeological Conference.

Shafer and Bond--Central Texas Coast

283

Bandelier, Fanny (translator)
1905 The journey of Alvar Nt~ez Cabeza de Vaca. New York.
Blair, W. F.
1950 The biotic provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Campbell, T. N.
1947 The Johnson site: type site of the Aransas focus of the Texas coast. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 18:40-75.

1952

The Kent-Crane site: a shell midden on the Texas coast. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 23: 39- 77.

1956

Archeological material from five islands in the Laguna Madre, Texas coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 27:7-46.

1958

Archeological remains from the Live Oak Point site, Aransas County, Texas.
Texas Journal of Science 10(4):423-442.

1960

Archeology of the central and southern sections of the Texas coast. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 29:145-171.

1962

Origins of pottery types from the Coastal Bend region of Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 32: 331 - 336.

1964

Appraisal of the archeological resources of Padre Island, Texas. Report submitted
to the National Park Service by The University of Texas, Austin.

Clark, J. D. G.
1954 Excavations at Starr Carr. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Corbin, James E.
1963 Archeological materials from the northern shore of Corpus Christi Bay, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 34: 5- 30.
1974

A model of cultural succession for the coastal bend area of Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 45:29-54.

Dering, Phil, and D. Ayers
1977 Archeological investigation in the village of Oyster Creek, Brazoria County,
Texas: a reassessment of economic archeology on the Texas coast. Anthropology
Laboratory, Texas A&M University, Report 42. College Station.
Fritz, Gayle
1972 Pilot archeological field survey, Cox Bay, Calhoun County, Texas. Matagorda
Bay-Estuarine Resource Management Study. Texas General Land Office, Austin.
1975

Matagorda Bay area, Texas: a survey of the archeological and historical resources. Texas Archeological Survey and Texas General Land Office Research
Report 45. Austin.

Gould, F. W.
1975 Texas plants: a checklist and ecological summary. Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Hall, Grant D.
1981 Allens Creek: a study in the cultural prehistory of the lower Brazos River valley,
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin, Research
Report 61.

284

Texas Archeological Society

Hedgepeth, J. W.
1953 An introduction to the zoogeography of the northwestern Gulf of Mexico with
reference to the invertebrate fauna. Publications of the Institute of Marine Science, University of Texas 3 : 111-224.
Hester, Thomas R.
1969 Archeological investigations in Kenedy and Kleberg counties, Texas, in August

1967. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas State Building Commission, Report
15. Austin.
Hester, T. R., and H. J. Shafer
1969 An initial study of blade technology on the central and southern Texas coast.
Plains Anthropologist 20:175- t 85.
Jones, F. B.
1975 Flora of the Texas Coastal Bend. Welder Wildlife Foundation Contributions B-6.
LeBlanc, R. J., and W. G. Hodgson
1959 Origin and development of the Texas coastline. Gulf Coastal Association of Geological Societies Transactions 9:197-220.
McGuff, Paul R., V. M. Bryant Jr., B. M. Davidson, W. B. Fawcett, L. Jones, and
D. Skelton
t978 Prehistoric archeological investigations at Palmetto Bend Reservoir: Phase 5,
Jackson County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin, Research Report 58.
Mallouf, R. J., D. E. Fox, and A. K. Briggs
1973 An assessment of the cultural resources of Palmetto Bend Reservoir, Jackson
County, Texas. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission,
Survey Report 11. Austin.

Martin, George C.
1929 Notes on some Texas coast campsites and other remains. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 1:50-57.

1930a Two sites on the Callo del Oso, Nueces County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 2: 7-17.

1930b A vase and some carved stones and pebbles from Nueces County, Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas A rcheological and Paleontological Society 2:18-20.

1931

Texas coastal pottery. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society 3:53-56.

n.d.

Preliminary archeological survey of a portion of the Texas coast made by George
C. Martin and Wendell H. Potter in 1927-1928-1929. Privately printed.

Newcomb, W. W. Jr.
1961 The Indians of Texas: from prehistoric to modern times. University of Texas
Press, Austin.
Patterson, E. R, and M. M. Ford
1974 Oso Creek flood control project area, Nueces County, Texas: a report on the archeological and historical resources. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin, Research Report 35.
Potter, Wendell H.
1930 Ornamentation on the pottery of the Texas coastal tribes. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 2:41-44.

Shafer and Bond--Central Texas Coast

285

Price, W. A.
1947 Equilibrium of form and forces in tidal basins of the coast of Texas and Louisiana. American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin 31 : 1619-1633.
Sayles, E. B.
1935 An archaeological survey of Texas. Medallion Papers 17. Gila Pueblo, Globe,
Arizona.
Sellards, E. H.
1940 Pleistocene artifacts and associated fossils from Bee County, Texas. Bulletin of
the Geological Society of America 51:1627-1658.
Shepard, F. R, and D. G. Moore
1955 Central Texas coast sedimentation: characteristics of sedimentary environment,
recent history and diagenisis. American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin 39:1463- t593.

Steele, D. G., and E. R. Mokry, Jr.
1985 Archeological investigations of seven prehistoric sites along Oso Creek, Nueces
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54.
Story, Dee Ann
1968 Archeological investigations at two central Texas Gulf Coast sites. Office of the
State Archeologist, Texas State Building Commission Report 13. Austin.
Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An introductory handbook of Texas archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeologica! Society, Vol. 25.
Wakefield, Walter H.
1968 Archeological surveys of Palmetto Bend and Choke Canyon reservoirs, Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin, Survey Report 5.

Archeologdcal Investigations of Seven Prelfistoric Sites
along Oso Creek, Nueces County, Texas
D. Gentry Steele and E. R. Mokry, Jr.

ABSTRACT
The survey and examination of surface collections from seven prehistoric archeological sites has yielded further information concerning the Aransas and Rockport assemblages from the Corpus Christi Bay area. In addition, faunal material has provided a
more complete picture of how early inhabitants of the region surrounding Corpus Christi
Bay used a wide range of natural resources garnered from marine, riverine, and coastalprairie habitats.

INTRODUCTION
Prehistoric archeological sites around Corpus Christi Bay and smaller bays
emptying into it contain archeological assemblages previously assignable to either the Archaic Aransas focus or the Late Prehistoric Rockport focus (Campbell
1947, 1952, 1956, 1958, 1960). The purpose of this paper is to expand upon our
knowledge of man’s past exploitation of this part of the Texas coast by reporting
the results of a survey of seven prehistoric archeological sites along Oso Creek,
which empties through Oso Bay into Corpus Christi Bay (Figure 1). The emphasis of the report is on understanding prehistoric man’s adaptation to the region and
his exploitation of the available resources.
Martin (1930), the first archeologist to report on sites from the bay area,
described two shell midden sites located on a peninsula at the junction of Cayo
del Oso and Corpus Christi bays that contained material of both the Aransas and
Rockport assemblages. The larger and more exposed of these sites was remarkable in both the large number of human remains that were eroding from the site
and the large size of the shell midden. However, the artifacts were minimally
described in Martin’s report, and the only reports of the skeletal material were
those of Woodbury and Woodbury (1935), and Woodbury (1937).
The next report on sites near Corpus Christi Bay was Campbell’s (1956) description of five sites from nearby Laguna Madre. One of the five sites, the Indian Island site, was assigned to the Rockport phase; the material from the four
other sites appeared to come from both Archaic and Late Prehistoric occupations. Like Martin’s, Campbell’s report on the Laguna Madre sites provided some
documentation of the maritime orientation of the inhabitants of the area. but it
was mainly concerned with defining the cultural complexes and their spatial dis-

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54 (1985for 1983)

288

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Map of the Coastal Bend of Texas, indicating the location of Corpus Christi
and Oso bays and the sites.

tributions. Corbin’s report (1963) on archeological materials from the northern
shore of Corpus Christi Bay had a similar orientation and, like Campbell’s work,
helped to clarify the manner of utilization of the bay environment by prehistoric
populations.
Story’s report (1968) on a site at Ingleside Cove, an eastward extension of
Corpus Christi Bay, is the most recent and the most extensive report on a prehistoric site from the Corpus Christi Bay area. It is particularly significant because it is the first to make a determined attempt to analyze the ecological adaptations of the inhabitants to the site. The ecological orientation of Story’s report
marks the beginning of a trend among archeologists to try to understand man’s
adaptation to coastal environments. Among Texas archeologists, for instance,
Hester and Hill (1975) stated a similar interest in this research problem for the
southern part of Texas, and Aten (1979) pursued this interest while examining

Steele and Mokry--Sites along Oso Creek

289

sites along the upper coast of Texas. Campbell (1960), Corbin (1974), and Hester
(1980) have summarized the archeology of other sites in the area, Hester and
Corbin (1975) have reported on burials from Ingleside Cove, and Mokry (1980)
has described shell artifacts from sites along Oso Bay and Oso Creek.
The major difficulty in furthering our understanding of man’s past utilization
of the Corpus Christi Bay environment is the incredibly rapid rate at which sites
are being destroyed. Both Campbell (1960:150) and Corbin (1963:27) have
drawn attention to this, but the history of one of the sites along Oso Bay, as reported by Martin (1930), most aptly dramatizes the tragic loss of archeological
information that is occurring in that area. On a peninsula at the junction of Oso
and Corpus Christi bays was a site estimated by Martin to be about one kilometer
(0.5 mile) in diameter, covering the entire tip of the peninsula. During the 1860s
the site was covered by brush, and no artifacts had been noticed there by John B.
Dunn, who worked the land at the time. Subsequently, the site was cleared of
brush and the soil began to erode, exposing abundant human skeletal remains.
The erosion was accelerated around 1900 by a storm that, according to Martin
Pearse, who then owned the land, exposed a large number of skeletons. Destruction of the site by erosion, construction, and removal of skeletons and artifacts
has continued intermittently to the present time. Martin described the site in
1929 as littered with cultural debris, structural features identified by him as tepee
sites, and piles of conch shells. Today, little or nothing remains on the surface.
The only reports we have concerning this important site are Martin’s preliminary
report (1930), two reports on the skeletal remains (Woodbury and Woodbury
1935; Woodbury 1937), and a brief discussion of the site by Hester (1980) in his
text on South Texas archeology.
Because of the need to report all of the information that can be salvaged
from the area surrounding Corpus Christi Bay, we present the following notes on
surface collections of seven sites along Oso Creek (Figure 1). The collections
consist of material recovered from intermittent surface surveys by Mokry and
from one survey by Steele and Mokry in July 1980. Formal type designations for
the projectile points and pottery follow Suhm and Jelks (1962) unless otherwise
specified.
SITE 41NU35
Site 41NU35 extends along the southern bank of Oso Creek just upstream
from where the creek widens into Oso Bay (Figure 1). Located on a low bluff
above the tidal fiat, the site is bounded on the north and northeast by the creek
and on the west by an extensive flood plain. The northern perimeter of the buried
site is being exposed now as intermittent wave action erodes the bluff. Because
the surface is protected from erosion by grasses and brush, the southern boundary of the site has not been determined, but, on the basis of the limited area of
exposure along the creek bank, it appears that the site is small and may have been
used only periodically.
Although no diagnostic stone artifacts were collected from the site by the
authors, flint debitage was seen eroding from the bank. A single Matamoros dart
point belonging to a local collector is the only stone artifact from the site. Faunal
remains include unidentifiable fragments of mammal bones, shells of the land
snail Rabdotus sp., and marine shells of the taxa Busycon perversum, Laevicardium robustum, Callista nimbosa, and Mercenaria campechiensis (Table 1).

290

Texas Archeological Society

Table 1. Systematic List of Marine Molluscs Recovered from the Seven Sites
(Classification follows Andrews 1977)*
S ite
O

o

Z

Z

Z

70
7
I

16
7
2

2

I
2

Marine Molluscs
Z

Z

Z

Z

l---

Aequipecten irradians amplicostatus

(Atlantic bay scallop)
Busycon perversum (lightning whelk)t
Callista nimbosa (sunray Venus)
Crassostrea virginica (eastern oyster)

2
8
3
3

2
3
2
I

Crepidula fornieata (common Atlantic
slipper shell)
Fasciolaria lilium (banded tulip)
Laevicardium robustum (giant

Atlantic cockle)

I

5
9
2

9
3
2

4
112
32
II

I

I
6

I

I

I

I

I

I

7

2

8
I

7
I

5

I

4

28
2
2

3

I

Mercenaria campechiensis

(southern quahog)
Murexpomum (apple murex)
Noetia ponderosa (ponderous ark)
Pleuroploca gigantea (Florida

horse conch)
Polinices duplicatus (shark’s eye)
Rangia cuneata (common rangia)
Rangia flexuosa (brown rangia)
Thais haemastoma floridana
(Florida rock shell)

I
4

2
4
4
2

*Since the sites were not sampled in a systematic fashion, the frequencies of the species are only approximate.
tAll fragments assignable to the genus Busycon, whether or not they
could be assigned specifically to B. perversum, are listed under this
species.
SITE 41NU65
Of the seven sites reported here, 41NU65 is the farthest upstream. Today the
site, near a tributary of Oso Creek, slopes gently and is cut by several shallow
gullies.
While the survey was being conducted, two areas of concentrated debris,
apparently representing different occupational events, Were exposed by deep
plowing. One area, on the western margin of the site, measured some 20 by 30
meters, with many specimens of Rabdotus sp. snail shells, marine shells, lithic
debitage, and dart points identified as Tortugas, Matamoros, Catan, and Ensor
eroding from the surface. The second area was to the east and had a smaller scatter of Rabdotus sp. snail shells, marine shells, baked clay nodules, and Perdiz,
Starr, and Fresno arrow points. Also found in the second area were two potsherds
and a conch shell pendant.
The stone artifacts recovered from 41NU65 also include an unidentified
barbed, expanding-stemmed projectile point, thick oval bifaces, laterally and

Steele and Mokry--Sites along Oso Creek

291

distally retouched unifaces, a marginally worked blade fragment, cores with
multiple flake scars and hinge fractures, and sandstone fragments with smoothed
surfaces.
The two small sherds recovered from the site are of hard, compact, sandy
paste with no visible temper. Both exterior and interior surfaces of the sherds are
smooth and are of a uniformly light tan color. Asphaltum adheres to one face of
each sherd. Sherd thickness is 4 to 5 mm.
Shell artifacts found at the site include adzes made from the body whorls of
Busvcon sp., fragments of awls made from the columellae of Busycon sp., a
bead made from Noetia sp., and a fragment of concho or pendant made from the
body whorl of an unidentified species of conch. The pendant apparently was circular and smoothed along the edge, with four shallow pits forming a diamondshaped motif on its inner face. The pendant was found in the area containing the
sherds.
Vertebrate remains recovered from the site include fragments of long bones
of small and medium-sized mammals (such as rodents, rabbits, dogs, and deer),
and fragments of a turtle carapace. Invertebrates include remains of Rhabdotus
sp. , Busycon perversum, Crassostrea virginica, Laevicardium robustum, Callista
nimbosa, Aequipecten irradians, Crepidula fornicata, Fasciolaria lilium, Mercenaria campechiensis, Noetia ponderosa, Rangia cuneata, and Rangia flexuosa
(Table 1).

SITE 41NUI01
Site 41NU101 is about 150 meters inland from the north bank of Oso Creek
and about 1.6 km upstream from 41NU35. Lying on an abandoned terrace, the
site is bounded on the south by the flood plain, and on the east and west by
deeply eroded gullies. The original site appears to have covered an area about 70
meters east to west by 30 meters north to south. Up until 1972 the site was subjected to extensive erosion, and in 1972 and 1973 to deep plowingand extensive
landscaping. Because of these activities little of the site is undisturbed.
Stone artifacts recovered from the site include single specimens of Refugio,
Morhiss, and Ensor dart points (Figure 2, K-M) and two undefined dart points.
One is approximately 38 mm long, 18 mm wide, and 9 mm thick, lozenge
shaped, with straight to slightly convex lateral edges and a base that contracts to
a convex point. The second undefined point is triangular with convex lateral
blade edges and a straight base. The point is 28 mm long, 15 mm wide, and
7 mm thick. Smaller arrow points recovered from the site are Perdiz (Figure 2,
A-E) and Fresno (Figure 2, F-I) points. Thirteen specimens or fragments of
Perdiz points were recovered; all were made from thin flakes characterized by
fine workmanship with unifacial chipping along the lateral edges. Both faces
were modified at distal tips, barbs, and stems. The length of the specimens
ranges between 18 and 28 mm; the width, between 14 and 22 mm; the thickness,
between 3 and 4 mm; and the stem length, between 5 and 11 mm. Eight specimens or fragments of Fresno points were recovered; these range between 7 and
20 mm in length, 13 and 17 mm in width, and 3 and 6 mm in thickness. In addition to these projectile points, the lithic assemblage includes one large bifacially
worked flake (Figure 2, Q), three smaller unifacially worked scrapers (Figure 2,
P) and one small core from which several flakes have been removed.

292

Texas Archeological Society

E
A

F

B

C

G

H

I

J

N

M

L

K

D

,Or"

Gi

0

0

Scale

~
0

l

2

In.

5

Gin.

~

Figure 2. Drawings of selected stone artifacts from 41NUIO1. Classification of the projectile points follows Suhm and Jelks (1962): (A) Perdiz arrow point; (F-I) Fresno arrow
points; (J) shell Fresno-like arrow point; (K) Refugio dart point; (L) Morhiss dart point;
(M) Ensor dart point; (N-O) unifacial flakes; (P) unifacial side scraper; (Q) large flake
with one edge worked bifacially and the other worked unifacially.

Steele and Mokry--Sites along Oso Creek

293

Pottery fragments recovered from the site include 13 sherds characterized
by hard, compact, sandy paste with burned and unburned bone temper that is
moderate to very coarse in size, with some exposed fragments measuring as
much as 5 mm in length. The sherds vary in color from grayish brown to dark
gray, and the surface finish is generally smooth. Sherd thickness varies from 5 to
8 ram. In addition to these fragments, a single small sherd with hard, compact,
sandy paste and no visible temper was recovered. The sherd is 7 mm thick; the
color varies from tan to pink, and the surfaces are smooth.
Shell artifacts are relatively common in the material recovered from the site.
Two specimens that could be projectile points or blades were recovered. Both are
triangular with straight lateral edges and slightly convex bases; they are 23 and
29 mm long, 10 and 18 mm wide, and 3 mm thick. The blades were probably
made from Callista nimbosa shells, which are of a dense calcareous material
with no observable microstructure. Also recovered were five adzes made from
body whorls of Busycon sp. Triangular to irregular in outline, three of the specimens have steep, bevelled, slightly convex edges. The fourth specimen is similar
in shape, but one edge is bifacially ground to a sharp edge. These adzes range
between 32 and 62 mm in length, between 35 and 57 mm in width, and between
4 and 9 mm in thickness. One artifact is a gouge made from the columella of a
Pleuroploca gigantea (Figure 3, G). Unlike other columella gouges found in the
area, this specimen has an obliquely ground edge on the canal side, which forms
a U-shaped bit. The specimen is 109 mm long, and the diameter of the columella
is 26 mm. Five modified Busycon sp. shells have been recovered from the site;
all are modified by having been broken, cut, or ground along the edge of the body
whorl.
Two bone artifacts recovered from the site are a bone awl (Figure 5, A)
made from the metapodial of a cervid (not Odocoileus), and the perforated canine tooth of a mammal. The tooth, possibly from Canis sp., has a hole in the
root end that was drilled from both the lingual and labial sides of the tooth.
Faunal remains recovered from the site include bones of both small and
medium-sized mammals, fragments of turtle carapace, and otoliths of Sciaenops
ocellata and Pogonia cromis. Marine shells recovered from the site include
Aequipectin irradians, Busycon perversum, Callista nimbosa, Crassostrea virginica, Laevicardium robustum. Mercenaria campechiensis, Murex pomum, and
Pleuroplocagigantea (Table 1).
SITE 41NU102
This site is a little less than 1 km (0~5 miles) downstream, on the same
(northeast) side of the creek as 41NU101, on a sloping terrace, about 40 meters
from the present stream bed. Material has been recovered from the site over an
area about 110 meters east to west by 85 meters north to south. Although no
clearly defined features could be discerned at the site, concentrations of land
snails (predominantly Rabdotus) and separate concentrations of baked clay nodules were found.
Stone artifacts recovered from the site include both large and small projectile points, bifaces, side scrapers, exhausted cores, and flint debitage. The
majority of the 54 large dart points recovered have been identified as Matamoros.
Other forms recognized include Tortugas, Catan, Ensor, and Kent, and 16 small,

294

Texas Archeological Society

Scale

o

1

o

0
C

2

In.

5

Cm.

E

D

A
B

F

G

H

Figure 3. Drawings of selected shell artifacts made from columellae of Busycon and
Pleuroploca: (A) Busycon hammer, from 41NU102; (B-E) awls made from the columellae of Busycon, (B-D) from 41NU102, (E) from 41NU169; (F-H) Pleuroploca
gouges, (F) from 41NU103, (G) from 41NU101, (H) from 41NU159. Specimen H comes
from a site not reported here.

Steele and Mokry--Sites along Oso Creek

295

thick dart points were found that do not conform to any defined types. The
smaller arrow points include Perdiz, Fresno, and Cameron (Cameron arrow
points have been described and illustrated in MacNeish 1958:74; Mallouf,
Baskin, and Killen 1977:261-262; Hester 1980: 104; and Highley 1980:64).
Shell artifacts recovered from the site include an adz formed from the body
whorl of Busycon, awls and hammers made from the columellae of Busycon
(Figure 3, A-D), and scrapers and blades made from valves of Callista nimbosa
(Figure 4, B).
Bone artifacts recovered from the site include two deer-ulna bone awls, one
cervid bone awl made from a metatarsal, and a fragmentary bone bead.
A large sample of faunal remains was recovered from this site and from site
41NU103, providing a more complete picture of the inhabitants’ utilization of
their resources (Table 2). Remains of the following mammal species have been
recovered: Didelphis virginiana, Odocoileus virginianus, Dico~les tajacu.
Lepus c.f.L. Californicus, Sylvilagus sp. indet., Neotoma c.f.N, micropus, and
Sigmodon hispidus. Remains of two species of snakes and of the following marine fishes have been recovered: Arius felis, Cynoscion arenarius, Cynoscion
nebulosus, Micropogan undulatus, Pogonias cromis, and Sciaenops ocellata.
Marine invertebrates recovered include Busycon sp., Crassostrea virgin(ca,
Laevicardium robustum, Fasciolaria lilium, Callista nimbosa, Mercinaria campechiensis, Murex pomum, and Polinices duplicatus (Table 1).
Two burials have been exposed at the site. The first burial, which was resting on its left side with the skull facing northwest, was exposed in a pasture road.
The legs were drawn up slightly toward the chest, and the arms were drawn toward the face. The individual was an adult, but the sex was undetermined. The
second burial was only partially exposed by deep plowing so the skeleton was
left in situ. From an examination of the partially exposed skeleton it appeared
that that individual also was buried in a flexed position. Sex and age of the individual were not determined.
SITE 41NUI03
Site 41NU103 is about half a kilometer (0.25 mile) downstream from site
41NU102 and is also on the northeast side of the creek. The site is about 100
meters from the present stream bed on an old terrace of the creek overlooking the
meander of a small stream that joins Oso Creek at this point. The stream is obscured by contour plowing and a stock tank. The site appeared to have covered an
area about 165 meters east to west by about 75 meters north to south.
Stone artifacts recovered from the site include specimens of large Matamoros, Catan, Ensor, and Morhiss dart points. One of the Matamoros points has
asphaltum adhering to the base. The smaller arrow points are fewer in number
and include a single Fresno point and a short oval unclassified projectile point. In
addition, the assemblage includes bifaces, side and end scrapers, and exhausted
cores.
Two potsherds have been recovered at 41NU 103 and are characterized by
hard, compact paste with bone and shell temper. Both exteriors and interiors of the
sherds are tan to gray and smooth. Sherd thicknesses are approximately 6 mm.
Bone and shell artifacts also have been recovered from the site. The bone
artifacts include fragments of awls made from the ulnae of cervids (Figure 5, B),

296

Texas Archeological Society

A

C

B

D

E

Figure 4. Drawings of selected shell artifacts made from bivalves and body-whorl fragments of Busycon: (A-D) shell scrapers and flakes from valves of Callista nimbosa,
(A,C,D) from 41NU103, (B) from 41NU102; (E) adz made from body whorl of Busycon,
from 41NU104.

Steele and Mokry--Sites along Oso Creek

297

Table 2. Systematic List of Vertebrates Recovered from 41NU102 and
41NU103
Vertebrates

Site
41NUI02 41NUI03

CLASS MAMMALIA*
Order Marsupialia
midelphis virginiana (opposum)
Order Artiodactyla
Bison bison (bison)
Odocoileus virginianus (white-tailed deer)
Dicotyles tajacu (collared peccary)
Order Carnivora
Canis sp. indet. (canid)
Order Lagomorpha
Lepus c.f.L, californicus (jackrabbit)
Sylvilagus sp. indet. (cottontail rabbit)
Order Rodentia
Geemys sp. indet. (pocket gopher)
Neotoma c.f.N, micropus (gray woodrat)
Perognathus c.f.P, hispidus (hispid pocket mouse)
Sigmodon hispidus (hlspid cotton rat)
CLASS AVESt
Order Galiformes
c.f. Celinus sp. indet. (quail)
Order Gruiformes
c.f. Rallidee genus indet. (marsh bird)
CLASS AMPHIBIA$
Order Anura
Rana sp. indet. (true frog)
CLASS REPTILIA
Order Chelonia
Gopherus berlandieri (Texas tortoise)
Order Squamata
cornutum (Texas horned lizard)
Celubridae genus indet. (Colubrid snake)
Crotalus c.f.c, atrox (west. diamondback rattlesnake
CLASS OSTEICTHYES**
Order Cypriniformes
Arius felis (sea catfish)
Phrynosoma

Order Perciformes
Cynoscion arenarius (sand sea%rout)
Cynoscion nebulosus (spotted seatrout)
Micropogonias undulatus (Atlantic croaker)
Pogonias cromis (black drum)
Sciaenops ocellata (red drum)

X

X

X
X

X
X
X

-

X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X
X
X

-

X

-

X

-

X

X

X

X
X

X
X
X

X

X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

Note: Because the skeletal material was not collected in a systematic manner and the skeletal remains were in fragmentary and incomplete
condition, only the presence (X) or absence (-) of the species was recorded.
* Classification of the mammals follows Davis (1974)
Classification of the birds follows Robbins et al. (1966).
% Classification of the amphibians and reptiles follows Conant (1975).
** Classification of the fish follows Robbins et al. (1980).

298

Texas Archeological Society

0

1

0

2

In.

5

Cm.

Scale

A

B

Figure 5. Drawings of selected bone artifacts from sites 41NU 101 and 41NU 103: (A) awl
made from the metapodial of a cervid, from 41NU101; (B) awl made from the ulna of a
cervid, from 41NU103; (C) distal end, cut away from the shaft, of a metapodial of
a cervid.

and a singular rectangular fragment of cortical bone with incised lines on one
face. Several artifacts of shell have been recovered and include adzes made from
the body whorls of conchs, awls made from the columellae of Busycon whelks,
valves of Callista nimbosa with flakes removed from the margins of the valves
(Figure 4, A, C, D), and a single small conch columella bead.
In addition to these artifacts, many baked clay nodules and a few burned
caliche nodules have been recovered. Two small bits of asphaltum have also been
recovered from 41NU 103.
In the course of salvaging an exposed burial site in August 1978, a l-metersquare unit and a 2-by-5-ft. unit were excavated to sterile soil. Occupational debris was recovered to a depth of 44 cm, and all excavated material was passed
through quarter-inch screen. The faunal material recovered from this limited salvage excavation, when combined with material recovered from surface surveys

Steele and Mokry--Sites along Oso Creek

299

of the site, provided the largest faunal sample yet recovered from the seven sites.
Mammalian remains recovered from the site include elements of Didelphis virginiana, Bison bison, Odocoileus virginianus, Dicotyles tajacu, Canis sp. indet.,
Lepus c.f.L, californicus, Sylvilagus, Geomys, Neotoma c.f.N, micropus,
Perognathus c.f.P, hispidus, and Sigmodon hispidus. The remains of other terrestrial vertebrates include birds (possibly a quail and a marsh bird), Rana sp.,
Gopherus berlandieri, Phrynosoma cornutum, and two species of snakes. Marine fishes include Arius felis, Cynoscion arenarius, Qvnoscion nebulosus, Micropogan undulatus, Pogonias cromis, and Sciaenops ocellata. Marine molluscs
recovered include Busycon perversum, Callista nimbosa, Crassostrea virginica,
Crepidula fornicata, Fasciolaria lilium, Laevicardium robustum, Mercenaria
campechiensis, Polinices duplicatus, and Rangia flexuosa (Table 1).
During investigations of the site in August 1978 by Mokry, human skeletal
elements were encountered in the west-central part of the site. Excavation and
salvage of the burial was begun after it was learned that further cultivation of the
site was to occur the following day. Two areas, a l-meter square and a 2-by-5-ft.
unit, were excavated in the vicinity of the surface remains of the skeleton. After
removal of the underlying disturbed soil, the units were excavated in 10-cm levels
until sterile deposit was reached.
The 1-meter unit revealed no human skeletal remains other than those deposited on the surface. The north wall of this unit, however, was profiled and
yielded evidence of three strata. The upper stratum (0 to 32 cm) consisted of a
light gray to gray sandy loam. Contents of this level included land snail shells,
fragments of marine shells, baked clay nodules, and occasional fragments of
nonhuman bones. The second stratum (32 to 44 cm) was a gray to dark gray
compact sandy loam, again containing cultural debris consisting of land snail
shells, fragments of marine shells, fragments of nonhuman bone, and charcoal
specks. The third stratum (below 44 cm) consisted of a culturally sterile, compact, gray-brown to gray-white mottled clay.
The human skeleton was recovered in the adjacent 2-by-5-ft. unit at the level
of 32 cm (top of the second stratum). No evidence of a burial pit was recognized
during the process of excavation. In situ skeletal elements consisted of a fragmentary left femur, fragments of a fibula and radius, and two incisors. From the
excavation it could be determined that, during deep plowing of the field, the
turnover plow had cut just above the long bones, removing the skull and mandible
and depositing these elements on the surface. The completely disarticulated
nature of the elements, together with the lack of pelvic, vertebrae, or rib elements, suggests a bundle burial, but the disturbed condition of the feature makes
it difficult to confirm this suspicion. The individual was apparently an adult, but
the sex could not be determined.
SITE 41NU104

This site is about half a kilometer (0.25 mile) downstream from 41NU103
and is on the northeast side of the creek. The site lies on an inactive clay dune,
240 meters from the present bed of Oso Creek. An extensive flood plain separates the site from the creek.
Only a few artifacts and little occupational debris have been exposed on the
surface of the site. Artifacts recovered consist of a single triangular shell pro-

300

Texas Archeological Society

jectile point or blade, a Perdiz arrow point, an adz made from the body whorl of
a Busycon shell (Figure 4, E), a small end scraper, distal fragments of projectile
points, and a biface. Other recovered material consists of baked clay nodules and
flake debitage.
Occupational debris is scattered sparsely over the site and consists of the
remains of Rabdotus, Callista nimbosa, Crassostrea virginica, Mercenaria
campechiensis, Busycon perversum, Laevicardium robustum, Noetia ponderosa,
and skeletal elements of small and medium-sized vertebrates.
SITE 41NU169
This site also is on the northeast side of Oso Creek, lying midway between
sites 41NU103 and 41NU104. The site is on the east bank of the same meander
stream that 41NU103 overlooks, and it occupies the same terrace of Oso Creek.
The site area appears to extend for about 200 meters north-south and about
150 meters east-west.
Stone artifacts from the site include large Tortugas, Matamoros, Ensor,
Morhiss, and Kent dart points, and smaller Fresno and Perdiz arrow points (Figure 6). In addition, bifaces, end and side scrapers, and exhausted cores have
been found. Included in the assemblage is one large bifacially worked knife with
an extensively ground distal edge (Figure 6, K).
Two small sherds from the site have hard, compact, sandy paste with no
visible temper. Paste color varies from gray to tan, and the exterior surfaces are
smooth. The interior surfaces of both sherds are grooved or scored by what may
have been a marine shell, and both sherds have orange to red slip on both exterior
and interior surfaces.
Shell artifacts include adzes made from the body whorls of Busycon, an
extensively smoothed columella from Busycon (Figure 3, E), and a single shell
bead from a bivalve (possibly Noetia).
Faunal remains have not been collected extensively at this site, but specimens
of the following molluscs have been recovered: Busycon perversum, Callista nimbosa, Crassostrea virginica, Fasciolaria lilium, Laevicardium robustum, Mercenaria campechiensis, Pleuroploca gigantea, and Thais haemastoma.
Human bone occurs in two areas of the site. Three small skull fragments
were collected along the terrace bank after a heavy rain, but no other skeletal
elements were recovered from the area. A fragment of a human radius was recovered near the stream meander. The recovered skeletal material was extremely
fragmentary.
DISCUSSION
All of the lithic material recovered from the seven sites (Table 3) fits the
descriptions of material assigned to the Aransas and Rockport assemblages by
previous researchers (Campbell 1960; Corbin 1974; Story 1968); therefore, detailed descriptions of the material will not be presented here. A major point the
authors wish to make, however, concerns the diversity of the recoVered lithic material. A wide variety of dart points and arrow points are contained in each site
assemblage. Unfortunately, since stratigraphic and spatial provenience of the
material is not available, we can make no inferences as to the meaning of this
diversity. Story (1968) notes a similar diversity of forms from the nearby Ingleside Cove site.

Steele and Mokry--Sites along Oso Creek

a

A

301

c

E

G

K

J

0
Scale
0

1
~

2
’

In.

5

Cm.

Figure 6. Drawings of selected stone artifacts from 41NU169. Classification of the projectile points follows Suhm and Jelks (1962): (A) Tortugas dart point; (B) untyped dart
point; (C) Tortugas dart point; (D)Matamoros dart point; (E)untyped stemmed dart
point; (F) untyped dart point; (G) Ensor dart point; (H) Perdiz arrow point; (I) Fresno
arrow point; (J)unifacial flake; (K)beveled knife with an extensively ground distal edge.

302

Texas Archeological Society
Table 3. Systematic List of Stone Points Recovered from the Seven Sites
Site

Projectile Points

DART POINTS
Tortugas
Matamoros
Catan
Ensor
Kent
Morhiss
Refugio
ARROW POINTS
Starr
Fresno
Perdiz
Cameron

X
-

X
X
X
X

X

-

-

X
X

-

X
X
X

X
X
-

X
X
X
X
X
-

X
X
X

X
X
X

-

X
X

X

-

X
X
X

X
-

X

X
X

Note: Type designations follow Suhm and Jelks (1962), Hester (1980),
and Highley (1980).
Prehistoric inhabitants made extensive use of the area from the confluence
of Oso and Corpus Christi bays upstream for several kilometers. Hester (1980)
notes that the greatest concentration of burials known for South Texas, including
several sites with large cemeteries, occurs along the lower reaches of Oso Creek.
Most of these sites appear to represent small, temporary occupations, but at least
one site at the confluence of Oso and Corpus Christi bays was quite extensive and
appeared to be a favored site, which was reoccupied through the centuries. Two
factors can probably account for the high concentration of sites along Oso Creek
and Oso Bay. Along this part of the Texas coastline, fresh water is a limited resource, and the creek and its tributaries are a major source of fresh water. Although under the cooler, moister conditions of the past, fresh water may have
been more abundant, even then the creek would have been one of the most constant sources of fresh water. This reason alone may account for the concentration
of sites along the waterway. Additionally, the area provided riverine and marine
resources that were extensively exploited by the inhabitants.
From the limited material recovered from surface scatters alone, it can be
seen that marine invertebrates, particularly molluscs, were collected both for
food and as a source of materials for tools and ornaments. The soft tissue of all
the molluscs found in the sites could have been eaten. The presence of relatively
large numbers of the southern quahog Mercenaria campechiensis and the eastern
oyster Crassostrea virginica clearly indicate that these two species were taken
primarily for food, since few if any of these shells were modified as tools. The
lightning whelk Busycon perversum and the sunray Venus Callista nimbosa were
probably taken as food resources as well, but since most of these shells evidenced
human modification, their value as food resources is not as unequivocally
documented.

Steele and Mokry--Sites along Oso Creek

303

In addition to gathering invertebrates from the bays and creek, the inhabitants also harvested a variety of fish. The sea catfish, sand seatrout, spotted seatrout, Atlantic croaker, black drum, and red drum were all recovered from sites
41NU102 and 41NU103. since systematic collecting has not been done on the
sites, the frequencies of the species recovered can only be taken as a rough approximation of the importance of the species to the inhabitants, but it appears
that black drum and spotted seatrout were the two most commonly utilized of the
species recovered. Smaller species of fish may also have been commonly eaten,
but, because of the small size of their skeletal remains, they may have been
missed during collecting.
Analysis of the faunal remains from these seven sites also indicates a broad
spectrum of terrestrial food resources. If the remains from sites 41NU102 and
41NU103 are typical of sites along the creek and Oso Bay, food resources included all classes and sizes of vertebrates, and there is no.evidence that any one
food resource was favored to the exclusion of others.
Two taxa whose remains were recovered warrant comment. One is Rabdotus, the land snail. Rabdotus shells were plentiful in all sites examined, and, in
fact, the areal extent of’ the sites could be fairly accurately determined on the
presence of Rabdotus shells alone. In the past there has been a question as to
whether the shells were food refuse of the inhabitants, or whether the snails were
attracted to the rich organic remains of the soils that resulted from human habitation of the area (Clark 1973, 1976; Hester and Hill 1975). The authors’ impression is that the shells represent food refuse.
Another taxon whose presence is particularly noteworthy is the collared
peccary, or javelina. Lundelius (1974), in discussing faunal changes in North
America, notes that collared peccary, armadillo, rock squirrel, and ringtail have
not been recovered from sites dating from the late Pleistocene and early Holocene. Since all of these species are adapted to warm or xeric conditions, their
absence from faunal collections is evidence that the warm, dry conditions of the
Southwest are a relatively recent climatic trend. This climatic interpretation is
also supported by the occurrence of remains of many cold- and cool-summeradapted species in southwestern sites that are no longer suitable habitats for such
species. The presence of the remains of collared peccary in the faunal collections
from 41NU102 and 41NU103 then may be of significance. An early presence of
the species in the region has been suggested by remains recovered from 41MC222
(Hall et al. 1982) and from remains identified by Steele from Site 41LK201.
Consequently, the peccary could have been present as early as 2,000 years ago
and may have been one of the first xeric-adapted immigrants to the area.
Another observation that became apparent during examination of.the assemblages from the seven sites was the extensive use the inhabitants made of
marine shell for making tools and ornaments. Adzes, awls, gouges, scrapers,
blades, beads, hammers, and possibly net weights all were made from marine
shell (Table 4). Additionally, it is probable that bivalves such as the giant Atlantic
cockle (Laevicardium robustum) were used as containers, although there was no
direct evidence of this in the form of wear patterns on recovered specimens. It is
also apparent that the inhabitants were selecting specific kinds of shells for specific tools. Sunray Venus shells were commonly found to have had flakes removed, much as flakes are removed from chert blanks in the manufacture of

304

Texas Archeological Society
Table 4. Shell Artifacts Recovered from the Seven Sites
Site

Shell Artifact

Buaycon hammers

-

X

X

X

X

X

X

Buagcon whorl adzes

-

X

X

X

X

X

X

Busycon awls

-

X

X

Pleuroploca gouges

X

Callista flakes

X

Noetia beads

-

X

Conch whorl pendants

-

X

Conch columella beads

X
X

X

X

X

X

-

X

-

-

projectile points. In some instances the umbo of the Venus shell was left intact so
the back part of the tool was smooth. In other examples the valve had been
reduced to fragments, and these fragments in turn were flaked on all sides
to produce blades or points. A Florida horse conch (Pleuroploca gigantea)
columella was made into what appeared to be a small adz. Shell beads made from
valves of the ark (Noetia sp. indet.) were recovered from two sites. The lightning
whelk (Busycon) provided material for the manufacture of a variety of tools and
ornaments. Fragments removed from body whorls of this species were commonly fashioned into adzes (Mokry 1980). The columellae were frequently made
into drills, and the columellae with the spires attached were commonly used as
hammers.
The use of shell as material for tools is typical of prehistoric inhabitants
along the entire Gulf of Mexico, where there are few ready sources of rock, so in
this respect the shell artifacts from Oso Creek sites are what one would expect to
find in most Gulf Coast sites. What does seem noteworthy is that there are more
tools than ornaments among these artifacts. For example, only one bead and a
fragment of a concho or pendant were recovered from 41NU65, and only one
bead (possibly from a specimen of Noetia sp.) was recovered from 41NU169.
Compared to sites of the Brownsville complex to the south, which are noted for
their shell industry (Collins, Hester, and Weir 1969; Hester 1969, 1980), and
sites such as Morhiss (41VT1) of Victoria County to the east, the material assemblages from the Oso Bay region are remarkably limited in the variety and
frequency of shell ornaments. In this way the shell industry strongly corroborates
historic descriptions of the meager material possessions of the Coahuiltecans and
Karankawans, who were local inhabitants at the time of Spanish contact.

Steele and Mokry--Sites along Oso Creek

305

The presence of skeletal remains in three of the seven sites raises questions
about burial customs in the region. In discussing the distribution of burials along
Oso Creek, Hester (1980) has already mentioned that the clay dunes over!ooking
the bay and the creek were preferred areas for both habitation and cemeteries,
with the cemeteries at the edge of, or separate from, habitation sites. Along Oso
Creek, however, occupation sites are common and very close together. When a
burial is encountered, it is difficult to confirm the individual’s association with a
particular habitation site or outlying cemetery. For this reason, the presence of
burials in these habitation sites cannot easily be used to infer patterns of burial
location.
Another problem that needs addressing pertains to the size of the prehistoric
populations in the Oso Bay and Oso Creek area, but this is one of the more difficult questions to address archeologically, for estimates of population size or density must invariably draw upon a wide range of evidence. The Oso Creek sites all
appeared to be relatively small in area, and without large masses of accumulated
shell or cultural debris. In fact, along Oso Creek and Oso Bay only one really
large accumulation of shell and cultura! debris has been reported: the previously
discussed site at the junction of the Oso and Corpus Christi bays (Martin 1930).
The majority of the sites along the creek and surrounding bay shore appear to
have been encampments occupied by small numbers of people for short per.iods
of time. If this is true, these sites reflect the same tifeways and settlement
patterns that were described in the early historical accounts for both the Coahuiltecans and the Karankawans--groups consisting of nomadic family units or
small bands moving from place to place with the seasons as different food resources became available (Newcomb 1961).
Such a life-style has now been well documented for the majority of hunters
and gatherers studied during historic times, but what has been less well established are the environmental and cultural factors that have allowed such populations to vary in size and density. To attempt to review and relate all of the literature on the population density of hunters and gatherers to the Texas coastal
populations would not be appropriate here, but a few ideas should be noted.
There is probably more ethnographic information available about the hunters and
gatherers that have existed in Australia during historic times than there is about
any others, and Birdsell (1953), in examining their population structures, found
a significant correlation between size of tribal area and amount of annual rainfall
in their territories, the large tribal areas occurring in areas of lesser rainfall.
Birdsell felt that the number of individuals within tribes was relatively constant,
so population density was also inversely correlated with rainfall. He noted exceptions to this generalization that are pertinent to our discussion of populations
of Indians along the Texas coast. One exception was that Australian tribes along
a permanent water source had the smallest tribal areas and highest population
densities, densities Birdsell felt could be maintained because of the riverine food
resouces available to these tribes. The other exception concerned coastal tribes,
for whom Birdsell proposed (1953:t89) that the availability of marine resources
made smaller tribal areas and higher population densities possible.
Three environmental factors could affect human population densities if
Birdsell’s Australian model is applicable to Texas hunters and gatherers. The first
is the Gulf of Mexico; the second is a rainfall gradient that decreases from south-

306

Texas Archeological Society

east to northwest; and the third is the gradual decrease in the number of creeks
and rivers from east to west. Following Birdsell’s model, all three of these suggest
that the highest population densities for hunters and gatherers in Texas would be
in the southeastern part of the state (that number would decrease to the north and
west), and the highest population densities would be expected along the coast.
These trends certainly are apparent when we examine today’s population distribution in Texas (Arbingast et al. 1976:60-61), but the difficulty is in finding
archeological evidence to support such hypotheses about past population densities and distributions. We have no evidence from the seven sites along Oso Creek
to help us answer this question, but we can emphasize that only through the study
of rapidly disappearing sites will we find an answer.
The authors could end with the observation that far more questions have
been raised than answered. Questions of particular concern are those of adaptations to, and manners of exploitation of, the Coastal Bend of Texas by these early
inhabitants. Were the band sizes always as smal! as the ethnographic sources indicate? Werd most sites occupied only for short periods of time, and, if so, were
they occupied only on a seasonal basis’? Were there seasonal periods when available food or other resources permitted greater concentrations of people, and can
we find archeological evidence of this? Were there differences in exploitation of
resources between the peoples of the Aransas complex and the Rockport focus,
and will we be able to find evidence of this difference in the archeological
record? It is more than likely that these issues will be clarified only through
problem-oriented excavations of selected sites, but what must be kept in mind is
that undisturbed sites of the kind that are needed are not plentiful, and they
should be excavated only when conditions allow excavators enough time to work
with extremely great care.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Special thanks to Leon Lowe, of Corpus Christi, for allowing access to his property
where many of these sites are located; and to the Mokry family, who presently lease and
farm adjoining farmland, for their cooperation in allowing surveys and salvage excavation
that occasionally caused delays in farming operations. The authors would also like to
thank Thomas R. Hester, Michael Nash, and Harry J. Sharer for their technical assistance
during the research and preparation of the manuscript; Roger Coleman for preparation of
Figures 1, 4, 5, and 6; Patricia Steele lbr her field assistance; and Sharon Noblet and
Patricia Steele for typing the manuscript. Partial support for D. Gentry Steele’s participation in research was provided through a summer research stipend, Texas A&M University,
and facilities and access to comparative faunal collections was provided by the Anthropology Department, Texas A&M University.

REFERENCES CITED
Arbingast, Stanley A., L. G. Kennamer, R. H. Ryan, J. R. Buchanan, W, L. Hezlep,
L. T. Ellis, T. G. Jordan, C. T. Granger, and C. P. Zlatkovich
1976 Atlas of Texas. Bureau of Business Research, The University of Texas at Austin.

Steele and Mokry--Sites along Oso Creek

307

Andrews, Jean
1977 Shells and shores of Texas. The Ehna Dill Russel Spencer Foundation Series 5.
University of Texas Press, Austin.
Aten, Lawrence E.
1979 Indians of the upper Texas coast: ethnohistoric and archeological framework.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Texas at Austin.
Birdsell, Joseph B.
1953 Some environmental and cultural factors influencing the structuring of Australian
aboriginal populations. American Naturalist 87:171-207.

Campbell, T. N.
1947 The Johnson site: type site of the Aransas focus of the Texas coast. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 18:40- 75.
1952

The Kent-Crane sites: a shell midden on the Texas coast. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 23: 39-77.

1956

Archeological materials from five islands in the Laguna Madre, Texas coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 27: 7-46.

1958

Archeological remains from the Live Oak Point site, Aransas County, Texas. The
Texas Journal of Science 10(4):423-442.

1960

Archeology of the central and southern sections of the Texas coast. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 29:145-171.

Clark, John W., Jr.
1973 The problem of the land snail Genus Rabdotus in Texas archeological sites. The
Nautilus, 87(1):24.
1976

Alvar Nunez and the snail Rabdotus in Texas. The Nautilus 90(1):13-14.

Collins, Michael B., Thomas R. Hester, and Frank A. Weir
1969 Two prehistoric cemetery sites in the lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 40:119-166.
Conant, Roger
1975 A field guide to reptiles and amphibians of eastern and central North America.
Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston.
Corbin, James E.
1963 Archeological materials from the northern shore of Corpus Christi Bay, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 34: 5- 30.
1974

A model for cultural succession for the Coastal Bend area of Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 45:29-54.

Davis, W. B.
1974 Mammals of Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Bulletin 41. Austin.
Hall, Grant D., Stephen L. Black, and Carol Graves
1982 Archaeological investigations at Choke Canyon Reservoir, South Texas: the
Phase I findings. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at
San Antonio, Choke Canyon Series 5.
Hester, Thomas R.
1969 The Floyd Morris and Ayala sites: a discussion of burial practices in the Rio
Grande Valley and the lower Texas coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:147-166.
1980

Digging into South Texas prehistory: a guide for amateur archeologists. Corona,
San Antonio.

308

Texas Archeological Society

Hester, Thomas R., and James E. Corbin
1975 Two burial sites on the central Texas coast. Journal of Science 26:286-289.
Hester, Thomas R., and T. C. Hill, Jr.
1975 Some aspects of Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric archeology in southern Texas.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio,
Special Report 1.
Highley, Lynn
1980 Archaeological materials from the Alazan Bay area, Kleberg County, Texas. In
Papers on the archaeology of the Texas coast, edited by L. Highley and T. R.
Hester, pp. 61 - 78. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas
at San Antonio, Special Report 11.
Lundelius, Ernest L., Jr.
1974 The last fifteen thousand years of faunal change in North America. The Museum
Journal 15:141- 160.
MacNeish, Richard S.
1958 Preliminary archeological investigations in Sierra de Tamaulipas, Mexico.
Transactions of the American Philosophical Society 48(6).
Mallouf, Robert J., Barbara J. Baskin, and Kay L. Killen
1977 A predictive assessment of cultural resources in Hidalgo and Willacy counties,
Texas. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission, Survey Report 23. Austin.
Martin, George C.
1930 Two sites on the Callo del Oso, Nueces County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 3:7- 17.
Mokry, E. R., Jr.
1980 Notes on conch shell adze technology, Texas coast. In Papers on the archaeolog3~
of the Texas coast, edited by L. Highley and T. R. Hester, pp. 51-60. Center
for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, Special Report 11.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961 The Indians of Texas: from prehistoric to modern times. University of Texas
Press, Austin.
Robbins, Chandler S., B. Brunn, and H. S. Zim
1966 A guide to field identification of birds ofNorth America. Golden Press, New York.
Robbins, C. R., R. M. Bailey, C. E. Bond, J. R. Brooker, E. A. Lachner, R. N. Lea,
and W. B. Scott
1980 A list of common and scientific names of fishes from the U.S. and Canada.
American Fisheries Society Special Publicatiori 12. Bethesda, Md.
Story, Dee Ann
1968 Archeological investigations at two central Texas Gulf Coast sites. Office of the
State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission. Report 13. Austin.
Suhm, Dee Ann, and E. B. Jelks
1962 Handbook of Texas archeology: type descriptions. Texas Archeological Society
Special Publication 1, and Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin 4. Austin.
Woodbury, George
1937 Notes on some skeletal remains from Texas. University of Texas Anthropological
Papers 1:7-16.
Woodbury, George, and Edna Woodbury
1935 Prehistoric skeletal remains from the Texas coast. Medallion Papers 18. Gila
Pueblo, Globe, Ariz.

Archeology of the Sheldon Site, Hidalgo County, Texas
Joel L. Shiner

ABSTRACT
Two summers of excavation at the Sheldon site are described. Prehistoric activities
are portrayed as oriented around fire hearths. The site, dated at A.D. 1086 --+ 56 by the
radiocarbon method, is related to similar late occupations in northeastern Mexico.

INTRODUCTION
The Sheldon site in Hidalgo County, Texas, was the scene of two summer
archeological field schools conducted by the Department of Social Sciences, Pan
American University, Edinburg, Texas. The primary purpose of the field schools
was to introduce to students of sociology and anthropology the most recent techniques of data gathering in a field situation, as well as problems of data classification and statistical treatment. During the first season (1976), general hypotheses were developed and tested to gain basic information about an area that had
never before been investigated through scientific excavation. During the second
season (1977) we tested more specific hypotheses that had been generated from a
study of the first year of work.
Sacrificing an archeological site in the name of education alone is not acceptable. Archeologists are obligated to see that the description and interpretation of recovered data are carried to fruition even when beyond the scope of a
field school. The author performed those statistical analyses that were too complex for the class and prepared the manuscript for publication. All recovered artifacts are permanently housed at the International Museum in McAllen, Texas.
A review of the literature on the Lower Rio Grande shows that most knowledge of prehistory in the area is based on limited surveys on both sides of the
river. Attempts to describe the regional prehistory in terms of excavation data
from adjoinging or nearby regions are not necessarily successful. In the present
report almost nothing is added to our general knowledge of the Lower Rio
Grande because the Sheldon site, as will be demonstrated, is not representative
of the general area. Instead, the site appears to be related more directly to sites of
northeastern Tamaulipas and Nuevo Leon, primarily due to a striking similarity
of tool assemblages and raw materials used.

LANDFORMS AND SETTLEMENTS IN THE LOWER RIO GRANDE
A common and distinctive landform along the flood plain of the Lower Rio
Grande consists of low, rolling, gravel hills covered with stunted brush. Major
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54 (1985 for 1983)

310

Texas Archeological Society

and minor creeks are frequent, and some of these drain large areas away from tim
river.
Near the location of the present town of La Jolla, the hills end and both
banks of the river grade imperceptibly from flood plain to flat, featureless plain.
East of this escarpment (Bordas Escarpment) there is almost no local drainage in
evidence in spite of ample rainfall.
Upstream from La Jolla there are numerous Indian campsites, mostly above
the flood plain and away from the river. The hills, having extensive gravel exposures, are essentially sterile of cultural material, except for occasional large
cortex flakes, some of Indian origin and some from the testing of pebbles by
modern agate collectors. Prehistoric sites are located along the edges of the
gravel exposures or where there is substantial silt deposited on top of the gravel.
Large creeks passing between the hills have both trapped Rio Grande silt and
deposited silt of their own. Sites associated with these landforms usually feature
an unusually varied growth of trees. Nunley and Hester (1975) have referred to
these sites as gallery locales, and to the more upland hill sites as bower locales.
Both landforms offer rich microenvironments for the hunter-gatherer, especially
with respect to seeds, roots, and small game.
The Sheldon site is in a bower location on a silt-covered hilltop (Figure 1).
Trees, especially mesquite, offer both shade and abundant food in the form of
bean pods. In addition, the wood is superior for some forms of cooking because
of hard, long-lasting coals. Ebony, a hardwood of large size, is more common in
the flood plain, and prickly pear (Opuntia sp.) is more at home in the lower hills.
Both plants produce seasonal opportunities for food (ebony beans and prickly
pear seed pods called tunas). A more compelling reason for the site location may
be the presence of a small spring flowing from between two layers of caliche conglomerate some 50 meters downhill from the area of concentrated occupation.
SOME EARLY WORK ON LOWER RIO GRANDE ARCHEOLOGY
Sayles (1935) noted the abundance of sites along the Rio Grande, and the
surveyors of the proposed Falc6n Reservoir collected many artifacts and information about area landforms in the 1950s. Unfortunately, very little of the archeological data from work in the reservoir area was formally published, and some
of the conclusions regarding terrace systems and artifact ages remain untested
hypotheses.
A major archeological synthesis for South Texas was published by Suhm,
Krieger, and Jelks (1954), but the Lower Rio Grande suffered from lack of excavation data. Their temporal phases Falc6n and Mier still need clarification
through excavations and problem-oriented surveys.
Nunley (1971) studied an area along the Texas side of the Rio Grande from
north of Laredo to the Falcdn dam vicinity, both in the field and through collections in Balcones Research Center. He essentially rejected the Falc6n and Mier
phases as well as some of the dart point typology. A later study (Nunley and
Hester 1975) more specifically defined settlement patterns characteristic of the
area upstream from Hidalgo County.
Hidalgo County apparently can be divided by a geographical and a cultural
boundary that separates the coastal Indians from those in the interior (Hester and
Ruecking 1969; Nunley and Hester 1975). The county is also sharply divided

Shiner--Sheldon Site

311

into the eastern low coastal plain and the western rolling hills. Today, much of the
eastern portion of the county is blanketed by citrus groves and contiguous small
cities. Archeological materials within the coastal plain are rarely encountered except as a result of deep disturbance by construction.

SURVEY FOR A FIELD SCHOOL SITE
During the spring of 1976, I began a search for a prehistoric site to use as a
field laboratory for excavations to be sponsored by Pan American University. It
was imperative that such a site be close enough to the campus for commuting,
intact enough to justify excavation, and complex enough to permit testing of
hypotheses.
After examining the published records and talking to several friendly artifact collectors, it became apparent that I would have to find a site the hard
way--by driving around and walking across country. Two days of intensive
search convinced me that the low hills of western Hidalgo County were the only
hope. Dr. Robert Trotter of Pan American had been going into the brushy hills
with local curanderos in search of medicinal plants, and he steered me to a promising area near La Jolla. During the search, I passed over several surface scatters
of Late Prehistoric sites. A presence of Starr arrow points (Campbell 1958) and
an absence of marine shell and pottery suggested that these small sites might be
affiliated with interior, rather than with coastal, groups.

THE SHELDON SITE
Several preliminary trips were made to the Sheldon site before the students
were introduced to the physical problems of excavation and of sampling for various kinds of data. Approximately half of the site area was intact, and the tops of
the larger rocks in a number of fire hearths were visible. About one-fourth of the
site had been displaced by sheet erosion, and another fourth was destroyed by
gullies up to 1.5 meters deep.
Examination of the eroded areas produced more than a dozen dart points of
the general Archaic to very late Archaic range. These rather small points with
triangular to teardrop silhouettes might be variously called Abasolo, Catan, Tortugas, or Matamoros, but in my opinion form a continuum from square to round
bases with only a mild beveling of edges (Figure 2). As noted by Hester (1976),
these point forms are difficult to place in time or with any specific culture type.
Two dart points from the deep gully are obviously much older and must represent
an association with the spring. One is a Scottsbluff point, which would seem to
be far south of its usual distribution, and the other is a large stemmed point of
unknown affiliation.

Pre-Excavation Questions
The presence of hearths, a projected lack of meaningful stratigraphy, and
overall site conditon limited the number of questions that could be addressed by a
field school excavation. It was decided to seek reasons for the site location, the
principal activities carried out there, the distribution of economic activities in
regard to space, and possibly hints as to the division of labor. Answers to these
questions would have to be sought in terms of stone technology and functional

312

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. General view of the Sheldon site area.

Figure 2. Examples of dart points from the Sheldon site,

Shiner--Sheldon Site

313

typology. Practice sessions provided experience in the recognition of firefractured rock, cortex flakes, biface thinning flakes, chips, and cores. Laboratory sessions with simulated tasks and microscopic examination of artifacts gave
adequate skill in gross categorization of scraping, slicing, boring, and chopping
wear patterns.
The preliminary plan was to divide the intact portion of the site into 1-meter
squares and to use a stratified sampling technique. It soon became apparent that
the site consisted of fire hearths of 1.5 to 2 meters in diameter, each ringed with a
limited number of tools and flaking debris. Spaces between the hearths were significantly free of artifacts. For this reason we turned to the excavation of each
hearth as a distinct feature and concentrated on mapping artifacts and hearth
stones.

Excavation
Once it was recognized that the Sheldon site consisted of fire hearths with
associated activity areas, an excavation technique consisting primarily of evenly
spaced test squares was used. Removal of earth was done with trowel and whisk
broom. All loose material was sifted through tA in. hardware cloth. Hearth
stones, areas of burned soil, and tools were left in place until they could be
mapped. Within midden areas, usually distinguished by large numbers of snail
shells (Rabdotus sp.) and a few flakes, vertical controls consisted of arbitrary
20 cm levels.
The fire hearths consisted of clusters of tightly packed river cobbles, mostly
of quartzite (Figure 3). Activity around each hearth had left hard-packed earth,
which could be easily detected by trowelling. Plan maps of each hearth revealed
patterns of debitage (flakes) clustered 1 to 2 meters beyond the outermost hearth

Figure 3. An excavated hearth at the Sheldon site.

314

TexaS Archeological Society

stones. Thus features with their associated debitage ranged from 4.5 to perhaps
7 meters in diameter. Smaller artifacts, such as chips, ranged more widely but
still formed part of each cluster.
Total recovery for the site might be presented as a multiple of all hearth
clusters. Table 1 is a technological breakdown representing the order of tool production. All artifacts listed are from excavations. The figures suggest that whole
cobbles of chert were brought to the site and reduced. Cortex flakes and chips are
frequent, while finished tools are relatively infrequent.
The morphologically distinctive tools are listed under the universal system
of Bordes (1961). The primary concern is overall shape and process of manufacture (Table 2). In order of frequency, finished and unfinished dart points are the
dominant form of tool and are followed by retouched flakes. In this methodology
only a small reliance is placed on correlating name with function. Some points
could have been used as knives or saws,and some scrapers could have been used
as push planes. In view of the quantity of chippage present in the assemblage,
four hammerstones seem inadequate (Table 2). Three choppers (Table 2) do not
seem to be sufficient to produce the amount of firewood that was consumed.
Activity, in terms of tool production and tool use, is best determined by
experimentation with the local stone and microscopic analysis. Functional tools
(Table 3) include those of named morphological types plus flakes and core fragments that clearly show wear patterns of direction, angle, and movement. The
utility of this typology is evident in that, excluding dart points, which are presumed to be used in the field, the number of activity-related artifacts is more than
doubled. None of the bifaces exhibited evidence of wear, and they were therefore
not used for cutting.
Individual Hearths
Three features appear to represent the terminal occupation at the site. Each
hearth contained large numbers of fire-fractured cobbles and abundant charcoal
in well-preserved cubical fragments. Unfortunately, one of the features suffered
major disturbance from exploration drilling conducted during the 1930s or
1940s. The hearths were all buried, and from the condition of the charcoal, I
woiald suggest that each had been deliberately banked with earth. It is probable
that all three were contemporary, and charcoal from one yielded a date of
A.D. 1086 --+ 56 (SMU 583).
At least six other, apparently older, hearths were present. Each contained
rocks that were burned and shattered into small granular fragments. No charcoal
was recovered, but small quantities of white ash were present. The peripheries of
the hearth activity areas did not produce frequent or patterned tool clusters.
These hearths appear to have been exposed to the elements at some time in the
past and were possibly exposed to the comings and goings of later occupants.
Hearth feature No. 1, when mapped, showed 4 preforms, 2 choppers, and 1
scraper on the west side of the hearth (6 large tools and 1 small tool). On the east
side of the hearth were 1 dart point, 1 hammer, 7 small scraping tools, and 3
slicing tools. I do not want to push the interpretation of these data too far, but
there is a high probability that these reflect differing activity patterns divided by
the hearth.
Hearth feature No. 3, some 15 meters to the south, yielded 1 preform and 8
small scraping or slicing tools on the west side of the hearth, while the east side

Shiner--Sheldon Site
Table 1. Technology
Spec i mens

Number

Cores
Cortex
Flakes
Chips
Bifacial thinning flakes
Tools
Total

Percent

40
700
363
5,421
474
74

0.6
9.9
5.1
76.7
6.7
l.O

7,072

I00.0

Table 2. Morphologically Distinctive Tools
Tools
End scrapers
Side scrapers
Raclettes
Denticulates
Notches
Points
Preforms
Burins
Gravers
Gouges
Retouched flakes
Hammers
Choppers
Total

Number

Percent

5
4
3
2
4
15
14
I
5
3
II
4
3

6.8
5.4
4.1
2.6
5.4
20.3
18.9
1.3
6.8
4.1
14.9
5.4
4.0

74

I00.0

Table 3. Functional Tools
Function
Scraping
Slicing-sawing
Graving
Boring
Chopping
Hammering
Planing
Rasping
Total

Number

Percent

46
20
I0
I
3
7
4
3

49
21
II
I
3
7
4
3

94

99

315

316

Texas Archeological Society

produced 6 preforms and 1 small functional scraper. Although there are only 35
artifacts from both of these hearth features, the distributions are highly suggestive. Unfortunately, a statistical test is ruled out by the small sample size.
There is the distinct possibility that the artifact distribution reflects a division of labor, with biface production and heavy chopping related to male activity.
The small scraping, slicing, and graving tools would seem to be more appropriate for women’s work with hides, clothing, and possibly the butchering of animals. This speculation is supported by dozens of ethnographies (e.g., Murdock
1946; Service 1971). A universal rule in hunting and gathering societies is that
males make and use weapons, while women prepare hides, make and repair
clothing, and butcher game.
Sexual division of labor has been suggested by Varner (1968), Whallon
(1962), and others, based on data recovered from hearths in northeastern Mexico.
The Sheldon site is the first example that I can find where functional typology was
combined with mapping around small hearths. The technique has been used previously in different kinds of sites (Shiner 1970; Shiner and Shiner 1977).
Whereas the hearths provided clues to the structure of activities at the site,
artifacts of stone proved to be remarkably unrevealing. Excavated dart points, 15
in number, matched those ubiquitous triangular through teardrop shapes found in
the eroded gully. All were carelessly made and comparatively thick, with little
evidence of craftsmanship or style. Three points were made of a black marine
chert that is common to northeastern Tamaulipas and Nuevo Leon (Department
of Geology, Pan American University, personal communication, 1977). The
same lack of interpretive significance was evident for the other stone tools,
although the range of morphological types was rather wide for such a small
sample. We had not expected to find Clear Fork gouges in a site this late in time,
but neither did we anticipate an absence of arrow points.
Animal bones are not well preserved due to calcium carbonates in the soil.
The few samples of cottontail rabbit and wood rat may represent debris from
food or material from rodent burrows. As such, they are of little significance.
Several fragments of turtle carapace were recovered.
CONCLUSIONS
The Sheldon site appears to be a temporary camp visited periodically, or
perhaps seasonally, as part of a patterned movement out of Tamaulipas and
Nuevo Leon. An intensive survey by the author along the Conchos River east of
Montemorelos, along the Arroyo Mohinas, north to China and west of the Rio
Salado has revealed almost identical hearths and tool assemblages. These sites
also represent repeated visits by small groups, but indicate special exploitation
of local resources. Among these resources are particular cactii and shellfish from
the arroyos. More importantly, the same projectile point shapes were present at
every site and included significant numbers of points made of a black marine
chert that outcrops in the vicinity of Linares, Nuevo Leon.
I will speculate as to why the Sheldon site was part of a seasonal round. The
hill has a spring of clear water and is close to resources of the flood plain, but is
apparently free of insect pests at night. Mesquite beans, tunas, ebony beans, and
small game are available. If interior Mexico were also a part of the patterned
movement, the Arroyo Mohinas and most of the Rio Conchos offer completely

Shiner--Sheldon Site

317

different but complimentary resources. I cannot push the data beyond these assumptions, but I have covered the western part of Hidalgo County and the aforementioned areas of Mexico intensively (Shiner 1976a, 1976b).
The nonutility of the Catan, Abasolo, and Matamoros morphological construct is again demonstrated. If the interpretive value of these so-called projectile
point types is to be discerned, then an intensive restudy is needed. Perhaps flaking technology may be the key.
As to the suggested evidence for the division of labor, I offer it only as
a hypothesis generated by scant data. The interpretation of activities around
hearths, however, is strengthened by this excavation. It now appears that the
basic pattern or structure of Late Archaic band activity in southern Texas and
northeastern Mexico is based upon self-sufficient nuclear families or small
groups, and that hearths, burned-rock middens, earth ovens, or other fireplaces
were a focal point of group activities (Shiner and Shiner 1977). Except at quarries, I find no evidence for site areas reserved for highly specific activities. It is
probable that other cultural patterns existed in nearby mountainous regions and
the coastal plain, but no comparative descriptive reports have yet been published.

REFERENCES CITED
Bordes, F. H.
1961 Typologie du pal6olithique et moyen. Publication de l’Universitg de Bordeaux,
M~mories de l’Institute Prdhistorique 1.
Campbell, T. N.
1958 Archeology of the central and southern sections of the Texas coast. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 29:145-175.
Hester, Thomas R.
1976 The Archaic of southern Texas. In The Texas Archaic: a symposium, edited by
T. R. Hester, pp. 83-90. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio, Special Report 2.
Hester, Thomas R., and Frederick Ruecking, Jr.
1969 Prehistoric cemetery sites. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:
147-166.
Murdock, George P.
1946 Our primitive contemporaries. Macmillan, New York.
Nunley, J. P.
1971
Sociocultural units of the southwestern Texas Archaic: an analytic approach. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Nunley, J. P., and Thomas R. Hester
1975 An assessment of archaeological resources in portions of Starr County, Texas.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio,
Archeological Survey Report 7
Sayles, E. B.
1935 An archaeological survey of Texas. Medallion Papers 17. Gila Pueblo, Globe,
Arizona.

Service, Elman R.
1971 Profiles in ethnology. Harper and Row, New York.

318

Texas Archeological Society

Shiner, Joel L.
1970 Activity analysis of a prehistoric site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
41:25-36.
1976a Ethnic persistence in prehistoric northeastern Mexico. Current Anthropology
17(3) :502.
!976b An archaeological survey of northeastern Mexico. Louisiana Archaeology 3:
253-256.
Shiner, Joel L., and Maxine V: Shiner
1977 Structure and organization of a burned rock midden: the Indian Creek site, Real

County, Texas. Plains Anthropologist 22(78), Part 1:263-282.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An introductory handbook of Texas archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol 25.
Varner, Dudley M.
1968 The nature of non-buried archeological data problems in northeastern Mexico.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 38:51-65.
Whallon, Robert
1962 Hearth surface survey. Typescript, Northeastern Mexico Archaeological Project file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Diet and Medicinal Plant Usage of a Late Archaic
Population from Culberson County, Texas
Richard G. Holloway

ABSTRACT
Eight coprolites, recovered from a test excavation at Caldwell Cave (41CU1),
Culberson County, Texas, were analyzed for their fossil pollen and macrobiological remains. Based on the results of the analyses, a warm season of occupation of the site is
suggested. Evidence obtained from the coprolites indicates that some of the material was
probably parched prior to consumption. A preliminary analysis of area water quality indicates that this prehistoric population may have suffered from a condition of chronic diarrhea. Evidence is presented for medicinal plant use in an apparent attempt to alleviate this
condition.

INTRODUCTION
Caldwell Cave (41CU1) is a sinkhole shelter located in east-central Culberson County, Texas. The site was initially excavated by Jackson (1937) and reported on by Tanner (1949) in his study of several sites in the area. Caldwell Cave
yielded a large number of perishable artifacts, including baskets, ropes, sandals,
and wooden artifacts. During the summer of 1979, 20 human coprolites were
recovered from an exposed wall profile by D. L. Hamilton (personal communication, 1982).
Coprolite analyses are important sources of data that are not normally recovered from archeological sites. Coprolites can reveal direct evidence of diet,
nutrition, and methods of food preparation. In early archeological studies and
until the mid-1960s, most coprolite studies examined only the macrofossil remains such as seeds, bone, and fibers. Martin and Sharrock (1964), in their study
of the Glen Canyon area of Arizona, introduced the concept of examining coprolites for their fossil pollen content.
With the new analytical techniques advanced by Martin and Sharrock (1964)
and by Callen (1963, 1965, 1967), other investigators soon realized the importance of coprolite evidence. Heizer (1967, 1969), Heizer and Napton (1969), and
Napton and Kelso (1969) reported on the analysis of coprolites recovered from
several sites in the Great Basin of Utah and Nevada. Williams-Dean and Bryant
(1975) reported on coprolites recovered from Antelope House, Arizona. Coprolite materials recovered from sites in Southwest Texas, all in Val Verde County,
also have been reported: Riskind (1970) analyzed coprolites from Parida Cave;

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54 (1985for 1983)

320

Texas Archeological Society

Bryant (1974a) analyzed coprolites from the Conejo Shelter site; and WilliamsDean (1978) analyzed coprolites from Hinds Cave. The present analysis of coprolites from Caldwell Cave represents the first analysis of such materials from
Culberson County, Texas, and emphasizes the need for additional sources of data.
METHODS AND MATERIALS
The 20 coprolites were initially divided into four groups based on specimen
morphology (Table 1). Morphological categorization of coprolites usually has
not been reported but may be significant as an indication of general health. Eight
specimens were selected for further analysis (these are denoted in Table 1 by an
asterisk) and were chosen to represent all four morphological groups as well as
degrees of specimen completeness.
Each specimen was initially cleaned by brushing the surface and was then
weighed. Smaller subsamples consisting of approximately one-half of the original specimen were removed by cutting the specimen lengthwise (where possible). These subsamples were then reweighed. Table 2 presents these data and
the computed fraction used in analysis. Cutting the coprolites lengthwise ensured
that the entire contents of the specimen would be sampled and reduced the potential for bias due to differential migration of materials through the digestive system (Bryant 1974a). The subsamples were placed in an airtight container and
covered with a 0.5 percent solution of trisodium phosphate (Na,PO,) for several
weeks prior to analysis. Trisodium phosphate acts as a reconstituting agent and
often produces an offensive fecal odor (Callen 1967). Compounds such as hydrogen sulfide, which form from bacterial decomposition (Oser 1965:530), also
contribute to this fecal odor.
Within a period of 72 hours, the supernatant liquid in all eight samples
turned a dark, opaque black. At the same time, an unusually strong, pungent
fecal odor was noted. The combination of coloration, strong fecal odor, and
overall morphology indicated that these coprolites are most likely human in origin (Bryant 1974a; Williams-Dean 1978).
The samples were retained in the solution for a period of several weeks, and
the softened material was then passed through a series of screens, the smallest
being 200 um mesh. All material remaining on the screens was saved for later
macrolossil analysis, while the materials passing through were subjected to the
following procedure for the removal of fossil pollen.
The residue was treated with 10 percent HC1 in order to remove the carbonate material, and silicates and other inorganic materials were removed through
use of a heavy density separation. The samples were treated with zinc chloride
(ZnC12, specific gravity 1.99-2.00) and were centrifuged at 1950 rpm for 30
minutes. The light polleniferous fraction was removed by pipet and then concentrated into 12 ml centrifuge tubes. The extraneous organic material was removed
by acetolysis (Erdtman 1960), and the residue was dehydrated by an ethanol series and transferred to 1000 cs silicon oil with butanol (TBA). A minimum of
200 grains per sample were counted where possible (Barkley 1934), and the entire slide was scanned at 1 mm intervals to avoid nonrandom distribution of the
pollen grains on the slide (Brooks and Thomas 1967).
The macrobotanical remains were dried, and a stereomicroscope was used
in sorting these remains. Identifications were based on comparisons with ma-

Holloway--Late Archaic Plant Usage

321

Table 1. Morphological Descriptions of Coprolites
Coprol ite
No. *
2*
3*
4*
5*
6*
7
8
9
10

Typet

Condition

Coprol ite
No. *

I
I
I I
V
V

partial
complete
partial
complete
complete
partial
partial
partial
complete
complete

II*
12"
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

1

I
I
I
I I

Type~
III
IV
Ill/iV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
IV
II

Condition
complete
complete
complete
complete
complete
complete
partial
partial
complete
partial

* = subjected to intensive analysis.

tType I: solid, firm, well formed; Type II: soft, well formed;
Type III: soft, not well formed; Type IV: soft, paddy-like,
apparently runny.

Table 2. Weight and Percent of Sample Used

Coprolite No.
and Type
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.

I, Type I
2, Type II
3, Type III
4, Type IV
5, Type IV
6, Type I
II, Type III
12, Type IV

Sample
Weiqht
30.4
68.2
44.5
83.3
182.8
36.7
133.0
153.8

g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g

Subsample
Weiaht
17.0
38.7
24.1
30.8
86.9
18.9
64.9
54.7

g
g
g
g
g
g
g
g

% Weight
Sampled
55.9
56.7
54.1
36.9
47.5
51.4
48.7
35.6

terial in the Texas A&M University Anthropology Department reference collections. When necessary, specimens were sent to other specialists for positive
identification.
ANALYTICAL RESULTS
Results of the palynological analyses are.presented in Table 3. Both raw pollen counts and calculated pollen percentages are included for each taxon. Macrofossil data are presented in Table 4.
Coprolite No. 1: Type I. The pollen spectra recovered from this coprolite
were dominated by Gramineae pollen, with only trace occurrences of other pollen taxa. Gramineae seeds also dominated the macrobotanical remains. No identifiable fragments of bone were recovered from this specimen.
Coprolite No. 2: Type II. The pollen spectra were again dominated by
Gramineae pollen, with only traces of other pollen taxa. The taxa represented by

322

Texas Archeological Society

the trace occurrences were very similar to those recovered from Coprolite No. 1.
The macroremains again were dominated by Gramineae seeds. In addition, 2
seeds identified as Prosopsis sp., a single rodent hair, 2 bones of Sylvilagus
cf. auduboni (rabbit), and 11 fragmentary pieces of unidentifiable bone were
recovered.
Coprolite No. 3: Type III. A total of only 126 pollen grains from two slides
were recovered from this specimen. Again, Gramineae pollen dominated. Other
taxa represented included Cactaceae, Cheno-Ams, Quercus (oak), Artemisia
(sage brush), Larrea (Creosote bush), and Lamiaceae. The macrobotanical remains consisted almost entirely of Opuntia (prickly pear) seeds, which were
identified by Donald J. Pinkava (Arizona State University Herbarium) as O.
lindheimeri. No identifiable bone material was recovered from this specimen.
Coprolite No. 4: Type IV. Gramineae pollen dominated, but there were
somewhat larger percentages of Pinus, Quercus, and Compositae pollen than
previously encountered. In addition, a more diverse pollen flora was recovered,
and Gramineae seeds were numerous. Evidence of Sylvilagus cf. auduboni was
present, as were 34 unidentified bone fragments.
Coprolite No. 5: Type IV. Gramineae pollen clearly dominated the pollen
spectra. Also recovered were significant percentages of Cheno-Ams, low-spine
and high-spine Compositae, and Artemisia. Several seeds of O. lindheimeri,
stems of Gramineae, and epidermal tissues of Liliaceae were recovered. The
Liliaceae specimen was most likely Allium sp. (onion), but positive identification was not possible. Fragments of an insect exoskeleton, 105 unidentifiable
bone fragments, and a large amount of mammalian hair (as yet unidentified) also
were recovered.
Coprolite No. 6: Type I. The pollen spectra were completely dominated by
Gramineae pollen, with Ephedra pollen being the next most common type. This
coprolite contained a large quantity of Gramineae seeds and two bone fragments
of Neotoma cf. albigula (packrat).
Coprolite No. 11: Type III. The pollen assemblage was again dominated by
Gramineae pollen. Relatively large quantities of low-spine Compositae and Artemisia pollen also were present. The macroplant remains from this coprolite,
which were somewhat meager in quantity, included some Liliaceae epidermal
fragments (possibly Allium sp. but not positively identified) and a portion of the
lower bracts of Allium. This coprolite also contained a number of bone fragments
identified as Sylvilagus cf. auduboni.
Coprolite No. 12: Type IV. The pollen spectra from this specimen were
clearly dominated by pollen of the Hydrophyllaceae (water leaf) family. In addition, there was a good representation of fossil pollen taxa. with Larrea and
Gramineae the next most common taxa. Numerous fibrous bracts of Allium sp.
were present, as were numerous grass stems, several of which were singed.
A small number of fragments of both Sylvilagus cf. auduboni and Neotoma
albigula also were recovered.
DISCUSSION
Seasonality
Only one coprolite (No. 3) failed to produce a statistically valid pollen
count of 200 grains (Barkely 1934). A total of only 126 grains was counted in

Holloway--Late Archaic Plant Usage

o co ,.o

L~

CO

O’~

~rh CN CN ’~"

r-- ’m"

cO-~~-

(’4O--

~

O

CW

wT----O

cO~’~

OO

~D~
--r~wh

mo

~
~F

co
co

~o

00o

--

Lo

o

~

~

o

co~
--o

~’~o
oN--

c~
o

-~.~ ~o ~oo

oh
o

323

co

r~

r--

-

_o

oo-

m

o~

o_

o]
oqJO

c
~L~

%4-

Igh

’m"
0

0

~0

0

0

0

L

O--

II

*<t
0

C

r~

Z

o

--

--

o

o

I°

o4

m

~

::n "-1 "~

O.m

o

o.m
0

.f_

}0 C

.

L

o~,o

....

~

~

~+-c

.--

M

~¢O000---L

tn rO U
OC

-

0
0

kl

o

¯ --

o~

L

~)

"t~ X:

0

000

C~ ~a

.

+m
0~--

z o
z

324

Texas Archeological Society

ssuew6eJ3
euo8 pe!~!¢uep!uN

-- t~4 ~t

.P
E

m

y-~
~.~
~->
,,eTnSTqTe

"~o

.-

o.
.o

emo~oeN

to
¯ --

m+--- C
O.C--

--

D

r~
©

**TUOqnpne
"@o snSeTTATTS

-~

%k

~__;~’-o_~
-- -- ~q (-4

a!eH Ue!lewweN
Pe!~!#uep!uN

x

J!eH #uepoU

x

s%Jed #oesul

x

O!UeSJOUl
leO~aeqO

xx

ds mnTTT~

"~0

speeS

x

x

x

x

x

"ds

g

x

x
x

x

waTTT~

"ds STdOso~d

x

y

s!wJep!d3

"~o s!wJep!d3

s%oeJ8

0

g

(se!~eds #ueld pece!#
-ueJe~!pun) s!wJep!d3
eT~undo

--

..NX

x

d
x

.2

spees
TZe~TeffPUTT

eT~und0

¯ -- 4in ¯ -

Jeq!j SUeld

XX

s!qoeu eeeu!weJ9

X

X

spees eeeu!weJ9

XX

X

X

Jeq~nN e%!loJdo0

--{’4

r-~ ’~"

~xO

X

X

X

X

~-<
m "X

--

04

Holloway--Late Archaic Plant Usage

325

two slides, or an average of only 60+ grains per slide. This could be interpreted
as being indicative of a winter or cold-season occupation, or alternatively, as the
result of ingestion of primarily nonpolteniferous food items (Williams-Dean
1978). I believe that the latter is a more defensible interpretation. As seen in
Table 4, very few macrobiological remains were recovered from this coprolite. These remains were dominated by whole and broken pieces of Opuntia
linheimeri L. seeds, and some plant fibrous material and a small number of mammalian bone fragments were recovered. This may indicate a meal consisting almost entirely of Opuntia or, alternatively, the remains of several meals. The paucity of bone fragments recovered may indicate a small amount of meat ingested
or possibly the remains of an earlier meal.
Many of the coprolites (Nos. 1,2, 4, 5, and 12) contained evidence of direct
ingestion of Gramineae seeds. Coprolite No. 5 contained no Gramineae seeds
but did contain a grass rachis. Three coprolites (Nos. 1, 2, and 6; see Table 3)
contained grass pollen in excess of 75 percent, and two others contained grass
pollen in excess of 50 percent. These high percentages of Gramineae pollen indicate direct ingestion of the pollen along with the seeds.
High percentages of Artemisia (12.1 and 8.8 percent) occurred in two
coprolites, and low-spine Compositae pollen (9.0 and 10.7 percent) also occurred
in two specimens. These percentages may suggest a late summer occupation
when these plants were flowering. Coprolite No. 11 contained 10.7 percent lowspine Compositae pollen and also contained the fibrous bracts of Allium sp. A1lium will flower at any time dt~ring the summer if the correct moisture conditions
are present, but the accompanying Compositae pollen indicate a late summer
time period. Coprolite No. 12, however, may indicate a late spring/early summer
period occupation, based on the large percentage of Hydrophyllaceae pollen
(45 percent); these plants normally flower from March through May or perhaps
into June.
As Williams-Dean (1978) has observed, seasonality is extremely difficult to
determine on the basis of coprolite data. Taken together, these eight coprolites
suggest occupation during a warm season, possibly extending from February or
March until August or perhaps into the early fall. None of the coprolite contents
indicate occupation during a cold season.
The consistent presence of some botanical materials described above do not
support the inferred occupation of Caldwell Cave during periods when plants
were not flowering. The best interpretation of the existing data is that the occupants of the site left at the end of the warm season. This same pattern of seasonal
occupation is noted from Hinds Cave (Williams-Dean 1978) and from Parida
Cave (Riskind 1970) in Val Verde County.
Food Preparation
Coprolite No. 3 contained a very large amount of Opuntia lindheimeri L.
seeds, both broken and whole. The whole seeds suggest that entire tunas were
being consumed. A small amount of charred seeds were present, suggesting that
some tunas were parched prior to consumption. It is unlikely that the tunas were
being stored for long periods of time, and the evidence suggests that the tunas
were consumed soon after the fruit ripened. The seed fragments may indicate an
alternative method of food preparation. Opuntia seed coats are very hard, and it

326

Texas Archeological Society

is unlikely that they were broken by chewing. Also, the frequency of charring is
much greater among the broken seeds, substantiating the interpretation that these
remains reflect more than one meal.
None of the grass seeds examined revealed direct evidence of parching, but
some of the grass stems or rachis were charred. This indicates that the entire
grass inflorescences were picked, and these were then charred, possibly to remove the chaff. D. L. Hamilton (personal communication, n.d.) reports the recovery of baskets charred on the inside, which suggests their use in tbod preparation. Parching probably was done by adding fire-heated rocks or coals into the
baskets containing the food items.
Dietary Habits and General Health
Of the 20 coprolites recovered during the excavation of Caldwell Cave, 13
(65 percent) were placed in categories Ill or IV. Coprolites in these categories
were not well formed and may have been loosely formed as the result of digestive
and/or alimentary disorders.
According to water-chemical analysis of local water sources (Table 5), magnesium content is very high (105 mg/1). While the site’s water source might have
varied with time in the exact reading of this element, a typically high proportion
of magnesium in local water sources could be expected due to the presence of
local gypsum deposits. Magnesium is known to have laxative properties and is a
major component of commercially available laxatives. Therefore, the high concentration of magnesium in the water may account in part for the high percentage
of loosely formed, amorphously shaped copr01ites recovered in the sample.
Examination of the botanical remains revealed several interesting correlations. Coprolite No. 6 contained 10.7 percent Ephedra pollen, which has been
used to consolidate stools as a treatment for diarrhea by the Tewa Indians of New
Mexico (Robbins, Harrington, and Freire-Marreco 19t6). In several coprolites
from Granado Cave, frequencies of greater than 85 percent Ephedra pollen were
noted. Since pollen often remains in the digestive system for several days after
ingestion (Bryant 1974b; Williams-Dean 1978), the frequency of 10.7 percent in
coprolite No. 6 may reflect residual pollen remaining after a treatment designed
to cure diarrhea. Conversely, the percentage of Ephedra pollen in these coprolites
may reflect nothing more than background pollen inhaled during the ingestion of
a meal.
Larrea pollen was present in specimens No. 3, 11, and 12. All three
coprolites were either Type III or Type IV, which may indicate diarrhea. Larrea,
boiled in a tea and ingested, has been used to aid in problems in urinating as well
as to remove calcium deposits in the kidneys (Martinez 1959; Ford 1975). Lewis
and Elvin-Lewis (1977) also report the use of a hot decoction of Larrea as a
treatment for diarrhea.
The coprolite evidence from Caldwell Cave is sufficiently different from
other reported analyses to warrant a few comments. Bryant (1974b), in his study
of coprolites from Conejo Shelter in Val Verde County, interpreted the presence
of entomophilous (insect-pollinated) pollen in frequencies greater than 2 percent
as evidence of direct ingestion of a variety of flowers. Evidence from Caldwell
Cave, on the other hand, does not indicate a similar use of local flowering plants.
Williams-Dean (1978:222) identified 25 percent of the coprolites from

Holloway--Late Archaic Plant Usage

327

Table 5. Water Chemical Analysis of Local Spring:::

Element

Dissolved Solids
(mq/l)

Na+
K+
Mg++

91.2
43.1
105
981
1,400
0.280
114

Ca++
S04
Fe
CI-

Element
FSiO2
BrNO3
NH3
Ba
HCO3

Total Dissolved Solids

Dissolved Solids
(mq/l)
2.6
27.6
0.7
31.0
O. I 0
O. 040
80.5
2,877.12

pH = 7.8
*Analysis by Clara L. Ho, Chemist-in-Charge, and Cynthia Mahan,
Chemist, Mineral Studies Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Hinds Cave as being "amorphous or diarrheic specimens" and attributed this to
diarrhea-toxin-producing algae. However, no algal taxa were recovered in these
coprolites. Although the sample is small, it is interesting to note the higher frequency of amorphous coprolites from Caldwetl Cave than from other sites.
Riskind (1970) reported on the analysis of coprolites from Parida Cave,
Val Verde County. Many of those specimens contained high percentages of
Gramineae pollen, which Riskind attributed to economic importance, Of greater
interest to the Caldwell Cave sample, however, is the high percentage of Ephedra
and Hydrophyllaceae pollen in certain coprolites. At Parida Cave, Riskind (1970)
observed that members of the Hydrophyllaceae family were eaten as greens.
Similar high percentages of Hydrophyllaceae pollen at Caldwell Cave suggest
that members of this plant family had economic importance for the local prehistoric population.
SUMMARY
Of the eight coprolites chosen for intensive analysis from Caldwell Cave,
only one specimen did not produce a statistically valid count, and this was probably the result of ingestion of nonpolleniferous materials. Evidence from all eight
coprolites indicates that occupation of the cave occurred during the warm season
of the year. In addition, many of the food items may have been parched prior to
ingestion.
Analysis of springs in the area suggests that the occupants may have suffered from a condition of diarrhea induced by high magnesium content in the
local water supply. The presence of Larrea and Ephedra pollen in some of the
Caldwe!l Cave coprolites may indicate that these plants were used medicinally.
The evidence for medicinal use, however, is not conclusive. Further analysis of
local spring deposits and analyses of additional coprolites from all four morphological types will be necessary before substantive conclusions can be made.

328

Texas Archeological Society
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I wish to thank Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr., Don Hamilton, and Thomas Stearns, all of
the Anthropology Program at Texas A&M University, for their critical reviews of early
drafts of this report.
REFERENCES CITED
Barkley, W. A.
1934 The statistical theory of pollen analysis. Ecology 15:283-289.
Brooks, D., and K. W. Thomas
1967 The distribution of pollen grains on microscope slides, Part I: the non-randomness
of the distribution. Pollen et Spores 9:621-629.
Bryant, Vaughn M. Jr.
1969 Late fullglacial and postglacial pollen analysis of Texas sediments. Unpublished
Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Texas at Austin.
1974a The role of coprolite analysis in archaeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 45:1-28.
1974b Prehistoric diet in Southwest Texas: the coprolite evidence. American Antiquity
39:407-420.
Callen, E. O.
1963 Diet as revealed by coprolites. In Science in archaeology, edited by D. Brothwell
and E. Higgs, pp. 186-194. 1st ed. Basic Books, New York.
1965

Food habits of some pre-Columbian Indians. Economic Botany 19:335-343.

1967

Analysis of the Tehuacan coprolites. In The prehistory of the Tehuacan Valley,
Vol. 1: Environment and subsistence, edited by D. S. Byers, pp. 261-289. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Erdtman, G.
1960 The acetolysis method: a revised description. Svensk. Bot. Tidskr. 54:561.
Ford, K. C.
1975 Las yerbes de la gente: a study of Hispano-American medicinal plants. University
of Michigan Anthropological Papers 60. Ann Arbor.
Heizer, R. E
1967 Analysis of human coprolites from a dry Nevada cave. University of California
Archaeological Survey Reports 70:1-20. Berkeley.
1969

The anthropology of prehistoric Great Basin coprolites. In Science in archaeology, edited by D. Brothwell and E. Higgs, pp. 244-250. 2nd ed. Praeger, New
York.

Jackson, A. T.
1937 Explanation of certain sites in Culberson County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 9:146-192.
Lewis, W. H., and M. P. F. Elvin-Lewis
1977 Medical botany: plants affecting man’s health. Wiley Interscience, New York.
Martin, P. S., and F. W. Sharrock
1964 Pollen analysis of prehistoric human feces: a new approach to ethnobotany.
American Antiquity 30:168-180.
Martinez, M.
1959 Las plantas medicinales de Mexico. Mexico.

Holloway--Late Archaic Plant Usage

329

Napton, L. K., and G. Kelso
!969 Preliminary palynological analysis of Lovelock Cave coprolites. In Archaeological and paleobiological investigations in Love!ock Cave, Nevada, pp. 19-27.
Kroeber Anthropological Society Papers, Special Publication 2.
Oser, B. L.
1965 Hawk’s physiological chemistry. 14th ed. New York.
Riskind, D. H.
1970 Pollen analysis of human coprolites from Parida Cave. In Archeological investigations at Parida Cave, Val Verde County, Texas, by R. K. Alexander,
pp. 89-101. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas at
Austin, Papers 19.
Robbins, W. W., J. P. Harrington, and B. Freire-Marreco
1916 Ethnobotany of the Tewa Indians. Bureau of Americah Ethnology, Smithsonian
Institution, Bulletin 55.
Tanner, R. W.
1949 The Caldwell Ranch sites: a distinctive culture complex in the northeastern
Trans-Pecos. Unpublished M.A. thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.
Williams-Dean, Glenna
1978 Ethnobotany and cultural ecology of prehistoric man in Southwest Texas. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Williams-Dean, Glenna, and V. M. Bryant, Jr.
1975 Pollen analysis of human coprolites from Antelope House. The Kiva 4l :97-111.

Laboratory Procedures for the Care of Prehistoric
Ceramic Collections
Elaine R. Hughes

ABSTRACT
With increasing awareness of the long-term research and educational potential of
archeological collections has come increasing concern about their proper care. The need
for preservation applies to all artifacts and materials collected, but ceramic collections
need special attention because they appear to be immune to decay and misuse. Ceramic
artifacts are often processed by outdated laboratory methods that eventually damage their
integrity. This paper introduces alternatives for cleaning, labeling, repairing, and housing
ceramic materials. With the application of proper techniques, ceramic collections can be
maintained for future educators and researchers.

INTRODUCTION
Most of the time professional and avocational archeologists practice extreme diligence when recording and excavating sites, taking great care to protect
and preserve valuable research data. One would expect similar care to be taken in
the processing of artifacts, but this is not always the case. Artifacts are often
hastily cleaned and restored, and, after the termination of research, it is not uncommon for these materials to be placed in dead storage. The term dead storage
usually means any out-of-the-way enclosure, such as a basement or attic, where
collections receive little or no maintenance.
Any collection will deteriorate if stored carelessly; ceramic materials in
particular will suffer abraded surfaces, postexcavation cracks, enlargement of
missing areas, and complete breakdown or peeling of adhesives. This kind of
damage greatly limits the educational and research potential of collections, since
eventually it renders the artifacts too fragile to handle, thus rendering the collection inaccessible (Ford 1977: 2-3).
Careless storage of ceramic collections is unacceptable, for these collections are irreplaceable. The objects may be all that has ever been collected from,
or all that remains of, a site--a significant fact since prehistoric sites are limited
in number, and the overall quality of sites is deteriorating due to increased pothunting activity and lack of government support of antiquities laws (Collins and
Green 1978:1055-1059). These factors, together with recent government regulations limiting collection rights, have resulted in a gradual trend toward reutilization of collections by researchers (Norick 1982:2-6; Ford 1977:1).

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54 (1985 for 1983)

332

Texas Archeological Society

Because the research potential of archeological collections extends beyond
initial study, it is the duty of the archeologist to ensure the future integrity of the
artifacts, and this can be accomplished only if sound laboratory procedures are
used. However, determination of what constitutes adequate procedure is not always easy, since artifacts must be protected from damage for an indefinite length
of time. Early archeological collections in museums are an invaluable source for
study of methods.
This article is based on field laboratory experience and is intended to alert
both avocational and professional archeologists to the danger of employing certain laboratory procedures when dealing with prehistoric ceramic collections.
Harmful methods are often used because they appear to solve particular problems, but there are usually other more suitable methods that will not result in
damage to the artifacts. The alternatives recommended here are suggestions and
will not necessarily meet the needs of every situation. In fact, they are based on
the meeting of several conditions.
The first condition is that the ceramic materials are stable, i.e., the sherd
bodies are not deteriorating. (The methods for dealing with unstable ceramics
will not be dealt with here; this report is concerned with general laboratory
methods rather than specific conservation techniques.) If unstable ceramic materials are encountered, consult a conservator or research the literature (for example, Dowman 1970; Lins 1976; Grist, Lormans, and Lynn 1982).
The second condition is that the pigments are not water soluble and the ceramic materials are not sensitive to chemicals. Paint solubility can be determined
by rubbing the surface of the sherd with a wet cotton-tipped applicator while observing the reactions under a 10-power microscope. Tests for chemical sensitivity
can be conducted in the same manner (Wilson 1968; Shepard 1976). If solubility
or sensitivity is noticed, consult a conservator.
The last condition is that cleaning is in factdesirable. Sherds or wares that
are destined for use-wear studies, trace-element analysis, and dating should not
be cleaned. If the ceramic material meets these conditions, the procedures outlined below are appropriate for dealing with typical Texas pottery types and most
southwestern wares.
Throughout laboratory processing it is important that workers record all
treatment dates, treatments, preservatives, and adhesives used on artifacts. No
one should assume that any treatment or conservation effort will be the final one.
Documenting what has been done to an artifact will aid future technicians in their
efforts to determine what methods will best reverse the effects of inappropriate
treatments.
CLEANING CERAMIC ARTIFACTS
If a ceramic artifact is covered with soil it is difficult to analyze characteristics such as design, use wear, and surface treatment, but harsh and abrasive
cleaning, as, for instance, with a toothbrush, can obliterate those attributes (Figure 1). Although some toothbrushes are soft, many of them rival wire brushes in
their abrasive ability, and, because of this, toothbrushes should never be used for
cleaning prehistoric ceramic artifacts. The recommended procedure is to use clean
water and fingers or a natural sponge, and, for soil lodged in corrugated or incised areas, a soft 1-inch paintbrush or a natural sponge. Clay deposits that re-

Hughes--Care of Ceramic Collections

333

Figure 1. Southwestern sherd showing damage from cleaning with a toothbrush. Part
of the design has been obliterated, and the remaining painted surfaces are covered with
fine striations.

Figure 2. Reverse side of part of a Mimbres bowl, showing labels that were applied
before the sherds were found to fit together.

334

Texas Archeological Society

main after hand washing can be removed best with a 5 percent sequestering agent
such as sodium hexametaphosphate. According to Dr. Don Hamilton, of Texas
A&M University (personal communication, 1983), all traces of this chemical
should be removed by flushing with water after treatment, since it can soften pottery paste.
Removal of calcium carbonate (lime) is another problem. This deposit is
usually evidenced by a rough white-to-gray film that obscures the surface of the
sherd. A common mistake when cleaning is removing these deposits by mechanical means such as a toothbrush, and we have seen what damage that can cause in
Figure 1. Chemical methods are preferable, since they remove the calcium carbonate with minimal damage to ceramic surfaces.
Several acids will remove lime from ceramics (Dowman 1970), but hydrochloric acid, due to its easy availability, is the one most frequently used. (Muriatic
acid is hydrochloric acid; the difference in name is due to grade and price.)
A 10 percent solution of hydrochloric acid will remove calcium carbonate,
but the solution should be applied only when sherds are completely wet. The
water prevents the acid from soaking into the body of the sherd, where it will
cause future damage. After the acid treatment, sherds should be flushed with running water, since leftover acid will turn them yellow. Because hydrochloric acid
dissolves calcareous materials, it should not be used on sherds that have bone or
shell temper. If sherds with shell or bone temper are encountered, a conservator
should be consulted.
A preferable alternative to acids for the removal of calcium carbonate is a
chelating agent. A 5 to l0 percent solution of EDTA tetrasodium will remove
calcium carbonate, but not with the speed of acid.
Procedures for marking artifacts vary widely, but ceramics are most commonly labelled with india ink. This type of label is difficult to remove because
the ink soaks into the sherd. Normally, removal of labels is not a matter of concern; however, several things should be considered. First, labeling is often done
by persons who are not experienced enough to avoid labeling over diagnostic features, with the result that labels have to be removed and relocated. Second, areas
that are nondiagnostic at the time of initial cataloging may be found to be diagnostic later on. Third, after labeling, pieces are sometimes found to fit together
(Figure 2).
Fortunately, india ink labels can be removed if they have been applied in
accordance with a two-coat system using polyvinyl acetate (PVA), a thermoplastic synthetic resin that resists crosslinking when exposed to light and high
temperatures. These factors make the labeling process reversible (Dowman 1970:
61-64). The first coat of PVA prevents the ink from soaking into the sherd; the
second coat, applied over the india ink, protects the number.
Correction fluid for typewritten copy (such as the Liquid Paper brand) is
often used on dark artifacts so black ink will show up; the correction fluid shquld
not be substituted for the first coat of PVA. Correction fluid has a tendency "to
peel with age and, when removed, usually leaves a white residue that is difficult
to clean off. On dark artifacts white ink should be used instead of india ink, but it
is important to note that not all I~rands of white ink are suitable, and all require
constant stirring. (Pelikan is the brand successfully used at The Museum, Texas
Tech University.)

Hughes--Care of Ceramic Collections

335

The question of thickness of the two-coat PVA solution now arises. Clear
fingernail polish (a type of PVA), a favorite among archeologists, varies in
quality and viscosity, is expensive, and is usually too thick for labeling. Thick
solutions of PVA are not desirable, since the differences in expansion and contraction rates of ceramic material and thick PVA at different temperatures sometimes cause the nail polish to peel off.
In an experiment conducted at The Museum, Texas Tech University, 10, 15,
and 20 percent solutions of Vinac B 15 (a type of PVA; see Appendix) in acetone
were tested to determine which solution was thick enough to prevent ink from
soaking into the sherds, yet thick enough to expand and contract with the sherds.
The weakest solution that met these requirements was 20 percent Vinac B15.
Krylon Clear Acrylic 1301 (Acryloid B72 in toluene) also was tested, but it was
equivalent to 15 percent Vinac B15 and allowed ink to soak into the sherds.
The second most popular method for marking ceramic materials is by attaching tags to them. Tags attached by string are acceptable, but their use is limited to vessels with handles or narrow necks. Adhesive-backed tags should never
be used; those that adhere well will, when peeled off after a few years, leave
adhesive residue on ceramic surfaces, which is not easily removed and can result in
permanent dark stains. Tags with less adhesive usually fall off after a few years.
REPAIRING CERAMICS
The first concern in the repairing process is to remove all traces of soil and
calcium carbonate from surfaces and edges. Vessels may fall apart after restoring
if edges are not clean, and surfaces that remain obscured by these deposits will
require more cleaning in the future. Removal of surface deposits should proceed
as described above, but edges usually require diligent cleaning with a paintbrush.
The second and most important concern is piecing the vessel together. The
method used most often is to glue sherds together as they are found, but, unless it
is done by one who has had extensive prior experience, randomly gluing sherds
together seldom produces satisfactory results. Another method sometimes employed in the field is gluing vessels together in situ; this practice is discouraged
because the vessel is usually deformed as a result of having been buried so long
in the ground.
A correct beginning step for piecing a vessel together is to arrange the sherds
so they radiate outward from the base (Figure 3). Reconstruction should begin at
the base, with the gluing together of two or three sherds. If the base is not correctly glued together, each successive sherd will magnify the error, so it is important to check alignment of the sherds at every stage of the reconstruction process.
After the base sherds have set up, successive sherds are added until the vessel is
complete (Figure 4) (Wolff 1960; Wilson 1968; Larney 1971; Rye 1982).
The type of adhesive used depends upon the size and condition of the vessel. For example, the main concern with Mimbres vessels (a Southwestern ware),
since they are nonporous, is the size of the vessel and the strength of the adhesive, but the main concern with Caddoan material (an East Texas ware), which
is porous, is the viscosity of the adhesive.
The adhesives most commonly used by archeologists are Duco and Elmer’s
Glue-All. Duco is a cellulose nitrate adhesive that sets up quickly and remains
reversible, but it also breaks down quickly, due to a plasticizer deficiency (Mibach

336

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 3. Correct beginning for piecing a vessel together.

Figure 4. The vessel shown in Figure 3, after it was pieced together.

Hughes--Care of Ceramic Collections

337

1975:58). This means that after a few years, artifacts may become too fragile to
handle because of the brittle state of the Duco. Duco is not the worst adhesive to
use, but it is certainly not the best for repairing vessels.
Elmer’s Glue-All has fortunately become less popular over the past few years.
It was once made from casein (a phosphoprotein of milk), but 10 to 15 years ago
the Borden Co. changed the formula to a polyvinyl acetate (PVA) emulsion. Normally, after, drying, PVA emulsions are soluble in PVA solvents such as acetone,
toluene, and lower alcohols (alcohols of low molecular weight), but this is not
true for Elmer’s Glue-All. The Borden Co. recommends water as a solvent and
claims that other solvents will "set the glue more" (Borden Co., personal communication 1982). However, Elmer’s Glue-All is only slightly soluble in water, so
it should be considered irreversible and therefore inappropriate for repairing
purposes.
Other brands of PVA emulsions and solids in a range of grade and viscosities
have been used by conservators for several years (UNESCO 1968). Vinac B25
(see Appendix) is the PVA used by the Anthropology Department, Texas A&M
University, and by The Museum, Texas Tech University. A 20 to 25 percent solution of Vinac B25 in acetone is adequate for most repairs, but, prior to gluing,
sherd edges should be coated with a 5 to 10 percent solution of Vinac B25. The
PVC coating will consolidate and thus protect the edges of the sherds that are
ground down whenever two sherds are casually fitted together and taken apart,
and will prevent the adhesive from soaking into the body of the sherd, creating a
plane along which future breaks are more likely to occur than they are along the
join (Figure 5).
Glued pieces can be set to dry in a sand box or a foam-padded box. Clothespins and rubber bands can be used to maintain correct alignment of the sherds,
but adhesive tape should never be used to hold pieces together. If the tape is
strong enough to support the sherds, it will also pull off some of the ceramic
surfaces (Figure 6).
After repair, all traces of adhesive should be removed from ceramic surfaces. A common misconception is that adhesive smeared over surfaces will help
to hold a vessel together. This is not true, and the adhesive can cause serious
problems after a few years (Figure 7), for removal of the adhesive at this time
will leave damaged areas that will require the expensive services of a conservator. It is best to avoid this situation by cleaning extra adhesive from ceramic
surfaces.
REPAIRING REBROKEN SURFACES
When a vessel starts to disintegrate due to rebreakage or breakdown of the
adhesive, it should be taken completely apart by loosening the joins between the
sherds with the solvent recommended by the adhesive manufacturer. (It is at this
time that one appreciates whatever conservation records have been kept.) As the
adhesive softens, the sherds should be pulled apart, starting at the rim. Before
the pieces are reglued, all of the adhesive residue must be removed or the resulting joins will not be as tight as before. Once the residue has been removed, repairing can proceed.
Vessels should not be "temporarily" mended with adhesive tape in the belief
that time will be found later for a permanent job. This is a mistake, for quite

338

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 5. A sherd that was repaired with Duco. When the piece accidentally rebroke, it
broke not along the join (A), but at the plane marking the extent of the absorption of
the Duco (B).

Figure 6. Masking tape removed from a sherd, showing particles of the ceramic
surface (black spots) adhering to the tape.

Hughes--Care of Ceramic Collections

339

Figure 7. Damage caused by adhesive that was smeared over slipped ceramic surface
when the vessel was repaired. The adhesive has peeled up, taking the surface with it.

Figure 8. Part of an olla, showing the effects of leaving bookbinders’ tape on the
surface for 12 years. Note the adhesive stain on the lower left sherd.

340

Texas Archeological Society

often the vessel is forgotten (Figure 8). If a vessel is found that has been taped
and forgotten, the tape should be removed as soon as possible. The procedure
used for removal will depend upon the type of tape and the length of time it has
been on the vessel. For example, removing fresh masking tape will only pull off
parts of the sherd’s surface, but removing old masking tape will pull off surfaces
or leave an adhesive stain or both. Applicaton of a water poultice will facilitate
removal of the fresh masking tape, but a water poultice and toluene or other solvents are required for removal of old masking tape and the stain it leaves.
Acetone would not remove the adhesive stains from the olla shown in Figure 8,
but some success was achieved by using toluene (Joan Gardner, personal communication, 1982). If these problems are to be prevented, the use of any type of
adhesive tape should be avoided in ceramic repair.
CONCERNING RESTORATION
After or during the process of repair, it is sometimes necessary to fill in
missing areas. Whether plaster of paris or Poly-filla--a durable substitute for
plaster of paris (see Appendix)--is used, edges should first be coated with a 5 to
10 percent solution of PVA. If the vessel ever breaks or if missing pieces are
found after restoration is complete, the supporting materials can be removed
easily.

HOUSING CERAMIC COLLECTIONS
The process of excavation removes archeological materials from relatively
stable environments. To prevent deterioration, excavated artifacts, especially repaired vessels, should be placed in environments that allow them to reestablish
chemica! stability, or equilibrium. It is a state not easily achieved, but its importance cannot be overemphasized; for this a collection room must have controlled
temperature, light, and humidity. Under uncontrolled conditions adhesives will
peel, become irreversible, or break down completely. These problems occur
more frequently and are more pronounced when poor adhesives such as Duco
have been used, but even good adhesives will deteriorate in adverse environments. No amount of conservation or preservation effort will make an artifact
immune to its environment. A poorly conserved collection in an environmentally
controlled setting will almost always fare better than a well-conserved collection
in dead storage. For the best results, ceramic materials should be housed, not
stored.
Equal in importance to the environment is the arrangement of ceramic material in collection rooms. Boxes or cabinets are adequate for sherds, but whole
vessels, regardless of form, are best housed on open shelves with dust-blocking
muslin curtains. This is especially important in humid environments where
pockets of high relative humidity can form in enclosed areas (Werner 1963:
594-595). Shelves should be padded, and, when possible, vessels should be
placed on covered rings of rope or in padded boxes. The padding prevents vessels
from rocking, which grinds down ceramic surfaces. Vessels should never be
stacked or stored on rims; both practices could put stress on glued joints, and
storing on rims increases the amount of handling vessels receive, since they must
be flipped over for viewing. Finally, vessels should be stored with spaces between
them so they do not touch one another.

Hughes--Care of Ceramic Collections

341

It is not possible to cover every detail of adequate housing in this short article; for further information readers are referred to Guldbeck 1976; Lewis 1976;
Guthe 1977; Reese 1977; Burcaw 1979; and Dudley and Wilkinson 1979.

CONCLUSION
A recent trend, due in part to current government regulations and accelerated pothunting activity, is toward the reutilization of collections by researchers,
so the time has passed when archeologists can avoid responsibility for the postexcavation condition of the artifacts they recover. It is the archeologist’s responsibility to ensure the integrity of collections by utilizing appropriate laboratory
methods and by providing adequate housing. The suggestions put forth here
should aid archeologists in determining what methods will best serve
their needs.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank Sylvia Bento, Karen Gardner, George Michaels, Erwin Roemer,
and Roger Colemen for reviewing the manuscript. Gentry Steele, of Texas A&M University, edited parts of the manuscript and helped with the photography. Nicky Olsen photographed several of the artifacts, and Dory Funk aided in the research. Eileen Johnson, of
The Museum, Texas Tech University (TTU), and conservators Joan Gardner and Donny
Hamilton, both of Texas A&M University (TAMU), supplied information and guidance.
In addition, without the use of collections at The Museum, TTU, and the Anthropology
Department, TAMU, the research would not have been possible. I would especially like to
thank Suzanne Wilson for suggesting the topic and reviewing the manuscript.

APPENDIX
Sources for Materials
Polyvinyl Acetate (PVA)
Vinac BI5 and Vinac B25: Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., Chemicals Group, EO.
Box 97, Calvert City, KY 42029; (502) 395-4181.
AYAF and AYAT: Union Carbide Corporation, 120 S. Riverside Plaza, Chicago, IL
60606; (312) 454-2000.

Support Material
Poly-filla: Conservation Warehouse, Materials Limited, Box 2884, Sparks, NV 89431;
(702) 331-9582.

REFERENCES CITED
Burcaw, G. Ellis
1979 Introduction to museum work. 4th ed. American Association for State and I..o~,al
History, Nashville.
Collins, Robert B., and Dee F. Green
1978 A proposal to modernize the American Antiquities Act. Science 202(12):
1055-1059.

342

Texas Archeological Society

Dowman, Elizabeth
!970 Conservation infield archaeology. Methuen, London
Dudley, Dorothy H., and Irma Bezold Wilkinson
1979 Museum registration methods. American Association of Museums, Washington, D.C.
Ford, Richard I.
1977 Systematic research collections in anthropology: an irreplaceable national resource. Report of a conference sponsored by the Council for Museum Anthropology, Peabody Museum, Harvard University.
Grist, Jehon, Jennifer Lormans, and Susann Lynn
1982 The conservation of the Hearst/Reisner pottery collection at the Lowie Museum.
Council for Museum Anthropology Newsletter 6(3):7-12.
Guldbeck, Per E.
1976 The care of historical collections: a conservation handbook for the nonspecialist.
2nd ed. American Association for State and Local History, Nashville.
Guthe, Carl E.
1977 The management of small history museums. 2nd ed. American Association for
State and Local History, Nashville.
Larney, J.
1976

Ceramic restoration in the Victoria and Albert Museum. Studies in Conservation
16:69-82.

Lewis, Ralph H.
1976 Manual for museums. U.S. Department of the Interior, Washington, D.C.
Lins, P. Andrew
1976 Ceramics and glass. Museum News reprint. American Association of Museums,
Washington, D.C.
Mibach, E. T. G.
1975 The restoration of coarse archeological ceramics. Conservation in Archaeology
and the Applied Arts, IIC, pp. 55-65.
Norick, Frank A.
1982 The reburial controversy in California. Council for Museum Anthropology Newsletter 6(3):2-6.
Reese, Rosemary S.
1977 A bibliography on historical organization practices: care and conservation of
collections, edited by Frederick L. Rath, Jr., and Merrilyn R. O’Connell. American Association for State and Local History, Nashville.

Rye, Owen S.
!982 Pottery technology: principles and reconstruction. Taraxacum, Inc., Taraxacum,
Washington.
Shepard, Anna O.
1976 Ceramics for the archaeologist. Carnegie Institution of Washington, Publication
609. Washington, D.C.

Hughes--Care of Ceramic Collections

343

United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)
1968 The conservation of cultural property with special reference to tropical conditions. UNESCO, Museums and Monuments Series 2. Switzerland.
Werner, A. E. A.
1963 Scientific methods in the examination and conservation of antiquities. The
Smithsonian Report Jbr 1962 4566:593-694.
Wilson, Shari
1968 Restoring pottery. Curator 11(2): 154-164.

Wolff, Eldon
1960 Pottery restoration. Curator 3(1):75-87.

Book Review
Historic Indian groups of the Choke Canyon Reservoir and surrounding area, southern Texas. By T. N. Campbell and T. J. Campbell.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio, Choke Canyon Series, Vol. 1. 1981. vi + 80 pp., 1 fig.
The modestly bound, typewritten publication of !981 by Thomas Nolan
Campbell, pore, and Tommy Jo Campbell, fille, seems to promise the reader
merely a tidy r6sum6 of the historic Indian groups who sometimes lived near the
intersection of the Frio and Nueces rivers. Let the reader beware. The 80 pages
of this volume are crowded with findings from the CampbeUs’ research, among
which is an explicit reconstruction of part of Cabeza de Vaca’s route of travel,
along with a compilation of ethnographic material and locational data from primary documents and publications. Also given is an exacting scrutiny of the most
relevant literature touching upon all of this.
The CampbeUs’ work is the first volume in a notable research series about
Choke Canyon, a section of the Frio River not far west of the town of Three
Rivers. The series is coordinated by Thomas R. Hester of the Center for Archaeological Research, San Antonio. But since the Campbells’ publication is not apt
to be seen by many outside Texas, or by very many historians or ethnologists
anywhere, I shall summarize rather more of the volume than is ritually fit in a
book review.
At the outset the authors establish an area of interest, or "target area," which
is a circle whose radius extends 50 miles from the town of Three Rivers on the
Frio River in Live Oak County. They then assemble information about Indian
groups reported in that circle before their ethnic identities were lost. The materials found are from (1) the travel accounts of Alvar Nfifiez Cabeza de Vaca and his
companions, (2) eighteenth-century documents dealing with the mission Indians
settled around San Antonio, and (3) records about later immigrant Apaches.
Cabeza de Vaca’s Route and His Indians
The Campbells use both of the published accounts of Cabeza de Vaca’s trek.
The first is the Relacidn of 1542 (nearly identical to the edition of 1555), which
was composed shortly after the journey, at least by 1537. The second is the socalled Joint Report as retold by the obstreperous historian Gonzalo Fernfindez de
Oviedo y Vald6s in 1543 or 1544, but published in 1853. The Campbells use this
latter source to advantage, although it gives no names of Indian groups and has
frequently been ignored by scholars tracing the Spaniards’ route. The Campbells
search both publications for details on the terrain and on plant or animal life,
using them to fix places where the Spaniards were at the time observations about
the Indians were given.
A signal contribution to the study of history is made, for if ever historians
were guilty of na’fve analysis and chauvinism it is in many of the studies printed
about Cabeza de Vaca’s journey. Exceptions are the analyses of Davenport and

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54 (1985for 1983)

346

Texas Archeological Society

Wells ( 1918-1919), and Krieger ( 1955, 1961 ). Even among quite reputable historians, a "trans-Texas" route has been argued which moves westward across
Central Texas to north-central Mexico. This reconstruction lives on innocently in
a host of school texts and modern publications. ~ Although Alex Krieger prefers
this route, he also presents evidence for an alternative way, a "trans-Mexico"
route through southernmost Texas. The big contribution of the Campbells’ study
is its convincing demolition of the trans-Texas route.
Both routes are often made to commence on the lower Guadalupe River. The
trans-Texas route goes thence to a nopal-collecting area in and around Atascosa
County, and on westward to the Rio Grande. The southern route runs from the
Guadalupe to beyond the lower Nueces River, and on from there southwest or
south to the lower Rio Grande and adjacent Mexico.
The authors stress that the surviving three Spaniards and one Moorish slave,
the only members to return alive from the 1528 expedition to Florida of the cruel
and inept conquistador P~infilo de Narv~iez, pursued a generally southern or
southwestern route from the Nueces River, since they were expressly trying to
reach the European settlement at P~inuco, New Spain. The Spaniards had seen, or
at least were aware of, the map of the gulf coast made in 1519 by Alonso Alvarez
Pineda, which gave P~inuco’s location. It is argued that if the collecting area for
nopal tunas had not been well along on such a direct route toward Pfinuco (as is
their preferred one near Alice, Jim Wells County), then the Spaniards would have
made their escape from where they were previously established on the lower
Guadalupe River. It makes no sense to have Cabeza de Vaca depart from nopal
fields fat- to the northwest of the lower Nueces, as in Alex Krieger’s favorite
explanation.
In a convincing argument that uses abundant material from the two primary
Spanish sources, the Campbells effectively establish, as others have done, that
the "Rfo de las Nueces" where some of the Spaniards lived for a while with the
Mariam2 and with the Iguaz, and where abundant pecans were harvested, is the
lower Guadalupe. It and the adjacent section of the San Antonio River are the
westernmost large streams on the coast with extensive pecan bottoms. The nearest large river to the west is the Nueces, which has a much narrower valley than
the Guadalupe and more xerophytic plant life. The name "Nueces" is misleading, for it bespeaks the presence of nuts on the river’s upper reaches near La Pryor
and Uvalde, far from the area of contention. From the Guadalupe, it was to the
lower Nueces and beyond that the Mariam, with Cabeza de Vaca in tow, went to
gather nopal fruit in summer. The distances specified in the two main sources
match this interpretation well. From the nopal fields the Spaniards, after considerable delay, began their flight towards P~inuco.3
Although it is difficult to place Cabeza de Vaca’s Indians on a map, the
Campbells are often successful in doing so. They convincingly locate the Guaic6n
on Matagorda and St. Joseph islands and the adjacent mainland, the Quitol between Copano and Corpus Christi bays, the Camol along the shore of Corpus
Christi Bay, and the Fig People south of that body of water. Closer to the Three
Rivers target area, at least in summer, were the inland folk who seasonally congregated at nopal collecting grounds. Considerable information exists about the
Mariam, whom the Campbells identify with the Muruam of Mission San Antonio
de Valero in the years between 1722 and 1762, as does A. C. Fletcher (in Hodge

Book Review

347

1907, 1:805). The identification of the Mariam with the Aranama at Goliad by
Castafieda (1936, I: 64), Krieger (1955: 74), and Newcomb (1961: 49) is shown
to be wrong. Also, an identity is suggested between the Iguaz and Oaz listed
by Isidro F61ix de Espinosa in 1708 at present-day Guerrero, Coahuila (Maas
1915:37), still living near the "Moroamo" at that time.
The Maliac6n or Malic6n may be the Manico reported by Dami~in Massanet
in 1690 about 100 miles northwest of Alice, Jim Wells County; the Malic6n Were
located east of Alice or near that town in Cabeza de Vaca’s time. In 1708 Fray
Isidro de Espinosa reported Manicu still living in what is now southern Texas
(Mass 1915:36, 37). The Campbells convincingly repudiate any equation of the
Malic6n with the Malaguitas of the lower Rio Grande (Newcomb 1961:60).
Excellent arguments are given for placing the inland groups geographically.
Citing only a few examples, the Acubadao or Decubadao are placed in southern
Bee County, and the Avavar or Chavavar in San Patricio County ranging as far
west as Benavides in Duval county. It is shown that the Anegado or Ganegado
may have spent the winters in southern Nueces County. The Susola, who traveled
eastward to the Guadalupe River to collect pecans, had their principal range on
the lower Nueces, whence they journeyed west to eat nopal in summer.
The Campbells draw many conclusions about Cabeza de Vaca’s Indians, far
too many to review here. The following seem the most noteworthy: (1) At least
four different dialects or languages are indicated for the Indians closest to Three
Rivers and Choke Canyon (Mariam, Avavar, Cutalchuch, and Malic6n), although
the languages themselves are unknown. (2) Human transhumance was practiced
in this area, with nopal fruit sought in summer, nuts in the fall. (3) The geographic range covered by this transhumance was as great as 110 miles, at least
for the Mariam. (4) Some groups, especially the Mariam, may have consisted of
as many as 200 people. Details of socia! life and material culture also are described and summarized by the authors.
Finally, the Campbells treat the two Indi~in groups encountered by the fleeing Spaniards just before they reached the Rio Grande: the Arbadao and the
Cuchendado. Their economic pursuits and settlements are described, and we
learn that one rancheria of Cuchendado had 40 to 50 huts. The Arbadao are
placed near Hebbronville, Jim Hogg County; the Cuchendado, in the southwestern part of that same county. For the first time, the locations chosen by the Campbells are probably wrong; this questions is discussed below under criticism.
The Mission Indians
The five main missions near San Antonio were established between 1718
mad 1731, and became the homes of several Indian groups native to the Three
Rivers target area, and of many others brought in from elsewhere. The Campbells
summarize what they have learned from published accounts and from surviving
religious records, mainly from the three missions moved to San Antonio from
eastern Texas in 173 !: Nuestra Sefiora de la Purfsima Concepci6n de Acufia, San
Francisco de la Espada, and San Juan Capistrano. In instances it was possible to
learn the previous locations of the Indians, and recognize which were from the
Three Rivers area and from south of it. But there the useful material almost
stops, for Cabeza de Vaca was the first and last European to live with Indians of
the area and recount their life and habits. There was never a story like his in

348

Texas Archeological Society

mission times, or anyone else to write from an inside view of the local societies.
He, alone, captured a shadow of what it meant to be a native in nonagricultural
southern Texas, and to experience a world of cold, hunger, infanticide, and surprise attacks. Of course, although Cabeza de Vaca did not emphasize them, he
also spoke obliquely of life’s pleasures--dancing, ceremonies, summertime gluttony, and vengeful strikes against enemies.
Seventeen mission groups are treated by the Campbells and several larger
groupings of them recognized. In certain localities from the upper San Antonio
and Medina rivers southwestward to the confluence of the Frio and Nueces
ranged the Siupam (Chayopin), Sulujam, Pampopa, and Pastia, while on the
lower San Antonio were the Pajalat and Pacao. All six peoples spoke dialects or
languages of the Coahuilteco family. Between the lower San Antonio and lower
Nueces rivers lived the so-called "Orejones," whose tongue before mission life is
uncertain. On the coast between the lower Nueces and San Antonio rivers, and
on the offshore islands, were several groups collectively labeled "Piquique,"
who did not speak Coahuilteco. And just west of the lower Nueces were groups
called "Pamaque" that probably spoke some non-Coahuilteco language before
mission living. None of these groups, or any of the other eight treated by the
Campbells, can be identified with Indians encountered 200 years earlier by Cabeza
de Vaca’s party, although group locations from the two periods sometimes overlap.
The Campbells wring out a few important data from the unproductive documents of the eighteenth century, and rigorously correct several misidentifications
which have been made in the literature. For instance, we learn that Orozco y
Berra (1864:304) misinterpreted a Spanish document and wrongly located the
Pampopa 22 leagues south of the mission of San Juan Bautista. The Tacanana at
San Jos6 y San Miguel de Aguayo were Tacame, not Pasnacan as H. E. Bolton
suggested (in Hodge 1910, I1:206). Hodge (1907, I:239) erroneously claimed
that the Chayopin (Sulujam) spoke Tonkawa; no Spanish documents have been
found that agree with his statement. And there is also no evidence for what
Ruecking claimed (1955:369), that the Sulujam were closely connected with the
Pachal on the Frio and Nueces rivers. Further, the earlier statement by T. N.
Campbell (in Branda 1976:709, 736) that the Pitalac lived in northeastern
Coahuila, and were in fact the Pitaloque or Pita, was a mistake and is withdrawn.
As for cultural information, an indication is gotten about maximum geographic ranges for the Pampopa and Pastia, who traveled over a distance of some
85 miles. Interestingly, this approximates the figure estimated for Cabeza de
Vaca’s Mariam Indians. Also, although political spokesmen for mission groups
are referred to, they are not mentioned earlier by Cabeza de Vaca.
Immigrant Apaches
The Campbells learn several things from documents referring to the intruding Apaches. The first records mention "Apaches," but give no group names.
The name "Lipanes" is not used till late in the eighteenth century, when this
group is identified as stealing horses and cattle from Spanish ranches on both
sides of the San Antonio River. The La Paz Map (ca. 1783) shows "Apaches
Lipanes" in all of southern Texas east of Laredo and south of San Antonio, and
this distribution is not contradicted by the documents. Favored camping areas
were northern Atascosa County and the Nueces River in La Salle, McMullen,

Book Review

349

Live Oak, and Nueces counties, much of which territory falls within the Three
Rivers target area.
Criticism
In my opinion, the main error made by the Campbells does not affect most
of their conclusions or useful findings, and is this: The route which they choose
for Cabeza de Vaca’s party after leaving the lower part of the target area (Figure 1, p. 2) probably veers too much toward the west and strikes the Rio Grande
as much as 70 miles too far upstream, at Falc6n Lake. The result is to place the
Arbadao and Cuchendado Indians farther inland than they likely were, and to
throw off by a similar distance the Spaniards’ trail through northeastern Mexico.
This mistake seems ironic, since throughout their volume the Campbells
carefully point out, in attacking a trans-Texas route, that Cabeza de Vaca is very
explicit about trying to reach the Spanish settlement at Pfinuco. It is my firm
opinion that this would have entailed traveling due south from the nopal fields
east of Alice and not far from the coast, to cross the Rio Grande in its delta-the
Valley. Yet the Campbells bring the Spanish around considerably to the west, for
they assume that the Mestefio Sand Plains which this route would cross were too
uninviting to travel over given other choices, and would have been skirted. They
also imply (p. 8) that the mountains first observed by the Spaniards after crossing
the Rio Grande could only have been seen in the neighborhood of Falc6n Lake or
northwest from there, meaning that the Spaniards must have traveled in a southwestern direction from the nopal fields. Both conclusions are unlikely.
That the Spaniards stayed away from, but near, the coast throughout their
trek is indicated several times in the sources. For instance, one way of reading the
Relaci6n shows that the place where the Mariam went to eat nopal tunas was near
the sea. In the original, the 1542, edition of the Relaci6n, nopal fruit and sea
beaches were mentioned in practically the same breath. Later editions and translations sometimes split the topics into two separate paragraphs, and made it appear as if different events and places were being described. This is from the
original:
And when it was time we went to eat nopal tunas. On land we found a great quantity of mosquitos of three different kinds that are very bad and vexing; and most of
the summer they caused us great fatigue. And to protect ourselves from them, all
around the people we would build many fires of rotten and wet wood that smoked
but did not burn. And this protection caused another great bother, for all night long
we could only weep from the smoke that got into our eyes, besides the great heat the
many fires caused. And [thus] we used to go to the coast to sleep [Ntifiez Cabeza de
Vaca 1542:66, 67, my emphases and translation]?

The Spaniards went to the costa to escape the smoke and heat, a word which
is not used in Spanish for lake, pond, or river shores. That at least some part of
the harvesting area for nopal was not far from the coast is implied, and the Spaniards could very well have begun their flight from quite near the Gulf of Mexico.
Next, not long after crossing the Rio Grande while headed south, the trekkers began to see mountains. "And, yonder, we believe that [the mountains] are
fifteen leagues from the sea, according to the account the Indians gave us about
the matter" (Nfifiez Cabeza de Vaca 1542:94). The Spaniards soon accompanied

350

Texas Archeological Society

the Indians toward these mountains. Then, according to the Relaci6n, the Indians
tried to escort the Spaniards to the point of the mountains (N6fiez Cabeza de
Vaca 1542:95). It has sometimes been thought that a "peak" or "spur" was indicated, but this is wrong) In context, the word punta means "beginning point" or
"end point"; this is made clear in the account of Gonzalo Oviedo y Vald6s who,
giving a rather different version of the same event, says that "From there [the
Indians] brought the Christians another five leagues onward, to a river which was
at the foot of the point where the aforementioned mountain began" (Oviedo y
Vald6s 1853, ed. of 1945:229, my emphasis and translation). Oviedo y Vald6s
also says that
straightaway they sent Indians to call people from down towards the sea, and
the following day many men and women came to see these Christians and their
miracles .... and these people tried hard to carry the Spaniards towards the
sea .... But the Christians only wanted to go upwards and inland, because they
had been well tutored by their experience with coastal people, and also because
they had always said that they did not go out to the sea at sundown; and up till now
they had been fearful of striking the sea when they would be thinking least about it;
and for these reasons they were wanting to push on to the land above [Oviedo y
Vald6s 1853, ed. of 1945:229].

There is no reasonable doubt, reading the foregoing, that the Europeans
knew that they were near the sea and wanted nothing more to do with coastal
Indians, who had always tormented and killed the Spaniards. At this juncture, I
believe that Cabeza de Vaca’s party was north of the Sierra de San Carlos, in
Tamaulipas.
As an aside, I should add that my recognition of a route of travel near the
coast was made strictly from reading the two original Spanish documents. It was
only later that I examined the study by Davenport and Wells (1918-1919) and
was almost startled to see that their very scholarly reconstruction of the route
coincides closely with mine, and with that sketched out in 1896 (pp. ix-xiii) by
Rains. Independent replication is encouraging.
Circumstantial evidence also supports this route. When the Europeans decided to give up their goal of reaching P~nuco, and determined to turn inland
instead, they must have known, as a fact, that the mountains beyond came down
very near the gulf coast, so near that contact with coastal people would be inevitable. To get this sort of precise information, it is reasonable to infer that Cabeza
de Vaca must have been near to both the coast and the end of the mountains. The
Spaniards’ determination to change their route was made, then, when they were
faced with very uncomfortable facts.
Perhaps the decision saved their lives, for agents of Nufio de Guzmzln may
already have been hunting slaves in Tamaulipas and antagonizing natives, although Guzm~in, himself, was busy founding settlements in west Mexico. In
1528 he had sent his relative Sancho de Caniego (or "Caniedo") to explore the
area somewhat beyond the R~o de las Palmas (Del Hoyo 1972:12-14); the present
Rio Soto la Marina, which is meant, is only 60 miles south of the area reached by
Cabeza de Vaca. We need to remember, too, that it was near this river in 1554
that coastal Indians massacred several score Spaniards from the ships wrecked on

Book Review

351

Padre Island (D~ivila Padilla 1596, in McDonald and Arnold 1979:227-238).
Those Europeans were also attempting to reach P~inuco.
The first thing which led the Campbells to reject a route southward from the
nopal fields and not far from the coast was the sandy Mestefio Plains of southern
Texas. The Campbells believe that the sandy plains would have been a hindrance
to our trekkers, and that they were avoided by traveling to their west. But far
from being an undesirable area for travelers afoot, the plains are at least as attractive as other routes. It is true that U.S. military commanders, and some earlier
Spanish parties, had considerable trouble getting wheeled vehicles, howitzers,
and herds of livestock through the sand; and that their attitude about the place has
infected the literature. Yet the sand sheets are covered with grass and low plant
cover comfortable to walk upon, and in autumn have many well-distributed
ponds of drinkable water that reach westward from the gulf to the boundary of
Brooks and Kenedy counties (Brown et al. 1977). The sandy dunes are few and
easy to avoid, and the old blowouts often have water just below the surface. In
1747, the military force led by Joaqufn Orobio y Basterra dug shallow holes in
the sandy plains north of Raymondville to get water for their horses (Castafieda
1938:145).
There is considerable native food in the plains, including acorns from the
large live-oak mottes or matas, pond lotus in some places, mesquite and ebony
beans in the southern parts of the plains, nopal in the far north and far south; and
many game animals, particularly in the live-oak mottes. The fact that much
brush-mesquite, nopal, etc.-has spread to over-grazed grasslands since Cabeza
de Vaca’s day is taken into account in assessing the original plant resources (e.g.,
Neck and Riskind n.d.).
I have examined the plains on U.S. Highway 77 and on U.S. 281, and judge
them at least as attractive and well supplied as the route suggested by the
Campbells, which goes roughly from San Diego through Benavides, Hebbronville, and Escobas to Zapata. In addition, the sections of the plains that have
been surveyed by archeologists, such as the northern parts of Hidalgo and
Willacy counties, turned up numerous late-prehistoric sites around old blowouts
and salt lakes (Mallouf et al., 1977). The Mestefio Plains were clearly no hindrance to aboriginal people, or to Europeans living and traveling as the Indians
would have done.
That section of the Rio Grande delta due south of the plains may have been
more of a barrier than the plains themselves, for it is flat and drier with fewer
ponds. Yet several springs are known in the delta, and were probably used by
travelers (Brune 1981, map of springs). Also, oxbows or resacas with water can
soon be reached when proceeding south. The negative evidence cited by the
Campbells that Cabeza de Vaca does not make specific mention of the Mestefio
Plains means little, for a great many geographic peculiarities were not recorded
about areas covered during the journey. The Mestefio area is not a bleak, Saharalike place, and would likely have seemed no more noteworthy to our Spanish
travelers than many of the other areas they penetrated and did not describe.
Not far south or southwest of the Rio Grande, Cabeza de Vaca’s party reported that they began seeing mountains in the distance for the first time. The
Campbells and other historians have assumed that the point of first sighting must

352

Texas Archeological Society

have been somewhere near present Laredo or Falc6n Lake, and that the Spanish
party must thus have traversed southern Texas some considerable distance inland
from the coast in order to reach this point. Such an interpretation of the route is
possible, but not very likely given that the group was headed for P~inuco.
In point of fact, the mountains of Mexico can be seen, according to two
academic informants of mine who have lived long in the Valley, at points in
Tamaulipas a few miles beyond the U.S. towns of Roma-Los Sfienz, La Joya, and
Mission. The Sierra Picachos of Nuevo Le6n, elev. 5,036 ft., is visible in clear
weather at a distance of some 85 miles to the west, while the Sierra de San Carlos,
of Tamaulipas, elev. 5,869 ft., lies some 90 miles to the south-southwest; either
could have been the first mountains seen by Cabeza de Vaca and his party. I conclude, with some certainty, that the Spaniards could have made their river crossing anywhere upstream from Reynosa, Tamaulipas, but probably not far north of
that city. Were a crossing made near Falc6n Lake, assuming clear weather, mountains would first have been observed from the left (U.S.) bank of the Rio Grande,
and this was not what happened. The travelers were several leagues beyond the
Rio Grande before the sighting took place. I further suspect that the Spaniards
headed for the Sierra de San Carlos, rather than the Picachos, in spite of Oviedo
y Vald6s’ statement (ed. of 1945:229) that the party was only seven and a half
leagues beyond the Rio Grande when they finally arrived at a village close to the
mountains. There is no high ground anywhere near that distance from the Rio
Grande in the area south of Del Rfo-Ciudad Acufia, and the distances recounted
in the Joint Account are notoriously unreliable.
Another bit of evidence that the southernmost point to which the Spaniards
penetrated beyond the Rio Grande was near the Sierra de San Carlos is Cabeza
de Vaca’s mention (1542:96) of having come across two women carrying loads of
cornmeal. Agriculture appears to have been practiced on the coast of Mexico as
far north as the Conchos (San Fernando) River, which runs just along the northern flank of the Sierra de San Carlos.
In themselves the foregoing arguments do not prove that the Spaniards necessarily traveled the Mestefio Plains, for other routes could also have been traversed. After all, we know that Cabeza de Vaca had some practice carrying water
and firewood while among the Indians. The point to be made is that a way
through the plains is more in keeping with what we know of the Spaniards’ destination to have been, and with information which they provided on their whereabouts after crossing the Rio Grande.
In summary, the work ofT. N. and T. J. Campbell in locating and documenting Indian groups in and near the Three Rivers target area around Choke Canyon
Reservoir is a benefaction to Southwestern history and ethnohistory. I suspect
that almost all the available and pertinent Spanish records were examined. The
study contradicts the notion of a northern trans-Texas route for Cabeza de Vaca,
posits the original locations for many of his Indian groups and others known
much later at the San Antonio missions, and produces material about group
range and size, social customs, and material culture which I have not had the
space to summarize here. Also, the Campbells have recognized many errors in
the published literature and corrected them. Their probably mistaken ideas about
Cabeza de Vaca’s route/after leaving the nopal fields do not detract from the main

Book Review

353

study. The only other fault of the monograph is its place of publication. As fine as
the Choke Canyon report series is, the Campbells’ results deserve to be made
available to a larger audience.
LeRoy Johnson, Jr.
National Register Department
Texas Historical Commission, Austin
NOTES
1. The Campbells cite many (p. 65). In a brief survey of fairly recent publications, I found the transTexas route, or worse, embraced by a study on springs and their distribution (Brune 1981), in a
history of New Mexico (Beck 1962:42), and in a flawed translation of Cabeza de Vaca’s Naufragios
(Covey 1961). TheAtlas of Texas (Arbingast et al. 1976:44), however, traces a southern route.
2. Cabeza de Vaca says "Mariames." Castilian plural endings are omitted here for names of Indian
groups, however, as they obscure the main nouns and hinder comparison with eighteenth-century
spellings which often lack the plurals.
3. There is confusion among scholars who espouse a southern route about where the last, or final,
nopal fields were located from which the Spaniards departed for Pfinuco, although most agree that
fields visited earlier on were near Alice, or east of Alice and near the coast. Davenport and Wells
(1918-1919), for examPle, argue that the last-visited cactus fields were in the northern Rio Grande
delta, but the matter has not been resolved.
4. The pages of the original Relaci6n of 1542 whose photocopy I used (Barker Texas History Center,
University of Texas, Austin) are not numbered. I have therefore assigned numbers, beginning the
count with the first page of text, whose dedication begins "Sacra, Cesfrea, Cat61ica Magestad."
5. An example: "The next day, as we were going to leave, they all wanted to take us to others of their
friends, who dwelt on a spur of the mountains (Bandelier 1905, ed. of Bandelier et al. 1972:110)."

REFERENCES CITED
Arbingast, Stanley A., and others
1976 Atlas of Texas. 5th ed. Bureau of Business Research, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Bandelier, Fanny, John Francis Bannon, and Gerald Theisen
1972 The narrative of Alvar Nt~ez Cabeza de Vaca. The Imprint Society, Barre,
Massachusetts.
Beck, Warren A.
1962 New Mexico, a history offour centuries. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Branda, Eldon Stephen (editor)
1976 The handbook of Texas, a supplement, vol. 3. Texas State Historical Association,
Austin.
Brown L. F., Jr., J. H. McGowen, T. J. Evans, C. G. Groat, and W. L. Fisher
1977 Environmental geologic atlas of the Texas coastal zone-Kingsville area. Bureau
of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Brune, Gunnar
1981 Springs of Texas, vol. 1. Branch-Smith, Inc., Fort Worth.
Castafieda, Carlos E.
1936- Our catholic heritage in Texas, 1519-1936, vol. I (1936): The mission era: the
1938 founding of Texas, 1519-1693; vol. III (1938): The mission era: the missions at
work. Von Boeckmann-Jones, Austin.

354

Texas Archeological Society

Covey, Cyclone
1961 Cabeza de Vaca’s adventures in the unknown interior of America. Collier Books,
New York.
Davenport, Harbert, and Joseph K. Wells
1918-The first Europeans in Texas 1528-1536. Southwestern Historical Quarterly
1919 22(2): 111-142; 22(3):205-259.
Del Hoyo, Eugenio
1972 Historia del Nuevo Reino de Le6n (1577-1723), vol. I. Publicaciones det
Instituto Tecnol6gico y de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey, serie: historia,
ntlm. 13.
Hodge, Frederick W. (editor)
1907 Handbook of American Indians north of Mexico. Bulletin of the Bureau of
American Ethnology, no. 30, vol. I, Washington, D.C.
1910

Handbook of American Indians north of Mexico. Bulletin of the Bureau of
American Ethnology, no. 30, vol. II, Washington, D.C.

Krieger, Alex D.
1955 Un nuevo estudio de la ruta seguida por Cabeza de Vaca a travfs de Norte Am6rica. Sc. D. dissertation, Universidad Nacional Aut6noma de M6xico, M6xico,
D.F.
1961

The travels of Alvar Nfifiez Cabeza de Vaca in Texas and Mexico, 1534-1536. In
Homenaje a Pablo Martfnez del Rio en el XXV aniversario de los orfgines americanos, 459-474. M6xico, D.F.

Maas, Otto
1915 Viajes de misioneros Franciscanos dt la conquista del Nuevo M~xico: documentos
del Archivo General de Indias (Sevilla). Imprenta de San Antonio, Sevilla.
Mallouf, Robert J., Barbara J. Baskin, and Kay L. Killen
1977 A predictive assessment of cultural resources in Hidalgo and Willacy counties,
Texas. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission, Survey Report 23. Austin.
McDonald, David, and J. Barto Arnold III
1979 Documentary sources for the wreck of the New Spain fleet of 1554 ("History and
Discourse ..... "by Augustin D~ivila Padilla 1596, pp. 227-238). Texas Antiquities Committee Publication 8. Austin.
Neck, Raymond W., and David H. Riskind
Biotic communities of southern Texas and northeastern Mexico-then and now.
Manuscript on file, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Newcomb, William W., Jr.
1961 The Indians of Texas: from prehistoric to modern times. University of Texas
Press, Austin.
Ntifiez Cabeza de Vaca, Alvar
1542 La relaci6n que di6 . . . con tres de su compahla. Augustfn de Paz y Juan Picardo, Zamora, Spain (photocopy at Barker Texas History Center, The University
of Texas at Austin).
1555 La relaci6n y comentarios del gouernador Aluar Nt~hez Cabeza de Vaca, de
lo acaescido en las dos jornadas que hizo a las Indias. F. F. de C6rdova,
Valladolid, Spain (an original, Barker Texas History Center, The University of
Texas at Austin).

Authors
Richard Boisvert is head of the Review and Compliance Department of the Ohio Historic
Preservation Office and is also a doctoral candidate at the University of Kentucky. His research interests include lithic technology, analysis of caches, historic and prehistoric use of mineral springs, and public archeology. He has conducted research in Texas, in Tennessee, throughout the Ohio Valley, and in
southwest France. Address: Ohio Historic Preservation Office, 1985 Velma Avenue, Columbus, Ohio 43211.
Clell L. Bond is a project archeologist with Espey Huston and Associates. He has carried
out research in several states, including Arkansas and Texas, and his primary
research interests include the prehistory of Central Texas and historic archeology of coastal areas. Address: Espey Huston and Associates, P.O. Box 519,
Austin, Texas 78767.
Richard G. Holloway is Research Scientist in the Department of Anthropology, Texas
A&M University. He has conducted field work in the southwestern and southeastern United States and the Pacific Northwest coast. His main research interests are archeological palynology and paleoethnobotany. Address: Department
of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843.
Elaine Hughes is working toward an M.A. degree in museum science at Texas Tech University. She served five summers as laboratory supervisor for the Texas A&M
University field school excavations at the Nan Ranch Ruin. She also interned at
Western New Mexico University Museum and has worked at the Museum, Texas
Tech University. Address: 4323 N. 27th Ave., Apt. 27, Phoenix, Arizona 85017.
LeRoy Johnson, Jr., is publications editor for the National Register Department of the
Texas Historical Commission. Past curator of ethnology at the Museum of Natural History, University of Oregon, he has published occasionally on obsidianhydration dating, numerical analysis, Texas archeology, and early Spanish explorations. Address: Texas Historical Commission, P.O. Box 12276, Austin,
Texas 78711.
John W. Greer is an archeological consultant working mainly in Wyoming and adjacent
states. He has also conducted field work and research in Central and West Texas,
with particular emphasis on Archaic adaptations, artifact typologies and chronolgies, rock art, and burned rock midden sites. He has also conducted field
work in Europe and in Central and South America. Address: 2599 S. Paradise
Dr., Casper, Wyoming 82604.
E. R. Mok~.. Jr., is an avocational archeologist and an active member and past officer of
both the Texas Archeological Society and the Southern Texas Archeological
Association. He has participated in field work primarily in the central Texas
coast region, and his research interests include faunal analysis, mortuary practices, and cultural processes of the region. Address: 2710 Allencrest, Corpus
Christi, Texas 78415.
Leland W. Patterson is an avocational archeologist with major interests and field experience in the upper coast and south-central regions of Texas. In addition to archeological analysis, his research interests include cultural resource manage-

358

Texas Archeological Society

ment. He is a longstanding member of the Texas Archeological Society and the
Houston Archeological Society. Address: 418 Wycliffe, Houston, Texas 77079.
Elton R. Prewitt is president of Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Consulting Archeologists.
He previously was a staff archeologist with the Texas Archeological Survey, and
he has conducted field work throughout Texas and in adjacent states. In addition
to his varied research interests, he takes an active role in the preservation
of archeological sites. Address: Prewitt and Associates, Inc., 7530 N. Lamar,
Suite 200, Austin, Texas 78752.
Jean A. Richmond is an avocational archeologist with extensive field experience in Central and West Texas and Wyoming. She is a longstanding member and past
officer of the Texas Archeologicat Society and has participated in many of
the society’s summer field schools. She is also a member of the Travis County
Archeological Society and the Southern Texas Archaeological Association.
Address: 11707 Indianhead Dr., Austin, Texas 78753.
W. L. Richmond is an avocational archeologist with many years of field experience in
Central and West Texas. He is an active member and past officer of the Texas
Archeological Society and is closely associated with the society’s summer field
school program. He is also a member of the Travis County Archeological Society and the Southern Texas Archaeological Association. Address: 11707 Indianhead Dr., Austin, Texas 78753.
Harry. J. Shafer is Professor of Anthropology at Texas A&M University. He has conducted
archeological field work in many areas of Texas, in the Mimbres Mogollon region of New Mexico, and in the central Maya lowlands. He is currently completing a book on the lifeways of the ancient artists of the lower Pecos River
canyons of Texas. Address: Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843.
Joel L. Shiner retired in 1985 as Professor of Anthropology at Southern Methodist University, and he is a former regional director of the Smithsonian Institution. He has
conducted field work in Texas, northern Mexico, and Egypt, and his research
interests include underwater archeology and sites of the Paleo-lndian period. He
is currently a contract archeologist with ARCO Petroleum. Address: 6939 Lyre
La., Dallas, Texas 75214.
D. Gentry Steele is Associate Professor of Anthropology at Texas A&M University and a
recent president of the Council of Texas Archeologists. His research interests
include human skeletal biology, primate biology, and zooarcheology, and he has
conducted field work in both North America and Europe. Address: Department
of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843.
J. Peter Thurmond is Executive Vice-President of the First National Bank of Leedey in
western Oklahoma. He has conducted field work in Texas primarily in the eastern, central, and northwestern parts of the state. His research interests include
the archeology of the Caddoan area and the Southern Plains, ceramic analysis,
aboriginal sociopolitical process and structure, processes of soil genesis, and
Quaternary geomorphology. Address: The First National Bank of Leedey, P.O.
Box 38, Leedey, Oklahoma 73654.
Michael E. Whalen is Assistant Professor of Anthropology at the University of Tulsa. His
areas of interest are the southwestern United States and Mexico, and his research interests include cultural ecology, prehistoric demography, and the evolution of early village societies. Address: Department of Anthropology, University
of Tulsa, Tulsa, Oklahoma 74104.

INFORMATION FOR CONTRIBUTORS
The Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society publishes original
papers in the field of American archeology. Emphasis is placed on Texas and
adjoining areas in the United States and Mexico; papers on other areas also
are considered. Articles concerning archeological technique, method, or
theory are encouraged.
Manuscripts must be typed, double spaced throughout, on 8½ x 11 in.
white paper. Footnotes should be avoided. References to published literature
(by author, date, and page or figure numbers) should be placed within
parentheses in the body of the text, with full bibliographic citations at the end.
See this issue of the Bulletin for examples. Authors also should consult "Style
Guide for Authors" in Texas Archeology 26(2):9-14 (April 1982) or write the
Editor for a copy.
The proportions of full-page illustrations (picture or drawing plus
captions) should be suitable for reduction to effective Bulletin page size of 4¼
x 7 inches. Plates may be printed either horizontally or vertically; allowance
for the caption to be printed in the same direction must be made. Captions for
illustrations should be listed in numerical order and placed in the manuscript
behind the list of references cited.
A complete manuscript is one with: a title, abstract, main body with
subdivisions, acknowledgments, references cited, appendices (if necessary),
figure captions, completed (camera-ready) photographic and drafted plates,
and author’s biographical note. Submit three copies of the typed manuscript.
Manuscripts are subject to peer review; final decision rests with the Editor.
Papers published in the Bulletin are abstracted and indexed in Abstracts
in Anthropology.
Manuscripts should be addressed to: Wayne R. Roberson, Rt. 2, Box
12C, Manor, TX 78653.

