BULLETIN
OF THE

Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society

Volume Six

SEPTEMBER
1934

Published
by the
Society at
Abilene,
Texas

The Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society
OFFICERS
CYRUS N. RAY, President
JULIUS OLSEN , Vice-President
OTTO O. WATTS , Secretary-Treasurer
DIRECTORS
DR . CYRUS N. R AY
DR. JULIUS OLSEN
DR . OTTO O. WATTS

DR. W. C. HOLDEN
DR. RUPERT RICHARDSON
C. W. HANLEY

REGIONAL VICE-PRESIDENTS
FLOYD V. STUDER - - - - - - - - - - - COL. M. L. CRIMMINS - - - - - - - - - VICTOR J. SMITH - - - - - - - - - - - - EILEEN E. ALVES - - - - - - - - - - - - DR. J. E. PEARCE - - - - - - - - - - - - GEORGE C. MARTIN - - - - - - - - - - -

AMARILLO
FORT SAM HOUSTON
ALPINE
EL PASO
AUSTIN
TERRELL WELLS

TRUSTEES
DR. ELLIS SHULER
DR. STEWART COOPER
W. A. RINEY
W. R. ELY
FRED COCKRELL
ERNEST W. WILSON

EDITOR
DR. C YRUS N. RAY

DALLAS
ABILENE
ABILENE
ABILENE
ABILENE
ABILENE

BULLETIN
of the

Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. The Texas Technological College Yaqui Expedition
by W. C. Holden ............................................................................................................................ 7
2. The Archeology of the Southwest and its Relation to the Cultures of Texas
by Harold S. Gladwin.................................................................................................................. 16
3. Types of East Texas Pottery
by A. T. Jackson ........................................................................................................................... 27
4. The Meaning of Gypsum Cave
by M. R. Harrington ..................................................................................................................... 40
5. Fetish Stones from Near El Paso
by Eileen E. Alves ....................................................................................................................... 48
6. Collecting Fossil Elephants of Texas
by Ellis W. Shuler ........................................................................................................................ 51
7. Texas Panhandle Culture Ruin No. 55
by Floyd V. Studer........................................................................................................................ 54
8. Hord Rock Shelter
by Victor J. Smith......................................................................................................................... 65
9. Flint Cultures of Ancient Man in Texas
by Cyrus N. Ray ........................................................................................................................... 71
10. Reviews of Texas Publications, Field News, and Reports ....................................................... 75
11. Secretary-Treasurer’s Report...................................................................................................... 79
12. List of Members ........................................................................................................................... 80

Vol. 6, 1934. Price $3.00
Abilene, Texas

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
PLATE I ................................................................................................................................................ 8
1. The Plumed Dancers Clan.
2. A Yaqui ceremony, naked Indian represents the Christus.
3. Yaqui funeral, Devil chaser in the foreground.
PLATE II ............................................................................................................................................... 9
4. Interior of Yaqui rooms showing horizontal bamboo weave.
5. A Yaqui kitchen.
6. An Arbor in front of a Yaqui house.
PLATE III ............................................................................................................................................ 12
7. Yaqui slingshot, rawhide thong for wood carrying, rawhide lariat, stool, gourd
nursing bottle, tortilla basket, sandals, whisk broom, and sash.
8. Yaqui musical instruments.
9. Cooking utensils, two wooden spoons, wooden bowl and earthen cooking pot.
PLATE IV ............................................................................................................................................ 13
10. Plume, corona, and gourd rattle of a plumed Dancer.
11. Left to right, bamboo flute, a whirling device for twisting horse hair into
strands, arrow with wooden point, notched music stick, smooth music stick.
12. Deer Dancers Mask.
13. Devil Chaser.
PLATE V ............................................................................................................................................. 28
14. Rattle bowl, with four large hollow knobs containing pellets.
A typical Caddo specimen found in Asinai territory.
15. Helmet like jar, with edges resembling human molars. Unusual Caddo specimen.
16. Bowl, showing entire outer surface decorated with incised sun symbols and
interlocking scroll designs. From burial on H. R. Taylor Farm, Harrison County,
Caddoan.
17. Small bowl, decorated with sun symbols. This vessel is from a historic site and
seems to show decadence. Asinai specimen.
18. Pot with corrugated outer surface, unusual Caddo specimen.
PLATE VI ............................................................................................................................................ 31
19. Large bottle, bearing trailed or grooved concentric circles. Asinai specimen,
Henderson County.
20. Bottle, highly polished—Incised scroll—Red paint in lines. Caddo specimen,
showing the ceramic art at its best. Red River County.
21. Tiny bottle, without decoration, resting on four legs. From a grave on Goode
Hunt farm, Cass County. Unusual Caddo specimen.
22. Pedestal vase or jar with square base. Note the concentric circles, Asinai
specimen, Nacogdoches County.
23. Bottle with large, gradually tapering neck. Note the incised vertical bands and
triangles. Typical Asinai specimen Henderson Co.
24. Small bottle-incised scroll with red paint in lines. Typical Caddo specimen,
Calls County.

PLATE VII ........................................................................................................................................... 34
25. Jar bearing incised arrow points and intricate sun symbols. Caddoan, Franklin
County.
26. Olla-employing raised swastika as a decorative feature, Caddoan, Morris County.
27. Redware jar, design carved through, Caddoan, Titus County.
28. Jar featuring three sets of concentric circles. From historic burial site, Richard
Patton farm, Anderson County. Traces of white paint remain in the incisions.
Asinni.
29. Large bowl, featuring multiple interlocking scrolls. Note the scratched or
combed lower surface. From a historic burial. Asinai specimen. Anderson
County.
30. Jar decorated with raised lines or melon stripes. Caddonn, Camp County.
PLATE VIII ......................................................................................................................................... 38
31. Effigy bottles, Caddoan, Harrison County.
32. Pots-bearing raised circles and scrolls. Harrison and Camp Counties.
33. Bowls bearing animal effigies, Asinai specimens. Anderson and Hopkins
Counties.
34. Double lamp with suspension holes and small bowl with saw tooth edge.
From Morris and Shelby Counties.
PLATE IX............................................................................................................................................ 41
35. Sloth humerus imbedded in sloth dung. Roan 4. Gypsum Cave. A mass of
sloth hair was found beneath this bone.
36. Leg bones of small slender camel in situ. Room 4. Gypsum Cave.
37. Claws and bones of Ground Sloth as uncovered in Gypsum Cave, Nevada.
PLATE X ............................................................................................................................................. 44
38. Bones of American camel split for the marrow, Gypsum Cave, Nevada.
39. Skull of Ground Sloth from Gypsum Cave.
40. Flint knife on original wooden handle, Gypsum Cave.
41. Dart points of quartzite and flint probably used in hunting ground sloths,
Gypsum Cave.
42. Dart point of quartzite, wooden dart foreshaft and ground sloth claw from
Gypsum Cave. The claw is over six inches long.
PLATE XI............................................................................................................................................ 49
43. Mountain lion, buffalo, frog, and bear fetishes.
44. The mountain lion in stone and in pottery.
45. Rear, lion, buffalo, and frogs.
PLATE XII .......................................................................................................................................... 52
46. Dr. Shuler excavating a mammoth skull.
47. An almost complete skeleton uncovered.
48. Section of the Connor Sand Pit near Dallas, Texas, where bones were excavated.

PLATE XIII ........................................................................................................................................ 55
49. Site 55 before excavation.
50. Looking Into Room B from across Arroyo.
51. Room A. Showing ventilator, fire pit, sipapu, and two floor levels.
PLATE XIV ........................................................................................................................................ 57
52. Field Plan of Ruin No. 55.
PLATE XV .......................................................................................................................................... 60
53. Texas Panhandle Culture pot.
54. Fired clay pipe or cloud blower.
55. Unfired clay far.
PLATE XVI ........................................................................................................................................ 62
56. Texas Panhandle Culture arrowheads, knives, drills and scrapers.
57. Texas Panhandle Culture bone implements.
PLATE XVII ....................................................................................................................................... 70
58. Bone of Musk Ox found in Hord Cave.
59. Musk Ox bone in situ. Hord Cave.
60. Artifacts found at Hord Cave. Top row left to right, flint point found at
same level as bones, woven bag, buffer stone, middle shows matting in pit
lining, cordage from lower level and the bottom picture shows a trigger.
PLATE XVIII ...................................................................................................................................... 72
61 to 111 illustrate Typical flints of the “Clear Fork” culture complex,
pre-Folsom and Folsom points, “Abilene Points,” an ancient “Sand Dune
Culture” point, and other flints of ancient man in Texas, and a carved
petrified horse bone found in a camp site.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

7

THE TEXAS TECHNOLOGICAL COLLEGE
YAQUI EXPEDITION
W. C. HOLDEN
Our interest in the Yaqui Indians grew out of a
casual incident. One of our anthropology students,
Miss Yone Stone, was much interested in
anthropology, and was constantly bringing us
newspaper clippings of archaeological findings. One
day in March, 1938, she told us she had met an
interesting immigration officer from Marfa, Mr. Ivan
Williams, who had a manuscript dealing with the
history of the Yaqui Indians. She was anxious for
us to meet Mr. Williams the next time he came this
way.
Three weeks later we met Mr. Williams, who
stated that while patrolling the sage brush south of
Tucson with another officer they found themselves
in the midst of a Yaqui army, consisting of twentyeight soldiers with their families and dogs. The
Yaquis in Sonora had been hostile for some time
and these had been pushed across the border by a
superior Mexican force. Williams and his brother
officer disarmed the Indians and took them to
Tucson where they were interned as political
refugees. They settled in Pascua village just outside
Tucson. Williams befriended them, and finally got
the Arizona Cotton Raisers Association to give them
jobs picking cotton. In time Williams became the
adviser, arbitrator, and all but father confessor to
this group of Yaquis. They elected him honorary
chief, and gave him a chief’s staff and feather
bonnet.

They directed one of their tribe who could operate
a typewriter to write the tribal traditions as dictated
by the old men. They had captured the typewriter
from a Mexican army they had annihilated. The
scribe wrote a few episodes and attempted to send
them to Arizona through the Mexican mails. The
Mexicans apprehended the letters and they did not
get through. The Yaquis tried another plan. They
typed a chapter on cloth, sewed it in the lining of a
shirt, put the shirt on a runner, who carried it over
the secret trails to Tucson. Williams said that every
few weeks a runner would come in with a “shirt
full of history.” It was written in Yaqui. “General”
Flores would translate it into Spanish, and Williams
in turn would translate it into English. In all there
were about 8,000 words of it. We expressed a desire
to see the manuscript. When we finally did see the
manuscript we were disappointed. It was mostly a
sketchy account of the tribal wars with the Mexicans
since 1740. It occurred to us that if we could get to
the old men on the Rio Yaqui we might draw from
them additional information to fill in between the
lines.
Williams visited the eight villages on the Rio
Yaqui in 1929, and had become a close friend of
Jesus Munguia, at that time the head of all the
villages. Munguia later urged Williams to visit the
Yaquis again and bring his friends. An opportunity
to enter the Yaqui country as “Williams friends”
caused us to start planning an expedition. The
financing of the expedition in the face of present
conditions presented a problem to be solved first.
Finally we worked out a plan to finance the party
locally. The Lubbock Avalanche -Journal undertook
to sponsor the campaign. Service clubs, business
firms, and the West Texas Chamber of Commerce
contributed more readily than we anticipated.

By talking with the old men Williams learned
that the Yaquis had long kept a history of their tribe
handed down by word of mouth. He asked
“General” Guadalupe Flores, chief of the Pascua
group, tosend word down to the chiefs of the Yaqui
villages on the Rio Yaqui in Sonora requesting them
to have some of their history written down and sent
to Tucson. There is constant communication
between the Arizona Yaquis and the Sonora Yaquis.
We went to Mexico City during the Christmas
Runners slip back and forth over secret trails holidays and secured not only the permission, but
between the Bacatete Mountains and the border. the cooperation of the Mexican government.
The Sonora chiefs decided to supply the history. Mexican officials listened to our story and became

8

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

quite as excited over our proposed expedition as
we were. They frankly admitted that the Yaquis had
been terribly abused by the Spanish government and
by the Mexican government until a few years ago.
Porfirio Diaz had tried to exterminate them. Now
the government seems to want to do the right thing
by the Yaquis.

When we arrived at Tucson, Flores was
expecting us and while here we got considerable
information from Flores and others concerning
conditions in the Yaqui country. Flores prepared a
letter for us to take to Munguia.

During January and February of
1934 we organized our expedition.
Now we wished to make historical,
physical anthropological, archaeological, ethnological, ethno-botanical,
herpetological, ornithological, and
medical investigations. Harvard
University loaned us a physical
anthropologist, Dr. Carl Coleman
Seltzer, student of Dr. E. A. Hooton.
Dr. Richard A. Studhalter of Texas
Technological College, went as ethnobotanist. Dr. Charles J. Wagner was
selected as physician and to investigate
Yaqui diseases. To William G.
McMillan of Lubbock was entrusted
the bird and reptile study. Bennie
McWilliams, as cook and assistant
archaeologist, Ross Edwards and
Frank Maddox of Lubbock as outdoor
men and camp assistants. We were
desirous of taking along a geologist,
but we had been repeatedly told by
persons who knew, that the Yaquis are
jealously guarding their minerals and
that one man examining rocks and
geological structures would jeopardize
the entire expedition.
Our party left Lubbock March 1
traveling in two cars and a heavily
loaded truck. That night we camped
at Van Horn where we had a long
interview with Mr. Williams. We had
hoped to take him with us, but he was
unable to get a leave. He had already
written “General” Flores that we were
coming by Tucson and had asked him
to give us a letter to Jesus Munguia.

PLATE 1.
1. The Plumed Dancers Clan.
2. A Yaqui ceremony, naked Indian represents
the Christus.
3. Yaqui funeral, Devil chaser in the foreground.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

9

At Nogales the Mexican immigration and
The Rio Yaqui rises in southern Arizona, flows
customs officials gave us every consideration.
south approximately 300 miles and then turns west
some 90 miles into the Gulf of California. The eight
Our route took us to Hermosillo, Guaymas, and
historic Yaqui villages were scattered at more or
then east into the Yaqui country. We stayed a week
less equal intervals along the lower 90 mile stretch
at Vicam and three weeks at Torin from which place
of the river which extends from east to west. The
we made short visits to Potam and Consica.
country on either side of the river from
ten to twelve miles is low and flat, and
of a sedimentary, sandy loam, covered
with a dense growth of mesquite trees
and cacti. Occasionally there will be
hundreds of acres of cholla so thick that
neither man nor horse can penetrate the
thickets. Organ pipe cacti and sahuaras
of great size are plentiful. All the
vegetation is of a semi-desert nature.
There is no rain at all in the region from
October until June, and none too much
from June to October. Some fifteen
miles north of the Rio Yaqui are the
Bacatete Mountains which extend about
twenty-five miles cast and west and
about sixty north and south. Passes into
the mountains are few, difficult, and
easily guarded from above. Ten men in
the mountains can defend the passes
against hundreds below by rolling rocks
down on them. The Yaquis have from
time immemorial held these mountains
and are still holding them today. They
will never be completely conquered so
long as they continue to occupy them.

PLATE 2.
4. Interior of Yaqui rooms showing horizontal
bamboo weave.
5. A Yaqui kitchen.
6. An arbor in front of a Yaqui house.

Dr. Alex Hrdlicka visited four of the
Yaqui villages in 1902. He reported
approximately 20,000 Yaquis living in
the eight villages at the time. Dr. E. L.
Hewitt was in the vicinity in 1906, but
as yet has never published his
observations. Today there are
approximately 2600 Yaquis living in five
villages, four along the river and one in
the mountains. The four river villages,
extending from west to east, are Potam,
Vicam, Torin, and Consica. The one in
the mountains is Agua Berde.

10

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

The Yaquis of Agua Berde are defiant of all
Mexican authority. They control the mountains and
live mostly by stealing and by raiding outlying
Mexican settlements. The Yaquis in the four river
villages present a unique political situation. Five
years ago the Mexican government changed its
policy towards them. The government made a treaty
with the Yaquis whereby each man would become
technically a member of the Mexican army and
receive forty-two pesos a month. In this way the
men of the river villages became a part of the army.
However, they do not drill and do not take orders
from any Mexican officer. In each village are two
garrisons, a Mexican and a Yaqui garrison. They
are both paid by the same government, but spend
their days watching each other. At night they mount
guard against each other. There is a sort of invisible
boundary line between them. The relations between
the Yaqui chiefs and the Mexican officers are
diplomatic, as between foreign countries.

Our ethnological work was handicapped by the
lack of adequate interpreters. At Tucson we had
been told by Flores that we could find Yaquis at the
villages who spoke English. Several days of
searching in the four river villages revealed one man,
Ramon Torry, and his knowledge of English was
scant. He had gone to school in Tucson and had
reached the third grade. Because of lack of an
adequate interpreter we decided to confine the
ethnological work to material culture and such
phases of social culture as we might get by
observation.

In physical appearance the Yaquis have tribal
characteristics as striking as those of the Navajos
or Hopis. The men are of average height and of
slender build with wasp waists. Their faces are long,
slightly prognathous, with full lips and broad noses.
The average weight of the men runs between 180
and 140 pounds. The women are heavy breasted,
large hipped, and average fifteen to twenty pounds
We were never able to contact Jesus Munguia. heavier than the men. They have large, beautiful
He refused to comply with the last treaty between black eyes which look at you squarely. Although
the Yaquis and the Mexican government. For the they become stout early in life, Yaqui women seem
last five years he has been the chief of the mountain to keep their freshness much longer than Mexican
Yaquis. As we were under the constant surveillance women.
of the Mexican army we had no opportunity to
In their dress the men wear any kind of a shirt
arrange a meeting with Munguia. The mountain
they can get, blue denim trousers, and straw hats
Yaquis are regarded by the Mexican government
of many varieties. The women wear several calico
as outlaws and are shot on sight. The Mexican army
skirts which gather at the waist with a draw string
guards the lower ends of the passes in an effort to
and a short loose shirt waist. In public they wear
prevent communication between the mountain
brown or black mantillas over their heads. At home,
Yaquis and those in the river villages. We
they frequently wear bandanna handkerchiefs.
ascertained, however, that the two groups have an
understanding, and that the river Yaquis help to
All the men and part of the women wear sandals,
support the mountain people with a part of the the rest of the women go barefooted. Very little
money they draw from the Mexican government. jewelry is worn by men or women. Such as was
Politically, the Yaquis are a state within a state. They seen is like that sold in our ten-cent stores.
pay no taxes, have their own laws and court
The average Yaqui going about his everyday
systems, and administer their own verdicts. The
routine is a walking arsenal. Around his waist is a
Mexican government provides schools to which the
cartridge belt filled with high-powered cartridges.
Yaquis may send their children, but only about ten
At his right hip hangs a cocked automatic pistol.
per cent of them permit their children to go. Not
Inside his belt behind his left hip is a long knife
that the old men do not realize the importance of
used both for hunting and por hombres. Over his
literacy, but they know the surest way for the
right shoulder hangs a repeating rifle which may
government to break Yaqui integrity would be for
range anywhere from a 30-30 to a 45 caliber. Most
them to send their children to Mexican schools.
of his arms are of American make.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
Of their marriage practices we have yet much
to learn. Monogamy prevails, and it is customary
for a couple to start living together without any
ceremony. A church service may or may not be held.
We found one instance where a Yaqui man before
going away had “loaned” his wife to his friend. At
the time the wife had already had two children by
the “friend”. Divorce is quite simple. The couple
may separate by common consent, or either party
may move off. In either case both parties are free
to form new alliances. The Yaquis have considerable
affection for children and show old people great
respect.
They are very fond of handshaking. When they
meet they shake hands and when they leave they
shake hands. Their method of handshaking is
unique. Each person touches his own left shoulder
with his right hand, then the other person’s left
shoulder, and grasps the other’s hand with a
backward movement.
The land system is both communistic and
individualistic. The public domain belongs to the
tribe. Any man can have a field for the clearing. It
is his as long as he uses it. The field reverts to the
people when abandoned. The same principle is used
with a building site. A man can build a house on
any unappropriated spot he wishes. The place is
his as long as he lives there and goes back to the
public domain when he leaves. A principle of
inheritance is coupled with this rule of occupancy.
The children may continue to live in the house and
work the fields after the death of the parents.
House construction materials consist of pole and
bamboo. So varied and important are the uses of
bamboo that the Yaqui material culture may be
called a bamboo culture. House building is one of
the phases of Yaqui life we concentrated upon, and
our data will require a lengthy report. We visited,
made ground plans, elevation sketches, and took
copious notes on the arrangement and contents of
fourteen house groups. We use the term “house
groups,” for the Yaquis often live in little colonies
consisting of two to six families. Each family
maintains its own establishment usually consisting
of a kitchen and a sleeping room. The house group

11

is often surrounded by a bamboo fence about six
feet high, forming a compound.
The kitchens usually have no walls on one, two,
or three sides. They contain an open, double
fireplace (with no chimney) either situated on the
ground or elevated some thirty inches on a pole
platform; a metate for grinding corn meal, mounted
on a post with three forks to it; another metate for
grinding a cheap grade of coffee which they buy
green and roast in earthen pots; a huge water olla
which contains from ten to twelve gallons and is
mounted on another post with three prongs; several
earthen pots and ollas of different sizes and shapes;
and occasionally a rude table. Hanging here and
there from the walls or ceiling are several baskets.
One of these will contain some tin or porcelain cups
and plates and a few cheap spoons and forks. They
do not use table knives. Near at hand is always
found a large, round, wooden spoon which is used
for stirring corn or coffee while it is being parched
in earthen pots.
Yaquis eat three meals a day, all of which consist
of tortillas made of corn meal, red beans, and black
coffee. Occasionally there is a stew made of wild
meat, usually javelina. The tortillas are cooked in a
flat earthen bowl on one side of the double fireplace,
and on the other side simmers a pot (an earthen
olla) of beans. It takes a Yaqui woman from one to
three hours to grind (backbreaking work) the corn
and cook a batch of tortillas. Food is eaten mostly
with the hands. One takes a tortilla, cups it in one
hand, puts in a spoonful of beans, (or stew), folds
and eats it like a sandwich.
We were always anxious to get into the sleeping
rooms. It was here we were most likely to find the
museum specimens we were looking for. These
rooms are always inclosed on all sides, and
sometimes the north side is plastered with adobe.
Along the walls stand bamboo sleeping mats. These
are usually from four to five feet wide, six feet long,
and a third of an inch thick. At night they are spread
on the earth floor and people sleep on them,
covering with a blanket. Somewhere in the room is
the corn and bean supply, varying from a few gallons
to several bushels stored in bamboo containers or

12

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

sacks. Hanging on the wall or in a bamboo basket ceremonial objects, drums, flutes, music sticks,
are the few extra articles of clothing-pitifully few. plumes, gourd rattles, masks, and other what-nots.
In one corner are usually piled a few agricultural
The Yaquis are extremely religious. When they
implements. Sticking about in nook and cranny are
shoot Mexicans they do it religiously.
From one fourth to one third of their time
is devoted to religious activities. Their
religion is a mixture of Catholicism and
paganism, a Christian theme largely
observed with pagan ritual. Their
churches combine the elements of
Christian temple and pagan shrine. They
are made of poles and bamboo somewhat
after the manner of our old-fashioned
brush arbors. The Yaquis have their own
priests. These wear no vestments, but
dress in blue denim and sandals like the
other men. Training for the priesthood is
gotten by the apprentice method. The
priests do no preaching, but lead the
endless prayers and chants.

PLATE 3.
7. Yaqui slingshot, rawhide thong for wood
carrying, rawhide lariat, stool, gourd nursing
bottle, tortilla basket, sandals, whisk broom and sash.
8. Yaqui musical instruments.
9. Cooking utensils, two wooden spoons, wooden bowl
and earthen cooking pot.

Religious observances consist for the
most part of pageantry and miracle plays.
The Yaquis possess a keen sense of the
dramatic. The Fiesta de Gloria which
lasts four days and nights is a series of
dramatic episodes, each with its climax.
Biblical and pagan characters are
impersonated. The most spectacular of
these personages is Death, who is
represented by a tall man wearing a black
veil and a long cape. When leading the
numerous processions the Yaquis are so
fond of, he rides a beautiful white horse
whose mane and tail have been made
festive with colored paper flowers and
streamers. The processions are made up
of the chiefs and their staffs, men and
women carrying images under canopies,
priests and chanting women, military
guards fully armed, and devil chasers in
huge grotesque masks with deer hoof
belts and shell anklets making desperate
slashes at imaginary devils with wooden
swords. A multitude of women and
children follow.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
When the Fiesta de Gloria started we divided
the eight members (Mr. Edwards had returned to
Lubbock) of our party into four watches and took
turns in two and a half hour shifts. Every moment
of the Fiesta was covered. Our notes
on this ceremony will make a long
report.
Yaquis adore funerals. They live
from one funeral to the next. While
at Torim we witnessed four, and
another was under way the day we
left. We had an unusual opportunity
to collect data on funeral customs.
The Yaquis do not use coffins. The
corpse is dressed in a calico robe and
placed on a bamboo litter. Two devil
chasers mount guard over the bier
and keep the devils fought off during
the twenty-four to forty-two hours
the funeral is in progress. This time
is consumed with dances and
speeches by the deer dancers who
perform with only short blankets
around their waists and with black
wooden masks on their faces, prayers
and chants by the priests and
women’s chorus, and feasting. The
funeral procession is a colorful bit of
pageantry. It is lead by fourteen
plumed dancers doing a beautiful
dance full of movement, glides, spins,
and whirls. The body is carried on the
shoulders of four men and four
women. All the clans march along in
full array. The brilliantly colored
plumes and headgears of the plumed
dancers give the procession a festive
appearance, and the clowning of the
devil chasers hustling the devils aside
reminds one of a circus parade. Our
final report will contain an entire
chapter on Yaqui funerals.
Dr. R. A. Studhalter’s principal
aspects of study were seven-fold.
First, in regard to agriculture he made
observations of soil types, methods

13

of clearing land, and crops raised. Twenty different
crops were seen growing and eleven which will be
planted in August were reported to us. The major
crops raised in the spring are wheat, beans, corn,

PLATE 4.
10. Plume, corona, and gourd rattle of a plumed Dancer.
11. Left to right, bamboo flute, a whirling device for
twisting horse hair into strands, arrow with wooden
point, notched music stick, smooth music stick.
12. Deer Dancers Mask.
13. Devil Chaser.

14

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

English peas, garabanzas, onions, garlic, tomatoes,
and celentro. Agricultural practices for each crop
are quite primitive. Observations were made as to
size of fields, preparation of soil, planting,
cultivation, irrigation if any, harvesting, storing,
superstitions, water supply for irrigation, and
agricultural implements. Implements are rather
simple, mostly of American manufacture, others of
Mexican, and a few are homemade. Of
domesticated animals, approximately one family out
of ten has a few cattle, one out of five has a horse,
one out of twenty has one or more donkeys, one
out of forty has some goats, and practically every
family has from six to twenty chickens. As pets,
they have dogs, paroquetes, and javelinas.
In regard to the botany of the region Dr.
Studhalter made 247 collections of plants. He found
all major plant groups represented in spite of the
severe drought. He made a detailed study of the
gariso, or bamboo cane, which grows prolifically
along the river hanks and which is used for many
different purposes by the Yaquis. He took notes on
two leather plants, (tree and shrub), genus jatropha,
in order to make a comparison with species growing
in Southwest Texas. A field study was made of four
parasitic flowering plants. Notes were taken on
introduced plants and plants which have escaped
cultivation. An ecological classification was made
of the region.

on Yaquis, made a study of the prevalence and
nature of Yaqui diseases, especially colds, whooping
cough, diphtheria, smallpox, tuberculosis, typhoid,
and the social diseases. He secured considerable
information on child birth practices. He got 28
family histories. This data has not yet been
compiled, but it deals with sizes of families, infant
mortality, diseases in the family, causes of deaths,
ages of those who have died, divorces, remarriages,
illegitimacy, and life spans. He collected data on
twenty medicinal plants and their uses. Dr. Wagner
was the chief photographer of the expedition. He
took over four hundred still pictures and 1200 feet
of sixteen millimeter film.
Bennie McWilliams explored the Yaqui valley
for archaeological remains. Due to the aggrading
nature of the land previous occupation sites are now
covered with silt. At one place he found where an
arroyo had cut through an old camp site. The few
pot shards obtained from the place were similar to
modern Yaqui pottery. Specimens of modern
pottery were brought back, and a description of it
will be made in a subsequent report.

As an architect and builder, Mr. McMillan was
most useful in collecting data on Yaqui houses and
in making ground plots and elevation sketches. In
addition, he collected data on the types and habits
of over seventy different kinds of birds and
especially noted those influencing Yaqui life. He
A study was made of the uses of plants for food, was hampered in his investigations of reptile life by
medicine and construction. Notes on medical uses the fact that reptiles are not active during the dry
were made. Photographs were taken, numbering season. According to the Yaquis they fairly swarm
192, mostly of Yaqui agriculture. Weather records during the wet months of July and August. The
were taken twice a day pertaining to barometric snake has influenced the habits and mythology of
pressure, temperature, humidity, clouds, rain and the Yaquis as it has other tribes of a semi-desert
wind. Approximately 100 Yaqui words, dealing environment. Mr. McMillan brought back a tree
mostly with agriculture and botany were written boa and a spiny tail iguana.
down with diacritical marks.
Dr. C. C. Seltzer took anthropometrical
It will be necessary for Dr. Studhalter to make measurements of 101 adult Yaqui males. He
another visit to the Yaqui country during the harvest recorded 105 measurements and observations of
season in October before he finishes his report. each individual. One of the most important aspects
When completed it will he of considerable length of Dr. Seltzer’s work was the discovery of a decided
and crowded with detail.
“negroidal” strain among the Yaquis. Of the
existence of this “negroidal” strain, Dr. Seltzer says
Dr. Charles J. Wagner, in addition to taking care
there can be no doubt. A question remains as to
of the health of the party, performed six operations
whether the introduction of this strain was post-

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

15

Perhaps our greatest single achievement was the
contacts we made at Torin. Due to a series of lucky
incidents we made as much headway in getting the
confidence and cooperation of the people as we
might otherwise have made in many months or
years. The day we left the men gathered and gave
us a farewell that we will not forget. They made us
promise to write them and to come back again. We
feel that when we do go back we will receive a
welcome that will be as sincere and as moving as
The expedition secured 144 museum specimens,
our last leave-taking. When we do return we hope
71 for Peabody Museum at Harvard and 73 for the
to have a better interpreter in order that we may
Plains Museum Society at the Texas Technological
make more headway on social ethnology.
College. The two collections are for the most part
duplicates and represent fairly well the articles used Texas Technological College
Lubbock, Texas
by the modern Yaqui.
Columbian or pre-Columbian. As yet, we have been
unable to find any evidence of a large negroid
migration into Sonora during historic times. If the
introduction of the negroid element proves to be
pre-Columbian, the fact will constitute further
evidence of the composite theory of the origin of
the American Indian, a theory which the Harvard
group of physical anthropologists are leaning
towards at the present time.

16

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF THE SOUTHWEST AND ITS
RELATION TO THE CULTURES OF TEXAS
HAROLD S. GLADWIN
Before attempting to describe the Puebloan
cultures of Arizona and New Mexico, I think it
would be best to review the changes which have
taken place in American Archaeology as a whole
during the past ten years.
In 1924 the belief was general, and still exists in
some quarters, that all American Indians were of
one race; that they could be divided into three
categories-hunters, food-gatherers, and sedentary
agriculturists, and that this last group could be
further divided within the area of intensive
agriculture into Mound Builders, Pueblos, and the
great civilizations of the Valley of Mexico, Central
America, and Peru.
In regard to time, the relative periods of these
last five civilized groups were sunk in the mists of
antiquity. Practically nothing was known of the
Mound Builders and their origin could be said to
have been almost mythical. The Pueblos were
known to have developed from hunting
Basketmakers who were thought to have invented
pottery, although maize was admittedly introduced
from an exterior source. Dates in Mexico were
claimed as far back as 8,000 B. C. or earlier, based
on sites which had been covered by lava flows,
which were reverently known as the Archaic Culture
of Mexico. Equally great antiquity was claimed for
the Maya of Central America and correlation
between the Maya and Christian chronologies
showed dates prior to the time of Christ, based on
astronomical reckoning, several thousand additional
years being required for the development of
astronomical knowledge and the evolution of the
Mayan system of glyphs. In Peru, no one had the
temerity to even estimate dates. When questions of
age arose, it was sufficient to point to the fossilized
ear of maize which had been discovered in Cuzco.

Turning from archaeologists to physical
anthropologists, there was, in 1924, an almost
hysterical insistence that no men had entered the
New World earlier than 10,000 B. C. and that his
cultural equipment at that time corresponded to the
Neolithic stage of culture in the Old World. In other
words, stone implements were made by polishing
or rubbing, but knowledge of agriculture, potterymaking, or house-building was unknown.
In exposing the fakes of the Calaveras skull in
California and the claims of Ameghino in the
Argentine, great ability was shown by the watchdogs of American archaeology. So much so that
other instances, such as the Lansing Man and the
carved mammoth from Jacob’s Cavern went into
the same waste paper basket.
I think I am correct in saying that this was
approximately the situation in 1924.
Archaeology, as thus defined, has been extremely
easy to teach. Embarrassing questions as to origins,
etc., could he readily answered by referring to the
extreme antiquity in the murk of which all questions
of origins were buried. It was not necessary for
professors of archaeology to change their views. It
was to everyone’s advantage for the science to
remain in status quo.

During the last ten years, and particularly during
the last five, American archaeology has emerged
from behind this veil. Beginning first with the
hunters, an increasing body of evidence has been
built up to show that Man has been in the New
World very much longer than had been supposed.
Beginning with the work of Barnum Brown at
Folsom, Harrington at Gypsum Cave, Cook and
Strong in Nebraska, and Howard in eastern New
Mexico, it has been convincingly proven that Man
existed in America at the time with the mastodon,
While it seemed obvious that the agricultural
mammoth, ground sloth, musk-ox, and extinct
civilizations of the New World were extremely
forms of bison and antelope. Hanging on like grim
ancient, the hunting tribes of America offered a
death, the paleontologists explained this association
queer paradox.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
by saying that fauna, which anywhere else would
have been accepted as Pleistocene, had, in North
America, actually persisted through into Recent
times, although it must be admitted that no recent
fauna was found in any of these sites. Texas has
provided the last link in the chain of evidence
through the discovery, by Ray* (EDITOR’S NOTE) of
a series of Covered Sites near Abilene, Texas, in
geological deposits which are unmistakably
Pleistocene, and of implements which conform to
those of Old World cultures of 50,000 B. C.
In addition to the geological and cultural
evidence, we have recently received proof which
should satisfy the physical anthropologists. Sixteen
skulls excavated by Sayles at Oso, on the Gulf
Coast, have recently been analyzed by George
Woodbury, of the Bedford Laboratory. The reports
state that these skulls show affinities to Dr. Ray’s
Abilene skulls, (**EDITOR’S NOTE) to the Val Verde
skulls, to the Pericue of Lower California, and, of
even greater importance, to the Lagoa Santa skulls
from caves in eastern Brazil, and the Punin skull
from Ecuador.

17

article. The same is also true of the Mound Builders,
although some of the more northerly groups may
ante-date the southern groups.
Summing up this general resume, we can say
with some assurance:
That we have no less than two racial types in
the New World, Australoid and Mongoloid
(probably also proto-Australoid);
That man has been in the New World for not
less than 40,000 years;
That civilization based on intensive agriculture
in Mexico, Central America, and Peru are all much
more recent than has been supposed;
And furthermore, that no early stages have yet
been found in any one of these three great areas
which can be regarded as introductory to the earliest
horizons thus far identified;
And lastly, that American Archaeology will be
very much more difficult to teach in the future than
in the past.

Louis Sullivan, Sir Arthur Keith, and Woodbury
PART II.
all agree in describing some or all of these skulls as
Turning now to the archaeology of the
either Australoid or of Melanesian type, a verdict
which should settle, once and for all, the question Southwest, it is again necessary to describe the
of the American Indian being of one race-unless by changes which have taken place in the last ten years.
this is meant the Human Race.
In 1924, Dr. Kidder, in his “Introduction to
Southwestern
Archaeology,” made the first attempt
At the other end of the scale, the results of work
during the last five years has been equally to arrange the various cultures in a comprehensive
revolutionary. In Peru, the fossil ear of corn has scheme. In so doing, he defined culture areas as
turned out to have been made of pottery, made being based on the major river drainages or
probably about 1200 A. D. In Central America, Eric prominent geographical divisions. His plan included
Thompson, of the Field Museum, has brought new the following: Kayenta, Mesa Verde, Chaco, Rio
light to bear on Mayan dates. While it is still Grande, Little Colorado, Upper Gila, Mimbres,
necessary to explain where, when, and how they Chihuahua, Lower Gila, northern peripheral, and
acquired their knowledge of astronomy, the earliest eastern peripheral. He also gave us a tentative
material culture of the Maya may not go much chronology within each area, beginning with the
farther back than 700 or 800 A. D. In Mexico, Basket makers and leading up to the historic
George Vaillant, working in the Archaic horizons, Pueblos. The importance of his work cannot be
has been treating Mexican dates with scant respect overestimated as, up to that time, no attempt had
and it is not at all improbable that the so-called been made to correlate the facts which had been
Archaic will date about 700 A. D. In the Pueblo obtained. The work which had been carried on had
area, the tendency has been along the same lines, been almost exclusively confined to the excavation
as I will attempt to show in the second part of this of large well known ruins. Judd had excavated

18

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Bonito; Hodge had completed his work at Hawikuh;
Fewkes had explored Casa Grande, Sikyatki and
Mesa Verde; Kidder was still working at Pecos.
Practically nothing was known of the smaller and
earlier sites since neither Morris nor Roberts had
yet begun their investigations of early Pueblo
horizons. In general, Kidder’s outline still serves
as the best background for the Southwest.

PUEBLO II: houses were built on the surface of
the ground, rectangular, with coursed masonry.
These were sometimes grouped into clusters of four
or five rooms, but were never more than one story.
Decorated pottery assumed distinct forms in
different areas. The corrugated bands on cooking
wares were indented, each coil being pressed by
the thumb against the underlying coil, originating a
technique which afterwards achieved great
excellence.

In 1927 the first Pecos Conference accepted his
definition of culture areas and gave it further
P UEBLO III: is the Classic period of the
support by outlining a classification of periods
which could be fitted into the general plan. This Southwest. Pueblos were built having two hundred
outline is generally known as the Pecos rooms or more, and often several stories, as the
Classification. The earliest period was named:
Pueblo Bonito, etc. Where the environment
permitted, these pueblos were built under
BASKETMAKER I: to cover the culture discovered
overhanging cliffs, as in the great cliff-dwellings of
by Harrington at Lovelock Cave, Nevada, where
Mesa Verde and Sagi Canyon. Pottery achieved its
life was dependent entirely on hunting, and neither
greatest excellence, markedly distinct in each
pottery, agriculture, nor house-building was known.
culture area. The period ended when the northern
This was followed by:
pueblos and cliff-dwellings were abandoned, the
B ASKETMAKER II: characterized by the people moving south and east causing repercussions
introduction of maize, admittedly from an exterior which were felt as far south as Chihuahua and as
far east as Texas.
source. Next came:
BASKETMAKER III: in which pottery was added,
and house remains were defined by slab-lined pithouses.

PUEBLO IV: was the period of decline. Great
pueblos were still built, as in the Jeddito, but all
arts declined. It ended in the Pueblo Revolt in 1650,
and the final subjugation of the Pueblos by the
Spaniards under De Vargas.

In all three Basketmaker periods, the physical
type remained constant, dolichocephalic,
undeformed; moderately tall men of slight build.
PUEBLO V: is the period of the modern pueblos—
The culture was also said to include twined and the Modern Hopi and Rio Grande Pueblos, etc.
woven bags, coiled basketry, rabbit-fur robes, the
Kidder’s definition of culture areas, supported
atl-atl or spear thrower, and square-toed sandals.
by the Pesos Classification, described the status of
————
Southwestern archaeology in 1927. It was at this
The beginning of the Pueblo periods was marked time, with every intention of further confirming this
by a sharp line of demarcation through the status, that we began a comprehensive survey of
appearance of a brachycephalic people, who’s the entire Southwest, laying particular emphasis on
broad-headedness was further accentuated by the succession of small, insignificant ruins that
occipital flattening of the skull.
preceded the building of the great pueblos.
PUEBLO I: house remains included both pithouses, slab-lined, and later, small houses built on
the surface. Decorated pottery carried new and
distinctive designs. Cooking wares changed from
the smooth plain grey ware of the Basketmakers to
pots with a series of flattened bands encircling the
neck.

In the spring of 1927, I led an expedition from
the Southwest Museum of Los Angeles to Cash
Grande, the center of Kidder’s Lower Gila culture.
We chose this area because it was the least known,
but, nevertheless, we believed, as did everyone else,
that the Lower Gila was merely a local variation of
the Pueblo culture. We soon discovered, however,

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
that this was not the case. The remains which were
obviously Puebloan were found to be merely a crust
overlying other remains which were distinct and
unrelated to the Pueblos at any period. Subsequent
investigation has confirmed our original opinion,
and Dr. Kidder has agreed with us that this
underlying culture constitutes a new and important
element in the framework of the Southwest.
The people who were responsible for this culture
we have named the Hohokam, a Pima word
meaning “Those who have gone,” and since the
stages of their development do not conform to the
Pecos Classification, we have used different terms
to define their successive periods. These begin with
a:

19

only available water is in the Gila River and its few
tributaries, and I feel convinced that the deliberate
choice of such an environment makes it certain that
the Hohokam must have had knowledge of
agriculture dependent upon irrigation when they
first entered the area, since life without such
knowledge would have been impossible to maintain.
The end of the Colonial period is shown by a
withdrawal of all outlying colonies and a
concentration in the Gila Basin along the Gila and
Salt Rivers.
SEDENTARY PERIOD: primarily defined by large
villages overlying Colonial settlements, often at a
distance of one to two miles from the old river
channels, fed by irrigation ditches, over one hundred
and forty miles of which have already been traced.
Houses were built on the ground, of adobe walls
reinforced by wooden posts. Houses were
sometimes grouped within a surrounding wall,
constituting what has come to be known as a
Compound.

COLONIAL PERIOD: houses were rectangular with
rounded corner, sunk in the ground to a depth of
eighteen inches. Entrance was provided through a
covered vestibule which probably also serves: as a
smoke vent, permitting a solid roof, as against the
early houses of the Pueblos in which the entrance
was a hatchway in the roof, which also served as a
While pottery of the Colonial period probably
smoke vent, and was covered, when necessary, by
was still made, a change took place in the form of
a flat stone slab. Disposal of the dead was by
jars. These were much larger than in the Colonial
cremation as against the Pueblo practice of
period, often twenty inches in diameter, with a sharp
inhumation.
angle at the greatest diameter which we call the
The most distinct feature of Hohokam as “Gila shoulder”. Jar rims were sharply re-turned.
compared to Pueblo culture, is to be found in their Plain brown ware changed to dull red wares with
pottery which carried a deep red decoration on a smudged black interiors.
buff base. In the Colonial period, bowls were made
CLASSIC PERIOD: At about 1300 A. D., the Gila
with wide flaring rims, resembling somewhat
Basin was invaded by Puebloan people. With few
shallow inverted bells. Decorated jars were small,
exceptions, the Hohokam villages show the
rarely over eight inches in diameter. Larger vessels
presence of the invaders. Identification of the
were made of plain brown ware with an abundance
remains of these new-comers shows that they came
of mica incorporated into the clay. Designs on
from the northeast From Tonto Basin and that they
decorated pottery were remarkably uniform over
were a branch of the Pueblos whom we have called
the entire area covered by the Colonial period and
the Salado Branch. Upon their arrival in the Gila
indicated a standardization which implies an earlier
Basin, they at once began making their own
focus of which, up to the present time, no traces
characteristic pueblos. If coursed masonry where
whatever have been found.
stone was available, or of adobe, as at Casa Grande,
Remains of this period have been discovered where there are no stones. There is no evidence to
throughout Southern Arizona from the New show that the Hohokam contributed to the making
Mexican line to the Colorado River and from the of these great buildings and when the Salado people
hills north of Phoenix to the Mexican border. This evacuated the area about 1466 A. D., the Hohokam
area includes the southern desert of Arizona. The continued to live in their own one-story houses,

20

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

and followed the manner of life to which they had
been accustomed before the invasion.

that the experiment will engender a new and deep
respect for the original inventors.

RECENT PERIOD: The exodus of the Salado people
was, in all probability, caused by the arrival of the
Apache from the east. As this menace increased,
the Salado people followed the usual Puebloan
practice of moving out, but the Hohokam stood
their ground, realizing their dependence on their
irrigation systems, cultivated fields, and established
villages, in which there is shown again a
fundamental difference in the character of the two
peoples.

In Basketmaker III, there was a sudden and
hitherto unexplained production of well fired
pottery in a greater profusion of form than is to be
found in any one later period. Platters of mud
reinforced with cedar bark are to be found in late
Basketmaker II. But there is no evidence to show
the transition between these mud platters and well
fired pottery and as a matter of fact, the mud platters
are frequently found in Basketmaker III, implying
that they may have served some special purpose,
possibly such as a protection for baskets in parching
corn.

Villages of this period are chiefly confined to
the Gila Basin, but there was also a series of
settlements along the Middle Gila in the vicinity of
San Carlos and Bylas.

As a result, I have come to believe that, at the
same time as knowledge of maize culture was
introduced to the Basketmakers, they also acquired
MODERN PERIOD: When the Spaniards entered
the idea of pottery-making from the Hohokam to
southern Arizona in the 16th century, they found it
the south. I lay emphasis on the idea only having
occupied by the Pima and Papago, living exactly
been carried, since I believe that Basketmaker men,
the kind of life which we have attributed to the
who had ranged south in their hunting, had returned
Hohokam. This area is today occupied by these
to their homes and told their women of what they
tribes and we have presumed that the modern Pima
had seen. Corn, when planted, will grow from a
or Papago are the lineal descendants of the
seed, but a chance sherd will not grow a pot, and
Hohokam. To think otherwise, it would be
the differences which exist between Hohokam and
necessary to have had the Hohokam completely
Basketmaker pottery might be explained by what I
disappear, and to have been replaced by these
have written above.
modern tribes who have no traditions describing
If this theory is reasonable, it would mean that
what would have been a great and recent adventure.
at a date somewhere between the time of Christ
——————
and 500 A. D., there were two peoples in Arizona,
The acceptance of the Hohokam as a civilized
both of whom we believe to have been
people in the early period of the Southwest carried
dolichocephalic-the Hohokam in the desert of
definite implications which modify somewhat the
southern Arizona and the Basketmakers on the
outline defined by the Pecos Classification. Maize
plateau of northern Arizona, the latter gradually
was admittedly introduced in Basketmaker II from
acquiring culture from the former.
an exterior source. This source, I believe, is to be
——————
found in the Hohokam. Quite possibly I attribute
too much importance to the invention of pottery.
Knowing that clay, when properly handled, can be
shaped and fired to make a pot, I have done my
best to collect raw clay, prepare it, and make a pot,
but the results will not bear comparison with the
most primitive efforts of the Basketmakers. I would
earnestly recommend that every student of
archaeology should be required to collect his own
clay, prepare it, and make a pot. I am confident

Next in importance to the discovery and
definition of the Hohokam was the discovery, in
1981, of another group of people in southern New
Mexico who had not, thus far, been included in the
cultures of the Southwest.
Having identified the Colonial period of the
Hohokam, we at once began to look for the source
from which they had come. Believing at that time,
with everyone else, that Mexico was the mother of

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
higher culture in the New World, we therefore went
south and covered northern Sonora. To our great
disappointment, all early traces died out north of
the Mexican border; sites below the border were
hardly even prehistoric. We then searched west to
the Colorado River, thinking that perhaps the
Hohokam had come up along the Gulf Coast to the
Colorado River and then into southern Arizona
along the Gila. Instead of traces of the Hohokam,
we at once ran into the Yuman tribes who fill the
valley of the river from its mouth up to Nevada.
Then we went north up the Verde River only to
meet the outposts of the Kayenta branch of the
Pueblos. The farther we progressed the denser and
litter these Kayenta sites became.
In the summer of 1931, we began our survey to
the cast, working down the San Francisco River
and south of the mountains to the Mimbres and the
Rio Grande Here traces were picked up which, at
first, we thought might be those of the Hohokam.
Pottery was red on a natural base, and polished.
Designs were more geometrical than Hohokam
designs, but there was a faint resemblance. We
applied for and obtained permission to excavate a
site of this culture on the Lower San Francisco near
Glenwood. The results were surprising in that,
instead of finding early Hohokam, we had run into
another group of people who could not be explained
by existing knowledge. They made pit-houses, six
to eight feet deep, excavated in the natural earth,
unlined. Entrance was gained through a long incline,
thereby suggesting something of a link with both
Basketmakers and Hohokam. Between the houses
were great numbers of under-cut storage pits, a few
of which have been found in northern Arizona, but
none amongst the Hohokam. Pottery was distinct
in being coiled as against the paddle and anvil
method of the Hohokam. Cooking wares had a red
slip, as against the unslipped wares of the Hohokam,
and vessel shapes bore no resemblance to those of
the Hohokam. A very significant and unusual trait
in Southwestern pottery was the incising of rims.
Burial was by inhumation; skulls were
brachycephalic and deformed.

21

Arizona, and had established contact with the
Hohokam in the San Pedro and San Simon Valleys.
They had mushroomed around the Hohokam, the
greatest number moving south into Chihuahua
where they had provided the foundation upon which
the later Chihuahua cultures were built.
Of chief importance in its relation to the
Southwest was their northward penetration up the
Mimbres and San Francisco Valleys. Work is now
being carried on which we hope will shortly give
us a better idea of what we have called the Mogollon
Culture, but the influence which they exerted can
already be traced to the north, east, and south.
As the Mogollon people pushed north up the
San Francisco and Mimbres Valleys, they entered
more and more into Basketmaker territory. The
evidence of this merging is first shown in the Three
Circle site in the Upper Mimbres, where Mogollon
red-on-brown and red-on-white wares are found
in clustered pit-houses with an early Mimbres blackon-white ware which suggests the Basketmaker
pottery. Farther north, at Kiatuthlanna near Zuni,
this same black-on-white ware is found in burials
which contain both dolichocephalic Basketmakers
and brachycephalic skulls, deformed, which I
believe to have been Mogollon. If this is correct,
we have, at Kiatuthlanna, the beginning of what I
have called the Little Colorado Stem.
It would not be possible, in this short paper, to
describe the gradual evolution of architecture and
pottery which progressed from this point. For
present purposes, it must suffice to say that, the
basis of the Little Colorado Stem once formed, there
was a subsequent diffusion in different directions.
These various groups I have called Branches, but,
in the aggregate, each Branch of the Little Colorado
Stem shares characteristics with all other branches,
which demonstrates that they are all one family. At
present the Little Colorado Stem divides into the
following Branches:

MIMBRES BRANCH; This covers the people who
remained in southern New Mexico and who did
not share in the movement north to Kiatuthlanna.
Subsequent investigation has shown that the The chief concentration was in Mimbres Valley, but
people responsible for this culture had occupied scattered colonies are found as far west as the
southwestern New Mexico and southeastern Arizona line and as far south as the Mexican border.

22

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

to the north and west already occupied by the
Kayenta Branch of the San Juan Stem, Pueblo I
they pushed south over the Rim into the upper
drainage of the Salt River, the old Rio Salado. Some
CIBOLA BRANCH; Beginning in the upper San
of them found their way into Tonto Basin where
Francisco and later in the Tularosa Valley, this group
they met outlying colonies of the Hohokam. From
finally settled in what the Spaniards called the
that time on, the destiny of the Salado Branch was
Province of Cibola, chiefly along the southern slopes
intimately bound up with that of the Hohokam, a
of the Zuni Mountains. They were the main
fact which may account for what appears to have
component of Modern Zuni and while always
been a comparatively peaceful invasion of the Gila
showing evidence of their southern origin, they were
Basin in the 14th century. It has always been a
greatly modified by northern influences, as shown
matter of surprise to us that people of the Salado
in their adoption of kivas which are rarely, if ever,
Branch and the Hohokam lived side by side at Casa
found in the Mimbres.
Grande in apparent amity. This prior meeting and
CHACO BRANCH; Moving north from Kiatuthlanna possible merging into Tonto Basin may be the
in early times a large group reached the valley of explanation.
the Rio Puerco. Following this valley to the
——————
northeast, they occupied the Red Mesa Valley above
The links which bind together the various
Gallup, and penetrated northward along the eastern
branches of the Little Colorado Stem are of various
slopes of the Chuchaka Range. Some colonies
kinds. In architecture, they all began with pitfound their way as far north as the San Juan River
houses, progressed to one-room masonry houses
and left a lasting impression on the cultures which
built on the surface of the ground, these were later
were forming there and which constitute the San
grouped in Pueblo II and became pueblos with two
Juan Stem which, with the Little Colorado Stem,
or more stories in Pueblo III. In the north, where
form the two major groups in our classification of
proper materials were available, they developed the
the Pueblos. The chief concentration in Pueblo III
best masonry of any culture or period in the
times was in Chaco Canyon itself, resulting in the
Southwest. Acquiring kivas from the northern
great series of ruins of which Pueblo Bonito is the
Basketmakers, they developed these to their
best known. At the end of the 12th century they
greatest size and elaboration. In the southern
were driven out of Chaco Canyon by people of the
branches where the Basketmaker influence was
San Juan Stem and moved eastward to the Rio
lessened, the subterranean kivas were not known.
Grande where in historic times they are known as
the Keresan Pueblos, from which it may be assumed
The pottery designs in all branches show a
that all branches of the Little Colorado Stem were, decided leaning towards hatched elements. This is
in one way or another, members of the Keresan particularly true of the Chaco Branch. In the
linguistic family. Since the Basketmakers were Mimbres, Salado, and Cibola Branches, hatched
probably members of the Shoshonean linguistic elements were often balanced by solid designs.
family, it may further be deduced that the Keresan Decoration was carried out with mineral paint, a
tongue was introduced into the Southwest by the compound of iron which turns to red when overMogollon people who, with the Basketmakers, fired. In general appearance this mineral paint gave
were the main components of the Little Colorado a lamp-black decoration on a chalky white
background.
Stem.
Their culture shows a stronger admixture of
Mogollon influence than any other Little Colorado
Branch.

SALADO BRANCH; From the early focus which had
Physical type through all branches was
formed in the upper drainage of the Little Colorado brachycephalic and deformed. The language was
River, one group of people moved west along the probably Keresan.
southern rim of the Colorado plateau. This is usually
——————
known as the Mogollon Rim. Finding the country

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

23

The area occupied by the various branches of
the Little Colorado Stem reached from the San Juan
in the north to the Mexican border on the south,
and from the Verde River on the west to the
Mimbres Valley on the east. Stretched as a great
are around the northern periphery of this area were
the people who constituted the San Juan Stem.
Farthest removed from the Mogollon influence, they
were more essentially a Basketmaker stock than
the members of the Little Colorado Stem, this is
particularly true of the Kayenta, or Western Branch.
The Mesa Verde, lying to the north and east of the
Kayenta Branch, was, in early times, modified by a
wave of Tanoan people, brachycephalic and
undeformed, who are believed to have moved into
the Southwest under Colorado soon after the arrival
of the Mogollon people in southern New Mexico.
The San Juan Stem divides into three main branches:

MESA VERDE BRANCH; Primarily Basketmaker but
modified by Tanoan people at an early date, this
branch shows strongly the influence of the Chaco
Branch immediately to the south. The area occupied
lies in southwestern Colorado and stretches west
through southern Utah. It is in this branch that the
kiva is most uniformly found. In Pueblo I or early
Pueblo II, with increasing population and with the
country south of them occupied by people of the
Little Colorado Stem, groups moved eastward into
the upper drainage of the Rio Grande, there to form
the third branch of the San Juan Stem. The people
of the Mesa Verde Branch held to their northern
area until the end of the 13th century when
increasing pressure by Athapascan people from the
east brought the Navajo into their territory and
resulted in the evacuation of the great cliff-dwellings
and pueblos on or near Mesa Verde.

K AYENTA B RANCH ; Filling the area from
northeastern Arizona west to the Colorado River
and southwest past Flagstaff and down the Verde
Valley, the chief concentrations in early times were
in Marsh Pass and in the neighborhood of Flagstaff.
This period has sometimes been described as
western Pueblo I. A direct evolution from
Basketmaker, I am inclined to think that, separated
from the civilizing influences which were
developing in the south, there is a perceptible lag
in the Kayenta Branch which may amount to one
hundred years or more. Living in pit-houses, they
appear to be contemporaneous with that stage of
the Chaco Branch when surface houses with
masonry walls were already being made by the
cultures to the south. Pottery designs of this period,
Pueblo I, also seem to have been derived from the
Chaco Branch to the east from the type which has
often been described as Chaco Transitional. The
subsequent development of the Kayenta Branch was
chiefly in the region described by the Spaniards as
the Province of Tusayan. Some colonies pushed
northwest as far as southern Nevada. In the 13th
century, the Kayenta Branch received influences
from clans migrating west from the Rio Grande
which changed the pottery from black-on-white
wares to black-on-yellow wares. From this point
the evolution into the Modern Hopi is unbroken.

R IO GRANDE B RANCH; As stated above, this
branch of the San Juan Stem was founded in
comparatively early times by colonies from Mesa
Verde but, in the 11th century, there was a migration
eastward from the Cibola Branch. This movement
seems to have continued for over one hundred
years, and I believe was primarily due to continuous
bickering, if not actual war, between the people of
the Little Colorado Stem who held the center of
the Southwest and the people of the San Juan Stem
who occupied the northern and western peripheries.
Between 1100 and 1200 A. D., the influence of the
Cibola and Chaco Branches can be clearly traced
in the Rio Grande through the introduction of blackon-red pottery and glazed paints. From this point
the development has been clearly described by Dr.
Kidder in the publications which cover the
excavations at Pecos and which carries up to the
modern pueblos in the Rio Grande Valley.
The various branches of the San Juan Stem are
again bound together by certain common traits.
Architecturally, the most important of these is the
kiva. Masonry never reached the degree of
excellence that was found in the Chaco Branch,
probably due to the quality of available materials
as, in a large part of the area occupied, lava blocks
took the place of stone. This is particularly true in
the Rio Grande Valley. Pottery as a whole is distinct

24

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

from that of the Little Colorado Stem in that
surfaces were highly polished and decorations were
made with vegetable paint in which there was no
iron and which merged with the polished surfaces,
often giving the appearance of having been polished
over the decoration. Designs, as a general rule, can
be readily distinguished from those of the Little
Colorado Stem. Physical types, in early times were
either dolichocephalic or brachycephalic,
undeformed, but later changed to brachycephalic,
deformed. Dr. Hooton has written an invaluable
treatise on the Indians of Pecos, the most
comprehensive piece of work along these lines that
has yet been attempted.

suit the purposes of other individuals and
institutions.

Leaving the Pueblos, I feel that it is necessary
to revert for a moment to the Mogollon people to
whom reference has been made. At this time, we
know comparatively little, about them, but the
possibilities of the influence which they may have
exerted on the other areas of intensive agriculture
cannot be overlooked. As we found them first in
the valley of the lower San Francisco, they were
living in pit-houses, making red-on-brown painted
pottery, a slipped redware, and jars the rims of which
were incised. Realizing the importance of their
discovery, we sent E. B. Sayles east into Texas to
In the west, in the Kayenta Branch, the language, conduct a survey in order to find out if we could
from beginning to end, was probably Shoshonean. find any traces of the origins of either the Hohokam
In the Rio Grande Branch, from beginning to end, or the Mogollon people. Of the Hohokam he found
it was probably Tanoan. Judging from the material no traces, but he did find suggestive analogies
culture at Mesa Verde, it seems probable that the between the Mogollon people and the potteryMesa Verde Branch began with Shoshonean but making people of Texas. These analogies were
further supported when a skull obtained at
later changed to Tanoan.
Mogollon:1:15 (a type site of the Mogollon culture)
——————
was sent to George Woodbury, and he reported that
The outline which I have given above covers
it compared more closely with Caddoan skulls than
my theory, in broad terms, of the growth of the
with any other type. In general appearance,
cultures of the Southwest. In building this theory, I
Mogollon red and incised wares are
have relied chiefly on Kidder’s original outline. His
indistinguishable from those of the Red River
lower Gila has been changed to admit the Hohokam,
Caddo. The same traits are to be found throughout
and I have taken his Chaco culture from a San Juan
Chihuahua, and I have therefore gone so far as to
origin to a Little Colorado origin. I have placed
postulate a Caddoan Root which divides into two
greater emphasis on the Little Colorado Culture,
stems-a Mississippian and a Playas Stem, the latter
raising it to the major status of a Stem. I have also
again divided into two branches-the Mogollon and
introduced new branches which were more or less
the Chihuahua Branch. This step, while it appears
unknown in 1924.
to be extremely rash, has been confirmed in several
In forming the theory, I have also relied on the particulars and may serve to stimulate further
Pecos Classification, but only as applied to cultural investigation.
development. I do not think that any classification
While it would be of extreme importance to
can be used to define both cultural development
establish a connecting link between the Southwest
and chronology, since I am confident that cultural
and the pottery-making tribes of Texas, it is possibly
development did not keep in step over the entire
of even greater importance to seek the extent of
Southwest. Chronology can be safely left to dating
this complex in Mexico. With dates in Mexico being
by the tree-ring method. In building up this theory,
consistently raised, it will soon become necessary
I have also used such terms as Roots, Stems, and
to advance a new theory to account for the
Branches, which have not heretofore been applied
civilization in the valley of Mexico. George Vaillant
to the Southwestern culture. We have found, at Gila
has written a Medallion for us in which he has drawn
Pueblo, that this method best suits our purposes,
attention to extremely significant analogies which
but this does not mean necessarily that it will also

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
are known to exist between the ceramics of Central
America and Mexico and those of the Mound
Builders and the Southwest. He attributes the
spread of these resemblances from south to north,
but the increasing body of evidence seems to me to
deny this trend and I am much more inclined to
believe that it will eventually be found that the
direction of culture trends was the same as that of
the people themselves who we already know moved
from north to south. An immense field for future
investigation is thereby opened. The work involved
in such investigation will demand the intelligent and
sympathetic cooperation of all institutions. I wish,
therefore, to take this opportunity of expressing
my deep appreciation of the uniform courtesy and
consideration that we have received during our
survey in Texas.

Gila Pueblo, Globe., Arizona.

* Editor’s Note:

25

10, 1929. Ray, “Traces of Ancient Man Reported,”
Science News Letter, Dec. 21, 1929. Ray, “Report
on Some Recent Archeological Researches in the
Abilene Section,” Vol. 11, Sept. 1980, Bulletin of
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society.
In January, 1930, the writer discovered a series
of stratified occupation levels within seven miles
of Abilene in a high bank of Elm Creek. One stratum
was buried close under a hard packed gravel stratum
at 24 ½ feet below the soil surface. Immediately
below this another occupation level was found
buried 27 feet below the soil surface. Pictures of
both the crude artifacts found and the stratified site
are shown in Ray, “Report on Some Recent
Archeological Researches in the Abilene Section,”
Vol. II, Sept., 1930, Bulletin Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society.
Also during January, 1930, the writer discovered
a very hard, heavy, petrified, carved horse bone in
pulley which traversed another camp site located
ten miles from Abilene. This evidently had been
carved so as to make a hand grip for a war club
handle, or for some such use.

In consideration of Mr. Gladwin’s statements in
It is evident that it was carved while green bone,
the foregoing article concerning evidences of
as it is now very hard and the same glistening patina
Glacial Age man in Texas, an editorial summary of
covers the carved parts equally with the rest. Harold
data in support of this idea is in order.
Cook identified it as a horse bone but could not
In February, 1929, the editor discovered near state of what species. The writer believes that there
Albany, Texas, a Stone Grave Burial containing two is no doubt that it is of a Pleistocene species for the
very dolichocephalic, primitive type, skeletons following reasons. The large camp site, where it
buried 6 ½ feet below the undisturbed soil surface, lay, now has no water supply except immediately
in a high eroded bank on the Clear Fork of the after rains and it is exceedingly doubtful that any
Brazos River, and an associated covered camp site such mineralization could occur in this dry site in
buried between six and seven feet. Ray “New the few hundred years since Spanish horses were
Evidences of Ancient Man in America,” Scientific introduced.
American, May, 1929. Ray, “A Differentiation of
Since the writer’s original deeply stratified camp
the Prehistoric Cultures of the Abilene Section,”
site discoveries of 1929-30 were made, many other
Sept. 1929, Bulletin I, Texas Archeological and
such sites have been found Moth by the writer and
Paleontological Society.
by E. B. Sayles. In the same region. In July, 1934,
During the fall of 1929 the writer discovered the writer was shown a mammoth bone in the bank
near Nugent, Texas, on the Clear Fork of the of a creek thirty miles southeast of Abilene by Mr.
Brazos, a whole series of stratified covered camp Roy Kendrick. When the writer carefully examined
sites at depths of 4, 5, 6, 8, and 15 feet below the this site he found two man-made flint flakes
soil surfaces. Ray, “News of Ancient Man Reported embedded in the same grey, sandy, Pleistocene clay
front Texas,” Daily Science News Bulletin, Dec. formation close to the teeth, ribs and leg bone of a

26

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

mammoth. One flake was situated south of and
above the hones at a distance of eighteen inches,
and the other one was situated at the same level
above the bones brut distant about four feet south
of them.
In no local buried site have channeled or Folsom
points thus far been found by the writer, nor within
his knowledge by anyone else in the Abilene region.
In the writer’s collection are fifteen such points.
Ten were found by the writer in five distinct surface
camp sites either in black surface soil grass roots,
or in plowed black surface soil fields. Three were
found in sandy chocolate colored soil gullies. Some
of the channeled points are patinated and some are
not. Probably a greater percentage of stemmed and
shouldered projectile points and knives from the
same surface sites show heavy patina than do the
channeled points. Also equally as many keel backed
scrapers from the same sites show patina. The keel
backed scraper is almost exclusively a surface site
type material to this region. In the deeply buried
sites, side scrapers, and other more crude forms
take their places.
Whatever evidence may exist elsewhere for the
Pleistocene age of Folsom points, neither exists
locally, or has not thus far been found in the Abilene
region. Lest any one assume that the local channeled
points are not Folsom in type. It may be said that
some of the chief advocates of the Pleistocene age
of such points, when found elsewhere, have so
identified them in the writer’s collection and one
became very angry when the facts concerning them
were related. It is the opinion of the writer that
such points probably were made locally up to within
a few hundred years ago. However, if flint patina
in Texas is as old as the British Museum claims for
it to England, 4,000 years, then they may be that
old. However if common surface soil sites are that
old, then the buried sites must be of tremendous
antiquity. However in these buried sites the older
the stratum the more crude the type of implements
one finds.
In addition to the cumulative evidence
discovered by the writer and cited above, there is

much else including such interesting exhibits as the
petrified human skulls dug from beneath the Texas
Coast Oso waters and sent to the writer by George
C. Martin in 1929. Also human femora from the
same place which clink like porcelain dishes when
knocked together. Martin, Vol. I, 1929, Bulletin
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society.
Not only do these Coastal fossil skulls show much
heavier mineralization than the numerous mammoth
and occasional mastodon bones excavated by the
writer, but most of the Abilene “Stone Grave”
skeletons are better preserved and are of firmer
texture than local mammoth bones, although the
former were buried on drier hill top sites. Many of
these “Stone Grave” bones have a resonant ring
instead of the usual dead bone sound when knocked
together. Locally two petrified sea shells heads have
been found with one partly mineralized skeleton.
In consideration of all of the facts enumerated in
the above chronology the Editor is impelled to agree
with Gladwin’s conclusion that Man lived in Texas
in Pleistocene Lime. In fact the evidence of the local
stratified occupation sites, situated at all the levels
between shows that man not only existed in the
Abilene region in Pleistocene times, but that in some
race or form he has inhabited the region ever since
Glacial times.
CYRUS N. RAY.
** Editor’s Note:
Beginning in 1929, the writer has excavated
more than thirty primitive type skeletons from stone
graves. These had extremely dolichocephalic or
long narrow skulls, much curved femora, and
platycnemic tibiae, or side flattened shin hones. Ray,
“Evidences of Ancient Man in America,” Scientific
American, May 1929. Ray, Archeological Research
Reports in Vols. I, 1929; III, 1931; IV, 1932; and
V, 1933, Bulletins of Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society. Dr. Hooton reported on
five of these skulls in Hooton, “Five Texas Crania,”
Vol. V of the same Bulletin.
CYRUS N. RAY.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

27

TYPES OF EAST TEXAS POTTERY
A. T. JACKSON
The ceramic art of the early Indians in East Texas
1. Evenly distributed from head to feet on both
was well developed. It bears many earmarks of the sides of the skeleton. Typical sites showing such
lower Mississippi Valley culture. It also embodies grouping were H. R. Taylor and J. M. Riley farms,
certain variations in forms and designs that suggest Harrison and Upshur Counties.
distinct local culture traits.
2. Grouped from the waist to the head. Mrs.
The University of Texas has done considerable J. M. Cook farm, Anderson County.
archeological work in the region during the past
3. Grouped from the waist to the feet. W. O.
five years. A number of important finds have been
Reed
farm., Upshur County.
made, many specimens and valuable data gathered,
yet the field barely has been touched. The marginal
4. Grouped chiefly around the head and
areas also should be worked. It is probable that shoulders, or back of the head; but with an
additional research may disclose types and relations occasional specimen below the waist. T. M. Sanders
not now suspected.
farm, Lamar County.
There is a wide range in size, shape and
decoration of the pottery. But most of it falls within
a few general classes. Those classes are—in the
order of frequency—bowls, pots, bottles, jars and
pipes. About five per cent of the specimens have
unusual features incorporated in the common types.

With regard to the arrangement of pottery in
the graves, Harrington 1 makes the following
comment about his finds in Arkansas. “In the Hot
Springs region the tendency was to group the
funerary offerings about the feet of the dead;
reversing the practice noted about Ozan and
The number of specimens of each form varies in Washington, where nearly everything was placed
the different localities. For instance, only six per at the head.”
cent of the vessels from Lamar County are classed
Position of Certain Types
as pots; while the average of that class for all the
counties is approximately twenty-six per cent.
It is also interesting to note the positions of the
BURIAL CUSTOMS
RELATING TO POTTERY
Quantity and Distribution in Graves.
The burial customs likewise vary somewhat in
different localities. This variation extends not only
to the, average number of earthenware specimens
in the graves but also to the arrangement of the
pottery.

different types of vessels. There are some variations,
but they are surprisingly few. In those localities
where offerings are ranged all around the skeleton,
the usual distribution is as follows:
Bottle immediately back or by side of skull.
Small bowls beside shoulders and chest.
Bowls and small pots beside hips.
Medium sized pots and bowls from knees to feet.

Large pots just beyond the feet.
The numbers range from five in the Neches River
drainage to eight in the Sabine River valley. The
Small bowls, sometimes to the number of two
Red and Sulphur River basins average three and
or three, frequently rest inside larger ones; and it is
six respectively.
not uncommon to find one or two small pots inside
The most common arrangements in the graves a large one; occasionally a bottle is inside a bowl;
are as follows:
and a tiny bowl or bottle may rest beneath an

28

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

inverted bowl. Another grouping shows
several tiny bawls and jars on their sides
partly telescoped.
Condition When Found
Many of the vessels are broken when
found in the graves. This seems in many
cases, to have been caused by the weight
of the grave fill. Occasionally broken
vessels resulted from intrusive burials.
In that event all or part of the broken
specimens might be cast into the more
recent grave. In certain non-intrusive
burials only a small part of the fragments
of a given vessel may be present;
indicating that sometimes a portion of a
previously broken specimen was tossed
into the grave along with whole ones. In
no case has there been found conclusive
proof of the ceremonial “killing” of
vessels, such as was practiced in certain
regions. We have no specimens with
holes in the bottoms—except in a few
cases where some pot hunter punched
holes in them with an iron rod.
The average, taking into
consideration all types, is forty per cent
whole to sixty per cent broken. The
percentages among the various forms of
vessels vary widely. This is occasioned
by their shapes. For example, bottles
represent the highest percentage of
whole specimens—seventy percent—
while large bowls and pots have the
greatest number of broken ones.
The percentage of whole specimens
is likewise influenced by the type of soil
in which they were buried. Those in
loose, sandy soil show the highest
average. When buried in clay there is a
greater number of broken ones, due to
seasonal contraction and expansion.

PLATE 5.
14. Rattle bowl, with four large hollow knobs
containing pellets. A typical Caddo specimen
found in Asiani territory.
15. Helmet-like jar, with edges resembling human
molars. Unusual Caddo specimen.
16. Bowl showing entire outer surface decorated
with incised sun symbols and Interlocking
scroll designs. From burial on H. R. Taylor
Farm, Harrison County, Caddoan.
17. Small bowl, decorated with sun symbols. This
vessel is from a historic site and seems to
show decadence. Asinai specimen.
18. Pot with corrugated outer surface, unusual
Caddo specimen.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Contents
We found most of the vessels contained nothing
but dirt. Many of the bottles were almost empty.
There were, however, a number of cases where
bowls contained potters clay, arrowpoints, red and
green paints, and evidences of food. Among the
latter were bones of small animals, fish and birds,
with an occasional mussel shell. Due to the position,
near the skulls, of most of the bottles it would seem
that when deposited in the graves they may have
contained water. Large vessels sometimes have
small ones placed in them, as if to conserve space.
Probable Uses

29

decorated and show no evidence of use in cooking.
These perhaps were utilized for storing corn, beans,
acorns, nuts, etc. A few of the, small ,jars, or vases,
with suspension holes near the rim may have served
either as seed containers or as lamps. Some of the
large bottles or ollas, with necks of sufficient size
to permit the insertion of the hand, could have had
grease stored in them.
The effigies and other unusual freak earthenware
specimens very likely served no utilitarian purpose;
but, from the care and skill lavished upon some of
them, would seem to suggest a ceremonial or
religious use.

Some of the large bowls bear on their rims
Standard Forms From Various Counties
incrustations of what appears to be grease. This
The study of a part of the University of Texas
indicates much-used and seldom -washed utensils.
Many of the large pots have coatings of soot on pottery collection, numbering two thousand
the outer surface, indicating long use over open specimens from representative sites, show the
fires. Some large pots and bowls are ornately number of vessels of each standard form as follows:

Standard Forms of Pottery by Counties

COUNTY Bowls
Anderson
66
Bowie
5
Camp
34
Cass
54
Cherokee
2
Franklin
39
Harrison
267
Henderson
7
Hopkins
30
Lamar
40
Morris
93
Red River
8
Shelby
3
Titus
146
Upshur
105
Wood
28
Total

927

Pots
36
5
21
48
6
23
144
2
15
6
66
6
—
105
77
13
573

NUMBER OF SPECIMENS
Bottles
Jars
14
21
2
2
7
2
17
13
—
—
11
4
84
33
2
1
9
1
23
13
35
12
9
3
3
2
21
6
26
14
6
1
269

128

Pipes
26
6
—
4
3
1
6
6
3
14
4
1
—
7
6
15

Total
163
20
64
136
11
78
534
18
58
96
210
27
8
285
228
63

103

2000

30

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
Comparison of Percentages- Texas and Arkansas

The percentages of the different forms of vessels in Northeast Texas and Southwest Arkansas are—
as might be expected— very comparable. Based on data concerning some six hundred earthenware
specimens from the latter region, excavated and classified by Harrington,2 the following comparisons
are made:
REGION
Southwest Arkansas
Northeast Texas

PERCENTAGES
Bowls Pots & Vases(Jars)3 Bottles
35.4
32.0
24.6
41.4
33.3
14.9

Pipes
8.0
10.4

Total
100
100

Unusual Vessels
Of one hundred fourteen unusual specimens from the University of Texas collection, the numbers and
percentages of each form are as follows:
UNUSUAL FEATURE AND FORM
Effigy bowls and bottles
Rattle or tambourine bowls
Pedestal or ring-base jars
Ollas, or wide-necked bottles
Pots, jars and bottles bearing handles
Pots and jars bearing suspension holes
Feather weight jars and bottles
Highly polished jars and bottles
Rectangular, square & triangular bowls & jars
Quadrangular rims & bases on jars, bottles and bowls
Scalloped or saw-tooth bowl rims
Nodular rims on bowls and jars
Ladles or dippers

No. of Vessels
14
7
4
15
22
13
3
5
6
10
5
7
3
114

Percent
12.3
6.1
3.5
13.2
19.3
11.4
2.6
4.4
5.3
8.8
4.4
6.1
2.6
100

Handles
A small percentage of the vessels have handles
near the rims. The handles are more common on
pots and jars, but a few occur on bowls and bottles.
Usually there are but two handles, placed on
opposite sides. Sometimes on pots with
quadrangular rims there are four handles—one at
each corner or projection of the rim.
The handles usually are small, the average size
being about one and one-half inches long, one-half
inch wide and one-fourth inch thick. A few are large,
one measuring three and one-half by one and onehalf by one-half inches. Some are so tiny as to
suggest their use primarily as a form of decoration.

The handle invariably is made of a single coil or
lump of clay. The writer has not seen a specimen in
all East Texas that bore a double-coil handle.
In addition to the regular handles, there are
others that are joined to the vessel for their entire
lengths. Some are merely nodes and lengthened
protuberances, and deserve the name of hand-grips
or hand-holds rather than handles. A variant of the
latter type is a perforated rim-node. A few of the
holes pierce the nodes vertically; others horizontally.
It was only a step from a perforated node to the
omitting of the node and putting the hole through
the vessel rim.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

31

These so-called suspension holes
usually occur in the rims of small jars or
“lamps.” Occasionally, however, they are
present in a large jar or pot. In most cases
there are only two holes, one on each side.
Sometimes there are double-holes on each
side. An ornately decorated, feather-weight
jar contains eight holes-a group of two
double-holes on each side.
The sizes of the suspension holes vary
greatly. Some are scarcely one-sixteenth
inch in diameter, with others as much as
one-fourth inch.
Many of the handles are plain; others
bear simple forms of decoration. The
ornamentation consists of raised lines,
gouged depressions, fingernail imprints,
incised cross-hatch, trailed or grooved lines
and nodes. A few of the handles are very
elaborate both in shape and decoration.
One is made in the form of an equal-armed
cross. Another consists of hollow tubes,
built onto the rim, the ends originally
plugged with white pigment. These tubes
or handles bear incised cross-hatch designs
and a node in the center of each.
Effigies and rattle-knobs would seem
to have had their origins in simple handles.
As the ceramic art developed, and
ceremonial vessels came into use, it was a
natural step to make the handles and knobs
more artistic by changing
them into the likeness of
PLATE 6.
animals, birds, etc.
19.Large bottle, bearing trailed or grooved concentric circles.
In addition to the handles
Asinai specimen, Henderson County.
on whole vessels, a large 20.Bottle, highly polished-Incised scroll-Red paint in lines. Caddo
collection of detached
specimen, showing the ceramic art at its best, Red River County.
handles, and fragments of 21.Tiny bottle, without decoration, resting on four legs. From a grave
handles on sherds, has been
on Goode Hunt farm, Cass County. Unusual Caddo specimen.
gathered from all parts of 22.Pedestal vase or jar with square base. Note the concentric
East Texas.
circles. Asinai specimen, Nacogdoches County.
The handles are attached 28.Bottle with large, gradually tapering neck. Note the incised vertical
bands and triangles. Typical Asinai specimen Henderson County.
while plastic; merely molded
24.Small
bottle-incised scroll with red paint in lines. Typical Caddo
or blended by pressure of the
specimen, Cass County.
fingers. No specimen has

32

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

been found showing evidence of inserting the coil
through a hole and “bradding” the ends of the handle
inside the vessel. This latter method, however,
seems to have been used exclusively by the historic
Indians at Espiritu Santo Mission near Goliad,
Texas.

two hundred eighty-five specimens, it has been
found that the average dimensions for these classes
are as follows (see table below):

It will be noted that the diameters of the bowls
average almost exactly twice their heights. The
diameters of the pots are slightly less than the
heights. There are a few wide variations from these
Legs
averages. An unusually tall, slim pot from the H. It.
Vessels with legs are very scarce. The ones found Taylor farm has a height of fourteen and diameter
include a triple bottle, and a small bottle with four of only seven and one-half inches. One from J. M.
short legs; also jars with four legs resting on circular Riley farm is only eleven inches tall, but has a
and square doughnut-like bases. The, bottles come diameter of sixteen inches. The top diameters of
from Red and Sulphur Rivers; the jars from the bottle necks are fairly uniform for the large and
Neches River basin. The triple bottle, from Lamar small sizes. The average diameter of the neck tops
County, is strikingly like one from Site One, Ozan, of large bottles is approximately one and one—half
Arkansas, pictured by Harrington.4
inches; of small bottles, about one inch. The height
and diameter of most jars are about the same.
Several bottles have four nodes near the base.
These nodes do not extend downward to the bottom
Kind of Wares
and cannot properly be called legs.
The wares may be roughly classed as (1) thick,
heavy;
(2) thin, light; and (3) medium thickness and
Sizes of Vessels
weight.
The sizes of vessels vary widely. The smallest
pot secured from the H. R. Taylor site in Harrison
The first divides itself into two sub-classes, firm
County is only one and three-fourth inches high and crumbly. These differences are very pronounced
and one and three-eight inches in diameter; while and have considerable bearing on the ease with
the largest pot from the same site measures nineteen which broken specimens can be restored in the
and one-fourth inches tall and sixteen inches in laboratory. When broken the well-fired ware, with
diameter. A bowl from T. M. Sanders farm is a firm texture, is easily distinguished by its sharp,
seventeen inches in diameter and six and seven- unshattered edges. Such specimens lend themselves
eighty inches high; one from H. R. Taylor farm, to restoration. Poorly-fired, crumbly ware presents
one and three-fourths inches in diameter and one such badly shattered edges as to render successful
restoration very tedious and difficult. The firm ware
inch tall.
has a metallic-like ring when struck and can be safely
The vessels divide themselves into small,
cleaned with brush and water. The crumbly ware,
medium and large sizes. By actual measurement of
Average Sizes of Vessels, In Inches

Form of No. of
Vessel Vessels
Bowls
118
Pots
73
Bottles
60
Jars
34

Small
Ht.
Diam.
1 6/7 3 3/7
5
4 3/4
3 3/8 2 3/4
2 7/8 3 1/8

SIZES
Medium
Ht.
Diam.
3
6
9
8
6
5 1/4
4 7/8 4 7/8

Large
Ht.
Diam.
5
10 1/2
13 1/4 11 1/2
9 3/4 6 1/4
8 2/5 7 9/10

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
which gives forth a “dead” sound when struck, has
to be dry-cleaned. Water tends to convert it into a
mass of mud.
The thin, light ware divides itself into hard and
porous. As a rule the thin ware is confined to small,
ornate vessels. A few of medium size are made of
very thin, delicate ware.
Some of the most beautiful specimens are thin,
well-polished and light. Most of this hard ware is
of a blackish color, with a glossy surface.
Occasionally it is streaked by discoloration in firing.
The thin, porous ware may be called “featherweight,” due to its unusual lightness. Specimens of
this kind are scarce. The porous, honey-combed
appearance of several of these seers to offer an
explanation of their light weight. When lignite was
used as a tempering material, and the heat in firing
became too intense, the combustible substance
might be consumed. That could easily result in a
porous, light-weight ware.

33

Tempering Materials.
MATERIAL
Percentage
Potsherd
17
Potsherd and carbon
13
Shell
9
Shell and Carbon
8
Carbon and Sand
8
Carbon
7
Sand and potsherd
5
Shell, potsherd and carbon
4
Sand
3
Various combinations of sand, carbon,
potsherd and shell
26
100
It will be noted from the above that no
differentiation was made as to the kinds of shell.
While much of the shell tempering material seems
to be from fresh water mussels, (Unio sp.) there
are also evidences of the use of certain fossil shells.

The ware of medium weight and thickness differs
A closer study of tempering materials may
from the thick, heavy ware in no essential respect. likewise bring to light the presence of calcareous
It, too, consists of both firm and crumbly specimens. substances. Animal bones were plentiful around
The kinds of ware may be further divided, as most campsites and might have been burnt and
regards the color of the clay. The predominating ground up for use as tempering material. Some bone
colors are yellow and gray. They have varying temper has been noted.
shades. The hues range from a beautiful deep yellow
to a dead unattractive gray. An occasional specimen
of white clay is found. But the ever-present red and
yellow clay of the region was the ancient potters’
chief source of supply. When fired the red clay
usually took on a yellowish cast.

The carbon temper seems to include both lignite
and wood charcoal. The sand used varies from
extremely fine to very coarse. Sand appears alone
in a very small percentage of the specimens; but in
combinations with other materials it is present in
approximately forty per cent of the pottery. Ground
potsherd appears to some extent as a tempering
agent in about fifty per cent of the pottery. About
Temper
The tempering material, added to prevent thirty per cent of the pottery bears evidence of some
cracking of the ware in firing, furnishes a broad shell tempering material.
study in itself. A beginning along this line was made
At certain sites various tempering materials
by Miss Hindman5 in her paper “Materials Used in predominated. At the Taylor farm, Harrison County,
Manufacture of Fast Texas Pottery.”
it was mostly carbon; at Riley farm, Upshur County,
The following tabulation is from the above ground potsherd; and at Clements farm, Cass
County, sand.
mentioned source:

34

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
Finish
The finish of the ware varies
considerably, but may be divided
into two general classes; with slip
and without slip.
The most common slip, or paint,
is of a bright red color—prepared
by grinding a soft red clay or ocher
very fine and mixing it with a
suitable medium. By dipping a
vessel in the slip, the surface was
coated uniformly. Its use was
confined chiefly to the decoration
of bowls and bottles, but
occasionally is present on jars and
in one case on a pipe. On bottles
the slip was applied only to the
exterior; but when put on bowls and
jars it usually covered both the inner
and outer surfaces. When dried and
fired, the color became more or less
permanent. Some redware is found
in most of the sites. Often it is in an
excellent state of preservation.
Some specimens bear a pale
yellow slip. A few sherds have been
found that seem to show a white slip
or paste.
The vessels without slips are
finished in three ways: (1) well
polished; (2) poorly polished; and
(3) without polish, with rough
surface. Some of the ware is so
highly polished as to resemble a
glaze. Certain specimens give
evidence of hasty polishing, that

PLATE 7.
25. Jar bearing incised arrow points and intricate sun symbols. Caddoan, Franklin County.
26. Olla-employing raised swastika as a decorative feature, Caddoan, Morris County.
27. Redware jar, design carved through, Caddoan, Titus County.
28. Jar featuring three sets of concentric circles. From historic burial site, Richard Patton
farm, Anderson County. Traces of white paint remain in the incisions. Asinai.
29. Large bowl, featuring multiple interlocking scrolls. Note the scratched or combed lower
surface. From a historic burial. Asinai specimen. Anderson County.
30. Jar decorated with raised lines or melon stripes. Caddoan, Camp County.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
compares very poorly with the better-grade work.
Still others are unpolished and sometimes have
rough, uneven surfaces. The small symmetrical
bottles, bowls and jars usually are well polished.
Most of the, large pots and some of the large bowls
are poorly polished. Many of the cook pots and
thick, poorly-made bowls are unpolished.

35

(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

Triangles
Concentric circles
Hatchwork
Band lines
Combinations of the various
elements
(8) Unusual
(a) Herringbone pattern
(b) Projectile points
(c) Bird-like designs
(d) Raindrop designs
(e) Head design

In connection with the polishing of pottery, it is
interesting to note the implements used for that
purpose. Most of them are in the form of waterworn pebbles, frequently found in graves in
association with pottery. Often the pebbles show
much evidence of use.
II. Raised designs:
(1) V-shaped, chevron-like
Two pottery-smoothing implements made of
(2) Solid lines, vertical
clay have come from Anderson and Red River
(3) Notched ridges and nodal lines
counties. The one from the former region is
(4) Circles and concentric circles
triangular in shape and made to fit the curvature,
(5) Lozenge or diamond-shaped
of the average vessel. The other represents a
(6) Corrugated or coil-like effect
papoose on a cradle board. The base of the effigy
(7) Ridges between finger imprints
served as a polishing implement. The body of the
(8) Combinations of elements
child, molded in relief, furnished a convenient
handgrip when the implement was in use.
Decoration

III. Conventional line designs:
(1) Brushed, combed or scratched
(2) Grooved or trailed

The decoration on the pottery is varied and
interesting. Some of it is very crude. Much more, IV. Diminutive designs:
however, shows a beauty and symmetry that
(1) Gouged depressions
bespeak a mastery of the art. Apparently little time
(2) Punctuated (Impressed dots)
was spent in decorating cooking utensils. A few
(3) Nodes (irregularly spaced)
gouged depressions around the rim-to give a firmer
(4) Fingernail imprints
hand grip-and a handful of grass stems scraped over
(5) Unusual
the remaining outer surface constituted the usual
(a) Impressed circles
hasty decoration of a large cook pot. On the other
(b) Roulette-like indentations
hand, considerable time must have been required
to execute the intricate designs appearing on some V. Form designs:
of the small, ornate bottles, jars and bowls.
(1) Scalloped or saw-tooth edge
A large percentage of the decoration is by means
(2) Handles
of incised lines. Various other methods are
(3) Legs and pedestals
employed. A tentative grouping, pending a more
(4) Effigies
exhaustive study, might be as follows:
VI. Employment of color
(1) Slips (usually red)
I. Incised designs:
(2) Pigment in incisions (red and white)
(1) Sun symbols and variants
(3) Painted design (red)
(2) Interlocking scrolls and scroll
(4) Excess shell tempering
variants

36

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

VII. Engraved after firing:
(1) Scroll work
(2) Circles
(3) Angular designs
The relative frequency with which these types
of decoration occur are indicated by the following
percentages, based on an examination of five
hundred specimens from representative sites:
TYPES OF DECORATION PERCENTAGES
Incised designs
65
Raised designs
6
Conventional line designs
6
Diminutive designs
7
Form designs
1
Employment of color
10
Designs engraved after firing
1
Undecorated
4
100
Circular Designs
There are various symbols that may have
represented the sun, moon, stars, four seasons,
winds, cardinal points, etc. An examination of two
hundred vessels bearing circular designs reveals the
following:
TYPES OF
CIRCULAR DESIGNS NO. OF SPECIMENS
Concentric circles:
Two circles
85
Three circles
14
Four circles
4
Five circles
4
Six circles
2
Circles of small triangles
24
Circles formed at union of scrolls
22
Equal-armed cross in circles
20
Circles bearing radiating lines or “spokes”
14
Semi-circles
12
“Stars” inside circles
12
“Eyes” inside circles
12
Circles inside large triangles
10
Diamonds or parallelograms inside circles
9
Swastika variants in circles
6
200

These eleven types of circular designs are
combined in numerous ways. A total of sixty-six
combinations and variations have been noted.
Scrollwork
Scrollwork played an important part in the
decoration of the aboriginal pottery. The scroll
appears in eighteen variations. These range from a
simple single-scroll to an elaborate interlocking
scroll. Some are merely rows of meandering lines;
others are triangles with curved and slightly
elongated apices. Again there is a double “S”; or
perhaps a single “S” interlocked with the ends of
two triangles. Not infrequently straight lines
connect circles; the lines extending from the bottom
of one to the top of another.
There is even a suggestion that the circular
designs may be an off-shoot from the scrollwork.
Particularly would this seem to be the case where a
small circle containing an equal-armed cross serves
to connect the arms of a graceful scroll.
Pottery in Historic Sites
Most of the burial sites excavated were
prehistoric. A few, however, contained evidences
of European contact. Notable among the latter were
sites on the Clements Brothers, H. E. Womack, E.
H. Moores, Mrs. Emma Owens, Richard Patton,
R. L. Jowell and Carl Matthews farms in Cass,
Lamar, Bowie, Anderson and Polk Counties.
At the Clements site in Cass County we exhumed
twenty-two burials, five of which contained blue
trade beads in association with pottery. All
skeletons—except one-were extended on back.
This is the usual practice in prehistoric burial sites
of the region. At this place, however, there was
one skeleton in a semi-flexed position. It was
accompanied by no European articles.
Quoting from my field notes: “The prevailing
types of pottery from this historic site greatly
resemble those from prehistoric burials in Cass,
Upshur, Harrison, Titus and Morris Counties. A few
vessels have rounded bottoms and delicately incised
lines like those from R. L. Jaggers farm, Franklin

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
Co., where a cremated burial—but with no evidence
of European contact—was found. Apparently red
slips were not common here. No whole specimens
bearing such slips were present; and only a few
sherds showed evidence of slips. Very few bottles
were found here; but their position, at or near the
head, was the same as in most prehistoric sites of
the region. A small, crude bowl illustrates the
method of forming a vessel from a single lump of
clay, rather than by the usual coil method.

37

decoration, is crudely made and unpolished. It is
unusual in that it has a pronounced bulge or ridge
around the center of the neck. The small bowl is
undecorated save for poorly formed triangles
scratched around its rim. It is rough and
inadequately fired. The medium sized bowl is fairly
well made and polished. It is decorated by means
of a semi-circle between two band lines. The designs
were carved after the vessel was fired. Both the
shape of the bowl and its type of decoration are
similar to certain ones from prehistoric graves in
“The designs include sun symbols, interlocking
Anderson County.
scrolls, one swastika, raised lines, fingernail imprints
and incised triangular designs. The workmanship
Two large bowls from the Womack site arc well
shows a fair degree of excellence. Certain designs made and artistically decorated. One has incised
show a marked similarity to some front Louisiana cross-hatch triangles hanging from band lines. It is
and Arkansas, as pictured by Moore.”6
similar to certain ones from a prehistoric site in the
immediate vicinity. The other bears intricately
At the Womack site on Red River, Lamar
incised interlocking scrolls between band lines. This
County, were found numerous evidences of
decoration is very much like that on a number of
European contact. They included a metal spearhead,
bowls from a prehistoric site in Harrison County.
old gun parts, gun flints, metal knife blade and trade
beads. Eight burials were uncovered. Five of them
A cemetery on the Richard Patton farm,
bore no specimens; one had only flint artifacts; and Anderson County, contained glass beads in
another was accompanied by two small bowls. The association with pottery and flint artifacts. In a grave
remaining burial contained a tiny jar and bottle, with glass beads were pottery specimens as follows:
small and medium sized bowls, two arrowpoints, A large bowl bearing three sets of six concentric
two flint knives, a flint scraper and nineteen glass circles; two small bowls with incised band lines
beads. The beads were around the neck; bowls around the rim; a conical-bowl pipe with punctate
against the face; bottle back of head; and jar beside decoration. On three of the four specimens white
the small bowl.
paint was used to accentuate the incised designs.
(Half of the forty pottery specimens from the site
Four of the skeletons at the Womack site were
employed white paint in the incisions.)
extended on back; two flexed and two uncertain.
One of those in a flexed position, on right side,
In this historic grave also were some flint knives,
with the right hand under the chin, was accompanied arrowpoints, etc. One flint knife, five and threeby no artifacts. Harrington7 pictures a flexed burial fourths inches long, was of the bevelled, doubleat a site near Ozan, Arkansas, and terms it “an pointed or four-edged type, very similar to knives
unusual position for a Caddo burial.” He further found associated with potsherds in certain sites in
states: “These were nearly all flexed burials, which Central and West Texas.
in this part of Arkansas, at least, rarely have anything
Most of the pottery from the Patton site is sand
buried with them.”
tempered. A few specimens contain a mixture of
The original position or type of burial of the sand and what seems to be calcareous material. One
skeleton accompanied by trade beads, pottery, etc., is tempered with lignite, or charcoal.
was uncertain. It was a child’s grave, with no bones
The historic pottery from this Neches River
remaining but the skull and a fragment of a humerus.
region does not differ greatly from that found in
The pottery in this historic grave suggests prehistoric graves. There are a few minor
decadence of the ceramic art. The bottle bears no differences as follows:

38

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

1. The percentage of undecorated vessels is
slightly larger—-being about six per cent as
compared to five per cent for prehistoric sites in
the vicinity.

Chief among these are the variations in the four
principal river basins—the Red, Sulphur, Sabine and
Neches. These variations reveal themselves most
strikingly in certain distinctive pottery types.

The outstanding types in the Red River region
seem to be: (a) Jars with perforations or suspension
holes near the rims; (b) Large, flaring bowls,
3. Pipes change little, except that the stems are
frequently with scalloped or saw-tooth edges; (c)
shorter.
Redware bottles with long, graceful necks;
4. Effigy vessels are less frequent in historic sites. sometimes with a band of indentations around the
base of the neck, and slightly spiraling nodal lines
5. While certain specimens in historic graves
dividing the body of the bottle; (d) Small, semi—
compare favorably in excellence of workmanship
globular bowls with two knobs on the rim and a
to the best found anywhere, there seems to be a
series of incised, parallel lines around the rim.
slight tendency toward decadence in the art.
The Sulphur River drainage seems to have the
following
distinctive features: (a) Hard, highly
Cultures Involved
polished ware of a blackish color, often delicately
In a general way, the region is fairly uniform in
engraved and sometimes employing red paint in the
cultural practices. There are, however, a number
incisions; (b) Jars with rounded bottoms; (c) Small
of significant differences.
bowls of the Cazuela form.
2. A greater percentage of the incised vessels in
historic graves bear white paint in the lines.

PLATE 8.
31. Effigy bottles, Caddoan, Harrison County.
32. Pots-bearing raised circles and scrolls. Harrison and Camp Counties.
33. Bowls bearing animal effigies, Asinai specimens. Anderson and Hopkins Counties.
34. Double lamp with suspension holes and small bowl with saw tooth edge. From Morris and Shelby
Counties.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
In the Sabine River area the distinguishing types
are as follows: (a) Large cook pots, some still
bearing soot on the outer surface; (b) Large storage
pots, with wide tops and flaring rims. These never
show use over the fire. (c) Large ollas with short
necks just large enough to admit an adult hand. (d)
Bowls of semi—conical form bearing incised sunray disks or circles enclosing the equal-armed cross.
(e) Redware bowls and jars, with sun symbols and
other designs carved through the red slip. (f) Rattle
or tambourine bowls with hollow knobs containing
clay pellets. (g) Jars with vertical raised lines.
The Neches River valley pottery is more nearly
in a class to itself than any other of the four. Among
its type characteristics are the following: (a) Bottles
with the body gradually merging into the neck, and
the neck tapering abruptly toward the top.
Decoration frequently is by means of incised,
vertical hatched bands. (b) Conical-bowl pipes
bearing punctate decoration, often accentuated by
use of white paint. (c) Large bowls with deeply
incised, multiple line interlocking devices. (d)
Medium sized jars that seem to be a composite of a
bowl and pot. Usually decorated with simple incised
triangles hanging from band lines; or with a series
of parallel incised lines about the rim. (e) Animal
effigies perched on small platforms attached to rims
of bowls. (f) Small bowls of conical form, usually
crudely made and undecorated. (g) Vases with four
legs and circular, or square, doughnut-like bases.

39

are a distinctive feature of the Sabine River valley,
one has turned up in the Neches River area. Animal
effigies on platforms seem to have had a local
development in a restricted area along the Neches;
yet one has been found in the eastern part of
Hopkins County, Sulphur River drainage.
But, as a general rule, one can tell by its
distinctive forms and decoration from what portion
of East Texas a collection of pottery came.
University of Texas
Austin, Texas

1. Harrington, M. R., Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas,
Museum of the American Indian, Heye Foundation, New
York, 1920, p. 132.
2. M. R. Harrington, Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas,
Museum of the American Indian, Heye Foundation, New
York, 1920, pp. 34, 58 and 82.
3. Since Harrington combined pots and vases—or jars—we
do likewise, for the sake of comparison.
4. Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas, M. R. Harrington,
Museum of the American Indian, New York, 1920, Pl.
LXXXVIII, a.
5. Elizabeth Hindman, Master of Arts Thesis, University of
Texas, Summer of 1932.
6. Moore, Clarence B., “Antiquities of the Ouachita Valley,”
Reprint from the Journal of the Academy of Natural Sciences
of Philadelphia. Philadelphia, 1909, Vol. XIV.

It must be understood, however, that these 7. M. R. Harrington, “Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas,”
various features are not always confined to a given Museum of the American Indian, New York. 1920, Pl. VII,
area. While rattle or tambourine bowls, for example, P. 42.

40

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

THE MEANING OF GYPSUM CAVE
M. R. HARRINGTON
While it is true that the sole object of
archeological research is to uncover and record
what actually happened in the past, before the days
of written history, in practice it does not always
work out that way. Archeologists have a tendency
toward preconceived notions of one kind or of
another. We are likely to regard our discoveries
through spectacles tinted more or less by what we
think we should find, rather than through the clear
lenses of absolutely unbiased investigation. I have
even heard of archeologists who deliberately
destroyed pieces of evidence that conflicted with
their theories of what ought to be.

The cavern is situated in a limestone spur of the
Frenchman Range of mountains and overlooks a
wide area of comparatively level ground sloping
away towards the Colorado River, here about 15
miles distant, and is in plain sight of the mouth of
Black Canyon where the so-called Boulder Dam is
now being constructed.

It is a rather large cavern for the region,
measuring some 300 feet from east to west and
120 feet from north to south. It is divided into five
principal rooms and the floor is very rough and
irregular, sloping steeply downward from front to
back, with level areas of any size only in the rear
Try as we will, being human, we cannot escape chambers.
this tendency entirely. Such was my case in
My attention was attracted to the cave originally
approaching the problem of Gypsum Cave in
by the curious fact that shattered weapons of the
southern Nevada. I was so influenced by the
ancient Basketmakers, who developed the first wellprevailing, or until recently prevailing, idea that man
defined culture hitherto found in the Southwest and
was a very recent new comer to America that I had
who flourished three or four thousand years ago,
paid little attention to previous discoveries
were found lying upon the surface of extensive
suggesting his antiquity, and it was only when
deposits of coarse fibrous dung of some unknown
various members of my expedition under my charge
animal, perfectly preserved by the dryness of the
made finds of this character that I awoke to the
cave. These deposits resembled the manure found
situation.
in a neglected stable or corral more than anything
At least I was convinced by the evidence saw else; yet as the Basketmaker relies upon their
and handled that man existed in America when many surface, I thought the beds must be older than the
animals now extinct were still very much alive and Basketmaker period, which, of course,
climatic conditions differed considerably from what automatically ruled out modern horses or burros,
we find today.
even if these animals had been able to crawl through
the narrow entrances into the dark interior rooms
The exploration of Gypsum Cave, which lies
where the deposits lay. It dawned upon me then
about 16 miles east of Las Vegas, Nevada, was
that we might be dealing with some extinct beasts.
begun by the Southwest Museum of Los Angeles
in January, 1930. The expedition under my charge,
I felt that we must look for some herbivorous
with funds furnished by Mr. and Mrs. C. H. Sessions creature. The dung was full of vegetal fiber of large
and the California Institute of Technology joined size which would have been able to crawl through
forces when it became plain that there were extinct low openings into the cave. It seemed at least
mammals involved in the finds. During the latter possible after thinking over all the various known
part of the work we were also favored with the mammals, now extinct, which had roamed over
financial support of the Carnegie Institution at North America during the Ice Age or Pleistocene
Washington.
period that the only animal fulfilling all these

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

41

requirements would be some species of ground preservation, mostly imbedded in the dung,
sloth, a queer massive race of beasts, awkward and sometimes with the dried tissues still adhering; but
stupid, which have entirely vanished from the earth. huge claws with their horny coverings still intact;
I was interested in the fact that the cave
was strewn with shattered darts of the sort
used in America before the invention or the
importation of the bow and arrow. Could
man and the sloth have met face to face?
The cave deposits might yield the answer.
Later on, specimens of the dung were
examined by Professor Barnum Brown of
the American Museum of Natural History
of New York, who reported, on the basis
of known specimens found in a cave in
Patagonia, that a ground sloth was
probably responsible.
This information keyed me up to a high
pitch of expectancy, and when the chance
came to explore the cave, in January, 1930,
we were eager to unravel the mystery.
The first few weeks of the expedition
passed uneventfully, however, without any
finds of unusual interest. Then one day my
niece, Mrs. Bertha Parker (Pallan)
Thurston, the expedition secretary, who
spent her spare time, when not laboring
with typewriter and expense accounts, in
searching the crevices of the cavern,
discovered the complete skull of a ground
sloth! This startling find renewed our
flagging interest, and most important of all
brought us the active cooperation of the
California Institute of Technology. A
competent young paleontologist, the late
Mr. James E. Thurston, was assigned to
the expedition and we also had the benefit
of frequent visits and consultations with
Doctor Chester Stock and Mr. E. L.
Furlong of the Institute.
Then came important finds in rapid
succession on the paleontological side. We
found not only bones of a number of sloths
(of the species Nothrotherium Shastense
Sinclair) in an excellent state of

PLATE 9.
35. Sloth humerus imbedded in sloth clung. Room 4,
Gypsum Cave. A mass of sloth hair was found
beneath this bone.
36. Leg bones of small slender camel in situ. Room 4,
Gypsum Cave.
37. Claws and bones of Ground Sloth as uncovered in
Gypsum Cave, Nevada.

42

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

abundant hair, coarse and tawny, sometimes reddish; must have been brought from some distance; the
and even some pieces of the hide of this strange burning, telling of its use, is very distinct. It is a
creature. The mystery of the dung was explained relic of some stout-hearted ancient cave-explorer.
at last.
The passageway between Rooms 4 and 5 yielded
Associated with the sloth in the same layers were a number of important items. One was a group of
the bones of at least two kinds of extinct American sticks, a dozen or so, all burnt on one end and
horses, a small delicate limbed camel related to the grouped together in a sort of pocket under a very
South American llama and one or two larger types solid layer of sloth dung. These apparently had also
of camel, all of them extinct, as well as numerous been used as torches, to illumine the dark recesses
bones and other traces of the big horn or mountain where lurked the weird hairy beasts.
sheep and a few smaller animals which still survive
In another case a fragment of a polished wooden
in this region.
dart-shaft was taken from the solid dung at a depth
Digging down deeper below the sloth layers we of about 20 inches from its surface—a memento of
found the lower portions of the cave filled with some forgotten hunt.
bedded angular gravels, sands, and silts, apparently
Across the passage a wooden fore-shaft for a
deposited by water, among which were a few bones
dart, showing part of the flint dart-point still
of American horses and of a large camel.
attached, appeared under an unbroken layer of the
In the sloth layers, even outside of the dung itself, dung, which was capped over by a layer of gypsum
which was a mass of vegetal fiber, there were containing one solidified stratum; nearby at a slightly
various sticks and leaves which, when identified, higher level lay a sloth claw. Another hunt was here
should give an excellent picture of the plant life of recorded—or perhaps the same—who shall say?
the time. The same layers also yielded dried insects
Room 4, the largest of all the rooms and the
of various kinds, bones of a desert tortoise and the
principal bedding place of the sloth, yielded various
mummified remains of a small rattlesnake.
specimens of man’s handiwork, but their
Such a paleontological find without anything else relationship to the sloth deposits was not always
would be well worth while, especially on account easily determined. There was one outstanding
of the preservation of the exceedingly rare hair, skin specimen, however, a flint dart-point still showing
and claws of the ground sloth, but it is the evidence traces of the pitch by means of which it had been
of the visits of man to the cave, apparently attached to the dart, lying in a semi-solidified
contemporaneous with the extinct animals, that gypsum deposit between two layers of burned sloth
gives the discovery its extraordinary value.
dung. Some 20 inches from it in the same layer was
a sloth bone and nearby at a higher level most of
It has been stated that the cave was divided into
the leg bones of our small camel, which I may add,
five principal chambers. Every one of these five
is probably a new species. Of course, this find
chambers yielded evidences of man’s association
implies that man was hunting in the cave while the
with extinct mammals. A single bit of evidence, or
sloth was still there, that there were sloths for a
even a few such bits, might be explained away, but
long time after his departure, and that after his visit
the finds of this nature were so numerous and so
the leg of the camel was dragged in from outside,
varied that no doubt remains in my mind that man
probably by some beast of prey.
and the sloth met, face to face, in Gypsum Cave.
The original sloth skull found by Mrs. Thurston,
Room 5, the innermost, yielded fragments of a
has been mentioned; this lay under a large slab of
cane torch lying beside the bones of a baby sloth
rock on the surface of a rock fall in Room 3. When
and covered by apparently undisturbed deposits,
we came to excavate the room, we found, in an old
including sloth dung. The cane of which the torch
floor deposit, under the very bottom of this same
was made grows in wet ground about springs and
fall and almost beneath the spot where the skull

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

43

had been a very fine dart-point of quartzite of the
same type as the point found in Room 4. Rock fall
evidence is usually not very reliable—but this one
is more convincing than usual.

ashes. Perhaps two yards distant, between the two
dung layers, was a pocket containing about half a
pint of wood charcoal, but the burning in this case
had apparently not taken place on the spot.

In another part of Room 3 was found a curious
painted flageolet of wood in a rock slide not far
from sloth bones and a little higher up to one side
of the slide a magnificent flint knife with its wooden
handle still intact, in the vicinity of some sloth dung.
But as both of these were in or near a shifting slide
their association with the sloth is doubtful.

The best find of this kind, however, was made
just before the expedition closed, when another
fireplace was found of slightly larger diameter, 4 or
5 feet south of the first one. In this case ground
sloth dung alone had been used for fuel, although
an attempt had been made to burn a consolidated
chunk of bat dung, an attempt which was not
entirely successful. While still burning the sloth dung
had been kicked or trampled upon and burning
fragments scattered out in different directions where
they had discolored the soil and left a trace of ash.
Again after the mass had cooled it had been
trampled on and cold bits of charred dung scattered
about. Then the sloths had returned and deposited
a heavy layer of dung, showing no trace of burning,
directly upon the ashes of the one-time campfire.

In Room 2, a pit was stink to determine the
depths of the deposits and their general character.
Near the surface a layer contained fragments of
typical Basketmaker atl-atl darts, but little more of
human origin appeared until a depth of 8 feet was
reached, and from this point down to about 10 feet,
when huge masses of fallen rock made further
digging impossible. From 8 to 10 feet deep several
fragments of atl-atl darts were found of cruder
construction than the typical Basketmaker style but
highly decorated with painted designs in colors.
Above these darts was a matted layer of sticks
among which were found pieces of sloth dung and
occasional wisps of sloth hair. This again records
the presence of man in the cave probably on a hunt
before the sloths abandoned it forever.

Near the campfires, but at a slightly greater
depth, was found a carefully worked stick showing
distinct marks of stone implements, neatly cut and
ground off; and in the same deposit, but at a higher
level, appeared a crude oval flint knife with one
edge chipped from one side only for use as a scraper.
Some of the sloth bones from Room 4 show
scratches which might well have been made in
In fact all the finds just described record similar
cutting the flesh from the bones with a knife of this
hunts in which man left behind only fragments of
kind.
his weapons and bits of the torches lie carried to
light his way- into the dark chambers, but there
Before leaving these pieces of evidence it might
was no indication of his camping or living at that be well to consider possible objections to our
early date in the inner rooms of the cavern.
interpretation of them as indicating the presence of
man in the days of the sloth. In the first place I can
In Room 1, however, which is near the entrance,
conceive no possible explanation for the torch
we did find a few traces of early cave life, or, at
fragments beside the bones of the baby sloth in
least, of an overnight camp or two, in the days of
Room 5 except the presence of contemporary man.
the sloth.
That the burning of the cane on both ends was due
These took the form of two beds of charred to human agency and not to general burning of the
material about 8 feet below the present surface and dung layer is indicated by the fact that there was no
under two very distinct layers of ground sloth dung. burning of the dung in the immediate vicinity. Even
The first consisted of a small bed about 8 or 10 if there had been burned dung adjacent, one would
inches in diameter of charred twigs and burnt dung still have to explain the burning at both ends of the
just beneath the lowest dung layer. That the burning cane while the middle portion remained in its natural
took place on the spot was indicated by a slight state; also, the very presence of the cane in the cave,
discoloration of the underlying earth and traces of as this plant is found only around springs and there

44

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

are no traces of such springs ancient or
modern in the immediate vicinity of the
cave.
The polished wooden dart-shaft
imbedded in the dung is also hard to
explain except by human agency and the
same is true of the dart fore-shaft buried
beneath a dung layer.
However, it has been suggested that
the twelve burned torch sticks found in a
pocket below an unusually heavy layer
of dung might have been deposited there
by rats, especially as there were
indications of rat droppings in the pocket.
In answer to this I can say that no opening
was found leading out from this pocket
in any direction and if the sticks were
deposited in it by rats, this was done
before the heavy upper layer of dung was
laid down by the sloth, which does not
alter the value of the evidence. It might
be mentioned here that none of the sticks
showed any indication of gnawing,
whereas most sticks found in rat nests
show abundant tooth marks.
The flint dart-point in the gypsum layer
between two layers of burned dung in
Room 4 would also be very difficult to
explain by any other agency than that of
contemporary man although it has been
suggested that the dart might have
penetrated the dung of the upper layer
and the point have become imbedded after
the day of the sloth. This seems very
unlikely on account of the almost
horizontal position of the dart-point and
the compact character of the gypsum
layer.
Another find exceedingly difficult to
explain away is the dart--point of similar
type found in a cave floor deposit below
the rock fall in Room 3, the top of which
rock fall contained the sloth skull found
by Mrs. Thurston. It seems very unlikely
that any person or animal would have

PLATE 10.
38. Bones of American camel split for the marrow.
Gypsum Cave, Nevada.
39. Skull of Ground Sloth from Gypsum Cave.
40. Flint knife on original wooden handle, Gypsum
Cave.
41. Dart points of quartzite and flint probably used in
hunting ground sloths, Gypsum Cave.
42. Dart point of quartzite, wooden dart foreshaft and
ground sloth claw from Gypsum Cave. The claw is
over six inches long.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
taken this skull away from an original bed elsewhere
and deposited it under the slab where it was found,
hundreds or thousands of years after the animal’s
death. A much more likely explanation is that the
rock-fall in Room 3 occurred at the same time as
the one before mentioned in Room 4 and the sloths
returned afterwards (an event proven in Room 4)
and after its death the skull of one of these returning
sloths worked down between the rocks and so
escaped destruction by hungry carnivores.

45

might have been made with flint implements in
cutting off the flesh. That the sloth lived in the cave
long after man’s first visits is plainly indicated by
the deposits of dung. It must be remembered that
man did not live in the cave at this time, although
he probably camped over night in the mouth of it
from time to time as is suggested by the deeply
buried fireplaces.
All that we know definitely about our earliest
man is that he used the spear-thrower or atl-atl and
darts, the latter resembling in a general way, those
of the Basketmakers but somewhat cruder in finish,
and, strange to say, highly decorated with painted
designs. These painted darts are probably our
earliest known examples of American decorative
art. The points are of lozenge-shape and unlike the
known Basketmaker types.

I can find no explanation, except the obvious
one of contemporary man, for the deeply buried
painted darts below the sloth layer in Room 2 and
the fireplaces in Room 1 were most convincing.
Outdoor deposits of charcoal due to natural
agencies such as forest fires due to lightning or
volcanoes are conceivable, but the presence of
charred wood and dung such as was found in Room
That the cave was occupied by Basketmakers at
1 below the sloth layers in a cave with no other
a later period is shown by many broken darts of
burned material near admits of but one
Basketmaker type and certain other typical objects.
explanation—contemporary man.
The Basketmakers, like their predecessors, seemed
As an evidence of the age, in years, of these to have come to the cave mainly for hunting,
fireplaces and the objects associated with them it because broken darts are their most numerous relics.
should be noted that early Pueblo and still earlier The victims were probably mountain sheep of which
Basketmaker remains were found in the surface there are abundant traces in the cavern in the form
layer high above the beds of charcoal. Provided that of bones and dung.
the rate of the deposit of the cave refuse was
Near the surface of Room 1, not far from the
reasonably uniform and discounting the mass of
entrance, was a layer containing abundant ashes,
rock apparently shaken down by earthquakes and
charcoal, the bones of rabbits and mountain sheep,
providing that Kidder’s estimate of the age of the
corn cobs, fiber strings and most interesting of all
Basketmaker, about 3500 years* is correct, we have
numerous pendants made of selenite (gypsum
a record here of something like three times 3500
crystals) in all stages of manufacture. This layer
or 10,500 years as the possible age of the fireplaces.
was identified as to age by pottery and arrow-points
Of course, this is little more than a guess, but that
of Moapa Valley Pueblo type, ranging in culture
the fireplaces are much older than the Basketmaker
stages from Pueblo I to Pueblo III. The Pueblos
culture represented in the top layer is certain.
had visited and actually lived in the cave while
Summing up the human history of the cave as gathering selenite crystals for the manufacture of
indicated by our finds we have first of all the early pendants; and we find a few evidences of occupation
visits of man, while the sloth was still in possession by recent Paiute, perhaps for the same purpose.
and there were native camels and horses of various
Now taking up our interpretation of the
species in the country. That these visits were for
geological age of our extinct animals and associated
hunting purposes is suggested by the fact that we
man, I have already mentioned the fact that the
found only broken weapons and torches
lower levels of the cave below the sloth layers
representing this period; and that the sloths were
showed deposits composed of angular gravels and
the victims is hinted by scratches on bones which
silts undoubtedly deposited by water. This implies

46

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

a climate very much more humid than at present, a
time when heavy rains produced torrents which
rushing down the mountain side found their way
into the cave bringing in with them angular gravel
and silt picked up on the way which were deposited
in the bottom of the cave. At this time American
camels and indigenous horses roamed the country
as is recorded by their scattered bones imbedded in
the sediments. Then the climate grew dryer and the
only deposits formed in the rear chambers of the
cave were rock falls from the roof, bat guano and
the like. Then the cave became a comfortable home
for a herd of ground sloths, the dung of which, on
their bedding grounds, remained intact for the most
part up to the present day. That there was still some
dampness at this time, however, is indicated by
stalagmitic formations in certain places, in and
above the sloth layers and in one case above the
skeleton of a sloth. Of course, in the vicinity of
these stalagmites the dung itself has been destroyed
by dampness.
During the occupation of the cave by the sloths
there must have been an earthquake, for we find in
Room b a great rock fall lying upon the dung; but
that the sloths returned afterwards is shown by
patches of dung deposited on the top of the same
rock fall.
Finally the climate became still dryer, so dry that
no more stalagmites were formed and it still remains
dry today.
It was thought that this increase of dryness might
have destroyed the vegetation upon which the sloth
fed, and thus hastened his departure or extinction,
but an examination of the dung shows that this
curious creature subsisted mainly upon the foliage
of the Joshua tree (Yucca brevifolia) which still
exists in the region, although now only at a much
higher elevation.

It is important to note that we have no record of
any return of a humid climate or other great changes
after the days of the sloth, except the increasing
dryness.
Now remains to interpret our geological record
as a whole. That we have represented here a change
of climate from a very wet and rainy one to the
present arid condition seems certain, and it should
not be difficult to determine what geological event
took place which might have been the cause of a
moist climate where now we have a very dry one.
This great event was the last glacial advance of
the Ice Age or Pleistocene period of North Americaan event whose climax is variously estimated as
occurring from thirty to fifty thousand years ago.
It is well known that the continental glacier itself
did not reach as far southwest as Southern Nevada
but the mountains, especially the higher ones, were
at this time undoubtedly heavily capped with snow
and ice the year around.
The presence of this ice meant streams running
bank-full in the summertime, numerous lakes and
ponds, and of course, much heavier rainfall. As the
ice retreated in the north and the climate became
warmer these elevated ice-fields in the south
gradually disappeared until the present time we have
permanent ice only on the very highest peaks and
not much of that, certainly not enough of it to exert
any marked influence upon the climate.
This gradual disappearance of moisture from the
region would account perfectly for the conditions
we find in Gypsum Cave.

The occupation of the cave, therefore, by the
sloth and his associates, the camels and the horses
and the early visits of man may be dated as occurring
during the period of the last glacial retreat; that is
to say they are of post-glacial age. That there was
At least we infer that the sloth and his associates, still some influence remaining from the latest ice
the camels and horses, probably were the last advance in the form of greater moisture may be
Pleistocene animals in the district, because the seen by the stalagmites formed during and
deposits above the sloth layer in Room 1, although subsequent to the time of the sloth; still, desiccation
they give us a record of considerable lapse of time, was well under way.
contain no evidences of animals different from those
This period of glacial retreat is called by Osborn
now surviving.
the last phase of the Pleistocene and the presence

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

47

of so many extinct species of animals certainly gave side, we learn that man, no bestial half-ape, but
already armed with atl-atl and darts and capable of
our period a decidedly Pleistocene aspect.
producing excellent flint work and of painting
The question is, just where does the Pleistocene
decorative designs in colors, arrived in southern
end and the Recent begin? On that definition must
Nevada before the strange creatures of the past had
hang the placing of our find as late Pleistocene or
disappeared.
early Recent.
This fits in with other, earlier discoveries, many
In terms of years the close of the Ice Age or
of which did not receive the credence they deserved;
Pleistocene period is variously estimated as from
and others, even more important, made since the
ten to thirty thousand years ago, but the evidence
Second Sessions Expedition folded its tents and
of the strata in Gypsum Cave as before related
abandoned Gypsum Cave. From these accumulating
suggests the lower figure as the more probable one,
finds the deduction seems inevitable-that man was
so far as our find is concerned.
widely distributed and well established in North
What, in a few words, is the meaning of Gypsum America by the end of the Pleistocene period.
Cave? What may we learn from the data dug with
so much labor from its dusty depths? On the
The Southwest Museum
Paleontological side, we gather that the ground Los Angeles. California.
sloth, Nothrotherium shastense and certain species
of native horse and camel, typical of the Pleistocene,
survived until the retreat of the glaciers was well
under way and arid conditions were establishing *Kidder, Alfred Vincent. An introduction to the Study of
Southwestern Archaeology, New Haven, 1924, p. 119.
themselves in the Southwest. On the archeological

48

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

FETISH STONES FROM NEAR EL PASO.
EILEEN E. ALVES
PHOTOGRAPHS BY ROBERT WHITLOCK
Somehow the deep religious significance
attached to fetish stones among the Indians makes
the usual definition seem rather inadequate, and I
like best this definition “a fetish is simply some
material object in which a god is supposed to dwell.”

Monthly ceremonies were also held at the full of
the moon if the intervention of the gods was in great
demand.

Among objects used as fetishes in different
countries are human bones, fossils, carved images,
natural stone concretions that resemble parts of the
human body or whole animals, bundles of feathers,
pieces of wood, or highly colored stones. The Sioux
have an object commanding great veneration, it is
a tiny figure of a man kept carefully wrapped in
swan’s down in a cylindrical wooden box. The
Cherokees revere a transparent crystal wrapped in
buckskin and put in a sacred cave. They feed this
crystal by rubbing it with the blood of a deer,
whenever they are in need of its magic power. A
little green man with red eyes comes all the way
from New Zealand as a representative of fetish
worship from those islands.

In the general vicinity of El Paso have been found
many stone animals, some crudely carved and yet
leaving no doubt as to the animal they represent—
bears and frogs are the most numerous, but there
are specimens of mountain lions, a buffalo, coyote,
and an unfinished stone bug rather like a potato
bug. From the same sites came perforated shell
fossils and smaller stones carved into frogs that may
also have been individual fetishes.

In the Report of the Bureau of Ethnology
1880—1881, a very full and interesting account is
Fetish worship is so universal that we hear of it given of the meaning and use of the fetish stones
in New Zealand, Australia, and Africa. It was among the Zuni. This article was written by Lieut.
brought to this country by the negroes, and played Frank Hamilton Cushing, and from the illustrations
an important part in the voodoo ceremonies of these and the text there is so much that is similar to the
people. From the North comes the Eskimo fetish stones found on the prehistoric sites in this part of
made of wood in the form of a whale, showing Texas and New Mexico that we will quote, Lieut.
plainly the religious application to their daily need. Cushing.

With the Indians of the southwest fetish stones
were, and are, in great favor, safety in danger, relief
from hunger and thirst, the conquering of enemies,
production of children, and above all, success in
the chase, all these advantages were the special
powers of the fetish stones, and if their charms
proved potent, they were given lodgement in the
sacred places of the Medicine Men, and special
yearly ceremonies were held in their honor with
the full regalia of the feathered prayer sticks and
incantations. Bathing and rubbing the stones in the
blood of the slain victims produced a beautiful
polished surface which of course, is not seen on
the very old specimens picked up on the plains.

Mountain Lions
To begin with the mountain lion as is his right as
Master of the North and of the Prey Gods, the one
here described is from the Sacramentos, in New
Mexico. His features are clearly marked, ears eyes,
nose and mouth, his tail lies along his back, ending
in the groove for the polishing or straightening of
arrows, or for the binding of the ceremonial objects
on his back. He is five and a half inches long and is
made of limestone. To quote from Lieut. Cushing
on the Zuni ceremonies “Oh Long Tail, thou art
stout of heart, and strong of will, therefore will I
give unto you the mastership of the gods of prey,”
he is the “special hunter of elk, deer and bison”.
The mountain lion lives by the blood and flesh of
the game animals—and he is endowed—with the
peculiar powers that they possess in the senses of
sight and smell.”

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
In connection with the Sacramento mountain
lion, from the, south in the state of Chihuahua,
Mexico, comes a small black on white animal effigy
jug, apparently Chupadero pottery, and this little
jug is so like Cushing’s description of the typical
mountain lion that I include it in this article, as it
surely belongs to the country of the
“Master of the North” rather than to
Mexico. This little piece of pottery is
five and a half inches long, tail over its
back, and eyes, ears, nose, mouth and
anus clearly marked, word for word the
description given by Cushing. This is not
a fetish stone of course, but is interesting
as being made of pottery, and still
carrying out so closely both details and
size of its stone counterpart.

49

the back. A very fine one, though much smaller,
was plowed up in a field near Mountain Park. From
the description I was given, bands of black in the
gray agate or onyx from which it was made, were
very effectively used in outlining parts of the head
and body.

Stone Bears
The stone bear is from the Little
Florida Mountains, near Deming, New
Mexico, and it differs from the bears
found in the Sacramento Mountains,
over two hundred miles to the east only
in one feature, most of the Sacramento
bears have a terraced erection on their
backs, which is lacking in the Florida
bear. This bear is six inches long and is
made from volcanic tufa. Eyes, ears,
nose, and mouth are clearly cut, also the
four legs and short tail. To again quote
from Cushing “Stout of heart and strong
of will, therefore I make you younger
brother of the mountain lion, guardian
and master of the west, for thy coat is
the color of the land of the night.”
The bear from Nogal, in the
Sacramentos is a very large one,
weighing about nine pounds. He may
partake partly of the nature of the
mountain lion, as his tail seems to be on
his back, but head, legs and body seem
more like the bear. The one found this
summer in a gopher hole near the
Ruidoso River is also of this large size,
and both have the terraced carving on

PLATE 11.
43 Mountain lion, buffalo, frog and bear fetishes.
44. The mountain lion in stone and in pottery.
4. Bear, lion, buffalo, and frogs.

50

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

The carved terrace occurs again on the bear from
the government reserve in the San Andreas
Mountains, while in size it resembles the Florida
specimen.
Coyote

The toad from Orogrande, New Mexico, is made
from a dark gray limestone. It is so perfect that
you can almost see the smooth stone throat puff in
and out as the animal breathes. The goggle eyes,
the mouth, the legs are absolutely true to nature.

The Florida frog from the G. W. Smith collection
The coyote fetish, found in a cultivated field on was found near the Florida bear, and carries the
a Ruidoso farm, is made of pottery, not stone— terraced carving that is lacking in the bear. It is
Cushing names the coyote and wolf as the “hunter almost as large as the pottery frog from the Ed Cox
god of the east.” This little wolf like creature has ranch. This frog is very crude, but unmistakably a
the pointed head of a wolf, but the tail is the tail of frog.
a duck. Under his body are four holes, evidently
Near the dry lakes in the southern part of New
made for four little wooden legs. The four legs need
Mexico, among the sand dunes, an exquisitely
not argue against the duck-like extremity as we have
carved frog was found which was made from a
a duck effigy bowl from Chihuahua that has four
fossilized shell. It was quite small, but was of
distinct legs. This is the only wolf like fetish I have
unusually good workmanship. Fifty miles from here
known in this region.
a white frog made of a beautiful satin-like limestone
In the Zuni cult according to the American was found. Brown markings in the stone were
Bureau of Ethnology, the eagle and the mole are skillfully used in the carving, quite after the manner
hunter gods of the Above and the Below, of cameo work. A hole was bored in the end of this
respectively, while the badger is Master of the one, as well as in the end of the fossil shell frog, so
South. In the El Paso region, I have never seen any both could have been carried as pendants.
of these three last mentioned, unless a bird like
image found on the mesa near here was intended
Stone Buffalo
for an eagle. In some of the tribes in the pueblos to
The stone buffalo was a surface find on the Ed
the north of us, a dragon fly, as an expert in the art
Cox ranch, forty-two miles west of El Paso, on the
of dodging, is used as a lesser fetish, and shows
Mexican border. Made of volcanic tufa, he is most
that insects and bugs were used in this connection,
realistically formed, from the drawn in head to the
so the stone bug from the Chiricahua Mountains in
short tail.
Arizona may also have had its use among the
fetishes that as “Masters of the Paths of Life are
Frogs, fossils—buffalo and bug—all point to the
given high rank among the gods.”
worship of Nature by her children of mountain and
plain. But the important fetishes—the lion, the bear,
and the wolf, the predatory animals of the chase
Stone Frogs
were greater than frog or buffalo. Their powerful
How in keeping with the whole meaning of fetish
magic meant food, water, and shelter to the hunter
worship, the helpful mediation of the fetish between
and his family. Their power over the game animals
the far off gods and man in his great needs, that on
meant the very life of the tribe. Was it any wonder
these sun scorched plains, images of frogs and toads
that their shrines were sacred?
should be found in such great numbers. How natural
1120 Arizona St., El Paso, Texas.
that a frog should intervene for the great gift of
water.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

51

COLLECTING FOSSIL ELEPHANTS AT DALLAS, TEXAS.
ELLIS W. SHULER
That man was co-existent with the mastodon
and mammoth in Europe is well established. Many
geologists and archaeologists are convinced that
man lived in North America during the Pleistocene
but the belief is by no means universal. Certainly
the archaeologist has a definite interest in the search
for fossil elephants and for any evidence of their
association with man.
Elephants were widespread and numerous in
Texas during the Pleistocene. In fact, it is easier to
prove that vast herds of elephants roamed along
Texas streams than to prove that countless buffalo
succeeded them; though as for that, there are men
in Dallas who have seen buffalo tongues peddled
on its streets. When it comes to the counting of
skulls it is far easier to find an elephant skull than a
buffalo skull. The bones of the victims of the lawless
buffalo hunting days have disappeared.
The industrial use of sand and gravel in the City
of Dallas has uncovered almost daily over a period
of fifty years bones of fossil elephants.
The best preserved fossils are found in the sand
terraces along the Trinity river about fifty feet above
the present flood plain and at the general level of
the Dallas City Park, from the sands of which one
of the earliest skulls was excavated, which is now
in the Peabody Museum at Yale. Fossils found
below this level show evidences of stream erosion
and probably come from reworked terraces.

vegetation? What do the teeth of the mammoth and
mastodon tell of the food on which they lived? Most
importantly, were the climatic conditions favorable
for Prehistoric man? As yet there are no satisfactory
answers.
However, since it is improbable that there were
fundamental changes in the soil, there seems to be
little reason for thinking that there was at any time
a dense forest over the surrounding prairies; more
rainfall, which is highly probable during the
Pleistocene, might produce more luscious grasses.
More rainfall might cover the river flood plain with
an entirely different flora perhaps better adapted to
elephants. But what would be man’s part in the
picture? It would be that of the hunter with a most
serious problem of shelter and protection, for along
the rivers of Central Texas there are few rock
shelters or caves.
The Elephants Were Trapped in Quick Sands.
A study of the commercial sand pits around
Dallas gives a clue as to how the elephants were
commonly trapped. Many, perhaps most of them
were caught in ancient quicksands. In the old Vilbig
sand pit in East Dallas in 1911) five skulls were to
be seen lying on the dump. Three additional skulls
were later removed from the pit and were preserved.
The sand in this pit had a total depth of forty feet.
The locality was abandoned because the sand grains
became too small for commercial use. Here was an
ideal trap for the unwary elephant, a quicksand
along the ancient Trinity River.

Accepting the date of the fossils found at the
level of the City Park terrace as mid-Pleistocene,
following Dr. O. P. Hay, then the valley of the Trinity
Whether smothered in a sucking sand or killed
River has been deepened almost fifty feet since midin other ways it is very rare that the elephant
Pleistocene time. The total change in the
skeleton is not widely dismembered. This is true
surrounding topography since Pleistocene times,
even in a quicksand. The skeleton which was
however, has been small.
recovered by Southern Methodist University in the
Changes in climate and vegetation are spring of 1931 was spread over an area of about
problematic. Are the palmetto’s at Preachers Slough sixty feet. The fossil skulls and heavier bones are
on the Trinity river in the southeastern corner of usually found at contacts of sand and gravel or of
Dallas County remnants of a more tropical clay and sand. The disappearance of the smaller

52

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

bones seems to be due to solution. The river water
carried in it vegetable acids and carbon dioxide.
Where the skeleton is covered with clay the lime
from the bone is leached out and redeposited in the
clay above and around it, often making it as white
as the fossil itself.

public was coming in droves. The great skull
appeared. Then in the afternoon McAdams called
over almost in a whisper but with a smile which
spread over all his face, “Shuler, I’ve found the
lower jaw!”

Recovering the Bones
The chief problem in the recovering
of the bones is to prevent quick drying
and slacking. The greater number of
recoveries by amateurs are ruined by
slacking. A good method is to saturate
the bones immediately as they are
uncovered with alcohol in which a small
amount of white shellac has been
dissolved. Beginning with a solution of
1 to 10 the ratio is increased (in
successive solutions) until the bones are
well impregnated with the shellac. In
order to move the specimens without
breakage it will probably be necessary
to enclose it in a plaster cast made of
torn pieces of sack dipped in a thin
solution of plaster of Paris. Flour paste
may be used, but—and I speak from
experience—it is not so desirable in a
country of rain.
One of the most interesting finds at
Dallas was made in the spring of 1931
in the Connor sand pit about 3 miles
southeast of Dallas city limits. The
almost complete skeleton is shown
uncovered in Plate 12, No. 47. This
skeleton was recovered by students of
Southern Methodist University under
the supervision of Mr. Ed McAdams.
First the femur and then the big
pelvic girdle, big enough for a man to
crawl through, were uncovered. The
sand pit man helped with his drag, and
the boys made the dirt fly. Two
vertebrae and part of a rib were found.
The digging continued. A tent was
brought down and a day and night
watch established, for by that time the

PLATE 12.
46. Dr. Shuler excavating a mammoth skull.
47. An almost complete skeleton uncovered.
48. Section of the Connor Sand Pit near Dallas,
Texas, where bones were excavated.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
A recent find, Plate 12, No. 46, again in the
Connor pit, was a medium size skull which has not
yet been identified. Two tusks were found projecting
from a clay bank. The skull was found resting on a
fine sand; it had been covered with mud and much
of the lime of the skull had been redeposited in the
clay above. With the greatest care and with constant
impregnation with alcohol and shellac this skull was
preserved.
By far the greatest number of recoveries are leg
bone fragments and teeth, but twenty-one skulls
have been uncovered around Dallas. Not more than
eight of these have been preserved. In the Dallas
finds are represented Elephas imperator; Elephas
columbi, Mastodon americanus, and undetermined
species.
In 1918 the skeleton of a man1 identified by Dr.
McCurdy of Yale as an Indian was uncovered in
the Lagow sand pit east of the Dallas Oil Mill. The
degree of fossilization was greater than that of a
camel skull found in the same pit. Had the bones
been those of any other mammal there would have
been no question as to their age; but although found
in a fossiliferous part of the pit the skeleton was
not covered over with a layer of limestone and so
could possibly have been buried artificially.

53

trapping the elephant with pits rather than in killing
them with weapons. It seems improbable that
prehistoric man armed only with spears or arrows
with flint heads could successfully hunt the thick
skinned elephant. Again if prehistoric man did kill
an elephant there was the very smallest chance for
its preservation in river sands.
If the human bones should he found in the
fossiliferous zone or bed of a sand pit; if the bones
have no association of burial mounds; if the degree
of fossilization were approximately the same as
other bones in the pit, then the association of the
human bones with those of fossil elephants should
be very significant and would probably indicate a
common collection of the bones by current action
or perhaps show the fate of the unwary watcher of
an elephant caught in the quick sands. Certainly
the facts of occurrence should outweigh any
preconceived notion as to the type of man which
should be uncovered.
It is certain that to develop the wide diversity of
prehistoric Indian stocks and languages man must
have been in North America a very long time. Is
there time for such development since the opening
of the Behring passway following the southward
push of the Wisconsin sheet?

If the Indian came in north from China, why is it
No artifacts have been discovered at Dallas
which show evidence of the association of elephants necessary to standardize his development by that
and man. At this point a warning should be made. of the early men of France or England?
If artifacts should be discovered associated with
skeleton bones do not move them. Photograph and
have pictures sworn to by a Notary Public. Send Southern Methodist University
for an odd number of geologists so that you can
Dallas, Texas
get a decision.
After all if man was coexistent with the elephant 1. Occurrence of Human Remains with Pleistocene Fossils,
in Texas what should we expect to find? Native Lagow Sand pit, Dallas, Texas. Ellis W. Shiner. Science
tribes living with the modern elephant succeed in Vol. LVII. No. 1472, March 16, 1923, pages 333-384.

54

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

TEXAS PANHANDLE CULTURE RUIN No. 55.
FLOYD V. STUDER
This paper presents a few archaeological
observations made during a long period of study
of, Texas Panhandle Culture people, and more
particularly the results of work done during the past
twelve months at Ruin No. 55.
The writer wishes to thank the Bivins Brothers,
on whose land Ruin No. 55 is found, for their
generous cooperation. Credit is due Dr. C. W.
Seibel, Mr. H. C. Pipkin, Mr. Charles Renfroe, Mr.
J. Robin Allen, Mr. Dale Smiley, Mr. George
Erlandson, Mr. Ed. L. Roberts, Mr. Terry Roberts,
Mr. James Parks, Mr. N. H. Mohler, and Mr. Allen
Early, Jr. for able assistance in field work during
the past few months.

1920. Three ruins in the Panhandle of Oklahoma
near the town of Optima, of a similar if not this
same culture, were recently reported to the writer
by Mr. C. S. Johnston of the University of
Oklahoma. The Texas Panhandle Culture8 people,
however, appear to be almost strictly indigenous
to the Panhandle of Texas.
It is certain that these early Americans lived a
life based upon agriculture and hunting. They built
masonry houses of several types, grew corn, made
baskets and pottery, and lived in fairly large
communities.

Every ruin thus far examined and reported shows
evidence of burning. This sign often indicates
Archaeological work in the Panhandle area was raiding. Little evidence, however, has appeared
begun by Dr. T. L. Eyerly1 and his associates in which would indicate hasty evacuation. No
1907. To him belongs the credit of recognizing and unbroken pots have been reported found, and but
reporting the importance of the field. Dr. Warren few whole objects are found within the rooms.
K. Moorehead2 was the first nationally known
Thanks to the natural agencies these buried rock
archaeologist to make a survey of the field and do
homes constitute an almost imperishable record.
considerable field work in 1919. During recent years
We do not, however, know when they came, how
work has been done by Dr. J. Alden Mason3, Dr.
long they remained, and when and why they left, or
W. C. Holden4, Mr. E. B. Sayles5, and Dr. Ronald
where they went. Was it pestilence, famine, raids
B. Olson6. The writer, considering the field as a
by predatory tribes, or merely a desire to “go west”?
whole, which embraces the entire Panhandle of
Texas, feels the surface leas barely been touched.
Dr. A. E. Douglas, of the University of Arizona,
The area is yet undeveloped. This hidden history well known tree ring expert, who has dated many
of the Panhandle is one of the most important Southwest ruins, has kindly offered to study our
charred wood material from these ruins. The wood
unworked areas in the Southwest.
now being saved and prepared for him, after
examination, may solve this most interesting and
Panhandle Culture Ruins
important problem.
All Texas Panhandle Culture Ruins indicate wellbuilt permanent homes with contiguous single-story
Since it is a matter of historical record9 that the
rooms of rock, adobe, and timbers. Evidence of Pueblos to the west were constantly harassed by
these homes will remain long after every vestige of the hunting tribes for corn and other food products,
our early white-settlers homes has disappeared. The it perhaps is not unreasonable to assume that the
ruins are largely confined to the tributaries of the periodic burning of the Panhandle Culture homes
Canadian River, though a few have been located was caused by the nomadic tribes.
on other water courses of the Panhandle. Ruins7 of
No European objects are found, however, it is
pueblo-like structures were observed by Dr. Warren
perhaps significant to note that nearly every Pueblo
K. Moorehead in the Panhandle of Oklahoma in

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

55

type of artifact is found within the ruins, except
grooved axes and mauls, and colored and decorated
pottery. The writer has found on the surface at
several of the ruins true Pueblo pottery.

arroyo on the east side of the group damaged
several rooms, but aside from this no human hands
had touched the ruin. Work was begun about twelve
months ago, originally and primarily to prevent
further water damage. Dr. Warren K. Moorehead
Among the several types of house structures
who visited the area again this year gave valuable
found are pit houses, circular slab houses, and
advice and urged continued and uninterrupted work
rectangular houses of stone or adobe. Some were
at this site which he considers very important.
semi-subterranean, some were built on mesa
tops, others apparently were on original
ground level, and a few were built to utilize
vertical cliff walls. The houses containing
rectangular rooms of rock and mortar with
roof supports of posts predominate. This
type of structure appears to correspond,
somewhat to the houses 10 of the
Basketmaker III, Pueblo I and II Culture
phase. In several respects these people
advanced well into the Pueblo horizons.
Characteristic of some of the Pueblo villages
west of us, almost every Panhandle Culture
house group is separated by a stream bed.
Most of the ruins indicate the builders
followed no definite plan of house
construction. There is one house plan
example, however, showing a very definite
original arrangement of rooms. Many semicircular rooms, uniform in shape and size,
were built adjacent to and utilizing one wall
of a large rectangular cluster of rooms.
These clan houses, while perhaps small in
size compared to the true Pueblo ruins and
cliff houses, are many in number.
House Ruins
Ruin group No. 55 (Pl. 14) is located
thirty-eight miles north of Amarillo, Potter
County, Texas. It lies well hidden on the
south side of a tributary to the Canadian
River. The area is rough, with huge boulders
near by. It was so well hidden and well
covered that the ranch owners, who so
kindly permitted work, had never seen the
ruins. Erosion, both surface and
underground, had created two large holes
which extended to cavernous depths
underneath the ruins. Water from a small dry

PLATE 13.
49. Site 55 before excavation.
50. Looking into Room B from across Arroyo.
51. Room A. Showing ventilator, fire pit,
sipapu, and two floor levels.

56

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

The entire group was first roughly surveyed, and
all surface artifacts gathered and recorded. A trench
three feet wide was then begun from the lower talus,
dug to undisturbed clay, and cut through a large
kitchen midden to the first outside room.
Stratigraphic deposits failed to reveal any change
or development in pottery. This trench was intended
to serve a triple purpose, first to study the remains
in the refuse heaps, second to allow perfect drainage
of water from excavated or partially excavated
rooms, and to prevent further erosional damage
caused by the natural agencies mentioned above.
The refuse heap yielded an abundance of the usual
interesting history. Many broken bones, layers of
ashes, charcoal, potsherds, stone, and flint objects,
awls and other bone tools, and shell objects were
found.

In 8 out of a possible 50 or more rooms thus far
completely excavated no communicating doorways
exist. Trenches dug outside of the walls on the east
side of the group indicate the rooms apparently were
built only slightly below the original surface level.
These trenches also revealed no plastered outside
walls.
The debris in each room consisted of roof
material, charred wood, ashes, bones, artifacts,
wind blown sand, and water-borne soil. The floor
levels and other strata indicate several periods of
occupation. Later houses were super-imposed
above the ruins of the older dwellings.

Several isolated slab-houses are adjacent to the
main communal house. These circular rooms were
slightly subterranean. No fill or mound reveals the
presence of these single room houses. A circle of
The ruins are quite extensive, and appear to be
vertical rocks extending a few inches above the
the main “town” of several more house groups
ground, level reveals their presence. Slab-house H
located from a few hundred yards to one mile away.
which was found to be 7 feet in diameter, is roughly
House group No. 55 is a typical unit-type circular, with flat stone slabs lining the wall. The
dwelling, built with indefinite original plans. compact clay floor was 8 inches below the ground
Evidence shows new rooms were built when level and had an average thickness of five inches.
needed, with much rebuilding over the original No fire pit was found, however, at this writing only
rooms. Fire had razed the building more than once. one-half of the room is excavated. No post holes,
A rather complex problem exists because of the but little charcoal and ashes, few artifacts, no adobe
building and rebuilding after each fire. No true roof material, and but few potsherds were found
masonry has thus far been found, although within the ruins. The sherds were found immediately
horizontally laid stones appear above vertically laid below the “imported” clay floor, and are somewhat
stones on the north wall of Room A. All of the different from our typical Panhandle Culture
rooms have some of the same features that pottery. Dr. Carl E. Guthe, Director, Museum of
Anthropology of the University of Michigan, is now
characterize all Texas Panhandle Culture ruins.
examining a series of Texas Panhandle Culture
The wall plaster in several of the rooms is still in
pottery sherds for the writer, but his complete report
place, which makes it difficult to study the various
has not been made. The superstructure was
wall constructions. Enough rocks are exposed in
probably brush built up in the shape of a cone. The
places, however, to indicate irregularly laid stones
debris from these rooms was scarce, although flint
in massive adobe. More adobe-mortar and less stone
knives and tubular pipes were found in slab house
work appears than in the other ruins.
F. The evidence from these rooms is not sufficient
The roof of each room perhaps was flat, a frame in the writer’s opinion to call these structures earlier
work of log cross pieces supported by upright posts, domiciles of the Texas Panhandle Culture people.
and covered with brush, reeds and mud. Much The larger, rectangular, clan houses were likely
charred wood is found. In a few instances the post coeval with the slab houses and not necessarily the
holes containing the remains of the original uprights result of a constantly progressing civilization.
are present. Much burned and hardened roof
material showing the reed. Imprints were recovered
from the various floor levels.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
ROOM A
Rooms A and B are worthy of special mention.
While both bear certain common characteristics,
yet, they are different in many respects. These rooms
are somewhat unusual and interesting. Room A,
(Pl. 13, No. 51) was the first excavated. It is now
an outside room, although outside excavation
reveals the probable presence of an adjoining room
which natural agencies destroyed. It is roughly
rectangular in shape. The inside dimensions were
17 feet from the east wall to the west wall and 22
feet from the north wall to the south wall.
The fire pit in the lower floor was circular and
bowl-like. It measured 26 inches in diameter, 10
inches deep, and was well plastered. It was dug
flush with the floor of a rectangular pit and was
without a raised rim or ridge of clay. It was filled
with clean, white wood ashes. The fire pit was 3
feet and 4 inches from the “ventilator” slightly to
the right of center.

57

A rectangular pit measuring 7 feet by 8 feet was
sunk 12 inches below the lower floor level. The
sides of this depression were smoothly plastered
and the corners nicely rounded. The plaster was
about one inch thick and well burned.
A horizontal passage doorway or “ventilator” is
located at about the center of the cast wall. The
shaft is 11 feet long, 18 inches wide, and 18 inches
high. It is a well constructed rectangular tunnel of
stone, adobe, and plaster. There is no vertical shaft.
It enters the room on a level with the second floor
which is 7 inches above the lower floor. The shaft
extends into the room 13 inches. The opening of
the shaft is about the same size as the mouth. Since
nature had previously, helped excavate this room it
was not possible to determine the presence of a
fire pit in the upper floor immediately in front of
the “ventilator.” No deflector was in place, though
a few stone slabs were found in about the right
location.

PLATE 14.
52. Field Plan of Ruin No. 55.

58

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

A number of holes in both floors were found.
Some were near the walls and were no doubt the
location of the upright posts which supported the
mud roof. One of the several holes found within
and near the rectangular depression was perhaps
the sipapu11, if this room is finally determined to be
a kiva or ceremonial room. Mr. Percy Hodges, Jr.,
of Santa Fe, who visited this location a few weeks
ago, pronounced it “suspiciously like a ceremonial
room and strikingly similar to those in New
Mexico.”

The inside measurements at the center of the
room were 14 feet and 10 inches in width and 16
feet and two inches in length. The west end of the
room is slightly contracted. The west wall was 5
feet and 7 inches high to the present surface level.
The plastered wall from the lower floor was 51
inches in height. The plaster on all four walls is in
splendid condition and the floor of this room shows
evidence of more than the usual heat and burning.

Many of the usual household articles were
recorded from this room. A large quartzite metate
The east and south walls retained much original or milling stone, broken in many pieces, was
plaster. The walls average 4 feet high. There is no removed from the long rectangular fire pit. Included
way to definitely determine how high the walls were, among the many objects found were points, knives,
but the height could be fairly estimated at 6 to 7 potsherds, bone implements, and much basketry and
feet.
grass matting. Extraordinarily large chunks of roof
material covered the lower floor.
A large vertical and fairly smooth dolomite
boulder was utilized as a part of the west wall. Some
Entrance to this room was more likely through
of the original plaster was found adhering to this a vent or hatchway which also served as a smoke
rock surface.
outlet. In any event both rooms A and B had to
have an opening on the roof for proper ventilation.
The fill averaged four to five feet deep, the upper
Whether the hatchway served as a means of
ten or twelve inches being rather barren wind and
entrance and egress in this instance is a matter of
water borne sand and clay. The upper level fill
speculation, unless we can prove the “ventilator”
contained unburned artifacts. All objects on or near
of this room was also used as a doorway. As in
the lower floor were burned. Not a few pieces of
Room A, the ventilator is large enough to permit
burned basketry were found on the lower floor. The
entrance of a large individual. Unlike the “doorway”
floors were made of compact and nicely smoothed
passage of Room A, this ventilator in its present
Triassic clay and were unusually free of ash or debris
state is uncovered and about 4 feet long. The side
of any kind. Some of the upper floor was left in
walls are 2 1-2 feet high. The plastered floorway
place to show the relative position of the floors.
passage inside dimensions are 20 inches wide.
Heavy rains could have created a swift stream of
ROOM B
sufficient strength to wash away the ceiling or top
This room, (Pl. 18, No. 50) is south of Room A of this ventilator as well as any portion that may
and is separated by a common wall of stone and have existed. Much charred wood was found in the
adobe 15-18 inches thick. The outer walls are from passage indicating a timbered roof. A normally dry
24 to 36 inches thick. There are no communicating arroyo comes quite close to this room on the east.
doorways or windows. It is rectangular in shape, This ventilator, as well as the lower portion of the
two corners coming to a point rather sharply and room, shows signs of intense and prolonged heat.
the other corners slightly rounded.
It opens directly into the long rectangular
depression which extends all the way from the east
The charred remains of four supporting uprights
wall to the west wall. This pit appears to have been
toward the center of the lower floor were found in
used in its entirety as a fire place and is 7 inches
position. Unlike Room A, there are no post holes
below the lower floor level and the same distance
near the walls.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
below the floor of the ventilator. The sill of the
ventilator was on a level with the lower floor, with
a nicely plastered apron around the aperture. The
sill, side walls and butt end of the ventilator extend
into the room proper 27 inches. The ends of the
ventilator are nicely rounded and well plastered,
and are 8 inches thick.
This unusual type “fire pit” is 13 feet, 11 inches
long; 3 feet and 2 inches wide at the east end; 2
feet, 3 inches wide at the west end; and 4 feet, 7
inches wide at the center. The four upright posts
were placed in the side walls of the fire pit near the
center of the room.
A slab-lined storage bin, 30 inches in diameter
and 13 inches deep is located in the southeast corner
of the room next to the wall. A rectangular subfloor
bin, approximately 3 feet square is in the northeast
corner.

59

Storage Cists
Storage pits and bins are found in the floors of
various rooms, and near the houses. The bins within
the dwelling were round and in shape; one example
was lined with stone, but the were merely pits dug
in floors. A few of them were rectangular usual types
plastered.
The outside cists were placed rat most any
convenient location. They were built by first digging
a round or oval pit in the ground. The walls were
lined with flat stones over which plaster was
probably placed. A superstructure of brush was
probably used as a covering. Occasionally a double
row of slabs were used as the first circle of stones.
One example was 5 feet long, 4 feet wide, and 3
feet deep. Each Gist examined contained the usual
house refuse. The number found indicates that the
people had much use for the storage places.

No holes in the floor indicating a “sipapu” were
Kitchen Middens
found, likewise no deflector was in place, although
as in Room A several flat stone slabs were removed
A wide trench run through a large refuse heap
on the north side of the No. 55 mound slope yielded
from the floor near the ventilator.
numerous broken sherds of pottery, and flint and
The floors of this room slope gently downward
bone objects. The average depth of the refuse was
from the fire trench to the north and south walls.
approximately 3 feet. The various well defined strata
The side walls of the trench are uniformly rounded
revealed ashes, charcoal, broken bones, wind blown
and plastered.
sand, sedimentary clay and sand deposits washed
As in Room A, this room had two floors, the from the higher levels, and all trash and garbage.
upper or second floor was 21 inches above the lower Corn cobs were the only so called perishable
floor. The fill between the floors consisted largely material found. All basket material was found on
of stone, chunks of clay, roofing material, and but the lower floors of the rooms. No burials thus far
little household debris. Unlike the average Texas have been found in the refuse heaps at any location.
Panhandle Culture room, both A and B were
unusually large.
Food Products
Perishable Material
Except for charred wood, basketry, and corn
cobs but little of the normally perishable products
were found. Bison hair was found in the ashes of a
fire pit as well as unidentified carbonized food
products. Wood, tools, sandals, skins, feather work,
and cloth, if any, were destroyed by fire, or have
long; since decayed.

Corn was grown in the Panhandle of Texas
somewhat extensively, for numerous charred cobs
are found within the Texas Panhandle Culture ruins.
Numerous and widely scattered bones found in the
refuse heaps and within the rooms, indicate that
bison, deer, antelope, rabbit, and turkey were
important food products. Mesquite beans, plums,
grapes, and acorns undoubtedly formed a part of
the daily menu. A sweet-potato-like tuber12 is found
growing on and near several of the Texas Panhandle
Culture ruins.

60

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

PLATE 15.
53 Texas Panhandle Culture Pot.
54. Fired clay pipe or cloud blower.
55. Unfired clay jar.
twined, and plaited. In the coiled ware we find the
characteristic horizontal warp sewn with a vertical
Many small and large carbonized fragments of weft thread. A reversal of this process is found in
coiled basketry13 bundle fibers, and grass matting the twined examples.
were found in Rooms A and B of Site No. 55.
Several splendid examples were successfully
Bone Implements
removed from the lower floors by use of hot paraffin
A considerable number of implements (Plate 16,
and ambroid. One form was the characteristic
No.
57) and ornaments of mammal bones were
southwestern coiled type. The material used was
probably yucca. All basket specimens were buried found. Numerically, awls rank first. Prominent
deep within the house ruins. Some of the fragments among bone work found are disc and tubular beads,
14
are large enough to fairly estimate the size of the punches, scrapers, fleshers, sounding-rasps ,
baskets. The rods probably are willow, since it needles, spatulate awls and flaking tools, The bone
grows along the damp banks of the ever-flowing awls were usually cut, shaped and polished splinters
stream close by. Since the fibers of the yucca plant of leg bones, others were fashioned from rib
were a favorite material for sandals and baskets, it material, one end rounded, the other pointed. A few
is likely the stitching material is of this plant. The of the awls are short and stubby without sharp
weaving technique of this early coiled basket work points, perhaps used to produce secondary chipping
is used by the modern Indian basket makers. Three on small flint objects. Others evidently were used
types of basketry were found at No. 28-coiled, for textile work. One especially fine 8 inch spatulate
awl specimen was found on the second floor level
Basketry

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
of Room B. It was made from a split cannon bone
of the antelope, unaltered head, flat-like,well
polished and notched decoration. Several scrapers
made of the scapulae of deer and antelope were
found. Rooms A and B yielded two sounding rasps
made of deer or antelope scapulae, and five notched
rib pieces one of which is seven inches long with
17 notches on one side, none of which extend
completely around the bone. Worked and unworked
antler material was fairly common.
Shell Objects
The shell objects were mostly ornamental types
used as pendants and beads. Several polished and
pierced, altered and unaltered mussel shell pendants
were found. Mussel shells are found in the adjoining
streams and were more commonly used than any
other, however, a sizeable number of olivella and
other Pacific Coast shells were found in the burials
and within the rooms. The olivella shells were used
whole as beads, except for the pierced end or tip
which was ground off for stringing.

61

trough was usually confined to only the central
portion of the slab. Some of the worn-out and
broken pieces were used as building stones.
Many hammerstones of various sizes were found
on, near, and within the ruins. The typical specimen
is some smaller than the closed fist, and is made of
any hard stone available. While in fewer numbers,
beautiful specimens made of agatized dolomite or
flint are found at each ruin. Huge hammerstones
for mining purposes are found at an extensive flint
quarry in the area.
Only a few chipped, but not polished and
grooved, axe-Beads were found. The notched
groove is present on two sites only, indicating the
heads were shafted to a wood handle.
The arrow points (Pl. 16, No. 56) were made
largely of flint, leaf-shaped and triangular, the
narrow notched forms predominating. Most of the
small points are beautifully made, indicating highly
skilled workmanship.

Flint drills (Pl. 16) and perforators were slender
in form, with one end pointed. The butt ends were
Stone Objects
usually unchipped or specially shaped. The drill or
Stone objects (Pl. 16, No. 56) are found in great point section of one example is two inches in length,
numbers. Stone in its natural state was used for sharply pointed, and has a partially worked shaft
building purposes, various types of stone ware, one inch in length.
household objects, weapons, agricultural tools, and
Hide scrapers (Pl. 16) were of two varieties.
other implements. The finished objects include
Perfect specimens of both end and side scrapers
metates, manos, hammerstones, picks, hoes, knives,
were found in generous numbers. The range in size
arrowpoints, pendants of turquoise and other
is wide. The material used most frequently was flint.
polished stones, mauls, drills, awls, arrow shaft
polishers, smoothers, pot polishers, and bide
In the group of chipped implements found were
many broken knife blades. The types occurring most
scrapers.
frequently were the well bevelled four-edged knives
Whole and broken metates of quartzite,
(Pl. 16, No. 56). On account of the frequency in
sandstone, and dolomite were found on the surface
which this knife is found, it appears to be a Texas
and within the ruins. A splendid quartzite specimen
Panhandle Culture type. They average between
was recovered from lower floor of Room B, site
three and four inches in length, with the bevel on
No. 55. Mortars of various sizes were observed on
the left edge and in appearance are similar to
the immovable boulders near the various ruins. No
miniature airplane propeller blades. Many broken
stone pestles were found. The manor were usually
halves of the large, thin flat blade type were found
oval in shape, worn on both sides and made of the
together with a few whole individuals. Both types
same material as the metates. Not a few of the
of knives show a splendid technique and skilled
metates were worn or grooved on both sides. A
chipping art.
typical metate specimen measures about 20 inches
in length, 14 inches wide, and 4 inches thick. The

62

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
Pottery

Among the numerous sherds found, no whole
or unbroken vessels of any type appeared. The
number of sherds present indicate the Texas
Panhandle Culture people utilized pots and vessels
to a large degree. The types are not similar to Pueblo
forms familiar to the writer. The general type
appears indigenous to this area. More or less
complete specimens (Pl. 15) found indicate nearly
all were fairly wide-mouthed, cylindrical necks,
round bottomed, globular bodied vessels. Most of
the ware was made for culinary use. No objects of
art or ceremonial pieces were observed.
Examination of hundreds of sherds do not reveal
any particular change in shape, composition, or
progressive development. Stratigraphic tests failed
to reveal any development or changes. The ware
appears to have a “basket” or “cord” impression
on the exterior, which is a typical feature of nearly

all of the sherds examined. The interior of the
pottery is always quite smooth or roughly smooth.
The sherds range from quite thin pieces to quite
thick pieces, but always with “cord-like” imprint
present. Black is the predominating color, while a
few pieces are light red, gray, and dark gray. A black
streak appears in the center of some of the sherds.
Sand, shell, and mica were used as tempering
material. The paste is usually coarse. A red “slip”
or an application of “fugitive red” is found on
several specimens and is difficult to remove. The
writer is unable to determine whether the “slip” was
applied before or after firing. A few pieces of fired
clay having the appearance of pot handles were
found, however, no rim pieces with handles attached
were present at Site No. 55. It is somewhat
significant to note that no intrusive Pueblo ware
has thus far been seen on the surface or within these
ruins. The writer has found a number of true Pueblo-

PLATE. 16.
56. Texas Panhandle Culture arrowheads, knives, drills and scrapers.
57. Texas Panhandle Culture bone implements.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

63

ware sherds at several other Texas Panhandle it appears, were common in the Basket Maker II
Culture sites in this area. Texas Panhandle Culture period while true ceramics (fired clay) had their
pottery did not reach the painted and decorated beginning in the Basket Maker III horizon.
stage, and perhaps should be classed as the work
of early and less-skilled potters.15
Burials
One specimen which appears to be typical,
measured approximately 11 inches in height and
10 1/2 inches in diameter. The orifice measured 8
inches in diameter. The wall thickness was slightly
less than one-fourth of an inch. The neck has vertical
sides and the distance from the body to the orifice
is 2 1/4 inches. Symmetry was maintained. These
measurements were made from an incomplete
specimen.
Several fired clay tubular pipes or cloud blowers
were found. An unusually fine specimen (P1. 15,
No. 54) came from Room T. It measures 2 1/2
inches in length and 1 inch in diameter at the mouth
of the “bowl.” The bowl has a depth of 1 inch. The
decorations consist of three groups of dots and a
cross. Each group of dots contain six small holes
or indentures.

Only two burials at Ruin No. 55 have thus far
been removed. There appear to be no definite burial
grounds. No burials were found in the refuse heaps
or within the rooms. The writer thinks it not unlikely
to find burials beneath the floors of the various
rooms. At this writing, no floors have been
disturbed. As work continues at No. 55, a thorough
investigation of burials will be a part of the program
to have immediate attention.

The two burials examined contained the skeletal
remains of children. They were located on the north
mesa top and near a rocky bluff of the stream which
furnished water for the inhabitants. A very few
irregularly laid stones served as a monument. The
remains were thirty inches below the present surface
level, which apparently has eroded but little.
Characteristic of certain burials previously removed
at other locations, a large flat stone was placed
Unfired objects of clay are not usually classified
immediately above the body.
as pottery. It is perhaps well to record the finding
The remains of the children were three feet apart,
of several unfired pieces of clay, smoothed on both
the outside and inside, which were found on the with heads toward the cast. The skeletal material
lower floor of Room B. The original form of these was in a bad state of preservation. Only portions of
pieces indicate a sun dried jar or pot. The average the skull, and a few finger bones were present,
thickness of these “sherds” was slightly more than however, every vestige of bone was carefully
one-half inch. A somewhat yellowish clay without removed and saved. Around the neck of one were
tempering material was used. The “paste” appears found 56 pierced olivella shell beads and a pierced
to have been molded, or if hand modelled, the maker mussel shell pendant. Careful examination failed to
was skilled in keeping the object uniform.
reveal other mortuary offerings. From the few small
thin shell-like skull pieces it is difficult to determine
A small “seed” jar or bowl of unfired clay was
cradle-board head flattening.
recorded with the other unfired clay pieces
mentioned. Three pieces were articulated, which
A splendid burial example at Texas Panhandle
revealed nearly one-fourth of the bowl. Its Culture Ruin No. 28 was examined within the past
approximate measurement is two inches high, two few months. No. 28 is not a part of house ruin No.
inches wide. The orifice is slightly less than two 55, though not far removed. This burial is perhaps
inches in diameter. The thickness of the “paste” is more of a typical Texas Panhandle Culture burial.
one-fourth inch. The base is slightly flattened, the The remains were found on an eastern hillside slope,
body or sides somewhat curved, and a moderately within thirty feet of the house ruins. Its existence
flared rim. It bears the characteristic “cord” or was revealed by a number of stones on edge, placed
“basket” imprint with a few “thumb-nail” in a circle, and sloping inward. The inside
indentations, (Pl. 15, No. 55). Unfired clay forms, measurements of the stone circle was 6 feet and 4

64

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

inches in diameter. The stones lined a pit which was
dug in virgin clay to a depth of 27 inches. The body
was flexed and placed on an adobe shelf 13 inches
wide at the top, 21 inches wide at the base, and 37
inches long. The head pointed north with the face
to the east. The remains were in a fairly good state
of preservation and with careful applications of
shellac and alcohol were safely removed. There is
no indication of occipital flattening of the cranium.
Six rectangular stones about 4 inches by 6 inches
were placed on the body. The fill contained but few
other stones. The body was placed near the south
wall. Many broken sherds were near the skull.
Reconstruction will likely reveal an entire pot. At a
point on a level with the floor, 8 inches from the
skull, a pot-shaped cist was found. This hole was
dug out of a fairly well cemented sandstone, and
was 22 inches deep, 18 inches wide at the opening,
and 23 inches wide near the center. It contained
only one hide scraper. The fill was mostly sand.
Other than the pot and the hide scraper, no other
mortuary objects were present. The body wrappings
were completely disintegrated. Special care was
exercised in attempting to find the garment imprints
in the clay but none were revealed.
635 Amarillo Bldg., Amarillo, Texas.
1. Eyerly, Dr. T. L., Canadian Academy Bulletin (1907).
2.Moorehead, Dr. Warren K., Archaeology of the Arkansas
River Valley, pp. 92-117, (1931).
3. The Museum Journal, Volume XXI. Numbers 3-4,
September-December, 1930, University of Pennsylvania.
4. Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society, 19291930.
5. Gila Museum.
6. American Museum of Natural History.

7. Moorehead, Dr. Warren K., Archaeology of the Arkansas
River Valley, p. 80 (1931).
8. Appropriately named by Dr. Warren K. Moorehead,
Archaeology of the Arkansas River Valley, p. 127, 1931.
9. Kidder, Dr. A. V., Southwestern Archaeology, p. 14 (1924).
10. Roberts, Dr. Frank H. H. Jr., Smithsonian Institution,
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 92, pp. 4-5 (1929).
11. Frank H. H. Roberts, Jr. (Bureau of American Ethnology
Bulletin 100-p. 17, 1931) says: “The sipapu, according to
the Zuni, Hopi, and other Indians of the Southwest, was
symbolic of the mythical place of emergence through which
their ancestors passed on their journey from the underworld
to the surface of the earth.”
12. In a personal letter to the writer, dated June 7, 1934, Dr.
Carl E. Guthe, says, “The roots which you nicknamed ‘sweet
potato tubers’ have been identified. The common name is
Canaigre and the scientific name is Rumex hymenosepalus
Torr. The Indians in the Plains used them for medicine,
dyeing and tanning. The Ethnobotanical Laboratory here is
making a careful examination and bringing together data
for you.”
13. In a personal letter to the writer, dated April 2, 1934,
Dr. Walter Hough, Head Curator, Department of
Anthropology, Smithsonian Institute, United States National
Museum, says “The samples of basketry you sent are very
interesting. The coiled fragments are of Basket Makers. The
bundle fibers on which is the string resembles the granaries
of the Pima-Papago assembled with cords or strips of fiber.
Mr. Setzler thinks the cords may be lechuguilla or sotol.
Mr. Lewton, our expert on fibers, will examine the cord and
I will let you know his conclusions. I would not be surprised
that it is cotton.”
14. Certain notched scapula, rib and leg bones are referred
to as “sounding-rasps” by Dr. A. V. Kidder in his Artifacts
of the Pecos, p. 252, (1932).
15. Dr. A. V. Kidder in studying the material, particularly
pottery, of the San Juan, New Mexico area made a
preliminary classification designating sites with crude
pottery as post-Basket Maker Ruins and sites with less
developed pottery as pro-Pueblo ruins. See Kidder, Dr. A.
V., Southwestern Archaeology (1924).

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

65

HORD ROCK SHELTER
VICTOR J. SMITH
Wood Implements
7
Cob
1
Wood (lot)
4
Pebble
1
Pestle
8
Knife (blade) 1
Mat Selvedge
2
Shell
1
Storage Pits
2
Hammerstone 1
Hord Rock Shelter may be located by reference
Total number of articles recovered, 113.
to the Alpine (Texas Sheet) Quadrangle of the U.
S. Geographical Survey, being approximately 30°
Sandals
23’ north latitude and 103° 47’ west longitude. The
Among the thirteen sandals and sandal fragments
contour lines of this map will indicate, the general
discovered, two things of interest developed. First,
topography of the wide canyon. Running water was
two specimens of “type II-a-2” are the first of this
within less than a mile of the shelter. The site is
kind to be discovered by the writer. A description
also one of a number which form the Sunny Glen
of this and other patterns, together with an
Group on which several reports are available. A
illustration will be found in Bulletin 5, 1933 of the
very careful excavation of two shelters less than
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
two miles distant was made during 1932 by F. M.
Abilene, Texas.1 These sandals are evidently a pair
Setzler, U. S. National Museum, Washington.
as they were found within 5” of each other. The
Owing to its relative inaccessibility, the Hord Shelter
sizes are approximately the same 3 3/4” x 8”, and
was undisturbed by souvenir hunters. I first
the sandal ties are similar.
observed the cave during a survey trip in 1928, at
which time surface specimens of cordage and a flint
With the exceptions of these two, all the other
point indicated that the place would bear further sandals are of the fish-tail type. One of the fish-tail
investigation.
sandals is the smallest so far as we know, to be
found in the area, being 1 7/16” wide and 2 9/16”
Further investigation revealed without much
long. This small sandal is not worn and does not
effort, sandal, cordage, and vegetable materials
have thongs or ties, therefore, may be a toy. Another
which seemed to indicate the value of the site for
small and shallow fish-tail, however, shows distinct
complete investigation.
wear and measures 1 7/8” x 3 1/2”. The average
Beginning March 16, 1933, our party of five size of the 11 fish-tail sandals, except No. 85, is 3
continued excavation until the work was completed. 5/8” x 5 5/8”, though it must be remembered that
discarded sandals, because they had passed their
Before discussing the results of excavation at
usefulness, arc usually worn away at the toe and
the Hord Shelter we wish to present a tabulation of
heel, therefore measure shorter than the usable
the specimens found:
articles. The length range of used sandals was from
3 1/2” to 6” and the width from 1 7/8” to 3 1/2”.
Summary of Specimens
Another interesting specimen, closely related to
(Bones Omitted)
sandals, was the beginning or base of sandal braiding
Name
Total
Name
Total which is almost identical with an illustration used
Cordage
22
Scraper
1 by Coffin in his report on the work of the Heye
2
Metates
17
Mano
1 Foundation in Texas. This detail of braiding
Sandals
13
Leaf
1 technique carries two opposed elements made up
Points (worked flint) 9
Woven Bag 1 of two flat leaf strands.
Because of several interesting finds located at
this site, Hord Rock Shelter should be of interest
to those who are studying the accumulating
evidence relative to the Big Bend Culture.

66

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
Cordage

Vegetable Materials

Knots included in the cordage are chiefly of the
square type. A small amount of string was found
but the range was wide, there being diameters
represented from 3/64” to 1/2” and in both loose
and compact two-strand twist as well as one piece
of three-strand plait. The smallest of the cords is
attached at each end to two small sticks as if it were
the remains of a trigger or snare. Another half yucca
stalk is wrapped with a piece of yucca leaf. Cordage
No. 76 obtains new interest because it is the deepest
of the numbered specimens recovered (22”) in the
neighborhood of the bone deposits to be described
in following paragraphs.

Enough typical vegetable materials were saved
from the general digging to indicate that the usual
desert plants were used by the inhabitants of the
shelter.

Wood Implements
In addition to the wood implements mentioned
above, there are small sharpened sticks and parts
of fire making apparatus. One such stick is cut at
the rear in such a way as to suggest use as a crude
needle. One hearth stick contains holes smaller than
usual, the blackened sockets being 1/4” in diameter.

Only one cob was located, 16 1/2” below the
surface and rather closely associated with the human
remains mentioned below.
Storage pits A and B are similar to those
previously reported from the district, i. e., they are
of the basin type about 20” in diameter,
approximately one foot deep and made by scooping
out a basin like hole and lining it with leaves,
branches, grasses, prickly pear, and sometimes
fragments of baskets, sandals and matting. In this
case, matting No. 43 was a part of the pit lining A.
Quite a number of quids or “cuds” were found
as usual among these in the general digging and at
all levels.
Stone Implements

The single mortar and the surfaces of the metates
and metate fragments found seems to indicate that
The two small woven fragments which appear this shelter was not extensively used for continuous
to be the selvedge of matting, are neatly assembled, living quarters, but rather as a refuge in time of
one in the twilled type with five woven elements to severe weather. This conclusion is based upon the
the inch, and one checker with four elements to the fact that all metates were very slightly worn and
inch.
were of inferior type and were made from a rather
poor quality of thin volcanic rock found in the
A small woven bag found is the first of this type
neighborhood of the shelter. I have noticed that this
which has come under my direct observation in the
type of metate is characteristic of the shelters which
district. It is shaped like a small knit cap though
require considerable effort in climbing to them.
mashed flat by pressure of deposits. The bag was
Again the metate is present at all levels and in much
fragmentary with respect to the top edge being
greater representation than the mortar and pestle.
frayed and the selvedge or method of closing, if
The single mano found was an excellent
any, missing. The weaving is of soft fibre bundles
specimen of the heavy disc type. It measures 1 3/
field together by means of a twisted assembly of
4” x 3 1/2” x4” and weighs 1 7/8 lbs. Only three
small two-strand string at intervals of 5/8”. The
small fragments of manos were found in the general
resulting bag or basket has a compact wall 1/4”
digging.
thick. This specimen is 3” in diameter and 2 1/2”
Only two pestle forms were found. The most
high. It was empty and was pressed out of true shape
definite of these was 5” below the surface in the
by a small stick which lay on top. The specimen
central part of the shelter. The second was 20”
was immediately adjacent to a skull fragment and
below the surface near the entrance where the depth
at the same depth.
may easily be accounted for because of the
accumulation of fallen rocks from above.
Woven Articles

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

67

Flint works recovered have been classified as Washington, for examination. A number of bones
follows:
were from the general digging but two groups
commanded my attention at the time of excavation.
Flakes from general digging
112 One of these was evidently a child burial and one
Scraper forms
8 was a group of animal bones, found under the
Points
10 overhanging rock wall, in the west part of the
Blades
3 shelter, which was not apparent prior to excavation.
Drill
1
Our skull specimen, together with other
This list indicates a rather limited amount of flint
artifacts. The surface specimen found on my trip is
the only one of the lot which would be considered
as a perfect museum specimen. An examination of
definitely worked material indicates nothing unusual
with respect to shape or chipping. We expect,
however, to report in more detail concerning flint
work in the, caves at a later date. Fight of the
numbered flints from this shelter were from the
surface to a depth of eight inches. The remaining
three were 13”, 19” and 30” deep respectively, but
they are significantly different from other specimens
except the deepest find mentioned which lay at the
same distance from the surface as bone No. 82,
shown on Plate 17, No. 58, though 16 feet away.
This interesting point is shaped quite like the
artifacts described as “atl-atl darts of the early type”
by M. R. Harrington in his report on Gypsum Cave.
Two other articles are worthy of mention. One
of these is a mussel shell. The other, a buffer stone.
The polished surface of this stone indicates that it
had been grasped between the thumb and fingers
of the left hand and had been used for polishing
some object. The bottom of the object, though
slightly convex, is well polished. Possibly this article
was used in the tanning of skins.
Skeletal Remains
Eleven definitely located bones were recovered
throughout the excavation period in addition to
several from the general digging and others in the
child burial. Some of these remains were evidently
human, others of doubtful identification but
interesting as to position or shape. Because of the
kindness of F. M. Setzler, Assistant Curator, U. S.
National Museum, who offered to obtain
identification of bones, these were mailed to

associated human remains and a few bones scattered
by rodents represent a child burial, the skull of which
was 18” below the surface. The body was buried in
an upright position with the face to the north and
rear of the shelter; head bent forward; knees well
drawn up; and the general position of the remains
indicated that a hole of minimum size had been sunk
along the edge of a sudden dip in the rock floor of
the shelter. The body had evidently been thrust into
this excavation and covered with dirt which was
unmixed with rock, indicating that it had been
carried in for the purpose for, if ordinary material
had been used, much loose rock would have been
in the mixture. Since the deepest bone recovered
was 2’ 6” from the surface the range of depth was
only 12” but it is probable that the weight of deposits
and decay had caused the skull to settle. No body
wrapping or clothing evidence was found. A large
slab metate (3” x 16” x 19”) lay face down 4” under
the top surface and immediately over the burial area.
The evidence that this metate was so placed at the
time of burial is not conclusive nor is it possible to
say with definiteness that articles near were
mortuary offerings. The following tabulation will,
however, list all of the artifacts of importance within
a 24” circle about the skull:
Specimen
No.
3
8
9
28
32
37

Name

Depth

Dist. from Cntr.
of Burial
Sandal 9”
5”
”
13”
3”
”
13 1/2”
3”
Bag
16”
1 1/2”
Cob
16 1/2”
12 1/2”
Smooth 17”
11”
Rock

68

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Sandals 3 and 9 have been mentioned in a
previous paragraph. We know of the custom of
sandal burial with children in other parts of the
Southwest but have not observed the practice
elsewhere in the Big Bend. The last two items listed
may be out of the burial area.
The following is quoted from the report of Mr.
F. M. Setzler as it relates to the burial under
consideration:
Doctor Thomas D. Stewart, Assistant
Curator, Division of Physical Anthropology,
has been able to restore the skull of your
human burial sufficiently to obtain the
cephalic index which is 68.4
(dolichocephalic). The bones, all of which
belong to the same individual, are of a child
who died between the ages of three and four,
established primarily by the complete,
temporary dentition. The child is too young
to determine sex. The cephalic index of a child
that I recovered from the Cart-ledge Cave
(same county), not over two years old, had a
cephalic index of 70.3.
The skeletal remains referred to above have been
added to the Brewster County material at the
Smithsonian Institution. It may be added that the
cephalic index of other skulls in the museum at
Alpine averages 70.7. Other bones from the general
digging, “not too fragmentary were identified as
an human scapula, an ulna, two vertebrae and a
tibia, all from the same child burial.”
Mammal Remains
The second group of bones which commanded
special attention during excavation were a number
of large fragments associated with each other found
not far from the burial described and partly under
the projecting shelter wall. These bones are shown
in situ on Plate 17, No. 59.
We here quote again Mr. Seltzer’s report:
“The following animal bones were
identified in our Division of Mammals: Nos.

63 and 57 were too fragmentary to obtain
definite identification. Nos. 79 and 86 arc
identified as bones from a horse, equus. The
species is too uncertain. No. 83 is probably
from a horse but again too fragmentary for
definite identity. Bones listed as
miscellaneous, associated with Nos. 82 and
83, were listed as horse-equus. No. 80 was a
bone from ‘antilocapra americana
(antelope)’. Bones which were not too
fragmentary from the general digging were
identified as rabbit, deer, and small dog or
fox. The most important hone is No. 82. This
was identified by Dr. Charles L. Gazin,
Assistant Curator in the Division of
Vertebrate Paleontology. His memorandum
regarding this bone is as follows: Cannon
bone (hind) of a musk-ox like animal which
resembles rather closely this bone in the
Preptoceros-Euceratharium group. The
species Preptoceros mayfeldi Troxell is
recorded from the Pleistocene of Texas. It is
rather unfortunate that our mammalogist
could not safely identify the species of horse
associated with bone No. 82. Naturally if the
horse was contemporaneous with bone 82,
it would be a type which lived in that region
prior to the coming of the Europeans. The
bones of the ‘Equus caballus’ are so similar
to these that it is practically impossible to
distinguish between the pre-Columbian horse
and the latter. I certainly congratulate you
upon finding such interesting mammalian
forms.”
Because of the interesting identification made
by Dr. Gazin, a careful recheck of field notes,
diagrams, and measurements, has been made from
the excavation records related to this shelter.
Diagrams show that, in the immediate area of
excavation about bone 82, Plate 17, No. 58, there
were associated closely the bones of other animals,
fragments of wood, including small logs, and more
remotely, definite human artifacts. I have tabulated
these specimens in order of actual plotted distance
from top center of each specimen to a similar point
at the top of bone 82.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Specimen No.
78
79
31
83
73
76
74
72
80
81
96

Cist B
Bone (horse)
PitA (matting in lining)
Bone, horse (?)
Sandal
Cordage
Firestick
Sandal
Bone (antelope)
Wood
Atlatl point

The listing of the above specimens most closely
associated with bone 82 should not be
misunderstood. They are so tabulated merely to set
out the facts of the interesting find and to form a
basis for the discussion which follows. The close
proximity of Gist linings of storage pits A and B
will, of course, have no substantial bearing upon
the age: relationship of the two groups of
specimens, human artifacts and mammalian remains,
since the very nature of the storage pit requires
excavation from one layer down into a lower
stratum. The presence of human artifacts in numbers
at 22” distant and at levels to 8” above that of bone
82 is also interesting but not significant. It may be
said that a positive layer of deposits indicating
human habitation lay from 7” to 11” above the 30”
depth of bone 82. Thus a good newspaper story is
lost.

Closest
Dist. to 82
6 ”
10 ”
15 ”
21 ”
21 1/4”
21 1/2”
22 ”
22 ”
21 1/2”
21 1/2”
16 ft.

69

Depth RelationshipWith 82
Minus Equals Deeper
Plus Equals Shallower
plus 1”
minus 2”
plus 14”
Same
plus 10”
plus 8”
plus 10 1/2”
plus 11”
minus 2”
minus 2”
Same

photograph was made of the pile: of unworked
material recovered from the general digging in this
part of the shelter. Below the definite layer of human
habitation mentioned appeared only small fragments
of charcoal which probably filtered down from the
camp refuse, above. I confess myself at a loss to
account for the limbs of trees as big as a man’s arm
associated very closely with the bones of musk-ox,
but such are the facts of this record.

Only two bones lay deeper than that of muskox. These were Nos. 79 and 80, that of horse,
species unidentified, and antelope (two inches
below). Eleven feet to the rear of the shelter from
the bone of musk-ox, on rock bottom, and at the
same depth from the surface as No. 82, was another
horse bone, but it lacked close association with
human evidence. Bone 82 itself was 8” from rock
bottom and at the top of a sterile layer. Diagrams
indicating the position and stratification as well as
Wood Throughout Deposits
the charted specimens are available in the museum
A rather unusual feature of the deposits in the at Alpine.
limited area discussed above lies in the distribution
In view of the evidence presented, it seems
of wood from the surface to the lower levels.
reasonable
to believe that the remains of horse,
Fragments of wood and limbs of trees were
positively associated with the mammal bones as is equus, is that of pre-Columbian species. In my study
3
indicated on the accompanying photograph. These of the route of Mendoza thru the Big Bend in 1684
fragments, of course, were saved in hopes that a I tried to indicate the earliest possible date which
tree ring chronology for the Big Bend may the Indians of the area may have secured horses
eventually be worked out. Our thought at the time from Europeans or have observed the animal ridden
of excavation was that this material represented fire by man as reproduced in pictograph form.
wood. It accumulated in such quantities that a

70

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

It is evident to anyone informed concerning the
deposits such as were found at the Hord Shelter
that tile accumulation of from 30” to 32” of such
deposit indicates far more than the passage of 250
years.

Preptoceros-Euceratharium
With respect to the presence of a musk-ox like
animal in North America, Hill reports its presence
in the colder parts of the continent, on the Pacific
Coast, and from Black Rock, N. 111., where it was
associated with remains of the camel and horse.
Hord Shelter is approximately 400 miles
from the New Mexico find. Reference is
further made to R. P. Conkling’s report of
his work at Bishop’s Gap, N. M., in
Publication 4 of the Society at Alpine.
Conkling reported equus, antilocapra,
vulpes, lepus, as well as many prehistoric
animals. I have quoted only those which
appeared in the relatively shallow deposits
of Hord Shelter.
Such scientific value as this article may
claim will lie in two distinct fields: (1) a
more detailed report concerning the
excavation results of a typical dry shelter
in the Big Bend area, and (2) the addition
of another definite and carefully recorded
site yielding evidence of the presence of
prehistoric mammal remains in North
America.

Sul Ross State Teachers College
Alpine, Texas.

1. Smith, Victor J., Sandals of the Big Rend
Culture, pp. 57-65 and Plates 12 and 13.
2. Coffin, Edwin F., Archaeological Exploration
of a Rock Shelter in Brewster County, Texas, Indian
Notes, Heye Foundation, p. 49, Fig. 9.

PLATE 17.
58. Bone of Musk-Ox found in Hord Cave.
59. Musk Ox bone in situ. Hord Cave.
60. Artifacts found at Hord Cave. Top row left to
right, flint point found at same level as bones,
woven bag, buffer stone, middle shows matting
in pit lining, cordage from lower level and the
bottom picture shows a trigger.

3. “Smith, Victor J., Spanish Exploration in the
Big Bend of Texas, Publication No. 2 of the W. T.
Hist and Scientific Society, Alpine; also Indian
Pictographs in the Big Bend of Texas, Publications
of the Texas Folk-Lore Society, 1923.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

71

FLINT CULTURES OF ANCIENT MAN IN TEXAS
CYRUS N. RAY
The search for evidences of ancient man in Texas
was deliberately undertaken by the writer during
the summer of 1927, following the reading of a
magazine article by Harold J. Cook, in the Scientific
American, describing results of his excavations near
Colorado, Texas, a place situated about seventyfive miles west of Abilene. It was hoped to find
skeletal and cultural evidences of Pleistocene man
in Texas, if any such existed.
After seven years of research, mainly confined
to within a radius of seventy-five miles of Abilene,
the writer believes that sufficient evidence exists to
justify a summary at this time. Since the nature of
the skeletal remains has been reported on rather
freely in previous issues of the “Bulletin” and in
“The Scientific American.” (Note 1.) And the
reports on artifacts made by the writer in the 1929
and 1930 “Bulletins,” were based on early and
incomplete research. (Note 2.) Although they still
are accurate reports of the fact, then on hand, the
data here given will supplement those reports.
The following report will be devoted mainly to
descriptions of the types of local artifacts depicted
on plate 18 of this Bulletin. Nos. 61 and 69, plate
18 are of a type which erode out of camp sites which
are buried a foot or two deep on hill sides above
streams now dry except after rains. Thus type point
is patinated, unbarbed but stemmed and shouldered.
It also has a distinctive bevelled stem found in no
other type of artifact. It belongs to Dr. Pearce’s
bottom level culture in Texas Burnt Rock Mounds.
(Note 3) Nos. 62, 65, 70, and 79 represent a larger,
more crude form of the Folsom idea, probably a
Folsom prototype. These were mainly found in
black surface soil, cotton field camp sites and in
these sites it is probable that a greater proportion
of stemmed and shouldered points show patina than
the pre-Folsom and Folsom points found in the same
surface sites. Nos. 72, 73, and 74, are true Folsom
points. No. 71 also has the Folsom criteria except
for its unusual length and that the channel does not
extend to the point. Nos. 62, 71 and 74 are

unpatinated. No. 71 was found by W. Van London,
within fifty miles of Folsom, New Mexico, and was
associated in the bottom of a sand “blow-out” with
a hand full of exceedingly minute points resembling
arrow heads. These microliths were too small for
arrow points and may have been used as points of
poisoned blow-gun darts. The writer has no data
as to the relative ages of the blow-gun and the atlatl.
This field should be thoroughly investigated.
However, the Van London point is definitely Folsom
in type, and is unpatinated. In the writer’s opinion,
absence of patina in an occasional point of any type
means nothing except that it may have been
protected from chemical change in sonic manner.
But when we find all of a certain type patinated
and all of another type unpatinated that necessarily
means a general age difference. Also, it seems
reasonable to suppose that if we find only half of
one type patinated and all of another type patinated
in the same camp site, that the latter is the older of
the two. It is the writer’s observation that several
different types of stemmed and shouldered points
are more uniformly patinated than are Folsom or
pre-Folsom points. Nos. 67, 75, 77, 81, 88, 94, 95,
and 96 of plate l8 belong to such types. No. 81 is
broken near the tip and the writer had a gunsmith,
F. A. Davis, to measure the thickness of white patina
with a micrometer, and his report showed a
thickness of 31 1/4 thousandths of an inch of patina.
No. 78 is the point of a twisted tope blade, broken
long ago, and patinated a shade of pinkish tan. The
writer broke the end and Mr. Davis found the patina
to be 33 thousandths of an inch thick. The longest
spear point shown, No. (63), has a rich butter yellow
patina which ancient flints acquire in sandy soils.
Some of the flints showing the greatest evidences
of age of any found in this region carry this patina
coloration. Their patina is not only very thick, but
flint edges which once were thin and sharp in the
freshly fractured state have become dull and worn
down by nature’s agencies, acting throughout a vast
period of time, until they have become smooth.

72

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Nos. 66, 67, 77, 95, and 96 are examples of worn
down dull edged flint artifacts. No. 63, a “Sand
Dune Culture” point see (Note 4), was originally 6
3/8 inches long, but was dropped on a stone and
broken into three pieces by the little boy who found
it. The writer obtained the two longer pieces from
the boy, and visited the sand “blow-out” site where
it was found, in company with the finder. This flint
spear or knife is remarkable for several reasons. It
has the unusually straight edge of a Folsom point
and similar beautiful flint flaking. In addition it
probably has the thickest patina of any flint of
comparable workmanship yet found in this region.
The patina is so thick that it had joined near the
point and no central unpatinated core shows where
a 1/4 inch piece had been broken off the point.
However another piece, 1 7/8 inches long, was
broken off the blade near the point and when Mr.
Davis measured this he found the patina of one edge
to be sixty and three-quarters thousandths of an
inch thick. The unpatinated core was one hundred
and seven thousandths of an inch thick. Both edges

combined had a patina of 121 1/2 thousandths of
an inch thick, which shows that there is considerably
more patina altered flint in the blade than that which
now remains in the unpatinated core.
No. 71, the long blade beside the deeply
patinated one, is 4 3/4 inches long, with straight
beautifully chipped Folsom type edges. It is
unpatinated, but the facts concerning its
associations are not available as it was not obtained
from the finder, however it came from Mills County.
Nos. 66 and 67 are stemmed and shouldered points
found deep in the Hill gravel pit on Dead Man Creek
by a gravel worker. No. 84, is a crude, thick,
percussion flaked, sinuous edged, leaf blade thinned
at the base on one face, found deep in the Watts Pit
on Dead Man Creek. Near by, both mammoth bones
and teeth have been found in this pit.
Nos. 82, 83, 85, and 86 were found embedded
in a camp site stratum buried 24 1/2 feet below the
soil surface in a site containing two superimposed
strata, one buried 27 feet deep. Nos. 85 and 87 are

PLATE 18.
61 to 111 illustrate Typical flints of the “Clear Fork” culture complex, pre-Folsom and Folsom
points, “Abilene Points,” an ancient Sand Dune Culture Point, and other flints of ancient man
in Texas, and a carved petrified horse bone found in a camp site.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
thick leaf-shaped percussion flaked blades, thinned
on one side of the base similar to the Watts Pit point.
The writer found No. 85, embedded in place and
No. 87 loose in the gravel of the creek bed
immediately below the bank where it evidently had
recently eroded out of one of the buried campsite
strata. No. 86 is smaller and thinner, but of similar
flint chipping and it was also found by the writer
embedded in place in the 24 1/2 foot stratum. Nos.
82 and 83 also were found in place by the writer at
the same depth and seem to be rough scraping tools.
Nos. 84, 85, 86 and 87 apparently represent a new
type of ancient Pleistocene or immediately postPleistocene projectile point. These blades will
hereafter be known as “Abilene Points” in this
publication. One of these, No. 84, is 2 15/16 inches
long, 1 1/16 inches wide and 7/16 of an inch thick.
No. 8 is 2 15/16 inches long, 1 1/16 inches wide,
and 1/2 inch thick. The latter two points were found
deeply buried in the banks of two different creeks
at sites situated more than twenty miles apart. No.
87, is slightly more than 2 1/2 inches long, 15/16 of
an inch wide, and 3/8 of an inch thick. No. 68
represents a type dug out of stratified banks on two
different creeks, about fifteen miles apart, at a depth
of eight feet below the soil surface.
Nos. 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, and 93 represent a
percussion fractured, thick projectile point which
has a blade curved like an airplane propeller blade.
These points belong to a culture complex which
the writer has neither seen depicted nor mentioned
in the literature outside of the Bulletins of Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society. Vol. 1,
Plate 1, Nos. 8, 9, 10 and 11 show pictures of four
recessed base scraper knives of this culture. In this
culture are found long thick knives having a typical
flattening or recess in one face of the base, with the
other side of the base left convex. Nos. 98 and 99,
plate 18 of this Bulletin, are good specimens of this
culture. No. 98 is 4 1/2 inches long, 1 7/16 inches
wide, and 1/2 of an inch thick. No. 99 is 4 1/2 inches
long, 1 11/16 inches wide, and 5/8 of an inch thick.
No. 97 is a typical awl or flint drill of this culture.
The scooped out based knives of this culture are
represented by Nos. 102 and 111. No. 102 is a
typical specimen; it is 4 inches long, 2 1/8 inches
wide near the base, just above where the scooping

73

out of the base begins. Its thickness at the same
place is 11/16 of an inch. Nos. 101 and 104
represent a thick square based scraper, typical of
thus culture, which is flat on the bottom side.
Another common type scraper of this culture, or
one nearly related in time to it, is represented by
Nos. 103 and 108. This type is made from a broad
wedge of flint, thick on one side, and thin on the
other, and flat on one face. The thin side is minutely
retouched along its edge. Nos. 105 and 106
represent a type of artifact sometimes found with
this culture complex. The latter are thick, sinuous
edged, percussion flaked hatchets, comparable to
Chellean paleolithic hand axes. This type of artifact
is also strewn over the highest gravel terraces of
this region. The culture complex described is usually
found a mile or two below present weakly flowing
springs, or on present day dry branches where
springs may formerly have been.
It is evident that when the camp sites were
occupied that streams flowed down the present dry
branches to the camps. The artifacts are found in
eroded gravels, or in deep gullies, usually in valleys
in the mountains. The culture seems to he mainly
confined to the present time dry branches of the
Clear Pork of the Brazos River, and the writer
would suggest naming it the Clear Pork Culture.
The artifacts are all deeply patinated and the
fractured surfaces are usually softened by time. How
old it is, the writer does not attempt to estimate,
but it is one of the older cultures of the region, and
in his estimation older than most flint cultures of
Texas.
No. 100 is a picture of a fossil carved horse bone,
found by the writer in a camp site in which among
other types, points like 84, 85, and 87 were found
at the same time.
In conclusion, the writer believes that a series
of distinct culture complexes can be found
superimposed in Texas, extending back from the
time of Columbus into the mists of Pleistocene time.

P. O. Box 504, Abilene, Texas.

74

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

(Note 1.) Ray, Scientific American, May, 1929. Ray, Abilene
Section Researches, Vols. I, 1929; II, 1930; III, 1931, and
V, 1933; also Hooton, “Five Texas Crania,” Vol. V, Bulletins
of ‘Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society.
(Note 2.) Ray, Vols. I, 1929, and II, 1930, Bulletins Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society.
(Note 3.) Pearce, “The Present Status of Texas Archeology,”
Vol. IV, 1932, Bulletin of Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society.
(Note 4.) The “Sand Dune Culture” was named, described,
and illustrated in the Bulletin. Ray, Vol. I, 1929 “A
Differentiation of the Prehistoric Cultures of the Abilene
Section.” The writer then assumed it to be one culture
complex, but later study shows it to embrace at least two
distinct successive culture phases, and probably more,
extending back through a long period of time. No. 63
certainly belongs to one of the very old phases.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

75

REVIEWS OF TEXAS PUBLICATIONS
FIELD NEWS AND REPORTS.
The University of Texas Bulletin No. 3327; July
15, 1933. A prehistoric Rock Shelter in Val Verde
County, Texas, by J. E. Pearce, Professor of
Anthropology, and A. T. Jackson, Field Foreman
of Archaeology. Anthropological Papers, Vol. 1, No.
3. Size somewhat under 6x9. Contains 143 pages
of text, 34 full page plates and 29 partial page plates
of photographs and drawings. Published by the
University of Texas, Austin, Texas.
According to the preface, this book: “is number
3, Volume I, of a series to appear, we, hope
continuously.” Numbers 1 and 2 it states are to
appear later.
The book is beautifully illustrated with many
clear, sharply defined photographs. The work shows
the results of much painstaking, scholarly research
and is in most respects better printed and edited
than the usual archeological publication. Artifacts
of stone, bone and shell of the types depicted are
widely distributed over Texas. Similar pictographs
and bedrock mortar holes are also distributed over
an immense Texas area hundreds of miles across.
Only the textiles, wood artifacts, and other
perishables shown are limited to the dry
Southwestern cave areas.

town of Christoval, Texas, was found by the writer
to contain seven round bed rock mortar holes.
During the summer of 1929 the writer studied a
camp site situated on the rocky banks of a dry creek
on the Douthit Ranch near Colorado, Texas,
obtained a fine collection of artifacts, and described
eighty-four boat shaped or oval mortar holes in an
article, sent to “Science Service,” Washington, D.
C., which was made into a two page article of “Daily
Science News Bulletin” issued on December 10,
1929. Also under the title “Traces of Ancient Man
Reported” the weekly “Science News-Letter” of
“Science Service” printed another article on these
finds, dated December 21, 1929. In Vol. 2,
September, 1930, Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society Bulletin, the writer reported
this research fully in “Report on Some Recent
Archeological Researches in the Abilene Section,”
plates 12 and 13 illustrated the holes and associated
artifacts. In “Field Reports” of the same Bulletin
mortar holes were also reported as examined by
the writer near the towns of Christoval, Paint Rock,
and San Saba, Texas. In Field Notes 1930, Volume
2, Dr. O. O. Watts also reported 180 boat shaped
mortar holes in Western Texas. In Volume 3, 1931,
of the same Bulletin, Henry T. Fletcher reported
round mortar holes all over the Trans-Pecos region
and on Plate 1, showed two pictures of them. E. B.
Sayles of Abilene reported mortar holes in Taylor
County, in the 1931 Bulletin. Victor Smith of Alpine
reported round mortar holes in the Big Bend Region
and showed two pictures in an article in the 1931
Bulletin. Floyd V. Studer of Amarillo reported round
mortar holes and his article was illustrated with two
pictures of them in the 1931 Bulletin. The writer
described additional sites containing both round and
oval mortar holes in an article containing thirteen
illustrations in the 1931 Bulletin.

This work is otherwise so well done that one is
surprised that the authors seemed to be unfamiliar
with the abundant Texas bibliography concerning
Texas bed rock mortar holes and went so far afield
to cite Dr. Webb’s Kentucky “Hominy Holes”
(American Anthropologist, December, 1929) when
Texas Mortar holes of two distinctly different types
showing evidences of great differences in time and
culture had been so profusely illustrated and
described by various Texas archeologists in three
previously published annual volumes of the Bulletin
of Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society.
If again it was a question of priority of publication
In Volume Four, 1932, Bulletin of the Society,
it is evident that Texas Scientific reports of mortar E. B. Howard’s article showed a picture of a
holes were published prior to the one cited. In collection of round mortar holes near Carlsbad,
August, 1927, a limestone ledge in the edge of the New Mexico. Also in Volume Four, 1932 Bulletin,

76

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

the writer listed other extensive oval mortar hole
groupings along the Colorado River, situated
twenty miles Northwest of the town of Colorado,
Texas. If the writer remembers correctly the
December, 1929, issue of the American
Anthropologist came out about the end of
December while the account of the Texas Douthit
Ranch mortar holes was first published by “Science
Service” on Dec. 10, 1929.
This Bulletin’s illustrations depict mortar holes,
pictographs, manos, metates, bone and shell beads,
drilled mussel shells, shell gorget, rabbit stick, flint
knives, drills, scrapers, arrow points, painted
pebbles, cordage, fiber cord nets, yucca sandals,
basketry, atlatl foreshafts, arrow shafts, and fire
making implements.
C.N.R.

needles, cactus fish hooks, skeletal material, and
many other interesting objects.
C.N.R.
“A Prehistoric Cave in Texas”, by Frank M.
Setzler, Assistant Curator, Division of Archeology
U. S. National Museum. Washington 1932. Size 6
x 9, 4 pages text, 3 pages photographs; one-half
page of drawings.
Much of the space in this all too brief record of
an archeological digging trip in Texas, which should
have been devoted to scientific data, has been taken
up by non-pertinent comments on subjects such as
scenery, sunrises, excavation difficulties, and an
unnecessary picture.

Of the six photographs shown on the three pages,
two show cave entrances, and two show excavators
inside the caves with nothing else of especial interest
Southwest Texas Archeological Society “Big
visible. Two-thirds of the third page of photographs
Bend Basket Maker Papers”, Bulletin 3, June, July,
is devoted to a picture of a young cowboy on a
and August, 1933. Edited by George C. Martin,
Pinto pony and the other third to a boat shaped
Witte Memorial Museum, San Antonio, Texas. Size
woven yucca and twig tray or cradle.
6 x 9 1/4, contains 95 pages of text and illustrations.
It contains 6 full pages of photographs, 12 full pages
The half page of drawings represent plaiting
of line drawings and 10 partial pages of line techniques of mats. The text states that 70 artifacts
drawings. Total pages 95. Price $2.00.
were found such as coiled baskets, sotol mattings,
sandals, twisted yucca fiber cordage, stone beads,
The third Bulletin of this Society shows a great
gourd sherds, yucca bags, wooden and bone awls.
increase, in the amount of text and of illustrations,
over the two previous issues of the Society. Any
The need for more careful writing is evident
scientific society, not supported out of public throughout the article.
taxation, which can simultaneously withstand the
CYRUS N. RAY
ravages of depression, the N. R. A. inspired
exactions of the printers, and increase the size of
its Bulletin is entitled to the congratulations of
“Prehistoric Cave Dwellers of Texas”, Frank M.
scientific men.
Setzler, Assistant Curator of Archeology, U. S.
National Museum, Washington D. C. Explorations
There are some minor typographical errors
and Field Work of The Smithsonian Institution
which however do not materially detract from the
1932, published 1933. This article contains two
fine piece of scientific research which George C.
pages of text and two of pictures. One of the pages
Martin and associates have done in the Texas Big
of pictures depicts archeological materials which
Bend Basket Maker region. The illustrations show
are schematic drawings of basket techniques,
textiles, net bags, basketry, sandals, cordage, fur
grooved clubs, atlatl foreshaft, atlatl bunt point,
cloth, mats, cradles, rattles, hafted scrapers, beads,
painted twined woven bag fragments, apocynum
atlatls, atlatl javelins, rabbit sticks, manos, metates,
cloth, painted.
mortar holes, painted pebbles, bone awls and
OTTO O. WATTS.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

77

On examination of the bones we found that for
old bones these were quite hard and were evidently
partially mineralized. Mineralization of bone is
supposed to be an exceedingly slow process
probably requiring thousands of years of time. To
become mineralized a bone or other object insist
have natural hardness enough to last a sufficient
time in a mineral solution so that each of its
molecules of organic matter may be replaced by
molecules of lime or silica in solution. Naturally
Gila Pueblo has been doing some excavation
this cannot operate in a soil subject to alternate
during the summer of 1934 in deeply stratified sites
drying and wetting, and bones so situated usually
near Abilene, Texas. Several scientists have also
decay completely within a few years.
recently inspected these ancient occupation levels.
It is then evident that these bones were kept in a
mineral solution for a long time, but it now would
Report on Two Mineralized Skeletons
be hard to find a drier situation than where the bones
Late in 1933 the writer was notified of the finding
lay.
of two skeletons on the Coon Hollow Ranch,
Some years ago the writer found another
situated on upper Elm Creek near Buffalo Gap,
Texas. The site was visited later in company with partially mineralized skeleton of a woman of very
similar type atop another eroded pinnacle in the
Jack Hammonds the Ranch Foreman.
same region and with this skeleton were two large
It seems that Mr. Hammonds noticed a pile of
sea shell beads which had become so completely
stones topping an eroded sandstone pinnacle on the
petrified that they clinked like porcelain dishes when
side of a mountain from which some bones
knocked together.
protruded and on digging therein uncovered two
People of this racial type were much below the
skeletons.
average in size with small bones, small narrow
As the ruins of an old dugout which was formerly
heads, low foreheads and short lower jaws. They
inhabited by pioneer whites existed close by, the
did not belong to the narrowest, longest, lowest
finders were in some doubts as to whether the
forehead race, found in Texas but to an intermediate
remains were of early whites or of Indians.
type between the most primitive men found here
Since no artifacts were found with the bones and the modern Indians.
they were brought to the writer for examination to
Like the remains of the most primitive Texas
determine if they were of Indians. Later two trips
inhabitants yet found, these people also buried their
were made to the site for a study of the
dead in the doubled up or flexed position with the
surroundings.
knees bent and resting on the chest and the hands
The top of the sandstone mountain above the resting on either side of the face. However their
site is covered with clay, but this has been eroded dead were not buried so deeply as the most primitive
off the steep hillside where the pinnacle existed, type bones.
down deeply into the sandstone for a considerable
One of the skulls found on the Coon Hollow
distance above and below the grave. Here only the
Ranch was that of a woman. This skull had all of
top of the pinnacle, protected as it was by a layer
the teeth in place except one front tooth and both
of stones, had retained its original layer of chocolate
the lower wisdom teeth which probably never
colored clay. This erosion of the rest of the hill side
existed in this individual. The lower jaw is unusually
probably took a very long time.
short and an xray by Dr. R. A. Maddox showed no
Complete illustrated reports on the archeology
of the Big Bend Basket Maker region are to be
found in Victor Smith’s Articles in Vol. 3, 1931,
Vol. 4, 1932, and Vol. 5, 1933. Bulletins of Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society. Also
both the Southwest Texas Archeological Society
and Texas University have issued fully illustrated
books on this region within the past year, which
are reviewed elsewhere in this volume.

78

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

unerupted wisdom teeth. Absence of the wisdom
teeth is fairly common in the white race but not so
common in primitive races. This woman had caries
in one tooth and had some pyorrhoea, and most of
the teeth were, worn but not decayed. Otherwise
the skull was in nearly perfect condition. It evidently
was the skull of a young adult.

sedentary tribes which not only produced acid
fermentation in the mouth and consequent softening
of the tooth enamel, but when constituting the bulk
of the diet probably served to unbalance the blood’s
alkaline reserve.

The tribes which lived on grains, seeds and
acorns also ground these on sandstone mills and
The other skull found was that of an old man. the loosened grains of sand wore down their teeth
His teeth had been worn off far down into the gums into the gums before their time.
and he had suffered greatly from pyorrhoea and
These sandstone hand mills are usually found
gum abscesses. Dental caries was also present in
on camp sites situated in the sandy shin oak land
some of his teeth. His skull was thin from old age.
best adapted to corn growing today; and we nearly
Enough signs of the ravages of age and disease were
always find that these sedentary tribes had worn
evident to give an idea what ended the old
decayed teeth. It is believed that Indians have grown
gentleman’s life.
corn in America for thousands of years, and that
The teeth of the very early more primitive meat much of Western America now unfitted for corn
eating hunter tribes usually were excellent. They growing may have been well fitted for it several
were kept active and energetic in the chase and thousand years ago. In other words that this region
probably found more vitamine containing fruits in has been gradually drying out for a long time. The
their migrations than the sedentary tribes. No doubt writers local researches indicate that there was a
they also ate much of their meat raw and included period, probably thousands of years ago when the
the vitamine containing internal organs in their diet Abilene region was more thickly populated than at
as well. The hunting Comanches also did this up to any subsequent time, and evidences exist of a more
a comparatively recent date. The writer has seen abundant rain fall then. A black earth stratum filled
Comanches cut the liver out of a beef immediately with camp site debris outcrops on stream banks all
after it was killed and eat it raw. The Eskimos also over Central West Texas at a depth of 5-6 feet. This
ate raw meat from all accounts and had excellent foot wide black earth stratum probably indicates
teeth until lately when the eating of the excessive heavier rain fall during that period.
carbohydrate diet of the white man is said to be
A portion of a mano or hand mill stone and
ruining their teeth.
ancient fire pits or hearths were found near the grave
It is probable that the main reason for the meat where it is probable that this tribe camped and
eaters fine teeth was that their diet contained very ground their food on sandstone manos and metates.
little of the excessive starchy grain diet used by
C.N.R.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

79

SECRETARY and TREASURER’S REPORT OF THE TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL AND PALEONTOLOGICAL
SOCIETY.
Statement for the Period from the Annual Meeting
October 28, 1933, to September 1, 1934.
RECEIPTS:
Balance on Oct. 28, 1933 ------------------------------------------------------------------$ 27.04
Bulletin Sales to Institutions and Purchasing Agencies ------------------------------------- 84.00
62 Memberships for 1934 at $3.00 -------------------------------------------------------- 186.00
3 Memberships for 1933 ----------------------------------------------------------------------- 9.00
2 Memberships for 1935 ----------------------------------------------------------------------- 6.00
Collections -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 17.00
329.04
DISBURSEMENTS:
Stamps and Mailing Expense ----------------------------------------------------------------- 14.00
Stationery and Supplies ------------------------------------------------------------------------ 8.00
Tax on Checks ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ .08
22.08
ACCOUNTS PAYABLE:
300 Copies of 1934 Bulletin in Process of Printing ------------------------------------------Engraving for 1934 Bulletin ----------------------------------------------------------------------

Bank Balance on Sept. 1, 1934 -------------------------------------------------------------------- $306.96

The Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society owes no past debts, or any other obligations
except the cost of this Bulletin, for which a cash balance is on hand.

80

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

1934 MEMBERSHIP LIST*
HONORARY MEMBERS
Harold J. Cook, Cook Museum of Natural History --------------------------------------------- Agate, Neb.
Albert G. Ingalls, Associate Editor, Scientific American ------------------------------------ New York City
ACTIVE MEMBERS
Mrs. Eileen E. Alves -------------------------------------------------------- 1120 Arizona St., El Paso, Texas
A. E. Anderson ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Brownsville, Texas
Dr. K. H. Aynesworth ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Waco, Texas
Thomas L. Blanton ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene, Texas
H. J. Bass ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Abilene, Texas
W. P. Bounds -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene, Texas
J. Carlton Bray -------------------------------------------------------------------- Box 653, Kingman, Arizona
Col. M. L. Crimmins -------------------------------------------------------- Fort Sam Houston, San Antonio
Price Campbell ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Abilene, Texas
Dr. Stewart Cooper ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene, Texas
Fred Cockrell -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene, Texas
Sam Chamberlain --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Refugio, Texas
Cox-Hunter—Hall Agency ---------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene, Texas
T. C. Campbell ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Abilene, Texas
Ellis Douthit --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene, Texas
Henry E. Elrod --------------------------------------------------------- 316 Petroleum Bldg., Houston, Texas
John A. Fox (Buster Brown) ---------------------------------------------------------------- Fort Worth, Texas
Judge O. C. Funderburk ------------------------------------------------------------------------ Eastland, Texas
Will Fulwiler, Jr. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene, Texas
Mary C. Gardner -------------------------------------------------------- Rosenberg Library, Galveston, Texas
C. W. Haney --------------------------------------------------------------- 2215 Fifth Ave., Fort Worth, Texas
Major John B. Hawley -------------------------------------------------- 411 Capps Bldg., Fort Worth, Texas
Bernard Hanks ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Abilene, Texas
W. H. Haney --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene, Texas
George R. Harris ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene, Texas
Paul Hutchison -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Dallas, Texas
Edgar B. Howard --------------------------------------------------- Univ. of Pa. Museum, Philadelphia, Pa.
Hilton Hotel --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene, Texas
R. W. Haynie ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Abilene, Texas
H. G. Haynie ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene, Texas
Dr. W. C. Holden ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Lubbock, Texas
Percy Jones -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene, Texas
Roland Jones ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Abilene, Texas
Morgan Jones ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Abilene, Texas
Henry James ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene, Texas
A. T. Jackson -------------------------------------------------------------------- 4314 Ave. G., Austin, Texas
Ed King ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene, Texas
W. M. Knight ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Shreveport, La.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

81

W. R. Keeble ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene, Texas
W. E. Kauffmann -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene, Texas
Eli Lilly ----------------------------------------------------------------- 5807 Sunset Lane, Indianapolis, Ind.
W. M. Love --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene, Texas
J. F. Morrison ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Abilene, Texas
Dr. Warren K. Moorehead ---------------------------------------------- Phillips Academy, Andover, Mass
Dr. Charles H. Mayo -------------------------------------------------------- Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minn.
George W. Minter ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene, Texas
Charles W. Motz --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene. Texas
Will Minter --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene, Texas
Bruce E. Oliver --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene, Texas
Dr. Julius Olsen --------------------------------------------------- Hardin-Simmons Univ., Abilene, Texas
D. Oldham ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene, Texas
Dr. J. E. Pearce ---------------------------------------------------------- University of Texas, Austin, Texas
H. A. Pender ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene, Texas
Lindsey Peyton ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene, Texas
Hermon C. Pipkin, Pres. Texas Bar Assn. ------------------------------------------------- Amarillo, Texas
Dr. Cyrus N. Ray -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene, Texas
Mrs. J. M. Radford ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene, Texas
Omar Radford ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Abilene, Texas
E. B. Sayles --------------------------------------------------------------------- Gila Pueblo, Globe, Arizona
Victor J. Smith ------------------------------------------- Sul Ross State Teachers College, Alpine, Texas
Floyd V. Studer --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Amarillo, Texas
R.H. Stewart, Jr. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Dallas, Texas
Dr. Grady Shytles ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene, Texas
Mrs. Maud Durlin Sullivan ----------------------------------------------- El Paso Library, El Paso, Texas
Dr. Ellis W. Shuler ----------------------------------------------- Southern Methodist Univ., Dallas, Texas
Dale Smiley ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Amarillo, Texas
Dr. C. W. Seibel ------------------------------------------------------- U. S. Helium Plant, Amarillo, Texas
P.A Tower ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene, Texas
W. J. Van London ---------------------------------------------------------- 712 W. 17th St., Amarillo, Texas
H.O. Wooten ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene, Texas
Lester B. Wood --------------------------------------------------------------------------- Breckenridge, Texas
Dr. Otto R. Watts -------------------------------------------------- Hardin-Simmons Univ., Abilene, Texas
William Watts ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Abilene, Texas
Ernest W. Wilson -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Abilene, Texas

*This only lists members who have paid 1934 dues.

