TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
The Society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and
scientific undertaking: the study of man’s past in Texas and contiguous areas.
The Bulletin offers an outlet for the publica! ion of serious research on history
prehistory and archeologicat theory. In line with the goals of the society, il
encourages scientific collection, study and I3 ublication of archeological data.
The Bulletin is published annually for the distribution to the members of
the Society, Opinions expressed hereto are those of the writers and do not
necessarily represent the views of the Society or the editorial staff,

Officers of the Society 1973-1974
President: DESSAMAE LORRAIN {Ava. Me.)
President-elect: FRANCIS ST1CKNEY {Midland)
Secretarv-Treclsurer: PAUL KOEPPE (Dallas)
E~!ilors: DR THOMAS R. HESTER (San Antonio}
DR. HARRY 1. SHAFER {College Station)
Ne~vslelter Editor: ANNE FOX (San Antonio}
Directors {in clddition to the ubovel: R. MILTON BELL (Austin), R.M. BOWEN
(Corpus Christi), (LK. CHANDLER (Houston), I)R. R.K. ttARR1SON (Texarkana). DR. S. ALAN SKINNER (Dallas), FRANK AL WEIR {Austin).

Regional Vice-Presidents: CLAUDE BROWN (Lubbock), LESLIE DAVIS {El
Paso), ION L GIBSON (Lafayette, La.), TOMMY HICKS (Dublin), EUGENE
O’BRIEN {San Antonio), W.L. RICHMOND (A.ustin), tAY SHARP (La Porte),
MRS. F.C. STICKNEY {Midland), RAY THOMPSON {Amarillo), ROBERT D.
VERNON, IR. [Sherman), ]AMES E. WARREN (George West), IOHN R. WAYLAND {Corpus Christi).

Address orders for publications and membership applications to
Secretary-Treasurer. Texas Archeological Society, Soul hem Methodist University, Box 165. Dallas, Texas ~275.

Bulletin of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Volume 45/1974

Thomas R. Hester, Senior Editor
Harry J. Shafer, Co-Editor

Olivia Rodriguez, Cover Design

PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY AT AUSTIN, TEXAS
1974

Phototypography and Camera-Ready Composition by Photocomp, Inc., Austin, Texas.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
The Role of Coprolite Analysis in Archeology
Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr ..................................

1

A Model for Cultural Succession for the Coastal Bend
Area of Texas
James E. Corbin

......................................

29

Preliminary Archeological Investigations in the
Rio Grande Delta of Texas
Elton R. Prewitt

.....................................

55

The Tchefuncte Culture in the Bayou Vermilion Basin,
South Central Louisiana: A Developmental Case Study
Jon L. Gibson ....................................... 67
Rock Art of the Guadalupe Mountains
National Park Area
John W. Clark, Jr ..................................... 97
An Analysis of the Ceramics of the
Guadalupe Mountains National Park
Alan L. Phelps

...................................... 121

Soil Characteristics of an Archeological Deposit:
Randall County, Texas
Emerson L. Pearson

................................... 151

Some Thoughts on Hoaxes and Fakes
Robert F. Heizer

..................................... 191

Shell Celts from Coastal Yucatan, Mexico
Jack D. Eaton ....................................... 197
Chemical Profile of Glass Trade Beads from
Archeological Sites in Texas and Oklahoma
Claire C. Davison and R. K. Harris

........................ 209

Evidence for Heat Treating of Southern Texas
Projectile Points
Thomas R. I/ester and Michael B. Collins

.................. 219

NOTES
A Magnetometer Survey of the Nineteenth Century
Steamboat Black Cloud
J. Barto Arnold III

.................................... 225

Methodological Comments on Woodall’s Prehistoric
Social Boundaries
David S. Vaughan

....................................

Reply to Vaughan
J. Ned Woodall

......................................

231
235

IN MEMORIUM
Wayne B. Neyland (1926-1972)
A. R. Duke ......................................... 237

BOOK REVIEWS
Predicting the Past, An Introduction to Anthropological
Archaeology. David Hurst Thomas.
R. E. W. Adams

...................................... 239

An Ethnohistorical Survey of Texas Indians.
Lydia L. M. Skeels.
...........240
Sandra Myres
Response to the Myres Review
Lydia Lowndes Maury Skeels

...........................

Reply to the Myres Review
Frank Hole

.........................................

244
244

Archaeology. Denise Schmandt-Besserat.
...................................... 246
Harry J. Sharer

THE AUTHORS

.....................................

247

THE ROLE OF COPROLITE
ANALYSIS IN ARCHEOLOGY
VAUGHN M. BRYANT, JR.

ABSTRACT
This article discusses the applications of human coprolite data in archeological research. It points out methods used for recognizing prehistoric coprolite specimens and then explains effective procedures for their
analysis. Under ideal circumstances human coprolites can yield data
pertinent to the understanding of seasonality, paleoenvironmental conditions, food preparation techniques, actual diet preferences and the general health of the individual. This can be achieved through the identification and analysis of coprolite contents which are often composed of fossil
pollen, seeds and other plant remains, phytoliths, feathers, bones, hair,
shell, insect chitin, parasites and non-organic compounds such as sand
and dirt.

INTRODUCTION
New demands are being placed upon the archeologist of today. In
the past it might have been sufficient for an archeologist to excavate a
site and later report his finds solely in terms of the ceramic, lithic and
fiberous artifacts. Those types of reports rarely, if ever, dealt with
some of the more important questions concerning man’s antiquity
and culture. Only occasionally did someone try to speculate upon
aspects such as animal butchering techniques, seasonal usage of a
site, subsistence patterns, paleoenvironmental conditions, or
methods of artifact manufacture. Part of the reason for the omission of
these kinds of data analyses resulted from a lack of suitable material
preserved for recovery during archeological excavations. However, in
other cases great quantities of potentially valuable artifacts were
inadvertently destroyed or discarded through a lack of understanding
of their usefulness in the interpretation of archeological data. One
such item, which has only recently been saved with any degree of
regularity during the excavation of archeological sites, is human
coprolites (preserved feces).
The remainder of this report is an attempt to acquaint the archeologist with the types of potentially important data which can be
recovered from the analysis of human coprolites.

HISTORY OF COPROLITE ANALYSIS
IN AMERICAN ARCHEOLOGY
Harshberger (1896) may have been the first to realize the potential

2

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
value of human coprolite analysis since he suggested that undigested
seeds and bones found in the feces of prehistoric man might offer a
clue to the types of foods eaten. Later, Young (1910) examined human
coprolites from Salts and Mammoth caves in Kentucky and found that
they contained sunflower seeds and hickory nut shells. From this he
concluded that these items may have been important diet components. Loud and Harrington (1929) were the next to report on the
analysis of human coprolites. From their study of fecal remains found
in Lovelock Cave, Nevada they suggested that man’s earlier diet
patterns included a variety of wild seed types and various plant fibers.
For the nex{ 30 years (1930-1960) there were only a few additional
attempts to examine human coprolite remains recovered from archeological sites. Volney Jones (1936) looked at coprolite material
from the Newt Kash Hollow Shelter in Kentucky and found that they
reflected a human diet consisting of ground seeds from canary grass,
pigweed and sunflower as well as acorns and hickory nuts. In the
same year Wakefield and Dellinger (1936) examined dried fecal remains found in a mummy recovered from a shelter site in Arkansas
and found they contained sumac seeds and acorns. During the 1940s
there were no new attempts to analyze human coprolite remains but
by the late 1950s there was a renewed interest in that type of research.
Sperry and Fonner found mesquite and burro weed seeds, antelope
hair and bird feathers in prehistoric human coprolites from Danger
Cave (Jennings, 1957). Webb and Baby (1957) looked at some human
coprolites recovered from caves in eastern Kentucky and found that
the fecal remains contained evidence to suggest that those early cave
inhabitants had eaten a diet of sunflower and goosefoot seeds as well
as several kinds of insects. MacNeish (1958) noted that human coprolites recovered from sites in Tamaulipas, Mexico, contained maguey
fibers, squash seeds, insect fragments and pieces of snail shells.
During the 1960s there were a number of new studies conducted of
human fecal materials. Callen and Cameron (1960) reported their
analysis of human coprolites recovered from Huaca Prieta Cave in
Peru. Three years later Callen (1963) published the account of his
analysis of human coprolites from the Ocampo Caves of Tamaulipas,
Mexico. Later, he (Callen 1965) reported on the completed analysis of
additional human fecal materials recovered from several Peruvian
archeological sites. Callen completed three additional studies and
had begun a fourth study before his death in 1970. The analysis of over
100 human coprolites from Tehuacan, Mexico (Callen 1967a) was of
critical importance to archeology because it dealt with diet changes
before, during, and after the period of early plant domestication in
Mesoamerica. Callen (1969) also became the first person to examine

COPROLITE ANALYSIS
the contents of human feces from Middle Paleolithic (ca. 75,000 B.P.)
age deposits. In the last report published before his death (Callen and
Martin 1969) Callen reported on the contents and probably diet patterns of the prehistoric peoples who lived in the Glen Canyon region
of Utah. In 1970 Callen began the analysis of human feces recovered
from rock-shelter and cave deposits near Ayacucho, Peru. However,
he died in Peru before that study could be completed.
Following the examples and new analytical techniques perfected
by Callen, others also began to recognize the importance of human
coprolite analysis. A series of reports resulted from the analysis of vast
quantities of human feces found at Lovelock Cave, Nevada including
reports by Heizer (1960, 1967); Napton and Brunetti (1969); Ambro
(1967); Cowan (1967); Tubbs and Berger (1967); Roust (1967); Heizer
and Napton (1969); Heizer (1969). Other human coprolite studies
conducted during the ! 960s include Bryant (1969), who reported on
the analysis of 43 human coprolites recovered from southwest Texas;
Fry (1969), who published his analysis of human feces recovered from
Danger Cave, Utah; and the Watson and Yarnell (1966) Salts Cave
report.
In the mid 1960s Martin and Sharrock (1964) introduced a new idea
to the study of human feces --pollen analysis. In their initial study of
54 human coprolites from the Glen Canyon area they found that the
pollen contents of coprolites could provide information relative to the
understanding of prehistoric diet, seasonal camp site occupation and
insights into the cultural usage of specific plants (such as juniper)
which are not otherwise represented in coprolite samples. Soon other
pollen analyses of human coprolites fo!lowed. These included the
studies by Bryant and Larson (1968) and Bryant (1969, 1974a) of
coprolites from southwest Texas; Napton and Kelso (1969) of human
feces from Lovelock Cave; Riskind (1970) of human coprolites from
Parida Cave, Texas; and finally those of Bryant (1974b) and Schoenwetter (1974) of human feces recovered from Mammoth and Salts
caves in Kentucky.
Even though this brief review of previous coprolitic research may
seem to include a large number of analyses it represents only a
fraction of the work that should have been done. There were undoubtedly many other archeological sites excavated during the last eight
decades which also contained human coprolites, yet those samples
were either lost, discarded or never recorded.

PRESERVATION AND RECOGNITION
OF HUMAN COPROLITES
In certain areas of the New World dry conditions prevail and result

4

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

in the archeological recovery of perishable wood and fiber artifacts as
well as botanical and fecal specimens. When present, fecal remains
may or may not be easy to identify as being of human origin. This
problem is clearly evidenced by the large number of misidentified
samples received by coprolite analysis laboratories. Past examples, to
name a few, include samples of rodent, rabbit, horse and owl dung all
of which were labeled "human feces" when they arrived for analysis
at the Texas A&M University Anthropology Laboratory. Other misidentified samples have included root fragments, quids, dirt clods
and even pi6ces of rock.
Coprolite analysts also find that fecal material is often difficult to
identify with assurance and identification sometimes can only be
determined after completion of a chemical test. In general, coprolite
identification must take place on three distinct levels: 1) during the
initial examination prior to chemical reconstitution, 2) during the
chemical reconstitution, and 3) during the analysis of coprolite contents.
Prior to chemical reconstitution certain major determinations as to
human versus non-human coprolites can be made. Fecal pellets from
certain types of rodents such as mice, packrats, gophers and moles are
easily recognized by their small size and shape. The feces of many
herbivores such as llama, deer, antelope, sheep, rabbit and horse can
be recognized easily by their shape, size and predominantly grass and
plant fiber contents. Many coprolites from large carnivores can be
identified by their hard outer coating of dried intestinal lubricant
secreted as protection against intestinal wall perforation by ingested
fragments of sharp bone. In other cases it becomes more difficult to
distinguish human from non-human coprolites, especially when the
samples have been crushed or fragmented. Another factor that makes
human feces identification difficult is the great variety of shapes and
sizes found represented by human coprolite specimens. Depending
upon the diet and the interval between bowel movements human
feces can appear as large segmented pellets, cylindrical masses or as
amorphous masses resembling the dung of certain large herbivores
such as cow and bison.
At the second level additional separations can be made between
human and non-human coprolites. When coprolites are placed in a
reconstitution solution such as trisodium phosphate the liquid generally becomes tinted within 72 hours. The resulting color of the fluid
and the degree of translucency are fairly reliable indicators of coprolite origin. Coprolites from carnivores usually turn the trisodium
phosphate solution white, pale brown, or yellow brown in color and
do not interfere with its translucency. Herbivores’ coprolites will turn

COPROLITE ANALYSIS
the reconstitution solution pale yellow to light brown in color and do
not change the fluid’s translucency. Human coprotites, on the other
hand, will always turn the trisodium phosphate solution dark brown
or black in color and make it opaque. So far as is known, there is only
one non-human type of coprolite that will produce a chemical reaction similar to that of a human coprolite. Fry (1970:19) reported that
the coprolites of the coati (Nasua nasua) will turn a trisodium phosphate solution black and make it opaque. There is one other additional clue that one could use at this second level of identification -odor. From experience it is known that non-human coprolites (even
those of the coati) generally emit a musty odor during the reconstitution process. Human coprolites, however, reproduce the original intense odor when reconstituted.
At the final level, during the actual analysis of the coprolite contents, one can often separate human coprolites from non-human coprolites. Man tends to favor an omnivorous diet and often eats prepared
foods. As such, human coprolites tend to include a wide range of
diverse components such as charcoal, cracked and ground seeds,
snail and clam shell fragments, bird egg shell and feathers, insect
chitin, bone fragments, mammal hair and plant fibers. Sometimes a
few of these items could be expected to appear in non-human coprolites, yet very rarely will such a variety be found in any single nonhuman coprotite.
An apparent exception to the foregoing must be noted for coprolites
from hominids of great antiquity such as those fromHomo africanus,
Homo erectus and Homo sapiens neanderthalensis. Although very
rare, coprolites of such ages have been recovered and analyzed from
the Olduvai Gorge, Terra Amata, and Lazaret archeological sites.
Coprolites of suspected hominid origin recovered from occupational levels associated with Homo africanus at Olduvai Gorge (dated
as older than 1 million B.C.) were sent to Lewis K. Napton for analysis.
His study showed that those prehistoric coprolites did not react to the
chemical reconstitution process in the usual manner. When placed in
a solution of trisodium phosphate the specimens did not emit a fecal
odor and did not discolor the solution; yet based upon the coprolite
contents, Napton (Leakey 1971) stated that they could reflect a possible hominid origin.
Callen (1969) examined four suspected human coprolites of great
antiquity recovered from archeological deposits associated with the
cultural remains of Homo sapiens neanderthalensis at the Lazaret site
in France. During his analysis Callen encountered many of the same
types of problems that Napton found during his study of the Olduvai
Gorge specimens. The coprolites did not darken the reconstitution

6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

B

D
FIGURE 1. Scanning electron photomicrographs. (A.) Zea mays (corn)
pollen grain (1,500 x). (B.) Sorghum halepc, nse (Johnson grass) pollen
grain (2,400 x). Note the fine reticulate pattern of the surface ornamentation. (C.) Zea ma)’s (corn) pollen grain (6,000 x). Note the
absence of the surface reticulate pattern. (D.) Curcurbita sp. (gourd)
pollen grain (1,000 x).

COPROLITE ANALYSIS
solution nor did they produce the usual fecal odor. On the other hand,
based upon their contents of charcoal, bone fragments, hair and other
debris Callen suggested that at least two of them were of probable
human origin.
More recently, the Texas A&M Anthropology Laboratory has begun
a preliminary examination of the contents of fecal samples 400,000
years old found in association withHomo erectus remains at the Terra
Amata site in France. The early analysis of those coprolites reveal the
presence of small fragments of marine shells, sand grains, flecks of
charcoal, and a few animal hairs (Fig. 3,D). As yet no seeds, bones,
fibers or other organic residues have been found. Like the earlier
studies of other very ancient coprolites these specimens did not react
to chemical analysis in the usual manner. When placed in a trisodium
phosphate solution the samples produced a weak fecal-like smell and
only a few specimens turned the solution even a faint brown color.
In all three of the studies where coprolites of Early Man have been
examined the resulting analysis has raised a number of important
questions. For example: 1) what should any human coprolite still
contain after many thousands of years of weathering; 2) how does
time alter the color and odor-forming substances of human coprolites;
or 3) do these apparent differences reflect different digestive patterns
found in other species and subspecies of man?

LABORATORY PROCEDURES
The most valuable data come from the total analysis of any given
coprolite sample and the first essential step towards such an analysis
is the laboratory extraction process. During the early history of coprolite analysis there was no known effective method whereby a coprolite specimen could be carefully opened and examined without causing damage to certain delicate plant and animal tissues.
Harshberger {1896) and Young (1910) reported that they broke open
dried coprolites and examined what was inside whereas Jones (1936)
crushed dried human coprolites with a mortar and pestle and then
examined the crushed remains. Each of these basic methods worked
with some degree of efficiency, yet it was not until Callen and Cameron (1960) introduced the chemical reconstitution process that a
suitable laboratory procedure became available for coprolite analysis.
Their method, which is herein described, is presently the most widely
used and accepted method of coprolite analysis.
Some coprolite analysts seek only the pollen data while others seek
only the macrofossil data. Ideally, however, the identical samples
should be used for both types of analysis. In this way each type of data

8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

will complement the other and thus give the analyst two vital sets of
important information from which to derive his interpretive information.
At the Texas A&M University Anthropology Laboratory coprolite
samples are initially measured, weighed, photographed and their
general appearance described before any laboratory process is begun.
Next the samples which appear to be of possible human origin are
carefully and thoroughly cleaned on the surface in order to remove
any pollen contamination which may have been deposited on the
coprolite after it was excreted. This is often a difficult task yet is an
essential step towards gaining an accurate analysis. Once cleaned, the
coprolite samples are placed in airtight containers. Here they are
subdivided for analysis. The amount of each coprolite specimen that
is used for analysis will vary with the individual sample. In some
cases, where large sized coprolites are available, a sizeable portion
can be used for the analysis. In other cases where only a very small
fragment is available the entire sample may have to be used. Once the
material for the analysis is selected each specimen is placed in the
airtight container and a sufficient amount of 0.5% trisodium phosphate solution is added to cover the sample. The strength of the
trisodium phosphate solution must be carefully regulated since experiments (Callen 1967a) have shown that strengths greater than 0.5%
will destroy the middle lamella of plant cells and cause the destruction of delicate plant tissues, limiting macrofossil identification. The
samples are then sealed and allowed to soak for a period ranging from
a minimum of 72 hours to several weeks. The exact length of time
needed for each sample to soak is dependent upon a number of factors
such as actual diet component, age of specimen, degree of preservation and completeness of dessication. There does not seem to be a
point beyond which a sample will begin to deteriorate if left to soak
too long in the trisodium phosphate solution. Experiments conducted
by this writer have shown that there is no degree of sample deterioration or destruction to delicate plant tissues even in coprolite specimens allowed to soak for periods of up to three years. Rarely, however,
is a sample ready for further processing in less than 72 hours after it is
placed in the trisodium phosphate solution.
The trisodium phosphate solution acts as a reconstituting agent and
once this is completed the next phase of the extraction process can
begin. Since the original incomplete breakdown of protein components in the coprolite samples often results in the liberation of an
intense odor it is suggested that the remainder of the process be
conducted under a vented fumehood. This is especially true of the
unstable amino acid tryptophan which is a common component of

COPROLITE ANALYSIS

B

D
FIGURE 2. Scanning electron photomicrographs. (21.) Homo sapiens
sapiens hair (1,000 x). Note the fine scales on the hair surface and the
wavy pattern.they form across the main body of the hair. (B.) Apodemus
sp. (field mouse) body hair (1,000 x). Note the coarse scale pattern on
the outer surface. (C:) Prosopis glandulosa (Mesquite) pollen grain
(3,000 x). (D.) Chenopodium sp. (Goosefoot) pollen grain (3,500 x).

10

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

most animal proteins. During its breakdown to 3-methyl indole, and
then to indole, it produces an intense offensive odor as a byproduct of
the reaction (Callen 1967a). Other compounds such as methyl mercaptan and hydrogen sulfide result from the bacterial putrefaction
process and may also add to the disagreeable odor {Oser 1965:530).
Each sealed jar containing a sample should be opened carefully and
a notation made of its color, smell, and whether or not a thin scum
appears on the surface. According to Callen {1967a) the presence of a
thin surface scum is an additional indication that meat was a diet
component. Once these data are recorded then each sample should be
carefully screened first through a clean 20-mesh brass screen and then
through a clean 100-mesh brass screen. During this process the larger
pieces of debris that appear on each screen should be gently agitated
and broken down to liberate any possible trapped pollen grains. Each
screen, with its contents, should then be gently washed with a jet of
distilled water so that all pollen grains will pass freely through both
screens into the beaker below. Once this step has been completed the
trapped solid residues on both screens should be dried and stored in
sealed containers for later analysis. The liquid fraction recovered
beneath the screens should be centrifuged and saved for pollen
analysis studies. For details of this process see Bryant and Holz
{1968).

ANALYSIS
One of the most frequently asked questions concerning coprolite
data is, "What kinds of information can human coprolites give us?"
The answer to this question is entirely dependent upon the specific
human coprolite sample and the procedures of analysis followed by
the analyst. It can range from a very limited amount of information in
some samples to extensive amounts of data in others. For example,
under ideal circumstances any specific human coprolite could contain pertinent information concerning seasonality, paleoenvironmental conditions, food preparation techniques, actual diet preferences
and the general health of an individual. Some of these data must come
from the presence of one specific component such as the occurrence
of parasite cysts which could be used to speculate on the general
health of the individual. In other cases, such as diet reconstruction,
more than one component must be relied upon to provide the pertinent data.

11

COPROLITE ANALYSIS

A

B

D
FIGURE 3. Scanning electron photomicrographs. (A.) Opu~tia sp.
(pricklypear cactus) pollen grain (1,300 x). (B.) rl)’pt~a lati/~)lia (cattail)
pollen grain (4,700 x). (C.) D<’rma<w~tor sp. (tick) head (180 x). (D.) Hair
of unknown mammal recovered from a 400,000 year old coprolite of
Homo cr<,rtu,s.

12

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

POLLEN COMPONENT

Pollen data recovered from human coprolites can often be very
informative since under ideal circumstances they can yield information as to: 1) diet, 2) types of economic, versus background, pollen, 3)
seasonality of site occupation, and 4) paleoenvironmental conditions.
Prehistoric man had to depend upon the available natural resources
for his food supply. Some of these food sources such as bark, tubers
and leaves do not contain pollen. Others, such as flowers and certain
types of seeds do contain pollen or have pollen accidently adhering to
their outer surfaces. When these ingested pollens are later voided
along with other materials as feces, they then can be identified (Fig.
1-5) and used to infer certain probable dietary patterns. In southwest
Texas, for example, pollen analyses of human coprolites reveal that
the prehistoric peoples living in that region between 800 B.C. - A.D.
500 ate a diet that contained a considerable proportion of flowers
and/or flower buds from plants such as yucca, sotol, agave, cactus and
mesquite (Bryant 1974a). This type of diet information was not otherwise known and would not have become apparent without the pollen
analysis of their fecal remains.
Not all of the pollen found in human coprolites are a direct indication of diet. Within each human coprolite there are two distinct
groups of pollen, economic pollen and background pollen. Economic
pollen, as a specific category, is recognized by the palynologist to
include those pollen types which have been ingested as part of the
diet during the eating of flowers and/or certain types of seeds. These
pollen types are easily identified because they come from plant
species whose pollen rarely, if ever, become part of the normal atmospheric pollen rain. Pollen types such as those from yucca, cactus,
agave, sotol and mesquite are transported from flower to flower solely
by insects which come to feed on the associated flower nectar or come
to collect the pollen. As such, these pollen grain types are only rarely
cast adrift into the atmosphere like the pollen grains of ragweed, pine
or oak. Therefore, when economic pollen types are present in human
coprolite specimens it reflects the direct eating of flowers rather than
accidental ingesting from other sources.
Background pollen, on the other hand, is in most cases incidental to
the understanding of diet practices since it reflects atmospheric pollen which is part of the normal pollen rain that constantly settles to
the ground and could be accidently ingested by man. Any, or all, of
the background pollen types (such as grass, pine, oak, hackberry,
ragweed, juniper and pecan) found in any specific human coprolite
could have become trapped in available drinking water sources, been

COPROLITE ANALYSIS

13

accidently inhaled, or could have settled out on prepared foods that
were later eaten by man.
Preserved pollen in human coprolites can often reveal clues as to
probable seasonality of site occupation. There are several ways in
which these data can be determined. If a coprolite contains high
percentages of economic pollen from one or more plants which bloom
during the spring and/or summer (such as yucca, agave, cactus, sotol
or mesquite), that season can be inferred as being the time of year that
that coprolite was voided. This information can then be used to offer
tentative evidence as to the seasonal usage of certain archeological
sites provided that man ate the flowers soon after they were picked
and did not store and eat them later in the year. Ethnobotanical reports
of many subsistence level protohistoric cultures have noted that in
most instances flowers were eaten fresh and were not stored for later
use (Palmer 1878; Newberry 1887; Barrows 1900; Castetter and Bell
1942; Curtin 1949).
In some cases pollen found in human coprolites can be used to
make limited generalizations concerning the local paleoenvironment. Often the local vegetation compositions will change when, and
if, the climate changes. Certain plant species would be sensitive
enough to reflect this change. If the pollen from those indicator types
were present in the coprolites from one specific time period but not
the coprolites from a later or earlier time period then these data could
be used to infer certain environmental changes. However, a great deal
of caution must be taken not to "over-interpret" dramatic climatic
changes based solely upon the pollen spectra in human coprolites.
One must always remember that man is a highly mobile and selective
animal; thus the coprolites represent the ingestion of food and water
that may, or may not, reflect only the actual pollen types in the
immediate area of his campsites.
SEEDS, LEAVES AND OTHER PLANT REMAINS
Hunters and gatherers as well as agriculturalists rely heavily upon
seeds of various types to supplement their dietary needs. Seeds are
especially useful because they are rich in carbohydrates and have
important caloric value. In addition to these assets many types of
seeds can also be stored for later use.
When eaten, seeds are useful indicators of actual diet and can
sometimes be used to provide insights into food preparation techniques. Seeds have a hard outer coat called the testa which is generally resistant to most human digestive processes and this is excreted
almost unchanged in feces. The shape and surface morphology of

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

14

A

B

FIGURE 4. Scanning electron photomicrographs. (A.) Taxaxacum sp.
(dandylion) pollen grain (3,000 x). (B.) Gossypium barbadense (cotton)
fiber (1,000 x). (C.) Agave lecheguilla (lecheguilla) phytolith (2,000 x).
(D.) Opuntia lindheimeri (pricklypear cactus) phytolith (200 x).

COPROLITE ANALYSIS

15

most seed testae are quite diagnostic (Fig. 5,B) and can be used to
provide an accurate identification as to the plant family, genus and/or
species represented. In many cases even when the seed testa has been
broken or ground during food preparation or masticated during eating it can still be identified by its fragmented parts.
Seeds are sometimes the item that is sought as the food source such
as maize, wheat, barley, rye and sunflower seeds. In other cases seeds
are accidently swallowed during the eating of the pericarp (fruit
wall). When eating squash, tomatoes, grapes, cactus fruits, guavas,
blackberries and chili peppers most of the seeds are swallowed along
with the edible pericarp. Regardless of why seeds are eaten, their
presence in human coprolites is a valuable source of data useful for
the reconstruction of diet patterns.
When fruits such as apples, peaches, plums and pears are eaten the
seeds are not usually ingested along with the fruit pericarp. In such
instances coprolite identification of the fruit must rest upon the correct identity of the hard outer pericarp wall. This outer fruit skin is
more difficult to identify than is the testa yet accurate recognitions
can be made by using the shape, frequency and arrangements of the
surface stomatal openings as morphological clues.
Food preparation techniques can sometimes be inferred from seed
remains present in human coprolites. Callen (1967b) found that some
of the millet seeds in prehistoric human feces from Mexico had been
prepared by pounding, while others had been split open by rolling
them back and forth on a grinding stone prior to being eaten. In
prehistoric coprolites from southwest Texas, Bryant (1969) noted that
some of the cactus seeds had been broken open either by pounding or
grinding before being eaten by prehistoric man. Some of the broken
cactus seeds in those coprolites were also charred which suggested
that they may have been roasted prior to being eaten. Baegert (1952)
has reported similar practices as noted in the ethnographic reports of
the Indians of southern California.
Plant leaves are not a frequent component in most human coprolites
yet when present they generally appear as chewed and broken fragments. Ethnographic reports suggest that leaves were either chewed
alone or were mixed with other foods and then eaten. This has been
noted by Brown (1868) for parsnips (Heracleum lanatum), by Blankinship (1905) for western dock (Rumex occidentalis), by Palmer
(1878) for saltbush (Atriplex powellii), and by Castetter (1935), for
goldenrod (Solidago missouriensis.) When present in human feces
leaves are usually very difficult to identify accurately. Small leaf
fragments that have been well chewed are generally so altered in
shape and form that there remains little to use as a diagnostic identifi-

16

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

cation feature. In some cases the only statement that can be made
concerning such leaves is that they were from either the monocot or
dicot group of plants. This level of identification does have limited
value and can be determined by the venation pattern even in badly
crushed or chewed plant leaves.
Roots, tubers and bark are not common in human coprolites yet do
occur in some samples. In southwest Texas, Bryant (1974a) noted that
out of a total of 43 Late Archaic Period human coprolites, four contained fragments of chewed bark and, in one specimen, the major diet
item had been the bark. Regardless of how often roots and bark occur
in human coprolites they still remain a difficult plant substance to
identify accurately. Experience has shown that the mere identification of these two plant substances is not usually a great problem, yet
beyond that level there are few morphological features which can be
used for a more nearly precise identification. The problem of specific
identification becomes even more complicated when the bark or root
fragments were pounded or chewed before being swallowed.
PHYTOLITHS
Phytoliths (plant crystals) (Fig. 4,C,D) occur in many kinds of plants
and are especially frequent in regions where available water sources
are rich in dissolved silicates and calcium. Plants, unlike animals,
have no method of excreting inorganic materials and therefore must
deposit these substances internally. These inorganic deposits in
plants consist primarily of calcium salts and anhydrides of silica in
crystalline form. When deposited they occur in four basic crystalline
shapes (druses, raphides, rhombohedrals and prismatics) and are
concentrated throughout the plant tissues mainly in specialized
idioblast cells. When these crystal-containing plant tissues are eaten
by man most of the phytoliths are liberated during chewing and pass
through the digestive system unchanged to become part of the fecal
remains. Later, during the analysis of human coprolites the phytoliths
can be isolated and described.
One of the major problems with trying to use phytoliths is that it is
nearly impossible to assign a specific type to a specific plant taxa
since most crystal types are not diagnostic of any one plant species. In
the analysis of plant crystals present in certain species of plants from
southwest Texas this writer found that four species of cacti (Opuntia
lindheimeri, O. phaeacantha, O. leptocaulis and Echinocactus
texensis) contained similar calcium oxylate plant crystals of the druse
shape. Furthermore, phytoliths were present in great numbers and
varieties in the leaves of three species of yucca (Yucca torreyi, Y.

COPROLITE ANALYSIS

17

thompsoniana, Y. constricta), two species of sotol (Dasylirion
texanum, D. leiophyllum), one species of sacahuiste (Nolina texana)
and in two species of agave (Agave americana, A. lecheguilla). Of all
the different crystal types found, only one type was unique and
diagnostic of a single specific plant species. Lechuguilla leaves contained one type or raphide crystal (Fig. 4,C) that was not found in the
leaves of any other plant taxa examined. Based solely upon the occurrence of large numbers of certain types of phytoliths Bryant (1969)
was able to suggest that certain prehistoric human coprolite samples
from southwest Texas contained evidence of a cactus and/or
lechuguilla diet even though no leaf fragments or fibers were present
in the feces. It was his conclusion that in certain instances phytoliths
can be used effectively as an aid to diet reconstruction; in most cases,
however, phytoliths present too many problems in terms of accurate
identification to be of diagnostic interpretative value.
FEATHERS
Down feathers and other types of feather fragments sometimes
appear in the coprolitic remains left by prehistoric man. These small
feathers often appear to be unidentifiable yet microscopic examination can often lead to a more nearly precise finalysis. Along the edges
of most feathers barbs are small processes called barbules. These
barbules (Fig. 5,C,D) are quite diagnostic for Certain bird groups and
can be used as morphological keys for the accurate recognition of the
birds they represent. Based upon these types of analyses Napton and
Brunetti (1969) were able to identify feather fragments in Lovelock
Cave human coprolites as belonging to several species of waterfowl
including the grebe, heron, goose and mudhen. The bones of these
same species of waterfowl were found in the archeological deposits of
Lovelock Cave (Napton 1969) yet the presence of their feathers in
human feces gives added strength to the assumption that these waterfowl species were actually part of prehistoric man’s diet in that region
of Utah. Other analysts noting the occurrence of feathers in prehistoric human coprolites include Callen (1967a), Fry (1969), Callen and
Martin (1969), and Yarnell (1969).

BONES, HAIR, SHELL AND SCALES
Prehistoric and protohistoric man tended to include meat as an
integral part of his diet much as man does today. The percentage of
meat versus plant foods in his diet was dependent upon a number of
variables, yet few, if any, groups subsisted solely upon a diet of plant

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

18

A

B

FIGURE 5. Scanning electron photomicrographs. (A.) Gclllus g’allus
(chicken) egg-shell surface (1,000 x). (B.) Chenopodium (goosefoot)
seed showing the fine reticulate surface pattern (60 x). (C.) Spizell~ sp.
(sparrow) feather (200 x). (D.) Gcdl’~,s g’allu,s (chicken) feather (500 x).
Note the tiny barbules along the edges of each barb.

COPROLITE ANALYSIS

19

foods. To the analyst looking at the coprolite remains of ancient man it
would be of great benefit to know what percentage of any given diet
was composed of meat. Unfortunately, to date this type of quantification has proven impossible to achieve based upon coprolite remains.
There are, however, a number of clues which can be used to suggest
the ingestion of certain kinds of meat.
Often when small animals such as snakes, lizards, rodents, birds
and small fish are eaten by man many of the bones are chewed and
swallowed along with the meat. These bones are generally small
enough so that they do not puncture or otherwise injure the digestive
tract and are later expelled as part of the feces. When present in
human coprolites animal bones can be segregated into general
categories such as fish, reptiles and mammals based upon general
morphologic features. If certain diagnostic bone fragments are present, more precise identifications as to actual species are also possible.
Even though bones present in human coprolitss are useful clues as to
man’s diet preferences they can not tell the analyst precisely what
percentage of that diet is represented by meat.
Bryant’s (1969) study of prehistoric human coprolites from southwest Texas demonstrates that the early inhabitants of that region ate a
variety of small animals as seen by the number of bone fragments in
their feces. In 21 of the total 43 human coprolites analyzed in that
study the bones of small reptiles, birds, mammals and fish were
encountered. Similar studies by Callen (1967a), Douglas (1969), Yarnell [1969), Fry (1970) and Trevor-Deutsch (n.d.) have also noted the
presence of animal bones in prehistoric human coprolites.
When man eats larger animals such as rabbits, deer, bison, antelope
and elk bones are not ingested since they are large and can be removed
easily during butchering or later while eating. Since meat protein is
rapidly broken down by the human digestive system little evidence of
its presence is ever found. However, in many cases during the butchering of large animals a few animal hairs will adhere to the meat and
can be accidentally and unknowingly eaten with the meat. Unlike
meat, hairs are very resistant to the human digestion process and
remain unaltered when excreted as part of the feces. These hairs (Fig.
2,A,B), like the bones of smaller animals, are often quite diagnostic
and can be used as a key to the identification of the species of animal
they represent. In the analysis of human coprolites from Tehuacan,
Mexico, Callen {1967a) was able to identify a number of large animal
genera that were eaten based soley upon direct morphological comparisons between the hairs found in human feces with hair reference
samples of known origin. Today, more refined techniques are available through the use of the scanning electron microscope.

20

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Small shell fragments are sometimes found in human coprolites.
During the opening of clams, oysters, or snails small chips are often
broken off and can be inadvertently eaten along with the meat. Such
small pieces of shell are not significantly altered by man’s digestive
system and are thus incorporated into the fecal remains. When
analyzed during coprolitic research these shell fragments can be
identified and sometimes assigned to specific categories or even to a
generic type. As in other instances, the preciseness of the level of
identification depends upon the amount of shell present and available diagnostic features.
Like snail, clam and oyster shells, egg shell fragments (Fig. 5,A) are
also found in human coprolite specimens. Egg shell fragments can be
segregated from other types of shell, yet a more precise identification
is often difficult. Current research using the techniques of scanning
electron microscopy are being applied to this identification problem
and soon may produce a solution.
Animal scales fall into two broad groups -- those from fish and
those from reptiles. Fish scales are generally rounded and have patterns of small concentric growth rings whereas reptile scales are more
often pointed at one end and lack the annual growth rings. As evidenced by previous analyses of prehistoric human coprolites (Bryant
1969; Yarnell 1969) both types of scales pass freely through the
human digestive system and can sometimes be an abundant component of a coprolite specimen. Species identification of scales can be
accomplished under ideal circumstances with an adequate comparative reference collection. In the study of prehistoric human coprolites
from Lovelock Cave in Nevada, Helzer and Napton (1969) were able to
identify three species of fish eaten by man based upon the identification of scales preserved in the feca! remains.
INSECTS
Among many modern cultures the eating of insects is considered
distasteful and is not a common practice. Ethnographic records, on
the other hand, reveal that many past cultures often ate insects and in
fact considered certain insect types to be a delicacy. Additional evidei~ce from the analysis of prehistoric human coprolites demonstrates
that the practice of insect eating is not strictly a recent innovation.
Remains of various insect types have been reported in prehistoric
human coprolites from Mexico (Callen 1967a), Utah (Fry 1970; Hall
1972), Texas (Bryant 1969), Kentucky (Yarnell 1969), Nevada (Heizer
and Napton 1969) and Peru (Bryant n.d.).
Many insects have a hard outer chitinous surface which forms a

COPROLITE ANALYSIS

21

durable exoskeleton that protects the insect’s internal organs. When
these types of insects are eaten by man their exoskeletons are not
dissolved by the digestive system and are expelled as part of the feces.
Some exoskeletons, such as those of grasshoppers and beetles are easy
to recognize while other types of insect chitin fragments are more
difficult to identify. Recovery of these components from prehistoric
human coprolites can be accomplished in several ways. Callen
(1967a) suggests mixing benzene with a trisodium phosphate solution containing the reconstituted feces specimen and then shaking
the mixture vigorously. This process will separate the insect chitin
and cause it to float at the interface between the benzene and
trisodium phosphate solution. Callen’s procedure is an effective
method to remove insect chitin yet it can not be used when pollen
analysis of the same samples are desired. During the benzene process
some, but not all, of the pollen present in the sample will adhere to the
benzene and float at the interface where it could be inadvertently
removed along with the floating insect material. The result would be
the selective removal of certain pollen types which would lead to an
incorrect analysis of the coprolitic pollen contents. When pollen
studies aredesired, insect chitin must be removed during the screening process rather than through the use of the benzene process.
There are two main categories of insects found during the analysis
of human feces: 1) insects eaten as part of the diet and 2) coprophagous insects. Insect types eaten as part of man’s diet will vary depending upon local availability and the personal preferences of certain
ethnic groups. The other category includes species of insects which
use excreted human feces as a place to nest and lay their eggs. Some of
these insects and/or their empty egg and pupa sacks often become
incorporated as part of the coprolite specimen and are recovered
during later coprolitic analysis. Once the analyst identifies these
coprophagous insect types then they can be disregarded as being
incidental to the understanding of prehistoric man’s actual diet practices.
ENDOPARASITES AND ECTOPARASITES

Human coprolites can sometimes contain the.remains of endoparasites such as the actual parasites, parasite eggs and/or protozoan cysts
which can provide certain clues as to the overall health of the individual who excreted the feces. Callen and Cameron (1960) found
tapeworm eggs in human feces, 3,000-5,000 years old from Huaca
Prieta Cave in Peru; Samuels (1965) found pinworm eggs in 1,000 year
old human coprolites recovered from sites at Mesa Verde, Colorado;

22

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and Moore, Fry and Englert (1969) found the eggs of the thornyheaded worm in 10,000 year old prehistoric hum’an feces from Danger
Cave, Utah. Not only can these endoparasites help us to measure the
hygienic habits and overall health of ancient man but they also provide clues as to the antiquity and geographical distribution of specific
organisms that infect man.
The ectoparasites that infect man such as ticks, mites, lice and fleas
can sometimes appear in human feces. These organisms tend to concentrate mainly in man’s hair and during grooming it would not have
been uncommon for prehistoric man to catch and eat one or more of
these ectoparasites. Callen (1967a) found several ticks (Fig. 3,c) in
6,000 year old coprolites from Mexico and Samuels (1965) found
mites in prehistoric human coprolites from Mesa Verde, Colorado. In
other studies Yarnell (1969) found mites in human coprolites from
Salts Cave, Kentucky while Fry (1969) found the remains of lice and
lice eggs in 3,000 year old human feces from Danger Cave, Utah. The
remains of ectoparasites, like those of the endoparasites, help to
identify the types of parasites that infected prehistoric man, how far
back in time they were associated with man and the geographical
range of these parasites.
NON-ORGANIC COMPONENTS

Coprolites often contain a number of non-organic items such as dirt,
rocks, sand and chemical residues. Like the organic components,
these items have great interpretative value.
Sand, dirt and grit found in human coprolites could come from
several sources. Some of the dirt and grit could have become attached
to the outside of the feces at the time it was excreted. Other grit in feces
could result from the eating of dirt or from the eating of foods containing grit. Callen (1969) has noted that some of the prehistoric human
coprolites he examined contained considerable amounts of dirt. Callen and Cameron (1960) had suggested earlier that this may have
resulted from the eating of dirt as seasoning, or the medicinal eating of
dirt for its suspected curative powers. Smaller amounts of dirt and grit
could become ingested inadvertently along with the eating of stoneground seeds, meat or plant foods roasted on hot coals and in the
drinking of silt-laden water.
Occasionally, small chips of stone occur in prehistoric human
coprolites. At first these were not regarded as important yet recent
ethnographic studies among the Australian aborigines (Gould 1968)
and among certain American Indian groups (Hester 1973) suggest that
such chips may result from the practice of using one’s teeth to retouch

COPROLITE ANALYSIS

23

the cutting edges of stone tools. In several prehistoric human coprolites from Hogup Cave, Utah, Fry (1969) found tiny chips of obsidian
and chalcedony. A similar occurrence of sma!l obsidian chips was
found by Nissen (1973) in a prehistoric human coprolite from Bamert
Cave, California. These small chips are not the kind of item one might
expect to find in a human coprolite unless it could be explained as the
byproduct of stone tool retouching using one’s teeth.
Human feces also contain certain inorganic substances that are
secreted into the intestinal tract and become incorporated into the
feces. These substances include phosphates, calcium, potassium,
sodium, iron and other trace elements. Chemical tests of prehistoric
human feces will reveal the percentages of these substances found in
the specimen yet these data are limited in value since they are dependent upon a number of variables. To use this type of chemical information one must be able to accurately reconstruct precisely what
foods were eaten and in what proportions; the pH (degree of acidity or
alkalinity) of the local water sources and the amount of water ingested; and the amount and frequency of urine and perspiration
excreted.
Occasionally one will find human coprolites that contain masses of
charcot-leyden crystals. These small inorganic crystals often form in
the intestinal tract as a result of severe diarrhea or dysentery and when
found in human feces can be used to infer this type of condition.
Heizer and Napton (1969) noted that in one of the Lovelock Cave
human coprolites these types of crystals were present. This led them
to suggest that perhaps some of those early inhabitants might have
suffered from intestinal amebiasis resulting from infection by the
endoparasite Entamoeba histolytica.

SUMMARY
The wealth of information that can be recovered from the analysis of
human coprolites can assist the archeologist in many ways. Fossil
pollen trapped in coprolites can offer clues as to certain diet preferences, possible seasonality of site occupancy, and inferences as to the
paleoenvironmental conditions. What types of foods were eaten by
prehistoric man and in some cases how he prepared them would be
especially evident by the presence of seeds that had been pounded,
ground and/or roasted. Other items often found in human coprolites
include pieces of feathers, hair, shell fragments and insect chitin.
These result from the eating of meat and can be used to identify the
actual meat sources and suggest the importance of meat as a dietary
item. Parasites in prehistoric human coprolites indicate the probable

24

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

health of the individual. Occurrence of pinworms, tapeworms and
thorny-headed worms in ancient human feces show that in some areas
of the world these parasites long have been associated with man. And
finally, the non-organic portion of human coprolites (such as sand,
small rocks, stone chips and dirt) can be used to infer practices such as
dirt eating and using one’s teeth to retouch the cutting edges of certain
stone tools.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I wish to thank Harry J. Shafer and Glenna Williams-Dean for their helpful suggestions in the preparation of this manuscript.

COPROLITE ANALYSIS

25

REFERENCES CITED

Ambro, Richard D.
1967 Dietary-Technological-Ecological Aspects of Lovelock Cave Coprolites. University of California Archeological Survey Reports, No. 70,
pp. 37-48.
Baegert, J. J.
1952 Observations on Lower California: Notes and Translations by M.
Brandenburg and C. Baumann. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Barrows, D. P.
1900 The Ethnobotany of the Cahuilla Indians of Southern California. Ph.D.
dissertation on file at the University of Chicago Library.
Blankinship, J. W.
1905 Native Economic Plants of Montana. Montana Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin No. 56.
Brown, R.
1868 On the Vegetable Products used by the Northwest American Indians,
as Food and Medicine, in the Arts, and in Superstitious Rites.
Botanical Society of Edinburgh Transactions (1866-1868) Vol. 9, pp.
378-396.
Bryant, Vaughn M., Jr.
1969 Late Fullglacial and Postglacial Pollen Analysis of Texas Sediments.
Ph.D. dissertation on file at the University of Texas at Austin Library.
1974a Prehistoric Diet in Southwest Texas: The Coprolite Evidence.
American Antiquity, Vol. 39, No. 3, pp. 407-420.
1974b Pollen Analysis of Prehistoric Human Feces from Mammoth Cave,
Kentucky. Archeology of the Mammoth Cave Area, pp. 203-209.
Academic Press, New York.
n.d. Analysis of Human Coprolites from Ayacucho, Peru. (unpublished
manuscript).
Bryant, Vaughn M., Jr. and R. K. Holz
1968 The Role of Pollen in the Reconstruction of Past Environments.
Pennsylvania Geographer, Vol. 6, No. 1, pp. 11-19.
Bryant, Vaughn M., Jr. and Donald A. Larson
1968 Pollen Analysis of the Devil’s Mouth Site, Val Verde County, Texas.
In: The Devil’s Mouth Site, The Third Season, 1967 by William M.
Sorrow. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No. 14,
pp. 57-7O.
Callen, Eric O.
1963 Diet as Revealed by Coprolites. Science and Archeology, pp. 186-194.
London.
1965 Food Habits of some pre-Columbian Indians. Economic Botany, Vol.
19, No. 4, pp. 335-343.
1967a Analysis of the Tehuacan Coprolites. The Prehistory of the Tehuacan
Valley: Vol. I. Environment and Subsistence, pp. 261-289. University
of Texas Press, Austin.
1967b The First New World Cereal. American Antiquity, Vol. 32, No. 4, pp.
535-538.
1969 Les Coprolithes de la cabane acheuleenne du Lazaret: Analyse et
Diagnostic. Memoires de la Societe Prehistorique Francaise. Vol. 7,
pp. 123-124.

26

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Callen, Eric O. and T. W. M. Cameron
1960 A Prehistoric Diet Revealed in Coprolites. The New Scientist, Vol. 8,
No. 190, pp. 35-40.
Callen, Eric O. and P. S. Martin
1969 Plant Remains in Some Coprolites from Utah. American Antiquity,
Vol. 34, No. 3, pp. 329-331.
Castetter, E. F.
1935 Uncultivated Native Plants used as Sources of Food. New Mexico
University Bulletin, No. 266.
Castetter, E. F. and W. H. Bell
1942 Pima and Papago Indian Agriculture. University of New Mexico
Press, Albuquerque.
Cowan, Richard A.
1967 Lake-Margin Ecological Exploitation in the Great Basin as Demonstrated by an Analysis of Coprolites from Lovelock Cave, Nevada.
University of California Archeological Survey Reports, No. 70, pp.
21-36.
Curtin, L. S. M.
1949 By the Prophet of the Earth. San Vicente Foundation, Santa Fe.
Douglas, Charles L.
1969 Analysis of Hairs in Lovelock Cave Coprolites. Archeological and
Paleobotanical Investigations in Lovelock Cave, Nevada. KroeberAnthropological Society Papers, Special Publication No. 2, pp. 1-8.
Fry, Gary F.
1969 Prehistoric Diet at Danger Cave, Utah as Determined by the Analysis of
Coprolites. MA thesis on file at the University of Utah Library.
1970 Prehistoric Human Ecology in Utah based on the Analysis of Coprolites. Ph.D. dissertation on file at the University of Utah Library.
Gould, R. A.
1968 Chipping Stones in the Outback. Natural History, Vol. 77, No. 2, pp.
42-49.
Hall, Henry J.
1972 Diet and Disease at Clyde’s Cavern, Utah: As Revealed by Paleoscatology. MA thesis on file at the University of Utah Library.
Harshberger, J. W.
1896 The Purpose of Ethnobotany. American Antiquarian, Vol. 17, No. 2,
pp. 73-81.
Heizer, Robert F.
1960 Physical Analysis of Habitation Residues. Viking Fund Publication in
Anthropology No. 28, pp. 93-157.
1967 Analysis of Human Coprolites from a Dry Nevada Cave. University of
California Archeological Survey Reports, No. 70, pp. 1-20.
1969 The Anthropology of Prehistoric Great Basin Human Coprolites.
Science and Archeology (2nd ed.), pp. 244-250. London.
Heizer, Robert F. and L. K. Napton
1969 Biological and Cultural Evidence from Prehistoric Human Coprolites.
Science, Vol. 165, No. 3893, pp. 563-568.
Hester, Thomas R.
1973 A Supplementary Note on Flint-Chipping with the Teeth. Newsletter
of Lithic Technology, Vol. 2, No. 1-2, p. 23.

COPROLITE ANALYSIS

27

Jennings, Jesse D.
1957 Danger Cave. University of Utah Anthropological Papers, No. 27.
Jones, Volney H.
1936 The Vegetal Remains of Newt Kash Hollow Shelter. University of
Kentucky Reports in Archeology and Anthropology, Vol. 3, No. 4, pp.
147-165.
Leakey, Mary D.
1971 Excavations in Beds I and II, 1960-1963. Cambridge University Press.
Loud, L. L. and M. R. Harrington
1929 Lovelock Cave. University of California Publications in American
Archeology and Ethnology, Vol. 25, No. 1.
MacNeish, Richard S.
1958 Preliminary Archeological Investigations in the Sierra de Tamaulipas,
Mexico.American Philosophical Society Transactions Vol. 44, No. 5.
Martin, Paul S. and F. W. Sharrock
1964 Pollen Analysis of Prehistoric Human Feces: A New Approach to
Ethnobotany. American Antiquity, Vol. 30, No. 2, pp. 168-180.
Moore, John G., Gary F. Fry and E. Englert
1969 Thorny-Headed Worm Infection in North American Prehistoric Man.
Science, Voh 163, pp. 1324-1325.
Napton, Lewis K.
1969 The Lacustrine Subsistence Pattern in the Desert West. Archeological
and Paleobiological Imrestigations in Lovelock Cave, Nevada. Kroeber
Anthropological Society Papers, Special Publication No. 2, pp. 1-98.
Napton, Lewis K. and O. A. Brunetti
1969 Paleoornithology of Love!ock Cave Coprolites. Archeological and
Paleobiological Investigations in Lovelock Cave, Nevada. KroeberAnthropological Society Papers, Special Publications No. 2, pp. 9-18.
Napton, Lewis K. and Gerald Kelso
1969 Preliminary Palynological Analysis of Lovelock Cave Coprolites. Archeological and Paleobiological Investigations in Lovelock Cave,
Nevada. Kroeber Anthropological Society Papers, Special Publications No. 2, pp. 19-27.
Newberry, J. S.
1887 Food and Fiber Plants of the North American Indians.Popular Science
Monthly, Vol. 32, pp. 31-46.
Nissen, Karen
1973 Analysis of Human Coprolites from Bamert Cave, Amador County,
California. The Archeology of Bamert Cave, Area dor County, California (R. F. Heizer and T. R. Hester)., pp. 65-71. University of California
Archaeological Research Facility, Berkeley.
Oser, B. L.
1965 Hawk’s Physiological Chemistry. Fourteenth edition. New York.
Palmer, E.
1878 Plants Used by the Indians of the United States. American Naturalist,
Voh 12, pp. 593-606.
Riskind, David H.
1970 Pollen Analysis of Human’Coprolites from Parida Cave. Archeological
Investigations at Parida Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Papers of the
Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No. 19, pp. 89-101.

28

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Roust, Norman L.
1967 Preliminary Examination of Prehistoric Human Coprolites from Four
Western Nevada Caves. University of California Archeological Survey
Report, No. 70, pp. 49-88.
Samuels, R.
1965 Parasitological Study of Long-Dried Fecal Samples. Society for
American Archeology Memoirs, No. 19, pp. 175-179.
Schoenwetter, James
1974 Pollen Analysis of Prehistoric Human Feces from Salts Cave Kentucky. The Archeology of the Mammoth Cave Area. Academic Press
(in press).
Trevor-Deutsch, Burleigh
n.d. L’Etude des Coprolites. Methods en Prehistoire (H. de Lumley, editor).
Marseille (in press).
Tubbs, D. Y. and R. Berger
1967 The Viability of Pathogens in Ancient Human Coprolites. University
of California Archeological Survey Reports, No. 70, pp. 89-92.
Wakefield, E. F. and S. C. Dellinger
1936 Diet of the Bluff Dwellers of the Ozark Mountains and its Skeletal
Effects. Annals of Internal Medicine, Vol. 9, pp. 1412-1418.
Watson, Patty Jo and Richard A. Yarnell
1966 Archeological and Paleoethnobotanical Investigations in Salts Cave,
Mammoth Cave National Park, Kentucky. American Antiquity, Vol.
31, No. 6, pp. 842-849.
Webb, W. S. and R. S. Baby
1957 The Adena People, No. 2. Ohio State University Press. Columbus.
Yarnell, Richard A.
1969 Contents of Human Paleofeces. The Prehistory of Salts Cave, Kentucky. Reports of Investigations, No. 16, pp. 41-56. Illinois State
Museum.
Young, B. H.
1910 The Prehistoric Men of Kentucky. Filson Club Publication, No. 25.
Louisville.
Texas A&M University

A MODEL FOR CULTURAL SUCCESSION
FOR THE COASTAL BEND AREA OF TEXAS*
JAMES E. CORBIN

ABSTRACT
A model for cultural succession in the coastal bend area of the Texas
coast is presented. Emphasis is placed on temporal and spatial changes of
artifacts in the time period from 2,000-3,000 B.C. to A.D. 1200. Seriation
and matrix analysis were used in chronological ordering of the artifactual
materials. Definitions of the Aransas and Rockport foci are re-examined
and a discussion of ethnohistoric peoples on this portion of the coast is
provided.

The purpose of this paper is to outline briefly a model for cultural
succession in the area of the Texas coast between and including Baffin
Bay and the Brazos River (Fig. 1). Although it is concerned with
cultural succession, it will not in reality be, for the most part, dealing
with culture per se at all. Rather, this discussion will consider the
distribution in space and changes through time of particular artifacts.
Although these are tangibles (artifacts) which may or may not reflect
real culture change, the establishment of the order of their changes
through time can be valuable tools to the archeologist.
For the present we cannot consider the entire temporal span of the
area with which we are concerned because we lack sufficient data.
Artifacts that might date into the so-called Paleo-American stage are
few and scattered. There are no radiocarbon dates to show that there is
any real time depth for coastal adaptations in this area, yet surely the
coast was exploited very early. At present, this author does not think
the sites have been found which would reflect this early adaptation,
and because of certain geologic and environmental changes (especially the rise in sea level) these may never be found.
In discussing the culture complexes in this area which would fall
into what Suhm, et. al., (1954) have called the Archaic, our concern is
with materials that date from ca. 2,000-3,000 B.C. to ca. A.D. 1200. The
early dates given are only guesses, for there is only one good radiocarbon date and that is for the end of the Archaic. One is tempted to date
coastal cultures in this area with correspondences to the interior and
south, but at this point there are indications that this area was out of
phase with most of the rest of Texas, and it would be wrong to make
across-the-board equations unless there are other data to back them
up.
*Paper presented at the Conference on the Archeology of the Gulf Coast, Beaumont,
Texas, 1971.

30

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

o"

TEXAS

Gulf

Coast

20

FIGURE 1. The Coastal Bend Area of Texas

CULTURAL SUCCESSION

31

To date, the only archeological complex that has been defined for
the Archaic is the Aransas Focus. T. N. Campbell (1947a) described
this complex on the basis of his analysis of the materials recovered
from the Johnson site (Fig. 2) on the northern portion of Live Oak
Peninsula. In a later analysis (Campbell 1947b:75) he included materials from the Kent-Crane site in the Aransas Focus. Although originally this complex was limited to that area between Corpus Christi
Bay and Guadalupe Bay, it has come to be applied to nearly all
Archaic materials between Baffin Bay and the Colorado River. This
expansion, plus the inclusion of all of the Kent-Crane site in the
complex essentially destroyed the Aransas Focus, although it has
taken a long time to realize it. At the Houston Archeological Society
Coastal Conference in 1967 this author presented some data on the
spatial distribution of certain artifacts and hinted at some temporal
distribution of these same artifacts which would 1) force an eventual
reduction of the definition of Aransas Focus, or at least a discontinuation of the term "focus", or 2) if the expanded definition was retained,
imply reference to an Aransan culture or perhaps an Aransas Aspect.
As stated earlier, this would be based primarily on changes in certain
artifacts through space and time, but may not reflect any significant
change in subsistence pattern or economic adaptation.
With this in mind, consider the projectile point types recovered at
the Johnson and Kent-Crane sites (Fig. 3), both on the north end of
Live Oak Peninsula, first noticing the differences between Johnson
and Kent-Crane as a whole. The picture is not really clear, but is
probably a reflection of the excavation techniques, particularly at the
Kent-Crane site. Two natural zones were recognized during excavation, with the thicker, lower zone being excavated in two arbitrary
vertical units. Each zone at Kent-Crane could have been divided
easily into at least three arbitrary units, possibly making the changes
through time a little clearer. This would have been particularly helpful for Level 2, for it is felt that the upper portion would be much more
like the Johnson site and the lower portion more like Zone lb. The
excavators also noted that there was a distinct stratigraphic break
between lb and 2 at the site. The absence of incised bone work in Zone
2 at Kent-Crane and in the Johnson site along with the appearance of
Catan in Zone 2 at Kent-Crane and its predominance at Johnson is
probably significant. It is possible that there could be a gap in the
archeological record between Zone 2 at Kent-Crane, and the Johnson
site.
Collections from some sites with shorter temporal duration tend to
clarify things at this point. The materials from SP-40 (Fig. 4,a), on the
south end of Live Oak Peninsula, are very reminiscent of Zone 2 of

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

32

\
~o÷\°°

TEXAS
Gulf

Coast

JEC

FIGURE 2. Location of the Kent-Crane and Johnson Sites

CULTURAL SUCCESSION

33

KENT-CRANE
"1
Z
o

oZ

rn

o

N

O

2
.u
Z

Z
m
w

:

P_

I

P~

:¢X>
m

INCISED

BONE

WORK

FIGURE 3. Kent-Crane and Johnson Site Sequence

34

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Kent-Crane. The projectile point types are duplicated at two other
small sites in the immediate vicinity of SP-40. Approximately threefourths of a mile away is another site, SP-43 (Fig. 4,b), but with a dart
point assemblage that is quite different and analogous to the Johnson
site. The Archaic zone at SP-43, excavated by Dr. D. A. Story (1968),
has a radiocarbon date (average of four dates) of ca. A.D. 1200, which
probably indicates the termination of the Archaic for this area. The
SP-43 collection is duplicated by materials from SP-53, the Edwards
Field site (Fig. 5), several miles to the north. There are more of the
small, side-notched points reminiscent of Fairland types, but a few of
these occur at SP-43 and at the Johnson site. There are other temporal
differences that can be noted: conch columella gouges and conch
adzes are common in Zones la and lb at Kent-Crane, while only a very
few occur in Zone 2 and at the Johnson site. There was one adze
recovered at SP-43 (i.e. late) and no gouges were recovered there or at
SP-53. Five gouges were collected at the earlier SP-40.
The above data seem sufficient to convince one that we are dealing
with considerable temporal change as far as the occurrence of some
cultural materials within what has been called the Aransas Focus is
concerned. Some simple distributional data (Fig. 6) will help to
finalize arguments on the Aransas Focus. Fig. 6 shows the distribution of dart point types north and south of Corpus Christi Bay and the
Nueces River. These data are based on the total sample available for
study in an area from the north side of Copano Bay to approximately
one-half the distance between Corpus Christi Bay and Baffin Bay. The
figure shows that unstemmed (Abasolo to Pandora) forms predominate south of Corpus Christi Bay, and stemmed (Darl-Bulverde) forms
predominate north of the Bay. The columns in the right half of Fig. 6
exhibit this same distribution, but in this case the initial collection
was divided and the percentage of each type was derived for each half
so as to show the relative importance of each type north and south of
Corpus Christi Bay. This author believes this north-south dichotomy
to represent some sort of real cultural line which will eventually be
defined. The actual line is probably a little south of the Corpus Christi
Bay and the Nueces River. lit is interesting to note the occurrence of
some of these projectile point types a little farther south, in the
vicinity of Baffin Bay. Hester (1969) records Matamoros as representing 37%, Tortugas 10%, Ensor 2%, Abasolo 2%, with all other types
(the majority of these being stemless), less than 2%.] Nunley and
Hester (1966:251) have demonstrated an almost identical east-west
line across Dimmit County, separating essentially the same projectile
point types. Again, this line runs generally several miles south of the
Nueces River. It would appear that what we are seeing here, as above,

CULTURAL SUCCESSION

35

:/i~¸~

B

0

1
inches

FIGURE 4. Projectile Point Types; A: 41SP40

B: 41SP43

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

36

J
f

iI

\
\

I

0
inches

FIGURE 5. Projectile Point Types, 41SP53

CULTURAL SUCCESSION

37

is a fluctuating cultural boundary (centered around the Nueces River)
which represents the movements of two groups (one based on subsistence in a mesic climate, and the other existing in a more xeric
environment) influenced by fluctuating ecological boundaries. This
is of course highly speculative, but is an intriguing possibility.
Thus it may be seen that what was originally defined as theAransas
Focus is much more complex than believed at its inception, both
temporally and spatially. Without taxing the data too much, it is
suggested that one of the two following statements is probably more
representative of the prehistoric cultural situation for the Archaic on
this portion of the Texas coast than earlier concepts:
I. Retain the concept of anAransas Focus, but limit its application
to the most recent archeological manifestation of an Archaic cultural
adaptation to a coastal environment. To be more specific, the term
should denote only the type site (Johnson) and those other sites
containing the predominant projectile point assemblage of Ensor,
Catan, Darl-Fairland, Matamoros. Spatially the focus would be limited in its southward extent to just south of Corpus Christi Bay and,
until more data can be presented, should not be extended north of
Guadalupe Bay (Fig. 7). The Aransas Focus was preceded by another
cultural complex which is represented by Zones la and lb of KentCrane and other sites (like the Kinney Bayou sites [SP-40, etc.]) which
contain the projectile point assemblage of Bulverde, Palmillas, and
Matamoros, along with a high percentage of shell tools (gouges and
adzes) and incised decorated bone work. Its southern limit is the same
as for the Aransas Focus. For the present, it is impossible to comment
on the northern range of this complex, but it probably is not north of
the Brazos-Colorado River vicinity. A third complex or focus may be
proposed for the coastal area south of Corpus Christi Bay to and
including the Baffin Bay area. The only date we can apply to anyof
these is that of ca. A.D. 1200 for the termination of the Aransas Focus.
II. Reject the concept of anAransas Focus, but use the termAransas
to designate the Archaic culturaladaptation to the coastal environment of this portion of Texas, i.e. an Aransas complex. New designations for the spatial and temporal differences could be adapted or
dispensed with for lack of sufficient data.
Stratigraphically overlying the Archaic cultural materials at four of
the excavated sites in the area are materials which Suhm, et. al., place
in a generalized late prehistoric category called the Neo-American. In
the central coastal area this period is signaled by the appearance of
arrowpoints and ceramics which are attributed to an archeological
complex known as theRockportFocus. Although originally proposed
by Sayles as occurring along the entire Texas coast, the area was

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

38

DART
CENTRAL

POINT STYLES
TEXAS GULF COAST

Distribution

Distribution

,~ Frequency
o

o

AREA

Sth

I’a

Types
Pandora

rth

Refugio

Tortugas

2 8

19

16

9

Tortugas

14

4

20

Refuglo

8

37

Palmillas

3

Catan

.
~

"

3

%,

70

°7°

Catan

Matamoros

rth

Matamoros

)0

0

utt

Types

)0
7°

I

AREA

17

~

0
".7.
d
i u

Abasolo

6

3
o

t

Darl

Palmillas

Ensor

0

~

Bulverde

U

9

50

Darl

4

81

Ensor

3

16

90

Bulverde

0

lO

100

Falrland

0

9

/

JEC

FIGURE 6. Dart Point Distributions and Frequencies

reduced by Suhm, et. al. to include just that area in which the distinctive Rockport ceramics occur (Fig. 8), i.e., from approximately Baffin
Bay to the Colorado River vicinity. For whatever the Rockport Focus
may be, it is felt this spatial definition is still valid. The real question
is concerned with the definition of the Rockport Focus. Suhm, et. al.,
listed a number of arrowpoint types as diagnostic of this culture,
specifically Perdiz, Scallorn, Cliffton, and Fresno. As knowledge of
the area has increased, this author has become convinced that the
interpretation of the data concerning projectile points is erroneous.

CULTURAL SUCCESSION

39

D

.o

TEXAS
Gulf

Coast

JEC

FIGURE 7. Proposed Aransas Complex-Culture Area

40

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TEXAS
Gulf

Coast

JEC

FIGURE 8. Rockport Focus Area

CULTURAL SUCCESSION

~
50-

41

I ~

-~

~

~.

Z~4
~,

~

n-

I

oFIGURE 9. Arrowpoint types, frequencies and distributions

Recent work in the area, which included a survey of the south end of
Live Oak Peninsula (Corbin 1963) and another of the northern end of
Padre Island (Campbell 1964), greatly increased our knowledge of the
area and it was felt that there were perhaps enough data for some fairly
sophisticated analyses. These analyses and their results were presented in professional meetings in 1967 and 1968. Since then, work
has continued, the results of which, along with new information from

42

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the area, have convinced this author that the data are valid and should
be included here. It was, in fact, these studies that prompted much of
this re-evaluation of the archeology of the area.
The study was confined originally to the area between Baffin Bay
and Saint Charles Bay, for which there was the most and best information, and was restricted to materials from surface collections and
excavated sites whose intra-site control relegated them to this status.
First, it was important to determine what projectile point types existed in the area and something about their frequency and distribution. Re-analysis of earlier data along with new information revealed
the types (Fig. 9) which would categorize adequately what actually
occurred in the area. The relationships between these types proved to
be very interesting. Simple tabulations and percentages showed a
picture (Fig. 9) somewhat opposed to original concepts. The shaded
bars show percentage relationships between types: Perdiz (40%) and
Fresno (28%) proved to be the predominant types, with Scallorn and
Cliffton and all others occurring as 5% or less of the sample. The
extended bars (light) show at what percent of the sites the various
types occur; thus it may be readily seen that only Perdiz and Fresno
enjoy a wide distribution throughout the area. The next step was to
carry out a seriation analysis paying particular attention to the relationship between Perdiz and Fresno (Fig. 10). Arranging of horizontal
site bars was done without knowing site identities and by trying to get
the smoothest curves for Perdiz and Fresno. The problem then was to
orient the resulting graph. Fortunately there were some clues with
which the orientation illustrated could be made, with some confidence as to its correctness. First, sites 3 (41SPll) and 1 (41NU1)
contained historic materials which seemed to be associated with
aboriginal materials. Incised sherds occurred at these sites along with
the only occurrence of the bulbar-stem arrowpoint type. Recently two
more sites with this same assemblage have been found. At one,
41NUll, on Oso Creek (Fig. 11), the association was on the surface as
with the other two sites, but at 41CL2 on Guadalupe Bay, the same
association was recovered in a controlled excavation by C. A.
Calhoun. Secondly, the clustering of the popularity of the Scallorn
type at the opposite end of the chart (Fig. 10) from 1 and 3 at a time
when Perdiz is not a major type would seem to corroborate data from
other areas; Scallorn precedes Perdiz.
To check to see whether any other ordering could be obtained, the
data were incorporated in two other systems used for seriation. The
ordering obtained with matrix analysis is identical with the original
study with the exception of the reversal of sites 6 and 7. The data were
then plotted on a tripolar graph (after Meighan 1960), the result being
identical to that of the matrix analysis (Fig. 12).

CULTURAL SUCCESSION

43

--N~O77VOS~

w
l_J

FIGURE 10. Seriation Graph

>_J
n~
w

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

44

\

\

\
TEXAS
Gulf

Coast

JEC

FIGURE 11. Sites with the bulbar-stemmed arrowpoints and incised
ceramics associated with historic (Spanish) artifacts.

CULTURAL SUCCESSION

45

Before constructing this portion of our model around the sequence
above, a short digression concerning some aspects of Rockport
ceramics which will apply to the problem must be made. One of the
distinctive features of these ceramics is the use of asphalt for waterproofing (?), patching, and decoration. It has long been hypothesized
that this feature was intrusive from the Huastecan area where
asphalt-decorated ceramics occurred. No one has bothered to discuss
the fact that there is no correspondence whatever between the simple
lines, dots, squiggles, and lip painting of Rockport ceramics, and the
complex designs that occur in the Huastecan wares. If the Archaic
culture peoples preceding the Rockport culture were introduced to
ceramics and adopted the idea, why would they not coat pottery with
the abundant asphalt as they did their basketry? It is beginning to look
as though this is a more plausible explanation than one of diffusion
from the Huasteca.
As for the origin of Rockport ceramics, the earlier hypotheses
(Campbell 1962:335) for diffusion from the upper coast are still wellfounded. Story’s excavation (Story 1968) at the Anaqua site may have
provided an immediate source. The cultural zone, representing
primarily a single component, contained sherds from plain, sandy
paste vessels in association with Scallorn and Granbury arrowpoints.
The ceramics seem to have affinities with the east, and perhaps with a
site mentioned by George Martin on Saint Charles Bay (Martin, n.d.)
which contained no "pointed-stem" (Perdiz) arrowpoints, but
expanding-stem forms (Scallorn) in association with plain, undecorated pottery. It is believed by this author that these sites (Fig. 13) and
the culture they represent are significant to the understanding of the
archeology of the area under consideration.
Incised designs occur not infrequently on sherds of Rockport ware,
particularly in the Guadalupe-Matagorda Bay area. A brief study on
the possible origins of the designs proved very interesting. It has
always been thought the designs were related to those that appear on
the Goose Creek wares of the Galveston Bay area. With the development of Aten’s Galveston Bay ceramic sequence this relationship can
be made more specific (Fig. 14). All of the incised designs on Rockport
wares which show similarities with Galveston Bay ceramics occur in
Aten’s Old River Phase, dated from ca. A.D. 1400 to A.D. 1700. In Fig.
14, the designs on the left (Group I) of the Rockport section are almost
one-to-one correspondences, while the center forms (Group V) are
very closely related. Only the designs to the right (Groups II, III, IV in
Fig. 14) do not seem to have their origin to the east. Comparison with
some unpublished sherds from McNeish’s sites in northern
Tamaulipas indicates a possible direction in which to look for these
design elements.

46

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c
OTHER

FIGURE 12. Tripolar Seriation graph

The next portion of the model can now be constructed around the
seriation graph (Fig. 9). Ca. A.D. 1250 (C14 date for the Archaic zone at
site No. 3 on the graph) new cultural influences were felt in the area.
This resulted in the introduction of ceramics and the bow and arrow
and probably other material and non-material cultural aspects. This
might be a result of:
A. Acceptance of these forms by the indigenous culture after continual contact with cultures having these items.
B. An influx of new peoples to the area who made a similar
economic adjustment to the coastal environment, or
C. A combination of the above, which was probably the case, but
with greater emphasis on A.

CULTURAL SUCCESSION

47

The late occurrence of these artifacts represents some time lag for
this area as ceramics occurred to the east as early as A.D. 100; the bow
and arrow appeared as early as A.D. 900 there, and ca. A.D. 500 (?) to
the west in central Texas. The concept of the bow and arrow may have
come from several directions; thus it appears that two of the predominant arrowpoint forms (Fresno, Padre) in the early portion of this
period are but a continuation of the diminution that Jelks (Suhm, et.
al. 1954) saw in Tortugas-Matamoros, Abasolo-Catan types in South
Texas. The triangular form (Fresno) becomes the predominant type
along with Scallorn, which (viz., at Anaqua and at Martin’s site on
Saint Charles Bay) may relate to the introduction of ceramics. Fresno
is replaced by Perdiz, which eventually almost completely dominates. In the meantime a distinctive ceramic ware with asphalt coatings and designs has evolved. Sometime after A.D. 1400 (probably
1500-1600) incised designs began to be employed as a minor ceramic
decorative technique. The introduction of a new projectile point form
(bulbar-stem) and contact with Europeans (or at least with European
goods) appear to have occurred at about this same time or shortly
thereafter.
Since very little of the above matches what has been defined as the
Rockport Focus, it is suggested that for the present the term "focus" be
discontinued and the phrase Rockport culture be used to designate
that late prehistoric cultural adaptation to a coastal environment in
the area between Baffin Bay and the Brazos River. This culture is
typified artifactually in archeological components by the occurrence
of Rockport ware ceramics and most commonly arrowpoint types
Perdiz andFresno. The Rockport culture dates between ca. A.D. 1250
and 1600-1700. Whether this culture may be continued any further
into the historic period is the final problem.
It would seem that the task of historical reconstruction would be
somewhat simplified when that time in the past for which there are
written records of the area with which we are concerned is considered. As is well known, the situation is only more complicated, for
we are faced with the task of matching historical facts with the
archeological record.
It has been mentioned that there are sites in this vicinity which
contain aboriginal materials mixed with the remains of European
manufactured goods. Thus, at this point in time (ca. 170"0) we are
dealing with the cultural remains of a people who were beginning to
obtain goods from the French and the Spanish (either in person or
from shipwrecks) and these contacts should be recorded to some
extent in the historical record. The model outlined above cited the
distribution of Rockport ware ceramics as the delimiting factor for the

48

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TEXAS

Gulf

Coast

JEC

FIGURE 13. Anaqua site and G. C. Martin’s Saint Charles Bay Site

CULTURAL SUCCESSION

49

area occupied by an archeological culture or aspect designated as
Rockport. Since there are written accounts by various explorers in this
area, it would seem an easy matter to connect the people recorded for
this area in the 1700’s and later as being the historic counterparts of
Rockport culture. Indeed the various Karankawan tribes have been
linked, albeit somewhat tentatively, with the prehistoric Rockport
materials. Suhm, et. al. (1954) state that it "seems probable" tha~ this
is the case, while Campbell (1958) says that at least part of the Rockport materials represent the Karankawas. Later he states the linkage
between the two as a fact, although some of the materials may be due
to Coahuiltecan groups. The only problem with the above is that at
least one of the major Karankawan groups, the Coaques (or Cocos), is
placed north of the Brazos, specifically along the southern shore of
Galveston Bay (Newcomb 1961). Presumably, Newcomb places this
group here because he assumes the Cocos of later chroniclers can be
equated with the Coaques of Cabeza de Vaca. As noted above, Rockport ceramics stop just short of the Brazos River. In this light we
would have to say that Rockport culture may represent a part of the
historic Karankawa groups. This may or may not be the case, but let us
examine the problem further.
Cabeza de Vaca, not having a Texas map, did not know where on the
Texas coast he landed and neither exactly do we. Using descriptions
of rivers crossed, most historians, with the exception of Bancroft,
identify de Vaca’s Isla del Malhado as Galveston Island. If this is the
case, and if the Caoque (or Capoque) he was with can be identified
with the Caux of Belle Isle, the Quaoquis of Father Douay, and the
Cocos, Cocoas, and Cokes of later Texian and Spanish chroniclers,
then sometime between 1540 and 1740 they moved from the vicinity
of Galveston Bay south to the region between Matagorda Bay and the
Brazos.
If the location of de Vaca’s Caoque (ca. 1540) and the assumption
that Caoque equals Cocos (or Cocoas, Cokes).is accepted, then this
movement and other pertinent correspondences may be documented
as follows:
1) The San Xavier missions on the San Gabriel River were established in 1746 and continued until 1755. One of the missions contained several groups of Karankawas. The Spanish chroniclers note
that in 1749 the Cocos left the mission to return to their homeland
between the Brazos and Colorado Rivers (Gilmore 1969:19). Test
excavations at the particular site that housed the Karankawan groups
recovered sandy paste sherds decorated with asphaltum
(Ibid.:ill-114). These and a few other sherds (with lip notching) fall
into the Rockport ware category.

50

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY ’

"6r~

0
f~

0

g
rl

r3

S

(3

--t

_

B

rn
0

r3
rn

o
rn

FIGURE 14. Incised motifs for Rockport and Galveston Bay ceramics

2) Mission Nuestra Senora del Rosario de los Cujanes was established on Colletes Creek in present Goliad County in 1754. This
mission was to house the five Karankawan bands (which include the
Cocos). The Cocos were in residence until 1797 when they left for
another mission (Bolton 1906). Analysis of the ceramics excavated
from the site (Green n.d.) revealed two distinct wares were present.

CULTURAL SUCCESSION

51

One of these wares fits the description in all respects of Rockport
ware. Decorative techniques are limited primarily to asphalt painting
although one incised sherd (similar to Fig. 14,2) was recovered.
3) Lafora’s map of 1767 (Editor’s note in Berlandier 1969:114)
shows the Cocos west of the Brazos.
4) Berlandier (1969:114) states that in 1830 the Cocos’ territory was
between the Rio Nogales (?) and the Colorado del Texas.
5) Lino Sanchez y Topia’s watercolor of the Cocos for Berlandier
shows a blue circle tattooed beneath the eyes of the Indians (Berlandier 1969:Fig. 16, sketch made in 1830).
6) Mrs. Oliver, Gatschet’s informant on the Karankawa (Gatschet,
1891) lived on a ranch at Tres Palacios on the east side of Matagorda
Bay from 1838 to 1848. It is from this group of Karankawa that she
learned to speak Karankawan and this corpus was the basis for
Gatschet’s linguistic analysis of the Karankawan language. Mrs.
Oliver states that "a small circle of blue tattooed over either cheekbone" was a distinctive mark of these people (Gatschet 1891:19). Mrs.
Oliver’s Karankawa decorated their pottery with asphaltum (Ibid.:59).
Thus it would indeed appear that the Cocos were located in the
vicinity of the west shore of Galveston Bay about 1540. Between 1540
and about 1760 they moved to between the Colorado and the Brazos.
The reason for this movement is not readily apparent. By ca. 1840 the
remnants of the Cocos appear to be centered around Matagorda Bay as
a result of several moves to various missions established for them by
the Spanish.
If it may be inferred that the Cocos at the time of Cabeza de Vaca or
shortly before were associated with the archeological culture, Galveston Bay Focus or a portion thereof, then the archeological record in
the present area of study would seem to substantiate the westward
movement of the Cocos as outlined below:
1) The majority of incised designs that occur on some ceramics in
Rockport culture sites (Fig. 14, 1 and 5) are identical to or very
reminiscent of designs that occur in Aten’s Old River Ceramic Phase
(ca. 1400-1700) in the Galveston Bay area (Aten 1970).
2) The incised ceramics* always occur in sites containing at least
some historic (Spanish) artifacts along with the bulbar-stemmed arrowpoint. Similar arrowpoint forms also occur in the Galveston vicinity.
*The fact that almost no ceramics (one sherd) with incised designs occur at Spanish
mission sites which were known to house Cocos would seem to indicate that they had
quit making these ceramics by ca. 1760 and were manufacturing a ware with asphalt
designs indistinguishable from the Rockport-Karankawan wares of this period.

52

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Other than the model presented above, we see only three other
alternatives at the present:
1) Cabeza de Vaca landed on Galveston Island; the Coaques are not
related to the Caux, Quoaquis, Cocos, etc., thus creating no problems,
or
2) Cabeza de Vaca landed on Matagorda Peninsula or in the vicinity (i.e. south and west of Galveston Island) and the Coaques are the
same peoples that are mentioned by later chroniclers in the vicinity of
Matagorda Bay and between there and the Brazos River.
3) The ethnographic and historical records are hopelessly scrambled and we may never be able to connect the archeological past with
the ethnographic present.
It may, of course, be that none of these alternatives is part of the final
solution. Thus it may be too late to make the necessary correspondences, and the statements on these matters must remain ones of
probabilities. This author favors the first statement, all the while
realizing that history is very seldom as we think it was or would like
for it to have been.
The preceding pages have been an attempt to reconstruct a model of
cultural succession for the central portion of the Texas coast. Although the reconstruction is essentially a reworking of earlier concepts based on more recent information, it is felt that it presents a
more logical model for this area than the original. In final analysis, it
should not be considered a complete statement, but rather a
framework on which to build and a model to be tested.

CULTURAL SUCCESSION

53

REFERENCES CITED

Aten, L. E.
1970 Coastal Southeast Texas Archeology. Unpublished manuscript, University of Texas at Austin.
Berlandier, Jean-Louis
1969 The Indians of Texas in 1830. Edited by John C. Ewers. Smithsonian
Institution Press.
Bolton, Herbert F.
1906 The Founding of the Mission Rosario. Quarterly of the Texas Historical Association, Vol. 10, No. 2.
Campbell, T. N.
1947 The Johnson Site: Type Site of the Aransas Focus of the Texas Coast.
Bulletin, Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 18,
pp. 4O-75.
1952 The Kent-Crane Site: A Shell Midden on the Texas Coast. Bulletin,
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 23, pp. 39-77.
1960 Archeology of the Central and Southern Sections of the Texas Coast.
Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 29, pp. 145-175.
1962 Origins of Pottery Types from the Coastal Bend Region of Texas.
Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 32, pp. 331-36.
1964 Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Padre Island, Texas.
Report submitted to the National Park Service.
Corbin, James E.
1963 Archeological Materials from the Northern Shore of Corpus Christi
Bay, Texas. Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 34, pp. 5-30.
Gatschet, Albert S.
1891 The Karankawa Indians, the Coastal Peoples of Texas. Papers of the
Peabody Museum of American Archeology and Ethnology, Vol. 1, No.
2.
Gilmore, Kathleen K.
1969 The San Xavier Missions: A Study in Historical Site Identification.
State Building Commission, Report No. 16.
Green, Lorraine H.
n.d. Unpublished manuscript. University of Texas at Austin.
Hester, Thomas Roy
1969 Archeological Investigations in Kleberg and Kenedy Counties, Texas.
State Building Commission, Report No. 15.
Martin, George C.
n.d. Preliminary Archeological Survey of a Portion of the Texas Coast
Made by George C. Martin and Wendell H. Potter in 1927-1928-1929.
Privately printed.
Meighan, C. E.
1960 New Methodforthe Seriation of Archeological Collections.American
Antiquity, Vol. 25, No. 4, pp. 203-214.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961 The Indians of Texas. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Nunley, Parker, and Thomas Roy Hester.
1966 Preliminary Archeological Investigations in Dimmit County, Texas.
Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 18, No. 3, pp. 233-53.

54

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Robinson, W. S.
1951 A Method for Chronologically Ordering Archeological Deposits.
American Antiquity, Vol. 16, No. 4, pp. 293-301.
Story, Dee Ann
1968 Archeological Investigations at Two Central Texas Gulf Coast Sites.
State Building Commission, Report No. 13.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Pullman, Washington

PRELIMINARY ARCHEOLOGICAL
INVESTIGATIONS IN THE
RIO GRANDE DELTA OF TEXAS*
ELTON R. PREWITT

ABSTRACT
The results of a preliminary archeological survey of portions of Cameron County, Texas, are presented in general terms. Information from the
79 Indian sites recorded during the survey is combined with information
derived from the Anderson collection made in the same area. Five types of
sites are recognized on the basis of topographical relationships. Cultural
remains are characterized by an extensive use of marine shells for tools
and ornaments. The evidence presented indicates the archeological materials represent a late prehistoric occupation of the area. Suggestions for
further research are made.

INTRODUCTION
This paper is more a statement of work thus far accomplished
within the Rio Grande Delta region and a reiteration of problems that
need to be investigated rather than a comprehensive report of the
material culture and chronology. The paper is based on a limited
surface survey of Cameron County which I conducted from March
through May, 1970, under the direction of Curtis Tunnell, State Archeologist. Funds were provided by the Texas Historical Survey
Committee (now the Texas Historical Commission). A total of 79
Indian sites was recorded during the survey.
The purpose of the survey was to attempt to determine the archeological potential of the Texas side of the Rio Grande Delta and to
formulate recommendations for further research. Prior to this field
work the bulk of the information available for the area was based on
the extensive collections made by A. E. Anderson of Brownsville.
Specific problems were presented by Anderson’s work: 1) could the
sites recorded by him be relocated? 2) if so, what effects are erosion
and agricultural practices having on them? 3) to what extent are the
sites recorded by him representative of the overall archeological picture?
Not all of these aims were accomplished by the survey. The primary
question of archeological potential was answered affirmatively.
Thirty-eight new sites were recorded and tentative patterns of site
distribution were discerned indicating that the potential for inves*Paper presented at the Conference on the Archeology of the Gulf Coast, Beaumont,
Texas, 1971.

56

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tigating specific problems and refining interpretations is good. Out of
over 60 of Anderson’s site locations visited, I was able to confirm the
continued existence of forty one of them. I was not able to pursue the
question of erosional and agricultural effects to the degree necessary
for significant conclusions. It does seem Anderson recorded a representative inventory of sites, but by no means did he record the total
number of existing sites.

ENVIRONMENT
Cameron County is included within the Rio Grande Embayment of
the Western Gulf Coast Physiographic Province as defined by Fenneman (1938:102). Blair (1950:102-105) places it within the Matamoran
District of the Tamaulipan Biotic Province. Blair singles the
Brownsville area out as a district because it is a more luxurient
brushland than the rest of the Tamaulipan Province. Dominant plants
which justify this distinction are: retama, Texas ebony, wild olive,
and knackaway. Large elms dominate the flood plain in some places,
and one species of palm reaches its northern limit at Southmost, just
downstream from Brownsville. In general, Blair characterizes the
Tamaulipan Province as semiarid and megathermal, indicating a
marked deficiency of moisture for plant growth, although there is
plant growth the year around. Predominant vegetation are: mesquite,
various Acacia and Mimosa, granjeno, cenizo, prickly pear, tasajillo,
and other thorny plants. Coastal marshes are dominated by sacahuiste
grass.
Historically, there has been an increase in the brush cover of the Rio
Grande Delta. In early historic times there was dense brush or chaparral along the Rio Grande. However, the plain away from the river was
covered with grass and motts of brush (Inglis 1964:26-27). The period
from about 1850 to 1900 marked the greatest increase in brush density
(Ibid:100). This change in the vegetation has been caused by a complicated series of events including a slight change toward greater
aridity, over-grazing, and clearing of land for agricultural purposes
(Price and Gunter 1942).
The topography of the delta is, of course, essentially flat, rising
gently westward from the Gulf shoreline. It is broken by many abandoned channels of the Rio Grande, locally called "resacas". Some of
these resacas form long narrow lakes bordered by lush tropical
growths. Others sport only occasional pools of water, flooding after
heavy rains. Many of the resacas near the coast support dense growths
of brackish-water weeds and dense brush along the edges, broken
occasionally by sacahuiste grass flats.

RIO GRANDE DELTA

57

Numerous small clay dunes (Price and Kornicker, 1961:245) line
the shore facing Laguna Madre, and are common on the east and north
edges of inland lakes. These clay dunes, locally called "lomas", are
usually about 15-20 feet high, and occasionally reach heights of over
30 feet. Several shallow lakes are scattered over the delta region, the
largest being Laguna Atascosa.
Blair (1950:103) indicates there are at least 61 species of mammals
in the Tamaulipan Biotic Province, as well as 36 species of snakes, 19
lizards, 2 land turtles, 3 urodeles, and 19 anurans. Three hundred
fifteen species of birds have been recorded since 1946 at the Laguna
Atascosa National Wildlife Refuge. An additional 15 species have
been recorded as accidental occurrences (Anonymous 1969). Animals
other than waterfowl common to the region are: dove, quail, whitetail
deer, peccary, raccoon, opossum, cottontail, jackrabbit, skunk,
coyote, bobcat, jaguarundi, ocelot, and the diamondbacked rattlesnake (Anonymous 1970).
PREVIOUS ARCHEOLOGICAL RESEARCH
he bulk of previous archeological research in the Rio Grande Delta
was done by A. E. Anderson, a civil engineer in Brownsville. From
1908 to about 1940, he made extensive systematic surface collections
from 196 sites in Cameron County, and about an equal number of sites
in adjacent Tamaulipas, Mexico. He not only carefully recorded the
exact location of sites and catalogued the specimens accordingly, but
he also made detailed notes of the physical appearance of the sites.
During his 30-odd years of collecting in the area, Anderson accumulated and catalogued over 2,000 specimens from the Texas side of the
river alone. I have made no attempt to determine the extent of his
collections from the Mexican side.
In 1932, Anderson published a brief paper listing the types of
artifacts found on the Texas side of the river. His major emphasis was
on the material used in the manufacture of artifacts rather than descriptions of the artifacts. Five pottery vessels found by Anderson
were described by J. Alden Mason (1935). Later, Ekholm (1944:433),
and Campbell (1960:163), identified these vessels as Tancol
Polychrome, a Huastecan type.
After Anderson’s death in the early 1940’s, his relatives loaned the
entire collection to the University of Texas. Since that time, Dr. T. N.
Campbell of the University of Texas at Austin has been systematically
describing the artifacts in his spare time, and has been consolidating
Anderson’s notes into concise site descriptions.
Richard S. MacNeish (1947:1-15; 1958:186-193) was instrumental

58

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

in securing the loan of Anderson’s collection, and used it as the basis
for his definitions of the Brownsville and Barril complexes in the Rio
Grande Delta. This was done as part of his overall survey of
Tamaulipas. However, MacNeish gave the collection only a cursory
examination, and went into very little detail about the area.
At about the same time, Jack T. Hughes (1947:33-39) surveyed the
Victoria-Matamoras highway, and located 11 sites between Padilla
and San Fernando. These sites, though, are along the eastern edge of
the Sierra de Tamaulipas, and differ markedly from the coastal and
deltaic sites.
Further systematic work in the Rio Grande Delta region was lacking
until the 1970 survey. However, various isolated sites, primarily
cemeteries, were reported by a number of workers (see Campbell and
Frizzell 1949; Hester and Ruecking 1969; Collins, Hester and Weir
1969; Hester 1969a; and Hester and Rodgers 1971).
CURRENT RESEARCH
Thus far, five types of sites have been recognized on the basis of
geographic location. Some of these sites are superficially very
ephemeral, while others are quite extensive. The 5 types of sites are: 1)
clay dune - laguna, 2) resaca - laguna, 3) clay dune - lake, 4) resaca, and
5) barrier island. I am sure there are more types of sites present, but
they have not yet been recorded.
Clay dune - laguna sites include those sites situated in or on clay
dunes facing Laguna Madre. These are usually at relatively high
elevations, running roughly 25-30 feet above sea level. Often, there
are small "sinks" or waterholes on the landward side at the base of the
dunes. Much of the debris seems to be concentrated on the landward
slopes of the dunes, suggesting that some of the camping or living
took place where there was protection from the strong gulf breeze.
Resaca - laguna sites are less common. These include those sites
situated on the bank of a resaca where it empties into the Laguna
Madre. They are generally low in elevation, normally about 10 feet
above sea level. There are usually small ponds of water in the resacas,
but these dry rapidly in the summer and would not provide a steady
water supply.
Clay dune - lake sites are those sites in or on clay dunes situated
around inland lakes such as Laguna Atascosa. These are quite similar
in character to clay dune - laguna type sites, but the elevations are
usually about 5-10 feet lower.
Resaca sites are those situated along the various resacas. These are
usually on low knolls or dikes paralleling the resacas. Some of the

RIO GRANDE DELTA

59

rises are almost imperceptible, and one often finds the knoll by finding the site. In some instances, the rise will have a one to two feet
eroded drop facing (or paralleling) the resaca. In other cases, there is
no erosion, and dense brush makes it almost impossible to definitely
identify a site.
Barrier island sites are those sites on South Padre, Brazos, and Boca
Chica Islands. Such sites have been orally reported by local amateurs,
but systematic work has not been undertaken to document them
precisely in this region (see Campbell 1964, for sites located on the
northern end of Padre Island).
Lithic artifacts are dominated by generally small triangular arrow
points; these have been divided into various types by MacNeish
(1958:68-70, 189). Specific types described by MacNeish are:
Matamoros, Fresno, Starr, and Cameron, the latter being the smallest
and often made of glass. A few stemmed dart points occur, but no
stemmed arrow points have been found. Other distinctive lithic artifacts (described by MacNeish 1958:189) are tiny circular pianoconvex scrapers and small chipped flint pin-like drills. A few unifaces, bifaces, and hammerstones occur. Very few flint flakes occur on
any of the sites, and those that are present generally show evidence of
chipping along one or more lateral edges. Anderson noted this in his
collections, and I found the same to be true during the THSC survey.
The final significant type of lithic artifact is the tubular pipe; Anderson collected one stone pipe and numerous pumice pipes. The bowls
of these pipes are blackened from use.
Ceramics occur, but either the vessels were seldom broken or there
were few vessels to break. Anderson collected only about a hundred
sherds (in addition to the Huastecan pots found with burials), and I
found only a handful during the THSC survey. Some of the sherds are
tentatively identified as belonging to the Rockport series (Suhm and
Jelks 1962:131). Fragments of 2 ceramic pipes were found. These are
apparently tubular and similar to the stone pipes.
Shell artifacts and debris dominate the materials recovered from
Rio Grande Delta sites. Clam shell scrapers comprise the largest single
artifact class; other shell tools include: conch columella adzes and
gouges, conch hammers, conch whorl scrapers, possible conch cups,
columella awls and columetla projectile points. Ornamental shell
artifacts include perforated and unperforated shell discs (in all stages
of manufacture), beads of Oliva and Marginella shells, gorgets, pendants and bracelets of conch shells, tubular beads, cylinders, and
pendants of conch columella, and a variety of engraved shells.
Species identification of the various shell sources has not been made
at the present time, but will be included in the final report prepared

60

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

when the entire county has been surveyed.
Predictably, the miscellaneous shell fragments scattered over most
sites appear to be from the same types of shells from which the tools
and ornaments were made. Oyster shells are conspicuous by their
absence; only one site (41 CF 8) exhibits an appreciable occurrence of
these shells. It seems significant that the only presently existing local
oyster beds are nearby at Brazos Santiago Pass. Rangia shell middens,
commonly found along the central and upper portions of the Texas
Gulf Coast, are absent in the Rio Grande Delta. The general absence of
both these types of shell may be attributed to environmental conditions rather than intentional cultural selection.
Drumfish otoliths occur on nearly all sites; rectangular otoliths are
from freshwater drum, and long narrow otoliths are from saltwater
drum. The saltwater type is predominant in the clay dune - laguna
sites, while the freshwater type is predominant inland. However,
there is much mixture of the two. In addition to otoliths, many spines
and vertebrae of drumfish are found in the sites. The cultural remains
observed at site 41 CF 29 appeared to be composed mainly of drum
spines and vertebrae. Other bone fragments are fairly common, but
most are too fractured for identification. A few of the bones found in
the clay dune - lake and resaca sites appear to be from deer-size
animals.
Early historic European artifacts are found on a few of the Indian
sites. Site 41 CF 12 has yielded wheel made pottery with lead glaze
and fragments of wine bottles. Local legends tell of an old Spanish
ranch being located on this site; it may very well be that this is indeed
one of the outlying ranches established when Escandon settled the
Matamoros area about 1750. Several glass arrow points have been
found, particularly at site 41 CF 8.
DISCUSSION
The most outstanding feature of the archeological sites recorded
thus far is the shell ornament industry. Most often, the ornaments are
generally single finds within a site; they occur in large groups, only
when associated with burials. One site, 41 CF 8, may have a
specialized shell disc manufacturing area represented, but such distinct distributions have not been noted in other sites. It may also be
speculated that, based on the amount of manufacturing debris represented, finished shell artifacts may have been a major export item
used in exchange for as yet unidentified materials. The Gulf side of
the barrier islands (Padre and Boca Chica) is the apparent source for
the raw materials used in the manufacture of shell ornaments.

~0 GRANDE DELTA

61

Specialized stone tools (particularly the tiny flint drills) appear to
have been developed to aid in the manufacture of some of the ornaments (specifically disc beads).
Food resources appear to have been diverse; certainly the Gulf, the
laguna, the river, the resacas, and the lakes were heavily exploited for
both fish and shell fish. Deer and other small game were apparently
hunted when possible. Undoubtedly various plant foods were
utilized even though such evidence is not preserved in the archeological record.
Mortuary practices in the Rio Grande Delta area have been variously
documented, particularly by Campbell and Frizzell, and later by
Hester. Basically, cemetery areas appear to be discrete and not associated with habitation areas; the interments often contain large
amounts of grave goods; skeletons are generally flexed, bundled, or
occasionally cremated; and the bones are sometimes covered with red
ochre (Campbell and Frizzel11949; Hester 1969a). Hester and Rodgers
(1971:370) point out that reported cemetery sites are clustered on or
near the north bank of the Arroyo Colorado and suggest that this
stream may have had some significance in the local mortuary customs. I suspect (as do Hester and Rodgers) that this may simply be a
product of sampling error. At site 41 CF 74 on Rincon de Guajardo, I
observed burials eroding from the bank; at least one skeleton was
covered with red ochre. Anderson’s notes indicate the Huastecan-like
pottery associated with burials came from his site 16.6 which is on
Cayo Atascosa. Jim Walker (personal communication) reports flexed
burials with grave goods from 4 sites: 41 CF 8 near Port Isabel, 41 CF
13 on Cross Lake, 41 CF 14 on Sweeny Lake, and 41 CF 17 just
northeast of Rio Hondo. All of these sites are south of the Arroyo
Colorado.
Based on Anderson’s extensive collections from the Mexican as
well as the Texas side of the delta, there seems to be little difference in
the archeological picture on both sides of the Rio Grande. The major
discrepancy is the distribution of conical conch columella projectile
points; most of them are found on the south side of the river. This
appears to be the basis for MacNeish’s separation of the delta into two
archeological units, the Barril and Brownsville complexes
(1958:186-192). In his discussion of these two complexes, MacNeish
compares some of the material with periods V and VI of the Panuco
sequence reported by Ekholm (1944).
It is not surprising that much of the Rio Grande Delta material
compares favorably with that reported from the area around Baffin
Bay to the north (Hester 1969b). A number of artifacts such as triangular stone projectile points, small circular scrapers, Rockport series

62

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

pottery, and various shell ornaments and tools are common to both
areas. Toward the Central Texas coast, the similarities decline rapidly
(Campbell 1947, 1952, 1956, 1958, 1960; Corbin 1963; Martin 1930;
Sayles 1935; and Story 1968).
CONCLUSIONS
The most salient archeological characteristic of the Rio Grande
Delta region is the prehistoric shell industry. The array of shell ornaments ranges from tiny circular shell beads to large engraved conch
whorl pendants or gorgets. All stages of manufacture of these ornaments are present, from roughed-out blanks to the finished products.
The same is true for many of the shell tools. It is evident the aboriginal
population depended heavily on the marine resources for both the
shell for ornaments, and shell fish and fish for food. This is probably
the base of the economy, with hunting and gathering rating as supplements.
MacNeish believes the cultural remains in the area to be late in time,
and I tend to agree with him, although there are no radiometric dates
to use for specific references. Probably the Brownsville complex is
contemporaneous with late Huastecan (Panuco V and VI) assemblages, and with the Rockport Focus; at least artifacts.comparable to
ones found in those two areas would seem to indicate this.
Campbell (1960:155-156) has listed four generalized basic questions to be answered in the Rio Grande Delta area. Briefly, they are: 1)
involvement in movement of Mesoamerican traits; 2) materials attributable to historic Indian groups; 3) cultural units and their
chronological positions; 4) relationships with adjacent areas. In addition to these general questions, there are several specific features
which merit special attention. They are: 1) relationships of the different kinds of sites; 2) relationships of sites to the environment; 3)
geological changes in the delta area and their effects on the archeological record.
This would entail the completion of the survey of at least Cameron
County, and would require extensive testing of several sites. Were
these sites indeed occupied by the same group of peoples over a given
period of time, or were they occupied by different groups exploiting
different resources at the same time? Are the inferences regarding
different types of sites made in this paper true; i.e.: are the associations of the faunal remains with specific topographical features valid?
What is the geological relationship of sites with the formation of clay
dunes, evolution of Padre Island, and the meanders of the Rio Grande?

RIO GRANDE DELTA

63

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank Mr. Curtis Tunnell, Texas State Archeologist, for initiating this
project and securing funds for it through the Texas State Historical Survey Committee.
Thanks are due Mr. A. A. Champion, Dr. T. N. Campbell, Mr. David S. Dibble, Mr. Jim
Walker, and Mr. Jack Bartholomew for their assistance in the completion of this project.
Finally, I would like to thank my wife, Kerza, for her patience and encouragement
during the course of the survey.

REFEt~ENCES CITED

Anderson, A. E.
1932 Artifacts of the Rio Grande Delta Region. Bulletin, Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 4, pp. 29-31.
Anonymous
1969 Birds of the Laguna Atascosa National Wildlife Refuge. Refuge Leaflet
125-R4, U.S. Dept. of Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service, Bureau of
Sport Fisheries and Wildlife.
1970 Laguna Atascosa National Wildlife Refuge. Refuge Leaflet 28-R3, U.S.
Dept of Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service, Bureau of Sport Fisheries
and Wildlife.
Blair, Frank W.
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 2, No. 1,
pp. 93-117.
Campbell, T. N.
1947 The Johnson Site: Type Site of the Aransas Focus of the Texas Coast.
Bulletin, Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 18,
pp. 40-75.
1952
The Kent-Crane Site: A Shell Midden of the Texas Coast. Bulletin,
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 23, pp. 39-77.
1956 Archeological Materials from Five Islands in the Laguna Madre, Texas
Coast. Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 27, pp. 7-46.
1958 Archeological Remains from the Live OakPoint Site, Aransas County,
Texas. Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 10, No. 4, pp. 423-442.
1960 Archeology of the Central and Southern Sections of the Texas Coast.
B ulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 29 (for 1958), pp. 145-175.
1964 Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Padre Island, Texas.
Mimeographed report submitted to the National Park Service by the
University of Texas, Austin.
Campbell, T. N., and Jack Q. Frizzell
1949 Notes on the Ayala Site, Lower Rio Grande Valley, Texas. Bulletin,
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 20, pp. 63-72.
Collins, Michael B., Thomas Roy Hester, and Frank A. Weir
1969 The Floyd Morris Site (41 CF 2): A Prehistoric Cemetery Site in
Cameron County, Texas. Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol.
40, pp. 119-146.
Corbin, James E.
1963 Archeological Materials from the Northern Shores of Corpus Christi
Bay, Texas. Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 34, pp. 5-30.

64

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Ekholm, Gordon
1944 Excavations at Tampico and Panuco in the Huasteca, Mexico.
Anthropological Papers of the Museum of Natural History, Vol. 38,
No. 1.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1938 Physiography of Eastern United States. McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc.,
New York.
Hester, Thomas Roy
1969a The Floyd Morris and Ayala Sites: A Discussion of Burial Practices in
the Rio Grande Valley and the Lower Texas Coast. Bulletin, Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 40, pp. 157-166.
1969b Archeological Investigations in Kleberg and Kenedy Counties, Texas,
in August, 1967. State Building Commission Archeological Program,
Report No. 15.
Hester, Thomas Roy and R. W. Rodgers
1971 Additional Data on the Burial Practices of the Brownsville Complex.
Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 22, No. 4, pp. 367-372.
Hester, Thomas Roy and Frederick Ruecking, Jr.
1969 Additional Materials from the Ayala Site, A Prehistoric Cemetery Site
in Hidalgo County, Texas. Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol.
40, pp. 147-157.
Hughes, Jack T.
1947 An Archaeological Reconnaissance in Tamaulipas, Mexico.
American Antiquity, Vol. 13, No. 1, pp. 33-39.
Inglis, Jack M.
1964 A History of Vegetation on the Rio Grande Plain. Bulletin, No. 45,
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department.
MacNeish, Richard S.
1947 A Preliminary Report on Coastal Tamaulipas, Mexico. American
Antiquity, Vol. 13, No. 1, pp. 1-15.
1958 Preliminary Archaeological Investigations in the Sierra de
Tamaulipas, Mexico. Transactions of the American Philosophical
Society, n.s., Vol. 48, Pt. 6.
Martin, George C.
1930 Two Sites on the Callo Del Oso, Nueces County, Texas. Bulletin, Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 2, pp. 7-17.
Mason, J. Alden
1935 The Place of Texas in Pre-Columbian Relationships Between the United States and Mexico. Bulletin, Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 7, pp. 29-46.
Price, W. Armstrong, and Gordon Gunter
1942 Certain Recent Geological and Biological Changes in South Texas,
with Consideration of Probable Causes.Proceedings and Transactions
of the Texas Academy of Science for 1942, pp. 2-21.
Price, W. Armstrong, and Louis S. Kornicker
1961 Marine and Lagoona! Deposits in Clay Dunes, Gulf Coast, Texas.
Journal of Sedimentary Petrology, Vol. 31, No. 2, pp. 245-255.
Sayles, E. B.
1935 An Archaeological Survey of Texas. Gila Pueblo, Medallion Papers,
No. 17.

RIO GRANDE DELTA

65

Story, Dee Ann
1968 Archeo!ogical Investigations at Two Central Texas Gulf Coast Sites.
State Building Commission Archeological Program, Report No. 13.
Suhm, Dee Ann, and Edward B. Jelks
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Special Publication No. 1, Texas Archeological Society, and Bulletin No. 4, Texas
Memorial Museum.
The University of Texas at Austin

THE TCHEFUNCTE CULTURE
IN THE BAYOU VERMILION BASIN,
SOUTH CENTRAL LOUISIANA:
A DEVELOPMENTAL CASE STUDY*
JON L. GIBSON
ABSTRACT
Eleven archeological sites in the Bayou Vermilion drainage basin of
south central Louisiana comprise the nucleus of the Lafayette phase of
Tchefuncte culture. The settlement pattern and paleoenvironmental contexts of Lafayette components-have been elucidated, and these findings
have provided a substantive test case for several hypotheses previously
formulated to explain the decline of Poverty Point culture and the interrelated development of Tchefuncte culture.

INTRODUCTION
Prehistoric cultural evolution in the Lower Mississippi Valley
traced a recurrent cycle of climax and decline. High points of development were separated by low ones as, individually, native cultures appeared, flourished for a while, and then gave way to sociopolitical forms at a distinctively separate level of organization. The
two millennia preceding the Christian era in the lower valley witnessed one of these complete transformational cycles. I am concerned
here with the low point in this cycle, what archeologists have identified as the Tchefuncte culture (500 B.C.-100 B.C.). The Tchefuncte
culture separated two widely recognized climax cultures, Poverty
Point (1500 B.C.-600 B.C.) and Marksville (200 B.C.-IO0 A.D.).
Cultural continuity among these cultures is apparent in some material systems, such as in the evolution of pottery styles but, by and
large, discontinuities are stronger and far more numerous. Poverty
Point culture introduced to the lower valley an interrelated complex
of large population aggregates, sedentism, monumental earthwork
construction, economic redistribution emphasizing foreign trade
materials, and social ranking (Ford and Webb 1956; Webb, Ford, and
Gagliano n.d.; Gibson 1973, 1974b), a complex that was also present
in varying degrees in Marksville culture. In contrast, Tchefuncte
culture appears to have reverted to seasonally mobile populations and
dispersed settlement patterns and to have generally lacked the organizational dimension essential for large scale mound building and
vast exchange networks.
*Paper presented at the Conference on Gulf Coast Archeology, Beaumont, Texas, 19 71.

68

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

In order to understand Tchefuncte culture, it is necessary to: (1)
clarify its variability on a regional level, (2) specify its ecological
context and, (3} explicate its inherent evolutionary processes. Only
then can the reasons for developmental fluctuations be approached
from a perceptive point of view. This paper represents a preliminary
attempt to come to grips with the nature of Tchefuncte culture in one
small region of the lower valley. Its tentativeness stems from two
principal factors. First, the chronology of Bayou Vermilion
Tchefuncte has not been firmly established; no radiocarbon or thermoluminescent ages have been determined. Secondly, site and environmental data have not been collected under the kind of regional
research design which would have permitted the establishment of
quantifiable differences among components and environmental conditions (cf. Gumerman 1971). However, both these shortcomings are
being remedied, and the data organization and hypotheses advanced
in this paper should give ample structure and testability to future
work.
THE SURVEY AREA
The data used in this demonstration derive from the Bayou Vermilion drainage basin, parishes of St. Landry, St. Martin and Lafayette,
south central Louisiana (Fig. 1). This small confined region lies along
the western margin of the Mississippi alluvial floodplain and at one
period in its geomorphic development was actually occupied by the
main channel of the Mississippi River (Fisk 1944). The present drainage basin was created as a result of Teche-Mississippi River aggradation. The growth of natural levees along the Teche-Mississippi channel stem apparently blocked the outflow of water and produced a rim
swamp (Aurville Touchet, personal communication, 1973). As a consequence, the internal drainage was confined between the broad
Teche-Mississippi levees on the east and the steep escarpment of the
Lafayette surface on the west (cf. Gibson and Miller 1973), and the
whole area was aggraded through alluvial drowning (Aurville
Touchet, personal communication, 1973). This geomorphic process
eventually separated the Vermilion basin from the more active areas
of the Lower Mississippi Valley.
The Bayou Vermilion drainage basin is aligned north and south; it
extends for 35km along that axis, has a maximum width of 11km, and
covers about 300km2. It heads near the junction of Bayou Fusilier and
Bayou Bourbeaux, is bordered by the three to four meter high
Lafayette escarpment and by the natural levees of Bayou Teche, and
terminates at the confluence of Bayou Tortue and Cypress Bayou in
the south {Fig. 1). Bayou Vermilion, formerly a Red River distributary,

TCHEFUNCTE CULTURE

69

HILLS;

30°20
GENTA

WEST

~MAGENTA

)U

EAST

ST. CLAIR

-

BREAUX
BRIDGE
.

3~

’~

~

LA FAYETTE MOUNDS~ i

LAFAYETTE

BEAU RIVAGE ".-~j~
BAYOU

TORTUE

1#
:
e BAYOU

CAPUCIN

\\
PAUL

BLANCHET

ST MARTINVI -LE

FIGURE 1. Lafayette Phase Components in the Bayou Vermilion
Basin, South Central Louisiana.

70

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

represents the master stream of the area today.
Aside from offering research convenience, the Bayou Vermilion
basin is important for a basic archeological reason. It constitutes what
I have chosen to call a "vital" region; that is, within its natural
boundaries are manifestations of all three cultures of the complete
evolutionary cycle with which we are concerned. Such regions are
few and far between in the alluvial valley; only five and possibly six
others are known to exist. Many other areas of the valley have
Tchefuncte or Marksville components, but most lack Poverty Point
sites. It is, in fact, on the basis of certain environmental regularities
common to these "vital" regions that hypotheses on intercultural
relationships and developmental processes have been conceived. It is
only in "vital" regions, such as the Bayou Vermilion basin, that the
full range of cultural continuities and discontinuities can be appreciated. Other regions are most likely to be informative on secondary cultural processes, e.g., diffusion, migration, etc., processes not
directly involved in the pristine genesis, development and transformation of cultures.
THE LAFAYETTE PHASE
In a monumental study of Lower Mississippi Valley archeology,
Philip Phillips (1970:882-884) formally established a Lafayette phase
of Tchefuncte culture which was intended to embrace Tchefuncte
components in south central Louisiana. Phillips took his lead from
Gagliano (1967:15, Fig. 6), who had previously proposed a Teche
phase to accommodate the then poorly investigated Tchefuncte sites
along the old Teche-Mississippi River system. In my opinion, Phillips’ phase is areally too broad and incorporates too many nonTchefuncte coponents to be of much utility, but his name is retained
to identify the cluster of Tchefuncte sites in the Bayou Vermilion
basin. This is in no way intended as a criticism of Phillips; considering the paucity of information available from this segment of the
valley in the 1960s, it is a tribute to his remarkable foresight that
Tchefuncte materials could be identified at all.
The Lafayette phase took its name from its most widely publicized
component, the Lafayette Mounds (Ford and Quimby 1945:21-24,
26-27; Jennings 1952:260; Phillips 1970:882-884). One of the mounds
of the Lafayette group was excavated in 1941 by the WPA archaelogical survey under the direction of Edwin Doran, Jr. and Robert Neitzel
and figured prominantly in the initial synthesis of Tchefuncte culture
(Ford and Quimby 1945). Ten additional components have recently
come to light; excavations of various types have been, or are presently

TCHEFUNCTE CULTURE

71

being, conducted at Bayou Tortue, Paul Blanchet and Hidden Hills
(Fig. 1); Magenta East and Magenta West (Fig. 1) have been systematically surface collected; and Bayou St. Clair and Ruth Canal (Fig. 1)
have been intensively, but indiscriminately, collected. Three additional sites, Baker, Olivier and Bayou Capucin, are believed to be
Lafayette components but little else is known about them. Bayou
Capucin has three mounds but whether these are Tchefuncte constructions can not be presently determined.
These 11 sites form the nucleus of the Lafayette phase (Fig. 1). The
abbreviated site descriptions below follow a reporting format developed in connection with another research project (Gibson and
Baker n.d.). This outline is subtended and is followed by brief explanations of the various categories.
Observational
Site name; brief description (cf. terrace edge site, west bank, Bayou
Carencro); kind of site (e.g., mound site with stained earth midden,
mound site without stained earth midden, nonmound site with
stained earth midden, or nonmound site without stained earth midden); nearest neighbor (metric distance); nearest neighbor of comparable age; componential nature (single or multiple component, specify
each); area covered (m2); depth and character of midden fill; size and
orientation of structures; general site orientation; artifactual distribution patterns; resource use (kinds of floral, faunal, lithic remains, and
others).
Interpretive
Site type (e.g., tentative categories; light use area, station, camp,
base camp, village, village center, vacant center, town, town center);
dominant site function (e.g., general maintenance; specialized function -- hunting, collecting, fishing, quarrying; limited function -burial, mortuary preparation, workshop, kill-butchering, etc.,
specify); nature of inhabitation (e.g., single short duration; reoccupation -- seasonal or sporadic; continual -- semi-permanent or permanent); occupant group composition (men, women or children); occupant group size; external trade and/or contacts; local phase; age.
Brief clarification of the interpretive part of the format is warranted
since some of the advocated categories differ from other proposed site
type or site functional typologies. These categories are by no means
final. They represent advance organizational types and, consequently, will require testing and modification.
The nine different site types hypothesized for lower valley cultures
provide a scale corresponding roughly to ascending site size, number
of occupants, permanency of residence, and number and variety of

72

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

activities performed. Exceptions to this general rule are the types
referred to as light use area and vacant center.
Station. A small spot conceived to have been the scene of a unique
procurative or extractive event, such as a Paleo-Indian mammoth kill.
A station would be indicated by the presence of very few tools,
probably broken, of limited functional utility (i.e., weapons, etc.) and
by the absence of manufacturing or refurbishing by-products and of
any structural remains. The spatial overlapping of a number of stations could result in the designation of an area as a light use area.
Camp. A small locus of short-lived activity, usually restricted to a
single dominant task and often, but not always, conducted by a
sex-specific group. A camp might be indicated by the presence of a
limited tool assemblage and/or by a restricted occurrence of special
kinds of technological by-products in a relatively small area. Ethnographic examples of this settlement type might include the awayfrom-home camps of hunters, warriors, and quarrying or exploitive
parties. Again, as in the case of overlapping stations, spatial proximity of a number of camps could result in a light use area.
Light use area. A territory, often quite extensive (20,000m250,000m2), with signs of repeated, prolonged use without permanent
occupation. Evidence would take the form of low density artifact,
facility (earth oven, fire pit, etc,), and ecofact (Binford 1964) scatter
along lowland streams subject to extended inundation. There should
be little indication of artifact manufacture and most of the tools might
be broken and unrepaired. This site type, at least in the central
Louisiana Caney phase (Gibson 1973, n.d.a), seems, to correlate with
summer fishing and possibly alligator hunting.
Base camp. A residential site of variable size which served as a
major focus of domestic activities in a seasonally shifting settlement
and economic system. A base camp should exhibit a significant quantitative and qualitative increase in artifacts when compared with
camps. Evidence of tool manufacture and repair as well as stationary
facilities (hearths, earth ovens, houses, etc.) should be present. Base
camps differ from villages in the degree of permanency; the former
should have some hints of seasonal specificity, while the latter should
reflect year-round inhabitation. This site type is identical with what
Beardsley and others (1955:138-140) have described as the primary
unit of a "central-based wandering" community.
Village. A residential site of variable size (generally larger than
camps and base camps) which was the scene of domestic activities for
prolonged, uninterrupted periods. A village would be indicated by
the presence of most of the criteria noted above for base camps but
should have evidence for continual, year-long occupation.

TCHEFUNCTE CULTURE

73

Village center. A residential site of relatively moderate to large size
which served as a village location as well as a focus of ceremonial
and/or local economic exchange for surrounding villages. A village
center should be recognizable by the presence of all the simple village
features and additionally by the occurrence of solitary or multiple
mounds, embankments, or other constructions requiring multicommunity cooperation. Concomitantly, or alternatively, a village
center might have been the central exchange hub for raw materials or
finished products, although these are expected to be of predominantly local derivation. Thus in contrast with a simple village, a
village center should have a relatively larger dominance in both
variety and quantity of these items. Social organizational analysis
should indicate the presence of a socially superior, probably religiously imbued administrative structure. Application of Christaller’s
central place theory (cf. Christaller 1966; Clarke 1968:507-510; Johnson 1972:769-785) would probably show that a village center was
centrally located with respect to an hexagonal or rhomboidal lattice.
Vacant center. A nonresidential site, perhaps occupied only by a
few ceremonial coordinators and/or caretakers, which served as the
locus for periodic community-wide ceremonies, funerals and
economic exchanges. A vacant center might be indicated by the
presence of earthworks, especially burial mounds, and/or of exchangeable lithics or other products. Some storage facilities (cache
pits), burned areas, and a few structural remains should be anticipated. A possible historical analogue of this settlement type in the
immediate area is found in the Chitimacha "worship-house" (Swanton 1911:344). Known archaeological counterparts include several
Marksville cultural components, especially Crooks (Ford and Willey
1940) and Coral Snake (McClurkan, Field, and Woodall 1966:3-26;
Jensen 1968:9-44).
Town. A permanent settlement component with large resident
population. Towns differ from villages of all types, not only in greater
relative size and number of residents, but in the kind and degree of
internal differentiation with regard to suprasubsistence activities and
services. Town life in the lower valley seems to have been in full
flower during DeSoto’s entrada of 1540-1543, and the early records
(Varner and Varner 1951; Bourne 1904) provide excellent models for
this hypothesized settlement type. Large settlements (200 to 500
houses and 1700 to 4500 residents; cf. Gibson 1974a), public constructions (mounds, temples, wall and palisades and moats) and central
square grounds or plazas were common to these towns. Society was
rigidly ranked, possibly even stratified in some cases and was dominated by a sun chief and royal family. Warrior corps were at least

74

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

partly supported by the administration as were various priests, ministers, emissaries and craftsmen. War was the central theme of society
and probably bore a strong functional relationship to hierarchical
ranking (Kroeber 1939:148-150; Gibson 1974a).
Town center. A town set apart from others by a combination of
factors, no doubt including situational logistics with regard to markets, sources of supply and transportation routes, and historical
events such as domination by force or strength of leadership. Town
centers are indicated in the DeSoto chronicles by reference to "provincial capitals" and "principal town surrounded by vassal towns"
(Varner and Varner 1951; Bourne 1904). Poverty Point may have
fleetingly been such a center, predating the general establishment Of
this settlement form by more than two millennia.
The interpretive categories of site function and nature of inhabitation are generally self-explanatory. The term "general maintenance",
however, requires amplification. General maintenance is a convenient description covering the full range of activities -- technological, economic, religious, sociological -- required to support an individual community in a relatively autonomous fashion. In other
words, the activities revealed through archaeological interpretation
should neither be limited nor strictly specialized, but should be
sufficiently broad to have permitted self-sufficiency.
Group composition based on age and sex has been primarily judged
on the basis of general ethnological analogies. The works of Swanton
(1911, 1946) are important in reconstructing social group composition. Summarily, his collated records indicate that men performed the
tasks related to hunting and warfare and made most of the durable
equipment; women on the other hand, carried out the duties required
in household upkeep, collected and prepared most of the plant foods
and made the equipment which required continual maintenance and
replacement. Observations on age and sex groups can rarely be made
directly, e.g., breakdown of burial populations, fingerprints in baked
clay objects.
Reconstructing demography from archeological data is a critical,
but often suspect, procedure. Nonetheless, several useful formulae
have been developed which seem to express direct relationships
between group size and floor space (Naroll 1962:587-589) and between number of people and total site area (Cook and Treganza
1950:223-262; Cook and Heizer 1965, 1968:70-116). For expediency, I
have used the logarithmic linear relationship between site size and
population discovered by Cook and Treganza (1950) and recalculated
in graphic form by Shenkel (1971: Fig. 10). A simplified version of
this graph is presented (Fig. 2). It must be stressed, because of the

TCHEFUNCTE CULTURE

75

iog

\

76

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

inherent difficulties in assessing prehistoric population sizes, that the
resultant figures should only be regarded as possible approximations
of community sizes, i.e., hints of the probable order of magnitude.
Evidence of external "trade" or extraregional contacts can be most
directly determined by the presence of lithic, faunal and other materials (sometimes, artifacts), which are not endemic to the region under
consideration. Whether this contact was directly with source areas
(actual mining or collecting by Vermilion peoples), procured through
middlemen or wandering traders (such as the Avoyel tribe of historic
times, Swanton 1911:272-274), or brought in via some supracommunity commerce network remains a separate investigative problem.
The Vermilion basin has no native stone sources, so in a very real
sense all lithic materials must be considered as evidence of external
contact. However, some materials, such as pebble chert, sandstone,
orthoquartzite, iron ochre, limonite and volcanic tufa are available
within short to moderate distances (50-150km) from the Vermilion
basin and for practical purposes will be considered as "local" materials. Foreign materials, native to areas distant as 1500km, are occasionally found on Vermilion sites. Such exotics, which include
quartz, galena, novaculite, white Ozark chert and Dover and other
midwestern flints, are certain indications of some sort of extraregional connection.

DESCRIPTION OF LAFAYETTE COMPONENTS
Lafayette Mounds
Natural levee site, east bank, Vermilion River; mound site with
three low conical mounds and associated stained earth midden;
0.5km upstream from Ruth Canal site (Fig. 1); multiple components
(Tchefuncte and Plaquemine); total site area unknown; midden depth
undetermined but undisturbed deposits incorporated in Gallion sediments beneath mounds revealed scattered postmolds (circular structures) and 15 refuse pits containing ash, bone and potsherds; Mound
one, a two stage structure containing at least eight flexed and 12
bundle burials in primary core, was 1.5m high and 18.3m in diameter;
mound two, 1.2m high and 15.3m in diameter; and mound three, 0.3m
high and 12.2m in diameter; mound orientation not specified; general
site orientation along levee crest; spatial patterns in and among distributions of refuse pits, house patterns and artifacts (potsherds, tubular pipes, baked clay objects, projectile points, other bifaces, ground
celt, bar weights and tablets, hones, stone bead and quartz crystals)
unclear, but burials in primary mound were massed in center and
slightly north (?) of central core (Ford and Quimby 1945: Fig. 6);
resource use included loca] and foreign ]ithics, clay for pottery, Pov-

TCHEFUNCTE CULTURE

77

erty Point objects, and mound fill, firewood and other woods for
construction, and at least one bird (perforated talon).
Village center; general maintenance and mortuary; continual
(semi-permanent to permanent) occupation, interrupted periodically
by annual or nearly annual floods; adult men and women present in
burial population (Snow 1945:Tab. XVII); all three crania studied had
evidence of degenerative osteoporosis, estimated ages at death, 22, 23
and 30 years respectively; occupant group size unpredictable but if
mounds were central focus of surrounding sites could have conceivably served as many as 100 people (if there had been no discrimination in burial practices, then based on hypothesized zero growth,
marriage at age 18, and calculated average death age of 25 years, the
number of dead in mound could have resulted naturally in the span of
less than three years and burial might represent a single mass interment); presence of quartz crystals suggests foreign procuration or
collection from nearby Poverty Point site; Lafayette phase, 300-100
B.C.
Bayou Tortue
Natural levee site, north bank, Bayou Tortue at confluence with
Vermilion River; one and possibly two conical mounds with possibly
"associated" lightly stained earth midden in Dundee silt loam;
nearest neighbors are overlying components of local Troyville and
Coles Creek phases, small Beau Rivage (Poverty Point) component,
50m west; large Beau Rivage site itself is 400m northwest on opposite
river bank; nearest neighbor of comparable age is Ruth Canal on
Vermilion Bayou, 6kin upstream, multiple components (Tchefuncte,
Troyville, Coles Creek, Plaquemine and spatially separated Poverty
Point components); total site area undisclosed but covers at least
5600m2; midden in places 1.25m deep, slightly darker than sterile
subsoil but not as dark as the black, greasy, later midden which
overlies portions of the Tchefuncte deposits; relatively homogeneous
with fairly low artifact densities; principally potsherds, amorphous
baked clay objects, lithic debris, projectile points, few faunal remains,
scattered postmolds (one pattern suggesting circular structure), and
ash; site conforms linearly to crest of natural levee, north-south orientation; distributional patterns of artifacts and features undisclosed;
resource use included local pebble cherts (projectile points, manufacturing refuse), clays (pottery, other baked clay objects), food remains
(deer, turtle, fish and small mammals), plus construction materials
and firewood.
Village or possibly village center; general maintenance (and possibly mortuary) function; semi-permanent or relatively permanent oc-

78

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

cupancy, vacated during exceptionally high spring floods; artifact
composition suggests presence of men and women, length of inhabitation implies children; using Cook and Treganza’s formula (cf. Fig.
2), a resident, population on the order of 75-80 people can be predicted; no evidence for external "trade" or contacts except for pebble
chert which could have been gotten from gravel outcrops near Turkey
Creek, 70kin to the north; Lafayette phase; 300-100 B.C.

Ruth Canal
Natural levee site, east bank, Bayou Vermilion; nonmound site with
unstained earth midden; closest site and also nearest site of "comparable" age, Lafayette mounds, 0.5km upstream on same bank; apparently single component (no excavation), Ruth Canal facies of Beau
Rivage or Lafayette phase; site area undetermined, but bank erosion
and canal dredging exposed cultural detritus over an area slightly
over 900m2; midden depth undetermined but canal spoil contains
sherds brought up from depths of 3m, while some in situ material has
been found within 0.25m of present surface; midden materials incorporated in Iberia clay (i.e., Teche-Mississippi alluvium); part of site
oriented along present Vermilion channel and probably along edge of
old grassy swamp; resources used included clay for pottery and Poverty Point objects, foreign (midwestern flint, novaculite) and local
(p ebble chert) lithics for points and drill and plummet (hematite), and
palmetto (or grass) for pottery tempering (94 of the 252 sherds in
present collection are fiber tempered).
Base camp or camp(?); maintenance dominant function; nature of
inhabitation undeterminable but probably short and seasonal; occupant group believed toinclude men, woman and children; group size
uncertain but possibly as few as 30-35 people (Fig. 2); midwestern
gray flint, quartz crystal, novaculite and hematite indicate community participation in redistribution system specializing in imported
materials or alternatively aboriginal procuration from surface of Beau
Rivage, 6.5km downstream, or some other nearby Poverty Point component; Ruth Canal facies of Beau Rivage or Lafayette phase; 600
B.C.-300 B.C.
Paul Blanchet (Stone Road)
Terrace edge and natural levee site, east and west sides, Bayou
Tortue at Cypress Bayou junction; nonmound site with slightly
stained midden; nearest site of comparable age, Bayou Capucin,
7.0km north on Bayou Tortue distributary; multiple components,
Poverty Point, Tchefuncte, Troyville (?), Coles Creek and Historic;
area covered by Lafayette component not determined exactly but

TCHEFUNCTE CULTURE

79

covers minimally 3500m2; in spots, midden reaches depths of 0.6m
and where overlain by later midden, encountered to depths of 1.0m;
silty brown midden in Memphis and Baldwin soils, homogeneous
with variable artifact densities, materials include potsherds, Poverty
Point and amorphous baked clay objects, flint debris, projectile
points, drills, irregular and ovate bifaces, scaled pieces, abraders, bar
weight and boatstone; site oriented with edge of escarpment on west
side of Bayou Tortue and along old prairie remnant on east; resource
use included foreign (Ozark chert, novaculite, Dover and Midwestern
flint) and local (pebble chert, orthoquartzite) lithics and pottery clays.
Village or base camp; general maintenance; continual (semipermanent or permanent) occupancy; men, women and children present;
possibly inhabited by as few as 60-65 people but probably more;
extraneous contacts suggested by presence of various foreign lithics
but possibly derived from or should be attributed to the Poverty Point
(Beau Rivage) component also present; Lafayette phase; 600-200 B.C.
Hidden Hills
Terrace edge site, north side, Bayou Carencro; nonmound (?, one
conical mound reported but not relocated) site with unstained earth
midden; 6.0kin in direct line from nearest Lafayette phase site, Olivier
(Fig. 1); multiple components, Beau Rivage and Lafayette phases
represented; minimally covers 6300m2 but man-made lake inundates
an undetermined portion; artifacts encountered to depth of +l.0m,
midden rather homogeneous loessal silt (Memphis) with nodular
inclusions, charcoal flecks, ash, potsherds, baked clay fragments,
stone bead, lithic debris, and stone tools -- projectile points and
drills; variable artifact densities seemingly related to position along
slope of escarpment; resource use included stone, clay and firewood.
Village or base camp; general maintenance; continual (semipermanent or permanent) occupancy; occupant group composed of men,
women and children; group size on the order of 80-85 people (Fig. 2);
external contacts suggested by presence of exotic lithics but possibly
attributable to underlying Poverty Point (Beau Rivage) component;
Lafayette phase; 600-200 B.C.
Magenta East
Crevasse levee site, east side, Magenta crevasse at point of entry into
old swamp; nonmound site with minimally stained earth midden;
nearest neighbor, Magenta West, comparable age, 400m west; single
component, Lafayette phase; site covers about 7500m2; midden depth
undetermined but at least 0.3m in plow furrows, midden composition
of Dundee silt-loam, fairly dense occurrences of potsherds, lithic

80

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

materials -- debris, debitage, projectile points and other bifaces, and
baked clay fragments; site oriented north-south and conforms to crest
of crevasse ridge; distributional patterns of artifacts include heavy
mixed concentrations along highest part of ridge and lighter densities
on slopes; evident resource use included stone (local) and clay.
Base camp or village; general maintenance function; nature of inhabitation undeterminable with present data but semipermanency
(seasonality) suspected; occupant group composition of men, women
and children; group numbered between 85-90 individuals (Fig. 2);
external contacts nonexistent, except for stone procurement from
hills, 55km north; Lafayette phase; 300-100 B.C.
Magenta West
Crevasse levee site, west side of Magenta crevasse at point of entry
into old filled-in swamp called Magenta basin; nonmound site with
minimally stained midden; nearest neighbor, Magenta East of comparable age, 400m east on opposite crevasse levee; single component,
Lafayette phase; areal extent about 5000m2; midden depth undetermined but at least 0.3m; silty midden (Dundee silt-loam) with moderately dense cultural materials, such as potsherds, faunal remains,
baked clay, stone artifacts (projectile points and debris); site aligned
with crevasse levee ridge and old swamp rim; site limits rigidly
defined with artifact densities dropping rapidly at site perimeters;
certain resource use included deer, local stone and clay.
Base camp or village; general maintenance function; semipermanency suspected; occupied by approximately 70-75 men, women and
children; no external areal contacts aside from those related to stone
collecting; Lafayette phase; 300-100 B.C.
Bayou St. Clair
Natural levee site, east and west banks of Bayou St. Clair, opposite
point of exit of small unnamed distributary which joins Bayou Vermilion below Bayou St. Clair-Bayou Vermilion confluence; nonmound component with minimally stained midden; nearest neighbor
(comparable age), Magenta East, 6.0km up Bayou St. Clair; single
component, Lafayette phase; real extent undetermined; midden
depth not disclosed but at least 0.3m, midden in Gallion and Baldwin
soils with moderate artifact and ecofact densities, potsherds, baked
clay fragments, opaline clinkers (residue from burning of cane), chert
debris, deer, and turtle remains; site orientation along levee crest at
intersection with old prairie; contextual relationships not presently
determinable; resources certainly utilized, clay, local stone, deer and
turtle.

TCHEFUNCTE CULTURE

81

Base camp or village, general maintenance function (?); semipermanent occupancy; occupant group size not calculated; men,
women and children probably present; no evident outside contacts
other than extra-areal stone procuration; Lafayette phase, 300-100
B.C.
CULTURAL ECOLOGY OF THE LAFAYETTE PHASE
An understanding of man-land relationships is basic to comprehending not only intercultural and intracultural variability but the
processes which produced or contributed to these differences. Several approaches have been employed by archaeologists in modeling
ecological relationships but all have involved the explication of
paleoenvironmental factors either by projection of contemporary
conditions into the past, by reconstruction based on ecofacts (Binford
1964), or by some combination of the two. Still, much has been left to
subjective interpretation primarily because such reconstructions
were not quantified. Remedial plans have, however, been recently
offered (cf. Gumerman 1971), and their implementation should eventually provide some new dimensions to cultural ecological studies.
Unfortunately, one of the best of these new research strategies (Plog
and Hill 1971:7-36) still leaves much to be desired. This fairly comprehensive plan does not effectively deal with the problem of historical changes in environments or with dynamic environments. Fluvial
regions, such as the Bayou Vermilion basin, have undergone quite
dramatic and sweeping changes in short time spans and actually
exhibit quite variable seasonal fluctuations. Indians in the Vermilion
basin were adapted to constantly changing environments, not stable
ones, a condition which seriously compounds the difficulties of
ecological reconstruction.
There exists, however, a solitary environmental factor which, while
not a panacea, has enormous potential for assisting the archaeologist
in modeling man-environmental relationships. Soil morphology is a
"... result of interactions between climate, living organisms, and
parent materials, as conditioned by time and relief." (Lytle 1968:8).
Soil formation constitutes a temporal process, and thus is quite applicable to the study of cultural adaptive processes and interdigidated
geomorphic growth processes in fluvial regions. This is not to say that
Native American settlement and adaptive strategies were consciously
and specifically geared to soil types, but rather that they were adapted
to various environmental contexts which are today adequately embodied in soils. Soils and interpretations based on them provide a
potentially quantifiable, correlative yardstick for assessing cultural

82

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
2

o’~

o

.,-’ oB

~o

oo
0

Z

~o~

~o
e3

0

"~

0

°

~o~

Z
<

0
oO~

o3
~:)..~

’~ .-o MM

o~

<

z

0

~~, ~ ~

X o’p, ~

~

~° o

~
o~

~
s s~=o

<
Z

~£o
©

co

©

03

~.~
$.~
c3

~d

6

0

£

O3
..0

t~
CO

~

~

~

O

83

TCHEFUNCTE CULTURE

.

1.

©

c~o

o

Z~

0

Z

Z

m~

~

m

O~

0

~

"~

0

,x:
0

<

~

m

o

~,m

~0

84

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

variability and should be included among the objectives of all current
research designs. When coupled with componential artifactual composition and faunal and floral remains, these data reflect the basic
ingredients of Tchefuncte ecology.
Settlement System
Based primarily on soil identification and paleoenvironmental interpretations, it is possible to draw some tentative conclusions on the
Lafayette phase settlement strategy. These conclusions provide a
major point of difference with the preceding Beau Rivage (Poverty
Point) phase and a test case for several primary hypotheses on the
decline of Poverty Point culture and the interconnected appearance of
Tchefuncte culture.
Soil morphology in the Bayou Vermilion drainage basin has been
characterized with regard to composition, source of parent materials,
sites of development, floral cover and annual inundation (Table 1).
Table 2 provides a list of site-soil correlations and associated
paleoenvironmental conditions. Soil identifications and paleoenvironmental reconstructions have been primarily supplied by Aurville Touchet and Kenneth Murphy of the United States Soil Conservation Service, with additional details abstracted from leaflets prepared by the National Cooperative Soil Survey (1967, 1972-1973).
Several important conclusions may be postulated on the basis of
these data and correlations. Lafayette phase components are associated with a variety of soil types. Although we presently lack
quantifiable data and thus can not use discriminatory statistical
analyses, two qualitative regularities are immediately apparent. Except for the Ruth Canal site, all of the Lafayette components are
confined to soils of loamy or silt loamy character. A second, and
perhaps more critical uniformity shared by Lafayette components
(again with the exception of Ruth Canal) is that all of the sites were
positioned at elevations above normal backwater levels. There is no
question that the periodic winter through spring high waters, so
typical of the Lower Mississippi Valley floodplain, would have posed
a severe constraint on aboriginal use or occupation of lowland areas,
and this factor was no doubt one of the principal considerations in
aboriginal settlement founding decisions.
Environmentally, the Lafayette components were founded in several quite distinctive situations. Hidden Hills and Paul Blanchet were
positioned along the crest of the four meter high escarpment which
marks the western boundary of the Bayou Vermilion basin. Florally,
these spots were dominated by a mixed hardwood canopy over and
interspersed with grass. The Lafayette, Bayou St. Clair and Bayou

TCHEFUNCTE CULTURE

85

Capucin sites were located on natural levee crests, covered with
mixed bottomtand hardwoods, but were adjoined by grassy prairies
and cypress-tupelo gum swamps. Bayou Tortue, on a prism of natural
levee sediments, had immediate access to a large wet hardwood
swamp and to the drier hardwood-meadow dominated terrace escarpment. The Magenta sites were on narrow bankline ridges of a
crevasse at the point where blowout waters entered an extensive wet
hardwood-cypress swamp. Olivier was founded on an elevated alluvial or colluvial apron of grass and hardwood gallery forest composition. The unusual Ruth Canal site occupied one of the wetter zones of
the Bayou Vermilion basin, but it too was situated in such a way as to
maximize access to a periodically drowned prairie, a wet hardwood
backswamp and drier areas of mixed bottomland hardwood levees.
The settlement system of the Lafayette phase seems to have been
one very efficient means of coping with a dynamic floodplain environment. An overriding founding consideration appears to have been
hydrologic fluctuations; site locations were chosen to place village
residents above all but the most severe annual floods and inundations. Although assemblage composition and intersite variation have
yet to be completely worked out, most Lafayette components appear
to have been small, seasonal base camps or semi-permanent villages,
occupied by small groups of men, women and children (numbering
between 30-90 people). These groups appear to have been economically self-supportive. Few intervillage economic ties and almost certainly none which required a socially formalized and ritualistically
validated structure, seem to have been maintained in the Lafayette
phase. However, a possible focus of community-wide importance
may have been in communal burial of the dead and participation in
attendant ritual. If the small conical mounds at Lafayette, Bayou
Tortue and Bayou Capucin were erected by Lafayette Tchefuncte
peoples (and this has yet to be demonstrated beyond a shadow of
doubt), then the possibility that contemporary Vermilion communities shared similar causes and construction energies is also
emergent.
In summary, the Lafayette phase settlement distribution forms a
dispersed pattern; locational choices appear to have been conditioned
or reflected by the distribution of loam or silty loam and by high
emergent spots in the floodplain. Microenvironmental situations at
each of the sites were quite different, but locations maximized access
to multiple niches, which included hardwood, prairie and mixed
zones. What implication this settlement strategy has for the development of Tchefuncte culture in the Bayou Vermilion basin, and by

86

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

o~
~"~o

~ ~.~

N.°~ "=
¢,1

#4

N-~
CO

~

.

~D~

~.~
CO

COco

o

&-~

TCHEFUNCTE CULTURE

87

o
o

G3
O

.~o7~
.

o~
o~°o
~o~
~0"O

I::L ¢0

sN~

¯~ o

r.,0 ~0

pD

o

O~

~C3

88

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

extension for the other "vital" regions in the lower valley, is the
central topic to be considered below.
Developmental Dynamics
The cultural phase which immediately preceded Lafayette
Tchefuncte has been termed Beau Rivage; it represents an isolated
geographic node of Poverty Point culture (Gibson 1973:371-374). The
Beau Rivage phase shares many cultural details with the principal
phase centered at the Poverty Point site, some 350km to the north. It
has been argued elsewhere that the Poverty Point site and surrounding site nexus conformed to a model of sociopolitical structure known
as a chiefdom (Gibson 1973, 1974b, n.d.b). It is suspected, without
independent confirmation, that the Beau Rivage phase had a comparable structural organization, although its size and complexity were
certainly no match for the spectacular Poverty Point chiefdom.
Hypotheses
Several interdependent hypotheses have been advanced to explain
the fall of the Poverty Point chiefdom and the concomitant decline of
Poverty Point culture in all of the "vital" regions of the Lower Mississippi Valley (Gibson 1973:359-393, n.d.b). If the data from the Bayou
Vermilion basin do not invalidate these hypotheses, then a major
corpus of independent support for their general accuracy will have
been engendered. The hypotheses are abstracted below. The conditions they describe account not only for the collapse of Poverty Point
but for the rise (if rise is an appropriate characterization) of
Tchefuncte culture.
Hypothesis 1. Emigration of people from circumscribed, upland
edge-floodplain contact zones (brought on by population expansion
and budding villages) led to a breakdown of economic redistribution,
the principal integrating factor of chiefdoms. The resultant relocation
of population groups and the expanded, rather indiscriminant use of
previously little used or unused floodplain ecosystems is causually
related to the decline of Poverty Point chiefdoms and the appearance
of Tchefuncte "tribal" societies.
Hypothesis 2. The historical shift in the Poverty Point redistributive
system from an initial state in which exotic raw materials were predominantly used for technomic or "useful" equipment to a late and
final phase which concentrated on the restricted distribution of rank
and status validating raw materials led to a loss of technological and
economic efficiency with disastrous results on the underlying support base. When coupled with population emigration and movement
away from the chiefdom’s sphere of influence, the results were a

TCHEFUNCTE CULTURE

89

decreasing ability to insure a steady inflow of exotic materials, a
lessening capacity of redistribution to promulgate societal cohesion
and a growing impetus for lower social ranks to break out of the
system which they were increasingly supporting with decreasing
materialistic rewards. This process culminated in the appearance of
Tchefuncte culture.
Hypothesis 3. A third and final factor which contributed to Poverty
Point collapse and Tchefuncte crystallization may have been in political power usurpation. There are slim indications, based on the panregional distribution of certain kinds of exotic materials and probable
Poverty Point cult items (e.g., clay female figurines and special lapidary objects) that Poverty Point leaders at the height of cultural
elaboration may have been systematically attempting to incorporate
the widely separated chiefdoms, including Beau Rivage, under a
single political or religious hegemony. No doubt, the principal Poverty Point chiefdom by dint of its strategic location (convergence of
trade routes and centralized position) had since its nascent phase
commanded the entire sphere of commerce. But this later, florescent
and post-florescent expansion seems to have been accompanied by
increased administrative support for a body of warriors; a process
indicative of a true political revolution (basic to the formation of a
primitive state). This heightened support of a coersive or potentially
coersive body is indicated at the big Poverty Point site by the heavier
exploitation of midwestern flint and slate sources, by the transformation of these materials into restricted and probably status-symbolic
projectile point types (especially, Motley) and decorated gorgets, and
by the geographic isolation of the Motley point and slate gorget
distributions from all other combined point and gorget types based on
intrasite analysis (Gibson 1973:162-169,222-228; 1974b). It is probable that the maintenance of this program placed a considerable strain
on the economic adhesive of chiefdom society. The ultimate consequence was chiefdom fragmentation and the emergence of "tribal"
societies, collectively known as Tchefuncte culture.
Testing the Hypotheses
The Bayou Vermilion data seem to be in substantial agreement with
the emigration process postulated in hypothesis 1. Physiographically, each of the three known Beau Rivage (Poverty Point) components were located along the crest and slope of the abrupt escarpment
which separated uplands from floodplain. The situations at Hidden
Hills and Paul Blanchet (Stone Road) have been previously described.
Both of these sites have Beau Rivage components underlying those of
the Lafayette phase. The Beau Rivage site itself is positioned at the

90

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

point where Bayou Vermilion cuts through the high western scarp
and exits the floodplain. Beau Rivage has a few sherds with
Tchefuncte-like designs, but these are very likely to have been part of
the limited Poverty Point pottery complex. This site lies across Bayou
Vermilion, some 400m north of the extensive Lafayette component at
Bayou Tortue, and indeed at least three small exposures of Beau
Rivage phase materials have been recently uncovered by construction
work on the periphery of the Bayou Tortue site. The major point to be
made here is that all three Beau Rivage sites have or are in immediate
juxtaposition to Lafayette components. Yet none of the Lafayette units
in the floodplain have yielded Beau Rivage components. This is not to
say that Beau Rivage sites do not exist in the floodplain; they are
anticipated in view of the presence of analogous sites in several other
"vital" regions. In fact, it is not totally inconceivable that the strange
Ruth Canal site with its fiber-tempered pottery, attributed here to an
early Tchefuncte time range, may have been a small Beau Rivage
camp.
The important thing to remember, however, is the fact that
Tchefuncte sites in the Bayou Vermilion basin were overwhelmingly
oriented to several divergent ecosystems along upland bluffs and
down in the floodplain, while those of the Beau Rivage phase were
limited to escarpment edges. Although our data are far from complete
and we cannot at this time provide quantitative statistical support, the
settlement and adaptive strategies of the Beau Rivage and Lafayette
phases do seem to have been quite distinctive. And given the time
involved in the transformation of Poverty Point culture into
Tchefuncte culture, at least part of this distinctiveness would appear
to have been brought on by the increasing floodplain orientation of
Tchefuncte peoples. This affords substantial backing for the emigration process of hypothesis 1; it would have produced the collapse of
redistribution, the principal integrating mechanism, by removing the
environmental preconditions essential for its existence.
Time phasing of the Beau Rivage and Lafayette phases has not
reached the point where strong support can be summoned to validate
hypothesis 2. It is, nonetheless, quite evident judging by the paucity
of exotic materials on Lafayette sites, that during the Poverty PointTchefuncte transformation, the procuration and redistribution of
foreign raw materials in general rapidly slowed and eventually
stopped altogether. Actually, the historical shift toward restricted
access to redistributed materials may have played a far less important
role in Beau Rivage-Lafayette phase transition than it did in the
decline of the principal Poverty Point chiefdom. The possibly reduced importance of this process in the Vermilion basin would be

TCHEFUNCTE CULTURE

91

especially appropriate if these south Louisiana sociopolitical organizations were, as I suspect, dependent on the inflow of trade materials
from the Poverty Point site itself rather than on direct procuration
from source areas. Under such circumstances, the stoppage of exotic
material inflow alone would have been sufficient to relax the dependency on redistributed materials and to have brought on the decay of
administrative structure.
Similarly, the third hypothesis postulated to account for Poverty
Point-Tchefuncte transformation in northeastern Louisiana may have
played a very minor and secondary role in Vermilion culture change.
Power usurpation in the form of novel foreign policy enactment and
of creation of enforcement and/or protection bodies for political or
religious emissaries need not have been an endemic process of local
chiefdom evolution in the Vermilion basin to have contributed to the
overall cultural decline. Indeed, the smaller Poverty Point chiefdoms,
such as Beau Rivage, probably never had a support base and sphere of
political influence capable of initiating and maintaining such ambitious projects. If prestigious warrior groups were being increasingly
supported by Beau Rivage leaders in an effort to back up regional
policy and religious proselytizing, this situation is not registered by
the presence of special projectile point types of midwestern gray flint
and of decorated gorgets of slate, the status-symbolic representations
of this warrior force at the Poverty Point site (Gibson 1973:162-169,
225-228).

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Power usurpation is inherent in the cultural processes which generated and sustained chiefdoms. A chiefdom, of its own inertia, is
constantly moving toward greater centralization of power and more
explicit control of its masses. If these processes can be religiously or
militarily validated, the chiefdom will become a state, but if the
underlying economic support is superceded or withdrawn, societal
fragmentation will result. Poverty Point chiefdoms in each of the
"vital" regions of the lower valley, including Beau Rivage, had collapsed by 700-600 B.C. The causes of this decline appear to have been
embodied in three interrelated processes in the major Poverty Point
chiefdom -- population fragmentation and increasing floodplain
reorientation, reorganization of redistribution, and burgeoning
power accumulation by administrative leaders. Decline in the distantly separated Poverty Point chiefdoms appears to have similarly
involved the reorganized settlement and economic utilization of
floodplain environments and to a lesser and probably secondary

92

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

extent, the factors of redistribution shifts and power usurpation. The
ultimate outcome of these probably rapid changes was the appearance
of a significantly different mode of cultural adaptation, the
Tchefuncte culture. Geared primarily to divergent lowland ecosystems and lacking redistribution for societal cohesion, the Tchefuncte
culture represented a nominally successful, but less sociopolitically
complex culture, whose genesis was bound with the decline-related
processes of the preceding Poverty Point culture. Both Poverty Point
and Tchefuncte cultures can be understood in terms of their inherent
systems of adaptation to variable environmental situations, and
though cultural de-evolution is a proper characterization of the Poverty Point-Tchefuncte cultural transformation, it can be appreciated
as an inevitable and predictable consequence of certain evolutionary
processes operative in the Lower Mississippi Valley during the last
two millennia B.C.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Much of the perspective adopted in this paper is a result of frequent discussions with
Aurville Touchet, U.S. Soil Conservation Service, Layton Miller, University of Southwestern Louisiana, and Clarence Webb, Shreveport, Louisiana; I am indebted to
Touchet for soil identifications and interpretations, to Miller for his assistance in site
surveying and excavation, and to Webb for continued exchanges on Poverty Point
problems. Charles Bollich, Beaumont, Texas, furnished valuable information and extensive collections from the Ruth Canal site. My archeology students over the past five
years have assisted in excavation and analyses of materials, and I express my appreciation to them collectively for their continued enthusiasm and substantive ideas. The
present paper represents a substantially modified version of a paper read at the Conference on Gulf Coastal Archeology, held at Beaumont, Texas, April 17-18, 1971. I would
like to thank Lawrence Aten and Charles Bollich, the conference organizers.

TCHEFUNCTE CULTURE

93

REFERENCES CITED

Beardsley, Richard K., et al.
1955 Functional and Evolutionary Implication of Community Patterning.
Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, No. 11, pp.
131-157.
Binford, Lewis R.
1964 A Consideration of Archaeological Research Design. American
Antiquity, Vol. 29, pp. 425-441.
Bourne, E. G. (ed.)
1904 Narrative of the Career of Hernando de Soto, 1539-42, According to
Elvas, Biedma, and Rangel. Trail Maker’s Series, New York.
Christaller, W. (trans. by C. W. Baskin)
1966 Central Places of Southern Germany. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs.
Clarke, David L.
1968 Analytical Archaeology. Methuen, London.
Cook, S. F. and R. F. Heizer
1965 The Quantitative Approach to the Relation between Population and
Settlement Size. University of California Archaeological Survey
Report, No. 64.
1968 Relationships among Houses, Settlement Areas, and Population in
Aboriginal California. In: Settlement Archaeology, (K. C. Chang, ed.),
pp. 79-116. National Press, Palo Alto.
Cook, S. F. and A. E. Treganza
1950 The Quantitative Investigation of Indian Mounds. University of
California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology,
Vol. 40, No. 5, pp. 223-262.
Fisk, Harold N.
1944 Geological Investigation of the Alluvial Valley of the Lower Mississippi River. U.S. Army, Corps of Engineers, Mississippi River Commission Publication, No. 52.
Ford, James A. and George I. Quimby, Jr.
1945 The Tchefuncte Culture, an Early Occupation of the Lower Mississippi Valley. Memoirs of the SocietyforAmerican Archaeology, No. 2.
Ford, James A. and Clarence H. Webb
1956 Poverty Point, A Late Archaic Site in Louisiana. American Museum of
Natural History, Anthropological Papers, Vol. 46, Pt. 1.
Ford, James A. and Gordon Willey
1940 Crooks Site, A Marksville Period Burial Mound in LaSalle Parish,
Louisiana. Louisiana Geological Survey, Anthropological Study, No.
3.
Gagliano, Sherwood M.
1967 Late Archaic-Early Formative Relationships in South Louisiana.
Proceedings of the 23rd Southeastern Archaeological Conference, No.
6, pp. 9-22.
Gibson, Jon L.
1973 Social Systems at Poverty Point, An Analysis of Intersite and Intrasite
Variability. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Southern Methodist
University.
1974a Aboriginal Warfare in the Protohistoric Southeast: An Alternative
Perspective. American Antiquity, Vol. 39, No. 1, pp. 130-133.

94

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1974b Poverty Point: The First North American Chiefdom.Archaeology, V °l"
27, No. 2, pp. 96-105.
n.d.a. The Catahoula Phase of East Central Louisiana: A Critical Appraisal.
Unpublished manuscript, University of Southwestern Louisiana,
Lafayette.
n.d.b. The Rise and Decline of Poverty Point. Unpublished manuscript,
University of Southwestern Louisiana, Lafayette.
Gibson, Jon L. and William Baker
n.d. Archaeology at Louisiana Delta Plantation, Phase I: The Survey. Manuscript in preparation, University of Southwestern Louisiana,
Lafayette.
Gibson, Jon L. and Layton J. Miller
1973 The Trappey Mastodon, Lafayette Parish, Louisiana. The University of
Southwestern Louisiana Research Series in Anthropology, No. 27.
Gumerman, George J. (ed.)
1971 The Distribution of Prehistoric Population Aggregates. Prescott College Anthropological Reports, No. 1.
Jennings, Jesse D.
1952 Prehistory of the Lower Mississippi Valley. In: Archeology of Eastern
United States (J. B. Griffin, ed.), pp. 256-271. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago.
Jensen, Harald P., Jr.
1968 Coral Snake Mound. Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 39,
pp. 9-44.
Johnson, Gregory A.
1972 A Test of the Utility of Central Place Theory in Archaeology. In: Man,
Settlement and Urbanism, (P. J. Ucko, R. Tringham, and G. W. Dimbleby, eds.). Duckworth and Co., London.
Kroeber, Alfred
1939 Cultural and Natural Areas of Native North America. University of
California Press, Berkeley.
Lytle, S. A.
1968 The Morphological Characteristics and Relief Relationships of Representative Soils in Louisiana. Louisiana State University, Agricultural Experiment Station, Bulletin No. 631.
McClurkan, B. B., W. T. Field, and J. N. Woodall
1966 Excavations in Toledo Bend Reservoir, 1964-65. Papers of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, No. 8.
Naroll, Raoul
1962 Floor Area and Settlement Population. American Antiquity, Vol. 27,
pp. 587-589.
National Cooperative Soil Survey
1967, 1972, 1973 Sharkey Series, Acy Series, Gallion Series, Fausse Series,
Memphis Series, Dundee Series, Baldwin Series, Iberia Series. United
States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service. Fort
Worth.
Phillips, Philip
1970 Archaeological Survey in the Lower Yazoo Basin, Mississippi,
1949-1955. Papers of the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, Vol. 60, Pts. 1 and 2.

TCHEFUNCTE CULTURE

95

Plog, Fred and James N. Hill
1971 Explaining Variability in the Distribution of Sites. In: The Distribution
of Prehistoric Population Aggregates, (G. J. Gumerman, ed.), pp. 7-36.
Prescott College Anthropological Reports, No. 1.
Shenkel, J. Richard
1971 Cultural Adaptation to the Mollusk: A Methodological Survey of
Shellmound Archaeology and a Consideration of the Shellmounds of
the Marismas Nacionales, West Mexico. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, State University of New York at Buffalo.
Snow, Charles E.
1945 Tchefuncte Skeletal Remains. In: The Tchefuncte Culture, An Early
Occupation of the Lower Mississippi Valley (J. A. Ford and G. I.
Quimby, Jr.), pp. 99-113. Memoirs of the Society for American
Archaeology, No. 2.
Swanton, John R.
1911 Indian Tribes of the Lower Mississippi Valley and Adjacent Coast of
the Gulf of Mexico. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 43.
1946 The Indians of the Southeastern United States. Bureau of American
Ethnology, Bulletin 137.
Varner, J. G. and J. J. Varner (tra.ns. and eds.)
1951 The Florida of the Inca. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Webb, Clarence H., James A. Ford, and Sherwood M. Gagliano
n.d. Poverty Point Culture and the American Formative. Unpublished
manuscript, Children’s Clinic, Shreveport.
University of Southwestern Louisiana
Lafayette

ROCK ART OF THE GUADALUPE MOUNTAINS
NATIONAL PARK AREA
JOHN W. CLARK, JR.

ABSTRACT
Rock art in the Guadalupe Mountains National Park and in the adjacent
Delaware Mountains consists of petroglyphs and paintings on stone surfaces, usually located in the interiors of rock shelters or slight overhangs.
The paintings apparently fall within the Jornada Style as defined by
Schaafsma (1972:101-118) and are dated between A.D~ 1050 and 1400 on
the basis of ceramic association.

INTRODUCTION
Six rock art sites in the Guadalupe Mountain National Park area are
described; four are located within the park boundaries and two are in
the nearby Delaware Mountains. The rock art was copied during the
Texas Archeological Society’s annual field school held in the
Guadalupe Mountains during June of 1970. The field school was
conducted to instruct the Texas Archeological Society members in
the "... purposes and techniques of modern archeological surveysl
and to carry out a systematic problem-oriented site survey of a portion
of the park" (Sharer 1970:10).
The purpose of the rock art survey was similar. Primarily, the
objectives were to introduce the field school participants to the techniques of recording rock art. Several recording techniques were
utilized in documenting the rock art in order to maximize the accuracy of the final product. Ultimately, the objective is to integrate the
rock art studies into a general understanding of the local prehistoric
cultural systems.
RECORDING TECHNIQUES
The method of pictograph recording most frequently used by the
survey party was a technique described by Dewdney and Kidd (1962)
and Clark (1967). This technique involves the use of water, Japanese
rice paper and soft pastels to make direct full size color tracings of the
paintings. First, the wall of the shelter must be wet carefully with the
water; then, the rice paper is placed over the painting (Fig. 1,a). The
paper is then wet to make it nearly transparent, allowing the tracing of
the pictograph to be made. The advantages of this method are that one
obtains a full size tracing in the natural or near the natural color, the
paper is opaque when dry, and wall conditions and configuration
may be indicated on the paper. Unfortunately, the paper is not per-

98

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

FIGURE 1: (A.) Tracing pictographs using wet rice paper at Apache
Mask Cave (41CU24). (B.) Apache Mask Cave (41CU24). Crew mapping cave prior to recording the rock art.

GUADALUPE ROCK ART

99

fectly transparent when wet and one must be sure not to overlook faint
portions of a painting.
A second technique employed was direct full size tracing utilizing
sheets of clear acetate and ink marking pens. Again, the advantage is
an accurate full size tracing of a painting, but one cannot approach the
natural color, show lighter or darker areas or satisfactorily note wall
features. This technique has been used previously in Texas by
Gebhard (1960), Grieder (1965) and Brook and Green (1967).
Scale drawings using colored pencils or water colors were another
means used in copying rock art. Bartlett (1854) was among the first to
use this technique in recording Texas rock art. The scale drawing
approach was also used by Jackson (1938) and Kirkland (1938, 1939
and 1942). The most recent work utilizing this approach has been
done by Green (1967a, 1967b), Brook and Green (1967), Green (1966,
1969) and Walters (1968). In all of these instances the primary recording device was the scale sketch.
Another technique utilized by the field school was recording by
color and black and white photography. The primary advantage of
this method is that one achieves a copy characterized by minimal
interpretation by the recorder, assuming the shelter wall is flat and the
camera is oriented perpendicularly to the plane of the wall. However,
there are often distortions of proportion due to the irregularities of the
rock surface and differences in camera angle. Because of the distortions involved, which can sometimes be quite serious, this method is
unsatisfactory for final recording.
Petroglyphs were noted at only one site in the park. These were
recorded by rubbing a pencil on a piece of paper which had been
placed over the engraved lines. Photographs were also taken of the
petroglyphs.
In addition to copies of the rock art, field records include written
site descriptions, photo record sheets, a catalog of artifacts collected
at each site, site maps, a description of the geology and environment
and grid plans for the pictograph copies. Each site was plotted on a
U.S. Geological Survey topographic map of the area.

THE SITES

In this section of the report the sites are described with data on the
geology, topographic position, painting surface, pictograph location
at the sites and a brief description of the pictographs.. The figures
include maps of the sites and the pictograph copies oriented in relation to a grid superimposed on the wall of each shelter.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

100

N

41 CU 15

SMITH CAVE

LEGEND

~

.

¯~

DATUM
SOTOL
IRON WOOD
LOG
REAR WALL AT FLOOR
REAR WALL
PICTOGRAPHS
ROCK

FIGURE 2. Map and profiles of Smith Cave (41CU15).

GUADALUPE ROCK ART

7

101

t~

FIGURE 3. The paintings of Smith Cave. All paintings are in red.

102

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Smith Cave (41CU15)
Smith Cave, previously recorded as pictograph site 17 by Jackson
(1938:57), is located in the north wall of Smith Canyon, an east-west
trending canyon on the east side of the Guadalupe Mountains massif.
It is near the head of the canyon and consists of two open chambers,
each containing red monochrome pictographs (Fig. 2, 3). The shelter
is located at an elevation of approximately 6,500 feet above mean sea
level and is a solution cavity formed near the base of a massive
formation of light gray, very finely crystalline, fossiliferous limestone. Vertical fractures extend the entire width of the formation,
allowing water to percolate through the fractures to wash the dark
gray weathered surface to a light gray or almost white color. The stone
has many small solution cavities filled with coarsely crystalline calcite. The exposed surfaces are characterized by numerous solution
cavities, ripple marks and fossil molds. This massive limestone formation forms a cap over more thinly bedded strata of limestone. A
perennial spring flows in the canyon below the shelter.
The ceiling of the north chamber is smoke blackened, and both
chambers contain midden deposits and dust exfoliated from the walls
and ceiling of the shelter. Pictographs, all done in red paint, are
located on the north end of the southwest facing wall of the north
chamber and on the west and north facing walls of the south chamber.
Archeological materials collected on the surface of the midden are not
diagnostic and do not help date the site.
The pictographs in the north chamber are confined to grid squares
3, 5 and 7 or an area about eight feet in length and four feet in height
(Fig. 3). They consist of a group of "n"-like figures and a ladder-like
design oriented horizontally.
In the south chamber is a more extensive panel of motifs consisting
of horizontally oriented ladder-like designs, curvilinear arrangements of dots, a hand print and several fragmentary designs.
Paintings at this site resemble the Desert Abstract Style described
by Schaafsma (1972:63). Other sites on the east side of the Guadalupe
Mountains massif in New Mexico contain similar motifs. These sites
include Last Chance Canyon and Painted Grotto. The principal difference between Smith Cave and the New Mexico sites is that the Smith
Cave pictographs are monochrome while the others are polychrome.
Schaafsma (1972:63) presumes this style to be earlier than the Jornada
Style characterizing the pictograph sites described below.
Apache Mask Cave (41CU24)
Apache Mask Cave is located in the north wall of an unnamed
east-west trending canyon on the east side of the massif. Like Smith

GUADALUPEROCK ART

103

41CU24
APACHE MASK
CAVE

/
12

/

c

SCALE

?

:C’

LEGEND
~=~.,)
,~
(J~J

IRONWOOD

~

DATUM
PICTOGRAPH LOCAL

~ SOTOL
AGAVE

~

GRASS

I~

BEDROCK

FIGURE 4. The map and profiles of Apache Mask Cave (41CU24).
Paintings were recorded in three small alcoves of the shelter as
indicated on the map.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

104

J

t

~

!

17 1--

15 I

31

1
LEVEL LINE

LEVEL LINE CONTINUED

I

y ,j!l

I

_J.

~o
36

3

38

4O

41 CU 24 APACHE MASK CAVE
LEGEND
RED PICTOGRAPH
28

SCALE

GRID NUMBER
o

9

ALCOVE NUMBER

FEET

FIGURE 5. Paintings from the three alcoves of Apache Mask Cave.
These paintings were painted only in red.

GUADALUPE ROCK ART

105

Cave, it is near the head of the canyon and near the upper limits of the
massive limestone deposit referred to in the discussion of Smith Cave.
The canyon is capped by a resistant massive limestone underlaid by
more thinly bedded limestone covered with small loose talus derived
from the decomposition of the upper beds. These strata dip to the
southeast.
The shelter (Fig. 1,b) is a southward facing solution cavity approximately fifty feet in length and about thirty feet deep. Along the back
wall are three small alcoves containing paintings (Fig. 4). The floor of
the shelter is composed of thinly bedded southerly dipping beds of
limestone. No cultural refuse deposit was present on the shelter floor.
The westernmost alcove contains a small group of curvilinear and
circular motifs (Fig. 5, grid 3). The middle alcove contains a slightly
more extensive group including concentric circles, several curvilinear motifs, a possible human figure, a mask-like element and a
circle enclosing two smaller circles which are separated by a diagonal
line (Fig. 5, grids 13-17). In the easternmost alcove are numerous
incomplete motifs, mainly straight lines oriented vertically or
diagonally (Fig. 5, grids 34-40). Too few motifs occur to allow detailed
analysis; for the present, they are merely recorded. The motifs, however, are characteristic of Schaafsma’s (1972:102) eastern phase of the
Jornada Style.
41 CU48
The third rock art site located on the east side of the massif is
41CU48 (Fig. 6). It is in the north wall of an east-west trending canyon
locally known as Bear Canyon; the site is near the base of the same
massive limestone outcrop in which the other east side pictograph
sites are found. This southeastward dipping formation contains
numerous rockshelters. The geological formations and topographic
conditions are similar to those at the other sites on the east side of the
massif. 41CU48 is located near the head of the canyon.
Pictographs at the site are confined to the two ends of the shelter.
The paintings consist of a group of four vertical yellow lines on the
west end of the shelter and two yellow crosses and a circle with rays
on the east end (Fig. 6).
41CU70
The fourth pictograph site within the park is located on the west
wall of a north-south trending canyon on the southwest side of the
massif. Paintings occur near the mouth of the canyon in proximity to a
substantial midden deposit and bedrock mortar holes (Fig. 7). It is at
an elevation of about 4,500 feet above mean sea level. The gravelly bed

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

106

A DATUM t5’

\
LA RG

SCALE
5

0

10

FEET

A

o
~,

i
FEET

,
i

41 CU 48
L EGEN D
~’

YELLOW PAINT

At=== PICTOGRAPH LOCATION

FIGURE 6. The map and paintings of 41CU48. The paintings (in
yellow paint) were located near the mouth of the shelter at both sides
of the mouth.

GUADALUPE ROCK ART

107

41 CU 70
Sketch Map

LEGEND

BEDROCK

PICTOGRAPHS

SAND
EDGE OF SAND

e
O~

MORTAR HOLES

DEPRESSION

$~

PETRGLYPHS

N

I

MIDDEN & TALUS

SCALE*

( ~APPROXIMATE )

FEET

FIGURE 7. A sketch map of 41CU70 indicating the location of five
petroglyph locations and three pictograph panels. Also indicated are
the bedrock mortar holes and the midden area.

108

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of an arroyo is surrounded by slopes of thinly bedded black limestone
on the lower portions of the canyon and lighter colored limestone in
the middle and upper portions of the canyon. The limestone is finely
crystalline and contains black chert seams and nodules. Quarrying
activities of the site inhabitants are evident at several localities
around the site. Water erosion and scouring of the limestone floor of
the canyon produced several tinajas (potholes) which retain runoff
water for short periods.
The site consists of a midden (containing Pecos Brown andJornada
Brown sherds) overlying a talus bench at the west side of the mouth of
the canyon. The vertical face of the west wall of the canyon bears
pictographs and petroglyphs. Fifteen bedrock mortar holes occur in
the canyon floor northwest of the midden.
Petroglyphs appear as very finely engraved lines high on the west
side of the canyon where the midden rises to meet the vertical face.
They consist of converging diagonal, vertical, cross-hatched and
horizontal lines in five small groups (Fig. 8). Pictographs appear in
three groups on the vertical face north of the midden. Group one (Fig.
9) consists of a series of polychrome paintings in a niche formed in a
joint plane high on the face. They consist of red and black curvilinear
and representational motifs overlying, in part, a patch of yellow paint.
Group two motifs (Fig. 9) are adjacent to group one outside the niche.
They consist of three vertical red lines, two with vertically oriented
zigzag lines and one with diagonal red lines. The third group (Fig. 9)
lies near the base of the vertical face, low in the canyon. This group
consists of a group of at least fourteen deer, several perforated by
fletched projectiles; a human figure; a pair of horizontally oriented
zigzag lines; and a motif consisting of a central dot with four triangles
forming an open "X." Paintings in group three are badly faded by
exposure to rain and sun. A fourth group is thought by some members
of the crew to exist between groups two and three, but they may be
manganese stains washed down the vertical face.

SITES OUTSIDE THE PARK
Two pictograph sites related stylistically to 41CU40 and the other
sites of the Jornada Style were discovered outside the park. They are
on the northwest side of the Delaware Mountains massif.
Bear Cave (41CU14)
At Bear Cave, paintings occur in red and yellow and all are associated with pecked petroglyphs. The site consists of a very slight
overhanging face above a low shallow shelter. A narrow ledge lies at

GUADALUPE ROCK ART

FIGURE 8. Petroglyphs of 41CU70.

109

110

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

6~

o

0
7o

~r---Qd"

2_J
°~

p-

7..’~

FIGURE 9. The three pictograph panels of CU70, Group 2 and 3
painted in a red monochrome while the paintings of Group 1 are
painted in red, yellow and black.

GUADALUPE ROCK ART

111

the mouth of the shelter. Petroglyphs, all "projectile point" motifs, are
found on the upper portion of the ledge, while polychrome paintings
are found on the lower portion (Fig. 10). These paintings conform to
the Jornada Style, eastern phase. The projectile point motifs are not
unknown in Western United States rock art and have been used, in
some instances, as an aid in dating petroglyphs through the identification of projectile point types (Thomas and Thomas 1972; Heizer and
Baumhoff 1962). Archeological remains found at the site consist of a
single sherd of E1 Paso Brown pottery and an arrow point.
41CU13
Site 41CU13 is a westward facing shelter in a soft fine-grained
sandstone. A midden deposit is present in the shelter and considerable quantities of burned rock, ash and artifacts are found on the talus
slope in front of the shelter. A ledge containing 11 bedrock mortar
holes runs along the rear wall. Lying on the ledge are two large roof
spalls which are polished and exhibit numerous petroglyphs, similar
to those at 41CU14; a stone lined cist is present in the floor of the
shelter. The paintings are located along the rear wall of the shelter and
cluster in four groups; only the most southerly group is illustrated
(Fig. 11). The paintings are red, black or yellow monochrome motifs,
some appearing on smoke blackened roof remnants, thus apparently
being older than those on the more recently exfoliated areas. Archeological materials from the site include Chupadero Black on
White, E1 Paso Polychrome, E1 Paso Brown, Jornada Brown andPecos
Brown potsherds. These artifacts are comparable to those found at
41CU70.
Clearly, the deer at 41CU13 and 41CU70 are similar in form and
style, if not color, while the human figures at 41CU14 and 41CU70 are
similar in style. Likewise, the petroglyphs at 41CU13 and 41CU14 are
similar. Many of the same sherds appear at these three sites; thus, the
sites appear to be related both stylistically and chronologically.

DISCUSSION
The paintings on the east side of the Guadalupe Mountains massif
appear to be more formalized or abstract than those at 41CU70,
41CU13 or 41CU14. Furthermore, the paintings at 41CU15 may date
to an earlier period than those at the other sites. Archeological materials collected at 41CU15 are not temporally diagnostic, and no materials were found at either 41CU24 or 41CU48.
Some of the paintings at 41CU15 were reported by Jackson
(1938:57-59). Unfortunately there are numerous discrepancies between the paintings, his copies and photographs (Jackson 1938: Plate

112

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

m

~o~
t’ ~:~.,~,

,q,
w,,

=,
U

FIGURE 10. Paintings and petroglyphs from Bear Cave (41CU14). The
petroglyphs (projectile point motifs) are pecked rather than incised
and the paintings are in red and yellow.

GUADALUPE ROCK ART

FIGURE 11. Polychrome paintings from 41CU13.

113

114

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

XLI.3, p.56 and Fig. 42.1, p.58). He illustrates several petroglyph sites
in the area (Sites 13, 18, 20 and 172) which are clearly different from
the petroglyphs at 41CU13, 41CU14 and 41CU70, but one of his sites
(Site 20) does have three "projectile point" motifs (Jackson 1938:54,
Fig. 35) and engraved converging and crosshatched lines (Jackson
1938:67, Plate L). Other paintings are recorded at Jackson’s sites 21
and 178. Those recorded at Site 178 (Jackson 1938:74-78, Plates LVLIX) are very similar to those at 41CU70. The paintings depict deer
perforated by fletched projectiles and human figures. Jackson’s Site
178 is approximately 45 miles south of 41CU70 in the Baylor Mountains. Mera (1938) illustrates paintings from the Guadalupes in New
Mexico which tend to substantiate the conclusions that the paintings
conform to Schaafsma’s (1972:101-118) Jornada Style, while those at
41CU15 appear to be of an earlier style (Schaafsma 1972:61-71). Petroglyphs similar to those at 41CU13 and 41CU14 are found in Hudspeth County at Jackson’s Site 11 (Jackson 1938:35-38). In general, the
style of the Guadalupe Mountains pictographs is similar to the paintings recorded by Jackson in E1 Paso, Hudspeth and Culberson Counties, Texas and Otero County, New Mexico. Specifically, some of the
mask designs at his Site 2 (Jackson 1938:17) and animal motifs (deer)
at his Sites 27 and 29 in Jeff Davis County (Jackson 1938:91) are
similar to those at 41CU70, while some ladder-like motifs at his Sites
26 and 27 (Jackson 1938:91) are similar to those at 41CU15.
Kirkland recorded pictographs between Mount Livermore in Jeff
Davis County and Balmorhea in Reeves County that contain deer
motifs similar to those at 41CU70 (Kirkland and Newcomb
1967:132-138, Plates 88-91). More variable motifs occur in that area
than at 41CU13, 41CU14 and 41CU70. Balmorhea Shelter (Kirkland
and Newcomb 1967:138, Plate 93.3) contains motifs similar to those at
41CU15. Masks and animal motifs at Hueco Tanks in E1 Paso County
(Kirkland 1938, 1939; Kirkland and Newcomb 1967:173-203; Newcomb 1963:118; Crimmins 1931; and Mungo 1970) are certainly
stylistically related to the paintings in the Guadalupe Mountains
National Park (except for 41CU15). They are also stylistically similar
to those reported in Eddy County, New Mexico (Green 1967a), White
Rock Cave in E1 Paso County (Green 1967b: Fig. 10; Brook and Green
1967) and Atlatl Pictograph Site in the Sierra de Kilo, Chihuahua
(Green 1966: Figs. 6 and 7).
The paintings in the Guadalupe Mountains National Park conform
to the southeastern New Mexico styles of Turner (1963:33-38) and
more specifically to the eastern phase of the Jornada Style defined by
Schaafsma (1972). This style consists of representational and abstract
motifs of stylized animals, naturalistic and formalized human forms

GUADALUPE ROCK ART

115

and complex decorative patterns. The eastern division of this style is
characterized by the presence of many masks, formalized rectilinear
human figures and often by the use of natural rock projections as
noses in masks (Schaafsma 1972:114). The Guadalupe Mountains
paintings are apparently within the broad tradition of southwestern
art as typified by the paintings in Navajo Reservoir, New Mexico
(Schaafsma 1963, 1965).
Adjacent areas of western Texas are also characterized by numerous
paintings and petroglyphs. In the middle portion of the Pecos River
valley of Texas there are paintings that appear to be similar to the
paintings of 41CU15, 24 and 48, the paintings on the east side of the
mountain massif. They are mostly curvilinear and nonrepresentational. Examples are at 41TE4 and 41TE5 (Clark 1967).
Other sites in that area such as 41CX2 (Clark 1967) in Crockett County,
sites in eastern Pecos County (Walters 1968) and Meyer’s Spring in
central Terrell County (Kirkland and Newcomb 1967:112-123; Jackson 1938:p.146, Plates XCIX-CXII) do not specifically resemble any
paintings in the Park, but are primarily representational like those on
the west side of the Guadalupe Mountain massif.
Rock art on the Llano Estacado (Riggs 1966) in Garza County and
farther north in the panhandle of Texas (Jackson 1938; Kirkland 1942;
Kirkland and Newcomb 1967:203-216) is stylistically different from
the art of the Guadalupes, as is that of central Texas (Kirkland and
Newcomb 1967:143-172). A considerable amount of work has been
done on the rock art of the Lower Pecos River valley (Jackson
1938:165-238; Kirkland 1937, 1938 and 1939; Newcomb 1963; Kirkland and Newcomb 1967:37-110; Gebhard 1960; Grieder 1965). Again
there is little stylistic similarity between the rock art styles of the
lower Pecos and those of the eastern Mogollon area as exemplified by
the art of the Guadalupe Mountains.
Interpretation of pictographs and other art forms requires an extensive knowledge of the ethnography of either the artists themselves or
their recent descendents (Boas 1955). Without knowledge of the
iconography involved in a style or a literal representative execution,
the interpretation of meaning is difficult, if not impossible (Clark
1967). Interpretation may depend on the intent(s) of the paintings.
They may have functioned as mnemonic devices (Mountford 1964:15;
Birkett-Smith 1963:32), as magical elements in hunting or other
ceremonies, as a record of an historical event, as a means of religious
devotion or as a casual scrawl.
The paintings of 41CU13, 41CU14 and 41CU70 are representative
and may be interpreted in several ways. The motifs at 41CU70 seem to
be primarily associated with hunting. Likewise, hunting motifs at

116

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

41CU13 and 41CU14 are prominent, but more human motifs and
ritual masks occur. These sites are associated with extensive midden
deposits.
The paintings on the east side of the massif are much more difficult
to discuss and interpret because of their non-representational nature.
Smith Cave is associated with a midden deposit, while 41CU24 and
41CU48 are located in canyons in which no other archeological remains were found. These localities may be ritualistic shrines. Similar
sites seem to be present in northeastern Terrell County (Clark 1967).
Their meaning is unclear at present because of the limited sample size
and non-representational nature of the rock art.

CONCLUSIONS
Two distinctive stylistic traditions of prehistoric rock art in the
Guadalupe Mountains National Park area have been described. One
tradition, present at sites 41CU13, 41CU14, 41CU24, 41CU48 and
41CU70, is a representational style associated with a general Southwestern tradition and particularly with the Jornada Branch of the
Mogollon (Lehmer 1948); the other style present at 41CU15 is principally abstract or non-representational, possibly predating the Jornada
Style. Sites of the Jornada style consist of a wide range of motifs.
Those on the east side of the Guadalupe Mountains massif consist of
the least representational elements of the style and are not associated
with archeological deposits. The styles on the west side of the massif
and those in the Delaware Mountains consist of representational
motifs and are associated with extensive midden deposits. The Jornada style paintings on the east side of the massif may have been
ritualistic sites.
The only recognized archeological complex in the area associated
with the southwest is the Jornada Branch of the Mogollon (Lehmer
1948). The paintings may have been executed by some other group
closely associated with the Mogollon or by Mogollon peripheral
units, ut there is a sufficient number of known sites with Southwestern style paintings to indicate that their influence was widespread in
Texas.
Thus, all the rock art sites recorded in this report, with the exception of 41CU15, are of the Jornada Style. The sites are clearly important to the understanding of the nonmaterial aspects of the cultures
which produced them. They should be protected from vandals in
order that they, with other sites still to be found and recorded, may
enhance our understanding of the people who occupied the southern
portion of the Guadalupe Mountains.

GUADALUPE ROCK ART

117

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Participants in the rock art survey of the Texas Archeological Society field school in
the Guadalupe Mountains National Park included people from a wide variety of
backgrounds who materially enhanced the project. Eugene Anderson located several of
the sites before the field school began. Bransford Eubank identified plants in the
environs of the sites, while Jack Klatt described the geology of the sites. John Runyan
identified the pottery types collected at some of the sites and John W. Green located and
initially recorded 41CU70 during the field school. Other participants were involved in
the direct recording of the rock art. These people were: Murray Beadles, Lou Fullen,
Marge Fullen, Glen Fredlund, Dick Gingrich, John Hudspeth, Nancy Jircik, Mary Lou
Klatt, T. Levy, Jim Schmidt, Evelyn Waiters, Joyce Warren, Peggy Wehrli, Norman
Wehrli, Dave Wilson and Ricci Wilson.
There were other participants whose names were not recorded in the field notes of the
rock art project, but whose participation is acknowledged and appreciated.

REFERENCES CITED

Bartlett, John R.
1854 Personal Narrative of Explorations and Incidents in Texas, New Mexico, California, Sonora and Chihuahua Connected with the United
States and Mexican Boundry Commission During the Years 1850,
1851, 1852 and 1853. D. Appleton, London (Vol. I).
Birket-Smith, Kaj
1963 Primitive Man and His Ways. Mentor Books, New York.
Boas, Franz
1955 Primitive Art. Dover Publications, New York.
Brook, Vernon R. and John W. Green
1967 The New Mexico Rock Art Survey. The Artifact, Vol. 5, No. 3, pp.
25-40.
Clark, John W., Jr.
1967 Three Pictograph Sites in the Central Pecos Valley of Texas. The Texas
Journal of Science, Vol. 19, No. 3, pp. 245-257.
Crimmins, M. L.
1931 The Pictographs at Hueco Tanks. Bulletin, Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 3, pp. 24-30.
Dewdney, S. and K. E. Kidd
1962 Indian Rock Paintings of the Great Lakes. The University of Toronto
Press, Toronto.
Gebhard, David
1960 Prehistoric Paintings of the Diablo Region: A Preliminary Report.
RosweI1 Museum and Art Center Pu blications in Art and Science, No.
3.
Green, John W.
1966 A Preliminary Survey of the Atlatl Pictograph Site in the Sierra de
Kilo, Chihuahua, Mexico. Transactions of the Second Regional Archeological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western
Texas, pp. 9-23.

118

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1967a Fusselman Canyon Petroglyph Site: EPAS-44. The Artifact, Vol. 5, No.
1, pp. 1-19.
1967b White Rock Cave Pictograph Site: EPAS-49. The Artifact, Vol. 5, No. 3,
pp. 13-24.
1969 Sitting Bull Falls Pictograph Site. TheArtifact, Vol. 7, No. 2, pp. 7-13.
Grieder, Terence
1965 Report on a Study of the Pictographs in Satan Canyon, Val Verde
County, Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, Miscellaneous
Papers, No. 2.
Heizer, Robert F. and Martin A. Baumhoff
1962 Prehistoric Rock Art of Nevada and Eastern California. University of
California Press, Berkeley.
Jackson, A. T.
1938 Picture Writing of Texas Indians. University of Texas Publication
3809, Anthropological Papers, Vol. 2.
Kirkland, Forrest
1937 A Study of Indian Pictures in Texas. Bulletin, Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 9, pp. 89-119.
1938 A Description of Texas Pictographs. Bulletin, Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 10, pp. 11-40.
1939 Indian Pictures in the Dry Shelters of Val Verde County, Texas.
Bulletin, Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 11,
pp. 47-76.
1942 Indian Pictographs and Petroglyphs in the Panhandle Region of
Texas. Bulletin, Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
Vol. 14, pp. 9-26.
Kirkland, Forrest and W. W. Newcomb
1967 The RockArt of Texas Indians. The University of Texas Press, Austin.
Lehmer, Donald J.
1948 The Jornada Branch of the Mogollon. University of Arizona Bulletin,
Vol. 19, No. 2.
Mera, H. P.
1938 Reconnaissance and Excavations in Southeast New Mexico. Memoirs
of the American Anthropological Association, No. 51.
Mountford, Charles P.
1964 Aboriginal Paintings from Australia. Mentor Books, New York.
Mungo, Marjie
1970 The Hueco Tanks. Texas Highways, Vol. 17, No. 9, pp. 10-17.
Newcomb, W. W.
1963 Forrest Kirkland’s Paintings of Texas Indian Pictographs. Texas
Quarterly, Vol. 6, No. 3, pp. 107-128.
Riggs, Aaron
1966 The Reed Shelter: A Petroglyph Site in Garza County, Texas.
Transactions of the Second Regional Symposium for Southeastern
New Mexico and Western Texas, pp. 44-58.
Schaafsma, Polly
1963 Rock Art in the Navajo Reservoir District. Museum of New Mexico,
Papers in Anthropology, No. 7.
1965 Southwest Indian Pictographs and Petroglyphs. Museum of New
Mexico, Santa Fe.
1972 Rock Art in New Mexico. State Planning Office, Santa Fe.

GUADALUPE ROCK ART

119

Shafer, Harry J.
1970 A Preliminary Report of an Archeological Survey in the Guadalupe
Mountain National Park by the Texas Archeological Society in June
1970. Texas Archeology, Vol. 14, No. 3, pp. 10-17.
Thomas, David A. and Trudy C. Thomas
1972 New Data on Rock Art Chronology in the Central Great Basin. Tebiwa,
Vol. 15, No. 1, pp. 64-71.
Turner, Christy G., III
1963 Petroglyphs of the Glen Canyon Region: Styles, Chronology, Distribution and Relationships from Basketmaker to Navajo. Museum of
Northern Arizona Bulletin, No. 38.
Walters, Evelyn
1968 Preliminary Report on Handprints and Pictographs of Eastern Pecos
County, Texas. Transactions of the Fourth Regional Archeological
Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas, pp.
65-72.

¢5 % J

Austin, Texas

AN ANALYSIS OF THE CERAMICS OF
THE GUADALUPE MOUNTAINS NATIONAL PARK
ALAN L. PHELPS

ABSTRACT
The pottery sherds collected by the Texas Archaeological Society Field
School from the Guadalupe Mountains National Park are identified and
classified. The sherds are tabulated by site and sites are assigned a date
span through the use of ceramic cross-dating. Ceramic attributes are
examined with the purpose of identifying the occupants and isolating
possible settlement patterns; the latter being attempted by using various
site groupings. An hypothesis is proposed that places a Jornada-Mogollon
occupation in the Guadalupe Mountains National Park between A.D. 850
and A.D. 1350.

INTRODUCTION
More than 3,000 sherds of pottery were recovered by personnel of
the Texas Archaeological Society (TAS) Field School during their
Guadalupe Mountains National Park (GMNP) survey in June of 1970.
The sherds were tentatively identified by John Runyan of Hobbs, New
Mexico in the field laboratory and all but the very smallest were
cataloged with the site number from which they were collected. Bags
were marked with site numbers and the sherds from the appropriated
site were placed inside. A sampling of sherds was selected at random
and a temper analysis was performed in the field environment. The
sample was then examined in detail, field identification refined and
the sherds classified.
The purpose of this report is to tabulate by site the sherds of each
pottery type represented in the collection and to group the sites in an
attempt to identify any settlement or living patterns. Additionally,
ceramic cross-dating is used in assigning a date span to each ceramic
bearing site. A description of the modified sherds found within the
park is included~ a general discussion of ceramics follows, and the
report concludes with a short summary.
The report is oriented toward, and emphasizes, the Jornada Branch
of the Mogollon (Jornada-Mogollon District as defined by Lehmer
(1948). Jornada-Mogollon was also the predominant pottery group
identified in the GMNP’collection and represented 70% of the total
ceramics. The sample collected was considered to be representative of
the areas surveyed but not necessarily representative of the park
ceramics as a whole (Shafer 1970). The use of the terms GMNP, GMNP
area and GMNP region in this report pertains to those portions of the

122

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

GMNP surveyed by the TAS Field School. The survey was conducted
primarily on the western and southern flanks of the central
Guadalupe massif.
CONSIDERATIONS
Identification refinement and classification of the pottery sherds
brought to light certain analytical problems, notably the generally
small size of the sherds and weathering of their surfaces. All sherds
were collected from the surface, and weathering had caused a deterioration of surfaces, a chalky appearance of slips and obliterated designs. Both size and weathering rendered positive identification very
difficult and the determination of design elements and motifs often
impossible. Sherd size was also an important factor in differentiating
olla (jug) from bowl sherds, a distinction which had an impact on the
analysis of the ceramics.
Identification difficulties created a genuine quandary when distinguishing E1 Paso or Jornada Brown from El Paso Polychrome. Both E1
Paso Brown (Lehmer 1948) and Jornada Brown (Mera 1943) were
considered ancestral to E1 Paso Polychrome (Stallings 1931), and
sherds of E1 Paso Polychrome that did not display painting were often
impossible to distinguish from either of the brown wares. The existence of E1 Paso and Jornada Red on Brown and Black on Brown
(Lehmer 1948; Gerald n.d.), types intermediate between E1 Paso and
Jornada Brown and E1 Paso Polychrome, added to the identification
difficulty.
The above variables were considered before an interpretation was
made of a site that contained appreciable amounts of the two Brown
wares, El Paso Polychrome and types generally associated with the
aforementioned three. Such mixed pottery situations were frequently
encountered during the GMNP survey, and a distinction between the
brown wares and polychrome was significant in establishing a relative placement for the ceramically heterogenous sites.
Finally, not all the observed sherds were collected from sites where
ceramics were found. Within large sites all recovered sherds were
obtained from an arbitrarily designated area in an attempt to diminish
a collecting bias. Sherd collecting in other than the large sites was
accomplished solely in a random manner and no attempt was made to
recover all the sherds.
SITE GROUPING
Grouping sites by different criteria can be valuable in attempts to
discern settlement patterns, since such patterns will often display a

GUADALUPE CERAMICS

123

distribution relative to a great number of variables. Three criteria were
selected in an attempt to isolate any such patterns within the GMNP:
chronological ordering of ceramic types; life zones; and spatial and
topographical grouping (see Table 1). This latter group is subdivided
in Table I to establish the relationship of each site to selected terrain
features as well as the relationship of each site to the other sites. These
two subdivisions are presented in Table 1 as "terrain category" and
"spatial group."
Those sites that contained pottery were plotted on the United States
Geological Survey map (1933 edition) of Guadalupe Peak, Texas, with
a scale of 1:62,500 and a contour interval of 50 feet. A color code was
used to distinguish site size based upon the number of sherds collected from a site. The relative size of sites was arbitrarily established
as follows: small, less than 25 sherds; medium, 25 through 75 sherds;
large, more than 75 sherds. Of the 59 GMNP sites with ceramic
association, ten had an excess of 75 sherds, 16 contained from 25-75
sherds and 33 were in the "small" category. Five of the identified sites
were not plotted on the map; all were situated in Culberson County
beyond the range of the map and two of the five were located south of
the principal survey area in the Delaware Mountains region.

CHRONOLOGICAL ORDERING
Pottery types identified in the GMNP ceramic collection were as
follows: Alma Plain (Haury 1936); Jornada Brown (Mera 1943); E1
Paso Brown (Lehmer 1948); South Pecos Brown (Jelinek 1967);
Middle Pecos Micaceous Brown (Jelinek 1967); Roswell Brown
(Jelinek 1967); McKenzie Brown (Jelinek 1967); Playas Red (Ceramic
Conference 1969); San Andres Red on Terra Cotta (McCluney 1962);
Three Rivers Red on Terra Cotta (Cosgrove and Cosgrove 1932);
Lincoln Black on Red (Mera and Stallings 1931); Mimbres Black on
White (Hawley 1950); Chupadero Black on White (Mera 1931); Crosby
Black on Gray (Jelinek 1967); Casas Grandes Rubbed Scored (Ceramic
Conference 1969); E1 Paso Polychrome (Stallings 1931); Ramos
Polychrome (Ceramic Conference 1969); St. John’s Polychrome
(Hawley 1950); and Escondido Polychrome (Ceramic Conference
1969). Many sherds of Casas Grandes or Chihuahua ware were not
positively identified as to specific type. Red on brown variants of
Middle Pecos Micaceous, South Pecos and Roswell pottery (Jelinek
1967) were identified, as were red on brown and textured (incised,
corrugated, scored, etc.) variants of E1 Paso andJornada ware (Lehmer
1948; Gerald n.d.).
The chronological ordering of the GMNP ceramics was based on a

124

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
TABLE 1

SITE GROUPINGS

Site Designation
HZ29

HZ32

HZ33

HZ36

HZ39

HZ40

HZ41

HZ43

HZ44

Life Zone

L

L

L

L

L

L

L

L

L

Pottery Phase

E

E

L

L

E

L

I

g

L

Terrain Category

A

A

H

H

A

A

A

A

F

Spatial Group

3

1

3

3

3

3

3

3

2

Remark Number

1

HZ64

HZ65

HZ66

HZ67

HZ68

HZ70

HZ71

HZ72

HZ73

Life Zone

L

L

L

L

L

L

L

L

L

Pottery Phase

I

E

E

L

L

I

I

I

I

Terrain Category

A

A

A

F

F

F

F

F

F

Spatial Group

1

1

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

Remark Number

1,2

CU47

CU55

CU56

CU61

CU70

CU73

CU75

CU84

CU85

Life Zone

U

U

L

L

L

U

L

U

L

Pottery Phase

E

E

E

E

E

E

I

E

L

Terrain Category

A

C

A

A

C

A

A

C

A

Spatial Group

I

I

4

4

4

I

4

4

4

Remark Number

3

Remarks: 1. near alluvial fan; 2. multi-component; 3. western portion of the valley; 4.
northern extreme of the survey area. NOTE: the prefix "41" was eliminated from the site
designations.

GUADALUPE CERAMICS

125

HZ45

HZ46

HZ47

HZ49

HZ50

HZ51

HZ52

HZ53

HZ56

HZ58

HZ60

HZ61

L

L

L

L

L

L

L

L

L

L

L

L

E

I

E

E

E

L

E

I

E

E

L

E

F

F

A

F

F

F

A

A

A

A

A

A

2

2

2

2

2

2

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

HZ74

HZ77

HZ78

CU13

CU14

CU16

CU18

CU19

CU20

CU25

CU26

CU43

L

L

L

L

L

U°

L

L

L

U

U

U

L

E

E

I

E

E

E

I

E

E

E

L

F

F

F

U

U

C

A

H

U

C

C

C

2

2

2

U

U

4

4

4

U

4

4

U

2

1

1

2

CU90

CU93

CU98

CU99

CU108

CU109

RS 13

RS 18

L

L

U

U

L

L

L

L

E

L

E

I

E

L

E

I

A

A

C

C

A

A

U

U

4

4

I

I

4

4

U

U

2,3

4

4

3

KEY TO LINES:
line 1 -- L-lower Sonoran, U-upper Sonoran
line 2 -- E-early, I-intermediate, L-late
line 3 -- F-flat, A-alluvial fan, C-canyon, H-hill, U-unknown
line 4 -- I-isolated, U-unknown

126

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

correlation of the date spans presently accepted for each of the identified pottery types (Breternitz 1966; Hawley 1950; Ceramic Conference 1969). Pottery phases were formed as temporal divisions and
their sequential placement was developed with the phases of the
Jornada-Mogollon providing a guide. Lehmer (1948) perceived the
Jornada-Mogollon as consisting of a northern and a southern sequence, each with a common opening phase (Hueco) and three subsequent phases. He identified, from early to late, the Capitan, Three
Rivers and San Andres as the ensuing phases in the north, and in the
south he established the Mesilla, Dona Aria and E1 Paso phases.
Lehmer also delineated the provenience of the Jornada-Mogollon and
assigned the Guadalupe Mountains, within which the Park is located,
as the eastern boundary. Aten (1972) suggested, based upon his excavation at the Northgate Site in E1 Paso County, Texas, that Lehmer’s
phases are rough guesses requiring considerable improvement. In
particular, he believes that Lehmer’s definition of the Mesilla phase is
weak and that it should have an earlier beginning date.
The Middle Pecos Valley ceramic sequence as defined by Jelinek
(1967) was also considered in the GMNP ceramics ordering, but the
GMNP sample more closely approximated the pottery of the
Jornada-Mogollon. The Middle Pecos Valley sequence was separated
into northern and southern areas similar to Lehmer’s (1948) northern
and southern sub-branches of the Jornada-Mogollon, but no boundaries as such were proposed for the Middle Pecos Valley sequence. It
could be inferred that the Middle Pecos Valley region was bounded on
the south by the area about and slightly down river of Roswell, New
Mexico, and on the north by Ft. Summer, New Mexico. The eastern
and western extremities were limited, with the exception of the Rio
Hondo section, by the general confines of the Pecos River Valley. No
portion of the Middle Pecos Valley could be spatially affiliated with
the GMNP.
Three ceramic phases are defined for the GMNP: an Early with a
date span of A.D. 850-1100, an Intermediate occurring from A.D. 1050
to A.D. 1250, and a Late ranging from A.D. 1200 to A.D. 1350. The
pottery types that constituted the Early phase were E1 Paso, Jornada,
Middle Pecos Micaceous, South Pecos and Roswell Brown, Alma
Plain, Mimbres Black on White and San Andres Red on Terra Cotta.
Red on brown variants of the Brown wares appeared occasionally but
were never particularly common within the park. Later types such as
E1 Paso Polychrome, Chupadero Black on White, Three Rivers Red on
Terra Cotta and Crosby Black on Gray were observed in a very few
early sites in decidedly small amounts, forecasting the subsequent
Intermediate phase. The Early phase was characterized by a prepon-

GUADALUPE CERAMICS

127

derance of Brown wares and compared in time span to Lehmer’s
(1948) Capitan-Mesilla phase and the opening years of his Three
Rivers-Dona Ana phase and to Jelinek’s (1967) 18 Mile phase.
An approximate balance between plain and decorated wares was
achieved during the Intermediate phase. McKenzie Brown was added
to the inventory of brown wares of the previous phase while E1 Paso
Polychrome, Chupadero Black on White and Crosby Black on Gray
increased considerably in prominence. Three Rivers Red on Terra
Cotta, which evolved fromSan Andres Red on Terra Cotta (McCluney
1962), did not occur in any quantity, nor did the latter in the Early
phase. The Mogollon wares, Alma Plain and Mimbres Black on
White, decreased in popularity from the preceding phase and eventually disappeared. El Paso and Jornada Red on Brown and textured
variants, in addition to red on brown varieties of Middle Pecos
Micaceous, Roswell and South Pecos wares, were present but not in
appreciable quantities. The later stages of Lehmer’s (1948) Three
Rivers-Dona Ana phase and Jelinek’s (1967) Mesita Negra phase related to the GMNP Intermediate phase.
The Late ceramic phase featured an influx of pottery from distant
regions. Casas Grandes textured wares, Playas Red, Ramos Polychrome andEscondido Polychrome entered from the Mexican state of
Chihuahua (Ceramic Conference 1969) while St. John’s Polychrome
arrived from New Mexico (Hawley 1950). All these pottery types were
probably introduced through the E1 Paso area Jornada-Mogollon. The
Casas Grandes and Playas Red textured wares did not replace El Paso
orJornada textured pottery and were not a major factor in the GMNP.
Brown wares were less prominent than in the Intermediate phase;
decorated pottery dominated the Late phase. Jelinek’s (1967) McKenzie phases and Lehmer’s (1948) closing E1 Paso-San Andres phase
were compatible with the last ceramic phase of the GMNP with one
notable exception: plain wares did not practically cease to exist as
Lehmer (1948) suggested for the Jornada-Mogollon, but simply decreased in abundance from the Early through the Late phases. Jelinek
(1967) observed a similar reduction in prominence of plain wares in
the Middle Pecos Valley but also noted an increase in one later
variety, McKenzie Brown.
Unfortunately, the allocation of a site to one of the ceramic phases
was not always a simple task. Continued occupation, repeated reoccupation (creating a multi-component site) or sherd scattering caused
a condition whereby a particular site could be simultaneously placed
in two of the three phases. Such a situation was characteristic of some
of the GMNP sites and the solution in most cases was to place the site
in question in the phase indicated by the latest pottery type rep-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

128

b~

o’3

N

~14

0-3

i

O

cO

o~

~

v-(

~-1

b~

bq

b~

©
Z
©
Z

bq

©
m

-g

n~

m

Z

n~
©

O

~3
n~
©
G’3

’~

o

(9

GUADALUPE CERAMICS

129

¢q

m4

¢xl

b~

03

=

N

v~

1~

~6

U

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

130

eq

N1

{
o,3

b~

b~
0

~m

m

b~

t~

b~

a:l

o

=
©

g
0

©

GUADALUPE CERAMICS

131

cxl

~N

e,l

~D

O
c,,l

ca
©
©
©

b

2

ca

2
ca

ca

©

©
¢3

"8

~a

Z

O
©

E
,<

,.=

ca

00

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

132

e-1

Z

o

¢’-1

Z
©
co

t~

GUADALUPE CERAMICS

133

134

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

resented in the site’s ceramics. Such a method was patterned after
Jelinek’s (1967) treatment of sites in the Middle Pecos Valley; sherds
within a site which were not compatible with the phase to which the
site was assigned were termed "salvage" sherds of an earlier phase.
Most sites with a minimum number of sherds did not lend themselves
well to dating, and the establishment of a date span for such sites was
tenuous at best. An overlapping of the dates for the Intermediate
phase was intentionally incorporated to facilitate the accommodation
of most of the multi-component sites discovered in the park. It was not
intended to imply that if a site was included in a particular ceramic
phase it was occupied throughout the span of years established for
that phase, but rather that occupation took place during a period of
time encompassed by the date span.
The accompanying chart (Table 2) graphically illustrates that the
GMNP sherd sample was dominated (81%) by pottery types native to
the two ceramic sequences previously mentioned: the JornadaMogollon (70%) as defined by Lehmer (1948) and the Middle Pecos
Valley (11%) as outlined by Jelinek (1967).
LIFE ZONES
Four major life zones are represented in the GMNP: Lower Sonoran,
Upper Sonoran, Transition and Canadian (Burns 1967). A well
documented discussion of the flora and fauna of the life zones of the
park is found in Burns (1967) and will not be detailed here. Ceramic
bearing sites identified by the GMNP survey were located exclusively
in the Lower and Upper Sonoran zones, and the majority (82%) were
found in the lower division.
The Lower Sonoran is the most arid of the four zones in this
relatively dry region. It incorporates the flat lands and a generous
portion of the foothills of the Guadalupe Mountains. The Lower
Sonoran terminates and the Upper Sonoran begins at four to five
thousand feet, depending on the immediate topography. An arbitrary
division of the two Sonoran zones was established at 4,500 feet to
provide easier classification of the surveyed sites.
The Upper Sonoran zone extends to a seven or eight thousand feet
altitude and encompasses most of the foothills and a large part of the
mountains proper. The Transition zone is limited to the highest
sections of the Guadalupe Mountains while the Canadian zone is
severely restricted to the highest peaks in the southern portion of the
range.
The western and southern slopes of the Guadalupe Mountains are
more precipitous than the eastern or northern (Newell 1953) and the

GUADALUPE CERAMICS

135

range is bordered on the west by an immense playa or lake bed locally
termed "Crow Flats". The lower elevations of the western slope are
dominated by sand ridges which are generally oriented east to west.
The majority of sites were found in these ridges. Evidence of occupancy in the Upper Sonoran was restricted to ceramically small sites,
80% of which were classified as early units. No pottery bearing sites
were located in the Transition or Canadian zones.
SPATIAL AND TOPOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION
An inspection of the map indicated an obvious spatial clustering of
the majority of sites in four areas (Table 1). The first area was a
scattering of sites near a major arroyo (intermittent stream) in the
northwestern section of the surveyed region. Sites in this area ranged
from small to large and were primarily early ceramic. The second area
was adjacent to the large playa and the sites were generally distributed along a north-south line on the western edge of the survey area. It
encompassed the greatest number of sites and seven of the ten large
sites discovered during the survey. The group of seven large sites
consisted of two Early, three Intermediate and two Late phase sites.
However, within the entire second area, Early phase sites were more
numerous than the Intermediate or Late category, but were not a
majority. There was no particular imbalance of site size within the
area since it contained seven each of large and small sites and four
medium sites.
A third area, which included a prominent hill, was a collection of
six sites south and east of the second area. It presented a fairly
balanced spectrum of sites in terms of chronological phasing. The
majority of sites were medium in size and the area contained no large
sites.
The final area, which was the largest, combined the sites in a valley
at the southern limit of the surveyed region. The area included sites
that were predominantly Early ceramic (66%) and usually small in
size (eleven of fifteen sites contained less than 25 sherds). The one
large site in the valley was the second largest encountered during the
survey and was categorized as Intermediate phase.
Six sites displayed no particular spatial relationship and were
considered isolated. Although isolated, they were not eliminated
from the overall analysis.
Four terrain features were selected for the final grouping method; a
method that was complementary to the life zone treatment. The plotted location of each site that contained pottery was carefully inspected and each site placed in one of four terrain categories: (1)

136

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

alluvial fans; (2) flats; (3) hills; and (4) canyons (see Table 1). Sites
were also examined for proximity to arroyos or springs but this terrain
feature was not used as a basic criterion. Twenty-nine of the GMNP
sites, a majority, were situated on alluvial fans. Fourteen sites were
located on the flats and adjacent to the playa and yielded some of the
largest ceramic samples. The remaining sites were found in canyons
(9), on the slope of a hill (3) or were not plotted on the map (5).
Less than 33% of the sites could be associated with arroyos or
springs. It was surprising that more sites were not associated with
present water sources in this arid region; however, water may have
been more abundant during prehistoric times, as suggested by Burns
(1967) and Riches (1970). Additionally, Burns (personal communication) had information concerning a map dating from the Civil War
period that pinpointed numerous springs in the sandy sections of the
western section of the park; these springs no longer exist.
Canyon and hill sites comprised slightly more than 20% of the total
ceramic sites. Canyon locations were observed exclusively in the
southeastern portion of the surveyed area, with the exception of the
two sites in the northern reaches that were classified as isolated.
These latter sites, combined with two other isolated canyon sites,
comprised approximately 45% of the canyon sites. Conversely, canyon sites, all of which were small in size, represented two-thirds of the
isolated sites. All of the isolated sites were small and were basically
Early ceramic. Two of the three hill sites were situated on two s eparate
hills in the third "site proximity" area. The other hill site was located
in the large southern valley and yielded a large ceramic sample.
An especially interesting distribution of sites, one that was relative
to both size and proximity to a particular terrain feature, was that 70%
of the large sites were situated in the flats adjacent to the large lake
bed. Another revealing distribution pattern was the indiscriminate
location of Early, Intermediate and Late phase sites throughout the
surveyed area. Also, Early, Intermediate and Late sites displayed no
apparent affinity to any terrain feature.
MODIFIED SHERDS
Very few ceramic tools and ornaments were discovered during the
survey, and those recovered were from the two largest sites, 41HZ68
and 41CU19. There were five spindle whorls, three of Jornada Brown
and one each of E1 Paso Brown and Mimbres Black on White. These
five artifacts were small and crudely made, as contrasted with many
spindle whorls from E1 Paso area Jornada-Mogollon sites (Lehmer
1948; Moore 1947; Moore and Wheat 1951; Phelps 1967).

GUADALUPE CERAMICS

137

Another pottery artifact, an El Paso Polychrome bowl rim modified
by smoothing three sides (the fourth side was the vessel rim), was
collected from 41HZ68. It is a curved artifact, rectangular in shape
with rounded corners, and measured 7.5 centimeters in length, 3.3
centimeters in width and was a fairly uniform .6 centimeters in
thickness. The object was possibly a scraper similar to those described
by Lehmer (1948).
The final artifact, which appeared to be a pendant, was made of
Jornada Brown and was also found in 41HZ68. The specimen was
oval in shape with the suspension hole drilled from both sides. It was
a relatively good piece of workmanship and measured 5.4 centimeters
in length, 4.3 centimeters at the widest section and was uniformally .7
centimeters thick.
These few modified potsherds seemed meager in quantity considering the number of sites identified and the number of shards collected
in the GMNP. Their scarcity was even more noteworthy in view of the
fact that survey teams most likely collected every modified potsherd
encountered. These artifacts are not uncommon in E1 Paso area
Jornada-Mogollon sites (Lehmer 1948; Moore 1947; Moore and Wheat
1951; Phelps 1967).
Jelinek (1967) made little mention of modified sherds or pottery
tools in the Middle Pecos Valley, nor did Burns (1967) or Riches
(1970) indicate the existence of many ceramic artifacts in the open
sites of southeastern New Mexico.
GENERAL COMMENTS
The criteria that distinguish El Paso Brown from Jornada Brown
and both from E1 Paso Polychrome has perplexed archaeologists for a
number of years (Jelinek 1967; Jennings and Neuman 1940; Gerald
n.d.; Riches 1970).
Mera (1943) maintained that the dominant pottery of the Tularosa
Basin and adjacent areas was Jornada Brown. Jelinek (1967) provided
the best description of Jornada Brown using the type descriptions of
Mera and Jennings, with minor modifications. Jelinek listed the major
characteristics of the pottery as: paste -- "tan to black", frequent
"black" core; temper-- primarily feldspar with quartz and infrequent
mica as secondary agents; finish -- hand smoothed with frequent
polish, infrequent tool smoothing, some temper protrusion; derivation -- Alma Plain(?).
Lehmer (1948) agreed with Mera in thatJornada Brown dominated
the northern Jornada Branch of the Mogollon (as Lehmer classified the
archaeological materials) but maintained that E1 Paso Brown, a new

138

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

type, was characteristic of the southern two thirds of the JornadaMogollon domain. He likened both Jornada and E1 Paso Brown to a
coarser form of Alma Plain and distinguished the former from the
latter as generally being polished and having a finer tempering material.
Lehmer (1948) presented a formal description of E1 Paso Brown and
asserted that the paste was soft, granular and friable, "light brown to
black" in color with carbon streaks often present. The temper consisted of angular fragments of limestone and quartz of up to 1.5
millimeters in size. Prominence, size and profusion of temper was
distinctive. Finish was characterized by a smooth matte with considerable variation in the degree of smoothing, and color varied from
"buff to dark brown" with fire clouds common.
Others in the E1 Paso area noted that the color range of Jornada
Brown paste and finish was greater than that of E1 Paso Brown, that
carbon streaks and firing clouds were only occasionally found in
Jornada Brown and that particle protrusion occurred infrequently.
They also determined that the wall thickness of Jornada Brown was
ordinarily thinner than that of E1 Paso Brown and that the latter was
generally more restricted in rim treatment (Moore 1947; Brook 1966,
1967; Fritz 1969; Hedrick 1967; Phelps 1966, 1967, 1968b; Moore and
Wheat 1951).
Jelinek (1967) did not recognize differences in E1 Paso and Jornada
Brown and stated that the ]ornada Brown identified in the Middle
Pecos Valley "includes all of the relatively coarse-tempered brownware which was not assigned to one of the other types." He did list a
coarse form as a variant of the basic Jornada type.
Similarly, Riches (1970), after researching most of the available
written material, discussed the situation briefly and decided that E1
Paso Brown was a coarsened form of Jornada Brown. She did, as
opposed to Jelinek, separate and tabulate the two in her pottery
listings.
Burns (1967) did not speculate at length in the controversy but
endorsed the proposition thatE1 Paso Brown andJornada Brown were
two separate ceramic types. Neither Greer (1968) nor Corley (1965)
addressed the problem, but both acknowledged each type in their
pottery discussions.
Runyan (ms.), in an analysis of the sherds from the GMNP survey,
noted that E1 Paso Brown contained large "white" temper particles
(elements not specified) of as much as three millimeters in size and
that the temper material protruded through the smooth finish of the
sherds. It was determined that Jornada Brown temper particles were

GUADALUPE CERAMICS

139

usually smaller than those of E1 Paso Brown and were normally 1.5
millimeters or less in size. It was also found that Jornada Brown
generally had a semi- to fairly good floated surface which was often
polished.
Jornada Brown, in its native area, was apparently a northern manifestation of E1 Paso Brown, or vice versa, with differences in temper
particle size, wall thickness, range in color of paste and finish and rim
and surface treatment. The usual absence of temper protrusion in
Jornada Brown may well have been due to a greater care exercised in
finishing and to the smaller sized temper materials used. Both types
occur together but less often in the more northern and southern
Jornada-Mogollon sites. The dissimilarities of the two types might
primarily have been a result of a difference in the available pottery
making materials.
El Paso and Jornada Brown are considered ancestral to E1 Paso
Polychrome (Lehmer 1948) and this was readily observed in the
GMNP sample, since E1 Paso Polychrome sherds varied so greatly in
appearance. The transition from brown to polychrome was evidenced
in the E1 Paso area by the existence of El Paso and Jornada Red on
Brown and Black on Brown (Gerald n.d.; Lehmer 1948). E1 Paso
Polychrome was a widely distributed type that has been found in sites
as far east as Garza County, Texas (Shedd 1968), in southwest New
Mexico and southeast Arizona (Mills 1971, 1972), south into northern
Chihuahua, Mexico (Phelps 1968a) and northward into central New
Mexico (Stallings 1936). The most recently published dates for E1
Paso Polychrome, A.D. 1260-1295, were derived from archaeomagnetic samples taken from fire hearths in an E1 Paso site in the
Hueco Basin (Brook 1970).
Characteristics such as temper materials, size, paste and finish were
frequently duplicated in sherds of El Paso Brown and E1 Paso Polychrome and in Jornada Brown and E1 Paso Polychrome (Mera 1943;
Lehmer 1948; Stallings 1931; Hawley 1950). E1 Paso Polychrome,
which lacked decoration due to weathering or because of sherd size,
was often extremely difficult to identify in the GMNP collection.
Considerable care had to be exercised in differentiating E1 Paso
Polychrome from either E1 Paso or Jornada Brown. Two characteristics, wall thickness and rim treatment, were used in lieu of (when
decoration was missing), and in addition to, painted surfaces. In the
former case El Paso Polychrome was usually thinner and in the latter
instance it exhibited a wider range of rim forms (Stallings 1931; Alves
1931; Lehmer 1948; Mera 1943). The three pottery types, E1 Paso and
Jornada Brown and E1 Paso Polychrome, were designated as indigenous to the Jornada-Mogollon by Lehmer (1948).

140

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The great spatial and temporal distribution of E1 Paso and Jornada
ware can probably be attributed to their function within the culture.
The wide range of forms found in E1 Paso and Jornada ceramics
(Lehmer 1948; Moore 1947; Gerald n.d.) suggests that E1 Paso and
Jornada pottery was used in a variety of tasks, and therefore the two
types endured for a considerable length of time. Also, since they were
adaptable to so many functions, E1 Paso andJornada ware could have
been and were accepted in regions quite distant from their origin.
The most prevalent intrusives in E1 Paso area Jornada-Mogollon
sites (Moore 1947; Brook 1965; Lehmer 1948) were Playas Red (this
term was used, rather thanPlayas Red Incised, in accordance with the
1969 Ceramic Conference in Dragoon, Arizona; the conference actually updated rather than changed the Playas Red series originally
recognized by Sayles [1936]), Alma Plain, Mimbres Black on White,
Chupadero Black on White, Lincoln Black on Red, Three Rivers Red
on Terra Cotta (to include the broadline variety which was classified
as San Andres Red on Terra Cotta by McCluney), Ramos Polychrome,
Gila Polychrome (Hawley 1950) andAgua Fria Glaze (Hawley 1950).
Of the above ceramic types, only the latter two were not identified in
the GMNP sherd sample. The two Chihuahua or Casas Grandes wares,
Escondido Polychrome and Casas Grandes Rubbed Scored, that were
found in the GMNP have not been reported from any JornadaMogollon sites. These two types might well have been present in the
E1 Paso region but were misidentified since formal descriptions of
Escondido Polychrome and Casas Grandes Rubbed Scored probably
did not appear until 1970 (Ceramic Conference 1969).
A very significant aspect of the GMNP sherd sample was the fact
that virtually 90% of the ceramics recovered were of wares either
native to or common intrusives in the Jornada-Mogollon. It was quite
interesting to note that 100% of the ceramic artifacts in the park
collection were also so disposed.
Until recently many of the pottery types in the Middle Pecos Valley
had not been descriptively typed, nor had the spatial and chronological relationships of all the Middle Pecos Valley ceramics been substantiated. Jelinek accomplished both tasks and published his findings in 1967. He identified and presented formal descriptions of six
new pottery types from the Middle Pecos Valley: Middle Pecos
Micaceous Brown, McKenzie Brown, South Pecos Brown, Roswell
Brown, Crosby Black on Gray and Middle Pecos Black on White.
Jelinek (1967) indicated that the new types were indigenous to the
Middle Pecos Valley: Middle Pecos Micaceous and McKenzie Brown
and Middle Pecos Black on White to a northern area and the remainder to a southern area centered about Roswell, New Mexico. He also

GUADALUPE CERAMICS

141

suggested thatSouth Pecos Brown was native to a much larger region,
perhaps as far south as the Texas-New Mexico border. All of these new
pottery types, except the Middle Pecos Black on White, were a part of
the GMNP survey sample.
Intrusives in the Middle Pecos Valley came from diverse regions
butJornada Brown, Alma Plain, Chupadero Black on White and Red
Mesa Black on White were the most frequent (Jelinek 1967); of these
only Red Mesa Black on White was missing in the GMNP sherd
collection. Jornada Brown represented a very substantial portion of
the intrusives in the Middle Pecos Valley, especially during the earliest phases, and was in fact the dominant pottery type in Jelinek’s
(1967) Early 18 Mile Phase. Jornada-Mogollon ceramic types provided the bulk of intrusives in the Middle Pecos Valley even though E1
Paso wares, considering the amount of Jornada Brown present, were
conspicuous by their very limited occurrence. Chupadero Black on
White was easily the most common reduced fire intrusive in the
Middle Pecos Valley and the same situation was found to have existed
in the GMNP. Three Rivers and San Andres Red on Terra Cotta,
Mimbres Black on White and St. John’s Polychrome were other intrusives common to both the Middle Pecos Valley and the GMNP. Numerical calculation determined that approximately 18% of the GMNP
sherds represented ceramic types that were either native to or intrusive in the Middle Pecos Valley ceramic series.
The apparent lack of Middle Pecos Black on White in the park was
worthy of note since it was the dominant pottery type in the two latest
Middle Pecos Valley ceramic phases, excluding the intrusive
Chupadero Black on White in the Post McKenzie phase (Jelinek 1967).
Middle Pecos Black on White might have been present in the park but
was inadvertently identified as Crosby Black on Gray and Chupadero
Black on White. Presently, no Middle Pecos Valley ceramics have
been conclusively identified in any of the E1 Paso area JornadaMogollon sites. Hedrick (1968) reported unknown brown ware sherds
(Middle Pecos Valley derivation?) associated with E1 Paso Brown and
Polychrome and Chupadero Black on White in the vicinity of Van
Horn, Texas.
The valley of the Pecos River in the vicinity of Carlsbad, New
Mexico, the eastern slopes of the Guadalupe Mountains and southeastern New Mexico were referred to as the Carlsbad District by Burns
(1967). He and Riches (1970) conducted archaeological research in
the region in an effort to define the local prehistoric assemblages and
to establish cultural relationships between the district and other
groups. They studied the available sources pertaining to the open

142

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

sites of the district and both made independent surveys within the
area.
Riches (1970) reported that the pottery associated with the open
sites indicated a relation to the Jornada-Mogollon. The ceramic types
Riches identified were primarily Jornada Brown, E1 Paso Brown, E1
Paso Polychrome, Chupadero Black on White and Three Rivers Red
on Terra Cotta. Her assemblage compared favorably with the GMNP
sample but it did not include some of the pottery types consistently
intrusive to the E1 Paso Jornada-Mogollon nor did it contain any
identified Middle Pecos Valley wares.
Burns’ (1967) sherd collection was even more closely associated
with the E1 Paso Jornada-Mogollon since he discovered, in addition to
the above ceramic types, Mexican (Ramos Polychrome, Villa
Ahumada Polychrome and Playas Red) wares, Alma Plain and St.
John’s Polychrome in the open sites of the district. He concluded that
the pottery of the Carlsbad District was basically Jornada-Mogollon.
His ceramic collection was also very similar to that of the park and he,
as Riches, did not have access to Jelinek’s (1967) publication on the
Middle Pecos Valley.
Neither Burns nor Riches found any evidence of Plains ceramics
during their prospective surveys as had Greer (1968) during his work
east of the Pecos River in the Carlsbad area. Vivian (1969) noted that
Plains influence at Gran Quivira, a ruin approximately 250 kilometers
west of the GMNP, was rather scanty and quite late in time. No
ceramic evidence of Plains culture was discovered in the park during
the survey but this does not preclude some form of contact between
the peoples of the Plains and those of the GMNP.
Design elements were difficult and motifs almost impossible to
identify considering the small size of most of the GMNP sherds and
the weathering to which they had been exposed. The elements that
were distinguishable did not differ from those noted for the various
pottery types in other works (Lehmer 1948; Moore 1947; Ceramic
Conference 1969; Hawley 1950; Alves 1931; Jelinek 1967; Gerald n.d.;
Moore and Wheat 1951). This indicated that the patterns would
likewise be similar. Vessel shapes, other than differentiating between
ollas and bowls, could not be determined with any certainty. The
great majority of the decorated sherds were found to be pieces of ollas.
The undecorated sherds from which a determination could be made
were also predominantly olla fragments. The existence of the salt beds
on the western edge of the survey area offers a tentative explanation
for the preponderance of olla sherds. Boiling large amounts of water
for salt extraction could be better accomplished with ollas than with
bowls since the bowls in the GMNP were apparently small; bowl

GUADALUPE CERAMICS

143

sherds in the GMNP collection were found to have been parts of small
vessels. Further, neither Jelinek {1967} nor Lehmer {1948) identified
large bowls in the Middle Pecos Valley or in the Jornada-Mogollon.
Rim sherds appeared infrequently in the GMNP collection, but a
variety of rim forms was represented. A direct method was most
common among the brown wares and some beveling was evident. The
rim forms of the ceramic types in the GMNP sample were more varied
but neither they nor the GMNP brown wares differed from previously
noted forms for corresponding pottery types in other publications
(Moore 1947; Moore and Wheat 1951; Lehmer 1948; Ceramic Conference 1969; Jelinek 1967; Gerald n.d.).
Temper materials observed in the GMNP sherds were basically the
same as those elements listed by others for the represented ceramic
types {Hawley 1950; Moore and Wheat 1951; Jelinek 1967; Lehmer
1948; Ceramic Conference 1969; Riches 1970). Tempering agents
were readily available in the park since the Guadalupe Mountains are
composed of Permian limestones (Newell 1953) and gypsum and
quartz granules are abundant in the park dunes (Burns, personal
communication). Other temper materials, such as mica and feldspar,
might have been introduced into the park from outside areas (Burns,
personal communication 1972). Deposits of the above mentioned
temper agents were not located during the TAS survey (Runyan ms.),
however, a discussion of the availability of tempering material becomes superfluous if all the GMNP ceramics are considered intrusive.
Approximately 30% of the collected sherds were decorated by
painting or texturing, but it should be emphasized that some plain
sherds might well have been fragments of decorated vessels. The
percentage of painted and textured wares was greater in the Intermediate and greatest in the Late ceramic phase sites. This paralleled
the relatively standard pattern of a decreasing prominence of plain
wares observed by Lehmer (1948) in the ]ornada-Mogollon and by
Jelinek (1967) in the Middle Pecos Valley, with the McKenzie Brown
modification in the latter area as previously noted. Painting was by far
the prevalent method of decorating pottery, as there were actually few
textured sherds in the park sample. This was in keeping with the
treatment of pottery practiced by the E1 Paso area Jornada-Mogollon
peoples (Lehmer 1948). They had no great amount of locally manufactured textured ware other than the occasional E1 Paso and Jornada
textured pottery and a black smugged corrugated ware. The latter,
none of which was discovered in the GMNP, was usually found in the
western-most E1 Paso area Jornada-Mogollon sites and was attributed
to the Mimbres peoples (Moore 1947; Lehmer 1948). Previously re-

144

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ported E1 Paso and lornada textured sherds usually composed less
than one percent of the total ceramics (Lehmer 1948).
Jelinek (1967) listed only Roswell Corrugated and McKenzie
Incised, both variants of their respective types, as textured wares
native to the Middle Pecos Valley. Neither were abundant in the
Middle Pecos Valley and both were absent in the park. Roswell Corrugated, McKenzie Incised, Pitoche Rubbed-ribbed and Jornada Corrugated appeared for the first time in quantity during the latest phases in
the Middle Pecos Valley (Jelinek 1967), but only the latter was present
in the GMNP. Red decoration, primarily lines and wash, seemed to
have occurred more frequently on Middle Pecos Valley brown wares
than on E1 Paso or Jornada Brown (Gerald n.d.; Jelinek 1967; Lehmer
1948). Such a condition was also found to exist in the park.
Runyan (ms.) speculated that salt extraction was a late development
in the GMNP but present evidence indicates otherwise. Early, Intermediate and Late ceramic sites were scattered throughout the survey
area. Seven (70%) of the sites classified as large were situated near the
lake bed and of those, two are Early ceramic phase, three are Intermediate and two are Late ceramicphase. The remaining sites near the
lake bed were varied in size and phase category. Early ceramic sites
were in most cases small and relatively scattered while later sites
tended to be geographically more closely allied. If the sites were
occupied simultaneously, these conditions suggest a gathering of
groups progressively closer to one another.
Sites containing certain pottery types were examined in relation to
their gross geographica! location within the park. Those pottery types
considered critical in an attempt to establish any ceramic influx
patterns were Mexican sherds, pottery types from eastern Arizona and
western New Mexico, and the Rio Grande-northern New Mexico
ceramics. No extraordinary spatial or temporal patterns were discovered, since neither the pottery types native to the Jornada-Mogollon
nor these native to the Middle Pecos Valley were considered to be key
indicators in the above instance. Had they been used, the obvious
ceramic influx patterns would have been from the west and northeast
throughout the time span of the occupation of the GMNP by ceramic
possessing peoples.
Another pattern that developed, or rather was negatively derived,
concerned the absence of defensively arranged sites and the small
number of sites that could be considered as being defensively located.
Although the hill sites might have offered some measure of security,
the degree of safety that could have been obtained would have been
marginal and questionable. Canyon sites, speculating that the inhabitants of the park were basically sedentary, would have invited

GUADALUPE CERAMICS

145

disaster rather than provided defense. This latter point is debatable
but the very small size of canyon sites indicated that if they were
indeed located for defense, only a minute portion of the total population received or was interested in safety. It could be argued that the
western GMNP sites, those near the playa that could be considered
contemporary, were arranged for mutual defensive support. But the
theory that they were situated closely to one another to achieve a more
responsive labor force seems more plausible.
Apparently the prehistoric inhabitants of the park preferred the
lower altitudes for settlement; perhaps because of their relative flatness within the generally rugged terrain of the GMNP, their proximity
to salt deposits, and the presence of sandy areas in which horticulture
could be practiced (Brad field 1971; Burns, personalcommunication).
The few sites that were situated in the Upper Sonoran life zone were
small and, as suggested by their diminutive size, temporary habitations.
The location of an overwhelming majority of sites on alluvial fans
and flats also suggests a possible concentration for horticultural purposes. Nevertheless, actual evidence of such a subsistence pattern
was extremely rare in the Guadalupe Mountains-Carlsbad District
area and was defined solely from cave sites (Burns 1972; Riches 1970).
Jelinek (1967) speculated that horticulture was practiced in the Middle Pecos Valley and Burns (personal communication), despite the
lack of specific evidence, believed that corn fi~i:ming was practiced in
the Carlsbad and Crow Flats areas. The only evidence’of corn within
the Carlsbad district was discovered in a cave in the southern
Guadalupe Mountains (Riches 1970).
It could be inferred from the large number of sites located on the
fringes of the playa that the inhabitants of the GMNP exploited the
presence of both resident and migrant birds. The lake probably contained sufficient permanent water during the prehistoric era (Burns,
personal communication) to have provided an attractive habitat for
bird life. The Crow Flats section is well within the limits of the central
American flyway for migratory birds (Zim and Gabrielson 1966). The
hunting of fowl was most likely a supplementary rather than the
primary subsistence system of the prehistoric park inhabitants.
Strong ceramic evidence, particularly the fact that very nearly 90%
of the GMNP sherds were of a Jornada-Mogollon type or types commonly intrusive to the Jornada-Mogollon, argues well for the extension of the Jornada-Mogollon into the GMNP survey area. Corley
(1966) proposed an eastern extension of the Jornada-Mogollon of at
least 150 miles. This later theory was supported by Burns (personal
communication) but branded by Riches (1970) as being unjustifiable

146

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

on the basis of current evidence (Riches found no evidence of corn
cultivation or sedentary villages in the open sites). Greer (1968) suggested a subdivision of the Jornada in the area east of the Guadalupe
Mountains based upon pottery collected and the listed radiocarbon
dates; he was mute concerning the actual mountain area but implied
by omission that the Guadalupe Mountains were a part of the principal Jornada-Mogollon cultural district.
The apparent lack of Middle Pecos Black on White and the small
amount of McKenzie Brown in the GMNP sample indicated a termination of contact with the Middle Pecos Valley during or shortly following Jelinek’s (197) Early McKenzie phase (A.D. 1250). The restricted
number of late pottery types and the absence of Gila Polychrome in
the park implied a discontinuance of activity between the park inhabitants and the E! Paso area Jornada-Mogollon during the middle
years of Lehmer’s (1948) E1 Paso-San Andres phase (A.D. 1200 to A.D.
1400). Both these conditions, coupled with the lack of Glaze wares in
the GMNP, suggested that the abandonment of the park by the ceramic
possessing peoples began sometime during the early- to mid-14th
century.
The presence of E1 Paso Brown, Jornada Brown, Middle Pecos
Micaceous Brown and South Pecos Brown in the GMNP collection
reasonably confirmed an A.D. 850+ date for the inception of ceramics
in the park. This date was determined by comparing and contrasting
the opening ceramic phase of the Jornada-Mogollon (Lehmer 1948)
with that of the Middle Pecos Valley (Jelinek 1967).
Based exclusively upon correlation of pottery types, the GMNP was
occupied by ceramic using peoples during the period A.D. 850-1350.
A possibility exists that the park was inhabited by pottery possessing
peoples into the 16th century, since Chupadero Black on White
remained in usage until that time (McGregor 1965); the remainder of
the ceramic types represented in the GMNP sample had disappeared
by the middle of the 14th century (Breternitz 1966; Hawley 1950;
Ceramic Conference 1969). However, Breternitz (1966) revealed that
the best trade period for Chupadero Black on White was the 14th
c entury, and imp lied that the typ e p ersisted into th e 16th century only
in central New Mexico. Additionally, Vivian (1964) indicated that the
latest Chupadero Black on White, or Tabira Black on White as he
termed it, was quite restricted in areal distribution.

SUMMARY
Ceramic evidence indicates that the surveyed area of the GMNP was
occupied during the period A.D. 850-1350 by people who were prob-

GUADALUPE CERAMICS

147

ably Jornada-Mogollon or by an unidentified group who depended
largely upon the Jornada-Mogollon for their pottery and/or ceramic
technology. Evidence of interaction with the Middle Pecos Valley
peoples was also very apparent in the GMNP. The prehistoric occupants of the GMNP received some ceramics from great distances,
judging from the assumed origin of some of the sherds recovered
during the survey. A great volume of ceramic trade was evidently not
conducted since sherds other than those of Jornada-Mogollon and
Middle Pecos Valley derivation comprised only a fraction of the total
park collection. There were no extraordinary ceramic trade patterns
discernable.
There was suggestive evidence that a distinctive attraction of the
GMNP region was the existence of vast and exploitable salt deposits.
Whether the inhabitants took seasonal advantage of the salt potential
or were permanent residents could not definitely be established. No
evidence of a predisposition toward defense was discovered, and the
GMNP inhabitants obviously preferred the lower altitudes and generally settled on the flats and alluvia! fans.
How the residents sustained themselves remains a matter of conjecture. Using the Jornada-Mogollon as a model it is likely that hunting
and gathering dominated the earlier stages of occupation and that
horticulture, presupposing a relatively sedentary existence based
upon the amount of ceramics present, supplemented by hunting and
gathering, pre-empted the original life style. Neither a sedentary nor
nomadic existence for the occupants of the GMNP is presently demonstrable, nor is horticulture as opposed to hunting and gathering
manifested by the ceramic evidence.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I wish to take this opportunity to thank Barney J. Burns for the extremely valuable
technical assistance he provided. His efforts, entirely by correspondence, made possible the incorporation of the latest data from the Carlsbad district into this report. Dr.
Harry J. Shafer, a sympathetic yet nonpatronizing individual, was my editorial guiding
light in this endeavor. He never lost faith in me and my attempts to transfer my
thoughts, which often approached incoherency, onto paper. He appreciated my long
absence from "things" archaeological and, with Barney J. Burns, continually encouraged me.
I am especially grateful to two other people, Thomas H. Naylor and my wife. Thomas
was particularly instrumental in bringing this undertaking to its conclusion. He advised and cajoled, pressured and insisted, and was truly a valuable mentor.
Had it not been for the tireless effort of my wife, Kitty, this report might never have
been finished. She did a great deal of typing and suggested organizational techniques.
She never faltered in her support of me during the many hours of work devoted to this
paper. To her I extend a very special "thank you."

148

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
REFERENCES

CITED

Alves, E. E.
1931 Pottery of the E1 Pas o Region. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 3, pp. 57-59.
Aten, Lawrence E.
1972 Evaluation of the Cultural Resources of the Northgate Site, E1 Paso
County, Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project Research Report,
No. 5.
Bradfield, Maitland
1971 The Changing Pattern of Hopi Agriculture. Royal Anthropological
Institute, Occasional Paper, No. 30.
Breternitz, David A.
1966 An Appraisal of Tree-Ring Dated Pottery in the Southwest.
Anthropological Papers of the University of Arizona, No. 10.
Brook, V. R.
1965 Cultural Traits of the Jornada Branch of the Mogollon. Southeastern
New Mexico and West Texas Symposium Papers, Bulletin No. I, pp.
18-22.
1966 The McGregor Site. The Artifact, Vol. 5, No. 2, pp. 1-22.
1967 Adobe Steps of the E1 Paso Phase. TheArtifact, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 37-58.
1970 Four Archaeo-Magnetic Dates fi’om the Hot Well Site (EPAS-3). Tile
Artifact, Vol. 8, No. 1, pp. 1-16.
Burns, Barney T.
1967 The Archaeology of the Carlsbad District, Southeastern New Mexico.
M.A. thesis on file in the Arizona State Museum Library.
Ceramic Conference
1969 11th Ceramic Conference - Casas Grandes Pottery Types. The
Amerind Foundation, Inc.
Corley, John A.
1965 Proposed Eastern Extension of the Jornada Branch of the Mogollon.
Southeastern New Mexico and West Texas Symposium Papers, Bulletin No. 1, pp. 30-36.
Cosgrove, H. S. and C. B. Cosgrove
1932 The Swarts Ruin, A Typical Mimbres Site in Southwestern New Mexico. Papers of the Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and
Ethnology, Vol. XV, No. 1.
Fritz, Gordon L.
1969 Investigations at the Rancho E1 Espia Site, Northwestern Chihuahua.
Transactions of the Fifth Archeological Symposium for Southeastern
New Mexico and Western Texas, pp. 51-64.
Gerald, Rex
n.d. Descriptions of Pottery Types of the E1 Paso Area. Manuscript on file
in the E1 Paso Archaeological Society, Inc., Library.
Greer, John W.
1968 Notes on Excavated Ring Midden Sites, 1963-1968. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 38, pp. 111-132.
Haury, Emile W.
1936 The Mogollon Culture of Southwestern New Mexico. Medallion
Papers, No. XX.

GUADALUPE CERAMICS

149

Hawley, Florence
1950 Prehistoric Southwestern Pottery Types. University of New Mexico
Bulletin, Vol. 1, No. 4.
Hedrick, John A.
1968 Plateau Station Area Survey, The Artifact, Vol. 6, No. 1, pp. 1-16.
Hedrick, Mrs. John A.
1967 Escondido Survey. The Artifact,Vot. 5, No. 2, pp. 19-24.
Jelinek, Arthur J.
1967 A Prehistoric Sequence in the Middle Pecos Valley. Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan Anthropological Papers, No. 31.
Jennings, J. D. and George Neumann
1940 A Variation of Southwestern Pueblo Culture. Laboratory of Anthropology, Technical Series, Bulletin No. 10.
Lehmer, Donald J.
1948 The Jornada Branch of the Mogollon. University of Arizona Social
Science Bulletin,oNo. 17.
McCluney, Eugene B.
1962 A New Name’ and Revised Description for a Mogollon Pottery Type
from Southern New Mexico. Southwestern Lore, Vol. XXVII, No. 4, pp.
49-55. ¯
McGregor, John C. ’
1965 Southwestern Archaeology. University of Illinois Press, Urbana.
Mera, Henry P.
’
1931 Chupadero Black on White. Laboratory of Anthropology, Technical
Series, Bulleti’n No. 1.
1943 An Outline of Ceramic Developments in Southern and Southeastern
New Mexico. Laboratory’of Anthropology, Technical Series, Bulletin
No. 2.
Mills, Jack P. and Vera M.
1971 The Slaughter Ranch Site. The Artifact, Vol. 1, .No. 3, pp. 23-44.
1972 The Dinwiddie Site. The Artifact, Vol. 10, No. 2, pp. 1-50.
Moore, Mrs. Glen E.
1947 Twelve Room House Ruin. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 18, pp. 94-114.
Moore, Mrs. Glen E. and Mrs. Joe Ben Wheat
1951 An Archeological Cache from Hueco Basin, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vgl. 22, pp.
144-163.
Newell, N. O.
1953 The Permian Reef Complex of the Guadalupe Mountains of Texas and
New Mexico. W. H. Freeman & Co., San Francisco.
Phelps, Alan L.
1966 Cruciform, An Unusual Artifact of the E1 Paso Southwest. E1 Paso
Archaeological Society, Special Report, No. 5.
1967 Six Stone Balls --A Cache. The Artifact, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 21-31.
1968a An Incised Stone Pendant and a Soto Projectile Point from Northwestern Chihuahua. The Artifact, Vol. 6, No. 3, pp. 16-22.
1968b A Recovery of Purslane Seeds in an Archaeological Context. The
Artifact, Vol. 6, No. 4, pp. 1-9.

150

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Riches, Susan M.
1970 Archaeological Survey of the Eastern Guadalupe Mountains, New
Mexico. M.A. thesis on file at the University of Wisconsin, Madison.
Runyan, John W.
ms. Pottery Analysis Report for Texas Archeologica! Society. Manuscript
on file at Texas A&M University Anthropological Laboratory, College
Station.
Sayles, E. B.
1936 Some Southwestern Pottery Types. Medallion Papers, Series V, No.
XXI.
Shafer, Harry J.
1970 A Preliminary Report of an Archeological Survey in the Guadalupe
Mountains National Park by the Texas Archeological Society in June
1970. Texas Archeology, Vol. 14, No. 3, pp. 10-17.
Shedd, Emmett
1968 A Probable Jornado Burial in Garza County, Texas. Transactions of the
Third Regional Archeological Symposium for Southeastern New
Mexico and Western Texas, pp. 12-20.
Stallings, W. S., Jr.
1931 E1 Paso Polychrome. Laboratory of Anthropology, Technical Series,
Bulletin No. 3.
1936 Dates from Gallo Canyon, East Central New Mexico. Tree Ring
Bulletin, Vol. 3, No. 1.
Vivian, Gordon
1964 Excavations in a 17th-Century Jumano Pueblo, Gran Quivira, New
Mexico. Archeological Research Series, No. 8. National Park Service.
Zim, Herbert S. and Ira N. Gabrielson
1956 Birds. Golden Press, New York.
Colonial Heights, Virginia

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS OF
AN ARCHEOLOGICAL DEPOSIT:
RANDALL COUNTY, TEXAS
EMERSON L. PEARSON

ABSTRACT
In presenting soil information on an archeological deposit in Palo Duro
Canyon, Texas, regional environmental data of a general nature are necessarily outlined to place mechanical and chemical values of that site in
proper perspective. Toward that end, physiography, topography, climate,
and vegetation are specifically addressed as they relate to the state park,
particular site, and soil under consideration. Those broader parameters
are followed by a discussion and initial interpretation of discrete cultural
and natural levels encountered during survey and their possible relationship to the entire site. A final statement briefly pursues the utility of soil
analysis during survey, a need for presenting several interrelated variables when considering any single aspect of site environment, and information more pertinent to continuing study of the cultural components
encountered.

INTRODUCTION
In the course of an initial survey mechanical and chemical analyses
of a prehistoric cultural deposit were performed on an archeological
site in Palo Duro State Park, Randall County, Texas in the winter of
1971-72 (Fig. i). The reason for that type of sampling and subsequent
testing addressed further quantification of occupational versus
nonoccupational zones in sites of a given culture within a specific
environmental setting. The following paragraphs discuss that site
(TsA:2.3.0.1.) and various aspects of the natural region that had an
influence on pedogenesis, preservation of cultural remains, and the
original inhabitants.
The site is located approximately 13.5 linear miles S 84° E of
Canyon, Texas at 34°57’19.0" N lat. and 101040’33.5" W long. (Fig. 2).
It is thus situated on a remnant second terrace above the Prairie Dog
Town Fork of the Red River. Existing deep in canyon country of the
Texas Panhandle has placed this deposit in the following environmental circumstances.

Physiography
Roughly 200 million years ago all of the Texas Panhandle was
covered by a shallow sea (Sellards 1932:185-186; Frye and Leonard
1957a:2). The highly oxidized ferric deposits left behind by that
marine transgression formed what is today referred to as Permian

152

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

RANDALL COUNTY

N

PALO DURO STATE PARK
Randall Couny, Texas
t

TEXAS PANHANDLE

FIGURE 1

S OIL CHARACTERISTICS

15 3

redbeds. It is this rock-stratigraphic unit that was later reworked and
presently forms most of the main channel terraces within Palo Duro
Canyon -- including the abovementioned second terrace.
At the onset of the Mesozoic Era streams moving in a general
eastward direction eroded earlier sediments and redeposited them as
fine-textured, water sorted alluvium in outwash and flood plains
(Baker 1915:14; Lee 1918:10; Adkins 1932:244-245). Those superimposing Triassic sediments were responsible for what is now seen as
many differentially eroded mesas, buttes, and questas in’the canyon.
Talus debris from a butte of that configuration overrode an exposed
portion of Permian terrace and consequently formed the original
living floor of TsA:2.3.0.1.
The Mesozoic Era came to a close with the advent of the Laramide
orogeny. During that period of mountain uplift water in the form of
stream run-off moved from the Rocky Mountains, down-slope across
an eastern peneplain of little-resistant detrital sediments toward the
coast (Barton 1930; Plummer 1932:526-529). Those downward cutting channels in the face of tectonic uplift generated such dendritic
drainage systems as the Arkansas, Cimarron, Canadian, Pecos, and
Red Rivers. Materials lost through that fluvial erosion were transported toward the Gulf of Mexico. Then, near the apex of mountain
building, massive erosion and accompanying high stream load redeposited silts, sands, and gravels eastward across much of the high
plains (Plummer 1932:769-771; Frye and Leonard 1957b:13). Those
water-born deposits form the present day late Pliocene Ogallala formation; a rock-stratigraphic unit containing today’s aquafer and supporting subsequent eolian deposits. This latter Cenozoic material
comprises much contemporary channel fill well up and in the main
and tributary channels to the Prairie Dog Town Fork of the Red River.
It is this same reworked sandy loam which has been wind deflated out
of dry stream beds and flood plains that is responsible for a good
portion of the present topsoil on the site under consideration (Fig. 3).
Parenthetically, the geomorphology of Palo Duro Canyon -- and
specifically that portion of the state park presently under study -includes highly weathered, weakly consolidated, fine Permian sandstone which has been unconformably overlain by nonmarine Dockum
Group sediments of the Triassic Period. Lithologically, the lower
Dockum contains poorly metamorphosed Tecovas shales and plaky
clay, while its upper section is primarily massive micaceous Trujillo
sandstone. Finally, the Tertiary and Quaternary Periods are represented by late Pliocene sands and gravels that have been "capped
off" with Pleistocene to Holocene caliche and eolian sand.

154

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

%

TOPOGRAPHIC SETTING

of

DURO
STATE

SAMPLING UNIVERSE and TYPE SECTION

PARK

1 mile
?~.~.~.~.~

diminished flora] cover

_____

road

¯

sol! type section

m

Ts A: 2. 3. 0, I.

FIGURE 2

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

155

v

v

~?ssoHl

5D
Z

o
E

Z
Z
d
c6

156

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Each of the aforementioned depositional units, when considered in
topographic and temporal perspective, are constituent elements of
the parent material forming today’s soil. Though parent material is
believed to be a greater central factor in local and regional
pedogenesis (Lotspeich and Coover 1962:7-10), climate and vegetation are also important agents in soil formation and shall be briefly
considered here for the additional parts they have played in soil
chemistry, internal site stratigraphy, and the preservation of cultural
materials.
Climate
In that a true paleosol (Ruhe 1965:755) is not immediately involved
with the archeological focus of this paper, and because TsA:2.3.0.1.
was not occupied much before 2000 B.P. (a typological assessment
based on large, corner-notched projectile points but no ceramics) it
will not be necessary to discuss climatic and biotic factors prior to the
beginning of Neoglacial time. From that period [(8,000 but }5,000
B.P. (Denton and Porter 1970:102)] down to the Christian era paleoenvironmental evidence suggests first a low level in available moisture
and maximum warming near the end of the Hypsithermal; then a
general tendency toward wetter (Maulde 1964:127; Mehringer
1967:99; Haynes 1968:608-610, 612) and fluctuating albeit cooler
conditions than the present (Denton and Porter 1970) down to ca.
2000 B.P. Since the time of Christ available moisture in the greater
southwest was probably on an erratic but overall decline (Maulde
1964:127-128; Haynes 1968:610,612; Schoenwetter and Dittert 1968;
Irwin-Williams and Haynes 1970:68-70), with global air temperatures
possibly even more episodic (Bryson 1970) but continuing to deterriorate from the previous climatic optimum until the mid- to late
A.D.1800s (Richmond 1960:1371; Maulde 1964:128; Denton and Porter, 1970). After a brief return to more moist and cooler times overall
environmental conditions have been waning and are today likely
quite similar to events of the period of site occupation (Hafsten
1961:79, 91).
Following the Ko’ppen system of climate classification (Koppen
and Geiger, 1930-39) Randall and immediately surrounding counties
are currently positioned between a low latitude steppe climate (BSh)
to the south and southeast and a middle latitude steppe climate (BSk)
to the north. In other words, the locality in question currently exhibits
a Bwk regime of relative inequality. Working with temperature and
precipitation values computed in accordance with monthly and
yearly means (Table 1) it is readily noticeable that the uppermost
portion of Palo Duro Canyon comes under the influence of both

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

157

continental-tropicai (cTs) air masses typical of latitudes 15°-- 35°N,
and the seasonally alternating continental tropical (cT) and continental polar (cP) air masses more common of latitudes 35° -- 50°N. This
has resulted in a rather dry climate (B) where evaporation usually
exceeds precipitation [a feature central to calcimorphic soils (calcic
pedocals)]. It is also largely responsible for most rain occurring as
convectional thunderstorms during May, June, July and August
(w=dry winter season), and an average yearly temperature of 58.69°F
(k= dry-cold; mean annual temperature < 64.4°F)- as well as marked
diurnal changes. Obviously, such a restricted yet intense precipitation pattern has played an important part in local depositional/erosional history. Further, air temperature has affected soil temperature
and therefore soil mechanics and chemistry. Consequently, climatic
effects on parent material over a substantial period of time -- when
coupled with factors of local topography -- have had a marked influence on vegetation as well as pedogenesis.
Vegetation
Considering only the land biocycle of the canyon, plant life at the
biochore level has been classified as a northern temperate grassland
biome (Shelford 1963:328-329). That macroenvironment (Coe and
Flannery 1964:650; Pearson 1968:25-26, 35) is regionally represented
as a short grass prairie formation [Shelford’s Mixed-Grass Grassland
Region (1963:329, 334-344)]. This latter classification has been
further restricted and is locally referred to as the Kansan Biotic Provence (Blair 1950: 109-112), which includes all of the Texas Panhandle and extends as far south as the northern escarpment of the Edwards Plateau. Within that formation Blair and Hubbell (1938),
largely for edaphic reasons, have further delineated three biotic
communities -- the presently more germane of which is the Mesquite
Plains district, i.e., primarily an open mesquite savanna that covers
most of the rolling Permian redbeds. The Mesquite Plains district
supports what Blair (1954:238-240) later referred to as four major
"associations". Those "associations", or more properly plant communities in a formal systematic sense, are the Mesquite -- Grama
(dominating the second terrace under consideration) and Rock Bluff
(a saxicolous development present on talus at the south end of the
site) associations, the Mesquite -- Buffalo-Grass association (also
identifiable in the immediate vicinity of TsA:2.3.0.1.), and arenicolous associations found on localized accumulations of deep sand. An
additional "minor association" also present is cottonwood. This latter
community, while not occurring on the site proper, can be found as an
interdigitating ecotone intrusive along the flood plain and some first

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

158

IX

Z~

0

o

~.~

~8~

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

159

terraces straddling this portion of the Red River (Table 2). While it and
other deciduous communities such as hackberry and chinaberry are
more common to eastern biotic communities and provences (e.g.,
Austroriparian), their leaves and fruit do make up a portion of the
organic matter found in the present topsoil of the site.
From this initial survey picture emerges an ecotone situation of
largely xerophytic, mesothermal vegetation reflecting both climatic
and edaphic factors of site locality. In turn, the floral cover has
certainly had an effect on the mechanical and chemical characteristics of the soil. Though rather drought resistant, none of the plant life
on the site proper can be considered phreatophytic. As a result, major
subsurface root disturbance of a magnitude to drastically obscure or
even alter natural or cultural stratigraphy should not be expected. On
the other hand, the moderately luxuriant surface growth when combined with seasonal shed of surrounding deciduous plants would
undoubtedly influence at least chemical values in upper reaches of
the soil profile. The following section discusses some of these interrelationships and their effects on the cultural deposit.

TABLE 2

Biotic Community Dominants Affecting
Soil Characteristics of TsA:2.3.0.1.
MESQUITE PLAINS DISTRICT
Mesquite---Grama Community
Dominants:
mesquite (Prosopis juliflora )
grama grass (Bouteloua sp.)
three-awn (Aristida )
broomweed (Gutierrezia )
bluestem (Andropogon sp.)
dropseed (Sporobolus cI~yptandrus)
Mesquite--Buffalo-Grass Community
Dominants:
buffa!o grass (Buchloe" dactyloides)
Rock Bluffs Community
Dominants:
cedar (Juniperus sp.)
hackberry (Celtis reticulata )
chinaberry (Melia azedarach )
yucca (Yucca glauca )
scattered cactii

160

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

PEDOLOGY AND ARCHEOLOGY
Soil Classification
Taking into consideration regional and local parent material, the
surrounding topographic setting, interrelationships of climate and
vegetation, and length of time for pedogenesis the soil in the immediate vicinity of TsA:2.3.0.1. can be classified in the following
manner.
TABLE 3

Soil Systematics*
(CLASS-~ Pedocal; REGIME-~ Calcification)
ORDER: Inceptisols (Zonal)
SUBORDER: Ochrepts (Dark-colored soils of semi-arid, subhumid, and humid
grasslands)
GREAT GROUP: Ustochrepts (Brunizem)
SUBGROUP: Typic Ustochrepts
FAMILY: Loamy, mixed, thermic, shallow
ASSOCIATION: Rough Broken Land-Potter-Quinlan-Woodward
COMPLEX: Quinlan-Woodward
SERIES: Quinlan
TYPE: Very fine, sandy loam
PHASE: 5% to 30% slope (lower range)
*7th Approximation (1960); terms in parentheses are units of older and possibly more
familiar taxonomic systems.

As may be surmised from temperature and precipitation data presented earlier the general class of soil present throughout most of west
Texas is a pedocal. This is a situation where evaporation usually
exceeds precipitation as a monthly and yearly mean; a phenomenon
common to areas of the western United States where yearly rainfall is
seldom greater than 25 inches. Such a paucity of available moisture
more often sets up a soil-forming process termed calcification. In BSh
to BSk climates with high total evapotranspiration rates there is very
little downward leaching of reasonably soluble bases. As a result, (1)
ions such as calcium and magnesium are not moved out of the zone of
eluviation, but remain to be used by grasses which return them to the
A horizon, and (2) calcium carbonate will move upward into the B
horizon (or form a discrete Cca) to be precipitated out as an illuvial
concentrate. This characteristic must be born in mind when considering several of the absolute values presented below in chemical
analysis.
Ordinal placement of local soils as Inceptisols has stemmed from
most all localities in this region being well-drained -- save playa

SOIL CHARACTE~STICS

161

basins which are Intrazonal. When climatic information is coupled
with an understanding of regional geomorphology and pedogenic
processes, many soils of the rolling Permian plains fall into the reddish prairie class of Ustochrepts -- especially south of the Canadian
River. While such Prairie Soils are well-suited for farming -- namely
corn in high grass plains to the north -- as one moves south into areas
of less effective moisture cattle raising and cotton become the more
feasable products. Within this Great Group is a specific Quinlan
Series. The Quinlan is a Palo Duro Canyon manifestation of the Typic
Ustochrepts Subgroup occurring within the Quinlan-Woodward
Complex of the Rough Broken Land-Potter-Quinlan-Woodward Association (Jacquot et.al. 1970:24-25). Following the 1970 soil survey
of Randall County (Jacquot et.al., Ibid.): "Typical profile of a Quinlan
soil that has a very fine sandy loam surface layer [in the Palo Duro
State Park, about 200 feet northeast of Sad Monkey Tourist Railroad
Depot, on east side of Park Road 5 (type section ca. 1.2 miles due north
of and on same terrace as TsA:2.3.0.1.)]:
A1--0 to 6 inches, reddish-brown (5YR 514) very fine sandy loam, dark
reddish brown (5YR 3/4) when moist; weak, fine, subangular
blocky and granular structure; slightly hard when dry, very friable
when moist; worm casts common; most roots occur in this layer;
fine flecks of shale throughout; calcareous; clear boundary.
B&R--6 to 12 inches, reddish-brown (2.5YR 4/4) very fine sandy loam,
dark reddish brown (2.5YR 314) when moist; weak granular structure; very friable when moist; few roots and worm casts; weathered
flakes of shale common; gypsiferous; calcareous; clear boundary.
R--12 to 18 inches +, reddish-brown (2.5YR 5/4), medium, platy, weakly
cemented sandstone, dark reddish brown (2.5YR 314) when moist;
prominent, round, gray splotches throughout; a few roots between
weathered plates in upper 4 to 6 inches; surfaces of plates gypsiferous; calcareous; interiors of plates are noncalcareous; mildly alkaline.
The A horizon ranges from 6 to 8 inches in thickness. When this horizon
is dry, color ranges from light reddish brown or reddish brown to yellowish red in hue of 5YR or 2.5YR, value of 5, chroma of 4 to 6. In a few
places texture ranges to fine sandy laom.
The B and R horizon ranges from reddish-brown (2.5YR 4/4) very fine
sandy loam in the upper part to red (2.5YR 4/6) very fine sandy loam in the
lower part.
The R horizon is weakly consolidated Permian sandstone that has red to
dark-red lenses of gypsum and pockets of packed sand.
Quinlan soils have about the same depth as Potter soils but are sandier.
Quinlan soils have a thinner solum than the Woodward soils."

As is the case with many standard U.S.D.A. county soil studies, the
Randall County report by the Soil Conservation Service is unfortu-

162

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

nately lacking in reports of chemical analyses. Indeed, not much
beyond gross mechanical tests are ever accomplished in such surveys
(L. C. Geiger, personal communication). For at least this reason suggestions pertaining to sample procurement out of the archeological
deposit to establish a normal range of values for relative comparison
are certainly wise (Cornwall 1958:116; Cook and Heizer 1965:11). In
this study that practice was followed vertically but not horizontally.
Given a bit more in-field time to establish an identical Series of the
same Type and Phase (Table 3), albeit no intervening cultural
component(s), off-site sampling should always be performed- at
least in this area of Texas. Nevertheless, earlier quoted mechanical
data are relevant to considerations concerning the prehistorically
altered mechanics of the soil discussed below.
Archeology
The site was originally reported in April 1969 by Bill R. Harrison of
the Panhandle-Plains Museum in Canyon. He formally visited the site
again in June of that year. A surface collection and initial field observations were made with each visit. Those notes and material are
presently on file with that institution and have received a West Texas
State University site designation number of A704. That museum’s
artifact inventory by gross category is briefly listed in Table 4.
With Mr. Harrison’s initial observations, and tentative knowledge
of material culture from the museum surface inventory, this investigator visited the site in early January, 1972 (Fig. 4). A study of
present vegetation on the site systematically placed this second terrace in the earlier mentioned Mesquite--Grama--Buffalo-Grass
Community of the Mesquite Plains District. A subsequent surface
distributional study of artifacts as correlated with an extant soil profile in the western erosional face of the terrace suggested:
1. the site occupies all of the remnant second terrace, and therefore
2. it is not of original dimensions;
3. maximum horizontal extension is approximately 300 feet north/south,
thus
4. it does not extend onto the talus slope (which doesn’t exclude the
possibility of a portion of the southern sector having been overridden
by the same in recent times);
5. soil color is relatively dark and debitage concentration heavier in the
southwestern corner, which may indicate
6. a remaining portion of the site might still contain a special function
area;
7. the depth of cultural deposit and volume of tertiary flakes and spalls
exceeds the normal expected range for small camp sites in the canyon
floor, so

SOIL CHARACTER!STICS

163

8. habitation may have been more than occasional; and finally
9. general museum data are representative of tool types and raw materials
of manufacture as exhibited on the surface -- but in no way a measure
of (a) current horizontal and vertical site dimensions, (b) the number of
possible components, or (c) intensity of occupation.

The terrace was next sectioned off in fourths and hydrogen-ion
values were determined along the site’s midline in each of the four
sampling units. The sampling was done 0.1 feet below the present
ground surface and tests were accomplished with a Truog Soil Reaction (pH) kit. This tool is reagent correct to the nearest 0.5 interval;
thus a rough alkalinity estimation found the northern half of the site to
be about 8.0, while the southern portion averaged around 8.5. These
gross parameters were later corroborated by laboratory ascertained
pH values.
TABLE 4

Panhandle-Plains Museum Surface Inventory.
[Site: A704; (TsA:2.3.0.1.)]
Bifaces
Unifaces
Scrapers
Projectile points and fragments
Utilized flakes
Unutilized lithic
TOTAL LITHIC

7
4
4
3
6
167
191

Bone (badly fragmented)
Tooth enamel
TOTAL OSTEOLOGY

6
1

Ceramics
Shell
Manos and fragments
Metates and fragments
Choppers
Fossilized corporlite
TOTAL MUSEUM INVENTORY

1
2
4
2
6
1

7

214

Three areas for test pits (T.P./1.-3.) were then laid out on what
visually appeared to be the more stable surfaces in an eroding terrace
(Fig.4). Those excavation units were 3 feet by 3 feet and received
examination for possible cultural and natural stratigraphy, discrete
soil characteristics, and cultural content. Individual strata were defined on the basis of soil color, texture, and mechanical inclusives.

164

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

That process was aided by each proposed stratum being tested in a
field-moist condition for hue, value, and chroma (Munsell Soil Color
Charts), approximate particle size (7X Peak achromat #7 reticled
comparator), and hydrogen-ion level (pH kit). Approximately 500 g.
of soil was collected from each unequivocal level for later laboratory
analysis. And finally, all pits were excavated by a natural level
method, with each distinct zone being separately screened for artifact
content. Information produced from those three squares is presented
and discussed in the following paragraphs.
Test Pit]l. (Fig. 5; Fig. 6)
The first square was excavated to a maximum depth of 2.33 feet and
found to contain three discrete levels with well-defined interfaces.
Level A averaged 1.2 feet thick, and was considered a generalized
occupational zone that extended from the present ground surface
down to a sharp change in color, texture, and content of cultural
inclusives that marked the beginning of Level B.
Mechanical analysis of the first zone indicated it was a moderately
weathered, dusky red silt loam containing rather well-weathered
calcite geodes and rotten sandstone. Those mechanical inclusives
were of general Triassic age and had been secondarily deposited as
talus debris from several yards upslope to the south.
From a chemical point of view, laboratory determined hydrogenion values were not surprising in light of either an initial in-field
estimation (pH 8.0) or more general regional reports (Jacquot et.al.,
1965; 1970). In light of pH the sodium level (170 ppm) was correspondingly quite in line. More noteworthy here was first the relative
acidity of Level A when compared to lower strata (pH 9.1; 8.8), and
second phosphate (P205) and organic carbon values. The hydrogenion ratio for the first zone, when compared to the mean pH for nonoccupational zones (~=8.9; s=0.122), was noticeably less alkalinemore especially when contrasted with that of Level B. There was also
a corresponding drop in phosphates (42.5 ppm to 11.0 ppm) and
organic carbon (from an average of 0.952% to 0.193%) from what is
here considered an occupational zone to the subsoil. It should be
noted that organic carbon content of the first level was relatively high
when compared to occupational zones in T.P./2. and T.P./3. This
phenomenon was probably more a reflection of the occupational zone
being exposed at the present ground surface and consequently supporting contemporary vegetation, than it was differential intensity of
habitation within the site. In sum, the northern half of the site has a
truncated profile in the sense that a culturally sterile topsoil is lacking.

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

165

Potassium (K20) is usually a good indicator of wood-ash along with
sodium (Na) in drier environments (Cornwall 1958:67). However, it
did not prove of much utility in these tests. Its sensitivity seems to
have been greatly diminished by the elevation and leveling out of
absolute values. Much of the eolian and some water deposited sediments on the second terrace are derived from Permian and Triassic
(Tecovas formation) parent material rather high in illite clay (Adkins
1932:252-253) -- an aluminum silicate quite rich in potassium
(Buckman and Brady 1960:25). In addition, soils of the Quinlan series
are fairly rich in muscovite mica (Green, 1972); a nonferromagnesian,
potassic silicate [K2A12Si6.AhO20(OH)4] whose composition is 11.8%
K20 (Jackson 1964:82). The primary source of such mica is massive
upper Dockum sandstone (Trujillo formation) -- a stratigraphic unit
completely ringing the upper portion of Palo Duro Canyon immediately below basal Ogallala gravels (Adkins, ibid.).
Total artifact inventory of Level A was 33 items which included:
cores--l, projectile points and fragments--2, unutilized lithics--29,
bone--l, in addition to minimal amounts of fleck charcoal present
throughout the level.
Level B averaged 0.5 feet thick, and was a culturally sterile zone that
extended rather uniformly from a sharp upper contact with Level A
down to an equally marked break in color and texture at the boundary
of Level C. Soil texture fell largely within the particle size range of
sand and presented a red color under field-moist conditions. That
matrix was moderately weathered and contained geode and sandstone inclusives of like derivation and age to Level A, albeit in much
more dense concentration. Chemically, the highly calcareous nature
of this strata in conjunction with the obvious lack of organic material
was well reflected in both sodium and pH levels. While potassium
seems to again be of limited archeological utility, the reduction of
phosphate values from 42.5 ppm to 11.0 ppm adds support to the
notion gained from physical inspection and the above chemistry that
Level B represents a period of nonoccupation. There were no artifacts
found in this depositional unit and the slight increase in nitrogen
probably reflects little more than downward mobility of nitrates.
Level C averaged 0.45 feet in exposure and extended from a sharp,
convex interface at the lower boundary of Level B downward into and
formed the test pit floor. From a mechanical point of view that unit
was a dark red, plaky clay whose texture fell in the inferred particle
size range of (0.002 ram. That well-weathered, undisturbed matrix
contained alternating lenticular facies of tightly interbedded, reduced white, plaky clay. Geomorphologically, those banded sediments unquestionably represent the upper aspect of the second ter-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

166

TsA: 2.3,0.1.-- T. R/1.
Scale:

1ft.

~

(no distortion)

True Horizon ....... i-*

Level

A-----

©

O

O

O

0

Level B

Level C

Pit Floe

NOT EXCAVATED

_~_J

VIEW:
pH units
Looking S.W.

10075 FS

0.002

Occupation Zone:

To
TOR 3/4

0.05

20252FS

0.05

Lithics, bone and fleck charcoal.

Culturally Sterile:

6.

8.0

5.

8.0

4.

8.0

3.

8.0

2.

8.0

dusky red silt with rotten

sandstone and calcite geode talus inclusives.

light red sand containing

dense concentration of rotten sandstone and
10R

5/6

0.~

¯ ) "-’,-.

calcite geode talus material

Culturally Sterile:

20109FS
<0.002

hibiting

1OR 3/6

dark red plaky clay ex-

alternating,

thin,

reduced

white

"episodal" bands. Undisturbed.

NOTE:

Profile truncated because of localized absence
of "true" top soil.

FIGURE 5

8.0

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

167

©

,/

I

¢4
el

u

:i

%

168

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

race found elsewhere in the site locality. As such, they are of general
Permian age and constitute a reasonable permeability basement for
meteoric water (e.g., note the dramatic increase in soluble salts).
Initial Interpretation: The soil texture and colors of Level C suggest its
having been water deposited in a series of lacustrine/bog or marsh
environments of presently unknown duration; the red representing
the former, the white the latter. For lack of a better term some of the
white, laterally intrusive facies are here referred to as episodes -- as
they seem to reflect but brief intervals of an oxyg en-poor environment
in a larger oxidizing picture. Others were nothing more than lenticular deposits of gypsum analogous to Jacquot’s earlier quoted R horizon.
The mineral composition and random distribution of mechanical
inclusives in Level B implicate the higher Trujillo formation as well
as the Tecovas formation as parent material; that is to say upper
Dockum derived micaceous sandstone and calcareous conglomerate
material was blended with finer lower Dockum sediments in a portion
of the second terrace as talus debris. Overall particle size and luster
analysis of individual grains composing the soil matrix within which
pebble-size debris occurs indicates wind deposition exceeded water
in volume of total soil deposited. In sum, the surface of the northern
half of the terrace at the time of initial occupation was a slightly
gravelly sand lacking a true A horizon, and thus probably supported
very little vegetation.
From a stratigraphic standpoint it was readily noticeable Level A,
clearly an occupational zone, exhibited no superimposed topsoil.
However, soil profiles in test pits 2 and 3 did produce a culturally
sterile top stratum that differed markedly in texture and mechanical
inclusives from a like depth in T.P./1.A. Such observations could have
a good deal of utility if formal excavation with tight artifact proveniencing is later planned. Daily reports on soil temperature from the
U.S.D.A. Southwestern Research Center at Bushland, Texas indicate
soils with native grass cover in this region "tend to freeze four to five
inches deep during average years". This would create a frost-heave
situation from the present ground surface down to that approximate
depth with at least two possible ramifications. Physical movement
would tend to obscure stratigraphic markers in upper reaches of the
profile; it is this investigator’s experience that such would also alter
original artifact provenience more than would be expected in uncultivated areas. In another respect the majority of primary and secondary root activity within the surrounding biotic community is largely
limited to the upper half foot or so of the weathering profile. As a
result, one might expect less reliability from artifact triangulation on

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

169

the northern portion of TsA:2.3.0.1. than might be gained in areas
represented by test pits 2 and 3. In general, the absence of a protective
topsoil in T.P./1. makes less trustworthy visual and mechanical inspection of upper portions of the profile. Were this reporter to encounter a similar test situation in the future he would certainly procure soil samples by the arbitrary level method within such a natural
unit. The procedure followed on this site was to select "averaging
samples" from the approximate middle of each visually defined depositional level. It is here suggested future arbitrary sampling units be
no larger than the observed or expected thinnest strata found elsewhere on the site.
Chemically, the organic carbon and phosphate values of Level A,
when coupled with sodium and hydrogen-ion values, correspond
nicely with what should be relatively expected for a surface exposed
occupational zone.
A reasonable inference at this point is a combination of sheet wash
from more steep grades immediately to the south, in conjunction with
wind deflation acting on those reworked sediments, gradually truncated the soil profile on the northern half of the site. Consequently,
vegetation and weathering directly affected the occupational zone
which elevated organic carbon values and lowered the pH ratio
beyond those expected in either the topsoil or habitation levels of the
other test pits.
Test Pit/2. (Fig. 7; Fig. 8)
The second square was placed 110 feet $7° W of T.P./1. and excavated to a maximum depth of 2.30 feet. Stratigraphically, the pit
exhibited four gross levels, but only tWo of the three resultant interfaces were immediately obvious. While the contact between general
levels A and B, and B and C were visually quite distinct, the interface
between B1 and B2 was "much less obvious upon initial exposure and
cleaning. It was not until the finished profile had stood overnight that
two separate units within the larger Level B became apparent. This
distinction was first made on the weight of soil color and texture, and
later supported by chemical analysis.
Level A averaged 0.4 feet thick, and was found to be a culturally
sterile zone that extended from the present ground surface down to a
sharp change in color, texture and the beginning of cultural inclusives that marked the start of Level B.
The soil was a dark red, silty sand that presented itself as a swirled
mixture of reddish brown loam and medium tan sand -- all of which
supported a fair amount of primary and secondary root activity from
grass.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

170

TsA: 2. 3. 0. 1, -- T.P./2
Ift.

Scale: i

i (no distortion)

True Horizon

Level A --

Level B1

Level B2

Level C --

::;~<,;. : o\+ ;ooo = o~.o+:o., o .

Pit FIOo~

NOT EXCAVATED

I ....

VIEW:
pH units

Looking S.W.

10091FS
2+5YR 3/6

20109F5
1OR 3/6

301o9
1OR 4/6

0.05
TO
0.1

iiiii!i

0~02
0.05

Top Soil: dark red silty sand resulting from
a down-slope random blending of chocolate
brown loam and medium tan sand.

4.

8.0

Occupation

3.

8.0

2.

8.0

1.

8.0

Zone:

dark

red

coarse

silt.

Lithics, bone, teeth, and fleck charcoal.

~
0.05

Occupation Zone:

red flnesilt. Lithics, bone,.

teeth, and fleck charcoal

20252 F S
1OR 5/6

0.002
~o
0.05

oo°~Oo
’,o

,

Culturally

Sterile:

light

red

silt

loam

including fairly dense concentration of rotten
sandstone and calcite geode talus.

Profile Pins, at 0.5 ft. interval.

FIGURE 7

171

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

68

o~

E
o

r,

!o2

~O

o

o

z z

E

T

o o

g

.<
o o

o

172

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

When considering relative chemical values it must be remembered
that, while this southern portion of the site exhibited more dense
floral cover than the deflated area to the north, root activity in the
northern half of the site was immediately involved with an occupational zone. For this reason the pH value is not quite as depressed in
either the first or second stratum of T.P./2. in comparison to T.P./1. On
the other hand, the marked nonphreatophytic nature of vegetation on
the site may largely -- if not wholely -- account for what initially
appears anomolous in the phosphate profile of the second test pit.
Initial inspection of these values could give a reversal impression
moving from Level A to Level B, -- if phosphates are indeed to reflect
human activity. However, more careful consideration of the distribution of exchangeable bases during plant growth suggests not a depression in the phosphorus content of B,, but an elevation within the
topsoil. The active absorption of phosphates and other plant nutrients, and their subsequent accumulation in the surface horizon
(Barshad 1964:48) has had at least two effects. First, it has increased
the phosphate level from 42.5 ppm in the sparcely covered area of
T.P./1. to 47.0 ppm in the more luxuriant region of T.P./2. Second,
through upward mobility during the winter dry season it has slightly
robbed and exceeded the P205 content of B1. This floral cause is
supported both by the content of organic carbon in each Level A, and
by a comparable ppm value of P2Oa in Level A of the third test pit. At
this point it should also be noted that the increase in phosphates from
B 1 to B 2 is proportionally quite in line with that from B 1 to B a in T.P./3.
-- especially if a bone bed is taken into account with the latter.
What sensitivity potassium may have as an effective indicator of
occupation may be seen in the second square if viewed in relation to
soluble salts. Together their increase in the larger B horizon could
reflect the effect of animal soft tissue on that depositional unit.
The total artifact inventory of combined Levels B1 and B2 was 38
items which included: projectile point fragments--I, unutilized
lithics--28, shell (Succinea sp.)--3, dental enamel--6, in addition to
minimal amounts of fleck charcoal throughout both strata.
Initial Interpretation: Though somewhat finer texture, the soil color
and talus inclusives in Level C along with its stratigraphic placement
suggest it to be a portion of the same depositional unit witnessed as
Level B in T.P./1. The same can be said on stratigraphic, soil texture,
and artifact yield bases for Levels B~ and B2 in T.P./2. and Level A in
T.P./1. -- soil color in the latter being altered because of additional
organic material and extraedaphic phenomena discussed earlier.
The increase in levels of soluble salts and sodium moving downward probably indicates leaching of more mobile elements, rather

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

173

than increased living activity at greater depths. But the low pH,
increased potassium value, and percentage peaking of organic carbon
in Level B, is indicative of a period of greater occupational intensity
than the earlier B2 stratum. The quite high phosphate value in B2 may
therefore reflect not much beyond a heavier distribution of bone, or
possibly lateral movement of phosphorus within the same stratigraphic unit from an area of greater concentration no more than 37
feet upslope.
The anomolous nature of the nitrogen curve has not yet been satisfactorily determined. However, it may be no more complex than
assimilatory nitrate reduction (one of two classes of denitrification)but probably not nitrate respiration (Stevenson 1964:270-271).
The reason for T.P./2 and/3, not having exposed the Permian redbed
is reflected in an upslope direction to the south of superimposing
sediments and is schematically represented in figure 3.

Test Pit/3. (Fig. 9; Fig. 10)
The third square was to originally be placed about 75 feet upslope
from T.P./2. in a S 51°E direction. But results of the surface distributional study of artifacts pointed out a heavy concentration of small
retouch flakes and spalls on the southwesternmost terrace extension
(Figs. 3 and 4). This debitage, in conjunction with dark carbonaceous
earth and the presence of bone and dental enamel in the immediately
surrounding erosional profile, strongly argued for pit placement approximately 37 feet S 42° W of T.P./2.
The last testing unit was excavated to a maximum depth of 2.05 feet
and produced six distinct levels with well-defined interfaces.
Level A averaged 0.6 feet thick and extended from the present
ground surface down to a sharp change in soil color, texture, and the
advent of cultural material that marked the upper surface of Level B,.
With the exception of surface deposited artifacts resulting from erosion in the immediate vicinity this unit was culturally sterile.
Rather similar to Level A in T.P./2., the soil was a light red, silty
sand that seems to have resulted from a down-slope random blending
of reddish brown loam and medium tan sand. The texture was not at
all atypical of that found in the topsoil of T.P./2., and it as well
supported a fair amount of primary and s econdary grass root activity.
With the exception of sodium and the soluble salts, Level A was
also chemically comparable to the topsoil in T.P./2. Concerning those
bases, an initial inspection might warrant an interpretation that the
undisturbed product was one of salinization, i.e., an intrazonal
halomorphic situation. This can and does occur in regions of limited
rainfall such as localities of Randall County that are poorly drained. In

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

174

TsA:2.3.0.1. -- T.P./3
1 ft.

Scale:

, (no distortion)

True Horizon
Level A

Level Bi
Level B2

Level B3
........ J

Level B4

Level C

--

Pit Floor

NOT

EXCAVATED

VIEW:
Looking South

o
Top Soil:

pH units

light red silty sand resulting from

a down-slope random blending of chocolate

10.30252FS
0.856/6
0.1’°

iiiiiii

30.TFS 0~5
5YR 4/3
30108FS
2,5YR 3/2

Occupation Zone:

8.0

reddish brown to organic

black fine silty sand. Lithics, bone, and chunk

0.1
0~o002
0.05

6.

brown loam and medlum tan sand.

L_J

carbon.
Occupation Zone:

8.0

dusky red to heavy organic

black fine silty sand. Artifacts >BI.
20117FS
5YR 4/4

~02
0.05

20117FS

0.002

5YR4/4

0.005

20252FS
108 5/6

0. C02
TO
0.05

Occupation

L_J
~

~

’

Zone

(?):

reddish brown silt.

Minimal, random chunk carbon; some bone.
Occupation

Zone

(?):

reddish brown silt.

8 .o+

8.0+

Artifacts about = to 82.

Culturally Sterile:

light red loam containing

dense concentration of rotten sandstone and
~ ~ ¯ ¯
o-,.

i

calcareous talus material.

Minimal,

chunk carbon.

Profile Pins, at 0.5 ft. interval.

FIGURE 9

intrusive

1.

8,0

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

175

O

©

d
e4

176

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

those situations water that is available does not experience much
downward percolation. Instead, it is primarily lost through evaporation and transpiration; consequently salt concentration is increased
(Seatz and Peterson 1964:308-310). However, there are two falacies in
this assessment. First, the soil has been altered as a result of cultural
activity, i.e., a typical Quinlan solum is not present. And second, this
human intervention has not reduced the permeability rate of the
typical Quinlan series [0.8-2.5 inches per hour (Jacquot et.al. 1970:49,
Table 3)] -- in fact in-field calculations suggest a slight increase in
this rate. For this reason increased salinity of the topsoil is here
believed to reflect an area on the site having contained a disproportionate volume of animal flesh at lower levels. Some support for this
position can be gained by consulting sodium and soluble salt values
from underlying deposits.
Aside from thickness (ca.0.15 feet), the most noticeable features of
Level B, are the marked increase in phosphates and a corresponding
reduction in percentage of organic carbon. This is accompanied by a
change in soil texture and drastic color change from brownish beige to
brown-black. Concerning carbon, an interesting lesson relevant to
visual assessment is to be learned. In-field generalizations about
content of carbon based on blackness of color and presence of charcoal may not always be warranted -- especially if the inference involves organic carbon. While a dark staining may reflect the presence
of inert charcoal, it may not reflect to the slightest degree the presence
or absence of organic matter such as decomposed plant and animal
remains. In this vein, though color does deepen in B1, the percentage
of organic carbon is significantly less than that of Level B1 in T.P./2. (a
salient feature discussed below). On the other hand, the phosphate
value is much higher in the second stratum. This is here taken to
represent a fairly dense deposit of bone; a point supported by minimal
amounts of preserved bone fragments.
Level B2 averaged 0.2 feet thick and was essentially void of artifacts,
save some minor intrusions through both upper and lower interfaces.
Soil texture indicated a bit finer depositional unit than immediately
above, and a change in color to brownish beige further aided in
visually distinguishing this separate stratum.
Chemically, the potassium curve is slightly depressed, the phosphate value is noticeably reduced, percentage of organic carbon is
further lowered, and pH reaches its highest value in the tested portion
of the site. From an archeological position this level clearly represents
a reversal from that either above or below it.
Level B3 averaged 0.18 feet thick and produced an even more
dramatic change within the stratigraphic sequence than B,. While

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

177

particle size was not markedly altered, soil color was a heavy organic
black and exhibited a typical "greasy feeling" to the touch. Though a
fractional test for total carbon was not performed on any of these
samples (which would indicate amount of charcoal), Level B3 is
believed to have contained more chunk and fleck charcoal than the
above Level B1. It should be noted, however, that the content of
organic matter is quite high in both a relative and absolute sense. This
is accompanied by the highest phosphorus content obtained anywhere on the site, a peaking of nitrates, an increase in soluble salts,
and a sudden drop in the hydrogen-ion value. However, concerning
the elevated nitrate value to 11.0 ppm in this stratum, it is here felt that
is not a marked enough increase to suggest either a buried A horizon
or more than usual concentration of excreta (uric acid or fecal material). Instead, it is more probably related to an increase in organic
matter in this depositional unit (Jackson 1964:133), or reflects the
tremendous volume of intrusive protein through the process of nitrogen mineralization (Stevenson 1964:265-268) -- or both.
That this was an occupational zone hardly needs mention -- especially in light of tangeable osteological evidence. The stratum produced a partially disarticulated portion of the thorax of Bison bison,
one moderately worn antler flesher, and the right distal epiphyseal
head of a B. bison humerus which exhibited utilization along the
fractured epiphysis-diaphysis plane. The lithic assemblage from this
level was distinctly higher than that for Level B1.
Level B4 was surprisingly similar in thickness to B2 above (ca.0.2
feet) and extended from an undulating interface at the bottom of B3
down to a sharp contact with Level C. The soil was a brownish beige
silt, and a bit finer texture than that of B2. This matrix contained some
chunk carbon, and a moderate amount of calcareous and sandstone
pebbles -- not at all atypical in derivation to like material found in
other levels.
This zone represents a quick return to more alkaline conditions, an
obvious drop in phosphorus value, a reduction in the amount of
soluble salts, and a lower percentage of organic carbon. These chemical returns are supplemented by an almost complete lack of artifacts.
Some bone did occur in the level but, as was the case with unit B2, the
test pit profile suggested intrusion -- in this instance coming in from
B3.

Level C averaged 0.75 feet in exposure and extended from a sharp,
undulating interface at the bottom of B4 downward into and formed
the test pit floor.
The soil was about the same color as Level B in T.P./1. and Level C in
T.P./2., and had a particle size range of 0.002 mm. to 0.05 mm. That

178

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

matrix contained a fairly dense concentration of rotten sandstone and
calcite geode talus debris. Generally, the level was quite dry (even
though a moisture line was noted at a depth of 1.9 feet in T.P./2.) and
very calcareous. The combination of those three features (viz., rock
inclusives, matrix composition, and dryness) necessitated maddock
excavation.
It is within this level that phosphates return to regional values
expected in fields under normal cultivation (J. L. Green, personal
communication). As mentioned earlier, potassium remains at an understandably high level, and soluble salts appear to be accumulating
in this "hard pan". No cultural material was encountered in this
depositional unit.
The total artifact inventory of combined levels B, and B3 was:
projectile point fragments--2, scrapers--2, utilized lithics--2, unutilized lithics--91, obsidian--2, total osteology--216; or a total artifact inventory of 315 items.
Initial Interpretation: As was the case in T.P./2., this excavation unit
did not terminate with Permian sediments. Instead, Level C represents the same depositional unit as that called Level C in T.P./2. and
Level B in T.P./1., viz., Triassic talus material. In this third excavation
unit the soil matrix was somewhat more consolidated. This was a
consequence of carbonate cementation -- which probably resulted
from ground water run-off toward the slumping western erosional
face (Fig. 3). This lower area near the toe of the present talus cone
seems to have been a recipient of eolian deposited silty loam which
comprises the culturally sterile Level B4. The upper surface of that
latter stratum unquestionably formed the uppermost surface of the
terrace in the southwestern extension of the site at the time of initial
occupation.
Level B3 represents a period of time of initial site occupation and
may therefore be termed a portion of the first cultural component.
Projected internal site stratigraphy suggests this unit to be the same as
T.P./2.B2. In that there was no indication of intrusion or stratigraphic
disturbance (mixing or reversal) the site could not have been occupied prior to the advent of B. bison.
More than gross thickness, soil chemistry-- particularly phosphate
and organic carbon values -- strongly suggests this earlier level was
more heavily utilized than Level B1. In that the phosphate content is
directly reflecting a bone bed, it should not be used as an indicator of
more intense occupation. However, organic carbon values are not
known to function in anywhere near a 1:1 relationship (direct or
inverse) with phosphorus. For this reason the high percent of organic
carbon present in B3 may more safely indicate more intense occupa-

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

179

tion than occurred in B, -- either by a greater number of people, or
over a longer period of time, or both. Added support for this argument
could be gained from pH (8.3) and soluble salts (3120 ppm) given, of
course, bison and other faunal remains more often find their way to a
garbage dump lacking most of their eatable protein.
Level B2 suggests a period of nonuse for that portion of the site. A
time during which the earlier occupational zone was covered over by
wind deposited sediments. This should not be taken to mean a period
of nonactivity for the entire site in the sense of a complete cultural
hiatus.
The period of occupation represented by Level B, was possibly one
of lighter reliance on that segment of the site; it clearly was the last
period of purposeful prehistoric habitation, and is stratigraphically
analogous to T.P./2.BI. It is this zone and its stratigraphic counterpart,
as separated from those below, that qualify the site as multicomponent; this is said regardless of any similarities or differences that may
be later witnessed in the material culture through formal excavation.
The topsoil is a largely wind deposited silty sand that has and is
experiencing differential erosion and deposition through sheet wash
and wind. Rapid removal by water is more probably occurring during
periods of convectional thunderstorm activity. Deposition, though
undoubtedly some from upslope, is primarily a result of windborn
sediments. A combination of the two, the former gradually "outstripping" the latter, has resulted in a highly mobile topsoil over most of
the site. As a result, the tightly quantifying utility of a distributional
study concerning artifacts on or within the topsoil should be weighed
carefully.
DISCUSSION
Supplementary to the more obvious points presented earlier, at
least three additional issues warrant comment: the utility of increased
quantification at a survey level of investigation, the necessity of
presenting a larger environmental picture to sufficiently understand
any single feature of that mosaic, and an overriding archeological
value of data presented in this report.
Though Redman’s (1973:64, Fig. 1) reiteration concerning an "organizational framework for a regional multistage field research design" is rather biased toward problem oriented surveys, fieldwork
prior to systematic excavation should be at least cognitively separated
into different-- albeit interrelated -- operational phases. While these
phases, e.g., literature search, reconnaisance and general ecological
study, site and specific environmental context survey, may be looked

180

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

upon as successive stages or levels of data retrieval, none is ideally
more or less sophisticated than the next. Indeed, while each may be
oriented toward a single methodological approach, all employ discrete techniques of execution. Hopefully, involvement at each level
will produce ultimate data retrieval for that step in terms of the
specific project and in the face of temporal expediency. Achievement
of such a balance is not always easy and techniques that lend themselves to greater quantification at a minimal cost of time and money
are surely worth consideration for the greater amount of information
they may generate. Mechanical and chemical analysis of soils has
long been recognized as such a tool, and it is this investigator’s
position that soil sampling can be of high survey utility if problems
posed involve pedologicat dynamics. The question remains, "At what
level of survey can this technique of information acquisition be expediently employed?"
Archeological survey at the reconnaissance level seldom entails
much beyond a statement of subareal or regional potential. This can
often be achieved by flying over, driving across, or walking through
the universe in question; the end product rarely requires an exacting
site inventory. Sample procurement at this stage of analysis is usually
limited to culturally and environmentally representative photography. At a second stage of investigation site survey may involve a
detailed list of components or localities encountered, their approximate horizontal size, and the collection of artifactual and nonartifactual surface samples. Tools needed during this phase can include
techniques of photography, controlled surface collection, probing,
and possibly rapid planimetric mapping. Such is the case for many
non-problem oriented, "salvage" surveys. Data retrieval at a more
intensive third level of survey is largely guided by problem oriented
research designs; though it frequently occurs that researchers either
bypass the earlier second phase or begin at this investigative level
from extant work when a final report requires statements significantly
beyond the descriptive [exceptions to this course of action can be
found with some research among participants in programs such as the
Southwestern Anthropoligical Research Group (Gumerman 1971), or
entire institutions such as the Museum of Northern Arizona where the
philosophy concerning archeological clearance for industrial projects has taken on "non-salvage" dimensions (A. J. Lindsay, personal
communication)]. Results of this latter stage are most recently tailored
along lines of environmental impact statements, or more commonly
have formed highly quantifying guidelines for formal excavation
selection. It is at this operational level that selective subsurface site
testing is sometimes added to augment information gained from ear-

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

181

lier mentioned techniques, e.g., vertical site dimentions, establishing
locality potential for cultural and/or natural stratification, and consequently a greater or lesser probability for single v.s. multiple components, etc. In the absence of an erosional face or other natural events
providing a convenient site profile, archaeologists will employ a
variety of coreing devices or a series of small escavation units
(trenches or test pits). If questions are being asked that require these
procedures, and if field time and money have been allotted for attempting answers to those questions, then surely time and funds are
such as to permit implementation of expedient yet high return tools
like soil sampling and analysis. In the instance of TsA:2.3.0.1. thirteen stratified samples of 500 g. each were prepared, provenienced,
collected from bottom to top, and filed for later analysis in approximately twenty minutes. The average laboratory cost per 250 g. samples was $2.08 (one half of each sample was retained for mechanical
analysis, rechecking, and obvious safety factors). In the end, little
time and money have been invested in a type of quantification that
better elucidates excavation potential in terms of a given problem
orientation, and aids in selection of a specific technical approach
should further exploration be desired.
The geographic location of TsA:2.3.0.1. in canyon country of
northwest Texas has placed that site and its contents in an ecologically transitional setting (Table 5). For that reason, along with the
intimate and subtle interplay between physiography, topography,
climate, vegetation, and soils, it is more necessary to consider a larger
environmental picture when assessing and reporting upon any discrete feature of the total collage. In the first instance, soil parent
material is not a primary product of local Permian bedrock -- any
more than it is wholely of Triassic origin. In fact, each is stratigraphically represented in the profile, and both have been overriden by
windborn Recent deposits of nonindigenous origin. Together they
represent a matrix of pedogenic inputs not always common to
localities or regions of more central or homogeneous placement
within a single physiographic provence. This must be well understood in order to better comprehend mechanical and chemical results
of soil analyses. It was, for example, within this parameter that potassium values were interpreted as less sensitive -- and not because the
entire profile was loaded with wood-ash. In the second instance,
attempts to understand one environmental factor without notice to
several others may lead to total befuddlement or again -- and yet
worse-- misinterpretation. In this vein, during comparison of topsoil
and occupation levels between test pits 1 and 2 a consideration of
density and type of floral cover aided explication of differential

182

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

hydrogen-ion values as well as a seeming reversal in the phosphate
profile. The former does not necessarily indicate more intense occupation of the northern half of the site by less alkalinity; and the latter
does not suggest stratigraphic mixing or an additional component
through elevation in phosphate content. In addition, understanding
climatic influences on particular soil types can certainly aid in prediction of the presence or absence of more perishable remains. In the
case of TsA:2.3.0.1. levels of temperature and precipitation working
on local soils over a reasonable length of time have been primarily
responsible for creating a calcimorphic soil. With the Quinlan series
this has resulted in little downward leaching of soluble bases and a
high probability that many ions remain in place -- indeed; any such
vertical movement at a reasonable depth may be expected to be in an
upward rather than downward direction. Surely this has been a central factor to excellent preservation of bison bone, and may further
remove ambiguities surrounding supposed zones of greater or lesser
occupational intensity.
TABLE 5
Transitional Physical Setting of TsA:2.3.0.1.

Setting

PHYSIOGRAPHY

Between Osage Plains section of
Central Lowland Provence and
High Plains Provence

TOPOGRAPHY

Talus slope

CLIMATE

Bwk

VEGETATION

Biotic ecotone

SOILS

Rough Broken Land

Description

Permian sediments overlain by
nonmarine Triassic rubble and
capped off with redeposited
Pliocene to Pleistocene eolian
sands.
3%-7% grade of Dockum detritus
overriding second terrace above
floodplain.
regime of inequality between air
masses to west & north (cT, cP),
and south & east (cTs).
western margin of Mesquite
Plains District (edaphic distinction) near Short-Grass Plains
{Kansan Biotic Provence}.
immature weathering profile of
talus rubble between stratified
floodplain alluvium [Broken Alluvial Land (Br)] and wind deposited loams of Potter-Mobeetie
(Pe) and Pullman (Pm-Pu) Associations.

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

183

On the other hand, knowledge of existing soil types and factors of
influence must be treated with guarded caution. One should not make
one-to-one assumptions from a known soil type at its type section to
soil involved with an archeological site. Not only must confidence
decrease with distance from the type or control section, human intervention certainly has a hand to play in changing chemical and
mechanical characteristics enough in degree that the kind or type of
soil being sampled is something other than the naturally maturing
ideal. Just as soil scientists should be careful not to establish a
pedological type section on an archaeological site, given enough time
the archaeologist should develop his own controls just off-- but quite
near -- the cultural component; these samples may then be accompanied by an inventory from all levels within the site (Cornwall
1958:116; Cook and Heizer 1965:16; van der Merwe and Stein
1972:245ff.). Regrettably, this sampling neglect is a shortcoming of an
otherwise excellent study performed by Eddy and Dregne (1964:8-9);
as samples appear to have been taken only from disturbed levels, the
final report lacks necessary horizontal and vertical controls against
which to compare culturally altered soil. In sum, type section information and close proximity control samples -- though very necessary
to understanding localized phenomena -- should be used only to
erect parameters within which the products of analysis may be expected to fall, and by no measure absolute dicta.
In survey perspective, mechanica! and chemical analysis of soil at
one archeological locality in Palo Duro Canyon has produced some
quantitative and repeatable information most beneficial to general
site assessment and future excavation. In addition to adding vertically
stratified artifactual and nonartifactual samples to an extant museum
surface inventory, establishing some technical approach guidelines
for more intensive exploration, and affording quantitative data on a
specific type and phase variation within the Quinlan series (Appendix and Table 3), the three test pits discussed herein present the
beginning of a strong argument for intrasite functional differentiation. Insofar as visually identifiable soil stratigraphy is reflecting
more a cultural reality within periods of natural deposition than
wholely physical events attributable to such phenomena as a mature
weathering profile or depositional/erosional history, it is here felt
TsA:2.3.0.1. was occupied at more than one discrete period of time
and probably by more than a single group of people. The projected
stratigraphic correlations between levels B1 and Ba in T.P./3. and BI
and B2 in T.P./2. certainly mitigate in this direction. In this light, ithas
been suggested the north half of the site may present a picture of
stratigraphic mixing, and thus produce less reliable cultural sequencing from tight artifact proveniencing.

184

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

;~

oa

ID

4d~dd44ddd44d ~
"Ct~

I:10 ""

ddddddddddddd

Z

~

~ggg~g~ggggg[

~ ~’~

~.~

ddddddd4d444a ~
ila

Ca

¢,~

¢ 30,1eO’vl~eO’cl4~o"ar~
O~a

v,.,l¢’Ox--~
O’a e’.l eO

ff.~

©

Ill
A A A A A A A A A A A AA

q

0

"~

o ~

Z

~~ 4dM4ddd

~0~0~00~00~
-~,~

~
~

a:

.~ >,<
~.~0

~No

Ca

=uSmu<~umugu
5
Z

.g
,-1

0
Z

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

185

It is further believed multiple occupations may have been of a
permanent enough nature for inhabitants to designate certain portions of the original terrace for specific functions -- at least at the
midden level. While the horizontal extent of midden debris could not
be determined by a single 3 feet by 3 feet test pit, T.P./3. does argue for
trash accumulation -- and comparison of data from that square to
information from the other excavation units suggest localized midden
deposits at each proposed occupation level (rather surprising in light
of local notions concerning "Archaic patterns").
Understandably, the equally synthetic query concerning occupation intensity has generated more questions than materiality. Within
T.P./2. the relatively low hydrogen-ion level (8.4), increased potassium value (222 ppm), and peaking of organic carbon (0.8983%) offers
a beginning suggestion that Level B, experienced a greater intensity
of occupation than the lower B2. On the other hand, the low pH (8.3),
level of organic carbon (0.7076%), and increased soluble salt value
(3120 ppm) exhibited by T.P./3.Ba points to more intense activity in
that district of the site at an earlier point in time. Barring stratigraphic
inversion or mixing, and bearing in mind the remnant nature of this
particular terrace -- as well as the very incomplete nature of survey
data -- one might be suspicious of such cultural patterns as shifting
centers of activity through the time represented by human habitation.
Were this the situation, it is possible T.P.i3. was located nearer the
center of the earlier midden than the later -- in which case a substantial portion of the latter deposit may have been lost to the combined
action of "pot hunters" and natural erosion; each form of site alteration has been quite common within the state park. Conversely, T.P.i2.
may not have found the center of either component and so not reflect
artifactual, stratigraphic, or pedological circumstances typical of sectors of highest use.
Certainly not all site surveys require or even allow for subsurface
testing. But it is the position taken in this report that greater quantification is sorely needed in all phases of preexcavation investigation.
And when means of pedological explication can place the archeologist in a better site evaluating position at so minimal a cost of
time and money, it is surely a tool worthy of consideration for any
person in a testing position, with a problem in mind, and more
intensive exploration ahead. It has undoubtedly shed most helpful
light on this investigator’s original problem of defining and describing occupational versus nonoccupational zones in the floor of Palo
Duro Canyon.

186

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author is indebted to Mr. Curtis Tunnell and the Texas State Historical Survey
Committee for substantial project funding of which this report is a part. Equal appreciation is expressed toward the State Antiquities Committee and Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department for a permit to investigate state property, as well as continuing help and
encouragement. Gratitude is personally extended to Drs. J. T. Hughes and J. L. Green of
West Texas State University and B. R. Harrison, Curator of Anthropology, PanhandlePlains Museum in Canyon for individual time, advice and facilities. Ms. Nova Young of
the Museum of Northern Arizona, Flagstaff delightfully served as graphic illustrator.

REFERENCES CITED

Adkins, W. S.
1932 The Mesozoic Systems in Texas. In: The Geology of Texas (Vol. I). (E.
H. Sellards, W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer, eds.), pp. 239-517.
Bureau of Economic Geology, Bulletin 3232, University of Texas,
Austin.
Baker, C. L.
1915 Geology and Underground Waters of the Northern Llano Estacado.
University of Texas, Bulletin 57.
Barshad, I.
1964 Chemistry of Soil Development. In: Chemistry of the Soil. (F. E. Bear,
ed.), pp. 1-70. Reinhold Publishing Corporation, New York.
Barton, D. C.
1930 Deltaic Coastal Plain of Southeastern Texas. Geological Society of
America, Bulletin 41, pp. 359-382.
Blair, W. F.
1950 The Biotic Provences of Texas. Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 2, No. 1,
pp. 93-117.
1954 Mammals of the Mesquite Plains Biotic District in Texas and Oklahoma, and Speculations in the Central Grasslands. Texas Journal of
Science, Vol. 6, pp. 235-264.
Blair, W. F. and T. H. Hubbell
1938 The Biotic Districts of Oklahoma. American Midland Naturalist, Vol.
20, pp. 425-454.
Bryson, R. A.
1970 The Character of Climatic Change, and the End of the Pleistocene.
Paper presented at first meeting, American Quaternary Association.
Montana State University, Bozeman.
Buckman, H. O., and N. C. Brady
1960 The Nature and Properties of Soils. MacMillan, New York.
Coe, M. D., and K. V. Flannery
1964 Microenvironments and Mesoamerican Prehistory. Science, Vol. 143,
pp. 650-654.
Cook, S. F., and R. P. Heizer
1965 Studies on the Chemical Analysis of Archaeological Sites. University
of California Press, Los Angeles.
Cornwall, I. W.
1958 Soils for the Archaeologist. Phoenix House, London.

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

187

Denton, G. H., and S. C. Porter
1970 Neoglaciation. Scientific American, Vol. 222, No. 6, pp. 100-110.
Eddy, F. W., and H. E. Dregne
1964 Soil Tests on Alluvial and Archaeological Deposits, Navajo Reservoir
District. E1 Palacio, Vol. 71, No. 4, pp. 5-21.
Federal Standard Colors
1968 Federal Standard No. 595a, (Vol. I). Washington, D.C.
Frye, J. C., and A. B. Leonard
1957a Ecological Interpretations ofPliocene and Pleistocene Stratigraphy in
the Great Plains Region. American Journal of Science, Vol. 255, pp.
1-11.
1957b Studies of Cenozoic Geology along Eastern Margin of Texas High
Plains, Armstrong to Howard Counties. Bureau of Economic Geology,
Report of Investigations, No. 32, University of Texas, Austin.
Geiger, L. C.
1972 Oral communication. U.S.D.A., Soil Conservation Service, Amarillo.
Green, J. L.
1972 Oral communication. Plant Science Department, School of
Agriculture, West Texas State University, Canyon.
Gumerman, G. J. (ed.)
1971 The Distribution of Prehistoric Population Aggregates. Southwestern
Anthropological Research Group, Proceedings No. 1. Prescott College
Press, Prescott.
Hafsten, U.
1961 Pleistocene Development of Vegetation and Climate in the Southern
High Plains as Evidenced by Pollen Analysis. In: Paleoecology of the
Llano Estacado. (F. Wendorf, ed.), pp. 59-91. Museum of New Mexico
Press, Santa Fe.
Haynes, C. V., Jr.
1968 Geochronology of Late-Quaternary Alluvium. In: Means of Correlation of Quaternary Succession. (R. B. Morrison and H. E. Wright, Jr.,
eds.), pp. 591-631. University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.
Irwin-Williams, C., and C. V. Haynes, Jr.
1970 Climatic Change and Early Population Dynamics in the Southwestern
United States. Quaternary Research, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 59-71.
Jackson, M. L.
1964 Chemical Composition of Soils. In: Chemistry of the Soil. (F. E. Bear,
ed.), pp. 71-141. Reinhold Publishing Corporation, New York.
Jacquot, L. L., L. C. Geiger, B. R. Chance, V. D. Woods, D. A. Leath, and L. C.
Imke
1965 Soil Survey of Armstrong County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Washington, D.C.
Jacquot, L. L., L. C. Geiger, B. R. Chance, and W. Tripp
1970 Soil Survey of Randall County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Washington, D.C.
Koppen, W., and R. Geiger (eds.)
19301939 Handbuch der Klimatologie. 4 Vols. Berlin.
Lee, W. T.
1918 Early Mesozoic Physiography of the Southern Rocky Mountains.
Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collection, Vol. 69, No. 4.

188

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Lindsay, A. J., Jr.
1972 Oral communication. Research Center, Department of Anthropology,
Museum of Northern Arizona, Flagstaff.
Lotspeich, F. B., and J. R. Coover
1962 Soil Forming Factors on the Llano Estacado: Parent Material, Time,
and Topography. Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 14, pp. 7-17.
Maulde, H. E.
1964 Environment and Man in Arid America. Science, Vol. 145, pp.
123-129.
Mehringer, P. J., Jr.
1967 Pollen Analysis and the Alluvial Chronology. The Kiva, Vol. 32, pp.
96-101.
Munsell Color Company, Inc.
1971 Munsell Soil Color Charts. Baltimore.
Pearson, E. L.
1968 Geocultural Survey of the West Mexican Marismas Nacionales. State
University of New York, Buffalo.
Plummer, F. B.
1932 Cenozoic Systems in Texas. In: The Geology of Texas (Vol. I). (E. H.
Sellards, W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer, eds.), pp. 519-818. Bureau
of Economic Geology, Bulletin 3232, University of Texas, Austin.
Redman, C. L.
1973 Multistage Fieldwork and Analytical Techniques. American
Antiquity, Vol. 38, No. 1, pp. 61-79.
Richmond, G. M.
1960 Glaciation of the East Slope of Rocky Mountain National Park, Colorado. Geological Society of America, Bulletin 71, pp. 1371-1382.
Ruhe, R. V.
1965 Quaternary Paleopedology. In: The Quaternary of the United States.
(H. E. Wright, Jr., and D. G. Frey, eds.), pp. 755-764. Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Sellards, E. H.
1932 The Pre-Paleozoic and Paleozoic Systems in Texas. In: The Geology of
Texas (Vol. I). (E. H. Sellards, W. S. Adkins, F. B. Plummer, eds.), pp.
15-238. Bureau of Economic Geology, Bulletin 3232, University of
Texas, Austin.
Schoenwetter, J., and A. E. Dittert, Jr.
1968 An Ecological Interpretation of Anasazi Settlement Patterns. In:
Anthropological Archaeology in the Americas. (B. J. Meggers, ed.),
pp. 41-66. Anthropological Society of Washington, Washington, D.C.
Seatz, L. F., and H. B. Peterson
1964 Acid, Alkaline, Saline, and Sodic Soils. In: Chemistry of the Soil. (F. E.
Bear, ed.), pp. 292-319. Reinhold Publishing Corporation, New York.
Shelford, V. E.
1963 The Ecology of North America. University of Illinois Press, Urbana.
Soil Survey Staff
1960 Soil Classification, a Comprehensive System, 7th Approximation.
United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service,
Washington, D.C.

SOIL CHARACTERISTICS

189

Stevenson, I. L.
1964 Biochemistry of Soil. In: Chemistry of the Soil. (F. E. Bear, ed.), pp.
242-291. Reinhold Publishing Corporation, New York.
Van der Merwe, N. J., and P. H. Stein
1972 Soil Chemistry of Postmolds and Rodent Burrows: Identification
without Excavation. American Antiquity, Vol. 37, No. 2, pp. 245-254.
University of Colorado, Boulder

SOME THOUGHTS ON HOAXES AND FAKES
ROBERT F. HEIZER

ABSTRACT
The long history of hoaxes and frauds in archeology is reviewed, and
some modern-day examples are examined. Such problems are only one of
the manifestations of the ever-increasing trend of site destruction and the
loss of archeological information.

Professional archeologists are often (perhaps most often) not the
individuals who make the initial discovery of an important archaeological site. Part of the price that archeologists must pay for
working in a field of inquiry which has popular appeal is that of
having the general public becoming interested and entering, usually
uninvited and often without sufficient training, into the search for
and collection of prehistoric materials. Unlike most other nations, the
United States does not claim federal ownership and control of antiquities. The result of this, abetted by a situation where the public has a
good deal of spare time, money, and the ability to transport itself, is
that a large number of citizens have turned to do-it-yourself archeology, an avocation commonly referred to as "pot-hunting." Some
professionals, and organizations that are largely professional in their
membership and aims, have drawn a sharp distinction between
amateurs (however well meaning they may be) and professional archeologists (American Antiquity, Vol. 27, pp. 137-138, 1961). Such
professions of faith may do more harm than good, since they can have
the effect of amplifying the "natural" antipathy between the two
groups rather than drawing them together to work toward a common
aim. Amateurs and collectors increasingly tend to organize themselves into archeological "societies" which are regretably all too often
nothing more than pot-hunting clubs with social activities and the
good-fellowship of showing their arrowpoints (usually arranged in
floral designs in picture frames) to fellow members. A spirit of competition and rivalry between such groups is not unknown. Thus we
have rival non-professional collector groups who compete for the
limited supply of archeological materials not only between themselves but also with the professional archeologists (Nickerson 1962)
and the trained amateur archeologists. There is no need to recite the
dreary tale of plundered local archeological sites, since each area of
the United States has experienced this destruction of the unique
record of the past. The failure of many state and federal agencies to
protect archeological sites, and their refusal to investigate and prosecute persons known to despoil sites on public lands, is a similar tale of

192

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

crying over spilled milk, with little prospect of improvement
(Agogino and Sachs 1960).
Where this unregulated, and often unprincipled, activity of relic
collectors can really hurt is when they decide to "fool the experts"
and create a hoax. The motivations of persons who claim to have
found, or deliberately introduce an extraneous bone or artifact into a
deposit with the hope and intent of leading the unsuspecting finder to
believe that the specimen was in situ, are no doubt as varied as the
number of occurrences. Some such attempts to defraud are so clumsy
and inept that they are readily recognizable as such (e.g. McKelvey
1947; Rieth 1970). Others are better done and are motivated by a
genuine effort to mislead. Archeologists know and talk about these, I
am sure, but they should perhaps be rather more on their guard than
they seem to be. A few examples will serve to illustrate some dangers
of hoaxes, plants, and frauds.
In the Far West the oldest hoax is that of the Calaveras skull, said to
have been found at Altaville in 1866 lying in Pliocene gravels at a
depth of 130 feet (for bibliography, see Heizer 1948:3-7). The great
American geologist, Josiah Dwight Whitney, bit hard on this hoax,
and its true nature was not fully and finally exposed until nearly half a
century later. A second probable such hoax, possibly engineered as
the Comstock Mining District’s answer to California’s claim, was the
little known Ophir skull (Reichlen and Heizer 1966). The famous
Piltdown hoax was also finally and completely exposed after nearly a
half century of debate and controversy. There was another fraud, not
unlike Piltdown, which was perpetrated on the "father of prehistory,"
Boucher de Perthes, who in 1863 became the victim of the hoax of the
Moulin Quignon human jaw said to have been found by workmen in
the Pleistocene gravels (Oakley 1964:111-116). Lubbock
(1878:360-61) in his Pre-Historic Times, the first general book on
prehistory, observed that archeologists were already facing the problem of forged Paleolithic flint tools. Boucher de Perthes "bit" on faked
stone handaxes in 1863 (Rieth 1970:34).
Mexico today is a country where the manufacture of beautiful but
fake stone carvings and magnificent pottery imitating prehistoric
forms thrives. This industry is fed and encouraged by European and
American collectors. Such items do not have to be laboriously planted
in sites and t~en discovered; they are merely made, sent to American
and European dealers, and sold with solemn promises of their
genuine nature to gullible buyers. No great harm is done by this kind
of exploitation; and most archeologists and museum directors are
aware of some of the kinds of objects being made for this trade.
Museums, despite their care in not acquiring forgeries, are at times

HOAXES AND FAKES

193

fooled. A notable case is that of the three magnificent terracotta
sculptures of Etruscan warriors acquired by the Metropolitan
Museum of Art between 1915 and 1921, and not proved until 1959 to
be modern forgeries (yon Bothmer and Noble 1961). Some of the ways
in which fakes have been detected are explained by Easby and Dockstader (1964), Hoving et. al. (1968), Stross (1960), Rieth (1970), Wakeling (1912), Plenderleith (1952) and Ekholm (1964).
The problem is somewhat different, however, when we come to
allegations that an artifact of significant type, and claimed to have
been found in its original position in an important site, is suspected of
having been planted there. The Clovis fluted point said to have been
found at Lewisville, Texas, in what was interpreted as an ancient
hearth has been claimed by several prominent archeologists to have
been planted, a statement which has been rejected as untrue by one of
the discoverers. Where do we stand, then, on the Lewisville Clovis
point? The archeologists who have published their belief that the
Lewisville Clovis point was planted should produce the evidence
they presumably have; otherwise we may never know whether or not
this kind of chipped tool was or was not being made in Texas over
37,000 years ago. Whether, as I believe, but as some others doubt, the
Lewisville hearths are nothing more than carbonized nests of pack
rats (Heizer and Brooks 1965) and have nothing to do with man, is
beside the question. There is still that Clovis point whose legitimacy
is in doubt, and since this question presumably can be answered, this
should be done by persons claiming to be in possession of the true
facts.
More recently at Valsequillo, Puebla (Mexico), Dr. J. L. Lorenzo
(1967) has stated that many of the stone artifacts found by the Harvard
University expedition and said to have an antiquity of 40,000 years or
more were deliberately planted by the workers. The charge is serious
and it can have only one effect -- to throw doubt on any and all
artifacts found by the American excavators. Until Lorenzo’s charges
can be proved to be true or in error, or until some other excavator finds
more artifacts at Valsequi!lo under conditions which admit of no
question of their being in situ, no decision is possible as to the
presence of ancient man at this locality. Attempts by the American
investigators to refute Lorenzo’s charges (e.g. Irwin-Williams n.d.) do
not settle the problem -- they merely enlarge it.
A happier outcome of an attempt to defraud archeologists in Oklahoma is briefly, and forthrightly, denounced by Leonhardy (1966,
preface). In this case no harm was done because the perpetrator was
discovered and "confessed his misdeed."
A final class of "fakes" are the ones which were not, or presumably

194

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

were not, made with the intention to fool or mislead archeologists.
Among these is the famous "dolmen" in New Jersey and the obviously
modern petroglyphs reported from seven localities in California and
Nevada and where some 73 symbols are inscribed (Elsasser and Contreras 1958). Here it is suggested that their makers were motivated "on
behalf of some organization which set great store on mystical rites, or
would encourage the placing of the symbols in the hope that at some
future date they might constitute evidence, for example, of the presence of migrants from ’lost continents’ such as Atlantis or Mu."
As time passes and private collectors acquire more and more of the
finite supply of archeological materials, archeologists will of necessity have to dep end upon those collectors who p ermit their hoardings
to be studied to determine the kinds of prehistoric materials which
occur in certain areas where proper archeologicat investigation was
not carried out before the disappearance of the important sites. Some
amateurs do adopt professional methods to the extent, at least, of
cataloguing their collections, but many depend upon their memory or
assumption that a shoebox of uncatalogued artifacts were all found at
the same spot. The opportunity for mixture and error is so obvious
that it does not require comment, but the pertinent point here is that
any misplaced item which is not recognized as such becomes, automatically, a hoax -- an unwitting one, but nevertheless a possible
¯ source of error. It is my belief that there should be greater efforts made
by responsible archeologists to encourage private collectors to refine
their collecting techniques and to catalogue their materials. Only to
the extent that collectors can be successfully encouraged to adopt the
minimally required practice of making a record of the context of their
finds can we ever hope to salvage something useful from the tremendous destruction which they have wrought. The cost professionals must reckon in refusing to communicate with collectors and
amateurs is the loss of information whose uniqueness alone should be
sufficient reason to justify the effort.

HOAXES AND FAKES

i95

REFERENCES CITED

Agogino, G. A. and S. Sachs
1960 The Failure of State and Federal Legislation to Protect Archaeological
Resources. Tebiwa, Vol. 3, pp. 43-46.
yon Bothmer, D. and J. V. Noble
1961 An Inquiry Into the Forgery of the Etruscan Terracotta Warriors in the
’Metropolitan Museum of Art. Metropolitan Museum Papers No. 11.
Easby, D. T. and F. J. Dockstader
1964 Requiem for Tizoc. Archaeology, Vol. 17, pp. 85-90.
Ekholm, G. F.
1964 The Problems of Fakes in Pre-Columbian Art. Curator, Vol. 7, pp.
19-32.
Elsasser, A. B. and E. Contreras
1958 Modern Petrography in Central California and Western Nevada.
University of California Archaeological Survey Report No. 41:12-18.
Heizer, R. F.
1948 A Bibliography of Ancient Man in California. University of California
Archaeological Survey Report No. 2.
Heizer, R. F. and R. A. Brooks
1965 Lewisville--Ancient Campsite or Wood Rat Houses? Southwestern
Journal of Anthropology Vol. 21, pp. 155-165.
Hoving, T. P. F. et. al.
1968 The Game of Duplicity. Metropolitan Museum of Art, Bulletin Vol. 26,
pp. 241-252.
Irwin-Williams, C.
n.d. Comments on Allegations by J. L. Lorenzo Concerning Archaeological
Research at Valsequillo, Puebla. Paleoindian Institute, Eastern New
Mexico University, Miscellaneous Publications.
Leonhardy, F.
1966 Domebo: a Paleo-Indian Mammoth Kill in the Prairie-Plains.
Contributions of the Museum of the Great Plains, No. 1. Great Plains
Historical Association, Lawton, Oklahoma.
Lorenzo, J. L.
1967 Sobre metodos arqueologicos. Instituto Nacional de Anthropologia e
Historia, Boletin No. 28, pp. 48-51.
Lubbock, J.
1878 Pre-Historic Times, as Illustrated by Ancient Remains, and the Manners and Customs of Modern Savages. 4th ed. London, F. Norgate.
(First edition, 1865).
McKelvey, N.
1947 Rome on the Range. Westways, Vol. 39, No. 3, pp. 12-13.
Nickerson, G. S.
1962 Considerations and Problems of Vandalism and Pot-Hunting in
American Archaeology. Montana State University, Anthropology and
Archaeology Papers, No. 22.
Oakley, K. P.
1964 The Problem of Man’s Antiquity: an Historical Survey. Bulletin of the
British Museum (Natural History), Geology, Vol. 9, No. 5.
Plenderlieth, H. J.
1952 Fakes and Forgeries in Museums. The Museum Journal, Vol. 52, pp.
143-148.

196

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Reichlen, P. and R. F. Heizer
1966 The Ophir Skull from Virginia City, Nevada. University of California
Archaeological Survey Report, No. 66, pp. 85-100.
Rieth, A.
1970 Archaeological Fakes. Praeger, New York.
Stross, F.
1960 Authenticity ofRelics Determined by Analysis.Analytical Chemistry,
Vol. 32, pp. 17A-24A.
Wakeling, A. F.
1912 Forged Egyptian Antiquities. London.
University of California, Berkeley

SHELL CELTS FROM COASTAL YUCATAN, MEXICO
JACK

D.

EATON

ABSTRACT
Celts made from the shell of the marine mollusk, Strombus costatus,
have been found along the coasts of Yucatan. A study of the wear patterns
on the collected tools, combined with the replication and use-testing of
tools made from modern beach shells, suggests that shell celts could
effectively replace their stone counterparts for most tasks in a coastal zone
where tool-quality stone is lacking. The shell celts were recovered from
middens that date from the Middle Preclassic until well into Colonial
times. During this time span of over 2,000 years, the basic form and
probable use of the shell celts remain essentially unchanged. At least one
Middle Preclassic village site on the northeast coast of the peninsula had
been a workshop which produced shell celts in quantity.

INTRODUCTION
During 1968 I made an archaeological reconnaissance of the west
and north coasts of the Yucatan peninsula as part of the research
program being carried out by the Middle American Research Institute
of Tulane University (Andrews 1970). The purpose of the reconnaissance, which covered some 800 kilometers from Isla del Carmen,
Campeche, to Isla Blanca, Quintana Roo (Fig. 1), was to search out and
sample ancient campsites in order to learn something of man’s occupation of the littoral during all time periods (Eaton ms.).
Ancient cultural materials were collected from more than 60 sites,
most of which are located within the coastal cienega, where traces of
the ancient beach were found. Twenty-six sitescan be fixed temporally through ceramic chronology and consist mostly of kitchen middens dating from the Middle Pre-classic into early Colonial times (ca.
600 B.C. to around A.D. 1600).
This brief report is concerned with a specific type of shell tool
found in many of the middens examined, particularly along the north
coast. The tools have a celt form and are fashioned from the thick outer
lip of the ribbed conch (Strombus costatus Gmelin). This is a conch
found commonly along the west and north coasts of the peninsula, but
rarely found along the east coast, where it is largely replaced by the
queen conch (Strombus gigas) and others (Andrews 1969:9).
The ribbed conch is a tasty gastropod relished by coastal people,
and is today an important shellfish in the commercial markets. The
shells of this mollusk are abundantly represented in nearly all coastal
middens studied, attesting to its importance as a marine source of
food in ancient times. However, this mollusk not only formed part of a

198

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

dietary pattern, but the shells provided the aboriginal peoples with a
dense and durable raw material that could be easily worked and was
utilized for the making of tools and body ornaments.

FIGURE 1. Map of Yucatan showing locations of sites where shell
celts are found.

More than 300 samples of celt-like shell tools were recovered from
coastal middens dating from the Middle Preclassic into the Colonial
period. During this time span of well over 2,000 years, the basic form
of the tool, and its probable use, had remained essentially unchanged.
Most of the celts were from Preclassic middens. This was partly due to
sampling technique, since the earliest middens had long been exposed to erosional processes and larger amounts of a cultural debris
was exposed on the surface. Also notable is that the majority of the
middens found along the coast belong to the Late Preclassic period.
Apparently this had been the most substantial p eriod of occupation of
the littoral in pre-Columbian times (Ball and Eaton 1972). At least one
Middle Preclassic midden (Alegria 1), on the northeast coast of the
peninsula, had been a workshop which produced the shell celts in
quantity. A surface collection alone from this small eroded site included 204 samples of finished and partly made shell tools.

SHELL CELTS FROM YUCATAN

199

DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS
Although the shell celts found in the middens along the coast vary
somewhat in form, the typical tool has a long rectangular outline (see
Fig. 2). The bit end has a ground, bifaced cutting edge, which is
slightly rounded. The bevel angle of the bit is usually around 35°, and
is remarkably consistant for most samples (from all periods) and
apparently results from one basic grinding technique. The poll end of
the tool is generally rounded. The sides are smooth and usually taper
toward the poll end. There is no direct evidence for halting. The
typical celt measures 8-10 cm. long, 3-4 cm. wide, and 0.5-1 cm. thick.
The actual size of the celts vary with respect to the original size and
thickness of the mature shells from which the tools were made.
Table 1 shows the geographic and temporal distributions of the
shell celts found along the coast. Included are relative and total
quantities, and bit conditions of the celts. These data relate only to the
typical celts. Bifaced shell tools of other forms, and badly shattered or
eroded fragments of celts, were not included. The collection sites are
numbered sequentially and keyed to the map (Fig. 1) for easy reference.

FIGURE 2. Typical shell celts from the coast of Yucatan.

J

200

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Out of a total of 274 complete (or nearly completed) celts collected,
86 (31.5%) have complete bits which are sharp, or perhaps only
slightly dulled from use, 105 (38%) have blunt and battered bits, 71
(26%) have basically sharp, but partly shattered bits, and 12 (4.5%)
have completely shattered bits. It must be considered, however, that a
tool with a worn, battered or shattered bit could easily be reground.
Several celts in the collections had been reworked until they were
quite short. The bits listed as partly, or completely, shattered might
also tend to be misleading. While some of the shattering was certainly
the result of use, much of it seems to stem from cracking and splitting
by weathering and decomposition.

FIGURE 3. Specialized forms of shell tools from the coast of Yucatan.

MANUFACTURE AND USE
The uses of a shell celt would be many and varied in a coastal zone
where tool-quality stone is notably lacking, as it is along the Yucatan
coasts. A variety of stone tools were found at some sites, but these are
obvious imports from the interior or other areas. For many functions,
at many of the sites, the shell celt had effectively replaced stone tools
that were seemingly not available or were difficult to acquire.

201

SHELL CELTS FROM YUCATAN

pa~olleqs

v-¢

~m

,-.¢j
~

o~

¢D

-~.~

~o
d

2 2.~.~-~.~

~D

"~’~

o’~

"~’~.~’~

r~

202

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The shell tools described in this report are, I believe, morphologically and functionally "celts". By definition, a celt is an axe without
perforations or grooving, for hafting. Basically the shell celt appears
to have been a hand-held tool (i.e. hand axe), although it would adapt
easily to halting thereby augmenting its efficiency. The broad, sharp
bifaced blade would provide a suitable tool for light duty hewing,
cleaving, chopping, etc. This has been demonstrated by tests described below. Testing has also demonstrated that the tool could be
used effectively as an adze, knife, scraper, etc., without loosing its
basic status as a celt. The celt is probably one of the oldest and most
versatile tools developed by man.
To gain an appreciation of the hardness and workability of the shell,
and to test its use, I produced several celts from modern Strombus
costatus shells collected from the beach. Fig. 4 illustrates how a celt
was produced from the mollusk shell. Possible methods of hafting are
also shown, but these are offered only as suggestions. The reason for
making tools from modern shells was not only to test the workability
of the procedure I believe the ancients used, but also I felt that
subjecting ancient tools to certain tests might be misleading because
of possible character change in the shell through time and exposure.
Study of broken shells in the middens, and the partly worked and
finished tools from the midden collections, has provided information
on the process by which the celts were made. A fair amount of
experimenting was done and some mistakes were made, but in the
main the procedure described below seemed to be the most practical
and produced the best celts.
First of all, the lip of a mature shell has to be removed (Fig. 4,a). This
is done by simply breaking it off. I found that by striking the back of
the shell quite hard several times where the break is desired, with a
fist-size stone, would remove the lip. Hammerstones of various sizes
and shapes were fairly common implements found at the sites and
undoubtably these were often used in the making of the celts. The
shell does not break easily, and not all shell lips will break off exactly
where you want them to, but with practice the ease and efficiency of
the lip removal improves.
The detached lip then has to be worked into form. It seemed to me
that there must have been an intermediate work stage to remove the
excess shell and to trim the jagged edges before the finished grinding.
I found through experimentation that the shell tool could be quickly
roughed into form by pecking away at it around the edges with a
hammerstone, as a flint knapper does his percussion flaking (Fig. 4,b).
I got the best results when the tool was placed on a large stone for
support while striking it. The shell is actually crushed more than

203

SHELL CELTS FROM YUCATAN

flaked, but the method is effective and rapid. After improving my
technique I was able to break away the shell with fairly good control.
Although a method of cutting shell was known and used by the
ancients (this is evidenced in other worked shell artifacts collected),
there was no evidence that the method was used in making the celts.

J

FIGURE 4. Celts made from the Strombus costatus marine mollusk shell.
a, removal of shell lip and subsequent forming of tool; b, roughing out
the tool with a hammerstone; c,d, grinding the tool; e, celt used as a
hand-held tool; f, suggested methods of hafting.

204

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The next step was to grind the edges smooth and to form the bit.
Incomplete tools found in the middens show that the form was first
ground smooth all around the periphery (Fig. 4,c), then the final work
was to bifacially grind the bit (Fig. 4,d). The bits, incidentally, are
always bifaced, and never have a unifacial bevel. The grinding was
evidently done on a medium to fine grained stone, possibly a limestone or basalt metate. Metates, or fragments of them, were also found
at some sites. I ground one celt on a large fragment of a smooth-worn
basalt metate for the experience, but it was, admittedly, a very slow
process that took me all afternoon. In order to accelerate the production of more celts for experimental purposes, I used a metal file. ¢~l
As already mentioned, the bit bevel angle is usually around 35°.
This is a bevel angle that results when the tool is placed upon the
griffding stone as shown in Fig. 4,d, with the poll end elevated just
enough to keep the hand free of the stone. Constant pressure has to be
applied while grinding, which is done in a fore-and-back sliding
motion. Maintaining the angle of inclination is important to give the
best bevel. The stone has to be cleaned frequently while grinding
since the powdered shell is a good lubricant and the abrading process
can soon be diffused. There seems to have been an attempt by the
ancients to maintain symmetry of the biface, although this was not
always attained and perhaps it was partly due to the curvature of some
shells. The actual bevel angle of the bit is not just the result of
technique, it is also an angle of practicality which was probably
learned in most ancient times. My experiments have shown that to
reduce the bevel angle to give a longer, thinner bit would invite
premature shattering; to increase the bevel angle notably would provide a bit too blunt for effective cutting. The practical superiority of a
bifaced bit over a bit with simple uniface bevel on a general purpose
tool was apparently something else learned very early by the ancients.
The tools were subjected to several tests. As a chopping tool I found
that it would cut, chip and split wood, bone, and other substances. I
deliberately destroyed a couple of tools when testing to see how much
punishment they could take. With hard and persistent chopping on
wood the bits were blunted and then shattered as a result. Wood, even
relatively hard Spanish cedar, can, however, be cut or fashioned by
persistent light chipping and the shell stands up to this quite well.
Chopping (or chipping) can be done by holding the tool in the hand as
shown in Fig. 4,e, but by attaching the tool to a handle (in-line with
the handle is best), more work can be done with less effort. As a coastal
tool it would be useful for the making of dugout canoes (cf. Painter
1968). For this use it would function as an adze, although a true adze
generally has a blade with a unifacial bevel.

SHELL CELTS FROM YUCATAN

205

The broad, sharp blade of the celt could also be used as a knife for
many cutting functions. Experiments demonstrate that it will easily
cut thin material (strips of meat, cloth, etc.) by drawing across it,
while bearing down forcefully. With heavier substances this does not
work as well because of the bit thickness, and it was found that the
blade cut some things easier with a rocking motion. Perhaps this is
one of the reasons for providing a slightly rounded bit (Fig. 2).
The shell celt was found to be a fairly good scraper, as most bladed
tools would be. The tool was tested by scraping bones, wood, removing bark, and scaling a fish. The tool worked best for most s craping if it
was held perpendicular to the surface, or at a slight incline when
actually used like a chisel.
The basic form and subjected tests of the shell tools demonstrates
that structurally and functionally they are best described as celts.
They would, as the tests have shown, however, be an extremely
versatile instrument in any limited tool assemblage.
The celts that I made and tested demonstrated that the Strombus
costatus shell has an effective hardness about equal to moderately
compact stone. A properly ground bit is remarkably durable, even
when subjected to prolonged cutting, scraping, or chipping wood.
The shell has enough elasticity to absorb some shock and does not
shatter easily. During the testing of the tools it was found that the bit
should be resharpened occasionally, or the efficiency of the tool will
drop off notably.

COMPARATIVE MATERIAL
Celt-like shell tools have been reported from other areas of Mexico.
For example, a shell celt from the site of Arrecife on Conzumel Island
was recently subjected to radiocarbon dating at the University of
Miami, Florida (Ball 1973). The results indicate an apparent age of
1620+60 B.P. (330 A.D.; UM 123). Pina Chart (1968) has illustrated
several shell celts from Isla Jaina, the large Classic period island
cemetery.
Shell celts are found at many sites in the Gulf of Mexico-Cirum
Caribbean area (see Hester ms. for distributional data.). They are
absent from the Texas coast, but are common in sites along the Gulf
and Atlantic coasts of Florida.
Although the major form of celts in the Yucatan coastal collections
all seem to be made from the lip of the Strombus costatus shell, at least
one identifiable exception has been noted. A celt found at E1 Cuyo 1
site is made from the body-whorl of a Turbinella angulata shell. This
tool (not illustrated) has a comparatively narrow form and is relatively
thin.

206

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Also in the coastal collections are shell tools fashioned from the
Strombus costatus lip which have forms differing from the celts
described in this report. Some are illustrated in Fig. 3. The forms
suggest uses differing from, and perhaps more task-specific, than that
of the celt tool. As noted in the illustration, these often occur with a
long taper ending in a relatively small, narrow bifaced bit. The ones
illustrated are from Isla Jaina, Isla Piedras, and Isla Guaymil, all
Classic to Postclassic period sites. Similar tools were also found at
Alegria 1, a Middle Preclassic site. A long, thin cylindrical tool with a
small bifaced bit, and made from the columella of a Busycon sp. shell,
was also found at Alegria 1 site. The long tapering tools might be
useful, for example, for cutting the attaching muscle and extracting
the mollusk from conch shells.
DISCUSSION
It is not surprising to find shell tools distributed along coastal zones
where large marine gastropods are plentiful. Shell is a reasonably
hard and durable material quite suitable for a broad range of tool
typ es, and with prop er technique it is remarkably easy to work (Hester
ms.). The celt is a very practical tool form, certainly designed out of
need, and has a long tradition. Stone celts have a world-wide distribution and are known to have been made for thousands of years (Bordes
1968). Included in the artifact collections from the Yucatan coasts are
a number of stone celts. Basically there are two types represented:
large percussion-flaked bifaces of flint; and smaller, ground and
polished celts of hard gray, green or black stone. Both celt types have
been noted throughout the Maya lowlands (Coe 1965:594-602) and
apparently had differing and specific uses.
Perhaps the shell celts served to bridge the needs in isolated coastal
communities where stone celts were hard to obtain. The presence of
stone celts at some of the coastal settlements indicate trade contacts,
although probably indirectly, with other areas. The shell celts, which
are rarely, if ever, found in the interior of Yucatan, were evidently a
common, locally-produced implement probably found in every seaside household.
The coastal reconnaissance of Yucatan produced a surprising quantity of shell celts, particularly when considering the basic aims of the
survey, which were to sample the coast by means of surface collec:
tions and by digging small stratified test pits. No extensive excavations were undertaken at any of the sites. The collections, therefore,
actually represent only a relatively small sampling of the coastal
littoral. A more intensive sampling would almost certainly demon-

SHELL CELTS FROM YUCATAN

207

strate that the shell celts have a much broader distribution than
presently recorded.
Cultural materials collected during the survey have shown that
man lived on the Yucatan coast at least as far back as the Middle
Preclassic period (ca. 600 B.C.). Ball and Eaton (1972), in their report
dealing with chronological placement of midden sites along the
coasts of Yucatan, have listed the earliest occupation as occurring
during the Late Preclassic period. A more recent re-evaluation of the
ceramics by Ball, from some middens on the northeast coast (along the
Rio Lagartos), has shown that these were in fact Middle Preclassic
deposits. The pottery found there equates with Smith’s (1955) Mamon
phase. The Middle Preclassic sites are listed in Table 1. Shell celts
were found in quantity at these sites. As already mentioned, a surface
collection at Alegria i site produced a large quantity of finished and
unfinished shell celts and I suggest that it was a workshop.
Although the Middle Preclassic occupation appears to be centered
along the northeast portion of the Yucatan coast, the greatest overall
occupation of the coastal zone seems to have been during the Late
Preclassic period. These sites were probably occupied by subsistence
fishermen. During the subsequent Classic and Postclassic periods, the
overall population on the coast was evidently reduced and tended to
cluster in certain areas, notably where salt was produced. This trend
continued into the Colonial period. In modern times, the largest
coastal settlements are based upon a fishing economy, and salt production is second in importance.
The coastal collections indicate that the shell celts continued to be
made into the Colonial period. They probably survived in many of the
remote coastal households long after Spanish contact, but the introduction of metal tools eventually decreased their importance until
they ceased to be made.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I wish to thank the late Dr. E. Wyllys Andrews IV, Director of the Middle American
Research Institute, for allowing me to do the coastal survey as part of a broad research
program in Yucatan. The help and encouragement received by Dr. Andrews, particularly during preliminary evaluation of the collected materials, is very much appreciated.
I thank Dr. Joseph W. Ball, Rio Bec region ceramic analysist, for reviewing the coastal
pottery and providing valuable information on the chronological setting.
The generous financial support of the American Philosophical Society is gratefully
acknowledged.

208

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

REFERENCES CITED

Andrews, E. Wyllys
1969 The Archaeological Use and Distribution of Mollusca in the Maya
Lowlands. Middle American Research Institute, Tulane University,
Publication No. 34.
1970 Pre-agricultural or Early Ceramic Remains on the Yucatan Coasts.
Year Book of the American Philosophical Society, 1970, pp. 540-541.
Ball, J. W. and J. D. Eaton
1972 Marine Resources and the Prehistoric Lowland Maya: A Comment.
American Anthropologist, Vol. 74, No. 3, pp. 773-776.
Ball, Hal C. (Editor)
1973 Radiocarbon Dating of Select Sites in the Maya Lowlands. Newsletter,
Institute of Maya Studies of the Miami Museum of Science. Vol. 2, No.
7.
Bordes, Francois
1968 The Old Stone Age. World University Library, New York.
Coe, William R.
1965 Artifacts of the Maya Lowlands, Handbook of Middle American
Indians, Vol. 3, pp. 594-602. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Eaton, Jack D.
ms. Archaeological Reconnaissance of the Coasts of Yucatan, Mexico.
Manuscript in preparation. To appear in Middle American Research
Institute, Tulane University.
Hester, Thomas R.
ms. A Technological Study of Prehistoric Shell Implements in the
Circum-Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico Region. Manuscript submitted
for publication.
Holmes, W. H.
1883 Art in Shell of the American Indians. Smithsonian Institution, Bureau
of American Ethnology, Annual Report (1880-81), No. 2, pp. 179-306.
Painter, Floyd
1968 Long Creek Midden, Part 5. A Busycon Shell Gouge. The Chesopiean.
Vol. 6, No. 3, pp. 57-61.
Pina Chan, Roman
1968 Isla Jaina, La Casa en la Agua. Instituto National de Antropologia e
Historia. Mexico, D. F.
Smith, R. E.
1955 Ceramic Sequence at Uaxactun, Guatemala. Middle American Research Institute, Tulane University. Publication No. 20.
Merida, Yucatan, Mexico

CHEMICAL PROFILE OF GLASS TRADE BEADS
FROM ARCHEOLOGICAL SITES IN
TEXAS AND OKLAHOMA
CLAIRE C. DAVISON AND

R. K.

HARRIS

ABSTRACT
The results of x-ray fluorescence analysis of 18th and 19th century glass
trade beads are presented. A chemical profile that appears characteristic
of the beads is discussed.

Fifty-two glass trade beads from 18th and early 19th century archeological sites in Texas and Oklahoma have been analyzed by x-ray
fluorescence (Table 1). The sites are, in chronological order, Womack,
Gilbert, Vinson, Spanish Fort (Ayers Farm), and Devil’s Canyon;
probable dates for the sites are shown in Table 2. Although the degree
of certainty varies, all are identified as Wichita Indian sites.
X-ray fluorescence, or any other method of chemical analysis, sheds
light on the chemical ingredients of the artifact analyzed. A knowledge of the chemical ingredients can, in turn, serve as a basis for
formulating other hypotheses; for example, hypotheses of artifact
groupings (Davison, Giauque and Clark, 1971:651), trade routes,
points of origin, artifact dating or site dating. For glass trade beads
such studies aim particularly towards the ultimate ability to specify
and date the manufacturing origins of the beads, to recognize all
beads of the same origin-- this may not be apparent visually-- and to
depict the factors that brought them to the archaeological sites. Such
studies are in their infancy, and it was in the spirit of furthering them
that we undertook the present pilot study of beads from Wichita sites.
The present study found that certain chemical features which are
significant from the glassmaking point of view are characteristic of
these beads throughout the time period represented. These four features are consistent with the dating of the beads. They constitute the
chemical profile of the beads and are as follows:
1. Antimony is in use. Antimony (Sb) is a glassmaker’s additive,
used as an opacifying agent and also as a decolorizer. The study of
glass history indicates that this element came into regular use by
glassmakers in about the 17th to 18th century A.D. (Turner and
Rooksby 1962; Neri 1662:82; Kunckel 1756:86). It had been used in
antiquity, but apparently not in the medieval period (Turner and
Rooksby, 1962; Sayre, 1963:263). Before the 17th to 18th centuries, tin
seems to have been the conventional opacifying agent. However, after

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

210

o

o

a

a

~

a

a

a

.~

d

&"

~"

~"

~:"

>

m

m

m

~’"

o

g

g

g

g

o"*

g

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

c5

o

o

6

c5

~

~

~"

.~
=~
~

~=

=
~’~
~,"
o

g

g
s

:
s

~

v

o

o

o

~

.~

o

o

o

v

o

v

~:"

o

6

6

g.
s

g
Ov

o

6

v

CHEMICAL PROFILE OF BEADS

o

o
"0

211

S

~

~

’~

g

g

g

g

’~

~0

(.0

C,.I

0

o

6

6

o

o

o

o

o

ci

o

o

o

o

o

o
o

"t~

"0

"0

"0

"0

"0

"~

"0

"~

"0

"0

*’~

"0

"0

"0

cO

c~

(~

co

CO

’,~

(.0

0

0

v

C,1

"0

v

v

o

g

.

o

o

c4

©

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

CD

0

0

o

o

o

o

d

o

o

o

o

o

o

©

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

d

c5

o

o

vo

ov

o

d

d

212

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

O

O3

o

c5

~
o

o.
o

o

o

o

o

v

v

v

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

O

(J

o

c5

~

c::;

o

.

~

o

.

o

CHEMICAL PROFILE OF BEADS
0

0

o3

.s~

o

o

o

.;2

~.

v

v-i

o
o

0

lao

s~
g

g.

g

0

0

0

-~

O.

.~

213

214

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

antimony came into use, the use of tin did not cease. Thus the presence of intentionally added antimony can aid in dating glass beads,
although in this case the beads were already dated archeologically
and the evidence from antimony merely serves to confirm the dating
of the beads.
Antimony (or tin) may be considered intentionally added in glass
when its concentration is in the tenth of percent range or higher.
Besides being added intentionally, antimony may enter glass through
cullet (scrap glass, which is usually included in new batches). Therefore in an antimony-using tradition one might expect to find that
glasses which do not seem to contain intentionally added antimony
still contain considerably more antimony than tin, and vice versa for
tin-using traditions. By observing the ranges of concentration in
Table 1, one can see which beads probably contain antimony as an
intended additive. Where it may be considered unintended, it is still
usually higher than the tin, which was almost never detected (Table
1).
2. Manganese is used to achieve black. There are several ways to
achieve a black "color" in glass. In these beads the glassmakers
apparently used manganese (Mn) in such high concentration that the
purple color given by this element is dark enough to appear black. If
the black beads are held to a strong light, the purple tint can usually be
seen.
3. Lead glasses occur. Lead (Pb) glasses are one ofthemain types of
glass, containing tens of percent lead oxide. In the lead glasses
analyzed here, the amount of lead was not determined, beyond the
fact that it was very high. It is estimated to be some tens of percent in
the high-lead beads.
4. Bismuth is often present in beads colored by cobalt. Presumably
the bismuth (Bi) is associated with the cobalt (Co) mineral, an association which is not unusual mineralogically. However, the presence of
bismuth is not generally characteristic of most of the glass beads
encountered in the experience of one of us (C.D.) except for the set of
beads here discussed.

CHEMICAL PROFILE OF BEADS

215

TABLE 2
SOURCES OF SAMPLES

SiteI

Probable date~

Womack (Texas)
Gilbert (Texas)
Vinson (Texas)
Spanish Fort, Ayers Farm (Texas)
Devil’s Canyon (Oklahoma)

Possibly c. 1719
c. 1750-1775
c. 1775-1800
c. 1759-1820
c. 1820-1836

1See Harris and Harris (1967).

Other remarks. The beads were also analyzed for iron, nickel,
copper, zinc, arsenic, rubidium, strontium, and, in some cases,
barium. These elements show no remarkable features comparable to
the four listed above. The iron is usually in the tenths of percent range
of concentration; nickel was rarely detected; copper, when used as an
additive, was in the tenths of percent range of concentration, and
otherwise usually was present in the hundredths of percent range;
zinc was usually present in the hundredths of percent range; arsenic
was often detected in the hundredths of percent range, particularly in
cobalt blue beads but also in various other colors; rubidium was
occasionally detected in the hundredths of percent range of concentration; and strontium was consistently present in the hundredths of
percent range. Trace amounts of barium were noted in some, but not
all, of the black and purple beads.
Sub-periods within the span of some 130 years represented by these
beads are not distinguished on the basis of the present chemical data.
It may well be possible to distinguish sub-periods with chemical
analyses more extensive and precise than these. Sub-periods have
been distinguished on the basis of (a) chronological changes in the
frequency of bead styles and (b) documentary evidence, in another
report (Harris and Harris 1967:156-158).
Of the above four features only two might be detected by the nonchemist bead consumer. These are the use of manganese in black,
which gives it a purplish tint, and the use of lead glass, which makes
the lead glass beads heavier than other beads of the same size. The use
of antimony rather than tin and the presence of trace bismuth are not
detectable by the senses.
It seems likely that the two undetectable features and perhaps all
four reflect the practices of the manufacturers (probably European)

216

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

rather than the preferences of the consumers. It is hoped that future
investigations may shed light on whether the chemical profile outlined here may be typical of 18th century glass trade bead production
generally, or may be diagnostic of a particular manufacturing tradition, and to what extent, if any, it may be influenced by consumer
preference.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The x-ray fluorescence analysis reported here was carried out in the Lawrence
Berkeley Laboratory, Berkeley, California. W~ thank the laboratory, particularly Robert
D. Giauque, for making the facilities available.

CHEMICAL PROFILE OF BEADS

217

REFERENCES CITED

Davison, Claire C., Robert D. Giauque, and J. Desmond Clark
1971 Two Chemical Groups of Dichroic Glass Beads from West Africa. Man,
Vol. 6, No. 4, pp. 645-659.
Harris, R. K., and I. M. Harris
1967 Trade Beads, Projectile Points, and Knives. InA Pilot Study of Wichita
Indian Archaeology and Ethnohistory (compiled by Robert E. Bell,
Edward B. Jelks, and W. W. Newcomb). Report to the National Science
Foundation, Grant GS-964.
Kunckel, Johann
1756 Vollstandige Glasmacherkunst . . . nebst einem Anhang yon den Perlen und Edelsteinen... Third edition, Nurnberg (originally published
1679).
Neri, Antonio
1662 The Art of Glass (translated by Christopher Merret). London (originally published 1612).
Sayre, Edward V.
1963 The Intentional Use of Antimony and Manganese in Ancient Glasses.
In Advances in Glass Technology, Part 2. Plenum Press.
Turner, W. E. S., and N. P. Rooksby
1962 A Study of the Opalescing Agents in Ancient Opal Glasses Throughout 3,400 Years. International Congress on Glass, Vol. 6, No. 2, pp.
17-28.
Plainfield, New Jersey
Dallas, Texas

EVIDENCE FOR HEAT TREATING
OF SOUTHERN TEXAS
PROJECTILE POINTS
THOMAS R. HESTER AND MICHAEL B. COLLINS

ABSTRACT
Heat-treated chert was used almost exclusively in the manufacture of a
particular projectile point form in southern Texas. These specimens are
described and the evidence for thermal alteration of the raw material is
presented.

A considerable literature has appeared in recent years dealing with
the widespread practice of thermally-altering (heat-treating) siliceous
stone as an adjunct to flaking (cf. Crabtree and Butler 1964; Purdy and
Brooks 1971). It has been determined that, in North America, heattreating was a phenomenon present in various regional lithic technologies from Paleo-Indian times (cf. Davis and Shutler 1969) into the
historic era (Hester 1972; Sollberger and Hester 1972).
In the southern Texas area, the presence of heat-treated lithic material has been previously noted, in the form of both debitage and
finished artifacts (Sollberger and Hester 1972; Hester and Hill 1973).
While occasional projectile points of various types have been recognized as made on thermally altered chert, it has come to our attention
that heat-treated material was apparently preferred for the manufacture of a specific projectle point form in this region. This point form
resembles to a degree the Shumla type of Suhm, Krieger and Jelks
(1954), a style common in the Trans-Pecos area of Texas, and these
similarities have lead local amateur archaeologists and collectors to
refer to these specimens as "South Texas Shumlas". Over the past
several years, collectors have shown many of these projectile points to
the senior author, pointing out the recurring pinkish-purple color of
the chert, and the vitreous luster and "greasy" feel manifested by the
material. Mr. J. W. House, an amateur archaeologist of Carrizo
Springs, Texas, has also noted these attributes of "South Texas
Shumla" points, and he has made available to us the series of specimens analyzed in this note.
While we do not wish at this time to propose a new projectile point
type, we would like to-provide some data on the morphological
characteristics and the spatial distribution of these specimens. We
cannot offer any concrete evidence regarding the temporal span of
these artifacts. All are surface finds, and while they derive primarily
from "Archaic" sites, we do not know how they fit into the overall
chronological scheme.

220

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

b
0

f

1

2

3cm

!i¸ :~

FIGURE 1. Heat-Treated Projectile Points from Southern Texas. a,a’
has flake scars typical of heat-treated material, with the exception of
two duller scars (indicated by arrow) representing an earlier surface.

HEAT TREATING OF PROJECTILE POINTS

221

The specimens (Fig. 1) have triangular bodies, the lateral edges of
which are often slightly serrated. Basal notches have formed a rectangular stem (with a slightly convex base) and long barbs. Barbs are
sometimes squared, although on some specimens they turn in toward
the stem. The specimens are usually very finely flaked, with pressure
flaking evident. Flake scars on the body are commonly in a paralleloblique pattern, sometimes approximating the "double diagonal or
chevron" pattern illustrated by Crabtree (1972). In cross section, the
specimens are markedly biconvex. The general size range of these
points is reflected by the specimens illustrated in Fig. 1. Given the
size of these artifacts, we suspect that they functioned as dart points.
The authors estimate that perhaps as many as 90% of these projectile points exhibit three major attributes: (1) pinkish-purple color (or
similar shades); (2) vitreous sheen; and, (3) "greasy" feel. To date, we
have not made any concerted effort to trace the spatial distribution of
this projectile point style. The senior author has reviewed notes in his
files, and these generally indicate a concentration of the sp ecimens in
the northwestern sector of the Rio Grande Plain (Dimmit, Zavala,
LaSalle, Frio and Maverick Counties; the illustrated artifacts are from
Dimmit County sites). Some specimens are also known from the major
prehistoric site in the Olmos basin of Bexar County (C. D. Orchard
collection, McQueeny, Texas).
EVIDENCE OF THERMAL ALTERATION
The six small dart points (Fig. 1) supplied by Mr. House were
examined for macroscopic evidence of heat treating. These examinations were aided by the experimental heating and flaking of specimens of local chert. The three most reliable macroscopic indications
that an archaeological specimen of chipped stone has been heated are
evidence for color change, altered flake scar quality, and patterns of
luster change. When heated, many cherts change color (for example,
from shades of gray, tan, or green to shades of red or purple: see Purdy
and Brooks 1971; Crabtree and Butler 1964; Sollberger and Hester
1972; Collins 1973; and Collins and Fenwick 1974). Color, luster, and
nature of ripple marks are subjective attributes whose reliability in
interpreting archaeological evidence for heat treating varies with the
materials, the temperatures attained, and with the investigator’s
familiarity with normal (unheated) colors, textures, and flake scar
qualities of the cherts in question. Alone, the presence of any one or
more of these attributes on an artifact or in an assemblage of artifacts
may be evidence that materials had been heated but not necessarily
that the heating had been intentional. Only when a consistent pattern

222

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

emerges in the distribution of heat-induced changes is the inference
of purposeful heat alteration warranted (Bordes 1969; Collins 1973;
Collins and Fenwick 1974). It is from such patterns that the place of
heat treating in the overall knapping strategy can be discerned.
Basically, heating may be evidenced by the presence of artifacts
whose colors are apparently altered from the normal color ranges. The
fact that flake surfaces produced prior to heating are often duller in
appearance than those produced afterwards allows inferences concerning the stage of reduction at which heating was deemed appropriate in the technology under examination.
In the present sample of six dart points, all specimens exhibit
pinkish or pinkish-purple colors in contrast to the usual tans and
grays of local cherts.
Flakes from eleven pieces of chert from Dimmit County were experimentally heated beneath a wood fire for 28 hours. When the
heated pieces were rejoined with their unheated controls, six exhibited marked changes in color from light yellowish tan to pink, deep
pink and purplish pink, three exhibited similar but less marked
changes, and two exhibited no color change. The various colors found
on the six projectile points are duplicated by the colors in the nine
heated pieces exhibiting color changes.
On five of the six projectile points, all flake scar surfaces are lustrous and exhibit the wavy ripple mark qualities of heated stone.
These stand in marked contrast with the quality and texture of flake
scars experimentally produced on unheated local cherts. The flake
scars on the sixth specimen (Fig. 1,a,a’) are lustrous with the exception of two duller scars (stippled surface indicated by arrow, Figure
1,a) which represent a surface produced early in the manufacture of
the piece. When flaked the eleven experimentally heated pieces,
including those which did not change color, exhibited lustrous, wavy
flake scars entirely comparable with those seen on the six projectile
points. This pattern suggests that in the manufacture of these projectile points, materials were heated at an early stage of reduction such
that virtually all surfaces on the finished items were produced after
heating.
The nature of the early reductive steps and the exact place of heat
treating in these activities must be inferred from debitage (including
flakes, cores, rejected preforms, etc.) in secure archaeological association. At present such data are not available for the projectile points
described above. However, later reductive techniques are evidenced
on the specimens themselves.
Both percussion and pressure flaking are indicated as the means of
force application on these specimens, with pressure flaking by far the

HEAT TREATING OF PROJECTILE POINTS

223

more abundant. One specimen exhibits two broad flat flake scars of
the form usually produced by soft hammer percussion whereas the
remainder of the scars on that specimen as well as all of the scars on
the other specimens were probably produced by pressure flaking.
This is consistent with evidence from other sources where both percussion and pressure flaking are enhanced by heating, but more
clearly and consistently so in the case of pressure flaking (Collins
1973; Collins and Fenwick 1974).
Several lines of inquiry are suggested by these observations. First,
in reference to this particular form of projectile point, analysis of both
the morpho!ogy and technology of a larger sample is needed. The
spatial and temporal distributions of the form are in need of delineation, and, of course, it is necessary to test the suggestion made here
that these points were customarily made on heat treated blanks. Full
understanding of the place of heat treating in the overall technology
can come only from examination of debitage in close archaeological
association with the points.
Finally, ifa close correlation is found between this typological form
and the technological practice of heat treating it will be appropriate to
examine other chipped stone types for similar patterns in an effort to
understand more fully the cultural significance of heat treating.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Mr. J. W. House for loaning us the six projectile
points for examination, Mr. T. C. Hill, Jr., for providing the junior author with samples
of chert from Dimmit County for experimental heating, and Dr. Wes Jernigan of the
Department of Anthropology, University of Kentucky, for drawing the specimen illustrated in Figure 1,a.

224

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

REFERENCES CITED

Bordes, F.
1969 Traitement thermique du silex au Solutreen. Compte Rendue des
seances menseulles de la Societe Prehistorique Francais, Vol. 66, No.
7, p. 197.
Collins, Michael B.
1973 Ethnography and Experimentation in the Study of Archaeological
Lithic Debitage. Paper presented at symposium on lithic debitage
analysis, S ociety for American Archeology, San Francisco, May 1973.
Collins, Michael B. and Jason M. Fenwick
1974 Archaeological Evidence for the Heat Treating of Chert: Methods of
Interpretation and Their Application. Plains Anthropologist (in
press).
Crabtree, D. E.
1972 An Introduction to Flint-Working. Occasional Papers, Idaho State
University Museum, No. 28.
Crabtree, D. E. and B. R. Butler
1964 Notes on Experiments in Flint-Knapping: 1. Heat Treatment of Silica
Minerals. Tebiwa, Vol. 7, No. 3, pp. 1-6.
Davis, E. L. and R. Shutler, Jr.
1969 Recent Discoveries of Fluted Points in California and Nevada. Neva da
State Museum, Anthropological Papers, No. 14, pp. 154-178.
Hester, T. R.
1972 Ethnographic Evidence for the Thermal Alteration of Siliceous Stone.
Tebiwa, Vol. 15, No. 2, pp. 63-65.
Hester, T. R. and T. C. Hill, Jr.
1973 Prehistoric Occupation at the Holdsworth and Stewart Sites on the Rio
Grande Plain of Texas. Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society (for
1972), Vol. 43, pp. 33-75.
Purdy, B. A. and H. K. Brooks
1971 Thermal Alteration of Silica Minerals: An Archaeological Approach.
Science, Vol. 173, pp. 322-325.
Sollberger, J. B. and T. R. Hester
1972 Some Additional Data on the Thermal Alteration of Siliceous Stone.
Bulletin, Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. 21, pp. 181-185.
University of Texas at San Antonio
University of Kentucky, Lexington

NOTES
A MAGNETOMETER SURVEY OF
THE NINETEENTH CENTURY
STEAMBOAT BLACK CLOUD
J. BARTO ARNOLD

III

The river steamboat "Black Cloud", also known as the "Black Crook", was
one of two boats owned by Mr. Joseph Richardson which plied the Trinity
River in the 185Os and 1860s. The other boat was named the "Early B ird" The
identification of the site (41 LB 37) as the wreck of the "Black Cloud’" was
made by J. Frank Richardson, the owner’s son, and other local residents
(Fisher n.d.). An idea of the services and rates of freight and passage is
available from contemporary newspaper advertisements (Fig. 1). The size of
the boat is estimated at about 150 x 45 feet (Prewitt 1973:41). The "Black
Cloud" hit a snag near the old Atascosita Road River Crossing and sank. This
incident seems to have occurred between mid April and early May, 1869. The
last advertisement for the "Black Cloud" in Galveston gave a departure date of
March 30, 1869 (Galveston Daily News, Galveston Triweekly News). These
advertisements had been appearing at intervals indicating a round trip of
approximately one month (Ibid.).
Shortly after the boat sank, the ship’s bell was salvaged by the owner, Mr.
Richardson, transported to Liberty overland with a yoke of oxen, and donated
to the First Methodist Church in whose possession it has remained to this day
(Fisher n.d.). The name of the manufacturer is cast in raised letters on the bell
"G. W. Coffin & Co. Buckeye Bell Foundry Cincinnati". It is a large bell about
two and one-half feet high by two feet in diameter at its mouth and is in a good
state of preservation. The bell is still in use.
The wreck was hit during the laying of a pipeline in October and November,
1965, digging up what was apparently part of the vessel’s stern. When the
laying of another pipeline along the same route was imminent, the precise
location of the boat had to be determined to avoid further damage.

SURVEY
A magnetometer survey was carried out in early January, 1974, by the Texas
Antiquities Committee and sponsored by the Natural Gas Pipeline Company.
The instrument used was a Varian M-50 proton magnetometer with a marine
sensor head.

CONDITION
All accounts indicate that the artifacts recovered in 1965, both iron and
wood, were in a good state of preservation. Local legend has it that a boiler
embedded in the opposite bank of the river came from this site, but there is
nevertheless a substantial and fairly concentrated anomaly adjacent to the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

226

REGULAn PACKI~[’o
,~Y£EA.MER :BLACK CLOUD.

R DXCZzY. Zas;e,--~V JO~ES. Cask
"~TILL make semi-weekly trips, regu¥ V lady, from Liberty to Galveston,
.~?-.w’-~,. "eeather and accidents alone
k.~-?~-~,@
preventing Leaving Libe~ky’
,~ e~ry ~,Mav. at " o’cloc ,
P. M. atsd Frida~l. at 10 o’clock. A. bl.-Lenvlng Galveston on Wedne,daye at l0
o’clock. A. H. Lad, 8undsys it 9 o’clock,
A.~[.
For freight or passa.°e apply on bo0rd in
OMve.tou, or to JA~ES WRIGLEY, at
Ltbertv.
¯
R&TES OF FREIGHT :
Dry Barrel~ .................. $ 50 ola.
Wet Barrel, .................. "/5 "
Corn, per ~aek ......... I- ....... 30 ~"
Boxe.~--Solp,Candlo~,Baeon.ete. ~O "
All smell boxe-t and paeka-es... ~0 "
Bundles. Bucket~iBrooms.~ubs, 40 n
5Iea,ureme,t ~ie ltlc per 4"ont.
Iron and Ca~ung’s. same as dry harrel~.
C,uou. per bale, .......... $t’Sn eurreucy
"’
15
ttide~, each ..............
Bundles and baleJ as customary.
$4
1~0
"
Cabin Pad*age:. ..........
"
Deck Pa.-age ............. :t O0
Tl~e Steamer BLAC..K CLOUD tcill run
regularl.~

from (latvc-lon

to

Lib~,rty, , C"

e,.dh~g to the above :.chedule. The rate.~
uf freight and pa-.~nb"e have beau placed
~.t liri.:~ rale~, and it new dep~nd,J open
~ pco/.k whether ~.he ~ball be su-,taitted’
SO deviatiou from the above rates will
be made.
ED. JONES, Clerk.
~larch 13, le6,’~-ff

LOCAL.
The I~lvsr
la in fine boating condition, Lnd we hear
that there is a great deal of cotton on the
river above, ready for ahlpment..
~taam ]~oat~.
,Yl"he Early ~Bird and Indian .N’o. ~ hay(
9as~ed down, with full cargoes of cotton.
The Ida Reese, Mustang, and Fleta are
above. The Black Cloud Mir.~ the Black
Crook, ia ntill in the woo~ trade from lower Triuit7 to Galveston. ’/he Sally Haynes
and Job-boat No. I, at l~t ac¢ount~, were
’ ~t Dallas.
~’erty ~lsa of Cotton, *
Betel and owned by some freedmen,
pa~eed down on the Early Bird. At pro.
sent prieeo, theue freedmen will realiz(
~t three thoneand ~llara lu ~a’~l~l fm
their cotton. Quite a nice little aum to
have thane hard fime~.

On Eunday morniog, the ~now came
down in good old atylo; but yielded as
l’a~t aa it fell, to the warm embraces of our
genial coil.
Yam Weather.
We have already had as much winter
as usually folio to onr lot, in t’hi~, climate,

ROBERT A. ~IERCFoR, Master,
Will run regulaxly in the Liberty trade
and will carry freight, trod pa.~enger
:l~aper tAom any etAev boat.
For freight or passage apply on board,
>r to CLIAS..N.I.’LEY. 1-’-~ Strand, G~resiGn.
[ScpL 9.5, 18f~.--tf

land hence an early spring ia a~ticipated
by our knowing ones. Lately we have
had quite a good deal of ruin, but a f~w
daya of ounshine will clear up ever.vthing;
atart the bird:t to einglng, the henn to lay
lag. the ~ to epringlog, the frog’a to
croaking, and our mcrr~ farmer~ to plowt~g a.ud ~wi.g.

b
FIGURE 1. a). Liberty Gazette Vol. 8, No. 12, Friday, April 10, 1868;b).
Liberty Gazette Vol. 9, No. 42, Friday, January 15, 1869, c). Liberty
Gazette Vol. 9, No. 42, Friday, January 15, 1869. Note in c). that
riverboat traffic extended as far up the Trinity as Dallas.

ARNOLD: MAGNETOMETER SURVEY

227

pipeline right of way. There is a substantial mass of iron still at the site. The
high reading of 540 gammas could possibly represent the boat’s engine and/or
other boilers.

0

0
0

Z

2GO

5
0
0

......0~P
PELINE

0
0

0

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

228

TRINITY
RIVER

PIPELINE
FIG. 3
COVERAGE

SYSTEMATIC

BLACK CLOUD
41 LB 37

RANDOM

100
FEET

200

ARNOLD: MAGNETOMETER SURVEY

229

The orientation of the wreck can be speculated upon since part of the stern
wheel was reportedly among the artifacts plundered from the site in 1965
(Illustrated Press of Liberty County, Nov. 1965). This fact in combination with
the magnetic data (Fig. 2) indicates that the boat lay roughly parallel to the
bank with the stern downstream to the south and the bow upstream to the
north. The area of reduced magnetic distortion in the left center of Fig. 2
probably represents the part of the wreck disturbed by the laying of the
pipeline. The survey also indicated that there is some widely scattered debris
downstream from the site concentrated in the part of the river adjacent to the
western bank. The main anomaly is approximately 75 feet long and this may
in fact correspond more accurately to the boat’s actual length than the estimated figures given above depending upon how much of the site was disrupted by the laying of the original pipeline.

CONCLUSIONS
The magnetic data indicate that the remains of the "Black Cloud" are fairly
concentrated. This is an important site which should be protected, and the
public-spirited attitude of the Natural Gas Pipeline Company in cooperating
in the magnetometer survey and rerouting the pipeline to avoid further
destruction is most commendable.
The advisability of large scale excavation of the site is questionable at this
time for a number of reasons:
1. The site has been disrupted to an unknown extent.
2. The boat was bound downstream when it sank. The cargo would
therefore have been agricultural products rather than the perhaps more significant manufactured and luxury goods that would be aboard on the trip
upstream.
3. There was at least s ome attempt to salvage the wreck soon after the boat
sank. It is reasonable to assume that the ship’s bell was not the only item of
value removed from the wreck.
4. Proper excavation and recovery efforts would be tremendously expensive.
In short, there are undoubtedly other wrecks in the rivers of Texas which
would yield better information in return for the investment of the large
amounts of time and money required for an underwater archeological excavation. However, this is not to say that the "Black Cloud" does not warrant our
efforts to protect it. Each archeological site both above and beneath water is a
vital part of the state’s cultural heritage. There is no doubt that there are many
items of ship’s fittings and equipment which would not have been considered
worth removing during salvage efforts in the 1870s. These artifacts are
nevertheless of considerable interest and importance to scholars of today. It
may be that in years to come excavation of this site may become advantageous.

230

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

REFERENCES CITED
Fisher, Charles W., Jr., compiler
n.d. Portfolio of Historic Documents relating to the Black Cloud. Unpublished collection on file at the Texas Archeological Survey.
1869 The Galveston Daily News. Vol. 5.
1869 The Galveston Triweekly News. Vol. 27.
1965 Illustrated Press of Liberty County, Vol. 6, No. 55, November.
1868 The Liberty Gazette. Vol. 9, No. 12, Friday, April 10.
1869 The Liberty Gazette. Vol. 9, No. 42, Friday, January 15.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1973 An Archeological Reconnaissance of the Areas to be Affected by the
Proposed Louisiana Loop Pipeline, Cameron Parish, Louisiana, Jefferson, and Liberty Counties, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report No. 25. Austin.

Austin, Texas

METHODOLOGICAL COMMENTS ON WOODALL’S
PREHIS TORIC S OCIAL B OUNDARIES
DAVID S. VAUGHAN

Woodall (1973) has hypothesized that the location of prehistoric social
boundaries (as, for example, between tribes) may be identified through examination of similarities and differences between artifacts found at various
sites in relation to geographic locations of the sites. In his study, Woodall has
attempted to formulate an hypothesis concerning the location of a social
boundary in a set of late prehistoric Caddoan sites along the Neches River of
Texas and to test this hypothesis. The data analysis problem was defined in a
manner which allowed application of several quantitative procedures, which
is desirable. However, due to several defects in the manner in which the
statistical procedures were used, interpretation of the study is not clear. The
present author will point out these statistical errors and suggest alternative,
more appropriate, procedures.

ARTIFACT SIMILARITY AND
PHYSICAL PROXIMITY
First, Woodall attempted to show that, among his sample of sites, those
sites physically closest together contained the most similar artifacts. He did
this in two ways.
He obtained an ordinal scale of the sites based on their artifact similarities
and another ordinal scale of the sites based on their physical location along a
north-south axis. He then calculated a rank-order correlation between the
artifact scale values and the physical scale values of the sites. Since the
artifact scaling was based on an "eyeballing" procedure, it is not clear
whether or not the best scale values were obtained. Also, it is not clear that a
one-dimensional scale accurately represents the set of intersite similarities. If
the scale does not accurately represent the similarities, a high correlation
between the scale values and physical location does not necessarily represent
a strong relationship between intersite similarity and physical proximity.
Difficulties of this general class of scaling methods were described by McNutt
(1973). More appropriate scaling methods will be discussed below.
The second method used to test the relationship between artifact similarity
and physical proximity was to calculate the product-moment correlation
between the set of 36 intersite artifact similarities for the nine sites and the set
of intersite physical distances. The correlation was calculated correctly, but
the significance test was misinterpreted. A basic assumption of the test of
significance of a correlation is that all observations upon which the correlation is based are independent of each other. However, in the present situation,
the observations are definitely not independent. Each site enters in to several
observations; all observations which involve a given site are not independent.
As a result of this lack of independence, the significance test is probably
liberally biased. This means that, for example, if the test shows significance at

232

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the .05 level, the result is in fact significant at only the .10 level or worse. A
given number of non-independent observations may be thought of as being
equivalent to a smaller number of independent observations. A reduced
number of degrees of freedom and correspondingly increased estimate of
sampling variance may be used in performing the statistical test. Although
the number of degrees of freedom to be used cannot be exactly determined, a
conservative statistical test seems more desirable than a liberal one, and a low
number of degrees of freedom should be used. Based on an equivalent independent sample size of nine, the correlation of .43 was not significant (t =
1.248, df = 7).
How might the author have proceeded in testing this hypothesis? First, it is
necessary to obtain a (perhaps multidimensional) scaling of the sites based on
their artifact similarities. If a scaling procedure which depends heavily on the
investigator’s subjective judgment is used, it would be desirable to have a
disinterested person at least replicate thescaling to insure that expectations
of the investigator did not unduly influence the scaling result. Use of either a
metric (Torgerson 1958) or nonmetric (for example, Young 1968) computerized multidimensional scaling procedure is more appropriate. The result of applying such a procedure to the similarity matrix in Table 1 of
Woodall (1973) would be coordinates for each site on each of the number of
dimensions selected, along with a goodness-of-fit measure which may be
used to choose the appropriate number of dimensions. The configuration of
points representing the sites in this similarity scaling may be compared to the
two-dimensional physical configuration of the sites by calculating the canonical correlation (see, for example, Cooley and Lohnes 1962) between the two
sets of coordinates, or by first rotating the configurations to congruity and
calculating dimension-by-dimension correlations.

SITE CLUSTERS
The second examination made by Woodall was to search for two distinct
clusters among the sites. He postulated that variation of the sites along a scale
based on artifact similarity would be due to two main causes: different
geographic location and membership in different cultural groups. He postulated that within each cultural group, the physical and artifact scales
should be linearly related but that the best-fitting line should be different in
the two groups. A visual method was used to search for two groups which
would meet the above conditions. A formal statement of this clustering
procedure is "find a group division so that the F-ratio is maximized in an
analysis of covariance with artifact scale location as the dependent variable
and north-south geographic location as the covariate." His procedure has two
main defects. It was carried out by "eyeball," and therefore it is not clear that
an optimal clustering was obtained. Second, it is clear that the results of the
procedure depend on metric information in the artifact scale; however, the
actual scale values used were the similarities of each site with one selected
"base" site. While the ordering of the sites may not be arbitrary, the actual
scale values, which depend on the selection of a "base" site, are arbitrary.

VAUGHAN: COMMENTS ON WOODALL

233

Also, all metric information other than that contained in the similarities with
the "base" was lost. Use of one of the automatic scaling procedures mentioned above, which produce metric scale values and use more information in
the data, would be preferable.

ANALYSES OF DESIGN MOTIFS
The last set of analyses by Woodall were directed towards confirming his
finding of two main clusters among the sites through examination of design
motifs of sherds found at the sites. His procedure was to look for a grouping of
the sites that maximized a chi-square statistic for each design motif considered. As a method of finding clusters this procedure seems reasonable
though inefficient, due to the fact that no use was made of relations between
variables. However, use of the significance test is not appropriate since
classification of sites to maximize the test statistic allow capitalization on
chance that is not taken into account in the significance test. As a result, the
test is biased liberally and significance is more likely to be obtained due to
chance than it should be. Furthermore, the author did not report how many
chi-square tests he did altogether. One out of twenty or so tests will probably
be significant at the .05 level by chance, so five, six, or seven significant
results out of 100 tests are difficult to interpret.
If the main goal of this set of analyses was to search for clusters among the
sites, one of several multivariate clustering procedures, such as that of Cattell
(Cattell and Coulter 1966:237), Johnson (1967), or Ward (1963:236) would
make use of more information in the data, as well as being less dependent on
the investigator’s subjective judgment. However, if the main goa! was to
confirm the cluster structure suggested in the earlier part of the paper, use of
discriminant analysis might be more appropriate (see, for example, Cooley
and Lohnes 1962). To use this procedure, sites should be classified according
to the previous hypothesis, rather than to maximize a test statistic. Furthermore, an independent sample of sherds should probably be used (the set of
sherds might be randomly divided into two parts). The result of discriminant
analysis is a significance test for the classification based simultaneously on
all the design motifs and also a linear combination of the motifs which best
distinguishes between the clusters. In this linear combination, the variables
which best distinguish between the sets of sites will have the largest weights.

DISCUSSION
Woodall’s use of statistica! procedures was deficient in two main ways. He
used statistical hypothesis tests in two situations in which important assumptions of the tests were not met. It is seldom, if ever, the case in practice that a!l
assumptions of a test are met, and furthermore, violation of some assumptions
seems to have little effect on the tests (see, for example, Lindquist 1953).
However, the assumptions violated in the present situation are important.
Violation of these assumptions will probably cause the tests to be liberally

234

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

biased. The result of this is that conclusions are drawn from data that is more
likely to be due to chance than the test indicates. Alternative ways of testing
Woodall’s hypotheses were suggested.
The second set of deficiencies involved the selection and use of scaling and
cluster analysis techniques. In this type of data analysis situation, which is
more exploratory in nature (the main goal is to search for patterns in the data
rather than to test specific hypotheses), the main virtue of a technique is its
heuristic value. Several different methods of analysis might be used. However, methods which are relatively free from influence by the investigator’s
expectations and which make maximum use of all information in the data are
preferable to methods which do not meet these requirements. Several computerized multivariate scaling and clustering techniques were suggested as
preferable alternatives to the methods used by Woodall.

REFERENCES CITED

Cattell, R. B. and M. A. Coulter
1966 Principles of Behavioral Taxonomy and the Mathematical Basis of the
Taxonome Computer Program. British Journal of Mathematical and
Statistical Psychology, Vol. 19, No. 2, pp. 237-267.
Cooley, W. W. and P. R. Lohnes
1962 Multivariate Procedures for the Behavioral Sciences. John Wiley and
Sons, New York.
Johnson, S. C.
1967 Hierarchical Clustering Schemes. Psychometrika, Vol. 32, pp. 61-66.
Lindquist, E. F.
1953 Design and Analysis of Experiments in Psychology and Education.
Houghton Mifflin, New York.
McNutt, C. H.
1973 On the Methodological Validity of Frequency Seriation. American
Antiquity, Vol. 38, No. 1, pp. 61-79.
Torgerson, W. S.
1958 Theory and Methods of Scaling. John Wiley and Sons, New York.
Ward, J. H.
1963 Hierarchical Grouping to Optimize an Objective Function. Journal of
the American Statistical Association, Vol. 58, pp. 236-244.
Woodall, J. N.
1973 Prehistoric Social Boundaries: An Archeological Model and Test.
Bulletin, TexasArcheological Society, Vol. 43 (for 1972), pp. 101-120.
Young, F. W.
1968 TORSCA-9, A FORTRAN-IV Program for Non-Metric Multidimensional Scaling. Behavioral Science, Vol. 13, pp. 343-344.
San Antonio, Texas

WOODALL: REPLY TO VAUGHAN

235

REPLY TO VAUGHAN
J.

NED WOODALL

The critique of my recent paper (Woodall 1973) has reached me at an
unfortunate time, since I am currently living abroad and do not have access to
my library, research notes, the citations of Vaughan, or even a copy of the
paper under discussion. Consequently, my comments will be general, rather
than specific replies to the criticisms offered.
First, Vaughan contends that since the artifact scaling was based on an
"eyeballing" procedure, it is not clear whether the best scale values were
obtained. In fact, after obtaining the coefficient of similarity for each pair of
sites, using the Robinson-Brainerd technique, the ranking of sites was done
by computer; the output matrices with the fewest negatively signed differences were chosen (several "tied" for this, as I recall) and from these was used
the one with the smallest total of negative signing. The only "eyeballing"
done was in calculating the coefficients of similarity, and I do not see how
nominal level data (e.g., the percentages of brushing, incising, engraving) can
be treated differently.
I fully agree with Vaughan’s statement that "a one-dimensional scale (may
not) accurately represent the set of intersite similarities." What I was trying to
detect, however, was the boundaries of matrilocal tribes, and this is why I
selected ceramic attributes that presumably functioned in the socioideological cultural subsystem. Such attributes would identify more nearly the endogamous units (tribes) than would artifacts, or attributes of artifacts, that
functioned primarily in the technological subsystem. Indeed, it would be
expected that intersite similarities calculated on the basis of frequencies of
stone tools, bone awls, or kinds and quantity of animal bone would be sharply
divergent from similarities shown by comparison of decorative modes on
ceramics. In analyzing archeological material it is recognized that since
culture is a multivariate phenomenon, then the sources of variation, like their
artifactual forms and loci, are multiple. I attempted to segregate a set of data
from the total corpus that would be more responsive to one source of variation, i.e. female residence patterns. I strongly disagree, therefore, with
Vaughan’s later statement that "methods... which make maximum use of all
information in the data are preferable..." I contend, rather, that certain data
not only can be, but must be ignored in some cases.
In discussing my analysis of design motifs in attempting to test the clustering suggested through analysis of decoration techniques, Vaughan suggests
use of a second set of sherds rather than different attributes of the same set. I
agree that this would have been preferable, but the small sample size from
several of the sites made it impossible; destruction of some of the sites by Lake
Palestine prevented further collection.
Finally, I respect Vaughan’s criticism of the statistical techniques I used,
and encourage a re-analysis of the data using the suggested methods, and any

236

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

others available. The abstraction of socio-cultural models from material remains, and the testing of those models by various means, is the most promising approach to pleoethnography.

REFERENCE CITED

Woodall, J. Ned
1973 Prehistoric Social Boundaries: An Archeological Model and Test.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society (for 1972), Vol. 43, pp.
101-120.
Wake Forest in Venice

IN MEMORIUM
Wayne B. Neyland
1926 - 1972
Wayne B. Neyland, former president of the Texas Archeological Society
(1962), died in Houston on October 27, 1972 at the age of 46.
Wayne was born in Fleetwood, Arkansas, but moved to Alexandria,
Louisiana, while still a boy. His comprehensive knowledge of Louisiana
archeology was acquired during his years of residence in that state. During
World War II, he served in the U.S. Navy as an electrician’s helper on a
minesweeper and was decorated for valor.
In July, 1954, Wayne and his family moved to Houston, Texas. He was
employed by theHouston Chronicle and later went into business for himself.
He immediately became interested in Texas archeology and, in particular, the
archeology of the upper Gulf Coast and the Houston area. He located, and
reported to the University of Texas, many sites in Harris, Chambers, Galveston and Brazoria Counties and became well acquainted with all aspects of
upper Gulf Coast archeology. His knowledge of Gulf Coast pottery was particularly impressive.
Wayne became active in the Texas Archeological Society in the middle
1950s and was a regional vice president [1959-1960), active vice president
(1961) and, finally, president in 1962. He also helped to organize the Houston
Archeological Society in 1959 and was its first president. He also found time
to contribute a number of articles on archeology to various publications.
The University of Texas at Austin has been the recipient of much of the
archeological material collected by Wayne over the years and the University
of Houston recently accepted, from his family, his large library of books on
archeology.
Although his activities were limited by poor health during his last years,
Wayne still found the energy and will to pursue his work in archeology.
Though an amateur, his approach was professional and his archeologica!
knowledge and analytical mind were respected by professional and amateur
alike.
A. R. Duke
Houston, Texas

BOOK REVIEWS
Predicting the Past, An Introduction to Anthropological Archaeology. David
Hurst Thomas. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York, 1974.82 pp., 8 figs.
Fighter pilots and M.D.’s are famed for their unwarranted overconfidence.
To this group should be added the "new archeologists." Thomas’ book belongs firmly within the Binford tradition with all of that outlook’s strengths
and weaknesses.
The book is divided into eight short chapters which define archeology as
part of anthropology, discuss classification of artifacts and the establishment
of chronology. There is a heavy emphasis on the use of sampling theory,
statistics, and computers in these operations. Thomas then proceeds to a
discussion of interpretation of archaeological data by means of cultural
ecological theory using his own Reese River Project as an interesting example
of how techniques actually worked in the field. A neat summary of Gould’s,
Crabtree’s, and Peter White’s ethnological and experimental excursions convincingly demonstrates the utility of such studies. Experiments in replicating
prehistoric flint tool types, observations and analysis of flint knappers in
traditional cultures (New Guinea) and information on likely prehistoric
house locations are all examples of the kinds of information to be gained.
The study of cultural processes (Chapter 7) is the capstone of the book with
its discussion of the scientific method, cultural laws and examination of a
couple of case studies. These case studies are those projects which have dealt
with the origins of Old and New world agriculture and the rise of civilization
in both areas. The book is rounded off with a brief, prophetic look at archaeology of the future. Thomas sees it as being more scientific, more involved in
statistics and data processing, and dominated in explanation by cultural
ecological theory.
Thomas’ book is enthusiastic, interesting and stimulating, but suffers from
a unitary point of view. The characteristics that he sees for the future are also
those of the "new archeology." These views are useful, but if adopted as the
single most desirable approach are also parochial, dogmatic and inadequate
to the explanation of many of the problems of prehistory. Thomas is somewhat more broadminded than many of his co!leagues, but still does not
control the data nor the alternative perspectives necessary to write a general
introduction to the subject. As an example, the discussion of Mesoamerican
theory is flawed by the disregard of six years of relevant and intensive work
since the publication of Thomas’ major source. Also surprising is his dependence on Binford’s model of the rise of Old World agriculture when there are
more convincing, prior and ecologically oriented explanations advanced by
Hole and Flannery. There are also logical inconsistencies in his presentation
which lead to difficulties. For example, what is the utilitarian difference
between a cognitive and a functional typ e? Thomas’ citation of White’s work

240

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

indicates that at least some traditional peoples do not carry around mental
templates of artifacts in their heads. This is the necessary assumption behind
cognitive types. Since both functional and cognitive types are therefore
analyst imposed categories, what is the useful distinction to be made? As
Binford has said, archaeologists are ill equipped to deal with palaeopsychology.
Altogether, this is good for the professional to read; it stimulates the
adrenalin. It is also a valuable case study of "new archeology" in action. It is
inadequate to its stated purpose as an introduction; other books do it better,
and in a more balanced manner.
R. E. W. Adams
The University of Texas at San Antonio

An Ethnohistorical Survey of Texas Indians. Lydia L. M. Skeels. Texas Historical Survey Committee, Office of the State Archaeologist, Report No. 22,
Texas Historical Survey Committee, Austin, 1972. xvi + 82 pp., 8 maps, 2
tables. No price given.*
Texas researchers in both anthropology and history have long recognized
the need for a broad, ethnohistorical survey of Texas Indians. At the same
time, as Professor Frank Hole points out in his introduction to this volume, we
need to begin "establishing archeologically oriented historical research and
historically oriented archeology" (p. iv) and move toward "truly interdisciplinary research which will be both mutually complementary and of considerable importance to the separate disciplines." (p. x) Unfortunately, An Ethnohistorical Survey of Texas Indians meets none of these needs. If anything,
it may set the latter purpose back. Historians and anthropologists have long
been, if not hostile, at least mutually suspicious, and historians will find most
of their prejudices reinforced by this work.
Skeels’ concept is excellent, but her execution is faulty. She has set out to
"organize ethnohistorical and historical sources so that they will be useful to
archeologists and historians who wish to cooperate in a program of research."
(p. xii) She has not accomplished this.
Just where to begin in pointing out the numerous difficulties with this
monograph is a problem. Skeels’ style is awkward, and the text abounds in
factual errors. Sometimes it is hard to tell whether style or misinformation is
the cause for incorrect statements. For example, on page 11 the author discusses the "Jumanos of East Texas," despite the fact that her maps place these
people correctly. At the bottom of page 11 and again on page 12, she mentions
*A similar version of this review previously appeared in the Southwestern Historical
Quarterly, Vol. 77, No. 3, pp. 422-423, January, 1974.

BOOK REVIEWS

241

explorers who "went up the Colorado River from New Mexico"-- an interesting geographical feat. On page 12 the author implies that the Pueblo Revolt
occurred in 1659 and that refugees from New Mexico settled at San Juan
Bautista on the "east side" of the Rio Grande! And this is just the beginning of
the list.
Some mistakes might be excused on the basis of the author’s lack of
intimate knowledge of Texas, but this does not excuse errors of interpretation
and citation. For example, on page xiii, Skeels states that "routes of travel
have been ascertained" for most of the explorers. While historians and archeologists undoubtedly would agree that much progress has been made in
identifying such routes, I doubt that any would maintain that they "have been
ascertained." Certainly, researchers would dispute the statement on page 13
that "conclusive evidence for the locations of La Salle’s camps and the routes
his men traveled (italics mine)" has been published. Since Skeels completed
her work, new information has been published on LaSalle in R. S. Weddle’s
Wilderness Manhunt: The Spanish Search for LaSalle, 1973. In the same
section, Skeels cites Bolton’s Spanish Exploration in the Southwest (1916) for
the Onate expedition despite the ready availability of the Onate journals
(Hammond 1927 and 1953). She uses Bolton (1916) and Smith (1928) for the
Mendoza expedition and ignores Connor’s more recent work (1969).
Even given these errors, however, the point can be made that they are
tangential to the major purpose which is to prepare a survey of "available
historic records" (p. 40) and information. Professor Hole suggests that Skeels
has prepared a "comprehensive bibliography" (p.v), but here again it is a
promise unfulfilled. The ten page bibliography, although combining historical and anthropological publications adds little to the bibliography in
Newcomb’s Indians of Texas (1961). The author notes she included only
secondary and published primary material, but even given this limited range,
Skeels leaves out a number of pertinent references, including, for example,
Pichardo: Limits of Louisiana and Texas (Hackett 1931); Historical Documents Relating to New Mexico, Nuevo Vizcaya, and the Approaches Thereto,
to 1773 (Hackett 1931); Border Comanches: Seven Spanish Colonial Documents (Simmons 1967); The San Saba Papers (Simpson and Nathan 1959)
and Morfi’s Diario y Derrotero (McLean 1967) to name only a few of the more
obvious omissions. Skeels’ choice of secondary materials, at least in regard to
historical works, is often poor, and the list is uneven. Although she lists the
reprint editions, and thus gives the bibliography an up to date appearance, all
but one of her historical references were published before 1955 and nearly
ninety percent before 1930. The most recent piece of research cited is
Schroeder’s 1962 article while the latest publication listed is Fehrenbach’s
1968 semi-popular history of Texas -- despite the availability of a newer and
more pertinent work (Bannon 1970). Furthermore, Skeels includes Wallace
and Hoebel’s history of the Comanches (1954) but fails to mention works on
other specific tribes and groups [for example, Newcomb’s ethnohistorical
study of the Lipan Apaches (1969)]. Nor is the bibliography annotated. Although Hole implies, as does Skeels, that this monograph includes an
analysis of the sources, this is not done. In fact, the author makes no critical

242

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

selection of or comment on the works cited and in at least one instance uses a
secondary account, (Castaneda 1935) as a primary source (p. 19). For the
eighteenth century, she relies almost entirely on Castaneda’s translation of
Morfi’s Memorias (1932) quoting verbatim for some twelve pages. This is a
questionable practice, especially when other sources are available.
Although I would not presume to judge the book from an anthropological
and archeological viewpoint, this material appears to be no more than a
summary of the work of Newcomb (1961) and Sayles (1935) which is already
familiar to researchers.
Professional historians and anthropologists will recognize the obvious
shortcomings of this publication and treat it for what it is, but amateurs in
both fields may well use it as a definite basic source. In fact, Hole’s introduction suggests this will be one of its greatest uses (p. vi). As a "guide" to
amateurs, it should not have been published in its present form, and the
responsibility for this must lie with the editors and publishers. In fact, in this
regard, Skeels cannot be blamed too much. Far from the sources, obviously
unfamiliar with Texas, she probably did as much as was possible from the
works at hand. She deserves to be commended for at least trying. The editors
and publishers owed her an honest critique and a careful review and editing
of the manuscript. Many errors could have been averted had this been done.
Several things are right. The maps, as Hole suggests, are useful (if easily
available) and the two articles (not documents as Hole states, p. v) published
in the appendix are useful and difficult to find elsewhere. Both Hole and
Skeels make some excellent suggestions for interdisciplinary studies.
Nonetheless, from the historians’ viewpoint the text is uneven, inaccurate
and unuseable. However, if it serves to motivate historians to begin work on a
sound ethnohistorical study then it has not been a total waste.

REFERENCES CITED

Bannon, John Francis
1970 The Spanish Borderlands Frontier, 1513-1821. Holt, Rinehart, Winston, New York.
Bolton, Herbert Eugene (editor)
1916 Spanish Exploration in the Southwest, 1542-1706. C. Scribner’s Sons.
New York.
Castaneda, Carlos Eduardo (trans.)
1932 Excerpts from the "Memorias" for "The History of the Province of
Texas," by Fray Juan Agustin de Morfi. Being a translation of those
parts of the Memorias which particularly concern the various Indians
of the province of Texas; their triba! divisions, characteristics, customs, traditions, superstitions, and all else of interest concerning
them. With a prolog, appendix, and notes by Frederick C. Chabot.
Privately published. Printed by the Naylor Printing Co., San Antonio.
1935 History of Texas, 1673-1779, by Fray Juan Agustin de Morfi, translated
with biographical introduction by Carlos Eduardo Castaneda, Latin
American Librarian, University of Texas. 2 Vols. Quivira Society
Publications, Vol. 6. Albuquerque.

243

BOOK REVIEWS

Connor, Seymour V.
1969 The Mendoza-Lopez Expedition and Location of San Clemente. West
Texas Historical Association Yearbook, No. 45, pp. 3-29.
Fehrenbach, T. R.
1968 Lone Star: A History of Texas and Texans. Macmillan Co., New York.
Hackett, Charles W. (ed. and trans.)
1931 Pichardo’s Treatise on the Limits of Louisiana and Texas. 2 vols. The
University of Texas Press, Austin.
1937 Historical Documents Relating to New Mexico, Nuevo Vizcaya and
the Approaches Thereto, to 1773. 3 vols. Carnegie Institute of
Washington, Washington, D.C.
Hammond, George P. (ed. and trans.)
1927 Don Juan de Onate and the Founding of New Mexico. E1Palacio Press,
Santa Fe.
1953 Don Juan de Onate, Colonizer of New Mexico, University of New
Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
McLean, Malcolm (trans.)
1967 Diario y Derrotero (1777-1781) p or Fray Juan Agustin de Morfi. Publicaciones del Instituto Tecnologico y de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey, Monterry, Mexico.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961 The Indians of Texas. University of Texas Press, Austin.
1969 "The Ethnohistorical Investigation," in Curtis D. Tunnell and W. W.
Newcomb, Jr., A Lipan Apache Mission, San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz,
1762-1771. Texas Memorial Museum, Bulletin 14. University of
Texas, Austin.
Sayles, E. B.
1935 An Archaeological Survey of Texas. Medallion Papers, No. 17. Gila
Pueblo. Globe, Arizona.
Schroeder, Albert H.
1962 A Re-analysis of the Routes of Coronado and Onate into the Plains in
1541 and 1601. Plains Anthropologist, Vol. 7, No. 15, pp. 2-23.
Simmons, Marc (ed. and trans.)
1967 Border Comanches: Seven Spanish Colonial Documents. Stagecoach
Press, Santa Fe.
Simpson, Lesley B. and Nathan, Paul D. (ed. and trans.)
1959 The San Saba Papers: A Documentary Account of the Founding and
Destruction of San Saba Mission. John Howell Books, San Francisco.
Smith, Victor J.
1928 Early Spanish Exploration in the Big Bend of Texas. West Texas
Historical and Scientific Society Publications, No. 2.
Wallace, Ernest, and E. Adamson Hoebel
1954 The Comanches: Lords of the South Plains. University of Oklahoma
Press, Norman.
Sandra Myres
University of Texas at Arlington

244

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
RESPONSE TO THE MYRES REVIEW

To comment on the above review, I first want to state that I think the
criticisms are justified and will serve a constructive purpose in pointing out
mistakes and omissions which may be useful to amateurs and professionals
both. I can only welcome such corrections and added sources, hoping that
they will help anyone interested in Texas archeology and protohistory.
It is a mistake, however, to state that I was "far from the sources." Actually, I
lived in Houston for five and one half years, and used the Rice University
Library for three years, until September, 1971, while I was preparing the text
and maps.
The general conclusions are otherwise quite satisfactory. I cannot quarrel
with her judgment that "professional historians and anthropologists will
recognize the obvious shortcomings" of the monograph and "treat it for what
it is worth", if as she adds, "amateurs in both fields may well use it as a
definite basic source." But I think its having stimulated an erudite review
such as hers, which will be read by professionals, perhaps suggests that it was
a good thing to publish in its present form after all.
Though the area and period of my survey are not of comparable importance
to Arnold Toynbee’s Study of History, I believe his comment in the
Introduction to Reconsiderations is equally applicable when he writes:
"Books are expendable, like the man-hours that go to the making of them. A
book that has weathered away will have served its purpose if it provokes other
minds to write books that may perhaps prove less vulnerable. The one thing
that matters is that inquiry shall go on; for, so long as it continues, there is
hope that it may also get further."
I am sorry she finds my style awkward and therefore the meaning at times
difficult to understand. Though I realized the fact that correlating so much
material from diverse sources over a period of three centuries prevented a
smoother manner of expression, I hoped the maps might clarify the text. I
hope other readers may find that they do.
Lydia Lowndes Maury Skeels
Storrs, Connecticut

REPLY TO THE MYRES REVIEW
The reviewer, who is a historian, asserts thatAn Ethnohistorical Survey of
Texas Indians meets "none of the needs" of moving toward interdisciplinary
research on the history of Texas Indians. In the sense that it presents nothing
"new", she is correct: Her subsequent remarks, however, suggest that the
publication may be so provocative that historians may be stimulated to
correct the erroneous impressions of archeologists, "establish" routes of
travelers, and critically evaluate sources so that we may not be misguided in
the future. Although this is a round-about way of initiating interdisciplinary
research, it may be a valid way.

BOOK REVIEWS

245

Myres has pointed out certain problems worthy of investigation and some
of these could be approached jointly from historical and archeological perspectives. To cite only one, the location of LaSalle’s camps, we should note
that The Keeran Site: the Probable Site of LaSalle’s Fort St. Louis in Texas
(Gilmore 1973) was recently published by the Texas Historical Commission.
There may still be disagreement on whether St. Louis was LaSalle’s fort, but if
the archeologists are incorrect it is now up to the historians to present their
side of the case. As long as historians fail to study archeologically interesting
problems because of their hostility, suspicion, or prejudices toward archeologists we cannot have interdisciplinary research. And in the absence of
"definitive" historical work, archeologists will continue to use what is available just as a long succession of historians have used tentative archeological
findings.
Inaccuracies in the text cannot be excused, but I would submit that the
bibliography suffers somewhat from the lack of recent work by historians. If
ninety percent of the cited sources were published before 1930 it sugg ests that
little attention has been paid to the history of Texas Indians since then. Indeed
the reviewer’s list of "obvious omissions" includes only three works published since 1931. It is incumbent on historians to publish if they have
something new to say. If Mrs. Skeels accepts as fact that which is not proven to
the satisfaction of historians she may be accused of incaution but hardly of
dereliction of duty when suitable alternatives cannot be found. The reviewer
does cite some instances of alternative sources (at least one of which appeared
after the manuscript was completed) but she does not indicate whether they
change the picture Skeels presented. Needless to say, this is a point on which
we should all like to be informed.
The basic question, however, concerns whether the publication is useful.
From the historian’s point of view apparently it is not. Nevertheless, the
world is not made up exclusively of historians and in my experience there are
few students who are able to ascertain rapidly what problems of ethnohistory
and archeology lend themselves to investigation. Although there are obvious
shortcomings to An Ethnohistorical Survey of Texas Indians, it has brought
together relevant material in a convenient format which serves as a point of
departure for archeologically oriented work. If it is too imprecise for historians to use, then I would welcome a volume which would render this one
obsolete.

REFERENCE CITED

Gilmore, Kathleen
1973 The Keeran Site: the Probable Site of LaSalle’s Fort St. Louis in Texas.
Texas Historical Commission, Office of the State Archeologist, Report
No. 24.

Frank Hole
Rice University

246

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Archaeology. DENISE SCHMANDT-BESSERAT. Steck-Vaughn Company,
Austin, 1974.42 pages with 54 illustrations. $3.40.
The amount of archeological literature that is being published overwhelms
both the professional archeologist and amateur enthusiast. The emphasis of
most new publications is the stressing of "new approaches" or "new concepts" in virtually every area of the discipline. The books and articles are
invariably directed at the well informed and often highly technical au dience.
One audience that has been sorely neglected by authors of archeological
books is the reader of juvenile age. The few selections that are available in
schools and public libraries are usually out-dated or stress the classical or
antiquarian aspects of archeology.
Archaeology by Denise Schmandt-Besserat is written specifically for children of the middle grades. This well illustrated book introduces the young
readers to many of the basic principles used by archeologists. The author
discusses where archeological sites are found and how they are recognized.
She describes and pictures several kinds of sites, among them Near Eastern
tells, rockshelters, burial sites, shipwrecks, and single component gathering
sites. The reader is introduced to the principles of stratigraphy, how stratigraphic layers are interpreted, and how artifacts are used to reconstruct past
lifeways and events. Certain techniques of documentation are discussed and
illustrated. In the final section, the author presents an archeological puzzle in
order to demonstrate a case of reconstructing a prehistoric event.
The text is not a straight descriptive narrative; thought-provoking questions are consistently introduced to encourage more serious inquiry by the
student readers. Terminology specific to archeology is explained in a
straightforward manner comprehensible to young readers.
Professional and amateur archeologists who want their children to share
their interest will find this informative book a welcome addition to home and
school libraries.
Harry J. sharer
Texas A&M University

THE AUTHORS
Richard E. W. Adams is Professor of Anthropology and Dean of the College of
Humanities and Social Sciences at The University of Texas at San
Antonio. He also presently serves as secretary of the Society for American Archaeology. Professor Adams received his doctorate from Harvard
University. He is a leading authority on Maya archeology and in recent
years has conducted excavations in the Rio Bec area. Some of his major
publications include "Maya Archaeology 1958-1968: A Review" (Latin
American Research Review, 1969), The Ceramics of Altar de
Sacrificios, and "Maya Highland Prehistory: New Data and Implications" (Contributions, University of California Archaeological Research Facility, 1972). Address: College of Humanities and Social Sciences, University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas 78285.
J. Barto Arnold received his B.A. and M.A. degrees from The University of
Texas at Austin, and presently serves as Assistant Marine Archeologist
in the Underwater Archeological Research Section of the Texas Antiquities Committee. Arnold’s major research interests include remote
sensing and electronic applications in archeology, underwater archeology, and computerized data analysis. Address: P.O. Box 12276,
Capitol Station, Austin, Texas 78711.
Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr. received his doctorate from The University of Texas at
Austin in 1969 and is currently Associate Professor of Anthropology
and Botany at Texas A&M University. Dr. Bryant has conducted research in the areas of palynology and paleoenvironmental reconstruction. Publications include "A Guide to the Drafting of Archeological
Maps" (Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, 1965), "The Role of
Pollen in the Reconstruction of Past Environments" (Pennsylvania
Geographer, 1968), and "Prehistoric Diet in Southwest Texas: The
Coprolite Evidence" (American Antiquity, 1974). Address:
Anthropology/Palynology Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College
Station, Texas 77843.
John W. Clark, Jr. is an archeologist with the Texas Historical Commission. He
received his B.A. in anthropology at The University of Texas at Austin
and has done graduate work at the University of Arkansas. Clark has
carried out excavations at prehistoric and historic sites in Texas. His
publications include "Three Pictograph Sites in the Central Pecos Valley of Texas" (Texas Journal of Science, 1967) and "Archeological
Investigations at Fort Lancaster Historic Site, Crockett County, Texas"
(Texas Archeological Salvage Project, Research Report, 1972). Address: 1407 Westmoor Drive, Austin, Texas 78723.

248

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Michael B. Collins is presently Assistant Professor of Anthropology at the
University of Kentucky. He received his Ph.D. degree at the University
of Arizona. Professor Collins has carried out archeological research in
Texas, Israel, Arizona, and France, and his current major research
interest is in lithic technology. Some of his publications are: "A Review
of Llano Estacado Archeology and Ethnohistory" (Plains
Anthropologist, 1971), "Two Prehistoric Cemetery Sites in the Lower
Rio Grande Valley of Texas" (with T. R. Hester and F. Weir; Bulletin,
Texas Archeological Society, 1969), and "The Devil’s Hollow Site, A
Stratified Archaic Campsite in Central Texas" (Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, 1972). Address: Department of Anthropology,
University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky 40506.
James E. Corbin received his B.A. degree at The University of Texas at Austin
and is presently completing his doctoral dissertation at Washington
State University, where he has held an NDEA fellowship. Corbin has
done archeological work in various regions of Texas and in recent years
has conducted field investigations on the Alaskan North Slope. Among
Corbin’s publications are: "Archeological Materials from the Northern
Shore of Corpus Christi Bay" (Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society,
1963) and "Nunamint Eskimo House Types: An Archeological Identification and Validation" (Arctic Anthropology, in press). Address: P.O.
Box 112, Rosalia, Washington 99170.
Claire C. Davison received the Ph.D. degree in anthropology from the University of California at Berkeley. Dr. Davison is particularly interested in
the comparative study of trade in archaeology, and has carried out
extensive research in the source analysis of glass trade beads in Africa.
Her publications include "Two Chemical Groups of Dichroic Glass
Beads from West Africa (Man, 1971), and "Trade Wind Beads: A Preliminary Report (with J. Desmond Clark; Azania, 1974). Address: P.O.
Box 1261, Plainfield, New Jersey 07061.
Alan R. Duke has been active for many years in the Houston Archeological
Society and has edited their Newsletter since 1965. He has also served
as Regional Vice President for the Texas Archeological Society. Mr.
Duke has published a number of papers in theNewsletter of the Houston
Archeological Society, and these reflect his interests in the archaeology
of the upper Gulf coast of Texas and in historical sites archeology.
Address: 1706 Oaks Drive, Pasadena, Texas 77502.
Jack D. Eaton has a degree in Electrical Engineering and is a Systems and
Electronics engineer. Over the past several years, Eaton has been actively engaged in Mesoamerican archeology, particularly in the Maya
area. He was a field director in the Rio Bec Ecological Project, and has
published a report on his excavations at Chicanna, Campeche, Mexico.

.........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................

THE AUTHORS

249

A forthcoming publication is entitled "Ancient Agricultural Farmsteads in the Rio Bec Region of Yucatan". Address: Apartado Postal 500,
Merida, Yucatan, Mexico.
Jon L. Gibson is Assistant Professor of Anthropology at the University of
Southwestern Louisiana. He received his doctorate at Southern
Methodist University. Dr. Gibson’s research interests are centered geographically in the southeastern United States, and his current research
efforts are directed toward an understanding of the development of
Poverty Point culture. Principal publications include "Aboriginal Warfare in the Protohistoric Southeast: An Alternative Perspective"
(American Antiquity, 1974), "Poverty Point: The First North American
Chiefdom" (Archaeology, 1974), and The Culture of Acadiana: Tradition and Change in South Louisiana. Address: Department of Sociology, and Anthropology, University of Southwestern Louisiana,
Lafayette, Louisiana 70501.
R.

K.

Harris is one of the leading amateur archeologists in Texas and is a
Fellow of the Texas Archeological Society. He has conducted intensive
archeological research in north and east Texas. Harris’ archeological
publications are numerous, and include the following: "Hearths and
Artifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas and Associated Faunal
Material" (with W. W. Crook, Jr.; Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society,
1957), "A Preliminary and Documentary Study of the Womack Site,
Lamar County, Texas" (with I. M. Harris and others; Bulletin, Texas
Archeological Society, 1965), and co-author of several papers in the
report on the Gilbert Site (Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, 1967).
Address: 9024 San Fernando Way, Dallas, Texas 75218.

Robert F. Heizer is Professor of Anthropology and Coordinator of the Archaeological Research Facility at the University of California at Berkeley. He received the Ph.D. degree at Berkeley in 1941, and in 1965 was
awarded an honorary ScD degree from the University of Nevada. In
1972, Professor Heizer was elected to the National Academy of Sciences. His extensive field work in California, the Great Basin, Mexico
and Egypt is reflected in several hundred publications, including the
following books: The Archaeologist at Work (1959), A Guide to Field
Methods in Archaeology (with J. A. Graham, 1967), An Introduction to
Prehistori c A rch eol ogy (with F. Hole, 1973), and Prehistori c Rock A rt of
California (with C. W. Clewlow, 1973). Address: Department of Anthropology, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California
94720.
Thomas R. Hester received his doctoral degree from the University of California at Berkeley, and is presently Assistant Professor of Anthropology
and Director, Center for Archaeological Research, at The University of
Texas at San Antonio. Professor Hester has done archeological work in

250

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Texas, particularly the central and southern parts, the Western United
States, and Egypt. Some of his publications include "Archeological
Investigations at the La Jita Site, Uvalde County, Texas" (Bulletin,
Texas Archeological Society, 1971), Chronological Ordering of Great
Basin Prehistory (1973), and "The Colossi of Memnon Revisted" (with
R. F. Heizer and others; Science, 1973). Address: Division of Social
Sciences, The University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas
78285.

Frank Hole is Professor of Anthropology and Chairman, Department of Anthropology at Rice University. He is currently the editor of American
Antiquity. Professor Hole received the Ph.D. degree from the University
of Chicago. His major archeological interests include New World prehistory and the prehistory of Southwest Asia, particularly origins and
development of domestication. Major publications include An Introduction to Prehistoric Archeology (with R. F. Heizer; 1973), and
Prehistory and Human Ecology of the Deh Luran Plain (with K. Flannery and J. Neely, 1969). Address: Department of Anthropology, Rice
University, Houston, Texas 77001.
Sandra L. Myres received her doctorate in history from Texas Christian
University in 1963; she is presently Associate Professor of History at
The University of Texas at Arlington. Dr. Myres’ research interests are
focussed on Colonial Latin America and the American Southwest to
1865. Her publications include The Ranch in Spanish Texas,
1690-1800 (1969), "The Lipan Apaches" (Indian Tribes of Texas, 1971)
and Essays on the American West (1969). Address: Department of
History, The University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, Texas 76019.
Emerson L. Pearson is presently completing requirements for a Ph.D. degree
from the University of Colorado at Boulder. He has done archeological
work in Texas, Maine and the west coast of Mexico, and is especially
interested in settlement pattern and geocultural research. Major publications include Geocultural Survey of the West Mexican Marismas
Nacionales (1968) and "Archeological Investigations of Architectural
Details of Structures M2, X, and V1 at Fort McKavett State Historic Site,
Texas" (Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report, 1973). Address:
590 Llano Street, Dallas, Texas 75206.
Alan L. Phelps is a major in the U.S. Army. He has a B.A. in history and has
carried out extensive archeological research in the E1 Paso area. Several
of Major Phelps’ publications have appeared in The Artifact, journal of
the E1 Paso Archeological Society and as monographs of this organization. Address: 4811 Conduit, Colonial Heights, Virginia 23834.
Elton R. Prewitt has a B.A. degree from The University of Texas at Austin and
is a Research Scientist Associate with the Texas Archeological Survey.

THE AUTHORS

251

He has done field work at many prehistoric sites in Texas. Publications
include "Excavations at the Terri and Lightfoot Sites, Proctor Reservoir,
Comanche County, Texas" (Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society
(1964) and "The Piedra del Diablo Site, Val Verde County, Texas, and
Notes on Some Trans-Pecos, Texas, Archeological Material in the
Smithsonian Institution, Washington" (Texas Historical Survey CommitteeArcheological Report, 1970). Address: Texas Archeological Survey, Balcones Research Center, Rt. 4, Box 189, Austin, Texas 78757.
Harry J. Shafer is Assistant Professor of Anthropology, and Director, Archeological Research Laboratory, at Texas A&M University. He received his doctorate at The University of Texas at Austin. Dr. Sharer has
conducted archeological investigations in many areas of Texas, and has
also worked in Israel. He has published a number of monographs in the
Texas Archeological Salvage Project series, and is the author of "Test
Excavations at the Youngsport Site: A Stratified Terrace Site in Bell
County, Texas" (Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, 1963), "Notes
on Uniface Retouch Technology (American Antiquity, 1970), and "An
Evaluation of the Natchez Occupation of the Fatherland Site" (Journal
of Mississippi History, 1972). Address: Department of Sociology and
Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843.
Lydia Lowndes Maury Skeels received a B.A. in English at the University of
Montana in 1929 and an M.A. in archeology at the University of Calgary
in 1968. Her master’s thesis is entitled Location of the Indian Tribes at
First White Contact in Alberta, Canada. Skeels became interested in
Texas Indian protohistory while living in Houston. Address: 32 Chaffeeville Road, Storrs, Connecticut 06268.
David S. Vaughan is a lieutenant in the U.S. Air Force. He received the M.A.
degree in psychology at the University of Iltinois at Urbana-Champaign
in 1974. One of his research interests is the application of multivariate
quantitative methods to the understanding of human behavior. Lt.
Phelps has published papers in the Journal of Behavioral Science and
the Journal of Genetic Psychology. Address: 4718 Esterbrook, San Antonio, Texas 78238.
J. Ned Woodall received his Ph.D. degree from Southern Methodist University and is presently Assistant Professor of Anthropology at Wake
Forest University. His primary research interest is the American Southeast Formative. Dr. Woodall has done field work in the Southwest,
Canada, Texas, and Mesoamerica. Publications includeArchaeological
Excavations in Toledo Bend Reservoir (1966), "Growth Arrest Lines in
Long Bones of the Casas Grandes t~opulation’’ (Plains Anthropologist,
1968), and An Introduction to Modern Archeology (1972). Address:
Department of Anthropology, Box 7805, Wake Forest University,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina 27109.

Information for Contributors
The Bulletin oF lbe Texas Archeologiccd Society publishes original papers in tile field
of American archeology. Em phasis is placed on Texas and adjoining areas in the t lnited
States and Mexico. but papers on other areas’will also be considered. Articles concerning archeological technique, method, or theory are encouraged
Manuscripts must be typed, double-spaced, on 8V2 x 11 white paper. Footnotes
should be avoided or kept to a mmHnum. Reference to publislmd literature by author.
date. and page or figure number should be placed within parentheses in the body of the
text. with full bibliographic citations at the end. See this issue of the Bulletin for
examples. Authors should also consull "Information for Authors", in Texas
Archeology. Vol. 18. No, 1 (January 19741 or write to the Editors fora copy.
The proportions of ful!- page illustrations (picture or drawing plus captionl should be
suitable for reduction to the effective page size of the Bulletin of 41/4 x 7 inches. Plates
may be printed either horizontally or vertically, but allowance for the caption to be
printed the same direction must be made. Captions for illustrations should be listed in
numerical order and placed behind the list of references cited.
A complete manuscript is one with: a title page, an abstract¯ main body, references
cited, appendices {if necessary), figure captions, and completed photographic and
drafted plates. Only complete manuscripts will be considered.
Papers published in the Bulletin are abstracted and indexed in ABSTRACTS IN
ANTHROPOLOGY.

Manuscripts should be addressed to: (1975) Dr. Harry I. Shafer. Department of
Texas A&M University, College Station. TX 77843: or:
119761 Dr. Thomas R. Hester, Center for Archaeological Research Division of Social
Sciences, The University of Texas at San Antonio San Antonio. TX 78285.
Sociology and Anthropology,

