TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
The Society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of history, prehistory, and the major m-tffacts of man
and fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement
of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils in museums
and their study and classification and the publication of the results of researches
incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the Society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent the views of the Society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1967-1968
President:

CURTIS TUNNELL

(Austin)

Active Vice-President: CHARLES N. BOLLICH (Beaumont)
Secretary-Treasurer: C. A. S~z_rrH, Jm (Dallas)
Editor: JOEL L. SH~ma (Dallas)
Newsletter Editor: E. MOrT DAvis (Austin)
Di~’ectors (in addition to the above): F. W. ZOELLER (Austin), J. c. BLAINE
(Dallas), VEm~,rON R. BRoor: (El Paso), JAlvms H. WOttD (Floydada), BOB
B~ESON (Temple), DESSAM-~E LOI~,A.IN ( Dallas )

Regional Vice-Presidents: CHARLES BANDY (Brownfield), CHARLES COULTER
lington),

(Ar-

PAUL LoPmA~r (Dallas), ROBERT L. TtraNER (Pittsburgh), Wm-

Lr~M L. FtrLLEN (Deer Park Texas), E. H. SCHMEIDL~_~ (Victoria), JOHN A.
HEDmCK (El Paso), Jr~ SHANNON (Waco), MRs. Pm~scorr KaOUSE (Minden, La.)

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Membership at $25.00 and Life Membership at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four
times a year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained
at $5.00 per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to SecretaryTreasurer, Texas Areheologieal Society, Southern Methodist University, Box 165,
Dallas, Texas 75222.

BULLETIN

of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

VOLUME 38, ~or

1967

Editor: Joel L. Shiner

Assistant Editor:
Norma Hoffrichter

Cover: Hubert Achor

Published by the Society at Dallas, Texas, 1968

Printed by
SOUTHERN METHODIST UNIVERSITY PRINTING DEPAI~Th~:ENT
DALLAS~ TEXAS

Editorial

A new editor may or may not introduce a policy of change. This
one likes the Bulletin or he would not have accepted the position of
editor. Some of the most admirable qualities of the Bulletin are its
broad coverage of topics and geographic areas, the enthusiastic participation of the amateurs, and the standards of quality in printing of
text and illustrations.
There are, however, a few areas in which improvements could be
made. These are mentioned, not so much in criticism as in hope that
we might be able to do something about them. One area in which
changes are needed is in termino!ogy. Knife, blade, and focus are
terms which are frequently misused. Knives, in current usage, may be
anything which appear to be suitable for cutting regardless of shape
or process of manufacture. Blades in 90 percent of the world are
elongated, parallel-sided pieces detached from a core. In the Southwest, however, they may be this, or they may be the front half of an
arrowhead or they may be a biface too large to haft as a projectile
point. A focus is a concept that should be refined so as to be in some
way compatible with the reality of social organization.
In regard to written reports there are several problems. Perhaps the
most tlTing of these is the lack of understanding by the excavatorauthor of his responsibilities. Here the professional is as guilty as the
amateur. I have a couple of comments. Fh’st, it does not further communications for each author to devise a brand new system of classifying scrapers and "knives." And second, a conclusion to a report
must be more than a summary.
One further thought at this time concerns the aims or objectives of
an archaeological excavation. It is not enough to classify a site as
belonging to a particular focus. Classification is not a goal but a step
toward something more important. This is particularly true when most
of our foei are defined ahnost entirely in telTns of projectile points. We
must try to recover more material on behavior.
JOEL

Southern Methodist University
Dallas, Texas

L.

SHINER

Table of Contents
Cad Mound: A Stone Bead Locus in East Central Louisiana.
by Jon L. Gibson ................
The Distribution and Character of Sites, Arroyo Los Olmos,
Starr County, Texas.
by Milton B. Newton, Jr ...............

18

The Use of Statistics in Archaeology-A Bibliography.
by J. Ned Woodall ...............

25

Notes on Excavated Iling Midden Sites, 1963-1968.
by John W. Greer ................

39

The Paleo Type Flake Knife.
by J. B. Sollberger
...............

45

A Preliminary l~eport on Excavations at Hitzfelder Cave.
by tl. Dale Givens ................

47

........... The-Nature of Non-Buried Archeological Data: Problems
in Northeastern Mexico.
by Dudley M. Varner ...............

51

........... Analysis of Human Skeleta! Remains from Coontail Spin.
by Robert A. Benfer and Thomas W. MeKem ......

66

Excavation of a Buried Midden, Site 41CXll in Crockett
County, Texas.
by Aaron D. tliggs
...............

76

Some Puebloan Trade Pottery from Panhandle Aspect Sites.
by Martha Lewis Crabb ..............

83

An Unusual Hollow Reed.
by Harvey P. Smith, Jr ...............

90

The High Bluff Site on the Clear Fork of the Brazos River.
by Richard and Judy Flinn .............

93

Cyrus N. Eay, 1880-1966.
by Bill Wright .................

126

Cyrus N. Ray, Bibliography and Contributions to Texas
Archaeology.
by R. K. Harris and Inus Marie Harris ........

130

James Alfred Ford, 1911-1968.
by Clarence H. Webb ..............

135

,¢¢
~-x

Illustrations
Page

FLINN
Fig. 1

Sketch map of the site.

94

Fig. 2

Projectile points.

98

Fig. 3

Projectile points.

99

Fig. 4

Projectile points.

101

Fig. 5

Projectile points.

102

Fig. 6

An’ow points.

104

Fig. 7

Knives.

107

Fig. 8

Knives.

109

Fig. 9

Miscellaneous tools.

110

Fig. 10

Miscellaneous m’tifacts.

113

Fig. 11

Crude bifacial tools.

115

Fig. 12

Miscellaneous artifacts.

117

Fig. 13

Ground stone.

119

Fig. 14

Shell artifacts.

121

GIBSON
Fig. I Archaic sites in the Catahouls Lake Basin
of LaSalle Parish, Louisiana.

2

Fig. 2

Bead blocks.

6

Fig. 3

Bead blanks.

7

Fig. 4

Tubular blanks and finished beads.

8

Fig. 5

Flake saws.

10

Fig. 6

Stone bead distribution in Louisiana.

12

I One of the skulls from Hitzfelder Cave.

49

GIVENS
Fig.

Page

NEWTON
Fig. 1

The locations of sites involved in this study.

19

Fig. 2

The lowering of artifacts to a common sm’face.

20

Fig. 3

The evolution of local types, Starr County, Texas.

21

Fig. 4

A generalized profile intersecting the
Arroyo Los Olmos, Starr County, Texas.

RIGGS
Fig. i Topographic map of Site 41 CXII.

23

Fig. 2

Profile of the south wall.

Fig. 3

Projectile points.

Fig. 4

Knives.

Fig. 5

Scrapers and choppers.

77
78
80
81
81

The hollow reed and needle-like point.

90

Fig. 1 Hearth in an area typically denuded of
ground-level vegetation.

57

Fig.

2

Hearth with extensive an’oyo dissection behind.

58

Fig.

3

Map of northeastern Mexico.

59

SMITH
Fig. 1
VARNER

Cad Mound: A Stone Bead Locus
in East Central Louisiana
JON L. GIBSON
ABSTRACT
Products of the various stages of stone bead manufacture and associated tools have been recognized from the Cad Mound site in southern
LaSalle Parish, Louisiana. These have made possible the reconstruction
of industry techniques and processes. Archeological context of the
site, stratigraphic position of the beads, and relative dating of the
industry by river channel correlation ca. 1300 ~3.c. indicates the antiquity of the process. It is suggested that Cad and other similar sites
in the Catahoula Lake Basin participated in the Eastern Archaic horizon.

INTRODUCTION
During the course of an archeological survey of Indian sites in
LaSalle Parish, Louisiana in 1963-1964, an interesting stone-working
technique was discovered. Surface collecting of the Cad Mound site,
revealed numerous pieces of stone showing evidence of peeking, grinding, sawing, drilling, and polishing. These were recognized as products
of the various stages or steps in the manufacturing process of stone
beads. The completeness of the bead series, and consequently its value
in illustrating the procedure and techniques of manufacture, was
deemed noteworthy. Rather than await detailed analysis of the smwey
work, which has subsequently indicated a need for intensive excavation at several sites, this short treatise has been prepared.1
Helpful correspondence was had with James Ford, Florida State
Museum, Clarence Webb, Shreveport, Louisiana, and R. King Harris,
Southern Methodist University. John Rovik, Louisiana State University School of Geology, kindly identified stone materials. Thanks are
also due to Mrs. J. E. Allbritton, LaCrange High School, for her critical
reading of this manuscript. Several initial drafts of this paper were
typed by Claudia Gibson, and the final copy was prepared by MalT
Beth Gibson.
LOCATION AND PHYSIOGRAPHY
Cad Mound and associated village midden are located in southern
LaSalle Parish, about six miles southwest of the small settlement of
Waiters, Louisiana. The site is situated about two hundred yards south
of Indian Bayou in the large, poorly drained, periodically flooded sump
area known as the Catahoula Lake Basin.
1 A preliminary report of the LaSalle Parish smwey has been published by the
author (Gibson 1966: 193-237).

9,

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

LOUISIANA

LASALLE

PARISH

SANDY RUN

SANSON

0

1

2

3

0

4

Miles

FIGURE 1. Archaic sites in the Catahoula Lake Basin of LaSalle Parish,
Louisiana. Inset shows location of LaSalle Parish.

CAD

3

MOUND

Physiographically, the site area is very complex; a reflection of the
dynamics of structural faulting and of stream development? Cad itself
is located on the first of an old series of crescentic ridges representing
the bank-line levees of an ancient meander. Size of the scar, approximately three-quarters of a mile across, indicates that it was probably
formed by a stream the size of the Ouachita River or the Arkansas
River. Implications of this observation will be discussed in more
detail later.
Directly adjacent and partially overlapping the backslope of the old
levee system is a strand line beach composed of coarse white sand.
This beach, one of a discontinuous series of such phenomena surrounding the bed of Catahoula Lake, has been formed by sediment deposition dnring panses in the lowering of the lake level.
A small conical mound, formerly sixty feet in diameter and six feet
high, is present at the site. It has undergone considerable alteration
since 1961, due primarily to land clearing operations. The mound was
not excavated, but a three inch auger hole was put down in the west
slope of the mound. Rather homogeneous reddish-brown sandy silt
was encountered throughout with no evidence of superimposed
mantles or other features. Coarse sands of the beach ridge containing
both Marksville and Coles Creek components were found underlying
the mound base. This indicates that the mound was constructed after
deposition of the beach and puts a post-Marksville date on the mound
erection.
STRATIGRAPHY
Limited testing of the Cad site in the fall of 1963 revealed a rather
deep midden. About twenty-four inches of black organic sand filled
with refuse of the Coles Creek period overlay a lower stratum of
yellowish brown silty clay containing Marksville pottelT in the upper
six inches and flint debitage in the lower twelve to twenty-four inches.
A six inch zone of yellow sand mixed with black soil and fresh-water
mussel shells separated the strata. Although no beads were found in
the lower stratmn, this is presumably the layer in which they occur
stratigraphically. Horizontal distribution of the products of bead manufacture support this assumption. Beads have been found only where
the post-Marksville period sands of the beach ridge finger out and
the silts of the old levee system reach the surface. Lending additional
weight is the fact that some beads have ironstone accretions adhering
2 For a history of the development of the Catahoula Lake Basin, the reader is
referred to H. N. Fisk’s monograph, Geological Investigations of the Alluvial
Valley o{ the Lower Mississippi River.

4

TEXAS AI~CHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

to the walls of the perforations. Ironstone nodules and lenses are
known only from the lower midden stratum.
SUMMARY OF SITE COMPONENTS AND ARTIFACTS
Cultural material characteristic of Archaic, Marksville, Coles Creek
and Plaquemine periods was found intermingled on the surface and
vertically distributed in the midden cuts. Potsherds were predominately
Coles Creek types; Coles Creek Incised, Greenhouse Incised, French
Fork Incised, Mazique Incised, Chevalier Stamped, and Bhineha~
Punctated. Occasional sherds of Plaquemine Brushed, Manchac Incised, and Catahoula Incised were present, indicating a light Plaquemine occupation. Marksville Plain, MarksvilIe Stamped, MarksvilIe
Incised, and Marksville Zoned Punctated types attested to the presence of a minor Marksville component. This summary of types agrees
well with that !isted by Fisk (1938: 7) of ninety-eight percent Coles
Creek types and two percent Marksville types from Cad Mound?
The Archaic component here was represented by several artifacts
characteristic of the Eastern Archaic pelJod (Griffin 1952: 355-356)
plus some evidentally local traits. The polished stone inventory included, in addition to stone beads: a bar gorget, a qualtzite "tablet,"
a geniculate or "figure-7," a notched "net sinker," a small granite maul,
a claw pendant of jasper, celt fragments, teardrop shaped plummets,
and bar weights. Other lithics were large choppers, several varieties of
scrapers, gouges of the Clear Fork type, and dmt points of the Gary,
Kent, Epps, Delhi, Macon, Marcos, and San Patrice types. A microlithie industry of polyhedra! cores, retouched and use-retouched flakes,
double-backed flakes commonly known as "Jaketown perforators,"
edge-abraded flake saws, and peculiar notched flakes rounded out the
artifact inventory of this component.
Although most of the preceding items are known for the Poverty
Point period (Ford and Webb 1956), I prefer to refer to this assemblage as Archaic because of the conspicuous absence of baked clay
objects, steatite vessel fragments, and Motley points. It goes without
saying that the full artifact inventory present at the Povelly Point site
may not be expected to occur in toto at many other sites, provided of
course that Poverty Point does represent the aggregation of products
of many widespread subsidary or satellite villages. Enough sites are
now known from the area to postulate a localized Catahoula Lake
Archaic development which perhaps slightly preceded the classic
3 This breakdown was of a collection of sherds secured from Cad by J. A. Ford
in 1933 in preparation for his analytical report of Indian sites in Louisiana and
Mississippi (Ford 1936).

CAD

5

~iOUND

Poverty Point manifestation and which may have added certain increments to the Poverty Point trait list. Alternative explanations of the
Catahoula Lake deve!opment are that it participated in the diffusion
of Poverty Point traits from the type site, and/or it was simply a marginal manifestation tucked away in the Catahoula Lake Basin. Only
more investigation will elucidate this problem.
STONE BEAD MANUFACTURING
All the steps of the stone bead manufacturing process were found
at Cad. The process involved an intimate knowledge of peeking, grinding, sawing, &illing, and polishing techniques. Materials utilized were
vari-colored quartzites, predominately shades of red and purple, red
jasper sometimes banded with black, and brown chert. Tan and green
siltstones occasionally provided raw materials. Over sixty percent of
the worked stone was quartzite. Another twenty percent was jasper,
with chert, siltstone, and limestone furnishing about equal remaining
percentages. All of this material was available locally in the hills north
and west of Cad, from graveliferous terrace outcrops. A very small
amount, probably less than two percent, of non-local stone was
present.
The initial step in processing the stone involved rough pecking and
grinding of the edges of the selected pebble in order to achieve a
rectanguloid shape. Often pebbles occurring naturally in this general
shape were used, thereby omitting this shaping step. Quite frequently
even smaller pebbles were selected which not only enabled the maker
to by-pass initial shaping but also sawing. For convenience the products of this initial shaping step will be termed "blocks."
The roughly shaped "block" was then cut by flake saws. Depending
on the size of the block, one or two lines were cut into one face and
one end of the material usually no deeper than 2 mm (Fig. 2). A blow
from a hammerstone, perhaps concentrated along the plane of a punch
or similar instrument, was then directed about the midpoint of one of
these gTooves which served to diffuse the energy of the blow along it
and through the block, breaking off smaller rectanguloid "blanks"
(Fig. 3). Accidents, probably results of misdirected percussion strokes
or faulty material, occasionally did occur as evidenced by block flagments (Fig. 9,, f, g). Virtually the same technique is used today to
trim glass.
Blanks were subjected to further grinding until tubular or barrel
shapes were obtained (Fig. 4, a-d). One small partially finished bead
was prism-shaped (Fig. 4, e). Two other blanks were rather rectangu-

6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

FZCURE 2. Bead Blocks. a-b from Sanson Place, Rapides Parish, Louisiana.
c-g from Cad Mound.

CAD

~OUND

7

V:

b

~b~ I

f
d

i
h

FIGURE 3. Bead Blanks. a-i from Cad Mound.

8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

b

d

CAD

9

~[OUND

lar in cross-section, but they may have been discarded before further
shaping was completed.
Holes drilled in the tubular blanks were cylindrical. Conical countersunk perforations were apparent in one finished bead (Fig. 4, f),
but they had been almost completely masked by later cylindrical
reaming. Small depressions, apparently drill seatings, pecked into both
ends of several blanks prior to drilling suggested that conical counter
drilling was concomitant with cylindrical drilling. James A. Ford (personal communication 1966) related that these drilling methods posed
a temporal difference, with counter-drilling earlier, and cylindrical
drilling later. However, evidence from Cad and from Indian Knoll
did not substantiate this assumption. Holes were drilled with a rotary
motion of the drill for encircling striations etched into the bore wall
of the bead were often visible.
Subsequent grinding and polishing completed the beads and often
gave a low lustrous finish (Fig. 4, f, g). Finished beads ranged from
30 mm. to 14 mm. in length, and 13 mm. to 7 mm. in maximum
diameter. Perforation diameter ranged from 6 ram. to 9,.5 ram. and was
usually slightly tapering. Tubular and bm’rel shapes were the only
forms found, but unfinished blanks suggested a prism form and possibly a long rectangular form. Beads observed in private collections from
Cad were flattened cylinders, oval in cross-section, but the seemingly
desired shape was some variety of the cylinder.
The cutting process was duplicated in laboratory experiments. Several pebbles of limestone and quartzite were sawed with flakes. The
flake saw after use had polished and abraded edges similar to aboriginal saws recovered from Cad. The blanks produced by striking
the sawed groove by shaq9 percussion blows were also similar. The
process was very time-eonsmning, and saw edges became dull and
useless very quickly.
TOOLS
The saws were "lamellar" flakes or blades of hard eryptocrystalline
chel± detached from prepared cores. However, considerable use was
also made of cortex flakes and other relatively lm’ge pieces of debris
(Fig. 5). Sizes varied from 38 ram. to 16 ram. in length and width
from 29, ram. to 14 ram. One side, two sides, or even all the sides were
abraded, polished and nicked with fine use sears. On all the observed
FmuR~ 4. Tubular Blanks and Finished Beads. a-b, d-g from Cad Mound.
c from Sanson Place. d-e partially finished beads with incomplete perforations, f-g finished beads.

i0

TEXAS AI~CHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

\

\

\

b

b

f

FIOVR~ 5. Flake saws. a-d symmetrical flakes, e-f irregular flakes. Length of
arrows shows extent of utilized edge.

CAD MOUND

ii

specimens, the utilized edge was V-shaped or slightly rounded in
cross section. No attempt was made to break down these "saws" into
styles, as has been done by Wheeler (1965: 19-20) in his description
of similar tools from Wetherill Mesa. It is sufficient to say that the
flakes were "saws" used for cutting bead blanks from prepared blocks.
Both conical and cylindrical drills were employed. These tools were
not represented in collections from the site, which may suggest that
they were made of a perishable material, utilizing sand as an abrasive.
Webb (1946: 269) desclibed the drilling process in atlatl weights
from Indian Knoll which was identical with the one used at Cad and
probably involved similar tools (cane or reed). However, flint drills
which Webb associated with conical perforations were not recognized
at Cad. Annular grooves in bore walls of some beads from Cad may
be indicative of repeated introduction of sharp, fresh, cutting sand
into perforations. However, it may be that sand grains trapped between the bore wall and the soft drill scratched these lines and is not
indicative of the "cutting-cleaning-cutting" process.
The other tools necessary for bead manufacturing, hammerstones,
were found at Cad. These undoubtedly served a dual purpose as
striking instruments and as anvils. They are typically chert or qualtzite
pebbles with battered edges and pitted faces. Several Catahoula sandstone hones found at Cad were probably the abrading and polishing
mediums.
STONE BEAD DISTRIBUTION IN LOUISIANA
Spatial distribution of stone beads in Louisiana gives full credence
to the fact that most alluvial surfaces in the Lower Mississippi Valley
were too geologically recent to have supported Archaic occupancy
(Haag 1961: 317-323). William G. McIntire (personal communication
1966) found no beads in his extensive survey of Coastal Louisiana,
although he theorized that Archaic components did exist (1958: 53).
Likewise, Sherwood M. Gagliano (1963: 105-132) in his extension of
the coastal survey to preceramic sites of the Pontchmtrain Basin and
the terrace lands of the Florida Parishes found no evidence for such a
lapidary industry. Recently reported Poverty Point sites in this area
(Gagliano and Saucier 1963: 326), yielded no beads; indeed, their
conspicuous absence was noted by the authors.
Nevertheless, stone beads are known from a few sites in geologically
old areas in South Louisiana, but they are certainly rare. One fragmentary bah’el-shaped bead was recovered from the Tchefuncte component at the Lafayette Mounds (Ford and Quimby 1945: 23). Moore
(1912: 507; 1913: 79,) reported jasper beads from a site in St. Landry

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

STONE BEAD DISTRIBUTION
IN LOUISIANA

50

o
Miles

Stone bead producing parishes outlined:
Caddo, Bossier, Webster, Claiborne,
DeSoto, Bienville, Na~chitoches, Winn,
Rapides, LaSalle, Catahoula. St. Landry,
West Carroll, St. Martin, East Baton Rouge.

A~RY ISLAND

FIGURE 6. Stone Bead Distribution in Louisiana.

Parish and one in Rapides Parish, but archeological contexts are not
fully understood. The recently- excavated Monte Sano Mound in East
Baton Rouge Parish yielded a red jasper owl e~gy bead or pendant
duplicating a similar specimen (called the Bertha Hale) from Poverty
Point. Lack of suitable stone, subsidence of old surfaces and therefore potential bead-producing sites, or possible cultural rejection may
be some of the factors influencing the distributional picture of stone
beads.
The majority of stone beads are from sites on the Quaternal3z ten’aces
and on the Arkansas River Cone (Macon Ridge) in North and Central
Louisiana. In the alluvial Mississippi Valley of Eastern Louisiana,
beads occur in sites located on the older alluvial areas primarily on
surfaces of the C~ and C2 stages (Fisk 1944: P1. 15, sheet 3) of the
Arkansas or the combined Arkansas/Ouaehita rivers. The few sites

CAD

MOUND

13

known hlrther south are all located on Prairie Terrace or perhaps

Bayou Teche deltaic surfaces.
Distributional information is only a reflection of current knowledge
and consequently is subject to revision as new data become available.
However, it certainly is a fnnction of land surfaces existent in the
Archaic and confirms the suspected antiquity of stone bead manufacturing in the area. Presently, bead producing sites occur in a broad area
of North Louisiana: eastward from a narrow band flanking the west
side of the Red River Valley to the recent alluvial Mississippi River
floodplain, and southward in quantity to Rapides Parish in the center
of the state.
CORRELATIONS, AFFILIATIONS, AND CONCLUSIONS
Unfortunately, no radiocarbon dates are yet available from Cad.
However, the old channel scar on which Cad is located was apparently
a portion of the C~ course of the Arkansas River, which Fisk (1944)
estimates to have been active circa 1300 B.c. Very limited evidence
primarily h’om Poverty Point, which was apparently associated with
a precedent C~ Arkansas channel but which yielded radiocarbon dates
averaging 800 B.c. (Ford and Webb 1956: Tab. 9), hints that this date
may be of too great a magnitude. Irrespectively, I am inclined at the
present time to favor a slightly earlier temporal position of the Catahoula Lake Archaic, primarily on the basis of the artifact assemblage
and the lack of certain traits known to have persisted into more recent
cultural periods.
Both Cad and Poverty Point had bead-making industries. Ford and
Webb (1956: 101-103) describe the beads at Poverty Point, but present no data on manufacture. Most of the beads h’om Poverty Point are
finished forms, and it is my impression from a cursmT examination of
several private collections that unfinished beads, blanks, and rejects
are far too few to complement the enolTnous nmnber of completed
specimens. Nevertheless, manufacturing data are available. A remarkable cache discovered at Poverty Point by R. King Harris of Southern
Methodist University apparently represents the entire contents of a
lapidary’s tool kit. Of the eighty-three pieces of red and green talc,
over half have been worked in a fashion similar but not identical to
the Cad method. Probably due to the soft and laminar nature of the
raw material, initial preparatolT grinding was not called for, and the
blanks were completely (or nearly so) sawed from the block. Also
differing from the Cad material is the fact that the saw was a large
novaenlite biface (a Pogo spear point in classificatory terminology).
Other differences in the total bead series from Poverty Point and

14

TEXAS AIRCI:ZEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Cad include lack of cylindrical reamed perforations and edge-abraded
saws at Poverty Point and absence of the wide variety of Povelt:y Point
bead forms at Cad. Whether these differences m’e suffleient to outweigh the similiarities in the finished products can not presently be
aseel~ained.
Other comparative data are available from Archaic components in
the Pickwick Basin of Northern Alabama (Webb and DeJarnette
1942) and in the Green River area of Kentucky (Webb 1946; Webb
and Haag 1939, 1947). Tubular and barrel-shaped beads of jasper
and channel coal are persistent occurrences in these sites. Unfortunately for our purposes here, processing techniques were not found or
were not recognized. Nonetheless, Webb (1946: 267-269) does go into
considerable detail in describing atlatl weight manufacturing at Indian
Knoll, Oh2. This process provides a corollary with the Cad process,
and undoubtedly with very few alterations could be expanded to inelude stone bead making in the area. It appears that drilling of the
atlatl prism was the crucial step in manufacture and was usually done
before a great deal of effort was expended on grinding and polishing.
Conversely at Cad, drilling of the bead blank was one of the last steps
followed only by finish smoothing and polishing. Webb makes no
mention of stone sawing in this connection.
In the northwestern portion of Louisiana and perhaps spilling into
eastern Texas and southern Arkansas are several sites yielding stone
beads. These sites are collectively grouped into the Bossier (Webb
1948) or the Bellvue (Fulton and Webb 1953) foci. Although too little
is known of these loci to compare them with phases in the Red River
Mouth sequence, they do appear to fall temporally later than the
Archaic or Poverty Point periods. Even so, they have retained some of
the major traits of the Archaic, including stone beads. Nearly all of
the beads are finished products, and processual data are not available.
Archaic period precursors of these foci m’e perhaps known, but
limited information prevents a definitive statement at this time. One
of these supposed Archaic sites, Albany Landing in Caddo Parish,
may have had a bead-making industry. Two unfinished beads-one, a
red jasper disc with incomplete countersunk perforations, and the
other, a barrel-shaped, undrilled blank-are knovn~ from the site ( C. H.
Webb, personal communication 1966). The Kieffer Place in western
Winn Parish, another apparent Archaic site, is unusual because it is
a mound site. Pallia! leveling of one of the three mounds in 1964
uncovered several oval pits which contained the calcined remains of
several individuals. Apparently pits had been dug from the mound
surface and the burials had been burned in situ. Burial furniture con-

CAD

1VIOUND

15

sisted entirely of barrel-shaped and tubular stone beads of silicified
wood, brown chert, and jasper. Surrounding the mounds in isolated
spots were found a few dart points of types Elam, Evans, and Delhi,
but pottery was conspicuously absent. These few data from Kieffer
lend additional support to mounting evidence of mound construction
in the Archaic period.4
Passing mention has been made previously to an, as yet undefined,
areheo!ogieal manifestation in Central Louisiana, the Catahoula Lake
Archaic phase. Further elaboration of Central Louisiana cultural
sequences is reserved for a paper planned in the near future.
Presently, bead making data are available from four sites in the
Catahoula Lake Basin and one from the eastern peripheral margin of
the basin. These sites m’e Cad, Sandy Run, and Crooks Site in LaSalle
Parish; Sanson, or more properly Joseph Island, in tlapides Parish;
and Walters Place in Catahoula Parish. For all practical purposes,
bead production at these sites are identical; description of the Cad
industry in this paper suffices for all. None, however, appear as extensive as Cad.
Cad is certainly a bead "factory" in the stMet sense of the word.
Beads were manufactured on the spot and were not brought in by
trade. Judging from the large number of unfinished and rejected
pieces representing various stages of manufacture, the number of
finished beads is surprisingly few. The studied collections give a
ratio of approximately fifty unfinished fol~ns for every finished bead.
This tantalizingly hints that Cad may have also functioned as a distributional center for objects of the lapidary art.
Evidently, Cad had some familiarity with the trade network so well
established by Poverty Point times. Galena, crystal quartz, slate,
greenstone, granitic rocks, and possibly other exotic materials are
present in small but persistent amounts. If these exotic materials are
trade items and not the results of home-based forays, then the idea
must be entertained that Cad must have had something to trade in
return. Stone beads would fu!fill this criterion admirably.
In conclusion, Cad bead factory is recognized as a local manifestation of the Eastern Archaic period. This tentative affinity is further
supported by the broadening of the bead distribution pattern to the
north and east, toward the major Archaic centers in the east. Confinement to land surfaees, geologically no younger than around 1300 B.C.,
4 Radiocarbon 14 determinations accumulated by Ford and Webb (1956) and
by Gagliano (1964: 13) suggest that mound-building was established in the
Lower Mississippi Valley perhaps as early as 2500 B.C. and almost certainly by
1000 B.C.

16

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

suggests the antiquity of this industry, which falls well within the
temporal bounds of the Eastern Archaic period. Presently, it is felt
that Cad and consequently, the Catahoula Lake Archaic phase, are
antecedent to Poverty Point, but only more excavation and radiocarbon determinations will help elucidate this problem.

REFERENCES CITED
Fisk, H. N.
1938 Geology of Grant and LaSalle Parishes. Louisiana Department of Conservation, Geological Bulletin No. 1O.
1944 Geological Investigations of the Alluvial Valley of the Lower Mississippi
River. War Department, Corps of Engineers, U. S. Army, Mississippi
River Commission Publication, No. 52.
Ford, James A.
1936 Analysis of Indian Village Site Collections from Louisiana and Mississippi. Louisiana Geological Survey, Anthropological Study No. 2.
Ford, James A. and George I. Quimby, Jr.
1945 The Tehefunete Culture, An Early Oceupation of the Lower Mississippi
Valley. Memoirs of the Society for American Arehaeology, No. 2.
Ford, James A. and Clarence H. Webb
1956 Poverty Point, A Late Archaic Site in Louisiana. Anthropological Papers
of tbe American Museum of Natural History, Vol. 45, Part 1.
Fulton, Robert L. and Clarence H. Webb
1953 The Bellvue Mound: A Pre-Caddoan Site in Bossier Parish, Louisiana.
Bulletin of the Texas Areheological Soeiety, Vol. 24, pp. 18-42.
Gagliano, Sherwood M.
1963 A Survey of Preeeramie Occupations in Portions of South Central
Louisiana. Florida Anthropologist, Vol. XVI No. 4 pp. 105-132.
1964 An Areheo!ogieal Survey of Ave~dz Island. ’Avery island, Ine.
Gagliano, Sherwood M. and Roger T. Saueier
1963 Poverty Point Sites in Southeastern Louisiana. American Antiquity, Vol.
28, No. 3, pp. 320-327.
Gibson, Jon L.
1966 A Preliminary Survey of Indian Occupation in LaSalle Parish, Louisiana.
Louisiana Studies, Vol. V, No. 3, pp. 193-237.
Griffin, James B.
1952 Culture Periods in Eastern United States Archeology. In Areheology of
Eastern United States, James B. Griffin (ed.), pp. 352-364.
Haag, William G.
1961 The Archaic of the Lower Mississippi Valley. Ameriean Antiquity, Vol.
26, No. 3, Part 1, pp. 317-323.
MeIntire, William G.
1958 Prehistoric Indian Settlements of the Changing Mississippi River Delta.
Louisiana State University Studies, Coastal Studies Series No. 1.
Moore, Clarenee B.
1912 Some Aboriginal Sites on the Red River. Journal of the Academy of
Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, Vol. 14, Pt. 4, Art. 5, pp. 482-644. ,
Some Aboriginal Sites in Louisiana and Arkansas. Journal of the Aeadem)
of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, Vol. 16, Pt. 1, Art. 1, pp. 7-99.
Webb, Clarence H.
1948 Caddoan Prehisto13z: The Bossier Foeus. Bulletin of the Texas Areheological and Paleontological Soeiety, Vol. i9, pp. 101-113.
1913

CAD

17

MOUND

Webb, William S.
1946 Indian Knoll, Site Oh 2, Ohio County, Kentucky. University of Kentueky Reports in Anthropology and Archaeology, Pt. 1, Vol. 4, No. 3.
Webb, William S. and David L. DeJarnette
1942 An Archeological Survey of Pickwick Basin in the Adjacent Portions of
the States of Alabama, Mississippi, and Tennessee. Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 129.
Webb, William S. and W. G. Haag
1939 The Chiggerville Site, Site 1, Ohio County, Kentucky. The University ot~
Kentucky Reports in Anthropology, Vol. 4, No. 1.
1947 Archaic Sites in McLean County, Kentucky. The University of Kentucky
Reports in Anthropology, Vol. 7, No. 1.
Wheeler, Richard P.
1965 Edge-abraded Flakes, Blades, and Cores in the Puebloan Tool Assemblage. In Contributions of the Wetherill Mesa Archeological Project,
Douglas Osborne (ed.), Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, No. 19, pp. 19-29.
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, Louisiana

The Distribution and Character of Sites,
Arroyo Los Olmos,
Starr County, Texas
MILTON B. NEWTON, JR.

ABSTRACT
The characteristic morphology of Southwest Texas prehistoric sites
is examined in the area of Start County revealing a typical banded, or
gallery, arrangement. No particular point may be called a site, but
strips of occupancy follow the banks of streams--a band of campsite
debris lies near the stream and a zone of foraging lies some distance out
from the stream bank.
Surface collections and initial excavations suggest a slowly evolving
projectile point inventory. These points, along with associated choppers,
gouges, knives, and so forth, chronicle a history of at least 9,000 years
from Lerma times through the Falcon Focus (5000 B.c. to 500 A.D.)
to the Mier Focus (500 A.D. to 1750 A.D.). This entire period seems to be
marked by slow evolution of one form of Desert, or Archaic, Culture.

The prehistory of Southwest Texas is so rich in problems and interesting material that it is strange that it has attracted the attention of
so few archeologists. As a logical beginning some indication of the
distribution and eharacter of the sites, or in short, the settlement
geography of the area will be described. In reporting these observations, An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology (Suhm, Krieger, & Jelks 1954: 134-43) will be used as a basis for descriptions.
The area discussed in this report is limited to the middle drainage
of the Arroyo Los Olmos, the name of whieh refers to the haekberry
(Celtis laevigata L., Uhnus family) which is characteristic of the
lower course. This stream joins the Rio Grande after following a
south-to-southeasterly route from Jim Hogg County across the middle
of Start County. It is near the village of E! Sauz that the Coahuiltecan
campsites described here are located. They occur along both sides of
the Arroyo Los Olmos about ten to fifteen miles north of Rio Grande
City, the county seat of Starr County (Fig. 1).
The landscape is dominated by mesquite and cactus which go under
the collective term "monte," "chaparral," or brush, but many other
plants fill in the cover. These include members of the Leguminosae
such as mesquite (Prosopis juliflora) and Texas ebony (Pithecolobium
fleicaule); members of the acacias such as retama (Parkinsonia
aculeata) and huisache (Acacia farnesiana) ; many Compositae; and
nmnerous Cacti.

SITES, STAlql:t COUNTY, TEXAS

19

FIGURE 1. The locations of sites involved in this study.
Although the Arroyo Los Olmos is intermittent, most of the time
water can be found either in pools or by digging into the sands of
the bed. The climate has been elassified as one marked by dryness
with steppe vegetation-called "mesquite savannah" (Suhm et al.
1954: 134)-with mild, dry winters, and hot summers. Under these
conditions life in prehistoric and early historic times was confined to
narrow bands along the stream. Several early Spanish ranches were
located along the Los Olmos in the same areas where most abundant
prehistoric remains are found. In addition, main lines of communication in both prehistoric and historic times followed the Los Olmos.
Additional physical features to be borne in mind when examining
prehistoric occupation along the Los Olmos are the charaeteristies of
the soils and the erosion working over these soils. There are, in general, two main layers of earth in most of these occupation areas. The
lower member is a stratum of at least several feet eonsisting of a
dense pink clay that is studded throughout by snail shells and nodules
of caliche.
Cason (1952) remarked on the cultural sterility of a similar clay
and on the difficulty of excavating it at Falcon Reservoir some 25
miles west of the Arroyo Los Olmos. It must be noted in passing,
however, that excavation connected with the present investigations

TEXAS

20

FIGURE

2. The lowering

of

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

artifacts to a common surface.

revealed cultural material lying upon the clay and slightly intruded
into it. These materials consisted of two Lerma points (one unfinished), choppers, gravers, knives, utilized flakes, and what probably should be called a hoe or grabber (chopper). Nevertheless, the
pink clay mentioned here and by Cason is, in general, culturally
sterile.
Immediately above the pink clay is a bed of gray-tan, clayey sand
of very fine texture which becomes comparatively hard and brittle
when undisturbed and exposed to the sun. When disturbed, however, it
is easily eroded. This fine sand is the culturally fertile zone. Significant
here, it also is the stratum most subject to both sheet and headward
erosion. In areas of active erosion the sand is quickly removed exposing wide expanses of clay littered with artifacts. These areas may
be mistaken for sites, but are in reality the debris of sites deriving
from the removal of the sand and the lowering of the artifacts to a
common surface (Fig. 2). The casual observer is likely to think that
he has come upon the site of an intensive or prolonged habitation.
The concentration upon a common surface of the artifacts from
what appears to be 9,000 years of human occupation has led to very
Iarge local collections which often run into the tens of thousands of
artifacts. The only value of such surface collections-aside from the

SITES~ STAI:~ COUNTY~ TEXAS

MIER

_roc us

F OC U S

9’1

m nA--A

.......

PANDORA ~ii: ::: :~

5000 ..............
?

EVOLUTION
OF TYPES
0

1

2

~!~i:;!

~)::P

2:%~!REFUGIO

-

ASOLOi;::~ :i:~i ~,~
~’ ~ili~i~]/],~t

:~ii~ ~

FIGURE 3. The evolution of local types, Starr County, Texas.
establishing the ranges of variation in the artifact types-lies in their
helping to determine the former location and orientation of a site.
The first human occupation of the "monte"-if indeed it was a
"monte" at that time-consisted of frequently shifting, generalized
food gatherers who manufactured the ubiquitous Lerrna point along
with a variety of similar generalized tools. (Aveleyra Arroyo de Anda
1964: 390, suggests with others that the Lerrna phase is primarily a
hunting culture). These people were followed by, or developed into,
the group defined as the Falcon Focus which was followed in turn by
the Mier Focus (Suhm et al. 1954: 136-138). However, the Falcon and
Mier foci may be the same culture at different stages.
It is here suggested that there was indeed an unbroken continuity
from Lerma to Start points (Fig. 3). This assumption is based on the
absence of any clear-cut break in tool types other than the few nonlocal types (Table 1) and on overall morphological similarity among
the characteristic points. This homogeneity was noted both in surface
collections and in limited excavations carried out at La Perdida Site
(Fig. 1) where two trenches showed overlapping sequences of LermaFalcon and Falcon-Mier foci. It is here suggested that since about
7000 ~.c. (Lerma C14 date of 7312--+500 ~.c.; MacNeish 1958:
194-99) until historic occupation by Spanish culture in 1749, there
was one basic lifeway developing in Southwest Texas. This con-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 1
Percentages of Selected Point Types
Falcon &
Earlier
LERMA
ABASOLO
TORTUGAS
PANDORA
REFUGIO
DESMUKE
MATAMOROS
CATAN
STARR
TOTAL LOCAL TYPES
NON-LOCAL TYPES

Mier &
Later

All Types
Together

70.00
18.18
5.45
93.63
6.36

9.05
12.32
31.98
5.30
5.30
2.18
12.01
3.1"2
.94
81.90
17.78

99.99~;

99.68%

10.92
14.88
38.61
6.40
6.40
2.64

79.85
20.15

100.00~
TOTAL SPECIMENS COUNTED
TOTAL MIER FOCUS & LATER
TOTAL FALCON FOCUS & EARLIER

641
110
531

tinuity is evidenced by the gradual shift in form through the following
types of projectile points: Lerma, Abasolo, Tortugas, Pandora, Refugio, Desmuke, Catan, Matamoros, and Start. These nine local types
make up the overwhelming bulk (81.9~) of collections in the area
and each single local type is represented by a strikingly larger portion
of the total than any non-local types (Table 1).
Because of the shifting of prehistoric inhabitants through their range
as the resources they desired varied, their cultural remains are to be
found at almost any site where erosion has not stripped such artifacts
away, but rather has exposed them to view. Apparently the considerations pertaining to camp location included:
1. proximity to water-generally the Arroyo Los Olmos
2. access to new crops of wild foods such as mesquite beans, cactus
pears and pads, yucca blooms and roots ("camotes"), and various
berries. (It must be bonae in mind that it is more economical to
move the camp to the food than to carry food any great distance
to the camp. )
3. likelihood of taking at least some game
4. availability of fish, crayfish, and mussel
5. the presence of suitable topographic situation (relief, cover, exposure, drainage, etc.)
The flexibility of these considerations, the demands of primitive conservation, and the scattering of bands in the area all operated to dis-

SITES, STAI:II:/ COUNTY, TEXAS

NO ARTIFACTS

FLOOD ZONE

CAMPSITE DEBRIS

9,3

FORAGING AREA

ARROW POINTS
DART POINTS
}
CHOPPERS
~-----I
KNIVES
SCRAPERS
,,,,.___[
~
"
BEADS
ABRAIDING STONES
GOUGES
SPALL PILES

i

ARROYO-

FIGUI~ 4. A generalized profile intersecting the Arroyo Los Olmos, Starr
County, Texas.

tribute sites more or less evenly over flats and small rises along both
banks of the Los Olmos.
At almost any point along the arroyo, either bank would exhibit a
profile much like that illustrated in Figure 4. First, in the immediate
vicinity of the stream, sharp erosion has cut below the culturally fertile
sand, through the sterile clay, and in some places down to a sandstone
bedrock. No artifacts are found in this thickly wooded flood zone of
the arroyo. This strip of "chaparral," frequently disturbed by floods,
varies in width from 10 to 100 yards.
Immediately back of the "ehaparral"-eovered bottom, evidence of
prehistoric occupation usually begins to appear in the "monte." This
second zone along the arroyo is usually a slightly eroded, plain-like
surface marked at intervals by low, indistinct hills. In the lightlyeroded areas and on the flanks of the hills appears the bulk of the undisturbed deposits which are being gradually exposed. At some places
such as the La Mulada and E1 Burrito Sites, wide clay flats intervene
between the wooded bottoms and the relatively undisturbed areas.
These relatively undisturbed areas of lightly eroded flats and hill
flanks are culturally fertile as are, of course, the areas of the fine graytan sand described above.

24

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

Artifacts are concentrated in a band following the arroyo, and in
this area of sandy soil are to be found a group of artifacts which are
uncommon or nonexistent at greater distances from the stream. These
include stone and shell beads, abrading stones, gouges, and spall piles,
along with general camp refuse such as hearth stones, mussel shells,
and-rarely-bits of bone. Found primarily in this same band, but
diminishing sharply with distance from the stream, are knives, scrapers, and projectile points. Arrow points, dart points, and especially
choppers are widespread and may be found a great distance from any
hearth stones or other signs of camp life. Thus, we have two cultural
zones paralleling each bank of the Arroyo Los Olmos: nearer the
stream, an area of concentrated camping, gathering, and hunting
refuse, and farther back from the stream, an area of scattered hunting
and digging tools. There is no absolute difference in kind between the
materials of the two enltural zones, and the proportions blend into a
continuum.
In summary then, it must be kept in mind while considering the culture of Southwest Texas that this area was inhabited for a very long
period by a group or groups resembling the historic Coahuiltecans and
whose material culture evolved slowly as may be inferred from a
gradual proliferation of aa’tifact forms based on a few generalized
models. Further, the shifting exploitation of a broad spectrum of resources as dictated by this culture failed to establish campsites in
exactly the same geographic location upon every visit to an area. Instead, artifacts-the only evidence of former occupation with the possible exception of certain alterations of the "natural" vegetation-are
widely scattered along the An’royo Los Olmos in topographic situations
as generalized as the culture which was seeking these temporary homes.
REFERENCES CITED
Aveleyra Arroyo de Anda, Luis
1964 The Primitive Hunters in Robert Wauehope (General Editor), Robert
C. West (Volume Editor) Handbook of Middle American Indians, Vol.
I. University of Texas Press.
Cason, Joe F.
1952 Report on Archaeological Salvage in Falcon Reservoir, Season of 1952.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 23,
pp. 218-259.
MaeNeish, R. S.
1958 Preliminary Areheologieal Investigation in the Sierra de Tamaulipas,
Mexico. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, n.s. VoI. 48,
Part 6.
Suhm, Dee Ann and Alex D. Krieger
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Ardaeologieal Society, Vol. 25.
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, Louisiana

The Use of Statistics In Archaeology -- A Bibliography
compiled by
J. NED WOODALL

INTRODUCTION
Statistics as used in the following bibliography refers mainly to
inductive, as opposed to descriptive, statistics. By descriptive statistics
is meant the use of certain summarizing measures to reduce an unwieldy mass of data in order that it can be more easily understood.
These measures may be percentages, means, standard deviations, histograms, or other devices; all share the common characteristic of functioning to condense a collection of facts. Examples can be found in
ahnost any archaeological monograph. Inductive statistics differs in that
the properties of a population (or "universe") are inferred by examining a sample drawn from that population. Involved is probability
theory and sampling techniques, and for this reason articles dealing
with statistical sampling of archaeological deposits are included in the
bibliography.
In compiling references the use of a statistical test of significance
usually determined the inclusion of any particular essay. Inductive
statistics makes use of an ever-increasing number of such tests, but the
one most widely favored by arehaeo!ogists is the chi-square test of
independence. The Brainerd-l~obinson technique and related tests
such as that of Meighan (1959) and M. Ascher (1959) are measures
of association between two variables. These can be understood as
inductive in that the non-randomness of the distribution of the two
variables (the correlation )-as demonstrated by the sample-points to
a similar non-random distribution in the universe.
In the bibliography below, those references with no annotation following were not examined first-hand. A few were included only on the
basis of a suggestive title, while others were obtained from the bibliographies of sources available to me.
THE BIBLIOGRAPHY
Anderson, A. D.
1961 The Clenwood Sequence, a Local Sequence for a Series of Archeo!ogieal Manifestations in Mills County, Iowa. Journal of the Iowa Archaeological Society Vol. 10, p. 3.
An application of the Bralnerd-!Koblnson technique.

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Anderson, Keith M.
1963 Ceramic Clues to Pueblo-Puebloid Relationships. American Antiquity
Vol. 28, No. 3, pp. 303-307.
The median test (a variation of chi-square for rank order data) and Yule’s coeflacient of association are used to compare ceramic types.
Ascher, Marcia
1959 A Mathematical Rationale for Graphical Seriation. American Antiquity
Vol. 25, No. 2, pp. 212-214.
An explanation of the xlgebraic foundations of Meighan’s three-pole seriation
technique, and a demonstration of a simpler method using only two percentages.
Ascher, Robert
1959 A Prehistoric Population Estimate Using Midden Analysis and Two
Population Models. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology Vol. 15, No.
2, pp. 168-178.
A use of column sampling, combined with the known mass of the site, to make
a population estimate.
Ascher, Marcia, and Robert Ascher
1963 Chronological Ordering by Computer. American Anthropologist Vol. 65,
No. 5, pp. 1045-1052.
A method which makes the Brainerd-Robinson technique susceptible to ordering
by computer.
Beals, Ralph L., George W. Brainerd, and Watson Smith
1945 Archaeological Studies in Northeast Arizona. University of California
Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology Vol. 44, No. 1,
esp. pp. 164-168.
A discussion of possible sources of error in archaeological sampling.
Belous, Russel E.
1953 The Cenh-al California Chronological Sequence Re-examined. American
Antiquity Vol. 18, No. 4, pp. 341-353.
A test of the accuracy of the Brainerd-Robinson technique.
Bennyhoff, James A.
1952 The Vim Valley Sequence: A Critical Review. American Antiquity Vol.
17, No. 3, pp. 231-249, esp. p. 233.
A discussion of what constitutes a reliable surface sample.
Binford, Lewis R.
1963 "Red Ocher" Caches from the Michigan Area: A Possible Case of Cultural Drift. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology Vol. 19, No. 1, pp.
89-108, esp. pp. 96-108.
A use of chi-square and analysis of variance.
1964

A Consideration of Archaeological Research Design. American Antiquity
Vol. 29, No. 4, pp. 425-441.
A valuable discussion of archaeological sampling.

Binford, Lewis R. and Sally R. Binford
1966 A Preliminary Analysis of Functional Variability in the Mousterian of
Levallois Facies. In Recent Studies in Paleoanthropology, J. Desmond
Clark and F. Clark Howell (editors), pp. 238-295. American Anthropologist Vol. 68, No. 2, Part 2.
The use of factor analysis to relate different assemblages to several cultural
activities.

STATISTICS IN ARCHAEOLOGY

27

Binford, Lewis R. and Ceorge I. Quimby
1963 Indian Sites and Chipped Stone Materials in the Northern Lake Michigan Area. FieIdiana: Anthropology Vol. 36, No. 19,, pp. 299-303. Chicago Natural I-Iistol~r Museum.
The use of cbi-square in comparing assemblages.
Brainerd, George W.
1951 The Place of Chronological Ordering in Archaeological Analysis. American Antiquity Vol. 16, No. 4, pp. 301-313.
An explanation of the application of matrix ordering for dating (the RobinsonBrainerd technique).
1951

The Use of Mathematieal Fornmlations in Archaeological Analysis. In
Essays on Archaeological Methods, Anthropological Papers, Museum of
Anthropology, University of Michigan.
A general critique of statistical techniques in archaeology.

Brown, James A.
1966 Spiro Studies. Volume 1: Description of the Mound Croup. The University of Oklahoma Research Institute. See esp. p. 52.
A cbi-square contingency table is used to show the association between kinds of
burials and other features.
Brown, James A. and Robert E. Bell
1964 The First Annual Report of Caddoan Archaeology, Spiro Focus Research. The University of Oklahoma Research Institute. See esp. p. 42.
Cbi-square is used to dernonstrate the association of burial type and area of
internment.
Brown, James A. and L. C. Freeman, Jr.
1964 A Univac Analysis of Sherd Frequencies from the Carter Ranch Pueblo,
Eastern Arizona. Americar~ Antiquity Vol. 30, No. 2, pp. 162-167.
A consideration of the bias caused by sampling error; an appended comment by
Paul S. Martin stresses the conceptual importance of proper sampling.
Brown, M. A. and A. E. Blin-Stoyle
1959 A Sample Analysis of British Middle and Late Bronze Age Material,
Using Optical Speeh’ometry. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society for
1959. N.S. Vo!. 25, pp. 190-193.
A positive correlation is demonstrated between trace elements in bronze.
Chenhal!, Robert G. (editor)
Newsletter of Computer Archaeology.
Arizona State University.

Department of Anthropology,

References to current applications of computers to archaeological data, including
the use of statistical tests.
Clarke, D. L.
1962 Matrix Analysis and Archaeology with Particular Reference to British
Beaker Pottery. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society for 1962, N.S.
Vol. 28, pp. 371-382.
Thirty-nine traits of British beakers were sorted by matrix analysis to reveal
attribute clusters.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Cole, G. H.
1967 The Later Acheulian and Sangoan of Southern Uganda. In Background
to Evohttion in Africa, Walter W. Bishop and J. Desmond Clark (editors) pp. 481-528. The University of Chicago Press.
The use of cbi-square to test the significance of differences between artifact
assemblages.

Cook, S. F. and R. F. Heizer
1951 The Physical Analysis of Nine Indian Mounds of the Lower Sacramento
Valley. University of California Publications in American Archaeology
and Ethnology Vol. 40, pp. 981-312.
A discussion of various sampling methods, the problems of each, and possible
sources of error.

Cook, S. F. and A. E. Treganza
1947 The Quantitative Investigation of Aboriginal Sites: Comparative Physical and Chemical Analysis of Two California Indian Mounds. American
Antiquity Vol. 13, No. 2, pp. 135-141.
The use of Fischer’s t value to test the significance of differences between two
mounds.

1956

The Quantitative Investigation of Indian Mounds. University of California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology Vol. 40,
pp. 223-261.
Least-squares method used to predict population size of archaeological sites.

Cowgill, George L.
1964 The Selection of Samples from Large Sherd Collections. American Antiquity VoL 29, No. 4, pp. 467-473.
The value of using only a portion of recovered specimens for statistical manipulation is discussed.
Cronin, Constance
1962 An Analysis of Pottel7 Design Elements, Indicating Possible Relationships Between Three Decorated Types. In Chapters in the Prehistory of
Eastern Arizona I. Fieldiana: Anthropology, Vol. 53, pp. I05-114. Chicago Natural History Museum.
Coefficient of similarity between pottery types is calculated for testing a hypothesis concerning type relationships.
Davis, Leslie B.
1966 Avonlea Point Occurrence in Northern Montana and Canada. Plains
Anthropologist Vol. 11, No. 39,, pp. 100-116, esp. pp. 109-113.
The Spearman rank order difference correlational procedure applied to artifact
attribute distribution.
Deetz, James
1965 The Dynamics of Stylistic Change in Arikara Ceramics. Illinois Studies
in Anfllropology No. 4. The University of Illinois Press.
The use of computers

to

demonstrate nonrandom

distribution of stylistic

attri-

butes among rim sherds.

Deetz, James, and Edwin Dethlefsen
1965 The Doppler Effect and Archaeology: A Consideration of the Spatial
Aspects of Seriation. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology Vol. 21,
No. 3, pp. 196-9.06.
A recognition of a source of distortion in seriation, contingent on the direction
of trait diffusion.

STATISTICS IN ARCHAEOLOGY

29

Dempsey, Paul, and Martin Baumhoff
1963 The Statistical Use of Artifact Distributions to Establish Chronological
Sequence. American Antiquity Vol. 28, No. 4, pp. 496-509.
A variation of the Bralnerd-Robinson technique, including an example of weighting of certain types.
Dixon, K.
1956 Archeological Objectives and Artifact Sorting Techniques: A Re-examination of the Snaketown Sequence. Western Anthropology, Vol. 3.
A use of the Robinson coefficient technique.
Fairbanks, Charles H.
1942 The Taxonomic Position of Stalling’s Island, Georgia. American Antiquity Vol. 7, No. 3, 223-231.
An application of the four-cell method described by Kroeber (1940) for demonstrating intersite similarities.
Fitting, James E.
1963 Thickness and Fluting of Paleo-Indian Projectile Points. American Antiquity Vol. 29, No. 1, pp. 105-106.
The calculation of cbi-square to test the relationship between the two attributes.
1965

Late Woodland Cultures of Southeastern Michigan. Anthropological
Papers, Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, No. 24. See
esp. pp. 12-33.
Cbi-square tests are used to demonstrate the non-random grouping within a site
of certain design elements, temper and vessel shape.

1965

A Quantitative Examination of Virginia Fluted Points. American Antiquity Vol. 30, No. 4, pp. 484-491.
The cbi-square test is used to define "clines" of projectile point attributes.

Flanders, Richard E.
1960 A Re-Examination of Mill Creek Ceramics: the Robinson Technique.
Journal of the Iowa Archaeological Society Vol. 10, pp. 1-35.
An application of the Robinson technique.
Ford, James A.
1936 Analysis of Indian Village Site Collections from Louisiana and Mississippi. Anthropological Study No. 2, Department of Conservation, Louisiana Geological Survey, pp. 11-15.
An ear.ly concern with sampling methods in archaeology.
1938

A Chronological Method Applicable to file Southeast. American Antiquity Vol. 3, No. 3, pp. 260-264.
A discussion of the theory of seriation by sampling.

1954

Connnent on A. C. Spaulding, "Statistical Techniques for the Discovery
of Artifact Types." American Antiquity Vol. 19, No. 4, pp. 390-391.
Ford points out that culture change revealed by statistics may be due either to
a lack of conformity to norms or to change through time. Statistics does not
indicate the cause of differences.

Fowler, Melvin L.
1959 Summary Report of Modoe Rock Shelter. Illinois State Museum, Report
of Investigations No. 8. Appendix III, Projectile Point Typology and
Analysis.
A use of the t-test to determine the significance of projectile point attribute
ratios.

30

TEXAS ARCIIEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Freeman, Leslie C~, Jr.
1962 Statistical Analysis of Painted Pottery Types from Upper Little Colorado Drainage. Chapters in the Prehistory of Eastern Arizona I. Fieldiana: Anthropology, Vol. 53, pp. 87-104. Chicago Natural History Museum.
The use of the Robinson-Brainerd technique of seriation.

1966

The Nature of Mousterian Facies in Cantabrian Spain. In Recent Studies in Paleoanthropology, J. Desmond Clark and F. Clark Howell (editors), pp. 230-237. American Anthropologist Vol. 68, No. 2, Part 2.
Correlation analysis and factor analysis used to test the variability of tool types.

Freeman, Leslie G. Jr., and James A. Brown
1964 Statistical Analysis of Carter Ranch Pottery. Chapters in the Prehistory
of Eastern Arizona H, Paul S. Martin et al (editors). Fieldiana: Anthropology, Vol. 55, pp. 126-154. Chicago Natural History Museum.
The use of cbi-square and a consideration of possible sampling error.
1965

A Univac Analysis of Sherd Frequencies from a Southwestern Site. The
Use of Computers in Anthropology, Dell Hymes (editor), p. 513. Mouton and Co., The Hague.
Statistical methods used to discover room types and functional constellations of
pottery. Bias caused by functional differences and sampling error (in addition to
temporal differences) is also considered.

Gibson, Cordon D.
1950 A Rapid Method for Ascertaining Serial Lag Correlation. Biometrika
Vol. 37, pp. 288-307.
First-moment correlation to objectify the best fit when using the dendrochronology scale.
Giddings, J. L.
1964 The Archeology of Cape Denbigh. Statistical Validation of Types, pp.
277-280. Brown University Press.
Difference-of-means tests used to show nonrandom distribution of ceramic attributes leading to type definitions.
Gifford, E. W.
1951 Archaeological Excavations in Fiji. Anthropological Records Vol. 13, pp.
189-288. University of California Press.
Coodwin, A. J. H. and C. wm Riet Lowe
1929 Stone Age Cultures of Africa. Annals’ of the South African Museum
Vol. 27, pp. 147-243.
Greenwood, Roberta S.
1961 Quantitative AnMysis of Shells from a Site in Coleta, California. American Antiquity Vol. 26, No. 3, pp. 416-420.
A consideration of field sampling problems, and an application of the analysis
of variance.
Haag, William G.
1948 An Osteometric Analysis of Some Aboriginal Dogs. The University of
Kentucky Reports in Anthropology, Vol. 7, No. 3, pp. 206-225.
Although the methods (t-test and analysis of variance)
material, both are adaptable to artifact analysis as well.

are used on skeletal

STATISTICS IN ARCHAEOLOGY

31

Hawley, Florence

1984

The Significance of the Dated Prehistory of Chetro KetI. The University
of New Mexico Bulletin. See esp. pp. 47-51.
A test of a hypothesis about a universe mean, with an explanation of the procedure followed.

Heizer, Robert F. and Sherburne F. Cook
1956 Some Aspects of the Quantitative Approach in Archaeology. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, Vol. 12, No. 3, pp. 229-248, esp. pp. 240242.
A gener,ll discussion of the value and problems of quantifying archaeological
data.

Hill, James N.
1966 A Prehistoric Conmmnity in Eastern Arizona. Southwestern Journal of
Anthropology, Vol. 22, No. 1, pp. 9-30.
Multivariate analysis performed to define non-random clusters of pottery types
and design elements. Also chi-square is used to demonstrate modes of roorn size.
Hole, Frank, and Mary Shaw
1967 Computer Analysis of Chronological Seriation. Rice University Studies
Vol. 53, No. 3.
The use of computers for matrix ordering is described in detail.
Jelinek, Arthur J.
1962 Use of file Cunmlative Graph in Temporal Ordering. American Antiquity Vol. 28, No. 2, pp. 241-243.
A rapid method of seriation which can be used if the relative ages of artifact
types are known.

Jennings, Jesse D.
1965 Computers and Culture History: A Glen Canyon Study. In The Use of
Computers in Anthropology, Dell Hymes (editor), pp. 516-517. Mouton and Co., The Hague.
Plans for a statistical analysis of the large Glen Canyon collection are revealed.
The need for statistical methods appropriate to such analysis is cited.

Johnson, Leroy Jr.
1967 Toward a Statistical Overview of the Archaic Cultures of Central and
Southwestern Texas. Texas Memorial Musemn Bulletin 12.
An example of the application of the Robinson technique of matrix ordering.
Included is a discussion of the various statisticxl tests used by archaeologists.
Kamenetskij, I. S.
1965 Datation of Layers frona Percentages of Pottery Types. In Archaeology
and the Natural Sciences (in Russian), pp. 302-307. Nauka, Moscow.
Kerrich, J. E.
1962 Statistical Notes. Appendix 5 in Prehistory of the Transvaal by R. J.
Mason, pp. 458-461. Witwatersrand University Press, Johannesburg.
An explanation of the chi-square test as applied to archaeological samples.
Kluckhohn, Clyde, and Paul Reiter
1939
Preliminary Report on the 1937 Excavations, Bc 50-51, Chaco Canyon,
New Mexico. The University of New Mexico Bulletin, Anthropological
Series Vol. 3, No. 2, p. 42.
The use of cbi-square to test vertical sherd distributions.

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Knudson, Ruth Ann
1967 Cambria Village Ceramics. Plains Anthropologist Vol. 12, No. 37, pp.
247-299, esp. pp. 251-252.
The use of the cbi-square test in pottery analysiL

Kavalevskajo, V. B.
1965 The Use of Statistical Methods for the Study of Large Arehaeo!ogieal
Collections. In Archaeology and the Natural Sciences (in Russian),
pp. 286-300. Nauka, Moscow.
Kozelka, Robert M.
1956 Mathenaaties and the Anthropologist. Plains Anthropologist No. 6, pp.
13-16.
A brief outline of the potential value of statistics to anthropologists.

Krige, K.
In
Statistical Test on the Validity of Grouping or Patterning Within
Press South and East African Later Aeheulian Industries. Cave of Hearths in
Prehistory, R. J. Mason (editor). Witwatersrand University Press,
Johannesburg.
Application of c/)i-square tests to artifact assemblages.
Kroeber, A. g.
1940 Statistical Classification. American Antiquity Vol. 6, No. 1, pp. 29-44.
A demonstration of the use of correlation coefficients for quantifying intersite
similarities.
1942

Tapajo Pottery. American Antiquity Vol. 7, No. 4, pp. 403-405.
An

"interareal

attributes

and

Z coefficient" is calculated
then is used

to find

to measure

significant

the frequency of potter),

trait groupings.

Krug, C. K., and O. Ju
1965 Mathematical Methods for the Classification of Ancient Pottery. In
Archaeology and the Natural Sciences (in Russian), pp. 318-325.
Nauka, Moscow.
Kuzara, R. S., G. R. Mead and K. A. Dixon
1966 Seriation of Anthropological Data: a Computer Program for Matxix
Ordering. American Anthropologist Vol. 68, No. 6, pp. 1442-1455.
The Brainerd-Robinson method of analysis by matrix ordering.
Laughlin, William S. and Cordon H. Marsh
1954 The Lamellar Flake Manufacturing Site on Anangula Island in the
Aleutians. American Antiquity Vol. 20, No. 1, pp. 27-39.
Ana!ysis of variance applied to a tool manufacturing site; a favoring of certain
modes is demonstrated.
Lehmer, Donald J.
1950 Review of "Excavations at Snaketown IV, Reviews and Conclusions" by
Harold Stirling Gladwin. American Anthropologist Vol. 52, No. 3, pp.
415-418.
Observed and expected frequencies of sherd types are compared to show that
certain of the types were not contemporary.

1951

Robinson’s Coefficient of Agreement-A Critique. American Antiquity
Vol. 17, No. 2, p. 151.
A protest against the lack of consideration given to sample size in computing
the coefficient of agreement.

STATISTICS IN ARCHAEOLOGY
1954

33

Archeological Investigations in the Oahe Dam Area, South Dakota, 1950-

195I. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 158. See esp. pp. 73-83.
A statistical demonstration of non-random distribution of artifact types in a site
using a difference-of-means test. Also included is a footnote concerning the choice
of a level of significance.
Lewis, T. M. N., and Madeline Kneberg
1959 The Archaic Culture in the Middle South. American Antiquity Vol. 25,
No. 2, pp. 161-183.
The use of Kroeber’s coefficient of proximity to arrange components in a rectangular matrix and then group them into two traditions.
Lipe, William D.
1964 Connnents on Dempsey and Baumhoff’s "The Statistical Use of Artifact
Distributions to Establish Chronological Sequence." American Antiquity
Vol. 30, No. 1, pp. 103-104.
A comparison of the Demsey-Baumhoff method to the Robinson technique.
Litvak King, Jaime
1964 Estratigrafia cultural y natural en un tlatel en el lago de Texcoco.
Departamento de Prehistoria del Instituto Nacional de Antropologia y
Historia, Publicacion No. 13. Mexico, D.F.
An example of the cumulative graph used to order a series of ceramic strata.
Longacre, William A.
1964 Archaeology as Anthropology: A Case Study. Science Vol. 144, pp.
1454-1455.
The use of multiple regression analysis to find significant horizontal groupings of
artifacts.

1965

Computer Analysis of a Prehistoric Pueblo. In The Use of Computers
in Anthropology, Dell Hymes (editor), p. 521. Mouton and Co., The
Hague.
Multiple regression analysis revealed non-randoln distribution of ceramic design
elements in the site.

MeMichael, Edward V.
1959 Statistical Analysis in Archaeology. Proceedings of the Indiana Academy
of Science Vol. 68, pp. 65-69.
A survey of the use of statistical methods in archaeo.!ogy between 1940 and 1959.
McPherron, Alan
1967 The ]untunen Site and the Late Woodland Prehistory of the Upper
Great Lakes Area. Anthropological Papers No. 30, Museum of Anflaropology, University of Michigan.
The application of chi-square, t, and analysis of variance tests.
Martin, Paul S.
1962 Archeological Investigations in East Central Arizona. Science, Vol. 138,
pp. 826-827.
The application of unspecified statistical tests, using a computer, to find constellations of pottery types.
Mason, R. J.
1957 The Transvaal Middle Stone Age and Statistical Analysis.
African Archaeological Bulletin Vol. 12, No. 48, pp. 119-148.

South

34
1959

TEXAS AIqCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Some South African Stone Age Cultures. Nature, Vol. 183, No. 4658,
pp. 377-379.
The value of statistical analysis £or defining industries is cited.

1962

Prehistory of the Transvaal. Chapter 5, "Statistics and Prehistory," pp.
87-93. Witwatersrand University Press, Johannesburg.

1967

Analytical Procedures in the Earlier and Middle Stone Age Cultures in
Southern Africa. In Background to Evolution in Africa, Walter W.
Bishop and J. Desmond Clark (editors), pp. 437-464, esp. pp. 756, 760.
The University of Chicago Press.

A general discussion of both descriptive and inductive statistics in archaeology.

Examples of the use and misuse of cbi-square in comparing artifact assemblages.
Matthews, J.
1963 Application of Matrix Analysis to Archaeological Problems. Nature, Vol.
198, No. 4884, pp. 930-934.
A critique of the use of matrix analysis by several archaeologists.
¯
Maxwell, Moreau S. and Lewis H. Binford
1961 Excavation at Fort Michilimackinac, Mackinac City, Michigan, 1959
Season. Publications of the Museum, Michigan State Uiaiversity Cultural Series Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 108-109.
The age of pipe stems is estimated by calculating a straight line regression for
hale diameter.
Meighan, Clement W.
1959 A New Method for the Seriation of Archaeological Collections. American Antiquity Vol. 25, No. 2, pp. 203-211.
The three-pole seriation technique using only three artifact types is described
with comments concerning sample size.
Milke, Wilhelm P.
1965 Statistical Processing. In The Use of Computers in Anthropology, Del!
Hymes (editor), pp. 189-204. Mouton and Co., The Hague.
A survey of the use of various statistical programs in all phases of anthropology
and the problems now apparent.
Moberg, C-A.
1961 M~ingder av Fornfynd (with English summary: Trends in the Present
Development of Quantitative Methods in Archaeology). Acta Universitatis Ggthoburgensis, G6teborg Universitets Arsskrift, Vol. 47, No.
1. GSteborg.
Mukherjee, R., C. R. Rao and J. C. Trevor
1955 The Ancient Inhabitants of Jebel Moya. Cambridge University Press.
An extensive use of the cbi-square test.
Myers, O. H.
1950 Some Applications of Statistics to Archaeology. Government Printing
Press for the Service des Antiquites de l’Egypte. Cairo.
Orr, Kenneth C.
1952 Change at Kincaid: a Study of Cultural Dynamics. In Kincaid, a Prehistoric Illinois Metropolis, by Fay-Cooper Cole, pp. 293-359. University of Chicago Press.
Use of the t-test to determine if artifact distribution varied significantly between
two deposits.

STATISTICS IN ARCHAEOLOGY

35

Prade!, L.
1954

De la Nature des Statistiques et de Leur role en Prehistoire. Bulletin
Societe Prehistorique Francais, Vol. 51, n. 11-i2, pp. 560-563. Paris.
A general discussion of the usefulness and sources of error in archaeological
statistics.

Robinson, W. S.
1951 A Method for Chronologically Ordering Archaeological Deposits. American Antiquity Vol. 16, No. 3, pp. 293-301.
A demonstration of the Robinson-Brainerd technique of quantifying sample differences, with the objective of chronological arrangement.
Robinson, W. S., and George W. Brainerd
1952 Robinson’s Coefficient of Agreement-A Rejoinder. American Antiquity
Vol. 18, No. 1, pp. 60-61.
A defense of the method.
Rootenberg, Sheldon
1964 Archaelogical Field Sampling. American Antiquity Vol. 30, No. 2, pp.

181-188.
A sampling design for use in stratified cluster sampling.

Sackett, James R.
1966 Quantitative Analysis of Upper Paleolithic Stone Tools. In Recent
Studies in Paleoanthropology, J. Desmond Clark and F. Clark Howell
(editors), pp. 356-394. American Anthropologist Vol. 68, No. 2, Part 2.
The use of cluster analysis for refining artifact typologies.

Schenck, W. Egbert
1926 The EmeryviUe SheUmound Final Report. University of California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology, Vol. 23, pp. 147-282,
esp. pp. 205-212.
An

estimate

thickness

of prehistoric

and

population

other non-artifactual

is calculated

evidence;

an

from

example

food
of

remains,
the

midden

problems

en-

countered in archaeological field sampling.

Shepard, Anna O.
1942 Rio Grande Glaze Paint Ware. Appendix I, Statistical Methods. Contributions to American Anthropology and History, No. 39. Carnegie
Institution of Washington Publication 528.
A critique of archaeological sampling methods and probability theory.
1956

Ceramics for the Archaeologist.
Publication 609, pp. 332-333.

Carnegie Institution of Washington

A brief mention of statistics in pottery analysis.
Spaulding, Albert C.
1953 Statistical Techniques for the Discovery of Artifact Types. American
Antiquity Vol. 18, No. 4, pp. 305-313.
The use of chi-square to demonstrate attribute clustering.

1953

Review of James A. Ford’s Measurement of Some Prehistoric Design
Developments in the Southeastern States. American Anthropologist Vol.
55, No. 4, pp. 588-591.
The use of Student’s t distribution to test the significance of correlation coefficients.

36

TEXAS AIqCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

1954

Reply to Ford. American Antiquity Vol. 19, No. 4, pp. 391-393.
A defense of the use o£ statistics in defining artifact types.

1956

The Aryberger Site, Hughes County, South Dakota. Occasional Contributions No. 16, Musemn of Anthropology, University of Michigan,
pp. 111-121, 131-132.
A test for homogeneity of deposit using logarithmic graphs; problems of using
cbi-square.

1958

The Significance of Difference between Radiocarbon Dates. American
Antiquity Vol. 23, No. 3, pp. 309-311.
An application of the t-test and analysis of variance to determine the significance
of different G-14 dates.

1960

The Dimensions of Archaeology. In Essays in the Science of Culture
in Honor of Leslie A. White, Gerh’ude E. Dole and Robert L. Carneiro,
(editors), pp. 437-456. Thomas Y. Crowell Co.
A general discussion of the use of cluster analysis, a method of testing for independence in attribute occurrence among artifacts.

1960

Statistical Description and Comparison of Artifact Assemblages. In
The Application of Quantitative Methods in. Archaeology, Robert F.
Heizer and Sherburne F. Cook (editors), Viking Fund Publications in
Anthropology 28, pp. 60-83. Quadrangle Book.
Examples of the use of chi-square and analysis of variance, their usefulness and
limitations.

1962

Archaeological Inoestigations on Agattu, Aleutian Islands. Anthropological Papers, Museum of Anthropo!ogy, The University of Michigan, No. 18.
Chi-square is computed to test for randomness in tool distribution at two sites.

Spier, Leslie
1916 New Data on the Trenton Argillite Culture. American Anthropologist
Vol. 18, p. 181.
An early recognition of the usefulness of statistical tests for demonstrating and
quantifying correlations between artifact types.
1918

The Trenton ArgiUite Culture. American Museum of Natural History,
Anflaropological Papers, Vol. 22, Part 4.
An early example of using the normal curve and the standard deviation for
measuring significance of variation in archaeological deposits.

1919

An Outline for a Chronology of Zuni Ruins. American Museum of Natural History, Anflaropologieal Papers, Vol. 18, Part 3, pp. 252-255,
281-287.
An application of the theory of random sampling for seriation study.

Strong, William D.
1925 The Uhle Pottery Collections from Ancon. University of California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology Vol. 21, pp. 135190, esp. pp. 159-169.
Pearson’s rho is used to demonstrate significant variation in the frequency of 40
traits in four time periods.

37

STATISTICS IN ARCHAEOLOGY

Suhm, Dee Ann

1959

The Williams Site and Central Texas Arehae01ogy. The Texas Journal
of Science Vol. 11, No. 2, pp. 218-250, esp. p. 226.
The use of cbi-square to test the distribution o£ projectile point types.

Treganza, A. E. and S. F. Cook
1948 The Quantitative Investigation of Aboriginal Sites: Complete Excavation with Physical and Archaeological Analysis of a Single Mound.
American Antiquity Vol. 13, No. 4, pp. 287-297.
An experiment to determine what constitutes an adequate sample for statistical
purposes.
Trigger, Bruce G,
1965 History and Settlement in Lower Nubia. Yale University Publications
in Anthropology 69, pp. 156-166. Department of Anthropology, Yale
University.
Estimation of prehistoric population as based on cemetery samples.
Troike, Rudolph C.
1957 Time and Types in Archeological Analysis: the Brainerd-Robinson
Technique. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society Vol. 28, pp.
269-284.
An example of matrix ordering by coefficient of similarity.

Tugby, Donald J.
1958 A Typological Analysis of Axes and Choppers from Southeast Australia.
American Antiquity Vol. 24, No. 1, pp. 24-33.
An example of matrix ordering of a tool sample to test the validity of current
typology.
1965

Archaeological Objectives

and Statistical Methods:

A Frontier in Ar-

chaeology. American Antiquity Vol. 31, No. 1, pp. 1-16.
The statistical methods applicable to each of four levels o£ archaeological interpretation are described including cluster analysis, matrix analysis, factor
analysis, cbi-square, Pearson product-moment and several others.

Vescelius, C. S.
1960 Archeological Sampling: A Problem of Statistical Inference. In Essays
in the Science of Culture in Honor of Leslie A. White, C. E. Dole and
R. L. Carneiro (editors), pp. 457-570. Thomas Y. Crowell Co.
A description and critique of archaeological sampling methods.
Weyer, Edward M. Jr.
1964 New World Lithie Typology Project: Part I. American Antiquity Vol.
29, No. 4, pp. 487-489.
A summary of the results of a conference concerning the use o£ computers

in

performing statistical tests, especially analysis of variance.

Willey, Cordon R.
1961 Volume in Pottery and the Selection of Samples. American Antiquity
Vo!. 27, No. 2, pp. 230-231.
To obtain a wieldy amount of pottery for classification a sample was drawn
from the total of recovered specimens.

38

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOCICAL

SOCIETY

Witherspoon, Y. T.
1961 A Statistical Device for Comparing Trait Lists. American Antiquity Vol.
26, No. 3, pp. 433-436.
A descriptive statistic calculated as an index to the similarity between archaeological cultures.
Wissler, Clark
1918 The Application of Statistical Methods to the Data on the Trenton Argfllite Culture. American Anthropologist Vol. 18, pp. 190-198.
An early demonstration of significant variation from the expected random distribution of artifacts vs. pebbles suggesting a positive correlation.
Wyekoff, Sort G.
1967 The E. Johnson Site and Prehistory in Southeast Oklahoma. Archaeological Site Report No. 6, Oklahoma River Basin Survey, University of
Oklahoma Research Institute.
The use of chi-square in determining the significance of certain artifact distributions.
Southern Methodist University
Dallas, Texas

Notes on Excavated Ring Midden Sites, 1963-1968
JOHN W.

GREER

ABSTHACT
Recent excavations and radiocarbon dates of ring middens in Texas,
New Mexico, and Colorado indicate that this type of site is relatively
late, dating generally after A.D. 800.

A survey of ring midden sites has been carried out during the past
few years, primarily in western Texas and southern New Mexico
(Greer 1965). Since the smwey began in 1963, a number of sites have
been tested, and radiocarbon dates are now available for many of
them.
Ring middens are circular, doughnut-shaped middens of fire-cracked
limestone rocks and gray ash. These may be elassified as either midden circles or mescal pits. Following are descriptions of the ring midden types in this report.
Midden eireles are the remains of the surface hearths from which
the broken stones have been thrown back in a circle producing a
mound of rocks and ash with a central depressed area of ash. Form I
midden circles are symmetrically circular middens with a widely depressed center. Variety A is 40 to 55 feet in diameter and 4.0 to 5.5
feet high. The sides of the pit are usually quite steep and the rim is
eomposed of medium-sized pieces of burned rock with little or no
ash. Variety B is about 30 to 35 feet in diameter and 0.5 to 2.5 feet
high. The eentTal depression is shallower-saucer-shaped-and the rim
contains a mixture of ash and small, heat-fractured rocks.
Mescal pits are the remains of earth ovens, the mound of burned
rocks and ash being the result of raking back the coals and broken
slabs after plant baking. Although surface features may be similar to
midden circles, the mescal pits contain a slab-lined cooking pit in the
center of the midden dug down below the natural gTound level, the
original surface. Form I has the same surface eharacteristies as Form
I midden eireles, even to the variety distinctions. FolTn II is a semicircular midden accumulation.
Excavated ring midden sites include eight in Texas--tln’ee middens
in Val Verde County, two in Sutton County, two in Crockett County,
one in E1 Paso County-as well as five in Eddy County, New Mexico,
and one in Las Animas County, Colorado. The sites in Val Verde,
Crockett, and Sutton counties are mainly in regions of low hills and
fairly wide, shallow canyons and no doubt represent, at least in part,
sotol-gathering activities. The E1 Paso County site, which is on a flat,

40

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

sandy desert section of the mountain-basin region east of E1 Paso,
may also be the result of plant baking. The southern New Mexico sites
are in the Guadalupe Mountains of Carlsbad Caverns National Park
just north of Culberson County, Texas (Greer 1966a). One site (with
three tested middens) is at the base of the mountains, and two others
are on top of the 600 to 1300 foot escarpment overlooking the desert
flats to the east and south. These middens also were probably used to
roast sotol (Dasylirion) and mescal (large Agaves, including A. perryi)
which are still present in the area. The site in southeastern Colorado,
just east of Trinidad, is on the open plains and is next to a large canyon. The purpose of this midden is unkonwn-no Dasylirion or Agave
or edible species of Yucca are present in the area.
Eighteen dates were obtained from the samples dated by the Radiocarbon Laboratory of The University of Texas at Austin (Table 1;
Pearson et al. 1966; Valastro et al. 1967; Valastro et al. in press). The
earliest date of 610 B.C. does not fit in well with the other dates and
may be questionable as a date of midden circles. It is from Felton
Cave (site TX-20, Sutton County) and ff correct should date the beginning of the side-notching tradition in the eastern part of west
Texas. The two excavated ring middens appear to be Form IB midden circles lying directly on bedrock. Perdiz points were scattered
about the general surface of the site and both middens. It has been
suggested-though impossible to discern at the time of excavationthat the middens accumulated during times of late corner-notching
and early side-notching traditions, and the centers were later dug out
to be used as earth ovens by people who used stemmed arrow points.
The date of 610 B.C. then may be attributable to the Archaic occupation rather than to a Neo-Indian group which made use of the midden circles.
A later date of A.D. 1240 for the early part of the Ensor-Frio tradition at the large Form IB mescal pit at the Hodge Site (site TX-21,
Val Verde County) suggests a definite overlap with the Neo-Indian
occupation in this part of Texas and the ceramic periods in areas only
slightly to the west. The occurrence at this late date of small sidenotched dal± points, primarily the Er~or type, in nearly all Neo-Indian
sites in the general area of Val Verde-Terrell counties might suggest
that dart points and arrow points were in use contemporaneously. It
is possible they were both used on arrows by the same groups of people. Similar suggestions have been made by Johnson (1964:37) and
Dibble (1967:34) for Val Verde County.
The Cammack Sotol Pit, site TX-14 in Val Verde County, is a NeoIndian Form II mescal pit yielding a large number of arrow points

raNG ~IIDDEN SITES

41

and a few side-notched dart points, but no pottery. The site, representative of the Livermore Focus or possibly the middle part of the
Bravo Valley Aspect, has a date of circa A.D. 1335 on taro samples.
The dates of the Form IB midden circle at the Dunlap Site, TX-63,
Crockett County (Calhoun 1966), seem to fall within those attributed
to the Livermore Focus or the middle part of the Bravo Valley Aspect
(Kelley et al. 1940). They range primarily from A.D. 1280 to 1410-the
earlier date of A.D. 1010 is inconsistent with the others. The site is
characterized by stemmed arrow points, E1 Paso Brotun pottery, and
a continuation of small, side-notched dart points.
Mr. Arnold Sommer of Midland, Texas, has recently excavated a
ring midden, site TX-75, on top of a high mesa at an elevation of
about 3000 feet. It is on the western edge of the Edwards Plateau
overlooking the Pecos River valley in western Crockett County. Although an earth oven technique is suggested by the small subsurface
slab-lined pit, there is some question as to what was cooked. The midden may represent a late Form IB mescal pit. Sotol is present in small
amounts on the middle slopes of the mesa sides, but it is entirely absent on the high flats where ring middens m’e most common. A single
side-notched Ensof point from the excavated area suggests a fairly late
date, but radiocarbon measurements are not yet available.
The Jornada Branch of the Mogollon in western Texas and southern New Mexico is divided here arbitrarily into early, middle, and
late parts since phase distinctions cannot be recognized for the excavated middens. The early part is represented by Form IB midden
circles at the Pow Wow Site, TX-2, E1 Paso County, and Middens No.
3 at site NM-82, Eddy County, and by a Form II mescal pit at Midden No. 2, site NM-1, Eddy County. These sites yielded dates of A.D.
900, 1130, and 1170 respectively. Pottery is primarily El Paso B,ro~un
and Alma Plain. The middle Jornada Branch at Midden No. 2, site
NM-2, Eddy County, dates A.D. 1330. E1 Paso Brotun, Chupadero
BIack-on-~¥hite, and Lincoln Polychrome(?) are present. The late
Jornada Branch at Midden No. 5 at site NM-89,, a Form IB midden
circle, was dated at A.D. 1465 and contained E1 Paso Brown and
El Paso Polychrome.
Arrow points from most Neo-Indian sites are stemmed and tend
toward laterally protruding barbs and often irregulm’ly serrated blade
edges, the Perdiz-Livermore type. A few sites such as the Form IA
midden circle at Midden No. 1, site NM-82, have contained plain and
notched triangular arrow points.
The Louden Site (CO-l), a Form IB mescal pit in southern Colorado, was dated at A.D. 1435, but it is uncertain what cultural affilia-

TEXAS AI~CHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

?

~

9

g4

9999

9

9

9

r~

o

o

>o~ >>

>>>>>
> >- >>>>>
>>
............

.> ..............

°°~g~ ~ I+o I+l+l+l+l+
~oooo

¢o~

I+

0-%

I+!+

(..00o

I+1+1+

Oo c.O ~-.., Oo ~,

~*~

¯

>

~

OO

~.

-

R=’~ ~

~-

~

"~- ’

=~

on

0

~ I+o

e~

I+

~

(")

Oo

~ ~.

~’ o ~. o ~. o

~ o~ ~ ~
0
I v o~

~

~

~ ~ ~+

-2 .... "’~e.~= ~.~

o~

v
~

~..~ ~-.~ ~..~ (.000

~

0

--~
~
v

?

0

".4

©

IRING

MIDDEN

43

SITES

tion is represented. Previously I suggested that the site might be attributable to an early Plains Apache occupation (Creer 1966b).
The dates show all these sites to be relatively late, with the exception of the questionable date of the Sutton County midden which is at
least 1450 years earlier than the other excavated sites. Surface collections at numerous middens indicate that side-notched dart points, occasionally with a few very fine and thin arrow points, are most common. The earliest sites-those containing only dart points-tend to be
in the eastern pal~s of west Texas, e.g. the Val Verde County region.
As one goes west across the state and north into southern New Mexico, ring midden sites are more commonly Neo-Indian and often contain ceramics. As shown by the date of A.D. 1240 from Val Verde
County, the late "preceramic" sites may actually be quite late.
Field work continues to suggest that the Form IB middens with
their small rocks, considerable ash, and gently rolling surfaces generally predate the more angular Form IA middens. Form IA middens are
characterized by steep, ash-h’ee rims of larger rocks, often a lighter,
orange color. The best example of tiffs sequence is site NM-82 where
the single Form IA midden overlies earlier type IB middens and contains later arrow point styles. Ramos Polychrome and obsidian, materials found in the latest sites, consistently have been found in Form
IA middens in the Guadalupe Mountains.
Many of the middens currently being investigated in western
Crockett County by Arnold Sommer and Aaron Itiggs of Midland are
classifiable as Form IA. They often contain more ash and small rocks
and have shallower central depressions with less steep rims than
many of the Form IA middens in the Cuadalupe region, the "type
area." It might be that the Crockett County middens represent a transitional form with a very limited temporal position. Additional work of
the present excellent quality by Sommer and tliggs will probably
clarify the situation considerably. It is my impression that mescal pit
middens with stone-lined pits are generally later than midden circles,
but there is presently insufficient data to support a formal hypothesis.

IIEFERENCES CITED
Calhoun, Cecil A.
1966 Midden No. 1. Texas Archeology, Vol. 10, No. 4, pp. 12-i3.
Dibble, David S.
1967 Excavations at Arenosa Shelter, 1965-66. Multilith report submitted to
the U. S. Nationa! Park Service by the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project.
Greet, John W.
1965 A Typology of Midden Circles and Mescal Pits. Southwestern Lore,
Vol. 31, No. 3, pp. 41-55.

44

TEXAS AtlCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1966a

Report on Preliminary Areheologieal Exploration at Carlsbad Caverns
National Park, New Mexico. Mimeographed report submitted to the
U. S. National Park Service by the Department of Anthropology, The
University of Texas.
1966b The Louden Site (CO-l), Las Animas County, Colorado. Southwestern
Lore, Vol. 32, No. 3, pp. 57-65.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1964 The Devil’s Mouth Site, a Stratified Campsite at Amistad Reservoir, Val
Verde County, Texas. Archeology Series, No. 6, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas.
Kelley, J. Charles, T. N. Campbell, and Donald J. Lehmer
1940 The Association of Archeological Materials with Geologic Deposits in
the Big Bend Region of Texas. West Texas Historical and Scientific
Society Publications, No. 10.
Pearson, F. J., Jr., E. Mott Davis, and M. A. Tamers
1966 University of Texas Radiocarbon Dates IV. Radiocarbon, Vol. 8, pp.
453-466.
Valastro, S., Jr., E. Mott Davis, and Craig T. Rightmire
In Press University of Texas at Austin Radiocarbon Dates VI. Radiocarbon, Vol.
10, No. 2.
Valastro, S. Jr., F. J. Pearson, Jr., and E. Mott Davis
1967 University of Texas Radiocarbon Dates V. Radiocarbon, Vol. 9, pp.
439-453.
The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

The Paleo Type Flake Knife
J. B. SOLI-~ERCER
ABSTRACT
The absence of biface knives at early kill sites might be explained
in terms o£ practical economy of stone working. Bifaces, especially
fluted points, have extremely short useful lives as butchering tools because of the tendency to become dull in a short time. Logically, then,
the Paleo knife was the flake kni£e.

One problem that has bothered many of us is the apparent absence
of a type knife at Paleo elephant and bison kills. This has led some to
assume that fluted points were used for butchering tools. Others fail
to identify knives, but assume that they should have been present.
Aside from perishable artifacts about which we know next to
nothing, two tools must have been indispensable to the Paleo Indian
hunter. One of these is apparatus with which the animal was killed
and the other is the device with which the carcass was butchered.
Hide scraping tools, however important, m’e not as essential as the
weapon and the knife.
Since only stone and bone artifacts survive at butchering/kill sites,
there is no positive proof as to identification of knives. A certain
amount of experience and experiment, however, permits the application of some logic to the problem.
First, it is absolutely impractical to make fluted points, Folsom or
Clovis, for use as knives. Anyone who has done extensive research in
flint working must admit that the difficulties in producing a Folsom
point are substantial (Crabtree 1966). A large amount of time and
labor is involved. Numerous experiments in grinding or smoothing
basal and lateral edges have shown me that sharp edges can be completely dulled in less than 60 seconds. Thirty or 40 strokes, rubbing the
edge through sandy clay, will produce a "typical" gn’ound edge. It is
my belief that thick-skinned, haiDz animals that wallow would have
large amounts of abrasive dirt on their hides. The biface fluted point
would be quickly dulled and could be sharpened only by considerable
effort. A few resharpenings and the tool would be used up. Certainly,
the labor required in producing a fluted point would not be wasted
on usage that would consume the tool in a few minutes. Fluting appears to be solely designed to reduce the bulk for hafting. Channel
flakes are obviously too small and fragile to be used as knives.
If, then, the fluted biface is impractical, what was the knife type?
It has been common practice to classify flakes with beveled edges or

46

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ends as scrapers. A fresh flake with a thin edge is sharp, but dulls
quickly. However, it can be produced easily. A thin edge can be
straightened and strengthened by beveling (shearing or raking).
When it becomes dull, it is easily resharpened. When it wears out,
there is no loss of an investment of time and labor. When the edge
becomes too thick for cutting, the tool can be retained as a readymade scraper, if needed.
To classify all beveled edged flakes as scrapers is unwarranted and
suggests that man killed bison and mammoth, scraped the hides, but
did not butcher. On the contrary, I suggest that the thin edged flakes
with beveling are the real Paleo knives. They can be produced easily
and economically and they can be resharpened. Fluted bifaces require
a large expenditure of effort to produce and would dull quickly.
REFERENCES CITED
Crabtree, Don E.
1966 A Stoneworker’s Approach to Analyzing and Replicating The Lindenmeier Folsum. Tebiwa, The Journal of the Idaho State University Museum. Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 3-9.
Dallas, Texas

A Preliminary Report on Excavations at
Hitzfelder Cave
R. DALE GIVENS

In the spring of 1962, Mr. Nol~nan Hitzfelder discovered a cave
shaft or sink hole on his ranch thirty miles north of San Antonio. For
a number of years thereafter Mr. Hitzfelder periodically worked at the
site removing rock and rubble that filled the shaft down to about 30
feet, at which point the opening was blocked by a soapstone boulder.
(It is worth noting that soapstone is not known to be native to the
immediate locale of the sink hole.) Mr. Hitzfelder used dynamite to
break the boulder and found human bones immediately below. Shortly thereafter, the site was visited by Robert Benfer who surveyed the
site and assigned it a number: 41-BX-26. In addition to several week
ends of work by Benfer, Mm’dith K. Sehuetz of the Witte Museum
and a party of spelunkers spent varying periods investigating the site.
In FebrualT, 1967, an unusual skull fragment (ca!otte) was recovered. At this time the cave shaft was at 35 feet at the deepest point.
Mr. Hitzfelder called this to the author’s attention and arrangements
were made for a group from Trinity University to excavate the remainder of the cave. Work in the spring of 1967 was carried out entirely
by a group of student volunteers. During the summer and the 19671968 academic year a class was organized to excavate with the help
of more volunteers.
To date, the excavation has revealed the skeletal remains of between
30 and 40 individuals, including portions of at least 30 skulls. A large
proportion of the bones are fi’agmentary and in poor condition. The
human skeletal remains are mostly represented by badly scattered
bones although ttu’ee semi-articulated burials have also been found. A
multitude of animal bones, mostly from small species, were found.
Remains of domesticated dog and most of five deer have also been
recovered.
Only a sprinkling of artifacts have been found. These include three
bone awls, one of which has been notched along one side; some 30
bone beads; a few pieces of worked shell; a spherical stone that may
or may not have been shaped; a stone pendant; three points of Frio
type; and a "stemmed knife." Two points were found by Mrs. Schuetz
with the first discovery of hnman bones-one is a Pedernales type and
the other is somewhat intermediate between the Marshall and Lange
point.
At present, excavation is at the 45 foot level. Bedrock has been

48

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

reached around the pm~phery of the main cavern, which is 35 feet by
15 feet, but the center is still dirt-or, in actual fact, mud. A shaft
running downward at close to a 45 ° angle extending some 20 feet was
recently discovered, but the opening is too narrow to enter at present.
A side cavern, some 18 feet deep and only a few feet wide on the east
side of the main cavern is currently being cleared. Each Saturday to
date, at least 50 bone fragments have been recovered, and there seems
to be no end in sight.
The excavation has been extremely difficult to carry out with anything like proper technique owing to continuous dripping from the
cave roof and water that runs in with every rain. Work proceeds in
a combination of mud and slush.
For much the same reasons it has been velT difficult to date the site.
Benfer collected a carbon sample at about 39. feet which gave a date
of 1000 A.D. -----190. However, there is good reason to believe that this
sample consisted largely of washed in surface carbon and gave a date
unrelated to the skeletons. Professor Ernest Lundelius of The University of Texas Geology Department has provided a report on the animal
species represented, but this has not helped the dating problem. Currently, he is worldng with a new and larger sample that may add more
information. The artifacts, few as they are, indicate an Archaic assemblage. Although dating on the basis of these artifacts is much too
broad and inaccurate, they would seem to indicate an age of about
3000 to 4000 B.C. as maximum.
The site is of significance for at least three reasons. First, Benfer and
Ruben Frank have pointed out the presence of several "burial caves"
in central Texas (personal communication), but the Hitffelder Cave
is the first of these to be scientifically excavated. Second, in other central Texas sites, skeletal remains and an Archaic artifact assemblage
have seldom been associated together, and little is known of the skeletal morphology of Archaic people. Third, the morphology of some of
the skulls is significantly different from the type generally representative of the American Indian (Fig. 1).
Little more need be said concerning the first two points at this rime,
but the third needs additional explanation. While the analysis of the
skeletal material is still in its early stages, enough of the skulls have
been reconstructed to make some generalizations possible. Approximately half of the 30 skulls either be!ong to infants or very young individuals, or else are too incomplete to study. Of the remainder, five
do not appear to be distinguishable in any way from modern and recent American Indians. The other ten, however, are remarkable in
showing a combination of morphologically "archaic" traits. In varying

HITZFELDER

CAVE

FmuR~ 1.

One of the skulls from Hitzfelder Cave.

49

degrees, these have a pronounced supra-orbital torus, marked postorbital constriction, a sloping forehead, and are dolichocranic (longheaded). Recently, Dr. T. D. Stewart, the Smithsonian Institution’s
Senior Physical Anthropologist, examined the material. He felt that
the skulls, including the more extreme ones, are within the range of
modern man (Homo sapiens sapiens), especially in regard to the size
of the mastoid process and in the presence of a well developed chin.
Other generalizations can be made at this time which raise additional questions. The teeth are markedly fi’ee of caries or other disease,
but show an extreme amount of wear even in young individuals. The
latter phenomenmn is undoubtedly related to diet. The limb bones are
equally free of disease, although there are a few eases of lesions. Life
expectancy must have been very low for the oldest individual recovered shows suture closure indicative of an age between thirty-five
and folty. The average age would have been much lower, probably
around twenty.

50

TEXAS ARCI-IEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The last point raises another problem. The remains are certainly
a sample, but of what kind? How large was the population from which
it was drawn, and over how long a time span were the bones left in
the cave? Does the accumulation represent one year or many?
Archaeologists are often prone to refer to any discovery of human
bones as a burial. In many eases this may not be the situation at all.
At Hitzfelder Cave, there are several alternative possibilities to consider. Do the bones represent bodies lowered to that level and buried,
or were they simply tossed in from the top? Do the bones represent a
primary burial or a secondary one? Was death due to natural causes
or to sacrifice or warfare?
One of the skulls shows clear evidence of having received a severe
blow which knocked a chunk out of the right parietal. The frontal
bone and facial region are split at approximately the same level, something which would occur with green bone but is not likely to occur
from a post-mortem blow on the pmJetal. It seems rather clear that
this individual, at least, met with foul play.
The range of variability in the skeleton of modern man is considerable. This, in fact, seems to be the ease with most Primates, and the
range may have been greater for ancient man than modern types.
The question can be legitimately raised as to whether the Hitzfelder
Cave skeletal material represents a single group of people (population
or deme) with an extreme amount of variation, or whether two more
or less separate groups might not be represented. It is too early to
make a fin!l judgment, but from observation alone (without the help
of anthropometrie measurements), there appear to be the "unusual"
skulls with some variation among them and the "normal" skulls with
no intermediate folzns between. Further analysis may show that the
less extreme of the "unusual" skulls fills this gap, but at present this
does not seem to be the ease.
No final interpretation is possible until a complete analysis of the
material can be made. When this is possible, our knowledge of the
early people of Texas should be greatly extended. It is already evident
that the range of variability is considerable if al! the skulls are placed
in a single population, as perhaps they should be. If no intmTnediates
are found, it might be more appropriate to consider the remains as
representing two different populations with one of them possessing a
mlmber of morphologiea!ly archaic traits. This should have a multitude of additional implications which need not be considered in this
paper.
Trinity University
San Antonio, Texas

The Nature of Non-Buried Archeological Data:
Problems in Northeastern Mexico
DUDLEY M.

VAIINER

ABSTRACT
Open area sites in northeastern Mexico were surveyed and artifacts
near selected individual hearths were collected in an attempt to discover significant hearth/artifact assemblages representing valid technological and cultural associations. It is suggested that future, similar
field work concentrating on isolated hearths might reveal artifact distributions which would permit a sorting out of the various activities
and participating soeio-cultural groups once occupying this and other
regions.
SURFACE SITES
Few attempts have been made to recover in a systematic manner
archeological data from surface sites. Non-buried cultural debris is
generally considered to have its greatest value in indicating the presence of a site whose contents are mostly buried and subject to excavation. Surface artifacts are presumed to be no longer in situ and of
little value for a spatial, contextual analysis. While disturbance at
open area sites is often extensive, significant distributional evidence
may still be present, and artifacts recovered from their relatively undisturbed contexts can indicate the patterned human behavior responsible for their existence.
Non-buried archeological data falls into two categories: (1) that
which has never been buried but lies approximately where discarded,
misplaced, or stored by its original owner, and (2) that which has
been buried and since uncovered by natural agents such as wind and
water.
Wind alone often produces blowouts in regions of sand or finegrained soil and little cover vegetation. Sites subjected to extensive
deflation, not uncommon in west Texas, contain a jumble of reexposed artifacts which may have suffered from several burials, uncoverings, and re-burials by the shifting sands. In consequence, vertical and even horizontal provenience of artifacts has been altered considerably since original deposition, permitting little more than reliccollecting by archeologists.
In contrast, sites apparently never buried have produced information regarding the spatial distribution of activities. For example, a
preeeramic site in east-central Arizona with Folsom and Coneho

59,

TEXAS AIICHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

Complex components revealed areally separated classes of debris representing activity loci (Longacre 1962). Another site, Lone Hill, in
southeastern Arizona, also contained artifact forms spatially clustered
in a manner representing probable sexual division of labor (Agenbroad 1966). Both of these sites were divided into grids (over a thousand four-meter squares in the former, 135 ten-foot squares in the latter) from which a statistically random sample of at least 10~ was
drawn. The selected sections were carefully searched for al! cultural
lithic debris. Analysis revealed functionally specific areas of the sites.
At the Carmen site in south-central Arizona (Brown 1967), a grid
system of ten-foot squares was imposed, but no independent clusterings of surface m’tifacts occurred. It was concluded that it was not a
domestic camp site but a locale from which material for chipped
stone was procured over a 4000 year span. Activities were thus spatially patterned in relation to available natural resources rather than
to socially defined task areas.
Sites which have been buried and subsequently uncovered by gentle
water action present additional problems when the archeologist is trying to recover artifacts from their original depositional context. This
has been attempted in northeastern Mexico (Varner 1967), where
the techniques of data recovery differed considerably from those used
in Arizona. Due to the kinds of artifacts, the disturbed condition of
many of the sites, and perhaps to the techniques employed, spatial
patterning, while present, was not spectacular. A refinement of approach, however, may provide future, conclusive analyses of the nonrandom distribution of surface artifacts in this and other regions.
HEARTH INVESTIGATIONS IN NORTHEASTERN MEXICO
In the summer of 1960 during an areheological survey of northern
Neuvo Leon and eastern Coahuila, Epstein (1961) discovered 70
sites, many of which are in large open areas. One site of particular
importanee, San Isidro (NL 37) in the state of Nuevo Leon, contained
evidence of early human occupation in the now semi-arid region between Monterrey and Reynosa. Lithie artifacts, including tools and
waste flakes, were found scattered among fragments of sandstone
and limestone. Much of this fragmentary burned rock was concentrated in numerous roughly circular folTnS, three to five feet in diameter. These were presumed to be the remains of campfires, although
none contained organic materials such as burned bone or charcoal.
Both the hearth and artifacts were stil! in the process of being exposed
by slow, relatively gentle sheet erosion that had left them just below
,or on the present ground surface.

NON-BUR~D ARCHEOLOGICAL DATA

53

The artifacts recovered during this initial reconnaissance at San
Isidro included many large bifacially and unifacially flaked pebbles
("choppers") made from a hard gray limestone, now covered by a
thick tan patination. Other smaller types of artifacts, including two
Paleo-American Plahwiew projectile points, were usually of the same
material. Among the few flint objects recovered were two additional
five 0ther points resembling Archaic and NeoAmerican types of Texas.
Dtff~ng tl~e summer of 1969. students of The University of Texas
Depallment of Anthropology Field Session excavated the San Isich’o
site as part of The Northeastern Mexico Archeologieal Project dh’eeted
by Epstein. Unfortunately, no cultural stratigraphy could be determined from the few artifacts recovered in the course of the excavations (including 12 Plah~vie~t), two Lerma, and foul" To~tugas projectile points). It had been decided, however, to make an extensive
collection of surface materials. Part of the site area was divided into
hundred-foot squares and these into quadrants which served as arbitrary zones for mapping the location of all artifacts and hearths.
In addition to the excavations and collections at San Isidro, the
general survey begun in 1960 was continued. Six other areas produced similar assemblages of large artifacts and, in one instance, a
Plainvieto point. It became increasingly obvious that a significant
amount of cultural data could be obtained by the systematic mapping
and collecting of artifacts from these numerous formerly-buffed surface sites. In an important way, natural erosion was accomplishing
what could not be done by archeological excavation-the removal of
tremendous amounts of covering material so that an extensive sample
could be taken from underlying cultural deposits.
In his original survey of 1960, Epstein began development of a
new procedure for obtaining archeological data from such surface
sites. This procedure consisted essentially of careful collecting of all
archeological material scattered around individual hearths. It was
assumed that these hearths represented an 0ccnpafi0n Of a Single
roup fora ............
reiatively short period of time in contrast to d6p6sits
g] ..............
...........................
found in caves,
middens, ere,¯ which may contain the cultural remains
of Several traditions deposited over an extensive span of time. Archeologieal effort at the latter sites has been expended to identify significant differences in artifact or other material content which may
reveal important cultural changes through time (el. Johnson 1967).
Epstein believes that individual hearths might come close to representing elusive "instants in time" which could be reconstructed
through archeologieal techniques. An intensive study of hearth/arti-

54

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

fact assemblages might provide the opportunity to more easily sort
out the activities of various separate cultures that had occupied a
single area over a period of time. The problems of determining valid
"cultural associations", i.e. relating artifacts to single cultures, might
be reduced if not resolved. This in turn could bring us closer to a
general understanding of the processes involved in prehistoric cultural changes. The small discrete archeological units in northeastern
Mexico appeared to provide an excellent area in which to attempt
such research.
QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
During the field session of 1962, an attempt was made to derive
some method of determining valid artifact assemblages from hearth
areas (Epstein 1969.). However, from a systematic colleetion of all cultural materials around individual hearths in a selected portion of the
San Isidro site, few conclusions could be reached. The attempt to distinguish categories of hearths, per se, from possible differences in
material and/or structure were even less conclusive. This difficulty in
determining culturally significant hearth/artifact assemblages was
considered to be due to the small and restricted sample of hearthsonly fourteen were analyzed, and all of these came from the one site
(Whatlon 1962).
With this background in mind, the writer and Epstein began discussing the possibility of applying similar procedures to hearth concentrations from widely dispersed locations throughout northeastern
Mexico. Perhaps a more extensive sample would reveal subtle and
still undiseerned cultural or eeological distinctions.
We found several important questions could be asked about hearths,
their associated artifacts, and most importantly, about the people who
made and used them. For example, when and how long were these
hearths used? Could a tempora! sequence of hearth or site occupaney
be detmTnined by seriation or any other archeologieal techniques applied "to the rather meager two-dimensional distribution of evidence?
Does each hearth represent a single occupation by one group of people for a continuous but limited period of time? This last question
might be diffieult to test. The several projectile point types known to
occur at single sites did suggest the presence of more than one eultural grou P. On the other hand, this........
studY mi ght
be an opp~ortunit
...............
................. Y
to discover with relative certainty the use o£ several pr0jectile ,point
types
..............
b)a Singie prehiS[0iic cnlturii
.................
group.
..............................
The sheer abundance of separa[e hearths in relatively small areas
seemed to indicate construction of a new hearth each time one was

NON-BURIED A!RCHEOLOGICAL DATA

55

needed. Since re-use of hearths by diverse groups would confuse the

evidence, it might be difficult to detennine valid intrasite assemblages
or complexes on the basis of internal evidence only. But intersite
comparisons should provide sufficient data to make such distinctions.
Were these hearths used in the manner of hearths known elsewhere
from ethnographical and archeological evidence? Campfires are generally constructed for a limited range of purposes such as J cooking,
warmth, ceremony, etc. But what was going on around these6 p~:
-ti~61ai:]~-ea~hs~How many of the potential activities around a campfire could we deduce or infer as actually having occurred? Not all
possible activities would have likely taken place around the same
campfire or necessarily even in the same camp, and cultural remains
such as lithic artifacts should reflect some of these differences.
Minimally, we could determine some of the kinds of technological
activities that had occurred around individual hearths. The total archeological evidence seemed rather meager-primm’ily lithic artifacts
which could be analyzed and separated on one hand into functional
tool types, and, on the other, into mere waste debris. At least it could
be discovered which artifacts appear most frequently and which appear least frequently around hearths. Thus the evidence would indicate which kinds of artifacts were made near or around hearths versus those made elsewhere and brought into the hearth area. Such a
distribution of artifacts would contribute to identifying loci of task
performance.
ASSUMPTIONS AND Pt/OCEDUItES
The main objective of the field work was to sample as much of the
region of northeastern Mexico as possible in the time available, beginning with areas closest to Monterrey. The first area chosen was
near the village of Garcia, about thirty miles west of Monterrey.
After inspection of this site (NL 19), it was decided that the only
really adequate system for co!lecting artifacts would be to record
their exact distance from the hearth center and the approximate direction in which they lay, i.e.N.E., S.E., S.S.W., etc. Although it
would have been much faster merely to collect the artifacts dispersed
about a hearth in toto and treat them as a gross unit, this would not
explore the possibility that differences in the assemblages might be
interpretable functionally as resulting from different activities taking
place near or farther away from a campfire or in a direction determined by factors such as wind, sun, or topography.
One basic assumption under which we had to work was that most
of the hearths had undergone relatively little disturbance since their

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

original use. Hopefully, there had been no important cultural disturbances such as re-use of hearths by different groups of people. We
assumed that re-use was not the role for several reasons. There were
no apparent secondal7 additions of stone to the reasonably compact
hearths nor any scattering of old hearth stones around a hearth
proper. In fact, many small concentrated hearths of a single layer of
stone were obselwed within such proximity that they were not likely
used at the same time. The over=all appearance of the healths indicated a rather limited use of each and !ittle, jf any, disturbance-o£ a
hemth by later occupants of the vicinity. If this lack of cultural disturbanee e6uld be verified, it would raise the question: why the apparent waste of effort involved in constructing an entirely new hearth
so near another?
Of more immediate concern in our attempt to obtain culturally
meaningful artifact groupings was the geological activity that had
taken place. An important question to consider was whether the
hearths and surrounding artifacts stil! retained approximately their
original position or if they had been significantly disturbed by erosion. That the land surface had remained exposed for a considerable
length of time following use of the hearths was suggested by the
absence of organic materials such as shell, bone, and especially charcoal within the hearths excavated at San Isidro. The major problem
could perhaps be reduced to one of a mixture of cultural debris on
the original surface rather than to that plus erosional mixing.
Several facts suggested that geological disturbances in the areas
had not been severe. The concentrated clustering of burned rock
seemed to show that disturbance was not extensive. Rocks which had
been split, presumably by fire, were lying with the several separate
pieces in. situ, i.e. in their position at breakage. They had not been
disturbed after complete detachment. The reason for this gentle exposure appeared to be the gradual sheet erosion of the fine-grained
soil pro’titles from around the hem’th stones. The piles of rock had
apparently been covered in a gentle fashion by deposition over them
of sediments earried by wind and/or water. Their subsequent and
probably recent uncovering has been due to gentle diffuse runoff over
large areas, i.e. sheet erosion by water action not confined to channels. Over-grazing by goats and cattle in northeastern Mexico since
the Conquest has promoted such unintegrated fluvial activity tending
to produce general denudation rather than arroyo dissection (Fig. 1).
In some locales, however, slope washing has led to extensive arroyo
cutting which resulted in the destruction of many hearths (Fig. 2).
It is likely that every single hearth has not been covered over at

NON-BU!RIED ARCHEOLOGICAL DATA

57

FIauRE 1. Hearth NL 156.5, in an area typically denuded of ground-level
vegetation.
some time during its existence, but there is no easy way to determine
this from field observation. Since there was evidence indicating that
most of the hearths had been buried, this was regarded as the rule.
The exceptions hopefully would not significantly affect our methods
of investigation or our conclusions.
After an initial walk through and around a site, an admittedly subjective aVtempt was made to select a more or less "random" sample
of hearths. The hearths selected included a great variety-from very
small and concentrated to large and more scattered. At some sites we
selected several adjacent hearths in order to plot then ~nd their as~
s6dated
artifacts on a sin gle
map usin g plane table and alidade. In
.........................................
.................
other instances we attempted to find hearths so remote and isolated
that no other hearth was even in sighL
.....The ~eations of artifacts gathered from around any individual
hearth were plotted on graph paper or simply noted in the daily log
as to distance and direction from the hearth center. On completion
of artifact collecting at each hearth, the stones were moved aside and
a shovel and small sereen were used to search for artifacts or organic
remains not on the ground surface. Very few artifacts were buried,
however, and the only area in which we found organic material was
near Torreon, Coahuila, where there was charcoal mixed in with

) ,),

58

FIGURE 2.

TEXAS A_RCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Hearth NL 158C.1 with extensive arroyo dissection behind.

hearth stones. The four radiocarbon dates obtained from this charcoal are not considered reliable because of probable contamination
from being virtually on the ground surface.

59

NON-BURIED ARCHEOLOGICAL DATA

USA

Chihuahua

/

Texas

/

it

/

M EXI CO

t

\
\

Coahuila

/

i

) w.

~ Torreon
/

FIGURE 3. Map of northeastern Mexico. Roman numerals indicate areas
investigated.

DATA
The specific sites investigated were in regions east, south, and west
of Monterrey (Fig. 3); time did not permit a survey to the north.
Some of the sites are on the banks of arroyos which may have once
contained water more often than they do today. Others occur in de~sicated regions with no evidence of present or past major water
sources. The reasons for hearth concentrations, i.e. preferred camp
sites in particular areas, are not obvious.
From the 20 open sites assigned numbers, a selection was made of
204 hearths. Artifacts were found nearby on the ground surface at
104 hearths whereas the remaining 100 hearths had no artifacts.
The 567 artifacts recovered during this investigation were all of
lithic material with an obvious predominance of heavily patinated
limestone pebble-cores and flakes. Because there were relatively few
flint artifacts, they were analayzed separately from those made of

60

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

limestone, sandstone, or basaltic rock. Strict attention was given to
establishing morphological categories of artifacts through analysis of
technological procedures. The analysis was based on observable artifact fO1Tn and excluded any presumed function. A similar analysis of
artifacts from Texas resulted in what has been called "lithomorphie
classes" (Johnson 1967). These are categories of lithic objects showing morphological alteration by man, but not all are tools or artifacts necessarily used by man. The resulting six major groups and the
number of artifacts recovered in the survey are:
I.
Pebbles
114 specimens
Unworked flakes
344 specimens
II.
III. Worked flakes
23 specimens
9,0 specimens
IV. Miscellaneous bifaces
V.
Thinned, pointed
bifaces
63 specimens
VI. Clear Fork gouges
3 specimens
There was no apparent alteration of any artifacts at a date later
than their original manufacture. Because of the heavy patination on
most artifacts, such reworking or resharpening would be obvious. It
should also be noted that no artifacts recovered showed deliberate
shaping by means of abrasion or grinding-there were no manos,
metates, mortars, or pestles.
ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSIONS
Observations made in the field and analysis of the collected artifacts have unfortunately east shadows on the validity of many of our
hearth/artifact assemblages. This does not necessarily depreciate our
general approach or specific techniques. At some sites there was undoubtedly more washing about of artifacts than originally anticipated,
as attested by the presence of modern potte17, bottle caps, etc., in and
among hearth stones. At other sites there may not have been enough
erosion to expose buried hearths adjacent to those visible, thus disguising the mixture of occupational debris from different hearths. This
was especially possible where an exposed hem’th lay near a bank
or on a steep slope.
A problem that is becoming increasingly important is the difficulty
of finding open sites over which goat herders have not tramped while
searching for projectile points and other thinned bifaces as a relief
from boredom and as a means of slight financial gain. Also, Texas
relic hunters have for years been scouring much of northeastern Mexico, including our specific Coahuila sites, in search of all kinds of
flint artifacts. Unfortunately, such looters are prone to pick up projeetile points and a miscellany of what is to them spectacular. Conse-

NON-BURIED ARCHEOLOGICAL DATA

61

quently, the professional or serious amateur archeologist is left with

depleted and unbalanced patterns with which to sta~ggle,
The projectile point types which were found have such extended
temporal ranges as far as related archeological data reveal that they
are of little analytical value in establishing dates for specific associated
artifacts or hearths. For example, MacNeish (i958) found Ab~Olo, .................
,.T~)i~igas, and Nogales type points in all of his excavated cultural ....... ’i . . . . . . . .
;.,,phases dated from 7000 years ago to early historic hmeg. These are
c~mmdn types in the northeastern Mexico-southwestern Texas region
and were found at coastal plains sites during this survey. The same
open sites possessed Catar~ and Matarnoros points, which are generally
assigned a temporal range of about A.D. 500 to 1700 (Suhm et al.
assigned a temporal range of about A.D. 500 to 1700 (Suhm et al. 1954).
About half of the hearths recorded had no visible, associated artifacts and others had so few artifacts that occupation of hearth areas
was probably blief, perhaps only for one night. MacNeish (1958:138)
suggested brief occupancy for similar "temporalN open camps" in
Tamaulipas.
From this equivocal evidence the question of a single occupation
for every individual recorded hem~h is not definitely answered. But in
general, the small compact construction of most healths suggests their
use by a micro-band of related persons who built a communal fire
adequate for their size group. This is consistent with our ka~owledge
of the early historical inhabitants of the area whose socio-political organization was a simple one of exogamous, patriloeal micro-bands
( l~uecking 1955).
The presence of numerous, adjacent hearths is probably due to
each having been buried soon after use. Later hearths would be built
on a slightly higher level of the sediments. Eventually, with the
change to erosional activity, deflation of all hearths resulted in their
common placement on the present ground surface, much in the manner of desert pavement.
The total specific activities around any individual hearth remain a
matter of speculation but now within a decreased range of probabi!ity. The paucity of artifacts and their uncomplicated forms suggest
rather simple, limited activities-certainly none that would not be
expected. No doubt brush was broken off, pulled up, or chopped and
placed on the hearth stones to provide kindling for cooking and
;~
warmth. Mussel shells found among the hearth stones at on6 site , ....
show that at least part of the time these
hearths." At other times they were probably used to. roast or singe
vegetation such as cactus pears.

62

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Unfortunately, no directional distribution of activities can be determined from the locations of artifacts around individual hearths.
Many artifacts and/or tools were no doubt manufactured near hearths
and carried away, o1" away from hearths and brought in, or near one
hearth and subsequently removed to a location near another hearth.
The data available from this brief survey are insuffcient for an extensive analysis of the complicated patterns of artifact distribution
which may be present; however, the gathering of additional data and
their statistical manipulation should reveal these patterns. The potential value of careful, systematic recovery of surface artifacts from
many open area sites may ultimately be realized through the ongoing refinement of statistical analyses and through the computers
which handle huge amounts of data.
Some simple correlations of tools with debitage were discovered.
There were 22 hearths with thinned, pointed bifaces (projectile
points, knives, etc.), 33 hearths with thinning flakes, and 11 hearths
with both. With the exception of an unusual red projectile point
found at one hearth and a black one found at another, wherever
thinned, pointed bifaces and thinning flakes occurred together, there
were flakes of the same color as the bifaces. The reverse is not true,
however-there are flakes at several hearths which lack the corresponding color projectile points. This can be interpreted to mean that
some step in the manufacturing or retouching of pi~0jeetile tookp
...............
6i~ts
place around the healths, Smee there appears t6 have been a "’cache"
of n6n:thlnnecl projectile point blanks discovered at one site, it seems
likely that flint was procured and roughed out into point blanks at
its source in the mountains to be transported until needed.
The emphasis on choppers, or at least large, heavy pebble implements at many hearth sites is consistent with the technological habits
of other desert cultures such as in the adjacent southwestern United
States. But the latter usually had a wider variety of artifacts in their
assemblages, including especially the grinding implements characteristic of or essential to an efficient desert economy. The complete absence of manos, metates, etc., around the Mexican hearths suggests
that there was no extensive pre-cooking preparation of edible vegetation in the vicinity of the hearths. The presence of pounding implements made of wood instead of stone in early historic times may mean
that prehistoric peoples made equally extensive use of wooden mortars. However, wooden pounding tools have not been found in excavated rock shelters and other sites in nearby mountains where
stone manos and metates were uncovered.
On the basis of the probable absence of wooden pounding imple-

NON-BURIED ARCHEOLOCICAL DATA

63

ments around hearths and the near absence of likely flesh-cutting or

hide-working implements or animal bones, one may suspect that most

..

hearth sites had a special use to people who lived elsewhere. In many
instances this would account for what appears to be an incomplete
assemblage of artifacts. One could tentatively conclude, as has Taylor
(1966:64), that these nomadic foragers frequently searched what must
stay in g
g
have
been g
y
..........
,~i~!
m0i~l~ains; ; r6ckshelteI’s; etc.
Thus hearth sites may represent temporary, perhaps seis6naI camps
of bands which lived more often or more permanently elsewhere.
Such seasonal transhumance was a practice of desert cultures of the
western Great Basin (Davis 1963). We may suspect that prehistoric
foragers of northeastern Mexico were systematically exploiting adjacent microenvironments in a more or less regular manner. Reoccupation of sites by the same group probably occurred, perhaps annually,
but with no material framework to return to such as in Arizona where
the metates were left inverted when not in use (Agenbroad 1966).
At isolated hearths there is little doubt that we recovered truly
valid, discrete hearth/artifact assemblages. There are sometimes few
artifacts at such isolated hearths, and these do not tell us much. For
example, one site consisted of 5 hearths, of which 3 had one biracial
pebble implement each, one or two percussion flakes, and several
black flint thinning flakes.
One basic problem at these and other surface sites may be that of
low "archeological visibility" which has been observed among contemporary nomadic cultures such as the African Bushmen. The Bushmen leave surprisingly little occupational residue behind at their
campsites (Deetz 1965). Similarly, the probable short-time use of
each hearth area in Mexico may have resulted in &dtural debris c0n:
~isting 6f 6~ly a small fraction of the p6tendaiiy structured material
el&nefits wia{el~ might be correlated with the behavi0ral attributes of
Theref6re, few single, discrete hearth assemblages
might contain sufficient artifacts to permit discovery of the quantitative co-variation in the distribution of cultural items. While some patterning of artifacts can probably be found m’ound hearths in any site
that is adequately preserved, the non-random distribution of debris
may sometimes only allow interpretations that approach triviality
or pontification of the obvious.
inconclusion,-be~use s6 few investigations have attempted to
discover such basic aspects as configurations of artifact categories,
the true nature of surface archeological data remains poorly explored. However, the recent work in Arizona and northeastern Mexi-

64

TEXAS ABCHEOLOGICAL SOC£ETY

co are suggestive of the potential value of systematic surface collection and that, at the very least, mere relic-collecting from surface
sites must not be tolerated. Archeologists-professional and amateur
-cannot continue to neglect the significant paleo-anthropological information to be found in non-buried archeological data.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Research discussed in this paper was supported by the National
Science Foundation (Grant GS 636) as part of the Northeastern Mexico Archaeological Project, Department of Antln’opo!ogy, The University of Texas at Austin, Jeremiah F. Epstein, Director. Field assistance to the author was provided by Donald R. Sutherland, graduate student at Tulane University, and by Lynn A. Varner, graduate
student at The University of Texas.

REFERENCES CITED
Agenbroad, Larry D.
1966 Preliminary Report on a Desert Culture Site: San Pedro Valley, Arizona.
Unpublished paper presented to the 31st Annual Meeting of the Society
for American Archaeology.
Brown, Jeffrey L.
1967 An Experiment in Problem-Oriented Highway Salvage Archaeology.
The Kiva, Vol. 33, No. 2, pp. 60-66.
Davis, Emma Lou
1963 The Desert Culture of the Western Great Basin: A Lifeway of Seasonal
Transhumance. American Antiquity, Vol. 29, No. 2, pp. 202-212.
Deetz, James
1965 Hunters in Archaeological Perspective. Unpublished paper presented at
the University of Chicago "’Man the Hunter’" Conference.
Epstein, Jeremiah F.
1961 The San Isidro and Puntita Negra Sites: Evidence of Early Man Horizons in Nuevo Leon, Mexico. In Homenaje a Pablo Martinez del Rio,
Instituto de Antropologia e Historia, Mexico, D.F.
1962 The San Isidro Site. Typescript, Northeastern Mexico Archaeological
Project. The University of Texas.
Johnson, Leroy, Jr.
1967 Toward a Statistical Overview of the Arehaic Cultures of Central and
Southwestern Texas. Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin, No. 12.
Longacre, William A.
1962 Surface Indications of a Preceramie Site (L.S. 187) in East Cenh’al
Arizona. Unpublished paper presented to the 27th Annual Meeting of
the Society for American Archaeology.
MaeNeish, Richard S.
1958 Preliminary Archaeological Investigations in the Sierra de Tamaulipas,
Mexico. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, n.s., Vol.
48, Pt. 6.
Rueeking, Frederick, Jr.
1955 The Social Organization of the Coahuiheean Indians of Southern Texas
and Northeastern Mexico. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 7, No. 4.,
pp. 357-388.

NON-BURIED A-RCHEOLOGICAL DATA

65

Sutml, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks

1954

An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin o[ the Texas

Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Taylor, Walter W.
1966 Archaic Cultures Adjacent to the Northeastern Frontier of Mesoamerica. In Handbook of Middle American Indians, edited by Gordon
F. Ekhohn and Gordon R. Willey, pp. 59-94. The University o[ Texas
Press.
Varner, Dudley M.
1967 An Areheological Investigation of Hearths in Northeastern Mexico. Unpublished M.A. Thesis, Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas.
Whallon, Robert
1962 Hearth Surface Survey. Typescript, Northeastern Mexico Archaeological
Project. The University of Texas.
The

University of Arizona

Tucson, Arizona

Analysis of Human Skeletal Remains
From Coontail Spin
ROBERT A. BENFER AND THOMAS W. MCKERN

ABSTRACT
Six adult skeletons and the remains of one fetus were excavated from
the Coontail Spin Rockshelter during salvage archeological excavations
at Amistad Reservoir in the fall of 1962. Five of the adult skeletons and
the fetus skeleton came from relatively late Archaic stratigraphic contexts (Nunley, et al. 1965: 8-12). Individual No. 2139 was unearthed
at some distance from the other four adult skeletons, but at approximately the same depth. Individual No. 2137, found on the surface,
cannot be assigned to a particular stage on archeological evidence. With
the above reservations, the skeletons of the six adult individuals are
considered as a sample of one population in the following description.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
In general, the preservation of skeletal material was quite good. The
individual found on the surface, No. 9,137,’ is represented by both
femora, tibiae, and innominates; the sacrum; right clavicle; and a
few vertebrae and ribs. This male was in his early twenties at time
of death. The fetus, No. 2142, lacks one fibula and radius. Individual
No. 9.189 (Burial No. 1) is a very complete skeleton of an approximately 9.3 year old female with practieally all the bones present, most
in excellent condition.
A male over 50 years of age, No. 2138 (Burial No. 2) is represented by a slcull, mandible, left humerus, right scapula fragments, a
right tibia, all five lumbar vertebrae, and both ealeanea and astragali,
fragments of the right humerus, right and left ulnae, right and left
fibulae, ribs and vertebrae. Another male over 50 years of age, No.
9.140 (Burial No. 3), is represented by a complete skull and mandible,
and fragments of a right and left femur and tibia. Right and left
humeri fragments, a left clavicle, four lumbar vertebrae, a complete
right astragalus, and fragments of the right caleaneum, scapula, rib,
vertebrae, and hand and foot bones were excavated with the previously
mentioned skull and thought to belong to that individual. In the lab,
however, it became obvious that the postcranial material represented
another individual, an adult female.
Skull fragments, a mandible, fragments of a right humerus, a manubrium, a right clavicle, and a few vertebrae and rib fragments represent individual No. 2141, a female(P) past 50 years of age. Because
1 Skeletal catalog numbers refer to data sheets on file at the Physical Anthropology Laboratory, Department of Anthropo!ogy, The University of Texas.

COONTAIL

SPIN

67

of the paucity of material, this individual is not definitely identifiable
as to sex, but the material is more suggestive of female than of male.
The last individual, No. 2143, which is represented by a mandible and
a few skull fragments appears to be a male over 50 years old. In
addition to the seven individuals, a few foot bones, a sternum, and a
light patella fragment-all apparently adult-were not assignable to
any individual and are excluded from the analysis.
Age was estimated by using eritelia suggested by McKern and
Stewart (1957), while the sex identifications are based on criteria
from Montagu (1960). All measurements and observations correspond
to those defined by Montagn (1960) and Hrdlieka (1952). Post-cranial
indices were computed only when bones were present from the same
side of the skeleton.
ANTHROPOMETRIC DATA AND OBSERVATIONS
Measurements for the skeletal remains from the Coontail Spin Site
are presented in Table 1. The two individuals with measurable skulls,
No. 2140 and No. 2139, are both extremely long-headed with cranial
indices that fall in the hyperdolichocranic range. No. 2140, a male,
has cranial index of 66.8 and No. 2139, a female, has cranial index of
62.4. Individual No. 2138, a male, while not measurable, had a skull
complete enough also to suggest hyperdolichocrany.
Individual No. 2140 has a skull higher than it is wide. It has a
complete Inca bone, and small wormian bones occur in the lambdoid suture. Most of the maxillary and mandibular dentition were lost
during life. Only the maxillary first left molar and both canines were
present, and absorption of the alveoli was generally complete. Bony
response to musculature was noted as medium on the skull.
Individual No. 2139 is similar in most respects to the preceding
male. This 23 year old female also has a long, narrow, rather high
skull. Wormian bones were present in the lambdoid suture, but there
was no Inca bone. The metopie suture is visible only in the nasalglabella area. All the mandibular teeth had been lost during life, and
the alveoli were completely absorbed. The same condition was found
in the maxilla where the only remaining tooth was a first right molar
which was eroded down to the root. The musculature of this individtfal
was also noted as medium.
Individual No. 2138 is represented by a nonrestorable skull. This
male of 50 years or more had lost all of his mandibular and most of
his maxillmT teeth during life. A left canine, premolar, and first molar
were present in the incomplete maxilla. Of pathological interest is a
small indentation in the frontal bone, above the lateral edge of the

68

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOCICAL

SOCIETY

left supraorbital ridge. The depressed area is about 15 mm. in diameter and protrudes about 5 mm. into the interior of the skull. There is
no evidence of necrotic intrusion into the surrounding bone. This male
also had a very pronounced inion.
A complete mandible is all that represents individual No. 2143, a
male over 50 years of age. The teeth present show exeessive wear and
all the crowns are completely worn down to the alveolar borders. A
left ineisor and first and second molars were lost during life. An interesting feature of the mandible are the extremely large mental foramina.
Individual No. 2141, a female(P) over 50 years old, is represented
by only a few skull fragments. Portions of the maxilla and mandible
are present. From the nature of the alveoli, it appears that the incisors
and canines were lost shortly before death. The remaining alveoli
were completely absorbed.
The posteranial material tends to represent individuals of gracile
proportions with rather heavily muscled males and medium to heavily
muscled females. Individual No. 2138 demonstrated a healed fracture
of two carpal phalanges. The anterior borders of the lumbar vertebrae
all tended to be moderately lipped, both superiorly and inferiorly,
but this is hardly unusual considering the mature age of the individuals. The only other abnormality noted was a bony growth, possibly
an exostosis, on the inferior side of the right sternum of Individual
No. 2141; the manubrium was also involved.
Stature, as calculated by the Mongoloid formula of Trotter and
Cleser (1958: 111), is presented in Table 4. The two males, No. 2137
and No. 2138, are 5’5" and 5’4" respectively, while the female, No.
2139, is 5’6". They have been compared with males from the Langtry
Creek Burial Cave (Greer and Benfer 1963: 247, Table 4) whose
statures were 5’9" and 5’7" (measurements taken only from the tibia).
As is generally known, stature tends to decrease ~vith age, and the
disparity in height is probably explained by the age difference of the
two samples. The two Langtry Creek males were 33 and 30 years old
at time of death.
Comparative data from the Cuadalupe Mountains of southeastern
New Mexico (Mera 1938: 61-63) and Langtry Creek Burial Cave in
Val Verde County are presented in Tables 2 and 3. The general impression is that the three samples, within the bounds of normal variability, represent one population. However, more speeifie relationships
can be pointed out. Female No. 2140 from Coontail Spin compares
quite closely to the Guadalupe Mountain material. The skull is much
shorter and narrower than either the Langtry Creek individual or the

69

COONTAIL SPIN

two females from the Cuadalupe mountains. It is interesting to note
the rather large disparity in size between the smaller Coontail Spin
postcranial measurements and the larger Langh7 Creek individual.
Cultural evidence also points to more similarities than differences
among the three groups. The artifact assemblages of the two Val
Verde County sites and the sites from the Cuadalupe Mountains valT
only in minor details. The only significant cultural differences would
appear to be the occurrence of pottery in the New Mexico sites and
some differences in dm-t point morphology. Significant similarities are:
side-notched projectile points (dart points), similar cordage, similar
sandals, rabbit sticks (or fending sticks), and similar burial practices
(Mera 1938; Creer and Benfer 1963; Nunley et al. 1965). Therefore,
on the basis of cultural similarities, the sample from the Cuadalupe
Mountains, though coming from a variety of sites-i.e., mortuary eaves,
occupational shelters, middens, and midden circles ("sotol pits")would seem to date at approximately the same time (Late Archaic)
as the samples from Coontail Spin Rockshelter and Langtry Creek
Burial Cave. The Langtry Creek Burial Cave is dated as Late Archaic
by Creer and Benfer (1963: 9.48). This evidence eonfilTns the impression of similarity derived from the Late Archaic skeletal evidence from
West Texas and southeastern New Mexico.
CONCLUDINC STATEMENT
Six adults and one fetus from Coontail Spin Site have been described. The sample was found to compare quite closely with other
skeletal material from the Late Archaic Stage in Val Verde County
and southeastern New Mexico. Because of the small number of published reports describing skeletal matel~al, these conclusions must remain tentative. Further excavation and analysis of skeletal material
are highly desirable, if not absolutely necessary, before our knowledge
of the biological nature of prehistoric human populations from Texas
and surrounding areas can be expanded.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

70

TABLE 1
Coontail Spin Skeletal Material:
Measurements and Indices1
Individuals

2137

2138

2140

2143

Sex

Male

Male

Male

Male ( ? )

Female

Female ( ? )

Age

20

50 plus

23

50 plus

50 plus

50 plus

2139

2141

CRANIAL
Cranial Capacity

........

1270

Maximum length

........

187

............
....

186

....

Maxinmm breadth

........

125

....

116

....

Basion-bregma

........

133

............

Auricular height

........

115

............

Left parietal

5

....

5

....

Minimum frontal

........
93
....

89

....

82

....

Bizygomatie diameter

........

119"

............

Nasal height

........

49

....

46

....

Nasal breadth

........

27

....

22

....

Interorbital breadth

........

23

....

23

....

Basion-nasion

........

95

............

Orbital height, left

........

34

....

34

Orbital, breadth, left

37

....

35

33(ft.)
....

Gonion-menton, combined

........
8I
....

....

Bigonal diameter

....

1O0

92

77

....

........

93

....

Height ascending
ramus, left
Minimum ranms width, left

....

61(rt.)

....

34(ft.)

54

....

....

28

31

34(rt.)

25

....

........

16

14

....

i4

----

31°

29 °

_.._

62.4

....

Mandible thick.
between M 1-2
Angle of lower jaw
( 0 ° = rt. angle )

....

24°

Indices
Cranial

........

66.8

....

Length-height

........

71.1

............

Breadth-height

........

106.4

............

Cranial module

........

148.3

............

Nasal

........

55.1

....

47.8

....

Orbital

........

91.9

....

97.1

....

All measurements in ram. except cranial capacity which is in cc.
* Approximate

COONTAIL

SPIN

71
Table 1 (continued)

Individuals
Sex
Age

2137

2138

2140

2143

2139

2141

Male

Male

Male

Male(?)

Female

Female(?)

50 plus

23

50 plus

20

50 plus

50 plus

POSTCRANIAL
Humerus, left
Maximum length

....

301

....

283

....

18

....

18

....

13

....

12

....

41

39

38

Minimum Cireum .....

51

....

49

Maximum middle
diameter
Mininmm middle
diameter
Maximum diameter head
Middle Index

....

66.7

Humeral-femoral index

72.2
....
............

Robusticity index

....

17.3

16.9

....

67.1

Humerus, right
Maximum diameter head

39

38

Radius, left
Maximum length
Humero-radius index

232
81.9

Ulna, right
Maxinmm length

246

Clavicle, left
Maxinmm length

132

Middle Circumference

31

128
25

Clavicle, right
Maximmn length
Middle Circumference

137

127

35

Femm; left
Bieondylar length

405

424

Maximum length

409

435

Maximum diameter head

41

42

....

41

Subtroehanterie diameter,
anterior-posterior

22

25

72

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Table 1 (continued)
2139

2141

Individuals

2137

2138

2140

2143

Sex

Male

Male

Male

Male(?)

Female

Female(?)

Age

20

50 plus

50 plus

23

50 plus

50 plus

Subtrochanterie diameter,
lateral

24

............

27

....

Middle diameter,
24

............

27

....

Middle diameter, lateral

22

............

23

....

Minimum Circum.

71

............

76

....

Platymeric index

91.7

............

92.6

....

Middle index

91.7

............

85.2

....

t/obustieity index

11.4

............

11.8

....

anterior-posterior

Femm; right
401

............

424

....

409
Maxflnum length
Maximum diameter head 41

............

431

....

............

41

....

21

............

24

....

24

............

27

....

Bieondylar length

Subtrochanterie diameter,
anterior-posterior
Subtroehanterie diameter,
lateral
Middle diameter,
26

............

27

....

Middle diameter, lateral

21

............

23

....

Minimum Circum.

71

............

77

....

Platymerie index

87.5

............

88.9

....

Middle index

80.9

............

85.2

....

Ilobusticity index

11.7

............

11.8

....

anterior-posterior

Tibia, left
Maxinmm length

358

............

354

....

27

............

26

....

16

............

16

....

30

............

31

....

Middle diameter,
anterior-posterior
Middle diameter, lateral
Nutrient foramen diameter,
anterior-posterior
Nutrient foramen
diameter, lateral

19

............

19

....

Minimum Circum.

63

............

64

....

Middle index

59.3

............

61.5

....

Platyenemie index

63.3

............

61.3

....

COONTAIL

73

SPIN

Table 1 (continued)
Individuals

2137

2138

2140

2143

2139

2141

Sex

Male

Male

Male

Male (?)

Female

Female (?)

Age

20

50 plus

50 plus

23

50 plus

50 plus

Length-thickness index

17.6

............

18.1

....

Tibio-femoral index

88.4

............

83.9

....

Tibia, right
Maximum lengfll

....

370

................

....

28

................

....

20

................

....

32

................

Middle diameter,
anterior-posterior
Middle diameter, lateral
Nutrient foramen diameter,
anterior-posterior
Nutrient foramen
....

24

................

Minimum Cireum .....

70

................

Middle Index

....

71.4

................

Platyenemie index

....

75.0

................

Lengfll-thiekness index

....

18.9

................

Tibio-femoral index

........................

diameter, lateral

Fibula, left
345

Maximum length
Innominate, left
Height

192

............

198

Breadth

132

............

149

Index

68.8

............

75.3

SaGrttftz

Height

104

............

79

Breadth

115

............

114

Index

110.6

............

144.3

74

TEXAS AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 2
Comparison of Cranial Measurements between Coontail Spin,
Langtry Creek Burial Cave, and Material from Southeastern
New Mexico (Guadalupe Mountains
Coontail Spin
No.

Langtry Creek

:%Iean

No.

Guadalupe Mtns.

Mean

No.

Mean

Male
Maximum length
Maximum breadth

I

187.0

I

190.0

7

180.0

1

125.0

i

140.0"

7

136.0

Basion-bregnna

i

133.0

7

132.0

Auricular height

1

115.0

6

114.8

Bizygomatie diameter

I

119.0"

6

131.4

1

186.0

i

183.0

2

183.0

1

116.0

1

134.0

2

134.5

Female
Maximum length
Maximum breadth
* Approximate

TABLE 3
Comparison of Long Bone Measurements between Coontail Spin and
Langtry Creek Burial Cave
Coontail Spin
No.

Mean

Langtry Creek
No.

Mean

Male
Humerus, left
Maximum length

1

301.0

Bicondylar length

1

401.0

i

499.0

Maximmn length

1

409.0

I

451.0

1

358.0

1

380.0

I

283.0

1

288.0

Bieondylar length

1

424.0

1

427.0

Maximum length

1

434.0

!

430.0

Femur, right

Tibia, left
Maximum length
Female
Humerus, left
Maximum length
Femur, left

COONTAIL

75

SPIN

TABLE 4

STATURE

Individual No. 2137, male

5" 5"

Tibia, left

Individual No. 2138, male
Tibia, left ........................ 5’4"

Individual No. 2139, female
Tibia, right ........................ 5’ 6"

REFERENCES CITED
Greer, John W. and Robert A. Benfer
1963 Langtry Creek Burial Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 33 (for 1962), pp. 229-261.
Hrdlicka, Ales
1952 Practical Anthropometry. (Edited by T. D. Stewart.) The Wistar Institute of Anatomy and Biology.
McKem, T. W. and T. D, Stewart
1957 Skeletal Age Changes in Young American Males. Quartermaster Research and Development Center Command, EP-45.
Mera, H. P.
1938 Reconnaissance and Excavation in Southeastern New Mexico. Memofi’s
of the American Anthropological Association, Contributions from the
Laboratory of Anthropology, 3, No. 51.
Montagu, M. F. Ashley
1960 A Handbook of Anthropometry. Charles C. Thomas
Nunley, J. Parker, Lathel F. DuNeld and Edward B. Jelks
1965 Excavations at Amistad Reservoir, 1962 Season. Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, Misc. Papers, No. 3.
Trotter, Mildred and Goldene C. Gleser
1958 A Re-Evaluation of Estimation of Stature Based on Measurements of
Stature During Life and of Long Bones After Death. American Journal
of Physical Anthropology, Vol. 16, No. 1, pp. 79-123.
The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

Excavation of a Buried Midden, Site 41CXll
in Crockett County, Texas
AARON D. t/raGS, JR.
ABSTRACT
A site in northwestern Crockett County was discovered exposed in the
banks of an intermittent stream. Burned rocks, ash, and other occupational debris were underneath ten feet of sterile overburden. Limited
excavations made in 1967 recovered Langtry projectile points and other
artifacts which suggest that the site may be assigned to the Period 2
Pecos River Focus.

INTRODUCTION
Site 41CXll is visible in the east bank of an intermittent stream for
a distance of 94 feet in a north-south direction. In the bank opposite
it is only 54 feet in length. The creek bed is approximately 12 feet
wide. This suggests a circular or oval outline for the midden dissected
to the west of center by the stream. The occupation layer varies from
9 to 30 inches in thickness on the east bank and is thicker-3 feet-in
the west bank. Overburden made up of sands and gravels covers the
occupation level to a maximum of 10 feet.
On the present surface there are two nearby burned rock middens.
The first is some 40 feet in diameter and lies nearly 400 feet to the
north-northeast. The second, only 10 feet in diameter, is about 300 feet
to the south. These middens and adjacent surfaces have been arrowhead hunted for years, but only an occasional find can be made today.
The smal! stream that cuts through the site derives from the Edwards Plateau and empties into the Pecos River a short distance below
the site. The creek bed contains water only following the infrequent
rainfalls.
Most of the vegetation in the area is in the form of cacti or brush
and includes barrel cactus, hedgehog, prickly pear, yucca, mescal,
leehugilla, sotol, allthorn, eatelaw, and creosote. Deer, rabbit, coyote,
and javelina are abundant in the area today. Smaller animals include
pocket gopher, raccoon, skunk, snake, lizard, frog, turtle, and bird.
The author is indebted to J. M. Barkes of Midland for his horn’s of
work on the contour map and to Colten S. Parker of Lubbock and
Arnold E. Sommer of Midland for their companionship and assistance
during the excavation.

77

SITE 41CXII, CROCKETT COUNTY, TEXAS

41 CX II

FmuR~ 1.

Topographic map of Site 41CXll.

EXCAVATION
A datum was established for vertical control, and the site was
mapped with plane table and alidade (Fig. 1 ). Horizontal control was
maintained by referring to a base point 9.5 feet west of the top edge
of the east bank. This point was selected because it offered the opportunity to reach the largest area of the burned-rock stratum by the
removal of a minimum of sterile overbui’den. A grid system of five
foot squares was superimposed, one of which would permit a stratatest through overburden, midden, and all other layers (Fig. 2). Within each stratum records were kept by 6 inch levels.
Six of these squares were excavated through the burned-rock layer.
tloeks were removed by hand, but all other excavated material was
passed over a 3-i-inch hardware cloth.
Although bedrock was exposed on the west wall of the creek some
9.0 feet upstream, it was not reached in the area of excavation. Several
soundings to 3 feet below the midden found only pea gravel. A narrow

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

78

o

o
~0

*~I) ~ ~ ~ ~ i ~o~-J.~:.li--~:::::::::~:..%~_~.~:6:~:.-~£-’-~::::::::
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~, ’ ¯ -~ .’:’:’:’:.:.:.:.:.’-’~.Y~n::P.{~::r~:.~.:c~.~;:;:;:;:;:::
~.......
:.:.:.:.:.
.......0..
.:.:.:.:.:
:.:.:.:.:.
.°%°..,.
:.:.:.:.:
°%...°,°
.:.:.:.:.

FIGURE 2.

Profile of the south wall.

O--

SITE 41CXII, CROCKETT ¢OVNTY, TEXAS

79

cut, 6 inches in width, was made in the opposite (west) bank, and it
conformed to the sequence of strata disclosed in the east bank.
The thickness of the midden deposit varied from 9 to 36 inches.
The mass of the midden was made up of thousands of densely-packed
angular fragments of limestone which averaged from 2 to 5 inches in
diameter. The limestone is derived from outcrops of the Cretaceous
formation found extensively over the Edwards Plateau. On contact
with fire limestone fractures in angular fragments and becomes a dark
gray color.
The space between the stones was filled with greasy ash. Bits of
fresh-water mussel shells, dirt, and various artifacts occurred throughout the unstratified mass of rocks.
Study of the area of burned rock exposed in the banks and the excavated area revealed no recognizable pattern of deposit. The midden
does not appear to be doughnut-shaped as there were no peaks on
either end in the bank profile. No cooking basin or pit outline was
recognized within the burned-rock deposit.
TOOLS
Twenty tools of chipped stone were recovered from the six excavated squares, nearly half of these coming fi’om one square on the
south-central pro± of the excavated area. Some of the squares had
been truncated by erosion down into the artifact-bearing zone, there,
fore, measurements were also taken upward from the bottom of this
zone. Most of the tools were in the lowest levels of the midden zone:
half of the tools were in the lower 6 inches and three-quarters were
in the lower 19, inches. The same frequencies applied to the projectile
points. The latter are identified according to the Hi~ndbook of Texas
Archeology (Suhm and Jelks 1969,).
One broken, stemmed dart point, apparently of the type Marshall,
was recovered from within the overburden, 5 feet above the base of
the burned-rock layer (Fig. 3 A). The broken blade is broad and
asymmetrical. Shoulders are barbed. The stem is parallel-sided and the
base is slightly convex. Maximum width across the barbs is 3.9 cm.
and stem width is 1.4 cm.
A crudely flaked projectile point with a contracting stem was classified as an Almag~’e (Fig. 3 B ). The tip is missing, so the blade shape
is unknown, but one edge appears to be straighter than the other.
Shoulders are weak and the thick base is almost pointed. It also resembles a variety of Langtry with crude workmanship.
Six projectile points from among the five squares that yielded artifacts are classified as Langtry (Fig. 3 C-H). More than one sub-type

80

FIGURE 3.

TEXAS A1RCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Projectile points. A, Marshall point. B, Almagre point. C-H,
Langtry points.

may be represented, but features intergrade and separation is difficult. These have triangular blades with edges that are straight (D, G,
H), or concave (E, F), or reeurved (C). All are finely chipped and
have prominent shoulders. Stems vary from contracting (E, F) to
parallel-edges (D, H) to slightly expanding (C, G). Bases are concave on four specimens (C, D, E, F) and straight on two (G, H).
Two specimens have a noticeable bevel on the base (D, E). Lengths
vary from a minimum of 5.4 cm. to a maximum of 8 cm. Shoulder
width of the Langtry type varies from 2.9. cm. (E) to 2.9 cm. (D).
Nine knives, the most numerous artifact class, are made of the local
gray and tan flint (Fig. 4). They may be divided into five groups
based on the shape Of the base, the thickness, or the manufacture:
(1) Two bifaces, one a basal fragment, have thin well-worked
blades with straight bases (Fig. 4 A, B ). The complete specimen has
one convex edge and one recurved edge.
(2) One specimen with a convex base is very thick (Fig. 4 C).
Workmanship is not as good on this knife as on other specimens, however, it is of a more coarse grade of chel±. It is 9.0 cm. long, 5.1 cm.
wide, and 2.5 cm. thick.
(3) Two specimens are triangular to leaf-shaped blades with con-

SITE

41CXII,

FIGURE 4.

FIGURE

5.

CROCKETT COUNTY, TEXAS

Knives.

81

8~,

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

vex bases (Fig. 4 D, E ). They are very thin and of fine chipping. One
(D) was the artifact found highest in the burned-rock layer. It is
10.4 cm. long and 4.4 cm. wide. The other (E) was found lowest in
the burned-rock layer. It is 5.0 cm. long and 2.8 cm. wide.
(4) Two parallel-sided specimens with convex bases are triangular in cross-section (Fig. 4 F, C). The complete specimen is 9.9 cm.
long, 2.6 cm. wide, and 0.7 cm. thick.
(5) Two unifacial specimens are actually triangular flakes retouched on a small area of one edge to provide a cutting or scraping
edge (Fig. 4 H, I).
Two scrapers, one on a cortex flake, were recovered. (Fig. 5, A, B ).
They are worked on one edge of one face. The underface is the flat,
original, unmodified cleavage of the flake.
A chopper produced from a thin core of tan flint has a cortex layer
present on both faces (Fig. 5 C). It is oval in outline. All except 3.1
cm. of the edge has been thinned. It is 9.1 cm. long, 7.3 cm. wide,
and 2.5 cm. thick.
CONCLUSIONS
A limited excavation serves as a means of testing a site to learn the
natnre of the deposit and to determine the need for a larger excavation. This goal was reached. The consistent distribution of Lan~ry
projectile points in each square suggests a pure Period 2 Pecos River
Focus as described by Epstein (1969,: 116).
No cooking basin or pit outline could be recognized within the
burned-rock layer. Burned rock or heat fractured limestone of this
quantity surely was created by cooking. More excavations are needed
to better understand the burned-rock midden and its relationship to
cooking methods.
I:~EFERENCES CITED
Epstein, J. F.
1969. Centipede and Damp Caves: Excavations in Val Verde County, Texas,
1958. Bulletin of the Texas Areheological Society, Vol. 33, pp. 1-19.9.
Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Ielks (editors)
1969. Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Archeological
Society Special Publication No. 1 and Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin No. 4.
Midland, Texas

Some Puebloan Trade Pottery From
Panhandle Aspect Sites
MARTHA LEWIS

CRABB

ABSTRACT
Twelve types of Puebloan trade pottery were found in 5 Panhandle
Aspect village sites and two camp sites in the western ha!f of the Texas
Panhandle. Nine of these have not previously been reported for the
Panhandle Aspect. All of these pottery types apparently date between
A.D. 1200 and A.D. 1450. These dates correspond to the general dates
suggested for the Panhandle Aspect.
INTRODUCTION
From 1964 through 1967 amateur archeologists from Dumas, Texas,
collected a large number of New Mexico trade pottery sherds. The
sherds were found at 7 sites along the Canadian River and its tributaries in the western half of the Texas Panhandle.
Except for two isolated finds, the 73 sherds were found in test
excavations or on the surface of 5 village sites. Four sherds from
a collection of the National Park Service are included. The village
sites, CRla, Big Blue 1, Floyd Ranch Ruin, Ozier Ranch Ruin and
Saddleback Ruin, are each located on a bank of the Canadian River
or a tributary creek where live water exists today. Each is adjacent to
a cultivable flood plain and some timber.
Four reported Panhandle Aspect sites, one in the Oklahoma Panhandle and three in the Texas Panhandle, have produced Puebloan
trade sherds while 8 reported sites have yielded none. The Saddleback Ruin near Tascosa in Oldham County (Holden 1933) produced
about two dozen Puebloan trade sherds and 4910 cordmarked sherds.
The trade pottery was identified as Glaze I and Biscuit A which
Baen’eis and Bryson (1966) equate with Agua Fria Glaze-on-red and
Abiquiu Black-on-gray respectively. Several Puebloan sherds were
picked up from the surface at Saddleback by Floyd Hudspeth of
Amarillo, Texas, including 3 Kuaua G[aze-polychrome dated circa
A.n. 1450 and one Cieneguilla Glaze-on-yellow dated A.D. 1375-1450.
The Antelope Creek Ruin in Hutchinson County and the Alibates
Creek Ruin in Potter County (Krieger 1946) produced the following
four types: Lincoln Black-on-red, circa A.I). 1300-1400; CieneguilIa
Glaze-on-yellow, circa 1375-1450; St. ]ohns PoIychrome, circa 12001275; and Agua Fria Glaze A. Agua Fria Glaze A is equated with
Agua Fria Glaze-on-red, circa 1325-1425, by Baerreis and Bryson
(1966).

84

TEXAS AI~CHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Four sherds of Puebloan trade ware in a sample of 1831 sherds were
recovered at the Stamper Site, Oklahoma, type site of the Optima
Focus (Watson 1950). They were identified as Rowe Black-on-white
dating from the late 13th centm3~ and found only in a few of the
upper Peeos Valley ruins.
My sincere appreciation goes to each of the following people: Dr.
Alfred E. Dittert, Jr., former curator, Museum of New Mexico, made
this paper possible by identifying and dating the sherds. Jack T.
Hughes, Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum, gave helpful advice.
Michael Beeker, Superintendent of Sanford tleselwoir, kindly gave
permission to use the identifications contained in his letter from
Albert H. Sehroeder, National Park Service archeologist.
The sherds were found by Mr. and Mrs. Floyd Blackburn, Mr.
and Mrs. Jimmy Crabb, Mr. and Mrs. Collier Phillips, Mr. and Mrs.
Fred Squyres, Mr. and Mrs. Arehie Caven, Mr. and Mrs. Bill Smith,
Charlie Knight, and Floyd Hudspeth.

VILLAGE SITES
CRIA SITE

Cl:[la is a large, rich site directly across iRunning Water Creek south
of CI~I in Moore County, Texas (Classcock 1955). It has produced
typical Panhandle Aspect materials except that stone houses and
polished stone tools are absent. Several artifacts not reported for other
Panhandle Aspect sites found here are: eagle or hawk talons; carefully
made discoidal stones with red ocher on the flat sides; a cache of 24
end scrapers, 9 side scrapers, 6 knives, and 94 large unworked flakes;
a small animal figure, a bead, and a small flower each of fired clay.
Over half of the cordmarked rim sherds are collared. Small triangular,
bifacially-worked flakes, one to two inches long, are abundant.
The midden which lies under 19. to 94 inches of compact overburden is from 8 to 36 inches thick, averaging about 18 inches. Local
collectors have recovered hundreds of artifacts from the midden area.
Although no positive evidence of houses has been found, the site must
have been occupied permanently or intermittently by a large group
for many years. House floors, but no stone structures or foundations,
have been found in Ctll just across the creek.
Four types of Puebloan trade pottery were found at this site:
Santa Fe Black-on-white, A.D. 1225-1350
(9 sherds, 1 vessel)
Wiyo Black-on-white, A.D. 1300-1400
(8 sherds, 2 vessels)

PUEBLOAN TRADE POTTERY

85

GalisCeo Black-on-white, A.D. 1300-1325

(13 sherds, 2 vessels)
Rowe Black-on-white, A.D. 1350
(19 sherds, 2 vessels)
These types are fi’om the Rio Grande-Pecos River area of northeastern
New Mexico. The temporal range is from A.D. 1225 to 1400 with a
median date of about A.O. 1300.
BIa BLUE 1 RUIN
This village site is located in Moore County on a high promontory
overlooking the winding channel of Blue Creek and a wide floodplain.
Slabs of dolomite mark the foundations and fallen walls of two
groups of separate structures at the Big Blue 1 Ruin. A midden area
6 feet deep which is located on a shelf immediately below one group
of houses was excavated. None of the houses were excavated.
Three sherds of a CieneguilIa Glaze-on-yellow vessel dated A.D.
1375-1450 and one possible jar base sherd of Agua Fria Glaze-on-red,
A.D. 1325-1425, were found in the midden. Dates of the pottery cover
a period from A.D. 1325-1450 with a median date of around A.D. 1400.
Ozm~ RANCH RmN
This ruin is on the north side of the Canadian River between Evans
Canyon and Martins Canyon in Moore County. It is on a bench about
20 feet above the bed of the river. Formerly the river bed was one
mile across but is now covered by the waters of Lake Meredith. North
of the site a steep bluff rises nearly 9,00 feet to the leve! of the Llano
Estaeado.
This site has been almost completely wrecked by vandals. Evidence
of stone walls at least 3 feet high were observed in some of the pot
holes. The rooms were evidently in a cellular arrangement.
A large amount of Borger Cordmarked pottery and the usual stone
and bone m’tifaets were found. A sherd of Puebloan trade pottery was
described by Dittert as an anomalous specimen close to GaIisteo Blackon-white (personal communication). Other Puebloan sherds collected
by National Park Service personnel and Jack T. Hughes were identified by Dittert as Apache A.D. 1600-1700(?); Largo Glaze-on-yellow,
circa A.D. 1425; Largo Glaze-poIychrome, circa A.D. 1425 (letter from
Albert H. Schroeder to Michael Becker 1966). The late Apache sherd
is doubtless intrusive.
Evidently this site was occupied after the Panhmldle Aspect ruins
were completely covered with sand and soil as the sm’face of the site
was covered with flint chips before it was disturbed by collectors.

86

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL

SOCIETY

Disregarding the Apache sherd, the dates of the Puebloan sherds
span the years A.D. 1300 to 1425. Since the identifieation of the
Galisteo Black-on-white is questionable, A.D. 149.5 is the best date for
the trade ware at the Ozier Ranch Ruin.
FLOYD RANCH RUIN

Full-height stone-walled rooms in cellular arrangement and polished
stone axes set the Floyd Ranch Ruin apart from the other 3 Panhandle
Aspect sites investigated. Situated northwest of Amarillo on a high
bank of the Canadian River, the site offers a panoramic view of the
river and surrounding plains. Typical Panhandle Aspect materials have
been found as well as a polished stone ax of fibrolite, tm’quoise ornaments, stone artifacts of obsidian and Dakota sandstone, and corrugated cookware sherds.
The Puebloan trade sherds show a wide range of dates and sources.
Types from the Rio Crande-Pecos River area of northeastern New
Mexico are 1 sherd of Cieneguilla Glaze-on-yellow, A.D. 1375-1450; 1
sherd of Wiyo Black-on-white, A.D. 1225-1350; and i sherd of Santa
Fe Black-on-white, A.D. 129,5-1350. One sherd of Chupadero Blackon-white, A.D. 1200-1600, usually found in eastern New Mexico and
7 sherds of 1 vessel of Heshotauthla Polychrome, A.D. 1275-1375 from
western New Mexico were recovered.
Disregarding Chupadero Black-on-white, the temporal range of the
sherds is from A.D. 1225 to 1450, median date of about 1350.
ISOLATED FINDS

One sherd of Puebloan potte13z identified as Kowina Black-onwhite, A.D. 1200-1400, was found on top of a sand dune a quarter of
a mile downstream from CR1 and CRIa. This type is probably from
western New Mexico. Another sherd identified as Largo Glaze-onyellow, circa A.D. 1425, was found in a cut bank of Blue Creek near
several Panhandle Aspect sites.
The Texas sites from which trade potte13z has not been reported are
the Handley Ranch or Wolf Creek Ruin, Cottonwood Creek Ruin
(Moorehead 1931), Tarbox Creek Ruin (Holden 1930), CR1 (Glasscock 1955), the Medford Ranch, Spring Creek, and Conners sites (Duffield 1964).

PUEBLOAN TRADE POTTERY

©

87

©

O9

~ z

o~ ~o~

.~z-,~ ~

0
o

oo

og

o

~o~o

o

o

~o og oo og o~ o~

0

z~

o

o

?

o

9

U ~ U
F~

m0

0

~

~

.~

o

~

o

o

o

,o

0

88

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Typical Panhandle Aspect materials found in association with the
sherds were Bo~’ger Cordmarked pottery; Harrel, Fresno, and Washita
projectile points; ovate and diamond-shaped beveled knives; snubnosed, side and flake scrapers; flint drills, hammerstones, choppers;
ornaments of mussel shel!, olivella shell, and of stone, bone, and
turquoise; bone hoes, rasps, awls, flaking tools, and digging stick tips;
charred maize kernels and cobs; and a great abundance of Alibates
flint chips.
Nine types of Puebloan pottery found at Panhandle Aspect sites are
added to the six types already reported. The fifteen types of trade
pottery include: Agua Fria Glaze-on-red, C ieneguilla Glaze-on-yellow,
Abiquiu Black-on-gray, Lincoln Black-on-red, St. ]ohns PoIychrome,
Rowe Black-on-white, Chupadero Black-on-white, GaIisCeo Black-onwhite, Heshotau,thla Polychrome, Kowina Black-on-white, Kuaua
Glaze-polychrome, Largo Glaze-polychrome, Largo Glaze-on-yellow’
Santa Fe Black-on-white, Wiyo Black-on-white.
While the maiority of the types are from the Rio Grande-Pecos River
area of northeastern New Mexico, it is interesting to note that Kowina
Black-on-white and Heshotauthla Polychrome are from western New
Mexico. These two western New Mexico types have a temporal span
of 200 years from A.D. 1200 to 1400. While the 12 types (shown in
Table 1) span 400 years from A.D. 1200 to 1600, all were being produced within the period from A.D. 1250 to 1450.
CRla with a median date of about A.D. 1300 seems to be the oldest
of the village sites here reported. It has yielded no evidence of rock
structures or foundations. Big Blue 1 with a median date of around
A.D. 1400 is a village of separate house ruins. Ozier Ranch with a
median date of A.D. 1425 is, beyond reasonable doubt, a village of
contiguous stone-walled rooms. It would appear, from the pottery
dates, that Ozier is the latest of the sites.
Although CRla, Big Blue 1, and Ozier Ranch fall into a neat
chronological pattern of early dates with no rock structures, middle
dates with individual houses, and late dates with contiguous rockwalled rooms, the Floyd Ranch site does not fit the pattern so nicely.
The dates of the Puebloan pottery found at Floyd Ranch range from
A.D. 1225 to 1450 with a median date of between A.D. 1350 and 1375.
The rooms at this site are definitely of cellular arrangement with stone
wa!ls to the full height of the rooms. The site is considerably closer to
the New Mexico Pueblo region than the others, and the corrugated
cookware, polished stone axes and hoes, turquoise ornaments, and use
of obsidian and Dakota sandstone indicate more Puebloan influence.

PUEBLOAN

TRADE

POTTERY

89

It is suggested that the people at the Floyd Ranch site were being
subjected to earlier or greater influences from the western Pueblos,
which would account for the appearance of contiguous roomed houses
at the slightly earlier date.
The dates of the Puebloan pottery here reported correspond with
the cm’bon 14 date detelTninations of A.D. 1200 to A.D. 1500 reported
by Baerries and Bryson (1966). The dates also correspond with the
dating of the Panhandle Aspect as discussed by Krieger (1946).
REFERENCES CITED
Baerreis, D. A. and R. A. Bryson
1966 Dating the Panhandle Aspect Cultures. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. XIV, pp. 105-116.
Duffield, Lathel F.
1964 Three Panhandle Aspect Sites at Sanford Reservoir, Hutchinson County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeologieal Society, Vol. 35, pp. 19-8i.
Glasseoek, Keith and Ahna
1955 Report on CR-1, An Indian Campsite in Moore County, Texas. Panhandle-Plains Historical Review, Vol. 28, pp. 96-106.
Holden, W. C.
1930 The Canadian Valley Expedition of March, 1930. Bulletin of the Texas
Areheological and Paleonto!ogieal Society, Vol. 2, pp. 21-32.
1933 Excavations of Saddle-Back Ruin. Texas Archeologieal and Paleontological Society, Vol. 5, pp. 39-52.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946 Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. University of
Texas Publication No. 4640.
Moorehead, Warren K.
1931 The Archeology of the Arkansas River Valley. Peabody Foundation,
Phillips Academy, Andover, Mass.
Watson, Virginia
1950 The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect: Description and Analysis.
Bulletin of the Texas Areheologieal and Paleontological Society, Vol. 21,
pp. 7-68.
Dmnas, Texas

An Unusual Hollow Reed
HA1WEY P, SMITH,

JR.

An interesting and unusual hollow reed was found in a small cave
during a recent survey of cave shelters in Brewster County, Texas (Fig.
1 ). Use of this type of native, jointed reed by the ancient cave dwellers of this region has been reported by many previous explorers. However, this particular artifact is rather unique.
It was found in a comparatively small cave which is approximately
3 feet wide and 3,~ feet high at the entrance, diminishing through a
depth of about 30 feet. An occupational deposit occurred 15 feet back
from the entrance in an irregular depression in the rock floor. A ~ inch
hard surface crust had to be broken and removed to expose the occupation stratum. A triangular flint knife, a polished bone awl, an unidentified bone tool, a short piece of twisted cordage, and a quantity
of bone fragments as well as the hollow reed shaft were recovered.
The reed shaft, which is 22 cm. long and 1.1 em. in diameter, consists of one section of hollow reed tube with closed joint sections at
both ends. It was unusual in the fact that it was fitted at one end with
a long, slender, hardwood, needle-like point. This hardwood point was
placed into the hollow reed in a perforation in the solid joint section.
The point extended into the reed approximately 4/5 inch and was
carefully fitted with the distal end to the interior. The projection of

FIGURE 1.

The hollow reed and needle-like point.

HOLLOW :REED

91

the proximal end of the point was partially concealed by an irregular
extension of the side walls of the reed beyond the joint. The opposite
end of the reed shaft also has an irregular projection of the side walls
of the tube beyond the joint section. These jagged projections may
imply that the hollow reed is a fragment of a longer original shaft.
The opposite end has a similar perforation of the same size through
the solid portion. The wood point appears to fit into this second perforation equally well. Nothing was found in the hollow portion of the
reed.
The hardwood point is 8.4 era. in length with a maximum diameter
of 0.5 era. Sharp cuts are appm’ent at the proximal end where the
piece was finished off to a blunt end. The distal end tapers to a very
sharp point.
When removed from the reed shaft, the hardwood point could be
reversed and refitted into the perforated joint, but it is slightly too
large at its proximal end for a proper fit.
Whether the hollow reed served only as a container for the wood
point or was part of a longer shaft is not known. However, the perforations of similar size in both joint ends seem to rule out the possibility of the reed having an original length much beyond the two
joints. The two joints have been smoothed by abrasion. Similar reeds
with smoothed joints have been reported in the Trans-Peeos by
Martin (1933).
It would have been possible for a wood point to have been placed
in each end of the reed judging by the similarity of the two joint section perforations. This would imply the possible use of the reed as a
carrying device or container for two such needle-like points. If it were
true that the reed shaft was used for carrying one or more wood
points, then the use of poison on the wood points would be plausible.
Otherwise, protection of the point pl~or to use would not have been
so necessary or important. Wood points which show evidence of clark
staining have been reported in the Trans-Pecos area (Martin 1933)
which may indicate possible use of poison by the early cave dwelling
people. These latter points were not found in relation to a reed or
other container. Other wood points, "fore shafts", and blunt wood
points previously referred to from this area appear to be considerably
larger and are designed for attachment to a reed shaft by inserting into
the hollow section (Cardner and Martin 1931).
The relatively small size of the wood point, fitted to an apparent
carrying device of hollow reed suggests the use of a poison dart technique by Trans-Pecos cave-dwellers.

99.

TEXAS AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Members of the survey party were Jimmy Zintgraff, Clarence Zintgraft, Don White, Ed. Smyth, Jimmey Smith, and the author.

REFERENCES CITED
Martin, George C.
1933 The Big Bend Basket Maker. Witte Memorial Museum Bulletin.
Gardner, Fletcher and George C. Martin
1931 A New Type of Atlatl from a Cave Shelter on the Rio Grande near
Shumla, Val Verde County, Texas. Witte Memorial Museum Bulletin
2.
San Antonio, Texas

The High Bluff Site on the Clear Fork

of the Brazos River
RICHAI~D AND JUDY FLINN

ABSTRACT
The High Bluff Site near the Young and Stephens County line in
north-central Texas was excavated on week ends and holidays from
1961 to 1964. The occupation zone extended from the surface to an
average depth of 12 inches. The projectile points recovered indicate a
transitional occupation of the late Edwards Plateau Aspect followed
by a briefer occupation of the Austin Focus of the Central Texas
Aspect.

INTRODUCTION
As early as 1958, the writers noticed flint and broken projectile
points each time a sandy road near High Bluff was graded. Upon
closer investigation, a fiat midden area of concentrated material near
the edge of the bluff was found. In 1961 a three-by-five foot test pit
was excavated in the midden which revealed ample cultural material
to warrant further work. A small grid consisting of five-foot squares
was laid out and dug as week-end time and holidays permitted.
Special thanks and appreciation are due Han’y J. Shafer of the University of Texas for his "lessons in archeology" and for encouragement
and answers to endless questions. Our thanks are also extended to the
land owner for allowing us to work on his property.
THE SITE
The High Bluff Site is located on the Clear Fork of the Brazos
River in the extreme northern part of Stephens County near the small
town of Eliasville. Seven miles north-east of Eliasville, the Clear Fork
flows into the Brazos River. Historically, the Brazos River Indian Reservation was located in this vicinity in the 1850"s.
The natural foods available in the area today were probably available during earlier times as well. Prickly pear cactus, with its fruit
ripening in smmner, is very abundant. Post oaks and live oaks, which
predominated in the days when the first settlers arrived, provided a
good source of acorns. Today, large numbers of mesquite trees and
underbnlsh cover the once open areas. Cottonwood, elm, hackbenT,
pecan, and grapes al! occur along the streams.
The wild game present in the area today are deer, opossums, rac-

94

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

1,"

/""

V’1, \
THE
H|GH BLUFF
SITE

a

.....-"~x

~4

~.

"

II

~

.

/

a

/,,1,~2)/}2/

[] Excavated Area
[] Test Pits
--- Midden Extent
.,¢7 Bluff Edge
O Hearth
@ Datum

FIGURE 1.

Sketch map of the site. Not to scale.

coons, ringtails, foxes, wolves, bobcats, squirrels, and occasional
mountain lions. Wild turkeys, doves, and quail are also abundant.
The site extends about 150 feet along the bluff edge and back from
the edge to a maximum distance of about 50 feet. A grove of live
oaks covers a considerable portion of the site.
The grass-covered midden area is almost completely level except for
a slight slope near the bluff edge. The site showed no recent disturbanee other than one charcoal-filled surface depression which had been
a recent campfire.
The site was apparently ideally suited for occupation. A large area
of shoals in the river directly below provided an abundant supply of
fl’esh water mussels. From the bluff edge, there is a commanding view
of the sulTounding countryside across the river, and it is possible to
see for miles from this point. Access to the river can be gained by
winding one’s way down between large rocks and boulders to the bottom of the bluff. An eroded gully runs from the top of the bluff,
where the site is located, down to the river bottom. This could possibly be the remainder of a well-worn trail of earlier times.
The plateau area behind the site is covered with heavy grass and

95

THE HIGH BLUFF SITE

must have been an ideal hunting area. The heavily wooded area
along the river below would also have been excellent for hunting.
The soil is hard, black and ashy, and contains burned fragments of
limestone and mussel shells in vm’ying amounts. All the burned rock
was in small to medium fragments-no slabs or large pieces were
found.
Only two soil zones were evident-a black midden soil and a yellowish-orange clay and gravel below. The clay and gravel zone rested
directly on bed rock.
The depth of the midden deposit varied from as little as 8 to as
much as 15 inches; over most of the site it varied between 10 and 12
inches. Almost all the cultural material came from the black soil although an occasional flint chip or mussel shell fragment was found
in the very upper pat± of the clay and g~’avel. Most of the projectile
points and many of the tools came from the uppermost 6 to 8 inches
of midden soil. Tremendous quantities of mussel shells occurred
throughout the black, ashy soil, and at some points solid masses of
shells extended from the surface level down to depths of 12 to 15
inches.

EXCAVATION
Using a large mesquite h’ee as a datum point, a small grid of fivefoot squares was laid out. All the lines were oriented in directions of
north-south and east-west The east-west rows were lettered and the
north-south rows were numbered. Each square was identified by the
coordinate of its south-east corner, as A-l, B-2, C-3, etc.
Sifting the soil soon proved to be impossible. The soil was either a
black gumbo or rock-hard depending upon rains or the lack of them.
During rare, damp periods between rains, the soil was vel7 crumbly
and easy to work.
A shovel was used for loosening the soil, and a knife was used for
closer work. The firmness of the soil made it possible for one to go
almost to the bottom of the deposit for a large shovelful. The entire
load of dirt could be carefully loosened and removed intact to a large
piece of plywood. This over-sized clod of dirt was then placed gn’ass
side down on the boat’d, and the dirt was removed working from the
bottom of the deposit towards the grass or soil surface. As each tool
was discovered, its measurement from the grass surface could quickly
be determined.
The location of each specimen within the squat’e was also noted on
a sketched square which was included with the field notes for each
respective square.

96

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

OCCUPATIONAL FEATURES
Several fireplaces or hem’ths were encountered. All were shallow,
saucer-like depressions containing burned rock, ash, and charcoal.
Some consisted of concentrated heaps of ash. None were lined.
Hearth No. I was a circular concentration of burned rock about 30
inches in diameter. It began at a depth of four inches and extended
down to about 8 to 9 inches. The soil in the immediate area of the
rock was extremely ashy, and bits of charcoal occurred throughout.
Many split bones, some of deer, and mussel shells were present southeast of the hearth stones for a distance of 5 feet. Heat scarred flint
predominated in this area. Some of the bones and mussel shells were
burned.
Hearth No. 2 was roughly triangular shaped and consisted of a
concentration of very ashy soil and charcoal fragments. It began at a
depth of two inches and extended down to about 6 inches. It was
about two feet long and 10 inches wide.
Hearth No. 3 was another concentrated group of burned rocks in
an elongated oval pattern which was about 24 inches in length and 15
inches in width. There was a large quantity of split bone on the western side of it extending several feet.
Hearth No. 4 was a small ch’cular area of burned rock and ash, 10
inches in diameter, which was roughly dish shaped. It ranged from
a depth of about 3 inches to 8 inches. Within a foot and a half to the
northeast of the hearth, there was a concentration of core tools, hammerstones and scrapers.
Hearth No. 5 was a large egg-shaped concentration of charcoal and
ashy soil ranging from a depth of 4 to 8 inches. It was 36 inches long
and about 29 inches wide. The charcoal was extremely concentrated
in the center area of this one. There was no burned rock. About 2,~’
feet to the west of the lower end of this hearth there was another concentration of charcoal about 6 inches in diameter. There were occasional burned rock fragments in no particular pattern or concentration in this area.
Hearth No. 6 was a roughly circular group of burned rock and charcoal about 16 inches in diameter. It ranged in depth from two inches
below the surface to about 6 inches. There was a very heavy concentration of mussel shells and flint in this area. At certain points, the
mussel shells were present in such great numbers that there was little
soil visible among them. About 3 feet to the southeast of the hearth
at a depth of 5 inches, there was a cache of about a quart and a half
of unworked flint flakes. All were of a rather uniform size and thickhess.

THE

HIGH BLUFF

SITE

97

DESCRIPTION OF THE ARTIFACTS
The 1101 tools from High Bluff included tools of chipped stone,
chipped and polished stone, ground stone, miscellaneous stone, worked
shell, and worked bone.
PROJECTILE POINTS
Da~ Points
Ninety dart points were recovered from the High Bluff Site. Of this
group, 27 fragments were unidentifiable as types. Many of these were
stems that resembled those of the Darl type. The remaining 62 spedmens were divided into several recognized types and some miscellaneous groups. The flint used for manufacturing these specimens was,
for the most part, local.
Points have been classified into types as defned in the Handbook
of Texas Archeology unless otherwise noted (Suhm and Jelks 1969.).
DARL

TYPE

(33

specimens, Fig. 2, a-o, Fig. 3, a-j)

This group of medium to long, slender points vary somewhat; however, as a group, they all have the same general chm’acteristies and
fit into Darl type.
Twenty-four specimens are beveled on the right on both faces, one
specimen is beveled on the right on one face only, and another (Fig.
2, a) is slightly beveled on the left side of one face. Four remaining
specimens are not beveled on either face.
The stem edges are parallel to slightly expanding. On most specimens the stem edges have been ground slightly; others show heavy
grinding. Stems are beveled on the left on one face on 5 specimens
and on both faces on 5 others.
The bases are concave to straight on the majority of the group; they
are convex on 4 examples (Fig. 2, d). Seven have been ground.
One specimen with a short stubby body that is beveled on the right
edge of each face appears to be a reworked DarI point (Fig. 2, m).
Range of dimensions: length 3.7 cm. to 7.5 era., width 1.6 cm. to
2.1 cm., thickness 0.6 era.

specimens, Fig. 3, k-l)
Two specimens with expanding stems, concave bases, triangular
bodies, and prominent shoulders are classified as Edgewood points.
Both distal tips are missing. The largest specimen is lightly beveled
on the right lateral edge of each face (Fig. 3, k).
Dimensions of larger specimen: length 3.8 m., width 2.2 cm., thickness 0.5 em. Smaller specimen: length 3.5 era., width 2.3 era., thickness 0.5 em.
EDGEWOOD TYPE (9,

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

98

e

1

j

_/3

o

f

m

0

I

2
I

cm.

./
FmuRE 2.
grinding.

Projectile points. Darl points. Dots denote stem and/or basal

ELIASVILLE PIROVISIONAL

TYPE

(10

speciments, Fig. 3, m-o, Fig. 4, a-f)

A group of 10 points from the High Bluff Site are classified tentatively as Eliasville points. In addition one fragment and two stems

THE HIGH BLUFF SITE

99

~il

FI6URE 3.

:

Projectile points, a-j, Darl points, k, 1, Edgewood points, m-o,

Eliasville provisional points. Dots indicate area of griding.

i00

TEXAS

AIRCHEOLOCICAL

SOCIETY

belong in this group. The points are characterized by medium to long
triangular, serrated bodies and weakly expanding stems with concave edges and convex bases. Bevelling occurs on three specimens.
The shoulders flare slightly, terminating in short angular projections in
many eases. The stem edges and bases are ground as indicated in the
illustrations.
Although certain specimens from the EliasviUe group resemble the
Darl type and also resemble the Godley Type in general outline, considerable differences are evident from either type (Jelks 1962: 40, Fig.
16; Forrester 1964: 9, 41-49., P1. 5-6, Fig. 20). These specimens with
the convex base may represent a local variation of DarI since they do
occur in combination with classic examples of the Darl type. When
members of the EliasviUe group are compared with Darl points, their
differences as well as their similarities are rather pronounced.
Range of dimensions: length 3.0 era. to 6.2 era., width 1.6 era. to
2.2 em., thickness 0.4 em. to 1.2 em.
ENSOIt TYPE (4 specimens, Fig. 4, g-j)
These four points, characterized by triangular shaped bodies with
lightly serrated edges (3 examples), stems demarked by shallow
notches, and straight to concave bases, correspond to the Ensor type.
Three of these points have beveled lateral edges on the right of each
face. The other is beveled on the right on one face only and steeply
chipped across the base on the same face (Fig. 4, j).
Range of dimensions: length 3.0 era. to 4.0 em., width across base
1.9 em. to 2.2 em.
MABCOS TYPE (4 specimens, Fig. 4, k-n)
These points are smaller than the Marcos type shown in the Handbook and except for their small barbs bear a much closer resemblance
to the ones from the Ham Creek Site (Forrester, 1964: 10, P1. 4).
Dimensions: length 4.7 era., width 2.2 era.
specimen, Fig. 4, o)
One small specimen appears to be a Meserve point. It has a slightly expanding stem with a deep concave base which has been thinned
by the removal of several flakes, giving the appearance of a short flute
on one face. Both stem edges are ground and the base is heavily
ground. It is beveled to the right on both faces.
MESEI/VE ( ? ) TYPE ( 1

(1 specimen, Fig. 5, a)
This triangular point has one straight lateral edge and the other
retouched to a thick convex edge.
Dimensions: length 3.6, width 2.1 cm.
MISCELLANEOUS TRIANGULAI~ POINT

THE HIGH

BLUFF

101

SITE

Fr~

1

k

0

I
,

2
icm.

0

FIcur, E 4. Projectile points, a-f, Eliasville provisional points, g-j, Ensor
points, k-n, Marcos points, o, Meserve(?) point. Dots denote area of grinding.

102

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

d

0

e

k

]
o

’-

i

’

2

J cm.

J

m

FmuR~ 5. Projectile points, a, Miscellaneous triangular point, b-d, Miscellaneous group I points, e-g, Miscellaneous group II points, h, i, Miscellaneous stemmed points, j, Pahnillas point, k, Pedernales point. 1, m, Williams
points. Dots indicate area of grinding.
MISCELLANEOUS

GBOUP I

(3

specimens, Fig. 5, b-d)

Three points are characterized by their approximately straight
stems and mildly concave bases. The bodies on two examples are of

THE

HIGH

BLUFF

SITE

103

medium length, but that on the third is large with convex edges. The
shoulders are prominent but not barbed. The stem edges and the bases
are ground on the two smaller specimens.
specimens, Fig. 5, e-g)
Members of this group are characterized by slightly expanding
stems, concave to pronounced concave bases, moderate shoulders,
and bodies with serrated edges. The stem edges are beveled to the left
on both faces, the beveling more pronounced on one face than on the
other.

N~ISCELLANEOUS GROUP II (3

MISCELLANEOUS STENI5’IED POINTS (2 specimens, Fig. 5, h, i)
Two points do not fit into a recognizable type. One, similar to
Darl and Eliasville, has triangular body with bevel to the right, straight
lateral edges, straight stem and base (Fig. 5, h). The other point,
though broken, appears long with retouched lateral edges, expanding
stem and straight base (Fig. 5, i). The stem is ground on one lateral
edge.
TYPE (1 specimen, Fig. 5, j)
A slender point with a bulb-shaped stem is made from a ve~7 lightweight tan flint which contains small fossils. The body has a shallow
sloping bevel on the right lateral edge of each face which is snore
pronounced on one face than the other.
Dimensions: length 4.5 era., width 1.7 era.
PALhlILLAS

PEDEI~NALES TYPE (1 specimen, Fig. 5, k)
The thickest projectile point has a leaf-shaped body, weak shoulders, and an indented base.
Dimensions: length 5.3 cm., width 9..5 cm., thickness 1.2 cm.
WILLIAN~[S TYPE (9, specimens, Fig. 5, 1, m)
One large point has a long heavy body with a broad, blunt, oval
point (Fig. 5, 1). The stein is convex on one lateral edge and eoncave on the other. The base is slightly convex. In size and general appearance it resembles the Williams type even though the shoulders are
not as pronounced as on many examples. The second specimen has a
slightly convex base (Fig. 5, m).
Dimensions: Specimen 1: length 7 cm., width 9..3 cm. Specimen 9.:
length 6 cm., width 3.9. cm.
Arrow Points

A total of 34 specimens-9.3 identifiable arrow points and 11 flagments-were recovered. Thirteen are subtriangular and 10 arestemmed.

FIGUR~ 6. Arrow points, a-d, Scallorn coryell points, e-g, Scallorn sattler
points, h, Scallorn miscellaneous point, i, j, Miscellaneous stemmed points.
k, Young point, 1, m, Granbm’y par[¢er points, n-q, Granbury variants, r-t,
Granbury joshua points, u-w, Miscellaneous subtriangular points.

THE InCH BLUFF SITE

105

YOUNG TYPE (1 specimen, Fig. 6, k)
This point is unworked on the concave, bulbar face except for
some faint retouching along some portions of the edges. The dorsM
face is crndely chipped over the entire surface. Its lateral edges are
convex, and the base is convex to irregular in outline.
Dimensions: length 2.9 era. (tip missing), width 1.8 cm., thickness
4 mm.
GtlANBUI/Y TYPE (9 specimens, Fig. 6, l-t)
Members of this group of subtriangular arrow points are characterized by slight to strongly convex bases and bifacial chipping. They
fit into the Granbury type described from the Kyle Shelter, Hill County (Jelks 1962: 35-36, Fig. 14).
Four of the specimens have bases that terminate in rounded to
shall) points. This may represent a local variation in design. All except one of these are well worked across both faces.
Range of dimensions: length 3.0 era. to 3.8 era., width 1.3 em.,
thickness 0.3 em. to 0.5 cm.
joshua variety (3 specimens, Fig. 6, r-t)
Tln’ee of the subtriangulm" points are worked across both faces and
have very mildly convex bases. Al! are missing their distal portions.
Range of dimensions: length (broken) 2.0 era. to 3.3 era., width 1.4
to 1.8 era., thickness 0.3 cm. to 0.5 em.
parker variety (2 specimens, Fig. 6, 1, m)
Two long, narrow specimens are worked across both faces and
have pronounced convex bases. The larger point is longer than the
maximum length of 4 cm. of the Kyle Site specimens. The lightness of
this point, which is made from a very thin flat flake and displays excellent workmanship on both faces, seems to indicate that it was intended for use as an arrow point.
Dimensions of lm’ger point: length 5.0 cm., width 2.3 cm., thickness
0.3 cm. Smaller point: length 4.1 cm., width 2.9, cm., thickness 0.4 em.
MISCELLANEOUS

SUBTIRIANCULA1R

ARROW

POINTS

(3

specimens, Fig. 6,

U-W )

One of these 3 specimens has a concave base (Fig. 6, u). Another
has a convex base, is irregular in outline, and is crudely chipped
across one face and partially across the remaining face (Fig. 6, v).
The remaining example is partially worked on both faces and bears
some resemblance to the Cli~ton type.
l~ange of dimensions: length 3.0 era., width 2.2 cm. to 2.5 em.,
thickness 0.4 em. to 0.6 era.

106

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

SCALLORN TYPE (8 specimens, Fig. 6, a-h)
The bodies of this type point are triangular in shape with straight
lateral edges which are sen’ated on several specimens. The stems
range from slightly expanding to strongly expanding examples. One
ScaUorn has a long slender serrated body, a wide thin concave base,
and is deeply notched to form a stem which is as wide as the body.
Four of these 8 points fit into the ScaIlorn coryelI variety and thi’ee
fit into the Scallorn sattler variety (Jelks 1962: 28, Fig. 13, a-l).
coryell variety (4 specimens, Fig. 6, a-d)
These have slight to moderately expanding stems with straight
bases and long serrated bodies. Two of the specimens have long barbs
while the others have rather short ones.
sattler variety (3 specimens, Fig. 6, e-g)
These have strongly expanding stems and short barbs. Two have
straight bases, and one has a convex, slighlty irregular base.
Range of dimensions: length 2.1 cm. to 3.5 cm., width 1.0 cm. to 1.7
cm., thickness 0.2 cm. to 0.3 cm.
(2 specimens, Fig. 6, i-j)
One specimen with asymmetrical shoulder, base, and stem area, is
dripped only around the edges on both faces (Fig. 6, i). The other
point is of black flint and is worked across both faces (Fig. 6, j).
MISCELLANEOUS STEMMED ARROW POINTS

KNIVES

Unstemmed, relatively well-worked bifaces with sharp cutting
edges are classified here as knives. Bifacially chipped tools of the
same shape but lacking sharp cutting edges were recovered in a variety of thicknesses and degrees of workmanship. Possibly some of
these pieces were blanks intended for later modification into knives,
but will not be included as such in this description.
There were 20 complete (unbroken) specimens, 85 fragments.
tlECTANGULAt/ KNIVES (4 specimens, Fig. 7, a-c)
One complete specimen and four basal fragments make up this
group. They are roughly rectangular and have straight bases. They
are all thin and the workmanship is generally good.
Range of dimensions: length 5.8 cm., width of bases 9..0 cm. to 2.2
cm., thickness 0.6 cm. to 0.8 cm.
BEVELED KNIVES (2 specimens, Fig 7, d)
A rectangular-shaped fragment has parallel edges and straight base.
The base is steeply chipped on one side. The left side of the body is
beveled on the same side as that on which the basal chipping occurs.

THE HIGH BLUFF

SITE

107

!

FIct~r~E 7. Knives. a-c, Rectangular knives, d, Beveled knife, e, Curved
knife, f-h, Triangular knives, i-l, Miscellaneous knives.
The second fragment has a wide bevel down the right edge. The
side with the bevel expands in width up to the point of the break.
The opposite side is straight and the base is straight.

108

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Dimensions of first knife: basal width 2.7 cm., thickness 0.7 cm.
Second knife: width at base 2.0 cm., width at break 3.8 cm., thickness 0.9 cm.
CURVED KNIFE (Fig. 7, e)
This knife has a curved outline and a pointed tip at the distal end
and resembles a knife from the Kyle Site (Jelks 1962: fig. 19). It is
difficult to tell whether the uneven base is simply unworked or partially broken.
Dimensions: length 5.1 cm., width 2.5 cm., thickness 0.6 cm.
TIIIANGULAlt KNIVES (5 specimens, Fig. 7, f-h)
Two of these triangular-shaped knives are broken at the distal tip.
Bases range from straight to irregular. One with a concave base retains a small portion of cortex on the base.
These knives are shaped by percussion chipping. One is bifacially
retouched along one lateral edge, another has use retouch along one
edge, and a third has a serrated lateral edge.
Range of dimensions: length 4.0 em. to 5.7 em., width 2.5 era. to
3.8 cm., thickness 0.4 cm. to 1.0 em.
SMALL OVAL KNIFE (1 specimen, Fig. 8, a)
This broad specimen is constricted towards the tiny straight base.
It is well made by percussion chipping with some retouching at points
along the blade edges. The constricted area near the base shows fine
retouching along the edges on one side. The tip of this knife shows a
small outer portion of the original flint nodule.
Dimensions: length 4.8 cm., maximum width 2.7 cm., width at base
1.2 cm., thickness 0.6 cm.
SUBREC~ANOULAe KNIFE ( 1 specimen)
A small knife has a convex base and a distal end which tapers to a
rounded point. Both lateral edges are convex and it is concavo-concave
in cross section. Percussion chipping on one face has produced a ridge
at the mid-section. Edges on one face have some retouch.
Dimensions: length 4.5 cm., width 2.3 cm., thickness 0.9 cm.
CLEBUtlNE TYPE (Q,9, specimens, Fig. 8, b-l)
This type of knife is the best represented knife from High Bluff
Site (Jelks 1969,: 44-45). Some examples of this subrectangular knife
are long and slender while others are short and broad, but all have
slight to pronounced convex bases. Some have convex lateral edges
and others have lower lateral edges parallel to one another. The lateral edges are retouched on most examples and the bases of some
are retouched.
The two smallest members of this group could possibly have been

THE

HIGH

BLUFF

109

SITE

Q

d

h
e

£

1
0

I

J
FIcURIZ 8.

2
1 cm,

Knives. a, Small oval knife, b-l, Cleburne knives.

dart points instead of knives. They would have been suitable for
either purpose.

Ii0

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

d

!

£

FmURE 9. Miscellaneous tools, a, b, Drills. c, Spokeshave. d, Gunflint. e-l,
Gravers. m-q, Burins. Broken arrows indicate graver beaks and solid arrows
indicate number and direction of burin blows.

Range of dimensions: length 4.0 cm. to 8.0 cm., width 1.5 cm. to 3.5
cm., thickness 0.4 cm. to 1.2 cm.
MISCELLANEOUS KNIVES (6 specimens, Fig. 7, i-l)
The lower lateral edges of these knives have a distinct inward curve

THE

HIGH

BLUFF

SITE

111

or taper near the base. The inward curve begins at the approximate
midsection of the knife on one example and on three other fragments
it begins closer to the base. Bases are straight to concave.
On one knife a chipped indented area occurs just below the midpoint of the knife. The edge below this is lightly smoothed. The indention is 1.6 em. wide and 0.1 era. deep.
Range of dimensions: length 6.6 era. to 7.4 em., thickness 0.6 em. to
0.8 cm. Width at base 2.2 era., maximum width 3.2 em.
DRILLS

(5 specimens, Fig. 9, a-b)
Five fragmentary drills were discovered-a complete bit portion, a
base and part of a bit, a rectangular base with broken bit, and two
fragments of large drill bits.
An ahnost complete bit portion, 3.5 cm. long, is steeply beveled
on both faces (Fig. 9, a). Viewed in cross section at the thickest
point, it has two bevels 0.8 cm. wide that are parallel and two bevels
less than 0.6 cm. wide running in alternate directions.
Two-thirds of the base and 2.1 em. of the bit length remain of a
badly heat-scalTed drill of black flint (Fig. 9, b). Beveling on all four
edges has produced a fiat center ridge on both faces. The bit is 1.2 cm.
wide where it joins the base. The base is shaped like the base of a
Darl point.
Another specimen with a broken bit has a bifacially worked, rectangular base. The bit is 0.6 cm. long and 0.8 cm. wide. The base is
2.5 cm. long and 1.8 cm. wide.
SPOKESHAVES

(4 specimens, Fig. 9, c)
These are rather small concave depressions chipped onto flint
flakes. The concave area would have been suitable for smoothing a
small arrow shaft.
Two are semicircular notches chipped onto a small, otherwise unworked flint flake, one is chipped onto a flint spall from one face, and
the fourth is a thick, rectangular cortex flake which also has a straight
scraper edge.
Range of dimensions: width 0.6 era. to 0.7 era., depth 0.2 cm. to
0.3 era.
GUN FLINT

(1 specimen, Fig. 9, d)
A gunflint of smoky-gray translucent flint was discovered eroding
from one edge of the dirt road near the site. It is square in outline

112

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and worked only on one face except for some flaking at one edge. The
worked face is flat with steep chipping or beveling on all four edges.
Three of the edges are finely retouched and the fourth edge is vel7
heavily worn with one corner worn blunt. The one chipped edge on
the other face is on this heavily worn edge.
Dimensions: length 2.1 cm. and 2.2 cm., width 1.9 era. and 1.7 era.
(heavily worn edge ).
GRAVING TOOLS

CRAVERS (23 specimens, Fig. 9, e-l)
Gravers were among the most common artifacts recovered. They
were consistently present at all depths and in all parts of the site.
These tools could have been used for engraving shell, bone, wood,
and soft stone and possibly for tatooing.
Eleven of the gravers are points worked onto thick flakes which
have been only slightly modified (Fig. 9, e, j, ]), and they fit into
Wright’s Type IA (1940: 35, P1. 7). The remaining 19. gravers are
worked onto the ends of long oval or rectangular flint flakes which
show fine chipping on either side of the graver point and down the
sides of the flint flake (Fig. 9, f-i, k). They fit into Wright’s Type I B.
The graver end on some examples is snubbed or steeply chipped, and
the undersides of these gravers are generally unworked. Ahnost all of
these graver points are curved inward and have a hooked, beak-like
appearance.
BURINS (5 specimens, Fig. 9, m-q)
The following description of the burins is by Han’y J. sharer.
All of the burins from High Bluff fit into Form B of Epstein’s
(1963: 72) classification: "points formed by the intersection of a burin
facet with a broken or flake edge."
One specimen is manufactured from the basal end of a broken bifacially chipped knife by the removal of several spalls along one
edge (Fig. 9, m). A corner of the transverse break was used as a
striking platform. A tiny negative bulb of percussion is present at the
point where the blow was delivered, leaving a concave cutting edge.
Portions of the cutting edge are smooth from use.
Dimensions: length of faceted edge 4.3 cm., maximum length of
facets 2.2 cm., width of cutting edge or striking platform 0.3 cm.
The second specimen is made from a biface fragment broken in a
way that two broken edges intersect at an approximate right angle
(Fig. 9, n). One of these edges was used as the striking platform.
The surface of the adjacent edge is marked with tiny facets. The restilting cutting edge is convex and is worn smooth from use.

THE

HIGH

BLUFF

113

SITE

a

G

i

0

I

2
Icm.

Ficur~E 10. Miscellaneous artifacts, a, b, Side scrapers, c, End and side
scraper, d, Utilized flake, e, Spall scraper, f, Hematite celt. g, Scratched
limonite, h, Stone ball. i, Bone bead.

Dimensions: length of faeeted edge 2.4 em., maximum length of
facet 0.9 em., width of cutting edge or striking platform 0.7 em.
A third specimen has several tiny burin facets at the pointed end

114

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

(Fig. 9, o). This end has been worn from use, and this wear can
readily be seen without the aid of a microscope.
Dimensions: length of faeeted edge 4.4 cm., width of bit 0.2 em.
The fourth burin has several tiny facets at the pointed end and is
burinated from the opposite end as well (Fig. 9, p). There is no visible sign of use.
Dimensions: length of faceted edge "2.8 cni., width of bit 0.1 em.
The last specimen probably represents an exhausted burin (Fig.
9, q). It is made from a fragment of a bifacial implement and has
a series of hinge fractures down one side.
Dimensions: length of faceted edge 3.4 em.
SCtlAPEItS

SIDE SCRAPPEI~S (5 specimens, Fig. 10, a, b)
One fragment and four complete specimens have been chipped
down one lateral edge of one face to form a working edge. The scraping edges are straight on three specimens, convex on one, and concave
on the broken one. The chipped surfaces range from a velN faintly
worked edge to a steeply chipped one. The example with convex
scraping edge is lightly serrated (Fig. 10, a).
Range of dimensions: length 4.6 era. to 6.3 era., width 1.6 cm to
3.3 era., thickness 0.5 era. to 0.9 era.
END SCRAPPER (1 specimen, Fig 10, e)
This end scraper was fashioned out of a long, thick flint flake. It
has a curved, unworked ventral side and a very high convex dorsal
side. A large portion of the original outer core of the flint nodule remains on this specimen. Steep chipping extends from the bit down
both lateral sides. The bit end shows heavy use.
Dimensions: length 4.8 em., width across bit 1.5 em.
SPALL SCIIAPEtRS AND UTILIZED

FLAKES

(327

specimens, Fig. 10, d, e)

This group is made up of flakes which show small areas of chipping from use. They show little to no modification other than the
small chipped or battered areas. Many retain a pollion of the original
flint nodular surface. Their shapes are generally irregular. Some have
straight chipped areas (Fig. 10, e) while others have convex or small
shallow concave working surfaces.

TOOLS
(56 specimens, Fig. II)
All the implements from this group were made by means of percussion flaking. Several were also retouched along the lateral edges
CRUDE

BIFACIAL

THE

HIGH

BLUFF

115

SITE

d
f
e

o
I

FIGURE

1 1.

I

I

2

I cm.

Crude bifacial tools.

but usually only on one face. Some show heavy use at the distal end,
and others show wear on portions of their blade edges. Many of these
resemble the knives in outline but not in workmanship-all of these
tools are much thicker and cruder. Shapes most often are oval and
subtriangular, but range to circular and irregular.

116

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

CHOPPERS
(7 specimens, Fig. 12, a-b)
One chopper, or hand axe, was fashioned by striking off large
flakes at one end of a stream-worn quartzite pebble. It has steep
chipping on one face only.
Dimensions: length 6 em., width 5.2 era., thickness 1.8 cm.
A second chopper has been fashioned by steeply chipping one end
of an oval stream-worn limestone pebble on one face.
Dimensions: length 6.5 era., width 4.5 era., thickness 1.4 cm.
Two choppers were fashioned from quartzite cobbles. On both of
these, steep chipping from both faces forms a sharp jagged edge
which shows battered areas. One of these choppers is chipped across
the distal end; the other is chipped halfway across the distal end and
on down one side.
A chopping implement was formed by chipping both faces of the
distal end of a large thick flint nodule. The working end shows very
heavy weed’. This chopper fits perfectly into either hand-on one side
a flat surface has been chipped back from the chopping end leaving
a place for the ends of the fingers to rest. When grasped in the hand,
the chopping end extends out about 3 era. past the ends of the fingers.
A specimen is chipped from both faces out of a flat flint nodule. It
has a working edge on pedt of the distal end and part way down one
side.
The last example is fashioned onto a smooth, large stream-worn
pebble (Fig. 12, a). It is bifacially chipped on one end and shows evidence of heavy use. One face is unaltered except at the chopper end.
The other face is chipped to leave an end which fits the fingers when
it is gripped.
HAMMERSTONES

(26 specimens, Fig. 12, d-e)
Twenty-six nodules and stream-worn pebbles have been battered
along the edges or over the enth’e pebble in some eases. Some are
battered from use. Others have been chipped from both faces to
form convex edges which show evidence of light to heavy battering.
Material: 14 quartzite, 9 chert, 2 quartz, 1 limestone.
COKES

( 160 specimens )
One hundred sixty medium to large cores seem to have been used
as sources for small and large flint flakes. Some of these also have

THE

HICH

BLUFF

117

SITE

b

a

FIGURE 12. Miscellaneous artifacts, a, b, Choppers. c, Smoothed fossil, d,
e, Hammerstones. Dots indicate area of smoothing.

small a’eas of edge retouching or weal’, and some have small battered
areas. It is likely that pieces from this gn’oup were used both as flint
sources and as handy, quickly discarded tools when convenient.
Material: 158 flint, 9. quartzite.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

118

CHIPPED AND POLISHED STONE

(2 specimens, Fig. 10, f)
A fragmentary heat fractured celt was discovered in close association with a hearth area. Three of the four fragments which were scattered over a five-foot square area have been glued together to form a
large portion of one face. The portions sloping down to the bit edge
are heavily polished and are very smooth.
The second specimen was flaked on both faces to the desired shape.
It decreases in thickness towards both the halting end and the bit
end. When viewed in cross section, the bid end somewhat resembles
the bifacially-chipped bit end on a gouge. This celt is constricted
somewhat at the end opposite the bit to facilitate halting. It is probably only partially finished as it does not exhibit the heavy polish that
is typical of so many of these artifacts. The halting-end edge is
ground smooth.
Dimensions: length 4 cm., width at end of bit 2.5 cm., width at hafting end 1.7 cm., thickness 1.1 cm.
GROUND STONE

OCHER

FRAGiX’IENTS (21

small and 1 large specimen, Fig. 10, g)

Twenty-one red ocher fragments, none larger than ~ inch, were recovered from all areas of the site. Many of these had scratched depressions where pigment had been scraped off for use.
A larger flat tablet-like piece of yellow limonite was ground smooth
down both sides and around the ends (Fig. 10, g). Both faces are
woru smooth. There is a shallow depression with deep scratch marks
across it on one face, and there are also deep scratch marks on the
opposite face. Upon close examination, tiny scratches running in
every direction over every surface can be seen.
Dimensions: length 4.5 cm., thickness 0.7 era.
GRINDING SLABS ( 8

specimens )

All of the grinding slabs were of sandstone and had been pecked
preparatory to grinding. Seven showed evidence of peeking and
grinding on one side. One of these was mainly a sill fragment. The
eighth fragment had been pecked and worn down on both faces, one
face more extensively than the other.
~ANOS (9 specimens, Fig. 13, a)
The one complete mano recovered is of fine-grained sandstone and
shows heavy usage on one side (Fig. 13, a). The broken manos, all
made of sandstone, showed moderate to heavy wear. Three of these
showed grinding facets at different angles along the sides and ends.

THE HICH

BLUFF

119

SITE

2

i cm.

b
FIGURE 13.

Ground stone, a, Manos. b, Grooved stone.

The other six were oval to rectangular in shape. One battered fragment was probably used as a hammerstone.
An oval stream-worn limestone pebble was perhaps intended for
use as a mano, but it showed no evidenee of wear.

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

19,0

Dimensions of complete mano: length 14.0 era., width 9.0 cm.,
width 3.5 cm.
GROOVED STONE (1 specimen, Fig. 13, b)
A piece of sandstone has four V-shaped grooves running across the
stone, possible evidence that it had been used as a hone for sharpening bone tools. Below these V-shaped grooves, there is a short, wide,
somewhat rounded groove which possibly was used as a shaft abrader.
Fainter grooves bisect the larger grooves at an angle. One edge of
this sandstone piece has one short V-shaped groove extending down
it at an angle.
Dimensions: length 10.5 cm., width 9.5 era., thickness 3.0 cm. Typica! groove: width 0.3 era., depth 0.1 era. Rounded groove: width at
each end 0.5 cm. and 1.5 era., depth 0.2 cm.
A small limestone object about the size of an average marble is
almost a perfect sphere except for a slight flat area on one side (Fig.
10, h). It is 1.4 era. in diameter and has a rough surface with no
evidence of smoothing. Its puq?ose is unknown.
One fossil was evidently picked up and brought into the camp site
as an object of interest or for other purposes. A smoothed area on the
edge at one end extends on around one side (Fig. 12, c). It seems unlikely that this is natural since the other side and end of the fossil
show no evidence of this wear. Dots at the upper part of the illustration indicate worn area.
A flint flake, showing some modification at one end, still retains a
large portion of its orighlal outer cortex. This flat brown cortex is covered with red ocher-colored marks. Most are faint, and it is apparent
that some have worn away. Others are almost invisible. It is impossible to discern an apparent pattern except that many are roughly parallel and others form a zig-zag appearance.
WORKED

UTILIZED N’IUSSEL SI-[ELLS

(8

SHELL

specimens, Fig. 14, a-d)

One mussel shel! has a battered or chipped section worn down to a
dull edge on the upper edge opposite the hinge (Fig. 14, b). Another
shell also has a portion removed at the end fartherest away from the
hinge (Fig. 14, a). The shell is broken alongside this area, leaving
two concave areas side by side. The broken area is worn to a dull
edge leaving no sharpness. A third shell is heavily smoothed along a
broken edge on one side of the shell.
A fourth shell shows light smoothing extending from the upper
area neat" the hinge around to about the half-way point on the oppo-

THE

HICH

]BLUFF

121

SITE

h

1
FIGURE 14. Shell artifacts, a-d, Utilized shells, e-g, Notched shells, h-l,
Perforated shells. Arrow indicates perforation begun on exterior surface of
the shell.

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

19,9.

site side. A perforation near the hinge has been damaged by a break
in the upper area near the hinge. This specimen was probably used
as a scraper.
Two shells have a notch removed along one edge (Fig. 14, c, d).
The notch on example c, which is 1.0 em. wide and 0.5 cm. deep, is
V-shaped and shows heavy smoothing or wear. The notch on example
d, which is 0.9 cm. wide and 0.6 cm. deep, is rounded and smooth. It
resembles a spokeshave in outline.
Two additional shells appear to have smoothed areas around their
outer long edges indicating use as scrapers. The wear is very light.
(5 specimens, Fig. 14, e-g)
Five shells show notched areas on their outer edges. One shell has
a broad chipped area (slightly worn) to one side of the notches (Fig.
14, f). A second shell is perforated at the hinge in addition to being
notched.
NOTCHED MUSSEL SHELLS

specimens, Fig. 14, h-l)
This rather large group of perforated mussel shells are in various
stages of disintegration. In almost every case, perforations occur near
the hinge, although some of the holes are closer to it than others. Almost all the perforated shells were small mussels, however, large
mussels were uncommon in the midden.
One large broken mussel has a large circular perforation near the
center intersected by another perforation. This leaves a hole with
the appearance of a figure-eight.
Most of the shells had circular perforations, some had elongated
oval ones, and one example had a definite well-made triangular perforation. The circular perforations ranged in size from 0.9. em. to 1.0
cm. Other perforated mussels were discovered during the course of
the digging, but these had crumbled beyond all possibility of removal.
Careful checking of all mussel shells for evidence of alteration and
use revealed thirteen shells that seemed to show the first steps in
making perforations. These shells had the beginnings of tiny drilled
holes in the hinge areas. The deeper these holes went the larger they
became. They appear to have been made with an object with a very
small sharp point.
Two of these shells have the holes punctured from the outside of
the shell, and the outer layers of the shell have flaked off around the
hinge area (Fig. 14, i). The other 11 had these tiny perforations on
the inside. One shell had three of these-a very small one, another
larger one beside it, and a larger one below these two. It would seem
PEtlFOltATED MUSSEL SHELLS

(54

THE

HIGH

BLUFF

123

SITE

that at times there was a bit of indecision as to just where the shells
should be perforated.
Two shells each have one attempted perforation and one completed one (Fig. 14, i). The remaining shells have only one beginning
of a hole.
Attempted perforations which almost puncture the shell range in
size from about the size of a pin head to 0.2 cm.
The perforated mussels were most common in areas in which mussel shells were most numerous. This may or may not be of significance
since the greatest concentration of other artifacts was here also.
BONE ARTIFACTS

(4 specimens, Fig. 10, i)
Bone in any form was very scarce throughout the midden soil. No
complete bone tools were found.
Four burned fragments of one tool included the basal end of a
mammal long bone with part of the articular surface present, a portion which fitted onto this, and two mid-section fragments. Two other
mid-sections from other tools were found.
One cylindrical bone tube bead was also recovered. It is smoothed
at each end and the outer area is smooth except where it is slightly
pitted. It has no decoration. It has been fashioned from what appears
to be a bird bone oz" the long bone of a small mammal. It is 2.7 cm.
long and 1.3 cm. in diameter.
FOODS
As already stated, bone material was extremely scarce at High
Bluff. However, in most cases that which was discovered was well
preserved, so the scarcity is probably not accountable to lack of preservation. Deer, one squirrel jaw bone, and turtle carapace fragments
were recognizable. Bison bones were not present. Snails were almost
non-existent
Mussels seem to have been the principal staple (at least during
the seasons when they were available) in the diet as attested by the
tremendous quantities of shells. Presumably, most were either eaten
raw or boiled as the only shells which were burned or charred were
associated with hearth areas.
A few badly decomposed pecan shells were present, but these were
probably introduced by burrowing rodents.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The High Bluff Site material appears to represent intmwnittent occupations of the Transitional Edwards Plateau Aspect (Johnson et al.

124

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1962: 122). The dart point styles indicate a late placement of the
material within the Edwards Plateau Aspect.
The Darl point was by far the most favored dart point style. They
were common in every portion of the site. Four specimens of En.sor
were also present. Both Darl and Ensor have been found to occur late
stratigraphieally in several Edwards Plateau Aspect sites (Miller and
Jelks 1952; Suhm 1955) and were found just below Scallorn arrow
points at the Smith Rock Shelter (Suhm 1957). Their presence at High
Bluff along with Pahnillas (1 specimen), which occurred at the bottom of the Austin Focus zone at Kyle (Jelks 1962: 39), and Edgewood, which is regarded as occurring during the latter part of the
Archaic period (Suhm, Krieger and Jelks 1954: 418), adds fnrther to
this transitional placement. The four Marcos points from High Bluff
resemble Marcos points found in the upper levels at Ham Creek, an
Edwards Plateau Aspect site in Johnson County (Forrester 1964: 10,
P1. 4). The Eliasville dart points with their resemblances to both the
Darl and Godley types seem to further indicate this late transitional
placement.
The only projectile point with any Paleo-Indian attributes is the
one Meserve point. It was possibly picked up and brought into the
site by the inhabitants.
The Austin Focus of the Centra! Texas Aspect is represented at
High Bluff by a small number of arrow points. It appeared at first
that there would be vertical separation with arrow points overlying
dart points. However, it soon became obvious that most of the dart
points and the arrow points were coming from identically the same
levels, namely, from between 3 to 5 inches below the surface. For
some reason the majority of the projectile points were confined to
this 3 to 5 inch zone although the midden soil and other cultural
material extended on down to depths of i0 to 15 inches at some points.
Some arrow point fragments (mostly tips) were found very close to
the soil surface, whereas no dal! points were present in the upper 3
inches of the deposit.
The arrow points ScaUorn and Grandbu.ry, both diagnostic of the
Austin Focus at the Kyle Site, indicate an Austin Focus occupation
following the principle Edwards Plateau occupation.
Diagnostic markers of the Toyah Focus, which follows the Austin
Focus, are not present. Absent are arrow point types Perdiz and Cliffton, small snub-nosed scrapers, small drills worked onto flint flakes,
and pottery.
The gunflint, which was the only historic item present, was likely
dropped or lost in the vicinity long after the main occupation of the site.

THE I~IIGH

BLUFF

125

SITE

In summary, the High Bluff material appears to represent occupations during the Edwards Plateau Aspect and the Austin Focus. The
site was inhabited intermittently by hunting and gathering peoples
with the later occupants using the bow and arrow.
REFERENCES CITED
Epstein, Jeremiah F.
1963 Centipede and Damp Caves: Excavations in Val Verde County, Texas,
1958. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 33 (for 1962),
pp. 1-125.
Forrester, Robert E.
1964 The Ham Creek Site: An .Edwards Plateau Aspect Site in Johnson County, Texas. Tarrant County Archeological Society, pp. 1-46.
Jelks, Edward B.
1962 The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County,
Texas. Archaeology Series No. 5, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr., Dee Ann Suhm, and Curtis D. Tunnell
1962 Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir: The Wunderlich, Footbridge,
and Oblate Sites. Texas Memorial Museum, Bulletin No. 5.
Miller, E. O., and Edward B. Jelks
1952 Archeological Excavations at the Belton Reservoir, Coryell County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,

Vol. 23, pp. 168-217.
Suhm, Dee Arm
1955 Excavations at the Collins Site, Travis County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 25, pp. 7-54.
1957 Excavations at the Smith Roekshelter, Travis County, Texas. Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 26-58.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks (editors)
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. The Texas Archeological Society, Special Publication No. 1, and The Texas Memorial
Museum Bulletin No. 4.
Wright, Welty
1940 The Type, Distribution, and Occurrence of Flint Gravers in Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 12,
pp. 31-47.
Scott, Louisiana

Cyrus N. Ray, 1880-1966
BILL WBIGHT

Late on a wintry evening in October, 199.8, a small group of men
met to form what is now the Texas Archeological Society. Their interest had been stimulated by discoveries which led them to believe
the bleak, red plains and limestone-capped hills of West Texas once
were the hunting ground of primitive man.
Four years earlier, in a gravel deposit located northeast of Colorado
City, Texas, a bison skeleton had been found with a spearpoint among
the bones. The find established a much earlier date for human occupation in North America than had been previously imagined. The
site was excavated by Dr. Cook, Curator of the Denver Museum of
Natural History. The discovery, which was publicized in newspapers
and scientific journals, caught the attention of an Abilene osteopath,
Dr. Cyrus N. tlay, who began looking for similar sites in the gravels
of Taylor County, some seventy miles to the east.
Dr. Ray enlisted the aid of other local people. With the help of
E. B. Sayles and Dr. Otto Watts, he began systematically smweying
the strata exposed by the meanderings of Big Elm Creek and the
Clear Fork of the Brazos. As Ray searched and found other fossil
bones among the gravel deposits of the streams, he also found many
surface sites adjacent to them. More and more material was found,
and the excitement mounted. In January, 199,8, Ray’s description of the
Red Hill Artifacts was published in Scientific American and attracted
national attention.
In the fall of 1928, Dr. Ray decided interest was strong enough to
organize an areheological society. Invitations were sent to various
people and institutions, including the three colleges then located in
Abilene: Simmons College (now Hardin-Simmons University), MeMurray College, and Abilene Christian College. The initial meeting
was held in Cyrus Bay’s osteopathic office, a large, barren upstairs
room on Pine Street next to the old Citizens National Bank Building.
Dr. Stewart Cooper of Simmons College attended along with his colleagues Dr. Julius Olson, Dr. Rupert N. tliehardson, and Dr. Otto
Watts. Professor Letloy C. Glass and Dr. W. C. Holden of McMurray College, Judge Fred Cockrell, Ernest W. Wilson, W. A. Riney,
and E. B. Sayles were among the fifteen persons who responded to
the invitations.
At the time of organization of the society, no state organization
existed. Setting their sights high, the group chose the name "Texas

cYRus N. ~Y, 1880-1966

127

Archaeological and Paleontological Society" with hopes that, as interest grew, the society would expand into a truly state-wide organiza-

tion.
Cyrus Ray was the prime mover of the organization from the start.
He was elected the first president, and for seventeen years he was
The Society. He put in his own money when there were no other
funds available. He began devoting practically all of his time to archaeological work.
In 1929, the fledgling Texas Archaeological and Paleontological
Society published its first Bulletin. The publication was a promotional
venture at the start. Dr. Ray walked the streets of Abilene selling
memberships in the society to the hard-headed businessmen on the
flimsy excuse that it would help publicize Abilene. His efforts were
successful. By the time of publication of the first Bulletin the society
had 160 members, even though many of them didn’t know an artifact
from an artichoke and cared less. The issue was three hundred copies
and contained articles by Dr. Ray, E. B. Sayles, Rupert N. Richardson, M. L. Crimmins, George C. Martin, and Dr. W. C. Holden.
Dr. Ray proved to be an excellent editor. As Dr. Holden recalls, he
was very meticulous and had the knack of correcting the grammar
and spelling of submitted papers while retaining the original meaning and flavor of the article. Under Ray’s editorship the Bulletin developed into a responsible scientific journal.
Cyrns Ray was born in 1880 in Kirksville, Missouri, attended public school there, and entered the American School of Osteopathy
from which he received his D.O. degree in 1909. After graduation he
came to Texas where he practiced for a while in Fort Worth. In 1911
he came to Abilene.
Dr. Ray’s interests were not limited to archeology. He was a constant contributor to his chosen profession of Osteopathy. Articles on
such subjects as the mechanical relief of hiccups and a chemicalmechanical cure for hay fever and asthma were published by The
American Journal of Osteopathy. Dr. Ray’s attention over the years
was focused on such diverse fields as insect behavior and glass collecting, the mystelT of patination and the making of pottery. He conducted researches in the hybridization of plants and developed a successful cross between the loganberry and the nessbenT, which he
called the rayberry. He worked for six years domesticating the native
Texas Black Currant. His work with irises has been widely acclaimed.
Cyrus Ray’s boundless enthusiasm was completely contagious. Dr.
W. C. Holden fondly recalls many an hour long phone call at 1 or 9.
a.m. when Ray would expound on some find or new project. The early

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

cold hours were forgotten in the excitement of the conversation. There
was something exhilarating about his enthusiasm.
Cyrus Ray was a hard-thinking man. He had the strength of his
convictions and insisted upon individual freedom. His disagreements
with critics became legendat7 with his professional colleag~ms as well
as with the citizens of Abilene. He made his position known on all
public issues-flood control, urban renewal, water conservation, and
flouridation. No opponent escaped the fury of his pen. The vigor with
which he assailed his critics, especially in his later years, could well
have limited the scientific acceptance of some of his archeologieal
work. But it was his nature to fight for what he believed. Along with
the fght, however, he never lost his sense of humor.
Dr. Itay lived in an old house which was surrounded by a jungle
of cactus, wild curt’ant bushes, and shrubs of varying types and descriptions. Rocks were in piles bordering the walks and drives. The
whole place had a wild, untamed look. Plants and rocks were some
of the treasures brought home from his many walks on the Plains. At
the back of the house in a separate building was Dr. Ray’s garageworkshop.
This little shack was all a boy could wish for. Ancient sun-toasted
bottles lined the walls. Big piles of worked flint-scrapers, gouges,
spear points-lay in a profusion on walls and floor. In a basket in one
corner of the floor lay the bleached and shellacked bones of some
ancient human-his jawless skull looking like Andy Cutup, buried to
the neck in a pile of bones.
I was in junior high school when I first visited Dr. tlay. His reputation was vividly exaggerated in my mind. I had heard he was unpredictable, apt to lash out fighting at the slightest provocation. As I
approached the workshop, I could see a flicker of yellow light tln’ough
the open door. Uneasily I knocked and I was invited in by a gruff
cough of acknowledgement.
Dr. tlay was flame-testing minerals on a platinum wire which
flamed blue and red and yellow with various mixtures of powdered
rock. His white hair was thin but curled like horns atop his massive
head. He was a great huge man who wore small steel-rimmed glasses
which seemed to intensify his light blue eyes. To me, he seemed to
be Mephistopholes, brewing some fiendish incantation. But I need
not have been uneasy. From the first, our mutual interests ch’ew us
together.
This meeting was the beginning of a friendship that lasted through
the years. We tramped the hills together many times. I learned about

cYRUS N. RAY, 1880-1966

129

Indians from him-he showed me their signs, their arrowpoints, flint
and grinding tools, and their beads.
With the passing years we drifted apart--he to undertake new projeets, I to attend college. Later when I returned to Abilene, I saw him
on the street, indomitable as ever, his coat flying in the wind. We enjoyed seeing each other again and recalling memories of past times.
We weren’t together much after that, a visit now and then was all.
Then one day the call came-another walker of the Texas Plains was
stilled.
Cyrus Ray had outlived most of his friends. To those who never
met him, Cyrus Ray will remain a composite of what others have
written and said about him. Knowing him personally was an experience-he was an unforgettable and unique ehm’aeter interested in
past and present, science and art, ready to enter any controversy. He
participated fully in life.
Others will continue to walk the plains with curious eyes and probing sticks and wonder about the riddles of the signs. Now for a quiet
moment, let us think one last time-Goodbye, Old FlJend.
Abilene, Texas

Cyrus N. Ray
Bibliography and Contributions to Texas Archaeology
R. K. HAt.IS AND

INUS

MARIE HAB_mS

Cyrus N. Bay, founder, first President, President Emeritus, and
Fellow of the Texas Archeological Society~ and Editor for 18 years of
the Bulletin, died on Tuesday, June 21, 1966, at the age of 86. He died
where he had lived and worked for 55 years, in Abilene, Taylor
County, Texas.
He was of English and Scotch-Irish ancestry. His paternal ancestor
came to Maryland from Manchester, England, in 1730. Dr. Bay was
born near Kirksville, Missouri, on January 18, 1880, and spent his early
years there. He received his degree as Doctor of Osteopathy there in
1909 and soon moved to Texas to practice.
In Abilene he became a prominent physician and surgeon, respected
by patients and colleagues alike. He was noted for his inventive and
original approach to medical problems. In 199.1 he was honored by
being elected President of the Texas Association of Osteopathic Physicians and Surgeons. In 1925 the Governor appointed him a member
of the Texas State Board of Medical Examiners. He had been listed as
a member of Who’s Who in America since 1932.
Outside his medical work, he found time to study native floras and
contribute articles to gardening magazines. In these articles he described native Texas plants, shrubs, plant-breeding experiments, and
methods of gardening in @ regions.
Dr. Bay’s research in Texas archaeology began in the Abilene area,
an area-among others in Texas-practically unknown archaeologically
at that time. In October, 1928, Dr. Ray called together a group to
organize an archaeological society. Those present included Dr. Julius
Olsen, Dr. Otto O. Watts, Dr. It. N. Richardson, Dr. W. C. Holden,
E. B. Sayles, Ernest W. Wilson, Frank Grimes, W. A. Riney, O. K.
Hobbs, and Dr. t/ay.2 As a result, the Texas Archaeological and
Paleontological Society was founded on October 3, 1928.
Under Dr. Bay’s guidance the society was devoted to the study of
history and prehistory and to fossils of the past floras and faunas of
Texas. The society enconraged proper collection and preservation of
Formerly the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society.
2 Listed in the Foreword of the Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological and Paleontologcial Society, Vol. 7, pp. 4-7, 1935.

CYRUS N. RAY, BIBLIOGRAPHY

131

artifacts and fossils for study and classification, and it urged the publication of research?
The society began as an Abilene society, which met monthly to hear
and discuss a scientific paper. From this beginning the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society has grown into a society of approximately 1,000 members. Although the name has been shortened,
the scientific goals have remained the same.
Dr. Ray was untiring in his efforts on behalf of the society. He
attended the annual meetings and gave papers whenever possible,
took an active interest in all problems confronting the society, and
responded to all controversial issues by taking pen in hand. Besides
serving for many years as President and Editor, he conta’ibuted 66
articles on archaeology.
Had it not been for his pioneering and persistent efforts in exploring mad understanding West Texas archaeology, Texas would have
been far behind in archaeological research. His interest in archaeology
began as an avocation, however, he found it productive and rewarding; therefore, more and more of his time was devoted to it. He wrote
many informative articles on the subject of early man in Texas and
lectnred widely before university and other groups. He was called
upon repeatedly to read papers and always responded. He was highly
respected by both professionals and amateurs for his scientific studies
in Texas archaeology.
The following list of Dr. Ray’s publications does not include his
medical, newspaper, oi" magazine articles on varied subjects. Only his
contributions to Texas archaeology are given?
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BIBLIOGRAPHY OF CYRUS N. RAY
KEY TO ABm~EVIATmNS
BTAPS-Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
BTAS--Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
1929a A Differentiation of the Prehistoric Cultures of the Abilene
Region. BTAPS, Vot. 1, pp. 7-22.
199.9b New Evidences of Ancient Man in America. Scientific American, Vol. 140, No. 4, pp. 430-431.
1930a In: Archaeological Field Work in North America During 1929.
American Anthropologist, Vol. 32, No. 2, pp. 368-369.
3 Foreword, Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society,
Vol. 1, pp. 4-5, 1929.
4 Most of this bibliography is taken from T. N. Campbell’s "’Texas Archeology:
A Guide to the Literature," published in the Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 29, pp. 177-254, 1958.

132

1930b
1931a
1931b
1932a
1932b
1933a
1933b
1934a
1934b
1934c
1935a
1935b
1935c
1935d
1935e
1935f
1936a
1936b
1936c
1936d
1936e
1936f
1936g
1936h
1937a

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tleport on Some Recent Archeological tlesearches in the Abitene Section. BTAPS, Vol. 2, pp. 45-58.
In: Archaeological Field Work in North America During 1930.
American Anthropologist, Vol. 33, No. 3, pp. 481-482.
Recent Areheologieal Researches in the Abilene Section.
BTAPS, Vol. 3, pp. 76-89.
Areheological Research in Central West Texas. BTAPS, Vol. 4,
pp. 63-70.
In: Archaeological Field Work in North America During 1931.
American Anthropologist, Vol. 34, No. 3, pp. 503-504.
Multiple Burials in Stone Cist Mounds of the Abilene Region.
BTAPS, Vol. 5, pp. 14-24.
The Brownwood Skull. BTAPS, Vol. 5, pp. 95-98.
Editor’s Note. BTAPS, Vol. 6, pp. 35-37.
Flint Cultures of Ancient Man in Texas. BTAPS, Vol. 6, pp.
107-111.
Report on Two Mineralized Skeletons. BTAPS, Vol. 6, pp.
116-118.
In: Archaeological Field Work in North America During 1934.
American Antiquity, Vol. 1, No. 2, p. 134.
Folsom Sites. BTAPS, Vol. 7, pp. 127-129.
Indian Flint Saws. BTAPS, Vol. 7, pp. 125-127.
On Artifact Forgers. BTAPS, Vol. 7, pp. 129-130.
Some Unusual Cremated Burials. BTAPS, Vol. 7, pp. 130-131.
The Pottery Complex Artifacts of the Abilene tlegion. BTAPS,
Vol. 7, pp. 70-88.
Glyptodon Species. BTAPS, Vol. 8, p. 188.
Large Piece of Obsidian Found in Taylor County. BTAPS,
Vol. 8, pp. 191-192.
New Data on Deeply Buried Sites. BTAPS, Vol. 8, pp. 189-190.
tleview: E. B. Howard, Evidence of Early Man in North
America. BTAPS, Vol. 8, pp. 178-179.
tleview: J. T. Patterson, The Corner-tang Artifacts of Texas.
BTAPS, Vol. 8, pp. 175-176.
ttio Crande Glaze Paint Sherds Found in Taylor County.
BTAPS, Vol. 8, pp. 190-191.
Some Comments on Sayles Survey. BTAPS, Vol. 8, pp. 180-184.
Some Unusual Cremated Burials Found near Colorado, Texas.
BTAPS, Vo!. 8, pp. 9-16.
More Evidence Concerning Abilene Man. BTAPS, Vol. 9, pp.
193-217.

CYRUS N. I~Y, BIBLIOCRAPHY

1937b
1937c
1937d
1938a
1938b

1938c
1939a
1939b
1939c
1940a
1940b
1940c
1940d
1940e
1941a
1941b
1941c
1941d
1941e
1942a
1942b
1942c
1943a

133

More Pueblo Pottery Found near Abilene. BTAPS, Vol. 9, p.
235.
Probable Uses of Flint End-scrapers. American Antiquity, Vol.
2, No. 4, pp. 303-306.
Review: J. T. Patterson, The Comer-tang Flint Artifacts of
Texas. American Antiquity, Vol. 2, No. 3, pp. 241-242.
New Evidence of Ancient Man in Texas Found During Prof.
Kirk Bryan’s Visit. BTAPS, Vol. 10, pp. 269-273.
(with Kirk Bryan) Folsomoid Point Found in Alluvium Beside a Mammoth’s Bones. Science, Vol. 88, No. 2281, pp. 257258.
The Clear Fork Culture Complex. BTAPS, Vol. 10, pp. 193207.
Inaccuracies in Fischel’s Folsom Article. American Antiquity,
Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 58-64.
Is the American Mano of Pleistocene Age? BTAPS, Vol. 11,
pp. 251-252.
Some Unusual Abilene Region Burials. BTAPS, Vol. 11, pp.
226-250.
Four Sand Dune Culture Burials. BTAPS, Vol. 12, pp. 241-242.
New Type of Painted Pebbles Found near Abilene. BTAPS,
Vol. 12, pp. 242-247.
The Deeply Bm’ied Gibson Site. BTAPS, Vol. 12, pp. 223-237.
Unusual Skull. BTAPS, Vol. 12, pp. 238-241. BTAPS, Vol. 13,
p. 168 (Plate 30).
Was the American Mano and Metate an Invention Made During Pleistocene Time? Science, Vol. 91, No. 2356, pp. 190-191.
Another Type of Gibson Site Point. BTAPS, Vol. 13, p. 177.
The Various Types of the Clear Fork Gouge. BTAPS, Vol. 13,
pp. 152-162.
Two Mistakes Made by the Editor: The "Iron Button." BTAPS,
Vol. 13, pp. 173-175.
Unusual Skull. BTAPS, Vol. 13, p. 168 (Plate 30).
(with E. B. Sayles) An Agreement on Abilene Region Terminology. BTAPS, Vol. 13, pp. 175-176.
Ancient Artifacts and Mammoth’s Teeth of the McLean Site.
BTAPS, Vol. 14, pp. 137-145, 149-153.
PrehistolJc Paintings Covered with Stalagmitic Deposit.
BTAPS, Vol. 14, pp. 49-59.
Transparent Calcium Incrustation over Rock Paintings. Science, Vol. 96, No. 2497, pp. 426-427.
A Texas Skeleton. Science, Vol. 98, No. 2456, p. 344.

134

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1943b

Ground Sandstone Balls of Upper Elm Creek Bed Gravel.
BTAPS, Vol. 15, pp. 97-104.
1943c Human Burial Covered by Twenty-one Feet of Silt. BTAPS,
Vol. 15, pp. 110-116.
1945
Stream Bank Silts of the Abilene Region. BTAPS, Vol. 16, pp.
117-147.
i946a Folsom Blades. BTAPS, Vol. 17, pp. 108-112.
1946b Of Manos, Metates, and Scrapers. BTAPS, Vol. 17, pp. 103-104.
1946c Permian Polished Boulders of Texas. BTAPS, Vol. 17, pp. 6383.
1946d Scientists Inspect Ancient Hearths in River Silts. BTAPS, Vol.
17, pp. 104-107.
1946e Two Buried Multiple Stone Gist Structures. BTAPS, Vol. 17,
pp. 18-9.7.
1947a Chemical Alteration of Silicate Artifacts. BTAPS, Vol. 18, pp.
28-39.
1947b Review: Alex D. Krieger, Culture Complexes in Northern
Texas. BTAPS, Vol. 18, pp. 160-167.
1948a Ancient Man in Texas. Proceedings and Transactions of the
Texas Academy of Science, Vol. 30, pp. 152-154.
1948b Survey of Twenty Coke County Sites. BTAPS, Vol. 19, pp.
36-56.
1948c The Facts Concerning the Clear Fork Culture. American Antiquity, Vol. 13, No. 4, pp. 320-322.
1955a Comments Concerning Some Type Names in "An Inh’oductory
Handbook of Texas Archeology." BTAS, Vol. 26, pp. 272-278.
1955b Stone-lined Basin with Charcoal in Lower Clear Fork Silt.
BTAS, Vol. 26, pp. 101-107.
1961
Deductions Concerning the Clear Fork Gouge. BTAS, Vol. 30,
pp. 199-207.
1964
(with Edward B. Jelks) The W. H. Watson Site: A Historic
Indian Burial in Fisher County, Texas. BTAS, Vol. 35, pp.
127-141.
Southern Methodist University
Dallas, Texas

.James Alfred Ford, 1911-1968
CnAI’CSNCE H. WEBB
With the death of James A. Ford on February 25, 1968, American
archeology lost one of its most versatile practitioners, an ingenious
innovator, and an excellent theoretician. He was the father of archeology of the Lower Mississippi Valley and the leader of a brilliant
group who established the sequence of cultures in the Lower Valley
-one of the cornerstones of Southeastern archeology. He was the leading spirit in establishing the Southeastern Archeological Conference
and one of its regular attendants through the years. Above all, he was
to many of us not only a true fi’iend and an always-interesting companion but virtually a member of the family.
James Alfred Ford was born in Water Valley, Mississippi, February 12, 1911, to James Alfred and Jaaaie David (Johnson) Ford. The
father, appropriately, came from Coles Creek, in Yalobusha County,
Mississippi. He was a railroad man and died of a train accident only
three years after Jim’s birth. The mother, a primary school teacher
before her marriage, resumed her profession after her husband’s death
in order to support herself, Jim, and another son. She is a sel£-reliant
person of considerable ability and still does remedial teaching for
problem students in her native Mississippi.
Jim Ford became interested in archeology before finishing high
school. He worked for three months each year during 1927-29 with
Moreau B. Chambers for the Mississippi Department of Archives and
History. With Chambers he made field surveys, excavated a number
of sites, prepared collections and exhibits, and established a record
of sites and specimens for the state museum. On completion of high
school he entered Mississippi College.
During the summer of 1930 he went to Alaska as assistant to Henry
B. Collins, Jr., of the U. S. National Museum. They excavated a series
of sites at Gambel, St. Lawrence Island, fi’om which the first chronology of western Eskimo prehistory, covering a period of 2000 years,
was established. Ford was sent back to Alaska by the National Museum in May, 1931, and remained for 18 months. Dm’ing the two
summers he was in charge of excavation of a series of sites near Point
Barrow. The chronology discovered here, covering about 1800 years,
demonstrated how the Thule Cultttre, which the Maritime Eskimo
carried to Central Canada and Greenland, had developed out of the
early stages in the Bering Strait region. He returned to Alaska with
Collins in the summer of 1936 and again with a party from Harvard

136

TEXAS

AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

University under the auspice of the Arctic Research Laboratory in the
summer of 1953. Out of these Alaskan studies came Ford’s 1959 publication "Eskimo Prehistory in the Vicinity of Point Ban’ow, Alaska."
In the introduction to this volume, Ford recounted some of his experiences during the winter of 1931-32, when excavations were impossible. Dm’ing that fall, he joined a boat crew which killed a bowhead whale east of Point Ban’ow and towed it to the land ice near
the Point. As his portion of the kill, Ford was awarded the skull,
which was detached and hauled up on the beach. There it was proreefed until the next summer when it could be shipped to Seattle,
eventually to reach the National Museum for display.
In October he joined the annual reindeer round-up at Wapalta,
where, within a week’s time, he helped to pass 12,000 reindeer through
the corrals, which ineluded killing, castrating, and marking chutes.
His compensation was a supply of skins for winter clothing and meat
for the next summer’s archeological camp. His mechanical ingenuity
came to the fore. With the help of a Signal Corps sergeant and the
local school teacher, a Model T Ford chassis was converted into a
"rather primitive snowmobile." Trips were made to the deer corral,
to Wainwright, and to the camp of the crew of the ice-bound steamer
"Baychimo" near the Sea Horse Islands-a total of 1300 miles. During
the cold winter months Ford lived with the medical missionary, Dr.
Henry B. Criest. In the early spring he traveled with Alfred Hopson,
with dogs and sleds, to the oil seeps at Cape Simpson to bring back
two sled loads of asphalt to be used as fuel. To the powerfully-built
Jim Ford, in the vigor of early manhood, these experiences must have
been stimulating and exciting.
When he returned to the states, Ford received a grant from the National Research Council to conduct site smweys in central and northern Louisiana and to excavate the Peek Village Site. Ford’s first publieations on the Lower Mississippi Valley resulted from these studies,
his earlier surveys with Moreau Chambers, and later studies by Chambers in Mississippi and by Ford in Louisiana. "Outline of Louisiana
and Mississippi Pottery Horizons" was published in 1934, "Ceramic
Deeoration Sequence at an Old Indian Village Site near Sicily Island,
Louisiana" in 1935, and the famous "Analysis of Indian Village Site
Collections from Louisiana and Mississippi" in 1936. These studies
and publications laid the groundwork for the establishment of the
prehistoric culture sequence in the Lower Valley. The "Analysis"
was the first attempt to set up a system of pottery typology in this
area. Having tried two systems of analysis and indexing and discarding both because of impracticability or subjective variation, he de-

JAMES ALFBED FORD, 1911-1968

137

vised an analytical system by which decoration motifs, decoration elements, and combinations or arrangements of these features were expressed by sets of mlmbers. Collections h’om 103 sites were so analyzed and seven complexes were recognized: Choctaw, Natchez, Caddo, and Tunica in the historic period; Deasonville, Coles Creek, and
Marksville in the prehistoric peliod.
From September, 1933, through July, 1934, Ford assisted Frank
M. Setzler in excavation of the Marksville Mound under auspices of
the U. S. National Museum. This work established the Marksville cultural complex as a southern variant of Hopewell culture. During
August of 1934 he worked for the Park Service, State of Georgia, excavating and studying a ruin near Brunswick which the Park Service
was in the process of developing into a state park in the belief that it
was the site of the 1680 Spanish Mission of Santo Domingo de Talajo.
In Ford’s succinct words "It proved to be the ruins of a sugm" mill,
built about 1820."
In September and October, 1934, he planned and constructed
buildings for an "American Indian Exposition" held on the Fair
Grounds at Atlanta, Georgia, by the Southeastern Fair Association.
Again in Ford’s words, he "managed the exposition, fed, housed,
nursed, and bailed out of jail the 40 Cherokees, 30 Seminoles, and 30
assorted southwestern Indians who had been provided to staff the exposition by the Bureau of Indian Affairs."
In the fall of 1934, Jim Ford entered Louisiana State University as
a student and tlesearch Associate in the School of Geology. He
brought to Baton Itouge his young bride, the former Ethel Campbell, whom he had married on March 3, 1934, in Jackson, Mississippi.
His 1935 surveys in Louisiana were sponsored by the University. July
and August of 1935 were spent in a summer field session in archeology at Chaco Cm~yon on a University of New Mexico Fellowship.
He received the A.B. degree from L.S.U. in 1936 and retained the
position of Research Associate in Antln’opology until 1946.
Intermittently during this period Ford was engaged in archeological work in Georgia, where he met many of the young archeologists
with whom he would be associated later in the Southeastern Archeological Conference and with whom he would collaborate in forging
the entire picture of Southeastern archeology. For a short time dining
1933 he worked with Dr. A. It. Kelly in excavating Brown’s Mount
near Ocmulgee. In 1937 he returned for the summer period to work
for Kelly in reconstructing the Council Chamber in Ocmulgee National Monument neaa" Macon, Georgia. This building, which had been
excavated in 1934, is one of the major exhibits of the monument.

138

TEXAS AI~CHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Working with Kelly, in addition to Ford, were Gordon Willey, Antonio Waring, Jesse D. Jennings, and Charles Fairbanks. During this
elimaetie summer the Southeastern Conference, the binomial system
of pottery nomenclature, the Southern Cult, and area-wide relationships of previously isolated culture sequences were discussed by this
group. Preston Holder, who was working on the Georgia coast, also
participated in the discussions. Initiated that year was the close professional relationship of Ford with Willey, who had brought knowledge of the binomial typing system and of tree-ring dating from the
Southwest
In the fall of 1937 Ford went to the University of Michigan as a
graduate student with a Fellowship in the University Museum. He received the M.A. degree in Anthropology from Michigan in 1938.
James B. Griffin was engaged in ceramic analysis in the Michigan
Ceramics Repository; he and Ford assayed the first binomia! elassifleation of Eastern pottery in 1937 ("Conference on Pottery Nomenclature for the Southeastern United States"). In the Waring Papers,
Stephen Williams gives the background for these developments. He
states that this system was applied by Ford to pottery classification
for the Lower Mississippi Valley to replace the cumbersome nmnerieal symbols which he had used. The second region to profit was Savannah, where Caldwell and Waring applied a trinomial system to
pottery types. The method was rapidly adopted and widely applied
(the writer used the binomial system in typing Caddoan pottery from
the Belcher Mound in 1940-41).
Ford and Griffin organized and hosted the First Southeastern Artheological Conference in Ann Arbor in the spring of 1988, with Wm.
G. Haag, then at Kentucky, as the first secretary. From this early
assoeiation Ford, Gri~n, and Haag remained fast friends and close
collaborators.
When Ford retm’ned to Louisiana State University in June, 1988, he
and Dr. Fred Kniffen, Chairman of the Department of Geology and
Anthropology, began to formulate the state-wide W.P.A. Areheological Project. It was initiated in September, 1938, and continued until
the fall of 1941, when it was terminated because of World War II.
During these three years excavations were conducted at Marksville,
Greenhouse, Crooks, Angola, Medora, Bayou Goula, Mansura, and the
Tehefuncte sites around Lake Pontchartrain and at Lafayette (Ford
had tested the Lake Louis Site near Sicily Island in the spring of
1937). Ford had gathered a number of archeologists for this work,
some of whom were to become outstanding in the field. Ineluded were
Gordon t/. Willey, George I. Quimby, Jr., ttobert S. (Stu) Neitzel,

JAMES

ALFRED FOIID,

1911-1968

139

Arden King, William T. Mulloy, Edwin B. Doran, Jr., Carlyle S.
Smith, Andrew Albrecht, Preston Holder, Walter Beeeher, and in addition a number of research consultants. The preliminary sequence of
Lower Valley cultures, which Ford had set up by his earlier studies,
was confirmed and expanded by these excavations and the resultant
publications. The new sequence of Tchefunete-Marksville-TroyvilleColes Creek-Plaquemine-Natehez/Caddoan has stood the tests of
time and correlations all across the Southeastern United States. Ford
and Willey’s "An Interpretation of the Prehistory of the Eastern
United States" (1941) is one of the finest interpretive syntheses in
American archeology.
In the fall of 1939 Ford, James Criffin, and Philip Phillips planned
an archeological survey of the Mississippi Valley in Arkansas and
Mississippi, designed to extend the study of the Lower Valley prehistory northward of previous surveys. During March and April of 1940
they collaborated in the initial field-work; additional surface collections and limited excavations were done in 1941 and, after the war,
there were tests and excavations in 1946 and 1947 in which Ford did
not participate.
During 1940 and 1941, under a Ilosenwald Fellowship, Ford worked
toward his Ph.D. in Columbia University. In June, 1941, he went to
Columbia, South America, for a year’s work for the Andean Institute,
Yale University Unit. For the first three months he assisted Wendell C.
Bennett in the survey and excavation of sites in the Central Cordillera
of Columbia, then continued the work until the end of May, 1942.
Ford’s report "Excavations in the Vicinity of Cali, Columbia," published by Yale University in 1944, outlined a short chronology in the
vicinity of Cali and assembled information fi’om private collections.
During the war years, 1942-1945, Ford was Senior Design Specialist,
Arctic and Winter Warfare, in the tlesearch and Development
Branch, Office of the Quartermaster Ceneral, U. S. Army. He was
engaged in correcting deficiencies and designing new items of clothing, web equipment, tentage, food and other items for operations under arctic conditions. He made thirteen trips to the Alcan Highway,
Alaska, and the Aleutians.
After the war ended, Ford was in New York from September, 1945,
until mid-January, 1946, devoting this time to reading and research
in Columbia University Library in preparation for comprehensive examinations for his Ph.D. He then received a Cuggenheim Fellowship
for work in Sonth America, participating in the Virfi Valley Project
on the north coast of Peru from February, 1946, until January, 1947.
This was an immense collaborative project under the auspices of the

140

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Andean Institute in which representatives of Yale, Columbia, the
American Museum of Natural History, the Smithsonian Institution,
Chicago Natural History Museum, and the Museo National de
Arqueologia of Lima cooperated in the study of the perhistory and
modern cultures of Vir6 Valley. The study provided relative dates for
315 prehistoric buildings, pyramids, and other prehistoric consh-uctions. The results of Ford’s and Willey’s smweys were recorded in a
joint publication in 1949; the Virfi Valley study became Ford’s doctoral dissertation.
On January 1, 1947, Ford went to the American Museum of Natural
History in New York City as Curator for North American Archeology,
where he remained until 1963. During this period many of his previous studies were sent to publication. He received the Ph.D. degree
in Anthropology from Columbia University in 1949.
During analysis of the collections and preparation of the report of
the Lower Mississippi Valley Archeological Survey, published with
Phillips and Griffin in 1951, Ford developed two useful tools in archeo!ogy: the con’elation of sites with river channel geology based on
Fisk’s monumental study of the Mississippi Valley River channe! geology and the resurrection of seriation as a major tool. The combining
of seriation and metric stratification analyses with the "battleship"
diagrams of waxing and waning pottery types have become familiar
sights in archeological literature.
While at the American Museum, Ford went out for field work at
frequent intervals: to the Jaketown Site in Mississippi in 1951 for excavations with Phillips and Haag; to the Poverty Point Site in Louisiana in 1952, 1953, and 1955 for testing and excavations; and back ~o
Alaska in 1953. He went back to Peru in 1958-59 for surveys and excavations in the valleys of Chira, Piura, and at Lambayeque.
Ford was aware of the Poverty Point Site from the time of his early
site surveys in Louisiana and was cognizant of the unique culture
which did not fit easily into the developing picture of Southeastern
sequences. He and the writer were in correspondence during the
1930’s when information about Poverty Point culture was gradually
accumulating. After a Poverty Point component was identified in the
lower levels of the Jaketown Site and an identical microflint industry
was established at the two sites, his interest quickened. Studies at
Jaketown, published with Phillips and Haag in 1955, were followed
by field work at Poverty Point. The immense and remarkable geometric village construction on a solar-oriented axis was established
from aerial photographs. Ford was assisted at Poverty Point by Junius
Bird and Stu Neitzel; Haag, Griffin, Phillips, and I, with many others,

JAMES

ALFRED FORD,

1911-1968

141

visited whenever possible. It was reported to have been quite a spectacle to watch Jim and Junius-equally ingenious and investigative
spirits--rolling clay balls between their fingers to see how they were
formed (I was doing the same with modeling clay at home) or scraping and sawing on bones with lamellar blades to prove that "perforators" could be only worn-out blades. Ford’s mechanical ingenuity was
demonstrated during excavations at Poverty Point. He rigged up a
mechanical dirt sifter which was shaken by attachment to a gasoline
engine; it worked so well that he described it in a brief communication to American Antiquity. He also tinkered with and adjusted a
bulldozer with back-hoe blade so that thin slices could be shaved to
cut narrow trenches through Mound B and leave balks with vertical
walls to establish profiles. The Poverty Point publication in 1956
combined information from these excavations with studies of the local
collections, with Michael Beckman’s studies, and with my studies of
Poverty Point.
As extensions of the Lower Mississippi Valley Survey, Ford excavated at Menard Site on the lower Arkansas River. He identified it
as the Quapaw Village of Osotouy, where the first European establishment in the Mississippi Valley was built by LaSalle’s followers in
1686. He excavated the Hopewell PmSod village site and burial mound
complex near Helena, Arkansas. Sponsored by the American Museum
and the National Science Foundation, he surveyed Archaic sites on old
courses of the Mississippi and tributaries in the floor of the alluvial
valley between Cairo and Natchez. Here, again, Ford displayed mechanical ingenuity by developing an artifact-gathering machine with
which he planned to make rapid surveys of village middens: the machine was to turn or loosen the soil, gather it to pass through a sifter,
then-in hm’vesting machine fashion-turn out the artifacts. Unfortunately, thin middens and previous avid local collecting interfered
with the success of this machine.
While working at Poverty Point Site, Ford also traveled to Baton
Rouge and Marksville, in 1953, to plan with Neitzel the exhibits for
the Marksville State Museum. In 1954, he returned to Marksville to
assist in the installation of these exhibits. In June and July, 1961, with
others from the U. S. National Museum, he gave intensive courses in
chronological techniques to young professional archeologists from
ten Central and South American counhies at Universidad del Atlantieo, Barranquilla, Columbia. Between 1962 and 1964 he advised and
collaborated with Stu Neitzel in excavation and report of the Fatherland Site at Natchez, Mississippi.
Ford had a considerable interest in the Caddoan Area, although

142

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

he conducted only two limited excavations in the area-at the Wilkinson and Allen sites in Natchitoehes Parish-during his early surveys.
He was in fi’equent touch with Krieger and the writer during the
1930’s and 1940’s when Caddoan archeological sequences were being
formulated. He and Willey visited with Mrs. Webb and myself, in
1937, advising about excavations at the Belcher Site and photographing pottery from northwestern Louisiana. In 1939 he recognized the
identity of the "Long-Nose God" masks from the Gahagan burial
mound with the masks recovered by Moore from the Grant Mound in
Florida. In his analytical study of pottery design movements, "Measurements of Some Design Elements in the Southeastern United
States" (1952), the extension of these elements into Caddoan ceramics
was included.
Ford attended a number of Caddoan Conferences and on several
occasions the Ford-Gri~n versus Krieger-Webb debates were fiery
higlflights of the meetings. There were some complications in that
both Jim Ford and Alex Krieger were much more accomplished writers than they were public speakers. Often Ford couldn’t (or wouldn’t)
understand Krieger and Alex couldn’t (or wouldn’t) hear Jim-there
was even a suggestion that Alex turned his hearing aid down when
Jim was talking-but all would eventually end peacefully and with
mutual respect.
With all of his scientific ability and serious pursuit of knowledge,
Jim Ford had also an enormous capacity for friendship and the avid
enjoyment of life. Mrs. Webb and I discovered one of his capacities
very early, when he and Willey visited with us in 1937. One day we
were busy with other commitments and left Jim and Gordon photographing pottery. Our cook prepared lunch for them including her
specialties, fried chicken, rice and gravy, and hot biscuits. On the next
day, after they had left, Neeeie came to Mrs. Webb with her eyes
rolling.
"Mrs. Webb," she said, "I never seen two men eat hot biscuits like
those two, especially that big Mr. Ford. Every time I went back in the
dining room the plate was empty.
"I’d say "Gentlemen, would you like some hot biscuits?" and Mr.
Ford would say "Just one or two more, Neecie, thank you, just one or
two more." I’d bring another plateful and next time they’d be gone,
too, until all I’d baked was gone. I never seen the like."
At archeologieal conferences a familiar sight was Jim Ford and Stu
Neitzel, usually together, like two great bears. In the cool of the evening, when the relaxed conferring began, woe betide the ordinary
man who tried to keep up with these two. At other times Jim told

JAMES

ALFRED FORD,

1911-1968

143

with huge relish tales of Sleepy Hollow, outside of New York, where
he and his gentle Ethel lived. For instance, the tale of the snowy
winter when Junins Bird dressed in a bearskin one night, claws and
all, and made huge tracks down the valley and into the back yards of
all their friends. This created a near-panic for the next few days over
the giant animal aloose in Sleepy Hollow. Or the tale of the time
when person o1" persons unknown, but generally suspected of being
Jim and Junins, experimented with the firing of ceramic tiles in the
Museum. What a hubbub when Gordon Ekholm discovered among
his prized tiles from a Mayan site a certain number which were decorated with likenesses of Pogo and other comic strip characters from
Okefenokee!
Jim was a leading exponent among dirt archeologists of the theory
of cultural determinism. We had many long arguments about this:
Jim, the eulturalist, explaining patiently how man was caught and
controlled by the sweep and flow of culture, and how supposed geniuses or inventors were produced, at the right time, by the forces of
culture; I, the physician and humanist, objecting to the role of man
as only a culture-bearer and maintaining that unusual men could, and
often did, change the course of history and alter the flow of culture.
Like the chicken and egg, o1" the heredity versus environment arguments, this was never settled, but it did help to pass the long, sometimes hot miles between sites in Louisiana, Mississippi, or Mexico.
Ford was active and influential in professional organizations. He
was a member of the Society for American Archeology and served as
its president in 1963-64. He helped to found the Southeastern Areheologieal Conference and attended most of its meetings. He was also
a member of the American Anthi’opological Association, the Arctic Institute of North America, the Florida Archeological Society, and the
Arkansas Archeological Society. He was awarded the Spinden Medal
for noteworthy archeological concepts.
By the early 1960’s new collections from the Poverty Point Site and
new sites of this period had indicated the need for a revision of ottr
1956 publication. Plans were instituted toward this end by 1962 for
tabulation of the immense Carl Alexander collection and a dozen
others. Illustrations were prepared, but further work was inten’upted
by excavations in Mexico on Ford’s part and medical duties on mine.
Preparation of this revision was resumed in 1966 with a survey of new
sites in Mississippi and a projected outline of the volume. Ford’s participation was telTninated by his illness in the spring of 1967. just
before the onset of his illness, Ford and Bill Haag excavated the
Monte Sano Mounds, a Poverty Point site in Baton Rouge.

144

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Between 1962 and 1966, convinced that elements of Formative Culture from South America and Mesoameriea had entered the Mississippi Valley during Poverty Point times, Ford sought a possible point of
origin on the Gulf Coast of Mexico. With Alfonso Medellin and Matthew Wollrath, Ford excavated at the Limoncito and Chalahuites
sites near Vera Cruz and studied the entire Trapiche Phase of that
area. After the publication of "Early Formative Cultures of Coastal
Ecuador" by Meggers, Evans, and Estrada, the conviction was
reached by Ford that the early fiber-tempered ceramics of the Georgia
and Florida coasts were expressions of the American Formative. His
last published article "Early Fol~native Cultures in Georgia and Florida," in American Antiquity in 1966, expressed and explained this
conviction. He was in frequent contact with Evans, Meggers, and
other workers in the Formative cultures of South America and Mesoamerica, and arranged a conference on this subject at the University
of Florida, where he had accepted the position of Curator of Florida
State Museum in 1963. He was in the final stages of completing a comprehensive study of the American Formative when his untimely
death occurred on Februal7 25, 1968.
His was a full life and much too short. We shall miss him.
MAJOR PUBLICATIONS OF JAMES A. FORD
1934

Outline of Louisiana and Mississippi PottelN Horizons, Louisiana Conservation Rev., Vol. 4, No. 6, pp. 33-38.

1935

Ceramic Decoration Sequence at an Old Indian Village Site
Near Sicily Island, Louisiana. Anthropological Study No. 1, Department of Conservation, Louisiana Geological Survey.

1936

Analysis of Indian Village Site Collections from Louisiana and
Mississippi. Anthropological Study No. 2, Department of Conservation, Louisiana Geological Survey.

1937

Excavation of Supposed Spanish Mission Ruin of Santo Domingo de Talaje. In Coulter, W. E. (editor), Georgia’s Disputed
Ruins, pp. 192-225.

1938

Chronological Method Applicable to the Southeast. American
Antiquity, Vol. 3, No. 3, pp. %0-264.

1940

(with Cordon R. Willey) Crooks Site, A Marksville Period
Burial Mound in LaSalle Parish, La. Anthropological Study
No. 3, Depallment of Conservation, Louisiana Geological Survey, pp. 1-148.

JAi~ES

ALFIiED FORD,

1911-1968

145

1941

(with Cordon It. Willey) An Interpretation of the Prehistory
of the Eastern United States. American Anthropologist, n.s.,
Vol. 43, No. 3, Pt. 1, pp. 325-363.

1944

Excavations in the Vicinity of Cali, Columbia. Yale University
Publications in Anttn’opology, No. 31, pp. 1-75.

1945

(with George I. Quimby, Jr.) The Tchefuncte Culture, An
Early Occupation of the Lower Mississippi Valley. Memoirs of
the Society for American Archaeology, No. 2, pp. 1-96.

\

1949

Cultural Dating of Prehistoric Sites in Vir6 Valley, Peru. In
Ford, James A., and Gordon t/. Willey, Surface Survey of Virtl
Valley, Peru. Anthropological Papers of the American Museum
of Natural History, Vol. 43, Pt. 1, pp. 29-88.

1951

Greenhouse: A Troyville-Coles Creek Period Site in Avoyelles
Parish, Louisiana. Anthropological Papers of the American
Museum of Natural History, Vol. 44, Pt. 1, pp. 1-132.

1951

(with Philip Phillips and James B. Griffin) Archaeological Survey in the Lower Mississippi Alluvial Valley, 1940-47. Papers
of the Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, Vol. 25, pp. 1-472.

1952

Measurements of Some Prehistoric Design1 Developments in the
Southeastern States. Anthropological Papers of the American
Museum of Natural History, Vol. 44, Pt. 3, pp. 309-384.

1954

(with discussion by Julian H. Steward) On the Concept of
Types. American Anthropologist, Vol. 56, No. 1, pp. 42-57.

1955

(with Philip Phillips and William G. Haag) The Jaketown Site
in West-central Mississippi. Anthropological Papers of the
American Musemn of Natural History, Vol. 45, Pt. 1, pp. 1-164.

1956

(with Clarence H. Webb) Poverty Point, a Late Archaic Site
in Louisiana. Anthropological Papers of the American Museum
of Natural History, Vol. 46, Pt. 1, pp. 1-136.

1957

M~todo Cuantitativo para Determinar la Cronologla Arqueoldgiea, Divnlgaciones Etnol6gieas, Vol. 6, pp. 9-22 (Pub. 1960).

1959

Eskimo Prehistory in the Vicinity of Point Barrow, Alaska.
Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of Natural
Histo~3~, Vol. 47, Pt. 1, pp. 1-272.

146

TEXAS AI~CHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1961

Menard Site: The Quapaw Village of Osotouy on the Arkansas
River. Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of
Natural History, Vol. 48, Pt. 2, pp. 133-191.

1962

Colichestveni Method Ustanovienia Arehaologicheskoi Hronologii. Soveskaia Ethnogn’aeiia 1, pp. 32-43.

1962

A Quantitative Method for Deriving Cultural Chronology. Pan
American Union Technical Manual 1, 118 pp.

1963

Hopewell Culture Burial Mounds near Helena, Arkansas. Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of Natural History, Vol. 50, Pt. 1, pp. 1-55.

1966

Early Formative Cultures in Georgia and Florida. American
Antiquity, Vol. 31, No. 6, pp. 781-799.
Shreveport, Louisiana

Information and Contributors
The Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society publishes original papers in
the field of American archeology. Emphasis is placed on Texas and adjoining
areas in the United States and Mexico, but papers on other areas are also acceptable.
Manuscripts should be typed on 8~ by 11 inch sheets of white bond paper, and
all material should be double-spaced. Footnotes should be avoided or kept to a
minimum.
Reference to published literature, by author, date, and page or figure number,
should be placed within parentheses in the body of the text, with full bibliographic citations listed at the end. See this issue of the Bulletin for models.

The proportions of full-page illustrations should be suitable for reduction to
Bulletin page size (6 by 9 inches), allowing space for captions at the bottom.
Captions for illustrations should be listed in numerical order and placed behind
the list of references cited.
Each paper must be accompanied by an abstract (one or two paragraphs summarizing the main points of the paper).

