TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
The Society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking: the study of man’s past in Texas and contiguous areas. The Bulletin
offers an outlet for the publication of serious research on history, prehistory and
archeological theory. In line with the goals of the society, it encourages scientific
collection, study and publication of archeological data.
The Bulletin is published annually for the distribution to the members of the
Society. Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers and do not necessarily
represent the views of the Society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1969 - 1970
President: DR. DEE ANN STORY (Austin)
Active Vice President: JAY C. BLAINE (Dallas)
Secretary-Treasurer: PAlm P. STEF-~ (Dallas)
Editor: DI~. JOEl, L. SlalNEa (Dallas)
Newsletter Editor: E. Moz’r DAvis (Austin)
Directors (in addition to the above): BOB BtmlmSON (Temple), DESSAlVIAE LOR~N (Dallas), ANNE FOX (San Antonio), WILLIAM L. FULLEN (Deer Park),
C~_~m_~s BANDY (Brownfield), Jorm W. GREEN (El Paso).
Regional Vice Presidents: EMMETr SttEDD (Post), CHARLES

COULTER

(

Arlington ),

PAUL Lom~N (Dallas), R. MILTON BELL (Mt. Pleasant), C. K. Cr~NDLER
(Houston), E. H. SCI-IMEmLIN (Victoria), LESLIE DAWS (El Paso), MILES
Locms (Waco), MES. RrrA K~USE (Minden, La.).

Membership and Publications
Membership in the Society is for the calendar year. Dues are as follows: Regular
--$7.50; Chartered Societies and Institutlonal-$10.00; Contributing-S25.00; Life$150.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is mailed out about four tSmes a
year. Back issues of the Bulletin, up to and including Volume #39, that are still in
print may be obtained for $5.00 per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to SecretaryTreasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Southern Methodist University, Box 165,
Dallas, Texas 75222.

Bulletin of the
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Volume 41, 1970

Editor: JOEL L. SHINER
Associate Editor: MAXINE SHINER
Assistant Editor: HUBERT ACIIOR

Cover designed by HUBERT ACHOR

PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY AT DALLAS, TEXAS 1970

Printed by
SOUTHERN

I’v£ETHODIST

UNIVERSITY

PRINTING

DALLAS~ TEXAS

DEPARTMENT

~I’ABLE OF CONTENTS

page
The Berclair Site: A Late Prehistoric Component in Goliad
County, Southern Texas.
by Thomas Roy Hester and Robert C. Parker ......
Aetixdty Analysis of a Prehistoric Site.
by Joel L. Shiner
...............

25

Areheologieal Investigations in the Whitney Beservofl" Area,
Central Texas,
by tlobert L. Stephenson..............

37

appendix by Edward B. Jelks ............

277

A Computer Program for Archaeological Data tletrieval.
by l~iehard Michael Gramly ............

287

On the Peopling of Hitzfelder Cave.
by Michael B. Collins ..............

301

Book Iteviews
Louisia~m,’s Ancients of Man, A Study of Changing
Characteristics of Louisiana Indian Cultures. J. Ashley
Sibley, Jr.
by Hiram Gregory ................

305

An Introduction to Prehistoric Archeology, Second Edition
Frank Hole and Robert F. Heizer
by Jay W.

Sharp

...............

311

The Berclair Site: A Late Prehistoric Component
In Goliad County, Southern Texas
THOIv~AS RoY HESTER and ROBERT C. PARKER

ABSTRACT
The Berclair site, in southern Goliad Count?’, Texas, has yielded a number
of artifacts characteristic of the Late Prehistoric period of Central Texas.
These include contracted-stem arrow points, small end-scrapers, fragments
of beveled knives, and a large ceramic sample. Many of the bone-tempered
potsherds from the site exhibit evidence of coastal influence, particularly the
liberal use of asphaltum for decoration and vessel repair. Other manifestations
of intercultural contact with Gulf coast peoples are also present. An abundance of bison bone at the site suggests that it may have been a camping
place for Late Prehistoric bison-hunters £rom the Central Texas region.

INTRODUCTION
The purpose of this paper is to present data on a Late Prehistoric
(or Neo-American) pottery-bem’ing component recognized at the
Berclair site (41 GD 4) in southern Goliad County, Texas. The site
was found by the junior author and a fiSend (Jacky Branch of Betclair). They carefully collected all m’tifacts fi’om the surface after the
site had been root-plowed (see below). The materials include arrow
points, a Im’ge quanti~ of pottery, fragments of beveled knives, scrapers, and other artifacts.
THE SITE
The Berclair site (Fig. 1) is situated about 600 feet east-southeast
of Miller (or Miller’s ) Creek, and the site area slopes toward the creel<.
Miller Creek joins Blanco Creel< 1.75 miles downstream fi’om the site;
that creek forms the boundary between Bee and Goliad Counties.
Mesquite, mountain laurel, persfimnon, prickly pear, tasajillo, spanish
dagger, thistle, broom weed, and various native grasses are present on
the site and its finmediate envfl’ons.
The site itself is small, within an area of 100 by !00 feet, though the
current heavy brush cover makes a more accurate delimitation impossible. All of the site area has been root-plowed, revealing abundant
cultural remains, as well as large quantities of mammal bone, mainly
bison. A shallow, five-foot square test pit was dug by Parker and
Branch, and it showed the bone refuse to be definitely associated with
the archeologica! materials. The bone is distTibuted over all of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

THE BERCLAIR SITE

GOLIAD
scale:
mh

CO.p TEXASt
1:24OO~

7

FmURE 1. The Berclair Site (41 GD 4) and Vicinity. Inset shows location
of area within state. The 200-foot contours are shown.
site, but Parker observed that it seemed to be clustered in some areas.
Of course, any distinct concentrations of bone or cultural material
would have been disturbed by the root-plowing.

THE ENVIRONMENT
Goliad County is situated on the West Gulf Coastal Plain (Fenneman, 1938: 102). This area is on the boundary between the Texan and
Tamaulipan biotic provinces (Blair, 1950:Fig. 1). The Texan province
has a moist subhumid climate and the vegetation is prfinarily of a
prairie type. Blair states (Ibid.: 101) that "... there are no endemic
species of vertebrates. The outstanding biogeographie phenomenon
. . . is the interdigitation of forest and grassland associations". He goes
on to record 49 species of mammals occurring in the province, along
with nmnerous examples of snakes, lizards, and urodele and anuran
~auna.

The Tamaulipan province, on the other hand, has a semi-arid and
megathennal climate, with thorny brush dominating the vegetation.
This brushland extends southward into Mexico; 61 species of mammals, as well as several species of turtles, lizards, snakes and a few

BERCLAIR SITE

3

species of urodele and anuran fauna occur within the province (Blair,
1950:104).
The southern third of the countT (the portion in which 41 CD 4 is
situated) is prairie with sandy and mixed loams; the remainder of the
county is rolling, mostly timbered (Johnson, 1931). There is a thick
tree growth along the streams. Early travelers in Goliad County (from
the late 1600’s through the 1850’s) reported vast prairies covered with
grasses, and broken occasionally by scattered clumps of mesquite,
]iveoak, postoak, hackberry and blackjack (Inglis, 1964:33-34). This
prairie environment was no doubt frequented by bison in prehistoric
times, since Gatschet (1891:119) reports that bison were seen in
numbers on the centra! coast in the 17th century.
J
The geology of the area has been studied in some detail by Evans
(1940). He paid special attention to the terrace deposits of Blanco
Creek, of which Miller Creek is a major tributary. He describes the
Blanco Creek valley as follows (p. 1644):
The greater part of the older valley and its principal tributary valleys was
formed in and rests on the Goliad formation, but file lower reaches of the
valley extend across the outcrop belt of the Lissie. Near its head, the older
valley is entrenched 50 or 60 feet below the general level of the adjacent
divides. Downstream entrenchment decreases progressively until the valley
walls are no more than a few feet high. The older valley is approximately
30 miles long; the width, about 2000 feet near the head, gradually increases
to more than a mile in the lower reaches. The valley walls are mature, with
moderately gentle slopes, usually well-covered by grass and brush. The
bedrock of the valley contains channels and other minor irregularities but is
otherwise quite fiat. The width and flahless of the valley floor are evidence
that the ancestral streams continued for a long period to widen all parts of
their valleys by lateral migration of tile channel after it became graded or
nearly so.

Evans goes on to state (p. 1645) that one of the principal tributaa’ies,
Miller Creek, has a similarly developed, though smaller, valley.
THE ARTIFACTS
In this section, archeologieal materials from the Berclair site will
be described as follows: Ceramics, Chipped Stone Artifacts, and
Ground Stone Artifact.

In this general area of the state, pottery occurs only rarely in prehistoric contexts (Hester, 1968; Hester and Hill, ms.). Thus, the 868
sherds (and 1 partially restored vessel) from the Berclair site consfitute an unusually large ceramic sample and therefore warrant
detailed description.

4

TEXAS AI~CHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Since the majority of the sherds are bone-tempered, they were
grouped for analysis according to the color of the exterior sm’face.
Color standards were provided by Munsell color charts. Decorated
sherds are described separately, as are several unique sherds and a
partially-restorable vessel.
GRouP 1

No. of sherds: 179
Color
Exterior: generally shades of light red (2.5 YR: 6/6 and 6/8); a
few have gray areas resulting from uneven firing.
Interior: most are gray, brownish-gray or dark gray; some have
the same color as exterior; a few are reddish-yellow.
Paste
Temper: bone; some fragments rather large (2-3 ram. ) ; bone often
quite abundant and is often burned.
Texture: laminated to coarse
Core color: gray to black.
Surface Finish
Exterior: hard and smoothed; some are lightly burnished; light
smoothing marks often remain; bone tempering agents usually
evident on exterior.
Interior: roughly smoothed; uneven; occasionally very rough;
some light scoring; bone often shows through.
Decoration: none; occasional patches of asphaltum, probably
resulting from crack-mending.
Form
Wa!l thickness: 3.5 to 7.5 ram.
Lips: thinned from inside; rims rounded or slightly flared; slightly
flattened.
Base: unknown
Vessel shapes: unknown
No. of Vessels tlepresented: at least 9, possibly as many as 12
or 13.
Manufacture
Coiled; many sherds have broken along coil junctures; some interiors show overlapped coils not well smoothed; one sherd has a
cast of a hollow reed-like stalk in the core.
Remarks
The texture and color of the paste, as well as the exterior and
interior colors of some of the Group 1 sherds are almost identical

BERCLAIR SITE

5

to Conehos Plain sherds (a type named by J. C. Kelley; sherds
studied are in Texas Archeological Research Laboratory collections). However, Conchos Plain ware is tempered with calcareous
agents, not bone. On the whole, this sherd group most closely
compares with the Leon Plain type, as described by Suhm, Krieger
and Jelks (1954).
CROUP 2

No. of sherds: 9,2
Color
Exterior: light gray to ga-ay; most are fire-clouded and/or
smudged.
Interior: pale yellow; light gray to gray.
Paste
Temper: tiny fragments of bone, in a somewhat sandy paste.
Texture: very fine; compact; small-grained.
Core color: gray.
Surface Finish
Exterior: smoothed, but rather uneven; surface generally feels
rather sandy.
Interior: much like exterior; leaf imprint on interior of one sherd;
sandy feel.
Decoration: some asphaltum on most sherds; much of this appears
to be ath’ibutable to crack-mending; a broad meandering band
decorates the exterior of a few.
Form

Wall thickness: 5 to 6.5 mm.
Lips: no rim sherds present.
Base: unknown.
-_
Vessel shape: unknown.
No. of Vessels Represented: i
Manufactm’e: coiled; a number have broken along coil junctures.
GROUP 3
No. of sherds: 12
Color
Exterior: varies from a very pale brown (10 YR;8/3) to light gray
(10 YR; 7/2); some are partially fire-blackened.
Interior: generally similar to exterior.
Paste
Temper: primarily sand and grit: occasional inclusions of bone;

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

6

some sherds do show considerable bone tempering, with some of
the tempering agent burned.
Textttre: coarse; granular.
Core color: very pale brown to grayish-brown.
Surface Finish:
Exterior: feels gritty/sandy; rather rough; bone exposed on surface of a few sherds.
Interior: smoothing marks are evident; rough, uneven finish.
Deeoration: some asphaltum on a few sherds, resulting from crack
repair.
Form
Wall thickness: 6 to 11 ram.
Lips: slightly flattened; average 4 mm. thickness.
Base: one sherd may be a basal fragment, and if so, suggests a
rounded base.
Vessel shape: unknown.
No. of Vessels Represented: 2, perhaps 3.
Manufacture: coiled.
G~o~Jp 4
No. of sherds: 3
Color
Exterior: reddish yellow (5 Ytt; 7/6) to light red (9,.5 Ylt; 6/8)
on 9. sherds; third is streaked, with light red and very pale brown
colors.
Interior: generally similar to exterior
Paste
Temper: 2 are heavily bone-tempered; third is similar though it
has large amounts of burned bone.
Texture: coarse; somewhat laminated.
Core color: very dark gray on 2; third is light gray.
Surface Finish
Exterior: well-smoothed.
Interior: very rough; uneven.
Decoration: one sherd has some asphahum on exterior surface.
Form
Wal! thickness: 5 to 6 ram.
Lips: none
Base: unknown
Vessel shape: unknown
No. of Vessels Itepresented: 2
Manufacture: coiled.

BERCLAIR SITE

7

GRouP 5
No. of sherds: 16
Color
Exterior: pink to light gray.
Interior: generally gray.
Paste
Temper: some bone tempering, in an overall sandy paste.
Texture: very fine in general, though 2 or 3 sherds have a coarse,
granular paste. The sherds are soft, easily broken, and have
weathered considerably.
Core color: dark gray to brown.
Surface Finish
Exterior: eroded; sandy and very gritty.
Interior: similar to above.
Decoration: none.
Form
Wall thickness: 5 to 11 ram.
Lips: none.
Base: unknown.
Vessel shape: unknown.
No. of Vessels Represented: 2
Manufacture: coiled.
CROUP 6

No. of sherds: 14
Color
Exterior: several are pink (7.5 YR; 7/4); others are from mottled
pink/gray to gray.
Interior: similar to exterior.
Paste
Temper: ve13~ high content of crushed bone; this is the distinguishing characteristic of this group . . . it is full of bone.
Textm’e: grainy; coarse.
Core color: pinkish brown to very dm’k gray.
Surface Finish
Exterior: pitted by leaching of bone tempering agents; only
slightly smoothed.
Interior: most are like exterior, though some tool marks are evident (twigs, etc., used for smoothing); the interior of 1 sherd is
well-burnished, and the interior of another has a small amount of
asphaltum smeared on it.

8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Decoration: none.
Form
Wall thickness: 6.5 to 9.5 mm.
Lip: thinned from interior; roundedi averages 5 ram. thick.
Base: unknown.
Vessel shape: unknown.
No. of Vessels Represented: at least 2.
Manufacture: coiled; not as well made as previous groups.
GRouv 7
No. of sherds: 39
Color
Exterior: brown (7.5 YI~; 5/9,-5/4); some slightly reddish brown
or even grayish brown.
Interior: most often same as exterior; some are a lighter reddish
brown or pinkish.
Paste
Temper: all bone-tempered, with the bone finely crushed and
sometimes burned.
Texture: fine paste; very compact.
Core color: dark gray.
Surface Finish
Exterior: very nicely smoothed; some are slightly burnished.
Interior: much rougher than exterior; uneven; sometimes coil
junctures are unsmoothed; too] marks nearly always present,
Decoration: some traces of asphaltum on exterior surface.
Form
Wall thickness: 4.5 to 8 ram.
Lips: thinned from interior; rounded; flare outward slightly.
Base: unknown.
Vessel shape: unknown.
No. of Vessels l~epresented: most sherds are fi’om a single vessel;
possibly 1 or 2 others also present.
Manufacture: coiled; thin; well-made.

Giaour 8
No. of sherds: 31
Color
Exterior: quite uniform; brown (10 Ytt; 5/3); a few are light
gray.
Interior: varied; light red, pink, gray, dark gray, and brown.
Paste

BERCLAIR SITE

9

Temper: much bone tempering, though two sherds have predominately sandy pastes, with little bone.
Texture: very compact paste; hard.
Core color: dark gray.
Surface Finish
Exterior: hard; well smoothed to lightly burnished; sandy/gritty

feel.
Interior: rough, with tool marks and light scoring; 2 sherds have
interiors which are lightly burnished.
Decoration: none.
Form
Wall thickness: 5 to 9 ram.
Lip: none.
Base: unknown.
Vessel shape: unknown.
No. of Vessels Represented: most sherds are from 1; 2 others may
be represented.
Manufacture: coiled; well-made.
GRout 9
No. of sherds: 104
Color
Exterior: overall reddish-yellow tone; some are close to a light
brown and pinldsh.
Interior: sometimes same as exterior; remainder are varied: reddish, gray, light brown.
Paste
Temper: bone, in large quantities; only 2 o1" 3 sherds have a rather
sandy paste with a minimum of bone; bone is often bm’ned.
Texture: vm’ies from fine and laminated to granular and coarse;
hard paste.
Core color: nearly always dark gray.
Surface Finish
Exterior: majority are well-smoothed to lightly burnished; 7 or 8
have a sandy/gritty feel.
Interior: rough; uneven; tool marks evident; light scoring; several
interiors, however, are highly smoothed and well finished.
Decoration: none.
Form
Wall thickness: 5 to 9 mm.
Lips: thinned from interior; one overlaps slightly on exterior side;
rounded to slightly flattened.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

i0

Base: unknown.
Vessel shape: two sherds have curvatures suggesting bottle necks,
or at least a fairly constricted aperture.
No. of Vessels Represented: several; difficult to determine exact
number, but at least 3.
Manufacture: coiled; thin; well-made.

GRouP 10
No. of sherds: 110
Color
Exterior: this is a residual category consisting of sherds with very
clark (gray to black) exteriors. Some of the darkness is attributable to uneven firing, fire-clouds, or smudging.
Interior: similar to exterior.
Paste
Temper: bone is present in all sherds, though it occurs in sparse
amounts in a few.
Texture: generally fine, compact paste; a few sherds have coarse,
grainy pastes; all very hard.
Core color: very dark gray.
Surface Finish
Exterior: we!l-smoothed; several are burnished; a few exhibit tool
marks.

Interior: considerably rougher than exterior; tool marks very
apparent; generally not snmdged on interior surfaces.
Decoration: some asphMtum is present on both interior and exterior sm’faces, resulting from cracl<-mending.
Form
Wall thickness: 4.5 to 7 mm.
Lips: flattened to slightly rounded; not tlfinned from interior as
in some previous groups.
Base: unknown.
Vessel shape: unknown.
No. of Vessels Represented: several; obviously, some of these
may be fragments of other groups.
Manufacture: coiled; generally thin and well-made.
OTHER CERANIICS

I~OCKPOI:LT WARE. Two veL~ small sherds are present. They have thin
walls (4 ram.), pinkish cores, dull gray exteriors, asphaltum-coated
interiors, and a very fine sandy paste. The two sherds fit the Rockport
ware type very closely (Suhm, Krieger and Jelks, 1954).

FIGUR~ 2. Artifacts from the Berclair Site. a-s, contracted stem arrow
points; t-w, end scrapers; x, discoidal scraper; y-z, flake side scrapers.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

INCISED-PUNCTATED (Fig. 3, k). This is a small body sherd (approximately 24 by 23 mrn.), bearing 2 deep circular punetations and an
incised line. The punctafions were apparently formed with a blunt,
rounded instrument pressed into the plastic surface. Both punctations
are about 3 mm. in maximum diameter and approximate!y 2 to 2.5
ram. deep; they are spaced 4 ram. apart. The incised line which runs
parallel to the punctations is 1.5 ram. wide on the average, and is about
1 ram. deep. The exterior surface appears to have been lightly
smoothed after the punetations and incision were made. The interior
surface is rough and unsmoothed. The paste is coarse and granular,
with grit and sand the major tempering agents. Some bone, a little of
which is burned, is readily visible in the paste. The exterior sttrface
is brownish and the interior is somewhat lighter. The core is very dark
gray, and the sherd has a nlaximum thickness of 6 mm.
BROAD-LINE INCISED

(Fig.

3, 1). It is a small body sherd with a broad

incised line present on the exterior surface. A fragment of a parallel
incised line is present at one break. The surface of the exterior is wel!
smoothed and seems to be lightly burned. The interior surface is very
rough. The incised line averages 2.5 ram. in width and is about 1.5
mm. deep. The paste is very compact and somewhat laminated, and is
tempered with coarse sand. The color of the exterior is brown, while
the interior is a light brown with a reddish tone. Maximum thickness
is 6 mm.
FINE-LINE INCISED. This is a very small bone tempered sherd, with a
pinkish yellow exterior. On the exterior are two converging finelyincised lines. The interior sm’face is similar to the exterior. Paste is fine
and compact Maximum thickness is 5.5 ram.

BIIUSHED (Fig. 3,g). A rather sizeable body sherd, this specimen has a
grayish brown exterior ( 10 YIt; 5/2) and an interior of a similar color.
It is bone tempered (the bone is finely crushed) with some coarse
sand inclusions in the compact paste. The exterior is covered with
vertical and horizontal fine-line brushing. The interior is velN rough
and undulating. Coils are olxly slightly smoothed over. Core color is
dark gray and maxinmm thickness is 6 ram.
ASPHALT-DECORATED (Fig. 3, re,n). There are 3 sherds with clearly
discernable asphaltum decorations. One is a bone-tempered sherd,
with gray surfaces, and a compact paste. There is a line of 3 asphaltum
dots on the exterior sm’face; each dot is about 6 ram. in diameter. The
core color is gray. The second sherd is also bone-tempered and very
small. It has a dark gray exterior, with a rough, grayish interior. There

FIcVRE 3. Artifacts from the Berclair Site. a-c, beveled knife fragments;
d, biface fragment; e, flake fragment; f, fragment of stone pipe; g, brushed
sherd; h-i body sherds of partially restorable vessel; j, restored base of same
vessel; k, incised-punctated sherd; 1, broad-line incised sherd; m, n, asphaltdecorated sherds.

14

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

is a band of asphalt 5 to 7 nnn. wide on the exterior surface. The paste
is compact and the sherd has a maximum thickness of 7 nnn. The third
specimen is tempered with bone and coarse sand. There is a portion of
a zig-zag band painted on the exterior surface. The interior surface is
badly eroded.
WORKED SHEP~D. The specimen is half of a sherd disc, the edges of
which are roughly smoothed. The interior surface is light red, and the
exterior is somewhat darker, though most of it is covered with a thin
layer of asphaltum. The paste is coarse, and contains abundant bone,
much of which is burned. Thickness varies from 6.5 to 8.5 ram.
MISCELLANEOUS SHERDS. Sherd A is a very badly eroded sherd; its exterior ,and interior surfaces vary from reddish to gray in color. It has a
brown core and a large amount of bone temper. The surfaces have
been pitted by leaching of the tempering agents. It is interesting to
note that the clay seems to have been tempered with bone that was
old and brittle, perhaps accounting for the considerable leaching and
surface erosion. The tempering agents, when examined in a fresh
break, are very flakey and crumble easily. The paste is quite coarse,
and maximum thickness of the sherd is 8 ram.
Sherd B is quite small (18 by 9.9, ram.) and is bone tempered, with
much of the bone burned. The surfaces are pinkish yellow. The surface
finish is rough (due to erosion) but has a very silty and sandy feel. It
has a fine grained paste and a dark gray core.
Sherd C has a brown exterior and an asphaltum-coated interior. It is
tempered with bone and the bone seems to have been very similar
to that described for Sherd A. Maximum thickness of the sherd is
6 ram.
1;{ESIDUE. 326 sherds have been grouped under this heading. Due to
their extremely small size, most of these could not be placed into any
of the previously-described categories. All are bone tempered, with
surface colors varying widely (from light red to reddish brown or
gray) and have dimensions of less than 8 by 8 mm.

I~AItTIALLY-lqESTOItABLE VESSEL

(Fig.

3, h-j; Fig. 4).

A number of large, thick sherds of a single vessel were fitted together, making possible a postulated reconstruction (see Fig. 4). The
vessel is best described as a jar, with rather straight sides and a
rounded, convex base. No rim sherds from the vessel were found. A
detailed description is presented below:
Color
Exterior: gray to dark gray.

BERCLAIR

15

SITE

Interior: very pale brown to gray.
Paste
Temper: mainly grog; some sand also present.

!

!

!

!

I

I

!

I

I I

I iI
i

I
I

!I

I I
I

I

If

i I
|

I

!

I

i

I

I

|
\
\

\
\
\

\
\

\

¢mlllll[lllllllll|lllllllll[lllllllllllllI[llllllllI[lllI[llllI
~2
3
4
5
6

FIGURE 4. Postulated Reconstruction of Partially-Restorable Vessel.
on a reconstruction by Harry J. Sharer.

Based

16

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

a

m

d

e

n

p

o

,mlmJlm.qm~lmllmqmqmJlmllm~lmq
1

;2

.3

4

q
FIGvr~E 5. Rim Profiles from the Berclair Site. a-e, Group 1; f, Group 3;
g, Group 6; h-k, Group 7; 1-o, Group 9; p-s, Group 10. Exterior surface is
on the right.

17

BERCLAIR SITE

Texture: paste is compact, though somewhat contorted.
Core color: gray.
Surface Finish
Exterior: roughly smoothed; undulating; some tool marks (twigs,
etc.) present on portions of exterior.
Interior: very rough; coils only slightly smoothed over; tool marks
evident.
Decoration: there appear to have been some bands of asphaltum
near the base which ran parallel to the rim; these are badly faded
now. Asphaltum was used liberally to repair cracks in the vessel
walls.
Form
Wall thickness: 6 to 8 nnn.
Lips: no rim sherds were recovered.
Base: rounded, rather bumpy and undulating; about 9 ram. thick
near center.

Vessel shape: jar, with straight sides and convex base; postulated
maximum diameter ca. 183 mm.
CHIPPED STONE ARTLFACTS

CONTRACa~D STEM ARROW POINTS

(Fig.

2, a-s).

This series of arrow points closely conforms to the Perdiz type as
described by Suhm, Krieger and Jelks (1954). A few specimens resemble the Cliffton type (Ibid.), but these may simply be unfinished
or poorly-made examples of Perdiz.
Thirty-three specimens were analyzed. Another 17 specimens were
too fragmentalT for study; some of these were thermal-fractured.
Measurement data for 31 studied specimens are presented in Table 1.
The entire series is characterized by triangular blades with convex
to straight lateral edges (a couple have reeurved oi" concave edges).
Blade edges are sometimes lightly serrated, and barbs we present on
some. Stems are contracted, with edges often convex. They eonverge
to pointed or, rarely, rounded bases.
All seem to have been made on thin flakes. One unfinished speehnen
is present in the collection. It is a flake on which a contracting stem
and a barb have been roughly fashioned. The remainder of the flake
is unmodified. On many specfinens, only one face of the blade is
extensively flaked, while the opposite face is unmodified. The stem on
most speeimens is bffaeially chipped.
The contracted stem series represent the only projectile pohlt form
at the Berclair site.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

18

TABLE 1
Contracted Stein Arrow Points:

Dimensions. Estimated measurenaents are

indicated by asterisks ( * ). Where esthnates were not possible, the incomplete
measurements are enclosed in parentheses. Measurements are in millimeters.
Length

Max. Width

30.5
32
30.5
20.5
29.5
22
35*
30*
31"
24
25
17.5
22*
30*
30*
30*
18
34*
33*
21

16

18.5
17.5
16
14.5
14
10.5
9.5
13
12
10.5
11.5

i0
8.5
15
14
18.5
ii
21.5
16

8
13.5

(=92)

?

21
33
22
14
19
22
24

I0
16.5

28
28
BEVELED KNIVES (Fig.

14
12
12

Max. Thickness

Stem Length

3
2.5
2
2
3.5
2
2.5
2.5
2
2.5
2
2
2
2
2
3
2
3.5
2.5
1.5

10.5
11.5
11.5
7
11
10
10
8
i0
10
5
7.5
6.5
6
9
7
1.5
8"
9.5*
2

1.5

7.5

2

8

........
........
........
........
........

............
............

( 16.5 )
18

........
........

3, a-e).

Three broken specimens are present. These specimens appear to be
fragments of diamond-shaped bifaces with alternately-beveled edges.
Two are end fragments alternately beveled along the right edge. The
third is a medial fragment beveled along one edge only. It is pianoconvex in transverse cross section, while the first 2 have rhomboidal
cross sections. The beveled edge on the medial fragment shows evidence of use. Due to the fragmentary nature of these specimens, length

19

BERCLAIR SITE

and width measurements are not possible; maximum thicknesses are
5.5, 7 and 7.5 ram.
FLAKE SIDE SCRAPERS (Fig. 2, y, z).
There are 9. specimens, both complete. One is made on a secondary
cortex flake. It is retouched unifacially along 50 ram. of one edge. The
second specimen appears to have been made on an interior flake. It,
too, is retouched unifacially along one edge (59. ram.). Lengths are
64 and 57.5 ram., and maxinmm widths are 9.4.5 and 17.5 mm. Maximum thicknesses are 8 and 4 mm.
END SCRAPERS (Fig. 2, t-w).
Four specimens are represented. One is made on a secondary cortex
flake, with steep retouch along the convex edge opposite the striking
platform. While the primary scraping edge on the other 3 is also along
the convex edge, these have slight retouch along the sides. One specimen (Fig. 2, u), which is triangu!oid, is retouched steeply along the
dista! end, and is alternately retouched along the lateral edges.
The measurements for this end scraper series are indicated below:

Length ( mm. )

Maximum Width

Maximum, Thickness

49,
36
34
26

19.5
23
26
16.5

8
3
7
4

DISCOIDAL SCRAPER (Fig. 2, x).
This specimen is discoidal in outline and is mostly unffacial, though
5 small flakes have been removed from the ventral face. Wear, in the
form of light dulling, is present around the entire circumference. It has
a maximum diameter of 35.5 ram., and a maximum thickness of 9 ram.
MISCELLANEOUS CHIPPED STONE ARTIFACTS (Fig. 3, d, e).
These specimens include: (1) a crude biface fragment, with a convex base; (2) a unfface fragment with no retouched edges; however
arrows (Fig. 3, e) indicate an area of some roughening, perhaps related to brief use; (3) a flake with some flake scars on both faces; (4)
a crudely-modified flake, with slight retouch (?) along a portion of
one edge.
GROUND STONE ARTIFACT

Stone Pipe Fragment (Fig. 3, f). This specimen is a fragment of
ground and smoothed reddish sandstone which seems to be a portion

9,0

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of a tubular stone pipe. A rounded and smoothed lip is present at one
end of the fragment. The interior bears longitudinal striations perhaps
resulting from the manufacturing process. The specimen has a coneavoconvex transverse cross section, and a maximum thickness of 9.5 nnn.
FAUNAL REMAINS
While Parker and Branch did not collect all of the faunal materials
exposed at the site, a good sample was obtained. It is characterized
by a predominance of very large bone, primarily splintered and fragmented long bones (and one astragalus). Given the prehistoric context of the site, it is assumed that these large bones are the remains
of bison. A few deer bone fragments are present as are river nmssels
and a fraganent of healt cockle (Dinocardium robustum). The river
mussels were probably eollected from Miller Creek or some other
nearby stream. But, the cockle shell is a marine species and was either
obtained by the occupants directly from the coast (about 60 miles to
the southeast) or through trade with coastal peoples.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The Berelair site (41 GD 4) has yielded a quantity of materials
attributable to Late Prehistoric (or Neo-Ameriean) peoples. The
materials appear to represent occupation(s) by a single cultural group.
The site is small in area, yet had a sizeable midden accunmlation; it
may represent a prefen’ed campsite occupied intermittently.
The cultural identification of the component at Berelair is ve13z
dfltleult, and perhaps impossible, with our present data. From the
types of artifacts found, We know that it is Late Prehistoric in age
(Suhm, Krieger and Jelks, 1954:112-117; Jelks, 1962:91-98). The contracted stem mTOW points (mainly Perdiz), plain bone tempered pottery, beveled knife fragments, and small end scrapers are all traits
of the Toyah Focus of the Central Texas Aspect (Jelks, 1962:85-88 ).
It has been suggested that this focus might represent prehistoric
Tonkawan peoples (Suhm, 1960:85), but this possibility has yet to be
substantiated.
If we were to assume for the moment that the prehistoric Tonkawan
bands are linked to the areheologieal materials represented in Toyah
Focus sites, what evidence do we have that the Berelair materials
might be attributed to these same Tonkawas? Lengthy deseriptions
of Tonkawa culture have been published by Sjoberg (1953a) and
Newcomb (1961). They were a marginal Plains culture, living a
nomadic, hunting and gathering existene9 in the central Texas region.

BERCLAIR SITE

21

For subsistence, they relied on bison, deer, smal! mammals, pecans,
Opuntia tunas, fish, and fiver mussels (Sjoberg, 1953a:284-286). They
used the bow and an’ow and made pottery, but it is bdieved that they
did not practice agriculture (Newcomb, 1961). It is known, however,
that they did range out of central Texas towards the Gulf coast from
time to time. Tonkawas were recorded on the lower Colorado and
Guadalupe Pdver in the late 17th century, (Bolton, 1916). DeLeon’s
expedition of 1690 found bands of Tonkawa in Victoria and Lavaca
Counties, the former area not far from the Berelair site. It is of significance to note that the Tonkawas encountered in that area in 1690
were on a bison-hunting expedition and had their dogs loaded with
the results of the hunt (Bolton, 1916:359). Bison was the most important economie item of the Tonkawa (Sjoberg, 1953a:284) and nmch
of their time was consumed in hunting them. Since bison were present
near the coast (they were even plentiful there in Historic times when
eliminated or scarce in areas further to the west; see Sjoberg, 1953b:8),
it could be that some Tonkawa group(s) followed herds of these
animals to the grassy prairies of southern Goliad County in Late Prehistoric times. It is likewise a possibility that they made seasonal
bison-hunting trips to this area.
If they were ranging this near the coast on theft" bison hunts, they
no doubt could have come in contaet with the coastal Karankawan
peoples. Such contacts would account for the use of asphaltum on
some of their characteristic central Texas pottery. A similar phenomenon occurred in the Historic period when Karankawas were
brought to the missions at Goliad. While at the missions, they influenced the mission Indian potte13z (Goliad ware) to the extent that it
was often decorated with asphaltum in coastal motifs (Mounger,
1959). The presence of 2 sherds of Rockport ware at Berelair seems
to further substantiate the intercultural contact between the Karankawa and the central Texans, since that particular ware has been
fairly well linked to the Karankawa (Fitzpatrick, Fitzpatrick and
Campbell, 1964). The vessel represented by the sherds might have
been obtained in trade with the Karankawa, just as the cockle shell
(mentioned in the Faunal llemains) might have been. Evidence of
Tonkawa-Karankawa contacts in the Historic era have been recorded
by Sjoberg (1953a:282) who states that some members of the Mayeye
band of the Tonkawa married into, and lived with, Karankawan
groups.
The areheo!ogieal remains at Berclafl" appear to represent a shortterm Late Prehistoric occupation or occupations oriented toward bison

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

hunting, with exploitation of other food sources such as deer and river
mussels. The amount of midden debris would suggest that the site was
a preferred camping area returned to on a number of occasions. The
arrow points, pottery and other artifacts are linked with central Texas
peoples, though the pottery definitely reveals coastal influence. There
are, however, several puzzling aspects of the site. There are a large
number of arrow points, yet very few other tools. If the site was indeed
a bison-hunters camp, might not we expect a higher ratio of tools
which would have been employed in processing the bison remains
brought to the camp? Similarly, there is a high frequency of ceramic
remains at the site. Would highly mobile bison-hunting groups from
central Texas carry pottery with them on their trips southward? Perhaps a group would take along a few vessels, either for utilitarian
purposes, or even for trade. If a group then returned to a single camp
site (such as Berclair) over a period of several years, might not a
sizeable accunmlation of potsherds result? We are also puzzled by
the punctated and deeply-incised sherds, and at present cannot safely
compare them with materials from other areas. While it is tenuous
at best to attempt to link the Berclair component to a prehistoric
Tonkawan group

(perhaps a bison-lmnting party or parties), the

traits recognized at the site compare very closely with those of the
Toyah Focus (Jelks, 1962). Jelks (p. 91-92) has stated that the Toyah
Focus extended about 100 miles south and east of the Balcones escarpment. However, the possibility remains that the materials from the
Berclair component represent a yet unidentified archeological complex
which might be present in the Goliad County vicinity. Additional
archeo!ogical research is badly needed in that region.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Drs. T. N. Campbell and Dee Ann Story (University of Texas)
examined the materials from the site and provided many helpful comments. The final draft of the paper was read by Dr. lqobert F. Heizer
(University of California). The facilities of the Texas Archeologieal
~esearch Laboratory (of which Dr. Story is Executive Director) were
used in the preparation of this paper. A sherd sample and the faunal
remains have been placed in the collections of that laboratory, along
with all notes and photographs. Mr. Harry J. Sharer (University of
Texas) gave much-needed advice and cliticisms on several aspects of
the paper, and provided a reconstruction of the partially-restorable
vessel from the site.

BERCLAIR SITE

23

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Blair, Frank
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 2, No.
1:93-116.
Bolton, Herbert E.
1916 Spanish Exploration in the Southwest, 1542-1706. Charles Scribner’s
Sons, New York
Evans, Glen
1940 Notes on Geology. In: Sellards, E. H., Pleistocene Artifacts and Associated Fossils from Bee Count),, Texas. Bulletin, Geological Society of
America, Vol. 51:1627-1657.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1938 Physiography of Eastern United States. McGraw Hill Book Company,
New York.
Fitzpatrick, W. S., J. Fitzpatrick and T. N. Campbell
1964 A Rockport Black-on-Gray Vessel from the Vicinity of Corpus Christi,
Texas. Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 35:193-204.
Gatschet, Albert S.
1891 The Karankawa Indians, the Coast People of Texas. Archaeological and
Ethnological Papers of the Peabody Museum, Vol. 1, No. 2.
Hester, Thomas Roy
1968 Notes on Some Pottery-Bearing Sites in Southern Texas. The Bull-Roarer,
University of Texas Anthropological Society, Vol. 3, No. 2: 9-11.
Hcster, Thomas Roy and T. C. Hill, Jr.
ms.
A Prehistoric Ceramic Tradition in Southern Texas. Manuscript in
preparation, authors’ files.
Inglis, J. M.
1964 A History of Vegetation on the Rio Grande Plain. Bulletin, Texas Parks
and Wildlife Department, No. 45, Austin.
Jelks, Edward B.
1962 The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County,
Texas. Archeology Series No. 5, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas.
Johnson, Ehner H.
1931 The Natural Regions of Texas. University of Texas Bulletin No. 3113.
Mounger, Maria A.
1959 Mission Espiritu Santo of Coastal Texas: An Example of Historic Site
Archeology. Unpublished M.A. thesis, University of Texas, Austin.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961 The Indians of Texas. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Sjoberg, And%e F.
1953a The Culture of the Tonkawa, A Texas Indian Tribe. Texas Journal of
Science, Voh 5, No. 3: 280-304.
1953b Lipan Apache Culture in Historical Perspective. Southwestern. Journal
of Anthropology, Vol. 9, No. 1: 76-98.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1960 A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin, Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 28:63-108.
Suhm, Dee Ann, A. D. Krieger and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Inta’oductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Department of Anthropology
University of California, Berkeley
Carrizo Springs, Texas

Activity Analysis of a Prehistoric Site
JOEL L. SHINER
ABSTRACT
The excavation of an Archaic Site was attempted in order to test a series
of preconceived models of socio-eeonomic behavior. Typological, technological, as well as scatter pattern analyses were used to help define activities. The
method shows promise toward determining elements of behavior to supplement trait lists of artifacts.

INTRODUCTION

After a series of discussions on the concept of model testing, a number of students and interested amateurs joined the author in attempting to apply these concepts to a field situation. It was decided that an
undisturbed archaic site would be ideal for a modest beginning, and
fortunately these are stil! available in North Texas.
After a blief look at the site, I presented to the Dallas Archaeological Society a series of hypotheses which could be tested in the feld.
At the same time, it was suggested that some novel data recording
techniques would be employed. The combination of these hypotheses
and techniques permitted a laboratory analysis with the stated goal of
gaining information on group behavior.
During the fall-winter-spring of 1968-69 one concentration at the
site was clem’ed and mapped. The project proceeded slowly since
there was absolutely no budget, and all work was on a volunteer basis.
Because of the apparent success of this initial phase of the project, it
was decided to present it as a preliminary report.
We hope to continue this project so as to define the activity or
activities carried on at a number of temporally and geographically
related sites. If we can demonstrate that some of these horizontal
components (not in the McKern sense) show sufficient and significant
behavioral homogeneity, it might be possible to propose that they
represent the material remains of some kind of socio-politieal grouping.
Further, the structural and behavioral analysis should permit us to
say quite a bit about the culture of that group and not just present a
laundry list of artifacts.
The site chosen for this series of model testing is known as the
Obshner Site. It was m~ginally investigated and reported by W. W.
Crook and R. K. Harris (Crook and Harris, 1955). Their excavations

--.96

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

were limited in size and no conclusions were reached beyond description, geological position and probable cultural affiliation.
I wish to express nay appreciation to Il. K. Harris for his information
and help. The following persons regularly attended the excavation
sessions: J. B. Sollberger, Hubert Achor, Paul Steed, Ileed Ferring,
Jerry Humphfies. Other members of the Dallas Archaeological Society
helped occasionally. Mrs. William Morris aided in laboratory work and
Hubert Achor is responsible for the photography.
PIlE-EXCAVATION HYPOTHESES
Because of the complete absence of ceramics and small "arrow"
points, it was suspected that the site was not associated with the
"Neo-Ameriean" period. At the same time, there were no examples of
"typical" early projectile points that would tend to characterize the
Paleo-Indian period. We would, then, appear to be left with early, late
or middle Archaic (whatever that really means), and such a temporal
placement would seem to be supported by the stemmed projectile
points found in eroded areas and in earlier test pits on the site.
Two fm’ther observations appeared to be significant. The deep
erosional gullies all around the ten’ace showed individual concentrations and not a continuous distribution of artifacts. Fire-broken rock
could be seen in several of the thin occupational lenses, suggesting
additional kinds of activity.
We decided to test first for the kind of occupation, knowledge which
would also define, in part, the social structure. 1) Base cmnp; 2) ternporto7 hunting camp; 3) temporary foraging camp; 4) kill site; 5)
qumTy (in North Texas this would mean cobble-pebble deposits and
not bedrock); 6) ceremonial site; 7) unknown other activity.
A base emnp should reflect a number of activities through the
presence of different classes of tools as well as specialized activity
areas within the settlement. These might be detected by the internal
structure and distribution of debris, debitage and the various projectile, cutting, scraping, chopping and pounding tools.
A long occupation would probably add the problem of vertical
envelopment by sequential activities, thereby masking the internal
structure. Thus, we hoped that the site would be the remains of a
single, short lived camp.
A temporm3z hunting cmnp should reveal an isolated fire hearth
with primarily those tools and debris associated with hunting. A large
hunting party might leave more than one heath but the hemths
should be closely placed and tools other than points should be scarce.

ACTIVITY ANALYSIS

9~7

A temporary foraging camp might be difficult to identify if digging
sticks were the major tools employed, but one might expect some kind
of stone choppers or something different from the array of artifacts
remaining at a base camp or one of the specialized activity sites.
A quarry site should show the presence of the material being sought,
some considerable evidence of rough percussion flaking, broken preforms and large quantities of cortex flakes.
A kil! site would be impossible to detect in the highly acidic red soil
since this soil consumes bones without leaving obvious traces.
Since we know nothing about the ceremonial activities of the postulated period in this region, we could only predict that a ceremonial
site might lack most of the debris and specialized technological evidence of other site types.
RECORDING TECHNIQUES
Several soundings were made before a concentration was located.
We had checked the back-dirt from rodent holes without success
before resorting to random test pits. Horizontal controls were imposed
for mapping purposes only. There was no pressure to dig or think in
terms of a grid system. Instead, the concentration was cleared and
mapped as a unit.
It is not practical to clear around every single tool, flake and chip in
a concentration, while leaving each artifact in situ. Field practice
called for mapping and picking up as soon as the density of exposed
artifacts created problems in moving about and in removing the fill.
Initially, each artifact, when detected by meticulous tTowel work, was
left in place and marked with a small wooden meat skewer (Fig. 1 ).
When a small forest of skewers interfered with the work, a scale map
was made. Each square, 2 meters by 2 meters, became a temporary
universe with its own list of consecutive numbers. Each artifact was
given its own number, using felt tip pen, and the same number was
placed on the scale map in the corresponding position. Pieces too small
to write on were placed in a glassine envelope (stamp collectors supplies) and the number placed on the envelope.
The technique eliminates the necessity of identification of artifacts
in the field, an often difilcult job when clay, dirt or lime encrustations
cover surfaces. Artifacts can be cleaned at leisure and scatter-pattern
maps plotted after identifications are made.
Another advantage of the technique is that specific chips may be
matched against specific tools in an attempt to demonstrate that the
tool was or was not made at the site, ,and that homologous materials

98

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

FIGURE 1. Marking position of artifacts before mapping.

have not been scattered by wind, water or post-occupational disturbances.
I~ESULTS
The large concentration produced four major categories of material
objects; fire-broken rock, tools, unfinished tools, and chipping debris.
A couple of cores and a few suspected stone hammers do little to

ACTIVITY ANALYSIS

~9

elucidate the pictLtre. Two subdivisions of the concentration are hypothecated but are not totally demonstrable. They occur on opposite
sides of what appears to have been an earth oven. Each subdivision
has in it several pal~ally completed bffaces along with cortex flakes
and chips of matching materials. They also contain a random scattering of umnatched chips, cortex flakes and bifaee thinning flakes.
Each subdivision contains several broken projectile points that appear to have been finished and subsequently ruined by impact against
something solid, tleplieative experiments with stone points suggest
that the impacts might have been against soft stone, hard wood or
bone. Projectile point tips have been spalled off in a maturer slightly
reminiscent of a thinning flake.
No formal fire hearth was recovered. Instead, the fire-broken rock
appears to have been scattered at the end of the brief occupation. The
action did not materially affect the relative positions of the artifacts,
only the fire rocks. It appears that the informal scattering was not the
remains of a normal fireplace, but of a small earth oven, broken open
to recover the cooked food (Collier, et al., 1942:38). No pit, burned
lens or other such feature was recovered. The 300-odd burned rocks
were scattered over most of the area of the concentration. This informality does not seem incompatible with our explanation that the site
is a tenlporary camp.
An examination of the chipping debris did not turn up chips that
could have been removed from the broken projectiles recovered at
the site. It may be suggested that the broken points were brought to
the site still halted on their shafts. This situation has a bearing on the
length of occupation because apparently, the occupants did not manufac~u’e points, go out and break them, bring them back and remove
them from the shafts, all from or at the same camp. We cannot show
that points made at this site were returned to this site, and therefore
would suggest that the occupation may not have lasted more than
two or three days.
From incidence of incomplete points, we might imply that any of
several nlishaps occurred during the manufactm’ing. Three kinds of
errors were common. The first of these was the failure to remove the
"hump" or "knot" left when flakes hinge (Fig. 2 a). The second kind of
accident was the result of a misdirected blow which broke the bifaee
through shock. The third was the overpassed or overshot flake which
cut the unfinished bfface in half (Fig. 2 b). Other incomplete bffaees
may have been abandoned because of the inferior raw material
(usually quartzite).

30

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

b
FmuR~ 2. Incomplete bifaces: a, knot caused by hinged flakes; b, ruined by
overshot flake.
TYPOLOGICAL AND TECHNOLOGICAL TERMINOLOGY
The author has attempted to avoid the use of historic types since
there is little evidence that such types have been properly achieved in
this region. Functional types cannot be avoided in the case of projectile points and some scrapers, but this analysis does not concede to
any merit in analogous terms such as spokeshave and knife.
A few terms are partially functional and partly descriptive (thus
morphological). They are used as follows:
PROJECTILE POINTS: Bifacially flaked, apparently thinned by soft hammer or billet (bulbar scars show no crushing, and thinning flakes are
longer and more parallel than those on the rough preforms). Basal
and lateral grinding is observable as well as fine (pressure?) retouch.
Three specimens clearly show what is interpreted as impact breaks
(Fig. 3 a, b). One other has been resharpened, thus distorting the
distal end (Fig. 3 c).
At the risk of making a value judgment, it is my opinion that the
overall workmanship is not good, due perhaps to the grainy quartzite
used.
ImEFORMS: Bffaces in various stages of manufacture. It is believed that
these specimens offer proof as strong as we will ever find in anthropology of specific activity. Each spechnen is unfinished for one of the

ACTIVITY ANALYSIS

31

FIGURE 3. Projectile points: a, b, broken by impact; c, resharpened.

three reasons given above. Two kinds of faulty blows are evident. The
first of these overshoots and cuts the bffaee in two (Preston 1969:185,
Fig. 11 g, h, i). The second is a vibration break which occurs at a
point where there is a sudden increase in the mass (Sollberger
1968:108 ).
RETOIJCrlED FLAKES: Flakes with nibbling retouch along one part of one
edge. The retoueh is not of a kind that would permit the identification
of the artifact as a scraper or a knife (whatever that is). The retouch,
however, appears to be patterned and deliberate, thus not idiosyncratic.
BIFACE THINNING FLAKE (Fig. 4): Flakes which could only come from
the soft hammer (or billet?) stage of biface thinning. There are six

FmtJRE 4. Biface thinning flake and stylized cross-s2ction.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

39,

attributes which are nearly always present. 1) Oval platform; 2)
platform somewhere between about 40 and 60 degrees to bulbar surface; 3) faceted platform; 4) diffuse bulb without the tiny flake near
the center of the bulb; 5) a narrowing and thinning of the flake below
the bulb before it widens out and sometimes thickens again; 6) a
curvature of the flake itself, following the oval surface of the bifaee.
In addition there is a number (unknown percentage) of specimens
with obvious grinding at proximal edge of the platform opposite the
bulb. This edge represents what had been the edge of the biface itself
before the flake was removed. Grinding apparently strengthens the
edge and gives more purchase (Crabtree 1966:9).
In the judgment of the archaeologist (after an examination of all tools, debris and debitage) one or more edges of a flake or
blade shows sears, polish or other evidence of having been used without previous intentional retouch or grinding.

USE llETOUCH:

ARTIFACTS RECOVERED
The following tools were recovered from this concentration:
Points ............................................................................................ 8
Denticulates .................................................................................. 1
Notches ........................................................................................... 1
Bifaee preforms ......................................................................... 12
Biface fragnnents ........................................................................ 5
Gouges (?) .................................................................................. 1
Retouched flakes ........................................................................ 2
Other artifacts include:
Debitage ...................................................................................... 13
Cores ............................................................................................... 4
Cortex flakes .............................................................................. 104
Chips ......................................................................................... 354
Biface thinning flakes ............................................................... 9,5
Use retouch ................................................................................. 31
The result is the following distribution: Tools -- 5.3%, Debris 86.8%, Use retouch - 5.5%, Debitage - 2.3%, Points or potential points
contribute 25 of the 30 tools in the assemblage.
CONCLUSIONS
Testing of the predetermined hypothesis in no way prevented the
collection of the older desiderata in a manner at least as scientific as
might have been done under former excavation techniques. In other
words, we still recovered the tools and their vertical context.

ACTIVITY ANALYSIS

~3

If we were operating under the older methods, we would have
concluded that this concentration was a component of the Carrollton
focus of the Trinity aspect. Such a classification implies no specific
ethnic, temporal, geographical or behavioral characteristics, only the
presence of certain tools.
Instead, we are able to report that this small area is evidence of cultural behavior and that it may or may not be affiliated with other
activity areas at the site. We shall not be able to report on the whole
site until a number of the concentrations have been treated with equal
care. We may, beyond a reasonable doubt, conclude that this concentration is the remaining material evidence of definable activities. We
may also conclude that certain things did not take place within this
concentration of flaked stone.
~Te tested for the existence of a base camp, kill site, quarry, gathering camp and ceremonial site. None of these could be supported by
the evidence because the artifacts and site structure did not fit our
models.
Our inferences about the structure and artifact residue of a hunting
eanip were tested and we believe that we can demonstrate that activity
beyond any reasonable doubt. The people who were responsible for
the litter of this concentration abandoned several broken projectile
points that appear to have been hunting casualties. They worked at
producing a number of chipped stone tools, and we can identify many
of these as bifaces. Several of the attempts failed and these’incomplete specimens were left alongside the waste flakes of the work.
There may have been two persons present, but the number is not
absolutely demonstrable. At least, the scattering of chipping debris
and the matching bifaces appeared to form two distinct sub-areas of
the concentration. Figure 5 illustrates the position of broken points,
incomplete bifaees and bifaee thinning flakes. The format of this report
does not permit the illustration of all mapped debris because of size
reduction of figures. Color coded maps of debris suggest the presence
of two men.
There was one other activity carried on at the site, and this involved
the burning of a considerable amount of rock. VVe had no preparation
for finding scattered, burned rocks throughout the concentration unless
it involved site deflation. Matching of chips to partially finished tools
proved that deflation had not occurred. The burned rock was quartzite
so we believe that the people were not engaged in heat treating flint.
Thus, we could only rationalize that the scattering of fire-burned rock
was the result of opening an earth oven. This explanation is not satis-

34

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

0
X

X.

X

X

0

xX

o
Ox

I

x

o

x

-0

o

0

x
o

x

o
e

e

o

o

x
o

0

X
x

X
x

,~N
X

point
incomplete biface
biface thinning flake

®
o
x

X

FIGURE 5. Scatter pattern of certain artifacts.

factmT because it is untested, and not part of the model.
We believe that the experiment is reasonably successful and that
activities often can be pinpointed. It is necessary, in most eases, to
involve the technology of manufacturing processes in order to achieve
some degree of reliability. Debris from certain kinds of work may be
the only clues to that activity that are left at a site.
Site structure can be studied to a more intimate degree than just the

ACTIVITY ANALYSIS

35

relative positions of architecture, tools and featm’es. While it is time
consuming, there will be circumstances where the archaeologist must
work with debris and scatter patterns or else recover no usable information from the site. There are also circumstances where the precise
position of each item of debris determines the presence or absence of
disturbance. Scatter patterns can also prove that certain tools were
made at the site and identify the nature of certain activities.
Southern Methodist University
BIBLIOCIIAPHY
Collier, D., A. Hudson and A. Ford
1942

"’ArchaeologT of the Upper Colmnbia Region." University of "~Vashington
Publicatio~i in Anthropology, Vol. 9, No. 1.
Crabtree, Don E.
1966 "’A Stone Workers Approach to Analyzing and Replicating the Lindenmier Folsom." TEBIWA, The Journal of the Idaho State Museum, Vol.
9, No, 1.
Crook, ~7. W. and R. K. Harris
1955

"Scottsbluff Points in the Obshner Site Near Dallas, Texas". Bulletit~ of
the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 26, Abilene, Texas.
Preston, Nolan E.
1969

"The McCann Site". Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society", Vol.
40, Dallas, Texas.
Sollberger, J. B.
1968 "A Partial Report on Research Work Concerning Lithie Typology and
Teehnology". Bulletin of the Texas Areheological Society, Vol. 39,
Dallas, Texas.

Archeological Investigations
in the
Whitney Reservoir Area,
Central Texas
by
t~OBERT L.

STEP!tENSON

with an appendix by
ED’vVAI~D B.

JELKS

INTRODUCTION
THE WHITNEY DA~I

AND RESERVOIR

Archeological investigations in the area of the Whitney Dam and
Reservoir were undelntaken by the River Basin Surveys as a part of the
long-range, continuing, Inter-Agency Archeologieal Salvage Program.
This program began on a nation-wide scale in 1945 as a joint obligation of the Smithsonian Institution and the National Park Service
(Brew and others, 1947; Johnson, 1951; Roberts, 1952; 1961). The
many dams and reselwoirs planned for the rivers flowing across Texas
and emptying into the Gulf of Mexico were recognized early in the
program as significant areas for archeological salvage. In order to
can’y out such salvage work as was necessalT in these reservoh’s, the
Smithsonian Institution established a field headquarters on the campus
of the University of Texas, in Austin, in March 1947. LaboratoxT and
research facilities as well as office and storage space were generously
made available by the Department of Anthropology at the University.
Field work was begun at the Addieks and Barker Dams near Houston
in southeast Texas, that same month, and at Hords Creek Dana near
Coleman in west central Texas in April. Field work was begun on the
Whitney Reservofl" in May 1947.
The Whitney Dana and Reservofi" is one of the largest of the many
federal water-control projects within the state of Texas (Fig. 1). The
dam is located on the Brazos River in central Texas, 5.5 miles southwest of the town of Whitney, from which both the dana and reselazoir
take their names. It is 38 miles northwest of the city of Waco, at 92°
27’ 45" west longitude and 31° 52’ 05" north latitude (Fig. 2). In this
vicinity the Brazos River forms the boundary between Hill County on
the northeast and Bosque County on the southwest. The dana is a con-

TEXAS A!RCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

38

STATE
SHOWING

RIVER

BASIN

OF

TEXAS

LOCATIONS

OF

SURVEYS

PROJEOTS

1947-- 1952

FZGU~,]~

I.

Map o~ Texas showing location of River Basin Surveys projects.

crete and earthfill sh’ucture 9,875 feet long, rising 159 feet above the
riverbed. The normal pool elevation of approximately 520 feet above
mean sea level forms a reservoir slightly over 100 feet deep at the dam,
approximately 26 miles long and ranging in width up to 2.2 miles, with
a storage capacity of 388,000 acre feet of water. The maximum flood
pool elevation is some 50 feet higher with a surface area almost three
times as large, providing a controlled storage capacity of 2,017,500
acre feet of water.
This is a multi-purpose project of the Corps of Engineers, U. S.
Department of the Army, built in cooperation with the Brazos River
Conservation and Reclamation District. The project controls 17,656
square miles of territory, affording substantial flood protection to

39

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

i

T387

Rs~

F~Gor.~ 2. Map of Texas showing major physiographic features.
the lower Brazos valley and the city of Waco. It also provides irrigation and hydroelectric power for the district. Construction of the
project began in June 1946. Impounding of water was initiated in the
spring of 1950 and it was ready for flood control use in December
1951. The first power was generated in June 1953 and all work on the
project was essentially complete by June 1962, except for a small
amount of construction for recreation facilities. Total costs for the
project to June 1962 were $42,986,542 (Corps of Engineers, 1962).
ARCHEOLOCICAL BACKGROUND

Despite a considerable amount of archeological work in many parts
of the state (Stephenson, 1950; Krieger, 1951; Kelly, 1951), and in

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

40

central Texas in particular, during the preceding quarter centred,’, vely
little had been done in the area to be flooded by the Whitney Reservoir prior to 1947. Private collections by local residents were few and
none were extensive. Commercial collectors, so aetive in the Leon
River vMley to the south (Fig. 3), during the 1930’s seem not to have
extended their activities into this area. Frank H. Watt and his associates in the Central Texas Archeological Society, dm’ing the 1930’s,
visited the !ower end of the reservoir area and recorded three sites.
The principal one of these, the Stansbury Site (41-39B1-1), was an
extensive village area of both historic and prehistoric interest. Watt
and his associates, on a number of visits to the site, made extensive
surface collections of alq:ifaets of both Indian and White provenience,
including a large quantity of glass trade beads. Analyses of these
collections were made and the results published (Watt, 1937, pp. 6167; Watt and Meroney, 1937, pp. 51-60).
The second site recorded by Watt and his associates was a small,
open campsite on Towash Creek, approximately a mile above the dam-

()

&o
FIGURE 3. Map of the vicinity of the Whitney Reserv0ir showing the central Brazos valley.

WHITNEY .1.~ESERVOII:I

41

site, and the thh’d was a small, shallow rockshelter on Rocky Creek
about two miles above the damsite. Small surface collections were
made from both sites, but nothing of diagnostic value was recovered.
These sites were later assigned the site numbers 41-39B1-2 and 4139B1-3, respectively (Fig. 4). A fourth site within the reservoir area
(41-39B1-12) was located by R. K. Harris and his associates of the
Dallas Archeological Society. This, like the latter two sites recorded by
Watt, was a small unproductive living area of little diagnostic value.
These four sites, all within a short distance of the present dam, were
the only sites recorded in the Whitney Reservoir area prior to 1947.
All of the collected materials and notes from these sites were generously made available to me by their owners.
Outside the immediate reselwoir area, archeological investigations
had been considerably more extensive. The CentTal Texas Archeological Society members had investigated and recorded many sites of
considerable interest in southern Hill and Bosque Counties and in
McLennan, Limestone, Falls, Bell, and CmTell Counties (Fig. 3). In
these m’eas, immediately to the south of the Whitney Reservoir, sites
were located along the Navasota River and its tributaries in Limestone
County, along the Lampasas and Leon Rivers in Bell and Coryell
Counties, and along the Bosque River in Bosque and McLennan
Counties. The valley of the Brazos River itself provided many site
locations in McLennan and Falls Counties, several of which are within
the city limits of present Waco. Sites on Aquilla Creek in southern Hill
County are the nearest ones to the Whitney Reservoir area that were
recorded by Watt and his group. Among these recorded locations are
sites representing a considerable range of time and cultm’al differentiation. Deeply buried sites occur frequently in the area, particularly
in ten’ace cuts along the Brazos valley, suggesting a certain amount of
geological antiquity. Sites of later, hunting-gathering complexes are
numerous tln’oughout the area and post-contact sites are not at all
fiffrequent. The members of the Central Texas Archeological Society
have recorded a great deal of the infornaation about these sites in their
journal, The Central Texas. Archeologist, and in their C.T.A.S. Nmusletter. Seven volumes of the journal have been issued, in 1935, "36, ’37,
’38, "44, ’53, and ’56.
The Chupek Site, near the confluence of Aquilla Creek and the
Brazos River, is of particular significance as it is a multi-component
site producing ceramic connections with the Alto Focus and other
pottery cultures of east Texas (Watt, 1941, pp. 17-19; Newell and
Krieger, 1949, p. 196). An historic Tawakoni village on the headwaters
of the Navasota River, an historic village at the present site of Waco,

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

/

i

\
\

o

o

I
,..=

c~

L~

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

43

and the site of Torrey’s Trading Post near Waeo are other significant
sites investigated by this group. On the Leon River in northern Bell
County, Watt and his associates excavated the Ayeock Shelter containing a number of burials (Watt, 1936, pp. 5-27) and examined other
sites nearby. In 1933, a party from the University of Texas under the
dh’ection of A. T. Jackson exeavated another burial shelter in this
same vicinity.
Private eo!leetions of unstudied materials have been made in this
region for nearly half a century, particularly around the vicinity of
Waco and along the Leon River. Attractive artifacts were found abundandy and led to a flourishing commercial enterprise during the 1920’s
and 1930’s. The business was so good that manufacture of fake specimens beeame quite widespread as well. Most of the larger collections
have now been disposed of by the original owners, and those that
remain are largely undocumented and of little scientific value.
THE WHITNEY SURXrEy AND EXCAVATIONS

With the beginning of construction on the Whitney Dam, plans
were promptly fornmlated for intensive archeological investigation of
the area to be inundated. The file and record materials concerning previous archeological work in the central Texas area were made available by the Department of Anthropology at the University and were
examined for several days before field work began. Other records and
materials from the more finmediate area, in the vicinity of ~Zaco,
Texas, were made available by Frank H. Watt and several days were
devoted to examination of these and consultations with Mr. Watt in
Waco on the initial trip to the Whitney area. Field investigations at
the Whitney Dam began on May 18, 1947 and lasted through October
1, 1947.
During this intensive, four and a half months of recom~aissance, 61
archeological sites, two historic ruins, and two paleontological localities (Fig. 4) were recorded, mapped, and described (Stephenson,
1947). The field work began at the damsite, continued upstream to the
maximmn limits of the flood pool and extended laterally into Hill and
Bosque Counties for a distance of approxfinately one-half mile beyond
the proposed limits of the flood pool. Besides foot and automobile
coverage, an aerial survey of the area was made near the end of the
season. Brief test excavations were made in 23 of the 61 archeological
sites. To ,aid in a portion of the test excavations, two temporary
assistants were hired for a period of two weeks, through the courtesy
of the Corps of Engineers’ field office at the Whitney Dam.
The two historic ruins visffed were those of Towash and Fort

44

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Graham. Towash was a mid-19th century community of significance
in the early development of Hill County, situated three miles upstream
from the new damsite. Fort Graham was a mid-19th century military
post located approximately ten miles above the damsite. One fossil
locality consisted of a secondary deposit of several mineralized bison
bones found during test pit excavations for the foundation of the dam.
The other was a portion of a proboscidian tusk found in a small
erosion gully near the damsite. The areheologieal sites consisted of 14
reek shelters, 6 large village sites, and 41 small campsites. Temporally
the occupations represented by the remains at these sites range from
one of moderate geological antiquity through early and late prelfistorie
to those of known historic affiliations (Stephenson, 1950; Krieger,
1951; Kelly, 1951). The potentialities for developing an outline of the
cultural sequences in this area seemed encouraging if excavation of
several of the sites could be accomplished before the reservoir was
filled. The sites that appeared to have no appreciable depth of deposit
were eliminated from the plans for further investigation after surface
eo!leetions and some brief test pits were made and the details of their
appearance were recorded. There were 45 sites in this group. The
remaining 16 all gave some indication of providing additional data
if excavated, and were therefore recommended for further investigation.
The Whitney I~eservoir area was next visited in Janualdz 1948, when
Dr. Theodore E. White was brought there to make an appraisal of the
paleontological potentialities of the flood area. Dr. White spent three
weeks in a detailed examination of the outcrops throughout the reservoir, after inspecting the two minor localities discovered during the
areheologieal survey. At the end of that trine he reported that "prospeeting failed to reveal additional evidence of vertebrate fossils in the
reservoir area, either in the Cretaceous strata or in the valley fill. Consequently it is believed that no further paleontological work is needed
in the reservoir basin." (White, in Stephenson, 1949e, pp. 35-6).
In March 1950, the 1-4iver Basin Surveys field party began extensive
excavations in some of the recommended sites. With Edward B. Jelks
as assistant, and a crew of laborers ranging from 6 to 9,1, but averaging
about 15 during most of the season, fifteen weeks were spent in the
field from March 6 through June 19, 1950. Due to limitations of both
time and funds, it was not feasible to excavate all 16 sites recommended. It was decided instead to concentrate the work on a few of the
most promising of the sites and to do a reasonably complete job on
them. One site of lfl~own historic affiliation, the Stansbm%~ Site (4139B1-1), was selected to represent the upper end of the chronological

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

45

eolunm. Three large rock shelters with apparent sh’atigraphic sequences were selected in the hope of extending the chronology back
from the proto-historie period to the moderately early prehistoric.
These were Pictograph Shelter (41-26D7-5), Buzzard Shelter (4126D7-12), and Sheep Shelter (41-26D7-20). One large village site of
the prehistol~e period, the Jones Site (41-26D7-23), was selected for
exeavation in an attempt to determine the relationships between the
rock shelters and the open sites. Test excavations at this site early in
the field season demonstrated that it had little stratigraphic value and
the collections of artifacts provided few diagnostic materials. Fmlher
exeavation at the Jones Site was therefore abandoned. Follunately,
however, additional reconnaissance at this time revealed a previously
unrecorded site, the Steele Site (41-26D7-38), that appeared to meet
the requirements hoped for in the Jones Site. The Steele Site was
therefore selected for excavation. Besides these five major excavations,
minor testing was accomplished at the two historic sites of Fort
Crahmn and Towash, and scale drawings were made of the ruins.
Following the close of field work at the Whitney Reservoir on June
19, 1950, the Itiver Basin Surveys party moved to the area of the
Lavon tteservoir, in Collin County, to excavate sites in that area
(Stephenson, 1949d; 19591). Two brief trips, though, were made back
to the Whitney area during the summer and fall. With a pm~ of sill
the last two days of June were spent at Pictograph and Buzzard Shelters excavating additiona! areas and rechecking profiles and stratiga’aphy. Edward B. Jelks and I spent the first three days in November
in the Whitney area obtaining additional photographs and rechecking
several of the excavations. Thus, during a period of 3½ years, a total
of 226 days or 1,319 man-days was spent in field work on the Whitney
Reservoir project.
It is of interest to note that despite the intensive coverage of the
area during the 1947 sma~ey, additional important sites remained to be
discovered later. During the course of the 1950 excavations, six new
sites were located. Four of these were small, prehistoric campsites.
One was a small campsite containing trade material of White provenience, and the other was the Steele Site. Even after the 1950 season
was completed, two more large and important sites were discovered,
bringing the total of all recorded sites in the Whitney Iteservoir Basin
to 73. Both of the latter were located by the late George C. Benson, a
local resident and member of the excavation crew in 1950. One of
these was the Blum ttockshelter where Jelks conducted full scale
excavations in September of 1952 (Jelks, 1953, pp. 189-207). The other

46

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SO~ETY

was the Kyle Site, excavated by Jelks and the Dallas Archeological
Society in 1959 and 1960 (Jelks, 1962).
Additional archeologieal sites, no doubt, remain undiscovered in
the Whitney Basin. If sites as large and as significant as the Steele
Site, the Blum Roekshelter and the Kyle Site can be passed by without
notice during such intensive search as was conducted in 1947 and
1950, then others may just as likely remain unnoticed. Any such sites
lying within the lower elevations of the valley, though, are destined to
remain unrecorded. The waters of Lake Whitney have taken their toll
and have sealed the record on these sites. This does not preclude
future work in the area, however. Some of the sites already recorded
are above pool level and nmeh of the above-pool area remains to be
searched. In fact, in 1957 and 1958 three previously recorded sites
were partia!ly excavated by the members of the Dallas Archeological
Society. These were the Forrester, Little Buzzard, and Buzzard Shelters. Work on the latter site was a supplement to my excavation there
in 1950 (Long, 1961, pp. 223-252). Also from time to time, Frank
Watt and his associates from Waco have conducted minor investigations at several of the recorded sites in the Whitney Basin subsequent
to the 1950 excavations.
ACKNO~cVLEDGNIENTS

Deep appreciation is expressed to the many individuals and organizations that have contributed to the Whitney Reservoir archeological
salvage project, and apologies are extended to all of them for their
patience in waiting so long for this report while I devoted nay efforts
to other matters. Ffl’st and foremost is acknowledgment of the splendid
cooperation, long-range planning, and general supervision of the
project provided by the late Dr. Frank H. H. Roberts, Jr., then Director of the River Basin Smweys. He provided every possible aid, both
in planning the general program and in supplying equipment and material. I was given complete freedom in planning and executing the
work, yet at no trine was I left without needed advice and suggestions.
No single request, that could possibly be granted, was refused. Dr.
Erik K. Reed of the Southwestern Regional Office (then Region III)
and Dr. John M. Corbett of the Washington Office of the National
Park Service, and the staffs of both their offices provided innumerable
services to the project by way of advice, suggestions, and material
considerations. It was through these two offices that the funds for the
work were made available.
The Department of Anthropology of the University of Texas provided access to all of its files, manuscripts, library, records, and other

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

47

materials and made space available for laboratory, office, and storage
facilities, through the efforts of Dr. J. Gilbert MeAllister, then Department Chairman, and his successor in that position, Dr. Thomas N.
Campbell. The Department even made a station wagon available for
the 1950 field season. I enjoyed frequent consultations with both these
men and with other members of their staffs. Dr. Alex D. Krieger and
Dr. J. Charles Kelley, in particular, were always available for consultation, and their friendly help is deeply appreciated. Glen L. Evans
and the late Dr. E. H. Sellards, both then of the Texas Memorial Museum, assisted materially in the geological aspects of the work. Hal
Story, also of the Texas Memorial Museum, prepared the sketches of
the two rock shelters and the water color reproductions of the pictogTaphs for which I am deeply grateful.
The Whitney field office and the Galveston and Fort Worth Dishiet
Offices of the Corps of Engineers were most cooperative and helpful.
Mr. Mark Haima, Project Engineer of the Whitney Field Office, was
especially helpful in many ways and even provided two laborers to
assist in the 1947 survey.
The assistance of Frank H. Watt of Waeo and of ]R. King Harris of
Dallas is deeply appreciated. Both men made all of their records and
materials available for study and provided many stinmlating thoughts
and arguments during theft" visits to the sites and during many pleasant evenings of consultations in their homes. Dr. Luther S. Cressman,
of the University of Oregon, to whom I am indebted for my first anthropological training, visited the field party and provided welcome
advice and suggestions. Those who visited the field excavations at one
time or another were Drs. Frank H. H. Roberts, Jr., Erik K. ]Reed, John
M. Corbett, J. Charles Kelley, Theodore E. White, and Alex D. Krieger, and Messrs. Glen L. Evans, Frank H. Watt, R. K. Harris, and Hal
Story. The sound eounse! of all these people is deeply appreciated.
Local residents and organizations in the Whitney area extended
many kinds of help without which the work would have suffered. Mr.
Albert Kyle, manager of the Steiner Valley ]Ranch, furnished the field
party with outstandingly pleasant living accommodations in 1950. The
Whitney National Guard unit loaned a much needed jeep when transportation problems became critical. The late Mr. George C. Benson
made his pickup truck available for use whenever needed. The many
services provided by this local naturalist and amateur archeologist are
legion. His intimate familiarity with the region, the local residents,
and the natural history of the country, and his willingness to halt his
own ranching activities for extended periods of time to work with the
field parties made his services of utmost value. The landowners of the

48

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

area generously allowed access to their land and permitted excavations on it as well as providing ilffonnation on the locations of sites.
To all of these people sincerest thanks are extended.
The members of the crew are deserving of the lfighest commendation. They were ahvays cheerful, dependable, and et~cient, even when
weather and other conditions sometimes made the going a bit rough.
Edward B. Jelks handled the job of assistant archeologist effleiently
and effectively, as did Adolph H. Witte the job of field assistant. Ensor
O. Miller, Edward H. Moorman, and the late George C. Benson all
served as outstandingly capable crew chiefs. Other members of the
crew were Ilenzo Clepper and John H. Taylor (in 1947), Joe E. Bottoms, Lon J. Boyd, Steve Boyd, Ray A. Cappers, Henry Crow, tlobert
L. Curbo, Dehnar A. Dyerson, Elvin A. Gatlin, tlhecie F. Catlin, Ben
E. Hart, Melvin Clyde Lanehart, Carmel Marsh, Norman J. Molidor,
Charlie A. Moore, John M. Moore, William H. Nix, Perry J. Prince,
William J. Purser, Johnnie G. Robinson, Otto Calvin t~uetter, Franlde
W. Shaw, William B. Smith, Porter Stone, Kenneth Surginer, William
T. Walker, and Thomas W. Wood, all of whom served commendably
throughout their association with the project.
Following completion of the field work, Dr. Carlyle S. Smith of the
Museum of Natural History at the University of Kansas kindly identified the metal objects from the Stansbury Site and provided the gun
illustrations (P1. 7). Dr. John Maxon, Director of the Museum of Art at
the University of Kansas, identified the earthenware from the same
site. For the preparation of the specimens and the final manuscript,
members of the Missouri Basin Project staff ha Lincoln, Nebraska,
were most helpful. Miss Clara tlehn and Mrs. Evelyn Anderson typed
the manuscript. Mrs. Evelyn Stewart prepared the mock-ups for the
plates, l~aymond S. Price retraced the figures and maps. The late Nathaniel Dewell made the photographs for the plates. Lee C. Madison,
Lawrence L. Tomsyck and the late Dean Clark assisted in handling
and sorting the specimens. To all of these people who helped so much,
sincere appreciation is expressed.
Finally, the profoundest gratitude is expressed to my wife, Ceorgie,
who assisted in so many ways from the veiN beginning of the project
to the last word of the manuscript. Her constant encouragement and
helpful suggestions are principally responsible for the completion of
this report.
THE SETTINC
PHYSIOGRAPHY AND GEOLOGY

The Brazos tliver is one member of the system of large Texas rivers,

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

49

heading in the northern and northwestern part of the state and flowing in a general southeasterly direction across the state to empty into
the Gulf of Mexico (Fig. 2). Other major rivers of this system are the
Red, Sabine, Neehes, and Trinity to the northeast, and the Colorado,
Guadalupe, Nueces and Rio Grande to the southwest. The Brazos has
its source in the eastern edge of the Llano Estaeado or Staked Plains
of west Texas, a southern extension of the Great Plains physiographic
province. It flows southeastward through the Gypsum Plains, the
Permian Redbeds and the Abilene Haskell Plains in the Central Lowlands physiographic province. Continuing in this southeasterly dh’eetion the Brazos River crosses the southern extremities of the Western
and Eastern Cross Timbers and flows into the Central Plains physiographic province near the city of Waeo. Here it bisects the Balcones
Escarpment. It continues on through the Black Prairie, the Fayette
Prairie and finally across the Coastal Dark Prairie to empty into the
Gulf of Mexico at the town of Freeport (Raisz, 1939; Fenneman,
1931 ).
The Whitney Reservoir lies approximately half way between the
headwaters and the mouth of the Brazos l:~iver, between the southern
extremities of the Western and the Eastern Cross Timbers. Here the
river forms the boundary between the Comanche Plateau on the
southwest and the Grand Prairie on the northeast. This area is a great,
eroded plateau, with only occasional renmants of the caprocks remaining today. The region has been dissected by more recent stream erosion, the principal one of which has been the channel cutting of the
Brazos River. The average elevation of the plain and prairie in the
area of the Whitney Reservoir is 650 to 700 feet above mean sea level.
The Brazos valley is some 200 feet less in elevation. Small tributaries
enter the river in this area as short, deeply eroded canyons. The valley
has a wide, relatively level floor averaging about a mile and a half in
width and bordered by steep slopes and sheer bluffs on either side.
The present course of the river has cut a channel some ten feet deep
into this valley floor and winds through the valley in great, expansive
meanders (Fig. 4).
In the Whitney Reservoir area the valley of the Brazos River is cut
into the sediments of the Lower Cretaceous Trinity and Fredericksburg groups. These limestone and shale formations dip to the southeast at the rate of about 10 feet per mile and are well exposed on both
valley walls as well as in a number of small ta-ibutary canyons. The
thick, massive limestones of the Fredericksburg ga’oup outcrop in the
vicinity of the damsite and for several miles upstream. The sediments
of the Trinity group outcrop along the northwest margin of the dam-

50

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

site. Only the sediments of the Fredericksburg group will be inundated at the level of the normal pool elevation (White, in Stephenson,
1949c, p. 35).
Since the period of major valley cutting, erosional forces have considerably altered the valley topography. Wind and water have constantly been at work cutting bluffs, rod< shelters, short canyons, and
building up alluvial and aeolion deposits. The short, deep canyons
entering the valley are the result of surface water draining from the
treeless uplands into the Brazos valley. The vertical bluffs appearing
intermittently along the margins of the valley have been carved by
both wind and water erosion but principally by action of the river
itself washing against the base of the soft limestone outeroppings. In
many of these bhfffs, as well as in some of the more gently sloping
limestone outcrops, are found rock shelters, ledges and "overhangs."
Ancient river erosion, when the river was at a somewhat higher elevation than now, has apparently been the principal factor in scouring
out these shelters. Subsequent ground water action and wind erosion
have continued to aid in the expansion of these cavities and lil<ewise
in their filling with detrital materials. The deposits covering the valley
floor are principally referable to river cutting and filling, but evidence
of aeolian deposition is frequently to be found. In many places the
sandy clays of the valley fill exhibit the vertical jointing characteristic
of aeolian deposits. These areas, though, are local in extent and probably represent dune deposits similar to the active dunes observable/11
small, local sections of the valley today.
The valley fill throughout the area forms a uniform terrace sequence. The oldest of these Quaternary stream deposits are the higher
sand and gravel terrace remnants, here usually no longer in evidence,
along the valley margins. At least one remnant of this oldest deposit,
however, appears to exist along the edge of the upland just west of
Old Fort Graham (Fig. 4). Two major terraces are clearly distinguishable. The upper (or 40 foot) terrace is composed of stratified deposits
of sand, silt, clay and gravels and constitutes the major alluvial fill in
the valley. The gravels of many of the deposits of this terrace fill are
cemented with calcium carbonate and in part are derived from the
adjacent Cretaceous limestones. In many places where the river has
migrated to the valley edges, this terrace has been eroded to partial or
complete obliteration but for the most part it is easily recognizable
throughout the area. It generally maintains an elevation of 35 to 45
feet above the present stream channel, hence the designation as the
"40 foot" terrace. The actual depth of deposition, though, is much shallower, usually not appearing to average nmeh over 25 or 30 feet. At

~7]~IITNEY ItESEItVOIR

51

the damsite the valley fill is recorded as about 60 feet, but this depth
was measured in an old channel of the river.
The lower (or 20 foot) terrace is a narrow shelf of alluvial fill composed of sandy clays and silts lying diseonformably against the streamward edge of the upper terrace. It is usually not more than a few
yards wide but occasionally stretches out for several hundred yards. It
maintains a general elevation of 18 to 29. feet above the river channel
with actual depths of alluvial fill somewhat near the same figure. As
with the upper terrace, this lower one has been obliterated in certain
local areas by river migration but is usually recognizable tln’oughout
the area. Both terraces are within the present floodplain of the Brazos
River, the lower one being inundated seasonally while the upper one
is inundated only at rare intervals of exceptionally high water. Due to
these latter, though infrequent, floods supplementalT deposits, stratigraphically equivalent to the lower terrace, have accumulated over
parts of the surface of the upper terrace. These deposits are usually
thickest near the upper terrace edge and thin out as they move back
from the river channel.
The river itself varies from two or three feet deep and nearly sixty
yards wide in places, to less than a third that width, with a corresponding increase in depth in other places. The bed is usually composed of silt deposits and sand and gravel bars at least at either edge,
but in many places the river flows on a relatively clean bedrock bottom. A new terrace is beginning to form at the water’s edge along the
whole course.
The Quaternary history of this area of the Brazos valley has not
been studied in specific detail. General observations, though, on the
structure and formation of the sedfinentary deposits have been made
by both Evans and White during visits to the area in connection with
the River Basin Surveys program. Consultations with both geologists,
supplemented by observation, have provided the basis for the foregoing brief description.
Jack T. Hughes has provided an extremely useful analysis of an
experiment in relative dating of archeological materials by use of data
from stream terraces (Hughes, 1950, pp. 97-104). While his experiment was in another region, the results he obtained prove useful in
analyses of stream terrace significance in any similar region. In his
study he was able to support the stratigraphic, typological and other
non-physiographic evidence by the evidence derived from terrace history. This study proved the value of one more useful tool for determination of cultural sequences. Correlations between the terrace sequences in the Brazos valley and those in other stream valleys have

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

been suggested or implied by a number of writers. Evans and Meade
(1945, pp. 500-503) have pointed out that Quaternary stream deposits
occur within all of the stream valleys erossing the Texas plains. They
have described these deposits in the High Plains and their implications for downsta’eam sections of the watercourses heading in the High
Plains. They suggested that the generalized sequences in all of these
valleys have had a similar history and can be roughly correlated over a
wide geogTaphieal area and with Quaternary sedimentation elsewhere.
For example, "The late Pleistocene terrace [in the streams near the
eastern margin of the Plains] is probably a correlative of the Neville
formation [of the Big Bend area of Texas] and the successively lower
ltecent terraces the correlatives of the Calanlity and the Kokernot
(Albritton and Bryan, 1939). The three terraces may also correlate,
from oldest to youngest, with the Jeddito formation, Tsegi formation,
and Naha formation of the Jeddito Valley area of Arizona which was
described by Hack (1942)." Other investigators have implied correlations of the central Texas stream sequences with the Quaternm7 sequences of the Big Bend region, west Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona (Kelley, Campbell and Lehmer, 1940, pp. 158-159). The correlations developed in this latter paper were based upon both areheological evidence and alluvial stratigraphy and are in substantial agreement with the later statements of Evans and Meade cited above.
Within the central Texas region itself, Kelly has provided both
areheologieal and stratigraphic evidence to correlate the alluvial fills
in the valleys of the Llano and Colorado rivers with each other and
by implication with those of other central Texas stream valleys (Kelley, 1947b, pp. 115-128). Similarly, Campbell has demonstrated the
applicability of terrace correlation on Brushy Creek, a seeondm’y
tributary of the Brazos ltiver, with the terrace system of the Colorado
lliver (Campbell, 1948, pp. 8-10; 28-33). Kelley has, further, brought
a good deal of this evidence together for both general and specific
eorelations of these alluvial sequences in a general review of the situation (Kelley, 1947a, pp. 97-109). In this paper Kelley has suggested
dates for these depositional cycles on the basis of studies by Haek in
Arizona (Hack, 1942, pp. 67-69 and Table II), and Albritton and
Bryan (Albritton and Bryan, 1939) in the Davis Mountains of southwest Texas. The geological evidence was further supported by dated
areheological manifestations within various of the sedimentary formations. The Neville formation, containing extinct fauna, is a part of the
terminal Wisconsin glaciation of Late Pleistocene times. The Calamity
formation is tentatively dated at ch’ca 4000 B.C. to A.D. 100 or, alter-

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

53

natively, at 2000 B.C. to A.D. 1000. The Kokernot formation, containing dated southwestern potsherds is placed at ch’ca A.D. 1200 to A.D.
1800 (Kelley, 1947a, p. 105).
The Whitney Reservoir area of the Brazos valley is not specifically
referred to in any of the above studies, yet by implication and extension, is included in all of them. The similarity between the appearance
of the alluvial fill in this area and that described in areas specifically
mentioned in these studies is striking. The terraces here can be correlated especially well with those of the Colorado River. Terrace elevations are similar in the two stream valleys and the composition of the
alluvial fills in both are comparable in all respects.
In summaly, then, it may be said that the Quaternary history of the
Central Texas-Southern Plains-Southwestern area has developed along
velT similar lines and at a generally uniform rate over a large geographic area. The central Brazos va!ley is one local area withhl this
widespread pattern of development. The earliest depositional remnants
are the Late Pleistocene sand and gravel terraces of the High Plains
which con’elate in trine with the development of the Neville formation
in southwest Texas and the Jeddito formation of the Jeddito valley of
Arizona. Only scattered remnants of these alluvial deposits remain in
the valleys of the Brazos and other central Texas streams. The next
major alhiviation is of Recent geologic age and is seen in the higher
of the two Recent terraces in the High Plains, the 40-foot terrace of
the Colorado and Brazos Rivers in central Texas and the equivalent
20-foot terrace of Brushy Creek in that area. At this time the Calamity
formation was developing in southwest Texas as was its correlative
in the Jeddito valley of Arizona, the Tsegi formation. These deposits
have been dated at circa. 4000 B.C. to A.D. 100, or, alternatively, at
2000 B.C. to A.D. 1000. Finally, the 20-foot terraces of the Brazos and
Colorado River valleys of central Texas, the major fil! of the Lehmarm
Rock Shelter on the Llano River in that area and the lowest ten’aces
of the High Plains, form the latest major alluvial deposits. Correlated
with these are the Kokernot formation of southwest Texas and the
Naha formation of the Jeddito valley in Arizona. This latest stage of
alluviation is dated at circa A.D. 1200 to A.D. 1800 (Table 1).
CLIff, ATE AND BIOTA

The climate of this section of the Brazos valley in terms of Blair’s
classification and description (Blair, 1942, Fig. 28, pp. 137-226) exhibits characteristics of fore" separate types. The area is situated on the
northern fringe of the Humid Subtropical zone (STH). A short distanee to the north is the Humid Warm Continental climatic zone

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

54

TABLE i
Ceneral Terrace Sequence Correlation Chart

----CENTRAL TEXAS----

Geologic

Jeddito

Big

Time

Valley

Bend

Colorado B. Brushey Cr. Brazos R.

Recent

Naha
Forination

Kokernot
Formation

Twenty
Foot
Terrace

Recent

Tsegi
Formation

Calamity
Formation

Forty
Foot
Terrace

Pleistocene

Jeddito
Forination

Neville
Formation

Twenty
Foot
Terrace

High
Plains

Twenty
Foot
Terrace

Lower
Recent
Terrace

Fort),
Foot
Terrace

Upper
Recent
Terrace

Highest
Terrace
Remnants

Late
Pleistocene
Terrace

(ICW) and to the west are the Middle Latitude Steppe (IS) and the
Low Latitude Steppe (STS) zones. The typical climate of none of the
four, consequently, holds entirely true for the Whitney area, though
elements of all are influential. The mean annual range of temperature
is between 40° and 50° F. The coldest month is normally January with
a mean actual temperature of 43° to 50° F. The wannest month is
nonnally July with a mean actual temperature of 80° to 90° F. Winter
temperatures often drop below freezing and near zero temperatures
are not uncommon. Summer temperatures often rise to 100° F. and occasionally above. The hot summer season usually lasts from late April
through early October, and the winter temperatures prevail from
December through February.
Rainfall is moderate throughout most of the year with an annual
mean of between 30" and 40". Late spring and summer rains fall as
heavy thunder showers which at times become torrential. Winter precipitation rarely falls as light snow, or occasionally, hail, which norreally melts within a few hours or a couple of days at most. Humidity
is ordinarily high throughout the year, especially during the long, hot
summer, often staying above 95% for several days at a time. The
nights are likewise hot and humid through the summer months. With
these long, warm, humid summers the area has a usual growing season
of 230 to 240 days. The last killing frost in the spring nonnally occurs
about the middle of March and the first killing frost in the fall about
the middle of November.
Prevailing winds during the summer are from the south and during

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

55

the winter from the north. The latter often take the form of strong,
cold fronts blowing across the state from the central Plains and are
locally called "Nolnkhers." A "Norther" may blow in at any time of the
year but is usually confined to the months of September through
March. With the "Norther" a temperature drop of from 10° to 30° F.
within a few hours may be expected. Local winds ordinarily blow
down the valley from northwest to southeast but frequently may take
a reverse course. Local spring winds occasionally become extreme and
may last for several clays at a time, as was the ease in March 1950
during the first weeks of the Whitney excavations. At such times a
great deal of aeolian erosion takes place over the valley and small,
local areas of migrating dunes are formed.
The valley has a generally open appearance throughout, with great
expanses of open terraces bounded by densly wooded stream banks
and side canyons. In these deeply eroded canyons adjacent to the
valley, over the steep valley margins and along the Brazos channel,
are dense growths of wild vegetation. Here are the "cedar breaks"
and "mesquite thickets" consisting principally of juniper (or cedar),
post oak, elm, hackberry, mesquite, pecan, wild grape and many types
of low-growing bushes. The uplands above the valley are, for the most
part, great expanses of grassland with occasional etumps or "motts" of
elm, oak and hickory. The terraces within the valley occasionally contain low spots with small clmnps of oak or ehn, but generally are level
and clear of timber. On these terraces are the modern cultivated fields.
Cultivation began here with the arrival of the first White settlers a
little over a century ago and has been quite extensive for the past
seven or eight decades. Cotton, corn, canes, maizes, melons and, in
recent years, peanuts are the principal crops. By 1950 most of the open
terrace area was under cultivation, but a few areas were still in pasture. Some of the open upland above the valley has been cultivated in
recent years but for the most part this vast grassland is in fenced
pasture.
Aboriginal human occupation appears to have had little effect on
the appearance of the valley. Cultivation was rarely practiced and
population apparently was not dense enough to have brought about
much change in the natural fauna and flora. Some old settlers still
living in the valley have stated (personal conversation) that land
clearing was never much of a problem because in the early days the
natural vegetation was not much different than now. The grassland
areas of the terraces were naturally cleared and fields were cultivated
by simply breaking the sod in these areas. Other old timers claim that

56

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

there used to be much more wooded land than at present, and still
others mahatain that there was less. Early written accounts (Roemer,
1935; Bonnell, !840; Kh’kpatrick, 1900; Cutbirth, 1943; and Account
Books of Torrey’s Trading House) as well as present indications in the
area tend to colfflrm the former opinion. The vegetation seems to have
changed little in the past century and probably not nmch in the past
several centuries.
The fauna, on the other hand, has changed markedly within the
space of a century. Today jackrabbit, cottontail, several species of
squirrel, raccoon, opossum, skunk, ringtail, armadillo, gray fox, swift
fox and red fox (the latter imported recently for sport) comprise most
of the mammalian fauna. Fish, turtle and freshwater nmssels are
abundant in the river and its tributaries. Dove, quail, grouse and other
game birds are moderately abundant and increasing. At least five
species of snakes, including two rattlesnakes, and numerous lizards
are to be found. The records mentioned above, especially the Account
Books of Torrey’s Trading House, provide ample evidence that less
than a century ago bison, deer, antelope, bear, coyote, javelina and
beaver were abundant. The areheological record indicates the presence
of elk as well, within the past eentm’y or two. Conversely, armadillos,
one of the most abundant forms today, had never been seen in the
valley prior to the 1920’s (personal communication from the late
George C. Benson of Steiner Valley). The various species of reptiles
have changed markedly in the past half century as observed over that
period by E. O. Miller, then living at Walnut Springs.
The depletion of the larger game animals is readily explainable as a
result of the encroachment of civilization. Many of the other shifts in
faunal population, however, may require a nmeh more complex explanation in terms of both local and inter-regional ecology. The creation of the tremendous lake back of Whitney Dam will, of course,
radically change the biota of the area but cannot be charged with the
changes noted before its flooding. Such problems certainly open a wide
field for the naturalist and already point up the urgency of a detailed
study of the biota of this loeaI area as well as that of the whole central
Texas region.
In terms of Dice’s Biotic Provinces this area of the Brazos valley is
marginal to both the Texan and the Comanehian Provinces (Dice,
1943, pp. 22-9.4 and 9~8-29). In both provinces short mild winters and
Iong hot summers prevail with most of the precipitation falling in the
long growing season. Shantz and Zon have indicated a Pifion-Juniper
forest zone for the valley proper, with Oak-Hickory forest in the up~

WHITNEY IIESEItVOIR

57

lands to the northeast and southwest (Shantz and Zon, 1924, Fig. 2,
4, p. 8). The description of this local area agrees in nearly all respects
with such a classification as Dice has made and in general with that of
Shantz and Zon. In the latter case, however, the Pifion-Juniper forest
of the valley is partly superseded by a more humid subtropical vegetation along the river channel and the Oak-Hickory forest is in small part
superseded by a Mesquite and Desert Grass Savanna. These apparent
vegetational overlaps are additional substantiation of the placement
of this area in Blair’s classification as a marginal area encompassing
elements of two hmnid zones and two steppe zones as suggested
above.
HISTORICAL STATEN,lENT

The documentary history of the central Brazos area in general and
of the Stansbury Site in particular is admirably treated by Jelks in an
appendix to the present report. In brief summary it is a history of infrequent Indian-White contacts from the latter half of the 16th century
to the early part of the 19th century and steadily increasing settlement
from the mid-19th century on. The earliest apparent European influence was brought to central Texas by trading parties of Jumano and
other roving bands who were in contact with the Spanish on the Rio
Grande near the mouth of the l~io Conchos of Mexico (Kelley, N.D. ).
These Indians traded extensively throughout the present area of Texas
and southern New Mexico from the Pueblo country on the west to the
Hasinai country on the east. The Whitney area lies well within the
routes of travel used by these groups.
Apparently no Europeans of known record actually penetrated this
region of central Texas until 1721 when the Aguayo expedition came
as far north and west as the present location of the city of Waco (Bolton, 1915, p. 141). The earliest extensive explorations through the area
were those of Athanase de M~zi~res in 1772 and again in 1778 and
1779 and that of Pedro Vial in 1786. Upon these early expeditions was
established the Spanish claim to the area (Bolton, 1914, Vol. I, pp. 3940; 1915, pp. 137-148). France and England, also manifestly interested
in this area, seem not to have been sufficiently interested to send an
official expedition there. French and English traders, though, were
working directly and indirectly into the region from the posts in
Louisiana and along the Bed and Mississippi Ilivers throughout the
!8th century and perhaps even earlier (Bolton, 1914, Vol. I, pp. 96-97,
115 and others).
Following de M6zib~res’ and Vial’s explorations, numerous traders,
explorers and colonizers of French, Spanish and American nationality

58

TEXAS AI~CHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ventured into the central Brazos area for over half a century. Few of
these parties, however, recorded more than brief, sketchy accounts of
the Indians. One exception was John Sibley’s account of the Indians of
Texas made in 1807 (Sibley, 1832, p. 723).
By 1836 a few permanent settlers were established in the present
area of the Whitney Reservoir. The Walling family being the first to
move into the area in that year were soon joined by the Greenwade
family and the beginning of permanent settlement was made. By the
early 1840’s a trading post was flourishing in the vicinity of what is
now Waco (Torrey’s Trading House records). The Gennan naturalist
Ferdinand Von tloemer, made a trip through the region in 1846 in
company with a trader and left an excellent account of his visit
(tloemer, 1935). Settlement was extensive enough by 1849 to warrant
a military post at Fort Graham, some ten miles above the present
Whitney Dam, for protection against the "hostile" Indians. This post
was abandoned in 1853 due to submission of the "hostile" Indians and
establishment of settlement further west. It was at about this same
time that a group of colonists from Mississippi established the town
of Towash just above the present Whitney Dam. This town flourished
as the principal population center in the whole area for some time and
supported a g~’ist mi!!, store, church, saloons, etc. Gradually, after the
turn of the century, Towash began to decline and by 1947 only three
families remained, though the old church was still fll use.
Thus in approximately one century the central Brazos valley above
the city of Waco has gradually developed from an hostile frontier to a
substantially settled fanning and ranching area. The center of population, at first concentrated along the river margins, has shifted to the
uplands in both Hilt and Bosque Counties. The town of Hillsboro, 18
miles northeast of the river, is the population center in Hill County.
The towns of Meridian and Cliffton, an equal distance southwest of
the river, are the population centers in Bosque County.
THE STANSBUtlY SITE (41-39B1-1)
INTRODUCTION

The Stansbmdz site was visited on many occlusions over a period of
years by Watt and his associates and reported in the Central Texas
Areheological Society’s Bulletin (Watt, 1937; Watt & Meroney, 1937),
and has been known by several designations. Watt referred to it as
the "Bead Site" because of the multitude of glass trade beads found
there. Alternatively he called it the "Towash Site" because of its location on the eastern edge of the once prosperous town of Towash. Local

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

59

residents frequently refer to it as the "Creenwade Place," taking this
name from the original landowner. It was the first site visited in the
River Basin Surveys investigation of the Whitney area and became
known then as the "Stansbury Site," the landowner at that time being
Mr. J. L. StansbmT. The latter name has been permanently adopted
as the other designations each had confusing connotations. There are
several "Creenwade Places" in the area; "Towash" is the name of the
nearby historic community and "Bead Site" confuses a complex areheolgieal situation with one specific kind of artifact.
The site was also assigned a numerical designation, 41-39B1-1, within
the uniform site designation system adopted by the River Basin Surveys in Texas. This system was established in 1940 by an infolTnal
group known as the Council of Texas Archeologists. (Council of Texas
Archeologists, 1940). The system is based upon numbered quadrangles
of one degree of latitude and one degree of longitude each, into which
the whole state is divided. Each of these quadrangles is divided into
four lettered subquadrangles, each of which is further divided into
nine numbered areas of ten minutes of lattitude and ten minutes of
longitude. The suffix number in the symbol indicates the number of
the site within the area. The River Basin Surveys has modified the
codification only so far as to prefix the symbol with a state designation
in a numbered alphabetical listing of the states. Thus, the site 4139B1-1 may be inteq?reted as: within the state of Texas (41); in
quadrangle 39; subquadrangle B; area 1; the first site (Fig. 5). It is to
be pointed out that "Wheat used the nunIber 42 to designate the state
of Texas (Wheat, 1953). This is an error that was made in interpreting the alphabetical list of states in the early months of the River Basin
Surveys. The District of Columbia was at that time thought to be
included in the list of states (see also Stephenson, 1947). The error
was corrected in the records and on the cataloged materials beginning
early in 1948.
This site designation system has since been abandoned and replaced
by the standard River Basin Surveys site designation system consisting
of a state symbol, a county symbol, and a site number (e.g., Jetks,
1962).
DESCRIPTION OF THE SITE

The Stansbury site (41-39B1-1) is situated on the sandy, upper (40
foot) terrace of the Brazos valley adjacent to the now-abandoned State
Highway 22 bridge across the Brazos River. It is five miles southwest
of the town of Whitney and two miles north of the Whitney Dam

AINCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TEXAS

60

A

C
3

8

9

. I
12

13

14

I

21

22

23

2

34

35

36

3¸

39

48

49

5

52

~B
It9

17

26

~7/

34°

/0

28

E9

9"././/
31

32

33

46

47

41

53

54

42

43

55

56
300

J06o
59

60~

61

6

64

7

72

65

94°

104°
69 ~’N

........ 28"

STATE

OF

TEXAS

~,~
96°

41

tO0°

79 I
26=
80

DRAWN 8Y RILSTEPHENSON
TRACED BY RSPRICE

98o

T389
4-23-1954

FIGURE 5. Map of Texas showing the site numbering system.

(Fig. 4). The upper terrace at this point rises rather steeply from the
river bank and extends northeast to the uplands, a distance of slightly
over one mile. The lower (9.0 foot) terrace exists only as a narrow
shelf in this bank (Fig. 6 b). The surface of this wide terrace is quite
level all the way back to the uplands except for occasional gully
erosion. Two of these gullies cut through the site at right angles to the

WHITNEY

I~ESERVOIR

61

river (Fig. 6 a). With these two exceptions, though, the surface of the
site is quite flat and at an elevation of approximately 470 feet above
mean sea level.
The exact areal extent of the site is not known. It seems to occupy a
long, narrow strip of the terrace edge nearly 9.000 feet in length and
approximately 800 feet in width. The main concentration of occupational refuse, though, is in an area 1200 feet long and 600 feet wide,
centered about a group of springs which has cut a deep erosion channel into the terrace ( Fig. 6 a). Half a mile to the west of the main section of the site m’e the ruins of the old town of Towash. Occasional
surface indications of occupational refuse were found as far east of the
main section of the site as half a mile and as far west as the rains of
the town of Towash. To the north such refuse was found only a few
hundred feet beyond the main occupation area. Surface examination
and subsurface testing in these marginal areas produced no appreciable amount of material, however.
One of the first permanent White settlers in this vicinity, Mr. Jack
Creenwade, built a large log house here in 1854 or 1856. The exact
date is somewhat obscure. Statements of long-trine residents indicated

FIGUI!.E 6. Stansbury Site

(41-39B1-1): a, plan; b, Profile across site.

62

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SO~ETY

both dates and the matter was not clarified by reference to the land
records. The weight of evidence tends to favor the earlier date and
that may be the correct one. The Greenwade family occupied the area
until the earl), 1940’s when it was purchased by Mr. J. L. Stansbury,
who in turn sold it to the U. S. Government in 1950. The original log
house, with some subsequent additions, remained in use throughout
the period and was not torn down until 1950. The area of the house
and yard and outbuildings had been constantly in use for ahnost a
century. A road was built along the edge of the site parallel to and
some 300 feet from the river in the early days of settlement to provide
access to and from the town of Towash. Between the river and this
road the terrace edge has not been cultivated. Some remains of a
peach orchard were to be seen there in 1947, but for the most part it
was overgrown with high weeds and juniper. The other areas of the
site had been in cultivation ahnost constantly since the first days of
settlement. Cotton, corn, melons, peanuts, and garden vegetables were
grown in various sections.
The site has long been known as an old Indian village and local
people have gathered great quantities of "Indian beads" from it for
many years. In fact, when Greenwade first settled here, a small group
of Tonkawa Indians were still living between his house and the
springs to the west (personal communication of his granddaughter,
Mrs. Jessie Greenwade. See Appendix, B). The known associations of
Indians with the site and the very early settlement by Whites has led
to a certain amount of folklore concerning the area. Buried treasure,
outlaws and mysterious strangers have figured in these folk tales over
the years.
AHCHEOLOGICAL FIELD ~¥OI~K

This site was visited on several occasions during the course of field
work in the Whitney Basin in 1947. With the assistance of J. L. Stansbury and his son, a small series of test pits was excavated and surface
collections were made. For convenience of recording, the site was
divided into six "areas" (Fig. 6 a) and the tests were made in areas
"A" and "D". From these tests 77 artifacts including several potsherds,
pipe fragments, metal objects and projectile points were recovered.
Abundant midden refuse was scattered over the surface of the main
area of the site, among which were several large concentrations of
broken bone. These bone concentrations, the heads and other trade
items, the types of aboriginal artifacts and the general geographic setting of the site gave the impression of cultural and temporal similarity
to the Spanish Fort site. The latter is a documented Taovayas village

on the Red River, some 125 miles to the north, and was a principal
point of Indian-White contact in that area in the middle 18th century
(Witte, 1938; Krieger, 1946, pp. 161-164; Steen, 1953). The supposition of a relationship between this site and Spanish Fort was further

supported by use of the term "Towash" to refer to the Stansbury Site
both locally and in the literature. Careful examination and analysis of
historic documents and further excavations in 1950 provided data indicating that this supposition is no longer tenable, as Jelks has shown in
the appendix to the present report.
Excavations at the Stansbury Site in 1950 were begun early in
March and continued at intervals, depending on weather and excavation schedules at other sites, until mid-June. A datum point was established and north-south and east-west base lines were staked off at five
foot intervals. The juncture of the two base lines was designated station 0-0. The five foot intervals north of 0-0 were marked N5, N10,
N15 etc. and those south of 0-0 were $5, S10, $15 etc. The east-west
base line intervals were similarly marked. All subsequent measurements were made in reference to those two base lines. The flat terrain
allowed both base lines to be extended over the entire site to form a
standard grid system. From this the entire site was mapped by planetable and alidade (Fig. 6 a).
A systematic series of test pits was excavated over the site at 25
foot and greater intervals. These 56 test squares were excavated in
arbitrary 6" levels to depths of 2’ to 4’. In addition, a 6" post-hole
auger was used to sample the deposits down to depths of 6’ in 18 of
the squares. The post-hole auger was also used to test the perepheries
of the site with 85 test holes outside the main area. Most of these were
unproductive.
The subdivision of the site into areas in 1947 was retained in 1950
and the six areas were designated

by

letters "A" through "F" and

larger excavation units were dug in all except area "’C". The 56 test
squares and the 110 excavation squares represent approximately 11,840 cubic feet of earth moved.
EXCAVATION AI~EAS AND FEATURES
EXCAVATIONS IN AREA A

Area A, located along the terrace edge adjacent to the river was
reputed to be a burial area as several burials were said to have been
removed from here in 1937. Unfortunately no record of the burials remains. The surface of this area produced virtually no artifacts nor
indications of occupational rnateria]s, except for a series of eight flat,

64

TEXAS ABCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

uncut stones partially buried and standing on end. These limestone
slabs (designated as Features 1-8) were of an average size of 18" long
by 7" wide by 2" thick and were notable as no other large stones were
seen on the surface of Area A. They had long been known to the local
residents who called them "Indian Crave Markers." In 1947 a series of
four test pits was excavated around the stones but no burials were
found. In 1950 these test pits were enlarged and 21 five-foot squares
were excavated. Three burials (Burials No. 2, 3 and 4), some grave
furniture and a small section of a stone wall (Feature 9) were
uncovered.
Burial No. 2 was located in the midst of the eight stone slabs (Fig.
6 a, square 47) at a depth of 18" below sm’iace (P1. 1 c). It was an
extended, supine burial of a child, between three and five years of age,
and of unknown sex. The bones were poorly preserved. It was oriented
with the head to the east, in a poorly defined burial pit of generally
oval shape. Both arms were semi-flexed and the feet were crossed.
Thirty glass seed beads, three flake scrapers of chert, two sherds of
white china and a fragment of a cast iron kettle were found near the
chest region.
Burial No. 3 was located adjacent and parallel to Burial No. 2 (Fig.
6 a, square 47) at a depth of 66" below surface (P1. 1 c). It, too, was
an extended, supine burial of a child of unknown sex but slightly
younger than Burial No. 2, being perhaps between two and three years
of age. It was oriented with the head to the west in a clearly defined,
compound, rectangular pit. The arms and legs were fully extended
and parallel. The burial pit was stepped so as to form three successively larger, superimposed, rectangular pits. The upper pit was 48"
x 42", and .38" deep. The intermediate pit was 36" x 25", and 18"
deep. The lower pit was 24" x 12", and 10" deep. The latter was the
size of the wooden coffin originally holding the body, as was clearly
shown by the outline of bits of rotted wood, tacks and small nails
around the pit edge. The north side of the upper burial pit was only
one foot south of Burial No. 2 and had been partly obscured by the
original excavation for that burial. There was thus no doubt of the
sequence of the two burials. Burial No. 3 had preceded Burial No. 2
by a short tinie. Associated with Burial No. 3 were two metal buttons
and the numerous nails and tacks mentioned.
Burial No. 4 was located 22 feet east of Burials No. 2 and 3 (Fig.
6 a, square 49) at a depth of 14" below the surface. The bones were
in extremely poor condition and only portions of the skull and long
bones and a few other iragnients remained. It was an adult male indi-

WHITNEY I~ESERVOIR

65

PLATE 1. Stansbury Site (41-39B1-1) features: a, bell-shaped cache pit;
b, burial No. 1 (smal! arrow points to rifle ball) ; c, burial No. 2 (left) and
buria! No. 3 (right). Stone wall fragments behind shovel at extreme left.

66

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

vidual of between 25 and 45 years of age. Position and orientation
were uncertain due to the fragmental7 condition, but it was apparently extended with the head to the east. Associated with this burial
were mlmerous chips of flint and chert, two flake scrapers, 12 glass
beads, 7 brass jingles, a projectile point, a large potsherd, a mano, a
brass bar, and three long tubular beads of conch eolumella. The latter
are of the type often referred to as "hair pipes" and are between 4 and
5 inches in length (P1. 4, h-j ).
TABLE 2
Tabulation of Burials, Stansbury Site
No.
1
2
3
4

Area
D
A
A
A

Depth
23"
18"
66"
14"

Position

Sex

Extended
Extended
Extended
?

M
?
?
M

Remarks
Indian,
Indian,
White?
Indian,

adult
infant
infant, in coffin
adult

Age
35-45
3-5
2-3
25-45

A stone wall remnant (Feature 9) was found three feet north of and
parallel to Bttrial No. 2 (P1. 1 c behind shovel). This fragment of what
had at one time apparently been a rather substantial, low wall, consisted of eleven uncut, flat, rectangular stones held together by lime
mortar. Only small bits of mortar remained but samples were collected
and compared with the mortar used in the building ruins at Towash.
It was found to be identical in texture and composition and presumably represents the same time period at the two places. The entire
remaining section of wall measured only 36" in length, 18" in height,
and 12" in thickness. Apparently the eight stones (Features 1-8) seen
extending to the surface in this area and resembling grave markers,
had at one time been a part of this wall. The top of the wall extended
to within a few inches of the ground surface. The bottom reached to
24" below surface, the same depth as the bottom of Burial No. 2 and
the top of the upper section of the pit of Burial No. 3. Other than the
eight scattered stones mentioned, no other similar stones or fragments
of wall were found in this area.
Local residents had no knowledge of any structure ever having
existed at this place, though they were aware of the graves. Unfortunately Mrs. Jessie Greenwade, the oldest living resident of the area,
was not questioned on this point. It seems quite probable that Burial
No. 3 was that of a White child buried in a coffin and the grave plot
had been fenced by this low stone wall. Burial No. 2 was that of an
Indian child placed within the protection of the stone wall at a later
date than Burial No. 3. The Indian child probably was placed in the

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

67

White cemetery secretly and without knowledge of the White settlers.
Both were buried early in the period of settlement as the stone wall
was covered with wind-blown sand and alluvimn long enough ago to
be forgotten by the oldest old-timers still living there in 1947 (except
possibly Mrs. Greenwade). Also, the later of the two was Indian and
there is little likelihood of an Indian family with children being in the
area after the forced removal of Brazos Valley Indians to the reservation in Oklahoma in 1870. The dates for the two bm’ials then nmst
be prior to 1870 but probably after 1840. Further excavation in Area
A of the Stansbury Site might have produced other sections of the
stone wall and additional burials of both Indian and White provenience that would have further clarified the picture. Neither time nor
facilities, however, were available for more work there.
EXCAVATIONS IN AREA B

Area B was a broad, level field extending from the Creenwade farm
buildings on the east to the large erosion gully on the west. The old
river road bounded the area on the south and the northern boundary
extended to the limits of the site in that direction. This was apparently
the main occupational area of the site. Some midden refuse was found
scattered over the entire area but with few apparent concentrations.
Subsurface testing produced material to depths of 20" to 30" over
most of the cenh-al section and particularly in test pits 23, 9.4, and 25
(Fig. 6 a). Investigations were carried out extensively in the vicinity
of test pit 24 and an area 30’ x 30’ was excavated to a depth of 36".
Test pit 24 was extended to a depth of 60" but no occupational materials were found below the 36" level.
Probably the most significant feature found in the site (Feature 10)
was located in this area. It was the remains of a rectangular dwelling
structure, 21’ long and 18’ wide (Fig. 7 a). Associated with this feature were a large, stratified central fire pit (Feature 1I), a small secondary hearth (Feature 12), a compacted floor (Feature 13), five
small, exterior, bell-shaped cache-pits (Features 14-18), two concentrations of flesh-water mussel shells (Features 19 and 90), eighteen
post molds (Features 21-38) and a large inventory of artifacts of both
Indian and White provenience. The surface of the floor of Feature 10
was at a depth of 28" below the present ground surface and this was
also the depth of the tops of most of the associated features. Excavation to the 36" level was carried on near the end of the season to determine if anything lay beneath the floor. The results were negative except for the fire pit, cache-pits and post holes.
The central fire pit (Feature 11) was suggested by an oval area of

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

68

A.

PLAN VIEW OF STRUCTURE IN

AREA

"O~

F IO

FEET

’©’
D.

PLAN VIeW O~
CACHE PIT, F~8

CROSS SECTION
S. CACHE
PIT, ~ OF
o

~o

~o

3o

B, CROSS-SEGTEON OF FIREPLACE, Ftl
o

~o

~o
mc.~s-

so
¯

STANSBURY SITE
L:EGEND
41-39B1-1

gl

FINE WHITE

POST MOLD
CACHE PIT
FmEPLADE
{]LAD:< GREASY
CHARCOAl: AND ASH

~

MUSSEL SHELL

ASH

SAND AND ASH
~
~
~

AS. AND CHARCOAL
LOOSE SAND
STERILE SANDY SOIL

FIGURE 7. Stansbury Site (41-39B1-1): a, plan of structure in Area B; b,
profile of fireplace; c, profile of cache pit; d, plan of cache pit.

WHITNEY I~ESERVOIR

69

fine, white ash 61" long and 42" wide, oriented with the long axis in
a northwest-southeast direction. The feature was bisected across its
long axis and the fill was entirely removed and sifted. The fill was
clearly stratified with five distinct layers of differing sorts of ash (Fig.
7 b). The lowest stratum, lenticular in cross section, contained eight
inches of gray ash mixed with large bits of charcoal. Numerous burned
bones of bison and deer were contained in this fill and frequently
projected into the sidewall of the pit. The second stratum, 4" thick,
was a layer of brown sand with small amounts of gray ash mixed
through it. The third stratum was a 6" layer of gray ash and charcoal
with burned bones of bison and deer in all respects similar to the first
stratum. The fourth stratum resembled the second and contained a
uniform .3" layer of brown sand with small amounts of gray ash mixed
through it. The fifth, or top, stratum was a layer of fine, white ash
with a few small bits of charcoal mixed through it and containing a
few thoroughly burned bone fragments. This layer was lenticular and
mounded slightly in the center with a maximum thickness of 8’" and a
minimum thickness of 2" near the edges. The entire pit for this hearth
had been dug at one time and then sporadically filled with fire refuse
until it no longer was a pit but rather a fire place in the center of the
floor. The alternate layers of fill suggest three separate occupations
with intervals between, during which the sand layers accumulated.
The center of the pit was 29" deep, including the slight mounding of
ash in the upper layer, or 26" below the compacted floor level.
At the north edge of this fire pit was a large accumulation of unburned, fresh-water nmssel shells (Feature 19). They covered an oval
area of about 2 square feet and all lay on the compacted floor, adjacent to but not extending into the fire pit.
On the south edge of the central fire pit was a post mold (Feature
9,1) 5" in diameter and 26" in depth. This post mold was unique in
that it s!ol?ed downward to the south at an angle of 45°. The post that
once filled this hole no doubt extended over the fire pit and probably
served as a pot holder.
A second hearth (Feature 12) was situated three feet to the west
of the first. It consisted of an oval area of black, greasy, charcoal and
ash 42" long bv 23" wide with the long axis oriented to the northwestsoutheast. Unlike Feature 11 this hearth was not a pit and had no
stratified layers. The lentieular fill was only 3" in thickness at the
center. It may have been debris from the fire pit (Feature 11).
The dark, compacted floor of the structure (Feature 13) had a
greasy texture and contained small amounts of fine ash throughout. It

70

TEXAS A1RCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

had the appearance of a carefully prepared floor rather than one that
had merely been compacted by use. It covered an area approximately
21 feet in its northwest-southeast dflnension by 18 feet in its northeastsouthwest dimension with a small, asymmetrical projection 8 feet wide
and 6 feet long on the southwest side. The edges of the floor, like the
rest of the surface, were flat with no upward extension such as would
be the ease if the floor had been below ground level at the time of
use. These floor edges were quite distinct in most parts except for the
section around the east corner (indicated by broken line in Fig. 7 a).
The southwest projection appears to have been an entrance antechamber. The thickness of the compacted floor was between 3" and 4" and
gradually blended into the sandy soil below.
Post molds were found at each of the four corners of the strncture.
Those at the east and south corners (Features 27 and 37) were each
28" in depth, 7" in diameter and contained a loose fill of sand, ash and
bits of charcoal. Those at the north and west corners (Features 32 and
34) were each 26" in depth, 6" in diameter and contained similar t311.
The floor outline extended slightly outside these four post molds and
was penetrated by them. One small post mold (Feature 38) was situated outside the confines of the house floor, two feet to the southeast.
It was 5" in diameter, of an unknown depth and contained a fill of
loose sand. Two post molds were situated along the southeast side of
the floor outline (Features 25 and 26) and were 9" and 4" in diamter,
respectively. The latter was 22" deep and contained a loose fill of
sand, ash and some charcoal. The former was 30" deep and contained
a similar fill. Two post molds occurred along the northeast side of the
structure (Features 35 and 36) and were each 6" in diameter, 20" in
depth, and contained fill similar to the others. Post molds (Features
29, 30 and 31) occurred along the edge of the protruding portion of
the floor on the southwest side of the strneture and appear to have
been uprights for the short antechamber and entryway. They were
each 5" in diameter, 9" in depth, and contained a fill of loose sand.
One other post mold (Feature 28), within the wall line along the
southwest side, was 5" in diameter. Two post molds (Features 22 and
9.4) were situated in the central part of the structure in a position
indicating that they might possibly be roof supports, although one is
quite small for this purpose, and an opposite pair was not found. One
of these was 4" in diameter, 14" deep and filled with loose sand. The
other was 6" in diameter, 30" deep and filled with loose sand and bits
of rotted and unburned wood, though near the top of the mold some
charcoal was found, indicating that the post may have been burned

WHITNEY ~ESERVOIR

71

off to ground level. Finally, two 6" post molds (Features 23 and 33)
were situated at random within the floor pattern of the house.
The five bell-shaped cache-pits (Features 14-18) were all situated
outside the confines of the compacted floor of the structure, though
one (Feature 18) was adjacent to the northeast edge of the floor. All
five were of remarkably uniform size and shape; the openings were 8"
to 10" in diameter, the flat bottoms were 13" to 15" in diameter, and
tile depths were 12" to 14" (Fig. 7 c and d and PI. ! a). Each was
flled with loose sand and tln’ee contained broken mussel shells, flint
chips and pebbles. The openings of all five were 9,8" below surface, the
same depth as the floor of the house.
The artifact inventory from the area of this structure provided a
considerable list of items of both native and W!~te provenience. Metal
knives, projectile points, bullets, a large iron pot bail, glass and crockcry fragments, gun flints, a silver strip, a button, conical jingles, gun
parts, copper fragments and glass beads represented the latter. According to the identifications of these by Carlyle S. Smith, they represent a wide range of time from middle 18th century to early 20th
eentury. A tabulation of the items identified and dated by Smith, when
ehecked against their vertical position in the site, indicated considerable mixing of the material in the fill above the floor of the structure.
Items identified as oldest were found not only on the house floor but
also at higher levels as well as occasionally on the surface. Items identiffed as most recent were found not only on the surfaee but at depths
within the fill up to 18". However, none of the late items was found on
or near the house floor. The stratigraphie position of the artifacts,
while not as helpful in establishing a date for the structure as might
have been expected, did suggest a date early in the contact period of
the site.
The artifacts of native manufacture included numerous smoking
pipes of stone and of pottery; bits of hematite pigment; hide preparing
tools such as scrapers, knives and bone tools; manos and grinding
slabs; a deep bowl mortar; abrading stones; choppers and hammerstones. Noticeably rare were potsherds and projectile points. These
native-made artifacts, like those of White provenience, could not be
separated by types into clearly defined vertical levels but seemed to
occur more or less at random through the fill.
In summary, the structure excavated in Area B appears to have
been a small, rectangular house with an extended entryway to the
southwest, a compacted floor, a central fire pit and small, bell-shaped
exterior cache-pits. The post-mold pattern is only moderately dear.

79,

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Corner posts are apparent but only a few wall posts were indicated.
Remains of wood from the posts were rare and there was little evidence of wattle-and-daub construction. A few clay clods were found
that may have been fragments of daub from such construction, but
certainly not enough to represent the whole structure. If the structure
had not been burned, and there was little evidence that it had, the
daub would not have been well preserved, however. The depth of
this structure below present surface level suggests an occupation date
early in the history of the site. The stratified fire pit suggested periodic
occupation.
EXCAVATIONS IN AREA C

Area C was the southeast corner of the field immediately to the
west of the large erosion gully and group of springs. It was bounded
on the south by the old river road, on the east by the gully, and by
arbitrary boundaries on the north and west. This was the area from
which Watt and his associates in the 1930’s recovered the majority of
theft" trade beads. One burial is reported by local residents to have
eroded out of the edge of this area many years ago in the vicinity of
test pit 29 (Fig. 6 a). In 1947 and again in 1950 the surface of Area C
was searched for cultural materials. No midden accumulations were
located but a modest artifact assemblage was collected and a few
small scattered fragments of human bone were found. This sandy field
has long been under cultivation and has slightly decreased in elevation
as a result, whereas other areas in the site have been slowly building
up. It is quite probable that burials once existed here but have long
since been destroyed by cultivation.
The area was systematically tested in 1950 by a series of 16 test
pits excavated to depths of 2’ to 4’. None of these tests produced any
cultural materials at depths greater than 14" and these materials,
consisting mostly of glass trade beads and a few other artifacts, gave
no indication of any rewarding cultural accumulations. Consequently
no further excavations were carried on in Area C.
EXCAVATIONS IN AI~EA D

Area D was located immediately to the north of the Old Greenwade
farm buildings in an area long in use as a garden plot. It was bounded
on the east by a small intermittent stream, on the south by the eastwest base line, by limits of occupation on the north, and on the west
by the north-south base line. Considerable accumulations of large
animal bones were found on the surface here and plowing had scattered these over most of the garden area. Surface artifacts were also
abundant here. Tests in 1947 in this area produced cultural material

WItITNEY I~ESERVOIIt

73

to a depth of 24" and showed several of the "bone piles" in undisturbed condition below the plow zone. In 1950 two lines of 5’ x 5’ test
squares were excavated in Area D, and one section of the east-west
line of squares was expanded to include an area 20’ x 20’. These excavations eovered two large "bone piles" and included a burial, six post
molds and a moderate artifact inventory. Excavations of the squares
were to depths of 18" and 24" with four strata pits being excavated to
48". Cultural material was not found at depths below 24".
Burial No. 1 was located in the center of the large excavation in
Area D at a depth of 23" below surface. It was an extended, supine,
adult, male individual of between 35 and 45 years of age. The skeleton
was oriented with the head to the east in an oval burial pit. The left
arm was semiflexed and the feet were crossed (P1. 1 b). In the neck
region were 131 blue glass beads and a single lead rifle ball was found
in the pelvic region. The bones were in good state of preservation and
the skeleton was nearly complete except for some of the hand and foot
bones.
Six post molds (Features 39-44) were found in the excavation; two
were of 5" diameters, two of 6" diameters, one of 7" diameter and one
of 9" diameter. The arrangement of the molds formed no discernible
pattern. All were filled with loose sand and two contained some ash
and bits of charcoal. The tops of the post molds were at a uniform
depth below surface of 16" to 18" and they ranged from 14" to
19" in depth. No indication of a compact floor, fire hearth or cache-pit
was found. Burial No. 1 was located between two of the post molds at
a depth of 7" below the post mold tops. A local resident stated that he
thought a grape arbor had at one time been located there, but this
does not explain the haphazard arrangement of the post molds nor the
fact that their top level coincides with the lower part of the general
midden deposit at a depth of 10" to 12" below the plow zone. Possibly
more extensive excavation in this area would have ’provided an explantation of these post molds. With the present evidence it is not possible to assign them the function of house posts, but they may have had
some connection with Burial No. 1. The possible explanation that they
were bull nettle root holes (as were found at the Steele Site) is eliminated by the smoothness of the interiors and the nature of the fill of
these post molds.
Midden material was abundant over most of Area D. This consisted
principally of broken and often burned bones of large animals, a few
fresh water mussel shells, flint chips, tools, smal! ash lenses and charcoal. The two "bone piles" (Features 45 and 46) consisted of large,

74

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

broken bones of bison, deer, antelope and a few other smaller animals.
Even after breaking and mixing by a century of cultivation these were
concentrated in considerable quantities. As a result of deep plowing
the concentrations could not be clearly isolated from each other on the
surface. Subsurface exposures, however, demonstrated without doubt
the separation of the "piles" and also clearly showed them to have
been deposited here prior to any cultivation. The bone concentrations
extended to a rather uniform depth of 9.0" to 22" below the present
surface. The two concentrations mentioned were the only ones found
below the surface, but indications of at least one and perhaps more
additional concentrations were seen from the surface refuse. It is of
interest to note that while most of the bones were those of bison and
nearly all skeletal elements of the animals were present, not a single
skull fragment nor horn core was found.
EXCAVATIONS IN AREA E

The immediate vicinity" of the Old Greenwade farm buildings was
isolated as a separate excavation area because of its understandable
concentration of modern refuse. Here two parallel test trenches were
excavated beneath the foundations of the old log house. Aboriginal
occupational refuse was found to underly the late 19th and 20th century materials associated with the house, although trade beads and
other articles of White provenienee were also mixed with the aboriginal artifacts to depths of 18". Midden refuse throughout the excavations in Area E was present but never very abundant. Several small
ash lenses were found in the northern portions of the two trenches,
but no other fea~n’es were found. The artifact inventory from this
area was very modest.
EXCAVATIONS IN AREA F

This area, located to the north and west of Area C and in the same
level field, was primarily a test area to determine the limits of the site.
A single test trench was excavated here and occupational debris was
found to be scanty. No features were distinguished.
THE PROFILE CUTS

In order to obtain a clear profile of the sub-structure of the site, two
profile cuts were made in the walls of the large erosion gully. Each cut
was nine feet wide and fifteen feet deep. Some suggestions of soil profile lines were seen in the gully bank where the profile cuts were made.
Upon very careful clem’ing in the face of the cuts, however, these
indications were found to be more apparent than real. On the uncleared face of the bank living roots had been exposed by erosion and

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

75

had caught transient soil which had washed from the surface above.
These small deposits tended to give the appearance of a soil profile as
they were, upon long exposure, slightly different in color than the soil
in the basal deposit. It seems apparent that this erosion gully and the
springs that formed it were in existence at the time of aboriginal occupation of the site and were then but little different in general appearanee than in 1950. Perhaps the bank was a bit higher and the gully a
bit wider in 1950 than before, but essentially it was the same. No
doubt these springs provided a fine source of clear water for the
Indian inhabitants as they have for the White occupants since. At the
time of the excavations in 1950 these springs were flowing at the rate
of about 15 gallons per minute, though this varied somewhat with the
season.
TABLE 3
Tabulation of Features, Stansbury Site
No.

Area

1-8
9
10
11
12
13
14-18
19
20
21-38
39-44
45-46

A
A
B
B
13
B
B
B
B
B
D
D

Depth
Surf.
24"
28"
26"
28"
28"
28"
28"
28"
28"
16"-18"
Surf.

Description
Eight upright stones. Part of F. 9.
Remnant of stone wall.
Rectangular habitational structure.
Central fire hearth in F. 10. Stratified.
Secondary fire hearth in F. 10.
Compacted floor in F. 10. Including entr}wcay.
Five small, bell-shaped cache pits.
Pile of mussel shells adjacent to F. 11.
Pile of mussel shells adjacent to F. 18.
Eighteen post molds associated with F. 10.
Six pole molds. Unpatterned.
Two piles of refuse bone.

OBJEC~rs tlECOVEPa~D
The artifacts from the Stansbury Site were not abundant, but enough
material was recovered to indicate the time periods and partial cultural assemblages of three occupations of the site. Most of the spedmens were recovered from areas B, D and E. The few from area C,
together with those collected from this area by Watt in previous years,
provided significant information. Areas A and F yielded few specimens
except for the burial accompaniments from Area A. Of the 3,018 specimens recovered during the 1947 and 1950 field work, 2,499 are glass
trade beads, 236 are other items of White provenience and 283 are
artifacts of native manufacture.

76

TEXAS AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

OBJECTS OF NATIVE OBIGIN

POTTERY: There were 18 potsherds recovered from the Stansbury Site.
One of these is a small, loop handle; two are rimsherds; and the other
15 are body sherds. Few as these pottery fragments are, they are sufficiently distinct from each other to suggest that they represent no less
than eleven separate vessels.
Vessel No. 1 consists of two rimsherds and two body sherds, from
the 0"-6" level in Area D, that were restorable to a single rim section
of a small bowl (P1. 2 d). This appears to be part of a hemispherical
bowl with a low, outflaring rim and a capacity of approximately one
pint. The rim itself is well polished, has a rounded lip, and is undecorated. The moderately sharp angle of rim and body is accentuated by
a pair of deeply engraved, crude, heavy lines encircling the vessel.
Pendant triangles filled with vertical lines are suspended from the
encircling line and are of the same deep, crude, engraved technique.
The paste is a fine clay, tempered with crushed bone, some coarse
sand and occasional bits of crushed potsherds. The exterior surface is
smoothed, but polishing occurs only on the rim. The interior surface
is similarly smoothed but not polished. Exterior color is a rich brown
and interior color is black, t~im height is 15 ram. and sherd thickness
ranges from 5 mm. at the lip to 8 ram. at the lowest part of the body.
This vessel resembles, in all respects except shape, the type Womaek
Engraved and may be a variation of that late, northeast Texas pottery
type (Duffield & Jelks, 1961, pp. 34-39).
Vessel No. 9. is represented by a single, tiny, loop handle from the
house floor in Area B. It is of a fine, gray paste, tempered with bits of
crushed bone (P1. 2 e). It is 17 mm. long, 8-10 ram. wide and 5-7 ram.
thiek. It is moderately smoothed but unpolished. The small size suggests use as a means of suspending the vessel on a cord or thong rather
than as a hand hold for the vessel.
Vessel No. 3 is represented by a large sherd of fine brown paste,
tempered with crushed bone and occasional particles of coarse sand
(P1. 9. a). It accompanied Burial No. 4, in Area A. The exterior surface
is of a brown color, mottled with darker firing clouds and smoothed
but not polished. The interior surface is brown and poorly smoothed.
Thickness ranges from 6 to 7 ram. This was apparently a rather large,
globular vessel of perhaps as nmch as two or three quarts capacity.
Vessel No. 4, from the surface of Area D, is represented by a single
body sherd of fine, blaek paste tempered with rare particles of crushed
bone (PI. 9. b). Both interior and exterior surfaees are black and well
polished. A deeply engraved, curved line design with pendant ticks is

WHITNEY I1ESERVOIR

77

C

3M
POTTER~

GM

PLATE 2. Stansbury Site pottery and bone "cup": a, sherd from vessel 3;
b, sherd from vessel 4; c, sherd from vessel 5; d, sherd from vessel 1; e,
loop handle from vessel 2; f, bone "cup" found filled with beads.

78

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

present on the exterior, and a second, parallel, engraved line appears
to be indicated at the point of breakage. The sherd is 7 ram. thick.
This is a sherd of the type Patton Engraved, a late east Texas pottery
type, usually found in association with historic, Hasinai villages of the
Caddoan area (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954, p. 336).
Vessel No. 5, from the 0"-6" level of Area D, is represented by a
single body sherd of fine, tan paste with no obvious temper (P1. 2 e).
It is well polished on both interior and exterior surfaces, the exterior
showing slight fire smudges. Two, deeply engraved, concentric, curved
lines appear on the exterior. The sherd is 6 mm. thick. This appears to
be another sherd of the type Patton Engraved.
Vessel No. 6, from the surface of Area B, is represented by two body
sherds of fine, black paste, tempered with crushed bone. Both interior
and exterior are smoothed. The sherds are 6 mm. thiek.
Vessel No. 7, from the 12"-18" level of Area D, is represented by two
sherds of fine, gray paste, tempered with finely crushed bone and
occasional fine sand particles. Both exterior and interior surfaces are
an even, tan color and well polished. The sherds are 6 ram. thick. This
may be another vessel of the type Patton Engraved.
Vessel No. 8, from the surface of Area D, is represented by two
small body sherds of fine, black paste tempered with crushed bone.
Exterior surfaces are black and smoothed. Interior sm’faces are polished and covered with a thin, orange wash. Sherds are 6 ram. thiek.
One sherd has a small, curved, engraved line on the exterior.
Vessel No. 9, from the surface of Area E, is represented by a single
sherd of fine, gray paste, tempered with crushed bone. Both interior
and exterior surfaces are smoothed and of a mottled tan color. A portion of the exterior appears to have some orange wash adhering to it.
The sherd is 5 mm. thick.
Vessel No. 10, from the surface of Area B, is represented by two
small sherds of black paste, tempered with crushed bone. Both interior and exterior surfaces are smoothed and of a tan color. Sherd
thickness is 6 ram.
Vessel No. 11, from the 12"-18" leve! of Area D, is represented by a
single sherd of fine, black paste tempered with crushed bone. Both
surfaces are well polished and of a tan color. Uneven firing has caused
exterior smudges of black. The sherd is 6 ram. thick.
Two, and probably three, of these vessels are of the type Patton
Engraved, a distinctive "marker" type of the historic Hasinai of east
Texas. One appears to be a variation of the type Womaek Engraved,
another historic pottery type of northeast Texas. The other seven yes-

WHITNEY I~ESERVOIR

79

sels are of indeterminant types, though their general characteristics
are quite similar. Surface finish, color, temper, paste, and thickness are
all reminiscent of the historic period pottery of the Caddoan area of
east Texas and suggest variations of the two types mentioned above
(Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954, pp. 9.20, 336: Duffleld & Jelks, 1961,
pp. 34-39). None of these sherds resembles the pottery from the sites
of the Henrietta Focus to the north, such as Nocona Plain, nor are
they of types identified from the regions to the west or southwest, such
as Leon Plain. It is apparent that, on the basis of these fgw sherds,
there is a relationship between the Stansbury Site and late cultures of
east Texas, such as the Hasinai (Allen Focus) of historic times. The
Womack Engraved sherds, as well as other traits to be mentioned
below, align the Stansbury Site with the Nortefio Focus as described
by Duffield and Jelks (1961, pp. 69-75).
PIPES: Excavations at the Stansbury Site in 1947 and 1950 yielded 34
fragments of elbow tobacco pipes. Four of these fragments were fitted
together, resulting in a total of 39, individual pipes, one of which, when
repaired, is complete. Sixteen of these are made of pottery, fifteen are
fashioned from white marl and one (the complete specimen) is of red
sandstone superficially resembling catlinite.
The pottery pipes are all of a paste resembling that of the pottelT
vessels from the site, and in six specimens crushed bone tempering is
quite apparent. The others appear to contain no tempering material.
The sixteen may readily be divided into two groups. Group 1, represented by three specimens (P1. 3, d and e) is a high bowl type with
the depth of the bowl approximately twice the top diameter. It has a
small, shelf-like keel protruding foiavard of and near the base of the
bowl. Bowls are 38 ram. deep, approximately 18 ram. in interior diameter, and nearly perpendicular to the shank. Other than the keel protrusion, there is no decoration on the bowl. In Area B, one specimen
was found on the surface and one in the 19."-18" level. The third one
was found on the surface of Area D. Group 2, represented by thirteen
specimens (P1. 3, f), is a low, conical bowl type with the depth of the
bowl approximately equal to the top diameter. It has no keel projection and only one specimen is decorated. This decoration is a deeply
engraved circular design on the outside of the bowl with red pigment
rubbed into the engraved lines. Bowls are approximately 18 ram. deep
and only 1 or 9~ ram. less in interior diameter at the top. The lip of the
bowl is markedly flat and the bowl is nearly perpendicular to the
shank. In Area B, two of these were found on the surface, one in the

80

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

PLATE 3. Stansbury Site tobacco pipes of native manufacture: a, c, carved
of white marl; b, carved of red sandstone; d-f, made of pottery.

plow zone, four in the fill above the house structure (12"-18"), and
two on the floor of the house.
The stone tobacco pipes may be readily separated into four groups
on the basis of shape. Group 1, represented by two specimens, is
nearly identical to the Group 1 pipes made of pottery, except that the
bowl is slightly lower (about 30 ram.) and the shank is somewhat
heavier. The keel protrusion is slightly less obvious. Al! are undecorated and carved from a soft, white mar!. One of these was found on the
surface of Area B and the other in a test pit at the 12"-18" level in
Area F. Group 2, represented by eleven examples, is similar to the
Group 2 pipes made of pottery. The exterior diameters of the bowls
are usually larger and the interior diameters vary from quite large (32
mm.) to quite small (15 ram. ). Thus the bowl walls vary from thick
to thin. One specimen is unfinished and has rough, toot marks over the
shank and bowl, but both shank and bowl have been carefully drilled
(PI. 3 e). In Area B, two of these were found on the surface, one in
the plow zone, two on the house floor, and one near the bottom of the
central fire pit of the house. In Area D, one was found on the surface,
and three in the plow zone. A single specimen was found on the surface of Area E. Group 3, represented by two examples, differs from
Group 2 only in being elaborately decorated (PI. 3, a). The front of
the bowl is extended in an angular, vertical "cockseonab," with deep,
horizontal notches along its front edge. On each side of the bowl is a
deeply engraved semi-circle with the open end extending to the lip.
Deeply engraved, horizontal lines fill the semicircular area. A drilled
perforation occurs at the base of the "cockscomb" in one specfinen.
The bowl has a small, conica! interior, 15 ram. in diameter by 16 ram.
deep, with thick walls (8 tuna.). One specimen was found in the fill
above the house in Area B, the other came from a depth of 26" in
Area D, Group 4 is the single, complete specimen made of red sandstone (P1. 3, b). It was found on the floor of the house in Area B. The
bowl is small, with a flat lip (14 ram. in diameter by 16 ram. deep in
interior measurement and 24 nam. in diameter by 33 ram. high in exterior measurement). The shank is larger than the bowl (23 nam. in
diameter and 45 ram. long) and has a large opening to receive the
stem (17 mm. in diameter by 23 ram. long). The shank has a narrow
shelf along the upper portion of both sides extending around the front
of the bowl. This shelf is topped, to the rear of the bow!, by a rectangular ridge that is perforated at the extreme rear of the shank. The
front of the shank is cut off vertically, just forward of the bow!.
These pipes, both of stone and potter?,, are all of native manufac-

TEXAS AHCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ture and nearly all of them show some evidence of use. Char or "cake"
adheres to the interiors of many of the bowls. For a site with such a
small artifact inventory the tobacco pipes are surprisingly abundant.
It is also sulnprising that at a site with such a quantity of glass trade
beads and other objects of White provenience, no clay trade pipes of
European manufacture were found. The materials collected by Watt
also included several stone and pottery tobacco pipe fragments of the
type of Group 2, but no clay trade pipes.
The pottery pipes of Group 1 resemble pipes from the Caddoan
area of east Texas (Krieger, 1946, p. 212 and P!. 22 e) and suggest
direct derivation from that area. The pipes of Group 2 in both stone
and pottery are similar to pipes found at the Spanish Fort Site to the
north (Adolph H. WiRe, personal eomnmnication; Krieger, 1946, p.
162; Witte, 1938). Again a strong suggestion is thus made of a contact
in that direction. The stone pipe of Group 4 is of a style typical of
many of the catlinite pipes of the Plains area but usually found much
farther north. It is undoubtedly a trade item. All styles of pipes found
in the site are clearly associated with both the house structure of Area
B and the piles of bison bone in Area D. It is thus suggested that the
house and the bison bone piles are closely related and that both have
some relationship to the Caddoan area and the central Plains, though
only the former is suggested by the potsherds discussed above.
PIGMENT: A single piece of limonite and 9_3 pieces of hematite were
found in Areas B, D and E. All had marks of cutting and scraping on
them and no doubt were used to provide pigment for various purposes where red and yellow paints were needed. The limonite was
from the plow zone in Area B, and most of the hematite was from the
surface or plow zone of Areas B, D and E. Two pieces of the latter,
though, were from the house floor in Area B.
BONE: Fourteen artifacts of bone were recovered from the Stansbury
Site. One was the proximal end of a bison (or cow) femur, roughly
broken off about 19~ centimeters above the joint (P1. 2, f). A portion
of the cancellous material had been gouged from the interior of the
marrow channel and the resulting cup-like cavity used as a container
for glass trade beads. As found, the bone was on its side with 1,204
blue, glass beads, of a single type, in and around it. The bone showed
no other marks of cutting or shaping except for a few, random hack
marks, and the interior is but roughly hollowed out. Apparently this
bone "cup" had served as a temporary container when beads were
available from a trader and nothing better was at hand in which to
carry them. The reasons for the "eupfull" of beads never having been

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

83

used makes interesting speculation. The specimen and its eontents
were found just below the plow zone above the house in Area B.
Unquestionably it post-dates the end of oecupation of the house.
Six deer ulna awls or flaking tools (the tip of each is broken) were
found (P1. 4, a and c). Two are from Area D and four are from Area
B. All six were found just below the plow zone. Another bone awl is
made from the ulna of an animal about the size of a raccoon. Identification of the animal is not possible due to extensive alteration of the
bone in the process of manufacturing the artifact. Two small awls or
pins made from the splint bones of a deer were found, one near the
house floor in Area B, the other in the plow zone of Area F (P1. 4, e).
One large, stubby awl was made from the split, distal end of a deer
femur and was recovered from the plow zone in Area E (P1. 4, d).
Another awl made of a flat sliver of bone, roughly pointed on both
ends, was found in the fill above the house in Area B. A bone, ground
to the shape of a long, thin cone, with a lateral perforation on one
side of the cut, basal end, extending into the cancellous portion of the
bone and thence out the cut end appears to have been a large needle
(PI. 4, f). It is blunt pointed but the perforation suggests use as a
needle. It was found in the house fill above the strueture in Area B,
as was a thin, flat slab of cancellous bone, ground to an oval shape.
This latter specimen (8 cm. x 5.5 em. x 1 era. ) was perhaps used as an
abrading tool for working hides. No pigment adheres to it to suggest
its use as a paint brash. The only other bone artifact was a worked
sliver of bison (or cow) femur from the plow zone of Area E. The
kinds of bone tools recovered suggest emphasis on hide preparation
and the manufacture of sewn clothing. It is of interest to note that,
even though the bone tool inventory is limited, only one specimen was
found associated with the house, yet many unaltered bones were recovered from within and around the structure.
ANTLEll: No artifacts of antler were recovered from the Stansbury Site.
SHELL: Shells of fresh water mussels were moderately abundant in the
site and, in Area B, two piles of these shells were found associated
with the house floor. One, containing some 70 shells, was adjacent to
the north edge of the central fire pit and lying on the house floor. The
other, containing approximately 50 shells, was adjacent to the northwest edge of a bell-shaped cache pit (Feature 18) and on the house
floor level, partly inside and partly outside of the house (Fig. 7, a).
Mussel shells, land snail shells, and freshwater snail shells were found
frequently throughout all areas of the site. There were, though, only
eight shell artifacts found.

84

TEXAS AI~CHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

PLATE 4. Stansbury Site artifacts of bone and shell: a,c, ulna awls; b, perforated Quadr~da shel!; d, e, bone awls; f, needle; g, shell disc; h-j, "hair
pipes" of Busycon columella.

~ZHITNEY RESERVOIR

~5

Four specimens of flesh-water nmssel shells ( Quadrula houstonensis
Lea), each with a perforation near the hinge, were found on the house
floor level but outside the house in Area B (P1. 4, b). The perforation
is cut, not drilled, through the heaviest part of the shell in each case,
but there is no indication that a handle had been halted in the hole.
The shells are rather small (6 em. x 5 era.) and it is suggested that
these shells may have served as ornaments, perhaps suspended on a
thong.
Three long tubular beads or "hail" pipes" were found with Burial
No. 4 in Area A (P1. 4, h-j). These are made from the columella of the
conch (Bus~jcon perversum Sa!! ), are well shaped and slightly polished
over all surfaces. Each specimen is of uniform diameter from end to
end and is not barreled or tapered. Diameters are 9, 10 and 11 mm.
and lengths are 94, 93, and 82 ram. respectively. The long, longitudinal
perforation in each was made by hand drilling from both ends with a
drill of non-uniforni diameter. The latter is inferred from the fact that
the external diameters of the holes are 5 and 6 nun., while the diameters of the holes near the center of the beads are but 2 ram. In two of
the beads the drilling is slightly off center so that the drill holes met at
a slight angle in the center of the tube.
These "hair pipes" are of interest. Such ornaments have long been
in use in the eastern United States, even from Archaic times (Webb
and De Jarnette, 1942, p. 64, P1. 96, Fig. 1), and in post-contact times
were extensively manufactured by White traders for use of the Indians
throughout the Plains. Ewers’ study of the subject indicates that the
commercially manufactured, trade specimens were generally made of
the lip of the West Indian conch (Sh’ombus gigas) rather than the
eolumella of the Busycon and that they were usually barrel-shaped or
tapered toward the ends rather than cylindrical (Ewers, 1957, pp. 3746). This suggests, then, that the Stansbury "hair pipes" were of native
manufacture and, since the source of this shell is the Gulf coast and no
other fragments of it were found in the site, the three specimens are
probably trade items from that area. The very small interior diameters
of the perforations tend to suggest that these were not hair ornanlents
but were probably beads. This suggestion is supported by the fact that
there were three found with the burial rather than an even number.
Had they been hair ornaments or ear pendants it would have been
probable that an even number of specimens would have been found.
It may be suggested, then, that these are of native manufacture, made
on the Gulf coast at a time prior to the availability of quantities of
commercially made "hair pipes," say before the early 1800’s, and that
they were used in the form of a necklace.

86

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The only other shell artifact is a thin (1 ram. ), centrally perforated
disc from a mussel shell (P1. 4, g). It is 22 ram. in diameter and the
perforation is 2 mm. in diameter. Two deep angular notches have
been cut from one side of the disc. It was found in the plow zone
above the house in Area B.
CHIPPED STONE: The 128 chipped stone tools from the site were found
scattered through all areas but, as with the other artifacts, Areas B and
D were the most productive. There are 14 arrow points, 12 dart points,
9 gun flints, 3 beveled blades, 1 drill, 1 bead, 1 gouge, 1 chopper, 14
small blades, ? large blades, 31 flake scrapers and 34 large scrapers of
various styles.
AI:IHOW POINTS: The 14 small projectile points presumably used as
tips for arrows and propelled with the bow may be separated into five
named types and a group of unclassified fragments. The latter is a
group of three small tip fragments. There are four Fresno Points (P1.
5, a and e). This type of triangular point is common in many parts of
Texas, is often found in sites of the Central Texas Aspect, and is consistently associated with sites of the historic period in the central,
northern and eastern parts of the state (Jelks, 1953, pp. 198-9; Suhm,
Krieger, & Jelks, 1954, p. 498; Duffield & Jelks, 1961, pp. 19-20). All are
from the surface of Areas D and B. Similar to these in style are two
Young Points, although they differ slightly from the ideal of this type
in being moderately chipped on both surfaces. This type of convexbased, crude, triangular point is a common element of the Henrietta
Focus (Suhm, Krieger, & Jelks, 1954, p. 510). One is from the plow
zone in Area C, the other is from the fill above the house in Area B.
Also somewhat sfinilar in style are two Cliffton Points (P1. 5, b) with
their rudimentary stems. These have been identified with the Henrietta Focus of north-central Texas and are commonly found in components of the Austin Focus (Krieger, 1946, p. 115, and Fig. 7, l?-S; Kelley,
1947 b, P1. 13 b; Miller and Jelks, 1952, p. 117, P1. 24, 3; Jelks, 1953, p.
198-9; Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954, p. 496), and more recently in
the Toyah Focus (Jelks, 1962). Both are from the surface of Area E.
Two examples of Alba Points were recovered from the fill above the
house in Area B (P1. 5, e). This type is associated with Gibson Aspect
sites in east Texas (Krieger, 1946, p. 115; Newell and Krieger, 1949, pp.
161-2; Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954, p. 494) and in central Texas,
with sites of the Central Texas Aspect (Miller and Jelks, 1952, p. 178;
Jelks, 1953, p. 199). At the Blum lloekshelter and in the Belton tleservoir sites they consistently occur in association with Seallorn Points
and on generally earlier levels than the contracting stem types such

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

87

PLATE 5. Stansbury Site projectile points and gun flints: a,c, Fresno Points;
b, Cliffton Point; d, Scallorn Point; e, Alba Point; f-i, metal points; j, o, p,
Darl Points; k, l, gun flints; m, Yarbrough Point; n, Ellis Point.

88

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

as Perdiz Points and Cliffton Points. The only stone arrow point from
the house floor in Area B is a Scallorn Point (P1. 5, d). This type is
perhaps the most common one in the components of the Austin Focus
(Kelley, 1947 b, P1. 13, f; Miller and Jelks, 1952, pp. 176-7; Jelks, 1953,
pp. 198-9; 1962, p. 85).
DART I’OINTS: The 19. larger projectile points, presumably used as
tips for darts and propelled by the atlatl, may be separated into three
named types. There are five specimens that with some reservations
seem to fit the category of Daft Points (P1. 5, j, o, p). Three of these
conform well to the type description, one is crudely made and partially shattered but appears to fit most of the characteristics, and the
fifth example appears to have been reworked into a short, stubby point
with an extreme bevel to the blade. The reworking of this latter specimen gives the base an unusually broad appearance (P1. 5, o). This
type is common in sites in north-central and central Texas and is believed to have appeared near the end of the Edwards Plateau Aspect
and to have continued into the Austin Focus of the Central Texas Aspect (Miller & Jelks, 1952, pp. 175-209; Suhm, Krieger, & Jelks, 1954,
p. 414 ). Four specimens may be typed as Ellis Points (P1. 5, n ) though
two are broken near the base so that classification is tentative. The
type appears to have a broad distribution and in the Centra! Texas
area has been found in components of both the Edwards Plateau and
the Central Texas Aspects (Miller & Jelks, 1959., pp. 171-9., and P1. 9,2,
i; Suhm, Krieger, & Jelks, 1954, p. 420). There are three specimens of
Yarborough Points (PI. 5, m) from the site. This type, too, is identified
with both Edwards Plateau Aspect and Central Texas Aspect components (Newell and Krieger, 1949, p. 168, Fig. 57; Miller & Jelks, 1959.,
pp. 172-3; Jelks, 1953, pp. 199-200). All of the dart points were found
on the surface except for one of the Ellis Points which was recovered
from the 18"-24" level in a test pit in Area C.
The projectile points do not provide much help in identifying the
cultures that occupied the Stansbury Site. The dart points are few and
in no instance associated with any identifiable feature. They are all of
culture complexes demonstrably earlier than any other evidence suggests for an occupation of this site. The arrow points, also few in number, are of a variety of types, all of which may well have been in use as
late as the proto-historic and historic periods in central Texas.
GUN FLINTS: Nine rectangular, chipped pieces of flint or flinty
stone representing gun flints were found (P1. 5, k, 1). Two of these
were recovered from near the house floor in Area B; two from the fill
above the house floor; and the others from the surface of Areas C, D

WHITNEY I~ESERVOIR

89

and E. Seven of these flints are of native manufacture (P1. 5, 1). They
are of uneven size, ranging from 31 mm. x 29 ram. x 7 mm. to i7 mm.
x 16 ram. x 6 mm., and are rather roughly chipped to rectangular
shape, though with obvious battering on all four edges to suggest their
repeated striking against the steel of flintlock firearms. Two are apparently of European origin. One appears to be a French flint as it is
made from a rectangle of blond or honey-colored flint unlike any of
the native flints of the area (Smith, 1960, pp. 40-69; 1961, p. 68). It
has a truncation flake removed from the top and obv{ously had a
sharp, thin striking edge on one side before it was so extensively used
(P1. 5, k). The other appears to be an English flint, made of a rectangle of black flint such as was usually used by the English flint-knap:t
pers. It, too, has a truncation flake removed from the top,but has been
so extensively used as to be heavily battered on all four sides and of
very small size. It was these two European specimens that were found
near the house floor in Area B, providing convincing evidence for the
construction of that house during a time when early trade with Europeans was flourishing.
m~ILLS: A single, chipped stone drill was found in the plow zone
of Area B. The base, or shank, is broken but it may have once had a
flared base.
BEADS: A section of a large crinoid stem with chipping along the
edges was the only specimen resembling a stone bead.
KNIVES: Three fragments of four-edged-blade, beveled knives were
found on the surface of Area C. Each had alternately beveled edges
and a flattened midsection. The fragments are too small to suggest the
original sizes of the specimens. Henrietta Focus sites (Krieger, 1946,
p. 139) connnonly produce knives of this type and they are also common tln’oughout central, north-central and west Texas in late prehistoric and proto-historic times.
CHOPPER: A large, oval slab of limestone (17 cm. x 12 cm. x 1.5
cm. ) was found in the fill above the house in Area B. It is roughly
chipped around all edges but both flat faces are the natural surfaces of
the stone. All edges show abrasion as well as chipping and the specimen apparently was a utility tool such as a chopper rather than an
ornament or ceremonial object (P1. 10, d).
COUCE: A large, well-made too! of the style of the Clear Fork
Gouge (P1. 6, c) was found on the surface of Area D. It is 8 era. x 5.5
cm. x 2 cm. with ahnost no chipping on the flat, under surface and a
low ridge along the convex upper surface. It is of triangular shape

90

TEXAS AI~CHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

PLATE 6. Stansbury Site scrapers, blades and manos: a-c, scrapers; d-g,
blades; h-k, manos.

WHITNEY BESERVOIR

91

with the apex rounded by chipping and the base chipped to a steep,
slightly concave worMng surface, l~ay has identified specimens of this
type with the ancient Clear Fork Culture of west-cenh’al Texas (l~ay,
1938, pp. 193-’207) and grouped the gouges into several types. This
specimen fits his description of type 2 (l{ay, 1941, pp. 154-157).
Apparently this gouge is not a part of the regular inventory of tools
manufactured by the occupants of the StansbmT Site, though perhaps
it is a tool found elsewhere by them and used at the site.
:BLADES, OR BIFACES: From the relatively large number of cutting
tools of various sorts found in the Stansbury Site, 21 oval, bi-pointed,
or leaf-shaped specimens were sorted into a group because of the
probability of their having been used as hafted or unhafted cutting
tools (PI. 6, d-g). Seven of these are large, bi-pointed blades (6-10
era. x 4-5.5 era. x 1.5 era. ), and fourteen are smaller oval or leaf-shaped
blades (4-6.3 era. x 1.5-3.3 era. x .5-1.5 era.). One of the latter, though
broken, appears to have been h’iangular with a straight base. All are
moderately well made and show extensive use.
SCRAPEI~S: Chipped stone tools of miscellaneous shapes with flakes
removed from one or more edges numbered 65 and are here grouped
as scraping tools, although many of them may also have been used as
cutting tools. Of these, 31 are made from thin, flat flakes with only
minor chips removed from one or more edges. In most of these specimens the chipping appears to be more the result of use than of intentional shaping, though a few have obviously been chipped to a sharp
edge before use. Among the 34 other scrapers, 6 are oval or rounded
with chipping along all edges and averaging 6.5 era. x 5.5 era. x 2.5 era.
(P1. 6, a). Four specimens are large spalls of elongate shape with
unifaeial chipping on one or two edges and averaging 10 era. x 6 era.
x 1.5 era. Three are leaf-shaped, bifacially chipped, with a medial
ridge on one face. One is a water-worn pebble with chipping along
one edge. The other 90 are unshaped spalls with chipping along one
or more edges.
None of the scrapers are diagnostic of any particular culture complex. Further analyses of these specimens have not been attempted but
should prove fruitful in conjunction with a detailed study of the
scraping tools of the Central Texas area.
CnOUND STO~E: The 58 ground stone artifacts @ore the site were
found in all areas. The maiority were from the sm’faee but 7 specimens
came from below the plow zone. There are 16 hammerstones, 9.5 manos,
19. abrading stones, 3 metates, 1 mortar, 1 grooved maul, and 3 stone
axe fragments represented in the collection.

9’2

TEXAS AI:ICHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

HAzNI~IERSTONES: Sixteen large and small, water-worn quartzite
pebbles with abrasion surfaces on one or more edges were found. All
are from the surface or the p!ow zone, except one from the 12"-18"
level in Area C. There is no evidence of shaping or other alteration,
except for the abrasion surface, on any of them. The range in size
from 3 to 8 era. in diameter and weigh from l i to 2 lbs.
~ANOS: Grinding stones or manos are of three kinds. All are
rather well shaped in the form of an oval or rectangle with rounded
corners, have been worn smooth on both grinding surfaces and average 11 era. x 8 era. x 3 era. in size. Six specimens have been used with a
rotary motion but on a rather flat grinding surface rather than on a
metate with a concave surface. Seventeen specimens (P1. 6, i-k) have
been used with a distinctive back-and-forth motion as seen by the convex grinding surfaces with a tendency toward a ridge diagonally across
the surface. Two specimens (P1. 6, h) have a single pit in the working
surface that is 1 em. deep and 3 em. in diameter. One of the pitted
manos and two of the back-and-forth motion manos were found on the
floor of the house in Area B.
AB~AmNC STONES: The objects listed here as abrading stones are
irregular slabs of sandstone or limestone (one example) with varying
areas of surface suggesting usage. Three specimens have deep, narrow
grooves suggesting that they were used to sharpen pointed implements
of wood, bone or other soft material. One has a wide, shallow groove
4 cm. wide and 1 era. deep that may have been used to smooth the
edges of some of the manos. The other eight specimens have irregular,
flat, smoothed areas or small, concave smoothed areas. One of the
latter was recovered from the firepit in the house in Area B. Al! of the
others were from the surface or the plow zone of Areas B and D.
IVIETATES: Three fragments of well-made, rectangular metates
were found; two on the floor of the house in Area B and the other on
the surface of Area D. The concave troughs in these metates are elongate ovals with sloping sides such as would be used with the back-andforth style of manos found in the site. It may be somewhat misleading
to distinguish clearly a back-and-forth motion as opposed to a rotary
motion for these implements. The wear of the mano faces and the
long oval of the metate trough suggest aetually a sort of combination
action, with the user extending his arm at full length on the forward
stroke and bringing it back, not in exactly the same path but with a
slight sideways motion. Obviously the major part of the aetion appears
to have been back-and-forth, though, rather than rotary.
MORTAl:I: One small stone mortar with a shallow depression in one

WHITNEY I~ESERVOIR

93

side was found on the surface of Area B. It appears to have been used
to mix paints or other small quantities of material.
CROOVED ~XAUL: A fragment of what may have been a grooved
maul was found on the surface of Area B. It is broken and identification is tentative.
AXES: The three fragments of stone axes or celts are so broken as
to be questionably defined as such. All three are from the surface. A
portion of what seems to be the blade of each remains and, while the
specimens are basically shaped by pecking and grinding, some chipping (perhaps from use) occurs along this blade edge. Size and complete shape are impossible to determine from these fragments.
The ground stone implements from the Stansbury Site are not very
diagnostic. Hammerstones and abraders such as these are to be found
as common elements of sites throughout the area. The manos and
metates, while well made and extensively used, are not of very distinctive styles. Similar specimens are discussed by Watt (1944, pp. 2-17)
from sites along the central Brazos Valley¯ Miller and Jelks did not
recognize the back-and-forth motion specimens fi’om either the Belton
tleservoh" area (1959,, p. 181) or from the Blum l{ockshelter (Jelks,
1953, pp. 201-2). I wonder, though, if they were thinking only of the
classic trough metate of the Southwest with side ridges, and the
accompanying, wide, manos when they stated that "No true metates
¯ .. were found" (Miller and Jelks, 1952, p. 181). Regardless of method
of use, the people that lived in the house in Area B were certainly
grinding vegetal, and perhaps other, food for their daily fare.
OBJECTS OF NON-NATIVE ORICIN

The objects of non-native migin in this site derive from two
sources. One is the European and American traders’ connnerce with
the Indians, either directly or indirectly, and may be represented
by objects manufactured in the 18th and 19th centuries. The other
is the Creenwade farmstead, which may be represented by objects
manufactured in the second half of the 19th century and the first
half of the 20th century. Objects of trade may have been reaching
the site as early as the 1770’s when de M~zib, res visited two large
Tawakoni villages in this area. Some trade objects may even have
reached here at an earlier date by indirect barter @ore the French,
Spanish and English traders who were surreptitiously working into
the area fi’om posts in Mexico, Louisiana and along the Iled and
Mississippi I~ivers during the earlier part of the 18th century. This
trade apparently lasted until the abandonment of the trading post
at Waeo in the 1850’s, although a similar type of trade may have

TEXAS AIqCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

94

been carried on from the stores in the nearby town of Towash in
succeeding years. Other objects found at this site probably have
nothing to do with the Indian occupation but instead are fragments
of the household possessions of the Greenwade family and derive
from the mid-19th to the mid-20th century. No effort was made to
collect any of the latter materials when they could be recognized
as such and surface specimens were gathered only if they were rather
obviously not a part of the farmstead. Nevertheless, many of the
objects in the co!leetion, no doubt, derive from this source as the
Indians and Whites were jointly occupying the land for ahnost two
decades and must have been obtaining at least some of their household good from the same sources during that time.

GLASS AND

EAIRTI:IENWARE:

The fragments of crocke13! jars, china

dishes, glass bottles, a bisque doll, and the many glass beads have been
examined by Dr. John Maxon at the Universi’cy of Kansas and by
G. Hubert Smith of the l{iver Basin Surveys, Smithsonian Institution.
Their comments and identifications are incorporated with my own
findings in the following descriptions.
GLASS SEAl)S: The Stansbury Site has provided local collectors
with large quantities of glass beads and was, for years, known to
many local people as the "Bead Site." Frank Watt, of Waeo, collected nearly 30,000 beads from the site. The Greenwades, the Stansburys, and many other local people have em’iched their curio eoIleetions with Stansbury beads. The collections made by Watt have
been described in two brief articles about central Texas beads, most
of which came from this site (Watt & Meroney, 1937, pp. 52-6; Watt,
1937, pp. 61-7).
During the River Basin Surveys excavations there were 2,499 beads
recovered. In general the published remarks and descriptions in the
above two articles apply equally well to this collection. (See also
Duffleld & Jell;s, 1961, pp. 40-54.) Of the styles illustrated by Watt
(1937, PI. IX), all were represented except number 14, 19, 26-32, 35,
36 and 38. G. Hubert Smith has also provided a description of trade
beads of the period but from a site in North Dakota (Smith, 1953,
pp. 41-56). Despite the geographie separation, Smith’s description
of the North Dakota beads, especially the small seed beads, is applicable to the Stansbury beads. Here, though, the vm’ie~ and total
quantity of the larger beads are not as great as in the North Dakota
sample.
Almost 91% of the beads are of the small "seed bead" varieties.
They are of generally spherical shapes, 1.5-3.5 ram. in diameter ~-ith

the length ususally about half the diameter. Colors are blue, white,
green, dear and black, in that order of predominance. On, or associated with, the floor of the house in Area B were 107 of these seed
beads. One was associated with Burial No. 2, 11 were from Burial
No. 4 and 1,204 light blue ones were found in and by the bison
bone "cup" described above. None of the others were associated
with any particular feature of the site but were scattered at random
through the several areas. The larger beads, presumably strung as
necklaces or other ornaments, rather than sewed in designs on clothing as the seed beads presmnably were, made up the other 9% of
the beads. A group of 129 blue and 2 white beads, 5-6 mm. in diameter and 6-7 ram. long, was found with Burial No. 1. Apparently
it had been a necklace. One red, cylindrical bead 9 mm. in diameter
and 15 ram. long, was found with Burial No. 4. A dozen large beads
of red, blue, white and green colors resembling those from Burial
No. 1, were found about the floor of the house in Area B. The others
were found scattered throughout the site. Of interest are three red
beads with six longitudinal lobes (raspberry shape); a clear bead of
flat, oval shape with a longitudinal hole; several small long cylindrical
(Bugle) beads of black, red and blue color; and a two-color spherical
bead of red on a black center (Watt, 1937, p. 64; Orchard, 1929,
pp. 88-9).
OTI-IEIt GLASS: Bottle fragments, 27, and two sherds of carnival
glass bowls were found scattered over all areas of the site. Only one
sherd, though, was found associated with the house floor of Area B.
This is a small, dear, cylindrical bottle or vial apparently once used
to contain medicine or cooking extract and was recovered from a
posthole in the floor. Other specimens include the concave base of a
wine bottle; six other wine and beer bottle sherds; a thin sherd of
a green, globular, liquor bottle; two thin sherds of a brown snuff
bottle, including one rim sherd; the neck of a small, thick, pale green,
glass medicine (?) bottle; seven body sherds of small, thick, pale
green, medicine or extract bottles, two of which indicate that the
bottle was rectangular in cross-section; six sherds of small, very thin
(1 mm.) pale green bottles, apparently of rectangular shape; a small
thick, brown sherd from the base of a small oval bottle and a sherd
fi’om the side of a small, clear glass bottle wifla the raised lettersOOGA-clearly visible. The two sherds of carnival glass include a
rimsherd from a small bowl with a fluted exterior and a rimsherd
of pale pink color. The latter appears to have been partially melted
and is of a wavy shape, probably resulting from the melting. In

96

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

cross-section the glass is in two layers with a pale pink, clear inner
layer and a milky pink outer layer. Perhaps this should be listed as
sandwich glass rather than carnival glass. All of these glass sherds
relate to the latter half of the 19th century and probably derive
from the Greenwade family, although some may also have been used
by the nearby Indians.
TABLEWAI~E: Plates, cups, and bowls for table use are represented
by 27 sherds of white earthenware, none of which was associated
with any of the aboriginal features at the site. All are identifiable
as of late 19th century or early 20th century origin. Six specimens are of interest. One, composed of 2 sherds, is a white, china
plate with fluting on the inner face of the rim and a polychrome
floral pattern on the bottom of the interior. Two are rimsherds of
plates, white on the exterior and deep blue on the interior with transfer floral designs in other shades of blue. G. Hubert Smith identifies these as of mid-19th century, while Dr. Maxon identifies them
as 1890-1900. Another is a rimsherd from a large bowl with scalloped
edge and a maroon floral design on the interior. One is a thin sherd
probably from a cup, of a milky, glass-like ware, coated with a creamco!ored chalky substance. This surface coating is not a glaze, as it
can be flaked off at the edges and is of a soft, satin-like texture. The
s, ixth is a sherd from a beautiful porcelain teacup. The porcelain is of
good quality, white on the interior, with a dark blue cobalt glaze
and a gold-leaf band on the exterior. The sherd is of a uniform thickness of 2 mm. Maxon identifies it as of late 19th century.
CROCKEI~Y: Heavy, thick sherds of glazed earthenware crocks,
jugs, jars, or milk pans in the collection nmnbered 19. Three are
identified by both Maxon and Smith as of Spanish or Mexican salt
glaze ware of the 18th and 19th centuries. Smith identifies six as
Anglo-American stoneware of the 19th century with the typical
pebble-finish, and four as good examples of "tledware" with its characteristic smooth, highly glazed surface and an "Albany slip" of dark,
reddish brown. These, too, are Anglo-American products of the late
19th century. The remaining six sherds are unidentifiable fragments,
apparently of crocks with brown, tan, and green glazes, probably
late 19th or early 9,0th century American products. All of these
specimens are from the surface or plow zone in Area E where the
old Greenwade house stood or in nearby Areas B and D, suggesting
their association with the farmstead rather than the Indian occupation. The sherds of "salt-glaze" ware may well have been of Mexican
origin, dating from the early years of the Greenwade farm.

WHITNEY ttESEBVOIR

97

BISQUE: The head and one arm of a small doll, made of a good
quality bisque ware, were found beneath the old Greenwade house.
The arm had the pahn of the hand extended. The head is that of a
young girl wearing a sunbonnet.
~,IETAL: Numerous specimens of iron, brass, lead, copper, silver, steel,
and zinc were found, many of which could be identified as to origin
and date. Representative examples of these were sent to Dr. Carlyle
S. Smith at the University of Kansas, who provided identifications and
some interesting comments on individual specimens as well as upon
the group as a whole. Identifications given below are from Smith
unless othelavise indicated.
GUNS AND BULLETS: As an aid to visualization of some of the gun
parts, Dr. Smith has provided the six photographs that make up
Plate 7. These represent complete specimens of two guns of types
from which parts were found at the Stansbury Site. Plate 7, a and b,
is a Spanish naval pistol of government manufacture, ca. 1793-99.
It is a smooth bore, Miguelet lock of about 12 gauge and is 19 inches
long. The cock is in uncocked position, the flint is in place and the
trigger and cock can be seen as in use. The long metal piece on
the side of the pistol (P1. 7, b) is a belt hook, used in place of a
hoister. In correspondence concerning these identifications, Smith
states: "The Miguelet lock was the Spanish solution to the problem
of igniting the powder. It differs from the flintlock only in mechanical detail."
Plate 7, c-f, shows two full-length and two detail views of a smoothbore, flintlock, trade nmsket, of 24 gauge, manufactured by Philip
Bond of London, between 1776 and 1815. The overall length of the
piece is 49 7/8 inches. The views in c and e show the cock in uncocked position and the ramrod pipe can be seen in place. The view
in d is a detail view of the serpent side plate with the cock in the
half cocked position. The view in f is a detail view of the lock assembly with the cock in the half cocked position and the pan open.
The flint is in place, the trigger guard and the fi’izzen spring can
be seen and an engraved bow, arrow and quiver appear behind the
cook.

There were 18 gun parts and 24 lead bullets recovered from the
excavations. One is an iron trigger plate from a nmzzle-loading gun
(P1.8, a). One is a brass trigger guard with an engraved snowflake design on the underside (P!. 8, k), fi’om an 18th centreT English gun (P1.
7, d, f). Two flashpans were found. One is from an early 18th centreT
flintlock. The other is from a French flintlock (P1. 8, h) resembling

98

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

PLATE 7. Guns representative of those of which fragments were found at
the Stansbury Site: a. b, two views of a Spanish miguelet pistol of 17931799 (Carlyle Smith collection); c, e, Philip Bond flintlock musket from
London of 1776-1815 (Museum of Anthropology, University of Kansas) ; d,
detail of serpent side plate on Philip Bond musket; f, detail of lock on
Philip Bond musket. (Illustrations by courtesy of Dr. Carlyle S. Smith,
University of Kansas).

PLATE 8. Metal objects from the Stansbury Site. a, trigger plate from
muzzle loading gun; b, iron awl; c, bridle bit fragment; d, steel frizzen
from Spanish miguelet lock; e, iron awl; f, brass chest handle; g, brass
bar; h, pan from French flintlock gun; i, axe blade used as wedge; j, cock
from Spanish miguelet lock; k, English brass trigger guard; 1, steel frizzen
from French flintlock.

I00

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SO~ETY

models of 1754 and 1763 (see P1. 7, f, to compare with the English
type). A steel frizzen from this same type of French flintlock (P1.
8, 1) resembling models of 1754 and 1763 (compare with P1. 7, f),
was also found. A second steel ffizzen (P1. 8, d) is from a Spanish
Miguelet lock of the 17th, 18th, or early 19th centuries (compare
with P1. 7, a). The cock from a similar Spanish Miguelet lock of
the same period (P1. 8, j) may also be compared to Plate 7, a. Plate
9, q, is a sear spring. Four ramrod pipes were recovered. One is
complete (P1. 9, u), one has been hammered into the form of a
tubul~ bead (P1. 9, v), one has been cut into the shape of a finger
ring, and the fourth has been hammered into a jingle. A front finial
of a brass trigger guard, resembling that of an 18th century Spanish
infantry musket (P1. 9, y), was found. Two fragments of brass, serpent side plates from a late 18th or 19th century English trade gun
were found (see P1. 7, d). The better of the two (P1. 9, x) was
found by Watt and is in his collection. One engraved fragment of
brass may be from a butt-plate or a side plate of an 18th century
English gun, but is too fragmentary to clearly identify.
Spherical lead bullets (balls) range from buckshot size (3 mm. in
diameter) through medium shot to musket balls (P1. 9, h-k) of about
12 gauge (16 mm. in diameter). One large ball is flattened from
having been fired against a hard object. Two pieces of lead probably
should not be described with the bullets but may have been material
for making bullets. Each is an irregular shaped bar of lead from
which 2 or 3 of the larger balls could be made.
Specimens also from this site but collected in earlier years by Watt
include numerous spherical lead bullets; 5 fragments of 18th century
brass trigger guards, possibly French or Spanish; a foP~vard finial of
a brass trigger guard from an early 18th century French gun; and the
portion of serpent sideplate mentioned above.
AtlROW POINTS: Five metal arrow points were found, two of which
are of brass and three of iron (P1. 5, f-i; 9, r), all of a similar style
with sloping shoulders and contracting stem.
KNla,ES AND AXES: Four large, steel knives were recovered. One
is a 17th to 18th century French clasp knife (P1. 1O, c) bearing the
name ANDtlE, but may have had additional lettering before the rust
took over. Another is an especially interesting French knife of the 17th
to 18th century. It is inscribed with a crown similar to that used by the
French arsenal at St. Etienne. Below the crown is the letter "M."
Beneath that, in two lines, is "MOZIN/LAINE.’" The inscription, the
crown, and the general form of the knife (P1. 10, e) resembles those

oa
I
t
oM

PLAT~ 9. a-g, l-n, brass "jingles"; h-k, lead musket balls; o, part of chest
lock; p, brass hawk bell; q, sear spring; r, iron arrow point; s, iron object;
r, buckle part; u, ramrod pipe; v, ramrod pipe (bead); w, hammered silver
bar; x, fragment of brass serpent side plate; y, forward fin!l of brass trigger
guard; z, aa, brass bracelet fragments.

102

TEXAS AI~CHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

PLATE 10. Metal and stone objects from the Stansbury Site: a, cast iron
kettle fragment; b, broken axe head stamped "IB"; c, French clasp knife;
d, large chipped stone chopper; e, French knife stamped with crown and
"MOZIN/LAINE"; f, carving knife of 19th century.

WHITNEY BESEIWOIR

103

found by Carlyle Smith at the Kansas Monument Site which dates at
the beginning of the 19th century (Smith, 1950, p. £8). Another knife
of similar form is too rusted to provide any inscription. The fourth is
a large carving knife of the late 19th century (P1. 10, f), but also
appears to be of French origin as the central portion of a French name
is readable on it, as "-OUPIE--."
An iron axe, reworked into a wedge, is so battered as to be no
further identifiable (P!. 8, i). Another broken axe head, or hatchet, is
stamped "IB" (P1. 10, b). C. Hubert Smith refers to this type of small
hatchet as a "half-axe" or "Squaw’s Axe."
Om~AMENTS: Smal! sections of thin, sheet brass rolled into conical
form and usually known as "jingles" or "tinklers" have been found in
abundance on the site. Fifteen such specimens were recovered from
the Biver Basin Smareys excavation (P1. 9, a-g, l-n). These are the
kind of ornament known from most historic Indian sites and were
worn as ornaments in the hair and as noise makers attached to the
fringes of clothing. A very tiny hawk bell (P1. 9, p) of brass with an
iron pellet inside it; an unidentifiable brass button with a smooth flat
surface and a wire loop for attachment; and a beaten strip of silver
that may once have been a bracelet (P1. 9, w) were the only other
ornaments found.
UTILITY OBJECTS: In this category have been included the fragments of utensils and implements that in all probability were a part
of the Greenwade farmstead, though in at least one instance a specimen was found indicating undoubted Indian usage. Among these
fourteen objects is an iron awl (P1. 8, b); a square nail; a pronged iron
object that may have been part of a buckle (P1. 9, t); 3 east iron pot
fragments (P1. 10, a); a long, bipointed iron awl (P1. 8, e); a era’led
fragment of iron scrap; a handle of brass from a box or chest (P1. 8,
f); a perforated piece of iron, perhaps from a buggy or wagon part
(PI. 9, s); a fragment of the mechanism from a lock made of iron and
zinc or German silver (P1. 9, o); a perforated strap with a hook on the
end, perhaps a house shutter hook; and a long iron rod. The iron rod
with a bend on the end was found on the floor of the house in Area B.

SCRAP: Sixty-nine fragments of brass in the form of irregular
shaped pieces of thin sheet brass, wire, and rods comprise the remainder of the metal objects from the site. Most of these fragments
are waste from which other objects, such as jingles and bracelets, may
have been made. A few of the large pieces may be stock intended for
the manufacture of such objects. One piece of thin, sheet brass appears
to have been a patched container as a rectangular piece of the same

104

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

material is attached to it by four hand-made clasps of thin brass.
Another may be the remains of a finger ring. The brass wire or rod
fragments are all too small to identify as to use, though several might
have been fragments of bracelets (P!. 9, z, aa; 8, g). The larger rod
fragments (6 ram. in diameter) are all cut on the ends apparently with
a cold chisel, suggesting intentional sectioning rather than breakage.
The identifications of these objects of non-native origin suggest
some possibilities for dates of occupation of the Stansbury Site on
purely typological grounds. When Dr. Carlyle S. Smith made the
identifications of the metal objects he was completely unaware of the
areheologieal situation and the documentary evidence regarding the
site. Yet on the basis of the specimens he was able to say in correspondence, "Your site appears to have had its main occupation in the 18th
century" and suggested the date as ca. 1750-1800. He went on to say,
"Another group of specimens pertains to a nmeh later 19th century
occupation, probably by Whites who must have had a house nearby."
Indeed the Whites did have a house, not only nearby but on the site
for nearly a century. His speculation on the method of dispersal of this
trash within the site is of interest. He says "My theory is that the smal!
scraps of glass, crockery, iron, etc. are introduced into fields by manure
spreaders, as the manure heap on a farm is often part of, or adjacent
to, the refuse heap." He thus accounts for the random surface dispersal
of the objects found over the several areas of the site.
SUM~ARY AND INTERPRETATION

The Stansbury Site (41-39B1-1) is a large, open, occupation area
on the edge of the upper, or 40-foot, terrace of the Brazos River, in
Hil! County, Texas, two miles above the Whitney Dana. It is now beneath more than 50 feet of water of the Whitney Reservoir. Archeological investigations here in 1947 and 1950 by River Basin Surveys
parties from the Smithsonian Institution provided a small but significant assemblage of artifacts of Indian and White origin and a series
of distinctive structural features. These features include four burials,
a stone wall, several "piles" of bison bones, a series of unpatterned
postholes, and an aboriginal dwelling structure. The latter consisted of
a series of postholes an’anged in a rectangle around a compacted floor
with a central fire pit, a short entryway and five exterior, bell-shaped
cache pits. This is, I believe, the first excavated aboroginal house in
the central Texas area.
No clearly defined, uniform, stratigraphie profile could be established for the site as a whole. The deep test pits throughout the site
and the two deep profile cuts at the edge of the large erosion gully

~VHITNEY t~ESERVOIR

105

all proved to be unrewarding in an attempt to establish soil profiles
or alluvial stratigraphy.
The stratigraphic positions of the areheological features and of the
artifacts are more informative. The allifacts of aboriginal manufacture as well as the trade goods of White provenience were found in all
areas of the site and at all depths, from surface to the lowest excavated levels of oecupation. Even the dart points, Clear Fork gouge,
etc., of an earlier era are mixed within the single zone of occupation.
There is thus no indication of occupation at any time earlier than the
beginning of White trade in the region. The historic records (see
Appendix B ) indieate that such trade may have begun as early as the
beginning of the 18th century. The stratigraphy of the artifacts found
west of the large gully in Areas C and F was of no help in interpreting
the site. In the other areas, though, the stratigraphy of the artifacts
and archeological features, combined with typological identifications
of the artifacts and a study of the documentary records, permits reasonable assumptions as to more specific dating and as to a cultural
sequence of occupations.
In Area A, Bmial No. 2, that of an Indian child in an oval pit, was
clearly superimposed upon the edge of Burial No. 3, that of a White
child in a coffin, and is therefore of later date. Both burials were associated with a stone wall containing lime mortar of the same type as
that used in the earliest buildings at the nearby town of Towash,
which were erected in the mid-1850’s. The two burials and the stone
wall can thus be dated at some time after the mid-1850’s but probably
before 1870 when the Indians of this region were moved to the reservation in Oklahoma. Extrapolating between these dates it may be
surmised that the stone wall and Burial No. 3 date between 1855 and
1865, and Burial No. 2 between 1865 and 1870. Burial No. 4 is not so
easy to interpret. The brass and glass objects associated with it clearly
demonstrate that it is of the post-contaet period. Its disassociation with
the stone wall; lack of any fragments of china, crockery and glass;
and association with a large aboriginal potsherd of east Texas style
and the three "hair pipes" tend to suggest that it is of a somewhat
earlier period than Burials No. 2 and 3.
The stratigraphie position of the stone wall provides a clue to its
relationship to, and the dating of, the aboriginal house in Area B. The
base of the stone wall was 9,4" below surface, implying deposition of
some two feet of alluvial and aeolian soil since its construction approximately a century ago. The floor level in the house in Area B was
28" below surface. This 4" difference in depth is amplified by the

106

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

position of Area A on the edge of the terrace where deposition is seen
to be greater than it is farther back on the terrace in Area B~ and by
lack of aggradation from cultivation in Area A. Taking these two
factors into account the house floor in Area B would have been perhaps as much as two feet deeper than the base of the stone wall in
Area A. The house is, therefore~ clearly older than the stone wall, and
assuming a reasonably uniform rate of deposition over the years, is
probably as much as a century older. This would mean a date of
between 1750 and 1775 for the house. The stratified ash deposits in
the fire pit in this house indicate that it was occupied for several years,
perhaps sporadically, and maybe for as long as a decade or two. The
artifacts recovered from the general floor leve! of the house are not
conclusive but are indicative of occupation during the 18th rather than
the 19th centre7. European gun flints, lead rifle balls, a French knife
and some of the brass objects are more likely to have been of the
earlier period than the later one. Also it is significant that no china or
crockery of either certain or probable 19th century origin was found
here.
In Area E~ around the old Greenwade house, objects of glass, china,
and scrap metal were found abundantly on or near the surface and
clearly relate to the post-1850 period. The few objects identified as of
18th century French and Spanish origin, especially gun parts here and
in Area D~ are exclusively from depths of 19." to 30", indicating a
rather eleareut break between the early and the late occupations. In
Area D the bone piles, the series of unpatterned postholes, and the
position of Burial No. 1 are difficult to interpret within this developing
framework. The postholes are all dearly below plow zone as are the
bases of the bone piles and the burial, so there can be little doubt of
their being older than the garden plot in which they were found. No
definitely datable allifaets can be related exclusively to these features,
although gun parts of the 18th century period did come from similar
depths here. I would suggest that these features are all of an earlier
time than the mid-19th century occupation.
The stratigraphie positions of these objects and features are not as
eleareut as one might wish, but certainly are suggestive of at least two
distinct periods of occupation. The earliest of these would seem to be
during the third quarter of the 18th century and the later occupation
during the third quarter of the 19th century. This framework is
strengthened by the fact that the stratigraphie analysis of the site and
the identifications of the objects of White provenience were done independently and the results of each of these analyses corroborates the
other.

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

107

Let us turn now to the documental7 record for the identification
and dating of the site. In the appendix to this report, Jelks has built a
strong case for the identKieation of the Stansbury Site as the location
of a large village of Tawakoni Indians that was visited in 1778 and
again in 1779 by Athanase de M~zi~res and known as the Flechado
Village. On both these occasions de M6zi~res visited two Tawakoni
villages in this vicinity. A careful cheek of his route places the first,
known as the Quiseat Village, near the present city of Waeo, Texas.
The second, known as the Flechado Village, was eight leagues (about
"20 miles) upstream on the Brazos l{iver. The StansbmT Site is approximately 27 aMine miles above Waco. In 1959, a site was found on
the west bank of the Brazos about 8 miles above Waco that clearly
fits the description of the Quiseat Village. This is the Stone Site
(Dut~eld and Jelks, 1961, pp. 70-73) and its identification as the Quiscat Village puts the Stansbury Site in almost the exact location where
the Fleehado Village is said to have been. This, together with the
archeological features, the identifications of the 18th century artifacts,
and the absence of any other known historic period site in the vicinity,
leaves little doubt that the Stansbury Site is, indeed, the Flechado
Village.
When de M~zi~res visited these hvo villages in 1778, he described
the Quiseat Village as containing about 150 warriors and the Flechado
Village as having in excess of that number. Furthermore, he spoke of
the latter as being the Major Post (Puesto Mayor) of the Tawakoni
(Bolton, 1914, VoI. II, pp. 195-197). Six years earlier, though, he
visited only the Quiscat Village and made no mention of the Fleehado
Village. One wonders why, since it was only eight leagues away and
considered by him to be the major of the two. The reason may be that
the Fleehado Village was not in existence on the Brazos tliver in 1772.
Bolton provides some substantiation of this possibility in a note regarding Father Calahorra’s trip to east Texas in 1760. He states that Father
Calahorra visited "... the Tawakoni village north of the second branch
of the Sabinas. From there it was five days journey to the Taovayas.
The Tawakoni village was composed of forty-seven houses of twelve
families each, comprising two hundred and fifty warriors. Its four
chiefs were brothers. Only a street sepm’ated this village from that of
the Yscones. Crops were raised here in abundance, even for sale. One
of the Tawakoni chiefs was called Fleehado en la Cara. E1 Fleehazo
was the name of the Tawakoni village found on the Brazos in 1778 by
de M~zi~res. The inference is that the people were identical and that
in the interim [1760-1778] they had moved from the Sabine to the

108

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Brazos." (Bolton, 1915, p. 92, footnote 46). If this assumption is correct, it seems probable that the "interim" can be narrowed still further,
for in 1772 de M~zi&res visited "... the Ysconis and Tawakoni olt opposite sides of the Trinity." (Bolton, 1914, Vol. I, p. 96) before his
visit to the Quiscat Village that same year. It seems reasonable to
assume, then, that this group of Tawakoni, visited by Father Calahorra
in 1760 on the Sabine River in east Texas, moved from there to the
Trinity River where de M~zi~res visited them in 1779. and again
moved, between 1772 and 1778, to the banks of the Brazos River
where de M6zi~res visited them in 1778 and 1779.
This village apparently was short lived because, as Jelks has argued
in the appendix to this report, it was not mentioned by Pedro Vial in
1786. Vial visited the Qniscat Village in that year and journeyed northwest along the Brazos, necessarily passing close by the Stansbury Site.
It seems that he would have mentioned the sister village to the one he
had just stopped in for several weeks, had it been in existence. On this
basis the occupation may be assumed to have ended by or before 1786.
THE FLECHADO VILLAGE: If these assumptions are colTect, the archeo!ogical remains excavated at the Stansbury Site in 1947 and 1950 are, in
part, those of the Flechado Village of Tawakoni Indians, established
between 1779. and 1778 and abandoned between 1780 and 1786. A
maximum duration of 13 years is thus indicated. This was a settlement
of Wichita-speaking migrants from northeast Texas and consisted of
more than 150 wan’iors and their families.
This village appears, then, to be partially represented in the River
Basin Surveys excavations by a rectangular house, 21 feet long and 18
feet wide, with a prepared floor, and depending for its construction on
moderate-sized, upright poles spaced at wide intervals. It had an
extended entryway on the southwest side. Other construction details
are unknown but a thatched cover and domed roof with the wall poles
bending over the center of the house and fastened to stringers that
rested on central support posts may be inferred. In the center of the
floor of this house was a deep fire pit with a clearly stratified ash deposit. Five small, bell-shaped cache pits were located iust outside the
sh’ucture. Artifacts of 18th century French, Spanish and English origin,
such as gun parts, knives, metal ornaments, crockery and glass beads
indicate an extensive trade with Europeans at the time of this occupation. The series of apparently unpatterned postholes in Area D may
also be a part of a similar house but the evidence is inconclusive.
Burial No. 4, in Area A, accompanied by "hair pipes" made from Gulf
Coast conch columella, likewise, may be a part of this occupation.

WHITNEY t~ESEt~VOIR

109

Duffield and Jelks (1961, pp. 69-75) have grouped the several
known sites of the historic period that they believe to have been occupied by Wichita-speaking peoples in the southern Plains, particularly
that part of the southern Plains lying in north-central and northeast
Texas, into an areheologieal focus which they have ca!led the Nortefio
Focus. In it they have included the Spanish Fort Site on the Red l~iver
in Montague County; The Carrett’s Bluff (or Womaek) Site on the
Red River in Lamar County; the historic component at the Sanders
Site also on the Red River in Lamar County; the Pearson Site on the
Sabine River in Rains County; the Vincent Site on the Navasota l~iver
in Limestone County; the Stone Site on the Brazos Biver in McLennan
County; and the Stansbury Site. The ease they have made for this
focus designation is a strong one and the evidence derived from analyses of the materials from the StansbuW Site clearly supports their
thesis.
THE TOWASI-I VILLAGE: The identification of this component at the
Stansbury Site is most hesitantly suggested. There is no certain areheological evidence for it, but some of the archeologieal materials recovered may represent it. The extended burial (No. 1) in Area D may
be of an occupation later than that of the Flechado Village but earlier
than the mid-19th century Tonkawa occupation discussed below. Such
is indicated by the shallow depth of this burial, its location within the
Greenwade garden plot and the presence of a lead rifle ball in its abdominal region. Some of the pottery such as the Patton Engraved
sherds may be of this middle occupation as this pottery type has been
found consistently associated with the historic Hasinai or Tejas tribes
of the Caddo family (the Allen Focus), in east Texas (Suhm, Krieger,
and Jelks, 1954, pp. "9,20, 336). Some of the pottery tobacco pipes also
suggest the Allen Focus, especially the engraved pipe with red pigment rubbed into the design and the pipes with the small keel-like
protrusion forward of the bowl (ibid, p. 9.9.0). None of these are certain, though, and without hints from the doeunmntary sources this
component would not be suggested.
Again let us turn to Jelks’ appendix to this report for some suggestions from the historic record. The reports of Cooper (18,51) and
Stem (1861, pp. 59.1-23) indicate that a Hainai group

(Caddoan

family or Allen Focus rather than Wichita Nortefio Focus ) moved out
of east Texas in the mid-1830’s and settled on the Brazos l:~iver under
the leadership of a principal chief named Towash. At about this same
trine the geographic location under discussion became known in most
Texas records as the Old Towash Village. Also, trading post records

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

refer to Hainai trading in the neighborhood of the present city of
Waco at this same time (Torrey’s Trading House Account Books).
As Jelks points out, it is probably no coincidence that the Hainai chief
named Towash (sometimes called Old Towash) appears in the area
at about the time the name Old Towash Village begins to appear in
the records to refer to the location that we are now calling the Stansbury Site. By 1846, though, ttoemer visited the Hasinai village, then
located nearly ten miles upstream from the Stansbury Site in the
locality whieh later became Fort Graham (lloemer, 1935).
There is thus some evidence, though it eertailfly is not conclusive,
to indicate that a Hainai group under the leadership of a man named
Towash ocupied the Stansbury Site for a short time between the mid1830"s and 1846.
THE TONKAWA CAMP: The final Indian occupation of the Stansbury Site
is not indicated explicitly by the areheological evidence since cultivation has obscured the surface features that may have been present.
The only feature definitely belonging to this occupation is Burial No.
2, in Area A, that of an Indian child of the period of 1865-70. Artifacts
identified as of American and English origin may, in part, be representative of this occupation. These middle to late 19th century objects
could well have originated with the Greenwade family but may well
have been used by the Indians as hand-me-downs.
Testimony of local residents leaves little doubt of the existence and
nature of this final occupation of the site. Mrs. Jesse Greenwade’s
statements (see Appendix B ) describes a perfectly good Tonkawa
camp h’om the viewpoint of a contemporal7 visitor to it. Other ]ocaI
oldtimers during the course of the excavations in 1947 and 1950 made
reference to "... those Tonks that used to live over on the Old Greenwade Place," or to the fact that "The Tonks were tame Indians that
lived on this side of the river and the wild Indians were Commanehes
that lived over west of the river." Such statements referred to the
period of the 1850’s and 1860’s.
The final Indian occupation of the site appears, then, to have been
by a small, mobile group of Tonkawa who attached themselves to the
fringe of a White settlement for protection from the Comanches and
for economic support from the Whites. When they began living here
is not known but probably shortly after the Greenwades moved here in
the mid-1850’s. They were present at the site in 1868 and with all of
the other Indians in the region were probably moved to Oklahoma
Territory in 1870.
In summary, then, there appear to have been three separate Indian

iii

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

occupations of the StansbulT Site. Theh" designations and probable
dates are as follow:
Flechado Village (Nortefio Focus) of about the mid-1770"s to end by
1786.
Towash Village (Allen Focus) (?) of about the mid-1830’s to end by
1846.
Tonkawa Camp of about the mid-1850"s to end by 1870.
THE PICTOGRAPH SHELTER (41-26D7-5)
INTRODUCTION

The Pictograph Shelter was first recorded durfiag the initial survey
of the Whitney Reservoir in 1947. The late George C. Benson, who
lived nearby and had volunteered his help on the survey, had known
of it for many years. He had thought that it might have once been an
Indian site, even though there were no artifacts on the surface, but
had never dug into it because, as he said, "I didn’t know the best way
to dig into it and I didn’t want to ruin it." Other local people had also
known of it and trappers, ranch hands and others had frequently used
it as a shelter from storms for a half century or more, but they too had
left it umnolested. Sheep, goats, cattle and wild animals had used it as
a refuge from storms and as a place to bed down for the night and
their droppings had thoroughly sealed off the entire surface of the
floor so that the underlying occupation layers were intact when the
excavations were begun in 1947.
No particular name had ever been attached to the shelter. It was
usually called "the cave in Steiner Valley" or "the cave near the White
Bluffs." Benson pointed out the Indian pictographs on the walls and
from this it was given the name "Pictograph Cave" for the 1947 survey
records. This was an unfortunate choice since it duplicated the name
previously assigned to a shelter in Montana (Mulloy, 1952, pp. 19.7-8;
1958). To reduce this confusion the word "cave," used in the preliminary publication (Stephenson, 1947, p. 137) has been changed to
"shelter." The whole name perhaps should have been changed for the
present report but even more confusion would result in the Texas area
since the site is now commonly known by that name. I hope that not
too nmeh confusion will arise from this similarity of names. The site
was also assigned a numerical designation, 41-26D7-5, in the uniform
site designation system described above (Fig. 5).
DESCRIPTION OF THE SITE

The Pictograph Shelter (41-26D7-5) is situated in a partly exposed

llg

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

PLATE 11. Pencil sketch of Pictograph Shelter before excavation (sketch
by Ha! Story, Texas Memorial Museum).
limestone outcrop along the northeastern edge of the Brazos Valley
and in the southeastern end of the local area known as Steiner Valley.
It is eight miles, by road, nollhwest of the town of Whitney and
eighteen river miles above the Whitney Dam (Fig. 4). This limestone
outcrop, a member of the Fredericksburg group, is a part of the extensive series of bluffs and steeply rounded hills which bound the valley
in this area and rise abruptly above the valley floor to an average
height of 200 feet. The shelter, at an elevation of approximately 595
feet above mean sea level, 120 feet above the normal river level and 75
feet above the average level of the wide, valley floodplain, is a deeply
scoured concavity of roughly hemispherical shape. It was presumably
eroded into the limestone in Pliocene times when the Brazos River
flowed at a higher elevation than now and is primarily the result of
stream action. Since the initial cutting, it has been subjected to extensive aeolian erosion and seepage decomposition of the surface rock.
This erosion and decomposition has resulted in a flaking off and powdering of the bedrock and occasional breaking off of large pieces of
bedrock. The erosional waste has been deposited on the floor of the
shelter and spilled out the front to form a moderate talus slope (Fig.
8, b). A horizontal zone of erosional material, at the elevation of the

-C

-F

,//%7
-E

B
A. PLAN OF SHELTER

SHOWING EXCAVATIONS AND FEATURES
o

C. PROFILE FROM SHELTER TO RIVER
LEGEND
STRATUM I ~ ROCK
~ STRATUMIT ~ BEDROCK
STRATUM~ ~ 1947 EXCAVATIONS
STRATUM~I~ ~

FmuR~

IS,GO EXCAVATIONS

-

io
F~T

so

o

sod
F£ET

PICTOGRAPH

SHELTER

41-26D7-5

T~?6

8. Pictograph Shelter (41-26D7-5): a, plan; b, profile; c, profile
~rom shelter to the Brazos River.

114

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

base of the shelter, extends along this steep hill for several hundred
yards to right and left and minor talus slopes extend all along the hill
below this zone. Heavy juniper vegetation grows up from the valley
floor to the top of the talus slope. Above that line the vegetation is
sparse to the top of the hill where it again is heavy (P1. 12, a and b).
Other shelters occur in this same limestone ledge nearby, hmnediately to tile northwest of the Pictograph Shelter, along the upper edge
of the talus slope, are two long, shallow shelters (41-26D7-6 and
41-26D7-7) that originate from the same sources as the Pictograph
Shelter. Both were extensively tested but were too shallow to produce
any occupational refuse. About a half mile to the southeast, at the
same elevation but separated from the Pictograph Shelter by a short,
wide, deeply eroded, side canyon is a series of six similar shelters.
Three of these, 41-26D7-10, 41-26D7-11, and 41-26D7-13, were tested
and found to be too shallow for human occupation. The other three,
though, The Buzzard Shelter (41-26D7-12), 41-26D7-14, and 41-26D715, were found to have been utilized as prehistoric occupation sites,
one of which was extensively excavated (Buzzard Shelter) in 1950.
The Pictograph Shelter faces to the southwest and overlooks the
wide expanse of Brazes River floodplain known as Steiner Valley. The
front of the shelter is well hidden from the valley floor by a heavy
growth of juniper but from atop a large rock in front of the southeast
side of the shelter opening, a fine view of several square miles of the
Steiner Valley may be obtained (PI. 12, a). The channel of the Brazes
River is 3,000 feet south of the site at the newest point ( Fig. 8, c ). The
shelter is 53 feet wide at the greatest interior dimension, 23 feet deep
from the top of the talus slope to the rear wall, and has a maximum
ceiling elevation of 7 feet above the undisturbed floor fill (Fig. 8, a
and b). The floor deposit extends to a maximum depth of 80 inches.
The compacted surface of this floor fill is quite level with a rise of only
26 inches from the lowest (west) side to the highest (east) side.
Occupation for the past half century and more, by sheep, goats and
other animals has provided an extremely compacted layer of manure
2 to 6 inches in depth over the entire surface. A large, flat, horizontal
extension of the bedrock overhangs the floor in the west end of the
shelter (P1. 11) and its under-surface is but 28 inches above the top
of the floor. A curved extension of the bedrock on the southeast side of
the shelter provides a protected cove in that end. Thus the actual
opening of the Pictograph Shelter is somewhat smaller in al! dimensions than the dimensions of the interior.

PLAT~ 12. Pictograph Shelter: a, looking north from floor of Steiner Valley to brush covered bluff containing shelter (arrow); b, interior of shelter
from rear wall during excavation.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

116

ARCHEOLOGICAL FIELD WORK

The Pictograph Shelter was examined and tested in 1947 with a
temporary crew of two and the voluntary assistance of the late George
C. Benson. A datum point was established on a large rock near the
center of the shelter entrance and designated as elevation 0. East-west
and north-south base lines were run from datum. The five-foot eastwest segments were numbered from 1 to 12 and the north-south segments were lettered A-G on the north and AA to BB on the south.
The resulting grid of 5 foot squares covered the interior of the shelter
and the talus slope. The test excavations of July 1947 and the fuller
excavations of March to June 1950 are indicated in Fig. 8 a. In all,
70% of the surface area and 80% of the total fill of the Pictograph
Shelter was excavated.
Horizontal control was held within the grid systenI and vertical
control was maintained by arbitrary six inch levels until stratigraphic
levels became clear enough to use for vertical control. All artifacts as
well as quantitative samples of bone, shell, antler, stone and vegetal
material were saved and sorted by square and level. In addition, all
material except the dirt was saved from squares 3B and 7D as a check
on cultural and non-cultural debris in the shelter. Except for some of
the talus material, all excavation debris was sifted through ~" or
finer mesh screen. Profiles were drawn of the trench walls along both
east-west and north-south trenches (Fig. 9).
THE

SHELTER FILL

The bedrock floor of the Pictograph Shelter is irregularly concave
in cross-section with a pronounced downward slope near the opening
(Fig. 8, b ). The deepest deposits of fil! occur slightly to the rear of the
center of the shelter due to this concave shape of the bedrock. The
uppermost surface of the deposits forms a nearly level, compact floor
over the entire shelter.
In the front center of the shelter is a huge, elliptical, limestone rock,
dropped from the ceiling. It is approximately 22 feet x 12 feet in
greatest dimensions and 5 feet thick. It extends from within a few
inches of the bedrock floor to within 18 inches of the surface and
weighs several tons (Fig. 8, b). The position of this rock, ahnost on
the bedrock floor, indicates that it was in its present position at the
time of the first human occupation of the shelter and for a considerable
time before. It fell very early in the natnral history of this shelter. The
rock forms an effective barrier behind and to either side of which preoccupational and occupational fill material has aeeunmlated in strati-

A

PROFILE AA-F ALONG LINE 5
,N

B. PROFILE AA-F ALONG LINE

4

N

D

C. PROFILE A--E ALONG LINE 3

EBB.

-

LEGEND
ELEVATION BELOW DATUM
¯ LENS
AsH
SHELL
IN’HEARTH

SNELL
io

ORAWN BY RL S~EPHENSON
~RAC~O
By R s PRICE

PICTOGRAPH

SHELTER

41-26D7-5

F~T

FIGuIt~ 9. Four profiles of Pictograph Shelter (41-26D7-5).

~77
3-4 -19s4

118

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

fled deposits. Forward of the rock, toward the shelter opening, the
entire fill is a mixture of unstratified occupational and non-occupationM debris forming the upper portions of the talus slope.
Within the subsurface fi!!, behind, above and to both sides of the
rock, four distinct stratigraphie levels may be differentiated, the middle two of whieh, in certain sections of the shelter, may be divided
further into a. and b. substrata (Fig. 8, b and 9, a-d). The upper and
lower of these strata are sterile of occupational material. The two
middle strata are occupational levels (P1. 1,3 b).
STRATUI~I I

This sterile layer extends over the entire bedrock floor of the shelter.
It varies in thickness from 2 to 3 inches under the big rock to as nmch
as 36 inches in places, but has a usual thicknes of about 20 inches. The
upper surface of this stratum is irregular. In places it extends up over
the edge of the big rock, in other places not. Along the rear wal! of
the shelter it tends to wedge upward along the bedrock. In many
places it has been dug into by occupants of the stratum above. The fil!
is a fine powdered, gray limestone, resulting from the dropping of
small flakes off the ceiling and walls of the shelter. These flakes have
weathered off over a period of many centuries, due to the action of
moisture seepage, freezing, thawing and wind erosion, processes that
are still going on today. Evenly distributed throughout this stratum
are bits of soft, black, pea-sized carbonaceous material, the result of
decomposition of roots, twigs and other vegetation.
Such vegetal remains nmst have been carried into the shelter by
wind action and rodents over a long period of the building up of the
fill of Stratum I since they are so evenly distributed throughout. It is
suggested that this fill required a long period of time to accunmlate
(many centuries, perhaps even millenia) as the flaking off of this limestone is, at present, a slow process and the material lay on the floor
long enough to further decompose into a fine powder, tloof flakes
lying on the modern surface of the shelter are not yet powdered but
fall as thin flakes of the size of a silver coin or larger and begin to decompose into a limestone powder only after further exposure to the
elements. The extension of this fill over a portion of the inward edge of
the big rock further indicates the precedence of the position of the
rock before much of the fill of this stratum had accumulated and suggests that the time of fill accumulation must have been extensive.
No human occupational debris of any kind was found within Stratuna I. The earliest occupants of the site, though, moved into the shelter and camped directly on top of this zone, as its surface is clearly

WHITNEY I~ESERVOIR

119

PLATE 13. Pictograph Shelter: a, interior looking northwest across partially
excavated area; b, profile of trench wall along line 3 from E to A.

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

marked by the begimling of occupational refuse. Also, several hearths
and slab-lined cists (e.g. Features 1, 2, 7, 15 and 17) lie on and are
excavated partly into the surface of this !owest layer of shelter fil!.
STltATUI~

II

The earliest occupation level, like the pre-occupation level below
it, extends over the entire area of the shelter. It valies in thickness
from 10 inches toward the rear of the shelter to as much as 42 inches
in places, but has a usual thickness of about 30 inches. The lower
limit of this stratum, following the contours of the surface of Stratum
I, is irregular. Likewise the upper limit or surface of Stratum II is
quite irregular, tending to dip slightly between the big rock and the
shelter wall. The fill extends over the edges of the big rock but does
not extend over the top of that rock. As with all other strata, this fill
tends to wedge upward along the rear wall of the shelter. The fill is
composed of fine windblown soil, a high percentage of dark gray ash
and considerable powdered limestone ceiling debris. The three sorts of
material are thoroughly mixed, suggesting a slow accunmlation during
occupation. Mixed in the fill are occasional twigs, sticks and other nonartifact, vegetal material and a great abundance of snai! and nmssel
shells. The shells of the land snail Bulimulus dealbatus mooreanus
(Pfeiffer), were remarkably abundant throughout Stratum II, averaging a frequency of approximately 300 per cubic foot of fill. The shells
of the fresh water mussel Quadrula houstonensis (Lea) were also scattered quite abundantly through the fill, averaging approximately 10
per cubic foot. Often both species of shells were found in heavy
concentrations.
Ash lenses and prepared hearths were abundant throughout this
level (Table 4). The ash lenses of Stratum II were usually large and
elongated and composed of various sorts of ash. Some were of a fine,
clean, white ash, others of a light or dark gray or even black ash, still
others were of a pink and yellow ash. These lenses were not always in
horizontal position but frequently were sloped upwards in one direction or another, usually at about a 20-degree angle (Fig. 9, b, e, d).
None of the lenses of light gray, white, pink or yellow ash contained
any charcoal, snail shells or other foreign material. The lenses of dark
gray and black ash contain bits of charcoal and a few snail shells.
Partly burned snail and musse! shells were often found concentrated
around one edge of the ash lenses.
Nine prepared hearths (Features 1, 3, 4, 7, 8, 10, 12, 14 and 15)
were excavated in this stratum. They were circular, ova!, triangular or
rectangular and all remarkably thick in cross-section. Each was pre-

121

WHITNEY IRESERVOIR

TABLE 4
Tabulation of Features, Pictograph Shelter
(Arranged by depth and strata)
No.

Depth

11
9
5
6
10
12
8
13

8"
12"
12"
14"
15"
15"
18"
20"

16
14
4

24"
30"
30"

II a
II a
II a

3
7
2
1
17

30"
34"
36"
38"
38"

II
II
II
II
II

15

40"

II a

Bur. 1
Bur. 2

24"
12"

IIIa
IIIa

Stratum
III
III
III
III
II
II
II
II

a
a
a
a
b
b
b
a

a
a
a
a
a

Square
8
4
6
6
4
6
4
8

C
C
B
C
B
F
A
E

7E
10 D
8 B
7A
6
5
5
8

D
E
D
D

4 E
4E
6C&D

Description
Hearth of burned clay with burned rocks
Circular hearth with burned rocks
Small, circular hearth with burned rocks
Irregular hearth with burned rocks
Well formed hearth with large burned rocks
Small, circular hearth with burned rocks
Small, circular hearth with burned rocks
Circular, slab-lined eist with slab lid and
concentration of snail shells
Ch-cular hearth with burned rocks
Large, oval hearth with burned rocks
Triangular hearth with burned rocks and
bones
Small, ova! hearth with burned rocks
Circular hearth with burned rocks
Circular slab-lined eist with slab lid
Large, reetangular, rock-lined hearth
Circular, slab-lined cist with slab lid and
concentration of snail shells
Circular hearth with burned rocks
immediately below Burial No. 1
Child, age 3 to 4 years, flexed, head to east.
Scattered human bone fragments

pared by digging a shallow basin in the floor and carefully lining this
depression with small limestone rocks and slabs. Fire was then built
on this prepared hearth. More stones were added with additional fires
until some of the hearths attained a thickness of as nmeh as 26 inches.
The fires burning in these hearths had cracked and broken the limestone until most pieces were but 3 or 4 inches in dimneter. The old
hearth-stones were apparently not removed, at least not until the
hearth had been completely abandoned, as broken sections of a single
stone were frequently found together. Occasionally a concentration of
ash and charcoal was found in tlae bottom of the depression below the
lowest stones. Some additional hearths must have been abandoned and
destroyed by the occupants as many random, fire-broken stones were
found in the general fill.
The prepared hearths and the ash lenses provided, even within the
single sta’atum, some suggestions of occupational sequences. None of
the hearths nor the lenses was at just the stone actual level above the
floor of Stratum II as any other hearth or lens. Even tlmugh the floor

TEXAS AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of this stratum must have at all times been rather uneven, one would
expect the fires to have been built at somewhat near the same level in
any short-lived, continuous occupation. The lenses and hearths, then,
suggest a sporadic occupation over a long time, with only one or two
hearths and lenses in use at any one time.
Three small, circular, slab-lined cists (Features 2, 13 and 17) were
found in the shelter, all in the floor of Stratum II. Each was about 24
inches in diameter and 10 inches deep, and was composed of a shallow
pit dug into the surface of Stratum I to a depth of about 6 inches. The
bottom of this pit was lined with from one to four flat slabs of limestone. Similar slabs were placed upright about the edges of the pit.
The upright slabs were canted outward at an angle of from 10 to 30
degrees from the vertical. A somewhat larger slab of similar limestone
was placed horizontally over the upper surface to form a lid for the
eist (Fig. 9, a). Within neither of the three was found any evidence
of stored food or other material nor were the slabs fire-cracked from
use as a fire pit. The fill inside these cists was the same as the usual fill
in the stratum. No doubt these were food storage eists left empty when
the shelter was abandoned.
Stratum II is separated into an upper and a lower section by a
clearly defined, thin line of carbonaceous material. The specific nature
of this thin, dark line is somewhat obscure but it appears to be burned
vegetal material. Probably a thin covering of leaves and brush over
what was then the shelter surface had accidentally caught fire and
burned. The nature of the fill above and below this line is essentially
the same and little difference is seen in the cultural material of the two
substrata. If such a fire did occur it probably happened while the
shelter was unoccupied and the floor covered with windblown leaves
and small trash. The ocupants finmediately after this fire were the
same as those who lived in the shelter prior to it, as only gradual
changes in the nature of Stratum II are to be noted from bottom to
top. This postulate, in turn, suggests that the occupation of Pictograph
Shelter during Stratum II times was not continuous but intermittentperhaps seasonal.
STI~TU~ K A: Within the lower part of this level the prepared hearths
tend to be larger and more abundant than in the upper part. The ash
lenses are notably fewer but larger in the lower part, and all three of
the slab-lined cists occur in this zone. Few significant ehanges in artifact typology could be noted between the two sections of the stratum.
STI~ATU~ II B: This upper part of an occupational zone differing from
the lower part only in the minor ways noted above, apparently repre-

~VHITNEY RESERVOIR

123

sents a continuation of the same, earlier, intermittent occupation, terminated by a period of abandomnent of the entire shelter. This abandomnent is suggested by the appearance of a uniform, thin layer of
leaves, twigs and sterile windblown debris over its surface. This layer
of debris, while only an inch in thickness, extends over most of the
shelter area and is at an elevation only slightly below the top of the
large rock. Above this line of separation the fill in the shelter differs
markedly from that below it.
STRATUM m: The late occupation level extends over nearly the entire
area of the shelter but pinches out to become non-existent in the extreme eastern and southeastern sections. This zone over the rest of the
shelter is somewhat more uniform in thickness than is the zone below
it and has a maxinmm depth of 18 inches and a usual depth of about
15 inches. The lower limit, following the contours of the surface of
Stratum II, is somewhat irregular. The upper limit, or surface, is quite
even but slopes slightly downward from the top of the big rock toward
the rear of the shelter. An even greater slope upward occurs in the
surface of this stratum from west to east.
The fill of Stratum III is composed of both fine and coarse windb!own soil, a high percentage of light gray to pinkish ash and some
powdered and flaked limestone ceiling debris. Sticks, twigs, leaves and
other vegetal remains are abundant in this layer but the shells of land
snails and freshwater nmssels, so abundant in Stratum II, are only
moderately represented in Stratum III. The much lighter color of this
fill readily distinguishes it from the darker fill below. This lighter
color is due to the lack of any appreciable amount of charcoal or carbonized material in this level and the lack of decomposition of the
vegetal material. The pinkish cast to many parts of the fill is, at least
in part, the result of a lichen growth on the ceiling rock which has
dropped into this level and partly decomposed. Some of this color,
too, is derived from the ash lenses. The flakes of ceiling rock which
have fallen into this stratum have not completely decomposed and,
while a good deal of this rock is powdered, many large and small
flakes are present. The land snails Bulimulus dealbatus mooreanus
(Pfeiffer) found in frequencies of about 300 per cubic foot of fill in
Stratum II were reduced to frequencies of less than 100 per cubic
foot of fill in Stratum III. Other mollusk shells were likewise reduced
in quantity in this zone. Some areas of Stratum III were completely
lacking in shells.
Ash lenses of this level tended to be larger than those of Stratum
II, but otherwise did not differ from them. Prepared hearths (Features

124

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

5, 6, 9, and 11) were smaller and less carefully prepared than those of
the level below. Both the lenses and hearths were fewer in nmnber.
One hearth (Feature 11) differed markedly from any other in the
shelter. It was prepared in an irregular bed of clay which had hardened under the fire, resulting in a very serviceable baked-clay fire
hearth. The clay was an intentional intrusion into the fill of the shelter, probably carried in from some place along the river. Only a scattered few hearth stones were associated with this hearth. As in the
layer below, the lenses and hearths of Stratum III were at valying
levels within the fill and suggest small, intermittent occupations.
In certain portions of the shelter, particularly in the more intensively
occupied areas toward the rear center, a differentiation was readily seen
between an upper and a lower section of Stratum III.
s’rRATUX~ m a: The light gray to pinkish fill of the lower section contains the bulk of the occupational refuse, features and artifacts and
comprises about 80% of the stratum. It also contains the only human
skeletal remains found in the shelter.
Burial No. 1, that of a child, was situated near the rear of the shelter in Square 4E at a depth of 24 inches from modern surface and only
a few inches from the shelter wall and the sloping bedrock floor of the
shelter. Stratigraphically the burial was in a pit excavated from the
lowest portion of Stratum III a, into the upper portion of Stratum II b.
This pit was immediately above Feature 15 of Stratum II and cut into
at least two dark ash lenses above Feature 15 (Fig. 8, a and 9, b).
Within the excavated pit a veIy intensive fire had been built and consumed to ash all but the top few pieces of firewood. These remained
as charcoal by reason of the fire being extinguished suddenly by being
doused with a heavy, greasy liquid. Bits of the gummy remains of this
liquid were visible over the charred wood during excavation. After the
fire was cold the body of a child, 3 to 4 ye~s of age, was buried in
this fire pit in a tightly flexed position on the left side and with the
head to the east. Several hearthstones were mixed with the hearth
debris that covered the body in this burial. Considerable vegetal
material such as leaves and twigs was also found in direct association
with the body, thus testifying to the fact that the fire was cold at the
time of burial. One fragment of this vegetal material was a flower
resembling one of the aster family. The significance of this flower
might provoke numerous romantic speculations but it is suggested that
it was simply among the trash used to cover the body of the infant. In
squares 6 C and 6 D a few scattered human bone fragments were
found at depths of 12-15 inches. These included two ribs, six phal-

~rHITNEY ItESERVOIR

i~5

anges, 4 cranial fragments and a fragment of vertebrae. This was
recorded as Btu’ial No. 2 for purposes of the field record, but it does
not constitute a bm’ial as such. No doubt this was either an accidental
death and animals consumed the body and scattered the bones, or the
body was buried elsewhere and uncovered by animals which dragged
some of the bones to this spot.
STI~TU~ III b: The fill of the tipper section of Stratum III was of a
light brownish color and composed of very little ash and cultnral refuse but mostly powdered and flaked ceiling debris and windblown
refuse. Vegetal material was abundant but snail and mussel shells
were ahnost completely absent and occupational refuse scanty. The
brownish color of this layer is due to windblown soil mixed through
the fill with only a small amount of light colored ash.
Apparently this thin, upper layer of Stratum III represents a period
of gradual abandomnent of the shelter. There was some occupation
during this period, but only of the briefest sort. In this level is the first
and only appearance of artifacts of White provenience. Some items
such as knife-cut pegs represent local people trapping small animals
here during the 20th century. The pegs may have been driven into this
level from Stratmn IV above. Two such pegs were clearly driven
through all of Stratum III into the top of Stratum II (to a depth of 26
inches). Other artifacts of Stratum III b, such as wool cloth, iron
scraps and corn cobs, refer to an earlier period, presumably between
the beginning of settlement of the area by Whites (1836) and the beginning of goat and sheep raising in this section (about the 1890’s).
STRATU~,I IV: The uppermost level in Pictograph Shelter covers and
forms a rather effective seal over all of the oecupationa! layers beneath. Completely devoid of cultural material, it is an excessively
compacted layer of sheep and goat manure mixed with windblown
refuse and a very little ceiling debris. This layer was so solidly compacted that it was necessary to chop it out in blocks with a mattock,
much as one would remove an old section of asphalt roadway. The
blocks, when thus removed, were broken up by hand for examination.
No artifacts, ash, bone, shells, charcoal or al\y other sort of cultural
material were found in this layer. A single large projectile point found
on the surface was the only cultural item associated with Stratum IV
and it had obviously been carried into the shelter in velT recent years.
The surface of this compacted layer, forming the modern floor of
the shelter was quite even and the bottom of the layer separated
readily from the loose material of Stratum III below. Stratum IV
varied in depth from 2 inches near the front of the shelter to 6 inches

126

TEXAS

ARGHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

near the rear wall, and represents the period from the 1890’s until
recent years, while goats and sheep were abundant in the Steiner
Valley.
Tim PICTOGRAPHS

A series of six pictograph units, painted in red pigment, adorn the
rear wall of the shelter in a horizontal panel at a uniform height of
50 to 60 inches above the floor-fll surface (Fig. 8, b). Four of the
units consist of two figures each and the other two units are of one
figure each. The units are separated h’om each other by a distance of
20 to 30 inches. Water-color reproductions of this entire panel of ten
figures were prepared, to exact scale, by Mr. Hal Story of the Texas
Memorial MuseunI. Four of the units are reproduced in black-andwhite as Plate 14.
From left to right, as one views this panel, the first unit appears to
represent a tall hunlan figure with short, stubby arms and legs. To
this figure’s own right is a short, stubby figure with similar arms and
legs and a cleft head (P1. 14, b). The second unit consists of a similar
pair of figures, but the tall figure is a little taller and the short figure
is to the tall figure’s own left ( P1. 14, a). The third unit was apparently
similar to the other two but the rock has flaked off so badly as to leave
only small traces of the red pigment. Enough remains, though, to indicate similar paired figures. The same is true of the fourth unit. The
fifth unit is a single figure, apparently human, with thick body and
long, thick arms (P1. 14, c). The legs may also have been long at one
time but have been lost due to rock flaking. The sixth unit is another
single figure with thick, short body and a short right ann. The left arm
is extremely long and bends downward in a long are. The legs have
been obliterated by flaking of the rock and only a portion of the head
remains (P1. 14, d).
Hock flaking has wrought considerable damage to all of these figures. Probably the legs and arms of all the figures were originally
longer than at present and more nearly in proportion to the bodies.
All except the stubby figures in the first four units appear to be daneing humans. The stubby figures look like hides staked out to dl7 or
they might be captives around whom the tal! figures are dancing.
It is not possible to assign these pietographs to any particular culture or time period. Since the entfi’e panel is at the same height on
the shelter wall, they probably were all painted at approximately the
same time. If the ease of reaching up to paint the fi~ures has any significance in indicating a time period for them, it may be suggested that
they were painted when the floor level was one or hvo feet below the

PLATE 14. Watercolor scale reproductions of four of the six units of pictographs in Pictograph Shelter (Watercolors by Hal Story).

TEXAS AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

present surface. This would have been at the time when Stratum III
a was the surface or perhaps even during the time when Stratum II b
was occupied. Only with difficulty could the elevation of the pietographs have been reached from stratum II a.
OBJECTS I~ECOVERED
There were 846 artifacts recovered from the Pictograph Shelter,
including 9.1 objects of White provenience, probably originating from
the 19th centre7 White occupation of the Brazos Valley. This is not a
large inventory of material goods but the specimens are of types and
in stratigraphic position suggestive of certain cultural and temporal
affiliations. Table 5 lists the several categories of objects and the number of each recovered from each of the four strata. The column headed
"random" lists those artifacts the stratigraphic positions of which are
unknown. They were recovered from the talus slope fill or from the
rodent-disturbed area adjacent to the rear wall of the shelter.
TABLE 5
Stratigraphic Tabulation of Objects Recovered From Pictograph Shelter
Group
Object
Pottery sherds
Chipped Stone
Arrow Points
Perdiz
Scallorn
Cliffton
Alba
Fresno
fragments
Dart Points
Gary
Darl
Ellis
Matamoros
fragments
Drills
Perdiz base
Darl base
flake base
Blades
Gravers
Spall Scrapers
End ’Scrapers
Side Scrapers

II a

8
i
9,
9,
3
i
4
7
5
I

II b

III a

"2

9

3
17
3
3
4
1.2

16
.20
10
10
9
15

III b Random Total Total
"2

"2

15

3
3
5
"2
1
1
....
-3
5
3

25
52
16
15
18
38

........

1

1
1
3
1

7
15
27
9

4
15
5

2
3
4
2

__
..

__

"2

__

2

........

6
I
7

5
6
6
47
__
4

1
27
4
68
5
6

1
6
3
1.2
1
3

__
6
4
9
__
5

1

7
51
18
143
6
.20

15
5"27

129

WHITNEY I~ESERVOIR

Object
Cores
Ground Stone
Hammerstones
Manos, shaped
Manos, unshaped
Slabs
Pigment
Antler, bone & Shell
Antler tine flakers
Deer ulna flakers
Splinter flakers
Awls
Fishhooks
Fishhook blanks
Bone beads
Misc. cut bone
Mussel shefls, perforated
Mussel shells, roughened lip
Mussel shells, smooth lip
Wood
Cut sticks (cut by stone tool)
Fire drills
Cut sticks (cut by metal tool)
Miscellaneous
Iron object
Cloth and string
Corn cobs
Gourd fragment
Bison hair hlft

II a

II b

III a

10

14

29

4
__
__
2
__

9
3
4
5
2

Group
III b Random Total Total
3

__

56

14
1
6
2
2
__
......
12
1
_.
9
.....

34
7
4
20
4

69

192
__
2
__
1
....
1
6
....
1
_.
1
6
55
2

__
2
3
10
38
2

3
__

2
1
1
__
2
1
1
_.
....
....
1
._
1
__
_.
2
....
....

8
2
4
12
1
2
4
7
28
116
8

6
3
._
....

20
2
7

1
4
1
1
1
2
10
23
4

29
3
8
_.
2
....

2

5

......

1
3
7
i

__
__
__
_.

1
3
8
I
1

-- ;74"

57

846

......
....
1
....
-136

14

1
24"7

332

__

846

POTTERY

Fifteen potsherds, all body sherds representing six individual vessels, were found in the upper three strata of Pictograph Shelter. No
potter), was found in Stratum II a. These body sherds are rather nondescript and none is identifiable as to specific type, though the general,
late pottery tradition of the Caddoan area to the east is represented by
all of them.
Vessel No. 1, represented by eight sherds, was a long-necked bottle
of coarse, black paste tempered with fine, sandy grit (P1. 18, a). Seven
of the sherds are from the neck section which had an exterior diameter of about 60 mm. and a height of more than 80 tuna. One sherd
is from the globular body of the bottle. The sherds are of 6-7 mm. in
thickness. The exterior surface has a thin, tan wash, some of which

130

TEXAS

AiRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

has flaked off and was at one time rather highly polished. The interior
surface is black to gray and shows vertical smoothing striations on the
neck sherds. The body sherd is much smoother than the neck sherds.
The sherds of this vessel were recovered from the lower portion of
Sta’atum III b and the upper portions of Stratum III a. The vessel is
well within the pottery traditions of the Caddoan area. The paste and
bottle form of this vessel resemble specimens illustrated for several
types by Krieger (1946) and by Suhm, Krieger and Jelks (1954).
Vessel No. 2, represented by tln’ee sherds from Stratum III a, was
a bowl of unknown size and shape. The sherds are of a coarse, black
paste with finely crushed potsherd temper and are of a highly polished
black color on both interior and exterior surfaces (P1. 181 c). They
are 9-10 ram. in thickness. A bit of carbonized material adheres to the
interior of one sherd, suggesting a cooking bowl. This vessel, too, is of
Caddoan style but specific type is not determinable.
Vessel No. 3, represented by a single, tiny, thin sherd of fine black
paste tempered with crushed potsherds, has a heavy" orange wash covering the exterior surface. A single incised line across the sherd may
be decoration or it may be accidental. This sherd was found in the
upper part of Stxatum II b, and is 4 ram. thick.
Vessel No. 4, represented by a single sherd of fine, black paste,
tempered with crushed potsherds, is the only dearly decorated sherd
found (P1. 18, d). The decoration consists of angular, engraved lines
on a highly polished, light brown, exterior surface. The black interior
surface shows marks of a smoothing tool. The sherd is from Stratmn
III a, and is 5 ram. thick.
Vessel No. 5, represented by a single sherd from Stratum II b, is of
a coarse, black paste, tempered with crushed potsherds. It has a
roughened, black, interior surface and a smoothed brown exterior. It
is 7 ram. thick.
Vessel No. 6 is represented by a large sherd from Stratum III a, with
a highly fired flaky red paste and indeterminate temper (P1. 18, b).
The exterior has been a highly polished black color but most of this
surface has flaked off, leaving the reddish core color of the sherd exposed. The interior surface is smoothed but not polished and striations from a smoothing tool can be seen. It is 7 ram. thick. The possibility was considered that this sherd represented the type Leon Plain
(Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954, p. 386) because of the color and texture. The appearance of having been fired at an unusually high temperature resulting in a flaky, laminated structure and brick red color,
though, appears to have been the result of secondary firing after the

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

131

sherd was broken. It was found within the ash of a hearth and probably had been accidentally re-burned there. Like all the other sherds
in the site, this one is wel! within the general Caddoan tradition.
The pottery @ore the Pictograph Shelter is not definitive but suggests contacts, dm’ing the later periods of occupation, with peoples of
the Caddoan area and traditions, from whoni they received some pottery vessels in trade.
CHIPPED STONE

Chipped stone artifacts are the nIost numerous objects recovered
from the shelter and number 527 in all. Stratigraphically, these artifacts were found in all levels and differentiation by type between the
levels tends to be more relative than absolute. Suggestions, though, of
changing types from level to level are obvious.
The small projectile points, presumably used as tips for
arrows and propelled by the bow, are the most numerous chippedstone artifacts in the site (P1. 15). The 164 specimens recovered fit
well within five named types as defined by Kelley (1947 b), Jelks
(1953) and Suhni, Krieger, and Jelks (1954). There are 38 of these
that are too fragmentary to classify, but all, no doubt, are of one or
the other of these five types. These five types, Perdiz Points, Scal!orn
Points, Cliffton Points, Alba Points, and Fresno Points have been described elsewhere and these descriptions need not be repeated here.
Their weights have not, though, been given elsewhere. Fenenga has
pointed out the significance of relative weights of projeetile points
(Fenenga, 1953, pp. 302-39.3) as did I some years earlier (Stephenson,
1942, ms. ). Since the Pictograph Shelter arrow points are reasonably
numerous and are good examples of the types as defined, the weights
are given here. These are the weights for the Pictograph Shelter specimens only and would not necessarily apply to all specimens of these
types from other sites. They should, though, apply to most other specimens of the types and to the types in general (Johnson, Suhm, and
Tunnell, 1969., pp. 39,, 94-98).
There are 9,5 specfinens of Perdiz Points (Kelley, 1947 b, P1. 13 a;
Miller and Jelks, 1952, p. 177; Jelks, 1953, pp. 198-9; Suhm, Krieger,
and Jelks, 1954, p. 504) from this site, 16 of which were found in level
III a (P1. 15, u-z). Only ttn-ee specimens of this type were found in
level III b, three in level II a, and three in the random collection.
Weights of these Perdiz Points range from 0.5 to 9..0 grams, with a
mean of 1.3 gn’ams. The Perdiz Point is widespread in Texas and occurs
as a dominant type in sites of the Toyah Focus of the Central Texas
Aspect, the Hem’ietta Focus of north Texas, the tlockport Focus of the
ARROW POINTS:

132

TEXAS

ARC~IEOLOGICAL

k

o

P

SOCIETY

m

q

5

x

oa

cc

dd

ee

PLATE 15. Arrow points from Pictograph Shelter: a-i, Scallorn Points;
j-m, Alba Points; n-t, Fresno Points; u-z Perdiz Points; aa-ee, Cliffton Points.

WHITNEY IIESERVOIR

133

Gulf Coast, and the Wylie and Frankston Foci of east Texas. At the
Belton Reservoir sites (Miller & Jelks, 1952, pp. 185-189) and at the
Blum Rockshelter in the Whitney Reservoir (Jelks, 1953, pp. 198-9)
Perdiz Points were consistently dominant in the uppermost levels of
the stratified deposits. This same situation is true at the Pictograph
Shelter where only three specimens were found below Stratmn III.
The Scallorn Point (Kelley, 1947 b, pl. 13 f; Miller and Jelks, 1952,
pp. 176-7; Jelks, 1953, pp. 198-9; Suhm, Krieger, & Jelks, 1954, p. 506)
is represented in this site by 52 specimens (P1. 15, a-i). They range in
weight from 0.8 to 2.1 grams with a mean of 1.4 grams. The stratigraphie positions of these points is of interest. In the lowest occupation
level, Stratum II a, Scallorn Points are more numerous than any other
type of projectile point, including dart points. In the second level,
Stratum II b, this numerieaI superiority doubles, but in Stratum III a,
increases only slightly, and in the uppermost occupation level, Stratum
III b, the type is extremely rare. Seallorn Points, then, appear in the
site before Perdiz Points and remain dominant throughout the lower
two levels of occupation, while the Perdiz Points begin to appear in
the second level (Stratum II b). In the third level both types are
abundant and both then fade to near absence in the uppermost occupationa! level, Stratum III b, though in the latter level Perdiz Points
are dominant.
The Cliffton Point (Kelley 1947 b, P!. 13 b; Kfieger, 1946, p. 115;
Miller and Jelks, 1952, p. 177; Jelks, 1953, pp. 198-9; Suhm, Krieger,
and Jelks, 1954, p. 496) is represented by 16 speefinens (PI. 15, aa-ee).
They range in weight from 0.8 to 3.8 grams with a mean of 2.3 grams.
The stratigraphic distribution pattern of this type follows that of the
Scallorn Points, with both numerical and relative dominance in Stratuna III a. Only a single specimen was found in Stratum II a. Both the
Cliffton Point and the Scallorn Point are typical of sites of the Central
Texas Aspect and of the Henrietta Focus to the north and the Roekport Focus to the south, but are not common in east Texas.
The fourth arrow point type, the Alba Point (Newell and Krieger,
1949, pp. 161-2; Miller and Jelks, 1952, p. 178; Jelks, 1953, pp. 198-9;
Suhm, Krieger and Jelks, 1954, p. 494) is represented by 15 specimens
(PI. 15, j-m). They range in weight from 0.6 to 1.5 grams with a mean
of 1.0 grams. The stratigraphic distribution of these points is ahnost
identical to that of the Cliffton Point, but is entirely absent in the
uppermost level. The Alba Point is found abundantly in Gibson Aspect
sites in the Caddoan area of east Texas and in central Texas in sites of
the Central Texas Aspeet.

134

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The Fresno Point (Kelley, 1947 b, P1. 13, g; Miller and Jelks, 1952,
P1. 25, 3; Jelks, 1953, pp. 198-9; Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954, p.
498), is represented by 18 specimens illustrating quite well the variation in size and proportion that is typical of the type as defined (P1.
15, n-t). All are small and delicately made but range from nearly
eqnilateral triangles to a long, narrow triangle in outline form. Weights
range from 0.4 to 2.0 grams with a mean of 1.9. grams. Some of these
specimens are probably Granbm7 points (Jelks, 1962). Stratigraphic
distribution of the Fresno Point in the Pictograph Shelter was ahnost
identical to that of the Alba Point, being present in the lower three
levels, dominant in the third level and absent in the uppermost level.
Fresno Points are characteristic of late horizon sites in central Texas
and are found abundantly in sites of the Henrietta Focus. It is a widespread type over most of the general Texas area in late prehistoric and
early historic times.
The types and stTatigraphie positions of the arrow points from the
Pietogr@ Shelter suggest cultural affiliation with the Central Texas
Aspect, and are consistent with the data from nearby sites such as the
Blum tloekshelter and the sites in the Belton Iteservoir area. The
Fresno, Alba, Cliffton and Scallorn points appear earliest, inerease
markedly by the third ocupation level and are absent or nearly so in
the uppermost level. The Perdiz Point, on the other hand, is absent
in the lowest level, appears in the second level, becomes dominant in
the third level and continues on through the latest level, though in
reduced quantity. On this basis the occupation of both parts of Stratum II could be assigned to the people of the Austin Focus and that
of both parts of Stratum III to people of the Toyah Focus. For later
discussion of this sequence see Jelks, 1962.
DAItT POINTS: The larger projectile points, presumably used as tips for
darts and propelled by the atlatl, are represented by 59 specimens,
most of which were recovered fi’om the lower two levels of occupation.
Only 11 specimens were found in Stratum III a and none in StTatum
III b. These points are of four named types and are reasonably good
examples of the types. Ten specimens are too fragmentary to classify.
Only one Ga~3z Point (Newel! and Krieger, 1949, p. 166; Miller and
Jelks, 1952, p. 175; Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954, p. 430) was found
in the site (P1. 16, h). It was recovered from the lowest occupation
level and weighted 4.5 grams. This type of point is common in late
Archaic and early pottery horizons throughout a great part of the
southeastern United States and is pmlieularly characteristic of these
horizons in the Caddoan area. In central Texas it apparently is not so

WHITNEY I~ESEI{VOIR

135

PLATE 16. Dart points from Pictograph Shelter: a-e, Ellis; h, Gary; i-l,
Darl.

136

TEXAS

ABCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

early and Miller & Jelks (1952, p. 186-9) have associated it with the
Toyah Focus in the Belton Reservon" sites. At the Pictograph Shelter
this single Ca17 Point appears well below the earliest Perdiz Points.
Seven Darl Poh~ts (Miller & Jelks, 1952, p. 175; Suhm, Krieger and
Jelks, 1954, p. 414) were found, four of which were in the lowest level,
none in the second level, two in the third level, and none in the upper
level (P1. 16, i-l). They range in weight from 5.0 to 6.5 grams with a
mean of 6.0 grams. These points are clearly associated with the earliest
occupation of the shelter and support Miller and Jelks’ placement of
them within the Austin Focus at sites in the Belton Reservoir.
There are 15 specimens of Ellis Points (NeweI1 & Krieger, 1949, pp.
166-7; Miller & Jelks, 1952, pp. 171-2; Suhm, Krieger & Jelks, 1954, p.
420-22) from the three lowest levels in the site decreasing in numbers
fi’om the lowest level upward (P1. 16, a-e). They range in weight fl’om
4.0 to 8.0 grams with a mean of 4.9 grams. The type is connnon in
Archaic and Early Woodland sites of the eastern United States and is
found in both Edwards Plateau and Central Texas Aspect components.
It is similar to the Ensor Point in many characteristics, but the prominent shoulders and width of the base clearly place the specimens from
this site in the Ellis Point tradition. Miller & Jelks place the Ellis Point
in the Toyah Focus with Perdiz Points, but the evidence here does not
indicate that.
A larger group of 27 specimens is here identified as Matamoros
Points (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954, p. 448). These generally thin,
well-made, unbeveled, triangular points (P1. 17 a-i, k, 1) have not been
previously identified by this name in the Central Texas area, so far as
is known. Many of these are undoubtedly now known as knives, under
the type names of Friday Knives and Cleburne Knives (Jelks, 1962).
They range in weight from 3.9 to 4.4 grams with a mean of 4.1 grams.
The majority of these are from Stratum II b, but occur also in Strata
II a and III a.
The types and stratigraphie positions of the dart points from the
Pictograph Shelter indieate clearly the earlier temporal position for
these mlifacts. They are abundant in the lower two levels, decrease
markedly in the third oecupation level, and are absent in the upper
level. The stratigraphie fill within this site suggests sporadic occupation and it would be difficult to determine whether these larger points
represent late groups of Edwards Plateau Aspect peoples occasionally
occupying the shelter after the Austin Focus people had begun to live
there or whether these dart point forms are a part of the Austin Focus
inventory. In any event, the dart point types are pretty clearly not a

137

"6rHITNEY RESERVOIR

/
t

I

I

d

PLATE 17. Triangular chipped stone artifacts from Pictograph Shelter.

138

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

part of the late occupation when Perdiz Points were the dominant
type.
ImlL~: A total of 10 drills was found in the site. A single specimen
with a thin, beveled shank had been fashioned from a Darl Point and
was found in the lowest occupation level, Stratum II a (P1. 18, h).
Two very cm’efully made, thin drills with narrow shanks had been
fashioned from Perdiz Points (P1. 18, e, f) and were found in Stratum
III a. The other seven are equally well made, delicate and thin but the
expanded bases are only partially chipped and none is made from a
projectile point. These seven were found in the upper three occupation
levels (P1. 18, g).
BLADES: Well made, thin blades are represented by 51 specimens, concentrated mainly in Stratum III a. Most are broken but the general
shape is quite obvious. They are of a general leaf-shape pattern with
rounded base, pointed tip and convex edges (P!. 17, m; 18 i, j), and
range in size from 120 iron. x 42 mm. x 11 ram. to 40 ram. x 20 rain. x
5 ram. Crosssections are all thin and biconvex. Nearly all of them have
been extensively used as indicated by fine flaking along the edges and,
in one instance, the edges were worn smooth. These were probably
used as cutting and scraping tools in the preparation of hides, food,
and the multitude of uses that one today might find for a pocket knife.
Cl~I~S: There are 18 small, rough spalls with chips struck off one or
more edges and a tiny, sharp projection shaped along one side. These
tiny projections of 9, to 5 ram. in length are shal]p-pointed and carefully
chipped on both their edges. There is no question of their being
accidental as they are each well made, while chipping on the rest of the
spa!l is haphazard if present at all. They were probably used as tools
for incising or engraving. Scattered through all occupation levels, there
was no concentration of these gravers in any level.
SI’AI~I~ SCRAPERS: There are 143 small, thin spalls with some chips removed from one or more edges. Most of these specimens have only
tiny flakes removed, suggesting that they were formed by usage rather
than intentional flaking, but others are intentionally flaked, as shown
by dearly patterned, larger flakes removed from one or more edges.
They were present in all levels but, like most of the other specimens,
most abundant in Strata II b and III a.
END SCI~APERS: Five well-made end scrapers of the type often refelTed
to as "snub-nose" were found in Sla’atum III a and one in Stratum III b
(P1. 18, k, I). These are medium size, 54 ram. x 40 ram. x 19 ram. to 31
nnn. x 23 ram. x 6 ram., piano-convex scrapers, with no chipping on

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

139

PLATE 18. Pottery and chipped stone arti£acts £rom Pictograph Shelter:
a, potsherd ~rom vessel no. 1; b, potsherd ~rom vessel no. 6; c, potsherd
from vessel no. 2; d, potsherd £rom vessel no. 4; e-h, drills; i, j, blades; k,
1, end scrapers.

140

TEXAS ARCI-IEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the relatively flat, under-surface, and a prominent central "keel" on the
upper surface. Minor chips have been removed from the two sides and
one end, but large flakes have been removed from the steep, worldng
end. Their presence exclusively in the upper levels suggests theh"
association only with the Perdiz Points here, yet this is a rather widespread type of scraper with a long time range from Archaic to historic
in sites elsewhere.
SIDE SCI:IAPEIlS: Moderately well-made scrapers of oval to long-elliptical
shape numbered 20 and were found about equally distributed through
the several occupation levels. The long, elliptical examples are carefully chipped along one edge only, while the oval examples are
chipped along all edges to some extent but with better chipping on
one of the edges.
CORES: There are 56 small, battered fragments of stone that appear to
be the cores from which spalls were taken to make other stone artifacts. All are roughly broken but none indicate any seeondalT chipping. Probably none of these were used as tools themselves. They
range in size from 2.5 era. x 3.0 era. x 1.5 era. to 7 em. x 6 era. x 4 era.
The blades, gravers, scrapers, and cores, are all of non-diagnostic
types and eannot, on the basis of type, be assigned to any particular
culture complex. Their assignment to a complex can be made only on
the basis of stratigraphie position within this site. Like the projectile
points and drills, they are all made from readily available, local flints,
cherts, chalcedonies, and jaspers.
CROUND STONE

Artifacts of ground, pecked and battered stone were not abundant
in the site but occurred in all four levels of occupation. Hammerstones
are the most numerous group, 34 specimens, but were all simple, river
cobbles, with one or more battered surfaces. Most of them are made
from quartzite but three are chert nodules. One specimen has a shaIlow pit battered into one surface. Many are fire-cracked and probably
served as hearthstones as wel! as hammerstones. They range in size
from that of a golf ball to that of a baseball and were found in all
occupation levels but were most abundant in Sh’atum III a.
There were eleven manos, or fragments of manos, recovered. Seven
of these, all made from very hard, fine-grained sandstone were clearly
used with a back-and-forth motion and shaped by peeking and grinding on all surfaces to a generally oval shape. They are all smal!, onehand, manos. Two of the four unshal~ed manos are of similar, hard
sandstone and two are of quartzite. These four were all clearly used

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

141

with a rotalT motion. All of the unshaped manos were found in Stratum II b and the shaped manos were from all three of the uppelTnost
levels.
Twenty" small fragments of limestone and sandstone slabs were
found throughout the several occupation levels. None was whole and
the Dagments are 1.0 to 2.5 era. thick. Most of them are 3 to 7 cm.
wide by 6 to 9 em. long, though three examples are more than twice
this size but only 2.0 to 2.8 em. thick. Three specimens have slightly
concave, well worn, flat surfaces and suggest usage as grinding slabs.
Two have abraded, flat surfaces suggesting use as whetstones. Most of
these slabs are fire-blackened and probably were broken by heat. They
are all artifacts, as some grinding or shaping marks can be seen on all
of them, but with the exceptions noted I cannot suggest the use to
which they may have been put.
Four small, scratched, cut, and ground lumps of soft hematite were
found in the middle two levels. These may be the remains of the pigment from which the paint was made to paint the petroglyphs on the
shelter wall. The extremely small quantity of hematite is sml)rising as
this sort of pigment is commonly found in sites in this area in much
greater quantity, even when no obvious use of it, such as the pietographs, is to be seen.
ANTLER AND BONE

The only antler artifacts recovered were 8 tine tips cut or broken on
the proximal end and worn smooth on the distal end (P1. 19, m, n). All
of these were probably used as flaking tools for chipping stone allifacts and were recovered from the upper three occupational levels.
Bone artifacts include 33 specimens. Two of these are flaking tools
made from deer ulna and extensively used, as the tip is worn quite
short (P1. 19, h). Four other flaking tools are made of well polished
bone splinters (P1. 19, a, o). Twelve bone awls with extremely sharp
points were found. One is made from a deer cannon bone; six are bone
splinters probably from deer leg bones (P1. 19, e, e, f); one is a cannon bone from a small anfinal, perhaps a rabbit (PI. 19, d); one is an
ulna from a similarly smal! animal; one is a garfish bone; and two are
very tiny bone splinters the size of knitting needles. All are well
polished and show extreme usage, especially near the shal~) tips. Five
beads made from bird bone are of varying styles. One is a long, thin
bead with well polished, cut ends, 80 ram. long by 5 ram. in diameter
(PI, 19, g); another is a similar bead but only 33 ram. long; two are
short beads with cut but unpolished ends, 30 mm. long bv 12 ram. in
diameter (PI. 19, p ) ; and one is a small fragile bead with wel! polished

142

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

PLATE 19. Bone, wood, antler, and shell artifacts from Pictograph Shelter:
a. bone flaker; b, spatuahe bone object; c-f, bone awls; g, long bone bead;
h, ulna awl; i, bone tab from which a fishhook had been made; j-k, perforated Bulimldus shells; l, wooden fire drill; m, n, antler tine flakers; o, bone
flaker; p, short bone bead; q, bone fishhook.

WHITNEY I~SERVOIR

143

ends, 11 ram. long and 6 ram. in diameter. A thin, spatulate bone nlade
from a section of deer rib with the eaneelous material ground off was
found in two pieces, five feet apart but both in level III a (P1. 19,
b-b’).
In the lower part of Stratmn III a, and in association with several
fish vertebrae, a single, well-made fishhook was found (PI. 19, q). It
is 30 ram. long with an evenly curved, sharp-pointed hook. The end of
the shank is encircled with a small groove for attaching a line. The
whole specimen is carefully carved and highly polished. The style of
the specimen and slight cutting marks on the curved portion indicate
that it was made from a flat bone splinter by cutting a long, oval hole
in the flat side of the bone, then cutting around one end and side of
the hole to form a slender, curved hook. The almost finished article
was then cut or broken off the parent bone and completed. This suggested method of manufacture is substantiated by the finding, in the
same occupation level, of just such a parent bone splinter from which
a fishhook had been cut (P1. 19, i). Another similar parent bone with
only the long, oval hole cut in its flat side was found in level II a.
There were six other cut and polished bones from the site. These
have random cut marks on them or polished areas or both, but none of
them appear to be a part of a finished artifact. They are rib sections
and fragments of leg bones.
SHELL

Shells of the landsnail Bulimulus dealbatus mooreanus (Pfeiffer)
were present by the thousand in this shelter. About 10 percent of these
shells had a small, lateral hole in the larger end near the opening (P1.
19, j, k). The hole is not of a uniform size in all specimens but usually
is about 3 ram. in diameter. Perforated specimens were found in the
three lower occupation levels but not in Stratmn III b. Perforated
specimens were usually found in clusters, though individual specimens
oecmwed at random mnong the unperforated shells. These perforated
snail shells may have been used as beads to be strung as necklaces or
to decorate clothing. If so, the people used an unusual quantity of
beads. An actua! count was not made but a conservative estimate
would be several thousand. An alternate suggestion is that the perforations were made as a means of extracting the meat of the snail.
These snails live today on and around low bushes near the shelter
and in an attempt to test the idea that the holes were made to remove
the meat, I gathered a quantity of live BulimuIus. Uncooked there was
no apparent way to remove the meat without thoroughly crushing the
shell. A small hole in the side of the shell was no help. Boiled, the

144

TEXAS AI~CHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

animal does not voluntarily leave the shell but after only two minutes
in boiling water the meat can easily be extracted with the aid of any
short, pointed instrument. (Perhaps the sharp-pointed bone awls found
in the site were used for this purpose). By making a hole in the side
of the shell, the boiled meat may also be extracted but with no greater
ease than by probing the natural opening. I roasted some of the snails
in the coals and cooked some on a flat slab of rock. The dry-cooked
snails cooked in either of these two ways reacted the same. After heating for 10 to 20 seconds the snail made a loud "pop" and began to
exude a foamy, sticky fluid. This lasted about 30 seconds and then the
meat began to burn. Within 2 to 3 minutes the meat was burned to
charcoal inside the shell. Immediately after the "pop" the meat could
be easily removed with or without a perforation, but not after it began
to burn. I had intended to eat a few of these snails but they smelled
so bad after they were cooked that I put aside the idea. These experiments actually proved little but did suggest that the best way to extract the meat was by boiling and that the hole was not necessary for
the extraction of the meat.
Fresh water mussel shells were utilized as artifacts by three types of
alteration. The majority of the altered specimens were roughened
along one or more edges of the lip (P!. 20, a-e). This roughening
appears to have resulted from extensive abrasion, perhaps in use as a
digging tool held in the hand or perhaps as a scraper for woodworking
or dehairing hides. Some mussel shells were worn smooth along one or
more edges of the lip (P1. 20, f, g) in a manner that would suggest
extensive rubbing. Perhaps these were used in leather working. A few
specimens were perforated with large or small holes near the hinge or
at the thickest part of the shell, but had no apparent alteration along
the lip (P1. 20, h-i). Neither the hole nor the shell itself was large
enough to suggest use as a halted hoe and probably these were perforated for suspension or ornaments. Like the snail shells, the mussel
shells were absent in the upper level. They occurred most abundantly
in the lowest level where the stone-lined eists and largest hearths
were found, and decreased in quantity in levels II b and III a. The
association with the eists and hearths strengthens the suggestion of use
of those with roughened edges as digging tools.
Since these mussels still live in the nearby river, I gathered some
for experiment. Both gn’een shells and ancient shells from the shelter
were used for a couple of days, instead of the trowel, as digging tools.
I also spent several hours rubbing the hair off an old piece of deer
hide with one of these green shells. As digging tools held in the hand

145

~rHITNEY IIESEIIVOIR

b

e

g

i
h
P~ATE 20. Mussel shell artifacts from Pictograph Shelter: a-e, tools with
roughened edges; f-g, tools with smoothed edges; h-i, perforated shells.

146

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

these shells worked very well and the lip edges of the green shells
wore away with chipped and roughened edges, resembling, almost
exactly, the roughened edge shells from the site. When they finally
broke, after extensive use, they broke diagonally across the grain as
the prehistorie ones had. The ancient shells used in this experiment
broke with the grain of the shell and were really too fragile to serve
very well as a digging tool. The shell used to remove the hair of the
piece of deer hide wore down to a smooth edge along the lip and was
faceted at one end by constant regular strokes back and forth over the
hide. A specimen was thus produced that nearly duplicated the prehistoric shells with smoothed edges.
"~VOOD

In all levels, miscellaneous cut sticks of juniper, willow, greasewood,
and other woods were found. Most of these are twigs with one pointed
end and one end rounded off by numerous rough cuts. Several are
rather well made and resemble the bone awls described above. One
is a cut piece of eottomvood bark and several are just cut sticks with
both ends rounded off by rough cuts. One specimen has a heavy,
frayed end as if it had been used as a brush of some sort. Six specimens are large pegs and are the only ones that appear to have been
cut with a metal tool. These six were all found in levels III a and III
b and probably are the pegs used by early White trappers to fasten
their traps, having been driven down from Stratum IV or from the top
of Stratum III b.
Two fragments of a fire drill set were found in Stratum II a. One is
a short twig, 12 mm. in diameter, with one end smoothed and charred
and had apparently been used as a drill for a fire set. The other is a
similar twig of 14 ram. diameter with a convex, smoothed, charred end
that also had been used apparently as a fire drill. In addition, this
second specimen had also been used as a hearth for a fire drill set. It
had a circular, lateral hole drilled to a depth of 3/4 the thickness of the
twig at a point 5 era. from the charred end. This lateral hole has
evenly vertical sides, is perfectly round with a concave bottom, is 11
ram. in dimneter, and the sides and bottom are both evenly charred
(P1. 19, 1). The other drill fragment fits perfectly into this hearth.
~fISCELLANEOUS

Within the uppermost occupation level, Stratum III b, and intrusive
from it into the level below, Stratum III a, were found 14 objects that
may be attributable to the White-contaet period in the cenh’al Brazos
Valley. Any or all of these could have been used in the shelter by the
latest Indian oeeupants but could also have been brought there by

WHITNEY P,ESERVOIR

147

White residents of the valley seeking shelter, making their trapping
rounds or visiting the site for any of many other purposes.
A single iron object, too disintegrated for identification, was the only
metal object found. It was found in the top of Stratum III b. A tuft of
bison hair, perhaps from a buffalo robe, was found in Stratum III a.
Eight small, corn cob fragments were found in Stratum III b. All seem
to be small, 8-row cobs of the kind raised in the valley by the early
settlers as well as by the Indians of the Hainai village visited by
Itoemer in 1846 (t~oemer, 1935). A small gourd fragment with eleven
tiny, random punctations in the outer surface was found in Stratmn
III b. The wooden pegs cut with a metal knife or axe have already
been mentioned.
Textiles are represented by a loosely twisted cord of homespun wool
and two fragments of cloth. The cord is 6 strands of 2-ply, loosely
twisted, woolen thread of a faded red color and is 125 ram. long. The
two cloth fragments, each about 25 ram. square, appear to have origin;
ally been a single piece. The warp elements are of a heavy, brown,
woolen yarn alternating with similar yarn of a bright blue color. The
edge of the cloth is formed by the warp elements being doubled back
into the cloth. The weft is of a medium-fine, white, wool thread,
loosely woven in a simple "under-over" stitch. Attached to each flagment is a small piece of very fine-mesh cloth of white wool thread. On
one specimen this fine cloth is actual]}, a part of the heavier yarn cloth
and may be a border strip. On the other it is attached by a double
loop of coarse white thread. Both pieces of cloth appear to be homespun as the threads flay at the ends in the manner of homespun. No
doubt these three textile fragments originated in the home of one of
the early settlers in the valley.
UN~VOItKED SHELL AND BONE

The only shells found in the site were those of landsnails and fresh
water mussels. Samples of both were collected from all levels and
every effort was made to include all possible varieties present, in the
samples. These were sent to the U. S. National Museum and identified
by Dr. Joseph P. E. Morrison and Dr. Harold A. Itehder. Despite the
great quantities of land snails present in the site, only two species are
represented. These are Bulimulus dealbatus mooreanus (Pfeiffer) and
Polygyra mooreanus (Pfeiffer). Nearly all are Bulimulus and only an
occasional Polygyra shell was present. Both are native to the area
and still thrive in the uplands above the shores of the Whitney
tleservoir.
The flesh water mussel shells, also abundant in the site, are repre-

148

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

sented by a larger variety of species, all of which are native to the
immediate area and many of which are still growing in the Brazos
River. The dominant species found in the shelter are Elliptio berlandieri (Lea), Quadrula houstonensis (Lea), and Lampsilis faUaciosa
(Smith). Others present include Proptera berla~dieri (Lea), Potamilus purpuratus ( Lamark ) , Amblema perplicata (Conrad), Leplodea
fragilis (Rafinesque ), and Unomerus Tetralasmus (Say). Presumably
all of these were used as food and in some instances the shells were
used also as artifacts. It is of significance that both snails and mussels
were most abundant in the lowest level and decreased in the upper
levels until only a few snails and no nmssels were found in the uppermost occupation level.
The unworked bone material was examined by Dr. Theodore E.
White, then paleontologist on the River Basin Surveys staff. His identifications are listed in Table 6. The number of individuals indicated is
minimal and is based upon the repeated occurrence of a single element
of a species, or the occurrence of elements in findspots separated by
stratigraphic levels. All occupation levels are represented and no trend
toward the use of any particular species was seen from level to level.
Deer, obviously were most numerous and it is surprising that so few
antelope and bison bones were recovered. Presumably most of the animals represented by these bones were used as food by the inhabitants
of the shelter, though some such as the gophers, frogs, and snakes may
well have themselves been fiahabitants of the site.
SUMIk4ARY AN’D INTERPRETATION

The Pictograph Shelter is a moderate-sized, natural rock shelter
facing southwest in a partly exposed limestone outcrop on the north
side of the Brazos River Valley in Hill County, Texas. It is 120 feet
above the normal river level and 3,000 feet from the river. A good view
of several square miles of the valley may be had from near the mouth
of the shelter. The site was recorded in the River Basin Survey files in
the summer of 1947, at which trine extensive test trenching was accomplished. It was again visited during parts of ttn’ee months in 1950
with a full crew and approximately 80% of the total shelter fill was
excavated.
The deposits of fill in the floor of the shelter ranged up to 80" in
depth and were divisible into six stratigraphic levels numbered from
bottom to top, I, II a, II b, III a, III b and IV. StTatum I was a sterile,
pre-occupation deposit. Strata II and III were occupational deposits,
each with two subdivisions. Stratum IV was a post-occupational de-

WHITNEY I:IESEI:WOIR

149

TABLE 6
Species Identified From Unworked Bone Remains
Pictograph Shelter
Species
Canis
( dog, wolf, coyote)
Procyon
( raccoon )
Lepus

Elements

Individuals

1 mandible, I vertebra, 1 metapodial, 5 teeth

2

2 teeth, 1 ulna, 1 maxila, 1 mandible

1

1 mandible, 2 ulna, 1 scapula

2

( Jackrabbit )
Mephitis

1 maxila

1

( skunk )
Terrapene
( box turtle )

1 pelvis, 2 humeri, 5 scapula, 2 plasteron,
12 carapace, 1 pubis

12

Am!Ida
(soft shell turtle )
Odocoileus
( deer )

1 skull, 1 pubis, 2 caracoid, 2 plasteron,
10 carapace, 1 endoplasteron
22 mandibles, 15 hoofs, 17 teeth, 6 antlers,
2 vertebra, 7 maxilla, 11 metapodials,
5 humeri, 15 scapula, 7 radii, 1 axis,
3 astraguli, 2 tibia, 2 ulna, 4 phalanx,
2 pelvis, 1 calcaneum, 1 atlas, 10 femur

5

Antilocapra
( antelope )
Bison
( bison )
Pseudemys
(water turtle)
Syluilagus
( cottontail )
Geomys
( pocket gopher)
Pituophis
( snake )
Species ?
(bird)
Species ?
(fish)
Species ?
(frog)

4 mandibles, 1 tibia, 1 calcaneum, 3 teeth,
2 hoofs

5

1 incisor

1

i carapace

1

2 mandibles, i tibia, 3 scapula, 1 calcaneum

3

2 mandibles

2

4 vertebra, 12 ribs

2

2 metatarsals, 1 scapula, 1 radius, 1 sacrum,
1 caracoid, 2 phalanx, 1 humerous

3

16 vertebra, 1 skull, many scales, fins, and ribs

4

1 metapodial, 2 ilium

2

32

posit. Features such as prepared fire-hearths, slab-lined cists, ash lenses
and an infant burial were recorded in various parts of StTata II and
III. Artifacts of some rather distinctive types and some non-distinctive
types found in the fill of Strata II and III numbered 846, including 21
items of White provenience. The stTatigraphic, artifactual and other
evidence recovered from the Pictograph Shelter provides data for some

1~0

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

rather specific interpretations regarding the culture history of the site
and, by extension, of the central Brazos valley area. Many sorts of data
are entirely lacking or are only inclusively suggested by the remains found in the site, e.g., evidence of general burial customs, evidence of varieties of clothing, use of basketry or matting, etc. Some
sorts of data, though present, are not as clear-cut as one would like,
e.g., it would be preferable to find certain specific artifact types associated with only one stratigraphie level or another. However, such remains within any areheologieal site can never be expected to be perfeetly complete and the archeologist can only interpret the data he
finds and present it for what it appears most likely to be. The data
from this site have been interpreted as detailed below on the basis of
evidence which is more complete than is often the ease in roekshelter
sites. Even so, much of the interpretation is speculative and will be
subject to confirmation or change with further data from other sites.
The Pictograph Shelter, formed many millenia ago as a rive>
scoured cavity, lay idle and unoccupied by man until some time after
the beginning of the Christian era. During this long period an accumulation of finely powdered lfinestone, fallen from the ceiling and
sidewalls of the shelter, built up to a depth of two to three feet over
the floor. About the trine this deposit (Stratum I) was beginning to
accumulate, a huge rock fell from the ceiling to form a partial barrier
in the front part of the shelter behind which the deposits aecunmlated.
But that was long ago and does not directly concern the problem at
hand except that this sterile deposit behind the large rock provided a
usable floor for the first human inhabitants of the site.
Just when the first inhabitants of the Pictograph Shelter moved in
is not known. Probably it was some time during the latter part of the
first millenium after the beginning of the Christian era. It is certain
they moved into a rather pleasant and well protected home. A good
view of the surrounding countryside was to be had and the floor of
the shelter was an irregular saucer-like area behind the protective
barrier of a large rock. The overhanging ceiling and constricting opening provided excellent shelter from the elements. Defense against
predatory animals and unfriendly humans would have been easy. This
would have been an especially ideal winter home, but not so well
suited to summer use as it faced the blazing summer sun. Whether or
not the early occupants used the shelter only in winter and camped
out in the open in the summer is speculative. There are many open
sites, though, in the viefility that could well have been used for such
summer camps, e.g., 41-96D7-9, 10, 16, 17, !8, 19, 27, 38 and others.

WHITNEY I~ESEI~VOIR

151

In any event those first inhabitants apparently were small groups who
occupied the site sporadically over a fairly extensive period of trine. An
extensive time is suggested by the depth of up to two feet of fill in
Stratum II a, and by the composition of that fill. The powdered ceiling rock required considerable time to decompose. The fire-hearths
and ash lenses situated at valTfing levels within the fill indicate sporadic occupation, and that this was seasonal is suggested by the fact
that the lenses are large as would be needed for warmth in winter.
There is no suggestion of continuous occupation. The size of the group
living here at any one time probably was small, perhaps a family or
two. This is postulated on the basis of the small number of ash lenses
and their location at different elevations within the fill. Apparently
only one or two fires were in use at any one time. Also had the group
been a large one, more refuse and material remains would probably
have been left behind.
These people depended principally upon gathering for their food
supply and secondarily upon hunting. Land snails apparently constituted a main item of diet and no doubt were gathered within the
immediate vicinity of the shelter. Freshwater nmssels collected from
the nearby river were also extensively used and the principal game
hunted appears to have been deer. A multitude of other animals such
as rabbits, turtles, antelope and birds were also used when available,
and no doubt belTies, seeds, roots, etc. were gathered, though positive
evidence of the latter is lacking. It was for short-term storage of these
food products, and probably other things as well, that the slab-lined
eists were built by these people. For cooking these foods, rock-lined
fire-hearths were carefully prepared, suggesting roasting as the main
cooking method.
Weapons included the bow and arrow, as small, lightweight projeetile points were by no means rare in this level. It is speculated that
the Mlatl was also in use at this time as much larger and heavier
projectile points were also found in similar quantities. Other chipped
stone tools and implements included small, roughly made scrapers, an
abundance of heavy, crude, core-type scrapers presumably used for
hide preparation, a few well-made, oval or triangular blades, perhaps
for skinning, and large, stone drills. Bone and antler tools were rarely
used by these people as only a single such tool, a bone awl, was found.
It may be postulated from this that any sort of tailored clothing was
lacking.
Containers of some sort must have been used for food gathering and
preparation and a number of other purposes, but what sort of contain-

TEXAS

AECHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

ers these might have been is unknown. No pottery was found in this
level and likewise no fragments of basketxy, matting or hide containers
were found. This latter seems a bit odd as vegetal remains, though not
abundant, were preserved in all occupational levels of the shelter. It
is often automatically presmned that peoples without pottery used
basketry for containers. Here, however, where basketry could have
been preserved ff present, none was found. It may be that accidents of
preservation eliminated the finding of basketry remains. It may also
be that in orderly abandonment of the site all of the baskets were
taken with their owners when they departed. It is more likely, however, that there simply was no basketry. The lack of bone awls would
also tend to support this latter view.
Ornamentation was apparently not an important feature of these
people’s lives as fragments of pigment were lacking in this level and,
except for perforated snail and mussel shells, no stone, bone, shell or
other ornaments were found. The perforated snail shells may have
been used as ornaments and strung as necklaces but this is not certain.
Likewise the perforated mussel shells may have served as pendants.
Many mussel shells were used for scraping or digging purposes and
show extreme abrasion along the lip edge. Perhaps these were used for
the digging of storage eists and excavation of pits for fire hearths.
Other mussel shells with extremely smoothed lips must have been used
for more delicate work such as fleshing of the inner side of hides or
removing the hair from hides.
The picture then may be postulated, with some reservations, of
small groups of people occupying the Pictograph Shelter sporadically
over a long period of time. These people subsisted on snails and mussels and to a lesser extent on deer and other animals, as wel! as the
usual belxies, seeds, nuts and other vegetal products. They stored
things in slab-lined eists, cooked on stone-filled hearths, used the bow
and arrow and perhaps the atlatl. They wore untailored clothing, little
or no ornamentation, had no potteldz and possibly no basketldz. The
material culture as a whole was simple and limited and such as would
be expected of a people who were highly mobile and nomadic in their
general culture pattern. There is no evidence from the site to suggest
that at any time these occupants abandoned the shelter abruptly.
Apparently they came and went as the normal needs of the times
dictated. Even upon tl~eir last abandomnent of the shelter (end of
Stratum II a) they left in an orderly manner, emptying their caches
and eists and ealTying off whatever material possessions they had.
At some time while the Pictograph Shelter was abandoned for a

WHITNEY I~ESERVOIR

153

long enough period for a layer of leaves and trash to accumulate on
the floor, not necessarily more than a season or two but probably
several seasons, the shelter caught fire. A thin layer of burned material
extending over the majority of the floor area of the shelter was found
and this was interpreted as the dividing line between Strata II a and
II b. The fill above this line of carbonized material and be!ow the next
change in composition of the fill is an occupation zone 1½ to 2 feet
in thickness, designated as Stratum II b.
The occupants of Stratmn II b may have been ethnically the same as
those of Stratum II a with stylistic and other changes taking place
within the culture. These people, as their predecessors, must have
occupied the site sporadically as small groups but for a shorter period
of time. The shorter time span is indicated by a shallower fill, an increased amount of ash and proportionate decrease in powdered ceiling
rock in the fill, and by smaller but more abundant ash lenses. The increased number of ash lenses and an increased artifact inventory suggest a more intensive occupation.
Subsistence during Stratum II b times continued to be primarily on
land snails and freshwater mussels as well as upon deer and other
game animals. Vegetable products such as berries, seeds, fruits, roots,
etc. were gathered as an impol~ant supplement. Snails, however,
appear to have been a considerably less important item of diet at this
time than before. Vegetal remains are much more abundant, now,
suggesting a greater dependence upon that type of food than before.
No storage pits or slab-lined cists were in use by these people. The
practice of building stone-filled cooking hearths was still in vogue but
the hearths were notably smMler and not so abundant here as in the
earlier occupation nor were they so carefully prepared. Probably some
changes in cooking practices may be implied by this. The decrease of
molluscan food and increase of vegetable food remains would support
such an implication.
Weapons still may have included the atlatI but by far the most
important was the bow and arrow as the small, lightweight projectile
points are nearly three times as abundant as the larger dart points.
Chipped stone scraping tools were of the same general types as before
but more numerous. Small, finelv chipped stone drills, often reshaped
from small arrow points, were used by the Stratum II b people. These
delicate drills may imply the beginning of the use of sewn skins for
clothing or containers. The increase in the importance of vegetable
foods is sh’ongly supported by the appearance of well made and carefully shaped manos and an increased number of the flat stone slabs

154

TEXAS AI~CHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

some of which may represent grinding slabs. Bone and antler tools
were extensively used. Antler tines and deer ulna flakers were used to
chip stone artifacts and bone awls were in use suggesting again that
hides were being sewn for clothing or containers. Still no evidence of
basketlT was found and the people did not make pottery. They did,
however, have some pottery vessels which they received in trade from
peoples of Caddoan affiliation. These consisted of small cooking bowls
and bottles.
Ornamentation appears to have taken on more importance at this
time as a few scratched pieces of hematite pigment were found, suggesting the painting of face or body, the painting of pictographs, or
colored decoration of possessions. It is quite possible that the pietographs on the shelter wall belong with this period. Perforated mussel
shells were still in use and beads were made from bird bones and
perhaps snail shells as well. Mussel shell scrapers with roughened
edges were still used as were those with extremely smoothed edges.
Fire was produced by a fire drill and hearth, but whether this was a
bow drill, hand drill or other type is not known. Only a fragment of
a hearth stick and two tiE fragments of the drill were found.
During the time of occupation of Stratum II b, as during the earlier
period, there is no evidence of an abrupt abandonment or any catastrophic disturbance in the life of the people. At some time, however,
they did abandon the site for a considerable period. This period is of
unknown duration but certainly long enough for an accumulation of
leaves and other trash an inch or two thick (even after extreme cornFaction) to form over the shelter floor and constitute a dividing line
between Strata II b and III a. The fill above this layer of leaves is of
markedly different composition than that below and is an occupation
zone 1-1g feet in thickness designated Stratum III. The lower twothirds of this sh’atum is distinguished from the upper third by both
material and cultural content. A poorly distinguishable line of demarcation separating the two can usually be seen in the profiles.
The occupants of Stratum III a appear to have been of a different
ethnic group than those who preceded them in the occupation of the
Pictograph Shelter. Their period of occupation was much shorter but
more intensive and probably the occupation unit was larger at this
time than before. The artifact inventory of Stratum III a is nearly
equal to that of all other strata combined. Yet there is no indication of
continuous occupation at this time and the data suggests a contfimation
of a sporadic type of occupation. The principal subsistence of these
people was not on mollusks but rather on nuts, fruits, seeds, berries

WIIITNEY I~ESEBVOIR

155

and other vegetable products and upon deer and small animals. Bison
may have been eaten, though rarely, as a bison tooth and a tuft of
bison haft" were found. Snail and nmssel shells are not abundant in
the fill of this level but vegetal remains are extremely so and the bones
of deer and small animals increase in quantity over those in the lower
levels. Ffi’e hearths, prepared with rocks, are few and small. Individual
ash lenses are fewer but much larger than in the levels below. One fire
hearth in this level was prepared of clay rather than rock.
Weapons of the period were primarily the bow and arrow with
probably complete abandonment of the atlatl as the small arrow points
were, here, abundant and the larger dart points rare. Other chipped
stone artifacts in use were a multitude of scrapers of various nondistinctive sorts but more carefully made than the earlier scrapers, and
small, finely made, chipped stone drills. Chipped stone knives of good
worknmnship were abundant in this level and suggest more emphasis
on hide preparation and usage in cutting vegetal foods and meat. Still
no evidence of basketry was found but pottery was used which had
been obtained in trade from peoples of Caddoan affiliation. Flat slabs
of stone, probably used for food grinding, were found but manos were
rare. Ornamentation was of some importance to these people as
scratched pieces of hematite pigment were found as well as beads of
bird bone and perforatect mussel shells. The emphasis on ornaments
was not as strong as in the occupation below, however, and the hematite may have been used for painting the pictographs during Stratum
III a times. Bone and antler tools were used but, like ornaments, were
fewer in this level than in the level below. One item of interest is the
use of bone fishhooks. One specimen was found together with a nmnber of fish bones, and a blank from which such a fishhook was made
was also found in this level. Mussel shell digging or scraping tools
were used as were mussel shell fleshers.
The thin deposit of occupational debris that forms the upper portion
of Stratmn III represents a period of abandonment by the prehistoric
peoples and of very slight occupation by historic people. The occupation of Stratum III b appears to have been one of little more than
overnight camps as artifacts are few and features indicating camps of
long duration are absent. A few scrapers, blades, arrow points, and
potsherds were found, as well as an occasional tool of bone or antler
and these were all of types that were dominant in the level beneath.
Here, though, were found the only articles of White origin to be seen
in the site-corn-cobs, iron, cloth, string, and wooden pegs that had
been cut with metal tools. These m’e the kinds of things that a trapper

156

’tEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

or rancher might leave behind while occasionally visiting the shelter
rather than the things that would suggest Indian possessions. None of
the usual Indian trade items such as glass beads, jingles, scraps of
sheet metal or gun parts were found. I prefer, therefore, to attribute
these White objects to local trappers of the late 19th century.
The cultural affiliation and cln-ono!ogical position of the prehistoric
~peoples who occupied the four cultural levels in the Pictograph Shelter is clearly that of a single culture complex, at least on the level of an
Aspect, and of considerable duration. There can be little doubt that
the entire occupation represents the Central Texas Aspect (Suhm,
Krieger, and Jelks, 1954, pp. 112-117) and that at least several centuries elapsed between the earliest occupation and the latest. We can,
though, do better than that in identifying and dating the occupation.
In 1959 and 1960, the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, under
the direction of Edward B. Jelks and assisted by members of the Dallas Archeo!ogical Society, excavated the Kyle Site, a stratified rock
shelter site only a mile or so downstream from the Pictograph Shelter
in the Whitney Reservoir Basin. Jelks’ report of this work (Jelks, 1962)
is of major significance because he took the opportunity to devote 16
pages of it to a definition of the Central Texas Aspect and to identify
two loci within that aspect, the Austin Focus and the Toyah Focus.
These aspect and focus designations are, of course, not new. We have
been dealing with them since the early 1940’s when J. Charles Kelley
first suggested their existence (Kelley, 1947a; 1947b). Jelks’ contribution is, on the basis of more ample data and clearer stratigraphy, a
more thorough description of the units and temporal ordering of the
two {oci within the aspect.
The similalSty of the materials from the Pictograph Shelter, and their
stratigraphie relationships within that site, to the materials and stratigraphy from the Kyle Site is striking. It is clear that the same eultm’a!
complexes are involved and in the same relationships to each other.
On the basis of this close similarity there can be little hesitancy in
assigning the two lower occupation levels, Strata II a and II b, to the
Austin Focus and the upper two occupation levels, Strata III a and
III b to the Toyah Focus at the Pictograph Shelter.
There are no Carbon-14 dates from the Pictograph Shelter. There
are, though, six Carbon-14 dates from similar materials at the Kyle Site
and one from similar materials at the Blum Rockshelter (Jelks, 1962,
pp. 96-98). The Blum Rockshelter sample is from the deepest part of
the Austin Focus occupation and dates at A.D. 551 ----- 120 years. Three
of the Kyle Site samples are from the Austin Focus levels at that site

WHITNEY ]RESERVOIR

157

and date at 561 _+ 150 ye0a’s to A.D. 971 __+ 170 years. The other tln’ee
Kyle Site samples are from the Toyah Focus levels and date at A.D.
1276 -+- 165 years to A.D. 1561 _--_ 130 years. Thus there are dates for
the Austin Focus suggesting occupation between the fifth and twelfth
centuries A.D. when the plus or minus factor is included in the range.
There are dates from the Toyah Focus suggesting occupation between
the twelfth and seventeenth centuries A.D., also including the plus or
minus range. There is nothing in the data from the Pictograph Shelter
that would conflict with placing the two major strata at that site within
those trine ranges.
The Austin Focus occupations, represented by Strata II a and II b,
may be placed within the time range of the fifth to the twelfth centuries A.D. This was a long series of sporadic occupations as is indicated by the rather extensive deposits of non-cultural materials (30
inches) and sparse deposits of cultural refuse within the two parts of
the stratum. As a guess-and I emphasize that this is only a guess-I
think that the latter portion of this time range is represented because
there appears to be some blending of Austin Focus traits into the occupations above, that are represented by Stratum III a. Perhaps these
occupations began some time around the ninth or tenth centuries A.D.
and lasted for two or tln’ee centuries.
The Toyah Focus occupations, represented by Strata III a and III b,
may be placed within the trine range of the twelfth to the seventeenth
centuries A.D. This appears to have been a shorter but more intensive
series of sporadic occupations as is indicated by the shallower deposits
of non-cultural material (15 inches) and the more abundant cultural
refuse within Stratum III a. Again as a guess, I would suggest that the
earlier portion of the Toyah Focus trine span is indicated. Perhaps
these occupations began about the hvelfth century A.D. and lasted for
a century or two. The scraps of White contact material found in Stratum III b can almost certainly be attl~ibuted to Caucasians of the latter
half of the 19th century. Stratum IV is the goat, sheep, and cattle
manure layer covering all of the other deposits in the shelter and
del-iving from the first half of the 20th century.
THE BUZZARD SHELTER (41-26D7-12)
INTRODUCTION
This long, low overhang in the lfinestone bluffs along the north side
of the Brazos River Valley was first recorded in the archeological
records during the initial survey of the Whitney Reservoh- in 1947.
Hidden h’om view by a heavy growth of underbrush and difficult of

158

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

access, its existence was not generally known to the local residents of
the area. It was named from the families of turkey buzzards that occupied it at the trine of the 1947 survey and was assigned the nunlerieal
designation 41-26D7-12 ( Fig. 5).
DESCRIPTION OF THE SITE

The Buzzard Shelter is situated in an extension of the same limestone outcrop along the northeastern edge of the Brazos River Valley
as the Pictograph Shelter and is just over a half mile southeast of that
site. A short, broad, side canyon bisects the limestone bluff between
the two rockshelters. It is seven miles, by road, northwest of the town
of Whitney and seventeen river miles above the Whitney Dam (Fig.
4). At an elevation of approximately 590 feet above mean sea level,
110 feet above the normal river level and 70 feet above the average
level of the ~4de valley floodplain, the Buzzard Shelter is a deeply
scoured concavity of irregular, elongate shape and roughly hemispherical cross-section in this Fredericksburg limestone bluff. Like the Pictograph Shelter, it has been subjected to aeolian and seepage decomposition of the surface rock with a consequent flaking off and powdering
of the bedrock and occasional breaking off of large pieces of the bedrock. This erosional waste has been deposited, in part, on the shelter
floor but a large percentage of it has spilled out over the edge of the
front of the shelter to form a major talus slope (Fig. 11 B). This talus
slope extends for several hundred yards to either side of the shelter
along the base of the bluff. A heavy growth of juniper grows up from
the valley floor to the top of the talus slope. Above that elevation the
limestone outcrop forms a sheer blmff approximately 40 feet in height,
on top of which the vegetation is again heavy (P1. 22 a).
Along the upper edge of the talus slope and immediately to the
southeast of the Buzzard Shelter is a series of seven similar but smaller
shelters at the same elevation. Four of these were too small and shallow to have been occupied by man, and brief tests in them provided
no evidence of occupation. The other three were smaller and shallower
than the Buzzard Shelter, but tests in them provided evidence of brief,
sporadic occupation. These latter were assigned the numerical designations 41-26D7-13, 14, and 15, respectively (Fig. 4).
The Buzzard Shelter, facing to the southwest, overlooks the outer
bend of a broad meander of the Brazos River, beyond which is a wide
expanse of the Brazos Valley on the Bosque County side of the river.
Between the shelter and the river, a distance of but 650 feet, the steep,
rocky talus slope leads down to a series of springs that form a deep

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

1~9

erosion gully or ravine in the 40-foot terrace of the river (Fig. 11 A).
The shelter is 120 feet long and 25 feet deep from the top of the talus
to the rear wall (Fig. 10). The ceiling has a maximum height above
the floor fill of 12 feet and is of a gentle, half-dome shape (Fig. 11 B).
At the southeast end of the shelter a deposit of trash has accumulated
on the top of the talus material to a depth of five feet as a result of

\
\\
\
\

\

LEGEND

\
\
\
\

]

1947 Excovolions

I

~

1950 gxcovolions

~j

Feolure

X-Y

Line of 9enerollzed
cross-section

\\
\

\

\

20

F~T
\

\

-\

\
\
\
\

\

\

\
\\
\

\,
\\

BUZZARD

SHELTER

41-26D7-12

DRAWN BY RL. STEpHENSOH
TRACED BY RS PRICE

FIGURE 10. Plan of Buzzard Shelter (41-26D7-12).

T373

160

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

rocks, soil and other debris washing over the top of the bluff above the
shelter during times of heavy storm (Fig. 11, B, C; P1. 29. b ). This had
formed a barrier in front of the shelter but had aeeunmlated in such
a manner as to channel rain water into, instead of out of, the shelter.
As a result of periodic coursing of water through the interior of the
shelter the general surface of the fill was quite uneven.
The floor deposit was quite shallow except for the area of trash
accumulation at the front where depths of more than five feet were
reached. Farther back in the interior of the shelter where most of the
occupational material was found, the usua! depth of deposit ranged
from 24 to 36 inches. The shelter provided a pleasant roomy place for
prehistoric people to live, giving protection from the elements as well
as from predators, easy access to water in the nearby springs, and
probably a good supply of wild game nearby (P1. 21).
ARCHEOLOGICAL FIELD WolIK

The Buzzard Shelter was examined and test excavations made in the
initial survey in 1947 with a crew of two and the voluntary assistance

PLATE 21. Pencil sketch of Buzzard Shelter before excavation (Sketch by
Hal Story, Texas Memorial Museum).

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

161

of the late George C. Benson. A datum point was established on Bedroek at the rear of the shelter as elevation 0 and no12h-south and eastwest base lines were established from datum. The five-foot segments
of the north-south line were lettered A to Q plus AA and BB. The
segments of the east-west line were numbered 1 to 17. The resulting
grid covered the entire shelter and part of the talus. Each square was
referenced by the number-letter designation of its southwest comer.
The tests in 1947 are identified along with the excavations of 1950
in Fig. 10.
The excavations conducted in April and May 1950 with a crew of
10 to 19, persons began by our not being able to find the 1947 datum
point necessitating a new datum point and grid system. When we did
locate 1947 datum we were off by two feet. This "double grid" is
seen in the site map shown in Fig. 10. The 1950 excavations (P1. 22 b)
included 60% of the surface area and 50% of the total till of the
shelter. Horizontal control was held within the grid system and vertical ~eontrol was maintained by arbitrary six inch levels until actual
stratiga’aphic levels became clear enough to be used for vertical control. Al! artifacts and selected quantitative samples of bone, shell,
antler and stone were sorted by square and level and except for
squares P-4 and J-12 all matelial was sifted through one-fourth inch or
finer mesh screen. Profiles were drawn of trench walls along both eastwest and north-south trenches (Fig. 11, B-E).
THE SHELTEI:t FILL

The bedrock floor of the Buzzard Shelter is quite flat with a gentle
slope from the rear wall outward toward the opening (Fig. Ii, B).
The deepest deposits of fill occur at the mouth of the shelter and just
outside the overhanging ceiling. These deposits are largely refuse
fallen from above the shelter. Over the inner two-thirds of the shelter
the deposits are rather thin, being generally about 36 to 42 inches in
thickness, and it was here that most of the occupational material was
found. Despite the shallowness of the fill, three distinctive stratiga’aphie levels were obvious throughout (Fig. 11, B-E). These are
numbered, from bottom to top, as Strata I, II, and III, and all were
occupation levels.
STRATU~i I.

The earliest occupation zone, resting on bedrock, extends over the
enth’e area of the shelter. Near the talus edge along the open side of
the shelter it attains thicknesses of as much as 48 inches, but here
contains little occupational material. From about the center-line of the

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL

PLATE

SOCIETY

22. Buzzard Shelter: a, looking north from floor of Steiner Valley to
brush covered bluff containing shelter (arrow); b, interior of shelter after
excavation, looking east. Lower right stake is K-12.

163

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

A. PROFILE FROM SHELTER TO BRAZOS

RIVER

B. GENERALIZED PROFILE OF SHELTER TAKEN FROM X-Y

o

C. PROFILE J-P ALONG LINE 4

F~T

D. PROFILE I-L ALONG LINE ?
0 , I i

J Fr~5,.T~ ~ i

,

~0

E. PROFILE H-K ALONG LINE 8
i I0

LEGEND
EBO, ELEVATION BELOW DATUM
ZONE I

EO.E~
ZONE :~

ROCK
BEDROCK
,RAWN By RL STEPHEt~SO~
TRACED BY RS PRICE

BUZZARD

,SHELTER:

41-26D7-12

T374
~2~19S4

FIGURE 11. Buzzard shelter (41-26D7-12): a, profile from shelter to the
Brazos River; b-e, four profiles of the shelter.

164

TEXAS AI:~CHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

shelter, back to the rear wall, this zone is 15 to 22 inches thick and,
while occupational material is not abundant anywhere in this stratum,
most of what was found is from this area. The fill extends from the
sloping bedrock floor upwards to cover several large rocks that have
fallen from the ceiling and form a level, horizonta!, upper surface of
the stratum over the entire shelter.
The fill was mainly composed of fine, powdered, gray limestone that
has resulted from the decomposition of small flakes of ceiling and wall
rock that have flaked off over the centuries and a number of large
rocks that have fallen fi’om the ceiling. Mixed with this was a considerable quantity of dark gray ash, some windblown soil, nmnerous light
gray and white ash lenses, a moderate amount of vegetal materia! such
as sticks, twigs, and leaves, some cultural material, and an abundance
of shells of landsnails and freshwater mussels. The shells are pl~ncipally Bulimulus and Quadrula and are much less abundant than at
the Pictograph Shelter. Here the Bulimulus average about 100 shells
per cubic foot of fill and the Ouadrula about 4 or 5 per cubic foot.
Occasional concentrations of the shells of the landsnafls BuIimulus
were found. One especially heavy concentration was designated Feature 4.
Large lenses of gray or white ash were numerous, ranging fi’om 24
to 45 inches in diameter and 3 to 9 inches in thickness, and occurred
at random elevations within the fill. They contained little charcoal or
other material than the ash. None of the lenses was tilted to any
appreciable degree from the horizontal, and a’ slow, uniform increase
in the elevation of the floor dm’ing this period of occupation is thus
indicated. Snail shell concentrations were frequently found adjacent
to the lenses, but seldom was a shell found actually with the ash.
Only three prepared hearths (Features 1, 9~ and 3) were found in
the entire shelter and all occurred in Stratum I near the southeast rear
of the shelter. Except for size, all three were quite similar. Each was a
shallow, circular basin lined with small limestone rocks and slabs.
Fires on these rocks had cracked and broken them and with subsequent fires more rocks were added until depths of 6 to 18 inches were
attained. Scattered hearthstones were found elsewhere in the fill of
Stratum I, suggesting other abandoned and destroyed hearths.
STRATU~ II.

This occupation zone was separated from the zone below it by a
c!early distinguishable change in color and content of fill. The line
between the two was readily seen tbxoughout the shelter. The zone
is rather evenly horizontal on both upper and lower surfaces, with a

WHITNEY I~ESERVOIR

165

thickness of 6 to 1"2 inches, but gradually pinches out toward the talus
to become non-existent beneath the large trash pile at the mouth of
the shelter. The fill was composed mainly of pinkish and light gray
ash mixed with fine and coarse windblown soil and powdered limestone flakes from the walls and ceiling. Vegetal material was abundant
in the stratum but snail and nmssel shells were rare, while artifacts
were abundant, especially throughout the rear half of the shelter. The
lighter color of this fill readily distinguished it from the darker fill
below.
Ash lenses were more abundant but smaller and thinner than in the
zone below, and many lenses overlapped each other so as to make their
individual differentiations at times difficult. Stratum II contained no
prepared hearths and the only feature in this zone was a large accumulation of chipping debris from a stone artifact workshop area. It
covered an area of approximately 50 square feet and extended from 3
inches above the floor of Stratum II to the surface of that zone. Large
quantities of flint chips, numerous broken artifacts of stone, and a
number of flint nodules were found in this concentrated area ( Feature
5). Occasional, small, fire-cracked rocks were found in the fill of
Stratum II, but not in any concentration and in such small total
quantity as to suggest that they had been recovered from hearths of
the zone below and reused for one purpose or another. Some of these
bore marks of hammering and had obviously been reused as hammerstones.
This was the zone of extensive occupation as most of the artifacts
were found in this stratum. While Stratum I appears to have been a
zone of occasional brief occupations extending over a long pel~od of
time, Stratum II represents a shorter period but one of far more intensive occupation.
STRATURI

llI.

The upper zone of fill, in places, was not readily distinguishable
from the zone beneath but for the most part was identifiable over the
shelter area. It was an uneven stratum. Its lower limits were quite
level but its surface varied a gn’eat deal. Ilainwater coursing through
the shelter had eroded small gullies in it and near the open side of the
shelter the deposits were increased by the trash that had fMlen from
above the shelter. In some places there is a suggestion of a separation
between Stratu!n III and the bottom of this trash pile but the distinction was so tenuous that the two were lumped together (Fig. 11, C).
Within the inner half of the shelter this zone is usually about 6 to 8
inches thick, but under the h’ash pile ranges up to 48 inches. Excluding

166

TEXAS A!RCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

this surface trash pile the zone is composed of banded, fine, white or
light gray ash, decomposed roof and ceiling rock, and vegetal material.
It did not have the pinkish color of the zone beneath. No hearths
were found nor were any clear-cut ash lenses except for the generalized banded appearance of the fill in some areas, and snail and mussel
shells were ahnost completely absent. Cultural material was very
sparse in Stratum III. Like the uppermost stratum in Pictograph Shelter this zone appears to represent a period of abandonment of the site.

TABLE 7
Tabulation of Feahn’es, Buzzard Shelter
F. No.

Depth

Stratum Square

1
2
3
4
5

24"
29"
27"
30"

I
I
I
I

7-

II

4-M
4-N
4-N
10-K

94~,j

Description
Stone-lined circular hearth 36" x 24" x 18"
Stone-lined circular hearth 18" x 18" x 6"
Stone-lined cireular hearth 12" x 12" x 6"
Concentration of landsnail shells
Workshop area 7’ x 7’ x 9"

OBJECTS

I~ECOVERED

The artifacts from the Buzzard Shelter numbered 1,186, a respectable inventory for a site with so little depth of occupational ~l. No
objects of White provenience were found at this site; all are prehistoric. These specimens are of types and in stratigraphic sequence
dearly suggesting specific cultural and temporal at~liations. Table 8
lists the several categories of objects and the number of each recovered
from each of the three stratigraphic levels. Due to water erosion
through the center of the site there are more than the usual number
of specimens that could not be placed with confidence in any of the
three strata. The column headed "random" includes those objects
found in this eroded area as well as those from the disturbed surface,
the talus slope, and from rodent-disturbed areas adjacent to the
shelter wall.
POTI~RY

There were 39 potsherds recovered from the Buzzard Shelter. Two
are undecorated rimsherds. All the others are body sherds, four of
which are decorated with fingernail punetations, and ten with angular engraved lines. At least three wares are distinguishable. One is a
highly polished black ware. One is a smoothed but only moderately
polished brown ware. The third is a highly polished tan ware. Seven
sherds are readily recognizable as of the type Holly Fine Engraved
and four are dearly of the type Dunkin Incised, both of Alto Focus

167

WHITNEY IIESERVOIR

affiliations in east Texas. The number of individual vessels represented
appears to be about ten but may be as many as sixteen.
TABLE 8
Tabulation of Objects Recovered from Buzzard Shelter
Object
Pottery Sherds (39)
Holly Fine Engraved
Dunkin Incised
Leon Plain
Goose Creek Plain
Other sherds
Arrow Points (410)
Perdiz
Cliffton
Alba
Scallorn
Fresno
Young
Cuney
Washita
"Eccentric"
Fragments

I

II

2

2
2

III

Random Totals 1957-88

7
4

3
2

........

9.2

3
2
....

........

_

55
43
38
169
33
51
8
9
19
15
59
12
24
12
11
7
28
8
8
5
4
2
1
1
..........
..........
........
2
9.2
6
1
1
29
93
16
29
19

87
14
6
32
9
15
2
1
__
?

13

1

8

Dart Points (25)
Yarbrough
Car),
Pahnillas
Pedernales
Carrollton
Miscellaneous
Frag~nents

..........
..........
..........
..........
6
2
1
9.2
1I
4
3
4
._
li

Drills (42)
Perdiz base
Alba base
Oval base
Flake base
Base missing

1
_.
1
5
1

1
!
1
9.2
1

i
I
5
3
3

1
9.2

1
14
1
1
40
4
19.2

3
31
2
1
131
23
9.20

5
9
1
1
9.29
6
7

Other Chipped Stone (505)
Beveled knives
Other knives
Cravers
Burin Platforms
Spall scrapers
End scrapers, snub-nosed
Side scrapers

1

28

6

..

3

....

3

1
1
9.
1
1

5
9.2
5

4
4
12
19.2
10

__
1
__
8
__

9.2
14
2
__
46
5
1I

11
68
6
3
246
38
50

_
18
__
__
5
1
15

168

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

I

Object

Spokeshaves
Scrapers & choppers
Cores
Ground and Pecked Stone (104)
Hammerstones
Manos (?)
Metates (?)
Stone slab fragments
Pigment

Shell (22)
Ornament
Mussel shell, perforated
Mussel shell, smoothed
Mussel shell, roughened

7
2
._
1
7

36
4
1
2
9

2
1
3

Random Total,~ 1957-8"

9
2
__
3
3

2

2

2
19.
?

16
1
1
__

68
9
2
6
19

_
__
_
__
__

1

5
I
3
1
7
2
1
4
3
5

3

1
1
2
1
1

2
3

1
2
1

2

1

3
2
1

3
1
2

2

1

1

__

2

__

214

496

219

252

1181

250

_°

i

1

Wood (2)
Cut sticks
TOTALS

III

..........
..........
10
49
13
11
83

Antler and Bone (32)
Antler flaking tools
Ulna flaking tools
Splinter flaking tools
Ulna awls
Splinter awls
Splinter tools (?)
Bone fishhook
Bone beads, tubular
Bird fenmrs, cut
Misc. cut bones

II

3
1
2

1
ii
4
6

_~

~Speeimens recovered by Robert E. Forrester in 1957-8 as reported bv Long
(1961, pp. 948-9). These are not included in the totals.

Vessel No. 1, represented by five body sherds of the type Holly Fine
Engraved (P1. 23, a, e), is a thin-walled vessel, perhaps a bottle, of
fine black paste tempered with tiny bits of clay grit. It is highly polished on the exterior surface. Two sherds have the typical fine, engraved, paralle! lines and excised triangles of this type of pottery
(Newell and Krieger, 1949, pp. 81-90; Suhm, Krieger, & Jelks, 1954,
pp. 300-303). Sfinilar sherds of this type were found at Belton lleservoir Sites (Miller and Jelks, 1952, p. 206) and in later excavations at
this same Buzzard Shelter by Long (1961, pp. 29.6-228).
Vessel No. 9, is another vessel of the type Holly Fine Engraved and
is represented by two body sherds (P1. 93, b, c). These are not a part

WHITNEY ]~ESERVOIR

169

PLATE 23. Pottery and shell artifacts from Buzzard Shelter; a, e, sherds of
vessel no. 1, Holly Fine Engraved; b, c, sherds of vessel no. 2, Holly Fine
Engraved; d, f, g, sherds of vessel no. 3, Dunkin Incised; h, sherd of vessel no. 4; i, sherd of vessel no. 5 ; j, sherd of vessel no. 7; k, perforated mussel
shell artifact; l, mussel shell artifact with smoothed lip; m, mussel shell
ornament.

170

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of vessel No. 1, though they are similar enough to be of the same
type, as the design pattern differs enough to indicate separate vessels.
These two sherds are from Stratum II and the sherds of vessel No. 1
are from Stratum III and the talus slope.
Vessel No. 3, represented by five body sherds (P1. 23, d, f, g), is a
thick, unpolished brown vessel of uniform brown paste, tempered with
clay grit, occasional lumps of quartz sand, and bits of crushed bone.
The exterior of four of the sherds is decorated with sporadically placed
small, fingernail impressions and one sherd has an engraved line deeoration. This vessel is of the type Dunkin Incised (Suhm, Krieger, and
Jelks, 1954, pp. 268-9). Actually two vessels may be represented as two
of these sherds are from Stratum I and three are from Stratum II.
Miller and Jelks illustrate a similar sherd from the Grimes-Houy
Shelter (1952, P1. 28, 5) and Long reports the type from his excavations here at the Buzzard Shelter (Long, 1961, pp. 226-8).
Vessel No. 4, represented by two decorated and two undecorated
sherds from Stratum II (P1. 23, h), is a thin, hard, tan vessel with
deeply engraved, bold, parallel lines in an angular pattern. The light
tan color and highly polished surfaces are quite distinctive but the
angular, incised design does not fit any of the pottery types with which
I am familiar.
Vessel No. 5, represented by three body sherds (P1. 23, i), from
Stratum II, is a thin, tan vessel of uniform paste, tempered with an
abundance of finely crushed bone. One sherd is decorated with a pair
of bold, engraved lines in a curving pattern. The interior is very rough
and of a gray color, but the clark tan exterior is smoothed but
unpolished.
Vessel No. 6, represented by a single rimsherd from Stratum I, is
from a bottle of ~’ay paste with a dull, unpolished exterior and a
rough interior. It is tempered with bits of finely crushed bone and is
5 ram. thick.
Vessel No. 7, represented by a single rimsherd, (P1. 23, j) from
Stratum I, is a thick, highly polished bowl with a flattened lip and no
decoration. It is of a very hard paste, tempered with finely crushed
bits of day and bone and of a uniformly black color. The lip is but
6 ram. thick, while barely an inch below the lip the sherd is 10 ram.
thick. Carbonized particles adhere to the interior surface of this bowl.
Other sherds include 18 body sherds representing at least three
and perhaps as many as six separate vessels. Four are from Stratum I,
seven are from Stratum II, one is from Stratum III, and six are from
the "random" levels. These sherds are of a coarse, dark, gray-brown

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

i71

to black paste, tempered with crushed bone, crushed sherds, and some
grit. All have a slight polish on the exterior surface and smoothed
interior surface. The paste beneath the sm’face in several specimens
has a gritty feel but not the characteristic sand-tempered quality of
the type Goose Creek Plain of the Texas Coast. Thicknesses range from
5 to 8 ram. All are probably fragments of vessels of east Texas pottery.
The entire group of 39 potsherds from the Buzzard Shelter are all
of pottery vessels of the Caddoan area of east Texas, and those that
are identifiable are of types associated with the Alto Focus of the
Gibson Aspect. A date is thus suggested of A.D. 500-1000. The two
identified types do not give a hint as to temporal separations of the
three levels in the Buzzard Shelter as they are mixed in the three
strata.
CHIPPED

STONE

Chipped stone tools were abundant in Buzzard Shelter, numbering
981 specimens in all. Tabulation of the various types of these tools by
stratigraphic level in Table 8 clearly shows that no distinctions can be
made between the levels on the basis of artifact types. There is a
slight numerical dominance of chipped stone tools in Stratum II, but
the several types of specimens range through all strata.
am~ow POINTS: Small projectile points, presumably used as tips for
arrows, are unusually numerous in the collections from this site. The
411 specimens recovered fit well within five named types, with the
exception of 6 specimens that are here listed as "eccentric" and 93 tip
or edge fragments that cammt be classified. All of the fragments are
undoubtedly of the five types of which whole specimens are present
but are too shattered to list as of any one specific type. The five named
types have al! been described elsewhere (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks,
1954; and others). Since the Buzzard Shelter specimens al! fit well
within these types as described, there is no need to repeat the descriptions here. Weights for these types of specimens, though, have not previously been given and are, therefore, included below.
The most numerous arrow point type in the site is the Perdiz Point
(P1. 24), represented by 169 specimens (Kelley, 1947b; Miller and
Jelks, 1952, p. 177; Jelks, 1953, pp. 198-9; Suhm, Krieger and Jelks,
1954, p. 504). These specimens range in weight from 0.2 to 2.5 grams
with a mean weight of 1.1 grams. In relation to the total amount of
material from each stratigraphic level they are about evenly distributed through all three strata. A widespread type in Texas, the Perdiz
Point, occurs commonly in central Texas Aspect sites; in Itoekport
Focus sites on the Gulf Coast; and in Frankston Focus sites in east

172

TEXAS AI~CHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

PLATE 24. Arrow points of the Perdiz type from Buzzard Shelter.

Texas. At the Belton Reservoh" (Miller and Jelks, 1952, pp. 185-209),
at the Blmn Rockshelter (Jelks, 1953, p. 199), and at the Kyle Site
(Jelks, 1962, p. 24), Perdiz Points were consistently found in the
uppermost levels and Jelks (1962, pp. 84-99) has assigned them as
traits of the Toyah Focus. Essentially the same stratigraphic placement
is indicated at the Pictograph Shelter. The presence of these points as
dominant in all strata of the Buzzard Shelter suggests that all three
levels were occupied by essentially the same cultural group.
By contrast Scallorn Points (Kelley, 1947-b; Suhm, Krieger, and
Jelks, 1954, p. 506) are a minor trait in the site with only 28 specimens
being found (P1. 25, a-g), and these were distributed through the
three zones of occupation almost equally. They range in weight from
0.6 to 2.4 grams, with a mean weight of 0.9 grams. Elsewhere this
point type is associated with the lower levels of the Central Texas
Aspect sites, such as at the Smith Rockshelter Site, the Blum Site
(Jelks, 1953, pp. 198-9) and the Kyle Site (Jelks, 1962, pp. 27-33).
The Cliffton Point (Kelley, 1947b; Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954,
p. 496) is modestly represented in all levels by 51 specimens (P1. 25,
w-dd). Those from the lowest level, though, number but about half as
many as from each of the two upper levels. They range in weight from
0.3 to 3.8 gn’ams, with a mean of 1.7 grams.
Alba Points, too, are modestly represented (Newell and Krieger,
1949, pp. 161-2; Suhm, Krieger and Jelks, 1954, p. 494) by 59 points
with a similar distribution within the occupation zones to that of the
Cliffton Points. The specimens range in weight from 0.3 to 1.7 grams
with a mean of 1.0 grams (PI. 25, h-v). Seven of these specimens are
atypical and appear to have some of the characteristics of the Perdiz
Point, i.e., more pronounced barbs and rounded to ahnost pointed
stems (P1. 25, h, n). Yet the stem sides are parallel as in typical Alba
Points.
The small triangular Fresno Points (Kelley, 1947b; Suhm, Krieger
and Jelks, 1954, p. 498) are rare at Buzzard Shelter. Only four specimens were found (P1. 29, g-i) and all four are rather poorly made
examples of the type. They range in weight from 0.3 to 1.4 grams, with
a mean weight of 0.8 grams. Absent in Stratum II, these were found in
Strata I and III.
Six specimens listed as "’eccentric" (P1. 29, m-o) all have extremely
serrated edges. The stem shapes vary from the pointed stem of Perdiz
to the expanded stem of Scallorn. Watt tells me that these points with
exta’eme serrations are found occasionally in the vicinity of Waco,
Texas, and refers to them as "Tawakoni Points" because he associates

174

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

%

,J
m
h

q

p

c

r

N
v

w

×

PLATE 25. Arrow points from Buzzard Shelter: a-g, Scallorn; h-v, Alba;
w-dd, Cliffton.

WHITNEY I~ESERVOIR

175

them with late sites. At the Buzzard Shelter I see no reason for assuming a late temporal position for these specimens and judge them to be
unusual specimens in their own cultural context, probably made for
some special purpose.
The arrow points from the Buzzard Shelter suggest that the three
stratigraphic levels are not velT meaningful as separate cultural zones
and that peoples of the same general cultural complex occupied the
site through all three strata. The predominance of the Perdiz Points
through all levels and the relatively rare appearance of Scallorn Points
would indicate that this was the Toyah Focus.
DART POINTS: The larger projectile points, presumably used as atlatl
dart points, are represented by but 25 specimens (PI. 26, a-g, m). Only
two of these were found in the uppermost level, but the small total
quantity of these specimens and the number found out of stratigraphic
position makes this fact relatively meaningless. I have listed three of
these points as Yarbrough Points (P1. 26, d, e, g) but with reservations
as they are not good examples of the type (Suhm, Krieger & Jelks,
1954, p. 492). The others are listed as "miscellaneous" as they do not
clearly resemble any of the named types. They all have characteristics
of the Ellis Points, Darl Points, Carrollton Points, and Ensor Points,
but specific determinations of type are not possible. One specimen is
of interest (P1. 9.6, m) in that it is made of a good quality of black
obsidian. It was found in Stratum II.
DI/ILLS: Chipped stone drills are prominent in the inventory from this
site and occurred in al! three strata. These are all delicately made,
fragile specimens with long, thin, blades and large, bulbous bases (P1.
9.7, a-k). There were 49. of these drills recovered. The blades range
from 19. to 30 ram. in length and 4 to 6 ram. in width. Most of these
blades are almost parallel-sided (P1. 9.7, h) but some contract from a
moderately wide base to a sharp point (P1. 9.7, j). The bases differ considerably and the various styles can be grouped as tentative "types."
Four are clearly bases of Perdiz Points and the drill appears in each
instance to have been ehioped from a long arrow point of this type
(P1. 9.7, h, j). Four others are clearly the bases of Alba Points (PI. 9.7,
i). Twelve spedmens have well-shaped and "carefully chipped oval
bases (P1. 9.7 a, f, g). One of these (P1. 9.7, g) has a triangular rather
than actually oval base and appears to have been made from a large
knife. Another twelve have more-or-less oval bases but without seeonda~dz flaking, the base being simoly an oval spall with a well-shaped
blade extending from it (PI. 9.7, b, e, e). The other ten specimens are
merely drill blades from which the base has been broken.

176

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

PLATE 26. Dart Points and scrapers from Buzzard Shelter: a-g, dart points
indeterminate types; h-j, l, end ecrapers, note burin platform at base of
specimen i; k, graver; m, dart point of obsidian; n, side scraper.

177

b

g

h
\

:)

;%

Hi

PLATE

27. Artifacts from Buzzard Shelter: a-k, chipped stone drills, note
graver tip on upper end of k; l-o, beveled knives.

178

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

BEVELED KNIVES: Nine fragments and two whole specimens of fourblade, beveled knives were recovered (P1. 27, 1-o). These "propellershaped" specimens are ve~7 carefully made and rang from approximately 7.5 to 13 cm. in length. At least two have rounded bases but
most of them are bipointed. Such specimens are common, though not
abundant, in Central Texas Aspect sites (Jelks, 1962, p. 47) and are
usual in the inventories from Henrietta Focus sites (Krieger, 1946, p.
139).
OTHEB KNIVES: Fragments of 55, and 13 whole specimens of other
forms of knives were found. All of these are rather crudely made by
percussion chipping with occasionally some pressure flaking along the
edges. One specimen (P1. 28, g) is unusually large and somewhat
better made than the others. It is 134 ram. x 70 ram. and of generally
oval shape. Two other fragments may represent similar specimens.
Others range from about half that size to small knives of 9.9 ram. x 19
ram. x 4 ram. dimensions (P1. 9.8, b). All are quite thin, with convex
bases, and, with one exception (P1. 28, a), all have convex edges.
Sixteen are sub-triangular in outline (P1. 9,8, b, d, e), and the others
are leaf-shaped (P1. 9.8, c, f). Most of these knives, especially the leafshaped specfinens, appear to be of the tentative type Cleburne Knives
as described by Jelks ( 1969,, p. 44) from the Kyle Site.
CBAVEBS: Six rough spalls with percussion flakes struck from one or
both sides and a tiny, sharp projection, pressure chipped along one
edge (P1. 9,6, k) are graving tools.
PLATFORMS: Three apparent burin platforms were recovered
from the Buzzard Shelter. One is the base of a long, snubnose end

BURIN

scraper (P1. 9,6, i, bottom of specimen) from which two or more long,
thin splinters have been struck by a sharp blow on the base of the
specimen. The best specimen is not illustrated but is a large, thick
spall with a flat sh’iking platform from which at least five splinters
have been struck. The third is similar to the second but only two
splinters have been struck from it.
SPALL SCRAPERS: There are 9,46 small, thin spalls with some chips removed from one or more edges. Most of these specimens have only
tiny flakes removed, suggesting that they were formed by usage rather
than intentional flaking, but others are intentionally flaked along one
or more edges.
Thirty-eight snub-nose end scrapers are included in the
collections (P1. 9,6, h, i, j, 1). They range in size from large specimens
80 ram. x 58 ram. x 9,8 ram. to tiny ones, 9,5 mm. x 9,9, ram. x 6 ram.

END SCRAPERS:

~VI~IITNEY I~ESERVOIR

PLATE 28. Knives from Buzzard Shelter.

179

180

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

None is very well made, being rather roughly chipped from nodules or
spMls but each has a carefully flaked working end from which pressure flakes have been removed from one surface only. Outline shapes
are of two general styles. Nineteen are ovoid to round in outline (PI.
26, j, 1), and an equal number are much longer than they are wide
(P1. 26, h, i).
SIDE SCl~APERS: Fifty specimens have been grouped as generalized side
scrapers. Ten of these are long, rough cores with percussion flaking
along one or both of the long edges. They are all about the same size
and an average one is 62 mm. x 25 ram. x 18 ram. Twenty-four are
oval to round in outline with percussion chipping along one or more
portions of the circular edge. These range from 34 ram. to 56 mm. in
diameter and are 8 ram. to 20 ram. thick. Fifteen are also oval to circular in outline but are thin spalls with delicate pressure flaking along
one or more portions of the circular edge. Only one of this latter group
varies from the circular pattern, but in all other respects resembles
the group (PL 26, n). One side scraper is a large, rough core witla a
concave side that has been carefully percussion chipped. It is 110 mm.
long, 46 ram. wide, and 40 ram. thick.
CORES: There are 83 small, battered fragments of stone that appear to
be the cores from which spalls were taken to make other stone artifacts. All are roughly broken, some with random percussion chipping
along one portion of the edge, but most show no chipping other than
the rough breakage. Those that do have areas of percussion chipping
appear to be cores that had been started as tools but perhaps broke
in the manufacturing process or were otherwise unsuitable for the
intended use. One and perhaps three other of these cores have the
appearance of burin platforms but they are not distinct enough to be
listed in that category.
The knives, drills, gravers, scrapers and cores from the Buzzard
Shelter are, for the most part, of non-diagnostic styles and cannot, on
the basis of type, be assigned to any particular culture. They are tools
and tool-making refuse that are so generalized as to be typical of a
wide range of cultm’e complexes. There are some of these artifacts,
though, that are not so generalized. The specific styles of the drills
made from Perdiz and from Alba Points are obviously assignable to
the complexes that contain those arrow point types. The four-blade
beveled knives, too, are rather distinctive and are commonly found in
Henrietta Focus and Central Texas Aspect sites. Within the Central
Texas Aspect, Jelks feels that these are confined to the Toyah Focus
(Jelks, 1962, p. 87). The three apparent burins are of interest in that

"vVHITNEY RESERVOIR

181

this type of tool is only beginning to be recognized from this area. I
am not certain that these are burin platforms but they appear to be.
The recent investigations of Epstein (1962, pp. 29-34, Fig. 21) are of
interest in this respect. If these are burins I hesitate to suggest their
significance. Certainly one would not care to imply any relationship
with the Arctic where burins are abundant and diagnostic (Giddings,
1956, and others). Perhaps a hitherto um’ecognized minor technology
is indicated for this central and west Texas area.
With the exception of the one dart point made of obsidian, all of
the chipped stone specimens are made of readily available, local flints,
cherts, chalcedonys, and jaspers.
GROUND STONE

Artifacts of ground, pecked, scratched or battered stone were remarkably rare in the Buzzard Shelter. Of the 104 such specimens
recovered, 68 are hammerstones. These are simple quartzite or chert
cobbles with at least some battering along one or more edges. Many
of these, even, are questionable and may actually have only been
accidentally battered. They are of two size categories, with forty-one
small specimens of about 25 ram. to 40 ram. diameter and twentyseven large specimens of 45 ram. to 75 ram. diameter. Six of these have
some slight indication of grinding on one surface and may have been
briefly used as manos or other form of grinding stone. Well-shaped
manos are lacking in the collections but nine specimens have relatively smoothed surfaces and apparently had been at least briefly used
as grinding stones. Two very questionable metate fragments and six
flat, limestone slab fragments that may have been used as grinding
slabs were found. This extreme dearth of milling stones is unusual
for a site of the Central Texas Aspect and is indicative of a lack of
emphasis on ground foods.
Seventeen fragments of red hematite and two fragments of yellow
limonite were found. All had been rubbed or scratched on one or more
surfaces in the process of removing pigment.
ANTLER AND BONE

The five antler artifacts are small, tip sections of antler tines with
blunt distal ends and broken proxfinal ends (P1. 29, e, f). All five
appear to have been used as flaking tools.
Bone artifacts are represented by 27 specimens. These include one
flaking tool made from a deer ulna (P1. 29, d), with extreme wear
shown on the working end. Another deer ulna (P1. 29, a) is an awl
with a well-worn, sharp point. Three bone splinters, apparently made
from mid-sections of deer leg bones, have one end worked to a blunt

182

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

PLATE. 29. Bone and antler artifacts and unusua! arrow points from Buzbard Shelter; a, d, ulna awl; b, splinter awl; c, f, antler tine flakers; e, bird
bone femur end; g-i, Fresno Points; j, k, bird bone beads; 1, bone fishhook;
m-o, "eccentric" arrow points.

WI-IITNEY RESERVOIR

183

point and probably were used as flaking tools (P1. 9.9, b). Seven
smaller bone splinters have sharp, delicate points with no other alteration and were probably used as awls. Two similar, small bone splinters are well polished and have rounded, scratched tips instead o~
pointed tips. These may have been small flaking tools. One bone fishhook similar to one found in the Pictograph Shelter, but larger (46
mm. long) and without an encircling groove around the upper end,
was found (P1. 9,9, 1). There are four long, tubular bone beads, three
of which are of bird bone and one of a small mannnal bone. The latter
is roughly cut at the ends and poorly smoothed on the exterior surface.
One of the bird bone beads is long and delicate with roughly cut ends,
smoothed exterior surface and two lightly incised lines partially encircling it at the mid-section and near one end (P1. 9.9, j). It is 80 ram.
long and 19_, nnn. in diameter and probably made from a goose wingbone. Another bead is made from a heavier bone, probably of a land
bird. It is extremely well polished on both ends and over the entire
exterior surface and even the interior surface seems to be polished
(PI. 29, k). It has an encircling groove around one end and is 51 ram.
long and 6 ram. in diameter. The third bird bone bead is roughly
made and only half the specimen is present. The cut, distal ends of
three bird bone fenmrs were found (P1. 29, e). These may have been
the waste from making bone beads but the one illustrated may have
been used as a bunt on the tip of an arrow. Five other fragments of cut
bone of deer ribs and legs complete the inventory of bone specimens.
SHELL

Only 29, specimens of shell were found that could be identified as
artifacts. One is a sma!l lozenge-shaped piece of mussel shell of unknown use (P1. 23, m). All edges are ground smooth except for the
basal portion of one edge, which appears to have fine serrations. The
others are whole nmssel shells, eleven of which have holes drilled
near the hinge (P1. 23, k), four of which have smoothed lips (P1. 9,3,
1), and six of which have roughened lips. These shells are all Quadrula
houstoner~sis (Lea) and Elliptio berlandieri (Lea), though several
other species, as well as these two, were abundant in the shelter fill,
especially in the lower levels. It is of interest that, while the landsnail
Bulimulus was abundant in the lower zone of this shelter, and present
in the upper zones, none of these she!ls were found with lateral perforations such as were found inPictograph Shelter.
WOOD

Twigs, leaves, bark, and other vegetal remains were abundant
the shelter fill, but only two small, cut fragments of wood

throughout

184

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

could be identified as artifacts. These are scraped sticks with shaq~ened points and are but 60 mm. and 40 ram. in length. No matting,
basketry, twine, or other vegetal artifacts were found.
SUNIIVIARY AND INTERPRETATION

The Buzzard Shelter (41-26D7-12) is a long, narrow rock shelter
facing to the southwest in a partly exposed, limestone outcrop on the
north side of the Brazos River Valley in Hill County, Texas. It is 70
feet above the valley floor and 680 feet from the river. The site was
recorded in the River Basin Surveys files in the summer of 1947 and
approximately 50% of the shelter fill was excavated during the smnmer
of 1950.
The rather shallow deposits of floor fill, excluding the pile of surface
trash near the front, were separable into three occupation levels, nmnbered I to III from bottom to top. Stratum I, with a maximum thickness of 22 inches, consisted largely of disintegrated roof rock, ash
lenses, some vegetal trash and many snail and mussel shells. Stratmn
II, 12 inches thick, contained more windblown soil and vegetal trash
but only a few snail and mussel shells. Stratum III, 8 inches thick,
differed little from the level below except that the ash was not in
lenses. The three levels were clearly separated from each other, especially the lower two, by changes in color of the fill.
The 1,181 artifacts were unevenly distributed between the three
strata. Approximately 18% were found in the relatively thick lower
level; 42% in the naiddle level; and 18% in the upper level; while
more than 21% were of indeterminate !ocation. The artifacts are of
distinctive enough styles to rather clearly identify the culture complex
of the inhabitants. There are a few potsherds of Caddoan origin but
the vast majority of the artifacts (83%) are of chipped stone and
nearly half of these are projectile points. Artifacts of ground stone,
shell, bone, antler, and wood are unusually rare in the collections from
this site.
While the general fill of the shelter clearly indicated three stratigraphic levels, the typological distribution of the artifacts among these
levels strongly suggests that people of a single cultural complex were
responsible for al!, or nearly all, of the occupations. This was, of
course, not a single occupation but a series of sporadic, perhaps seasonal, occupations extending over a considerable period of time. The
artifacts suggest that these occupations were by peoples of the Toyah
Focus of the Central Texas Aspect. The abundance of Perdiz Points,
Cliffton Points and Alba Points, together with many small drills, snub-

V~tlTNEY I~ESERVOIR

185

nose end scrapers, beveled knives, and pottery of the types Holly Fine
Engraved, Dunkin Incised and other unidentified Caddoan types, all
suggest the Toyah Focus rather than the earlier Austin Focus (Jelks,
1962, pp. 84-99). Negative evidence supporting this assignment is
seen in the scarcity of Scallorn Points, Fresno Points, and any type of
dart points, which, if present, would suggest an Austin Focus occupation.
There are, though, a few Seallorn Points {less than 7% of the
arrow points ) and a few dart points that must be accounted for. There
are also some differences between Stratum I and Stratum II that cannot be explained by ehanges in natural deposition between the strata.
These are the presence of stone-lined hearths (even though there are
only three of them), exclusively in Stratum I, and the abundance of
snail and mussel shells in the lower stratum and not in the upper
stratum. These data may be explained if we assume that the Toyah
Focus people did make some use of the larger dart points and of
Scallorn Points even though these were minor styles compared to the
more popular Perdiz Points and Cliffton Points. We must also assume
that during the earliest occupation of the Buzzard Shelter, these people cooked, to a limited extent, on stone-lined hearths and used land
snails and freshwater nmssels as staples of diet, but gave up these
practices before the most intensive occupations of the site took place.
An alternate explanation, and I think a nmch better one, is that
there was brief occupation by Austin Focus people early in the cultural history of the site. Judging by the depth of fill, the lowest level
tool; more time to accumulate than both the upper levels together.
During the early part of this period Austin Focus people with their
dart points and Scallorn Points may well have lived here on several
occasions, built the stone-lined hearths and gathered quantities of mollusks as a part of their daily fare. Perhaps before these people quit
coming to the site or shortly after, at any rate long before Stratum I
had completed its deposition, the Toyah Focus people began living in
the shelter and continued to do so, at intervals, throughout the remaining history of the site. A sequence of this sort would account for Toyah
Focus material in all occupation levels. It would also explain the dart
points and the Scallorn Points in the upper levels since these artifacts,
in so shallow a floor fill, may well have been recovered and even reused by the later peoples, though originally a part of an earlier occupation. If this interpretation is the correct one, then we must assume that
the Toyah Focus people were not given to building stone-lined hearths
and that they were not especially fond of snails and nmssels as staples

186

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

of diet. This tends to be borne out at Pictograph Shelter where stonelined hearths were abundant in the Austin Focus level but relatively
rare in the Toyah Focus level and where the distribution of mollusk
shells followed that same pattern. Though the evidence is not clearcut,
it seems we have here another group of traits by which the two loci
can be separated. The scarcity of ground stone implements and of artifacts made from bone, shell, antler, and wood is not explainable from
the data at hand, though these also may be a part of the distinction
between the two loci.
During the winter of 1957 and 1958, members of the Dallas and
Fort Wroth Areheologieal Societies re-excavated portions of this shelter and excavated in two of the adjacent shelters that I had tested in
1950. These were sites 41-26D7-14, which they named Little Buzzard
Cave, and 41-26D7-15, which they named Forrester Cave. ltobelt E.
Forrester did the work on Buzzard and Forrester Caves. Loyd Harper
and Joseph K. Long, III, together with other society members, did the
work on Little Buzzard Gave. Long subsequently prepared an excellent report of the excavations (Long, 1961, pp. 9.23-252). No attempt
to maintain stratigraphic controls was made in the Buzzard Shelter
because of extensive disturbance of the site between 1950 and 1957,
or in Forrester Shelter due to extremely shallow floor fill. Veltieal
control by 6-inch levels was maintained in the Little Buzzard Shelter,
but stratigraphie distinctions between tile levels were not apparent,
and 97% of the artifacts were in the top 12 inches of occupation.
The results of these excavations are interesting. Long concludes
"... that Buzzard Cave is predominantly of the Toyah Focus, that
Little Buzzard Cave contained a more or less equal mixture of Toyah
and Austin Focus elements, and that Fon’ester Cave is essentially an
Austin Focus component." (1961, p. 247). Lacking any stratigraphic
placement, the artifacts recovered from the Buzzard Shelter in 1957-8
are comparable in all respects to those recovered in 1947 and 1950.
The only major difference was a higher percentage of Seallorn Points
in the 1957-8 excavations (see Table 8).
There are no carbon-14 dates from the Buzzard Shelter but if we
are correct in assigning most of tlae occupation at this site to the Toyah
Focus, witll perhaps some brief, earlier occupation by the Austin
Focus, we may use the dates for components of these loci at the Blmn
and Kyle Sites (Jelks, 1962, pp. 96-8) as we did at the Pictograph
Shelter. Any occupation of the site attributable to the Austin Focus
would rather clearly have been toward tile end of the life of that
culture. The Bhim and Kyle dates range between the fifth and twelfth

187

WHITNEY llESEIIVOIll

centuries A.D. and I would suggest that Austin Focus occupation at
the Buzzard Shelter should probably be within the llth or 12th centuries A.D. There is no evidence to indicate a long time span between
this and the Toyah Focus occupation. In fact there could conceivably
be some contemporaneity of the two. In view of this it seems reasonable to assume a Toyah Foeus date early in the life of that eultm’e. The
Kyle Site dates for the Toyah Focus range between the 12th and 17th
centuries A.D. and I would suggest a date range for this occupation at
the Buzzard Shelter within 12th to i3th centuries A.D. and extending
over no more than one or two centuries. This was obviously a series
of sporadic occupations by Toyah Focus people, but since the shelter
fill is shallow and the cultural material is concentrated principally
within a 12-inch zone, it would seem that the total span of time covered by these occupations was not great.
THE SHEEP SHELTEIt (41-26D7-20)
INTRODUCTION

The Sheep Shelter is a large overhang in the limestone bluffs along
the north side of a small intermittent tributary of the Nolans ltiver.
It was first entered in the areheological records during the Biver Basin
Surveys reconnaissance in the summer of 1947. The shelter, though,
had been well known to the local residents for a long while, not as
an Indian camp site but as a shelter ~or sheep and cattle dmSng inclement weather. Big, roomy, well-protected and easy to get to, it
would provide a refuge for large numbers of sheep and cattle during
times of storm and was often used as a feeding station for these animals during the winter. The local ranchers had come to call it the
Sheep Shelter and this name was retained for the archeological site,
with the numerical designation 41-26D7-20 (Fig. 5).
DESCRIPTION OF THE SITE

The site is located approximately three airline miles south of the
town of Blmn and eleven airline miles north-nm~hwest of the town
of Whitney, in Hill County, Texas. The Pictograph Shelter, the Buzzard Shelter and the Kyle Site lie approximately four airline miles to
the south and the Blum Itockshelter is slightly less than three miles
to the north.
This is a large eroded cavity at the base of a limestone outcrop
approximately 580 feet above mean sea level and 70 feet above the
normal level of the Nolans tliver. It fronts on a narrow, little valley
through which a small intermittent stream flows to join the Nolans

188

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

River some 6,000 feet to the northwest. The juncture of this stream
with the Nolans River is just two miles above the mouth of that river
where it flows into the Brazos. The little"galley in front of the shelter
is but 400 feet wide, heavily covered with brush in some places and
open and grassy in others (P1. 30, a). The valley floor is quite level
with a drop of only ten to fifteen feet from the shelter to the stTeam.
The eastern half of the shelter faces on an open, grassy area but the
western half is dosed in front by a pile of huge limestone rocks fallen
from the bluff above and by a heavy gTowth of ta’ees and brush among
these rocks (P1. 30. ) The limestone bluff in which the shelter is loeated
rises approximately 30 feet from the valley floor.
The shelter is 125 feet long with a maxinmm depth of 38 feet from
the rear wall at ground level to the forward edge of the overhanging
ceiling. The ceiling is a maximuna of 14 feet above the floor fill. The
deposits of floor fill extend to depths of as nmeh as 6 feet and the
bedrock beneath this fill is fah’ly flat and level, extending out from the
rear of the shelter across the smal! valley in front of it, dropping only
a dozen feet between the shelter and the stream bed. Occupational
material extends outward from the front of the shelter some 25 feet
or more but is sparse in this open area. The entire surface of the shelter fill was quite level throughout.
ARCHEOLOGICAL FIELD

WORK

The Sheep Shelter was examined and tested in the initial surveys
in 1947 with a crew of two and the volunteer he!p of the late George
C. Benson. A datum point was established on a large rock near the
front of the shelter and from this point two arbila’aiT base lines were established. The north-south line was divided into five-foot segments
lettered A to K and the east-west line into segments numbered 1 to
24. Squares were designated by the number-letter combination of their
south-east corners. The tests in 1947 and the excavations made in June
1950 with a crew of 19 persons are indicated in Figure 12. Horizontal
conta’o! was maintained within the gTid system and vertical control
was by arbitrary six inch levels until actual stratigraphic levels became
clear enough to be used for control.
All ,artifacts as well as quantitative samples of bone, shell, antler,
and wood were saved and kept segregated by square and level. All
excavation material was sifted through one-fourth inch or finer mesh
screen. Profiles were drawn of trench walls at six locations. (Fig. 13).
Tlaz SI-IELTER FILL
The rather level, even surface of this shelter was littered with small,

PLATt~ 30. Sheep Shelter: a, looking northwest from canyon floor to a part
of the entrance to the shelter; b, interior of shelter after excavation, looking
southwest. Lower left stake is G-3.

190

ARCI~rEOLOCICAL

TEXAS

\’X (

~

~

H

?

?

?

A,

LEGEND
1947 EXCAVATIONS

~
o°~

!)

\\\\N\N\\
I\\N\\\\\N\ N\
\\\
\
\\\

\\\

FIGURI~

FEATURE

Q LARGE ROCK

12. Plan of Sheep Shelter (41-26D7-20).

SMALL STONES

SOCIETY

Vv~HITNEY RESERVOIR

~9~

A.

PROFILE

O--d

B.

PROFI{=E

C-I

ALONG LINE

ALONG LINE

9

14

GSTR AT U

O.

PROFILE

G-I

STRATUM

ALONG ,.LL~E

15

E. PROFILE

E-G

ALONG

LINE

20

:C~

SHEEP

SHELTER

4 1-26 D7 - 20
STRATUM

ZZ
0
I

E

P

PILE

C-F

ALONG

LINE

5
....
I
SCALEIN FEET

22

~~S
T
n A T U M

FlGUl~E 13. Six profiles of Sheep Shelter (41-26D7-20).

0
I

192

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

fallen roof rocks, twigs and leaves. The latter were especially concentrated toward the rear of the shelter where they had been blown by
the wind or carried by rodents that had burrowed along the rear wail
of the shelter, sometimes to depths of three or four feet or more. Other
surface trash included numerous mammal bones (mostly sheep, cow,
and deer bones), a few freshwater mussel shells and shells of landsnails and seventeen artifacts. Beneath the surface the floor fill was
seperable into four strata, each fairly level and of rather consistent
depth over the entire excavated portions of the shelter. The bedrock
floor beneath the fill seems to be quite level over the shelter, thus accounting for the uniformity of the strata above it. The total depth of
the floor fill ranged from 47 to 78 inches, but most of the excavated
area was about 72 inches.
STRATUR/f

I

The bottom stratum extends over all the bedrock floor of the shelter,
ranging in thickness from 16 to 9.4 inches but in most of the excavated
portions is about 9.2 inches thick. It is composed of heavily compacted,
brown soi! with some mixture of disintegrated and powdered roof rock.
Throughout the stratum are many large and smal! limestone blocks
that have fallen from the roof of the shelter. These range from the
size of cobbles to some that obviously weigh several tons (Fig. 13),
and are not apparent in the strata above. This layer of the shelter fill
is ahnost sterile of cultural material. Eight nondescript artifacts and
an occasional snail and mussel shell constituted the entire cultural
material recovered.
STRATUR~ 11

Stratum II is distinguished from the stratum below by a change in
color and consistency of the fill. It is composed mainly of disintegrated
and powdered roof rock mixed with light g~’ay ash, bits of charcoal,
and some freshwater mussel shells and landsnail shells, giving it a
generally light gray color as opposed to the much darker co!or of the
fill below. The ash appears to be randomly dispersed tln’ough the stratum and no lenses or concentrations were noted. This fill ranged in
thickness from 9,9. to 30 inches but is generally about 27 inches thick.
Artifacts were not abundant in this stratum but enough were found
to identify a euhural occupation. Burials No. 1, 2 and 3, and Feature
1, a slab-lined cist, were within the fill of Stratum II but were clearly
intrusive into it from the stratum above as indicated by the depressions in the top of the stratum and the discontinuity of the fill directly
above the eist and the burials (Fig. 13, c).

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

STRATUR~

193

III

The fill of this stratum is darker than in the stratum below and is
eomposed of brownish, gTay ash, much charcoal, powdered roof rock,
small pieces of roof rock, some of which are fire-broken, some windblown soil and, in the lower portion, great quantities of landsnail shells
and shells of freshwater nmssels (P1. 31 a, b). The ash, while generally
mixed through the fill, is also found in large lenses of ahnost pure, dark
ash, often underlain by a few fire-broken rocks. The snail shells, Bulimulus dealbatus moorean.us (Pfeiffer) are even more abundant than at
Pictograph Shelter and often appear to be in lenses, especially in the
lower half of the stratum. The fill is of a rather uniform thiekness of
approximately 20 inches, though it may vary 3 or 4 inches either way.
No stratigraphie distinction could be seen within this stratum separating the upper portion fi’om the lower portion, with the possible exception that the snarl shells were several times as numerous in the lower
12 or 13 inches. The artifact styles, however, indicate a major separation between the upper and lower portions. The artifacts from the
lower 12 o1" 13 inches of the stratum ( approximately 46% of the artifacts
from the site) are rather distinct from those in the upper 7 or 8 inches.
This clear typological separation, together with the marked decrease in
quantity of snarl and nmssel shells in the upper 7 to 8 inches of the
stratum has led me to divide Stratum III into an upper and a Lower
section for purposes of the artifact analysis.
All of the features found in the shelter were associated with Stratuna III. Feature 1, mentioned above, was a slab-lined cist with three
horizontal, limestone slabs forming the bottom, and sides composed
of semi-vertical slabs canted outward at an 80° angle. Just above the
center of" the cist was a large, horizontal slab placed as if to form a
lid (Fig 12, 13 c). In all respects it resembled the cist found in Pictograph Shelter. Feature 4 was a similar, slab-lined cist but was formed
of a double layer of slabs and had no "lid" (P1. 32, b). Both were
filled with the same dark, ashy mixture as the rest of the stratum fill.
Features 2, 3 and 5 were small, oval hearths filled with fire-broken
rocks, ash and charcoal (Table 9). Feature 1, as suggested above, had
been excavated well into Stratum II from the bottom of Stratum III.
The other four features were clearly within the lower 8 inches of
Stratum III.
Four of the five burials (Table 9) also appear to be associated with
the lower portion of Stratum III. Burial No. 1 lay near the shelter wall
at a depth of 22 inches below the bottom of Stratum III, but the disturbed fill above the burial pit clearly indicated that it had been ex-

194

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOC~TY

PLATE 31. Sheep Shelter a, profile of trench wall along line 16 from G to I;
b, profile of strata square wall along line 9 from H to G. Note B,tlimadm
shells.

~W’HITNEY RESERVOIR

195

PLATE 32. Sheep Shelter features: a, burial no. 3, a double burial, small
arrow indicates a projectile point between the vertebrae; b, slab-lined cist,
feature 4.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

196

TABLE 9
Tabulation of Features and Burials
Sheep Sheher
Description

No.

Depth

Square

F-1

44"

16-G

Oval, slah-lined eist with "lid"

30" x 24" x 8"

F-2

19"

ll-H

Small, oval, stone-filled hearth

g2" x 19" x 11"

F-3

21"

13-H

Small, oval, stone-filled hearth

19" x 17" x 9"

F-4

18"

18-E

Circular, slab-lined cist without "lid" but with
double layer of slabs. 28" x 28" x 10"

F-5

16"

22-D

Large, oval, stone-filled hearth 41" x 31" x 14"

B-1

48"

16-H

Adult, male, flexed, in oval pit, with head to the
east. Skull missing.

B-2

44"

18-F

Child, male (P), flexed, in oval pit, with head to
the west.

B-3

30"

13-D

Adult male and adolescent female, semi-flexed, in
oval pit, with heads to northeast.

B-4

17"

18-E

Child, male (P), flexed, in oval pit, with head to
the southwest.

B-5

10"

18-E

Adolescent, female, semi-flexed, in oval pit, with
head to the southwest.

cavated to that depth from the bottom of the stratum above. Buria!
No. 2 was away from the shelter wall and only four inches above the
level of Burial No. 1, but also was dearly an intrusion into Stratum II
from the bottom of Stratum III. Burial No. 3, only 6 inches below the
bottom of Stratum III, was a double burial in a large, oval pit toward
the front of the shelter (P1. 32, a; fig. 12) and had been dug into the
fill of Stratum II from the bottom few inches of Stratum III. Burial No.
4 was 7 inches above the bottom of Stratum III but the pit appeared
to be shallow and soil disturbance above the grave extended but a few
inches, suggesting that it had been excavated from the top of the lower
portion of Stratum III. This is not clear, though, since the separation of
the two parts of this stratum is not indicated by a clear-cut line. Burial
No. 4 may have originated with either the upper or lower portions of
the stratum. Burial No. 5, at a depth of but 10 inches from the surface,
is dearly a part of the last occupation of the site in the upper part of
Stratum III.
STRATU~,£ IV

This is the surface zone of the shelter. It is separated from Stratum

197

WHITNEY llESE1WOIB

III by a thin band of black, carbonized material that appears to be
burned dung and vegetal material. (P1. 31, a). The 3 to 4 inches of fill
above this carbonized line consist of loose, powdered roof rock, windblown trash and considerable quantities of mamnml bones and sheep,
goat, and cattle droppings. No features were found in this stratum and
artifacts that could clearly be associated with it, such as those from the
actual surface of the site, appeared to have come from the uppermost
portion of Stratum III. Due to the years of use of this site as a sheep
and cattle shelter there had been much surface disturbance and the few
artifacts that appear to have been within Stratum IV appear to have
been displaced from the top of the stratum below. This is supported
by the finding of a potsherd on the surface that fitted together with one
from depth of 8 inches, well within the fill of Stratum III. Stratum IV
then appears to have been a surface zone that accumulated after the
last Indian occupation.
OBJECTS

RECOVERED

A rather small inventory of artifacts, 529 specimens, was recovered
from the Sheep Shelter. All are of prehistoric origin and the vast majority are from two occupation zones, one at the bottom of the lower portion of Stratum III and the other in the upper portion of Stratum III.
The latter is a thin layer of occupation material at depths of 3 or 4
inches to 6 or 8 inches below sm’faee, suggesting that a short span of
time was covered, and while several brief, sporadic occupations are
indicated there do not appear to have been many such occupations in
this zone. Brief, sporadic occupations in the lower portion of Stratum
III were obviously more numerous and the materials were concentrated
at depts of 16 to 24 inches below surface. Between the two zones of artifact concentration was a zone of 6 or 8 inches where artifacts were not
abundant. A third occupation zone is indicated below these within
Stratum II at depths of 24 to 50 inches below surface, though the artifacts recovered from this zone are relatively few. The typological categories of specimens suggest a sequence of occupations by three cultural
groups-the Edwards Plateau Aspect, the Austin Focus of the Central
Texas Aspect, and the Toyah Focus of the Central Texas Aspect. Table
10 lists the several categories of objects recovered and the nmnbers of
each from the various stratigraphic levels.
POTTERY

There is a total of :39 potsherds from the site, five of which are decorated rimsherds with incised, diagonal lines; three are undecorated
rimsherds; three are decorated body sherds with incised, diagonal

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

198

lines and engraved cross-hatchings; four are basal sherds; and the
remainder are undecorated body sherds. All but three of these sherds
are from the upper few inches of Stratum III and represent but seven
or eight vessels.
TABLE 10
Tabulation of Objects Recovered from Sheep Shelter

Object
Pottery Sherds (39)
Maxey Noded Redware
Canton Incised
Sanders Plain
Miscellaneous Brushed
Other sherds

I

II

......
......
....
1
__
....

Arrow Points (62)
Perdiz
Cliffton
Alba
Scallorn
Fresno

2

Fragments
Dart Points (64)
Yarbrough
Ellis
Pahnillas
Darl
Pedernales
Bulverde
Triangmlar
Fragments

1

Scrapers (160)
Spall scrapers
End scrapers, snub-nose
Side scrapers
Cores (26)
Miscellaneous

4
6
3
2
I
I

2

Drills ( 5 )
Ova! base, delicate
Yarbrough base, large
Triangular base, large
Unshaped base, large
Knives (31)
Friday
Covington
Miscellaneous, crude

Lower
III

Upper
lII

Random

1
1

19
__
7
__
8
__
....
2
__

19
7
9
I
3

2
__
I
15
4
9

II
._
5
_
4
_.
__
3
....
6
__

13
5
5
2O
4
15

7
5
2
2
1
2
9
6

3
I
I

14
12
6
4
3
3
9
13

1

1

1
1
1
2
10
9
12

1

1

5
2
3

4
6
6

i
1
2

2

22

66
1
9

41
2
9

2

Total

13

6

137
3
20
26

199

WI-IITNEY I~ESERVOIR

TABLE 10 (Continued)

Object

I

Ground Stone (31)
Hammerstones
Metate
Limestone slabs
Manos
tlematite

II

9.
_.
.....
__
2
__
1
....

Lower
III

Upper
III

Bandom

Total

1
1
1
1
1

3
__
....
3
__
9
__
6
__

6
1
6
11
7

2
7
7

2
3
6
5
3

_
__
__
._
__
__
_
__

4
14
13
11
6

....
1
__
2
3

8
5
43

Antler and Bone (55)

Antler flakers
Antler punches
Ulna tools
Bone awls
Bone pins
Bone flaker
Fishhook blanks
Miscellaneous cut bone

....
1
3
....
_
_.

1
5
1
2
....
....
......

I
2
4

i
2
4

Shell (56)

Mussel, drilled

....

Mussel, smoothed lip
Mussel, roughened lip

....
_
I0

TOTALS

8

83

8
4
28
243

185

10

529

Vessel 1, represented by 19 sherds of the type Maxey Noded Redware
(P1. 33, t) is a thin-walled water bottle with a bright red flhn over all
exterior surfaces except the bottom of the fiat base. It differs from the
type description (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954, p. 322) only in that
there are no nodes or punetations on the sherds that are present but
instead there is a narrow band of crude, engraved cross-hatching
around the base of the neck. The paste is extremely fine, compact, and
hard and of a distinctive, blue-gray color with a thin layer of buff color
on the exterior surface beneath the bright red fihn. The exterior surface is highly polished but the interior is extremely rough with horizontal striations and coil marks visible. This is a Sanders Focus pottery
type from northeast Texas, and Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks ( 1954, p. 189,)
suggest dates of A.D. 800-1200 for this focus as a late complex of the
Gibson Aspect in the Caddoan area.
Vessel 2, represented by two rimsherds and two body sherds of the
type Canton Incised (PI. 33, s, v) is a thick-walled bowl of tannish
brown color with diagonally incised, parallel lines around the rim
(Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954, p. 2,54). All four sherds are from the

9,00

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

PLATE 33. Arrow points and pottery from Sheep Shelter; a-e, Perdiz Points;
f-k, Scallorn Points; l-n, Alba Points; o-q, Fresno Points; r, sherd of vessel
no. 5; s, v, sherds of vessel no. 2, Canton Incised; t, sherd of vessel no. 1,
Maxey Noded Redware; u, sherd of vesse! no. 3, Canton Incised.

WHITNEY IIESEBVOIR

201

upper 6 inches of Stratum III. This is another Sanders Focus pottery
type.
Vessel 3 is another bowl of the type Canton Incised and is represented by tln’ee rimsherds with diagonal, parallel, incised lines (P1. 33,
u). All three sherds are from the bottom of the upper portion of Stratum III.
Vessel 4 is a carinated bowl of the type Sanders Plain, represented by
two rimsherds and seven body sherds. It is of a coarse, hard paste
moderately to well polished on both sm’faces and dark brown to
ahnost black. All but one sherd are fronl the upper 6 inches of Sh’atum
III and that one may be from a separate vessel as it was in the bottom
of Stratum III. Since it was near the rear wall of the shelter it may
have been displaced by rodent activity.
Vessel 5 may actually be two vessels as the two sherds were found
so widely separated. One rimsherd of a bottle (P1. 33, r) was found in
the top 6 inches of Stratum III near the center of the site, and the
body sherd, also apparently of a bottle, was found in Test Pit 1 just outside the shelter in the bottom of Stratum III. Paste, color, texture, and
surface treatment are identical. They are tan, with some fire-mottling,
well smoothed on both surfaces and heavily tempered with day-grit
and crushed bone. Thickness is 6 nnn. to 8 mm. and there is no decoration on either sherd. It is a vessel of Caddoan style but the specific type
is not known.
Vessel 6 is represented by a single, thick, brushed body sherd of light
brown color and fine, compact paste with clay-grit temper. The brushed
exterior has been smoothed over and the interior is smoothed. It was
found in the top of the lower portion of Stratum III.
Vessel 7 is represented by a tiny, black, polished sherd of compact
paste with finely pulverized bone temper. It has a finely incised, crosshatched decoration on the exterior.
YVith one or two exceptions these sherds are all from the very latest
occupations of the site and the majority of them were concentrated
in the eastern half of the site. They are predominantly of types associated with the Sanders Focus of late Gibson Aspect times and are thus
trade items from the Caddoan area of northeast Texas of the period of
A.D. 800 to 1200. Thus a terminal date of no later than A.D. 1200 may
be assumed for the latest occupations of Sheep Shelter if the interpretation of this pottery in its homeland is correct.
CHIPPED STONE

Compared to Buzzard Shelter and Pictograph Shelter, the chipped
stone tools from the Sheep Shelter are remarkably few. Together the

20"2

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

several classes of these artifacts outnumber all other classes of artifacts
in the site, but the diagnostic specimens such as projectile points, drills,
and certain forms of scrapers are not nunlerous, and it is of more than
passing interest that hammerstones, cores, and scrapers in general are
so few. A total of 348 chipped stone tools was recovered froni this site.
These are tabulated by level in Table 10 and each category is described
below.
AIIIIO~,,V POINTS: The small projectile points are all quite clearly identifiable by type and the 69, specimens conform rather well to the type
descriptions as detailed in the literature, except for the 15 fragmentary
specimens, but even these obviously belong to one or the other of the
five types discussed.
The thirteen Perdiz Points (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954, p. 504)
are rather large for the type as described and for the most part conform rather well to the style that Jelks (196"2, pp. 24-5) distinguishes
as the Whitney variety. The blades are long and tile edges tend to be
serrated. They are, with two exceptions, confined to the upper 4 inches
of Stratum III. The two exceptions are from only slightly deeper in
the middle portion of Stratum III. The weights of these points range
from 0.4 to 2.7 grams with a mean of 1.4 grams (P1. 33, a-e).
All five of the Cliffton Points (Suhni, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954, p.
496) were found in the upper 4 inches of Stratmn III. They conform
well to the type as described and, like this type in other nearby sites,
e.g., Kyle, Buzzard, Blum, Pictograph, are approximately one-third
as numerous as the associated Perdiz Points. Weights range from 0.3
to 3.1 grams with a mean of 1.2 grams.
The five Alba Points (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954, p. 494) conform well to the type as described, except that the squared stem
tends to round off almost to a point and yet they are dearly not the
pointed stem of the Perdiz type (P1. 33, l-n). Four of these are from
the upper 6 inches of Stratum III and one is from the mid-section
of that stratum. Weights range from 0.6 to 1.9 grams with a mean of
1.1 grams.
The Scallorn Points are more numerous than any other type in the
site (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954, p. 506) and have a different
stratigraphie distribution than the types discussed above. Three were
found in the upper 6 inches of Stratum III, fifteen in the middle and
lower portions of that stratum and two in the upper part of Stratum
II. There appear to be two varieties of this point type but they do
not conform to the varieties suggested by Jelks (1962, pp. 27-31) nor
do they appear to have stratigraphic significance. Slightly over half

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

9,03

the specimens have long blades with serrated edges (P1. 33, i-k) and
the others are short and stubby with little o1" no serration. (P1. 33, g, h).
One specimen may actually be of a different type but appears to be
a long-bladed Seallorn Point without barbs (P1. 33, f). Weights range
from 0.5 to 2.9 grams with a mean of 1.1 grams.
Only four Fresno Points were found (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks,
1954, p. 498) all of which were in the middle portion of Stratum III.
These are vel7 carefully chipped triangular points with straight bases
and sides. Weights range h’om 0.2 to 0.9 grams with a mean of 0.7
grams (P1. 33, o-q).
The remaining fifteen specimens are fragments with the base
missing. Four are extremely long-bladed with serrated edges and are
probably Seallorn Points but not enough of the bases remain to be
certain. The others may be of an), of the types discussed above.
Moderately clear stratigraphie disth~etions are seen between the
several arrow point types. Perdiz Points, Cliffton Points and Alba
Points are confined almost entirely to the topmost occupation level of
the site as are the pottery sherds. These points are also predominantly
from the east end of the shelter as are the sherds. The pottery types
that are identifiable are Sanders Focus types confined to the eastern
portion of the shelter. It seems dear that these sherds and the three
Toyah Focus an’ow point types mentioned above are all a part of a
rather brief occupation and that this was the last prehistoric occupation of the site. The Seallorn Points and the Fresno Points are predominantly from lower stratigraphie levels and are clearly earlier than
the Perdiz, Cliffton, and Alba Points and also earlier than the Sanders
Focus potsherds. These Seal!orn Points, furthermore, are scattered
over the central and western portions of the site and, vertically, within
both the middle and lower portions of Stratum III. It is thus apparent
that they represent a series of brief occupations of the larger part of
the site by Austin Focus peoples prior to the Toyah Focus occupation.
DART POINTS: Compared to any of the other excavated sites in the area
the Sheep Shelter provided a really large quantity of the larger projeetile points that were presumably used as tips for atlatl darts. There
are 64 specimens distributed principally between Stratum II and the
lower portion of Sh’atum III. These points conform moderately well
to the type descriptions as detailed in the literature and six of the
described types are represented.
The most numerous dart point type is the Yarbrough Point (Suhm,
Krieger, and Jelks, 1954, p. 499,). The 14 specimens were found mainly
in the lower to middle portion of Stratum III, but 4 were found deep

204

TEXAS ABCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

in Stratum II and 3 were found in the upper portion of Stratum III
(P1. 34, d, h, i; P1. 35, d). These examples range in weight from 4.6
to 12.0 grams with a mean of 6.6 grams.
There are 12 Ellis Points (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954, pp. 420-1)
almost equally divided between the middle portion of Stratum II and
the lower portion of Stratum III (P1. 34, a-c, e). They range in weight
from 4.5 to 13.3 grams with a mean of 7.2 grams. Two specimens approach the characteristics of the Ensor Point (P1. 34, f, g) but the
proportions of length to breadth to thickness suggest that they belong
in the Ellis category.
I have called six specimens Palmillas Points (Suhm, Krieger, and
Jelks, 1954, p. 462), even though I consider this type as described to
be a heterogeneous mixture of styles. The points listed in this categm7
from the Sheep Shelter are rather small, ranging from 3.4 em. to
3.7 era. in length bv 2.0 cm. to 2.9 era. in width (P1. 35, c). Weights
range from 3.2 to 4.4 grams with a mean of 3.7 grams. With one
exception they are all from the uppermost portion of Stratum II and
the lower portion of Stratum III.
The four Darl Points (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954, p. 414) have
the same stratigraphic distribution as do the Palmillas Points and
conform well to the characteristics of the type as described (P1. 35,
b). Weights range from 7.1 to 9.3 grams with a mean of 8.0 grams.
The most distinctive and cleareut dart point type in the site is the
Pedernales Point (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954, p. 468) of which
there are three (P1. 34, j, k). One of these was from Stratum I, one
from Stratum II and one from the lower portion of Stratum III. Except
for two dart point fragments this is the only dearly typable artifact from Stratum I in the entire site, but it was clearly in situ at a
depth of 66 inches.
Three examples of Bulverde Points (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954,
p. 404) were found in Stratum II and the lower portion of Stratum
III (P1. :35, a). l~ather poor examples of the type, these are not well
made but the general characteristics as described are present. Weights
were not taken as the tip sections are broken.
Nine well-made triangular dart points were all recovered from the
lower portion of Stratum III. (P1. 35, f-h). These have straight to convex bases, convex edges and are quite thin. They range from 3.3 cm.
to 4.2 cm. in length, 1.8 era. to 2.6 em. in width, and 0.4 era. to 0.7
era. in thickness. Weights range from 3.2 to 5.9 grams with a mean
of 4.1 grams.

WHITNEY ttESERVOIR

~05

PLATE 34. Dart points from Sheep Shelter: a-c, e, Ellis Points; d, h, i,
Yarbrough Points; f, g, Ellis or Ensor Points; j, k, Pedernales Points; l,
Palmillas Point.

~06

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

PLATE 35. Dart points and knives from Sheep Shelter; a, Bulverde Point;
b, Darl Point; c, Palmillas Point; d, e, Yarbrough Points; f-h, triangular
points or "Cleburne" Knives; i, k, "Friday" Knives; j, "Covington" Knife.

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

207

The remaining 13 dart points are unidentifiable tip fragments from
the lower three occupation levels.
DRILLS: Only five chipped stone drills were recovered. None is complete but the fragments of four are large and heavy, quite unlike the
tin),, finely made drills from the Buzzard Shelter. The one exception
has a well-shaped, oval base and a fine, well-made shank. One large
drill is made from a reworked Yarbrough Point, one has a short triangular base with an expanding shank, and two have rough unshaped
bases.

KNIVES: Perhaps the specimens listed above as triangular dart points
could be included within the classification of knives under the type
that Jelks (1962, p. 44) has called Cleburne Knives (P1. 35, f-h). I
feel that they were probably dart points, though, because of their
small size. There are, though, nine whole and 22 fragments of specimens that appear to have been knives. These were distributed throughout the several strata with no apparent concentration of any type
within any one level. There are no beveled knives in the eollection
and it is of some interest to note that there is no chipped stone tool
of any kind with beveled edges in the entire collection from this site.
There are four complete and six fragmentary examples of the Friday
Knife (P1. 35, i, k) that clearly conform to the type description (Jelks,
1962, p. 42). These are well made, triangular specimens with straight
to slightly concave bases and straight to slightly convex edges. The
Covington Knife (Jelks, 1962, p. 42-4) is represented by three con>
plete and six fragmentary examples (P1. 35, j). These triangular knives
have convex edges, convex bases, and careful workmanship over the
entire specimen. Twelve specimens are crudely made by percussion
chipping, are asymnaetrical in shape but are all of generally subtriangular form. One of these, a whole specimen and perhaps the
crudest of the lot, was recovered from the upper few inches of
Stratum I.
SPALL SCRAPERS: There are 137 small, thin spalls with some chips removed from one or more edges. Most of these spalls have only tiny
flakes removed, suggesting that they were formed by usage rather than
by intentional flaking. A few, though, are intentionally chipped along
one or more edges. Three of these each has a small, concave section
of edge with fine pressure flaking apparent and indicate usage as
spokeshaves. Six have serrations chipped along one or more edges.
END SCRAPERS: Only three snub-nose end scrapers were recovered and
they are extremely crude, small examples. One was from near the bot-

208

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

tom of Stratum III, the other two from near the top of that level.
SIDE SCRAI’ERS: Other scrapers from the site were rare and crudely
made. Of the 20 specimens found, six are more or less circular in form,
4 era. to 5 era. in diameter and 1.0 era. to 1.5 era. thick, roughly chipped and each retaining a small portion of the original nodular cortex.
Nine specimens are of various !ozenge to sub-rectangular shapes, are
roughly chipped along one or both longer edges and one or both
ends, and are 4 era. to 5 era. long, 2 em. to 3 cm. wide and 0.5 era. to
1.5 cm. thick. The remaining five scrapers are of irregular, oval shape
with rough chipping along one portion of the edge. These are barely
more than cores that have been used for scraping tools but the one
edge that is chipped is sufficiently so to set these specimens apart from
the rest of the cores. Except for two specimens these are all from the
two upper occupation levels.
CORES: There are 26 small, battered fragments of the1% flint, or chalcedony that appear to be the cores from which spalls were struck to
fashion artifacts.
The chipped stone tools, other than the projectile points, are notable
more for their non-specific style and for their relative lack of abundance than for theft" distinctiveness. Compared to other sites in the area
they are crude and rare and none is suggestive of any specific cultural complex. These are simply the sorts of crude tools that might be
expected in ahnost any kind of site of any time period anywhere in
North America.
GROUND STONE

Artifacts of ground, pecked, scratched, or battered stone are more
abundant and more distinctive in the Sheep Shelter than in either
the Pictograph or Buzzard Shelters. Metates, manos, hammerstones,
and stone slabs are all present and of distinctive forms. There are but
six hammerstones but each is well used, about the size of a temais
ball, generally of spherical shape, and well battered on one or more
sides. These are not just random stones used briefly and discarded.
There are not many of them but each was used repeatedly and shows
a considerable amount of battering. They were found in all three of
the upper occupation levels.
There is but a single metate fragment, or grinding slab, but it is
well made and extensively used. It is made from a large, thin slab of
sandstone, carefully shaped on all sides with rounded edges and the
bottom has been ground smooth. It is of oval shape, approximately
eleven inches wide and fifteen inches long, to judge by the remaining

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

209

fragment. The concave upper surface is one inch deep and worn
almost through at the center. It may be that it did wear so thin that
it broke before it was abandoned. It was used with an oval grinding
motion of the mano as is clearly indicated by the shape of the concavity and by oval striations around the sides of the concavitv. It was
found in the bottom of Stratum III. Six other fragments of stone slabs
with slight evidence of grinding on one surface were found. These
are comparatively thick, 2 to 3 inches, and so fragmentary that the
general shape is not discernible. Probably these limestone slabs were
used in some aspect of cooking as all are fire-broken. Similar slabs
were found in the Pictograph Shelter.
Eleven manos or mano fragments were found, nine of which were
in the upper few inches of Stratmn III. Six of these are well-shaped
sub-rectangular sandstone manos with a single, faceted, working surface, indicating quite clearly a back-and-fo1~h motion in usage, and
extensive use. They are 10.5 cm. to 14.5 era. long, 7.9 era. to 9.5 era,
wide, and 3.1 era. to 5.8 era. thick. The other five, mostly fragments,
,are not well shaped but are simple quartzite cobbles and usage surfaces indicate a rotary motion.
Seven pieces of hematite, scratched and worn into faceted surfaces
were found mainly in the upper few inches of Stratum III.
ANTLER AND BONE

Antler fragments were found in al! occupation levels. One specimen is the base of an antler that has been split longitudinally. Four
are tine fragments with the tips blunted off from use, probably as
flaking tools (P!. 36, g, h). One is a cut mid-section of antler and
the other twelve are cut tines with sharpened tips that probably
were used as awls or punches.
Nearly all of the 37 bone tools were found in Stratmn III. The
two specimens from Stratum II were found near the rear wall of the
shelter and may have been displaced from their original location by
rodent activity. Ten specimens are made from deer ulnae and the
three complete ones have broad blunt tips, suggesting use as flaking tools (P1. 36, e). The 7 broken specimens were probably also
flaking tools as the remaining portions are broad and striated (P1.
36, c, d). Three ulna tools are made from the ulnae of smaller
animals of approximately the size of a dog or coyote (P1. 36, b) and
appear to have been used as awls as the shaft of each is scraped to
an oval rather than flat, cross-section and tapers toward what must
have been a sharp point before it was broken.
There are seventeen sharp pointed bone tools that appear to have

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

PLATE 36. Bone and antler artifacts from Sheep Shelter; a, Splinter awl;
b-e, ulna awls; f, splinter awl; g, h, antler flakers; i-k, delicate splinter awls;
note that j has been made from the waste manufacture of a fishhook.

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

211

been used as awls or punches or pins. One is a heavy awl with a
sharp point, made from a split deer leg bone (P1. 36, a). Nine are
made from sections of mammal bone and are well smoothed and
polished over theft" entire length. They have oval eross-seetions that
taper gently fi’om 4 mm. to 7 ram. in diameter to a sharp tip, and
those that are whole or nearly whole are 10 em. to 13 era. long (P1.
36, f). One similar, sharp-pointed awl is made from a long garfish
bone. Six delicate, sharp-pointed tools are of unknown use but
may have served as pins or needles. They are smal!, well-polished,
and have long, delicate, sharp points. One of these appears to have
been made from the mid-section of the ulna of a small mammal and
is squarely cut at the upper end (P1. 36, k), four others are made
of bird bone (P1. 36, i) and one is made from a fine splinter of mmnreal bone. One bone tool resembles the long awls mentioned above
but has a blunt striated tip and appears to have been used as a flaking tool.
Two specimens are the basal stumps from which fishhooks have
been cut. One is a deer tibia section and the other is the leg bone
of a large bird (P1. 36, j). The latter has had the tip of the fishhook
stump further polished for use as a fine-pointed pin. Other bone
artifacts include a cut and scratched wingbone from a large waterfowl, a notched leg bone of a large wading bird, a cut and scratched
rabbit scapula and a cut section of mammal bone.
SHELL

Shells of the landsnail Bulimulus dealbatus mooreanus (Pfeiffer)
were extremely abundant in the lower six inches of Stratum III of
Sheep Shelter but were relatively rare in a!l other stTata of the site.
(P1. 31, a, b). These shells were scattered at random within the fill
but in places were accumulated in concentrations of several thousand.
In the Pictograph Shelter these snail shells were abundant, but in
this one occupation zone of Sheep Shelter they were even more so.
Many of the Bulimulus shells (perhaps 3 to 5% of them) had a
small lateral hole in the larger end near the opening (PI. 19, j, k).
Presumably the snails were a major staple of diet at the time of oeeupation of the lower portion of Stratum III. Whether the holes
were punched in these shells to extract the meat or as a means of
suspending them as ornaments is not known.
Fresh-water mussel shells, Elliptio berlandieri (Lea), Ouadrula
houstonensis (Lea), Lampsilis [allaciosa (Smith), and Proptera berlandieri (Lea), were identified from the site. Predominantly these
were of the first two speeies. Like the landsnails, the mussels

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

were concentn’ated near the bottom of Stratmn III, but some were
recovered from each oeeupation level. Among these shells are a
few that had been made into artifacts. Seven specimens eaeh had
a hole drilled from the inside, near the hinge, and one specimen
had a pair of holes drilled h’om the inside near the center of the
shell. Five mussel shells have partially smoothed lips but none
so extremely worn as the specimens of this sort from Pictograph
Shelter. Forty-three other mussel shells appear to have intentionally
roughened lip edges and/or breakage across the grain, suggesting
use as digging tools or some such tool for rough usage.
SUNIN{ARY AND INTERPRETATION

The Sheep Shelter (41-26D7-20) is a large, open rockshelter in a
limestone outcrop along the north side of a small intermittent tributary of the Nolans River in northern Hill County, Texas, three miles
south of the town of Blmn. River Basin Surveys tests in 1947 and
excavations in 1950 resulted in the remowfl of approximately 25% of
the total floor fill of the site.
Deposits of fill on the floor of the shelter are rather level throughout and are separable into fotu" strata on the basis of physical appearance with a combined depth of six feet. The bottom stratum,
Stratum I, is a dark-colored zone, 22 inches thick, containing large
roof rocks and ahnost no cultural material. The eight specimens
recovered from that stratum nmst be considered as fortuitous intrusions from above and the stratum itself as a preoccupation zone.
The earliest occupation in the shelter is indicated by considerable
amounts of ash and charcoal, some mussel and snail shells and a
small inventory of artifacts scattered through the 9.7 inches of fill in
Stratum II Yarbrough, Ellis, Pahnillas, Darl, Pedernales, and Bulverde Points were found in this stratum together x~th Friday and
Covington Knives, crudely-made knives, spall scrapers, side scrapers,
cores, hammerstones, a mano, a few antler and bone tools, and mussel
shells with roughened lips. The only arrow points from this stratum
were two Scallorn Points from the upper two inches of the deposit
and these may well have been actually a part of the stratum above.
This assemblage suggests a series of brief, sporadie occupations by
peoples of the Edwards Plateau Aspect (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks,
1954, pp. 102-12), but the total quantity of material is so small and
the distinctions between the loci of this aspeet are so poorly known
that it seems inadvisable to distinguish this eomponent as to foeus.
Geographic location of the site and the presence of Pedernales Points

~HITNEY I~ESEIIVOIII

213

in the assemblage suggest the Round Rock Focus, but there is not
enough material to identify the complex further.
This occupation zone terminates in a distinct change in color and
natm’e of the fill. Stratmn III, above, is a darker zone of ash, charcoal, powdered roof rock, and abundant cultural material mixed
with some wind-deposited soil. This stratum is approximately 21
inches thick, extending to within 3 or 4 inches of the surface without
noticeable change in the natural deposits. The culttu-al material,
though, is quite different in the lower 14 or 15 inehes of Stratum III
than in the upper 5 or 6 inches of that stratum.
The series of occupations, in the lower part of Stratum III, is
the major one in the shelter and appears to have been separated from
the earlier occupations, of Stratum II, by a substantial period of
time as the artifacts are rather few in the upper portion of Stratum II
and the break between the two strata is clearcut and distinct. There
is no way, though, of suggesting how long a period was involvedperhaps a century or two, perhaps several centuries. The shorter
span seems more likely since the same types of dart points, knives,
and scrapers were found in both, suggesting a development of the
one complex out of the other. The cultural distinction between the
material from Stratum II and that from the lower portion of Stratum
III lies mainly in additions to the inventory of traits. New traits in
the lower part of Stratum III include small arrow points indicating
the use of the bow and arrow, pottery, stone-filled hearths, slablined cists, flexed and semi-tlexed burials within the shelter, abundant use of landsnails and freshwater mussels, and use of the shells
of the latter as tools and ornaments. The presence of Scallorn Points
as the dominant projectile point style, supplemented by Fresno
Points and a continuation of the use of the same, large dart point
types that were found in the level below suggests that this lower
portion of Stratum III was occupied by peoples of the Austin Focus
of the Central Texas Aspect. (Jelks, 1962, pp. 84-99). This was a
series of sporadic occupations, perhaps even seasonal, as the materials were found at different levels throughout the 14 or 15 inches
of the occupation zone.
The third and final occupation of the shelter was represented in
the upper 5 or 6 inches of Stratmn III by the dominance of Perdiz,
Cliffton, and Alba Points to the near exclusion of Scallorn Points and
the larger dart point forms. Other distinguishing features of this
component are the presence of Sanders Focus pottery types, a finepointed drill with an oval base, bone fishhooks, and the absence of

214

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

stone-filled hearths, slab-lined eists, and a very marked decrease in
the use of snails and mussels. Burials within the shelter appear,
though, to have continued h~to this complex. This appears to be
clearly a component of the Toyah Focus of the Central Texas Aspect
(Jelks, 1962, pp. 84-99) and the last Indian occupation of the site.
Stratmn IV is a thin, 3- to 4-inch, sm’face zone containing modern
animal refuse, windblown trash and powdered roof rock but little
cultural material. The minor amounts of cultural material from this
zone had obviously been displaced from the zone below by modern
animals in their use of the site as a shelter from storm.
There are no carbon-14 dates for this site nor do I know of any
for Edwards Plateau Aspect components elsewhere. The dates obtained from the Blum l{oekshelter and the Kyle Site (Jelks, 19622,
p. 98), though, provide some indication of the probable temporal
placement for the Austin and Toyah Focus components at the Sheep
Shelter and suggest at least a terminal position for the Edwards
Plateau Aspect component here. The Kyle Site dates of A.D. 12276
165 years to A.D. 1561 -+- 130 years for the Toyah Focus, provide a
time span, including the plus or minus factor, of approximately A.D.
1100 to A.D. 1700. The estimated dates of the Sanders Focus of A.D.
800 to A.D. 122.00 (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954, p. 1822} would
argue for the earlier part of that time span. On this basis a temporal
position within the 13th century may be suggested for the Toyah
Focus component at the Sheep Shelter. The Austin Focus dates
from the Kyle Site and the Blum t{oekshelter of A.D. 551 ± 1220 years
to A.D. 971 ± 170 years, provide a time span, including the plus or
minus factor, of approximately A.D. 430 to A.D. 1140. If the single
Sanders Focus potsherd from that component is significant, a date
toward the middle or latter part of that time span would be suggested. The Austin Focus component here is of some duration as it
fully occupies approximately 15 inches of undisturbed shelter fill.
Perhaps a temporal position, then, within the 8th to llth centuries
would be reasonable. The Edwards Plateau Aspect component is
obviously e~u’lier than the Ausin Focus component at this site and
probably by at least one or two centuries-possibly more. A terminal
date for the Edwards Plateau Aspect component then may be suggested within the 6th or 7th eentm’ies. Its duration may have been
as much as 5 or 6 centuries, if the 227 inches of deposition in this
stratum is consistent with the deposition rate in the later levels, and
if the dates of those levels are eolTeet.

WHITNEY I~ESERVOIR

215

THE STEELE SITE (41-26D7-38)
DESCRIPTION OF THE SITE

The Steele Site is a large, sh’atified, open, camp site on the upper
(40-foot) terrace of the Brazos River in Hill County, Texas. It was
discovered in 1948 by the late George C. Benson, who lived nearby
and had assisted with the earlier River Basin Surveys reconnaissance
of the Whitney Reservoir area, and was recorded in the River Basin
Surveys files during the excavation season of 1950. The site was named
for Mr. Charles Steele who, at that time, owned the land on which it
was located, and it was given the numerical designation 41-26D7-38
in the standard system of site designation.
It is situated on the east bank of the Brazos River 1.5 miles below
the confluence of that river with the Nolans River. It is 6.5 miles
southwest of the town of Blum and the adjacent Blum Roekshelter;
4 miles southwest of the Sheep Shelter; 4.5 miles west-northwest of
the Pictograph and Buzzard Shelters; 12.5 miles northwest of the
town of Whitney; and 14 miles north-northwest of the Whitney Dana,
by amine.
Here the channel of the Brazos River flows about midway between
the two valley margins with a broad floodplain on either side formed
by the lower (9,0-foot) terrace, near the river, and the upper (40foot) terrace, extending to the edge of the uplands (Fig. 14 b). The
site occupies a position on the highest elevation of the upper terrace,
250 feet from the river’s edge and 2,000 feet from the edge of the
uplands at an elevation of approximately 530 feet above mean sea
level. The lower terrace here is composed of two "benches" or substages. The first "bench" is 13 feet above normal river level and approximately 35 feet wide. The second "bench" rises 7 feet above
the first and is about 40 feet wide. From this point the upper terrace rises steeply to an elevation of 39 feet above normal river level,
extends a distance of 175 feet and gradually rises at the edge of the
site to an e!evation of 50 feet above the normal river level.
The lower (20-foot) terrace is inundated annually by normal river
flooding but floodwaters rarely have reached the upper (40-foot)
terrace within the last century. Heavy timber growth covers the
lower terrace and the edge of the upper telTace to the edge of the
site, but the wide surface of the upper terrace from the site to the
edge of the uplands is cleared and has been in cultivation for some
65 years. Cotton is grown here but plowing has been consistently
shallow, about 4 inches, and has not eroded ninth, if any, of the
surface away. Local residents state that the present extent of timber

216

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOCICAL

SOCIETY

is about as it was before cultivation was begun and that the present
cotton fields were covered with a good stand of tall grass.
The areal extent of the surface occupation of the site covered less
than half an acre and was indicated by an abundance of freshwater
mussel shells, burned and broken rocks, flint and chert chips, and
some chipped and ground stone artifacts but very few bone fragments. Excavation clearly indicated that the sub-surface extent of
the site was considerably larger and some of the deeper occupation
zones appear to have been as much as 3 or 4 acres in extent.
An ample water supply was available nearby from several good
springs that flowed from the base of the upper terrace, one of which
still flowed more than 9,0 gallons a minute during the excavation of
the site in 1950. Erosion along this terrace edge indicates that these
springs have been even more productive in the past.
The only White occupation in the vicinity was an old house located
500 yards to the southwest of the site and a modern field road and
fence along the edge of the cotton field cutting across the northwest
edge of the site.
ARCHEOLOGICAL FIELD

WORK

The l~iver Basin Surveys field party visited the Steele Site, made
surface collections, and dug four test pits in March 1950, and spent
the first two weeks of April excavating a portion of the site.
An arbitrary datum point, station 0-0, was established near the north
edge of the site and a grid system of five-foot squares was laid out
along the north-south and east-west base lines from this datum point.
The area of abundant surface refuse was marked off with wooden
stakes at each five-foot interval and the surrounding area was staked
off at 25-foot intervals for a distance of 200 feet south and east of
the datum point and 100 feet north and west of the datum point. The
top of the base stake at station 0-0, level with the top of the plow
furrow ridges, was established as elevation 0. Each square in the
grid system was identified by the stake at its northeast corner.
Thirty-seven squares were excavated and these were supplemented
by forty-five test holes dug with an 8-inch diameter post-hole auger,
mainly in the areas outside the area of surface concentration. Most
of the squares were excavated to a depth of 3 feet but several were
excavated to depths of 4, 5, 8, 12, and 15 feet. The auger holes were
dug to depths of 4, 8, 12, and 15 feet. Septa, 4 inches wide, were left
between the adjacent excavated squares for stratigraphie control.
The septa were cumbersome, difficult to maintain, detrimental to

217

~,¥HITNEY ItESEI:IVOIH

photography, and useless so long as care was taken to record the

stratigraphy when the square was initially dug.
A map of the entire site was made and profiles drawn of each of
the squares by use of a plane table and alidade set up at station
0-0. Vertical control was maintained throughout by 6-inch levels
(Fig. 14, 15, 16).
STRATIGRAPHY

AND FEATURES

Initial testing of the site clearly demonstrated that both natural
and cultural stratigraphy were present in the sub-surface deposits
and that cultural material extended to considerable depths. Accordingly it was proposed that a bulldozer or other heavy equipment be
secured toward the end of the excavation season to uncover the lower
levels of occupation. Such equipment proved to be unavailable,
though, and all of the excavation was done by hand. Consequently
the upper oceupation zones, to depths of 3 feet, are rather well known
but the deeper occupation zones are known only from the auger
holes and tile few squares that were excavated to depths of 4 to 15
feet. Even at the lowest excavated depths cultural material was found
over an extensive area of the site and sterile soil had not been reached
so the total depth of the site is not actually known.
Within the excavated 15 feet of deposits, eight cleareut stratigraphic zones were noted with distinct soil lines separating them.
Each was of rather uniform thickness throughout the site. (Fig. 16).
These have been designated Strata I tIn’ough VIII from bottom to top.
The soil lines separating these strata consist of dark, humie bands,
sharply defined on their upper surfaces and gradually fading out in
the few inches below to blend with the rest of the fill. Throughout
all of these strata the natural fill appears to be about the same and
consists of brownish sandy clays mixed with some loam.
The areal extent of the several occupations appears to increase with
depth and the older occupations seem to cover two or three times
as nmch area as do the later ones. Surface material was scattered
over approximately a half acre. Auger holes excavated outside that
area produced no cultural material in the upper foot or two, but did
yield refuse at lower depths, indicating an areal extent of at least one
and a half or two acres.
STRATA I TO IV

The lower four strata are poorly known from the minor amount of
excavation that was deep enough to penetrate them. They are clearly
occupation zones and consist of sandy clays and loam separated at

TEXAS

AI~CHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

TO RIVER

.............. ..,.........

)ATUM o o
¯ OINT~

[[]
H
H

..~{
,.%

+

e7

+

(=B

9o:

+

,oo

PROFILE

FROt~

RIVER

ACROSS

SITE

TAKEN

ALONG LINE

X-Y

STEELE

SITE

41-26D7-38

FE{T

DRAW~ By R L STEpH~NSON
TR~CE0 By R 6 pRiCE

FIGURE

T380
3-9-1954

14. Steele Site (41-26D7-38); a, plan; b, profile across the site.

219

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

I
W5

I

WIO

1
0 "

I
E5

I
EIO

I
El5

$25 --

$50 --

$35 --

$40 --

$45 --

$50 --

S55--

S60 --

$65 --

$70 --

$75 --

%

$80 --

$85 --

$90--

LEGEND
S95--

~)

POCKET

CACHE

STONE LINED

SIO0--

~

HEARTH

MUSSEL SHELL
CONCENTRATION

DRAWN BY R.L STEPHENSON
TRAG£D BY R.S. PRICE

STEELE

%

SITE

41-26D7-38

17

’I

FEET
T381
3-10-1954

FIGURE 15. Detailed view o£ major excavation area o£ the Steele Site (4126D7-38.

TEXAS AIqCH’EOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ST~

S80
SiO0

S915

~

sgo

S70

¯

A

PROFILE ALONG

~’i
LEGEND

,o,.,,,,,

SOIL LINE

~

STRATUM

D .......

........
STRATUM
°

F~T

IO

FIGHI~E 16. Profile of excavations at the Steele Site (41-26D7-38[

intervals by soil zones and containing varying amounts of white and
gray ash, small bits of charcoal, a few mussel shell fragments, an
occasional fire-cracked rock, some flint and chert chips and two wellused spall scrapers, the latter from Stratum IV. Stratum I extended
beyond the deepest excavation depth of 180 inches and terminated at
a dark soil line 146 inches below surface. Stratum II was 37 inches
thick, extending from 146 to 109 inches below surface. Stratmn III
was 9.4 inches thick, extending from 109 to 85 inches below surface.
Stratum IV was 9’9 inches thick, extending from 85 to 56 inches below
surface.
STRATUIX,£ V

This occupation zone was 9’6 inches thick and extended from 56 to
30 inches below surface. The same kinds of cultural refuse were
found here as in the strata below but with the larger excavated area
were more abundant. A stone-filled hearth, a Darl Point, an Ellis
Point, 13 scrapers, a large oval blade, "2 hammerstones, 9’ perforated
mussel shells and numerous chert and flint chips were recovered.
Unworked mussel shells were abundant in this stratmn, but only one
landsnai! shell and a very few bone fragments were found here. The
hearth, Feature 5, was a large, oval cluster of fire-broken rocks of

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

221

STEELE SITE
41-261)7-38
tic

DIAGRAM

OF PROBABLE AREAL [XTEt~T OF THE VARIGUS OCCUPATIONAL ~£V£LS

Ts~=

limestone, sandstone, and quartzite mixed with abundant white and
gray ash and small charcoal fragments. It was situated in the middle
portion of the stTatum with its upper surface at a depth of 34 inches.
The base of this large hearth (Table 11) had been a shallow concavity of approximately 6 inches in depth, filled with rocks to a thickness of ahnost 18 inches. The concavity was dug from about 10
inches above the bottom of the stratum and was apparently in use at
a time when about half the fill of the stratum had been deposited.
STRATU~I VI

The sixth occupation zone was 15 inches thick and extended from
the soil line at 30 inches below surface to an even more distinct soil
line at 15 inches below surface. Artifacts, features, and cultural refuse
were abundant here and were distlJbuted throughout all depths within the stratmn with no apparent concentrations at any level. Five
features were associated with Stratmn VI. Features 1, 4, 5, and 6 were
stone-filled hearths of oval to circular shape and moderate to large
size (Table II). Each was based in a shallow concavity and filled
with small, miscellaneous, angular rocks, most of which had been
broken by the heat of the repeated fires in the hearth. Ash and charcoal were abundant in these hearths and occasional fragments of

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE ii
Tabulation of Features by Depth, Steele Site
F. No.

Depth Stratum

Size

8
9
2

6"
8"
8"

VII
VII
VII

50" x 50" x 6"
6" x 6" x 6"
24" x 24" x 6"

10
3

11"
14"

VII
VII

10" x 10" x 6"
18" x 18" x 4"

11

15"

VII

10" x 10" x 9"

12

18"

VI

12" x 12" x 10"

4

21"

VI

? x 18" x 6"

1

22"

VI

18" x 12" x 4"

5

9.4"

VI

40" x 54" x 12"

6

24"

VI

48" x 24" x 12"

7

34"

V

58" x 30" x 18"

Description
Concentration of mussel shells.
Pocket cache containing seeds.
Stone-filled hearth containing firebroken, limestone rocks, gray ash, and
charcoal.
Pocket cache containing flint chips.
Stone-filled hearth containing firebroken rocks, gray ash, and charcoal.
Pocket cache containing snail shells,
deer bones, and mussel shells.
Pocket cache containing snail shells,
deer bones and mussel shells.
Stone-filled hearth containing firehroken rocks, ash, and charcoal.
Stone-filled hearth containing firebroken rocks, ash, and charcoal.
Stone-filled hearth containing firebroken rocks, ash, and charcoal.
Stone-filled hearth containing firebroken rocks, ash, and charcoal.
Stone-filled hearth containing firebroken rocks, ash, and charcoal.

unworked nmssel shells were found in or near them. Two hearths
(F.5 and F.6) were at the bottom of the stxatum extending slightly
into the top of the stratum below and two (F.1 and F.4) were well
within the upper fill of the stratum. Feature 12 was a small, pocket
cache in the mid-portion of the stratum. It consisted of a hemispherical cavity of 12 to 14 inches diameter filled with landsnail shells
(all Bulimulus) mussel shells (Elliptio, Quadrula, Proptera, and
Lampsilis) and fragments of deer bones. Elsewhere in dais stratum
Bulimulus shells were rare and bones of deer and other animals were
not abundant but the several species of freshwater mussel shells were
found in all parts of the excavation.
STRATUM VII

Stratum VII varies in thickness from 15 inches at the central part
of the site to 8 or 9 inches at the peripheries of the excavated area
but generally has a thickness of 10-12 inches. Its upper limit is marked
by a poorly defined soft line approximately 5 inches below surface.
This soil line may, in part, be related to the bottom of the plow zone

223

WHITNEY ~RESERVOIR

but its darker color and sonie carbonaceous material along its surface
give it an identity of its own. Cultural material in this stTatmn is less
abundant than in either the stratum below o1" in the plow zone above.
Concentrations of ash and charcoal, fire-cracked rocks, stone-filled
hearths, and artifacts were all less abundant than in Stratum VI,
even though almost 10% more area was excavated. Snail shells were
still rare, as were bone fragments, but mussel shells were increasingly
abundant.
Six features were associated with Stratum VII. Features 2 and 3
were circular stone-filled hearths identical to the hearths in the stratum
below. Feature 8 was a large eoncentration of mussel shells in the
upper half of the stratum. Almost 1,100 shells or fragments of shells
were concentrated in an oval area approximately 4 feet in diameter
and half a foot thick. Most of these shells were broken but many
were whole and a few had both halves of the shell still together. Only
one contained a perforation and none had the lips ground smooth or
the edges roughened. Feature 9 was a hemispherical pocket-cache
dug from the mid-portion of the stratum, 6 inches in diameter, and
containing several thousand small unidentified seeds. Featm’e 10 was
a similar pocket-cache containing 382 chert, flint, and chalcedony chips
and nodules, dug from near the base of the stTatum into the top of
the stratum below. Feature 11 was another pocket-cache also dug
from the bottom of the stratum into the zone below, and containing a
few snail and mussel shells and some broken deer bones.
STRATUM VIII

The upper 5-6 inches of the site including the surface and the plow
zone and extending generally about an inch below the deepest plow
marks, were combined into Stratum vnI. The majority of the artifacts from the site are from this zone. Plowing had obliterated all
evidence of features but scattered, fire-broken rocks indicated that
there had once been several stone-flied hearths here. The general fill
of the stratum, otherwise, resembled the fill of the strata below, except that snM1 shells and broken bones, while still not abundant, were
more numerous than in the levels below.
OBJECTS I~ECOVERED

The 613 al~ifaets recovered fi’om the Steele Site are predominantly
from the upper three strata with more than half the total being from
the surface-plow zone (Stratum VIII) but a few specimens were
found in the lower strata as well. In only the deepest two strata (I
and II) were no artifacts found, but even here the presence of numer-

9,9,4

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ous flint chips indicated that more extensive excavation would have
produced artifacts. No potsherds were found in the entire site and
only a few arrow points, though the larger dart points were numerous.
Bone and antler tools were not found, but perforated mussel shells
were moderately abundant, as were objects of ground and pecked
stone. Table 12 lists the several categories of objects and the number
of each recovered from the various stratigraphic levels.

TABLE 12
Tabulation by Strata of Objects Recovered
Steele Site
VIII

Object
Arrow Points (9)
Perdiz
Alba
Cliffton
Scallom
Unclassified
Fragments
Dart Points (141)
Yarbrough
Ensor
Ellis
Pahnillas
Gary
Pedernales
Darl
Meserve
Triangular
Unclassified
Fragments
Drills
Gravers
Sl?okeshaves
Knives
Spall Scrapers
End Scrapers
Core Tools
Metate
Stone slabs
Manos, shaped
Manos, unshaped
Abraders
Hammerstones
Hematite
Mussel shells, perforated
TOTALS

1
1
2
2
1
2

VII

VI

V

IV

......
........
........
........
......
......

24
16
14
13
4
2
__

5
9
1
2
__
2
2

1
1
6
14
1
2
2
46
64
6
40
1
5
8
14
1
42
4
19

........
1
....
..
2
2
1
__
__
1
2
3

359

__
__
__
9
21
1
7

......
6
....
__
1
1
......
1
..
3
....
1
__
._

2
2
2
15
38
4
14

....
....
....
__
8
2
8
__
. __
5
__

........
:3
....
5
....
2
5
....
1
....
2
__
1l
i0
2
....
2
18
9
..
99

124

29

2

Total

1
1
2
2
I
2
29
31
17
15
5
7
3
1
2
11
20
3
4
4
78
133
11
66
1
8
13
21
2
65
6
48
613

WHITNEY IRESERVOIR

225

CHIPPED STONE

The nine small arrow points are all from the uppermost level of occupation and are so few and so diverse in style
as to suggest that they had been lost by later hunters in the area
rather than by occupants of the site. One is a large, well-made Perdiz
Point with a long stem and large barbs (P1. 37, a). Another is a wellmade Alba Point (PI. 37, e), and two are typical Cliffton Points (PI.
37, d). The two Seal!orn Points include a classic example of the type
(P1. 37, b) and an aberrant form. This latter has a pair of lateral
projections on opposite sides of the blade about half way between
the tip and the shoulders and the neck of the stem is thicker than usual
in this point type (P1. 37, f). One unelassified point has a thin, oval
blade with flaking confined almost entirely to one surface like a
Cliffton Point, but the asymmetriea! stem expands at the base like a
Seallorn Point (P1. 37, e). The other two specimens are tip fragments
that could have been pal~s of any of the above types.
ARROW POINTS:

])ART POINTS: Four major and four minor named types are represented in the I41 dart points from the site. Two-thh’ds of these are
from Stratum VIII and the rest are from Strata VII, VI, and V. Except
as noted below, these are all characteristic examples of the types as
described by Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954, pp. 414-93). It is of
interest to note that, cutting across the typological categories, the attribute of minor to extreme beveling of the blade is to be seen on
ahnost one-third of the speefinens from all levels of occupation.
The most numerous dart point type is the Ensor Point (P1. 37,
g-p; 40, a-e; 41, a-f). Three specimens of this type differ slightly from
the normal in being larger and in having unusually long barbs.
Weights range from 3.0 to 7.1 grams with a mean of 4.1 grams. This
is the dominant type of point in Strata VI and VII but not in Stratum
VIII, though it is a major type in the latter level. Similar in style is
the Ellis Point (PI. 38, a-e; 40, g; 41, j, o) but it differs fll vertical distribution, being a major type in Stratum VIII but only a single example was found in each of the three strata below. Weights of these
points range from 3.0 to 6.6 grams with a mean of 4.4 grams. The
Yarbrough Point is the dominant type in Stratum VIII, but only a
few were found in Stratum VII and none deeper than that (PI. 37, q-u;
40, d-e). Eight of the surface specimens are small for the type (3.2
ram. to 4.0 nnn. long) but othelwvise are characteristic. Weights range
from 4.6 to 13.3 grams with a mean of 7.2 grams. The fourth major
type, the Pahnillas Point (PI. 38, j-l) was also confined largely to

226

TEXAS AI~CHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

PLATE 37. Projectile points from Stratum VIII of the Steele Site: a, Perdiz; b, Scallorn; c, Alba; d, Cliffton; e, f, Abberant; g-p, Ensor; q-u, Yarbrough.

WHITNEY I~ESERVOIR

227

PLATE 3 8. Projectile points from Stratum VIII of the Steele Site; a-e, Ellis;
f, g, Pedernales, h, i, Gary; j-l, Palmillas; m, Abberant form; n, Unidentified forms; r, Meserve.

TEXAS

ARCI-IEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

PLATE 39. Scrapers and core tools from Stratum VIII of the Steele Site:
a, d, f, core tools; b, c, e, knives; $, h, end scrapers.

the uppermost stratum and absent below Stratum VII. Weights
range from 2.3 to 4.8 grams with a mean of 4.0 grams.
Minor dart point types include 7 Pedernales Points (P1. 38, f-g;

WHITNEY I~ESEI~VOIR

9.’29

40, f; 41, g-h) distributed almost equally between Strata VI, VII,
and VIII. They weigh between 5.7 and 8.3 grams with a mean of 7.0
grams. There are 4 Gary Points (P1. 38, h-i; 41, i) in Stratum VIII and
one in Stratum VI. These weigh 4.1 to 7.1 grams with a mean of 6.i
grams. The 3 Darl Points are from Strata V and VII (P1. 40, h; 41,
n) and represent the only type absent from the upper occupation
zone. They weigh 4.9 to 6.2 grams with a mean of 5.9, grams. One
broken Meserve Point was found in the plow zone (P1. 38, r). The tip
is shattered but the typical base is present. A single triangular point
from Stratum VIII and another from Sta’atum VI (PI. 41, 1) are small,
with slightly convex base and straight sides. They are 3.4 era. and
3.9 era. long, 1.7 era. and 1.9 era. wide, 0.5 era. and 0.6 era. thick and
weigh 3.1 and 3.9. grams, respectively.
The eleven unclassified points include one that resembles a poorly
made Gary Point with a bulbous rather than pointed stem (P1. 38,
m), four badly shattered basal sections (PI. 38, n-q) and one that
resembles an Ellis Point but made from a very thin spall with only
minor chipping along all edges, all from Stratum VIII. Two points
from Stratum VII (P1. 40, i-j) and two from Stratum VI (P1. 41, k)
are very much alike. They have rectangular stems, rudimentary
shoulders and stubby blades with convex edges. Two of these have
beveled blades, one rather extremely beveled. They range in weight
from 9..9 to 8.4 grams with a mean of 6.8 grams and are 3.1 era. to
4.4 era. long, 1.8 era. to 9,.4 cm. wide, and 0.6 era. to 0.9 cm. thick.
The eleventh speein~en in this group is a broken midsection with a
portion of barb remaining and may have been an Ellis or Ensor Point.
It is from Stratum V. The twenty fragments of dart point tips complete the group. Ilemarkably few tip sections were found compared
to the quantity of da~t points in this site, suggesting that dints with
broken tips were retrieved and brought back to camp to be refitted
with new points.
DRILLS: The three specimens listed as chipped stone drilling tools
are poorly made and quite different from the delicate, small drills of
the Toyah Focus components in the ,area. One, found in the plow
zone, was made by reshaping the blade of an Ellis Point. It is short
and stubby with a shaft only 1.1 era. long and tapering from 0.8 era.
wide to a crude point. The other two are Im’ger and cruder, apparently made from triangular dart points. The base is convex and the sides
of the shank are chipped along the edges. The blade constricts 1.5
era. above the base to form a thick, heavy drill shaft 3.5 era. long

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

PLATE 40. Artifacts from Stratum VII of the Steele Site: a-c, Ensor Points;
d, e, Yarbrough Points; f, Pedernales Point; g, Ellis Point; h, Darl Point;
i, j, unidentified points; k, core tool; 1, m, end scrapers.

~rHITNEY I~ESERVOIR

231

PLATE 41. Artifacts from Stratum VI of the Steele Site; a-f, Ensor Points;
g-h, Pedernales Points; i, Gary Point; j, o, Ellis Points; k, unidentified point;
!, triangular point; m, scraper-graver; n, Darl Point.

9,39,

TEXAS

A!RCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

and 1.2 cm. wide. The two are nearly identical except that one is
so crude as to appear to be unfinished.
CRAVERS: Four gravers were found, eaeh made from a moderately
large, thick, core with scraper edges flaked along one or more sides
and a beak-llke protrusion chipped at one end (P1. 41, m-m’). Two
are from Sh’atum VIII and two are from Sh’atum VI. In each specimen the graver tip is pronounced (0.6 era. to 1.1 cm. long) and well
made.
SPOKESHAVES (Notches): Strata VIII and VI provided four large
spalls with concavities chipped along one edge. These concavities
are 1.7 era. to 2.1 cm. long and 0..3 em. to 0.4 em. deep and are carefully made.
KNIVES: The 78 specimens that make up this categm), are poorly
made, ovate to sub-triangular tools probably used for general purposes of cutting and scraping. Most of the shaping was done by percussion chipping but some pressure flaking is apparent on about onethird of the specimens. Nearly all are broken and the fragments are
about equally divided between basal and tip sections. Lengths, therefore, are not determinable except on six specimens, but reasonable
estimates may be made for more than half of them. Estfinated lengths
range from 4.5 era. to 7.0 era., widths are 2.3 cm. to 4.3 era. and
thicknesses are 0.2 em. to 1.1 era. (P1. 39, b, e, e). Basal fragments
of eight of these suggest the Clebume Knife that Jelks has deseribed
(1962, pp. 44-5). One tip section is made of "Alibates flint," suggesting a h’ade item with the Panhandle region of Texas but all of
the others are of local flints, cherts, chalcedonies, and jaspers.
SPALL SCRAPERS: The small, generally thin, spalls with chipping
along one or more edges numbered 133. Many of these have only tiny
chips removed along a sharp edge, suggesting that they were formed
by usage rather than by intentional flaking, but an unusual number
are extensively flaked along two or more edges and some appear to
have been roughly shaped by this method into subtriangular forms.
END SCKaPERS: Eleven end scrapers of the snub-nose variety were
recovered. Three small and three large specimens are from the surface (P1. 39, g, h), one large one is h’om Stratum VII and four large
ones are from Sh’atum VI (P1. 40, 1, m). Eaeh is made from a flint
or chert nodule with unifacial flaking along one end only. Two surface specimens are rather carefully made but the others are crude
examples of this type of scraper.
CORE TOOLS: The 66 rough cores of flint, chert, and chalcedony from

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

233

which spalls had been struck for use in making other artifacts, also,
themselves, seem to have been used as scraping or chopping tools.
Eveiy core found at this site had been shaped into a tool. These are
oval, with chipped edges partially or entirely eneireling the specimen, 4 era. to 7 em. in diameter and 9, em. to 3 era. thick (P1. 39, d, f);
elongate with chipped edges on one or both ends and one or both
sides, 6 era. to 9 era. long, 3 cnl. to 5 era. wide, and 2 cm. to 4 era.
thick (P1. 39, a); subtdangular, with chipping largely col~ned to the
pointed end (P!. 40, k); and of irregular shape with random chipping
on one edge.
GROUND STONE

A small, shaped, sandstone metate fragnlent was found on the surface. The external shape is rectangular, 23 era. wide, an estimated 30
era. long, and 4 era. thick. The interior shape of the bowl is circular,
18 era. in diameter and 2.5 era. deep. It has been so extensively used
that the bottom of the bowl had nearly been worn through.
Eight fragments of fire-broken limestone slabs were found in the
upper two levels of the site. Each had a minor surface area showing
some grinding but othenvise the slabs were unaltered.
Manos were abundant and 34 specimens were found. Thirteen of
these were carefully shaped into rectangular form with flat grinding
surfaces on one or both sides. One is of quartzite, one of limestone and
the others are of sandstone. Only one has a suggestion of a faeeted
surface and all appear to have been used with a rotary motion. The
remaining 21 nianos are unshaped, oval cobbles of quartzite or sandstone, with grinding evident on one surface. All appear to have been
used with a rotmT motion. Each of these unshaped manos has also
been used as a hammerstone and considerable battering is evident on
one or both ends and occasionally on the sides. Several are so extensively battered as to suggest that they were primarily hammerstones
and secondarily manos.
Two sandstone abraders were recovered. One is a small oval stone
with two parallel "U"-shaped grooves on opposite sides of the stone
extending the full length of the stone. The grooves are 4 ram. deep
and 6 nnn. to 8 ram. wide. The other is an irreg~dar-shaped piece of
sandstone with six deep grooves worn in random positions across it.
Grooves are "V"-shaped with slightly rounded bottoms and are
4 ram. to 9 ram. deep.
Hammerstones consisting of quartzite or chert cobbles from the
size of a golf ball to that of a tennis ball and extensively battered on
one or more surfaces, numbered 65. Several have large spalls removed

234

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and probably also served as cores to provide material with which to
make other tools. All, though, are extremely battered and were used
so extensively that the beaten surface has, in some instances, become a
dull edge.
HEMATITE

Six small pieces of hematite with scratches over most of the surfaces
were found in the upper two strata.
SHELL

Despite the great quantities of freshwater mussel shells found
throughout a!! levels of the site, the only shell artifacts found were
46 mussel shells with perforations near the hinge. Two of these holes
appear to have been drilled and the remainder seem to have been
punched. Many are broken across the perforation. The lips of none
of these shells appear to have been smoothed or roughened from
usage.
!vlISCELLANEOUS

A small, milky quartz crystal, apparently unworked, was found on
the surface, as was a glazed sherd from a white stoneware crock. The
latter is obviously of 20th century origin and may have come from
the abandoned house nearby. A piece of the base of a large antler
and a small sliver of bone, both with random scratches on them, were
found in Stratum VI, but the scratches appear to be marks of rodent
teeth rather than man-made. No bone or antler tools were found in
tile site.
SUMMARY AND INTERPRETATION

The Steele Site is a large, stratified, open, camp site on the upper
(40-foot) terrace of tile Brazos Iliver in Hill County, Texas, about
9,50 feet from the river’s edge and 50 feet above normal river level.
It is now beneath some 9,0 feet of water in the Whituey Reservoir.
Excavations were conducted here in April 1950 by a Itiver Basin Surveys crew and eight stratigraphie zones were noted. Most of the excavation was done in the upper three feet of the site, but test excavations were made to depths of 15 feet and these did not reach sterile
soil so presumably additional occupational materia! lay buried below
the deepest excavation pits. The strata, separated by dark soil lines,
were numbered from I to VIII from the bottom up. Natural ten’ace
fill of brown, sandy loam differed little in the several strata but the
dark soil lines clearly separated the strata. Within the lower four
strata only two artifacts were recovered, but ash, flint chips, and other

camp refuse were plentiful. Strata V-VII produced increasingly
abundant tools and refuse and Stratum VIII (the surface and plow
zone) was richly productive. Deep tests indicated that the lower
occupation zones covered a larger area than the upper zones.
All 12 of the features in the site were found in Strata V-VII and
included stone-filled hearths, pocket-caches, and a concentration of
mussel shells. Other features may have existed in Stratum VIII but
had been destroyed by the plow.
Ahnost 75% of the 613 artifacts recovered are chipped stone tools.
Others are of ground or battered stone and some are perforated mussel
shells. No bone or antler tools were found. While the tool inventor?, is
not large, and the tools are generally rather heavy, percussion-chipped,
roughly made specimens, one gets the feeling, in the overall assemblage, that nearly every specimen had been extensively used. None
seem to have been made to be used a few times and discarded. Even
such casual tools as spall scrapers and hammerstones show extensive
usage. The number of different kinds of tools is remarkably small.
There m’e several styles of dart points but other classes of objects are
not numerous. The rough, heavy, rather crude styles of the artifacts,
the small variety of kinds of artifacts, and the intensive usage of the
individual mtffaets suggest a rather primitive way of life by conservative peoples who used what they had to the utmost, were s!ow to invent new ways of doing things or to accept new ideas from other
peoples. This pattern is consistent with the hunting-gathering way
of life of the Edwards Plateau Aspect in central Texas, insofar as data
are available on that eultm’e (Kelly, 1947 a, 1947 b; Suhm, 1955, pp.
49-52; Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954, pp. 102-112).
There is little to distinguish the eultura! materials of one sla-atum of
the Steele Site from those of another sla’atmn. The small arrow points
were all found on the surface but they were so few and so diverse
in type that I attribute them to casual hunting losses long after the
site had been abandoned rather than to an actual occupation of the
site. With the exception of the dm’t point type Darl, every type of
artifact found in the lower strata was also found in the uppermost
stratum. Some significance may be attached to the relative predominance of Pedernales Points in Stratum VI and to the absence of
Darl Points in Stratum VIII, but these are indeed meager indications
of culture change. Apparently the entire series of occupations of
the site was by peoples of a single culture complex who camped
here briefly, from time to time, over a period of several centuries.
Unquestionably these occupations represent the Edwards Plateau As-

0,36

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

peer but there is not sufficient evidence, here or at any other sites
that I am aware of, to make any distinction as to focus within that
Aspect. The point has been repeatedly made, espeeially by Suhm
(1955, pp. 49-52) that the present state of knowledge of this aspect
is not adequate to define loci within it. Attempts, though, have been
made to do this (Kelly, 1947 a; 1947 b; Stephenson, 1950) and a
Clear Fork Focus, a Bound Rock Focus, and a Uvalde Focus, each
has been discussed. Each has been based largely on the presence of
a single projectile point type and not on a distinctive duster of traits.
I suspect that these loci will eventually turn out to be valid, espeeially the Clear Fork and Round Rock Foei, but at present they are
nebulous and the data from the Steele Site certainly adds nothing to
elarify the situation. The presence of Pedernales Points would suggest the Eound tloek Focus, but even this hint is negated by the fact
that Pedemales Points are so few at the site. The best we can do, then,
on the basis of present evidence, is to assign the several Steele Site
occupations to the Edwards Plateau Aspect.
Dating of the site is equally difficult. Apparently it precedes the
Central Texas Aspect occupation of the area as represented by that
culture in the several rock-shelters discussed above. The earliest
carbon-14 dates for the Central Texas Aspect are about A.D. 500
(Jelks, 1962, pp. 96-98). This, then, would suggest a probable terminal
date for the Steele Site of not later than A.D. 500. There is no certainty, though, that the Edwards Plateau Aspect did not overlap the
early poltion of the Central Texas Aspect. Nor is there any certaintly that the Steele Site occupation ended immediately before the
earliest dates we have on the Central Texas Aspect. There just is no
evidence at hand to pinpoint a terminal date, but on the basis of the
evidence there is, a date of about A.D. 500 and not later than A.D.
600 nor earlier than A.D. 200 would seem to be the most reasonable
estimate.
The beginning date is probably several centuries earlier. The
several soil zones within the terrace fill and a depth of fill of more
than 15 feet within this upper (40-foot) terrace would indicate a
fah-ly long time. As discussed earlier in the above ehapter on Physiography and Geology, this terraee probably dates between 4000 B.C.
and A.D. 100 or alternatively between 2,000 B.C. and A.D. 1,000. The
former date, 4,000 B.C. to A.D. 100, seems more reasonable if we are
to accept the carbon-14 dates for the Central Texas Aspect. Assuming
a reasonably steady rate of deposition of the terrace fill (a dangerous

WHITNEY I~ESERVOIR

237

assumption ), the fifteen plus feet of occupation would indicate about
one-third of this time span or some 1,500 years of occupation. This
is certainly speculative dating based on compounded assumptions but
it does constitute the evidence at hand and suggests a date span of
approximately 1,000 B.C. to A.D. 500 for the occupations at the Steele
Site.
SYNTHESIS
Within the flood area of the Whitney Reservoir in Hill and Bosque
Counties, Texas, there have been 71 archeological sites recorded since
the beginning of the t/iver Basin Surveys investigations in that area
in May, 1947. Excavations have been conducted in nine of these and
a reasonably good body of data, illuminating a sequence of cultm’es
in this portion of central Texas, has emerged. Surface collecting or
lhnited testing has been carried out in the other 62 sites in the area
but most of the data are derived from the excavated sites. Seven of the
excavated sites are rock shelters with stratified floor deposits and
two are open occupation areas with stratified deposits of terrace fill.
The two open sites and three of the rock shelters were excavated in
1950 and are described in detail in the present report. The other
four shelters were excavated since 1950 and are reported elsewhere
(Jelks, 1953; 196g; Long, 1961).
Both the oldest and the most recent materials came from the two
open sites and the long interval between is represented by the materials from the rock shelter sites. A period of nearly 3,000 years of
occupation of this part of the eentraI Brazos River valley is indicated
(Fig. 17). There is no evidence that I am aware of to suggest occupation of this area by peoples of the Paleo-Indian Stage of cultural
development or of a time period that could be attributed to that
stage-i.e, prior to 4,000 or 5,000 B.C. At three sites (41-26D7-34,
41-9.6D7-32, and 41-9,6D7-17) surface collections provided projectile
points of roughly laneeolate shape and at another site (41-39B1-9,3)
"Waeo Sinkers" (Watt, 1938, pp. 9,1-70) are said to have been found.
These, though, are only hints of what may be present in the area and
certainly insufficient to suggest a Paleo-Indian occupation. The
earliest material appears to represent the late pal± of the Edwards
Plateau Aspect and later material dearly indicates the Cenh’al Texas
Aspect and the Historic Contact Period. These data are sufficient to
provide a broad cultural framework for the Whitney tleservoir area
and to fill in some of the details of that framework.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

STEELE SHEEP BUZZARD PICTOGRAPH LITTLE FORRESTER STANSBURY BLUM
SITE
SITE
51TE SHELTER SHELTER SHELTER BUZZARD CAVE
SHELTER
1900 "
|

KYLE
SITE,

TO N K A WA
CAMP

| ALLEN
FOCUS
I NORT~O
FOCUS

1800 "

1700 TOYAH
FOCUS

1600

C-~4A D. 1561

1500

+

130

1400
1300 TOYAH
FOCUS

1200 -

TOYAH

F=us i

FOCUS

ITOYAH
i FOCUS

II00 I000 AUSTIN
FOCUS

900 "

AUSTIN
FOCUS

AUSTIN
FOCUS

AUSTIN
FOCUS

800"
FOCUS

700

C-I
-+ 150

600

500
+- 120

400

C-I~
A.O. 561
± 150

300

2O0

I00

0

I00

FIGURE 17. Chronology chart showing temporal position o£ components at
nine Whitney Reservoir sites.

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

9..39

THE EDWARDS PLATEAU ASPECT
The earliest known occupations of the Whitney Reservoir area are
attributable to the generalized Edwards Plateau Aspect culture complex. This is a broad, undifferentiated complex of the Archaic Stage
of cultural development in tile central portion of Texas. For purposes of the present report, and I believe that this is the current
understanding of the aspect, it includes all of the occupations of
central Texas after the Paleo-Indian Stage and before the advent of
the bow and arrow, pottery, or the earliest beginnings of agriculture.
The developmental background of the concept of an Edwards Plateau
Aspect has been ably reviewed by Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954,
pp. 102-112) and again by Suhm (1958, pp. 63-89). In these reviews
and in the numerous reports of excavated sites attributable to this
aspect, it is quite apparent that while we have been working with
such a concept for almost 40 years, we really know very little about
it. Scores of sites have provided cultural remains that justifiably
are attributed to the Edwards Plateau Aspect. These are burnt rock
middens, rock shelters, buried terrace sites, or open sites along
streams or at the edge of the uplands in stream valleys. There seem
to be but two basic traits that identify them. One is the presence of
large, stemmed dart points of various styles, usually found in at least
moderate abundance. The other is an accompanying assemblage of
rather heavy, crudely made scrapers, knives, drills, gouges, hammerstones, core tools, and usually some grinding implements. These are
distinguished from tools of the later Central Texas Aspect by never
being small, delicate, nor finely made.
Age estimates for the Edwards Plateau Aspect have been mainly
based on Kelley’s studies (1947b) and are usually accepted as being
4,000 or 2,000 B.C. to A.D. 100 or 1,000, though no carbon-14 dates
have been obtained on any of the components that I am aware of.
Attempts have been made from time to time to give more specific
meaning to this aspect by separating it into foei (Stephenson, 1950)
and, in fact, segments of the aspect even preceded the concept of
the aspect itself (Suhm, 1958). Perhaps the most successful of these
attempts was by Kelley (1947a; 1947b), when he distinguished the
Clear Fork, Round Rock, and Uvalde foci, based in part on the
earlier studies of Ray (1938, and others). The distinctions between
these foei were based largely on distributions and fi’equeneies of
certain projectile point styles. The Pedernales Point was diagalostie
for the Round Rock Focus, the Nolan Point for the Clear Fork Focus,
and the Montell Point for the Uvalde Focus. These certainly are small

TEXAS AI~CII-EOLOGICAL SOCIETY

distinctions on which to separate culture complexes and it is especially
discouraging to findtwo or more of these diagnostic point styles
together in the same level of the same site. I am not, though, willing
to discard these loci, or something like them, as invalid. After all
we are not adverse to basing Paleo-Indian complexes on the presence
or absence of a single projectile point style. When projectile points
are the only distinctive traits seemingly available then they are the
traits we have to use. I have no doubt that additional sla’atified
Edwards Plateau Aspect sites will be more extensively excavated
under carefully controlled conditions and that additional diagnostic
traits will be isolated within the various strata. When this has been
done and all of the materials can be viewed together, I suspect that
these foei, or something like them, and probably others as well, will
become more valid. In the naeantime it seems best to subsmne the
sites attributable to this aspect under the broad, undifferentiated
heading of Edwards Plateau Aspect without attempting focus assignment. Cel~ainly the data from the Whitney l~eservoir sites would not
aid in such differentiation.
Within the Whitaaey tleselazoir area materials from at least 22 of the
51 unexcavated open sites appear to be of the Edwards Plateau Aspect. In addition, the entire occupational sequence of one of the excavated open sites, the Steele Site (41-26D7-38), is attributable to this
culture eomplex. Only one of the 18 recorded rock shelter sites, the
Sheep Shelter (41-26D7-20), though, provided a clearly distinguishable Edwards Plateau Aspect component, and that was a minor
component in the lowest occupation levels.
At the Steele Site, stratified cultural remains were found at depths
of from 15 feet to the surface of the 40-foot terrace representing a
long series of sporadic occupations. The lower four strata produced
no diagnostic ~’tifacts but the general nature of the cultural remains
from these zones differed in no other way from those in the upper
four zones. All eight strata may safely be assmned to represent occupations by the Edwards Plateau Aspect. Yarbrough, Ensor, Ellis,
and Pahnfllas points are dominant in this sequence and Gary, Pedernales, Darl, and Meserve, points are present. The presence of Pedernales Points, though not a dominant type, would suggest a Round
Itoek Focus occupation if any such focus separation were to be made.
The depth of materials found within this terrace suggests sporadic
occupations by the Edwards Plateau Aspect peoples from probably as
long ago as 1,000 B.C. to perhaps as late as A.D. 500.
At the Sheep Shelter, brief, sporadic occupations by peoples of the

VgI-IITNEY ]RESERVOIR

241

Edwards Plateau Aspect are represented in the bottom 27 inches o~
the deposits. Artifacts are few and suggest only very minor camps
within the shelter, but, judging by the depth of the deposits, probably
extended at intervals over a fairly long span of time. I have speculated that these may cover the period of A.D. 100 to A.D. 600, representing a time close to the tel~minal dates for the Edwards Plateau
Aspect in this area. Undoubtedly these occupations began much
later than similar occupations at the Steele Site. Yarbrough, Ellis,
Pahnillas, Darl, and Pedernales points were found here and strongly
suggest relationships directly ~4th the Steele Site. As with the latter
site, if a focus distinction were to be made, the Round Rock Focus
would be suggested.
On the basis of the information derived h’om the sites within the
Whihley Reservoir area, the Edwards Plateau Aspect peoples who
lived in this locality apparently lived in small social groups probably
consisting of no more than the extended family. They probably resembled, culturally, the 19th century Australian aborigines, though
we, of course, know nothing of their ceremonial customs for which
the Ausi~’alians are so famous. These small, family units were mobile
groups, camping for only brief periods at any one place but probably
retm’ning to the same camp spots at intervals, and the same camp
locations were re-occupied over and over again for many generations.
There is no evidence of the kind of structures they built but presumably they had some sort of simple, temporary shelter. Some of
their camps, at least near the end of the aspect, were in rock shelters
which probably served the purpose of protection from the elements.
The majority of their camps, though, were in the open along the
river banks. Nor is there any evidence of their bm’ial customs. Neither
is there evidence of the kind of clothing they wore, but lack of bone
or antler awls and punches at the Steele Site would suggest that they
had no tailored clothing. Yet antler punches and a bone awl in this
component in the Sheep Shelter suggests that near the end of the
aspect they may have begun to use tailored apparel.
Subsistence was based upon gathering and hunting. Fresh-water
nmssels were gathered and eaten in abundance and their shells were
used as ornaments and as digging tools. No doubt, many forms of
vegetal foods, such as seeds, nuts, roots, berries, bark and other
items, were gathered and eaten. Deer and other small game were
hunted especially by the peoples who lived in the Sheep Shelter but
their bones were rare at the Steele Site. Some foods were prepared
by grinding them in a shallow, basin-shaped metate with a mano

9.49,

TEXAS ARCI-IEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

that was used with a rotary or semi-rotary motion. Cooking was
probably done in several ways among which was the use of mediumsized, oval hearths filled with rocks and some foods may have been
cooked by laying them directly on the flat, limestone slabs that made
up the hearths.
Weapons were chiefly large darts, presumably propelled by the
atlatl, and tipped with large, heavy, chipped stone points of several
styles. These points were made by percussion chipping but some were
refined by pressure flaking along the edges and they generally
weighed between 4 and 10 grams. Nearly all of the projectile point
styles were stemmed but a few were of triangular form. The styles
now known as Ensor, Daft, Yarbrough, Ellis, Palmillas, Pedernales,
Gary, and Bulverde were in general use.
General~ed tools for multipurpose use included heavy, core scrapers;
oval, elongate, and irregularly shaped scrapers; heavy, snub-nose
scrapers; all roughly shaped by percussion chipping; and light weight
scrapers made from random spalls and flaked along the already sharp
edges by continuous usage. Holes were drilled, probably in wooden
utensils and in mussel shells, by the use of chipped stone drills of
heavy, rough forms, sometimes made by chipping the blade of a
projectile point down to the form of a drill. Percussion flaking was
apparently accomplished by use of hammerstones made from small
or medium-sized cobbles of flint, chert, and quartzite. All of the
stone tools were made from readily available local stones.
There is no indication that these people were in any way aware
of the use of the bow and arrow, of pottery, or of the growing of plants
for food, nor is there any evidence of trade or other relations with
peoples outside their own area. No doubt they made and used many
implements of wood and other vegetal products sueh as bowls, clubs,
digging sticks and even baskets and matting, but the evidenee for
these perishable objects is lacking.
These were conservative peoples with an apparently small number
of material possessions at any one time and they utilized the tools and
implements that they did have to the utmost. Individual objects
show evidence of extensive use, and though new materials were
readily available with which to make these tools, they made only
what was needed and used them until they were well worn before
discarding them. The relatively small numbers of specimens, therefore
indicate a larger total population than would be the ease within a
culture where more tools and implements were made but where each
was used less extensively.

WHITNEY I~ESERVOIR

243

THE CENTRAL TEXAS ASPECT
The next later stage of cultural development in the central Texas
area is generally recognized as the Central Texas Aspect. The background of the concept of this culture complex has been reviewed on
several occasions (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954, pp. 112-117; Suhm,
1957; 1958). Like the concept of an Edwards Plateau Aspect, we
have been working with this complex, in one form or another, for
some 40 years. Generally, it has come to be recognized as those manifestations of prehistoric euttures in central Texas where indications
of the use of the bow and an’ow, the use of pottelT, and perhaps the
beginnings of agriculture are found. Sites are identified chiefly oll
the basis of the presence of small, delicately made, stemmed or triangular arrow points; small, delicately made, chipped stone drills;
carefully made knives; small, well-formed, snub-nose scrapers; and
usually a few sherds of broken pottery.
Age estimates for the Central Texas Aspect have varied widely but
for many yem’s were generally considered to be about A.D. 1,200 to
1,500. In the past decade, though, these estimates have tended to be
pushed farther back, and recently a series of carbon-14 dates were
published that dearly extend the range for the aspect. These dates
indicate a range extending from the fifth or sixth centuries A.D. to
the sixteenth or seventeenth centuries A.D. (Jelks, 1962, pp. 96-98),
and there is no assurance that these, dates include either the beginnflag or ending dates for the aspect. Probably they m’e close to beginning and ending dates, though, and certainly they are for the sites
dated (Fig. 17). Fortunately for ore" present purposes these sites
are the Blum Roekshelter and the Kyle Site, within the Whitney
Reservofi" area, and are directly comparable to the sites described in
the present report.
As a result of increasingly helpful studies of Centa’al Texas Aspect
sites Jelks (1962, pp. 84-99) has recently published a detailed analysis
of the aspect and sorted out criteria on which two separate and
sequential loci could be established. These are reincarnations of the
Austin and Toyah Foei proposed by Kelley (1947a; 194719) a decade
and a half earlier. The two are, as Kelley pointed out, separable
primarily on the basis of the presence of Seallom Points in the Austin
Focus and Perdiz Points in the Toyah Focus. To this, however, Jelks
has been able to acid other traits and to rather dearly demonstrate
the precedence of the Austin Focus in the sequence of the two.

244

TEXAS ARCITEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

THE AUSTIN FOCUS

Within the Whitney Reservoir area, materials from one open occupation site and from eight rock shelters are attributable to the Austin
Focus of the Central Texas Aspect. The open site, the Bm’leson Site
(41-26D7-9) was not excavated but surface examination provided a
single Scallorn Point and no dart points or Perdiz Points. One of the
rock shelters, the Greenwade Shelter (41-39B1-20) was not excavated
but from it Watt recovered a burial associated with what appears to
be a Scallom Point and a bone atlatl hook. Other material said to
have been recovered by others from this shelter is not known, but
ff this projectile point is indicative of the culture complex, it is the
first known instance of the association of atlatl hooks with the Central
Texas Aspect.
The seven excavated shelters containing Austin Focus components
include The Sheep Shelter (4!-26D7-20), The Buzzard Shelter (4126D7-12), The Little Buzzard Shelter (41-26D7-!4), The Forrester
Cave (41-26D7-15), The Pictograph Shelter (41-26D7-5), The Blum
Rockshelter (41-26D7-42), and The Kyle Site (41-HL-1). At the
Forrester Cave only the Austin Focus is represented. At all of the
others the Austin Focus naaterials were clearly beneath the Toyah
Focus materials in stratigraphic relationship.
The major occupations of the Sheep Shelter, both in terms of
quantity of cultural material, and intensity of occupation is attributable to the Austin Focus. Beneath it was a series of minor occupations, though probably of longer total duration, attributable to the
Edwards Plateau Aspect, and above the Austin Focus zone was a very
brief occupation by Toyah Focus people. The three cultures were
quite clearly separable, stratigraphicalIy, especially the two loci of
the Central Texas Aspect. They were also quite clearly separable in
terms of cultural content, except that the dart point styles of the
Edwards Plateau Aspect occupations persisted on into the Austin
Focus level. The persistence of these dart points may be explained
by one or another of three possible interpretations.
It may be that a new people in the area-the Austin Focus-collected dart points from the older sites, found them useful either as
projectile points or as ready-made scrapers, and added them to their
own inventory of material goods. This seems a doubtful interpretation
because too many dart points are found too consistently in the components of the Austin Focus throughout central Texas to be accounted for as objects randomly collected for re-use.
Alternatively, it may be suggested that the Edwards Plateau Aspect

~,¥HITNEY RESEtWOIP,

245

persisted as a cultural entity and the people continued to camp occasionally in this shelter after the Austin Focus peoples had begun
to use the site. Thus the two separate culture complexes actually
overlapped in both time and space. This suggestion seems weak
because the dart points in the Austin Focus components are consistently mixed with the new traits of that focus. Until a site is found
with components of the two cultures clearly separated and with at
least one Austin Focus component without dart points underlying an
Edwards Plateau Aspect component with dart points, this interpretation will remain improbable.
A third interpretation is that the Austin Focus, as a new cultural
entity, developed directly out of the Edwards Plateau Aspect retaining some, or many, of the older traits, but adding to them the new
traits that distinguish the new focus. This interpretation seems most
reasonable as the overall "way of life" of these two culture groups
seems to have been so similar, differing only in certain specific traits.
It is strengthened by the presence of the same dart point forms in
both complexes at site after site and in similar quantities, and especially by the presence of an Edwards Plateau Aspect component immediately beneath an Austin Focus component at the Sheep Shelter in such
relationship that, though they are dearly sepm’able, there ahnost
seems to be a blending of the one into the other. Too, if the apparent
association of an atlatl hook with the Austin Focus, in the Greenwade
Shelter, is correctly interpreted, there is major support for the use
of dart points as an integral part of that culture.
At the Pictograph Shelter, The Buzzard Shelter, The Little Buzzard
Cave, The Forrester Cave, The Blum I~oekshelter, and The Kyle Site,
components of the Austin Focus ahnost identical to that at Sheep
Shelter were found. The Austin Focus component at the Buzzard
Shelter, though, was a veldz minor one and obviously of short dm’ation.
At the other sites the Austin Focus components were major ones
and, at the Forrester Cave, the only one. The latter site, thus provides
the only "pure" Austin Focus component so far excavated.
Dates for the Austin Focus are provided by a series of three carbon14 samples from the Kyle Site and one sample from the Blum t{oekshelter. These give a time span of A.D. 561 ± 150 to A.D. 971 ±
170, a range of 730 years when the plus or minus factor is taken into
consideration.
The evidence derived from these sites suggests a "way of life" of
the Austin Focus peoples that differed but little from that of the Edwards Plateau Aspect peoples. They appear to have lived in small

246

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

social units of probably but a few families each, occupying any partitular camping spot but a short time and moving on to another.
They consistently utilized rock shelters as camp spots in this area
but there is no evidence of any kind of permanent shelter or even
semi-permanent shelter other than that provided by the overhanging
rock itself. Subsistence was based upon hunting, gathering, and
probably fishing. Freshwater niussels as well as vegetal products
were gathered for food, and deer, rabbits, and many other small
animals were hunted. Fishbones were not clearly identified in Austin
Focus levels but a single, bone, fishhook blank appears to belong to
this occupation at the Pictograph Shelter. Food appears to have been
prepared in nmch the sanae way that it was in Edwards Plateau Aspect times.
Weapons seem to have changed dramatically at this time with the
advent of the bow and arrow and the use of small, delicately made
projectile points. The atlatl and dart with large, heavy point, was
still in use but became a secondary weapon to the bow and arrow
during this time. There was also a change in the technology of stoneworking. Fine, pressure flaking largely supereeded the rougher percussion chipping of the earlier peoples as seen in the arrow points,
and other tools made by pressure flaking. The principal alTOW point
style was the Scallorn Point.
There is some indication that toward the end of this period the
people were in contact with peoples of east Texas and were receiving pottery vessels in trade for them. The few sherds found in Austin
Focus components arc consistently in the upper portions of the strata
and indicate that such trade occurred late in the histol3/of the focus.
The Austin Focus people were not the conservative people that
theh" predecessors were. They made and used a more diversified
group of tools and implements and they were not so careful to use
each individual tool to its fullest capacity. They were more skillful
craftsmen, at least in stone chipping, and this added skill, I suppose,
was at least one factor in the production of a larger inventory of material objects. The total culture, while basically similar to that of
the Edwards Plateau Aspect, was more elaborate and more complex.
This additional elaboration suggests to me that, while the quantity
of tools was gTeater in this period, the population may actually have
been smaller with each individual making and using more tools than
would a comparable individual of the earlier period.
THE TOYAtt Focus
In six of the seven excavated rock shelters in the Whitney Reservoir

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

247

m’ea, a Toyah Focus occupation was found as the uppermost cultural

eomponent but in only one of the open sites was there any indieation
of this focus. The latter, the Odom Site (41-39B1-2), was tested but
not excavated and the recovered artifacts ineluded a Perdiz Point
and a Fresno Point but no Seallorn Points or dart points thus suggesting a Toyah Focus occupation.
At the Sheep Shelter only a very minor component of Toyah Focus
was found as a thin occupation layer near the top of the deposit and
above al! of the other occupation material. At the Buzzard Shelter
nearly all of the deposit was of the Toyah Focus with but a small
anaount of Austin Focus material beneath it. At the Pictograph Shelter,
the Little Buzzard Cave, the Blmn l~ockshelter, and the Kyle Site,
major components of the Toyah Focus were found overlying major
components of the Austin Focus.
Dates for the Toyah Focus are provided by a series of three carbon14 samples from the Kyle Site. These give a time span of A.D. 1,276
----- 165 to 1,561 -+- 130, a range of 580 years when the plus or minus
factor is taken into consideration.
The "way of life" of these people appears to have been much like
that of their predecessors but differed from the earlier cultures not
so much by the addition of new traits as by the stylistic changes in
the same traits, though some new traits were added, too, and some old
traits were apparently abandoned. These people were still living
in small social units of a few families each, and moving about from
camp spot to camp spot at frequent intervals. They utilized roek
shelters to the near exclusion of open sites (or at least in the Whitney
area) and still made no permanent structures. They subsisted on
hunting deer, antelope, and many other kinds of smM1 game, and
upon gathering vegetal products, fresh-water mussels and land snails.
The latter seem to be a new item of diet ~dth the Toyah Focus
people, or at least to have been increased from a ve~7 minor item to
one of the principal foods by these people. Also added to the diet
were fish taken on a hook and line. There is some evidence that
fish were taken in earlier times but in Toyah Focus components both
fishbones and bone fishhooks are common. Whether other methods
of fishing were used is not known.
Stone-chipping technology did not change except as refleeted in increased usage of pressure flaking to finish the finely-made stone tools.
The styles, though, of the tools changed. The Perdiz Points and
Cliffton Points replaced the Scallorn Points and small, well-made,
ta’iangular Fresno Points became common. Finely made, long-shafted

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

stone drills were added to the tool inventory as were four-edge,
beveled knives, and small snub-nose scrapers. Chipped-stone knives
of ovate or bipointed form seem to have replaced the large triangular knives and the asymmetric, percussion chipped knives of earlier
times. Bone tools were more abundant but little change in style is
noted. The strong emphasis upon land snails as items of the diet
of the Toyah Focus people provided great quantities of the shells of
these animals some of which were perforated and may have been
strung as beads. Mussel shells were also used abundantly as scrapers
and as digging tools. The atlatl and dart seems to have been eleminated as a weapon as only a few dart points are found in Toyah Focus
components and these may readily be accounted for as relies of
earlier occupations.
Contact with other areas, especially the Caddoan Area of east Texas
is obvious at this time with greatly increased trade in ceramics. Pottery sherds of the Sanders Focus, the Alto Focus, and probably others,
are common in Toyah Focus components, as are the Alba Points that
are also associated with east Texas sites of Gibson Aspect times. There
is some indication, too, that a native porte1T was made by these people
as sherds of the type Leon Plain have been found in Toyah Focus
components at the Smith Site to the south of the Whitney area (Suhm,
1957) and at tile Buzzard Shelter and the Kyle Site.
Like the Austin Focus people, these were not conservative peoples
but were even more sophisticated in their technological abilities and
engaged in considerable trade with distant neighbors. There is not
sufficient evidence to indicate whether they developed out of the
Austin Focus or were a new people in the area but there is some indication that the latter might be the ease. One does get a feeling of
cultural continuity and a similarity of a general way of life between
the two but the abrupt stylistic changes, espeeially in projectile point
forms, would m’gue that they were a different people. If they are new
people in the area I have no suggestion as to tlaeir earlier antecedents.
Kelley (1947a, p. 121) has suggested that tlaey were the Jumano
Indians of historic times but the new Carbon-14 dates are at variance
with this intel]dretation. One might, though, speeulate that they were
the prehistoric ancestors of the Jumano. Suhm (1958, p. 84) has
suggested that they might be the early ancestors of the historic
Tonkawa and this suggestion is not without merit. If they retained
their Toyah Focus culture until X,~qlite-eontact times and then gradually changed to the deteriorated way of life of dependence on the
Caucasian settlements there would be no confliet with the evidence

249

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

from the Carbon-14 dating or the cultural implications. If so, I
would suggest that they were not originally the Tonkawa but perhaps
became the historically known Tonkawa. Jelks (1962, p. 99) has suggested that the Toyah Focus simply expired before the end of the
prehistoric period. As is so often said, more evedence is needed before the matter can be clarified.
THE HISTORIC PERIOD

The final stage of Indian occupation in the Whitney Reservofi" area
is readily attributable to several immigrant groups and to one apparently locally developed group during the 18th and 19th centuries.
Historic documents (Appendix B) indicate that a group of Wichitaspeaking Tawakoni Indians had moved from the Sabine River in east
Texas and built a village of some 150 warriors and their families near
the present location of the Whitney Dam during the 1770"s and 80’s.
Excavations at the StansbmT Site (41-39B1-1) provided evidence of
this village as the earliest occupation of the site. Interpretation of this
evidence in conjunction with historic documents suggests that this was
the Flechado Village occupied from the mid-1770’s to some time near
1786, a component of the Noltefio Focus as defined by Duffield and
Jelks (1961, pp. 69-75). This was a large, permanent, though shortlived, village with permanent, rectangulm" dwelling structures. The
economy was based upon corn agriculture and hunting, fishing, and
gathering. The people were in contact with the Caucasians and utilized many of the White man’s trade goods, such as firearms, knives,
brass, iron, glass, and probably blankets, but were in no sense dependent upon European culture for their subsistence.
Why this village was abandoned or where the people moved to
from here is not known. It is apparent that they were gone by 1786
but a sister village was still ttn’iving a few miles downstream in that
year. Perhaps the two villages merged or perhaps Flechado took
his people back to east Texas about that time. The evidence is not
available to indicate just what happened.
About a half centreT later, in the mid-1830’s, another group of
immigrants from east Texas seem to have been living at the same location. This appears to have been a group of Caddo-speaking, Hasinai Indians under the leadership of a headman named Towash. The
archeological evidence for this occupation is not velT strong but
the historic docmnents seem to support the evidence there is. The
village, too, was sholt-lived and by 1846 had moved some ten miles
or so upstream to the vicinity of what was soon to become Fort

9,50

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Craham. By then, though, the village was under the leadership of a
headman named Jos~ Maria. If we may add to the scant evidence
from the Stansbmy Site, the contemporary description of the village
when it was at the Fort Graham location, we see that it must have
been a rather large village with extensive corn fields and generally
typical of the late Caddoan villages of east Texas. This, then, may be
considered to have been a component of the A!len Focus as defined
by Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks ( 1954, pp. 219-21).
By this time American settlers were moving into this section of
the Brazos Valley and a trading post had been established but 20
miles downstream near the present town of Waeo. In 1849 the
United States miHtm’y post of Fort Graham was established near the
Jos~ Maria village but was abandoned in 1853 because there seemed
to be no fm-ther threat to the settlement by Indians. In 1854 the
Greenwade family moved onto the Stansbury Site and built a log
house. Meanwhile, a group of sixteen immigrants from Mississippi
had settled a half mile north of the Stansbury Site and by 1853 the
Town of Towash had developed there, with a church, store, saloons,
grist mill, a dana ~eross the river, and some 9.5 or 30 buildings in all.
Yet two more Indian groups were to pass across this stage before
the Indian history of the area was to be completed. In the late
1850’s or early 1860 a group of Choctaw established a camp in Lofer’s
Bend just below the Stansbury Site. tlecent evidence has indicated
that this camp may have been located at the McMahon Site (4139B1-13) though no excavations have been conducted to demonstrate
this. During this same time a group of Tonkawa were living adjacent
to the Greenwade farm on the Stansbury Site and constituted the final
Indian occupation of that site. These were both simple, rudimentary
camps inhabited by Indians who had attached themselves, for economic dependence, to the White settlement. Both the Choctaws and
the Tonkawas remained in these cmnps until 1869 or 1870 when
they were removed to Indian Territory.
Thus some 3,000 years of Indian history is outlined within this
section of the Brazos tliver Valley in central Texas. There are many
gaps in our knowledge of these cultures and even some of the basic
data that we presume to know is predicated upon reasoned inferences.
We do know a great deal more than we did a decade or two ago
about this culture history and we may look forward to the next decade with enthusiasm in anticipation of the filling of the gaps in this
hmwledge, Let us hope that this future research will be able to
build constructively upon the present framework and will not demonstrate our current ideas to be too far wrong.

WHITNEY BESERVOIR

251

]PLATE 42. Towash Site: a photograph of the Towash Mill, mill arch, and
the dam across the Brazos River. Taken shortly after it was abandoned,
probably about 1910. b, The remains of the Towash Mill arch as it looked
in 1950.

TEXAS

AI~CHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

PLATE 43. Towash Site: a, ruins of the Towash Mill in 1950; b, the church
at Towash in 1950.

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

"253

REFERENCES CITED
Albritton, C. C., Jr., and Kirk Bryan
1939 Quaternary Stratigraphy in the Davis Mountains, Trans-Pecos Texas.
Bulletin of the Geological Society of America, Vol. 50, pp. 1423-1474.
Anonymous
1840-43. Torrey’s Trading House Account Books, now in the Baylor University Library, Waco.~
Aveleyra Arroyo de Anda, Luis.
1951 Reeonocimiento Arqueologico en la Zona de la Presa Internaeional Falcon, Tamaulipas y Texas, Revista Mexicana de Estndios AnthropoIogicos, Tomo XII, pp. 31-59. Mexico.
Blair, Thomas A.
1942 Climatology, General and Regional. New York.
Bolton, Herbert E.
1914 Athanase de Mdzidres and the Louisiana-Texas Frontier, 1768-1780.
Vols. I and II, The Arthur H. Clark Company, Cleveland.
1915 Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century. University of California Publications in History. Vol. III.
Bonnell, George W.
1840 Topographical Description of Texas, Austin.
Brew, J. O., Chairman, and Others
1947 Symposium on River Valley Archeology. American Antiquity, Vol. 12,
No. 4, April, pp. 209-225.
Campbell, T. N.
1948 The Merrell Site: Archaeological Remains Associated with Alluvial Terrace Deposits. BuUetin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society, Vol. 19, pp. 7-35.
Cason, Joe F.
1952 Report on Archaeological Salvage in Falcon Reservoir, Season o£ 1952.
BuUetin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 23,
pp. 218-259.
Cooper, S.
1851 Report to the Secretary of the Interior, July 23, 1851. Records of the Bureau of Indian Affairs, Letters received, 1851, Texas, 1-752, The National Archives. Washington.
Corbett, John M.
1949 River Basin Archeology a Race Against Time. Planning and Civic Comment July-September 1949 organ of the National Council for Historic
Sites and Buildings. Washington.
Corps of Engineers
1962 Chief of Engineers, U. S. Army, Civil Works Activities Annual report for
the fiscal year ended June 30, 1962, Department of the Army, Corps of
Engineers, Vol. 2, pp. 823-824.
Council of Texas Archeologists
1940 Texas ArcheoIogical News, an occasional report issued by the Council of
Texas Archeologists. No. 1, October 1940, Austin.
Crook, Wilson W., Jr., and R. K. Harris
1952 Trinity Aspect of the Archaic Horizon: The Carrollton and Elam Foci.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 23,
pp. 7-38.
Cutbirth, R. N.
1943 Ed Nichols Rode a Horse. Texas Folklore Society and University Press
in Dallas.

254

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Dice, Lee R.
1943 The Biotic Provinces of North America. Ann Arbor.
Duffield, Lathel F., and Edward B. Jelks
1961 The Pearson Site, A Historic Indian Site at Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains
County, Texas. Archaeology Series No. 4, The University of Texas,
Austin.
Epstein, Jeremiah F.
1962 Centipede and Damp Caves: Excavations in Val Verde Count),, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 33 for 1962, Austin.
Evans, Glen L., and Grayson E. Meade
1945 Quaternary of the Texas High Plains. University of Texas Publication
4401, pp. 485-507.
Ewers, John C.
1957 Hair Pipes in Plains Indian Adormnent, A Study in Indian and White Ingenuity. Anthropological Papers No. 5, Bureau of American Ethnology
Bulletin 164.
Fenenga, Franklin
1953 The Weights of Chipped Stone Points: A Chin to their Functions. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, Vol. 9, No. 3, pp. 309-323. Albuquerque.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1931 Physiography of the Western United States. New York and London.
Freeman,’ Bob, Lt. Col.
1853 Report of Inspection of the 8th Military Dept., Dept. of MilitaW History,
National Archives, Washington, D.C.
Giddings, J. Louis, Jr.
1956 The Burin Spail Artifact, Arctic, Vol. 9, No. 4, pp. 9.29-237.
Givens, N. C., 1st Lt. A.A.Q.M.
n.d.
Fort Graham. Records of the War Dept. ofiqces of the Quartermaster
General, National Archives, Washington, D.C.
Hack, John T.
1942 The Changing Physical Enviromnent of the Hopi Indians of Arizona.
Papers, Peabody Museum of American Archeology and Ethnology, Vol.
35, No. 1, pp. 45-69.
Hughes, Jack T.
1950 An Experiment in Relative Dating of Archeological Remains by Stream
Terraces. Bulletin of the Texas ArcheologicaI and Paleontological Society,
Vol. 21, pp. 97-104. Lubbock.
Jelks, Edward B.
1953 Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter. Bulletin of Texas Archeological Society, Vo!. 24, pp. 189-207.
1962. The Kyle Site, A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County,
Texas. Archeology Series No. 5, The University of Texas, Austin.
Johnson, Frederick
1951 The Inter-Agency Archeological Salvage Program in the United States,
Archaeology, Spring 1951, pp. 25-40.
Johnson, Frederick, et. al.
1945 Prehistoric America and the River Valleys. Prepared by the Committee
for the Recovery of Archeological Remains. Frederick Johnson, A. V.
Kidder, William S. Webb, J. O. Brew.
Johnson, Le Roy, jr., Dee Ann Suhm, and Curtis D. Tunnell
1962 Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir: The Wunderlich, Footbridge,
and Oblate Sites, Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin NO. 5.

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

Q,55

Kelley, J. Charles
ms.
Jumano and Patarabueya Relations at La Junta Los Rios. Unpublished
manuscript.
1947a The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Position of the Clear Fork
Focus. American Antiquity, Vol. XIII, No. 2, October, pp. 97-109.
1947b The Lehmann Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the Toyah, Uvalde and
Round Rock Foci. Bulletin, of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 18, pp. 115-128.
1951 Stephenson and Krieger on Culture Chronology in Texas. American Antiquity, Vol. 17, No. 2, October, pp. 137-139. Salt Lake City.
Kelley, J. Charles, T. N. Campbell and Donald J. Lehmer
1940 The Association of Archeological Material with Geological Deposits in
the Big Bend Region of Texas. Snl Ross’ State Teacher’s College Bulletin,
Vol. XXI, No. 3.
Kirkpatrick, A. Y.
1900 The Early Settlers" Life in. Texas and the Organization of Hill County.
Hillsboro.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946 Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. University of
Texas Publication. 4640, Austin.
1951 Stephenson’s Culture Chronology in Texas. Ameriean Antiquity, Vol. 16,
No. 3, January, pp. 265-267. Salt Lake City.
Long, Joseph K., IiI
1961 Three Central Texas Aspect Sites in Hill County, Texas, Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Voh 30, 1959, Austin, 1961, pp. 222-252.
Miller, E. O. and Edward B. Jelks
1952 Archaeological Excaw~.tions at the Belton Reservoir, Coryell County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
Vol. 23, pp. 168-217.
Mulloy, William
1952 The Northern Plains, in Archeology of Eastern United States, ed. James
B. Griffin, pp. 124-138.
1958 A Preliminary Historical Outline for the Northwestern Plains. University
of YVyoming Publications i~ Science, Vol. XXII, No. 1, Laramie,
Newell, H. Perry and Alex D. Krieger
1949 The George C. Davis Site Cherokee County, Texas. Memoirs of the Society for American, Archaeology No. 5, American Antiquity, Vol. XIV, No.
4, Part 2, April.
Orchard, William C.
1929 Beads and Beadwork of the American. Indians. Museum of the American
Indian, Heye Foundation. New York.
Raisz, Erwin
1939 Map of the Landforms of the United States, fifth and revised edition
1951, in Physiographic Provinces of North America, Wallace Atwood,
Ginn and Company.
Ray, Cyrus N.
1938 The Clear Fork Culture Complex. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 10, pp. 193-207.
1941 The Various Types of the Clear Fork Gouge. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 13, pp. 152-162.
Roberts, Frank H. H., Jr.
1952 River Basin Surveys: The First Five Years of the Inter-Agency Archeological and Paleontological Salvage Program. Annual Report of the
Sm.ithsonian Institution for 1951, pp. 351-383.

~56

1961

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The River Basin Salvage Program: After 15 years, Ann~lal Report of the
Smithsonian Institution. for 1960, pp. 523-549.

Roemer, Ferdinand Von
1935 Texas. Bonn, Germany, 1849. Translated by Oswald Mueller, San Antonio, 1935.
Shantz, H. L. and Raphael Zon
1924 Natural Vegetation. Section E, the Physical Basis of Agriculture, Part
1. Atlas of Americat~ AgricuItltre, Washington.
Sibley, John
1832 Report to Commissioner of Indian Affairs. American State Papers, Indian
Affairs, Vol. IV, Washington.
Smith, Carlyle S.
1950 European Trade Material from the Kansas Monument Site. Plai~s Archeological Conference Newsletter, Vol. 3, No. 2, April 15, 1950 (Reprinted
and repaged, 1961).
1960 Two 18th Century Reports on the Manufacture of Gun Flints in France.
The Missouri Archaeologist, Vol. 22, pp. 40-72.
1961 Gun Flint Manufacture in the Cher Valley, France. Plains At~thropologist, Vol. 6, No. 12, Part 1, p. 68.
Smith, G. Hubert
1953 Trade Beads from Fort Berthold, N. D. Central Texas Archeologist, No.
6, Waco.
Steen, Charlie R.
1953 Two Early Historic Sites on the Southern Plains. BulIetit~ of the Texas
ArcheoIogical Society, Vol. 24, Austin.
Stem, Jesse
1851 Report of Jesse Stem. House Executive Document No. 2, 32nd Congress,
First Session, Part I, pp. 520-525. Washington.
Stephenson, Robert L.
1942 Projectile Point Types of North America. Master’s thesis on file at the
University of Oregon, Eugene.
1947 Archaeological Sm~vey of Whitney Basin: A Prelinainary Report. Bttlleti~z
of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 18, pp. 129142.
1948 Archaeological Survey of McGee Bend Reservoir: A Preliminary Report.
B~tlletilz of the Texas ArcheoIogical at~d Paleol~tological Society, Vol. 19,
pp. 58-73.
1949a A Note on Some Large Pits in Certain Sites near Dallas, Texas. American
Antiq~tity, Vol. XV, No. 1, July, pp. 53-55.
1949b Archaeological Survey of Lavon and Garza-Littie Elm Reservoirs: A Prelinainary Report. Btdleti~ of the Tc~as Archeological a~d Paleontological
Society, Vol. 20, pp. 21-62.
1949c Archeological Survey of Whitney Basin, Bosque and Hill Counties, Texas,
A Preliminary Report. Mimeographed appraisal of the River Basin Surveys, Smithsonian Institution.
1949d Archeological Survey of Lavon and Garza-Little Ehn Reservoirs: A Prelinainary Report. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological a~ad Paleontological
Society, Vol. 20, pp. 21-62.
1950 Culture Chronology in Texas. Americar~ A~tiqttity, Vol. 16, No. 2, Octo1952
1954

ber, pp. 151-157, Salt Lake City.
The Hogge Bridge Site and the Wylie Focus. Americal~ Antiquity, Vol.
XVII, No. 4, April, pp. 299-312.
The Stansbury Site: An Historic Site in the Whitney Reservoir, Texas.
Proceedings of the Nebraska Academy of Sciences. Abstract. April.

WHITNEY I~ESERVOIR

257

Suhm, Dee Ann
1955 Excavations at the Collins Site, Travis County. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 26, pp. 7-54.
1957 Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis County, Texas. Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 26-58.
1958 A review of Central Texas Archeology. BuUetin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 29, pp. 63-108. Issued i960.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger and Edward B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25, Austin.
Torrey’s Trading House
n.d.
Account Books, Baylor University Library, Waco.
Vial, Pedro
1787 Diario que par la gracia de Dios Comienzo (yo Pedro Vial) a hacer
desde este Presidio de Sn. Antonio de Byar, Hasta arribar al de mi Governador Dn. Domingo Cavello, Governador de la Provincia de los Texas,
con expresion de las jornadas desde el dia 4 de Octubre de 1787. A.G.M.
Historia Vol. 43, Document 14. University of Texas Library, Austin.
Watt, Frank H.
1936 A Prehistoric Roekshelter Buria! iu Bell County, Texas. Bulletin of Central Texas Archeological Society, No. 2, pp. 5-27.
1937 Descriptive Analysis of Class Indian Trade Beads Found in Central Texas.
Central Texas Archaeologist, Bulletin No. 3, pp. 61-67.
1938 The Waco Sinker. Central Texas Archeologist, No. 4, pp. 21-70. Waco,
Texas.
1941 Preliminary Report on Potsherds fi’om Chupek Site. Central Texas Archaeological Society Newsletter, pp. 17-19.
1944 Abrading Implements, Cultural Indices in the Central Brazos Valley
Area. Central Texas Archeologist, No. 5, pp. 2-17.
Watt, Frank H. and W. P. Meroney
1937 Class Indian Trade Beads in Central Texas. Central Texas Archaeologist,
Bulletin No. 3, pp. 51-60.
Webb, William S. and David L. DeJarnette
1942 An Archeologieal Survey of Pickwick Basin in the Adjacent Portions of
the States of Alabama, Mississippi and Tennessee. Bureau of American
Ethnology Bulletin 129.
Wheat, Joe Ben
1947 Archeo!ogical Survey of the Addicks Basin: A Preliminary Report. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 18,
pp. 143-145.
1953 An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin, Southeast Texas.
Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 154, River Basin Surveys Papers,
No. 4, Part 1, pp. 14.3-252.
Witte, Adolph H.
1938 Spanish Fort, An Historic Wichita Site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Voh 10, pp. 2.34-244.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Appendix A
NOTES ON OTHER SITES RECORDED IN THE
WHITNEY tlESEIIVOI1R
There are 71 areheologieal sites recorded within the Whitney l~eservoir area. Nine of these have been excavated and reports of the findings published, either in the present report or elsewhere. The other
62 sites are known only from surface examination or from brief test
excavations and reports of the findings have not been published
except in brief summary form (Stephenson, 1947; 1949e). Most of
these sites were thin, surface occupations dispersed over a considerable area of 9. or 3 to 5 or 6 acres, and proxdded vmy little
areheologieal information, though several, had they been excavated,
might have added materially to the present data. Each, though, did
provide some data and it seems that even these brief hints of culture
content of the area should be recorded since most of these sites are
now beneath the waters of the reservoir. Consequently, a brief note
coneel~Jng each of these sites is included below for whatever it
might add to the general picture of the prehistory and early history
of the area. Cultural designations, where given, are only tentative
suggestions based on the flimsy evidence available. The first three
sites were visited and recorded by Frank H. Watt prior to 1947. All
of the others have been recorded in connection with the salvage
work during or since 1947.
41-39B1-1
The Stansbmy Site. Excavated in 1947 and 1950. Investigations are
published in the present report and in Stephenson, 1947; 1949c; 1954.
41-39B1-9’
The Odom Site. Test pitted in 1947. This is a large, open campsite of 3 or 4 acres on the southeast bank of Towash Creek. Surface
refuse was abundant and eleven artifacts were recovered, including
a Perdiz Point, a Fresno Point, and several scrapers and small choppers. The points suggest a Toyah Focus occupation.
41-39BI-3
The Walling Shelter. Test trenched in 1947. This rock shelter on
the northeast side of Itocky Creek is 19.0 feet long, 10 feet wide and
has a high ceiling some 50 feet above the floor. The two feet or so
of floor deposit contained abundant occupation refuse but only two
artifacts, a split deer ulna awl and a large scraper. Some years before, Watt recovered several large, broken dart points from the surface of the site. Cultural affiliation is not known.

VCHITNEY I~ESERVOIR

259

41-39B1-4
The Mixon Site. The late Mrs. Jessie Greenwade (born 1859)
reported having visited a large Choctaw camp here on the lower terrace of the Brazos River in Lofer’s Bend in the late 1860’s. No evidence of the site was found. See Site 41-39B1-13.
41-39B1-5
The Biffle Site. Test trenched in 1947. On the lower telTace of
the Brazos l~iver a half mile downstream from the Stansbury Site,
a cultivated field produced abundant camp refuse scattered over an
area of 5 or 6 acres. Local people have collected artifacts here for
many years. Testing showed midden deposit only to the bottom of the
plow zone, though, and artifacts collected included a shaped mano,
a GalT Point, 3 Ellis Points, and several scrapers. Burials were reported to have been found here. All of the specimens from this site
that were seen in private collections were large dart points. These
points suggest an Edwards Plateau Aspect occupation.
41-39BI-6
The Garrison Site. Test trenched in 1947. Located in a sandy
field on the upper terrace of the Brazos l~iver and some 1~ miles from
the river, this site contained sparse eultttral debris on the surface
and nothing below the plow zone. Five dart points were found ineluding Pahnillas, Yarbrough, and Ellis types. These would suggest an Edwards Plateau Aspect occupation.
41-39BI-7
The Town of Towash. Adjacent to the northwest edge of the StansbmT Site was the town of Towash, established about 1848 or 1849
by a "colony" of settlers from Mississippi. Other settlers soon joined
the Mississippians and by 1853, when Hill County was established,
Towash was the largest town in the county. Some 25 or 30 buildings
had been erected including a store, a church, two saloons, a blacksmith shop and numerous residences. At the edge of the river and
between it and the town Sfinpson C. Dyer began eonsh’uction of a
grist mill in 1852 which he completed in 1855. Timbers for the mill
were sawed along the banks of the Brazos but the main construction
was of stone and mortar. In conjunction with the mill Dyer also built
a low dam, some 6 or 8 feet high, across the river to channel water
through the mill arch and thence through the mill itself (Fig. 18, PI.
49.). The mill became a focal point for the entire area and people
came from as much as 20 or 30 miles to have their corn ground into
flour and meal here, thus contributing to the prosperity of the town.

TEXAS

~60

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

CHANNEL.
~x.~OPER

A.

GROUND

,o

,

2o
FEET

PLAN

,

e

WEST
INTAKE
WALL
28’

ARCH

HIGH

,r,.-"

BRAZOS

RIVER

MASONRY

WALLS

OF MILL PROPER

.__.__j-

ARCH
PROFILE

OF":TOWASH

MILL

AND ARCH

¥

MILL
I)RAWN BY R.L.STEPHENSON
TRAG,EO B’~ RS.PR[CE

FIOURI~ 18. Towash Mill: a, sketch of the stone arch; b, ground plan showing relationship of arch, intake wall, outlet wall, mill proper, and the Brazos
River; c, profile of mill and arch.

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

261

The mill remained in operation until 1908 and the sh’ucture, along
with the store and church and a few later frame buildings, were still
standing in 1950. The church, in fact, was still in use in that year

(Pl. 43).
Towash continued to grow and prosper and became a lively frontier town for the next three or four decades. Many tales of frontier
episodes of robbers, scandals, buried treasure, hardships, and celebrations are told of the town of Towash. By the 1890’s, though, it had
begun to decline and by the turn of the century other towns in the
counhT had deprived it of its prominence. By 1950 a single family
was living there, and now it is beneath the waters of the Whitney
Reservoh’.
41-39B1-8
The Collins Site. Test trenched in 1947. Situated in a sandy field
just south of the old Towash School this site is reputed to have produced arrowheads, glass beads, and glazed crockmT. No evidence
of cultural refuse or artifacts was found.
41-39B1-9
The Talbot Site. Extensive test trenching in 1947. Located on the
upper terrace, two miles from the Brazos River channel and near the
edge of Towash Creek, the site has been a favorite collecting spot
for loca! people to gather alTowheads. Surface refuse was abundant
but the 60 feet of h’enching produced no material below a depth of
8 inches. The 37 artifacts collected include a Bulverde Point, a Yarbrough Point, several dart point fragments, gravers, a spokeshave,
rectangular and triangular scrapers, spall scrapers, a heavy flint
drill, a large snub-nose scraper, a well-made sandstone trough metate,
and several shaped manos showing evidence of back-and-forth grinding motion. The points suggest an Edwards Plateau Aspect camp.
41-39B1-10
Adjacent to the old De Grafenreid cemetery Mong old Highway
22, this 8 or 9 acre field was sparsely productive of occupation refuse
but, being covered with heavy sod, only 5 artifacts were found. These
include an Ellis Point and fragments of blades and scrapers.
41-39B1-11
This site was reputed to be a burial mound but test trenching in
1947 produced no e~dence of burials nor of cultural material of any
kind. It is simply the remnant of a small natural ridge.
41-39B1-12
The Nuckols Site. Surface collecting at this 4 to 5 acre site on a

TEXAS AI~CHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

remnant of the upper terrace of the Brazos River near the rnouth of
Long Branch Creek yielded 15 artifacts. Midden material was abundant, though brush and weeds covered most of the site except for
several small gullies eroding into the gravel stratum beneath the
sandy silt mantle. The artifacts include an Ellis and a Palmillas point
and several dart point fragnnents along with a graver and several
crude scrapers and blades. Probably an Edwards Plateau Aspect
campsite.
41-39BI-13
The McMahon Site. On the edge of the upper Brazos River terrace
and along the west bank of Towash Creek about 13.,’ miles above its
confluence with the Brazos River, this site covers 2 or 3 acres adjacent
to a fine spring. A small orchard and some farm buildings occupy
most of the surface area of the site. Cultm’al refuse is abundant on
the surface and the 47 artifacts collected include a fragment of a
small arrow point, GaiT, Ellis, Pahnillas, Yarbrough, Dar!, and Ensor
points, flake scrapers, oval and triangular blades, a heavy stone drill
with a shaped base, large snub-nose scrapers, manos, hammerstones,
and heavy side scrapers.
Correspondence from R. K. Harris of Dallas (Oct. 7, 1965 and
December 7, 1965) says: "I think that I have finally located the
Choctaw village of 1860. I now have the fol!owing specimens from
the site: scissors, iron tinlders, lead balls, gun flints, and about three
hundred glass trade beads .... Also . . . several U. S. Military buttons,
some of which are Dragoon buttons. These buttons appear to date
circa 1860 and are probably from Fort Graham nearby .... It is
shown on your map as 39B1-13." No historic items were found here
in the 1947 smwey but may well have been missed in the brief surface
examination of the site at that time. It is certain that there is an
older occupation here, probably of the Edwards Plateau Aspect and
an historic occupation has now been suggested.
41-39B1-14
The Barton Site. Test trenched in 1947. This site on Bear Creek,
~ of a mile below Fort Graham, covers about 10 acres of cultivated
fields. Surface material is abundant but does not extend below the
plow zone. The 42 artifacts recovered include a shaped mano, flake,
cia’cular, and side scrapers, a graver, blade fragments, a grooved
hammerstone, several cores, and Darl and Ellis Points. This appe~s
to be an Edwards Plateau Aspect campsite.

9,63

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

41-39B1-15
On a bluff overlooking the mouth of Cedar Creek, this 3 or 4 acre
campsite is marked by occupation refuse and artifacts over its surface
area. The 34 specimens recovered include Ellis, Y~brough, and Gray
Points, a large drill, a quartzite mano, miscellaneous scrapers and
blades and many tip fragments of dart points. Thirty additional specimens donated by a local collector and said to be all from this site
include the same kinds of specimens but with the addition of one
Scallom Point.

The site appe~s to be an Edwards Plateau Aspect

campsite.

41-39B1-16
A ridge between Cech’on Creek and the Brazos River contains a
small occupation area that yielded a crude mano, three broken dart
points and six crude scrapers.
41-39B1-17
This is another small, culturally poor occupation area on the terrace
of Cedron Creek. Refuse was present but not abundant on the surface and no artifacts were found.
41-39B1-18
This is a small campsite with a modest representation of surface
refuse, and a few crude scrapers were recovered. It is situated on the
lower terrace, 100 yards from the Brazos River.
41-39B1-19
One mile below Fol± Graham, dais is probably an extension of site
41-39B1-14 on Bear Creek but seemed to be separated from it by a
culturally sterile area. Surface refuse but no artifacts were found.
41-39B1-9,0
The Greenwade Shelter. This rockshelter is in a small limestone
outcrop on the south side of Rocky Creek, approximately three miles
above tile confluence of that stream and the Brazos River at an elevation of 550 feet above sea level. It is 19,0 feet long, 9,0 feet wide, and
ttle ceiling is some 10 feet above the floor. The floor deposits are from
5 to 6 inches deep to as much as 3 feet in some places. Cultural refuse
includes ash, charcoal, flint chips, broken nmssel shells, snai! shells
and occasional fire-broken rocks. Only two hammerstones and a small
circular scraper were found on the surface.
Correspondence from Frank H. Watt of Waco (FebmalT 9.5, 1957)
states that a local collector had excavated two burials here and called
on him to remove the thfl’d one. This was a semi-flexed burial of an

264

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

adult at a maximum depth of 30 inches. Near the feet at a depth of
30 inches Watt recovered a small, bone atlatl hook. The only other
m~ifaet he found (though the local collector is said to have found
other artifacts) was a small arrow point with fine serrations, perhaps
a Seallorn Point. It was in a vital spot in the burial. The point might
suggest that this was an Austin Focus occupation but if so would be
the first evidence of atlatl hooks in the cultural inventory of that focus.
41-39B1-21
This is a small, culturally poor site between two deep arroyos on
the lower terrace of the Brazos River. The only artifacts found were
3 scrapers and a dart point tip.
41-39B1-22
Along the west bank of Towash Creek this small site on the upper
terrace of that stream occupies about one acre. Abundant surface
refuse includes mussel shells, flint chips, ash and broken bone. The
few artifacts found include a flake scraper and four blade fragments.
One of the latter is beveled and may be a portion of a 4-blade beveled
knife.
41-39B1-23
This site is on the crest of a gravel ridge that is a renmant of the
third terrace of the Brazos ]River, and overlooks Steele’s Creek. The
gravel fill of this site contains abundantl small, ovoid pebbles of
white and pink quartz, the material from which the "Waco Sinkers"
are made (Watt, 1938, pp. 21-70). This is the only site recorded
where this material is found in any quantity and one informant reported finding a "Waco Sinker" at this site. Surface refuse includes
flint chips, quartz and quartzite spalls, but no mussel or snail shells.
Artifacts recovered include a Gary Point, a Yarbrough Point, a hammerstone, several cores and scrapers, and a large, heavy drill fragment. Possible connection between this site and the rather early
archaic sites 50 miles and more downstream where the "Waeo Sinkers"
were found, is suggested.

41-39B1-24
This site is similar to, and near, site 41-39B1-23 except that the
quartz pebbles are rare in the gravels of the site. A notched, chipped
stone axe, a dart point fragment, a triangular blade, and two crude
scrapers were recovered.
41-39B1-25
This is a small, culturally poor site on the same terrace as the above
two sites but contains a mantle of soil above the gravel. A graver, a

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

265

small, well-made scraper, a Palmillas Point and two crude scrapers
were found.
41-26B7-1
This site covers an area of five or six acres along the east bank of
Bear Creek adjacent to the location of old Fort Graham. It is apparently a part of both the village of the Caddo Indians that was
visited by Ferdinand Roemer in 1847 and the militalT post of Fort
Graham (41-26D7-3).
41-26D7-2

The Coffin Site. Test pitted in 1947. It is located on the north
bank of the Nolans River, 2,~ miles above the confluence of the Nolans
and Brazos Rivers. Several hummocks in a pasture are said to have
contained burials excavated by a local resident about 1917. A single
test in one of these hmmnocks produced only a large, parallel-sided
blade. Occupation refuse was not seen on the surface.
41-26D7-3
The Fort Graham Site. This site is situated on Bear Creek approximately 1~’ miles above that creek’s confluence with the Brazos River.
It includes the location of the historic military post of Fort Graham as
well as the "Caddoe village" visited by Ferdinand Roemer in 1847.
Together with sites 41-26D7-1 and 41-26D7-4, which are obviously parts
of the same large site complex, it covers some 30 acres on both banks
of the creek. A sandy alluvial soil covers the area. Camp refuse such
as flint chips, broken bone, nmssel shell, burned rocks and other trash
is abundant on the sm’face. Local collectors have gathered projectile
points here for many years. These are mostly large dart points but
a few small arrow points were seen in the collections. Darl Points
seemed to predominate and at least one Seallorn Point was seen.
Presumably the site had been occupied in past centuries by Edwards
Plateau Aspect people and later probably by Austin Focus people.
It is apparent that this was also the location of the Caddo (Hasinai)
village of the 1840’s. In 1847 the German naturalist, Ferdinand
Roemer, visited a "Caddoe village" some 40 miles above Waco on the
north side of the Brazos River. The village was under the leadership of a headman called Jos~ Maria. It was a rather large, well
situated village with extensive corn fields on both banks of a small
stream that flowed into the Brazos a mile or so distant. The foothills
were said to have formed a background for the village. This is a
good description of the location under discussion. Furthermore the

266

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

military post of Fort Graham established here in 1849 was ordered
to be "at Jos6 Maria village."
If ore" assumptions concerning the Stansbury Site (41-39B1-1) are
correct, it is reasonable to assume that "Old Towash," the leader of
the Hasinai at that location during the late 1830’s and early 1840’s,
must have died or in some other way faded from the seene and been
replaeed by Jos6 Maria by or shortly before 1846. At about the time
that Jos6 Maria took over leadership of the Hasinai band the group
may have moved to the new location that we now call 41-9.6D7-3.
They were soon to be displaced from this village by the White soldiers
who moved in in 1849. Implications fi’om the doeumenta13z records
suggest that they moved on up the Brazos to build another village
"about 95 miles above."
Much documentary information is available on Fort Graham in
the National Archives in Washington, D. C. and in the Library of
Congress there. In connection with other research my w~e, Ceorgie
E. Stephenson, secured for me from those two repositories, nmnerous
letters, orders, reports, and accounts from Fort Graham, particularly
those of Lt. Col. W. A. Freeman, and other officers of the post as well
as those of several civilians. From these records I have been able to
compile the following data concerning the Fort.
Fort Graham was named for Lt. Col. W. M. Graham (Gardner,
Dictionary of the U.S.A., p. 580). It was "Established by Brevet Brig.
Cenl. Harney by virtue of orders No. 9, dated Headquarters, 8th and
9th Depts., San Antmzio, February 8th, 1849, and garrisoned April
17th, 1849 by Companies F and I, 2nd Drags. May llth, 1849, Major
Arnold with F Company was ordered to Fort Worth and Lt. F. Hamilton, 2nd Drags. remained with I Company till 6th October 1849,
when Bvt. Lt. Col. Bomford, 8th Infy., in company of Co. H an’ived
and assumed command of the post" (Givens, n. d.).
The records are not dear as to how long Bomford commanded Fort
Graham but it was at least into February 1851. A letter dated Februm7 11, 1851 was signed by "Capt., Bvt. Lt. Col. J. N. Bom%rd,
Commanding Offleer." In August 1851 Captain H. H. Sibley was
commanding but how long he was there is not dear. By September
30, 1859, Bvt. Maj. tl. A. Arnold was again in command and remained so until "he was killed by the Asst. Surgeon of the post" on
September 6, 1853 (Freeman, 1853). Fh’st Lt. tl. H. Anderson, next
in rank, then took command and presumably remained in command
until the post was abandoned, though the record is not entirely dear
on this.

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

267

The U. S. Army Register, 1779-1879 (p. 135) states that Fort Graham was abandoned on 9 November 1853. H. R. Ex. Doe. No. 93, of
the 35th Congress, 2nd Session, (p. 20) however, states that "Fort
Graham, Tex. Est. March 9.7, 1849: evacuated October 6, 1853." In
an inspection report of September 10, 1853, Lt. Col. ~vV. G. Freeman
states that "Orders had been received to abandon the post and the
movement was only delayed by the means of ta’anspollation." The
"means of transportation" could well account for the conflict in dates
of abandomnent
During those four and a half years from February or March of
1849 to October or November of 1853 contemporary reports and correspondence now in the National Archives in Washington, D. C. indicate much about the general nature of the country and the settlement in the area at that time. Buildings on the post were built mainly
of squared oak logs often covered with clapboard and were built by
hired civilian labor. A powder magazine of stone was built by the
ta’oops and was "leaky and unfit for use." Givens reports that "Stone
in any quantity and of excellent quality is found re1T convenient to
the post, and provided masons were elnployed (at least in part)
they would constitute by far the cheapest material for building. The
timber in the vicinity of the post consists chiefly of post oak, HackbenT, Elm, Cottonwood and cedar. Some of it can be used for building purposes, but it is unfit for being sawed into boards. Lumber is
procured fi’om Porters Bluff on the Trinity, 120 miles, and delivered at
the post for $60 per M feet." Presumably the masons were not available as the post buildings were not of stone.
Water was obtained fi’om a creek near the gan’ison "and fi’om
several excellent springs which yield an abundant supply." Fuel for
the post was furnished by conta’act with local civilians at $3.00 per
cord. Corn was furnished by contract at $1.75 per bushel, a price
considered to be high and "consequent upon the scarcity of corn
and the distance it has to be transported." Hay was ftu’nished by
contract fi’om "some distance fi’om the post" at $7.00 per ton and grass
was poor in the vicinity. "There are very few settlers near the post
and Beef is scarce, but is furnished on contract at five cents per
pound." (quotations from Givens, n. d. )
Principal roads from Fort Graham were to Fort Worth, 60 miles
northeast; to Austin via Fort Gates, 130 miles southwest, thence on to
Red River and Fort Washita. These roads were said to be good in the
dry season but often finpassable in the wet season because of the
swollen streams which intersected them.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

268

Supplies of quartermaster and ordnance stores were sent chiefly
from the depot at San Antonio by government teams. Subsistence
stores, though, came from Washington-on-the-Brazos and from Houston by hired transportation, distances of 220 and 230 miles respectively.
Transportation was almost impossible to hire in the vieillity of the post
and chm’ges of $2.00 to $2.50 per hunch’ed pounds were made for
loads going to Austin or San Antonio when anyone could be found
to hire.
In none of the contemporary doemnents located was there any
refrence found to trouble with the Indians in the Fort Graham vicinity. The post was established for the purpose of protecting the
settlements on the frontier from the Indians and apparently its mere
presence was sufficient to accomplish its purpose. In 1853, Freeman
stated that "The Caddoes, Anadarkos, Shawnees, and some Delawares
occasionally visit the post, and are established, for the most part,
about 25 miles above, on the Brazos. They are under the government
of Jos6 Maria." Apparently the Tonkawas had not by then attached
themselves to the Greenwade farm at the Stansbury Site. Life for the
military personne! at Fort Graham must have been peaceful from the
military standpoint. Except for the regular Army routine, it was probably little different than it was for the civilian settlers in the neighborhood.
41-26D7-4
This is a portion of the Fort Graham Site, covering some ten or
twelve acres on the south side of the Fort area. It was given a separate site number as it seemed to be detached by an area sterile of
surface materials.
41-26D7-5
The Pictograph Shelter. Excavated in 1947 and 1950. Investigations are published in the present report and in Stephenson 1947;
1949c.

41-26D7-6
The Klepper Shelter. Test trenched in 1947. Adjacent to 41-26D7-5,
this small rock shelter is 50 feet long, 10 feet wide and has very little
ceiling overhang. The two feet of floor deposit contained some ash,
charcoal, shell, and other occupation refuse but no artifacts were
found.
41-26D7-7
The Carter Shelter. Test trenched in 1947. This small shelter located in a small !imestone outcrop a half mile west of 41-26D7-5 pro-

9.69

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

duced but slight occupation refuse in the 19, to 15 inches of floor deposit and no artifacts.
41-26D7-8
The Bear Creek Shelter. Test trenched in 1947. This is a larger
shelter, 120 feet long and 22 feet wide, in a limestone outcrop on the
east bank of Bear Creek, 1,000 feet upstream from Fret Graham.
The site seems well suited for occupation but the shallow floor deposit (16 inches) provided little refuse and only a couple of crude
scrapers and cores.
41-26D7-9
The Bm’leson Site.

This two-acre site is situated at the edge of

the Brazos l:tiver on the lower terrace and opposite the Buzzard
Shelter. Occupation refuse was moderately abundant on the surface
and included many broken nmssel shells. The 6 artifacts recovered
included a Scallorn Point, a mano fragment, an abrader, a hammerstone and two flake scrapers. This may be an Austin Focus campsite.

41-26D7-10
On the top of the bluff, overlooking the Brazos River and directly
above the Buzzard Shelter is an occupation area covering some 4 or
5 acres. The soil mantle over the bedrock is but a few inches deep but
refuse was found in moderate abundance. Scrapers, choppers, a mano,
and three dart point fragments were recovered.
41-26D7-11
This is a small rockshelter adjacent to the north end of the Buzzard Shelter. Floor deposit is shallow and only slight evidence of
occupation was found.
41-26D7-12
The Buzzard Shelter. Excavated in 1947 and 1950 and reexeavated
by Robert E. Forrester of Fort Worth in 1957-58. Investigations am
published in the present report and in Stephenson, 1947; 1949c; Long,
1961.
41-9~6D7-13
The Taylor Shelter. Test trenched in 1947. This small shelter is
adjacent to the south end of Buzzard Shelter, is smaller and contains
but a few inches of floor deposit.
tion refuse was found.

Only minor amounts of occupa-

41-26D7-14
The Little Buzzard Shelter. Test trenched in 1947. Excavated by
Joseph K. Long, III, Loyd Harper and other members of the Dallas

9.70

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

and Fort Worth Archeological Societies in 1957-58. A report of the
excavations was published in Long, 1961. The site is some 300 feet
southeast of 41-26D7-13 and in the same limestone outcrop. The 1947
investigations showed the floor deposit to be up to 3 feet deep but
stratigraphic levels were not discernible. Much cultural refuse was
found, including mussel and snail shells, broken and split bones, flint
chips, ash lenses, scattered ash, and fire-broken rocks. This material
seemed to be concentrated in the upper 12 inches, though no clear
break could be seen between this zone and the less productive deposits below. The artifacts recovered froln the testing included a large
shaped metate, 3 manos, several hammerstones, cores, choppers, and
scrapers, a triangul~ dart point, and an abrader, but no arrow points
or potsherds.
The 323 artifacts recovered in later excavations included 5 potsherds,
114 arrow points (mainly Perdiz and Scallorn), 38 dart points and a
substantial assemblage of other tools. Long (1961, pp. 223-252) suggests that the site represents " . . . a more or less equal mixture of
Toyah and Austin Focus elements .... " There can be no question
that this is essentially the situation.
41-26D7-15
The Forrester Cave. Tested in 1947. Excavated by Robert E. Forrester of Fort Worth in 1957-58. A report of the excavations was published in Long, 1961. The site is the southeasternmost one of this selies
of five shelters and is approximately 400 feet southeast of 41-26D7-14.
It is a small shelter with but 8 or 10 inches of floor deposit. The 1947
test provided little evidence of occupation and no artifacts. The
1957-58 excavations produced 55 artifacts, most of which were arrow
points and blades. The 31 alTOW points were predominantly Scallorn
Points. Long properly concludes "that FolTester Cave is essentially an
Austin Focus component" (Long, 1961, p. 247).
41-26D7-16
The Indian Spring Site. Near a large spring on the lower terrace
of the Brazos River in the west end of Steiner Valley, this occupation
area covers 2 or 3 acres. Refuse is moderately abundant on the surface but only 4 crude scrapers were found.
41-26D7-17
The Ceo. Benson Site. This is a large, 10-acre occupation area on
the lower Brazos River terrace in the west end of Steiner Valley.
Surface refuse was abundant and 29 artifacts were recovered. These
include ovoid, triangular, and snub-nose scrapers, hammerstones,

271

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

choppers, blades, and 6 dart points. The latter are Ellis, Yarbrough,

and Palmillas Points and a laneeotate point. These points suggest an
Edwards Plateau Aspect occupation.
41-26D7-18
The Nicks Site. Test trenched in 1947. At the back of the upper
terrace approximately a half mile from the Steele Site, this is a partly
buried occupation area. Cultural material was moderately abundant
on a portion of the surface and the 7 artifacts recovered include a
Gary Point, a hammerstone and several scrapers and cores. The one
point suggests an Edwards Plateau Aspect site.
41-26D7-19
A site similar in all respects to 41-26D7-18 but yielding no artifacts
is situated approximately 200 yards to the south of that site.
41-26D7-20
The Sheep Shelter. Excavated in 1947 and 1950. Investigations are
published in the present report and in Stephenson, 1947; 1949c.
41-26D7-21
This is a large, cuturally poor, occupation a’ea on a high bluff
overlooking the confluence of the Brazos and the Nolans Rivers.
Surface refuse was spm’se over the 6 or 7 acres of the site and no
artifacts were recovered.
41-26D7-22
On the north bank of Nolans River, a half mile from its mouth,
is another large, culturally poor site with but little surface refuse.
No artifacts were found here. Local informants indicate that a major
Indian-White battle took place here at one time but none could be
more specific than that.
41-26D7-23
The Jones Site. Test trenched in 1947 and in 1950. This site is
located on the lower terrace of the Brazos River at the mouth of
Mesquite Creel<. It covers approximately 6 acres and occupation
refuse was abundant on the surface. The brief tests in 1947 indicated
that there might be some depth of occupation that would produce
stratified components if excavated. The 57 artifacts recovered include
a celt, a ground limestone hoe, numerous scrapers, blades, and choppers and 34 dart points. The latter include Gary, Yarbrough, Pahnillas,
Ellis, Bulverde, and triangular points. More extensive trenching and
test pitting in 1950 clearly demonstrated that cultural material did not

9,72

TEXAS AItCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

extend deeper than the plow zone. This appears to be an Edwards
Plateau Aspect campsite.
41-26D7-24
This is a very small rock shelter in the edge of a bluff just above
41-26D7-23. No evidence of occupation was found. Infornaants state
that several years ago a burial along with a "bowl," arrowheads, tomahawks, shell beads, and "other relics" were taken from this shelter.
41-26D7-25
Another small rockshelter near 41-26D7-24 produced only slight evidence of occupation and no artifacts.
41-26D7-26
A large occupation area on the bluff overlooking the Brazos River,
this site produced moderately abundant surface refuse and 7 naanos,
hammerstones and scrapers.
41-26D7-27
This is a small occupation area on the lower terrace of the Brazos
River about a mile west of Fort Graham near the old military road
crossing of the river. Only minor cultural material was seen on the
surface and two minos and several scrapers were recovered.
41-26D7-28 to 33
This group of six sites is located along the top of a ridge between
Steele’s Creek and the Brazos River. They are apparently all parts
of a single large occupation area used intermittently over a considerable span of time and extending for approximately a naile and
a half along the ridge with an average width of 50 yards or more.
Local people have collected artifacts here for years but report only
finding arrow points in the area designated 41-26D7-31. Along the
rest of the ridge dart points have been found in abundance. Hannnerstones, scrapers, and dart point fragments were collected during the
1947 sm’vey and one Ianceolate dart point was found at 41-26D7-32.
41-26D7-34
On the north bank of Steele’s Creek Mong the lower creek terrace,
a shallow, surface site of 2 to 3 acres provided Ellis and Yarbrough
points, a ta’iangular dart point, a lanceolate point and a few scrapers.
It is apparently an Edwards Plateau Aspect campsite.
41-25D7-35
On the north bank of Mesquite Creek a small surface site yielded
modest amounts of occupation refuse but no artifacts.

WHITNEY I:~ESERVOIR

273

41-26D7-36
This site, at the base of the uplands and opposite the mouth of
the Nolans River, is a large occupation area with abundant surface
refuse. Artifacts include Pedernales, Ellis, Yarbrough, Daft and Ensor
Points, several blades, scrapers, and choppers, 4 trough metates,
manos, and hammerstones. The points suggest an extensively used
Edwards Plateau Aspect site.
41-26D7-37
A rock shelter near the upper end of a steep ravine between the
Buzzard Shelter and the White Bluffs about the size of the Buzzard
Shelter appeared to have a deep floor deposit. Time did not permit
testing of the site and no artifacts were recovered.
41-26D7-38
The Steele Site. Excavated in 1950. Investigations are published in
the present report.
41-26D7-39
This is a small rock shelter at the upper end of the ravine through
which Cedar Creek flows. The floor deposit is 1 to 2 feet deep and
occupational material is moderately abundant. No artifacts were recovered.
41-26D7-40 and 41
These are two large occupational areas along the lower terrace of
the Brazos River, near the mouth of the Nolans River. Occupation
material was abundant on the surface of both sites but only a few
scrapers and dart point fragments were found.
41-26D7-42
The Blum Roekshelter. Excavated in 1952 by Edward B. Jelks for
the River Basin Salvage Project. Investigations are published in Jelks,
1953.
41-26D7-43
On top of a bluff overlooking the Brazos River about 5 airline miles
above the mouth of the Nolans River a large shallow occupation
area with abundant surface refuse provided several scrapers, cores,
and manos, a Gary Point, and several dart point fragments.
41-HL-1
The Kyle Site. Excavated in 1959 and 1960 by Edward B. Jelks for
the Texas Archeologieal Salvage Project. Investigations are published
in Jelks, 1962.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

274

TABLE 13
Tabulation of Sites in the Whitney Resmwoir Area
Culture

Number

Name

Kind

Work

41-39BI-1
41-39B1-2
41-39B1-3
41-39B1-4
41-39B1-5
41-39B1-6
41-39B1-7
41-39B1-8
41-39B1-9
41-39B1-10
41-39B1-11
41-39B1-12
41-39B1-13

Stansbury
Odom
Walling
Mixon
Biflte
Garrison

Open
Open
Shelter
Open
Open
Open
Open
Open
Open
Open
Open
Open
Open

Excav.
Tested
Tested
Surf.
Tested
Tested
Surf.
Tested
Tested
Surf.
Tested
Surf.
Surf.

3,018
11
2
0
23
5
0
0
37
5
0
15
47

41-39B1-14
41-39B1-15
41-39B!-16
41-39B1-17
41-39B1-18
41-39B1-19
41-39B1-20
41-39B 1-21
41-39B 1-22
41-39B1-23
41-39B 1-24
41-39B1-25
41-26D7-1
41-26D7-2
41-26D7-3
41-26D7-4

Barton
-----Greenwade
-----Parks
Coffin
Parks
Parks

Open
Open
Open
Open
Open
Open
Shelter
Open
Open
Open
Open
Open
Open
Open
Open
Open

Tested
Surf.
Surf.
Surf.
Surf.
Surf.
Surf.
Surf.
Surf.
Surf.
Surf.
Surf.
Surf.
Tested
Surf.
Surf.

4"2
64
10
0
7
0
3
4
5
13
5
5
5
1
0
4

41-26D7-5

Pictograph

Shelter

Excav.

846

41-26D7-6
41-26D7-7
41-26D7-8
41-26D7-9
41-26D7-10
41-26D7-11
41-26D7-12

Clepper
Carter
Bear Creek
Burleson
Buzzard

Shelter
Shelter
Shelter
Open
Open
Shelter
Shelter

Tested
Tested
Tested
Surf.
Surf.
Surf.
Excav.

0
0
4
6
19
0
1,181

41-26D7-13
41-26D7-14

Taylor
Little Buzzard

Shelter
Shelter

Tested
Excav.

0
29

41-26D7-15

Forrester

Shelter

Excav.

0

-Collins
Talbot
-Nuckols
McMahon

Artifacts

Historic
Toyah F.
?
?
Ed. Plat. A.
Ed. Plat. A.
Part of BI-1
?
Ed. Plat. A.
?
?
Ed. Plat. A.
Historic (?)
Ed. Plat. A.
Ed. Plat. A.
Ed. Plat. A.
?
?
?
?
Austin F.
?
?
Ed. Plat. A.
?
?
Part of D7-4
?
Part of D7-4
Historic (?)
Ed. Plat. A.
Toyah F.
Austin F.
?
?
?
Austin F.
?
?
Toyah
Austin
?
Toyah
Austin
Austin

F.
F.
F.
F.
F.

275

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

TABLE 13 (Continued)
Number

Name

Kind

Work

41-26D7-16
41-26D7-17
41-26D7-18
41-26D7-19
41-26D7-20

Indian Spring
Geo. Benson
Nicks
-Sheep

Open
Open
Open
Open
Shelter

Surf.
Surf.
Tested
Surf.
Excav.

4
29
7
0
529

Open
Open
Open
Shelter
Shelter
Open
Open
Open
Open
Open
Open
Open
Open
Open
Open
Open
Shelter
Open
Shelter
Open
Open
Shelter

Surf.
’Surf.
Tested
Surf.
Surf.
Surf.
Surf.
Surf.
Surf.
Surf.
Surf.
Surf.
Surf.
Surf.
Surf.
Surf.
Surf.
Excav.
Surf.
Surf.
Surf.
Excav.

0
0
96
0
0
0
7

0
9
0
54
0
613
0
7
4
0
11
0

41-26D7-21
41-26D7-22
41-26D7-23
41-26D7-24
41-26D7-25
41-26D7-26
41-26D7-27
41-26D7-28
41-26D7-29
41-26D7-30
41-26D7-31
41-26D7-32
41-26D7-33
41-26D7-34
41-26D7-35
41-26D7-36
41-26D7-37
41-26D7-38
41-26D7-39
41-26D7-40
41-26D7-41
41-26D7-42

--Jones
-----------

-Steele
--Blum

41-26D7-43
41-HL-1

Kyle

--

Open
Shelter

Surf.
Exeav.

None
None

Towash
Fort Graham

Town
Fort

Surf.
Surf.

Culture

Artifacts

19,
6
4
0
9.

0
0

?
Ed. Plat. A.
Ed. Plat. A.
?
Toyah F.
Austin F.
Ed. Plat.
?
?
Ed. Plat.
?
?
?
?
Ed. Plat.
Ed. Plat.
Ed. Plat.
Cent. Tex.
Ed. Plat.
Ed. Plat.
Ed, Plat.
?
Ed. Plat.
?
Ed. Plat.
?
?
?
Toyah F.
Austin F.
Ed. Plat.
Toyah F.
Austin F.
Historic
Historic

A.

A.

A.
A.
A.
A.
A.
A.
A.
A.
A.

A.

The brief notations concerning these sites make it obvious tfiat
cultural identifications of most of them are extremely tentative. This
is emphasized by the data from Little Buzzard and Forrester Shelters
where the surface collections and brief tests of 1947 provided nothing diagnostic, but later excavation clearly demonstrated the cultural
identification. Surface examination and even testing of a site just
does not provide enough reliable data for interpretation. It doeS,
though, provide some data and, in the case of many of these sites, a!l

276

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the data that can ever be had. With this caution in naind and on the
assumption that most of the cultural identifications nlade here are
probably correct, some very interesting generalizations may be made.
The vast majority of the 71 recorded sites in the Whitney Reservoir
area (51) are open campsites along the river terraces with little depth
of deposit. Not enough diagnostic naaterial was recovered from 23
of these sites to even offer a speculative cultural identification but at
least 22 of them appear to be components of the generalized Edwards
Plateau Aspect. Only three open sites produced materials suggesting
Central Texas Aspect conaponents. One of these appears to be a
Toyah Focus component, another an Austin Focus component, and
the third not definable as to focus but apparently one or the other
of the Central Texas Aspect loci. One excavated open site is a series
of historic occupations (The Stansbury Site), and two others may
possibly be historic sites. One of the latter may be a Choctaw camp
of the mid-19th century, the other may be a Caddo village of the same
period. One open site is the historic town of Towash and another
is the historic military post of Fort Graham.
The 18 recorded rock shelter sites present a quite different story
than do the open campsites on the terraces. In these sites the deposits are usually stratified with two or three cultural complexes
represented. In only one shelter, though, was a component of the
Edwards Plateau Aspect represented. The Austin Focus was represented in 8 shelters and the Toyah Focus in 6, and no historic material was found in any of the shelters except for the minor items in
Pictograph Shelter that can be attributed to late 19th and early
20th century ranchers.
This suggests that the earlier Archaic peoples of the Edwards
Plateau Aspect in this area lived in open campsites along the river
ten’aces and only rarely did they ever take advantage of the rock
shelters for habitation. Conversely, the CentrM Texas Aspect people
of later times lived in the rock shelters and only rarely, if at all,
lived in open sites out in the valley. This generalization adds significance to the presence of Edwards Plateau Aspect materials in the
lower levels of the Sheep Shelter and suggests that that occupation
may be of a time near the end of that aspect. Suggestions have been
made by Suhm (1958, pp. 84-85), Long (1961, pp. 246-251), and
others that the Central Texas Aspect developed out of the Edwards
Plateau Aspect and even that there might have been a transition
stage between the two. The evidence from the Sheep Shelter seems,
under the circumstances, to support such a transition.

277

WHITNEY I~ESEIWOm

This distinction of settlement pattern between the two aspects appears to be a local phenomenon within the central Brazos valley and
does not hold true in other areas. Along the Leon River, only a few
miles to the south, components of both aspects are found in rock
shelters and in open terrace sites (Miller & Jelks, 1952). The same is
true in the Colorado River drainage and e!sewhere in central Texas
(Suhm, 1958, pp. 89-103).

Appendix B
DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE OF INDIAN OCCUPATION AT
THE STANSBURY SITE (41-39B1-1)
by

EDWARD B. JELKS
The principal historic Indian occupation of the Brazos River between the Balcones Escarpment and the Clear Fork consisted of two
main groups: Wichita-speaking tribes who came to the area from
the north, and Caddoan tribes from the east. To the first group belong the Tawakoni, Waeo, and Kichai; to the latter, the Anadarko,
Hainai, and Kadohadacho.
Appearing on the earliest maps of Anglo-American settlers in this
region is the Old Towash Village, spotted at the exact location of the
StansbmT Site (Anonymous, 1855; 1857; Upshur, 1841). These maps
are dated from 1841 to 1857. Obviously a notable landmark during
this period, the Old Towash Village was used as an orientation point
in the survey of Robertson’s Colony in 1835, and the Anglo-American
town, Towash, was established adjacent to it in the 1850’s. The name
Towash was commonly used by the Anglo-American settlers of Texas
in referring to that tribe of the Wichita Confederacy known to the
Spaniards as Taovayas. Culturally the Towashes were almost identical to the Tawakonies, Wacoes, Yseanis, Kichais and Wichita proper.
Local tradition in Hill and Bosque counties attributes the naming of
the town of Towash, as we!! as Towash Creek which flows nearby, to
the presence of Towash Indians at the time the town was founded.
Jack Greenwade erected a log house squarely on the Old Towash
Indian Village site in 1854 or 1856, and this house was occupied continuously until 1949. Descendants of the first Anglo-American settlers
in the area still relate handed-clown accounts of the so-called Towash
Indians, stating that they continued to live in the old Indian village,
adjacent to the Anglo-American settlement, until the late 1860’s.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

In view of these references to a group of Towash Indians living
at the Stansbury Site in historic times, it was assumed at the beginning of archeologieal investigations at Whitney Reservoir that Towashes were actually responsible for most of the areheological remains
at the site. This belief continued during excavation of the site-indeed,
it was strengthened because of the similarity of the artifacts discovered, to those present at the Spanish Fort Site on Red River, a
site unquestionably attributable to the Towash. (Witte, 1938; Krieger,
1946, pp. 161-64; Harper, 1953, p. 9.71; Hart’is and Hart’is, 1961, pp.

2-5).
After excavations of the Stansbury Site had been completed, an extensive investigation of existing historical records was undertaken for
the purpose of supplementing the archeology of the site with contemporaneous documentation, but no reference to the Towash village on the central portion of the Brazos was found. Eighteenth and
nineteenth century Spanish accounts; documents of the tlepublie of
;"Texas; records of the United States govermnent; reports of Indian
agents, ethnographers, and early settlers: all these were consulted,
and although descriptions of all other tribes known to have been in
the area are present in some detail in each of these sources, there is
not a single report of a Towash village.
Athanase de M6zi~res, who in the 1770’s traveled on three different occasions along the Brazos from near present Waco to the
vicinity of the Nolans lliver, encountered no Towashes anywhere in
that area (Bolton, 1914). He did, however, visit two large Tawakoni
villages. The first of these, in or near present Waco, was named
Quiseat after its chief, and the second, also named for its chief and
situated :eight !eagues (twenty miles) above the first, was called the
Flechado Village. The Stansbury Site is about twenty-seven airline
miles from modern Waco, the supposed site of the Quiscat Village;
but allowing a few miles error in De M6zi3res’ reckoning of the distance between the two villages and!or locating the Quiseat Village
somewhat above the site of present Waeo, it becomes apparent that
the Stansbury Site could actually be the location of the Fleehado
Village of Tawakonies.
In 1959 a site was discovered on the west bank of the Brazos some
eight miles above Waco which fits De M6zi~res’ description of the
Quiseat Village quite well. It is known as the Stone Site (Duffietd and
Jelks, 1961, pp. 70-73). Artifacts found on the surface of the Stone
Site-both native and European-are similar to those from the Stansbury Site.

WHITNEY I~ESERVOIR

279

The second White man to visit this locality and leave any record
of his observations seems to have been Pedro Vial (Vial, 1787; Castafieda, 1941, pp. 20-23) a Frenchman, who was commissioned by the
Spanish government in 1786 to lead an expedition from San Antonio to
Santa Fe. The primal7 purpose of this expedition was to discover the
most convenient comnmnication route between the Spanish outposts
in Texas and those in New Mexico. Vial had another assignment,
however: the apprehension of a small band of Towashes who had
raided San Antonio a short time previously. With the alTest of these
raiders as his main objective, Vial left San Antonio in the autunm of
1786, setting a direct course for the large Towash village on tled River
near the present town of Spanish Fort. Becoming ill, he detoured via
the Quiscat Village, where he remained for several weeks recuperating. On his departure from the Quiscat Village, Vial followed the
course of the Brazos northwestward for six days, necessarily passing
close by the Stansbury Site. Considering that ViM was pursuing a
band of raiders identified as Towashes only on the basis of their
dress, it is surprising that he would have headed directly for the Towash village on Red River had he known of a nearer one on the
Brazos. Had a Towash village of which he had no wevious knowledge existed at the Stansbury Site, it is even more surprising that he
would have passed ahnost within sight of it without investigating it
or mentioning it in his journal. In the light of Vial’s and De M~zi~res’
accounts, then, it appears reasonably conclusive that no Towash Village was located in the vicinity of the Stansbury Site prior to 1786.
In 1807 Dr. John Sibley, reporting to the U. S. Commissioner of
Indian Affairs, wrote a brief sketch of each Texas Indian tribe ( Sibley,
1832, p. 723). Tawakonies, Tonkawas, and Comanches are the only
groups listed as residents of the central portion of the Brazos. Sibley
described the Taovayas as living on Red River.
The Austin Papers, a collection of letters and other documentm37
material relating to Stephen F. Austin and Moses Austin, contains
several references to the Towashes. In a letter from Thomas Duke to
Stephen F. Austin, written in 1825 from the Waco Indian village at
the site of present Waeo, Duke states that "the Towash live some
where towards the head of this river about six days h’avel from here."
(Barker, 1924, pp. 842-43). In 1826, Austin wrote of his plans to
destroy the Tawakonies, Wacoes, and Towashes: "I am making
every arrangement my situation will permit for a sinmltaneous attack on the three Tahuaeano villages, that of the Wacoes on the Brazos
and that of the Tahuiases on Red River." (Barker, 1924, p. 1,315).

280

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Thus records of the 1820’s do not speak of Towashes on the central
Brazos; instead they place them at locations far distant.
A congressional report from Butler and Lewis fia 1847 states that
"the "Wich-a-taws and Tow-zash live on the north side of Red River,
in the Witch-a-taw mountains." (Butler and Lewis, 1847, p. 7). In a
letter from Indian Agent Robert Neighbors to the Commissioner of
Indian Affairs dated October 12, 1847, Neighbors states that a few
days previously he had distributed a quantity of government-issued
supplies to the Indians living along the Brazos above Torrey’s Trading House, near modern Waco. Present to receive these supplies were
"Comanches, Ionies (Hainai), Caddoes (Kadohadacho), Onadakos
(Anadarko), Wacoes, Keechies, Wiehitas, Tawaeearos (Tawakoni),
Tonkawas, and the bands of Delawares, Shawnees, and Cherokees
that reside in Texas, also some few Beluxies, Kiekapoos, and Pawnee
Mohaws." (Neighbors, 1847b, pp. 903-4). Completely absent from
this list is any mention of Towash Indians.
G. W. Bonnell, Commissioner of Indian Affah’s, reporting to Congress in 1848, said, "The Pawnee Piets, or Toweashes, reside on Red
River." (Bonnell, 1848, p. 47).
After Fort Graham was established on the Brazos in 1849, some
35 airline miles above present Waco and 7 miles above the Stansbury
Site, the Indian villages in the immediate vicinity were removed upriver to the Western Cross Timbers. In possession of the United States
War Department are several reports from Fort Graham concerning
the Indians living along the Brazos, and these reports, dated from
1849 to 1852, consistently locate all local Indian villages well upstTeam from the fort. In fact, the United States War Department issued orders (evidently dated early in 1850) directing that "Indians
found within the line of military posts shall be put to death." (Cooper,
1851). In view of this policy, it appears certain that there was no
Indian occupation at the StansbulT Site between 1850 and the abandonment of Fort Graham in 1853.
In summtu’y, no docmnentary reference was found to a Towash
Indian village on the centra! Brazos, either in the numerous records
relative to the Anglo-American settlement of the area (post 1835)
or in the earlier accounts of explorers. Yet by 1835 this site began
appearing on maps as the Old Towash Village, and local tradition
maintains that a group of Towash Indians had a sizable village there
from the 1830’s or earlier until the late 1860’s. In addition, areheological research has shown that a large number of Indians who had a
considerable amount of European trade material did live at the Stans-

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

281

bury Site for at least several decades. How can these apparently conflieting facts be reconciled? The most plausible explanation is that
the name Towash in this instance has no direct connection with the
Towash tribe, but was either given in mistake or derived from some
other source.
One living person was found who remembered visiting the "Towash"
Indians while they were still living at the Stansbury Site. This was the
late Mrs. Jessie Greenwade of Morgan, Texas, who was ninety years
old at the time she was intelwiewed by Robert L. Stephenson and the
writer in 1950. Her testimony was, in substance, as follows:
About 1868, when she was eight years of age, Mrs. Greenwade visited the
"’Towash" Indian village, located approximately three hundred feet east of
the Greenwade house on the Stansbury Site. This group of Indians, consisting
of about thirty persons, praetieed no agriculture, but subsisted by hunting
and begging from tile White settlers. They lived in skin tipis, so small that
a man could not stand erect inside them. Cooking was done outside the tipis
over open fires. Hair featl~ers were commonly worn, and clothes were made
for tlle most part from Blankets, heavily beaded.

This is not a good description of Towash Indians, who practiced
agriculture and, in theft" permanent villages, built large, grassthatched houses. Towashes might well have discontinued the practice of agriculture after the influx of the White settlers since they
could have obtained agricultural products from them by trade, but
it is not reasonable to suppose that they would have replaced their
comfortable thatched houses with small, cramped tipis. Much more
likely is the possibility that the Indians visited by Mrs. Greenwade
were, in fact, Tonkawas, who did live in skin tipis, who did not
ordinarily practice agrieultm’e, who were well known to early White
settlers of the area as beggars, and who, in 1868, were represented in
Central Texas by small, mobile bands who camped near AngloAmerican settlements for protection from the Comanches.
Thus most accounts agree that there were no Towash Indians living in the vicinity of the Stansbury site in the historic period. How,
then, did the name Towash, the Anglo-Amelicans’ name for the
Taovayas, become attached to a creek, and Indian village, and an
Anglo-American town in thak locality?
One possibility, already suggested, is that the Stansbury Site is
the location of the Fleehado Village of the Tawakonies, and someone, in naming it, could have confused them with the Towashes.
This conceivably might have happened since the Towashes were almost identical to the Tawakonies in appearance, language, and material culture. Of more likelihood, perhaps, is the possibility that the

TEXAS AIRCX-IEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

Old Towash Village was named for some individual known as Towash. The naming of Indian villages for their headmen appears to
have been a common practice along the central Brazos, e.g., the Quiscat, Flechado, and Jos~ Mm’ia villages. The principal chief of the
Hainai group which settled on the Brazos in the 1830’s was named
Towash; furthermore, he was sometimes called "Old Towash."
(Cooper, 1851; Stem, 1851a, pp. 521-23). It is probably more than
just coincidence that he and the name Old Towash Village both
turned up in the locality at about the same time. Indeed, in the light
of present knowledge, it appears that the Old Towash Village was
most likely named for this individual; then the name Towash, after
having been further applied to a creek and an anglo-American town,
gradually acquired a geographical connotation. As Indian tales were
handed down from one generation of Anglo-Americans to the next,
the name Towash became associated with local Indians generally,
resulting in the present belief that Towash Indians actually lived in
the area.
It appears, therefore, that the name Towash, as it was applied there,
is ethnically a misnomer and that it was actually derived from either
(1) the Hainai chief, Towash, or (2) a group of Tawakonies who
were mistakenly confused with the culturally similar Towashes. The
Hainai people, who did not reach the Brazos until about 1835, might
well have lived at the StansbmT Site for a few years, but by 1846
their village was located above there. (tloemer, 1935). Consequently
they calmot have been responsible for the principal occupation, since
the many large accumulations of refuse would requh’e longer or more
populous habitation than can be accounted for by the Hainai. Fm’thermore, identification of European trade material recovered from the
Stansbttry Site indicates that Indian occupaey there was predonainatly
in the latter half of the eighteenth century, with a later reoccupation
probably beginning toward the middle of the nineteenth century. It
is possible that all the artifacts attributed to a nineteenth century
occupation could have been brought in by the Creenwade family
after they moved onto the site in the 1850’s.
It should be noted that the dates assigned to the Ettropean trade
material do agree with the supposition that the Stansbm3~ Site is
actually the location of the Flechado Village of the Tawakonies
visited by De M6zi~res in the 1770’s. Occupancy of the site by the
Hainai in the nineteenth centm3z does not negate the probability that
Tawakonies lived there earlier. It should be emphasized, however,
that identification of the Stansbury Site with the Flechado Village is

9,83

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

only a supposition and that the exact cultural identity of the people
eoneerned is uncertain at present. Areheologieal investigation of
known Tawakoni sites would provide comparative material which
should be of great help in clarifying the problem.

POSTSCRIPT

During the years since the Stansbury Site was excavated and since
the historical records were searched, several sites attributed to the
Tawakonies and/or theh" kinsmen the Wacoes, Taovayas, Kichais,
Yseanis, and Wichita have been investigated, and their areheologieal
traits have been grouped and described under the label Nortefio Focus
(Duffield and Jelks, 1961). The 18th century component at the Stansbury Site is clearly a unit of the Noltefio Focus.
Thus recent data tend to substantiate the conclusion reached in
1951 that the Stansbury Site was occupied by one of the tribes of
the Wichita Confederacy (Tawakoni, Waco, Taovayas, Kiehai, Yscani,
or Wichita proper). In the light of historical records and of present
archeological knowledge, the conclusion is inescapable that Stansbury
was quite probably the site of the 18th century Fleehado Village of
the Tawakonies.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Anonymous
Map of Bosque Count),, Texas, 1855. Files of the Texas State Land Office.
Austin.
Map of Hill Count},, Texas, 1857. Files of the Texas State Land Office. Austin.
Map Q-73, Map File. Records of the Office of the Chief of Engineers, the
National Archives. Washington.
Map US-169 (2), Headquarters Map File. Records of the Office of the Chief
of Engineers, the National Archives. Washington.
Sheet 23, Dr. 148, Fortification File. Records of the Office of the Chief of
Engineers, the National Archives. Washington.
Austin, Stephen F.
1837 Map of Texas with parts of the adjoining states. Philadelphia.
Barker, Eugene C., ed.
1924 "The Austin Papers." Annual Report of the American Historical Association for the year 1919. Washington.
Barrett, Arrie
1927 Federal Military Posts in Texas, 1846-60. Thesis (M.A.), University of
Texas. Austin.
Bolton, H.E.
1914 Athanase de M~zi~res and the Louisiana-Texas Frontier, 1768-1780.
Cleveland.
1915 Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century. Berkeley.
1916 Spanish Exploration in, the Southwest, 1542-1706. New York.

284

TEXAS AtlCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Bonnell, George W.
1840 Topographical Description of Texas. Austin.
1848 "Report of G. W. Bonnell, Commissioner of Indian Affairs." Senate
Report No. 171, 30th Congress, First Session. Washington.
Buckley, E. C.
1911 "The Aguayo Expedition into Texas and Louisiana, 1719-22." Quarterly,
Texas State Historical Association, vol. 15, No. 1, pp. 1-65. Austin.
Burgvin, E.
"’A Chart of the South Western Region Extending from the Arkansas to
the Colorado." Map US-169 (1), Headquarters Map File. Records of
the ONce of the Chief of Engineers, the National Archives. Washington.
Butler, P. M. and M. G. Lewis
1847 "’A Report of Messrs. Butler and Lewis relative to the Indians of Texas
and the southwestern prairies." House Document No. 76, 29th Congress,
Second Session, vol. No. IV. Washington.
Castafieda, Carlos E.
1936 Our Catholic Heritage in Texas, 1519-1936. Austin.
1941 "Communications between Santa Fe and San Antonio in the Eighteenth
Century." Texas Geographic Magazine, vol. No. 1, Spring.
Catlett, H. G.
1849 "Letter to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, May 12, 1849." Records of
the Bureau of Indian Affairs, Letters tlec~ived, 1849, Texas, C-305, the
National Archives. Washington.
Cooper, S.
1851 "’Report to the Secretary of the Interior, July 23, 1851." Records of the
Bureau of Indian Affairs, Letters Received, 1851, Texas, 1-752, the
National Archives. Washington.
Creuzbar, Robert
1849 A. De Cordova’s Map of the State of Texas, compiled from the records
of the General Land Office of the State. Houston.
Duffield, Lathel F., and Edward B. Jelks
1961 "The Pearson Site: A Historic Indian Site in Iron Bridge Reservoir,
Bains County, Texas." Archeology Series, No. 3, Department of Anthropology, the University of Texas.
Haekett, C. W.
1932 New Spain and the Anglo-American West. Los Angeles.
Hardee, W. J.
1851 "Report of W. J. Hardee." House Executive Document No. 2, Part I,
32nd Congress, First Session, pp. 121-24. Washington.
Harper, Elizabeth Ann
1953 "The Taovayas Indians in Frontier Trade and Diplomacy, 1719 to 1768."
The Chronicles of Oklahoma, vol. 31, No. 3, pp. 268-289.
Harris, B. K., and Inus Marie Harris
1961 "’Spanish Fort, A Historic Trade Site." The Record, Dallas Archeologieal
Society, Dallas. Vol. 16, No. 1, pp. 2-5, April.
Hill, Robert T.
1937 "’Yes, North Texas has a history." Dallas Morning News, Nov. 21, 1937.
Dallas.
Hillsboro Evening Mirror, Special Editiofi, May 18, 1936. Hillsboro, Texas.
Hodge, F. W.
1910 "Handbook of American Indians North of Mexico." Bulletin, Bureau of
American Ethnology, No. 30. Washington.
Indian Papers. Texas State Archives. Austin.
Kennedy, William
1841 Texas. London.

WHITNEY RESERVOIR

285

Kirkpatriek, A. Y.

190-

The Early Settlers Life in Texas and the Organization of Hill County.

Hi!lsboro.
Koch, Lena C.
1922

The Federal Indian Policy
University of Texas. Austin.
Krieger, Alex D.

in

Texas,

1845-1860.

Thesis

(M.A.),

1946

"Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas." University of
Texas Publication No. 4640. Austin.
Lesser, Alexander and Cene Weltflsh
1932

"Composition of the Caddoan Linguistic Stock." Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. 87, No. 6. Washington.
McConnell, j. c.
1933-39 The West Texas Frontier, Jacksboro, Texas.
Marcy, R. B.
1854 Exploration of the Red River of Louisia, na, in the year 1852. Washington.
1855 "Report of an expedition to the sources of the Brazos and Big ~qehita
rivers, during the summer of 1854." Senate Executive Document No.
60, 34th Congress, First Session, vol. XII. Washington.
1866 Thirty Years of Army Life on the Border. New York.
Margry, Pierre
1879-88

Deeouvertes et etablissements des Francais dans rouest et dans sud
de l’Amerique Septentrionale, 161401698. Paris.
Morfi, Juan A.
1935

History of Texas, 1673-1779. Translated and annotated by Carlos E.
Castafieda. Albuquerque.
Neighbors, Robert S.
1847a "Report to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, June 22, 1847." Senate
Executive Document No. 1, 30th Congress, First Session, pp. 892-96.
1847b "’Report to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, October 12, 1847." Ibid., pp.
903-6. Washington.
1859 "Report to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, September 2, 1859." Records
of the Bureau of Indian Affairs, Letters Received, 1859, Wichita, N-27,
the National Archives. Washington.
Noel, U. P.
1924

The United States Indian Reservations in Texas, 1854. Thesis (M.A.),
University of Texas. Austin.
Powell, J. W.
1886

"’Indian Linguistic Fanailies of America North of Mexico." 7th Annual
Report, Bureau of American Ethnology, pp. 1-142. Washington.
Pefia, Juan Antonio de la
1935 "Pefia’s Diary of the Aguayo Expedition." Translated by the Rev. Peter
P. Forrestal. Preliminary Studies of the Texas Catholic Historical Society,
Vol, 2, No. 7. Austin.
Pichardo, Jose Antonio
1931

Treatise on the Limits of Louisiana and Texas. Translated, edited, and
annotated by Charles W. Hackett. Austin.
Robertsou County Survey Records, File 378, Texas State Land Office. Austin.
Roemer, Ferdinand yon
1935 Texas. Translated by Oswald Mue!ler. San Antonio.
Rollins, John H.
1850

"Unratified treaty between Special Agent John H. Rollins acting for the
United States, and Indians of Texas, December 10, 1850." Records of
the Bureau of Indian Affairs, the National Archives. Washington.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Schoolcraft, H. R.
1851-1857 Historical and Statistical Information Respecting the History, Conditions and Prospects of the Indian Tribes of the United States.
Philadelphia.
Shelby, Charmion C.
1927 St. Denis’s Second Expedition from Louisiana to the Rio Grande, 17161719. Thesis (M.A.), University of Texas. Austin.
Sibley, John
1832 "Report to Commissioner of Indian Affairs." American State Papers,
Indian Affairs, Vol. IV. Washington.
Stem, Jesse
1851a "Report of Jesse Stem." House Executive Document No. 2, 32nd Congress, First Session, Part I, pp. 520-25. Washington.
185ib "Letter to Hon. Luke Lea, Commissioner of Indian Affairs." House Executive Doemnent No. 2, 32nd Congress, First Session, Part I, pp. 525-26.
Washington.
Swanton, John R.
1911 "Indian Tribes of the Lower Mississippi Valley and the Adjacent Coast
of the Gulf of Mexico." Bulletin, Bureau of American Ethnology, No. 43.
Washington.
1942 "Source Material on the History and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians."
BuUetin, Bureau of American Ethnology, No. 132. Washington.
Torrey’s Trading House, Account Books. Baylor University Library. Waeo.
Upshur, H. L.
1841 Sketch showing the Route of the Military Road from Red River to Austin, Col. Win. G. Cooke, commanding, Win. H. Hunt, Engineer, 1840.
Vial, Pedro
1787 "Diario que por la gracia de Dios eomienzo (yo Pedro Vial) a haeer
desde este Presidio de Sn. Antonio de Bejar, Hasta arribar al de la Capital Villa de Santa Fe por eomision de mi Governador Dn. Domingo Cavello, Governador de la Provincia de los Texas, con expresion de las jornadas desde el dia 4 de Oetubre de 1787." A. G. M. Historia, Vol. 43,
Doemnent 14. University of Texas Library. Austin.
Waco-Tribune Herald, Centennial Edition, October 30, 1949.
Whiting, Lt. H. C.
1850 "’Lt. H. C. Whiting’s Report." Senate Executive Document No. 64, 31st
Congress, First Session, pp. 237-45. Washington.
Wilbarger, J. W.
1935 Indian Depredations in Texas. Austin.
Witte, A. H.
1938 "’Spanish Fort, an Historic Wichita Site." Bulletin, Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 10, pp. 234-44.
Yoakum, Henderson K.
1856 History of Texas ~rom its first Settlement in 1685 to its A,mexation to
the United States in 1846. New York.

A Computer Program for Archaeological
Data Retrieval
RICHARD

MICHAEL

CRA~vILY

ABSTRACT
Utilizing the perimeter of one artifact it is possible to select other artifacts
with similar perimeters from a collection of thousands of speeimens.
The selection is based upon a step-by-step comparison of perimeters. Variables of the program permit selection of artifacts with perimeters of varying
exactness with respect to the perimeter of one artifact. This exach~ess or
tolerance can be specified by the investigator.
Possible uses for this program are the rough-sorting of artifaet eoleetions
into artifact classes and the inspection of projectile point eolleetions for the
distribution of projectile points as a clue to the spatial-temporal dinaensions
of traditions and horizons.

INTRODUCTION
This program was designed to eliminate the time-consuming and
inefficient operation of searching a large collection of artifacts for
artifacts of specified character. The program was also created with the
hope in mind that photographs and drawings of artifacts published in
obscure or relatively inaccessible journals of archaeology could be
treated so that part of this information would be at instant recall to
an investigator.
Also there was felt to be a need for a means of gathering data about
m’tifacts from small, private collections that m’e seen for the first, and
perhaps the last, trine in the course of an archaeological survey.
The first section of this paper outlines the nature and limitations of
this computer program for archaeological data retrieval. The second
section gives instructions for the operation of the program: while the
last section sets forth an actual example of the utility of this progn’am.
During this era of increasing awareness of the real value of archaeological research and site salvage, as is anaply evidenced by the great
number of mnateur archaeological excavations and the increased
tempo of professional investigations, the need for a means of assflnilating and comprehending the vast amount of data that has been
gathered is at hand.
Hopefully this program will allow the investigator to master nmch
of this data; but if this system of data retrieval is not the one that is
ultimately put into use, perhaps it will be seen as a step in that
direction.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

I.

THE PROGRAM

In essence, the computer is requested to discriminate among artifacts according to their two dimensional shape, that is to say, by the
trace of a perimeter. Real artifacts, of eom’se are three dimensional,
and there are many perimeters to choose from; in the case of projectile points, however, for which this system of data relaieval perhaps
has the greatest utility, the cross-sections of thickness are not norreally used to discriminate types. In the ease of projectile points the
plane containing the dimensions of length and width is considered
most significant for typing.
It is to be expected that two artifacts of similar shape may have
different linear perimeters because of a difference in size. In order
that the computer consider these two artifacts of similar shape but
different size the same type, the linear perimeters of all artifacts are
normalized. Of course, the true length of the artifact is also noted in
order that the investigator be able to subdivide a type into size categories.
Each artifact whose linear perimeter, or perimeters, is stored in the
data bank for this program is accompanied by general fifformation
cards that specify the material from which the artifact was made, the
find locus, a measure of the length of the artifact, and so forth.
If it is desired, that once the computer has sorted the data bank for
artifacts of a specified character, the output could be further sorted on
a card-sorter under the categories of information that are contained
on the general information cards with each artifact in the output.
Thus it would be possible to retrieve all narrow-stemmed points
similar to a certain narrow-stemmed point, sort the output into categories of size, and then discriminate among the projectile points on
the basis of lithic material. The last two operations are done on a
punch-card sorter.
It is foreseen that tavo artifacts that are considered to be the same
type may have similar, but not congruent, linear perfineters even after
the artifacts have been normalized. In order to express this departure
in linear perimeter between two artifacts, any two artifacts . . . not
just those that are considered the same type, the computer sorts artifacts into categories of exactness, that is, categories of diminishing
congruency of the linear perfineter. Figure 6 of this article illustrates
six categories of decreasing congruency with respect to a particular
Adena point and 99 other artifacts.
The investigator is free to choose the extent of the range of the
categories of decreasing eongrueney. As it stands now, it is possible

COIVfPUTER P1RO GHA1Vf

289

in tilis program to output artifacts under 20 categories of decreasing
eongTueney. Artifacts in the 20th category will be least congruent to
tile linear perimeter of the artifact for which the data retrieval was
instigated.
The form of the output of the program can either be sheet listings
or punch-cards. The form of the output is usually specified at the
computing center where the job is executed. If it is desired to sort the
general information cards of the artifacts in the output for the find loci,
let us say, it would be wise to request an output of puneh-exu’ds, which
could be fed directly into a card sorter.
The output of the progTam for each artifact is 1) a listing of the
linear perimeter of the ~’tifaet exactly as it was read by the computer,
2) a listing of the data contained on the general information cards, and
3) the category of decreasing congruency into which an artifact falls
with respect to the linear perimeter of the artifact for which the data
retrieval was instigated. See part III of this paper for an example of
the output of this program"
The machine language used in this program is Fortran IV, and the
computer used to run the example in Part III was the IBM 360, G
level. Several logical IF statements are used in this program; and
before this program is used, the investigator should check to see if
these statements are within the operating capability of his computer.
The investigator also may need to change the first number within
the parentiaeses of the READ and WRITE statements. Once this
change is made it will not have to be made again unless perhaps a
different computer is used.
The required changes in value of the control variables for jobs of
different size or the extent of the range of decreasing congruency are
set forth in Part II of this paper.
Compilation on the IBM 360 takes about 8 seconds. In one minute
the linear perimeters of nearly 1000 artifacts can be examined and the
program executed. At $240.00 per hour, a reasonable estfinate of the
charge for the use of an IBM 360, it would cost about $5.00 to $8.00
to run the program for 1,000 specimens, depending upon the extent
of the range of decreasing congruency.
II. INPUT TO THE PROGRAM
The method of ascertaining the linear perimeter of an artifact
utilizes one of a series of clear plastic grids. All the grids of the series
are photographic reductions of a single, large gTid.
As shown in Figure 1, the smallest, clear plastic grid that will just

290

TEXAS

AI~CHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

contain the artifact (in the case of projectile points I consistently place
the tip of the point towards the top of the grid) is used to txaee the
perimeter of the artifact. The artifact is always left-justified in the grid.
There are no other specifications for the placement of the artifact
within the grid.
The method of reading off intersections of an artifact perimeter on
a grid is shown in Figure 1. The values of the intersections are fed
:into a matrix, and each artifact has its own matrix of intersections.
There are a maximum of 84 intersections.
The only rule of reading intersections is that no column have only
one or three intersections. There nmst either be two or four intersections. If for one column an artifaet clearly intersects at one place only,
estimate another intersection one grid greater. Thus, change a cohimn
reading of 07 00 00 00 showing only one intersection to 07 08 00 00.
In addition to the matrix of glJd intersections desclJbing the perimeter of the mlffact, each artifact is alloted 160 information spaces.
This is the amount of information that is contained on two data punehem’ds. Ten spaces of the 160 are reserved for two, five-digit, identification numbers. If a bank of data cards is accidentally dropped and
the cards set out of order, the program is prepared to detect this
disorder using the identification numbers.
In Figure 2, there is given an example of how the 160 information
spaces may be used to describe the find locus and other pertinent
characteristics of an artifact, in this ease a projectile point. The county
and state of a find locus are designated by a unique number code as
set forth by the American Petroleum Institute.1
At the present moment the user of this program will have to design
his own clear plastic grids for the determination of perimeter-intersections. For this program the only requirements of the grids are that
the grids be square and dimensioned into 400 squares (20 by 20
spaces). Also the grids must be members of a propoltionately-reduced
or normalized series.
In the future the program will be modified to incorporate grids of 24
spaces square, and these grids will be furnished to those interested at
no cost.
The importance of constructing a carefully normalized series of grids
is shown in Figure 3. Here two projectile points of similar, but not
eongruent, perimeter will give nearly the same matrix of perimeterintersections when normalized grids are used.
~The API Unique Well Number and Standard State and County Codes; American Petroleum Institute, Production DMsion, Dallas, Texas; 1968

COI~PUTER PROGRAM

291

General information cards and perimeter-intersection cards can be
punched at a small cost, and, of course, once this information about an
artifact is recorded, it need never be punched again. Most of the labor
involved in the input of data to this program is the reading of the
perimeter-interseetions of the artifacts. This can be fatiguing. With a
proper series of grids and a standard recording form it is possible to
record 30 to 35 artifacts in an hour’s time.
The last points that must be covered in conjunction with the usage
of this data retrieval system aa’e 1) the user-specific control variables
and 2) the order of the data cards, which specify the control variables
and describe the artifacts, as they are fed into the computer.
Figm’e 4 illustTates the nature and order of the punch-cards (the
data cards), which specify the control variables and describe the
artifacts, as they are fed into the computer.

19
18
17
16
15-141-13
12ROWS 1",!
10
9
8
6
5
4
3
2

D

<
1 23 4 5 67 89 101112131415161718192021
COLUMNS

READ ACROSS
FIGURE 1: Method of reading grid intersections
Reading upward in Column i (lower left-hand corner, Fig. 1) there
are two intersections. They are at rows 7 and 8. Therefore the _first

TEXAS AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

292

element of the perimeter-intersection matrix will be the following:

07 08 00 O0
A maxinmm of four intersections are allowed in each column; since
there were only two intersections in column i, zeros fill the remaining
mabJx positions.
Elements of Colmnns 4, 7, 10 and 13 are as follows:
Colunm 10:02 20 O0 O0
Column 4:18 15 O0 O0
Column 13:08 15 O0 O0
Column 4:01 20 O0 O0
10034

Kt-0037A8

Schohariel

03

32

N130S60

NE

Str.2A

~o7 ...... ~; .......;o

Space:

Temp.21 Th.Idx.=.24 Biconvex Unifacial Gr. Qtzite

Sp.Gr.=2.73 No grinding No serration 2500B.P. K-126

~T-5~--~7--TU---i;fd--i~7-~;U--T3-U-T46-----i 4;---1;o
2Ww

10034

............................

151
0018
0019
0020
0021
0022
0023
0024
0025
0~26
0027

0028
0029
0030
0031
0032
0033
0034
00~8

e036
0037

34
35

155

160

IF(ILOW.GT.ITESTL(J,K})
GO TO i00
GO TO 35
GO TO I00
IFIITESTL(JyKI.GT.IHIGH)
M=M+I
K=K÷I

40 CONTINUF
J=J+l
L=L÷I
M:I
K=I

iF(ITESTL(J,KI} 49,701~49
49 IFIISPECIL~M)) 50~701~50
50 CONTINUE
701L=l
WRITE(6,7 )
7~ FORMAT(’O’)
WRITE(6,60) IDTXA{LL),{DATAIJK’JJ)’JJ=I’I#BI’IDTXBIMM|’ISERIEIMI)
6~ FORMAT(’
’ 15,1X,IOOAII6X48AI,IX.IS.5X,’ISERIEIL|=’I21
WRITE(6,73) ISPXAINN),((ISPECIL,M|,MKI,4},L:I,21)TISPXBINM)
73 FORMAT (t
~ 15,1111X412)I5XIO(I×412},IX,15|

0038

IM:l

0039
0040
O04L
0042

inO MI=MI÷I
900 CONTINUE
RETURN
END

FIGURE 2: Forcmat for information cards

Spaces 1-5 and 156-160 are reserved for card identification numbers.
Spaces 7-15 are the museum number. Spaces 28-32 are the unique state
and cmmty code numbers. Spaces 51-57 are allotted to the grid (template) identification munber. The other spaces are reserved for deseription and additional find locus data.

it.J~

!Tin::
!ll,
IL

I["

ib
li:

!
II l!I:
I [

,LI:
FIGURE 3: Normalized grids

In Figtu’e 3 the two projectile points of the same type will give
simfl,’u" matrices of perimeter-intersections since normalized grids
have been used.
FIGURE 4: The nature and order of the data cards
In reference to statement #.9 of the Main:

Ij is a number with a maximum of five digits. IJ is the number of
artifacts in the data bank. In order not to exceed the array capacity of
a computer, it is wise to break up a data bank of artifacts into 100artifact lots, as above, and zaln each lot as a separate job.
In reference to statement #4 of the Main:
8

I

8~O~o~o~o~e~o~~a~e~e~e~ea~a~e~8~8
1111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111

"

"

FIGURE 4 b, READ (5, 9) IK

t

294

TEXAS AI~CHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

IK is a number with a maximum of five digits. IK is the nmnber of
categories of decreasing congruency. There are a maximum of 20
categories. A request for eight categories is shown in Fig. 4 b.
In reference to statement #8 of the Main:

FIGURE 4 C, READ (5, 7) ISERIE(MI)

MI is a series of nmnbers, which are the categm~es of decreasing
congruency. On the cards the categories 1-8 were requested out of a
possible range of 1-’20. See the output of the program ha the example
in Part III for actual values for the MI for tln’ee artifacts.
In reference to statements #16 and #18 of the Main:

Each ~tifact in the data bank has two information cards that describe, among other things, the find locus of the artifact. Notice the
information card identification numbers at the beginning of the first
card and at the end of the second card. In the cards above nearly all
the spaces that would normally be filled with infmmnation have been
left blank.
In reference to statements #’28, #30 and #3‘2 of the Main:
ll~l|t’ifli’il’lfl

l]?l~.ql’l!]fl

l’![i!~:flflftfl

ffg~:’f!!’l!’i[t!’l

0!f’! f!flt’l[!

fl17’! f!r!rH1

fl.’:-:~-’fll]fH]l’l

fi~iFfll’lllfl

oo,2,,,:,I,,Z ,ILT .IZZ ,ILT,TZ:7°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°°

~

\

\

ollllllllolnnlillo lnllnllo llllllllo illillllo6~ooo H 10100*BOH0a000aODm H 0al~0oo-~

~;~;~’7~;~;;;’;~7~’;~7~7~;;;;;~’~7~’~;;~;~’~’7~7~’’~;7~;’~;~;h!

FIGURE 4 e, READ
22) , . .

(5,20)

(ITESTR . . . READ (5,

21)

. . .

READ (5,

ITESTIt is the matrix of the perimeter-intersections of the artifact
for which the data retTieval was instigated.
In reference to statements #34, #36 and #38 of the Main:
I0110000 08150000 05170000 03200000 01310000 01210000 03300000 05180000
(~15!:i001.~

~

O;-~i{~(J O0

0{((’~(~0

~(m;O0{’,

~00~0{’00

O00v.O!:~O0

O00000I~O

01’O000(t(

00000000 NO000000 00000000 0000(~00,? 00000000

I
~~11~I~1~1~~~~1~iI

FmuR~ 4 f, (S,221) (ITESTL... READ (S,221 . . . READ (5,222) . . .
(5,222 . . .

IETSTL is also the matrix of the perimeter-intersections of the m~fact for which the data retrieval was instigated; only notice that the
order of the columns is reversed.
In reference to statement #48 of the Main:

ISPXA is the matrix of the perimeter-intersections for one of the
artifacts in the data bank. There are as many ISPXA’s as there are artifacts ha the data bank.
III.

AN EXAMPLE OF THE OUTPUT

A sample of 100 artifacts, mostly projectile points from Missouri,
was prepared as a data bank and input to the computer. An Adena
point was used as the basis of comparison; thus ITESTll and ITESTL
were the matrix of the perimeter-intersections for this projectile point.
Eight categories of decreasing congruency were specified, and the
range of these categories was 1-8.
A samp!e of the printed output from this artifact-sorting on the
basis of the Adena point is given in Figure 5.
Figure 6, displays the result of this artifact-sorting for categories 1-6.
Figure 7, illustrates a samp!e of the artifacts that were not included
in the six categories shown in Figure 5.

9,96

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A close inspection of Figure 5 will reveal that the sorting was sueeessful in so far as the computer included no artifacts radically different from the Adena point used as a basis for comparison.
The machine time for this job cost $1.38.

GRID NO.~

GRID NO. 15
8

1~

9

0

0 0 0 0
ii

0

713

0

0

616.

11

ISERIEIRI:

2

O 0 ~ 121 0.0 219 0 0 517 0 0 71500 8900
0000 0000 0000 o o o o 0000

0 c ~ 0

0 0 0 0
11

GRID NO

GRID NO. 15
II _.8 9 0 O 713 0 0 616 i
Ii
ISERIEIL)= 2
0 00 0
71500
8900
0 O 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0121 0 O 219 ¢0 517 0 0
11
000 0000 0000 0 0 0 0 0000

i
GRID NO.

82
82

GRID NO. 16
911 0 0 716 O 0 ¯
82
ISERIEIR)= I
0000 0000 0", 0 120 0 0 219 0 0 517 0 0 8111 O 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0000 O Q 0 0 0000 0000 000.0
82
GRID NO. 16

82
82

1~"

911 0 0 716 0 0 et
0000 0000 0 0

129

129

GRID NO. 16
82
ISERIE{L)= I
120 0 0 219 0 9 517 0 O 814 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0000 D O 0 0 O0 0 O 0000 0000
82

GRID NO.~
310 ~ 0 217 o 0 21
0 0 0 0 0 ~ 0 0 0 0

129
121 O 0
0000

129

GRID NO.
ISERIE(R)= 5
121 (~ 0 221 0 0

09

O

0

0000

319 0 0
0000

614 0 0
0000

30

O 0 0 0
129

GRID NO.
GRID NO. 30

~29

129
BlO 0 0 217 C 0 219
0 0 ~ 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 121 0 0
0000

ISERIE(L)= ?
121 0 0 221 0 0
0000

0000

319 0 0
00

O

O

6141~ 0
0000

0 0 0 0
129

I
FmuRE 5: The form of the Output for program "RETRIEVE"

Figure 5 shows how each artifact falls into two categories of
decreasing congruency. As is the case for artifacts #11 and 4#82, these
two categories are the same. Artifact #19.9, on the other hand, falls into
two different categories. Choose the category with the most diminished
congruency as the con’eet category for that artifact.
In Figm’e 6, column a contains the artifacts that were selected for
the first category of decreasing congruency with respeet to the perimeter of the Adena point shown in the upper left hand corner of the
figure. Column b contains the arUfaets of the second category of
decreasing congruency; column c contains the artifacts of the third
category, and so forth.

COMPUTER PROGRAM

FIcURE 6: An example of the Artifact-sorting

FICURE 7: Artifacts that were not included in Categories 1-6

297

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOC~TY

FIGURE 8: The program "RETRIEVE"
ORTRAN

onn2
°093
0004

m005
0006

nC07
0098
0nn9
holm

~ll
0012
0013
C016
0~15
CO16

0017
0018
~#19
0~2n
0021
0922
¢~23
0n24
0n25
~n26
~27
0~28
0929
0030
9~31
n~3Z
n033
0034

0n35
0~36

0037
0~38
0039
00~0
~41
0042
0043
OnA~

09~5
0046
0~4T

0048
0~49

0050
0051
~¢52
~053
0054
0055
0~56
0057
~058
~059
0060

IV

G

LEVEL

I,

MOD

3

MAIN

DATE

=

69143

21!51122

DIMENSION DATA(IOO,148),ITESTR(24,4),ITESTL(24,4),ISPEC(24~61~
BIDTXA{LOIl,IDTXB(10II,ISPXA(101),ISPXB|IOI|,ISERIEi2L)
REAO(5,B} Id
3 FORMAT {I5)
READ{5,9) IK
9 FORMATII2}
MI=I
DO 17 NI=I,IK
READ (5,TIISERIE(MI)
7 FORMATII2)
MI=MI+I

17 CONTINUE
LL:I
MM=I
JK=I
00 15 ll=l,Id
READI5,5)IDTXA(LL), (DATA(JK,JJ)vJJ=I,741
5 FORMAT (15, IXT4AI]
READ(5,6) (DATAiJK,JJ|,JJ=75~i48)~IDTXBiMM)
6 FORMAT (74AI, IXI5)
IF {IDTXA(LL) - IDTXB(MM))I2, 14, 12
12 HRITE(6,13I IDTXA(LL},IDTXB(MM)
13 FORMAT (t SOME DATA CARDS ARE ARRANGED INCORRECTLY,’,IOX~IS,3XvlS)
GO TO 130
14 LL:LL+I
MM=MM+I
JK=JK+I
15 CONTINUE
READ{5,20}I(ITESTR(J,KJ,K=I,4)tJ=I,8]
20, FORMAT (8(IX412|)
READ{5,21)(IITESTR(JtK),K=h4),J=g,16I
21 FORMAT (8(IX412|)
REAO{S,22)(IITESTR(J,K),K=I~4),J=IT~211
22 FORMAT (8(IX41211
READiS,22C)((ITESTL(J,K),K=ItA}~J=I~8|
22n FORMAT(B{IXAI2))
READ{5,221)({ITESTL{J,K|,K=I~4)~J=9pI6)
221FORMAT(8(IX412|)
READ(5,222)((ITESTL(J,K),K=I~4),J=IT,211
222 FORMAT (8(IX412]|
NN=I
NM=I
JK=I
MM=l
LL=I
DO 12A I=l,IJ
MI=I
IM=O
READ(5,23) ISPXA(NN),{(ISPEC(L,M),M=I,4|,L=I,8}
23 FORMAT( 15,8(IX412)}
READ(5,24|((ISPEC(L,M)tM:I,4),L=9,16)
24 FORMAT (8(IX4121)
READ(5,26|(IISPEC(L,M),M=I,4),L=IT,2I)tISPXB{NM)
26 FORMAT (5(IX412),IX,15|
IF(ISPXA(NN] - ISPXB{NM|] 27, 29, 27
27 HRITE[6,28]ISPXA(NNI,ISPXB[NM|
28 FORMAT (’ SOME SPECIMEN CARDS ARE ARRANGED INCORRECTLY,~IOXvISv
83X,151
GO TO 130
29 00 900 ML=I,IK
IF(IN| 900,731,90¢
?Bl JI=ISERIE{MI|

¢061
’0062
0n63
¢~64
n~65
0~66
0~67

700

0068
0~69
n~Tn
0071
0072
~073
0074

0075
n~76
0~77
~078
nn79
OCBO
Or8I
0082
~83
0084
0n85
0a86
0087
0088
Dr89
~090

34
35
40

L=I
M=I
J=l
K=I
O0 5n JL=I,BL
DO 4") KL=I,4
IHIGH=ISPEC(L,MI+J[
ILOW= ISPEC IL,MI-JI
GO TO 34
IF I I SP EC{ h ,M) .LT.J I )
GO TO 100
IF( E TESTR( J.KI .GTo IHIGHI
GO TO I00
IF( [LOW.GT.I TESTR{ J,Ki !
GO TO 35
GO T0 100
IF { ITE STRI J, K) .GT. IHIGH|
M=M+I
K=K+I
CONTINUE
J=J+ I
L=L+ l
M=I
K=I
IF IITESTR(J,K]) 49,7f}I,49
IFIISPEC(L,M}) 50,701,50

49
50 CONTINUE
701 t=l
WRITE(6,7m)
70 FORMAT{’O’)
WRITE(6,60) IDTXA(LL],{OATAIJK’JJ)’JJ=I’IAB)’IOTXBIMM)’ISERIE{MI)
60 FORMAT(’ ’ 15,1X,100A1/6XABAI’IX~IS’5X’’ISERIEIR)=’I2)
WRITE(6,T3) ISPXAINN),({ISPECIL’M|’M=I’4)’L=I’21)’ISPXB{NM)
73 FORMAT 1’ ’ 15,11(IX412)/5XIO[I×AI2),IX,I5I
IM=l

0091
0092

IOn

MI=HI+I

nn93

900

CONTINUE

0094

CALL NIRRORIOATA,ITESTL,[SPEC~IDTXA,IDTXB~ISPXA,ISPXB’ISERIE’IK~
8JK,LL,MM,NN,NM|
JK=jK+I

0n95
LL=LL+I
~096
MM=MM+I
On~T
NN=NN+I
0098
NM=NM+I
¢n99
12~ CONTINUE
nlhO
STOP
137
~I01
END
0102
:ORTRAN IV G LEVEL i, MOD 3
00~i
00~2
00~3
nO~4
~5
¢n~6
~n8
Oon9
Onln
Onli
nn12
0~13
~015
o016
0017

MIRROR

DATE = 69143

21/51/22i

SUBROUTINE MIRROR(DATA,ITESTL,ISPEC,IOTXA,IOTXB, ISPXA,
BISPXB,ISERIE,IK,JK,LL,MM,NN,NM)
DIMENSION DATA{ i00,148) , I TESTL(24,4},I SPEC (24,4) , IOTXA{ I0[),
81OTXB( 191} , [SPXA(IOI) , I SPXB(101) , ISERIE(21)
IM=~)
MI=l ¯
29 DO 900 ML=I, IK
IF(IN) 900,7311900
731 JI=ISERIEIMI )
L=I
M=I
J=l
K=I
00 50 JL=I,BL
DO 40 KL=I,4
700 IHIGH=ISPECIL,MI+J[
[LOW=I SPECIL,MI-JI
IF(ISPEC{L,N}.LT.JI)
GO TO 34
IF(ITESTLIJ,K).GT. IHIGH) GO TO 100

300

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

CONCLUSION
The operating procedure of a computer program designed for
archaeological data retrieval has been set forth.
The use to which this program is put rests with the investigator.
The author intends to utilize the program as a part of an extensive
archaeological survey to be conducted in the near future. His use of
the program wilt be merely to retrieve ga’oss classes of archeaological
data, for example to distinguish between axes and knives from a data
bank of thousands of artifacts.
Other investigators may wish to study the areal and temporal extent
of traditions (in the archaeological sense) using this program.
Even ff this program does not become widely used, the fact that
this program was written points to a need for a good, working system
for the masteiT of arehaeologieal data.
A limited nmnber of punch card decks containing the program are
available for the cost of postage (about $.50).
These decks may be obtained by writing the author at the following
address: 422 Fairway Avenue, Ehnira, New York, 14904.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author would like to thai~ C. F. Iglehart of Pan-American
Petroleum Inc., Dr. W. W. Howells, and Daniel Ingersoll both of
Department of Anthropology, Harvard University, for their helpful
advice and attention.
A grant, which made the completion of this project possible, was
obtained through the Tozzer Fund of Harvard University.
Hm’vard University

On the Peopling of Hitzfelder Cave
MICI-IAEL B. COLLINS

Givens (1967; 1968a:219; 1968b:47-50) has clearly-though cautiously-implied that he believes a portion of the individuals recovered
from the site of Hitzfelder Cave in Central Texas is morphologically
distinct from American Indian Homo sapiens. The "distinctions" are
almost entirely non-nletric and include (1) pronounced supraorbital
torus, (2) marked postorbital consta’iction, (3) low vault, (4) low
sloping forehead, and (5) dolichocrany (Givens, 1968b:48-49; 1968a:
219). Without adequately documenting his evidence, Givens suggests
a biologically heterogeneous population a pol~ion of which is "presapiens" or exhibits evidence of "pre-sapiens ancesh’y."
I must object to several of Givens’ assertions. I have discussed Hitzfelder cave with Robert A. Benfer who conducted an early test excavation in the site, I have visited the site, and I have had the opportunity
to see the recovered skeletal material in Givens’ laboratol7 in San
Antonio. I have examined closely and measured one of the skull
fragments (a nearly complete frontal) which he considers to exhibit
certain "pre-sapiens" characters.
It is important to establish two facts before claiming a given collection of skeletal material is somehow unique. First, it nmst be dated,
and second, it lnust be shown to differ signi~cantly from other, contemporary skeletal collections. Givens has accomplished neither of
these tasks, at least in print, yet he claims to have skeletal evidence
which supports the position "... that the Amerind population was
heterogeneous and probably involves a pre-sapiens type" (1968a:219).
Fh’st, the nature and age of the cave deposits are important. The
cave is a vertical shaft in the shape of an inverted funnel with the
small opening near the crest of a rounded lfinestone hi!!. A large
volume of earth ~lled the cave at the time of its discovery. The source
o£ this ~ll is di~cult to determine because it seems unlikely that it all
could have eroded from the limited surface area that is higher than
the cave enh’ance. This !imited area could be considered the source of
611 if a very long time were involved, but the presence of Middle and
Late Archaic dart point forms (including types Frio, Pedernales, and
Marshall-like) indicates a "maximum" time for ~ll-aecumulation of
6,000 years. The presence of Frio dart points indicates a more probable
elapsed time of 3,000 years or less (Pedernales points date from around

302

TEXAS AI~CHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

4,000 B.C. and Frio pofi~ts from around 1,000 B.C.: see Son’ow et al.,
1967: 141-145; Johnson et al., 1962; 8uhm and Jelks, 1962). Fmthermore, as Benfer (1967 and personal communication) observed, these
projectile points may have been introduced with the fill and actually
give an age indication that is too great; this is based on a single radioera’ben date (Tx 334) which indicates that the fill above the skeletons
began to accumulate about A.D. 950-----190 years. Givens (1968b) incorrectly reports this date as A.D. 1000---+190 years and dismisses it as
likely based on "washed-in surface carbon" and asserts (1968a) that
"C-14 dating has been finpossible".
It is my opinion (based on the close examination of approxhnately
200 skeletons from Archaic to protohistoric archeological contexts in
Texas and an equal number from Archaic and later sites in Arkansas)
that the material recovered from Hitzfelder Cave is entirely within
the range of variation exhibited by Amerindian Homo sapiens material
of the stone general region and time period. The one Hitzfelder skull
fragment which I have examined closely is near, but within, the
exh’elne of variation as regards robusticity of the supraorbital regions
and the extent of post-orbital constriction, but in no other character
is it at all unusual when compared to contemporary material of the
same region. (Descriptions of pertinent skeletal material can be found,
mnong other sources, in the following: Aten, 1965; Benfer and MeKern, 1968; Burton, 1966; Collins et al., 1966; Ellzey et al., 1966; Greer
and Benfer, 1963; Hooton, 1933; Hrdlicka, 1938; Maples, 1962; MeKern, 1962; Stewm% 1945.)
Specifically, many of the prehistoric crania from Texas and neighboring areas exhibit considerable robusticity, moderately sloping foreheads and dolichocrany. The frequent combination of dolichocrany
and sloping forehead gives a false impression of the vault being low
(Comas, 1966). These traits, alone or in combination, do not constitute evidence for a "pre-sapiens" population; furthermore, the Hitzfelder population would not be unusual in exhibiting evidence of
"pre-sapiens ancestry" as this is inherent in human evolution.
Angel (1966:13-15) and Iieed (1967:63-64) emphasize that "ancient" eharacteIJstics do not necessarily indicate great antiquity. They
suggest that human populations existing in "refuge areas" may retain
until relatively recent times those physical features usually associated
with Palace-American individuals. Skeletal evidence for the sloping
forehead and post-orbital eonsh’iction at Hitzfelder Cave is in no way
indicative of "pre-sapiens" inhabitants nor is it in ariyway incompatible with an age of 3,000 years.

303

HITZFELDER CAVE

Until an archeological site report and a detailed skeletal analysis
are published which convincingly support Givens’ opinions, he would
be wiser to wonder what the Amerindian populations of America had
to do with the "peopling" of Hitzfelder Cave than what an Indian
population of perhaps as late as 1000 B.C. had to do with the
"peopling of America".
University of Arizona
Tucson, Arizona

BIBLIOCRAPHY
Angel, J. Lawrence
1966 Early Skeletons from Tranquility’, California. Smithsonian Contributions
to Anthropology, Vol. 2, No. 1.
Aten, L. E.
1965 Five Crania from the Jamaica Beach Site (41 GV 5), Galveston County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 36, pp. 153-162.
Benfer, Robert A.
1967 Comment on Radiocarbon date Tx-334. Radiocarbon, Vol. 9, p. 448.
Benfer, Robert A. and Thomas W. MeKern
1968 Analysis of Human Skeletal Remains from Coontail Spin. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 38, pp. 66-75.
Burton, Sharon A.
1966 Analysis of Human Skeletal Material, Salt Lick Site (16 AS 37a). IN:
Excavations in Toledo Bend Reservoir, by McClurkan, Field and Woodall. Pat)ers of the Texas ArcheoIogical Salvage Project, No. 8.
Collins, Michael B., T. S. E!lzey, and Thomas W. McKern
1966 Human Skeletal Material from the Pecan Springs Site (41 EL 11). IN:
The Pecan Springs Site, By William M. Sorrow. Papers of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, No. 10.
Comas, Juan
1966 La Escafocefalia en Cr’meos Mexicanos. AnaIes de Anthropologia, Vol.
III, pp. 99-117.
Ellzey, T. S., Michael B. Collins, and Thomas W. McKern
1966 A Description of Human Skeletal Remains from Two Rockwall CountT
Sites, Upper Rockwall and Glen Hill. IN: The Upper Rockwall and
Glen Hill Sites by Richard E. Ross. Papers of the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, No. 9.
Givens, R. Dale
1967 Hitzfelder Cave. Paper read at annual meeting, Texas Archeological
Society, Houston, Texas November 4, 1967.
1968a On the Peopling of America. Current Anthropology, Vol. 9, p. 219.
1968b A Preliminary Report on Excavations at Hitzfelder Cave. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 38, pp. 47-50.
Greer, John W. and Robert A. Ben£er
1963 Langtry Creek Burial Cave, Val Verde Count),, Texas. Bulletin. of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 33, pp. 229-251.
Hooton, Ernest A.
1933 Notes on Five Texas Crania. Bulletin. of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 5, pp. 25-37.

304

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Hrdlieka, Ales
1938 Skeletal Remains from Northern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 10, pp. 169-192.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr., Dee Ann Suhm and Curtis D. Tunnell
1962 Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir, Bulletin of the Texas Memorial
Museum, No. 5.
Maples, William Ross
1962 A Morphological Comparison of Skeletal Material from Sanders Focus
and fl-om Fulton Aspect. Master’s Thesis on File at The University of
Texas, Austin.
MeKern, Thomas W.
1962 Indian Skeletal Material from the Kyle Shelter. IN: The Kyle Site, by
Edward B. Jelks. Archaeology Series, No. 5, Department of Anthropology, University of Texas, Austin.
Reed, Erik K.
1967 An Unusual Human Skull from near Lovelock, Nevada. Miscellaneous
Collected Paper No. 18, IN: University of Utah Depa~¢ment of Anthropology Anthropological Papers, No. 89, pp. 63-70.
Sorrow, William M., Harry J. Sharer, and Richard E. Ross
1967 Excavations at Stfllhouse Hollow Reservoir. Papers of the Texas Archeological SaIwlge Project, No. 11.
Stewart, T. Date
1945 Report on J. C. Puhnan Skeleton from Texas. Bulletin. of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 16, pp. 31-39.
Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Special Publication
Number one, Texas Archeological Society, and the Texas Menmrial
Museum, Bulletin No. 4.

Book Review
Louisiands Ancients of Man, A Study of Changing Characteristics of
Louisiana Italian Cultures. J. Ashley Sibley, Jr. Claitor’s Publishing
Division, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, 1967. xiii + 257 pp., Frontispiece,
61 figs.
The professional anthropologist, more specifically the archaeologist,
sometimes finds himself trapped between the proverbial horns. On one
hand it is his obligation to encourage lay participation in science and
on the other to discourage sloppy scholarship. Although the literature
is filled with tirades against the humble pot-hunter it is often barren
of sound academic reviews of works written on archaeology by people,
both professional and non-professional, which fail to contribute to
archaeological scholarship. The sentiment seems to be ff they are
writing they are good. It is to be suggested here that one sloppy book
will outlive a dozen destructive pot-hunters and that the failures of
such works to adequately convey sound knowledge are even more
dangerous. In most instances it is a pleasurable experience to write
reviews of non-professional works. Certainly the amateur archaeologists have made invaluable contributions to knowledge, and all professionals attempt encouragement. Unfortunately it sometimes becomes
requisite to write a review of work by an amateur that misses the mark
badly. In professional circles criticism is expected and constant, an
integral part of science. When it falls upon non-professionals the amateurs occasionally feel it is too caustic, too destructive of their efforts.
This misunderstanding has led many professionals to fail at their
obligation to evaluate scholarship for the amateurs ,and others. This
is a review of a bad book. The fact it was written by a non-professional
has nothing to do with that matter at all. It would have been a bad
book regardless of who or what wrote it. The purpose of tlais review
is not to discom-age lay participation in archaeology, or any other area
of anthropology for that matter, but to sel~ce as a notice to the public
at large of bad scholarship. If the layman participates he will invariably be judged by the standards of the science. The lack of a professional degree has not hampered sound scholarship oal the part of
numerous amateurs in all the sciences. It cannot be used as an excuse
for a badly written work on archaeology. Consequently when such a
work appears it is the professional community’s responsibility to warn
a larger, unfortunately more impressionable, audience of its short-

306

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SO~ETY

comings. It is hoped that this will prevent other such bad work, save
people money, and force more intelligent approaches for layman and
professional alike. This review is directed to these ends.
J. Ashley Sibley, Jr. has done one thing with this book, Louisiana’s
Ancients of Man. He has demonstrated that the professional archaeologists in Louisiana, the author of this review included, have failed in
their responsibility to inform the public. The task of writing a general
synthesis for use in the public schoo! and by a wider audience has
been left to others. Sibley’s work is a grim reminder of the relegation
of the task to those who, albeit less conversant with the subject, are
interested and willing to take the time to hT it. When J. Ashley Sibley,
Jr. authored this work it was hoped that a long felt need was finally
being met It is therefore doubly unfortunate that the book fails so
miserably and is so badly edited and written. Nevertheless the book
has had a wide circulation and the naivete of its audience seems to
insure even wider reading. In spite of the fact that Louisiana is close
to the bottom of the national literacy scale nmch more. than this book
has to offer seems due her. The book is so badly edited, a cursory
count yielded numerous errors in spelling ranging from technical terms
to the names of authors in the bibliography, and even the title is essentially" poor English. Were these the only errors one could certainly
blame the publisher, whose poor printing is readily apparent in the
work, as is the fault3., reproduction of plates and poor quality paper.
However, the work is more seriously lacking than that It manages to confuse the data on geography, archaeology, and etlmology
badly. In some instances the work misinfornas the reader in ahnost a
deliberate fashion. It is unforttmate when an author does not check
his som’ces close enough to catch rather gross misinterpretations.
Sibley did not.
An example, not an isolated one in the book taken as a whole either,
may suffice here. Sibley attempts (p. 123) to synthesize the Poverty
Point manifestation in northeastern Louisiana.
"Webb reports that on a ridge of high ground called the Macon
Plateau (italics mine) about 15 to 20 feet above the Mississippi Valley
between 600 and 800 B.C:, the people laid out and built a village in the
form of an octagon with a series of six dirt terraces (italics mine)
about a 100 (sic.) feet wide, one terrace within the other that they
lived on in circular pahnetto covered houses, 15 feet in diameter."
Quite aside from being a ’5"un on" sentence, some six lines long,
which is poorly punctuated and mixes arabic numerals and words, it
is a gross misinterpretation of the sources quoted. For example, Macon

BOOK BEVIEV~

307

Plateau is in central Georgia and the Poverty Point Site is located on
Macon Ridge, an alluvial cone deposit in northeastern Louisiana. Also
the ten’aces in Sibley’s account are the ridges of midden described in
any number of papers by Ford and Webb. They are concentric ridges.
Ford and Webb (1956:128) speeifleally note that no direct evidence
of dwellings was found at Poverty Point. The circular patterns were
based upon such evidence from the Jaketown Site near Betzoni,
Mississippi and nmst have been derived from the report on that site
by Ford, Phillips, and Haag (1955). Unfortunately no reference to
that classic report is in Sibley’s text.
Such garbled synthesis sporadically occurs throughout the book,
Louisiands Ancients of Man. Even worse is the narrow view Sibley
seems to take of archaeology in general. He states (p. 80):
"Archaeology gives us the knowledge of the pre-historic (sic.) cultures, and ethnology, the historic cultures. Other information to aid
in interpreting these culturues (sic.) is rendered through paleontology,
physical and cultm’al geography, histolT, linguistics and socio-economie (sic.), political sciences."
This definition ignores the fact that archaeologists, with virtuMly no
exceptions, working iu Louisiana have eonsistently dealt with the
problems of historic site archaeology. The identification of the historic
complexes of the Louisiana Indians is one of the honored themes of
Louisiana archaeology. One searches Sibley’s work in vain for the
classic references to the historic archaeology of the Natchez (Qufinby
1947 and Ford 1936), the Bayougoula (Quimby 1957), the Natchitoehes (Walker 1935, Webb 1945, and Gregory and Webb 1965), the
Caddohadaeho and other t{ed River valley ga’oups (Williams 1964)
and the classic statements of Phillips, Ford and Griffin (1951) about
the problems of historic site archaeology in the Lower Mississippi
VMley. The fact that Ford (1936) and Phillips, Ford and Griffin
(1951) are in Sibley’s bibliography seems no indication he was conversant with those titles. At least it did not seem that they broadened
his view of archaeology.
Not content with tying the archaeologist to prehistoric sites Sibley
also manages, with traditional southeastern zeal, to bind him to potsherds and history (p. 146) :
"Potsherds are the data upon which arehaeological histories are
erected."
One wonders that Sibley managed to mention the aceramic manifestations in Louisiana. He came close to missing them when he stated
the hills between the tied I~iver and the Ouachita showed virtually no

308

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SO~ETY

sites. Perhaps the traditional emphasis of Louisiana State University
upon the Lower Mississippi alluvial plain and adjacent coast blinded
Sibley to the possibilities of poor survey data. Had he but suggested
that these northern Louisiana hill areas were poorly known archaeologically he might have made a major contribution to knowledge. However, he conveys the impression that these were barren areas, sparsely
inhabited if at all.
One might continue criticizing Sibley’s errors of commission and
omission ahnost indefinitely. Let the examples given stand for themselves. Sibley not only did not understand the archaeology of his state,
he did not even reeognfize its geographic place names. Worse yet he
does not seem to understand either the concept of culture, or understand that archaeologists are yet another variety of anthropologists
and not historians counting potsherds. Perhaps Sibley should not bear
the criticism for this latter point, it doubtless is derived from the traditional emphasis upon ceramic analysis which is a virtual synonym
for archaeology in Louisiana. However, he can be blamed for not considering the other aspects of culture even slightly as has been done in
the southeastern United States.
Louisiana’s Ancients of Ma~, whatever that title means, is a dangerous document Certainly Sibley with his years of teaching experience,
a point he uses as proof positive of his authority and interest (pp. 7273), is well aware of the decline of the English language and need not
be reminded that students need no encouragement in this respect. He
should have been equally aware of his responsibility to give sound
data and models abstracted from that data to his audience. Certainly
this book is not indicative of his many years in public education in
Louisiana. At least one hopes not.
To recommend oneself as an authority is a serious undertaking, but
Sibley is not one to hide his merits. He (p. 296) heartily advises his
the use of his book as a text for the teaching of Louisiana arehaeo!ogy.
This reviewer heartily advises against the use of his text for anything,
muehless the foisting of it upon unsuspecting school children.
It would be better, at this point, to recommend the whole series of
primary sources, especially twelve which deal with both prehistoric
and historic sites in Louisiana (all published prior to Sibley’s book)
which some individual not awed by Sibley’s authority might want to
read for himself. Unfortunately only those secondary sources, especially those related to the Louisiana State University models of Louisiana prehistory and Webb’s classic study of the Belcher Site (1959),
are adequately listed in the bibliography. Sibley’s anthropological

BOOK ~EVmW

309

concepts seem to be derived from old class notes, from Louisiana
State University which do not do his mentors justice, such thne]y
sources as the College Outline Series. Certainly a text for use in
public and private schools can be required to hold stricter standards
than this. Perhaps it is time the standards of the schools were questioned, especially if Sibley’s recommendations are seconded by other
members of any academic community.
Let this work stand on the shelves as a reminder that if the archaeologists, professional and amateur alike, fail to maintain some standards of sound research and reporting others will do their jobs for
them. The results will be books like Louisia,nds Ancients of Mare Such
failures will haunt us via the medium of a whole generation of misinformed students who learned their archaeology from well-meaning
gentlemen with fllustrous qualifications, but little preparation.
Hh’am Crego13z
Northwestern State College
of Louisiana
Natehitoehes, Louisiana

Book Review
An Introduction to Prehistoric Archeology, Second Edition, 1969.
Frank Hole, Itice University; tlobert F. Heizer, University of
California, Berkeley; Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc.
Au Introduction to P,reMstoric Archeology is a book which is, it
seems to me, aimed specifically at those who are seriously and actively
involved with the discipline, not at those with merely a passing or
casual interest. The book is gaining acceptance among professors and
students as well as professionals outside academic institutions, and is
being used both as a text in the college classroom and an impm~ant
source for ideas and references.
As I will discuss in this review, it is my feeling that the book can
also prove exceptionally valuable for people of my ilk, namely, the
serious amateur, although a few good lectures would be helpful
complements to several of the chapters.
The book does have certain flaws, which I will take up presently,
but worrying through these is a small price to pay for fl~e em’ielnnent
offered.
The principle objective and scope of the book is, I think, rather
clearly stated in the preface, where the authors tell us that the reader
"will be exposed to methods of investigating the human past, approaches to prehistory, and what archeologists do rather than what
they have found after some one hundred years of systematic investigation." (The italics are mine.)
The authors’ basic premise is that archeologists should work primarily to answer fundamental questions about cultural processes of
prehistoric peoples rather than to see simply what they might discover
by excavating sites. (That investigators should focus on fundamental
questions ratl~er than simple data collection seems to be a relatively
novel thought in some qum~ers of archeology. This contrasts sharply,
of course, with many other disciplines, in which such an approach is
taken for granted. Biologists, for instance, have been working for
years to answer fundamental questions about the origin and nature of
life. Astronomers have been struggling with questions about the origin
and history of our moon and solar system, and since studying lunar
samples returned by Apollo astronauts, incidentally, the scientists
seem to be farther from the answers tlaan ever. Physicists have been
trying to um’avet questions about the nature of matter and energy.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Formulating questions, then pursuing answers is sflnply innate in the
scientific method. In emphasizing this in their book, Hole and Heizer
are bound to have a healthy influence on areheological thought, and
help move the field that much nearer to its rightful place as a fullfledged science. )
Additionally, the authors have set out to illustrate how the General
System Theory--in essence, a generalized basis for scientific investigation-relate to their advocated approach to archeology.
Broadly speaking, the content and organization of the book are indicated by the headings of the six major divisions: "Introducing the
Study of Prehistory," "Archeological Evidence," "Acquiring the Facts
of Prehistory," "Dating the Events of Prehistory," "Reeonstl,actfllg Cultm’al Subsystems," and "Theories and Methods of Archeologieal Interpretation."
From my viewpoint as a serious amateur, the most important and
exciting thing tlle book does, in developing its premise, is bring me
into contact with perhaps tile most stimulating new current in prehistoric archeology: "The trend of archeology," we are told, "seems to
lie in the direction of seeking explanations for observed culture histories that can be regarded as examples of the process of culture generally. The larger number of archeologists have worked, and are working diligently, to recover and describe the records of extinct cultures.
For most archeologists this study is largely a process of description.
The so-called ’new archeologists,’ however, are steadfastly attacking
the problem of explaining the sequences that have been described . . ."
And later, "In following the General System Theory we hope to arrive
at generalizations t!lat are relevant to human society generally."
It is my feeling that the development of such thoughts gives the
amateur a nmeh better perspective in his understanding of archeology
as a whole, and it better equips him to cope with some of the esoteric
literature in tile field. It is my personal and fervent hope that, as the
new trend takes hold, we will see a decline in the areheologieal literatm’e that plagues us with stark, bare statistics and descriptions, which
only specialists can fully appreciate; and that we will see a considerable increase in the literature that undertakes interpretation. This
naturally will make the job of professionals far more hazardous and
di~eult, but the results will be infinitely more worthwhile.
Another important thing tile book does is to serve as an authoritative reference for the amateur. There is, for instance, the best survey
of both absolute and relative dating techniques that I have seen. Not
only do the authors discuss the basic process involved in each teeh-

BOOK REVIEW

313

nique, they also discuss the relative merits, shortcomings and potential
pitfalls. And in what I think is one of the book’s most illuminating
parts--"Models of Prehistory," beginlzing on page 391--I got a complete new insight into the problem of defining the developmental
stages of culture. "Working in Texas, one learns rather rapidly that the
Lithic, Archaic, Formative, Classic, and Post-Classic stages suggested
for the New World by one book simply don’t apply. It’s going to be a
while, now, before I feel a sense of embarrassment about my ignorance
when I ask a professional just what he means by terms such as
Neolithic or middle Paleolithic, for it turns out that these labels often
have quite different meanings in different regions of the world.
Authors Hole and Heizer also give us the benefit of theft" considerable experience and resourcefulness. The parts on "Areheological
Evidence" and "Acquiring the Facts of Prehistory" are loaded with
descriptions of new (at least to me) technological innovations that
are now being used in the field and laboratory. Take one example:
"... soil scientists have developed methods of securing a vertical smnple of stratification by attaching a heavy cloth or board to the sides of
the excavation, fixing the soil to this backing with an adhesive, and
then removing the backing with a thin layer of soil attached. The
vertical panel can then be removed to the museum and used to cheek
texture, color, and other features of the original profile at leisure."
Perhaps the most impressive single feature of the book is the sizeable effort that went into making it what the authors call a "springboard for more advanced work on technical and theoretical topics."
For vfi~ually every subject mentioned, we have been presented with a
set of references; yet these are handled adroitly, seldom interferring
with the reading process. In the narrative itself, there is a brief
mention of each reference; at the end of each chapter, the references
are listed and grouped according to subject; and at the end of the
book, there is a full bibliography. If I counted correctly, the seventy
pages of bibliography contain one thousand six hundred and thirty-one
separate references! In my estimation, such a list of references keyed to
subjects is alone worth the price of the book.
Along miscellaneous lines, I might mention that both the line illustrations and tables are generally clear and well done, seldom g~’owing
"too busy" for easy interpretation. If these were used for examples,
there is many an archeo!ogieal report Which would be considerably
improved.
Now, I have a few complaints.
While the professional, just in reading the preface, unquestionably

314

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

understands at once the full significance of the book’s basic premise,
I, the poor amateur, had gotten several dozen pages downstream
before the water cleared. This is partly due to my own ignorance, I
realize, but I would have been grateful if the premise had been
established more fully and considerably earlier, perhaps at the very
beginning.
Similarly, I would have appreciated an earlier and more thorough
treatment of the General System Theory. It is taken up any number of
times after the book gets under way, but I never really acquired a
crystal clear understanding of the Theol7 as a concept and of its potential application to archeology.
Consider two statements, for example: "General System Theory consists of hypotheses about the way systems operate." And, "General
System Theory is being developed to formulate a common set of
principles that are valid for systems in general." These statements,
which both appear on page 45, are so suggestive that they arouse one’s
curiosity to a considerable degree, yet they are never really developed.
I am aware that the Theory is relatively new in the discipline, and
I know from experience how difficult such abstract notions can be to
explain. I suspect that these two factors lie at the root of the problem
in exposition.
It would be my guess that the problems concerning the book’s basic
premise and the General System Theory are an indication that the
publishing house didn’t get its money’s worth from the editor.
I can’t help wishing, at this point, that we could prevail on Frank
Hole to do a paper dealing specifically with the General System
Theory and its application to archeo!ogy. It would be an enormous
aid to people like me; it would be a good supplement to the book;
and it might even be incorporated in the next edition.
My final complaint of any significance is that the quality of reproductions of photographs and half-tones is considerably below modern
standards. Often the poor definition and contrast half obscure details
which one would greatly like to see in greater clarity, having read
about them in the captions or the text. It is this failure that is, I feel,
the most annoying, for the others may be largely overcome by careful
study and re-reading and a bit of research.
The flaws notwithstanding, AN INTIIODUCTION TO PFtEHISTONIC ARCHEOLOGY will be one of the most important books a
serious amateur can add to his library.
I had a conversation with Frank Hole not long after I started reading the book, and I told him then that my preliminary finpression was

BOOK REVIEW

315

that he and Robert Heizer had produced a veW rich piece of work.
Having completed the book, I find that impression verified and considerably reinforced.
When the third edition appears, I plan to be first in line to pm’ehase
my copy, for I expect my present, second edition to be worn out by
then.
Jay W. Sharp
Houston, Texas

Information and Contributors
The Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society publishes original papers in the
field of American archeology. Emphasis is placed on Texas and adjoining areas in
the United States and Mexico, but papers on other areas are also acceptable.
Manuscripts should be typed on 8~ by 11 inch sheets of white paper, and ALL
MATERIAL should be double spaced. Footnotes should be avoided or kept to a
minimum.
Reference to published literature, by author, date, and page or figure number
should be placed within parentheses in the body of the text, with full bibliographic
citations listed at the end. See this issue of the Bulletin for models.
The proportions of full-page illustrations (picture or drawing plus caption)
should be suitable for reduction to the effective Bulletin page size of 4 5/16x7
inches. Plates may be printed either horizontally or vertically, but be sure to
allow for the caption to be printed the same dfi’ection as the plate. Captions for
illustrations should be listed in numerical order and placed behind the list of
references cited.
Each paper must be accompanied by an abstract (one or two paragraphs summarizing the main points of the paper). The abstract should be submitted as the
first part of your paper.

