TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of the history, pre-history and the major artifacts of
man and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils in
museums and their study and classification and the publication of the results of
researches incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1959
President: EDWARD B. JELKS (Austin)
President Emeritus.. CYRus N. Ray (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: WILSON W. CRoton, JR. (Dallas)
Secretary-Treasurer:

MARDITH K. SCI-IUETZ

(San Antonio)

Editor of Publications: E. MOTT DAVIS (Austin)
Directors (in addition to the above): T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin), CARL B. COMPTON
(Denton), and RICHARD E. JOHNSON (Fort Worth)
Trustees: ALeERT FIELD (Lampasas), R. KING HARRIS (Dallas), ~¢V. C. HOLDEN
(Lubbock), DOUGLAS PROCTOR (Tyler), O. L. SIMS (San Angel9), FLOYD V.
STUDEa (Amarillo), FKaNK H. WATT (Waco), and OTTO O. WATTS (Abilene).
Regional Vice-Presidents: W. A. DAvis (Jasper), REx GERALD (El Paso), MRs. T. L.
HODCES (Bismarck, Arkansas), WAYNE B. NEYLAND (Houston), RALPH iX.
NICHOLAS (Daingerfield), JAZZES B. SrlAEFF~I~ (Norman, Oklahoma), CIIAaLIE
R. STERN (Santa Fe, New Mexico), and JAMES H. WORD (Floydada)
Fellows: CYr~US N. RAg (Abilene) and ALEX D. KRIEGEa (Riverside, California).

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Memberships at $25.00 and Life Memberships at $100.00. Al! members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four
times a year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained at
$5.00 per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Witte Museum, Brackenridge Park, San Antonio
9, Texas.

BULLETIN

of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Volume 30, for 1959

Editor: T. N. Campbell
Assistant Editors:
E. Mott Davis
Edward B. Jelks

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1961

Table of Contents
Proceedings of the Fourth Conference on Caddoan Archeology
Edited by E. Mott Davis

1

A Suggested Developmental Sequence for House Forms in the o
Caddoan Area
By Edwin N. Wilmsen

35

The Limerick Site at Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains County,
Texas
By Lathel F. Duffield
Indian Grinding Stones or Metates in East Texas
By E. W. Hayner

51

117

Evidence of a Late Archaic Horizon at Three Sites in the McGee
Bend Reservoir, San Augustine County, Texas
By Curtis D. Tunnell
The Development of the Atlatl and the Bow
By Oren F. Evans

. 123

159

An Analysis of Archaic Material from Three Areas of
North America
By Mardith K. Schuetz

163

Archaeological Salvage in the Twin Buttes Reservoir Area,
San Ange!o, Texas
By F. E. Green

183

Deductions Concerning the Clear Fork Gouge
By Cyrus N. Ray

199

The Elida Site, Evidence of a Folsom Occupation in Roosevelt
County, Eastern New Mexico
By James M. Warnica

209

A Basic Annotated Bibliography to Facilitate the Identification
of Vertebrate Remains from Archeological Sites
By Stanley J. Olsen

217

Three Central Texas Aspect Sites in Hill County, Texas
By Joseph K. Long III

223

The Devils Mouth Site: A River Terrace Midden, Diablo
Reservoir, Texas
By LeRoy Johnson, Jr.

253

The Boggy Creek Sites of Washington County, Texas
By Robert A. Hasskarl, Jr.

.

287

Researches in Coahuiltecan Ethnography
By Rudolph C. Troike

301

A List of Radiocarbon Dates from Archeological Sites in Texas
Compiled and edited by T. N. Campbell

311

Book Reviews
Webb, The Belcher Mound: A Stratified Caddoan Site in
Caddo Parish, Louisiana
By E. Mott Davis

.

321

Caso, The Aztecs: People Of the Sun
By Nancy P. Troike

322

Ford and Webb, Poverty Point, A Late Archaic
Site in Louisiana
By E. Mott Davis

324

Lewis and Kneberg, Tribes That Slumber.. Indian Times in
the Tennessee Region
By E. Mott Davis

326

Proceedings of the
Fourth Conference on Caddoan Archeology
Edited by E. Mott Davis

Contents
"

INTRODUCTION

¯

2

....

History of the Caddoan Conference

2

Accomplishments of the Fourth Conference

3

Nature of these Proceedings

4

PARTICIPANTS

.

.....

..........

NOTE ON SYMBOLS AND ABBREVIATIONS

.....

8

Gibson Aspect
Pre-Gibson

.

6
6

INTRODUCTORY DISCUSSION: TAXONOMIC FRAMEWORK
Fulton Aspect

5

.............
¯
.
¯
.......
~

CERAMIC TYPOLOGY

.........

,

12
13
15

.........

15

Vessel shape ..............

17

Decoration and surface treatment

18

Temper

........
..........

18

List of categories of surface treatment
......
.
.
.
"
.
.......
Plain

2t

Incised.

.............

21

Brushed

.........

21

Punch-&-drag

.........

22:

eneral discussion

.............

22

................

22

.............

23

Trailed
Appliqu6
Punctated
MARGINAL CULTURES

..... ¯

McGee Bend Reservoir, East Texas
Wylie Focus

Oklahoma Quartzite Industry

......

.....

......

23
26
27
28
28

......

GENERAL DISCUSSION

23
25

.....

.....

Peripheral materials in Arkansas

HISTORIC SITES

....

.....

Central Texas Caddoan material

Sanson site

21

....

30’
31

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Introduction
A CONFEREN CE of Caddoan archaeologists took place at the Louisiana
State Exhibit Museum in Shreveport on Saturday and Sunday, April
13 and 14, 1957. The conference was initiated by Edward B. Jelks,
who made the preliminary arrangements and drew up a tentative
agenda. C. H. Webb took care of local arrangements, and H. Brainerd
Wright of the Museum, our host, kindly provided space in the room
where the Poverty Point diorama is being constructed. Webb acted
as Moderator for the sessions~ and E. Mott Davis was elected Secretary. The Conference took the form of an informal roundtable discussion, with specimens and reference volumes ready at hand.

HISTORY OF THE CADDOAN CONFERENCE

Systematic archaeology in the Caddoan area is relatively recent,
most of it having been carried on within the last twenty-five years2 A
number of conferences of Caddoan archaeologists have taken place in
the latter part of this period, but until the meeting reported here. nothing approaching a formal institution was set up. Although the specific
titles of these conferences varied, they shall be referred to here as the
Conferences on Caddoan Archaeology, or Caddoan Conferences for
short.
The First Conference on Caddoan Archaeology grew out of informal discussions during the 1940’s at the home of Clarence H. Webb
in Shreveport, Louisiana. This first formal meeting was "The First
Symposium on the Caddoan Archaeological Area," held at the University of Oklahoma in Norman in September, 1946. At this three-day
meeting the several archaeological complexes in the area were described by those most familiar with them, and their relationships with
-one another and with materials in neighboring areas were discussed.2
The Second Caddoan Conference was held at Dr. Webb’s home in
1 Krieger gives a brief summary of the systematization of Caddoan archaeology
in Suhmo Krieger, and Jelks (1954: 151-1’61).
"-’ Published r6sum6s of the first three Caddoan Conferences have appeared as
follows:
First Conference: Alex D, Krieger, "The First Symposium on .the Caddoan Archaeological Area," American Antiquity, Vol. 12, No. 2 (January, 1947), pp. 198-207,
Second Conference: A brief note by Krieger appears in Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks,
J954, p. 160.
Third Conference: Robert E. Bell, "Caddoan Area," American Antiquity, Voh
J8, No. 1 (July, 1952), pp. 95-96.

FOURTH CADDOAN CONFERENCE

Shreveport in August, 1950. This conference concentrated on problems of pottery typology.
The Third Caddoan Conference was a "Caddoan Area Workshop
Session" held at the University of Oklahoma in Apri!, 1952. It was
devoted to reports on current work in the area and to discussion of
pottery types.
The Fourth Conference on Caddoan Archaeology, held in Shreveport in 1957, is the one reported on the following pages. Intensive
field work in the Caddoan area, in connection with the building of
federal dams and reservoirs which necessitated archaeological salvage
work, brought about the need for an assessment of the current status
of the archaeology of the area. Edward B. Jelks, seeing this need in
the course of analysis of his materials from excavations at the McGee
Bend Reservoir, initiated the conference and suggested that it be made
a regular affair. Accordingly, at the Fourth Conference a Secretary
was elected who had the responsibility for initiating the next meeting.
It is anticipated that Caddoan Conferences will be held with some
regularity in the future, in order to keep abreast of the research that
is continuing ill the area.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS OF THE FOURTH CONFERENCE

The Fourth Caddoan Conference was in many respects a soundingout opportunity, a chance to find out what was going on in the minds
of others in the field. There was a gap of six years between the Third
and Fourth Conferences, so that in a sense the Fourth Conference was
preliminary--a fact signalized by the lack of significant disagreement
in the course of the meeting, an extraordinary circumstance in a
scholarly discussion. It is anticipated that future Caddoan Conferences,
although as congenial as this one, will not be as peaceful. Certainly
one of the accomplishments of this Conference was that most of the
participants left with the intention of coming to the next meeting
armed with organized material to present towards the working out of
special problems which had come to the fore during this meeting.
More specifically, there were matters which can be spoken of as concrete contributions of this Conference. One of these was the emergence of a consensus that the taxonomic units now utilized in Caddoan archaeology are far from being neat classificatory compartments.
Many of the foci grade into one another, and even the two Caddoan
aspects, the Gibson Aspect and the Fulton Aspect, are not as clearly
demarked from each other as might appear from a brief perusal of

4

TEX~S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

-the literature. However, there was no suggestion at the Conference
that the existing taxonomic framework be discarded or even appreciably modified at this stage of studies, Whatever alterations will eventually be made in this framework must await more data than are
now at hand.
The second concrete accomplishment is implicit in the agenda: there
was a detailed review of the significance of pottery attributes in problems of classification-and chronology in the Caddoan area. It is strik~ng (to the editor at least) that in the course of this review the question, "What do we mean by ’type’?" never became important even
though it was in the background of much of the discussion. It is a
-tribute to the skill of Dr. Webb as Moderator that matters were kept
on factual grounds and were not allowed to bog down, at this relatively
preliminary stage of current Caddoan discussions, in theoretical arguments concerning basic classificatory concepts arguments impossible
to bolster with data, since the data were not brought for the occasion.
For some of the participants those relatively new to Caddoan
work--the Conference provided an introduction to the complexes included under the rubric "Caddoan." The people from Louisiana State
University, for instance, had an opportunity to see the differences and
similarities between their Mississippi .Valley material and that in the
Caddoan area~ and to get an impression of the relationships and re,semblances within the latter area which give it ~some distinctiveness.
In general, this conference provided an opportunity to bring data
together, look them over, and find where the main problems lie. Subsequent conferences will in all likelihood be devoted to more specific
problems.
NATURE OF T~-IESE PROCEEDINGS

The proceedings as recorded here are based on notes taken during
the sessions. The record is incomplete, as the Secretary does not take
shorthand and was himself occasionally embroiled in the discussion.
To insure clarity, the original notes had to be entirely rewritten in
¯effect, translated into readable English and a few changes had to be
made in the order of certain remarks. As a result, the statements attributed to specific persons are not to be taken as quotations, but as
paraphrases.
The second step in the preparation of the proceedings was to send
the record to all participants, who revised and amended the record of
their remarks according to their own notes and memories. A few of the
¯nore formal statements in the proceedings, for example those by

FOURTH CADDOAN

CONFERENCE

Gregory and by Webb on the Sanson Site, have been completely rewritten--or, in some cases, added to insure the completeness and usefulness of the record. In such cases an asterisk has been placed after
the participant’s name at the beginning of the revised sta~tement.
The third step, following this working-over by participants, was to
send the record thus revised to a number of archaeologists concerned
with the Caddoan area who were not present at the conference, so
that they might add comments. Their remarks are included in smaller
type.
It has not been possible to undertake a logical fourth step, that of a
final rewriting of the whole proceedings to achieve smoothness and
consistency of style. The text, as it stands, is stylistically rough and
erratic, and apologies are made for this state of affairs. The editor has
had to limit his efforts to the achievement of clarity.
The editor is grateful to the participants and the later contributors
for their co-operation, and trusts that they will find their helpfulness
rewarded by the usefulness of these proceedings.
PARTICIPA~TS
Those participating in the Conference were:
Michael Beckman, Shreveport, Louisiana
Robert E. Bell, University of Oklahoma
E. Mott Davis, University of Texas
W. A. Davis, Jasper, Texas
Robert L. Fulton, Shreveport, Louisiana
Pete Gregory, Louisiana State University
William G. Haag, Louisiana State University
Edward B. Jelks, National Park Service
LeRoy Johnson, Jr., National Park Service
Robert S. Neitzel, Marksville State Park, Louisiana
James B. Shaeffer, University of Oklahoma
C. H. Webb, Shreveport, Louisiana
Fred Hadleigh West, Louisiana State University
Those contributing later comments to these proceedings:
David A. Baerreis, University of Wisconsin
W. W. Crook, Jr., Dallas, Texas
R. King Harris, Dallas, Texas
Alex D. Krieger, Riverside Municipal Museum, Riverside, California
Philip Phillips, Harvard University
Robert L. Stephenson, Smithsonian Institution

6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

NOTE

ON SYMBOLS

AND ABBREVIATIONS

The heading "Dis:" signifies discussion and general comment not
attributable to any one participant.
An asterisk after the name of a participant signifies that the passage which follows has been added or significantly revised, by the
participant, since the conference took place.
A paragraph without a heading is referable to the heading of the
preceding paragraph.
Statements in smaller type are later comments made by persons not
present at the conference.
Included are maps of the Caddoan area showing foci of the Gibson
Aspect and other early foci (Fig. 1), foci of the Fulton Aspect and
other late foci (Fig. 2), and location of sites mentioned in these Proceedings (Fig. 3).

Introductory Discussion: Taxonomic Framework
Webb: How adequate is our general Caddoan area taxonomic framework. the foundations of which were laid down by Krieger?
Dis: This is firmly enough imbedded so that we need to use it and
to work within its framework.
"Aspect" as used in the Caddoan area is a formal, strictly McKern
concept.
Baerreis: I have personally tended to use Krieger’s approach to the concept of Aspects as an illustration of the manner in which the McKern or
Midwestern Taxonomic classification is modified in use, rather than as a
strict use of the method. The aspects would appear to be in essence a regional period classification. Krieger himself uses the term "horizon"
alternatively with "aspect" (Krieger, 1946: 267).
Stephenson: I think the Caddoan taxonomic framework is one of the
soundest we have for any area in the country. Krieger did an excellent
job in devising this basic framework. "Aspect," as used in the Caddoan
area, is not a strictly McKern concept. It goes beyond the McKern concept
by adding a time dimension. Of course, this is what McKern envisioned
when he devised his taxonomic system That is, he presumed that people
would take the taxonomic units as they would develop in the McKern
system and then put a time perspective on them. This is what Krieger did
in the Caddoan framework

[Webb, at the blackboard, listed foci. He tried to list them chronologically, but this brought up problems which led to much of the %llowing discussion. First the Gibson Aspect foci were listed and dis-

FOURTH CADDOAI~T COI~TFERENCI~

OUAC

.NATCHEZ

LAKE
CHARLES

IALVESTON

o~

FOCI

OF

THE

ASPEGT
CHRISTi
FOCUS

NAMES

ARE

EARLY

OTHER

AND

UNDERLINED

0
I

,
scole

Fig. 1

50
!

,

in

Miles

I00
3

FOCl

8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

cussed: then those of the’Fulton Aspect, which is later than Gibson
Aspect, were taken up.]

GIBSON

ASPECT

Gibson Aspect loci:
Alto
Spiro
Gahagan
Haley
Sanders

Dis: The Alto, Spiro, and Gahagan foal are earlier; the Haley and
Sanders foci are, general.]y speaking, later.
Krieger: It would be better to say that the Alto, Spiro, and Gahagan
loci are approximately contemporaneous and that ~the Haley and Sanders
loci are somewhat later, but overlap the first three.

Dis: What do we mean by "Spiro"? For this discussion it means,
from Krieger, Middle Spiro, i.e., the middle component of the Spiro
site--the Craig Component.
Bell:* "Spiro" materials are being found all through the Gibson
Aspect, causing taxonomic difficulties because of our lack of data concerning the Spiro Mound, the Spiro site, and the Spiro Focus. The
total number and variety of artifacts from the Spiro Mound (Craig
Mound) must represent a reasonably long time period. Until we can
break this down into smaller time units containing diagnostic traits,
comparisons of Gibson sites with "Spiro" will remain difficult.
Krieger: If, as Bell says, Spiro materials are being found all through the
Gibson Aspect, then these are aspect traits, not specifically Spiro Focus
traits.
Bell: The McCurtain Focus is mainly in the Fulton Aspect, but
Baerreis thinks it goes back into Gibson Aspect times. We have no
final reports upon any McCurtain component at present, so I am not
prepared to present the evidence. I suspect, however, that the focus is
based upon such things as temple mounds, four-post rectangular
houses, large burial pits, shell gorgets, ear spools, and so forth, such as
are represented at the Clement site.
Harris: The McCurtain Focus or something very close to it seems to last
just to the beginning of historic contact times at the Kaufman site on Red
]liver in Red River County, Texas. I say this because of the small number

FOURTH CADDOAI~ CONFERENCE

of trade beads and cones made from sheet copper found around the house
sites at Kaufman. Also Burial 9 at this site contained vessels which can
be traced to McCurtain and proto-historic times intead 6~ historic times.
White contact is much heavier at the Womack or Garretts Bluff site in
Lamar County, Texas. However, the Womack site has some sherds from
McCurtain Focus. I will say that if the McCurtain Focus started in Gibson
Aspect times and lasted to historic times, it had a fairly long time span.
Krieger: Why might not the McCurtain Focus represent a survival,
rather than going back into the Gibson Aspect?
Dis: The Haley Focus shows a definite transition from Gibson Aspect to Fulton Aspect. The Sanders Focus is latest.
Jelks:* There is some information suggesting that the Sanders Focus
might be the earliest Gibson Aspect focus rather than the latest. The
evidence is as follows. There are several ceramic traits whose earliest
appearance in the Southeast seems to have been in the Gibson Aspect
of the Caddoan area. These include carinated bowl forms, bottles, and
engraving. These traits all occur at the large ceremonial centers such
as the Davis, Sand’ers, Spiro, and Gahagan sites, but at all those sites
they are only part of very well developed, elaborate ceramic arts.
Over a sizeable area of northeast Texas are a number of smaller sites
(such as the Yarbrough site), generally identified with Sanders
Focus, where engraving, carinated bowls, and bottles occur, but without the elaborations found in the large .ceremonial centers. Pottery is
simple--a~d is often quite scarce--at these sites, anti some of them
seem to be essentially Archaic components, with’the addition of small
quantities of a pottery which migt~t; be thought of as representing a
basic Caddoan ceramic tradition. One reasonab}e hypothesis that can
be advanced in interpreting this set of circumstances is that’a, relatively early--and simple ceramic tradition (exemplified by t!~e Yar~
brough site and others) existed in northeast Texas, .out of which the
elaborate developments found,at the large ceremon~al~sites evolved.
If so, the sites where the hypothetica} early Caddoan ceramics occur,
and which are now cl’assified as Sanders Focus sites, could well represent a developmental phase of Gibson Aspect and may be earlier
than the Alto, Spiro, and Gahagan foci--=and also probably earlier than
the Sanders site itself.

.

.

Krieger: This is a good idea; and I wouldadd that there is:an amazing
resemblance between Canton Incised of Sanders Focus and the incisedpunctated utility pottery of Fourche Maline, which Jelks"ideas would fit
(as an hypothesis). It should be added that the Southern Cult at the Sanders site would then be a simple, developmental expression rather than a

1o

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

decadence of the Spiro expression of the Southern Cult. The Evans Component at Spiro (after Orr) should have been discussed here in relation to
"Early Spiro" and Sanders.

Crook and Harris: We think Ed Jelks has a point. From the study of
materials from several sites in Kaufman, Henderson, Wood, and other
counties in northeast Texas in the last few years, we have sites which
seem to be built largely on an Archaic base. These sites have very little
decorated pottery; a large number of sherds from each site are plain
about 90% plain and about 10% decorated. In decoration and color this
pottery falls into the Gibson Aspect. The arrowpoints are few compared
with dart points--about 18% arrowpoints and 82% dart points. Alba and
Bonham-Perdiz points predominale among the arrowpoints, and Gary
points make up about 99% of the dart points. Copena points or knives are
present in very small numbers in some sites (e.g., Trinidad). We think the
utility pottery of Sanders Focus should have more study. If this is done,
our knowledge of the Gibson Aspect would probably increase.

]elks: The Alto, Spiro, and Gahagan loci form a group with many
similarities. Sanders Focus stands somewhat apart. We need to give
attention to these greater or lesser similarities between loci.
Bell: Aren’t these greater or lesser similarities merely a matter of
time span within the Gibson Aspect? ]elks: Yes, but also a matter of
geography. What do you do with the sites that don’t really fit any one
focus? For instance, house floors at the Battle Mound had good associations of both Texarkana and Belcher Focus types, which demonstrates
the existence of a complex that is neither Texarkana nor Belcher but
which shares traits of both loci in roughly equal proportions. Webb:
We have pottery types, such as Hodges Engraved, Sinner Linear Punctated, and Pease Brushed-Incised, which we previously thought to be
pure Fulton Aspect types, but which we now know to go back into the
Gibson Aspect in the Haley Focus. ]elks: The main point is that the
foci are not distinct entities exhibiting similar types and traits from
site to site. There is actually considerable variation from one site to
another, and therefore a focus must not be defined as a tight cluster
of traits, but rather should be allowed a great deal of flexibility.
Stephenson: I most certainly agree with this in all respects. W’e must
sooner or later admit that no culture unit, however small, is either
static in time or identical with any other culture unit. On the component
level every single culture is unique; no other is exactly like it. We must
devise our clusters of traits in each component, focus, and aspect in such
a way as to reflect the internal temporal change that must necessarily
have gone on in that unit, and at the same time reflect the external

11

FOURTH CADDOAN CONFERENCE

OKLAHOMA

!

\
~’NATCHEZ

CHARLES

GALVESTON

FOGI

OF

FULTON

THE
ASPECT
FOCI

AND
GL,- GLENDORA FOCUS
COMPONENTS

FOCUS NAMES ARE
UNDERLINED

0

Fig. 2

I00

50
scale in

miles

12

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

impact of acculturation upon it. The "tight cluster of little traits" concept
of focus is false and misleading.

Webb: There are more common traits running through Gibson Aspect than there are running through Fulton Aspect. For instance,
tapering spouts on bottles, long-stemmed pipes, Hickory and Crockett
pottery types, Alba projectile points, copper plating, pulley-shaped
stone ear spools, knives with recurved edges (Copena?), Catahoula
Sandstone hones, large mound sites, multiple pit burials, profuse
burial offerings, effigy pipes.
Dis: Earliest Caddoan (i.e., early Gibson Aspect) traits all over the
Caddoan area are: Crockett, Pennington, Hickory, and Holly pottery
types; tapering spouts on bottles; Alba points; delicate long-stemmed
pipes; no brushed pottery; no carved shell. Bell: The Harlan site in
Oklahoma has many of these traits, but with some differences. The
Gibson Aspect is the only aspect in Oklahoma where there is ceremonial destruction of vessels.
FULTON ASPECT

Fulton Aspect loci:
Prehistoric loci:
Titus (Texas)
Frankston (Texas)
Texarkana (Texas, Arkansas)
McCurtain (Oklahoma. Texas)
Fort Coffee (Oklahoma)
Turkey Bluff (0klahoma)
Mid-Ouachita (Arkansas)
Bossier (Louisiana, Arkansas)
Belcher (Louisiana, Arkansas)
Wylie (Texas)--possibly not Fulton Aspect
Historic loci:
Allen (Texas)
Glendora (Texas, Louisiana, Arkansas)
Dis: The Glendora Focus seems a bit broad. About the only trait
common to all Glendora sites is contact material; otherwise there is a
great deal of variation.
Krieger: Yes, the Glendora Focus seems a bit broad, but contact material is not found in all of the sites, however close to the historic horizon
they may be; and shell-tempered Natchitoches Engraved is a better diag-

FOURTH CADDOAN CONFERENCE

13

nostic trait. I agree that this "focus" needs better definition and that there
may be more than one focus involved.
West: Where do you find Catlinite artifacts in the Caddoan area?
Dis: There are no definite cases in the Caddoan area, though there are
some specimens of fine-grained red sandstone.
Dis: Are there any bison bones in the Caddoan area? They are
absent in all Gibson Aspect foci except Sanders Focus, and are found
in Wylie, Turkey Bluff, and Fort Coffee foci. Haag: There were bison
all over the East in historic times, but no bison bones have been found
in a prehistoric archaeological site.

PRE-GIBsON

Bell: "Archaic" is not all Archaic. There is a "pre-Gibson," for instance the upper Fourche Maline. We are eventually going to need a
separate term.
Jelks: The Snipe site (41-20D4-3) in the Texarkana Reservoir, is
another possible example of "pre-Gibson." And still another example
of material not covered by present classification, and seemingly preGibson, is material from McGee Bend in East Texas [discussed below,
p. 23]. It is neither Fulton nor Gibson, but has traits suggestive of
Adena-Hopewell, including a copper reel-shaped ornament and several
copper bracelets.
Webb and Fulton:* Bellevue, in northern Louisiana, is also an example of "pre-Gibson." Bellevue mounds are situated on hilltops, representing a Pleistocene terrace, overlooking small valleys with streams.
Burials are unusual, three types having been found so far: (1) primary, semi-flexed; (2) secondary, the bones having been scraped or
else gnawed by animals, and later re-articulated for secondary burial;
(3) cremations. Pottery is 99% plain, poor in quality, usually tempered with crushed sherds. There is some bone tempering. One burnished Marksville rim sherd and one Churupa Punctated sherd have
been found. Points are all dart points averaging about 4 cm. long,
chiefly Gary and Ellis types, with two San Patrice specimens. In one
cremation that is probably (but not yet certainly) of this same complex, numerous stone beads and 3 copper beads were found, 40 to 50
beads in all.
Stephenson: Why not formulate a new aspect for this post-Archaic, preGibson material?

TEXA~ ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

OKLAHOMA

@
CORSIC~NA

\

"NATCHEZ

, LAKE

GOLIA

MAP OF
IN

SITES

THE

THE

MENTIONED

PROCEEDINGS

CADDOAN

ARCHEOLOGICAL
AND

AREA

VICINITY
IOO

SCALE IN MILES

Fig. 3

FOURTH CADDOAI~ COI’qFEREI~qCE

15

Ceramic Typology
TEMPER AS A TYPOLOGICAL DETERMII’CAI’CT
Webb: How much emphasis are we to give to certain attributes?
Shell temper, for instance. In northeast Texas it is historic and protohistoric (Allen Focus). It is late in Louisiana, earlier in Oklahoma
and North Texas (Nocona-Woodward).
Krieger: One should also add McCurtain Focus, in mentioning shell
temper. McCurtain components occur in the adioining corners of Oklahoma, Texas, and Arkansas; and shell temper is common in all or most of
these components.
Bell: Shell is not useful as a determinant in Oklahoma. Webb: This
is true also in Louisiana; you can’t use it for Krieger’s distinction between Hodges Engraved and Natchitoches Engraved. ]elks: In the
Fulton Aspect, it would be unusual to find a type which occurs with
one tempering agent exclusively, even in one site.
Krieger: It may be true that shell temper is not a useful determinant in
Oklahoma, as Bell says, but I don’t agree with Webb that you can’t use it
to distinguish between Hodges and Natchitoches Engraved. :[elks’ statement is true enough as far as it goes for general purposes; but in the case
of Hodges versus Natchitoches Engraved, the Handbook [Suhm et al.~
1954] had to settle on some specific difference; and in this case we had to
decide on a trait that would distinguish the two types. I still say that, no
matter how much alike the vessels and decorations may be, Hodges Engraved (almost wholly in Arkansas) has no shell temper, whereas Natchitoches Engraved (in Texas and Louisiana) does have this temper. In other
words, while agreeing that shell temper is not suitable for distinguishing
types in most cases, in this case shell temper was seen to be significant for
distinguishing two types that are otherwise very similar.
Dis: But in any case shell is relatively late in the Caddoan area. In
Central Louisiana, shell doesn’t appear until nearly historic times.
It is a little earlier, but still rare, in the Belcher Focus (at the Belcher
site, shell tempering is absent in pre-mound Haley pottery, present in
2% to 5% amounts in subsequent Bossier and Belcher), and at the
Sanson site; Woodward Plain in Oklahoma (same as Nocona Plain in
North Texas) is earlier; and at the Norman site in Oklahoma, shell
tempering is found in a Gibson Aspect, Spiro-like component.
Krieger: Woodward Plain is similar to Nocona Plain, rather than being
the "same as Nocona Plain" as stated parenthetically above.

16

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

KEY TO FIG. 3
Numerical
1 Norman
2--Harlan
3--Horton
4 Splro
5--Greer
6--Douglas
7 Old River Landing
8--Spanish Fort
9 Hogge Bridge
10 Stansbm7
] 1--Chupek
12--Sanders
13 Womack (Garretts Bluff)
14 Kaufman
15 Yarbrough
16 Hunt
t 7--Clement
18 Snipe
19--Battle
20 Haley
21 Belcher
22 Bellevue
23--Smithpor t Landing
24---Gahagan
25--Los Adais
26---Jonas Short
27 Walter Bell
28--Print Bell
29--Sanson
30 Bayou Goula

Alphabetical
Battle--19
Bayou Goula--30
Belcher--gl
Bellevue--2g
Chupek--11
Clement--17
Douglas--6
3ahagan--24
Greer 5
Haley--20
Harlan--2
Hogge Bridge--9
Horton--3
Hunt--16
Jonas Short--26
Kaufman--14,
Los Adais--25
Norman--1
Old River Landing--7
Print Belt 28
Sanders--12
Sanson--29
Smithport Landing--23
Snipa--18
Spanish Fort--8
Splro--4
Stansbury--10
~vValtar Bell--27
Womack--13
Yarbrough--I 5

The question of shell temper in a component of the Spiro Focus (or any
focus of the Gibson Aspect) needs to be thoroughly investigated from the
point of view of intrusion. At the Spiro site, for example, considering the
nature of the field notes, it is an open question whether vessels in a grave
in the Spiro Mound really belonged to the Spiro Focus or were intruded
in the mound by a later people. As to the Norman site I cannot say, but ff
shell-tempered pottery were actually a part of any focus of the Gibson
Aspect, I would like to see some exact field notes to prove it.
Dis: It looks as if shell tempering moved into the Caddoan area from
the north. There is no shell temper in Coles Creek, but it is present in
Plaquemine. In Bossier Focus, which covers a long time, shell temper
seems late, and is absent from most sites.
Baerreis: Small quantities of shell temper are present in sherds of Middle

FOURTH CADDOAIW CONFERENCE

17

Woodland type in Delaware County, northeastern Oklahoma. This could
well be a local innovation and one possible source for its early appearance
in the Caddoan area.

Dis: Bone temper seems to occur mainly in Texas and Oklahoma.
It is very common in East Texas, in both the Gibson and Fulton
aspects. Webb: Bone temper is early in northwest Louisiana, in the
pre-Gibson Bellevue Focus; it continues in Bossier and Belcher potteries. Haag: There is no bone temper east of the Mississippi. Dis: Bone
temper is found westward into the Central Texas Aspect in Leon Plain
pottery. (No one here can recall it for the Lower Mississippi, or in the
Southwest.) Except for Leon Plain, bone tempering seems strictly
Caddoan,
Krieger: Bone temper is not exclusively Caddoan. It occurs in several
types of pottery in the southern Plains, as, for example, those described
by Schmitt and others in Central Oklahoma, and the type Borger Cordmarked in the Texas and Oklahoma Panhandles.

.[elks: Sand is sometimes added, in small amounts, especially in
harder pots. It is used either in addition to clay temper or without
evident temper. Is it intentional? Dis: There are excellent kaolin
deposits in the Caddoan area, where the finest wares occur. Inferior
clays may have considerable sand, but in other instances sand seemed
to be added intentionally.
Dis: In the Caddoan area, there is little, if any, crushed stone
temper. Temper is dominantly clay. And temper is not a determinant
of type.
VESSEL SHAPE

Webb: Do we have consistencies in vessel shapes by type, or are
there all sorts of shapes in each type, if you type by decoration?
]elks: Yes, there are consistencies within limits. For instance, there
are no square bottoms in Belcher Engraved; square bottoms are a
Gibson Aspect, not a Fulton Aspect, trait (except at Sanson, which is
a marginal site). Webb: The later you get, the more variation in shape
there is in terms of decoration type. Shape is not a determinant, but it
is better than temper. You don’t throw a vessel out of a type because
it is the "wrong shape"; many of them are. The primary typological
determinant, then, is decoration and surface treatment.
West.. Are there any stirrup-spouts in the Caddoan area? Dis: Yes,
some in Mid-Ouachita Focus, but these specimens, or the stirrupspout trait, appear to be due to trade. This is a Middle Mississippi trait.

18

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

DECORATION AND SURFACE TREATMENT

General Discussion.
Dis: What about paste color as a trait in differentiating types?
Titus Focus pottery tends to be lighter and more reddish than the
dark-chocolate, black or brown on Red River and the Ouachita. Some
of the Titus Focus types of Krieger are almost the same as some of the
Texarkana and Belcher types, but the lines are heavier and the color
is different. Burnished black pots evidently were carefully made and
the firing was controlled. In this case, color is important because of the
firing technique.
Applied color and slips are not consistent within any one type.
Rubbed-in color occurs only in engraving (with the rare exception of
a few vessels of East Incised), and hence is more limited. Red film in
the Gibson Aspect is limited to Sanders and Haley foci.
Is the distinction between "incised" and "trailed" clear? Consensus:
yes, it seems to be.
There is no cord-marking in the Gibson or Fulton Aspects. except
at the Sanson site, which is peripheral and would fit with Troyville
and Coles Creek. Absence of cord-marking is a negative Caddoan trait.
(The decorative technique on Sinner Linear Punctated pottery looks
like an imitation of cord-marking.)
Is it all right to use hyphenated names for types? For instance,
Pennington Punctated-Incised, Pease Brushed-Incised. What should
the policy be? (No decision.)
Stephenson: I for one do not like the long hyphenated names. They
serve very little useful purpose and hinder concise writing. Type names
should be as brief as possible in order to be most usable.
Krie#er: Hyphenated type-names seem iustified in some cases, as when
a Pennington design is done entirely in incised lines, seemingly as a
simple substitute for combinations of lines and punctates; or when Pease
vessels have either incised or brushed lines, or lines which cannot easily
be determined as incised (cut with a single sharp implement) or brushed
(cut with a few stiff grasses or the frayed end of a stick, etc.). The alternative would be to set up separate "types" which probably had no
meaning to the people who made the pots.

Webb: Curvilinear incising and trailing (parallel line. scrolls,
spirals, volutes) seems most common along the Ouachita and west as
far as the Red. Is it found farther west? Dis: It is found sometimes in
Titus Focus, and sometimes in Oklahoma, mostly in the Fulton Aspect. This trait seems to center on the Ouachita, but is also found

FOURTH CADDOA!N~ CONFERENCE

29

around Natchez, and extending into the Mississippi Valley (Leland
Incised).
Phillips: But don’t forget that it goes back at least to Yokena, which has
some very fine meander patterns (but not spirals as far as I know), and
this continues on into French Fork Incised. Leland, Fatherland, and
Natchez appear to be the end products.
Bell: Williams Plain sometimes has incisions on the rim. Should
you have two type names, Plain and Incised? Dis: The occurrence of
a few incised lines on otherwise plain vessels would not necessitate
two separate types. (Not 100% agreement on this. Discussion of this
and related problems. The implications of same and different names,
e.g. Dunkin, Manchac). Should there be type names and variant
names? Jelks is in favor of lumping. Webb points out inclusiveness of
Pease Brushed-Incised.
Phillips: I think there should be type names and variant names. Wheat,
Gifford, and Wasley are shortly coming out with a proposa! for the classification of Southwestern ceramics that may be the answer to our problem.
[see Wheat et al., 1958; Phillips, 19581.
Stephenson: Names for variants serve no purpose until they have broad
cultural significance, and as soon as they have broad significance they become type names. I think we should lump all of these things as much as
we can. There is certainly nothing wrong with minor amounts of decoration in a plain pottery type if this fact is clearly stated in the definition
of the type.

Webb: You often get one decoration around the rim and a distinct
one on the body; for instance, in the Titus and Mid-Ouachita loci
there are bowls with engraved rim and a different decoration (one
of several techniques) on the body. (Dis: This is found in the Glendora
and Texarkana foci too.) Which is to be considered most important,
the rim decoration or the body decoration? In the past we [Webb and
colleagues] have generally assumed rim decoration as the determinant. Earlier, for instance in the Haley Focus, there is none of the
body decoration on these bowls.
Krieger: Alto Focus should also be mentioned, since there you often
find rim and body with decoration done in different techniques. Rim
decoration has usually been chosen as "more important" in Caddoan
ceramics because rim sherds tell more about vessel shape and size, and
rim decorations are more variable than body decorations.

Bell: How much of this pottery is made purely as burial ware, and

2O

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

how much is utility ware? And why do you have concentrations of
points in only one area of a site? Webb: Do you find arrow points in
burials, or both arrow and dart points? Dis: Webb finds only small
points with burials. Bell likewise, in Oklahoma. But dart points are
found in these sites. Shaefer:* Both dart and arrow points are found
with burials in the Horton site, near Vian, eastern Oklahoma. The
dart points are late, or a small variety of Gary point. Dis: Red River
sites, on the floodplain, have only small points. Upland and terrace
sites have large points in addition. It looks as if typology of small
points may eventually turn out to be more helpful than has been
thought in the past. There certainly is an element of selection in
burial materials. But even then, you find some of the fancy material
in the middens. There does not seem to be any special burial ware,
with the possible exceptions of Cowhide Stamped, and head effigies
(in Arkansas only). It is rather a matter of selectivity; you get the
good material in the burials, along with some everyday specimens.
Shaeffer:* In Oklahoma. decorated pottery is confined pretty much to
burials, and plain ware to house areas. Perhaps this is an area differentiation, in Oklahoma within the Caddoan area.
Haag: How about having the next conference work out geographic
distributions of certain pottery types? For instance, pottery motifs-the scroll, ticking, hatching, and the like. We could use dittoed maps
of the area in plotting distributions. This might focus the matters we
have been discussing.
Gregory: What significance is there to the distribution of large
notched points? You find a few in the valleys, more on the hills.

Webb: How do you distinguish between dart points of Archaic and
post-Archaic sites? Dis: In the Lower Mississippi area, the same types
of dart points occur in both Archaic and later complexes, and this is
also largely true in the Caddoan area. And certainly you can’t distinguish between Archaic and post-Archaic sites on the basis of
presence or absence of dart points. W. A. Davis: The problem of
distinguishing Archaic from non-Archaic sites is worth taking up as a
special subj ect at a later Conference.
Dis: Gary points are of all sorts, and will probably be subdivided
chronologically. Bell: Gary points seem to get smaller, lighter, and
with bigger shoulders, as time goes on; this is a hunch. Dis: This
hunch seems to be borne out in the Poverty Point report (Ford and
Webb, 1956, p. 54, Fig. 18). Some Gary points are quite small.

FOURTH CADDOAN CONFERENCE

21

Stephenson: This hunch is absolutely true from Texas to the Atlantic.
It’s no hunch at all. It’s a fact.

Dis: Discussion of the atlatl versus the bow, and of "atlatl weights."
Perhaps the atlatl survived in the Fulton Aspect as a specialized
implement, for example, for use in fishing.
Categories of Surface Treatment
Plain
Incised
Brushed
Punch-&-Drag
Trailed
Appliqu6
Punctated
Engraved
Ridged
Pinched (separate technique? Probably should be so considered)
Stamped
Combed
Krieger: Under "Pfinctated" you need two treatments: stick punctates
and fingernail punctates. These are clearly used in different ways and are
different on certain types of pottery. In the Lower Mississippi Valley you
also have linear punctates made with serrated shells or something similar
(this is also found in the Midwest), but this probably doesn’t concern
Caddoan ceramics. As to whether "pinched" is a separate technique, I
should say yes.
PLAIN (As a vessel, not just a sherd, character). Dis: Is there
more plain ware in the Gibson Aspect than in the Fulton Aspect?
Fulton vessels are likely to have more of the surface decorated. There
are plain vessels in all shapes and in all periods.
INCISED. This technique is found throughout the Caddoan sequence.
BRUSHED. Dis: Is there any brushed pottery in the Gibson Aspect?
]elks: At the Davis site, some "fine incising" might be brushing.
Webb: Haley Complicated Incised, in Haley Focus, is often seemingly
brushed. Perhaps brushing started here. Dis: The Bossier Focus has
brushed pottery. In Central Louisiana, the earliest brushing is in
Plaquemine. (Except that Tchefuncte has Chinchuba Brushed, a very
localized type. This, like a lot of Tchefuncte traits, died out, leaving

22

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

no evident descendants. There is similar material in early Southeastern pottery, e.g. at Stallings Island.)
Krieger: Brushing Js present in Haley Focus, on the Pease Brushed-Incised and Haley Complicated Incised types at least. On Pease it may occur
alone or with incising; and on Haley Complicated Incised it may occur
in some of the circles and odd areas, along with incising and appliqu&
Brushing, red film, applique, handles, lugs, and effigies a!l appear to enter
the scene with Haley Focus and then become common in various Fulton
Aspect loci.
Phillips: In Mississippi (Yazoo Basin) our type Salomon Brushed is at
least as early as Coles Creek. It is not always distinguishable from incision, however. Caddoan brushing could have come from this.

PUNCH-&-DRAG. Dis: This is a special incised-and-punctate technique. You find it in Tchefuncte (Orleans Incised), but not used in
the same way as on Caddoan vessels. In Caddoan pottery it is mainly
used in lines dividing fields. It is a minor technique, in other words,
serving the same function as appliqu~ or punctate lines.
A special treatment to be considered is the making of small depressed triangles (not excised) at the end of incised or engraved lines.
Did this trait come into the Caddoan area with French Fork Incised?
(Ford’s idea.) Haag: It could have spread in the other direction.
TRAILED. Dis: This trait is late in northwest Louisiana. in the
Belcher and Glendora Foci. It appears at the same time as do groups of
curvilinear lines. It occurs in Military Road Incised. Cowhide
Stamped, Keno Trailed. In these types it is often used to outline zones,
as in Marksville; but it is not so used in Texas except in the Titus
Focus and a little in the Texarkana Focus. It is found in Tchefuncte
pottery.
What is the difference between Foster Trailed-Incised and Keno
Trailed? On sherds you often can’t tell. The shapes are different, and
so is the frequency of certain design elements.
APPLIQUIk. Dis: As far as the Caddoan area is concerned, this
treatment appears earliest in the Haley Focus (Pease BrushedIncised and Haley Complicated Incised) and Sanders Focus (Maxey
Noded Redware). It is absent in Alto Focus. It is found throughout the
Fulton Aspect. In Fort Coffee Focus it is not common, but it is common in McCurtain Focus. As for nodes, they are found at the Haley
Site, in the Haley Focus component at the Belcher Site, and in the
Sanders Focus (Maxey Noded). Nodes are common to the east. in St.

FOURTH CADDOAN CONFERENCE

23

Francis. Appliqu~ seems oil first glance to come from the Mississippi
Valley, but the earliest appliqu~ there is Fortune Noded, which is
fairly late. Appliqu~ is popular at Cahokia and northward to VVisconsin, but it seems to be late everywhere. Perhaps this trait spread
from the Sanders and Haley Foci. But, Oil the other hand, the ialey
Focus has Mississippian trade material in it, for instance shell tempered trade vessels, so appliqu~ in Haley Focus may not be earlier
than in the Mississippiall material. Thus we don’t know where
appliqu~ might be earliest.
PUNCTATED. Dis: This trait is found everywhere. But what about
profuse fingernail body punctate, e.g., Wilkinson Punctated? This
tends to be early, fading out at about [he time brushing comes in. It is
verT frequent from Alto Focus into Bossier Focus and drops out in the
Belcher and Glendora foci. The situation is the same in Oklahoma.
In Central Louisiana it is late (Parkin) but this seems to be different
from Wilkinson Punctated.
Phillips: But there are earlier types in the Lower Mississippi Valley
showing the same technique, e.g. Evansville Punctated.
Dis: Is fingernail punctate earlier elsewhere than in the Mississippi
Valley? It is found in Tchefuncte and also at Stallings Island in
Georgia. This, however, is random punctate. In East Texas, fingernail punctate is usually thought of as Alto Focus.
Krieger: Fingernail punctate may usually be thought of as Alto Focus
in East Texas, but it does continue into the Frankston and Titus foci in
quantity, and in the Allen and Texarkana foci somewhat. When one collects a large number of sherds from a site in the central part of East Texas,
it is often possible to guess the affiliations as Alto Focus if there is a lot
of fingernail punctating (and pinching), but no brushing, on body sherds
of utility jars; and conversely one may suspect Frankston, Alien, or Titus
foci if the reverse is true: lots of brushed jar sherds but comparatively
little fingernail punctating or pinching. In testing scores of sherd collections, this distinction proved to be a rather good and constant clue to
the focus. Then, one would naturally look for the proper associated types
of engraved ware, and so on.

Marginal Cultures
MCGEE BEND PtESERVOIR,

LowErt ANGELINA RIVER, EAST TEXAS

7elks: All the sites excavated at McGee Bend last Fall [1966] have,
among other things, some very sandy pottery, undecorated, with

TEXANS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

simple vessel shapes. This is supposedly close to the western edge of
its distribution. Goose Creek sites have this sandy material, but it is
often decorated. The Jonas Short Mound, at McGee Bend, had it.
One rocker-stamped sherd, Marksville or Troyville, was associated
with it at the Print Bell site at McGee Bend.
Haag: You don’t get this in southwestern Louisiana, and work has
been done there, by McIntyre. On the east side of the lower Sabine
you get only Tchefuncte and Marksville sites. Farther east you do get
sandy ware, Alexander-like, in Tchefuncte sites.
]elks: At the Walter Bell site at McGee Bend, we have also a
punctated-incised ware, similar to Pennington but rather poor. Haag:
This is found all across southern Louisiana, and it all resembles
Pennington or Rhinehardt. In the same area there is also a "cheesy
French Fork Incised" and also an incised "messy Dunkin" or "messy
Manchac." Webb: This material is probably later than both Pennington and Rhinehardt. The vessel shapes are different and the treatment
of decoration idea and paste is different. Dis: This material should
have a separate name in order to distinguish it from Pennington and
Rhinehardt. ]elks: What about "Angelina Incised"? Dis: It includes
both incised alone and punctated-incised. It derives from PenningtonDunkin (in Texas) or Rhinehardt-Manchac (in Louisiana). In this
case one name should be valid, even though elsewhere two names are
used depending on whether or not punctates are used. ]elks: In addition to the differences in decoration, the Angelina vessel shapes are
wrong for Pennington. At the Walter Bell site (at McGee Bend)
we do have good Pennington--in addition to this poorer material-but it grades off into the poor material. We have Dunkin too; it is
found east into DeSoto Parish, Louisiana, for instance at Smithport
Landing. Webb: There should be Alba points with this. ]elks: There
are some Alba points, but mostly the points are Perdiz. We have free
punctates too. Webb: This is Wilkinson Punctated. ]elks: Also we
have sloppy ridged pottery--it is really incised (Webb: Karnack Incised); these vessels are in burials, with Perdiz points. Possibly it
means that there were two occupations at Walter Bell.
Webb: At Smithport Landing you find things like this, and they
appear to be due either to two occupations or to a general development
toward Bossier Focus. Stephenson’s material from his 1948 reconnaissance at McGee Bend was, according to Krieger, Alto III and "Shelby
Focus"--later re-named Bossier. To me this appears to be an AltoBossier development.

FOURTH CADDOAN CONFERENCE

25

Stephenson: For most of the sites producing enough material to tell in
my reconnaissance of the McGee Bend area, I believe this statement is
quite true.
]elks: In East :Texas, Perdiz points arb Supposed to represent the
Frankston Focus. At Walter Bell there are not only Perdiz, but
Bassett points, vvh~ich are similar to Perdiz. g/ebb & Gregory: At the
Sanson site you get both Perdiz and Bassett points. The difference
between Perdiz and Bassett points is in whether the stem goes below
the barbs or not; if it does, you call it Perdiz.
WYLIE FOCUS

]elks: Along with Fort Coffee and Turkey Bluff, the Wylie Focus
is a sort of buffer between the Caddo area and the Plains. It has both
Caddoan pottery and Plains material. The type site is Hogge Bridge.
There is some Sanders and some Frankston pottery. The points are
of the types Alba, Bonham, Perdiz, Fresno, Cliffton, and Plains triangular (Harrell). Wylie Focus sites are small. Hogge Bridge seems
to represent a brief occupation and the associations seem good. In the
middle of each site is a saucer-shaped depression about 100 ft. in
diameter. Nocona Plain, a shell-tempered pottery type, is found here
and farther west. There are eight or ten Wylie Focus sites in a localized area in the Trinity drainage. Wylie Focus also has bone work:
bison scapula hoes, fish hooks, bone pins. There is also charred corn.
Webb: The Bonham points in Wylie Focus are very much. like
Alba points; is Bonham really a separate type? ]elks: Some Bonham
points are more like Perdiz points.
Webb: It looks as if Wylie Focus covered a long time.
]elks: It seems closely related to the Henrietta Focus; Krieger
originally included in the Henrietta Focus several Dallas County sites
which later became incorporated in the Wylie Focus by Stephenson.
We don’t know whether the Caddoan pottery is trade ware or not.
The Henrietta Focus has a stronger Plains flavor and doesn’t have the
basins. There are probably more Wylie Focus sites than those which
have been recorded--non-pit sites, for instance. The burials usually
don’t have offerings, and are tightly flexed--a Plains, rather than
Caddoan, trait.
Bell: Wylie Focus is very odd; it is reminiscent of Fourche Maline.
Krieger: I do not feel that the Wylie and Fourche Maline loci are much
alike, either in ceramic or non-ceramic traits.

~6

TEXA£ ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Baerreis: ]elks speaks of the Wylie Focus as "a sort of buffer between
the Caddoan area and the Plains." This has an implication in terms of
historic events that may not be quite adequate. For at least the northern
margin of the Caddoan area the Fulton Aspect would appear to represent
a shrinkage in the geographic scope of the late Caddoan cultures. The
shrinkage may in part be due to a somewhat earlier departure of Caddoanspeaking peoples from the area~Wichita, Pawnee, and Arikara, for example-and with their departure and residence in the Plains the opportunity for culture contact with linguistic relatives would be enhanced. If
a "buffer" implies, as my dictionary states, "anything serving to deaden
a shock or bear the brunt of a collision," I would argue rather for a peaceful Contact situation allowing for a free interchange of traits.
Stephenson: To me, the Wylie Focus is simply a marginal group of Fulton Aspect people who, due partly to geographic location, absorbed a
number of Plains (or Henrietta Focus) traits. I fail to see the relationship
between Wylie Focus and Fourche Maline, but then perhaps I am not
adequately acquainted with Fourche Maline. The Wylie Focus appears to
me to have had its beginning early in Fulton Aspect times, if not perhaps
overlapping the last dying gasps of the Gibson Aspect, and certainly continuing on long into Fulton times. I am sure there must be more sites of
the Wylie Focus than we have recorded, particularly--as ]elks points
out--sites without pits.
Crook and Harris: We have thought of the Wylie Focus as follows: the
first occupation was Archaic for a long period of time, then contact was
made with pottery cultures of Gibson or pre-Gibson Aspect and continued
through a part of the Fulton Aspect. The Henrietta Focus also exerted
some influence on Wylie Focus. The Wylie Focus people may have also
made a small amount of pottery.
CENTttAL TEXAS CADDOAN MATEI~IAL

]elks* [Elaborated later on the basis of comments by Krieger]:
There is a band of material between the Brazos and Trinity rivers,
between the latitudes of Waco and Austin. A few sites have sherds of
Alto Focus types, Alba arrowpoints, and Copena points or knives.
Other sites have numerous Frankston Focus sherds and associated
artifacts; and still others have sherds more closely resembling
Sanders Focus types than any others. Krieger calls the Chupek site
near Waco, where Frank H. Watt has made extensive collections,
primarily an Alto Focus component, but there are sherds and other
artifacts of the Frankston Focus there too, as well as sherds resembling Sanders Focus types. The Alto Focus pottery types at

FOURTH CADDOAiN CONFERENCE

27

Chupek include Weches, Dunkin, Pennington, Crockett, Holly, and
Hickory. There is another component near Bryan with several of the
key Alto Focus pottery types, Alba points, and Copena knives, but no
admixtures of other Caddoan foci. West of the Brazos, you find fewer
dart-point types of the Alto Focus (Wells, Morrill), Copena knives,
and Alto Focus sherds, and these disappear as you go west in Central
Texas. Presumably, all Alto Focus pottery found west of the Brazos
(and possibly the typical dart points and Copena knives as well) was
carried there by traders or visitors. On the other hand, Frankston
Focus pottery is fairly common in Central Texas and extends much
farther west than any Alto Focus traits.

OKLAHOMA

QUARTZITE INDUSTRY

(Bell and Shaeffer showed specimens from an Oklahoma quartzite
industry. This material does not seem related to Caddoan material but
was introduced for general appraisal.)
Schaeffer:* FOr some time quartzite chips, cores, and tools from
sites principally in central Oklahoma have been brought in, mainly
by Dr. Sherman Lawton. Bell has examined several of these sites and
has found Plainview points. The sites are characteristically located
away from present water sources or on high ground above them and,
in southwest Oklahoma and the Panhandle, on the shores of now dry
lakes. The collections contain many chips and large fragments but,
except for knives and a few point fragments, no bifacially chipped
artifacts. The remainder of the tool types are pebbles which are percussion-chipped on one face only. These consist of choppers, highbacked planes or pebble scrapers, a form which might possibly be a
prototype of the Clear Fork Gouge, hammerstones, and possibly a few
grinding stones. A recognizable point which was found is a typical
Plainview form 2.5 cm. wide, and a small 5 cm. quartzite projectile
point with a single prominent shoulder is reminiscent of the Sandia
point form. The present distribution suggests a western connection
but it may be that future surveys will fill the gap to the south so that
it can be more directly connected with Archaic material in north
central Texas.
]elks: These specimens can be duplicated (except that the material
of which they are made is different) in the Edwards Plateau Aspect
of Central Texas; but the Edwards Plateau sites which contain specimens like these are quarry sites, and the specimens are thought to be
rejects. Shae~er: If these are rejects, where are the tools? In Central

28

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Oklahoma, they are unique. They seem to occur mainly along the
Canadian, but this distribution may simply reflect where the work has
gone on. The investigation is really just beginning. ]elks: Perhaps this
is a flint industry which has moved into a non-flint area. 8haefJer:
Typologically and in selection of stone, these specimens hint at a developmental sequence. To me, the main resemblance is to Cochise.

PERIPHERAL MATERIALS IN ARKANSAS

Dis: Were there Caddoan settlements along the lower Arkansas
River? The Douglas, Greer, and Old River Landing sites between
Little Rock and Arkansas Post--are these Caddoan sites with some
Mississippian and Quapaw, or are they, as Griffin suggests, Quapaw
with Caddo influence? They have vessels with banded punctates (formerly called Menard Punctate Banded; now called Owens Punctated).
These sites have painted vessels and the teapot shape, plus Caddoan
material. [Looking at C. B. Moore illustrations.] They are all quite
late. This seems to be a Caddoan-Mississippian contact area. The Greer
site in particular is surely mainly Caddoan. It is late, with shell temper; late Foster Trailed-Incised pots, and painted pottery, among other
things:
Stephenson: Robert Greengo made a survey for the River Basin Surveys
in the Spring of 1957 at the Dardanelles Reservoir area about midway between Fort Smith and Little Rock, Arkansas. Here he found a number of
sites that provide sherds and proiectile points of perfectly good Caddoan
types running through all time periods. Particularly numerous were
projectile points that seemed to relate the sites to the Archaic period in
the Caddoan area. This, of course, is an extremely fringe area relative to
the Caddoan area, and the materials Greengo got were only surface collections; consequently, there isn’t much that can be said about them at
this time. I am sure that with some testing and excavation in these sites
before the dam is built, we will have something of major significance
from the area.

SANSON SITE

Gregory:* The Sanson site is located on the south end of Catahoula
Lake in Rapides Parish, Louisiana. The site runs along a broad sandy
ridge and covers a small island. It consists of two dome-shaped mounds,
one truncated pyramidal mound and vast midden accumulations.
There might possibly have been a plaza associated.
One of the dome-shaped mounds was a burial mound that was ex-

FOURTH CADDOAN CONFERENCE

29

cavated during the 1930’s by the Sanson brothers for the collections
of Mr. Edward F. Neild and Mr. and Mrs. U. B. Evans. These individuals supervised the work at the site and Mr. Emerick Sanson was
put in charge of the field crew. They used a standard grid system and
four lateral trenches by which the whole mound was moved.
The mound contained numerous burials, a great many of which
had been reached by the plow line. Therefore a lot of the material at
the site was scattered by the plow prior to the excavation. There were
three cremations in the very center of the mound and these were accompanied by an offering of three groups of five pots, all of which
were ceremonially "killed" either by perforation (before or after
firing) or by smashing. There was also a placement of two pipes at
the cremation. Scattered through the fill (there was no stratification
visible) were numerous other burials accompanied by all types of
offerings ranging from arrow points to vessels. A good number of the
vessels were ceremonially "killed." The burial forms ranged from
disarticulated to extended forms.
The pottery types included a number of "typical" Plaquemine
Period types, plus a good number of Caddoan types such as Maddox
Engraved and Pease Brushed-Incised. The projectile point types included a number that were definitely Caddoan in origin, such as
Perdiz, Bassett, Steiner, and Hayes; plus some types that are found
with material in the Lower Mississippi tlegion such as "Fir Tree," a
form which might be compared to Scallorn in Texas. A number of
large notched points including San Patrice and Ensor, have been collected from the surface of the site, and since many of these are worn
and broken, they might indicate an Archaic site in the area.
Webb:* Surface collections along the beach at Sanson indicate to
me a fairly long occupation, with stone work which appears Archaic
(probably late), sherds of Marksville, Coles Creek, Plaquemine, and
Caddoan pottery types. None of this is surprising, since the site has
a favorable location fronting on the lake, generally above high water
and with good soil available. Gregory is hesitant about concluding
that there was an Archaic occupation, because of some geological
implications--not too certain--and the frequent occurrence elsewhere
of Archaic projectile point types extending into the pottery-making
horizons. Our surface collection in the summer of 1957 [after the Conference], however, included crude pointed or "pick-like" tools, one
graver, and numerous large and small flake "scrapers," in addition to

TEX~LS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

a variety of proiectile types, all in one day’s search. To me this seems
to be too much for a simple "carry-over" of Archaic traits.
The maior and apparently final occupation was the mound-building
period, which is a mixture of Plaquemine and Caddoan traits. Gregory
and Ford think it is primarily Caddoan with some Plaquemine: I think
it is primarily Plaquemine with some Caddoan; the truth probably is
about 50-50. Each of us inclines as he does because the total assemblage is considerably different from either Caddoan or Plaquemine. as
the case may be.
In summary I would say that the Sanson site represents occupation
from late Archaic through Marksville-Troyville and Coles Creek to a
final, and apparently major, occupation by a mound-building people
whose culture represents an admixture or amalgamation of Fulton
Aspect Caddoan and Plaquemine traits. The strength of influence
from either direction and the presence of pottery decoration which is
similar to, but not identical with. that found in the Caddoan or Plaquemine areas makes it unlikely that trade obj ects could account for the
situation. Moreover, the presence of some traits which are different
from either Caddo or Plaquemine elsewhere will probably set Sanson
apart as a distinctive culture. In relation to the Caddoan area. Sanson
could be considered as a fringe culture which has Caddoan affinities.

General Discussion
Discussion of trade and its importance, particularly in relation to
Poverty Point and Hopewell. Might organized traders from Mexico
have come into the Southeast? This idea is being worked on by Dr.
William Sanders of the University of Mississippi, in a project for
Louisiana State University.
Haag-Webb controversy on where the Poverty Point people got the
idea of building those earth structures. This is no matter of incidental
stimulus diffusion, says Haag; this reflects closer contact. It is not the
same as Mexico-Southeast relationships. And how does one explain
the microflints in Poverty Point?
Discussion of burial types. [Transcription incomplete.] In Oklahoma, all types of burials run all the way through the sequence. In
general, in the Caddo area, cremations are exceedingly rare. and seem
to be early. Nearly all Fulton burials are simple extended primary
burials. The trait of large deep pits with multiple burials and large
offerings is uniquely Caddoan in the Southeast (it also occurs in Hopewell).

FOURTH CADDOAIN

CONFERENCE

31

Historic Sites
(Topic taken up at the request of West)
West: Where are there sites with contact material? What are the
late pottery types like Fatherland Incised? Webb: Natchitoches Engraved and Keno Trailed, especially when they are shell tempered.
Neitzel: It is surprising how few European trade goods are to be
found in localities where the French are known to have been for a
number of years. As a related problem, we tried finding material in
known spots on Civil War battlefields, using mine detectors, and often
found very little. White-Indian trade may have emphasized perishables.
West: Is there much contact material in the mission sites around
Nacogdoches? ]elks: None of these sites has been excavated. One finds
beads on the surface. Small beads "seed beads" are most common.
West: You don’t find those in Louisiana. Dis: If you sieve the dirt, you
will find them. Webb: Around Natchitoches, most beads are ~" long.
Dis: These are Venetian glass and porcelain. There are no trade sites
in northwest Louisiana; only at Natchitoches. The Hunt and Clement
sites in East Texas are historic, as in Womack (Garretts Bluff). ]elks:
Spanish Fort, on both sides of the Red River in Texas and Oklahoma,
is a major historic site; this is a Taovayas site (Wichita Confederacy).
Another is Stansbury, on the Brazos River above Waco, probably
Tawakoni (Wichita Confederacy).
Dis: Extended discussion, at prompting of West, of information on
different sorts of trade goods: beads, various kinds of china and earthenware Majolica, feather-edge, Willow ware, etc.; stone ware; glass,
green glass. The best things to look for in the Caddoan area that will
indicate a historic date are glass beads, metal knives, iron bracelets,
and gun fragments. Very little chinaware on any site. Porcelain dolls
may be expected. [Note differences with West’s comments below,
which were added later. Ed.]
West:* Following are impressions of what are presently taken to be
contact sites in northwestern, central and southeastern Louisiana:
No excavation has been attempted and, indeed, in most cases indications are that the bulk of the material is on the surface and in the
root zone. Thus the establishment of definite association, and hence
contemporaneity, of the Indian and European materials is difficult.
Seemingly the only possible approach is to determine first that one is
dealing with unequivocally late Indian pottery types such as Fatherland Incised. Secondly, it must be possible to state with some certainty

32

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

that the White materials are of the same general time period. The latter of these two problems is more difficult.
My observations of sites of this kind have led to the conclusion that
looking for trade goods as such, and using them as the prime determinant of the contact site, can lead to serious errors. Far and away the
most common item of White manufacture consists of china sherds.
Probably second most common are Churchwarden pipestems. Less
numerous are musket balls. Green bottle glass is fairly common. One
finds, after a while, that he develops a "feel" for the European material. Some "feels" old and some not so old. I have not yet had an opportunity to check and verify this sensation, so it may develop that I
"feel" upside-down: what is early may "feel" late, and vice versa. In
other words, this is a raw field impression.
Having determined rough coevality in a surface sample of late Indian pottery and early White material cannot, of itself, prove the site
to be an historic contact one. It does, however, render this supposition
highly likely and may in many cases constitute the best hypothesis.
If the sites from which this discussion is drawn are indeed of the
contact period, then there is in this area an apparent anomaly: standard trade items such as glass beads are virtually absent. Instead. European china and glass are found. This is in marked contrast to contact
sites elsewhere in the country. Perhaps a partial explanation is that
very little of the early exploration here was overland. Another possible pertinent factor may have been the very early and widespread
missionizing among the Indians which most often entailed the actual
resid ence in the village of a priest.
Actually, the paucity of such materials at other sites in other areas
may be more apparent than real. Such things as china, being slightly
suspect as being non-contemporaneous, may have been overlooked in
favor of the more obvious trade goods.
I have observed one type of china. Featheredge, in contact situations
in such widely separated localities as Louisiana, North Carolina. and
North and South Dakota. Unfortunately, Featheredge has such a long
period of apparently great popularity (ca. 1750-1850) that it is of
little utility as a time-marker. In fact, there have been exceedingly
few contact sites that have not yielded at least one sherd of this ware.
For the most part, identification of European ceramics must be
done by an expert in such matters. There are few of these willing to
undertake such a tedious task gratis, and all of them are generally

FOURTH CADDOAN COI~I~]gR]~NCE

33

swamped with requests for identification, so that the problem of identification is a difficult one.
Quimby’s Bayou Goula site yielded abundant china and glass. I
have done some testing at Los Adais, the site of the Spanish mission
and presidio among the Adai. Expectably, china and glass are also of
frequent occurrence here. A comparison of these materials from Bayou
Goula and Los Adais, both of which are dated, may yield a basis for
more certain identification of European wares found elsewhere in the
region. In fact, it was with this plan in mind that I tested at Los Adais.
None of this material has, as yet, been analyzed, so the success of this
scheme is still unknown.
It is impossible to draw any firm conclusions from incomplete work.
However, it does seem conceivable that a re-examination of other
contact sites may be in order. Perhaps the apparent situation here in
regard to surface indications may not be quite so local in character as
it now appears.

Re]erences Cited
Ford, James A., and Clarence H. Webb
1956. Poverty Point, a Late Archaic Site in Louisiana. Anthropological Papers
of the American Museum of Natural History, Vol. 46, Part 1.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. University of
Texas Publications, No. 4640.
Phillips, Philip
1958. Application of the Wheat-Gifford-Wasley Taxonomy to Eastern Ceramics.
American Antiquity, Vol. 24, No. 2, pp. 117-125.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas:
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Wheat, Joe Ben, James C. Gifford, and William L. Wasley
1958. Ceramic Variety, Type Cluster, and Ceramic System in Southwestern
Pottery Analysis. American Antiquity, Vol. 24, No. 1, pp. 34~47.

The University
Austin, Texas

of Texas

A Suggested Developmental Sequence for
House Forms in the Caddoan Area
EDWIN N. WILMSEN

Introduction
EUROPEAN EXPLORERS of the late seventeenth and early eighteenth
centuries who visited the Caddoan area of northeastern Texas and adjacent Louisiana and Arkansas reported that the Indians whom they
found there were living in large houses made of poles and grass.
Joutel (1879, 1906) describes the structure and Espinosa (in Swanton, 1942) the construction of such houses.
Most reports on Cad&an archeology are justifiably vague in discussing houses beyond describing post mold patterns. The implication
is that construction methods of the early historic period extend into
the prehistoric period for some unspecified time. There is little speculation as to what went before. However, a close study of the available
material indicates that the Caddoan house of historic time is but a
late manifestation of a house type with a long and complex history
and that its sources must be sought outside the Caddoan area--indeed,
at great distances from that area.

Historical Evidence
The earliest historical reference we have in which houses are mentioned is l~anjel’s diary of the De Soto expedition. His description of
the attack on a village of the Province of Tula in southern Arkansas
includes this statement: "they [the Indians] climbed on top of the
houses, where they tried to defend themselves with arrows; and when
driven from some would climb on top of others" (in Swanton, 1942:
29). This was in 1541. In 1687 Douay (Shea, 1852: 204) and JouteI
(1879: 345), both of whom entered the Cad&an area with La Sa!le,
describe the houses they saw there as fine, large, round cabins in the
shape of beehives or haystacks, some of which reached sixty feet in_

36

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

diameter and fifty feet in height. These houses were built of poles set
into the ground around the circumference of the house, bent and
joined together at the top, and covered with a thatch of long coarse
grass. Subsequent writers describe similar houses: Theran (Bolton,
1915), Espinosa (Hatcher, 1927a) and M6zi~res (Bolton, 1914).
A comparison of Ranjel’s statement with the descriptions of those
who followed him seems to suggest some interesting developments in
the houses of the area during the one hundred and fifty intervening
years. If De Soto’s victims defended themselves from their housetops, it
seems highly unlikely that these houses were of the high conical type
reported by Joutel and others. Such houses could not permit rapid
ascent and at best would leave but one arm free for the manipulation
of bow-and-arrow, a feat (if performable) requiring wondrous dexterity and probably slow--not suited to the hot defense of life and
home. This suggests that at least some houses in the Caddoan area
were. when Ranjel wrote, lower, with less steeply pitched roofs than
were the majority of houses at La Salle’s time and after. I believe these
houses had rather low vertical walls and pitched pole roof structures
which may have taken the form of a low dome. Thatch may already
have been employed as covering from ground to top. Some of the
houses may have been rectangular, but most were probably round.

drcheological Evidence
The archaeological evidence for such a change is virtually nonexistant, primarily because little work has been done on this particular
problem. But there is some reason to suspect that something of the sort
occurred; indeed, the archeological record for the prehistoric period
is quite clear: successive changes in house types took place over a long
period of time. How and why these changes took place is not so clear.
Krieger (Newell and Krieger, 1949) noted such changes at the Davis
Site and C. H. Webb (1959) anticipated some of my own ideas in his
excellent coverage of the houses found at Belcher Mound. In order to
attempt a fuller understanding of the problem, I think it necessary to
summarize what is known about some of the houses found in the Mississippi drainage basin and to try to find some interrelationships among
them. This will be done by known cultural units as defined by archaeological evidence in temporal sequence from earliest to latest.
Not a great deal is known about the building practices of the
Tchefuncte culture of the Lower Mississippi Valley. The best evidence
~:omes from the Lafayette Mounds, St. Martin’s Parish, Louisiana

.37

CADDOAiN HOUSE FORMS

o

°

@

@

G

Q

@

(P

0

o

D

0
Q

t)

@
g
o
Q
0
o
o

D

,o

o
D
g

o
o

Half Section

0

g

¯

Half Elevation

Fig. 1. Earliest Caddoan area house form, through Gibson Phase 1. Figs. 1--4 drawn
to same scale.

38

TEXA.S AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

(Ford and Quimby, 1945). These mounds were built in two superimposed stages over a group of houses which had previously occupied
the site. The only remains of these houses were slight depressions in
the submound surface, apparently dug to reach a clay layer, and post
molds, some of which suggested circular patterns. At the time of publication, Ford and Quimby placed the Tchefuncte culture at a date
possibly earlier than Adena. Whether or not they hold the same view
in light of the revised Adena chronology brought about by radiocarbon
dating is not known to me, but Tchefuncte is certainly very early in
the Lower Mississippi area.
By contrast, the work of W. S. Webb and his associates has given
us a clear picture of Adena houses, at least with respect to the ground
plan of these houses. This information is summarized as follows
(Webb and Baby, 1957: 112) :
Early Adena circular pattern with vertical posts fairly equa!ly
spaced
Middle Adena circular pattern, probably beginning of paired posts,
outward sloping
Late Adena circular pattern with posts set in pairs, outward sloping

At the Dominion Land Company Site houses were found under
mounds with upright wall posts set singly and with outward sloping
singly set posts. The authors consider the former the earliest known
Adena House (ibid.). In another report (Webb and Snow, 1945), rectangular houses with paired posts are noted. These are not placed in
time, but according to the above outline, there is some reason to place
them in the latter half of Adena history. Nearly al! of these houses
have floor diameters within a range of forty to sixty feet, and. with
few exceptions, the post molds are within an inch of six inches in
diameter. The later houses all had four posts forming a square in the
center; these are not mentioned in the earlier houses.
Turning now to the Gibson Aspect, we find that all but one of the
houses of the first phase at the Davis Site (Cherokee County, Texas)
were round; the aberrant house was oval in plan (Newell and Krieger,
1949). These houses are twenty-one to fifty feet in diameter, with
most post molds falling within a range of four to seven inches. The
later phase 2 houses are almost all square or rounded square, ranging
in size from 24 by 24 to 37 by 37 feet with three- to five-inch post
molds. No centerpost holes were found in fifteen of the twenty-six
first phase houses; all phase 2 houses had centerposts except House
35 which seems to have been a very specialized structure.

CADDOA:N HOUSE

FORMS

~9

%
e

!
Entrance
$

1

!

#@oD@@@$ o@d"$°~

Half Section

Half Elevation

Fig. 2. Caddoan area house form, Gibson Phase 2.

Houses at Spiro, Oklahoma, may be summarized as follows (Orr,
1946) :
Early Component--square with four centerposts
Middle Component--rectangular with four centerposts
Late Component--rectangular with two centerposts

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The Belcher Mound presents an interesting sequence (C. H. Webb,
1959). Of the two houses attributed to the Belcher I period, one was
rounded-rectangular with four- to six-inch posts set in trenches and
had an extended entranceway; the other was small, circular without
post trenches. Webb places this period in the late Gibson Aspect. Belcher II houses were small, circular, with three- to five-inch posts set
individually. Belcher III, which Webb states may conceivably have
existed until 1650, had circular houses thirty to forty feet in diameter
with seven- to eight-inch posts, large center post molds and extended
entranceways.

Analysis o] Evidence
Unfortunately, not all site reports give as much information on the
house forms found as do the Davis, Belcher, and Adena reports; many,
in fact, are so vague in this respect that they could not be used in this
paper. However, certain patterns can be discerned in what has been
presented above. Most obvious, perhaps, is the fact that all of the earliest houses (Tchefuncte, Early Adena, Gibson Phase 1 ) are circular in
plan with diameters close to thirty feet. They are found under mounds.
Associated post molds are set vertically, are six inches or less in diameter, and there is no apparent relationship between size of house
and size of post. Indeed, some of the largest houses have the smallest
post molds. C. H. Webb (1959: 61) has made a similar observation:
"South and west of the Red River, the earliest structures in the Gibson
period, represented by premound patterns at Davis, Hatchel, and Keith
sites, were circular, usually large, without projecting entranceway or
organized roof supports .... Centerposts were used at times .... "
Rectangular houses appear later at Adena and Gibson sites. Spiro,
which began in mid-Gibson times, apparently had this form from its
beginning, with occasional intrusions of round forms very similar to
those at Davis site. Centerposts of the Adena type appear at Spiro in
the early phases but by Late Component times this pattern had been
abandoned. Only two centerposts were used in this period.
It appears that the rectangular form was never adopted with enthusiasm below the Red River. This form never appears at some sites
in this area, and at others is more often than not only partially a rectangular form in that the corners are usually rounded. House plan
forms became round again in the Fulton Aspect, but the extended
entranceway which had accompanied the rectangular intrusion into
the area was retained, only to fade away after Belcher III-IV. Fulton

CADDOAN HOUSE FORMS

41

¢B

Q

@
o

e

G.P.
eBtoo~
e
0
D

Half Section

Half Elevation

Fig. 3. Caddoan area house form, Fulton Aspect.

42

TEXA~ ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

circular houses were usually smaller than earlier houses of this form,
but post sizes apparently remained fairly constant. Circular houses became quite large again in the Belcher III-IV period, and post sizes
apparently became significantly larger.
Historic references to houses in the Caddoan area give plan diameters up to sixty feet (Joutel, 1879) and heights of forty to fifty feet
(Douay: in Shea, 1852). These sources are perhaps not entirely accurate, yet they suggest quite large structures. No mention is made
of entranceways, other than doors, by any of the early writers.
It seems, therefore, that the following sequence obtained in the
Caddoan area and that this sequence was related to similar occurrences in other areas.
I. Earliest houses through Gibson Phase 1 (Fig. 1)
a) fairly large circular plan
b) uniformly small posts set vertically
c) centerpost sometimes present
d) no extended entranceway
II. Gibson Phase 2 (Fig. 2)
a) large rounded rectangular plan
b) usually small posts set vertically
c) centerpost usually present
d) extended entranceways
III. Fulton Aspect (Fig. 3)
a) small circular plan
b) uniformly small posts set vertically
c) centerpost present
d) extended entranceway
IV. Protohistoric-Historic (Fig. 4)
a) large circular plan
b) uniformly large posts set vertically
c) centerpost always present
d) extended entranceway present early, then disappears.
The exceptions to this are Spiro, in the northern part of the area being
considered, where rectangular forms are present throughout the occupation, and the southwestern section of Arkansas (Harrington. 1920),
where both forms seem to be present in about equal numbers. This
area is apparently a meeting ground for the two forms (Webb, 1959).
There is no need to suppose that the early houses were constructed
in the same manner as were those of historical reference. I think the
evidence I have presented gives good reason to believe that they were
not. Figure 5 illustrates the obviouslarger beehive structures require
longer poles than do smaller ones and, therefore, the lower part of the

43

CADDOA~- HOUSE FORMS

o

o

o

o

0

0

0

o

6’
0

0

0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0

)Centernost

0

0

o

0
0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0
0
0

0
0

Half Section

Fig.

4.

0

Half Elevation

Caddoan area house form, Protohistorlc-Historlc period.

TEXANS AtACHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tree trunks used (the part which leaves its mark as a post mold) in
larger houses must necessarily be in a size range which is generally
larger than that of smaller houses. Many structures of the early period
were of such size that, if the bent-pole construction of historic times
were used, trees forty to fifty feet tall would have to be used. The lower
trunk diameter of these trees would certainly exceed the less than sixinch diameter of post molds common to archaeological sites of this
period. I feel, therefore, that these early houses (Fig. 1) were constructed of vertical posts set into the ground and extending to a height
perhaps as little as four to five feet, or as great as ten feet above the
floor. These posts were secured by horizontal poles at their tops which,
in turn, supported a roof of poles leaned and lashed together to form
a pitched roof. Centerposts may have been used to support these roof
poles until they were securely interconnected. Roofs were probably
thatched and walls were probably wattle-and-daub. That no wall material of this type has been found with houses of this period offers no
serious objection to this hypothesis. Few early houses show evidence
of burning (therefore, no fired wall material can be expected) and
many floor areas were apparently carefully cleaned before the area
was reused.
Phase 2 houses (Fig. 2) were probably built the same way, except
that rectanguloid plans and extended entranceways were adopted.
The Fulton period saw a return to the circular pattern (Fig. 3), but
houses were frequently smaller than before. The building methods of
the previous periods were probably retained in some cases, but it is
likely that Caddoan bent-pole construction was used for the smaller
houses whose archaeological remains consistently include centerposts. Davis (1958: £8) suggests that the shallow depth of one postmold pattern atop the primary mound at the Whelan Site may indicate a type of construction different from Caddoan bent-pole. This
suggests the coexistence of vertical wall, pitched roof buildings and
bent-pole types and may indicate that the latter form was first used
for common, non-mound buildings. Theran’s map (Bolton, !915) of
a Cadodacho settlement near Texarkana in 1691 tends to support this.
The complete thatching of such a building could have been carried
over into all building forms during this period.
The Protohistoric-Historic phase probably saw the full development of Caddoan bent-pole construction (Fig. 4) described by the
early French and Spaniards. The large postmolds common to this
period (e.g., Belcher IV) suggest that this is so.

0

o

Diame~’er

of

House

(Feet)

30

40

50

60

Fig. 5. Relation of pole length to house height and diameter in Caddoan area houses.
Pole length is the height of tree required to supply the post for the house. Ten feet have
been added to the length actually needed to allow for unusable portions at top and bottom
of tree and for the two-to-three feet set into ground.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Relationship to Other Areas
I have previously shown that there appear to be some basic similarities in the house forms found in Tchefuncte, Early Adena, and Gibson Phase 1 sites. I feel that these similarities are not simply fortuitous
but, rather, that they indicate some sort of contact between these areas
at an early time and that this contact continued

perhaps with dif-

ferent centers of origin at least until protohistoric times. Phillips,
Ford, and Griffin (1951:451 ) state, in summarizing their findings in
the Mississippi Alluvial Valley, that they are "certain that the center
for development is not in the Survey Area at all. In fact, we are becoming increasingly doubtful that a single center for this development
exists anywhere." This can be extended to include the Caddoan area.
The question, then, is: what was the nature of this contact and from
whence came the house form ideas which it carried?
Griffin (ibid.) suggests that strong Meso-American influences were
felt in the Cahokia area through the Gibson Aspect in East Texas, bypassing the Lower Mississippi Alluvial Valley, and subsequently
diffusing down the Mississippi from Cahokia. There certainly seems
to be grounds for assuming Mexican influences in early Texas. MacNeish (1947) lists forty-two trait similarities between the Huasteca
an d Gibson Aspect. Ekholm (1944) and MacNeish (1954) have found
mounds in the Huasteca with suggestions of circular buildings similar
to those found in the earlier periods with which this paper is concerned. Ekholm suggests that these structures are the earliest round
forms in Mexico and that the trait diffused from that area. Both authors date these finds as contemporary with the Pre-Classic of the
Maya. Orr (1952: 249) is of the opinion that the Southern Cult material appears to be earlier in the Caddoan area than it is in the east.
It seems, then, that the possibility of the circular house form entering
Texas from the Huasteca and radiating into the Adena and Tchefuncte
areas is not too remote to be considered. The Gibson Aspect as now

known probably post-dates this early contact, but may be a part of its
later phases.
~vVilley (1955: 44) shows that some very interesting connections
between North. Meso, and South America existed from very early
times and suggests an interrelated rise of high cultures in Mexico and
Peru. with a major period of exchange beginning circa 800 B.C. It is
not entirely unreasonable to postulate a similar interrelationship between Mexico and the remarkably developed Adena culture at the
same time. or perhaps a bit later, and perhaps a part of the same move-

CADDOAN

47

HOUSE FORMS

ment. After all, the Adena people had corn, and that, if nothing else,
must have come from south of the United States.
Why this contact took place is beyond the scope of this paper to
establish, but some speculation might be useful here. Evangelism
does not seem to offer an answer; a group of teleconcerned priests
sitting in Mexico awaiting the excruciatingly slow news from Ohio
hardly seems likely. Military conquest seems unlikely; from the information we have there was nothing to conquer, and trade also seems
unlikely for the same reason. A migration of peoples seems to be the
best answer. It is perhaps worth considering that while such things
as pottery, corn, art forms, and tools can be spread by trade among
peoples without writing, a house must be built by someone familiar
with its construction.
The rectangular form undoubtedly stems from the north where it
is a very old established form. It is known from the earliest defined
Eskimo cultures of Alaska, and appears throughout the northern area.
Bennett (1952) describes the early houses of the northern Mississippi
Valley as mainly rectangular, made of wattle-and-daub, and bark.
The form may have diffused clown the Mississippi Valley until it met
the round form from Mexico. Bennett (1944: 21) describes the most
striking characteristic of the Lewis Culture located at the mouth of the
Ohio River as "a mingling of Southeastern and more typically Northern Cultures." Rectangular houses are attributed to this culture (Phillips, Ford, and Griffin, 1951: 445).
The sequence that emerges is this. A circular house form accompanies an early migration from Mexico to the Mississippi-Ohio Valley
region and becomes established as the dominant form. A rectangular
form enters the area from the north at a later date--probably also
carried by a migration of minor dimensions and exerts some influence, but becomes the dominant form in limited areas only (e.g.,
Spiro and later Middle Mississippi cultures). Over a period of time
these forms undergo local change and such forms as the Adena pairedpost outward slanting style and the Caddoan bent-pole style emerge.

Re]erences Cited
Bennett, John W.
1944. Archaeological Horizons in the Southern Illinois Region. American Antiquity, Vol. 10, No. 1, pp. 12-22.
1952. The Prehistory of the Northern Mississippi Valley. In: Griffin, 1952, pp.
108-123.

48

TEX2~S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Bolton, Herbert E.
1914.

Athanase

de

M~zi6res

and

the

Louisiana-Texas

Frontier,

1768-1780.

Cleveland.
1915.

Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century. The University of California
Publications in History, Vol: 3.

Davis, E. Mott
1958.

The Whelan Site, A Late Caddoan Component in the Ferrell’s Bridge
Reservoir, Northeastern Texas. Report submitted to the National Park
Service. On file at Santa Fe, New Mexico, and Austin, Texas.

Ekholm, Gordon F.
1944.

Excavations at Tampico and Panuco in the Huasteca, Mexico. Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of Natural History, Vol. 38,
Part 5.

Ford, James A., and George I. Quimby, Jr.
1945.

The Tchefuncte Culture, An Early Occupation of the Lower Mississippi
Valley. Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, No. 2.

Griffin, James B.
1952.

Archaeology of Eastern United States. Chicago.

Harrington, M. R.
1920.

Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas. Indian Notes and Monographs, Museum
of the American Indian, Heye Foundation, No. 10.

Hatcher, Mattie Austin
1927.

Descriptions of the Tejas or Asinai Indians, 1691-1722. The Southwestern
Historical Quarterly, Vol. 31, pp. 150-180.

Joutel, Henri
1879.

Relation. In:

Margry, Pierre, Recherche des Bouches du Mississippi et

Voyage a Travers le Continent depuis les C6tes du Texas jusqu’a Quebec,
1669-98. Paris.
1906.

Journal of La Salle’s Last Voyage, 1684-87. Albany.

MacNeish, Richard S.
1947.

A Preliminary Report on Coastal Tamaulipas, Mexico. American An-

1954.

An Early Archaeological Site near Panuco, Vera Cruz. Transactions of

tiquity, Vol. 13, No. 1, pp. 1-15.
the American Philosophical Society, Vol. 44, Part 5.
Newell, H. Perry, and Alex D. Krieger
1949.

....

The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, No. 5.

Orr, Kenn2th G.
1946.

The Archaeological Situation at Spiro Oklahoma: A Preliminary Report.
American Antiquity, Vol. 11, No. 4, pp. 228-256.

1952.

Survey of Caddoan Area Archeology. In: Griffin, 1952, pp. 239-255.

Phillips, Philip, James A. Ford, and James B. Griffin
1951.

Archaeological Survey in the Lower Mississippi Alluvial Valley, 19401947.

Papers of the Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and

Ethnology, Harvard University, Vol. 25.

49

CADDOAN HOUS:E FORMS

Shea, John Gilmary
1852. Discovery and Exploration of the Mississippi. New York.
Swanton, John It.
1942. Source Material on the History and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 132.
Vgebb, Clarence H.
1959.

The Belcher Mound: A Stratified Caddoan Site in Caddo Parish, Louisiana.
Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, No. 16.

IYebb, ~William S., and Raymond S. Baby
1957. The Adena People, No. 2. Columbus.
Webb, William S., and C. E. Snow
1945. The Adena People. University of Kentucky Reports in Anthropology
and Archaeology, Vol. ’6.
Willey, Gordon R.
1955. The Interrelated Rise of the Native Cultures of Middle and South America.
In: New Interpretations of Aboriginal American Culture History: 75th
Anniversary Volume, Anthropological Society of Washington, pp. 28-45.

University of Arizona
Tucson, Arizona

The Limerick Site at Iron Bridge Reservoir,
Rains County, Texas1
LATHEL F.

DUFFIELD

Introduction
ABOUT 50 miles east of Dallas, Texas, on the Sabine River is the site
of Iron Bridge Dam and Reservoir, now under construction by the
Sabine River Authority. This, the first dam on the main stream of the
Sabine, will flood lands located in Hunt, Rains, and Van Zandt counties, Texas. Its primary purpose is to provide a supplementary water
supply for Dallas and other nearby cities.
A preliminary archeological survey of the Iron Bridge area was
carried out in April, 1957, by the National Park Service (Johnson,
1957). Of the 22 sites located during the survey, 10 appear to be
Archaic or non-ceramic sites and 10 are ceramic sites. The nature of
the other two sites has not been determined. In his report of the survey, Johnson (1957) recommended that four of the sites be excavated
or extensively tested.
Under a co6perative agreement with the National Park Service, a
field party of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project was sent to
Iron Bridge early in August, 1958, to begin the recommended salvage
excavations. Three sites, all situated on the east bank of Hooker Creek
near its mouth, were selected for investigation. These are the Limerick
Site (41RA8), a small but relatively rich ceramic site of the prehistoric
period; the Harkey Site (41RAIl), also a small prehistoric ceramic
site; and the Pearson Site (41RA5), thought to be the location of a vili The archeological investigation of the Limerick Site was carried out by the
Texas Archeological Salvage Project as a coSperative project of the National~Park
Service and The University of Texas. The following report was accepted by the
National Park Service in September, 1959, in partial fulfillment of the terms of
Contract No. 14-10-333-422 between The University of Texas and the National
Park Service.

~2

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

lage of Tawakoni and Yscanis Indians mentioned in 18th century
Spanish documents (Johnson and Jelks, 1958).
Brief testing at the Harkey Site produced practically no cultural
material; consequently, it was decided that intensive excavation of
the site was unwarranted. An attempt to sink test pits at the Pearson
Site proved impractical since the black gumbo soil there was dry, extremely compact, and virtually impenetrable at that season of the
year. Therefore, excavation of the Pearson Site was rescheduled for
the fall of 1959 when field conditions should be at an optimum.
With the Harkey and Pearson Sites eliminated from consideration,
the full season at Iron Bridge--from August 4 to September 1--was
devoted to work at the Limerick Site. The site was not completely excavated, but a number of squares and short trenches were dug in the
four major areas of concentrated cultural material, and it is believed
that a representative sample of archeological data was obtained for
the site as a whole. The excavations were supervised in the field by the
writer under the general direction of Edward B. Jelks.
The following report describes the Limerick Site, the extent of the
excavations, the artifacts recovered, and the provenience of the
artifacts. Analysis of the data has revealed that the site was occupied
over a considerable period of time, first by pre-ceramic peoples of the
Archaic Stage and later by a Neo-American culture closely related to
the Sanders Focus.

Acknowledgments
From its inception to the final report, this investigation has been
aided by the coSperation of many individuals and organizations. While
it is impossible to give specific acknowledgment to all, their coSperation and participation are greatly appreciated. For those who more
frequently were burdened with the problems which constantly arose,
special mention is due.
The assistance of various officials of the Sabine Biver Authority was
invaluable. They granted permission to dig on land under their jurisdiction, gave access to aerial photographs and maps of the area, and
did many favors, both large and small, for which they receive my
deepest appreciation. Members of the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project gave much time, service, and advice to the study. Chief among
these was Edward B. Jelks, in charge of the project, whose aid in the
way of suggestions, discussions and encouragement in all phases of
the study has been especially helpful. Lel~oy Johnson, Jr., provided unpublished information regarding related sites in the Iron Bridge area

LIMERICK SITE

53

that has been of great value. My thanks also extend to William A.
Davis, field foreman, whose supervisory ability and technical skill
contributed substantially to the successful completion of the dig.

PreviOus IVork in the Area
The absence of published material on the archeology of the area
immediately surrounding the Iron Bridge Reservoir does not reflect a
lack of previous excavations in the area. The Yarbrough Site, located
near Grand Saline, about twenty miles southeast of the Limerick Site,
was completely excavated by a University of Texas-Works Progress
Administration crew in 1940, but no report of this work has been
published. This site yielded a large sample of artifacts which are very
similar to those from the Limerick Site (LeRoy Johnson, Jr., personal
communication}.
Major excavations to the north and west of the Iron Bridge Reservoir
have been published. Krieger (1946) defined the Henrietta Focus,
with the type site, the M. D. Harrell Site, in Young County approximately 160 miles to the west of the Iron Bridge area. In the same publication he described the Sanders Focus, with the type site, the r. M.
Sanders Site, located in Lamar County, about 65 miles to the north
of the Limerick Site. Bell (1958a) reported the Boat Dock Site in Marshall County, Oklahoma, northwest of the reservoir. Stephenson
(1952) defined the Wylie Focus with sites located in Collin, Rockwall,
and Kaufman counties immediately to the west of the Limerick Site,
while Crook and Harris (1952, 1954) defined the Carrolhon and Elam
loci, sites of which are located primarily along the upper Trinity
I~iver in Dallas County. Suhm, Krieger and/[elks (1954: 74-98) presented a summary of the general area.
Major reports of work to the east of the reservoir area have been
published. Krieger (1946) discussed pottery found in various East
Texas foci of the Gibson and Fulton Aspects. Newell and Krieger
(i 949) reported on the Davis mound of the Gibson Aspect in Cherokee
County to the southeast of Iron Bridge Reservoir. Tentative identification of an East Texas Aspect of the Archaic Stage was published by
Suhm, Krieger, and/[elks (1954:148-151 ).

Environment
Cowleach Fork and Cedar Creek, with their headwaters respectively
in Collin and Fannin Counties, Texas, join in Hunt County to form

54

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the Sabine River. Hooker Creek, on which the Limerick Site is located, empties into the Sabine in Rains County. The Sabine from its
origin flows in a wide arc across eastern Texas and eventually empties
into the Gulf of Mexico. The waters begin their flow in a southeasterly
direction, then gradually trend toward a more southerly direction as
they progress downstream. From the southeast corner of Panola
County, Texas, to its mouth the Sabine forms the boundary between
Texas and Louisiana, and from Panola County to the Gulf of Mexico
its course is generally southward Along its headwaters, where the
Iron Bridge Reservoir is under construction, the Sabine is a small
stream with a broad floodplain composed for the most part of arable,
black gumbo soil. Gullies of various sizes dissect the land. and aerial
photographs of the area show scars left by gullies which were incised
in the floodplain and later filled by alluviation. At the outer edge of
the floodplain the ground rises slowly to form !ow, rolling hills which
provide a border for the floodplain and create the characteristic upland
topography of the area.
The Iron Bridge region is included in the West Gulf Coastal Plain
physiographic province of Fenneman (1938) and in the Gulf Coastal
Plain of Atwood (1940). In general, the Gulf Coastal Plain is characterized by Atwood as follows:
Low ridges parallel the coast line in Alabama, Mississippi and Texas,
and each ridge is bordered on the landward side by a lowland belt. (Atwood, 1940: 25)

The Limerick Site lies just within the eastern edge of the Black
Prairie district, one of the lowland belts which is bordered on the
southeast by the Nacogdoches Escarpment and on the northwest by
the White Rock Escarpment (Fermeman, 1938: Fig. 27).
The rolling hills bordering the floodplains of Hooker Creek and the
Sabine River are covered with prairie grasses and, in some areas, deciduous trees. The grasses and trees are characteristic of the Texan
Biotic Province of Dice (1943: 24"1. within which the Limerick Site is
located. Dice describes the Texan Biotic Province as follows:
Gently rolling plains are characteristic of all the Texan. Forests of oak and
hickory often grow on sandy soils here, whereas the heavier soils are
usually covered by prairie.
The prairies of the Texan province are dominated by various grasses

. .

Perennial flowering plants are also abundant. The trees of the province
are chiefly oaks and hickories of which the most important are post oak

55

LIMERICK SITE

(Quercus stellata), black jack oak (Q. marilandica), and Texas hickory
( Carya buckleyi).
The winters are short and relatively mild, the summers, long and hot. The
precipitation is considerable and falls mostly during the !ong growing
season (Dice, 1943: 24).

The geology in the vicinity of the Limerick Site is complicated by
the fact that there are two outcrops of the Midway group in that part
of Rains County. One outcrop, the Kincaid formation, underlies the
second, the Wills Point formation (Sellards, Adkins, and Plummer
(1932: 532, Fig. 32). According to Sellards, Adkins, and Plummer
( 1932: 546) the soils of the Kincaid formation are
¯ . . yellowish green at the base and grade upward into black at the surface .... They are yellower, darker, and more calcareous than the Wills
Point .... Small black nodules streaked with gray lines characterize certain parts of the Kincaid beds and do not occur in adjacent beds.

Concerning the Wills Point formation they state,
The soils of the Wills Point formation are lighter in color, more silty,
much less calcareous, and less colloidal than those of the Kincaid . . . outcrops. (Sellards, Adkins, Plummer, 1932: 564.)
The profile data from the Limerick Site indicate that the soil in the
upper areas was a dark gray, sandy soil which overlay a light gray
sandy soil. The latter was mottled with light gray and/or whitish sand.
Generally, a sandy clay, yellowish in color and containing small dark
orangish and gray nodules, underlay the grayish soils.
A comparison of the characteristic soils of the Kincaid formation
and Wills Point formation with soil profile data from the Limerick
Site suggests that the site is probably situated on the Kincaid formation of the Lower Eocene. This identification is tentative and a detailed analysis of the soils in the vicinity would be required for positive
identification of the formation.

Description o/the Site
The Limerick Site is located on the floodplain of Hooker Creek,
about 2.5 miles above its point of juncture with the Sabine River and
about 8.5 miles south of the town of Lone Oak, Texas (Fig. 1 ). The site
was named for the landowner, Mrs. Adine Limerick. Formerly trees
characteristic of the bottom lands grew on the site, but in the 1920’s

56

TEXANS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the land was cleared and put into cultivation except for a small area
consisting of two small knolls connected by a low saddle. In 1955,
the trees on the knolls were cleared and the entire field was used for
farming.
IRON BRIDGE

COUNTY

COUNTY
~L~

Fig. 1. Iron Bridge Reservoir. The Limerick site is designated 4 1 RA8.

The site is large, and cultural debris is found on the surface over
an area of approximately 75 acres on and around the knolls. There
are, however, several distinct locations within the site where the cultural materials are concentrated. These areas of concentration constitute a distinctive feature of the site.
The two main areas of concentration are on the two adjacent knolls.
The knolls are in the form of slightly irregular ovals with gradually
sloping sides. In the fields surrounding these knolls are many grayish
or tan-brown sandy spots, irregular in shape and size, which contrast
distinctly with the surrounding black gumbo soil of the floodplain.
Cultural debris is concentrated in and on these sandy areas, but the
black gumbo soil between the sandy spots is virtually devoid of
cultural remains.
Since the cultural materials were concentrated in areas and had a
discontinuous distribution, various portions of the site were given
letter designations. Thus A and B were assigned to the two knolls, and
C and D were assigned to two of the larger sandy areas located to the
southwest of the knolls (Fig. 2). All of the test excavations at the
Limerick Site were carried out in those four areas.

57

LIMERICK SITE

©

©

j~

13
0

O

%

0

%
0

._o

C~

w

o

¯

9
°-

c,i
~r

58

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Soil profiles of the site reveal a superficial zone of gray, humusstained sand overlying a zone of yellowish, sandy clay. The top few
inches of the sand member has been disturbed by plowing. In the
lower part of the humus zone the soil tends to be mixed with clay from
the underlying zone and is relatively compact. The clay member is
very compact and contains many small, dark, orangish nodules. The
black gumbo was encountered occasionally below the surface at the
edges of the areas of occupation. Occupational debris tended to be in
the plow and humus zones, but was generally absent in the clay and
gumbo soils.

Excavation and Recording Methods
A grid system using a basic unit of five-foot squares was superimposed on the site. In order to keep the major part of the site within
the western half of the grid, a zero line or base line, oriented on magnetic north and south, was laid out on the east side of the site. An
arbitrary datum point on this line was designated as the north zero
west zero (N0-W0) point. All stakes were numbered with a north or
south designation expressed as the direction and distance (in feet)
from the zero stake. For example: a point 150 feet north of the
N0-W0 stake and 25 feet west of the north-south base line was designated as N150-W25. Test squares were labeled with the co6rdinates
of the stake located at the southeast corner of the square. All elevations were related to the N0-W0 datum point, which was given an
arbitrary elevation of 100.0 feet at the top of the stake.
Areas A, B, C, and D were tested by sinking five-foot squares
spaced at varying intervals. Profiles were recorded at each square
excavated and these were later combined to obtain an overall profile.
In recording profiles, the elevation at the ground level of the stakes
involved was used in plotting the surface contour on the profile sheet
and this line served as a reference line.
In order to gain quick comprehension of the subsurface structure
of the site as a whole, a post hole digger was used to determine soil
stratigraphy. Surface elevation and profile data were recorded for
each hole excavated in this manner. Use of the post hole data enabled
the profiles to be extended horizontally as well as vertically and also
helped in locating areas where there seemed to be the greatest chance
for cultural stratigraphy.
In order to obtain a representative sample of materials from the
site, a series of exploratory five-foot squares was dug in each of the

LIMERICK SITE

59

tested areas, no extensive trenching being attempted. When a test pit
indicated that possible features might lie in an adjoining square, it
was excavated also. If the material found in a test pit suggested that it
was in an area of concentration, adjoining squares were opened. Test
pits were excavated either to the underlying sandy subsoil or to soil
which was sterile of cultural remains. Since the testing in Area B
promised to provide the best stratigraphic sequence at the site, the
majority of the work was conducted in that area,
Generally, excavations were by six-inch levels; however, in some
cases three-inch levels were used in order to gain a closer stratigraphic
control. Occasionally levels of less than six inches were used when the
bottom level of the soil containing cultural debris rested on extra hard
sterile clay. The topmost level, from ground surface to one-half foot
below the ground surface, was designated as level one; from one-half
foot to one foot below ground surface, level two, etc.
Excavations were carried out by a crew of six men including the
field archeologist. All dirt was shoveled from the test pits onto a halfinch mesh screen. The dirt was sifted and the cultural debris removed
and sacked. On each sack were recorded the site number and name,
square designation, level number, distance below the surface, date,
and excavations. In addition to the artifact provenience, field data
were recorded in the form of photographic records, daily log, site
journal, square and level reports, profiles, contour maps, and maps
showing areas of excavation. The excavations carried out in each of
the areas are described in detail in the following sections.

Arti[act Description
A total of 853 artifacts was recovered from the excavations at the
Limerick Site. Sherds comprise slightly more than half of this total
and chipped stone specimens make up the rest. Most of the specimens
were concentrated in Areas A and B where nearly all the sherds
were found.
The specimens were first sorted according to the areas in which
they were found. They then were divided into two classes--chipped
stone and ceramic. These classes were further subdivided into groups
--projectile points, scrapers, knives, drills, etc.--and in many cases
these groups were further subdivided into still smaller categories.
After the final sorting into sma!l groups--each group containing only
those specimens which closely resembled one another in form indi-

6o

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

vidual groups were identified with previously defined types wherever
possible.
After the division of the specimens into classes, the criteria progressively became more arbitrary with each further subdivision. As a
result, if other investigators should classify the same material separately by this system, the end groups would probably be somewhat
different from those resulting from the present analysis. This approach to classification of artifacts from a site attempts to minimize
the use of previously established type descriptions in the initial sorting. There are several interrelated reasons for this.
(1) An analysis based on published descriptions assumes that the
types are valid, an assumption which is not always well founded.
Many types have been established, published, and later revised or
completely dropped. As a result, the validity of any analysis based on
~reconceived types would be dependent upon the continued acceptance of those types.
(2) An overdependence on previously established types in the
initial sorting may result in an initial "pigeonholing" of a group of
artifacts which actually has significant variations of form within the
group; in such a case the variations might not be recognized because
the typological classification used was based on other criteria.
(3) Since the Archaic Stage in East Texas has only been tentatively defined, specific artifact forms associated with the stage are
vaguely known. Rather than impose a preconceived typology on an
undefined culture complex, it was considered better methodology to
sort the artifacts into small groups of closely related specimens, and to
avoid typological assignment of any such group unless it conformed
in detail to published definitions of a recognized type.
One artifact "type" which had been affected by "pigeonholing"
analysis is the Gary dart point. Recently Gary has been redefined on
the basis of variations within the group, and sub-groups or varieties
have been described by several investigators. Baerreis, Freeman, and
Wright (1958) have divided Gary points from sites in Oklahoma into
three varieties, Gary A, B, and C, and have demonstrated that these
varieties indicate temporal changes within the type. Ford and Webb
(1956: 59_,-53) in refining the Gary classification, classified Gary
points from the Poverty Point Site as Gary Typical, Gary Small,
Gary Large, and Gary Long. A special study made by Webb using
length as a criterion, suggested that Gary points in Louisiana decrease
in size from early to late archeological horizons (Ford and Webb,
1956: 53-54).

LIMERICK

SITE

6i

PROJECTILE POINTS

On the basis of size and manufacturing techniques, projectile points
recovered in the excavations at the Limerick Site were divided into
two groups--dart points and arrow points. The dart points, which are
generally larger than the arrow points, were made primarily by
percussion chipping or by a combination of percussion and pressure
techniques. The arrow points were made by pressure chipping. The
usual practice in making arrow points was to shape them from small
thin flakes, while dart points were manufactured predominantly from
thicker flakes or small cores.
Using these criteria as a basis, the points were divided into the two
groups~ using only those specimens which were whole or complete
enough to enable them to be further subdivided. A total of 152 specimens was placed in the dart point group, while 80 specimens were
classified as arrow points. For the most part, only those artifacts found
during the excavation are included in the analysis, since those recovered by the initial survey were not designated according to the area of
the site in which they were found.
Each group was then further subdivided on the basis of similarity
of base, stem, and/or blade forms. Since only a small number of the
points fit well into previously defined typological categories, the
points will be described in the following pages on the basis of shape
and will be given letter and number designations for convenience in
reference. For dart points, the letter "D" is assigned and for arrow
points, the letter "A" is used. When a shape is the same as that of an
established type, this will be noted. The term "shape" is used to
describe an empirical grouping based on the overall appearance and
dimensions of the points. Groupings of this nature are intended to be
purely descriptive categories and are not on the same level as types.
Dart Points

Dart points were first classified by stem shape. The majority have
contracting stems characteristic, in a general way, of the Gary type.
This group, however, lacks internal consistency, and clusters of points
with consistent, distinctive features could be segregated within this
general category. These clusters were described as individual subgroups of the general Gary tradition.
The criteria used in segregating the subgroups were based on
similarities of (1) the point as a whole, (2) similarity of the component parts and (3) their relationships. Characteristics of the point

62

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

as a whole include overall shape, size, workmanship, etc., while the
component parts and their relationships include the shapes of the
edges of the blade, shape of base and stem, and the proportions and
dimensions of various parts of the point.
Of the 28 categories of dart points, five were assigned previously
defined type names, while the others were designated by the letter
"D" followed by a number designation for each separate category. For
the first 15 categories the letter "D" is preceded by "Gary", indicating
that each of the categories fits into the Gary tradition. The following
dart point forms are included as part of the Gary series.

Gary D1 (Fig. 3), 62 specimens, from all areas of the site.
LeRoy Johnson, Jr., when conducting the site survey of the Iron
Bridge Reservoir. recognized this form as being a distinctive one and
described it as follows:

This type includes points similar to the Gary type except that they are
much smaller than allowed in the definition of Gary points by Suhm,
Krieger, and Jelks (less than 4 centimeters m length), yet are too thick
and heavy to be considered arrow points. These artifacts likewise resemble
Wells points strongly in that the stem is often half the length of the entire point. Here again, however, these points fall below the defined length
range for Wells points (Johnson, 1957: 7).

The average point of this shape is about 3.2 cm. long, 1.7 cm. wide.
and has a stem length of 1.2 cm. The length may vary from about 1.9
to 5.0 cm., while the maximum width at the shoulders ranges from
1.2 to 2.3 cm. Stem length varies from .8 to 1.7 cm. Generally this
form has well defined shoulders and a tapering stem characteristic of
the Gary type. Some have tapering stems which terminate in a flat
base, others have somewhat bulb-shaped stems with a slightly rounded
base, while others have tapering stems with pointed bases. It is not
known whether these variations in the base and stem are culturally
significant or merely a result of minor variations in the stone and/or
workmanship. Similar forms were found in Wylie Focus sites (Stephenson, 1952: Fig. 95, A, second and third from the left) and at the
Boat Dock Site in Marshall County, Oklahoma (Bell, 1958a: P1. 1 t. E).
The proportions of these points are different from the Gary Small
group as illustrated in the Poverty Point report (Ford and ~¥ebb,
1956: Fig. 17, n, o, p).

Fig. 3. Gary D1 dart points from the Limerick site.

64

TEXANS A!RCI-IEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Gary D2 (Fig. 4, A-E). 11 specimens, from Areas A, B, and C.
This Gary form has a triangular blade with edges that are generally
straight but may be concave or convex. The stem contracts to a
rounded or, occasionally, a pointed base. The shoulders are prominent.
The dimensions of this form vary considerably--the length ranging
from 3.9 to 5.5 cm., the width varying from 2.1 to 3.4 cm., and the
stem length measuring from .9 to 1.7 cm. The majority have stems
which are about 1.35 cm. long. This form appears to be the same as
Gary variant A of Baerreis, Freeman and Wright (1958); however,
the Limerick Site specimens are generally smaller than the ones
reported from Oklahoma. Specimens of this form have been found in
the Addicks Basin about 20 miles west of Houston (Wheat, 1953:

pl. 36, j).
Gary D3 (Fig. 4, F-H). 10 specimens, from Areas B and C.
The stem on this form, which is broader than that of Gary D2,
tapers gradually to a roundedbase. Pointed bases do not occur in this
form. The shoulders are usually slight but distinct, although on some
specimens the shoulders merge with the stem. The blade is triangular
with more or less straight edges. The length of the Gary D3 points is
between 4.3 and 4.7 cm. with the width of the majority ranging from
1.8 to 2.2 cm. The length of the stem varies from 1.2 to 1.7 cm. While
this form resembles the Gary B variant of Baerreis, Freeman and
Wright (1958), it is generally smaller than those defined as Gary B.
Similar points have been found in Wylie Focus sites (Stephenson,
1952; Fig: 95, A, fifth from left), in the Addicks Basin (Wheat, 1953:
P1. 36, b, f, g,) and at the Boat Dock Site (Bell, 1958a: PI. 11, F).
Gary D4 (Fig. 4, I-J). 6 specimens, from Areas A and C.
These points have triangular blades with straight to slightly convex
edges; the bases are rounded to pointed and the stems are relatively
broad and short (average length 1.5 cm.) on all except two of the
specimens. The pointed bases occur on those specimens which have
the narrow stems. This group as a whole seems to be consistent on
the basis of size (overall length ranges from 4.1 to 5 cm., and the
average width is 5 cm.) and crude chipping techniques. They resemble points found at Addicks Basin (Wheat, 1955: P1. 56, a, c, k, 1,
m) and at the Boat Dock Site (Bell, 1958a: P1. i 1, A).
Gary D5 (Fig. 5, A-B). 15 specimens~ from all areas.
This form is distinctive, although there is considerable variation
within the sample. In general, the entire point is an elongated oval

LIMERICK SITE

Fi9. 4. Gary dar~ forms from the Limerick site. D2: A-E; D3: F-H; D4: ~-J.

65

66

TEXA,S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

shape with an average length of 4.0 am. Some of the specimens are
widened in the shoulder area. creating a lozenge shape. The average
width of this form at the shoulders is 2.2 am. The stems are tapering
and are not distinctly differentiated from the blades except on those
specimens with widened shoulder areas. On this form the stem tapers
sharply and terminates in a rounded base, which is also one of the
characteristics of the form. Gary D5 resembles in general shape, but
definitely not in size. the Gary C variety as defined by Baerreis.
Freeman and Wright (1958: 69). It also has certain characteristics in
common with the Desmuke point (Suhm, Krieger. and Jelks, 1954:
416) but differs from Desmuke in that the edges of the blade are
commonly convex rather than straight and the blade is never beveled.

Gary D6 (Fig. 5, C-D). 7 specimens, all from Area C.
This form includes a series of small (2.8 to 3.7 cm. long) dart
points with triangular blades and well-defined shoulders, The stem
varies from a narrow, slightly tapering shape to one having parallel
sides. The base is straight, slightly rounded, or convex. These may be
variations of the small Gary Di form, but they have narrower stems.
This form is similar to the Wells type (Suhm, Krieger, and :[elks.
1954: 488) but is much smaller. Similar points have been found at the
Whelan Site in Marion County, Texas (Davis, 1958: P1. III, A,

29,20).
Gary D7 (Fig. 5, E). 2 specimens, both from Area C.
Gary D7 closely resembles Gary D6 except that this form has
barbed shoulders, These points are about 3.3 cm. long and 2.3 cm.
wide.
Gary D8 (Fig. 5, F). 3 specimens, all from Area B.
The Gary D8 form has a long, tapering stem which terminates in
a pointed base, and has well-defined shoulders on a basically triangular blade. The one complete specimen is 4.1 cm. long, 2.3 cm.
wide and has a stem length of 1.6 cm. The general shape is the same
as that of points associated with Wylie Focus sites to the west of the
Iron Bridge Reservoir (Stephenson. 1952: Fig. 95, A, second from
right and first from left).
Gary D9 (Fig. 5, G). 3 specimens, all from Area A.
These points have relatively long, narrow blades and slightly protruding shoulders. Overall length ranges from 4.8 to 5.0 cm. and the

LIMERICK SITE

Fig. 5. Gary dart point forms from the Limerick site.

67

Gary DS: A-B; Gary D6: C-D;

Gary D7: E; Gary D8: F; Gary Dg: G; Gary D10: H; Gary Dl1: I; Gary D12: J; Gary"
D13: K; Gary D14: L; Gary D15: M.

68

TEXA,S

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

width varies from 1.7 to 1.9 cm. The long, narrow stem tapers slightly
and terminates in a round or straight base.
Gary DIO (Fig. 5, H). 1 specimen, from Area A.
An asymmetrically shaped blade and a long stem give this point a
distinctive appearance. The shoulders are prominent (2.7 cm. wide)
and the base is rounded. This point resembles Gary D6 and Gary D7,
differing from them in the relatively long stem (1.9 cm.), the total
length (5.9 cm. ), and the long, asymmetrical blade.
Gary Dll (Fig. 5, I). 1 specimen, from Area B.
The short, stubby blade of this specimen suggests that it may be a
reworked Gary. Only one shoulder is present, and the width in the
shoulder area is 2.4 cm. The tapering stem, which terminates in a
convex base, is much longer than the blade, comprising about twothirds of the length of the entire point. The total length of the point is
3.1 cm.
Gary DI2 (Fig. 5, J). 1 specimen from Area B.
This form has a short, pointed stem and recurved edges on the
blade. The point is 4.0 cm. long and the prominent shoulders are 2.2
cm. wide.
Gary D13 (Fig. 5, K). 1 specimen, from Area C.
The narrow, slightly tapering stem of this specimen terminates in
a rounded base. The prominent shoulders (2,8 cm. wide) are slightly
barbed. Most of the blade is missing, but the remaining portion suggests the original blade was triangular with straight edges.
Gary D14 (Fig. 5, L). 1 specimen, from Area C.
This point, which features a tapering stem and rounded base, appears to be a reworked Gary. The well defined shoulders measure
1.8 cm. across. The total length of the point is 4.2 cm. This specimen
may have been used as a drill.
Gary D15 (Fig. 5, M). 1 specimen, from Area C.
This point has a crudely chipped, irregular shaped blade. The edges
of the blade grade imperceptibly into a tapering stem, no definite
shoulders being present. The length of the point is 5.2 cm. and the
width is 2.1 cm. The base on this form is slightly pointed.
The following dart point forms are either unstemmed or have stems
which differ from the Gary contracting stem series.

LIMERICt~ SITE

69

D16 (Fig. 6, A). 1 specimen, from Area A.
This point, 4.4 cm. long and 1.4 cm. wide, has a long, narrow blade
with straight edges. The stem is undifferentiated from the blade on one
lateral edge of the point, and on the other edge a small notch located
a short distance above the rounded base sets the stem area apart from
the blade. The base is rounded. The point, in some characteristics, resembles the form defined as Palmillas (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks,
1954: P1. !10).
D17 (Fig. 6, B). 1 specimen, from Area A.
This form is triangular with slightly convex sides and a straight
base. It is 4.3 cm. long and the maximum width is 2.6 cm. This specimen could possibly be classified as a triangular knife.
D18 (Fig. 6, C). 1 specimen, from Area A.
The surviving portion of this fragmentary specimen suggests that
it had a triangular blade with straight edges. The prominent shoulders are 5.1 cm. wide and have very slight barbs. The stem expands
and the base is slightly rounded.
Di9 (Fig. 6, D). 1 specimen, from Area A.
This relatively long point (6.5 cm.) has one straight and one slightly
convex side. The shoulders, while well defined, are 2.3 cm. wide--only
slightly wider than the stem, which expands slightly. The base is convex. Similar points have been reported from the Boat Dock Site (Bell,
1958a: P1. 11, H-J).
D20 (Fig. 6, E). 1 specimen, from Area B.
The short, stubby blade has strongly convex edges, the basic blade
shape being that of a short, broad leaf. No shoulders are indicated. Side
notches create a stem area which is quite short and widely expanded
so that the base (2.2 cm. in width) is wider than the maximum width
of the blade. The base is concave. The length of the point is 2.7 cm.
This form is reminiscent of the Ensor type as defined by Suhm,
Krieger, and Jelks (1954: 422, P1.90).
D21 (Fig. 6, F). 1 specimen, from Area B.
The blade is triangular with straight edges. The shoulders are.
prominent and the parallel-sided stem terminates in a slightly convex
base. The point is 4.7 cm. long, and 2.2 cm. wide.
D22 (Fig. 6, I). 1 specimen, from Area B.
This stemless, asymmetrical point has one strongly concave edge
and one edge which is slightly convex. The length of the point is 4.7

7o

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig. 6. Dart points from the Limerick site that lack contracting stems. D16: A;
D18:

C; D19: D; D20: E; D21: F; Trinity point: G;

point: K; Edgewood point: L; Yarbrough point: M.

Elam point: H; D22:

I;

D17: B;

D23: J;

Ellis

LIMERICK SITE

71

cm. and the width is 1.7 cm. The base is rounded. This specimen
slightly resembles certain forms recovered from the Boat Dock Site
(Bell, 1958a: P1. 11, O, P).
D23 (Fig. 6, J). 1 specimen, from Area C.
The original shape of this point is difficult to determine since it is
badly fire pitted and cracked. The portion of the point recovered suggests that it had a short, slightly expanding stem with a straight base.
The blade was long with slightly convex edges.
Elam point (Fig. 6, H). 1 specimen, from Area C.
The short, stubby blade and the wide stem give this specimen a distinctive shape. The length is 2.8 cm. and the width 2.1 cm. The edges
of the blade are convex and the shoulders are only slightly differentiated. The sides of the stem are parallel and the base is straight. This
specimen is made of fossil wood and part of the outer patina of the
original core i~ present. Similar points are illustrated and described
as the Elam type--a diagnostic of the Elam Focus, Trinity Aspect-by Crook and Harris (1952: P1.4, No. 27).
Ellis point (Fig. 6, K). 1 specimen, from Area A.
The blade of this point, while basically triangular, has slightly convex edges. The shoulders, which are 2.2 cm. wide, are barbed and the
expanding stem terminates in a straight base. The length of the point
is 3.5 cm. Ellis is one of the more common dart point types found at
the Davis Site, Alto Focus (Newell and Krieger, 1949:166, Table 18),
and has also been reported as a minor type in the Behon Reservoir on
the Leon River (Miller and Jelks, 1952:172).
Trinity points (Fig. 6, G). 6 specimens from Areas B and C.
Most specimens of this type are made of fossil wood. Each has side
notches in the blade which set off the stem area. The notches vary in
depth within the group. The stem is short and expands just above the
base, which is commonly convex but in some instances is fiat. The point
of juncture between the base and the stem is rounded, forming "ears."
The length of these points ranges from 2.8 to 4.9 cm. with the majority
being approximately 3.8 cm. long. The width varies from 1.7 to 2.0
cm., and averages about 1.9 cm. The width of Trinity points as de,
fined by Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954: 484) varies from 2.0 to 2.5
cm. Since the modal width of the Trinity points from the Limerick
Site is 1.9 cm., the Limerick sample indicates a slightly narrower
form. In Area C they occurred principally in the lower levels. Points
of this type are illustrated by Crook and Harris (1952: P1. 1, Nos. 17,
18; also P1.4, Nos. 2, 3, 4).

72

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Yarbrough point (Fig. 6, M). 1 specimen, from Area A.
This point seems to be an average example of the Yarbrough type.
The overall length is 5 cm.~ the maximum width is 2.3 cm. and the
stem length is 1.5 cm. The triangular blade has slightly convex edges.
Concave side notches iust above the base define the stem area which
flares out to terminate in a faintly concave base. This point, although
made of local reddish quartzite, has been finely chipped.

Edgewood point (Fig. 6, L). 1 specimen, from the surface of Area D.
This point has a length of 4.4 cm. and a width of 2.3 cm. The triangular blade has the right edge beveled on both faces. The shoulders
are barbed and the stem expands so that the width across the base is
equal to the width across the shoulders. The base is slightly concave.
Arrow Points

The arrow points from the Limerick Site were diversified and no
one form dominated the arrow point category as the small Gary forms
did the dart point category. Furthermore, only a few of the forms
could be identified with previously established types. Some arrow
points had some characteristics in common with established types but
did not fit the type descriptions completely and consequently were
not given type names.
The classification method employed on the Limerick Site artifacts
tends to minimize the "lumping" effect that often results from the
more direct typology approach. One arrow point type which has been
affected by "lumping" in typological analysis is the Alba type. Some
publications illustrate arrow points identified as Alba, but which differ
considerably from the original type description in total length, in stem
length, in base-stem form and in barb-shoulder form. Some variation in
total length is to be expected, but according to the definition (Newell
and Krieger, 1949: 161) the stem length is ¼ to ¼ the total length of
the point. In this context, the overall length is of considerable importance. In one case an arrow point with a stem 1/13 as long as the tota!
length of the point was identified as an Alba point (Wheat, 1953: P1.
35, a). Variation in the base-stem form is to be expected also, but some
series of "Alba" points have parallel-sided stems, widely expanded
stems, and bulb-shaped stems--all in one series. The parallel side and
bulb-shaped stem forms conform to the definition of Alba as it was described (Newell and Krieger, 1949: 161) and as it was subsequently
revised (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954: 494; Bell, 1958b: 8). Never
was the form described as having widely expanding stems. These forms

termed "Alba" are probably a consistent group within the sites in
which they were found, and certain arrow points in the group may
conform to the definition of the Alba type. Generally, however, it is
not known whether the arrow points which are of the standard Alba
types are the dominant forms in the group or if they represent variants of the group and serve only to give it a name. These discrepancies
and inconsistencies in the use of the term "Alba" indicate a need for
further refinement of the term and/or a more discreet application of
the term.
In the process of classification, the arrow points were divided into
two groups--those with expanding stems and those with non-expanding stems. The following arrow point forms can be included in the expanding stem tradition.
A1 (Fig. 7, A). 5 specimens, from Areas A and B.
The distinguishing feature of this shape is a strongly expanding
stem with a slightly convex base. The shoulders are well defined but
not sharply barbed, and the triangular blade has slightly convex
edges. These points average about 2 cm. long and !.3 cm. wide, while
the stem length is frequently .4 cm. Similar points from the Addicks
Basin were identified as the Sca!lorn type* by Wheat (!953: P1. 34,
q, r), and others from the Hogge Bridge Site were classified as Alba
by Stephenson (1952: Fig. 95, e, second from the right).
A2 (Fig. 7, B). 3 specimens, from Areas A, B, and C.
Expanding stems with slightly convex bases and barbed shoulders
are the characteristic feature of this form. The blades are triangular
and have slightly concave to slightly convex edges. Since the tips of all
three specimens are broken, their length can not be determined~ but
the width is about 2.2 cm. and the stems are all about .6 cm. long. Similar forms at the Addicks Basin have been called Eddy Stemmed
(Wheat~ 1953: P1.34, w and x).
A3 (Fig. 7, C). 1 specimen, from Area A.
The single specimen of form A3 has a triangular blade with one
well-defined shoulder~ the other evidently having been broken off. The
short narrow stem expands very slightly and the base is straight. The
width of this point is about 1.7 cm. and the length is 2.5 cm. This form
is possibly a variant of the Alba type.
A4 (Fig. 7, D-E). 8 specimens, from all areas.
This form has a triangular blade with concave edges and barbed
* Spelled "Scalhorn" by Wheat.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL

Fig. 7. Arrow point forms from the Limerick site. Form AI: A; A2: B; A3: C;
AS: F; A6: G; A7: H-K; A8: L-N; A9: O; A10: P; A1 I:Q; A12: R,

SOCIETY

A4: D-E;

LI~IERICK SITE

75

shoulders. The short expanding stem tends to have a straight base,
although on some specimens the base is slightly convex. The average
dimensions of this form are 2.0 cm. long and 1.6 cm. wide, with a stem
that averages .4 cm. long.
A5 (Fig. 7, F). 2 specimens, from Area B.
These two specimens have serrated, recurred edges, and prominent
shoulders. The stems are short and expanding and have slightly convex bases. The length of the one complete specimen is 3.4 cm., and the
width is about 2 cm. The stem length is about .4 cm. Points with recurved edges that resemble this shape have been found in Wylie Focus
sites (Stephenson, 1952: Fig. 95, g, third from right).
A6 (Fig. 7, G). i specimen, from Area B.
This point is 2.2 cm. long and has a triangular blade with serrated,
concave edges. The shoulders are 1.5 cm. wide and are barbed. The
stem expands and has a rounded base. This form, while reminiscent
of the bulb-shaped stem or rounded stem variety of Alba, has a shorter
stem.
A7 (Fig. 7, H-K). 11 specimens, from all areas.
The characteristic trait of this form is the very short, broad stem
which in some cases is barely differentiated from the blade. The shoulders tend to be wide (average width !.7 cm.) in relation to the overall length (average 2.1 cm.) of the point. The edges of the basically
triangular blade are slightly concave to slightly convex. Generally
these points are made from thin flakes with the chipping confined to
the edges.
A8 (Fig. 7, L-N). 3 specimens, all from Area A.
These small points (1.5 to 2.0 cm. long) are characterized by unusually wide shoulders (1.4 to 1.8 cm.), so that the width of the blade
is as great or nearly as great as the length of the point. The short stem,
which is parallel sided to slightly tapering, terminates in a slightly
convex base. Similar forms have been typed as Alba in the Wylie Focus
(Stephenson, 1952; Fig. 95, e, first from left).
A9 (Fig. 7, 0). 2 specimens, from Areas A and B.
The tapering stem of this form strongly resembles the stem shape
of the Gary dart point. Both specimens have concave blade edges and
prominent shoulders. The base of each has been broken off but the
major part of the stem remains in each case. The dimensions of this
form are approximately 2.8 cm. long by 1.6 cm. wide.
AIO (Fig. 7, P). 1 specimen, from Area C.
The triangular blade has slightly concave edges and is laterally

76

TEXA,S AI/CHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

barbed. The contracting stem is very short and the base is pointed. The
length of this point is 2.3 cm. and the width is 1.6 cm. Points of this
general shape have been described under the type name of Cliffton
(Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954: P1. 127, d, first from left) and also as
Perdiz (Wheat, 1953: P1.34, k, 1).
Al! (Fig. 7, Q). 3 specimens, from Areas A, B, and C.
The blades of these specimens have convex edges and the shoulders, which protrude at right angles to the blade, are prominent. One
shoulder on each of the specimens is lower than the other, and the
short, rounded stem has a convex base. The average size of this point
form is 2.4 cm. long and 1.7 cm. wide, with a stem length of .5 cm.
AI2 (Figl 7, t/). 1 specimen, from Area A.
This point, which is 2.3 cm. long and 1.1 cm. wide, has a blade with
concave edges. The shoulders, which are well defined, appear to have
had sharp barbs that have been broken off. The stem is bulb-shaped
and has a well rounded base. Possibly this form could be included in
the Alba type.
A13 (Fig. 8, A). 1 specimen, from Area C.
The triangular blade with serrated edges has barbed shoulders, the
base is rounded, and the stem is short: This specimen is 2.7 cm. long.
Points similar to this have been reported from Addicks Basin and typed
as Alba by Wheat (1953: P1. 35, c, d).
A14 (Fig. 8, B). 1 specimen, from Area C.
The stem on this point is short and has a rounded base. The shoulders are barbed and are 1.6 cm. wide. The portion of the blade which
remains suggests that the edges were serrated.
A15 (Fig. 8, C). 1 specimen, from Area B.
This stemless specimen is 1.8 cm. long and is roughly leaf-shaped
with a fiat base. The point is 1.5 cm. wide. It resembles somewhat the
Young type (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954: P1. 134); however, it
differs from that type in that it falls below the defined dimensions for
Young.

A16 (Fig. 8, D). 2 specimens, from Areas A and C.
This form is a stemless triangular point which is 2.4 cm. long and
1.6 cm. wide. It has a concave base.
A!7 (Fig. 8, E-F). 3 specimens, all from Area B.
These stemless points have triangular blades with slightly concave

Fig. 8. Arrowpoints (A-G, L-R) and drills (H-K) from
A13: A; A14: B: A15: C: A16: D; A17: E-F; A18: G;
Drill

Ill

form:

K;

arrow

point form A19:

poln:: O; Alba points: P-R.

L;

the Limerick si~e. Arrowpoln? form
Drill | forms: H-I;

Perdiz point:

M;

Bonham

Drillll form: J;

point:

N;

Clifftort

78

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

edges or, in one case, convex edges. The bases are slightly convex. The
average dimensions are 2.0 cm. long by 1.3 cm. wide. This form is
similar to some found in Wylie Focus sites (Stephenson, 1952: Fig. 95,
c, second from right).
A18 (Fig. 8, G). 1 specimen, from Area C.
Although the stem is missing this point is included in the analysis
because of its distinctive blade form which has serrated, recurved
edges and prominent shoulders. The width of this specimen is 1.8 cm.,
and the length is 2.0 cm. This blade, while similar in outline to arrow
point form A5, varies from it in size.

A19 (Fig. 8, L). 1 specimen, from the surface of Area A.
This stemless point which is 3.1 am. long and 1.8 cm. wide has a
triangular blade with one concave and one convex edge. The base is
slightly convex. This specimen may be an aberrant form of the Fresno
type (Suhm, Krieger, and/[elks, 1954: 498, P1. 128}.
Alba points (Fig. 8, P-R). 7 specimens, from Areas B, C, and D.
The stems of these specimens have an average length of .44 cm. and
have parallel sides with straight bases. The shoulders, with an average
width of 1.3 cm.. are prominent and frequently barbed. The blade
lengths vary within the group and are basically triangular in shape
with slightly concave edges. Most of the specimens have serrated blade
edges. The average length of the points is 2 cm. These points as a group
are consistently smaller than the average form of the Alba type
(Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954: 494) and, in addition, have serrated
blade edges. Points of this form have been found in Wylie Focus sites
(Stephenson, 1952: Fig. 95, E, second and seventh from the left); at
Addicks Basin (Wheat, 1953: P1.35, e, g) ; at the Davis Site, Cherokee
County (Newell and Krieger, 1949: Fig. 56, d and h) ; in sites at Belton Reservoir (Miller and Jelks, 1952: P1. 25, No. 2. second and third
from right) ; and at the Blum Rockshelter, (Jelks, 1953: P1. 19, g, h).
Bonham points (Fig. 8, N). 4 specimens, from Area B.
This form, with an average length of 2.55 cm., has a triangular
blade with straight to slightly concave edges. The shoulders are barbed
(average width 1.36 cm.) and the stems relatively elongated (average length .7 cm.). There is a slightly expanded area in the stem about
halfway between the base and the blade. The base is rounded or
slightly pointed. Points of this type were found at the Sanders Site in
Lamar County (Krieger, 1946: 185, P!. 22, e).

LIMERICK SITE

79

Cliffton points (Fig. 8, O). 2 specimens, both from Area B.
These two points are only slightly more than modified flakes. One
specimen exhibits flaking on only one face; the other is flaked on both
faces. The points are crude in appearance, but basically they have a
short, tapering stem with a rounded base and a triangular-shaped
blade. Both specimens are about 2.2 cm. long and 1.6 cm. wide. Points
similar to these were found at the I-Iarrell Site in Young County (Krieger, 19 6: Fig. 7, r, s) and at the Belton Reservoir on the Leon River
(Miller and ffelks, 1952: P1.24, No. 3, first on left).
Perdiz points (Fig. 8, M). 3 specimens, from Area A and B.
The narrow, pointed stem of this form is a characteristic trait. The
blade has a relatively elongated, triangular shape with prominent
shoulders. The length of the one complete specimen is 2.8 cm. and the
average width is 1.4 cm. The average stem length is .5 cm., which is
in the lower limits defined for the Perdiz type (Suhm, Krieger and
Jelks, 1954: 504). The Limerick specimens have some characteristics
of both the Perdiz and Bonham types; however, they seem to be closer
to Perdiz. Similar points were found at the Boat Dock SiLe (Bell, 1958a:
P1. 12, U) and in the Addicks Basin (Wheat, 1953: P1. 34, e, g, i).

MISCELLANEOUS CHIPPED STONE ARTIFACTS

Knives
The term knife as used herein refers to an implement which appears
to have been used for cutting purposes, the blade of which is worked
on both faces. A knife form shows some tendency toward a definite,
elongated shape. Several knife varieties were found at the Limerick
Site. These forms are designated with Roman numerals to facilitate
reference.
Kmfe I (Fig. 9, C-D). 4 specimens, from Areas A and B.
These specimens, which vary from 4.7 to 6.9 cm. long, have convex
bases and triangular blades with slightly convex edges.
Knife H (Fig. 9, A). 6 specimens, from Areas A and B.
These knives are triangular and quite similar in shape to Knife I.
However, smaller flake scars and better workmanship are apparent in
the manufacture of this form: In addition, they are smaller and range
in length from 3.8 to 5.2 cm. These could be classified as projectile
points.

80

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig. 9. Knives, gouges, and a pecking pebble from the Limerick site. Knife I forms: C-D;
Knife II form: A; Knife III form: B; Gouge I form: F; Gouge II form: G; pecking pebble: E.

Knife III (Fig. 9, B). 1 specimen, from Area B.
This specimen is a thick implement with a tapering stem and a
rounded, almost pointed base. It resembles a heavy, crude, Gary type
dart point. It is 5.7 cm. long.
Knife IV (Fig. 10, K). 5 specimens, from Area C.
This knife form has a rounded base and an elongated blade with
convex edges which taper to a rotmded point. It is thin and lenticular
in cross section and small flakes were removed in its manufacture. The
complete specimens of this knife form range in length from 3.1 to 4.1
cm., but the broken ones suggest that some may be slightly longer.
Corner-tang Kl~ife (Fig. 10, L). i specimen, from Area B.
This corner-tang knife is basically a triangular form with one corner worked to form a stem or a "tang." It was fashioned from a thin

LIMERICK SITE

81

flake by delicate flaking around the edges, the major portion of both
faces being unflaked. The knife is 5 cm. long. The stone is a pale brown
chert which appears to be foreign to the Iron Bridge area.
Scrapers
In this classification the term "scraper" refers to those implements
which are basically piano-convex and are chipped on one or both faces.
Thus the term is strictly denotative and does not necessarily bear any
functional connotation. Using this definition as a basis, the scrapers
from the Limerick Site may be separated into several form groups.
Scraper I (Fig. 10, A-B). 7 specimens, from Areas A, B, and C.
This form is characterized by its oval to circular shape, with flakes
removed all around the edges from one face. Scrapers of this form have
been found in the YVylie Focus (Stephenson, 1952: Fig. 96, a, Nos.
12-15) and in Addicks Basin (Wheat, 1953: P1. 42, d, e).
Scraper II (Fig. 10, C). 1 specimen, from Area B.
This form of scraper is made from a thick flake, one edge of which
has been worked. In longitudinal cross section the top and bottom are
fiat and the top curves down to form the working edge of the implement. The flakes removed from the working edge are smaller than the
other flakes used in shaping the tool. Similar scrapers have been illustrated for the Trinity Aspect (Crook and Harris, 1952: P1. 2, Nos.

s-5).
Scraper III (Fig. 10, D, F). 29 specimens, from Areas A, B, and C.
These specimens are made from irregular-shaped flakes. Generally
only one edge of the flake was worked but occasionally more than one
edge shows evidence of working.
Scraper IV (Fig. 10, E, G). 2 specimens, from Area B.
This small scraper form is roughly ova! in shape and is made from
a thin flake. One face of the scraper is the unmodified flake scar. All
edges have been worked.
Scraper V (Fig. 10, H-J). 8 specimens, from Areas C and D.
These scrapers, while basically triangular in shape, have strongly
convex edges and base. The blade has one relatively flat face and the
other often exhibits some of the core patina.
Biracial Implements
The characteristic feature of the biface is that it has been worked on
both faces and any edge of the tool could have been used for cutting

82

TEXANS AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig. 10. Scrapers and knives from the Limerick site. Scraper I forms: A-B; Scraper II form:
C; Scraper Ill forms: D, F; Scraper IV forms: E, G;
K; corner-tang knife: L.

Scraper V

forms:

I-t-J; KnKe iV form:

LIMERICK SITE

83

and/or scraping. They generally are lenticular in longitudinal and
lateral cross section and they tend to be thicker than most of the other
artifacts which are bifacially chipped. The form varies sufficiently
so that three categories may be used in describing them.
Biface I (Fig. 11, A-B). 47 specimens, from Areas B, C, and D with a
heavy concentration in Area C:
These relatively small artifacts vary from roughly circular to oval
in outline. In longitudinal and lateral cross section they generally
have a thin lenticular shape. Basically the flaking is of the crude
percussion type, but many have small flake scars resulting from pressure chipping. Some of these specimens closely resemble implements
categorized as Scraper V, the difference between Biface I and Scraper
V being the scraper has one face unmodified. Some of the biface specimens, although both faces have been worked, have one relatively fiat
face. Similar artifacts have been found in the Wylie Focus (Stephenson, 1953: Fig. 96, Nos. 2, 4, 6, 7) and in the Trinity Aspect (Crook
and Harris, 1952: Pl. 2, Nos. 12, 13, 15; also P1.5, Nos. 4~9).
Biface II (Fig. 11, C-H). 15 specimens, from Areas A and C.
This form is represented by miscellaneous cores which have been
chipped on both faces. They tend to be elongated and worked on all
edges.

Bi[ace Ili (Fig. 11, I). 3 specimens, all from Area A.
These specimens, larger than the other bifaces, were manufactured
by the removal of flakes from all edges of a pebble. On some areas of
the specimen patches of the original patina remain. The flake scars
are large and irregular, suggesting that the flakes were removed by a
percussion method. Two of the implements are roughly circular in
shape, but the third has a rounded base and edges which taper to form
a rounded point.
Drills
An artifact was classified as a drill when one portion was either
noticeably longer and narrower than the rest of the implement and/or
had indications of wear which could have resulted from use as a drill.
No ensiform, T-shaped, or reworked projectile point drills were found.
Three different forms of drills were recognized.

Drill I (Fig. 8, H-I). 2 specimens, both from Area A.
This form consists of a narrow, needle-shaped blade with a base

84

Fig.

TEXAS AttCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

11. Biface forms from the Limerick site. Biface I forms: A-B; Biface II forms: C-H;

Biface III form: I.

LIMERICK SITE

85

which is an unmodified portion of a flake. Drills of this form were
found in Addicks Basin (Wheat, 1953: P!. 44, c).
Drill II (Fig. 8, J). 4 specimens, from Areas B and C.
This drill shape has a narrow blade and--in contrast to Drill I--a
rounded base which has been chipped to shape. This form has been
found at the Boat Dock Site (Bell, 1958a: P1. 12, k) and in Wylie
Focus sites (Stephenson, 1952: Fig. 95, h, first and third from left,
second and third from right).
Drill III (Fig. 8, K). 1 specimen, from Area B.
While this form does not show evidence of having been made intentionally for use as a drill, it does appear to have been used for that
purpose. Just above the point of the blade are two slight indentations
where very small flakes have been removed or knocked off in use.
Similar drills have been found in Addicks Basin (Wheat, 1953: P1.
44, e, f) and at the Boat Dock Site (Bell, 1958a: P1. 12, n).
Gouges
Gouges are probably specialized forms of scrapers. Those recovered
from the Limerick Site are oblong or roughly triangular with a cutting
edge at the broader end. The blade at the broad end has one relatively
steep side sloping to the leading or cutting edge of the tool. Generally
one face of the implement tends to be flatter than the other. The four
gouges found at the Limerick Site can be divided into two groups.
’Gouge I (Fig. 9, F). 3 specimens, from Areas A, C, and D.
This form is small and made of quartzite or petrified wood. The
working edge is either concave or straight and the sides taper to a
pointed end. These forms have been reported from Wylie Focus sites
(Stephenson, 1952: Fig. 96, A, 17), the Boat Dock Site (Bell, 1958a:
P1. 12, c, d), and Trinity Aspect sites (Crook and Harris, 1952: P1. 2,
Nos. 7, 10).
Gouge II (Fig. 9, G). 1 specimen, from Area A.
The gouge II form is an elongated implement made of ferruginous
sandstone with the convex working edge at one end. The edges of the
blade are relatively smooth. The shape and materials suggest that this
:specimen was made from a sandstone concretion. Ferruginous sandstone gouges have been found at the Yarbrough Site (LeRoy Johnson,
Jr., personal communication) and also have been reported from
Archaic sites on the upper Trinity River (E. B. Jelks, personal corn-

TEX2.S AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

munication). This form has been included as a trait of the tentative
East Texas Aspect (Suhm, Krieger. and Jelks. 1954: 150).
PECKED Oil GIIOUND STONE ARTIFACTS

Pecking Pebbles
Three specimens, from Areas B. C, and D. (Fig. 9. E). These are
stream pebbles which were utilized without preliminary modification.
Use marks are present on one or more sides of the stone.
HalTtlnerstol2es

Four specimens, from Areas A and B Hammerstones are larger
than pecking pebbles and are cobbles which have been utilized without previous modification. Usage is indicated by marks or battered
areas on various portions of the stone.
Hand Stone

Two specimens, both from Area B. These fragments indicate
that two forms of the hand stone were known to the people at the Limerick Site. One fragment has a squared end and the other specimen has
a rounded end. Both specimens have small fire cracks on the surface.
Grinding Slab
One specimen, from Area C. This quartzite conglomerate fragment
has one smooth side and possibly is part of a grinding slab.
Pitted Stone

One specimen, from Area B. (Fig. 12). This piece of laminated
sandstone is pitted on both sides. The pits appear to have been pecked
into the surface of the stone. They are located directly opposite each
other and, had they been slightly deeper, would have penetrated the
stone.
Pottery
A total of 1095 sherds, including the 516 found on the initial survey,
was recovered at the Limerick Site. The sherds found on the preliminary survey of the site are not included in the present analysis since
the area in which they were found is not known. They are, however,
essentially the same as those recovered from the excavations; there-

Fig. 12. Pitted stone from the Limerick site.

88

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

fore they are useful in complementing the analysis of the excavated
material.
While 155 decorated sherds were found, only 57 of them have a
known provenience. The decorative techniques consist of incising, engraving, red filming, trailing, punctating and appliqueing. Some of
the sherds found on the surface have trailing or broad line incising.
Most of the incised and engraved wares were identified as Sanders
Focus types Canton Incised and Sanders Engraved (Fig. 13). Some
engraved sherds, because of their small size, could not be included in
these categories with certainty; however, they probably are of these
same types.
Sanders Plain (Fig. 13, D). 520 sherds.
The plain wares recovered are characteristic of type Sanders Plain
(Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954: 350). They have clay-grit tempering, but some sherds are partially or completely tempered with bone.
Wall thickness ranges from .2 to 1.3 cm. ; however, the majority of the
sherds average from .6 to .7 cm. The color varies from buff to brown
or gray° sometimes with a mixture of the latter two. The lips are
rounded and some are slightly flattened. One rim sherd has shallow
notches incised at right angles to the lip. This same sherd also has a
distinctive profile in that it is thickened on the interior of the vessel
by the application of a thin strip of clay. At the lip area this strip
merges with the exterior of the vessel, but the lower face of the clay
stri~ protrudes on the interior and a slnall groove nnder the e3~,e of t}’e
strip is present where it is imperfectly joined with the interior wall.
The resulting rim profile is hook-shaped. Other decoration on the
sherds includes red slipping. Although no complete vessels are present,
the sherds indicate that carinated bowls, bottles, and forms with
slightly out-turned rims (barrel shape.9) are present. Some sherds
indicate tall cylindrical forms which may be "goblets," or possibly the
cylindrical vessel forms characteristic of type Canton Incised.’ Plain
sherds from decorated types could be included easily in this plain
ware category since the pottery characteristics (tempering, surface
finish, etc.) for all the types found at the site are the same, except for
the decorating techniques.

Canton Incised (Fig. 13, A, C, E-G). 37 sherds.
The sherds grouped as Canton Incised have clay-grit temper with
some mixture of crushed bone. The lip of this form tends to be fiat but
in some cases is rounded. The wall thickness ranges from .4 to .8 cm.
The color is predominantly brown with some gray-brown. The ex-

Fig. 13. Pottery from the Limerick site. Canton incised: A(?), C, E-G; finger-nail puncta~ed:
B; sanders Plain rim: D; Sanders type pipe fragments: H (stem), I (bowl).

9°

TEXAS ARCHEOLOOICAL SOCIETY

terior appears to be smoothed better than the interior, although neither
surface is polished. The designs show parallel diagonal lines incised
around the rim. These are incised in the same direction; in alternating
directions; or crossed to form diamond-shaped elements. Some sherds
found on the surface have punctations in conjunction with the incising. The only form indicated by the sherds is a cylindrical vessel.
These pottery characteristics are included in the type Canton Incised
(Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954: 254).
Sanders Engraved. 8 sherds.
The sherds classified as Sanders Engraved are in the minority and.
as in the Canton Incised, only one vessel form is indicated the carihated bowl. The majority of the Sanders Engraved lips are flat. but
some are rounded. The tempering as the same as that present in the
other pottery types at the site-~-clay-grit with a small amount of bone
mixture. The designs are engraved parallel diagonal lines oriented in
the same direction; excised triangular areas; and parallel diagonal
lines oriented in opposite directions. Except for the presence of only
one vessel form and the excised decoration, these sherds are characteristic of the type Sanders Engraved.
Punctated Sherds. 11 sherds.
The punctated sherds are of two types stick punctates and fingernail punctates. These sherds have the same tempering characteristics
as the other sherds from the site. No sherds were found which were
indicative of vessel forms, and the rim sherds show that the lips are
flattened. The punctations are randomly impressed over the surface
of the sherds; no designs are present.
Applique Sherd. 1 sherd.
One sherd was found which had applique in conjunction with stick
punctating. The temper, similar to the other sherds at the site, is claygrit and bone. The surface is smoothed but not polished.
Pipe (Fig. 13, H-I). 2 fragments.
A pipe with a conical clay bowl similar to the elbow pottery pipes
found at the Sanders Site was recovered in Area B of the Limerick Site.
Clay pipe stem fragments were found in Area A and on the surface
of the site. The sherds of the pipe are clay-grit tempered and the undecorated surface is poorly smoothed. The interior of the bowl is blackened and, in small areas, patches of carbonized material adhere to the
inside of the bowl.

LIMERICK SITE

9i

Area A
The knoll, designated as Area A, consists of a low, circular, clay
hill capped by a thin mantle o£ sandy soil. It is approximately 325 feet
in diameter and its highest point stands eight feet aboYe the surrounding floodplain (Fig. 14). Although the flanks of the knoll had much
J

\

\
\

\
LIMERICK SITE
41RA 8
AREAs A AND B
contour interval = 0.S feet
¯ excavated area

scale

Fig. 14.

in

feet

Contour map of a portion of the Limerick slfe, showing Areas A and B.

TEXA,S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

92

cultural debris on the surface, the depth of the soil on the flanks was
very shallow, being six inches or less to the underlying sterile clay. On
top of the knoll the sandy soil was deeper and, consequently, most of
the test pits were confined to the summit of the knoll.
The clay hill (Fig. 15) is probably a remnant of the sandy clay
bedrock left isolated on the Sabine floodplain as a result of erosion.
The origin of the sand on top of this clay knoll is uncertain. Cultural
debris was found throughout the sand and on top of the clay suggesting that the sand was deposited on the knoll during the period of
human occupation. However, the surrounding floodplain is composed
principally of black, stream-deposited gumbo soil, which suggests
that the sand on the knoll is not the result of alluvial deposition. It is
possible that the sand derived by leaching or weathering processes
out of the sandy clay bedrock. But in that case it is difficult to explain
the presence of artifacts throughout the sandy zone. There is no evidence to suggest that the sand was carried in by man.
A total of 18 test pits, with depths varying from 6 inches to two
feet below the surface, was excavated in Area A. Each pit was 5 feet
square. In the majority of the squares two or three six-inch levels were
excavated. The top 5 or 6 inches represented a disturbed p!ow zone
consisting of light gray, sandy soil. Below this, the sandy soil was
darker gray with flecks of charcoal and other occupational detritus.
This zone varied in thickness from 0 to 18 inches but for the most part
was 6 to 8 inches thick. Below this stratum lay a transitional zone
where the dark gray, sandy humus soil of the overlying zone was
mixed with the yellow sandy clay of the underlying bedrock formation. This was a more compact zone than those above it, and it varied
from 0 to 8 inches in thickness. Beneath the transitional zone the yellow clay bedrock formation was encountered. This clay, which contained small orange-colored stains, was sandy but very compact. Cultural material was encountered in all the zones except the bedrock
formation.
The cultural litter on the surface of Area A indicated that it might
have a greater artifact yield than the other areas of the site; however,
the excavations produced few artifacts and no occupational features.

DART POINTS
The majority (79~o) of the dart point forms recovered from Area
A are of the Gary contracting stem tradition. In addition, one Ellis and

93

LIMERICK SITE

one Yarbrough point were recovered in the excavations. The dart
points are concentrated in levels 2 and 3, where 69% of them are
found.

A~ow POINTS
Of the 24 arrow points found in Area A, only one could be identified
as a previously defined type. This was a Perdiz point found in level 1.
The arrow point forms at Area A are quite similar, by and large, to
those found at the other three areas. In general, it can be stated that
the arrow points, in contrast to the dart points, were concentrated in
the upper two levels (Fig. 17, A) with 75% occurring in level 1 and
21% in level 2.
"
TABLE 1
Vertical Distribution of Dart Point Forms in Area A
Forms

Level 1

Level 2

Level 3

(0-6")

(6-12")

( 12M 8")

Gary DI
Gary D2

3
....

6
3

1
1

Gary D4

1

1

1

Gary D5
Gary D9
Gary D10

1
1
1
1

D16
D17

....

D18
D19
Ellis
Yarbrough

....
....
....

Total
Percentages

1
....
2
....
........
........
1

....

1

1
....
1
....
1
....
........

9

17

31%

59%

3
10%

SHERDS

Area A yielded more sherds than any other class of artifacts. When
analyzed according to temper, three main groups are indicated--clay
(sherd?) and clay-grit, bone and clay, and bone tempering. A few
sherds could not be grouped with certainty into any of these categories.
A horizontal distribution analysis of the various groups of tempering
revealed no particular area of concentration for any one group.
Of the 158 sherds recovered, only 9 are rim sherds and 3 are base
sherds. Generally the sherds are ~mall and vessel shapes difficult to
determine. Twenty-two sherds show evidence of decoration including

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL

WSO

W250

W

WLSO

WlO0

SOCIETY

W300

I04

o
[]

Yellow cloy

o

,,

~

Fig. 15. Diagrammatic profiles at the Limerick site, Areas A and B.

TABLE 2
Vertical Distribution of Arrow Point Forms in Area A
Forms
Expanding stem
A1
A3
A4
Non-expanding stem
A7
A8
A9
All
A12
A16
Perdiz
Fragments
Total
Percentages

Level 1

Level 2

1

1

Level 3
....

l
1

........
........

2
1
1
....

1
....
2
....
........
1
....
........
....
........

1
1
1
8
18

75 %

........
1
5
4%
21%

engraving, red filming (both inside and outside), punctating (in conjunction with appliqueing and incising), and incising. The small number and the small size of many of the decorated sherds hinders extensive comment on the designs present. However, more sherds of in-

95

LIMERICK SITE

cised ware with designs which appear to be typical of the type Canton
Incised were found than ally other decorated type. Recognized types
include Sanders Plain, Sanders Engraved, and Canton Incised. In addition to the vessel sherds, a pottery pipe stein fragment was found.
Vertical analysis of the sherd distribution revealed that they were
concentrated in the upper levels of Area A with 86.7% being in the first
level and 12.7% in the second.
MISCELLA1WEOUS

ARTIFACTS

The miscellaneous artifacts--drills, knives, scrapers, bifaces, etc.-had a relatively general vertical distribution, with no indication of significant clustering in either the upper or the lower levels.

TABLE 3
Vertical Distribution of Sherds at Area A
Level 1

Level 2

Level 3

Surface

....
....

80
28

Clay and grit tempered

68

8

Bone and clay tempered

60

7

Bone tempered

7

4

1

Unknown

2

I

....

137

20

1

Totals

12.7%

86.7%

Percentages

TABLE

108

.6%

4

Vertical Distribution of Miscellaneous Artifacts from Area A

Biface III
Gouge I
Gouge II
I-Iammerstones
Knife I
Knife II

Level 2
Level i
1
1
1
....
........
1
1
2
....
2
....

Level 3
Surface
2
1
........
1

....

I
....
1
....
........

1

2

1

6

Scraper III
Scraper V
Biface II
Drill I
Miscellaneous chipped objects

4
....
2
1
12

3

4

2

Total

22

21

13

16

Percentages

39%

38%

23%

....

Scraper I

3

1
1
7

2
3
........
2
....

96

TEXAS A1RCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

PAINT PIGMENTS

During excavation many small fragments of limonite and hematite
were found. Initially these were thought to have been imported into
the area but, as excavation continued, the number and irregular shape
of the fragments suggested that they occurred naturally in the area.
No evidence of their having been used as pigments was recovered in
Area A.
NEGATIVE FEATURES

No artifacts of bone, antler, shell, and polished stone were found in
Area A, nor were there any features such as burials, pits, post molds,
hearths, and other indications of sedentary occupation. The only evidence of a structure was the presence of a few fragments of clay daub
and a baked mud-dauber’s nest.

SUBSISTENCE

A lack of evidence for agricultural activities of the people who occupied Area A of the Limerick Site implies a hunting and gathering
mode of existence. There is, however, a general scarcity of animal
bone, possibly due to poor conditions of preservation. Of the bones
recovered, deer bones were the most abundant, suggesting that the
deer was the chief source of animal food.* In addition to deer bones,
a few raccoon teeth were found, as well as a beaver mandible fragment. The evidence for gathering is even more scarce. No mussel shells
were encountered in this area and only one charred nut (?) was
found.
Discussion

Since there was no well-defined stratigraphic separation of materials
at Area A, a percentage analysis by artificial levels of each major artifact class was undertaken in order to determine any general trends in
vertical distribution that might be present (Fig. 17, A, B, C, D). Graphing these percentages, a summary picture is obtained which indicates
a diminishing incidence of dart points and an increasing incidence of
arrow points and of pottery from the lower to the upper levels (Fig.
18).
; Identification of the animal bones was generously made by Dr. John A. Wilson,
Professor of Geology, The University of Texas.

LIMERICK SITE

97

In the upper level, the materials are representative of the NeoAmerican stage when pottery of types Sanders Plain, Sanders Engraved, and Canton Incised--as well as long-stemmed clay pipes typical of the Sanders Focus--were in use. Other traits characteristic of
the Sanders Focus are absent. As the Sanders Focus has been defined
primarily on the basis of burials, this difference may be partially
reconciled, since the Limerick Site was probably only a temporary
hunting camp used intermittently by a group with Sanders Focus cultural affiliations.
In the lower levels, the large number of dart points as opposed to
arrow points and pottery sherds, indicates an occupation by a group
with Archaic affiliations. The small sample of materials from these
levels prohibits a precise classification.
The few sherds and arrow points in the lower levels of Area A
could possibly be attributed to natural disturbances and/or to the artificial levels used in the excavations. However, criteria on which these
materials could be shown to be intrusive in the lower levels are lacking.

Area B
Area B is an irregularly-shaped knoll, approximately 225 ft. in diameter, situated about 300 ft. northwest of Area A. Between the two
knolls is a low connecting saddle. Topographically Area B has the
same characteristics as Area A, but its point of maximum elevation
is only six feet above the floodplain level as compared to a maximum
elevation of eight feet for Area A (Fig. 14). Structurally, however,
Area B differs from Area A (Fig. 15). It is a low sand hill which appears to rest in a shallow basin in the sandy clay subsoil. From all
indications the knoll is a natural formation, but the geologic origin of
a structure of this nature is uncertain. It is an intriguing problem,
however, considering that cultural debris was found in the lower excavated levels, up to four feet deep. Several feet of sand containing
occupational debris must have accumulated on the knoll subsequent to.
the deposition of the earliest cultural remains.
Twenty test pits, each five feet square, were excavated in this area.
In an attempt to obtain a representative sample and as much information as possible in the short time available for work at the site, the test
pits were spaced at intervals over the entire area (Fig. 14). The deepest levels of the excavation, level 7 or 3.5 to 4.0 feet below the ground
surface, revealed few cultural materials--only one scraper and a few
flint chips. The excavations were terminated at this depth.

98

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The profiles of the knoll (Fig. 15) indicate a lack of natural stratigraphy such as soil lines or other indications of a hiatus in the knoll
formation. The plow zone, in the top 5 or 6 inches of Area B, was a
light gray, sandy soil in which there were numerous grass roots. Below
this lay a dark, sandy, humus soil that contained bone scraps, charcoal
flecks, stone flakes, and other cultural residue. This zone varied in
thickness from .5 to 2.0 feet but averaged about 1.5 feet. Beneath the
dark gray, sandy soil a zone of lighter gray sand, frequently mottled
with a whiter sand, was encountered. Work was stopped when this
zone failed to yield sufficient materials to warrant continued excavadon. The post-hole digger revealed that this zone was about 3 feet
thick, and excavations were generally confined to the upper one foot
of the zone. This light gray sandy soil rested on yellow clay bedrock
that contained orange-colored stains. This clay zone appears to be the
same as that which underlies Area A.
While cultural debris was recovered throughout the knoll, a horizontal distribution analysis of the material revealed two areas of occupation concentration

one on the north side of the knoll and one on

the south side. In comparing the material from these two areas on a
typological basis, no differences were noted. A vertical distribution
study of the materials from the two areas also failed to reveal any differences; therefore, the two areas were lumped as a unit in the final
analysis.
Area B, in contrast to Area A, had little evidence of occupation exposed on the surface. Only 27 sherds, 2 fragments of ochre, 1 worked
stone object, and one scraper of the Scraper II form were found on
the surface.
DART POINTS

Few of the dart points from Area B could be identified with previously defined types. The majority (88 ~o ) of the points have contracting stems and probably are related to the Gary tradition. The dart
points were concentrated in levels three and five, but this does not
necessarily indicate heavier occupation in those two levels because of
the small sample and the possibility of sampling error (Table 5).
Sherds, arrow points, and other artifacts do not indicate a concentradan in any specific level.
ARROW

POINTS

Although four arrow points from Area B were found in the fourth
and fifth levels (1.5 to 2.5 feet below the surface) the big majority

LIMEI~ICK SITE

99
TABLE 5
Vertical Distribution of Dart Points at Area B

Forms
Gary D1
Gary D2
Gary D3
Gary D5
Gary D8
Gary Dll
Gary D12
D20
D21
D22
Trinity
Totals
Percentages

Level 1

Level 2

Level 3

Level 4

Level 5

Level d

4
2
5
1
....
1
3
....
........
2
2
........
3
....
............
1
................
................

2
5
1
....
....
1
1
....
2
....
1
....
1
....
....
1
................
................
1
....
........
1
............
2
....................
6
14%

4

14

4

12

3

9%

33%

9%

28%

7%

were concentrated in the top three levels. Those found below the upper
three levels may be the result of rodent or other disturbances. No definnite stratigraphic differences within the arrow point category could be
determined, but the expanded stem arrow points, in all except one
case, were found in the deeper levels from level two to level five. In
level three they comprise over half the total number recovered.
Whether these differences are meaningful is uncertain since the
sample of arrow points from Area B is small. The overall distribution
of the arrow points, in any case, shows a significant increase from the
lower to the upper levels (Table 6).

SHERDS

As in Area A, sherds were the most abundant of all artifacts recovered in the excavations at Area B. They include types Canton
Incised, Sanders Plain, and Sanders Engraved. In all, 290 sherds were
found, having a vertical distribution as follows: Level 1, 81; Level 2,
95; Level 3, 61; Level 4, 35; Level 5, 13; and Level 6, 5. The small.
number of sherds in Levels 5 and 6 suggest that these may have been
a result of disturbances which resulted in the displacement of the
sherds from higher levels.
Of the 290 sherds, only 31 or 11% were decorated. The decoration
was in the form of slipping, polishing (only on slipped vessels), incising, engraving, and punctating of both the fingernail and stick varieties. Incising was the most popular form of decoration with 17 of

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

lOO

TABLE 6
Vertical Distribution of Arrow Points in Area B

Forms

Level 1

Level 2

Level 3

1

1

Level 4

Level 5

Level 6

~Expanding stem
....

i

....

A1

....

A2
A4
A5
A6

1
............
........
1
....
1
....
........
I
i
............
....
1
....................

Non-expanding stem
A7
A9
All

A.15
A17
A1ba
Bonham
Cliffton
Perfliz

2
1
1

I .............
I
....................
1

................

1
........
............
1
2
................
....
3
2
............
1
........
2
1
....
2
1

....................
1
................

Totals

11

11

Percentages

33%

33%

7
21%

2

2

6%

~%

0
....

the 31 decorated sherds showing incised designs. Most of the designs
consist of cross hatching spaced so as to create large or small diamondshaped elements. These are common on type Canton Incised as described by Krieger (1946: 185-190).
The engraved designs are the same linear cross hatched designs
found on the incised sherds. The work on both the engraving and incising is careless and occasionally "parallel" lines nearly touch.
Three vessel forms are suggested by the sherds found at Area B-bottles (Sanders Plain type), carinated bowls (Sanders Plain type),
and deep bowls with slightly flaring sides (Canton Incised type). The
.one base sherd recovered is of the flat disc form.

MISCELLANEOUS ARTIFACTS

An analysis of the vertical distribution of artifacts other than sherds,
arrow points, and dart points, shows that they were concentrated in
the upper levels (one through four) of Area B, with a scarcity of miscellaneous implements in levels five, six, and seven.

101

LIMERICK SITE

TABLE 7
Vertical Distribution of Miscellaneous Artifacts From Area B
Forms
Knife I
Knife II
Knife III
Corner-tang knife
Scraper I
Scraper II
Scraper III
Scraper IV
Biface I
Drill II
Drill III
Hammerstone
Hand stone frags.
Pecking pebble
Pitted stone
Pitted paintstone
Totals
Percentages

Level I Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 Level 5
....
1
....
1
........
........

1
....
1
I*
1
1
....
............

....
1
....
....
....
1
1
....
1
....
1
1
........
2
3
2
3
....
1
........
................
....
2
........
1
....
l
............
............
............

Level 5 Level 7
2

....

1

1

........

....
I
1
1

6

8

8

8

18%

23%

23%

23%

1

2

I

3%

6%

3%

PAINT PIGMENTS

One hematite specimen was found with indications of use as paint
pigment. It is a thick piece with a pit hollowed out on one side. The
interior of the pit shows evidence of heavy scratching.

NEGATIVE FEATURES

No artifacts of bone, antler, shell, and polished stone were found in
Area B, nor were there burials, pits, post molds, and other evidence
of a sedentary occupation of the area.
Area B failed to produce any evidence of agricultural activities by
the people who occupied the site. The presence of a small amount of
bone and a few mussel shell fragments suggests that the subsistence
pattern of these people was one concerned primarily with hunting and
gathering. Identified bones were mostly of the deer, although several
fragments of opossum and raccoon mandibles were also found.
*Although in level three, this specimen was on the flank of the knoll and next to
the clay subsoil.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

102

DISCUSSION

Area B had a few sherds and arrow points in the lower levels, but
because of extensive disturbance by rodents it appears likely that some
or all of these are intrusive from the upper levels. While the general
trend toward increasing use of pottery and the bow and arrow is
obvious, it cannot be determined with absolute certainty whether or
not the earliest occupants of Area B had one or both of these traits as
minor items of their cultural inventory.
The sequence and trend of events at Area B are basically the same
as those of Area A, but the thickness of the deposit suggests that the
time span at Area B may have been longer. There was a time at Area B
when the people who occupied the area used many dart points and few
if any arrow points or pottery vessels; subsequently, however, the dart
points gradually lost in popularity as pottery and arrow points became
increasingly more popular (Fig. 17, E, F, G, H, and Fig. 18).
Some of the pottery from the upper levels can be typed as Sanders
Plain, Sanders Engraved, and Canton Incised. The clay pipe and clay
pipe stem from these levels are also characteristic of the same pottery
tradition. The presence of these pottery forms suggests that the materials from the upper levels of Area B resulted from a Sanders Focus
occupation, while the materials from the lower levels are representative of peoples of the Archaic Stage.

Area C
Area

C

is a large, flat, sandy area located in the floodplain about

1250 feet south and slightly west of Area B (Fig. 2). This spot is an
"island" of grayish, sandy soil completely surrounded by the black
gumbo soil characteristic of the region. It is oval in shape and on the
southwest edge merges with another sandy area. Area C is approximately 125 feet long and 75 feet wide. The center of the area is approximately one half a foot higher than the edges of the area. The profiles (Fig. 16) show that this sandy soil rests in a shallow depression
in the underlying clay subsoil. Again, as in Areas A and B, the geologic
history and the origin of the sandy soil in Area C is unknown, but as
the sandy fill accumulated in the depression there was intermittent
prehistoric occupation of the spot.
The presence of cultural debris on the surface of Area C, plus the
initial check with a post-hole digger indicating that the deposit had
depth, prompted the excavation at that location.

103

LIMERICK SITE

"*~o

wrl)°

we~

--9e’

"-- ~~;i~l[filllTI]]lllTlflltffl~ffflifrlrilfMfrllrrtrnirlllnlmfm --~
Diagrammatic Profile of Line
=

¯

scale
,,

in feet
,,
,o

S950

[] Gray sandy humus

,,

~]~ Yellow clay

s,~o

Sg~Z5

S975

Diagrammatic Profile of Line W675
scale

in

feet

-o<

[] Gray sandy humus
[]

Yellow clay

.....ff

,,yo

9~,~-- I

¯ ~

S 000

--97’

AREA D
Diagrammatic Profile of Line
scale

LIMERICK SITE,

in

feet

41RA8

$675

[] Gray sandy
[]

Profiles - based on test

humus

Yellow cloy

pits

and post holes

Fig. 16. Diagrammatic profiles at the Limerick site, Areas C and D.

Ten five-foot test squares were excavated (Fig. 2). At those preliminary test squares where cultural debris was heaviest, adjacent
squares were excavated. In some pits the excavation went down to and
included the sixth level, or 2.5 to 3.0 feet below the ground surface;
in others the excavations were terminated with the first level.
In terms of classes of artifacts, Area C differs significantly from
Areas A and B. Sherds, which were abundant in Areas A and B, were
exceedingly rare in Area C, only 2 small ones being found. Area C,
however, yielded many dart points as well as a few arrow points.
DART POI]~TS

Dart points were found in all of the excavated levels of Area C, increasing in frequency from the lower to the upper levels. The Gary
D1 form was by far the most common. In general, the majority of
the dart points found in Area C were of the contracting stem tradition.
However~ there were some points characteristic of the Elam Focus of
the Trinity Aspect, and these tended to be concentrated in the lower
levels (Table 8).
ARROW POII’~TS

The arrow points found in Area C were concentrated in the upper
three levels. None were encountered be!ow the bottom of the third

I04

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

level. The small sample was far from homogeneous and several forms
were represented.
MISCELLANEOUS ARTIFACTS
An analysis of the vertical distribution of the miscellaneous artifacts
indicates a clustering of artifacts in level five and a concentration of
artifacts in levels one, two and three (Table I0).
TABLE 8
Vertical Distribution of Dart Point Forms
Forms

Level i

Gary D1
Gary D2
Gary D3
Gary D4
Gary D5
Gary D6
Gary D7
Gary D13
Gary D14
Gary D15

Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 Level 5 Level 6 Level 7

13
4
6
1
........
i
2
1
1
1
1
1
3
....
4
1
....
....
1
1
............
........
1
....
........
1
........
1
............

5

1

....

1

1

............

i

............

2
2
1

1
....

D25
Elam
Trinity
Point frags.
Totals
Percentages

4
27

I
13

4,
15

....
1
13

2
1
4

1
1
2

36%

17%

20%

17%

5%

2%

1
....
2

2%

TABLE 9
Vertical Distribution of Arrow Points in Area C

Forms

Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 Level 5 Level 6 Level 7 Surface

Expanding stem
A2
1
A4
2
Non-expanding stem
A7
1
A10
....
All
....

A13
A14
A16
A18
Alba
Bonham
I~ragments
Total
Percentages

............................
1
........................

1
........................
1
........................
1
1
....................
1
............................
1
............................
....
1
........................
1
............................
............................
1
............................
1
2
2
I
....................
7
9
2
0
0
0
0
2
50%
39%
11%
....................

105

LIMERICK SITE

TABLE 10
Vertical Distribution of Miscellaneous Artifacts from Area C

Forms

Level 2

Level 1
’

Level 3

Level 4

Level 5

Level 6

1
................
....................

I
Scraper III

2
2
1
5

U

2

5

3

1

Scraper V

2

....

1

....

3

....

Biface I
Biface II

5
2

4
3

6
2

1
1

9
1

2
....

Gouge I

................

1

....

Knife IV
Pecking pebble
Grinding slab

1
1
2
1
........
1
....................
................
1
....

Totals

21

11

]3

6

18

3

Percentages

29%

15%

18%

8%

25%

4%

Drill II
Sherds
Scraper

....................

NEGATIVE FEATURES

No evidence of any feature such as pits, post molds, burials, and
hearths, was found, nor were there artifacts of polished stone, shell or
bone.
SUBSISTENCE

A small number of animal bones was recovered in Area C. These
consisted primarily of teeth caps of deer.
DISCUSSION

The lower levels of Area C are characterized by the absence of arrow
points and by the presence of dart points which may definitely be
ascribed to the Archaic. Several traits of this occupation are similar to
those which are characteristic of the Elam Focus of the Trinity Aspect.
In the upper levels arrow points appear, suggesting that this Archaic
culture acquired the bow and arrow and began to integrate it into a
hunting pattern. The scarcity of materials recovered in Area C and
the small amount of bone refuse imply that this area, like Areas A and
B, was used as a temporary hunting camp.

Area D
Area D is another sandy "island" in the black gumbo floodplain
similar to Area C. It is approximately 400 feet northwest of Area C
and 1200 feet southwest of Area B (Fig. 2). This area is a larger ver-

TEXA,S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

siGn of Area C, consisting of a zone of sandy soil resting in a shallow
depression formed in the sandy clay subsoil (Fig. 16). Area D’s center,
like that of Area C, is about one half a foot higher than the edges, and
the area measures 160 feet long and 100 feet wide.
Area D was selected for excavation on the basis of the artifacts on
the surface and the depth of the sandy soil as determined by preliminary testing with a post-hole digger. Three five-foot test squares
were excavated along the W960 line to a depth of 2.0 feet. but since
these tests produced only a small number of artifacts, no further
testing was attempted. A total of only 22 artifacts was recovered and
all except two specimens were found in the upper two levels. No features were encountered and no artifacts of polished stone, shell, or bone
were found. The area lacked evidence of pottery.
It is felt that the sample from Area D is too small to be of much significance. The graphs, however~ indicate that the same general trend
is present at Area D as at the other areas: arrow points increase in frequency through time as dart points decrease (Fig. 18).

TABLE 11
Vertical Distribution of Artifacts in Area D
Level I
Dart points
Gary D1
Gary D5
Edgewood

-- ....

Dart point fragments

....

Arrow points
A4
A5
A6
A7

....
....
2

Alba
Arrow point fragments

Level 2

Level 3

2

1

Level 4

1

Surface

....

1
1
(2

4
2

1

1

1

1

....

1
2

Scraper V
Biface I

4

Gouge ]

1

4

Pecking pebble

....

1

Total

11

9

Percentages

50%

40%

1

1

1

5%

5%

12

LIMERICK SITE

I07

Comparison of Areas A, B, C, and D
When the materials from the various areas of the site are compared,
they seem to be typologically similar in the main. Some dart point
forms in the lower levels of Area C were different, but the other artifacts were much the same throughout the site. As a result of the typological similarities, the intra-site analysis was based on percentages
and/or frequencies of the three principal artifact classes. For each
area, the number of artifacts in each class was computed. Considering
the small sample, a level by level comparison probably would not be
valid; however, the general trend from the lower to the upper levels
of each area is probably significant.
TABLE 12
Relative Percentages of Pottery, Arrow Points, Dart Points

Pottery
Area
Level
Level
Level
Level
Level
Level

A
1
2
3
4
5
6

84%
48%
20%

B
83%
86%
74%
85%
48%
63%

Dart Points
A
B
5%
40%
60%

I

6%
4%
17%
10%
45%
37%

Arrow Point~

A

B

n%

n%

~2%
20%

lo%
9%
5%
7%
0%

For Areas A and B, the comparison was based on three classes--pottery, dart points and arrow points (Table 12). When comparing Areas
A and B, the lowest level in each area should not be given full statistical weight because of the small size of the samples. The lines in Table
12 indicate marked percentage changes and the approximate division
between the Archaic and Neo-American occupations.
For Areas C and D, where no pottery was recovered, the intra-site
comparison has to be on the basis of arrow points and dart points only
because--except for two sherds at Area C--pottery was not found in
these areas. Table 13 compares the vertical distribution of dart points
and arrow points for all of the areas. This may be an unwarranted
comparison if the people responsible for the cultural debris in Area
C and D were pre-pottery groups.
INTERPRETATION OF THE TABLES

The percentage Figures in Table 12 indicate that level 1 of Area A
and levels 1 through 4 of Area B are possibly the result of occupation
by the same people. This relationship is also indicated by typological

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

108

No. %

Leve!s

I

~

r

Is 75
5

Arrow

21

i

t distribution
Area

A

L~iels
Sherd -distribution
Area A

A

B

No. %
Levels

9

31

Ills

tee 70
65 23

Dart p

Levels

No. %

I
’

2 1
3

lmlmml

It

35

II

3
t distribution

D

Levels

No. %

I

~
m

2
3

lm

2

6

4

.5

met

2

6

5
6

III

IlW

I

No. %

4

Levels

No. %

I

I

el

2

95 33

2

lllllll

61 2t

3

llllll

4

,

4

llll

35 12

4

lll

49 12

5

m

13

4

5

ml

28

7

3

6

.

5

2

6

.

I0

3

7

Area B

Area B

Area B

F

G

H

Levels
I

1

7 39

2

I

2

3

No %
27 36

Levels

No

1

I

15 20

3

4

1

t3

17

5

5

l=

4

6

6

.

2

7

.

2

4

Arrow poin! distribution

13

J

Levels

NO. %

4

57 35
2

I

31

I

6 20

3

1

30

18

4

1

5

17

4

Ill

19

II

5

5

.

I

3

5

~

22

14

2

6

6

.

5

3

2

7

Dart point distribution
Area C

%

13 43
13

Area C
l

29

90 23

Overall distribution

9 50

II

~118

t2 28

2

ll

I04 26

3

17

3

No. %

t

9

/

lmmlll

Levels

14 33

I

2

28

Sherd distribution

B

III

14

Dart poinl distribution

E

Levels

6

7

istribution

Area A

4

Area

al-~d

C

33

Arrow point distribution

is
Over

Area A

721

6

I0

Gary

.

t

3

Overall

distribulion

Area
DI distribution
Area

Q

K

Fig. 17. Artifact distribution according to level at the Limerick site.

19

L

C.~__

TABLE 13
Relative Percentages of Dart Points and Arrow Points
Dart Points
Area
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Level 5

Level 6

A

B

33%
77%
75%

35%
27%
67%
67%

I

86%
lOO%

Arrow Points

C
[
I

75%
65%
88%
100%

D
]

33%
50%
100%

A
67%
23%
25%

lOO%
loo%

B
I

65%
73%

C
I
I

D

25%
35%

[ 67%
50%

33%
33%

12%
0%

0%

14%
0%

0%
0%

comparison. The ratio of pottery to dart points and arrow points in
these levels is similar for both areas. Levels 3 and 4 of Area B, however, have more dart points than arrow points, a reverse of the situation in the upper levels of Area B and Area A.
As noted previously, Table 13 is open to question. If it is a valid
comparison, then certain intra-site relations are suggested. It can be
noted that using this method of comparison only levels 1 and £ of
Area B equate well with level 1 of Area A.
The figures for Area C indicate a high ratio of dart points to arrow
points in the top 3 levels, a relationship that in the other areas of the
site exists only in levels 2 and 3 of Area A and levels 3, 4, and 5 of
Area B.
While the exact relationship of the various areas of the site remains
uncertain, some relationships are indicated by the general trend which
is basically the same in each area. This trend is toward the diminished
use through time of dart points and the increased use of arrow points.
In Areas A and B, the increased use of the arrow point is in conjunction with the increased use of pottery (Fig. 18).

Cultural Affiliations
In Areas B and C the artifacts, their provenience, and their associations indicate that two different groups of Archaic people once occupied the Limerick Site. While there are some typological similarities, there are also some differences. In both areas the contracting
stem dart point was found, but the lower levels of Area C has, in addition, a concentration of other distinctive dart point forms. In the
same levels with these dart points are other artifacts which have been
found in association with these same dart point forms at other sites.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

i 10

LEVEL5

Area A

Area h

Area B

Area B

L£VEL~

2

3

4

5

6

Area D

Area C
LEVELIS

i i i! i !i i i !i i! il

5

¯ ::::.’:: :.7.’::::::::::: :::.’::,

fi i iLi i i i i i
[] Pottery

...:..::: :::::::::::::::..::...,¢:::

[] Arrow points

..::..::..::.,:..::::::::::::.,::..,-:.
,:::::..::::::::::::::::::,7:.’:."

[] Dart points

Comparative Relationship
of Pottery, Arrow points, and

’

Fig.

18,

3o

Dart points

,"

Comparative relationships of pottery, arrow points, and dart points at the

Limerick site.

F_,LAtVi FOCUS I~.ELATIOiXISHIPS

The cultural affiliations suggested by the assemblage of dart points
and other artifacts in the lower levels of Area C are primarily with the
Elam Focus of the Trinity Aspect. In order to differentiate the Elam

LIMERICI~ SITE

111

Focus from the preceding Carrolhon Focus, the Elam Focus, in its
definitive description by Crook and Harris (1952: 7-38), was partially
defined on the basis of negative traits or traits which were absent in
Elam but generally present in Carrollton. However, one of the major
negative traits shared by Garrolhon and Elam was the absence of
arrow points. Arrow points are lacking in the lower levels of Area C.
Other traits characteristic of Elam Focus are the presence of Elam
dart points, a few Gary dart points, leaf-shaped knives, scraping flakes,
straight-edged gouges, and "turtle back" scrapers. This assemblage
of traits is present in the lower levels of Area C.
Although there are several similarities, there are some differences
between the lower levels of Area C and Elam Focus. Some of these differences may be due to the small sample of materials from Area G,
which may account for the absence of the following Elam Focus traits:
Ellis, Yarbrough, and Wells dart points, choppers, hammerstones, and
manos. Also, the incidence of contracting stem dart points relative to
other forms is much higher than has been previously reported for
Elam Focus components.
Since the contracting stem dart point is more common eastward
from the Limerick Site, and also since it evidently appeared later than
some non-contracting stem forms (Wheat, 1953:215; Tunnell, 1961),
its presence in Area G’s material culture configuration may be the
result of the marginal location of the Limerick Site with respect to
other Elam Focus sites; or it may be that the culture of these people
existed slightly earlier or later than that of the Elam Focus proper.

WYLIE FOCUS ~ELATIOINSHIPS

A comparison of traits between the Limerick Site and the Wylie
Focus shows distinct differences, although there are several traits
which are common to both. Some of the traits shared with Wylie Focus
are certain arrow point forms (A3, AS, A8, and A17) ; the Gary dart
point forms 131, D3, and D8; some scraper, gouge, and drill forms; and
Sanders type pottery. More significantly, those traits which are considered especially diagnostic of the Wylie Focus--large basin-shaped
pits, bone artifacts, agricultural implements, Fresno and Harrell arrow
point types, shell tempered pottery, and T-shaped drills,--are absent
at the Limerick Site. The absence of Wylie Focus diagnostic traits indicates no major cultural relationship existed between the Wylie Focus
and the Limerick Site.

TEXA~ ARCIKEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

i i2

EAST TEXAS ASPECT RELATIONSHIPS

Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954:148-151 ) presented a provisional
trait list for the East Texas Aspect of the Archaic Stage. A comparison
of traits from the Limerick Site with this list shows marked similarity.
The provisional East Texas Aspect is characterized by the following
traits: abundance of Gary type dart points, presence of Yarbrough
and Edgewood points, Alba and other arrow points, T-shaped drills,
fist axes, heavy end scrapers (gouges), sandstone nut stones, small
milling stones, small manos, and pigments of hematite and limonite.
Of these traits only the T-shaped drill is absent at the Limerick Site.
Other traits in the provisional trait list stated to be rare or almost unknown were not found in the small sample of materials recovered from
the Limerick Site.
A major difference is the presence of some pottery in what is generally a basic Archaic complex. Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954: 150)
comment that arrow points seem to have entered the East Texas area
somewhat in advance of pottery. To the south, however, near Houston,
Texas, Wheat (1955: Fig. 25) found in the Addicks Basin that pottery was introduced first into that area. To the southeast in San Augustine County, Texas, pottery appears before arrow points (Tunnell,
1961). To the north in eastern Oklahoma, Bell’s data from the Scott
Site (!955) indicates that granular clay tempered pottery was introduced into the Wister Reservoir area before arrow points. The Limerick Site data, while insufficient to permit comment on which was
introduced first in the East Texas area in general, suggests that pottery and arrow points appeared at the site at approximately the same
time.
The only evidence suggesting a prepottery-arrow point occupation
is present in the upper levels of Area C. It will be recalled that the
two top levels of Area C contained arrow points and a relatively
scarcity (only 2) of potsherds, together with a relatively large number of dart points. In addition, the proportional percentages of the
dart points and arrow points are different for this area. It is possible
that these differences are the result of the use of the area as a temporary

hunting camp.
Conjectures
The sample of materials from the Limerick Site is small and any
conclusions reached herein are tentative. They are based, however, on
the premise that the sample was representative unless otherwise noted.

LIMERICK SITE

i i3

The data from the Limerick Site suggest that there was an early
Elam Focus occupation followed by a later Sanders Focus occupation
showing some relationships with the Wylie Focus. A period of occupation, as used herein, is not a continual or specific occupation
but rather it is a time span during which the site was probably
occupied intermittently by groups of people having the same material
culture.
The early occupation was by a pre-ceramic, pre-arrow point group
with Elam Focus cultural affiliations. The evidence for this occupation was recovered in the lower levels of Area C.
The late occupation occurred at a time when pottery was well integrated into the material culture and when the bow and arrow complex
was replacing the atlatl and dart. The arrow points were diversified in
form and no one type seems to have dominated the arrow point category. The basic core tradition used in Archaic times was still present.
The materials representative of this period were found in the upper
level of Area A and the upper levels of Area B. The pottery tradition-including Sanders Plain, Sanders Engraved, Canton Incised and the
Sanders clay pipe form--suggest that these people are culturally
closely related to the people responsible for the Sanders Focus. Considering the number of dart points relative to arrow points, and the
absence of "Plains" traits (alternate beveled knives, buffalo scapula
hoes, etc.) as well as the ceremonial traits, the Sanders occupation at
the Limerick Site may represent an early period of the Focus.
After categorizing some of the materials into these two periods, there
remain some artifacts which can not be ascribed to either period. The
materials from the lower levels of Area A and Area B do not appear
to be closely related to either the Elam Focus or the Sanders Focus.
This group possessed the small arrow point and Sanders type pottery
tempered with bone and/or clay-grit. These traits, however, seem to
be superimposed on a basically Archaic tradition because the dart
point was the more popular projectile point form, and the other implements of this group, which included drills with unmodified bases,
gouges, hammerstones, knives and blades, core implements and scrapers, etc., are basically the same as those used by Archaic groups. The
materials and their relative percentages suggest that the people who
made them could be included in the Archaic Stage of the East Texas
Aspect. They do, however, probably represent a late component--possibly a group which was transitional. That is, they were basically
Archaic and in the process of integrating the bow and arrow and pottery into their cultural system.

114

T~XA~S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Other explanations of the Limerick Site are possible. A more categorical explanation follows the same general line as the above interpretation. The materials from the lower levels of Area C could belong to the Elam Focus and the lower levels of Area A and Area B
could be components of the East Texas Aspect. The pottery and arrow
points in these levels would, in this case, be attributed to natural disturbances and the artificial levels used in the excavations. As a result, all the arrow points and pottery found on the site would have
been made by the people with Sanders Focus cultural affiliations. A
new problem is created by this interpretation. Which Archaic group
occupied the site first or did both groups occupy it concurrently? There
is no evidence that the Archaic occupations of the site were contemporaneous, and there is insufficient data to determine which group was
there first.
These are only tentative conjectures, and undoubtedly further excavations and analysis of materials from the areas surrounding the
Iron Bridge Reservoir will provide a more stable frame of reference for
the integration and interpretation of the archeology of the region.

Summary
The Limerick Site, on the Sabine River in Rains County, Texas is
one of several sites to be inundated by the Iron Bridge Reservoir. The
site consists of two knolls and several large sandy spots. Excavations
were conducted in the knolls and on two of the sandy spots.
The materials were analyzed and classified by first grouping them
according to material used in manufacture, e.g., clay, stone. The groups
were further subdivided into smaller groups based on general characteristics, e.g., decorated and undecorated sherds, projectile points.
scrapers, etc. These groups were further subdivided on the basis of
similarity of forms, e.g., engraved or incised sherds, expanding or contracting stems on proiectile points, and in many cases these groups
were again broken into smaller groups. This method of analysis differs
from analysis by previously defined types where the materials are
pigeonholed into previously established categories. In the present
analysis groups of artifacts initially sorted on the basis of similarity
in form within the site were assigned to previously established types
only when all the necessary requirements for the type were fulfilled
by the whole group.
The materials recovered indicate that there were at least two periods

LIMERICK SITE

I 15

of occupation at the Limerick Site. These two occupations had evidence of influences from two defined foci---Elam and Sanders. In addition to these occupations, a third group lived on the site prior to the
Sanders Focus people. It is suggested that the material culture of this
third group represents a component of the East Texas Aspect. Whether
these people possessed pottery and arrow points is a matter of interpretation of the data. Two possible explanations were offered, but because
of the small size of the sample plus the tack of data from related sites,
final conclusions must be withheld until further data become available.

Re/erences Cited
Atwood, Wallace W.
1940. The Physiographic Provinces of North America. Boston.
Baerreis, David A., Joan E. Freeman, and James V. Wright
1958. The Contracting Stem Projectile Point in Eastern Oklahoma. Bulletin of
the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. 6, pp. 61-81.
Bell, Robert E.
1953. The Scott Site, Leflore County, Oklahoma. American Antiquity, Vol. 18,
No. 4, pp. 314-331.
1958a. Archaeological Investigations at the Boat Dock Site, Ma-1, in the Lake
Texoma Area, Marshall County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society, Vol. 6, pp. 37--47.
1958b. Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points.
Special Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, No. 1.
Crook, Wilson W., Jr., and tl. K. Harris.
1952. Trinity Aspect of the Archaic Horizon: The Carrollton and Elam Foci.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 23,
pp. 7-38.
1954. Traits of the Trinity Aspect Archaic: Carrollton and Elam Foci. The
Record, Vol, 12, No. 1, pp. £~-16.
Davis, E. Mott
1958. The Whelan Site, A Late Caddoan Component in the Ferrell’s Bridge
Reservoir, Northeastern Texas. Unpublished report to the National Park
Service, on file at the Regional Office of the National Park Service, Santa
Fe, New Mexico, and at the Department of Anthropology, The University
of Texas, Austin.
Dice, Lee !l.
1943. The Biotic Provinces of North America. Ann Arbor.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1938. Physiography of Eastern United States. New York.
Ford, James A., and Clarence H. Webb
1956. Poverty Point, A Late Archaic Site in Louisiana. Anthropological Papers
of the American Museum of Natural History, Vol. 46, Part 1.

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Jelks, Edward B.
1953. Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter. Bulletin of the Texas Archeologicat
Society, Vol. 24, pp. 189-207.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1957. Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Iron Bridge Reservoir, Hunt,
Rains, and Van Zandt counties Texas. Unpublished report to the NationaI
Park Service, on file at the regional office of the National Park Service,
Santa Fe, New Mexico, and at the Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas, Austin.
Johnson, LeBoy, Jr., and Edward B. Jelks
1958. The Tawakoni-Yscani Village, 1760: A Study in Archeological Site
Identification. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 10, No. 4, pp. 405-422.
Kreiger, Alex D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. The University of
Texas Publication 4640.
Miller, E. 0., and Edward B. Jelks
1952. Archaeological Excavations at the Belton Reservoir, Coryell County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 23,
pp. 168-217.
Newell, H. Perry, and Alex D. Krieger
1949. The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, No. 5.
Patterson, J. T.
1936. The Corner-tang Flint Artifacts of Texas. The University of Texas Publication 3618.
Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1932. The Geology of Texas. Vol. 1: Stratigraphy. The University of Texas
Bulletin 3232.
Stephenson, Robert L.
1952. The Hogge Bridge Site and the Wylie Focus. American Antiquity, Vol. 17,
No. 4, pp. 299-312.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Tunnell, Curtis D.
1961. Evidence of a Late Archaic Horizon at Three Sites in the McGee Bend
Reservoir, San Augustine County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 30 (this issue).
Wheat, Joe Ben
1953. An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin, Southeast Texas.
In: River Basin Surveys Papers, No. 4, The Addicks Dam Site. River
Basin Surveys Papers, Inter-Agency Archeological Salvage Program.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 154, pp. 143-252.

The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

Indian Grinding Stones or Metates
in East Texas
E. W. HAYNER
IN ATTEMPTING to deal with the Indian metate in East Texas, we have
a real problem on our hands. It is difficult to assign this artifact to any
particular stage or culture, or to determine what was ground on it-whether corn or something else.
The American Indian must have been the world’s busiest grinder,
because so many of the things he used in his daily life had to be
ground, and he had to do the grinding himself. This daily grinding of
so many" different things is the reason that we find so many pitted and
milling stones of different sizes.
In East Texas, pitted stones are plentiful. Every camp site or village
area has some of them, and at some sites they are very numerous.
Most of the manos that are found here have pits in them. Some have
one pit, and others are pitted on both faces.
However, it is not the purpose of this article to deal with the small
pitted stone, or "nut stone," which occurs in all foci in East Texas, but
rather to try to shed a small amount of light on the large grinding
stone, or metate. This large type of grinder is not common in East
Texas, and in the last few decades, when much of the farm land has
been turned into pasture, the large grinding stones are not as easy to
find as the), once were.
I have worked on a large number of sites in this area, sites belonging to all three aspects--Archaic, Gibson, and Fulton--and have
visited other sites which were being worked by other people. The
metate is nearly always conspicuous by its absence. In fact, the metate
is one artifact which is extremely hard to find.
The Indian grinding stones that are found here are made from different kinds of stone, some of them native to the area and others imported. All the grinders can be classed in one or the other two types,
the small pitted or nut stone, and the metate with a large concavity.
Many of the artifacts have pits or concavities on both faces.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A peculiar thing about the large grinders is that the concavities on
some of them are rough, whereas on others the concavity is smooth,
polished by use. Almost all of the small pitted stones have polished
pits.
Many of the large grinders have a small pit in the center of the large
concavity. Sometimes this combination occurs on both faces of the artifact. This combination of pits seems to indicate that the artifacts were
used to grind some substance which could not be handled in one size
of the pit alone.
It is not the purpose of this article to try to assess the uses and values
of the various grinders. Rather, the writer wishes to correct some of the
statements in the literature which, on the basis of his experience in
finding a number of metates in place in prehistoric campsites, he feels
to be in error.
Most of the people who write about the metate assign it to an agricultural culture. They do not seem to think that the Indian in the
Archaic Stage could have had a use for the large grinding stone. However, four of the metates in my collection have come from Archaic
sites. I am certain of this fact, because I found them myself. In addition, I found another specimen which I replaced in its bed at the
site and covered it over again with soil.
This discussion is based specifically on a group of twelve metates,
of which five are from sites which by current standards are judged
to belong to the Archaic Stage. The other seven are from surface ]ocations in different East Texas counties. In this group of twelve specimens. four are made from stones resembling rocks from glacial till.
These four specimens are of a quartz-like or granitic material. Two
other specimens are made from a compact hard claystone material,
another is from hematite, and the remaining five are made of local
ferruginous sandstone. In dimensions these specimens vary from 8 x
6 x 3 in. to 14 x 12 x 6 in. The concavities vary from 5 x 3 in. to 8 x 6
in., and are from 1 to 3 in. deep.
Brief descriptions of these twelve specimens, with their places of
discovery, are given below. The numbers correspond to those in Fig. 1.

"Glacier-formed" stones, quartz-like and granitic material
#1. From Morris County; a surface find, site unknown. On each
face of the stone is a large concavity which covers almost the entire
surface. Within each concavity is a small pit.
#2. From Cass County; a surface find, site unknown. On each face
of the stone is a large concavity, and in each concavity is a small pit.

METATES

IN

EAST

TEXAS

#3. From Morris County; a surface find, site unknown. This stone
has a large concavity on one face only.
#4. From Harrison County; from a proven Archaic Stage site. This
stone has a large concavity on each face, and each concavity extends
over the edge of the stone at the thinnest side.
Claystone material, source unknown
#5. From Gregg County; from a proven Archaic site. This stone
has a large concavity on one face and a small pit on the opposite face.
#6. From Morris County; from a proven Archaic site. This stone
has a large concavity on one face. The opposite face has no concavity
or pit.
Ferruginous sandstone, source native
#7. From Harrison County, on the Hayner old plantation; a surface find, site unknown. This stone has a large concavity on one face,
The opposite face is rough.
#8. From Morris County; a surface find, site unknown. This stone
has a large concavity on each face.
#9. From Morris County; a surface find, site unknown. This stone
has a large concavity on one face, with a small pit in the center of the
concavity. The opposite face is rough.
# 10. From Morris County; a surface find, site unknown. This stone
has a large concavity on each face, with the concavities extending over
the thin side of the stone.
# 11. (not illustrated). From Gregg County, from an Archaic site.
This stone is of hematite in a bad state of decomposition, and has a
large concavity on one side. As is the case with most hematite tools, it
is polished all over the surface. It is about average in size for a metate.
After it was found, this specimen was replaced in the spot where it
was discovered and covered over again with earth. This procedure
was followed so as to be able to prove, without any question, that there
were grinders of this type in the Archaic Stage. There is a witness to
the find and the replacement.
#12 (not illustrated). From Gregg County; from the same Archaic
site as #5. This stone has a depression on one face which seems to
have been started as a large concavity but was finished to make a
smaller pit, which is nevertheless much larger than the pit of the average nut-stone.

120

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig. 1. Indian metates from East Texas, described in the text. Large concavities are Outlined
with white chalk. Small pits, present on specimens nos. 1, 2, and 9, are not marked but can
readily be seen. Nos. 6, 7, 9, and 10 have been accidentally splattered with white paint.

METATES

IN

EAST

TEXAS

121

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Summary and Conclusions
As stated at the beginning of this article, when we try to deal with
the Indian milling stone in East Texas, we have on our hands a problem which is as yet unsolved. The stones themselves are large enough
so that it is unlikely they were buried accidentally. The writer has
observed that most Indian campsites seem to have been cleaned by the
process of spreading new or clean sand over the area. In this process
the large grinder would not be covered as many smaller objects would
have been. Also, being a large stone, and in most cases being near the
surface, it is one of the first objects to be disturbed by the plow. Furthermore, if left on the surface by the Indians where last used, these
stones are slow to become covered with organic matter through natural
processes. Therefore, when found buried, it seems likely that they
were buried intentionally.
In this paper twelve large grinders have been described; call them
metates, milling stones, or whatever you wish--they are, in any case,
Indian grinding stones. Of the twelve, five are from Archaic sites. I
found them myself, and am certain of this fact. There is no way of
knowing how many of the others are of Archaic origin.
This article has been prepared for the express purpose of proving
that agriculture is not always implied by the presence of the metate.
We assume that the Archaic Indians did not have corn; but they did
have the metate. On the other hand, because of the fact that the later
pottery-making Indians did have corn, most writers feel that the
Archaic Indians did not have any agriculture.
The Indian grinding stone in East Texas, and in other areas of the
state as well, has not had the attention which it deserves. Because of
the Indians’ methods of gathering and preparing food, the grinder had
to be one of his most important tools, if not the most important. Perhaps someone will eventually have the time that is needed to give this
important phase of Indian economy the attention that it deserves.
Kilgore, Texas

Evidence of a Late Archaic Horizon at Three
Sites in the McGee Bend Reservoir,
San Augustine County, Texas
CURTIS

D. TUNNELL

Introduction
AN AI~CHEOLOGICAL SURVEY of the McGee Bend Reservoir, located on
the Angelina River in East Texas, was conducted in 1948 by B. L.
Stephenson of the Smithsonian Institution (Stephenson, 1948). This
survey marked the beginning of the Inter-Agency Archeological Salvage Program in this basin. A National Park Service field crew under
the direction of Edward B, Jelks began test excavations at several sites
in the McGee Bend Reservoir in the fall of 1956. During this season
four sites were tested, including extensive work at the Jonas Short and
Walter Bell sites. From Steptember to December, 1957, Jelks again
conducted excavations at McGee Bend, and it was during this period
that the sites covered by this report were tested.
The three sites under consideration here are the Runnells Site No.
1 (41-42D5-5), the Bunnells Site No. £ (41-42D5-4), and the Sawmill
Site (41-42D5-9).* The following classes of artifacts were present at
all three sites: dart points, arrow points, bifacially flaked blades, scrapers, pitted stones, various pottery types, and miscellaneous non-diagnostic artifacts.
There was very little depth to the midden deposit at Runnells No. 1,
and the distribution of artifact types was of no temporal significance.
The artifacts recovered from the test excavation of this site so closely
resemble those from the other two sites that they are useful primarily
for comparative and typological studies. The cultural material from
* In accordance with a new site designation system at The University of Texas,
these sites are now numbered as follows: Runnells No. 1 (41 SA87), Runnells No.
2 (41 SA86), Sawmill (41 SA89).

TEXANS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

this site will be only briefly discussed in this paper. The formal report
of these excavations, which is being prepared by Jelks, will contain a
complete discussion and analyis of each of these sites.
l~unnells Site No. 2 and the Sawmill Site produced cultural material from the surface to a maximum depth of three and one-half to
four feet. Observations i~ the field indicated a change in the artifacts
from the upper to the lower levels of the excavations at both sites. This
was a change in both quantity and kind. Cultural remains were most
numerous toward the lower levels of the excavation. Potsherds were
by far the predominant class of artifact in the upper levels, but they
were gradually replaced in numerical superiority by dart points in
the lower levels of the excavation (Figs. 9 and 14). Arrow points were
also concentrated in the upper levels of the excavations at both sites,
and their vertical distribution is similar to that of potsherds.
Apparently these sites were occupied intermittently over a relatively long period of time. There was no separation of occupations by
clear-cut stratigraphic zones, but rather a gradual change from one
stage into the other. This is perhaps due in part to soil conditions and
disturbance by rodents. Some artifact types occur throughout all
levels of the excavations, but these vary greatly in quantity according
to depth.
This paper will attempt to determine the elements which characterize the late Archaic horizon that seems to be present at three of the
excavated sites; to show how these elements fit into the later occupations of the sites; and to determine where in the occupational sequences the late Archaic stage terminates.
Statistical distribution studies were made for all three sites. The
distributions of the principal types of artifacts were computed horizontally by five-foot test squares, but the results were not conclusive
and will not be considered in this report. Vertical distribution of the
major artifact types was charted both by arbitrary six-inch levels and
by geologic zones at l~unnells No. 2 and at the Sawmill Site. The results
of these computations appear in Figures 9, 13, and 14, and will be discussed in some detail in a later section.
The archeology of this area of Texas is poorly known. This is especially true for the Archaic stage, and any correlation is difficult to
establish because of the lack of published information on comparable
material.
I wish to acknowledge the generous help of Edward B. Jelks and
Lel~oy Johnson, Jr. They have given suggestions and constructive
criticism for which I am very grateful.

I\([CGEE

BEND

ARCHAIC

Description o[ the Area
l~unnells Site No. 1 (41-42D5-5}, Runnells Site No. 2 (41-42D5-4),
and the Sawmill Site (41-42D5-9) are numbered according to the system adopted by the Council of Texas Archeologists and previously in
use by The University of Texas. Unit 42D5 is located between 31 ° 10’
N. and 31020’ N., and between 94°10’ W. and 94°20’ W. It lies in
deep East Texas on the boundary between San Augustine and Angelina Counties (Fig. 1 ). This area is part of the "Piney Woods" section
of the Texas Gulf Coastal Plain. As the popular name implies, the entire area is heavily timbered. The Angelina River flows toward the
southeast in a broad shallow valley with a flood plain from one to two
miles wide. Low clay ridges capped with sand border the flood plain
on both sides. It is on these elevated areas that the sites discussed here
are located.
The average elevation of the area is some 200 to 250 feet above mean
sea-level, increasing toward the north. Various sandstones, hematite,
limonite, chert, and silicified wood are found as natural gravels and
were used by the Indians in the manufacture of artifacts. The average
annual rainfall is about 60 inches and the river bottomlands have a
heavy growth of vegetation. Most of the ridges above the flood plain
of the Angelina are in cultivation or have been in the past. As might
be expected, the animal life in the wooded sections is very abundant.
A wide variety of deer, small mammals, birds, and reptiles can be
observed today.
Description o[ Artifact Types
Not all of the artifacts recovered from the excavations are useful in
differentiating and delimiting the Archaic horizon. Both diagnostic
and atypical artifact types are described in some detail below. These
include dart points, arrow points, bifacially flaked blades, and certain
other miscellaneous stone artifacts. Minor types of artifacts which
are present at only one site will be described in the section entitled
"Site Description and Analysis." Artifact forms which make up a
homogeneous group, but do not strictly conform to previously defined
types have been assigned a distinguishing number. These te::tative
types will be referred to by number throughout this paper.
Projectile points are divided into two major groups: the small light
arrow points which occur in the upper levels of the middens, and the
larger heavier dart points which occur throughout the excavations,
but are concentrated in the lower levels.

i 26

TEXAS ARCHEOLOOICAL SOCIETY

Broaddus

N

!41-

41-4
41-42D

0

5

~-~
Scale

Fig. 1. Map of Unit 42D5 showing location of E. E.

~
in

miles

Runnells Site No. 1

E. E. Runnells Site No. 2 (41--42D5-4), and the Sawmill site (41-42D5-9).

(41--42D5-5],

MCGEE BEND ARCHAIC

127

Fig. 2. Dart points, Type I. A-D, I-L, from Sawmill site; E-H, from Runnells No. 2.

DART POINTS

Type I (Fig. 2). This homogeneous group of dart points resembles
the Kent type as defined by Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954: 432), but
has a much larger percentage of expanding stems. These points are
generally crude, and were shaped by the removal of large irregular
flakes, although several of the smaller specimens show secondary pressure flaking. The blades are trianguloid with slightly concave or convex edges, and some examples have one edge concave and the other
convex, giving a curved appearance to these artifacts. The shoulders,
though usually poorly defined, are right-angular, and a few of the
points have weakly developed barbs. There is an even gradation of
stem shape from very slightly contracting, through parallel-sided, to
well expanded. The general appearance of the stems is rectanguloid.
Bases are either straight or convex. All of these points are made of
local stone with silicified wood and chert occurring most frequently.
Some points are fragmentary but appear to fall within the size ranges
given in the following tabulation (measurements in centimeters):

128

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig. 3. Dart points. Gary points, A-D;

Ensor point, E; Ellis point, F; Pogo point, G;

Paisano-llke point, H; Type II point, I. B from Sawmill site; all others from Runnells No. 2.

Minimum
Length
Stem length
Width at shoulders
Stem width at base
Thickness

2.7
0.8
2.0
1.0
0.5

Maximum
6.0
1.3
3.3
1.9
1.4

Average
4.2
1.0
2.6
1.4
1.1

Types II and 11I (Fig. 3, I, for Type II). These types were found
at only one site, and are described in the section entitled "Site Description and Analysis."
Gary Type (Fig. 3, A-D). These points (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks
1954: 430) were found at all three sites.
Ellis, Ensor, and Pogo Types. These types, described by Suhm,
Krieger, and Jelks (1954: 420, 422, and 398) are represented by one
specimen of each type (Fig. 3, F, E, and G respectively).
Miscellaneous Forms. This category is set up to include all of those
dart points which are of no diagnostic value in this report. These points

MCGEE

BEND

ARCHAIC

129

vary widely in size and shape, but all are made of locally available
stone. None of the points in this group fits any recognized type, and
many of them are fragmentary.
ARROW POINTS

Alba Type (Fig. 4, A-F). Eighteen points from the excavations are
included in this type. Most of these points conform strictly to the
type description (Newell and Krieger, 1949: 161-163). Several, however, have blades with pronounced recurred edges and reverse barbs
(A-C). All of these points are finely pressure flaked. They are similar in general appearance, fall within the same size range, and resemble points classified as Alba at other localities (Wheat, 1953: Plate
35, and Stephenson, 1952: 309).
Perdiz Type (Fig. 4, G-K). This type was recovered from t/unnells
No. 2 and the Sawmill Site. All specimens conform to the type as
described in Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954: 504) .....
Cliffton, Cuney, and Scallorn Types (Fig. 4, Cuney atO, Scallorn
at N). These occur in small numbers in the upper levels of the excavations. Type descriptions are to be found in Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks
(1954: 496, 498, and 506).
Miscellaneous Forms. Various additional arrow points were found
at all three sites. These specimens are either too asymmetrically shaped
or too fragmentary to classify.
STONE DRILLS

Type I (Fig. 4, L-M). These drills are long, narrow bifacially flaked
implements with parallel sides and oval cross-section. One end is
sharply pointed and the other is rounded. All specimens of this type
are made of local chert and silicified wood. Several specimens are fragmentary but appear to fall within the size ranges given in the following tabulation (measurements in centimeters) :
Minimum

Maximum

3.5
0.8
0.7

5.3
1.0
0.8

Length
Width
Thickness
BLADES

Bifacially flaked blades of various types were the most commonly
occurring class of lithic artifact at these sites. These are tentatively

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

30

¢M.
Fig. 4. Arrow points and drills. Alba points, A-F; Perdiz points, G-K; Scallorn point, N;
Cuney point, O; drills, Type I, L-M; drills, Type 11, P-Q. From Sawmill site, A, C-K, O; from
Runnells No. 2, B, L-N, P-Q.

divided into five types. All specimens are made of coarse-grained petrified wood or weathered chert pebbles.
Type I (Fig. 5, E-H). These are long, thin rectanguloid slabs of
silicified wood. One lateral edge and one or both ends are unaltered.
One of the lateral edges on each specimen has been bifacially flaked
into a straight or convex cutting edge. This easily recognized type of
blade will be named and described in detail in the final report on the
McGee Bend excavations. Several of these blades are fragmentary, but
they appear to fall within the size ranges given in the following tabulation (measurements in centimeters):

MCGEE

BEND

ARCHAIC

Length
Width
Thickness

Minimum
4.8
2.4
0.5

Maximum
17.2
6.0
2.3

Average
8.4
3.6
1.4

Type II (Fig. 5, A-D). These artifacts show a considerable range
in size, but all have a distinctive characteristic. Each blade of this
type has an unaltered base which is commonly capped with the cortex
of the stone nodule used in its manufacture. All were made from
locally occurring stones. The trianguloid blades are bifacial with
straight to convex or slightly concave edges. A few have well developed
distal tips, but most of them end in roughly rounded points. These
artifacts form a distinctive type of blade which will be named and
described in a forthcoming report by Jelks. In the following tabulation dimensions of these artifacts are given in centimeters:
Length
Width
Thickness

Minimum
4.0
2.0
0.7

Maximum
10.3
4.1
1.7

Average
7.8
3:2
.4

Fig. 5. Blades. Type I, E-H: Type II, A-D. From Runnells No. 2, A-D, F; from Sawmill
site, E, G-H.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Type III (Fig. 6, A-C). This is a group of small, trianguloid bifacial
blades that are oval to triangular in outline with straight or convex
edges. These blades are lenticular in cross-section, often have well developed points, and bases are straight or convex. Dimensions (in centimeters) are given in the following tabulation:
Average
Maximum
Minimum
5.0
7.1
3.0
Length
2.9
3.5
1.5
Width
1.3
1.8
0.7
Thickness
Type IV (Fig. 6, D-F). These blades closely resemble the group described above in shape and workmanship, but this group is considerably larger in size. These artifacts are oval in cross section, oval or
trianguloid in outline, with straight or convex edges and convex bases.
Dimensions (in centimeters) are given in the following tabulation:
Length
Width
Thickness

Minimum
8.1
2.4
1.1

Maximum
10.7
4.3
2.1

Average
9.8
3.4
1.5

Fig. 6. Blades. Type lib A-C; Type IV, D-F; Type V, G-I. All from Runnells No. 2.

MCGEE

BEND

ARCHAIC

133

Fig. 7. Pitted stones from Sawmill site.

Type V (Fig. 6, G-I). These nodular blades (or worked stone nodules) all have similar physical characteristics. They are pebbles that
are largely unaltered, but each has one end sharpened to a point by
the removal of large flakes by percussion. In the following tabulation
dimensions are given in centimeters:
Length
Width
Thickness

Minimum
3.7
2.4
1.2

Maximum
8.5
3.9
2.3

Average
5.0
3.1
:1.7

Miscellaneous Forms. Many blades and blade fragments are unclassifiable. All are made of locally available stone and none gives any
indication of wide variations of size or shape outside the types described
above.
PITTED

STONES

Many large fragments of coarse-grained, dark brown hematite have
been shaped into pitted stone implements (Fig. 7). There is much

TEX2~S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

variation in size and shape, but each of these stones has one surface
ground fiat and a small circular pit pecked into the fiat surface. It is
thought that these stones were used as platforms for cracking the wild
nuts that are so abundant in these woods (the nut being placed in the
pit and struck with another stone). Dimensions (in centimeters) of
these specimens are given in the following tabulation:
Minimum
8.0
3.8
......
......

Maximum diameter
Thickness
Diameter of pit
Depth of pit

Maximum
15.9
6.3
3.0
0.8

Other minor types of lithic artifacts are described in the section entitled "Site Description and Analysis."
POTTERY

Sand-tempered Plain Pottery. This coiled pottery is tempered with
rounded quartz particles of variable size. Sherds are usually smooth
both on the inside and outside, and they are medium to coarse in texture. Some sherds are almost pure sand, and these give the appearance
of a fine-grained sandstone. Color ranges from light brown to dark
brown and dark gray. No complete vessels of this type were recovered
from the test excavations.
Clay- and Bone-tempered Pottery. This includes a large number of
types that exhibit various surface decoration techniques. These sherds
are limited primarily to the upper levels of the test excavations, and
no attempt has been made to define the types represented.

Site Descriptions and Artiiact Analyses
E. E. BUNNELLS No. 2 (41-42D5-4)
This site is located on a low sandy ridge overlooking Harvey Creek
(Fig. 1 ), which flows south and west into the Angelina River. During
floods the Angelina overflows into the basin of Harvey Creek and inundates the flood plain at the base of the ridge. The site was named
after the present land owner.
The occupation area is roughly oval in outline and has a maximum
diameter of about three hundred feet. A grid system was used with
the base stake on the southeast edge of the site and at an arbitrary
elevation of one hundred feet. A five-foot wide test trench was exca-

MCGEE

BEND

ARCHAIC

135

vated from NO-EO to N150-EO and from N150-W5 to N150-W250
(Fig. 8). The trench was excavated to a depth of one foot with cultural material recorded by six-inch levels. Five-foot square test pits
were dug every fifty feet, and were taken to a depth of three or four
feet by six-inch levels. All test pits and trenches were carefully cleaned
and profiled, but no features could be detected. Test squares number
N140-EO, N145-EO, N150-EO, N150-W5, N150-~¥10, and N150W15 were all taken to a depth of four feet, and all produced cultural
material in all levels down to three feet in depth. A compact red-mottled clay, which commonly underlies the sand on these ridges, was
found at a depth of two feet at N50-EO, but it was not encountered in
the deep test area mentioned above.
The sandy soil containing artifacts is of uncertain origin. There is
no evidence of its being transported to the ridge top by human agency.
An alluvial origin for the formation in this area would indicate considerable age for the deeply buried cultural material. At the present
time the Angelina River deposits a relatively small amount of sediment during time of flooding. At its peak flood stage the river has never
covered these ridges in historic times, if this sandy deposit is of alluvial
origin, it indicates a much higher flood stage for the Angelina River in
prehistoric times. This is a very interesting problem but one that is
beyond the scope of this paper.
This ridge has been in cultivation in the past, and it was used as a
house site by early Anglo-American settlers. At present it serves as a
cow pasture and is covered with a good growth of grass. From the surface to varying depths is a brown sand geologic member (Zone III).
Four divisions were recognized in this sandy member: humus-stained
plow zone (III D) ; a fine tan sand (III C) ; a mottled tan and white
sand (III B) ; and a whitish sand with some tan sand inclusions (III
A). Geologic Zone II is composed of red-brown clay with small pockets
of tan sand. Zone II merges with Zone I, which is a mixed red-orange
and pale blue clay with scattered sand pockets. Cultural material occurs only in zones III D, III C, and III B.
The lithic artifacts from this site are made primarily of a coarsegrained silicified wood. The next most common material is a buffcolored chert, and several specimens are made of hematite, sandstone,
and flint. The petrified wood has numerous microscopic flaws and fractures. Flaking techniques often produce irregular chips, and consequently the artifacts made of this material are usually crude. The chert
occurs in the form of small river pebbles, and some patinated cortex.
appears on most of the artifacts made of this material.

TEXANS AllCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

E.E.RUNNELLS NO.2
41-42D5-4
50
0
i-~

I00
I

contour interval 1.0’
~ area excavated

scale in feet
Fig. 8. Map of Runnells No. 2, showing area excavated.

MCGEE

BEND

ARCHAIC

137

Typological analysis of the lithic material was very time consuming.
There are many variations within each type, and identification of
individual artifacts is, in some cases, quite difficult. However, each of
the artifact groups shows a surprising homogeneity. The numerous
small variations are probably the result of poor raw materials and
careless flaking techniques.
All of the lithic artifacts were first separated into groups according
to form and supposed function (dart points, arrow points, drills, scrapers~ blades, gravers, and ground stone artifacts). Each group was then
divided into types according to stylistic variations (example: dart
points--stem shape, blade shape, barbs, notches, size, flaking technique, etc.).
Dart Points. Thirty-four Type I dart points (Fig. 2) were found at
this site. In the deep test pits (Fig. 9) these points were distributed as
follows: three points in Zone III D-III G (mixed), surface to 1.5 ft.;
three in Zone III G, i to 1.5 ft.; eight points in Zone III C-III B
(mixed), 1.5 to 2.5 ft.; and five points were recovered from Zone III
B, below 2.5 ft.
Five projectile points of the Gary type (Fig. 3, A, G-D) were recovered during the excavation of this site. Four of these points are very
similar to each other in size and shape, and al! four show fine pressure
flaking. Three are made of buff-colored chert and one of milk quartz.
The fifth Gary point is made of light brown chert and is about twice
the length of those described above. Three of the Gary points occurred
in Zone III D-III G (mixed), surface to 1 ft.; o.ne in the Zone III G, 1
to 1.5 ft.; and the third was in Zone III G-III B (mixed), 1.5 to 2.5 ft.
(Fig. 9).
One point of the Pogo type (Suhm, Krieger, and 3elks, 1954: 398)
was found in Zone III C, 1 to 1.5 ft. This point (Fig. 3, G) is made of
light gray mottled chert.
One dart point of the Ellis type (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954:
420) is made of gray-white flint (Fig. 3, F). It was found in Zone III
D, surface to 0.5 ft.
Another point (Type II) has a triangular blade with straight edges.
This point shows very careful pressure flaking and is made of silicified
wood. It has very slight shoulders and a long contracting stem with a
straight base. The edges of the stem have been ground smooth from the
shoulders to the base (Fig. 3, I). This characteristic is often associated with Paleo-Indian points. If this point is of Paleo-Indian origin,
it is probably intrusive in this site, because no other evidence of Paleo-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Depth

Zone

k. T>pe I

o.o, - o.5,)n~

~

0.5’ - l.O’~iiiC
1.o, - Z.5’J
2.0’ IIIC-IIIB

,.

.o.

z6

s

i{

5

/

2.5’ - ,.O’~IIIB.IIL~

3.5’J

~

’ ......
~/’/

,
1.5, - 2,01i) IIIC-IIIB
2.0’ - 2.5
2.5’ - 3.o, IINIIIA

.

0.5’ - 1.O’ ~iiiC

,TT/

,"

rer~p~d

56

3s

12

No.
3

V
F. T~ II
Blld.~

12

i

~7

~

\!

52

Ii

I0

2

C~y

She~.

\~/

E.E.RUNNELLS NO.2

/

X

19

t

60

:o.

/ \

[{..~i~.

Tempered
Plain Shords

/

~5

\/

s. Sand
o.o, - o.s,] nIo

"

5

,,9

/

T)

3.O, - 3.5

o. o=r~,
D~r~ Point8

No.

19

nla~o=

/ ~o

X

,=~. ,~l.~

5. TYPe i

D. ~T~ eolnr~

....... ~,},;=

°"’
LO,

26

~

B. ~i~oella~ou~

{-/

/=~

2.0’ - 2.5’
3.0’

{

D=,-~ Fo~=

41- 42D5-4

~/

i.o, - 1.5,
VERTICAL

2.0’ - 2.5

~.5’ - ] .o,~ nrB-zn*

I
l

DISTRIBUTION

OF TYPES BY ZONE
6

/

3.0’ - 3.5’

Fig. 9. Distribution of artifacts at Runnells No. 2.

Indian occupation was noted. This Type II point came from Zone III
C-III B (mixed), 1 to 1.5 ft.
Another point, strongly resembling the Ensor type (Suhm. Krieger,
and Jelks, 1954: 4P9,2) is made of dark brown silicified wood (Fig. 3,
E). Itwas recovered from Zone III B. £ to 2.5 ft.
Twenty-eight miscellaneous dart points are of no diagnostic value.
One of these points (Fig. 3. H) has a concave base and shallow side
notches. The blade edges are convex and serrated. It bears a superficial
resemblance to points of the Paisano type (Suhm, Krieger. and Jelks,
1954: 460). All of the points in this miscellaneous group are made of
coarse-grained silicified wood or of buff to gray chert. They were
evenly distributed throughout the deep test area. Three occurred in
Bone III D-III C (mixed) ; five were from Zone III C; four from Zone
III C-III B (mixed) ; and four were from the lowest artifact-producing Zone, III B. The remaining twelve dart points of miscellaneous
types were recovered from the long shallow test trenches.
Arrow Points. Only five arrow points were [ound in the test excavation of this site. One of these is a basal fragment of no diagnostic value.
This group appears insignificant when compared to the 70 dart points
and fragments. Three of the four complete arrow points are of the Alba
type with "reverse" barbs (Fig. 4, B). All of these points occurred in
the upper zones III D and III C, surface to 1.5 ft.

MCGEE BE~¢D ARCHAIC

The other complete arrow point is a finely worked specimen of
petrified wood (Fig. 4, N). This point has a narrow triangular blade,
slightly convex edges, well-developed barbs sloping downward, corner
notches which form an expanding stem, and a straight base. It resembles arrow points of the Scallorn type (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks,
1954: 506), and was located in Zone III D, surface to 0.5 ft.
Drills. Ten artifacts recovered during excavation of this site are
classified as stone drills. Seven of these are Type I drills (Fig. 4, L, M).
These artifacts occurred at various depths throughout the excavation.
The three remaining, drills are of a different type, here designated as
Type II (Fig. 4, P-Q). Each has a broad flattened base and a short
pointed bit that is oval to triangular in cross-section. The base of each
of these drills is bifacially flaked. Drills from this site have the following measurements (in centimeters) :
Minimum
Length
Bit length
Bit width
Base width
Thickness

2.4
1.0
0.5
1.4
0.4

Maximum
4.0
1.7
0.8
2.0
0.7

Gravers. Two gravers were found in Zone III D-III C (mixed). The
larger of the two, made of reddish brown chert, is trianguloid with
one straight unworked edge and two bifacially worked slightly convex
edges. The flaked edges come together and form a rounded beak. This
specimen has the following measurements (in centimeters): length
2.8, width 2.7, beak width 0.8, thickness 1.0.
The smaller of the two gravers, a pressure-retouched flake of redgray flint, is trianguloid in outline and has two unworked edges. The
third edge is bifacially pressure flaked and may have been used as a
scraping artifact. At one end of this edge is a small graver beak with
a high dorsal ridge. Its dimensions (in centimeters) are: length 5.0,
width 2.1, beak width 0.5, thickness 0.6.
Scrapers. In addition to the scraping edge on the graver described
above, there are eleven other scraping artifacts. One of these is a small
piano-convex end-scraper (scraper Type I) made from a flake of
brown chert. It has a convex bit which contracts behind the bit and
expands into the unworked flake body. Its dimensions (in centimeters)
are: length 4.0, bit width 1.4, thickness 0.4. This scraper came from
Zone III B-III A (mixed), 2.5 to 3 ft.
Six very small flakes of stone have finely retouched convex scrap-

TEXA,S

AiRCI-IEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ing edges (scraper Type If). These are of various shapes and all are
unifacially flaked. Five are made of buff to gray chert. One made of
silicified wood has two small scraping" edges. Measurements (in centimeters) are as follows:
Minimum
Length
Width
Bit width
Thickness

2.0
1.5
0.7
0.3

Maximum
2.7
2.5
2.5
0.6

Two long thin flakes (scraper Type III) have concave scraping
edges (sometimes called spokeshaves). These are unifacially flaked and
are made of buff and reddish chert. Measurements (in centimeters) on
these two specimens are given below:
Buff Scraper
Length
Width
Bit width
Thickness

2.6
1.9
3.2
0.5

Reddish Scraper
3.7
1.3
3.0
0.5

Another scraper is made from a thick flake of coarse gray chert. It
is roughly triangular in outline and has a convex scraping edge, a
notched edge, and an unworked edge. Its dimensions (in centimeters)
are: length 5.6, width 3.8, width of convex scraping edge 5.3, length
of concave scraping edge 1.7, thickness 1.5.
The last scraper in the series is a bifacially flaked petrified wood
implement which was apparently made for hafting. It is oval in outline and has two deep notches in one side that form a stem opposite
the long scraping edge. Its dimensions (in centimeters) are: length
2.4, width 2.0, thickness 0.5.
The scraping artifacts represent a very small percentage of the lithic
artifacts from this site. They occur in all levels of the test excavation.
Bifacially Flaked Blades. The blades recovered from the excavation
of this site are as follows: Type I, none; Type II, 21; Type III, 27;
Type IV, 5; Type V, 13; and 36 miscellaneous blades. The distribution of blades of Types I and II is shown in Fig. 9.
Hammerstones. Ten large fragments of stone show extensive battering along one or more edges. Six of these are long pieces of petrified
wood which are rectangular to triangular in cross section (Fig. 10).
The other four are made of assorted local stones, and all are rounded
in appearance. Most of these are battered along several edges and one

MCGEE

BEND

ARCHAIC

I~I

Fig. 10. Hammerstones from Runnells No. 2. All made of silicified wood.

shows evidence of grinding. Hammerstone dimensions

(in centi-

meters) are given below:
Length
Width
Thickness

Minimum
9.0
3.0
J.6

Maximum
14.9
7.9
5.1

Pigment. Red and orange pigment stones were found throughout
the excavation. Nine of these stones are a fine-grained hematite and
were used as a source of red pigment. Six others, fine-grained silt
stones, were used as a source of orange pigment. All of these pigment
stones show some evidence of cutting or scraping. In diameter they
range from 1.5 to 8.2 cm.
Miscellaneous Objects. Fourteen pieces of burned sandy clay were.
found. These are irregular lumps and none shows intentional shaping. Stone cores and flakes occurred throughout the excavation in
abundance.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Discussion. Runnels No. 2 seems to have been occupied intermittently during the late Archaic (pre-ceramic) stage. Evidence of this
occupation is found in the levels below two feet (Zone III B) in the
deep test area. A complete lack of perishable materials, features, and
hearths leaves the definition of this occupation primarily to speculation. Cultural remains from these levels consist of lithic artifacts
only. If bone, wood, and other perishable materials were used, they
have long since disappeared. The lithic artifacts from this zone are as
follows: Four Type I dart points; five miscellaneous dart points; seven
Type I blades; nine miscellaneous blades; one Type I scraper; two
Type II scrapers; one Type III scraper; two hammerstones; one Type
I drill; and many stone chips. Three potsherds were found in disturbed
earth near a rodent burrow in this level, and are probably intrusive
from upper levels.
These artifacts indicate that the first occupation of this site was by
small groups of nomadic hunters. These people probably erected
temporary shelters, hunted local game animals, and gathered wild
nuts and plants. The atlatl or spear thrower, used extensively by
Archaic hunters, was probably the principal weapon. No arrow points
were found in the lower levels of this site. Dart points of Type I were
the predominant type occurring in Zone III B. Seven blades of Type I
indicate that this type of artifact was a definite element of the earliest
occupation at this site. Some time after the first occupation a small
amount of sand-tempered plain pottery was made. Type II blades also
began to appear at this time. These traits apparently did not greatly
modify the pattern of life. Dart points continued to increase in number. There are no significant changes in types of dart points or classes
of artifacts in the levels from one to two feet below the surface (Zone
III C). One arrow point came from a depth of 1.5 ft., but this could
have been intrusive, as some evidence of soil disturbance by rodents
was noted in the field. Apparently the nomadic hunting peoples
adopted sand-tempered pottery and continued their pattern of existence with little other modification.
In the upper levels of the site (surface to 1 ft., zones III C and III
D) a few arrow points and some decorated, clay- and bone-tempered,
pottery appears. There are several possible explanations for the appearance of these cultural traits: the arrival of new groups of people
in the vicinity with these traits already well developed; or a gradual
diffusion of these traits into this area due to contact of the local population with other cultural centers. Dart points are still present in Zone
III D, but they have greatly decreased in popularity. A few dart points

MCGEE

BEI’~D

ARCHAIC

of the Gary type are found in the upper levels, and this would seem to
indicate that they came into the area at about the same time as the
bow and arrow and clay-tempered pottery. Gary points are found
throughout the southeastern United States.
E. E. I~UI’qt’qELLS No. 1 (41-42D5-5)
This site is located about three hundred yards west of E. E. t~unnells
No. 2 on a low sandy ridge (Fig. 1 ). The site is rectanguloid in outline
and approximately 500 feet long (north-south axis) and 150 feet wide.
The ridge was planted in corn at the time of excavation, and it was
necessary to harvest the corn before test excavations could begin. The
grid system (Fig. 11 ) was established with the base stake on the south
central edge of the site, at an arbitrary elevation of one hundred feet.
A five-foot wide test trench was excavated from NO-EO to N350-EO.
The first level was from the surface to one foot and extended below
the plow zone. Five-foot east-west test trenches were excavated from
NS0-EO to NS0-E50, and from N100-EO to N100-ES0: and to a
depth of one foot. Five-foot square test pits at fifty yard intervals in
the test trench were excavated in six-inch levels.
The stratigraphy varied considerably throughout the excavation.
Two zones were recognized. Zone II is a tan sand and extends from the
surface to depths ranging from ten inches to several feet. This zone is

wmo

~w,oo

~wmo

o z~w,o~

................. 4

J

99.

E.E,RUNNELLS NO. I
41-42D5-5

c

20

,o

eo

eo

,oo

,,,,. ,. ~.,

¯ Fig. 1 1. Map of Runnells No. 1, showing area excavated.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

macroscopically the same as Zone III of Runnells No. 2. Zone I is a
mottled red-orange and blue clay, and apparently corresponds to the
orange-blue clay (Zone I) of Runnells No. 2.
Zone II has three subdivisions: a tan, humus-stained sand, the plow
zone (II C) ; a humus-stained tan sand zone (II B) ; and a clean, light,
tan sandy zone (II A). Artifacts were found throughout Zone II.
Zone I has two recognizable subdivisions: a red-orange clay zone containing much sand (I B) ; and below this a very compact mottled clay,
red-orange and blue in color (I A). No artifacts were found in Zone I.
No trace of Zone I was found in five-foot test square N350-EO.
Further testing showed that Zone I lenses out in this area and Zone II
is underlain by a clean gray sterile sand. Little is known about this
formation; and, as it is sterile and has no bearing on the archeology
of the site, it will not be considered further in this paper.
Cultivation over a relatively long period of time has caused extensive water erosion of Zone II. Stratigraphy within this zone was of no
archeological significance. The cultural remains recovered during
excavation are very similar to those described for Runnells No. 2. For
the most part they will only be listed by type or identifying number,
but a few items are described separately.
Dart Points. Nineteen Type I dart points were found. Fifteen are
made of buff-colored chert, three of gray silicified wood, and one of
white quartzite. All of these points fall within the size range previously given for this type.
Five additional dart points are made of chert and have no diagnostic
value. Four other points are made of petrified wood. One of these
shows very fine workmanship on both faces. The blade is triangular
with convex edges. One side of the point has a weakly developed
shoulder, and the other bears no trace of a shoulder. This point has a
contracting stem with a slightly convex base. Its dimensions (in centimeters) are: length 4.4, stem length 1.6, width at shoulder 2.2, thickness 0.7. The remainder of the dart points are either fragmentary or
unclassifiable.
Arrow Points. Only seven arrow points were found at this site. One
is of Alba type, one is Perdiz, and five are unclassifiable fragments.
Three are made of petrified wood and four are made of chert.
Drills. One stone drill was uncovered by the test excavation. It is
a Type II drill and is too fragmentary to be measured.
Scrapers. One piano-convex end-scraper (Type I) is made of chert.
This is a fine specimen with a thick bit and convex scraping edge; its
dimensions (in centimeters) are: length 3.1, width 1.9, thickness 1.0.

MCGEE

BEND

ARCHAIC

Two other scraping artifacts were found. One is a Type II scraper and
the other is an unclassified form. Both are made of chert. Sizes are
similar to those previously listed for comparable types.
Bifacially Flaked Blades. These form the largest class of lithic artifacts. Fifty-three of these are made of chert and petrified wood, with
the latter material occurring more frequently. These blades are of the
following types: Type I, 3; Type II, 10; Type III, !5; Type IV, 5;
Type V, 4; and 16 miscellaneous blades. One of the miscellaneous
blades is bifacially flaked, and apparently was made for hafting. It
has a trianguloid blade with one straight edge and one concave edge;
broad, shallow side notches; and a slightly concave base. Its dimensions (in centimeters) are: length 7.3, width 3.5, thickness 1.0.
Ba~nerstorze. Only one polished stone artifact was found at this
site. This is a bannerstone fragment made of a dark brown, very finegrained hematite (Fig. 15, C). The entire fragment is highly polished.
A hole of uniform diameter was drilled through the complete width
of the stone. It is along this perforation that the bannerstone was
broken. Only half of the artifact was recovered. Its measurable dimensions (in centimeters) are: width 4.5, length of central hole 4.5, thickness 1.7, diameter of central hole 1.0.
Hammerstoues. Five large fragments of silicified wood have been
roughly battered on both ends. The largest of these is 18.9 centimeters
in length and the smallest is 7.0 centimeters.
Miscellaneous. Unaltered pigment stones, burned clay lumps, and
miscellaneous stone chips were recovered also from the test excavation. These were widely scattered and appear to have no stratigraphic
significance.
Discussion. The artifacts from Runnells No. 1 closely resemble those
from Runnells No. 2 both in number and in types. This, as well as the
close proximity of the two sites, leads to the conclusion that Runnells
No. 1 experienced the same sequence of occupation as described for
Runnells No. 2. A tabulation of the horizontal and vertical distribution
of artifacts at this site was of little value because the deposits were extensively disturbed by cultivation and subsequent erosion.

SA’vVMILL SITE

(41-42D5-9)

This was by far the most productive site tested during the field season. It is located on a low sandy ridge overlooking the Angelina River
flood plain (Fig. 1 ). Extensive testing (Fig. 12) was carried out during
much of October and November. Excavations produced evidence of

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

occupation of this site at various times from the Archaic stage up to
historic times. Relatively recent cultural modifications of the ridge
top include cultivation, a deep, narrow road-cut no longer in use, and
an abandoned sawmill which accumulated a very large mound of
sawdust during the years of its operation.
The exact area covered by this site was not accurately determined.
It apparently covered most of the elevated area in this vicinity and
may have extended out onto the flood plain at times. The deep central
midden, which was extensively tested, is approximately two hundred
feet in diameter. At one time a county road was cut across the center
of the site and removed a section of the midden about twenty feet
wide. Human burials were reported to have been found along this
road-cut in the past, but none of the skeletal material could be located.
Artifacts from test excavation of this site number about 12,000. Because of time limitations it was not possible to describe and analyze
all of this material. A section was selected from the center of the concentrated midden, and an analysis of the material of this section was
made (Figs. 15 and 14). For purposes of this paper, all of the potsherds from this section have been considered as a single group. A
complete and detailed analysis of this pottery will be made by Mr.
Jelks in his forthcoming report.
Stratigraphy was relatively well defined at this site. Cultural material was recovered by arbitrary six-inch levels and separated according to the geologic zones. The basal deposit (Zone I) consists of yellow to reddish sandy clay and contained no cultural remains. Several
deep test holes in the test trenches and in the road-cut did not reveal
any change in this deposit. Zone II is a sandy member immediately
overlying Zone I. A tan unstained sand (II A) comprises the bottom
portion of this zone. The upper part (II B) of this zone is humusstained and apparently represents an old stabilized surface with a
wel!-developed soi! surface. A few flakes of stone and an occasional
artifact indicate that the first occupation occurred on this old surface.
This zone is now buried beneath Sandy deposits up to four feet thick.
i~ ~

The origin of these overlying deposits is uncertain.
A clean unconformity separates the surface of layer II B from the
overlying Zone III. Zone III is a sand member several feet thick which
covers the top of the ridge. Cultural material occurs throughout this
zone, which is divided into three partsl Layer III A is an organically
stained sand of varying thickness. This layer produced numerous lithic
artifacts but very few potsherds. Zone III B is a dark humus-stained

sand containing much cultural material. Layer III C is the plow zone

I~¢ICGEE

BEND

ARCHAIC

\

SAWMILL SITE

41-42D5-9

~

200

_i..__~0
scale in feet

contour interval 2.0’
m area excavated

Fig. 12. Map of Sawmill site, showing area excavated.

148

TEXAS ARCHI[OLOGICAL SOCIETY

and is comprised of dark humus-stained sand usually indistinguishable
from Zone III B when both are dry. Potsherds occur in great quantity
in layers III B and III C. In several instances disturbance of natural
stratigraphy was detected in the form of pits and rodent runs.
The lithic artifacts from the deep test area of this site are described
according to class and type. Distributions of the dominant types are
tabulated according to both arbitrary depth and to geologic zone (Figs.
13 and 14). Pottery distribution was computed considering all sherds
as one group. Observations in the field indicate that the sand-tempered
pottery appears considerably earlier than other types. This will be
clarified in the final report on this site.
Dart Points. A total of 143 dart points was recovered from the concentrated midden area. Ninety-seven of these are Type I dart points
(Fig. 2, I-L). In this large sample certain small variations are apparent. This group was divided into four subtypes according to stem
shape. This was done primarily to emphasize the variation of stem
shape within this type. The distribution of each subtype is almost
identical (Fig. 13).
Subtype IA is represented by 24 points with poorly developed barbs
and broad, expanding stems. Bases are straight or convex. Thirty-five
points (IB) have well-developed shoulders or slight barbs and moderately expanding stems with straight or convex bases. Twenty-three
points make up subtype IC. These points have well developed Lshaped shoulders and slightly expanding stems, with straight to
slightly convex bases. Fifteen points are of Subtype ID. These points
have right-ang~flar shoulders, rectangular stems with parallel sides,
and straight or slightly concave or convex bases.
All of the above listed Type I dart points are made of silicified wood
or of chert. This group of 97 points falls within the size range previously listed for the type.
Five projectile points are of the Gary type (Suhm, Krieger, and
7elks, 1954: 430). Three are made of chert and two of petrified wood
(Fig. 3, B). The vertical distribution of the Gary points is shown in
Fig. 13.
There are 41 miscellaneous dart points. Two of these are triangular
non-stemmed rarities. One (made of chert) has a concave base,
straight edges, and is too fragmentary to measure; the other (made of
silicified wood) has slightly convex edges and a straight base; its
measurements in centimeters are: length 2.6, width 2.1, thickness 0.8.
One heavy chert point was shaped by the removal of large flakes.
It has convex edges, large side notches, and a bulbous stem with con-

MCGEE

BEND

ARCHAIC

vex base; its dimensions in centimeters are: length 4.8, stem length
3.0, width 2.0, thickness 1.0.
Twenty-one of the miscellaneous dart points are crudely fashioned
stemmed varieties of no recognizable type. Blades are triangular to
parallel-sided; edges are concave, straight, or convex; shoulders are
poorly developed; stems vary from expanding to contracting, but none

o, . . .

i.o, - 1.5’
1.5’ - 2.0’

E. gary
Dar~ Po~u~

v. Ty~ ID
Dart ~in~s

....... 5’ }iiIc

}

IIIB

2.5’ - 3.0’
3.0’ - 3.5’~ !IB
3.5’ - 6.0,

~

~o
~o

2

13

~//

!-/

21

~

13

V

63

40

2

SAWMILL SITE
41-42D5-9

J

VERTICAL

DISTRIBUTION

OF TYPES BY DEPTH
Fig. 1 3. Distribution of dart points (Type I and Gray) from Sawmill site.

~p~

zo~

To~
Dar5 Poln~

%

NO.

....... ~,)mo

s ~

o.~, - ~.o, )

9 ~

....... ~ ....

..... )
~.~, - ~.o,

~.~’
2.5’ - 3.0’
3.0, -

3.5’ - h.O’
3.5’)

ilia
I1~

~--~

1~ ~

/-/

~s

--.
--

I’/
"

t,o
18 ~6
17 2h
~ 3

B. Tot~
A~ Po~

%

/

~

No.

~9 ~
~ ~

~
\,,/

~

~

~

"

~

" ~

3

I

I

i

~

6

--

7

i

2

1

-\ /

i~

h

C. To~
~o~ ~s

\

/

\-7/
\__.
1"7

*

No.

%

~o ,~
~o ~,~
~
~
~
i

~’

~s
97
36

D. TX~ I

1.o, - 1.5,
1.5, - 2.0’

Ir~

~.5’ - 3.0’
3.O’ - 3.5’ )
lIB
3.5’ - L.0’

"~

SAWMILL SITE
41-42D5-9
VERTICAL

DISTRIBUTION

OF TYPES BY DEPTH
Fig. 14. Distribution of artifacts from Sawmill site.

TEXAS AI~CHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

is well shaped; and bases are concave or convex. Eleven points in this
group are made of silicified wood, nine of chert, and one of gray quartzite. The average dimensions (in centimeters) of this group are:
length 4.5. stem length 0.9, width 2.2, thickness 1.0.
Fifteen projectile point fragments are unclassifiable. The material
and workmanship of these fragments indicate that they probably represent types similar to those described above. For the purposes of tabulation, these points are considered with the miscellaneous group.
The last two dart points (Type Ill) in the miscellaneous group are
small side-notched varieties. The blades are triangular with one edge
concave and the other convex. The concave edge on each specimen is
steeply beveled. Small side notches form a broad expanding stem with
concave base. The stern is wider than the blade on each specimen. The
stem and base of these artifacts resemble the Frio type of dart point
(Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954: 428), and they are possibly reworked
points of this type. These artifacts also resemble Albany Beveled
Spokeshaves (Webb, 1948: 132). However, in this report these artifacts will be tabulated as Type Ill dart points. One is made of chert
and the other of silicified wood.
Arrow Points. Thirty-six arrow points and arrow point fragments
were recovered from the concentrated midden area. Ten of this number are of the Perdiz Type (Fig. 4, G-K), and their distribution is as
follows: Six points came from Zone III C, surface to 0.5 ft.; three from
Zone lit C-Ill B (mixed). 0.5 to I ft.; and the last came from Zone
III B-III A (mixed), 2 to 2.5 ft. This last Perdiz point may be intruslve at that depth, because several rodent burrows were noted in the
test square.
There are fourteen points of the Alba type (Fig. 4, D-F). These
points were recovered from the following zones: Seven from Zone III
C, surface to 0.5 ft.; five from Zone Ill C-III B (mixed), 0.5 to i ft.;
one from Zone lit B, i to 1.5 ft.; and one from Zone Ill B, 1.5 to 2 ft.
Three Cliffton points (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks. 1954: 496) made
of dark red chert were found in Zone III C, surface to 0.5 ft. These
three points are roughly triangular and crudely chipped. The blades
have convex edges, and the shoulders are very poorly developed. The
stems are very short and convex. All three specimens are fragmentary
and accurate measurements cannot be taken.
One point (Fig. 4, O) strongly resembles the Cuney type (Suhm,
Krieger, and Jelks, 1954: 498). It is made of a fine-grained silicified
wood and was located in Zone III C-III B (mixed), 0.5 to 1 ft.
Eight fragmentary arrow points cannot be classified. Seven are

MCGEE

BEND

ARCHAIC

made of buff to dark brown chert, and one is made of light gray quartzite. Five show traces of a stem; the others are distal fragments. All
of these arrow point fragments came from the upper one foot of the
test excavation.
Drills. Only three artifacts can be classified as stone drills. These
Type I drills were recovered from Zone III G, surface to 0.5 ft.
Scrapers. Nine scraping artifacts (Type II) were found within the
concentrated midden area of this site. These are al! made of buffcolored chert. All are thin flakes with small, convex, pressure-retouched scraping edges. They were scattered throughout the excavation.
Bifacially Flaked Blades. A total of 83 blades forms the largest class
of lithic artifacts. There are 27 Type I blades (Fig. 5, E, G-H), all
made of thin slabs of silicified wood. Fourteen blades, all made of the
same material, are of Type II. The vertical distribution of these Type
I and Type II blades is shown in Fig. 14. Eleven small biracial blades
(cf. Fig. 6, A-G) conform to the description and sizes listed for blade
Type III. The remaining 31 blades are all bifacially chipped, and are
of various sizes and shapes. The majority of these are made of gray or
brown petrified wood. They range from 4 to 8 cm. in length. Most of
these miscellaneous blades were shaped by the removal of large flakes
by the percussion method. A few specimens show secondary pressure
retouching along one or more edges.
Polished Stone Celts. Nineteen ground and polished stone artifacts
were found in the concentrated midden area. Two of these are small
polished stone celts (Fig. 15, A-B). The smaller of the two (A) is made
of a dark, fine-grained "greenstone" pebble. The poll end of the pebble
is unaltered, and the other end has been ground down to form a wide,
sharp, well-polished cutting edge. The poll shows signs of battering.
This celt is circular in cross section. Its dimensions (in centimeters)
are: length 5.9, width 3.1, thickness 2.5.
The larger celt (B) is made of fine-grained, very dark brown hematite. It is oval in cross-section. The entire surface has been ground and
well polished. In outline the lateral edges are slightly convex. The poll
is rounded and the bit is slightly convex. It has a length of 7.4 cm., a
width of 3.2 cm., and a thickness of 1.6 cm.
A small celt fragment is made of unidentified greenstone. This is
a fragment of the bit end, 3.7 cm. in length and 2 cm. in width.
The larger celt was found in Zone III G, surface to 0.5 ft.; the small
celt and the fragment both came from Zone III C-III B (mixed), 0.5
ft. to 1 ft.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig. 15. Ground stone artifacts. Celts, A-B; bannerstone fragment, C. From Sawmill site,
A-B; from Runnells No. 1, C.

Abrading Stone. A small fragment of light brown coarse-grained
sandstone has a shallow groove along one side. This artifact was possibly used for sharpening points of bone, stone~ or wooden tools, or
perhaps as an arrow-shaft straightener. It came from a depth of 1.5 ft.
below the surface. Its dimensions (in centimeters) are: length 5.0,
width of groove 1.1, thickness 2.8~ depth of groove about 0.2.
Pitted Stones. Seven of these (Fig. 7, A-C) were found during the
excavation of the concentrated midden area.
Harnrnerstones. 0nly three recognizable hammerstones were found.
One of these is a small chert river pebble, another is a pebble of milk
quartz, and the third is a long fragment of silicified wood. All three
show extensive battering on several edges.
Miscellaneous Ground Stone Arti[acts. The eight remaining ground
stone artifacts are of no diagnostic value. They are of various shapes
and sizes, and all of them show evidence of grinding on one or more
sides. One is light tan quartzite, one is light gray sandstone, and six

MCGEE

BEND

ARCHAIC

are of dark brown hematite. The smallest has a maximum diameter
of 3.7 cm., the largest a maximum diameter of 8.2 cm.
Pigment and Clay Objects. Numerous small fragments of red and
orange pigment stone were found throughout the excavation. The
average diameter is about 3.5 cm. Several small (up to 4 cm.) fragments of clay daub were found scattered throughout the concentrated
midden area. A few of these show vague wattle impressions.
Stone Chips. As would be expected in a rich midden, each level excavated yielded a large quantity of stone chips. These were primarily
chert and silicified wood. Most of the stone chips were discarded in the
field, after careful examination. One hundred and sixty-six of these
stone fragments were collected and catalogued. Analysis of their stratigraphic distribution yielded no useful data.
Pottery. A tabulation of the vertical distribution of sand-tempered
sherds as opposed to clay- and bone-tempered sherds, produced the
results shown in Fig. 16. This shows that the percentage of sandtempered sherds is relatively high in the levels between two and three
feet deep, but the percentage is much smaller in the upper levels. This
appears to support the results of a similar analysis at Runnells No. 2.
Considering the small number of sherds found below two feet at Sawmill Site, these results are not very conclusive. Numerous potsherds
were found in the upper two feet of the midden, and soil disturbance
by rodents could account for small numbers of sherds in the levels
NO
SANDY

DEPTH
0.0-0.5

NO
CLAY
SHERDS
2556

SHERDS

0.5-1.0

1405

92

1,0-1.5

565

66

1.5-2.0

200

26

2.0-25

95

4

2.5-5.0

26

IO

5,0-5.5

0

91

III

PERCENTAGE

OF

SAND-TEMPERED

SHERDS

PER LEVEL

L:_

PERCENTAGE

OF

CLAY-TEMPERED

SHERDS

PER LEVEL

-:

Fig. 16. Distribution of potsherds from Sawmill site.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

immediately below. The significance of the vertical distribution of
pottery types will be covered by Mr. Jelks in his report on this site.
Discussion. The Sawmill Site has produced evidence of a series of
occupations. There is no separation of cultural levels by unconformities or sterile members, but a tabulation of artifact types by depth
gives some interesting percentages (Figs. 13 and 14). These figures are
based on a relatively large sample of artifacts. There is little evidence
of a completely non-ceramic occupation of this site. No pottery was
found below three feet (Zone II B). but the following lithic artifacts
do occur below that depth: three Type I dart points; one unclassifiable dart point; one Type I blade; one Type II blade; and a small
number of stone chips. This material is too meager for any positive
conclusions. It can only be speculated that this ridge was briefly
visited by people who did not make pottery.
Above the unconformity separating zones III A from II B cultural
material appears in greater quantity. From two to three feet in depth
(zone III A) artifacts are as follows: 90 potsherds (mostly sand-tempered plain); 34 Type I dart points; 15 miscellaneous dart points;
4 Type I blades; 3 Type II blades; 15 miscellaneous blades; 4 pitted
stones; and one Perdiz arrow point. The arrow point seems to be intrusive into this zone from the upper levels. This artifact assemblage
reflects a culture based primarily on hunting. Type I dart points were
predominant at this time. The atlatl was probably used in connection
with these dart points. A dependence on gathering is suggested by the
pitted stone artifacts found at this level. The distinctive Type I and
Type II blades were in use by this time, and the local peoples had begun to use the sand-tempered plain pottery, and perhaps some of the
clay-tempered wares as well.
From two feet in depth to the surface (Zones III B and III C) there
is a steady increase in the amount and types of pottery in use. Arrow
points appear in the upper part of Zone III B along with various types
of clay-tempered and bone-tempered pottery, as well as Gary Type
dart points. Type I dart points and Type I and II blades continue to be
used in all levels, but these types greatly decrease in popularity in the
upper part of Zone III B and in Zone III C (Figs. 15 and 14).
The Sawmill Site was occupied mainly after the appearance of sandtempered pottery and the associated blade types. The most extensive
occupation of this site came, in more recent times, after the appearance of the bow and arrow and various types of pottery. It is significant, however, that the early traits continue in diminishing quantity
throughout the midden.

MCGEE

BEND

ARCHAIC

Summary and Conclusions
An archeological survey of the McGee Bend Reservoir was conducted in 1948, and approximately 90 sites were located and classified.
Extensive test excavations were conducted at several of these sites
during 1956 and 1957 by the National Park Service (River Basin
Surveys). During the course of these excavations it was noted that the
lower levels in several of the sites seemed to produce cultural remains
of a pre-ceramic occupation, l~unnells No. 1, l~unnells No. 2, and the
Sawmill Site were selected for study to differentiate between the late
Archaic horizon and more recent occupations. This task was complicated by the fact that there is no clear-cut stratigraphic separation of
the geologic zones at any of the sites. It was determined that certain
distinctive artifact types occur at all three sites and that the quantity
of these types varies according to depth (see Table 1). Statistical distribution studies were made, and these produced evidence which can be
used as a basis for the following general conclusions,
There was a late Archaic occupation at all three of these sites. This
occupation is characterized by rather crude dart points with parallelsided or expanding stems, shaped by percussion, and made from local
stones (dart point Type I). A distinctive type of blade was commonly
manufactured from a thin slab of silicified wood, and this shows fine
pressure retouching along one edge (blade Type I). A few other scraping and cutting artifacts are associated with this occupation in small
numbers.
The Type I dart points, which occur in large numbers at these sites,
are very similar to those described as provisional types 6 and 8
(Wheat, 1955: !99) at Addicks Basin, about 125 miles to the southwest. A sand-tempered plain pottery is also present at Addicks basin.
These two traits seem to indicate definite cultural ties between these
areas. Ford and Webb (1956: 62) also illustrate dart points (Kent
type) from the Poverty Point Site in northeastern Louisiana that are
very similar to Type I dart points. This indicates an extension of this
type over a wide area from the Texas Gulf coast to northern Louisiana
(and perhaps much farther) in late Archaic and early ceramic times.
To the basic late Archaic culture at McGee Bend a sand-tempered
plain pottery was added. This was accompanied by a new type of blade
with an unworked base (blade Type II), pitted stones, and other miscellaneous lithic artifacts. These elements all increased in popularity
for a while, but declined in numbers when, in more recent time, claytempered pottery, bone-tempered pottery, and arrow points appeared.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE I
Distribution of Artifact Types by Site
Artifacts

Dart Point

41-42D5-4

41-42D5-5

I

II

III

41-42D5-9
IV

I
II
III
Ellis
Ensor
Gary
Pogo

34
1

19

97

I
I
5
I
28

9

56

3

1

1

14
3
1
10

5

8

Type

Misc.
Arrow Point Alba
Cliffton
Cuney
Perdiz
Scallorn
Misc.

1
1

Drills

I
II

7
3

Scrapers

I
II
III
Misc.

1
6
2
2

1
1

I
II
III
IV
V
Misc.

9
21
28
5
13
36

3
10
15
5
4
16

27
14
11

1

13

5

3

Blades

3

9

31

Gravers
Ground/Polished
Hammerstones

I0

290
4642

Clay Temp.

63
7

Total

70

174

4932

Pigment

15

I

31

Wattle

14

Pottery

Sand Temp.

39

The totals in columns II and IV do not represent the entire excavations, but only
the areas used for distribution studies.
The totals in column III represent the entire excavation at that site.

IVICGEE

BEND

ARCHAIC

These latter traits probably entered the McGee Bend area from other
cultural centers by a slow process of diffusion.
The E. E. Runnells sites seem to have been occupied more extensively in late Archaic times than the Sawmill site. Most of the cultural
material from these two sites is assignable to the late Archaic and early
ceramic horizons (Type I dart points, Type I and II blades, and sandtempered pottery), although a small amount of later material (arrow
points, clay- and bone-tempered pottery) appears in the upper levels
of these sites.
The Sawmill site was occupied principally after the appearance of
sand-tempered pottery and its associated lithic artifacts. The most
extensive occupation of this site occurred after the appearance of the
bow and arrow and various clay-tempered and bone-tempered types
of pottery.
In my opinion, the appearance of sand-tempered pottery, Type II
blades, and a general increase in the number of lithic artifacts, marks
the end of the Archaic stage in the McGee Bend area.
It should be realized that the conclusions drawn in this paper are
based on test excavations at only three sites, and at the present time
there is very little published information on comparable material. It
is hoped that future excavations at McGee Bend and in the surrounding areas will give a more complete picture of the archeology of this
section, and of the Archaic stage in particular.

Re]erences Cited
Ford, James A., and Clarence H. Webb
1956. Poverty Point: A Late Archaic Site in Louisiana. Anthropological Papers
of the American Museum of Natural History, Vol. 4~6, Part 1.
Newell, H. Perry, and Alex D. Krieger
1949. The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoirs of the Society
for American Archaeology, No. 5.
Stephenson, Robert L.
1948. Archeological Survey of McGee Bend Reservoir: A Preliminary Report.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 19,
pp. 57-73.
1952. The Hogge Bridge Site and the Wylie Focus. American Antiquity, Vol.
17, No. 4, pp. 299-312.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOOICAL SOCIETY
Webb, Clarence H.
1948. Caddoan Prehistory: The Bossier Focus. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 19, pp. 100-147.
Wheat, Joe Ben
1953. An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin, Southeast Texas.
In: River Basin Surveys Papers, No. 4, The Addicks Dam Site. River
Basin Surveys Papers, Inter-Agency Archeological Salvage Program.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 154, pp. 143-252.

The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

The Development of the Atlatl and the Bow
OREN F. EVANS
SOMEONE

HAS said that in our study of primitive man we should be

more concerned with what he did than with what he might have done.
Nevertheless, by placing ourselves mentally in his environment and
reproducing, as far as possible, his lines of thought we can gain a fairly
close insight into how he reacted to any particular situation. Thus,
should some archeologist of the distant future recover a complete pick
and shovel from the ruins of one of our cities, it would not be very
difficult for him, by using a little imagination and having some knowledge of our times, to figure out almost exactly how" those implements
were used. In so doing, he will only be repeating what the archeologist
of the present is trying to do with the tools, weapons, and household
utensils of the prehistoric people. Thus, a similar study of the evolution of the atlatl and spear and the bow and arrow should come very
close to the actual way the development of these weapons took place.
After the club and the thrown stone, man’s next discovery in weapons was probably the spear. It took only a little experience to show
him that a long, slender club pitched lengthwise was more accurate
and gave a harder blow than the thrown stone, and with a sharpened
point it was a still more deadly missile.
For a long time the spear was supreme. It gave a deadly certainty of
attack and at the same time allowed a few feet of distance from the
enemy or the quarry. However, the force that can be applied to the
thrown spear by the unaided arm is very limited and man must have
long felt the need of some way of giving it a greater velocity. This came
with the discovery of the atlatl or throwing stick.
The exact way the idea came into being, we will never know. It
may have been the result of seeing a child throw a gob of mud from
the end of a stick or a green fruit from a limber twig. Whatever it was,
it gave some observant savage the idea of hooking the end of a short
stick over the end of his spear. With a little practice, he found he could
throw much harder and about as accurately as by hand. From that

16o

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

time, it began to come into general use and continued until displaced
by the invention of the bow.
The atlatl is still used by the Eskimos and the Australians and there
is evidence that it was formerly in general use throughout much of
North and South America. Yet the belief appears to be quite common
that the propulsion of a spear by the use of the throwing stick is very
difficult and that its mastery requires either a long period of practice
or that the technique is so difficult that it is practically impossible for
civilized man.
However, I once heard the explorer Stefansson say that a civilized
man can do, in nine months, everything a savage can do and do it
better. So with this statement in mind, I made a throwing stick about
16 inches long and cut a 5~-foot spear from a young willow. I sharpened the large end of the spear and made a cup-like depression in the
small end to receive the atlatl head. The atlatl was a pine stick about
an inch square with a shingle nail driven at an angle in the upper
end.

The first attempts at throwing were disappointing. The spear was
inclined to go sidewise and would probably have missed a cow at ten
feet. But a few minutes practice gave the knack of balancing the spear
so as to direct the energy of the drive along its longitudinal axis and
it was soon possible to hit a bale of hay nearly every time at 15 or 20
feet. After practicing a few times, a target a foot in diameter could be
pierced at 20 to 30 feet about four out of five times. From this it is easy
to see how the atlatl-driven spear could become a very efficient weapon
in the hands of a strong, active man.
My method of throwing is to use both hands, guiding the spear with
the left and propelling it with the atlatl in the right. If the movement
of the atlatl is carried too far forward and downward, it throws the butt
of the spear down and it either goes sidewise or turns end for end.
However, it does not take long to overcome this tendency and get the
knack of driving the spear in a straight line.
If the spear is more than about three times as long as the atlatl, it
is difficult to see how it could be controlled except with two hands. The
Eskimos are described as throwing with one hand from a canoe. With
a short, light spear only two or three times as long as the atlatl, I
found it possible to throw quite accurately with one hand by giving
the weapon a slight upward toss just as the throw is made.
Thus it seems that in the hands of primitive man who used the
throwing stick almost constantly, the atlatl and spear were probably
quite accurate and efficient.

ATLATL AND BOW

i~l

Although not all tribes adopted the use of the atlatl, those who did
probably continued its use until it was displaced by the invention of
the bow. It was very efficient under certain conditions, but it has a
number of serious limitations. It is quite evident that the bow is much
superior when shooting at an object in a tree or on the side of a cliff.
Also, arrows are more accurate and, although lighter, they have two
or three times the effective range of a spear. While it was possible to
carry only two or three short spears, 20 or 30 arrows can easily be carried in a quiver. Also, the bow can be used with less effort than the
spear and can be shot with less body exposure.
Whether the bow originated as a primitive harp of one string, as
our musical friends insist, or as a toy resulting from tying a string to
the two ends of a bent twig, will never be known. The discovery of the
bow was simple but its development into an efficient weapon was difficult and took a long time. The first real advance was probably the
discovery that it might be used to throw a light spear with considerable
force and accuracy.
Fortunately, dart points 3 or 4 inches long and weighing 1~ to 2
ounces were already in use. To give accuracy to an unfeathered small
spear or aITOW, it is necessary to use a fairly heavy head and these
small spear points were just about the right weight for the purpose.
Experiments have shown that for the greatest accuracy the center
of gravity in an arrow should be from ~ to ~ the distance of the
length of the arrow from its nook.1 This is because a featherless arrow
is mainly guided by the pressure of the air against the side of the
shaft. So the farther forward the center of gravity, the greater the
guiding force. However, if the center of gravity is very much more
than 3~, the length of the shaft from the nock, the weight of the point
becomes so great that the increased traj ectory interferes with accuracy.
Usually, arrows are from 2 to 3 feet long and five-sixteenths to threeeighths of an inch in diameter. It can be shown by either calculation
or experiment that they can be properly balanced by points from one
to two ounces in weight. It happens that stone points from 3 to 4~
inches long and of the usual proportions are of about this weight and
so work well on a featherless shaft. Thus it seems logical to think that
they were so used on the first arrows. There are even tribes today
who do not feather their shafts but depend on the weight of the head
for accuracy.
1 Evans, O. F., 1957. "Probable Use of Stone Projectile Points," American Antiquity, Vol. 23, No. 1, p. 83.

TEX2.S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Later, when some ingenious savage hit on the device of attaching
feathers to the side of the shaft, it was found that lighter arrow heads
would give just as true a flight, as good penetration, and a flatter trajectory than the larger ones. This discovery of the use of feathers was
a big step in advance. It probably compares in archery with the discovery of the use of the patched bullet in firearms.
In the light of the above, I suggest that our classification of projectile points could well be changed. I believe it is now usual to consider
points up to 1 ~ inches long as arrow points and all above that as dart
or spear points. Perhaps, considering their probable use, it would be
more logical to consider points up to 2 inches in length as arrow points,
from 2 to 4~ inches as either arrow or dart points, and above 41~
:inches as primarily spear points.
Although the weight of the arrow point is of importance in determining the accuracy of unfeathered shafts, it is of small importance in
the dart because of the greater weight of the dart shaft. With the dart
and spear the accuracy of flight is somewhat more under the control of
the arm muscles than is the flight of the arrow. Also, with the early
darts the distribution of weight in the shaft may have been almost
automatic, as the shaft was nearly always taken from the body of a
shrub or small tree and the thicker part used as the forward end, thus
throwing the center of gravity forward so that the weight of the stone
point contributed only a little to the balance of the shaft.
In my experiments with the atlatl I found that placing vanes near
the butt end of the shaft added to its accuracy. I do not know whether
primitive man did this or not. I have seen pictures of African natives
with masses of cotton or wool attached to their spear handles, but
whether this was for use or decoration, I do not know.
University of Oklahoma
Norman, Oklahoma

An Analysis of Archaic Material from Three
Areas of North America
MARDITH K. SCHUETZ
IN IiECEt’qT years there has been a great deal of interest in the problem

of the Archaic Stage as a continent-wide manifestation in North America. There has been much concern with the relationship of the western
Desert Culture to the Archaic complexes of the eastern United States,
and the place of Texas in the Archaic scheme of things. In regard to
this last problem, when Jennings and Norbeck (1955) first defined
the Desert Culture they included the western part of Texas within
the geographical distribution of their early culture. The acceptance
of early southwest Texas foci as part of the Desert Culture has, in fact,
been widespread.
As an outgrowth of research for a report on the Pecos River Focus, I
became involved in a continent-wide study of the Archaic Stage in
North America and northern Mexico. Several matters became evident
during the course of this study, some of them substantiating certain
existing theories about Archaic cultures and others presenting arguments against other theories which are currently popular. Since the

study is to appear shortly,

I shall

not

go into

detail,

but will

only

summarize certain conclusions:
1. There is indeed ample evidence of an underlying pattern of culture
throughout North America on what is usually called the Archaic level.
However~ the simple term "Archaic" has been used in so many different
contexts that it has become too indefinite a term to be fruitfully applied.
I have found it well to differentiate between a "proto-Archaic" and a
later "Full Archaic." I use the term "proto-Archaic" to denote an early
stage~ between 8000 and 4000 B.C., in which a degree of homogeneity
existed throughout North America.
2. Within the succeeding "Full Archaic" stage there may have been at
least three areas of regional differentiation: the Great Basin and areas
geographically peripheral to it; a southern area known principally from
Trans-Pecos Texas but undoubtedly including northern Mexico as well;

164

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and the Eastern Woodlands area. The study has presented evidence which
differentiates these areas by an estimated date of 3000 B.C.
3. Artifacts common to both the western and eastern United States are
due to the early homogeneous culture, or proto-Archaic, and not to the
later Full Archaic stage.
4. Texas does indeed serve as a link between eastern Woodlands Archaic
and western Desert Culture, but nevertheless displays a unity of its own
and should not be considered as marginal to either one or the other.
The study to be reported in the present paper was made in an attempt to see how similar or dissimilar the areas in question are to one
another. The method used was to compare the artifacts from type sites
selected for each area. Danger Cave in Utah was selected as the type
site for the Desert Culture (Jennings, 1957). For the western edge of
¯ the Eastern Woodlands, data were combined from sites D1EvIII,
D1CaI, and D1McVIII in the Grove Focus of northeastern Oklahoma
(Baerreis, 1951). For Texas, two points of reference were used: a
group of Pecos River Focus sites in the southwestern part of the state,
and a group of sites in Williamson County, central Texas, typical of the
Edwards Plateau Aspect(Schuetz, 1956, 1957b). For the Southeast, my
observations are based on Webb’s Indian Knoll report of the Green
River culture of Kentucky (Webb, 1946).
A few" observations are in order concerning the material from these
type sites. First, after doing the research for this paper I had an opportunity to observe personally the material from Danger Cave. I
found the differences between the projectile points from Danger Cave
and those from Texas to be so great that there should never be any
confusion between the two groups. Out of the Utah material only about
half a dozen points could be mixed with Texas points and pass unnoticed. It is necessary to stress the diminutive size of Danger Cave
projectile points, which is not obvious in the written report. The small
size of the projectile points also sets Danger Cave apart from other
Great Basin sites. Clearly, I might have selected a more representative
"type site" for the Desert Culture. Unfortunately, time has not permitted analysis of another site. I can only point out the drawbacks of
using the Danger Cave material and ask the reader to bear them in
mind.
The reason for using two type sites in Texas is simply explained. A
close affinity between the Pecos River Focus and the Edwards Plateau
Aspect has been demonstrated (Schuetz, manuscript to be published).
The basic lithic inventory of the two areas is essentially the same.
However, artifact percentages differ considerably and may eventually

ARCHAIC

IN

NORTH

AMERICA

shed some light on possible patterns of diffusion. The differences are
great enough so that neither group of sites can alone be considered
typical of the Texas Archaic.
Comparisons with a type site in the Southeast, such as Indian Knoll
which I have chosen, are beset with difficulties. In most of the southeastern site reports no attempt has been made to type the artifact series
except in vague categories such as "side notched" or "corner notched"
points. Few of the publications give actual specimen counts for the
categories, being content instead with "frequent" or "rare" occurrences. I have therefore had to treat the Indian Knoll comparisons
separately from those among the other sites.
Because of the factor of preservation, comparisons of perishable
artifacts are limited to Danger Cave and the Pecos River Focus. Where
Danger Cave lacked certain artifacts which have been found elsewhere
in the Great Basin on the same time level, these other occurrences
have been noted.
Comparing artifacts from one area with those of another in terms of
typology and frequency is a chore beset with many pitfalls; it has to
be done with caution. To begin with, only small segments of each culture can be compared over large areas because of the limited preservation of perishable material. This circumstance tends to distort one’s
view of the culture, throwing one segment--the imperishables--into
the limelight and making this segment seem to be of primary importance. In addition, there are problems which the investigator must
sometimes solve arbitrarily according to his own view of things. For
example~ a type described in one area may be described as several
types in another area or by another worker, making comparisons
difficult and often unreliable.
It is also difficult to equate time levels from one part of the country
to another. I have attempted to compare only materials of similar age.
A sequence of radiocarbon dates is known for Danger Cave~ but we
have only a single date for the Pecos River Focus, and two dates for
the Green River cultures. However, the Level V date from Danger
Cave and those from the other two areas correspond favorably. The
relevant artifact types from Danger Cave are all present in Level V,
although they all appeared as early as Levels II or III. Carbon-l
dates from Level II of Danger Cave are 7010 B.C. and 7839 B.C., and
two dates from Level V are 2050 B.C. and 2950 B.C. (Jennings, 1957:
93). The one date available from the Pecos River Focus, from the next
to top level at Eagle Cave, is 2600 B.C. (Schuetz, 1957a). The artifact
types used in the present study were all present in this level. The

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Green River culture of Kentucky (culturally the same as Indian
Knoll) is dated a~ 2950 and 3350 B.C. (Libby, 1955, p. 94). A date is
not available for the northeastern Oklahoma Grove Focus material,
but this complex is a pre-ceramic focus in an area where pottery is
known to appear in the late Archaic in at least one focus, the Fourche
Maline.

Lithic ArtiJacts
PROJECTILE POINTS

Many stone tools represent forms which have persisted from earlier
levels than the levels under consideration here and are therefore of
little value in trying to establish later relationships. For purposes of
comparison here we will concern ourselves first of all with projectile
point types.
Beginning with the Danger Cave series, I should explain that I have
arrived at my percentages by comparing counts of individual categories with the total count of Jennings’ W series through form W42.
Beyond W42 I could not always be sure of the distinction between
dart points and knives. Some of Jennings’ categories have been grouped
together where several forms of his series fall within the range of a
single type in Texas. Such groupings have been explained in each case.
Danger Cave-Te:cas Archaic Comparisons. Four forms of Jennings’
W series~W5, W10, W16, and W31--show similarities to the Pedernales type in Texas (for the Danger Cave forms see Fig. !, top; for
Texas types see Suhm et al., 1954:396 ft.). Pedernales blades are
highly variable in form, but the type is distinct in its straight stem and
deeply concave or indented base. Jennings’ W5 form might be considered somewhat marginal to the Pedernales type, since the base is
more concave than indented. W10 overlaps W5 in form, and one point
illustrated in the Danger Cave report has the typical Pedernales indentation. Both W5 and W10 are carefully made with fine pressure
retouching. Pedernales points vary from hastily made crude points to
finely made specimens. W16 resembles the variant Pedernales points
with slightly expanding stems. Stems of the W16 series also bear resemblances to the Uvalde and Frio points of Texas, but the long, slim
blades are not characteristic of those two types. W31 points with indented bases are like the Pedernales type in outline but are described
as having only one surface retouched, a technique not found on
Pedernales points.

ARCHAIC

IN

NORTH

AMERICA

Jennings’ W8 point form is similar to the Kinney point type of
Texas in having a triangular or leaf-shaped blade with concave base.
However, the W8 form has fine diagonal chipping, a technique not
used on Kinney points. This difference in chipping sets the two forms
apart, and I fail to see anything but a superficial resemblance between

W6

W5

W8

WIO

W16

WI8

W19

W41
DANGER

GAVE PROJECTILE POINT FORMS

(After Jennings, 1957, Figs.75ff.)

AI

A2

A5

BI

B3

El

C

E2

GROVE FOCUS PROJECTILE POINT TYPES
(After Baerreis, 1951, Fig. 14)

Stemmed

Corner Notched

Side Notched

Expending From Base

INDIAN KNOLL PROJEOTILE POINT FORMS
(After Webb, 1946~ Fios.51152}
Fig. 1. Archaic projectile point styles.

TEXANS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

them. Furthermore, both are found only as minor types: W8 points
constitute 2 per cent of the projectile point total at Danger Gave, and
Kinney points constitute 1 per cent of the total both in the Pecos River
Focus and in the Williamson County material. For these reasons I
have not included these two categories in the table of comparisons
(Table 1).
The better-made examples of the W18 and ¥V19 forms are similar
to Marcos points. The three types can be described as triangular points
with deep, narrow corner notches. However, bases of Marcos points
are characteristically straight, whereas bases of the W18 and ~¢V19
forms may be more variable. An even more distinctive difference is
the serrated blades of the ¥V18 points. The W21 form overlaps W19,
as noted by Jennings; the first W21 point illustrated (Jennings, 1957:
118, Fig. 92a, left) would fall somewhere within the Frio-Martindale
categories in Texas. The others are like W19. The three forms
W19, and W21--are grouped together in the table.

¥V18,

The w2g category is illustrated by two points in the Danger Cave
report: one with a broad expanding stem which resembles the Castroville type, and one with a contracting stem and heavy barbs extending
below the stem, which is like the Shumla point of the Pecos River
Focus. Because this W23 form would fall into these two distinct types
in Texas, and because it occurs in very small numbers, it is not used
in Table 1.
¥V28 and W29 points are triangular with corner notches and small
basal notches. They are very much like the Montell point in Texas.
¥V30 resembles the Frio point in Texas. Both types are triangular
with fairly wide side notches and deeply recurved or indented bases,
sometimes described as "eared." The ~N30 form differs from Frio points
in being thick in cross-section.
W41 shows some overlapping with the Tortugas type. The points
are unnotched and triangular in outline, with retouched bases and
blades. However, Tortugas points are often beveled. The W41 form
accounts for 3 per cent of the points at Danger Cave. The Tortugas
type is of major importance only in southern Texas, and its frequency
is less than 1 per cent in the Pecos River material and 1 per cent in
the Williamson County sites of the Edwards Plateau. Because it is
not typical of either the Pecos River Focus or the Edwards Plateau
Aspect, it is not entered in Table 1.
Texas-Grove Focus Comparisons. Proceeding to comparisons of
Texas types with those of northeastern Oklahoma, we shall see that
ten types of dart points described by Baerreis from the Grove Focus

ARCHAIC

IN

NORTH

AMERICA

(Fig. 1, middle) have parallels in the Texas Archaic. Comparisons
are limited by lack of information on techniques of manufacture
in the Oklahoma series~ so that we are dependent primarily upon outline drawings and data on size range.
Baerreis’ A1 and A2 types are like the Gary type of Texas. These
points have triangular blades and pointed or rounded contracting
stems. The size range is about the same in Oklahoma and Texas. However, the Gary type is not characteristic of the Pecos River Focus or
the Edwards Plateau Aspect, but rather is typical of the East Texas
Archaic. It is unfortunate that we do not have a control site in east
Texas with which to make more accurate artifact percentage comparisons, since the disparity between an 18 per cent incidence of the type
in Oklahoma and a 1 per cent incidence in central Texas might assume
a different significance if the east Texas data were brought into the
picture. It is quite likely that the frequency of Gary points in east
Texas is about the same as in northeastern Oklahoma.
Baerreis’ type A5 shows similarities to the Desmuke type, but the
limited distribution of the latter in southern Texas minimizes the possibility of a direct relationship. The size range of type A5 is much
like that of types A1 and A2, and of Gary points, and type A5 might
be considered as a variant of these three.
Type B1 shows similarities to the Ellis and Ensor categories of
Texas. In outline, B1 seems more akin to the Ellis point, but its size
range is almost double that of the latter. It bears some resemblance to
the Ensor type~ although the side notches of the latter tend to be
smaller. The size ranges for the two are about the same. Ellis is a
major type in eastern Texas, but I do not have a control site in that
area, so that we are not able to make comparisons with an assemblage
in which Ellis is a major type. Therefore B1 is compared with Ensor
in Table 1.
The B2 points from the Grove Focus are similar to points of the
Marcos type both in outline and in size range. B5 seems to be most
similar to the Marshall type, which includes points with a heavy triangular blade and basal notches. B5 is also similar to the Castroville
point, but the stem is too narrow in proportion to the blade to fit into
that category.
Type C from the Grove Focus resembles the Lange point with its
wide shoulders and slightly expanding straight-sided stem. However,
Lange points have comparatively short stems in relation to blade
length~ whereas on type C points the stems constitute one-third the
total length of the point. Such long stems are within the range of the

TEX2~S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Lange type, but on the Lange points a stem about one-fifth the total
length is more typical.
Baerreis’ types E1 and E2 have rectangular stemmed points corresponding to the outline of the Bulverde type. Bulverde points are
characterized by basal thinning of the stems, resulting in a wedgeshaped longitudinal section. Since we lack information as to the flaking techniques used on the E1 and E2 points, we can not tell whether
the similarity of these points to Bulverde points is limited to the outline or not.
The points of type H in the Grove Focus seem related in outline to
the Frio type, but there are evident differences. The H points have a
smaller size range than Frio points. The blades of H points are occasionally beveled. More interesting is the frequent occurrence of
ground bases and sides in the H series. This practice might be a survival from an earlier fluted-point, ground-base tradition. Several Texas
Archaic point types show the same smoothing of the bases.
Discussion. When the significant point forms from these different
areas are grouped according to appearance and their percentage frequencies in the different areas are compared (Table 1), some interesting matters .for speculation become evident. We find that seven
point forms are shared by the Oklahoma (Grove Focus) and Texas
(Pecos River-Edwards Plateau) Archaic. Four forms are shared by
Danger Cave and the Texas Archaic. Two forms are shared by all
three.
Most intriguing are the high percentages of Pedernales and Montell
points occurring in Danger Cave and the Edwards Plateau Aspect. If
we ignore the size differences that distinguish points from the two
areas, the Pedernales and Montell points constitute important types
in both areas.
The contrast between the high percentages of the A1, A2, and B1
series in the Grove Focus and their infrequency in the Edwards
Plateau sites is misleading. The A! and A2 types are comparable to
the Gary type~ and the B1 type is probably most comparable to the
Ellis type; and both Gary and Ellis points are characteristic of the
East Texas Archaic rather than of the Edwards Plateau. Close analogies can probably be established when the Grove Focus material can
be compared with material from the East Texas Archaic.
The high percentages of Marcos-like and Bulverde-like points in
the Grove Focus give rise to the speculation that the origins of these
t%,zo types lie north Of Texas.

ARCHAIC I~~ INORTH AMERICA

i~i

o
L~
v

+~

o
o

Q~

o~-~

c’q

~-

°

TEXA, S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Marcos-like points occur in high percentages at Danger Cave and
in the Grove Focus, but the Marcos point is a minor trait in Texas
sites. This distribution is puzzling in view of the fact that there seems
to be a greater affinity, in terms of point type frequency, between
Danger Cave and the Edwards Plateau than between Danger Cave and
the Grove Focus.
Frio-like points are not very significant in the Grove Focus and the
Edwards Plateau Aspect, but are prominent in the Pecos River Focus
and moderately so at Danger Cave.
A consideration of the dominance of certain point types at each
control site reveals some important differences. Predominant at Danger Cave are those points within the Pedernales range (¥¥5, ¥¥10,
W16, and W31) which account for 15 per cent of the projectile point
total, the Montell-like points (W28 and W29) which account for 11
per cent, and the Marcos-like points (W18, W19, W21) with a total
of 9 per cent. Other major point categories are: W26 with 8 per cent
and no parallel in Texas; W37 with 7 per cent and no parallel in
Texas; W30 with 4 per cent and a resemblance to the Frio type; and
W6 and W9, each of which accounts for 4 per cent and is without a
parallel in Texas. Of these last, W6 is described by 3ennings (1957:
106) as "perhaps the most characteristic artifact from the sites." It is
a lanceolate point with a deeply concave base, which would seem to
owe its form and technique of manufacture to the fluted point tradition. This point has no parallel in Texas.
Major Pecos River Focus types are: Langtry, with a frequency of
21 per cent; Ensor, 20 per cent; Abasolo, 8 per cent; Frio, 7 per cent;
and Shumla, 6 per cent. In addition there is a fair representation of
Edwards Plateau Aspect types.
A shift in the dominant point types occurs in the Edwards Plateau
Aspect of central Texas, major traits of Pecos lqiver becoming minor
and vice versa. The Pedernales point accounts for 23 per cent of the
total count, Castroville for 18 per cent, Montell for 7 per cent, Marshall for 6 per cent, and Abasolo for 4 per cent.
In the Grove Focus of Oklahoma, the Gary-like A1 and A2 points
account for 18 per cent of the total; the Ensor-Ellis-like B1 point for
18 per cent; the Marcos-like B2 point for 18 per cent, and the Bulverdelike E1 and E2 points for 16 per cent.
On the basis of the type parallels and percentage distributions presented here, we can conclude that the Archaic ]ithia complexes of
Texas and Oklahoma are more closely linked than those of Texas and
the Basin cultures. However, we can also tentatively point to possible

ARCHAIC IN

173

NORTH AMERICA

links between Texas and the Basin area on the basis of such distinctive point forms as Pedernales and Montell and their western counterparts.
Texas-Grove Focus-Indian Knoll Comparisons. It is hard to find any
great similarity in projectile point types between the Oklahoma-Texas
series and those to the east. Webb has classified the Indian Knoll points
into "stemmed," "corner notched," "side notched," and "expanding
from base" forms (Fig. 1, bottom). Otherwise the varieties are not
typed. The counts are given for "large" and "small" points, the dividing line being 6 cm., but these size categories cut across those based
on stem forms. The "stemmed" form makes up 20 per cent of the
total; "corner notched" constitutes a huge 52 per cent; "side notched"
makes up 27 per cent; and "expanding from base" (contracting stem),
which overlaps the Gary type, constitutes only 1 per cent.
The most impressive characteristic of these southeastern points is
their large size. They immediately bring to mind the East Texas Pogo
points which are regarded as possible spear points. The Pogo type of
Texas is something of a catch-a!l, encompassing large stemmed points
which display much variation in stem and blade form. The large
blades at Indian Knoll account for 24 per cent of the total point count.
These comparisons suggest that the Gary-like form was developed
somewhere in the East Texas-0klahoma-Missouri region and was
adopted as a minor addition to the eastern lithic complex, and also
that the large stemmed blade tradition originated in the southeastern
states and was adopted as a minor trait in Oklahoma and Texas.
What may prove significant in the final analysis are techniques of
corner notching, side notching, and rectangular stemming of points,
serving as criteria for regional differentiation. Major types in Texas,
Oklahoma, and the southeastern states could all logically be defined in
terms of variations of such simple ancestral traits.

OTHER LITHIC

ARTIFACTS

There are four categories of Archaic lithic artifacts found in Texas
and perhaps in Oklahoma, but which are apparently missing from the
Danger Cave complex and perhaps from the Basin generally, and
which are absent in the east. They seem to have developed within the
period under consideration here, and may afford strong indications of
links between Texas and the area immediately to the north. The distribution of these artifacts is imperfectly kno~m, hence my qualificati~m in assigning them to Oklahoma.

TEXA.S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

One artifact is the corner tang knife. Once thought to be restricted
to Texas, in recent years it has been reported from virtually all the
southern Plains states to the Rocky Mountain area and in northern
Mexico.
A second category of artifact is the Clear Fork Gouge. The type has
a distribution throughout central and southwestern Texas and has recently been described as having a distribution throughout the southern -~;wt of Oklahoma (Bell, 1957). Possibly the Clear Fork Gouge can
be correlated with the Neosho scraper pictured by Baerreis (1951),
thereby extending its distribution northward. It would appear to be
developed from the very early plano-convex keeled scraper-plane
which had a continent-wide distribution on a very early time horizon.
The third category is that of specialized knives which tend to doublepointed or lozenge-shaped forms with beveled cutting edges. They are
found through central Texas with Archaic material. An example was
reported by Baerreis from site DICaI but is suspected of being intrusive from the later Neosho Focus.
A fourth artifact type is a hand axe fashioned from a cobble with
part of the originally encrusted outer surface of the nodule retained
for grasping. There is considerable variation in the finishing of the
cutting edge, from a crude (probably hastily made) form to one of
more finished appearance. The hand axe is consistently found in small
numbers with typically Archaic material in central and southwestern
Texas. I have no information concerning its distribution outside the
state, but on the basis of other lithic artifacts common to both areas,
we might logically expect to find it as a component of the Archaic
complex of Oklahoma as well.

Perishable Arti]acts
A comparison of the inventory of perishable artifacts of the Great
Basin Desert Culture and that of the Pecos River Focus reveals many
shared traits. It also reveals a great many differences worthy of further
study when more material becomes available for analysis. The comparison is presented in Table 2; the matters of significance in connection with the comparison are summarized here.
I. Objects identified as arrow fragments were found in Level V of
Danger Cave along with atlatl parts. The provenience of probable arrows
from the Pecos River caves is as yet unknown and may represent a very
late cultural deposit overlying Pecos River Focus Archaic.

175

ARCHAIC IIN NORTH AMERICA

2. The functions of the small bows found in both areas are unknown.
Jennings suggested that his specimens might have been used as bow
drills. The bows from the Pecos River sites may have been snare parts. AII
of these specimens, from both areas, could be toys.
3. The knife handles described from Danger Cave are quite unlike
the Pecos River hafted blades. Only the trait of hafting knives is shared.
4. There seems to be a great difference in bone working between the
two areas. L-shaped and splinter awls predominate at Danger Cave. Awls
carefully fashioned of split metapodial bones predominate in the Pecos
River Focus and seem to have a more finished appearance than the Danger
Cave specimens.
TABLE 2
Comparison

WOOD
Rabbit stick
Pointed and grooved
dart foreshaft
Double pointed foreshaft
Barbed foreshaft
Tongue and groove
foreshaft
Reed shafts
Atlatl
Arrows
Small bows
Y-snare and trap trigger
Hearths and drills
Scoops
Fire tongs
Digging stick
Wedges
Stakes
Burred wood
Pins or pegs
Painted gaming sticks
Basping stick
Flageolets
Cane cigarettes,
cedar foliage
Paint brushes

Needles
Shuttle
Atlatl hock for reed
shaft
Cradles
Knife-scraper handles
Encircling-groove and
breaking technique

of Traits:

Pecos River Focus and Danger Cave

Pecos Danger

Pecos Danger

River

River

Cave

x
x
x
x

x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x

x

x
x
x
x
x

?
x
x
x

x
?
x
x
?
x

?

x
x
x

x

x

x

BONE
Awls
Flakers

x
x

x

Antler wrenches
Antler hammer-rubber
Pins
End scraper
Scapula rattles
Rasp
Grooved needles
Netting needles J
Beads
Bars of bone
"Shoe horn"
(bull-roarer?)
Horn spoons
Tubes
Grooved tooth pendant
STONE
(other than lithic
material described
in the text)
Net sinkers
Tubular pipes
Slate pendants
Other stone pendants
or beads
Single handed manos
Slab milling stones
Block milling stones
Abrading stones
Incised stones
Painted stones
Pictographs
Petroglyphs
Red and yellow ocher
SHELL
Mussel shell scrapers
Pendants
Land snail shell beads
Olivelta shell beads

Cave

x

x

x
?

?

x
x
X

x

x

?
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x

x

x

x

x
x
x

x

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1 76

TABLE

2--Continued

Comparison of Traits: Pecos River Focus and Danger Cave
Pecos Danger
River Cave
SKIN
Sandals
Moccasins
Blankets
Apron
CORDAGE
Fiber cordage, Z twist
Fiber cordage, S twist
Fur string
Feather string
Hair string
Carrying nets
Fish nets
Gaming nets
Knotted netting
Coil-without foundation
netting
Apron

X
X
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
?
x

x
x

CORDAGE SOURCES
]uniperus (cedar)
Apocynum (Indian hemp)
Arzemesia (common sage)
Asclepias (milkweed)
Cowania (cliff rose)
x
Linurn (flax)
Salix (sandbar willow)
Scirpus (bulrush)
Stipa (needle grass)
Agave (Lechuguilla, Sisal) x
Dasylirion (Sotol)
x
Yucca (yucca)
x
Gossypiurn (cotton)
x
TEXTILES
Headbands
Rattlesnake vertebrae
necklace

x
x
x
x

x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

Pecos Danger
River
x
Bracelets
x
Carrying chain
x
Carrying "nooses"
Fish stringers
x
Fiber storage bundle
x
x
Simple twined basketry
x
Diagonal twined basketry
Twined openwork basketry x
Twined wickerwork
Unique twined (see text)
x
x
Checkerweave
x
Twilled weave
Interlocking coil stitch
x
Non-interlocking coil
stitch
Coil: bundle foundation
x
x
Coil: half-rod foundation
Coil: one rod foundation
Coil: one rod and bundle
Coil: two rod horizontal
Coil: three rod bunched
Fuegian coil
x
Unique openwork
x
(see text)
Decorated baskets: added
elements
Over one-under one cloth
Basketry patches
x
x
Sandals

Cave

x
x
x
x
x

x
x

x
x
x
x

x
x

x

MISCELLANEOUS TRAITS
Cement hafting
x
Unfired clay objects
without tempering
x
Grass lined basins
x
Burials within shelter
Evidence of peyote and
mescal cults
x
Evidence of hunting cult
x

5. Although bone flakers have not been described from Danger Cave,
they were reported from Deadman Cave, Utah (Smith, 194.1) and are
probably components of the Desert Culture.
6. Two types of bone needles have been described from southwestern
sites. Grooved needles, probably used for sewing, are known from both the
Pecos River Focus and Deadman Cave (Smith, ] 94,1) and may have been
used extensively throughout the Basin area. The netting needles from the
Pecos River Focus, together with the shuttle, are unique net-making implements.
7. The absence of net sinkers and fishing nets in Danger Cave is of no
particular significance in distinguishing differences between the two areas.

ARCHAIC

I~

NORTH

AMERICA

177

Net sinkers were recovered from Leonard Rock Shelter~ Nevada (Heizer,
1951). Fishing was practiced in the Desert Culture where conditions
permitted.
8.

String made of strips of duck skin was found in Danger Cave; the

technique of manufacture is the same as the twisted-fur string from that
site and is unlike that from the Pecos River Focus.
9. Gaming nets are used here to designate the very long stretched nets
described in the Pecos River Focus. The only examples of netting pictured
in Jennings" report are two drawstring bags which seem to be like the
carrying nets described from the Pecos River Focus. Dimensions are not
provided by Jennings and it is quite possible that large drawstring bags
could have been used for trapping. Game nets were reported from the
Leonard Rock Shelter (Heizer, 195]).
10. Although lint cotton in unspun fiber form is found at Shumla in
the Pecos River area~ there is as yet no evidence for its use as a textile
source. It is listed in the table because of its presence at a presumed early
period and because of the contact with Tamaulipas~ Mexico~ which its
presence implies (MacNeish~ 1958).
11.

Modeled artifacts of unfired gray limey clay without intentional

tempering are shared by both cultures. The forms differ completely~ however. At least one Danger Gave specimen is an effigy. Others from the site
are unidentifiable. The two specimens recovered from the Pecos River
area are cigar-shaped.

From these comparisons we recognize first of all the divergent techniques of manufacture displayed in several industries.
The Pecos River Focus appears to have achieved a higher degree of
specialization in bone working. Awls seem to be better finished in the
Pecos River sites. Flakers are not reported from Danger Cave and the
other ~¥endover sites but are found in the Pecos River sites in sufficient quantities to indicate their importance. Such highly specialized
tools as netting needles have never been reported from the Basin area.
The textile industries reveal only superfici!l resemblances. Absent
from Danger Cave and the other Wendover sites are the sandals,
checkerweave and twilled mats~ and headbands common to the Pecos
River Focus. Twined basketry predominates at Danger Cave; coiled
basketry predominates at Shumla~ a Pecos River site. Though the interlocking stitch predominates in both cultures~ the non-interlocking
stitch runs a fairly close second at Danger Cave and is not represented
at Shumla. Further~ coiled work foundations are completely different
in the two areas. Three unique basket weaves have been noted from
the Shumla material. A unique sample of wickerwork was recovered
from Danger Gave. Just what these unique basket weaves mean is

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

impossible to tell at present. The construction, particularly the selvage
finish, of twined mats at Danger Cave, appears to be more elaborate
than that used on Pecos River specimens. Danger Cave also produced
a true cloth, which is absent from Pecos River. On the other hand, the
Shumla Site displays greater specialization in its cordage, with feather
and hair string.
Only two examples of netting are shown in the Danger Cave report
and we are not told whether they were the only examples recovered,
whether they were both constructed by larkshead knotting, or what
the dimensions are. We are left with the impression that netting was
not widely used and that coiling without foundation was unknown.
Plant sources of fibers used in cordage are completely different in
the two areas with the exception of flax, which was used in both cultures. And yet, all the plant fibers used in the Danger Cave area-with the exception of Stipa (needle grass)--are available in the lower
Pecos River area or in the area immediately to the west. We can only
conclude that for some unknown reason, inhabitants of the two areas
preferred to use different sources for fibers.
Noticeably absent from Danger Cave and the other YVendover sites
are artifacts associated with fishing, baby cradles, cigarettes, and perhaps pipes. On the other hand, the Basin sites produced painted gaming
sticks which have a widespread distribution in the Southwest. Perhaps
gaming devices are a typical Basin development. Bone bars from
Dan~;~er Cave, unidentified as to function, may also be associated with
gaming.
tt is unfortunate that data on the ceremonial aspects of the Desert
Culture are lacking, for such information could help to clarify possible
relationships with other areas. Of particular interest is the practice in
the Pecos l~iver Focus of burying the dead within the dwellings. This
practice seems to have been quite foreign to the inhabitants of the
Danger Cave area, since no true burials were recovered there. There
is much evidence pointing to highly developed ceremonial aspects of
the Pecos River Focus in contrast to the Desert Culture. Outstanding
are evidences of a hunting cult, as indicated in pictographs and painted
stones. These evidences could signify that hunting was economically
more important to the inhabitants of the Pecos River region, and!or
that hunting was pervaded with magico-religious observances to a
degree not found in the hunting practices of the Desert Culture. Certain artifacts such as pipes, cigarettes, rattles, rasps, flageolets, mescal

beans, and peyote buttons are also indicative of ceremonial rites in
the Pecos River Focus. Pipes and musical instruments are not def-

ARCHAIC

IN

NORTH

AMERICA

initely identified at Danger Cave. However, two bone artifacts described from that site may represent a tubular pipe and a bull-roarer.
Narcotics (mescal or peyote) have not been reported from Danger
Cave or related sites.

Conclusions
As might be expected, Texas and Oklahoma Archaic sites are closely
linked by their ]ithic assemblages. Projectile points overlap both in
form and size. Tools such as specialized knives and gouges may provide
other links.
The size differences between Danger Cave and Texas-Oklahoma
Archaic projectile points immediately distinguish artifacts from the
two areas. However, the presence of indented-base points of several
types in both the Desert Culture and Texas-Oklahoma cannot be ignored. It is of interest that rectangularly stemmed indented base points
of the Pedernales and Montell categories occur as major types both in
the Texas Archaic and Danger Cave. The Texas Frio and Uvalde
points and the Oklahoma H series, which also fall into an indented
base category, must be considered as well. The indented base point,
often termed "Pinto" in the West, has a widespread distribution
throughout the western states and represent a development parallel
with that of a contracting stem point often called "Gypsum" in the
West. The earliest known occurrence of a contracting stem point in
Texas is the Langtry type, diagnostic of the Pecos t/iver Focus. New
evidence indicates it antedates notched points (J. F. Epstein, personal
communication). However, with the contracting stem all similarity
between Langtry and Gypsum points ends. The Gary-like points of
East Texas and Oklahoma are more akin to the western type. If the
Gary and Gypsum types represent diffused traits, where is the route
of diffusion? The small percentages of indented base points of the
Pedernales and Montell types and the absence of "Gypsum"-like
points in the Trans-Pecos seems to rule out a southern diffusion route.
The Pedernales-Montell types of indented base points are not found
in the northeastern Oklahoma series. And indented base points found
occasionally in the Eastern Woodlands are of the Frio and H series
varieties. It will be interesting to watch for a possible route of influence across the panhandle area of Texas and Oklahoma. We can be
justified in a declaration of parallel development only when all possible diffusion routes are ruled out.
There is not much overlapping in point forms between Texas-Okla-

TEXA,S A!RCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

homa and the southeastern states as represented in the Indian Knoll
series. It has been suggested that the large stemmed point may have
originated in the southeastern area and introduced into Texas and
Oklahoma and that the Gary-like points found in large numbers in
East Texas and Oklahoma may have developed within that area and
been introduced into the southeast in turn.
In spite of the number of perishable artifacts shared by the Desert
Culture and the Pecos River Focus, the resemblances in this respect
are actually superficial. Manufacturing techniques vary considerably and set the two areas apart. Also, it must be borne in mind that
Archaic peoples of Oklahoma and the southeastern states were also
making baskets and cordage. The perishable materials from these
areas which have been recovered to date are probably from a later time
level, but they display many of the techniques used in the Pecos River
Focus and may have been known at an equally early date (Schuetz,
manuscript to be published).

Re]erences Cited
Baerreis, David A.
1951. The Preceramic Horizons of Northeastern Oklahoma. Anthropological
Papers, Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, No. 6.
Bell, Robert E.
1957. Clear Fork Gouges Found in Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 28, pp. 285-288.
Heizer, Robert F.
1951.

Preliminary Report on the Leonard l~ockshelter Site, Pershing County,
Nevada. American Antiquity, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 89-98.

Jennings, Jesse D.
1957.

Danger Cave. Anthropological Papers No. 27, University of Utah. (Also
published as Memoir No. 14, Society for American Archaeology.)

Jennings, Jesse D., and Edward Norbeck
1955.

Great Basin Prehistory: A Review. American Antiquity, Vol. 21, No. 1,
pp. 1-11.

Libby, W. F.
1955.

Radiocarbon Dating. 2nd ed. University of Chicago Press.

MacNeish, Richard S.
1958. Preliminary Archaeological Investigations in the Sierra de Tamaulipas,
Mexico. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, Vol. 48, Part
6.
Schuetz, Mardith K.
1956. An Analysis of Val Verde County Cave Material. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 27, pp. 129-160.

ARCHAIC

IN

NORTH

AMERICA

1957a. A Carbon-14 Date from Trans-Pecos Texas. Ibid., Vol. 28, pp. 288-289.
1957b. A Report on Williamson County Mound Material. Ibid., Vol. 28, pp. 135~68.
Smith~ Elmer R.
1941.

The Archeology of Deadman Cave, Utah. Bulletin of the University of
Utah, Vol. 32, No. 4.

Webb, William S.
1946.

Italian Knoll, Site Oh2, Ohio County. Kentucky. University of Kentucky
]Reports in Anthropology and Archaeology, VoL 4, No. 3, Part 1.

Witte Museum
San Antonio, Texas

Archaelogical Salvage in the Twin Buttes
Reservoir Area, San Angelo, Texas
F. E. GREEN

Introduction
spring of 1958, the West Texas Museum completed an
archaeological survey of the lands which will be inundated by the
Twin Buttes Reservoir in Tom Green County. This reservoir will be
formed by a dam which is to be constructed approximately seven
miles southwest of San Angelo, Texas, and will impound waters from
both the Middle Concho and South Concho Rivers. The results of the
archaeological survey indicated the presence of at least five sites, but
only three were considered of sufficient importance to warrant further
investigation (Willis, 1958). Of these three, a midden area on Spring
Creek was selected for test excavation by Charlie Steen, Regional
Archaeologist for the National Park Service, Region Three. The Museum entered into an agreement with the National Park Service, and
the excavation of the selected site was carried out during the week of
September 21 to September 26, 1959. This report contains the results
of the test excavation of the midden designated as TG-5 in both this
and the original survey report.
Funds that made this work possible were furnished by the National
Park Service, Region Three, as part of its archaeological salvage program. The Museum, Texas Technological College, provided the equipment necessary to carry out the project and also the facilities for study
and storage of the materials recovered. While the excavation was in
progress, personnel of the Bureau of Reclamation connected with the
Twin Buttes Project were extremely co6peradve and offered to assist
in any way possible. Mr. Joe W. Barnett, head of the Bureau’s Materials Laboratory, was especially helpful, not only in gaining access
to the site, but also in taking care of other incidemal details which
DUllING THE

TEXAS AIRCI-tEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

greatly facilitated the iob. To these people and organizations, the
writer is deeply grateful.
Site Description
The site designated as TG-5 is located in the west-central part of
Tom Green County approximately 10 miles southwest of the center
of San Angelo. The midden, which covers an oval area roughly 70 by
100 feet, is situated on a small but prominent knoll 700 feet north of
the ~Tpring Creek channel and has an elevation of 1,910 feet above sea
level (Figs. 1 and 3).
Spring Creek is an eastward flowing tributary of the Middle Concho
River, and as the name implies, contains numerous small seepage
springs along the banks of the channel. The Spring Creek channel in
the vicinity of TG-5 is approximately 500 feet in width and has rather
steep or vertical banks on both sides. At the beginning of the excavation~ only the deeper parts of the channel contained water, and only
a small trickle of water flowed between the holes. However, before the
project was completed, torrential rains had filled the channel from
ban]: ~o bank and a considerable volume of water was being emptied
into Lake Nasworthy, which lies two miles east of the site.
The promontory upon which the midden is situated has fairly steep
slopes on its south and east sides, and is the termination of a northwestward trending topographic nose or rise. Hearth areas, generally
consisting of a few b~lrned limestone and sandstone rocks and scattered
flint fragments, extend northwestward from the midden for a distance
of 600 feet and are c6J.afined to the crest of the rise.
The midden occupies the central part of the knoll and consists of
fill~ with no apparent stratification, made up of dark gray silt with
abundant pebbles and cobbles of burned and unburned limestone and
sandstone, angular fragments of limestone and caliche, and innumerable chips, flakes, and fragments of chert and flint. Mussel shells are
also abundant and are interspersed with the other fill materials. The
depth of the midden accumulation ranges up to 20 inches, but the surface of the underlying bedrock is very irregular and the average thickness would probably be no more than 8 or 10 inches.
The base of the midden deposit and the promontory itself is an
erosion resistant conglomerate made up mainly of pebbles and cobbles
of chert, flint, and limestone in a sandstone matrix. This conglomerate
is believed to belong to the San Angelo formation of Permian age, and
its high content of chert and flint cobbles was undoubtedly responsible

TWIN BUTTES RESERVOIR

Fig. 1. Rise on which the TG-5 midden is located. Large trees bordering Spring Cree~

185

can

be seen in the right background.

Fig. 2. View of trench in midden deposit at TG-5. Twin Buttes can be seen on horizon
behind tree in left foreground.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

for the selection of this particular spot for a camp site by its Archaic
inhabitants. The abundance of easily obtainable lithic raw materials,
as well as the great number of flakes, fragments, and cores in and on
the midden indicate that this site was primarily a quarry. On the
premise that site TG-5 was occupied for the purpose of obtaining raw
materials, a brief reconnaissance was made to a prominent outcrop of
the San Angelo conglomerate approximately 1500 feet west of TG-5
at a point where Spring Greek makes a sharp turn to the south. The
conglomerate at this latter locality is well exposed and forms a steep
bluff on the stream side. The outcrop is capped by a small knoll
covered with the burned rocks of hearths, scattered mussel shells, and
thousands of fragments of chert and flint. In addition to the debris on
the knoll, hearth areas were noted to occur in high concentration to
the east of the knoll for a distance of several yards. This latter site is
designated as TG-6 (Fig. 3), and differs from TG-5 in that there is
no large single midden accumulation even though the hearth areas are
more extensive at TG-6. Also, no projectile points or even fragments
of points were recovered from the surface at TG-6, while they do occur
on the surface at TG-5.
An unknown amount of soil has been removed from the surface of
the prominent rises which mark sites TG-5 and TG-6. This has been
accomplished by both wind and water erosion, and the result has been
the concentration and mixing of materials on the present surface. All
of the hearths that occur to the north of the midden at TG-5 appear
to have been let down by erosion, and the burned limestone and sandstone rocks rest on a light tan sterile soil. This is also true of most of
the hearths on the knoll at TG-6; however, off the eastern slope and
topographically lower, the hearths have been buried to a depth of two
feet in some places and may be seen in the banks of shallow eroded
gullies.

Methods and Procedure
The purpose of the excavation at TG-5 wasto determine by trench~ng whether or not stratification and separation of cultural materials
existed within the midden. Consequently, prior to staking out the
trench, several small test holes were dug at random spots on the midden, and the trench was then laid out to cut through the thickest part
of the accumulation. An examination of the plan view and cross-section (Fig. 4) will show that the thickest midden deposits are on the

187

TWIN BUTTES RESERVOIR

CONTOUR MAP
of
SPRING CREEK, TWIN BUTTES
RESERVOIR AREA, TOM GREEN
COUNTY, TEXAS

I~
I

Contour Interval = 5feet
SCALE
0

BASE:

U,S.G.S.

Map

0.5

I

MILE

~’1,

421-9

Fig. 3.

northwest side, and also shows the relationship of the trench to the
midden.
The trench was laid out in a north-south direction and blocked off
in squares four feet wide and five feet long for labeling purposes. Excavation consisted of removing the material in six-inch layers down
to the thin caliche crust which caps the San Angelo conglomerate. All

188

TEXA.S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

0

XLB3

A4

jAI
A6 jA7
r BI
IA2
iA3
CROSS-SECTION
ofA5TRENCH

\ \\~\\B

iI~ 1/}

>

B2

;Z

E

D

R

0

C

A8

IA9

0

K

Scale
Fee,
~ J

IlO

Xo
115

Feet

2? Feet

(horizontal)

Fig. 4.

material removed from the trench was screened and all of the larger
flint fragments, whether worked or unworked, were retained. An estimated 15 per cent of the total flint scrap was discarded because of
small size and the time required for sorting on the screen.

Analysis oi Artiiacts
Because of the abundance of raw material at site TG-5 and the probability that it was primarily occupied for the purpose of mining chert
and flint, there is a profusion of spalls, flakes, and cores showing varying degrees of work. For this reason, and the fact that most of the artifacts are crudely made, no attempt was made to sort questionable
items at the time of screening. These materials were brought in to the
laboratory and washed before sorting and tabulating.
Even in the smaller archaeological samples such as this one, there
are usually some artifacts which defy typing. This is also true of the
materials from the trench at TG-5; however, the major problem is the
separation between the partially chipped flakes or rejects and poorly
made tools. Thus an arbitrary and artificial category called "worked

TWIN BUTTES RESERVOIR

flint" is used to include all of those flakes which show deliberate chipping on one or more edges, but which lack shaping that would permit
them to be classified as scrapers or blades with reasonable certainty.
Projectile points. All of the projectile points fall under the dart point
category, and the types are listed in Table 1, which also shows the
vertical and lateral distribution of the different types. Most of the
points were recovered from the uppermost six inches of the midden
deposit, with a few specimens from the six-to-twelve inch level, and
none from the twelve-to-eighteen inch depth. The predominant types
making up the sample are Uvalde, Pedernales, BuIverde and Langtry,
TABLE 1
Lateral and Vertical Distribution of Projectile Points
TYPES
Uvalde
Pedernales
Bulverde
Langtry
Frio
Lange
Castroville
Williams
Kinney
Martindale
Marshall
Unidentified
Uvalde
~q
"7

Langtry
Pedernales
Lange
Unidentified

Ba

]

B,2

Bt

A1

A,2

..

1

..

..

1
l
1
1
’2

Aa A I A5 A~ Ar As A,aTOTAL

1
..
l
1
..
1
1
1
1
........
1
1
..
1
2
............
1
1
......
..
1
......
1
......
1
............
..
1
..........
..........
1
....
............
1
........
1
..
..
1
1
2
..
3
1

....
..

4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
8

1
I
1
I
.°

1

3

NONE

with several other types represented by only one or two specimens.
This assemblage is characteristic of the Edwards Plateau Aspect, and
the only unusual occurrence is the presence of Langtry points (Fig.
5, No. 3, and Fig. 6, No. 2). Four incomplete Langtry points were recovered from the test trench, and although they show crude workman-

TEXANS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ship, they fall well within the range of variation of the type. In fact,
these points also fall within the range of the Gary point type of northeast Texas, but the latter points are usually thicker and narrower.
Scrapers. Excluding projectile points, scrapers constitute a major
percentage of the other artifacts recovered, and they occur at all three
levels (see Table 2). However, there is no predominance of any one
type. The collection is made up of almost equal numbers of end-scrapers, crudely made side-scrapers, flint nodule or pebble fragments with
chipped edges, and primary core flakes with the thin edges sharpened
by pressure flaking. Scrapers showing better than average workmanship are illustrated in Figs. 5 and 6.
Ovoid blades. These are rather thick, percussion-chipped tools ranging from 5 to 7 centimeters in their greatest dimension, and from 1.5
to 4 centimeters thick. Their occurrence has been noted from burned
rock mounds in the central Texas area and from middens in the Abilene area. They apparently have no diagnostic value in regard to loci
within the Edwards Plateau Aspect.
Gouges. A total of eight gouges was excavated at TG-5, and most of
these are incomplete. They consist of thick rectangular or triangular
percussion chipped blades, and are bi-convex in cross-section rather
than plano-convex as are the Clear Fork gouges (Ray, 1938). These
tools were compared with the gouggs in the Ray collection stored at
the museum, and there are no apparent affinities other than general
shape between the gouges from TG-5 and those of Ray’s Clear Fork
Culture (Focus).
Knives o1" blades. Complete specimens of this type are lacking and,
for the most part, this category is made up of thin, fairly well chipped
broken tips or mid-sections of knives. Other fragments of more crudely
worked, but distinctly edged blades make up the remainder of this
type of artifact.
Drills. Three drills are represented in the sample; two by drill
points, and one by a specimen lacking the point (Fig. 6, No. 6). This
latter artifact is tanged and is of the type usually considered to be a
reworked projectile point. However, the chipping seems to indicate
that the design of the flaring base and tang with narrow drill point
was the original purpose of manufacture, and that the drill was not
an alteration.

Gravers. Of the four gravers found, two are flat rectangular flakes
with small narrow projecting graver points on the short side of the

T~¥IN BUTTES RESERVOIR

Fig.

5.

Artifacts

from

uppermost six inches.

1,

4,

8,

Uvalde points;

2,

Frio point;

3,

Langtry point; 5, 7, Bulverde points; 6, Kinney point; 9, unidentified point; 10, Pedernales
point; 1 1, gouge; 12, scraper.

flake. The other two are triangular flakes with the apex finely chipped
on one side to form a flat beak-like point.
Chopping tools. Three large percussion-flaked artifacts have been
tabulated as chopping tools or hand axes. The largest of these is shown

TEXA.S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 2
Lateral and Vertical Distribution of Artifacts

TYPES

Ba

B,_,

Bl

A1

A2

Aa

Scraper

4
1
..
..
2
..
....

1
3

1
..
1
1

1
1

1
..

Ovoid blade
Gouge
o

Knife orblade
Drill
Graver
Worked flint
Scraper

7

~o

"7

Ovoid blade
Gouge
Knife or blade
Drill
Chopping tool
Worked flint
Scraper
Knife or blade
Worked flint

..

2
1

1

9

i0

2
1
..
15

A4

A~

A,;

Ar

2
..
1
2
4
4
....
l
....
21
7 22 11
8
1
2
1

1
1
1
..

3

..
2

2

3

7

1
1
5

1
1

l
I

2
1
2

t

..
....
..

..

"

2

..
1

2

..
1
..
6

3

....
1
..
1
..
..........
....
1
..
1
.~
1

As AgTOTAL

1

2
7

11
8
5
18
2
4
117
3
2
3
6
I
3
20
1
2
6

in Fig. 6 (No. 5), and this one may have been hafted and used as an
axe, although there is no notching or thinning in the center.
Worked flint. This category is defined at the beginning of this section and probably includes some items which would be classified as
scrap or workshop debris by other authors: It has been pointed out,
however, that all of the flakes in this class show some intentional chipping and are not simply random flakes struck from pebbles or cores.
Miscellaneous. Only one small fragment of a grinding stone (pr0bably a milling stone) was found during the excavation. This is surprising since numerous flat slabs of sandstone which would serve as
excellent blanks are present in the terrace deposits below" the midden,
and they are also common in the burned rocks found in the midden
but none shows any signs of wear. A complete basin-type milling stone
and one-hand mano were found in a shallow wash several hundred
feet east of the midden, and a few fragments of these grinding implements were noted in the hearth areas at site TG-6.
One other item of note is the abundance of fresh water mollusc
shells which occur throughout the midden deposit and around the

TWIN BUTTES RESERVOIR

Fig. 6. Artifaci’s from slx-to-twelve inch depth.

1, Uvalde point; 2, Langtry poln~; 3, 4,

Castorville points; 5, ax or chopping tool; 6, drill; 7, scraper (from 12-to-18

inch depth);

8, mussel shell with hole drilled near margin.

hearths. At least three different species of mussels are represented in
the collection, but of all the shells examined, only one shows evidence
of being worked (Fig. 6, No. 8), and this has a single hole drilled near
the margin.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Discussion
In the original survey report of the Twin Buttes Reservoir area,
Willis (1958) concluded that the midden at site TG-5 belonged to the
Round Rock Focus of the Edwards Plateau Aspect. This was apparently based on the presence of a Pedernales point found on the surface.
There is considerable confusion in the literature in regard to foci
within the Edwards Plateau Aspect, and a lack of documented excavations which might serve to clarify the problem. As defined by Kelley
(1947a, 1947b), the Edwards Plateau Aspect includes the Clear Fork,
Round Rock, and Uvalde foci. Suhm, Kreiger, and Jelks (1954: 106107) do not follow this classification because of the lack of clear-cut
data, and treat the Edwards Plateau Aspect as a unit.
Although a thorough treatment of this problem is beyond the scope
of this report, the artifact assemblage from TG-5 is considered distinctive enough to merit consideration in respect to differentiation between the three foci of Kelley. The first separation of central Texas
cultures appeared in Pearce’s (1932) summary of Texas archaeo!ogy.
He illustrated artifacts (ibid.: Plate 10) of three different levels of
his "Texas Kitchen Midden" culture, and those of the Bottom level
clearly belong to the Clear Fork Focus, while those of the Middle level
would be classified as belonging to Kelley’s Round Rock Focus because
of the Pedernales points present. Kelley (1947a: 99) states that the
Round Rock Focus is the same as Sayles’ "Round Rock Phase" and
probably "Guadalupe River Phase;" and Sayles (1935: 53) considered
his "Round Rock Phase" to be the same as Pearce’s Middle level of
the "Texas Kitchen Midden" culture. Pearce’s report is not detailed,
but if his separation is valid, the differentiation between Round Rock
and Clear Fork foci by Kelley is certainly valid. However, a review
of reported sites, which under Kelley’s criteria should be classified as
belonging to the Round Rock Focus, shows that Clear Fork elements
are usually present. Even the characteristic points of Sayles’ "Round
Rock Phase" include Nolan points, which are considered by Kelley as
diagnostic of the Clear Fork Focus on a frequency distribution basis.
Seemingly, Nolan points and Pedernales points should be treated as
characteristics instead of diagnostics of their respective loci. Other
examples of Clear Fork and Round Rock "mixtures" are as follows:
(1) The Lehmann Rock Shelter of Gillespie County contains artifacts
in Stratum II which Kelley (1947b) assigns to all three loci (Clear
Fork, Round Rock, and Uvalde). (2) The Merrell Site in Williamson
County consists of midden deposits in an alluvial terrace, and Camp-

T~¥IN BUTTES RESERVOIR

bell (1948) reports that diagnostic elements of both Clear Fork and
Round Rock Foci are present. (3) The Collins Site in Travis County
(Suhm, 1955) contained a respectable percentage of both Nolan
points and Clear Fork gouges in an assemblage which might
otherwise be classed as falling under the Round Rock Focus. On the
basis of distinctive lithic characteristics, the term Clear Fork Focus
seems to be justifiable; however, the separation or identification of
Round Rock Focus components in the Edwards Plateau Aspect is
understandably difficult.
The third, and least known focus of the Edwards Plateau Aspect
was named the Uvalde Focus by Kelley (1947b: 116), who stated
that it comprised the upper and middle levels of Huskey’s (1935)
"Mound A" culture and the "Late Edwards Plateau" culture of Sayles
(1935). Kelley (1947b: 124) lists Frio, Montell, and Smithwick Small
Stem (Marshall) points as being diagnostic of the Uvalde Focus. Projectile points illustrated by Huskey (1935: Plate 14) as occurring in
the middle and upper levels of the "Mound A" culture appear to include Ensor, Lange, Smithwick Small Stem (Marshall), Montell,
Bulverde, Langtry and Marcos types. The lower level of Huskey’s
"Mound A" culture is omitted from the Uvalde Focus by Kelley, presumably on the basis of the presence of Pedernales points.
The Uvalde Focus is of primary importance in that site TG-5 may
represent a component of this culture. An examination of Table 1 will
show that Uvalde and Pedernales dart points are equally represented
by five specimens each. The Uvalde points as yet have no diagnostic
value within the Edwards Plateau Aspect, and are not connected with
the Uvalde Focus in spite of having the same name; thus, using
Kelley’s criteria for separating foci, TG-5 would be classified as belonging to the Round Rock Focus. An evaluation of the entire assemblage of the cultural materials from site TG-5, however, seems to
indicate that it has closer affinities with the Uvalde Focus than with
the Round Rock Focus for reasons stated as follows:
1). Neither characteristic nor "diagnostic" Clear Fork elements are present in the materials from TG-5, and it has been pointed out that these
elements are consistently present in sites which Kelley’s system would
assign to the Round Rock Focus.
2). Four Langtry points in the TG-5 assemblage indicates a stronger influence from the southwestern part of the state than from the Austin
and Abilene areas.
3). The abundance of mussel shells and the paucity of animal bones in
the TG-5 midden may indicate a preference for molluscs as food by

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the occupants. A strong parallel is seen in the "Mound A" culture with
its abundant burned and unburned shells, and Huskey (1935: 106)
concluded that snails were the principal food of the primitive inhabitants of the Nueces Canyon.
4). Among- the distinctive elements of the Round Rock Focus listed by
Kelley (1947a: 100) are numerous manos and grinding" slabs, sidenotched pebbles, and spike-like blades. These last two items were not
found at TG-5, and the rarity of grinding implements has already been
noted. Huskey makes no mention of manos or milling stones in the
mounds of the Nueces Canyon, so one must assume that they were
either absent or of rare occurrence.

Summary
The test trench through the midden at TG-5 produced materials
which suggest that this site is probably a component of the Uvalde
Focus of the Edwards Plateau Aspect, which belongs to the Archaic
stage. The thickness of the midden itself seems to preclude an extended occupation over hundreds of years, and the presence of Langtry and Frio dart points may refer the occupation of this site to the
latter part of the Archaic stage.
The abundance of mussel shells in the midden and near the hearths
indicate that molluscs were the most important food item gathered by
the inhabitants. The quantity of worked flint and flint scrap, and the
locations of TG-5 and TG-6 on knolls formed by remnants of the San
Angelo conglomerate which contains numerous flint and chert pebbles, both suggest that these sites were primarily occupied for the
purpose of obtaining lithic raw materials.

References Cited
Campbell, T. N.
1948. The Merrill Site: Archaeological Remains Associated with Alluvial Terrace Deposits in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 19, pp. 7-35.
ttuskey, Vane
1935. An Archaeological Survey of the Nueces Canyon of Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 7, pp. 105-114.
Kelley, J. Charles
1947a. The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Position of the Clear Fork
Focus. American Antiquity, Vol. 13, No. 2, pp. 97-109.
1947b. The Lehmann Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the Toyah, Uvalde, and
Round Rock Foci. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society, Vol. 18, pp. 115-128.

TWIN BUTTES RESERVOIR

Pearce, J. E.
1932. The Present Status of Texas Archaeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 4, pp. 44-54.
l~ay, Cyrus N.
1938. The Clear Fork Culture Complex. Bulletin of the Texas ArcheologicaI
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 10, pp. 193-207.
Sayles, E. B.
1935. An Archaeological Survey of Texas. Medallion Papers, No. 17. Gila
Pueblo, Globe, Arizona.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1955. Excavations at the Collins Site, Travis County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 26, pp. 7-54.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Willis, Lewis E.
1958. Archaeological Survey of Twin Buttes Reservoir, Tom Green County,
Texas. Unpublished manuscript. 5 pp.

Texas Technological College
Lubbock, Texas

Deductions Concerning the
Clear Fork Gouge
CYRUS N. RAY
nineteenth century several discoveries of evidences of
ancient man in America were made by reputable observers, but they
were met with so much ridicule and abuse that the evidences were
soon forgotten. It seems that the leaders of American anthropology at
that time had evolved a theory that none but American Indians of
Mongoloid stock had ever lived in America, and they for only about
two thousand years. These people had written books advocating that
theory and resented any disbelief in it. It is hard now to realize how
venomously anyone’s veracity was attacked, even as late as 19£5, if he
presented evidence suggesting that this idea was not entirely correct.
Personally, the writer never believed a word of this theory, because
it was an illogical deduction. After all, at that time all scientific circles
also believed the evidence that huge animals of proboscidean types
and of numerous widely differing species had gone back and forth
across the Bering Straits for a long enough time to have evolved
numerous different species on each continent. If the animals had done
it, man could do it too.
Into the hostile atmosphere of that time Dr. Harold J. Cook, then
paleontologist of the Colorado Museum of Natural History, exploded
in 1927 the news of his discovery of three flint blades imbedded among
the ribs of a Pleistocene bison, in the gravel bank of Lone Wolf Creek
near Colorado City, Texas.
This discovery gave the writer the idea that if ancient man lived
only seventy-five miles away he probably also lived near Abilene, and
I could think of nothing more thrilling than finding his remains. So
thenceforth anything involving time-consuming spectator entertainment and speeches by bores went out of my program. During the
summer of 19£7 I started a week-end search of the countryside with
all of the fervor of the seekers of the Holy Grail.
Gravel pits and river beds, and high gravel ridges where ancient
DURING THE

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

rivers once ran, and present day river banks from vertical cliffs forty
feet tall to the water’s edge, were closely examined and many evidences of ancient man’s presence were found in most of them (Ray,
1929; note p. 18 and P1. 1, lower panel, nos. 8-11; this is the first
mention in scientific literature of the Clear Fork Gouge). The implications of some of these evidences are so vastly ancient that the times
are still not ready for publication on them. Even during the first year
I found the bones of a strange curved boned race, and with them two
petrified shell beads, which no doubt had mineralized after they were
carved and drilled. I also found great numbers of previously unknown
artifacts of several different culture types, and these discoveries have
been described in the early bulletins of this society (Ray, 1930; note
p. 46, "Limestone Incrusted Artifacts;" P1. 10, no. 2).
The subject discussed here will be one ancient implement type out
of the Clear Fork Culture, the gouge (Ray, 1934; Clear Fork Gouges
shown on P1. 18, nos. 101,102, 104, 106, 109, 110, 111). Early in my
research I began to find gouges on the highest gravel-strewn terrace
tops which parallel present day streams at distances of a mile or more
(Ray, 1938: 193, Pls. 24 and 25). These specimens were thick percussion-fractured blades with curved or scooped-out cutting edges at
the larger ends. These tools were later found deeply buried in pure
culture aggregations composed of a great variety of deeply patinated
tools of either previously undescribed types or of implements which
greatly resembled European paleolithic tools (Ray, 1940). Within a
few months in 1927 I had collected about fifteen gouges of various
sizes which I would arrange in a row and ask visiting scientists to
name, and none of them could do so, nor had they ever seen them
before. One collector tried to convince me that the gouges were not
purposely made tools, but were flint cores which had accidentally
taken on such a shape. However, the uniformity of the curved cutting
edges showed them to be some specialized form of tool. Years later I
delivered over five hundred gouges to the Museum of Texas Technological College at Lubbock with my collection of stone tools and
ancient skeletons.
While there are several distinct types and sizes of gouges, with the
ends opposite the broad end finished into borers, chisels, knives, and
spatulas, all have the curved cutting edges at the broader ends. The
production of this type of end seems to have been so dominant in the

practices of Clear Fork men that a recognizable trace of the same
trait exists on the bases of many of the long fine knife blades of Clear
Fork time, and also on the bases of a few of their dart points also.

CLEAR FORK GOUGE

201

The base on these specimens has a square cut across the end, and on
one face is a shallow flaked depression.
There has been considerable speculation about the uses of the Clear
Fork gouge. Evidently it was not a woman’s hide scraper, as the culture
was abundantly supplied with large, crusted, flake side-scrapers, and
gouges were not abundant enough in any site to supply such a need.
I felt unusually successful if I found six or eight gouges in a full day
of searching over heavily eroded areas in the red silts of the mountain
valleys where the Clear Fork hearths lay exposed. It is unlikely that
other collectors had found them ahead of me, because at that time few
collectors collected anything besides arrow heads.
The scooped-out cutting ends might suggest that the gouges were
halted and used as we do garden trowels, to dig roots for food; and
their scattered distribution on mountain slopes, where such plants
grow, might suggest the same function. It is evident that some gouges
were pushed across a material of sufficient hardness to polish areas on
the flat faces. Both the specimens made on a flake with one flat face,
and those flaked all over, show such signs of polish. At that distant
period soft wood species of trees suitable for wood-working with stone
tools may have lived in a wet cool climate. We once found a large
gouge in mountain gullies in which Clovis points were also found;
this gouge had three smooth notches cut into the sides and end which
evidently were made so as to fit it to be tied to something. We have
wondered if some of the gouges could have been used as counterweights on the throwing sticks of atlatls.
Gouges have been found which have a calcium incrustation such
as occurs commonly on the older flaked stones from the old gravel
beds of the region, and this feature occurs fully as often on gouges as
on Clovis points. In the thirty-one years that gouges have been under
our observation we have seen no evidence that they were made or
used at a time later than many thousands of years before pottery was
made in Texas. There are twenty or more feet of silts separating them
in river banks where the ancient silts still lie in regallar age sequence.
We do know of two sites, however, in the Abilene region, where the
forces which aggrade apparently have balanced those which erode so
evenly that as each generation of types of men occupied the low creek
bank sites, their various types of flint tools were let down into a common soil mixture of everything from Folsom and Clovis points, and
Clear Fork gouges, on up to the unpatinated arrow heads and endscrapers of the latest pottery culture of the region, the Valley Creek.
In such sites, examples of almost everything used by stone age man

TEXA.S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig. 1. Two views of the Hedges Site, looking east. The photographs were taken in 1959.
The section of the bank shown

in the top photograph is to the right (south)

of that

in

the lower view.
The bank has caved off and its

lower half is covered with top silts in which vegeta,’ion

has grown, so that study of the lower part of the bank is more difficult than when the site
was first described. In the upper photograph, and the right-hand part of the lower photograph,

horizontal

lines

mark

major

indicate climatic changes as well.

changes

in

silt

textures

and

colors,

and

probably

They probably also denote old valley floor levels which

persisted for considerable time periods. There was a tendency for

camp site hearths and

debris to accumulate on these lines.
The Clear Fork Culture camp site formerly exposed in the Hedges site was to the south,
beyond the right end of the upper photograph, in the lower zone of vegetation. The excavation made by the W.P.A.-Texas Technological College was at the

left end of the

lower

CLEAR FORK GOUGE

203

during the ages back to the Pleistocene can be found on one plowed
field. Such sites are very confusing to an inexperienced student until
he has worked out the correct age placement of the artifacts in undisturbed stratified deposits. All over a vast area of the Callahan
Divide, which separates the watersheds of the Colorado and Brazos
Rivers, three distinct sheets of silt were laid down, largely by wind
action as well as water, which have the same relative placement on
the uplands as along the river valleys below. The top silt layer is
composed of the pinkish-tan sandy Nugent Silts. The second layer is
composed of red silt and gravels of the Upper Clear Fork Silt, and
below that is the dark red clayey Lower Clear Fork Silt.
In this area most of the light sandy Nugent Silts have been carried
away by the runoff from steeper slopes in the mountains, and this
erosion has exposed large areas of the two older more compact Clear
Fork Silts, which lie below the Nugent Silts, so that they can be inspected from their top surfaces. Here whole campsites lie imbedded,
which date from Clear Fork times, and numerous hearths lie exposed
in the Upper Clear Fork Silt. In the deep gullies worn down into
these silts the Clear Fork hearths and implements occur in a zone of
gravel between the Upper and Lower Clear Fork Silts. Once the
Upper Clear Fork zone of occupation has been identified, it can be easily
traced all over the area as the gravel zone in which most of the ancient
hearths are found. Whereas some of the campsites may be observed
on the top of eroded silt surfaces, sites of the same age in the lower
river valleys are covered with twenty or more feet of Nugent deposits,
and it is like hunting for a raisin in the edge of a layer cake to find a
flint blade in the edge of a stratum only a few feet thick along a steep
vertical river bank (Ray, 1944-45; 1946~ 1955).
Another thing not understood by the casual obse~wer is that a river
bank thirty feet high may have at one place a complete stratified
record in it from the most recent Indian back to Pleistocene man,
whereas a few hundred feet upstream or downstream the same bank
may have been gullied and later refilled to the same height--a process
photograph. The large mesquite tree marks the southern edge of that excavation, which
was made into a recenHy refilled river bank deposit. The ancient river strata indicated by
the horizontal lines in the upper photograph extend across the lower view and end at the
dark spot about 25 ft. south of the W.P.A. excavation. From the dark spot northward to the
end of the bank, the silt has no stratification and is of uniform texture and color from
bottom to top, and doubless is no more than a few hundred years old. Consequently, the
W.P.A. excavation was made in a fill that is of no value in determining the age of the
ancient silts.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig. 2. The Gibson Site on Elm Creek, as it appeared in 1959. When discovered by the
writer in 1930, it contained numerous hearths, abundant charcoal deposits, man-made flint
chips, and some complete flint artifacts, eroding from strata varying in depth from 24 to 30
ft. below the surface. The material was exposed for a distance of 125 ft. along the bank.
The situation at that time is shown in Ray, 1930, Plate 11, Figs. 3 and 4, and Plate 15.
The site is situated where Elm Creek, turning shorply east from a north-south course, undercuts the bank and causes cave-offs. The bank is 30 ft. high and has probably receded westward as much as 20 ft. during the 30 years it has been studied. During all of that period
charcoal, flakes, hearths, and occasional complete Clear Fork points and other ancient point
types such as Clovis points have been found imbedded in the hard red silt in the Upper and
Lower Clear Fork strata shown near the bottom of the bank.
At the present time campsite evidences seem to be thinning out, but in this latest picture
a considerable deposit of charcoal shows in the hard red silt 8 ft. directly below the left end

CLEAR

FORK GOUGE

20~

sometimes taking only a few hundred years--the new fill consisting
of top-level plow-depth silt containing unpatinated flints of the most
recent stone age Indians of the region. Such a bank refill is an
amorphous sand bar mixture of no age significance. It may contain
anything formerly held by the older banks above it. The serious student can learn to identify this development easily near Ft. Griffin, as
there is no stratified banding in such recent refills and the sandy
textured amorphous silt is of the same color from top to bottom.
We visited the excavation at South Bend while it was in progress.
It was situated where two branches of the Brazos River join, with a
narrow sand bar between them, and the site consisted of a deposit of
amorphous sandy silt left by the overflows of the two streams. There
was no stratification from the bottom to the top of the bank, and it
was all of the same color and texture. Here people of the latest flint
culture of the region, the Valley Creek, had buried their dead during
dry periods, and may have lived on the same sand bar during similar
times between floods. Accretion evidently progressed rapidly in such
a place and the grave depths mean nothing of any age consequence on
a sand bar, and any serious student of anthropology Should know
better than to attempt such conclusions as have been made by some.
Such refills occurred extensively near Ft. Griffin and at intervals all
along the branches of the upper Brazos River. The Valley Creek
Culture there also contains Rio Grande trade potsherds such as were
alleged to have been found in the South Bend sand bar. Long ago
Dr. Mera of the Laboratory of Anthropology in Santa Fe identified
Pueblo sherds I sent him from a Valley Creek site as "Rio Grande
Glaze paint ware which was dated from early in the 14th century
A.D. to about 1700" (Ray, 1935: 83-84).
In the Abilene region there are several recent refills of areas adjoining ancient stratified river bank deposits, and these have caused
some serious errors by unwary diggers sent there. There is one top-tobottom refill of amorphous silt adioining the Gibson Site on the northeast end, and another one was at the north end of the Hodges Site
until it was excavated at great expense by the W.P.A. with no definite
results. In the latter case, we asked the Texas Technological College
to excavate a Clear Fork Culture site several hundred feet south of
where they decided to do their work. They dug out a recently refilled
river bed where the stream ran not more than a few hundred years
of the bottom of the large cave-off scar in the center of the picture. The marker set on the
charcoal

shows dimly on the lowest dark stratum. Just below that is caved-off material at

the base of the bank, and the light area below that is the dry creek bed.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ago. The old filled channel could still be traced by its outlines, as it
had cut through the north end of the ancient stratified deposits, and
also by a chain of shallow surface sloughs which had not yet entirely
refilled and still held water after rains. Why the superintendent of
the excavation rejected our recommendations we do not know. On the
spot I had picked to dig, a Clear Fork Culture accumulation of burned
rocks in a long line had been eroding for years at a depth of twenty
feet in the ancient stratified section of the bank. From the exposed
edge of the deposit I had dug portions of a Clear Fork metate, a whole
worn mano, and two Clear Fork Gouges, along with considerable
charcoal.
The mistake made at the Hodges site can still be seen plainly if one
views the whole east bank from the top of the west bank when the
late afternoon rays of the sun illuminate it fully (Fig. 1 ). The banded
or stratified deposit is seen to stop near the south end of the W.P.A.
excavation, and the bank from there northward to the edge of the
excavation is seen to be an amorphous recent Ft. Griffin type of refill
from bottom to top.
l~everting to the claims that four Clear Fork Gouges were found
in the South Bend sand bar with a Rio Grande potsherd, and that it
proves that the gouge is only a few hundreds of years old, the writer
visited the site while it was being excavated, and only Valley Creek
flints were shown to us, but no gouges, and the pictures shown in the
later report were too poor to tell whether they were of gouges or not;
but if they were, it proves exactly nothing. We once found a section
of the bone which supported a Permian Ship Lizard’s dorsal sail fin
in a hearth deposit of the 24 feet deep Upper Clear Fork Silt level at
the Gibson Site, which was also full of charcoal and burned rocks, and
in which Clear Fork darts were found. However, we did not rush into
print with any great discovery that the Ship Lizard of the Permian
Period lived until Clear Fork times.

Re]erences Cited
Ray, Cyrus N.
1929. A Differentiation of the Prehistoric Cultures of the Abilene Section. Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 1, pp.
7-22.
1950. Report on Some Recent Archaeological Researches in the Abilene Section,
Ibid., Vol. 2, pp. 45-58.

1934. Flint Cultures of Ancient Man in Texas. Ibid., Vol. 6, pp. 107-111.
1955. The Pottery Complex Artifacts of the Abilene Region. Ibid., Vol. 7, pp.
70-88.

CLEAR FORK

GOUGE

207

1938. The Clear Fork Culture Complex. Ibid., Vol. 10, pp. 193-207.
1940. The Deeply Buried Gibson Site. Ibid., Vol. 12, pp. 223-237.
1944-45. Stream Bank Silts of the Abilene Region. Ibid., Vol. 16, pp. 117-147.
1946. Scientists Inspect Ancient Hearths in River Silts. Ibid., Vol. 17, pp. 1041955.

107, Plates 22-24.
Stone Lined Basin With Charcoal in Lower Clear Fork Silt. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, ¥ol. 26, pp. 101-110.

Abilene, Texas

The Elida Site, Evidence of a Folsom
Occupation in Roosevelt County,
Eastern New Mexico
JAMES M. WARNICA

EARLY MAN SITES afford us a dim view into a distant past, but because
of their scarcity the knowledge has come to us very slowly, bit by bit.
The information these sites provide is priceless, and for the most part a
great amount of time and labor is required to collect and compile the
data obtained from them. Hunting or kill sites give us a very good
idea of how the early hunters ki!led and butchered large game animals, which was their primary source of food. This knowledge comes
mainly from the projectile points that were left in the animal when
it was killed and butchered. Today as excavations are carried out
these projectile points are found with the fossil animal remains and
are assumed to be, for the most part, the primary cause of death at
the hands of Early Man.
Campsites generally provide a better record of the culture of these
early peoples. This record te!ls something of their way of life that
would not be known were these campsites not found and the information they provide not published. This paper is an account of the discovery of a Folsom campsite and the artifacts found there.
This site, here named the Elida site, is located in a sand dune area
six miles east and 12 miles south of Elida, Roosevelt County, New
Mexico, on the Bill Smith Ranch. This locality is some 27 miles southsouthwest of Portales, New Mexico. At one time the site was a cultivated field, but it has long since been abandoned and wind erosion has
scoured it down to a caliche formation over a large area. The artifacts
were found resting on this caliche formation, which normally underlies a red sandy-clay stratum. It is believed that the surface-collected
artifacts were originally in the lower part of the sandy-clay stratum or
in the top part of the caliche. The materials collected suggest that the
Elida site was not only a campsite but a workshop area.
The site was first visited in the afternoon of April 29, 1956, by

2 I0

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig. 1. Projectile points from the Elida site, eastern New Mexico.

ELIDA SITE, NEW MEXICO

Charles Harrison and James M. Warnica of Portales, New Mexico.
Because of the lateness of the hour only a short time was spent at the
site. One complete projectile point (Fig. 1, A), one basal fragment of
another point (Fig. 1, J), and one scraper were collected on this visit.
At the time it was not realized that this was a Folsom campsite.
A second visit to the site was made two days later. The individuals
making this second visit were Charles Harrison, D. L. Hankins, and
James M. Warnica of Portales, New Mexico, and Don Krieble of
Lubbock, Texas. The artifacts collected at this time included one complete projectile point (Fig. 1, C), another point with the distal tip
missing (Fig. 1, B), and a third point that seems to have been broken
when fluting was attempted (Fig. 1, H), as well as several scrapers and
tiny, finely chipped gravers, and a large number of small flint chips,
the residue from manufacture of artifacts. This assemblage seemed
to indicate a Folsom campsite, and Dr. E. H. Sellards of the Texas
Memorial Museum in Austin, Texas, was notified.
A third visit to the site was made in June, 1956. The party consisted of Dr. E. H. Sellards and Otto Schoen of the Texas Memorial
Museum, Don Krieble of Lubbock, Texas, and James M. Warnica.
The time was spent in collecting artifacts from the surface and studying the site. One complete projectile point (Fig. 1, I), two basal fragments (Fig. 1, D, K), and a few scrapers and gravers were collected.
To date a total of 82 artifacts has been collected from the Elida site.
These include eight complete or relatively complete points, 16 fragmentary points, 32 scrapers, 13 gravers, four channel flakes from
fluted points, nine miscellaneous implements, and a large number of
flint flakes.
One point (Fig. 1, H) appears to have been broken when the Folsom
people attempted to remove a channel flake. The person who made the
point roughly shaped it; then he seems to have placed the tip against
a solid object and struck the base a sharp blow. The fracture traveled
up the face for 23 mm. and then turned abruptly through the middle
of the blade, breaking it into two parts. Evidently the force of the blow
caused a smaller flute to travel from the tip for 20 mm. back toward
the base on the opposite face of the blade from the main flute. When
found the point was in three pieces some distance apart. When placed
together they fit perfectly. Only the channel flakes are missing.
The only fossil remains found in the campsite area were a few fragments of animal teeth, but there is no proof of their association with
the artifacts.
It must be assumed that the climate was considerably different

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

21 2

B

D

E

d

Fig.

2.

K

Gravers from the Elida site, eastern New Mexico.

when the campsite material was laid down. The only natural water
near the site today is to be found in pluvial lake beds that are dry
except after heavy rains. There also must have been a shortage of

F

N

o

t

2

3

CM
Fig. 3. Scrapers from the Elida site, eastern New Mexico. End-scrapers, A-M; sidescrapers, N-P.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE I
Measurements and Observations on Artifacts Illustrated in Figures 1-3

Length
in mm.

Width
in ram.

51
30
26
11
17
32
20
50
30
25
18

26
23
19
11
17
32
16
25
18
25
20

15
20
20
16
20
25
20
28
33
18
16

24
16
14
13
13
11
18
17
20
12
16

Bed flint
Gray flint
Gray flint
Light blue flint
Gray flint
Light tan flint
Light gray flint

21
24
20
23
26
21
27
26
27
24

12
24
18
18
20
18
23
t8
21
2l

Material
Fig. I--A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
Fig. 2--A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
Fig. 3---A
B
C
D
E
F
G
IK
I
J

Gray and blue flint
Light tan flint
Dark brown flint
Gray flint
Brown flint
Blue flint
Gray flint
Blue flint
Light brown flint
Light gray flint
Light brown flint
Dark blue flint
Blue flint
Light brown flint
Light brown flint
Tan flint
Gray flint
Gray flint
Red mottled flint
lied mottled flint
Light gray flint
Light brown flint
Dark blue flint
Light gray flint
Brown speckled flint

K

Tan flint

32

31

L

Gray flint

38

32

M

Cream and gray flint

65

34

N

Blue and gray flint

48

25

O

Light brown mottled flint

45

20

P

Light brown flint

48

22

I~LIDA SITE, IXE~r MEXICO

local materials for artifacts, for it seems as though every piece of flint
that was large enough was utilized for some purpose. Very small
chips were made into gravers or flaked on one edge so as to be of some
use. One channel flake (Fig. 3, A) was made into an end-scraper. The
nearest available flint supply lies near the Pecos River, 45 miles to
the west of the campsite.
Projectile points, with one exception, seem to be of cruder workmanship than is normally found on Folsom points. This may prove to
be of significance in comparative studies.
Unfortunately the site had been exposed by wind erosion when discovered and no stratigraphy could be determined, but further investigations of the locality may yield significant stratigraphic information.
Three additional projectile points were found near the campsite but
outside the area from which the Folsom points were collected. Two of
these points resemble the Agate Basin type and one is a Scottsbluff
point. One of the Agate Basin points is made of obsidian and has a reworked distal tip. These points, which are considered to be later than
Folsom, probably represent a later occupation of the Elida locality.
Acknowledgments. The author wishes to thank D. L. Hankins for
photographs of the specimens shown in Fig. 1, C, and Fig. 3, A; and
Don Krieble for photographs of specimens shown in Fig. 1, I, and Fig.
2, I).
Portales, New Mexico

A Basic Annotated Bibliography to
Facilitate the Identification of
Vertebrate Remains from
Archeological Sites
STANLEY J.

OLSEN

VERTEBRATE paleontologists and mammalogists have at hand
various standard reference works that relate to the skeletons of the
animals with which they are concerned. After using these works for
many years they become as familiar to the specialist as his dictionary
or word guide, and it is difficult for him to realize that many of these
publications are not known to the archaeological field worker or to
others who might benefit from their use. It is with this thought in
mind that the following brief bibliography was compiled. Although
by no means complete in itself, many of the references contain bibliographies of their own which can be pursued further if so desired.
MOST

A bibliography of this sort, in order to be of real value, must be
made practical by listing publications that are available to the average
worker rather than listing many papers that would be obtainable only
by those few people who occupy laboratories near a more or less complete library. No attempt has been made to include old works that are
not available outside of large university libraries or to cite those publications that are confined to the non-loan reference sections and hence
of little value to the research worker who has need of the volume in
his workroom where the comparative osteological material is housed.
Flower’s An Introduction to the Osteology of the Marnmalia (1876)
would fall into this last category, except for the current reprinting of
this old standard handbook (Dover Publications, New York, in press),
which now places it within the reach of all who would like to own it.
It is hoped that in the not too distant future other "rare" reference
volumes will become available due to modern methods of reprinting
at a low cost.

TEX~S

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Many of our common animals have not been described adequately
in regard to their skeletons. However, a book which covers the osteology of the domestic dog can, of course, be used to separate all canids
from other similar unrelated forms. This group in turn can be isolated
still further into finer groupings by referring to publications (where
available) that key out features of the dentitions or skeletons which
are peculiar, say, to the fox, wolf, dog, etc. This same observation
applies to a well-illustrated anatomical text which covers the domestic
cat, which in tur.n can be used to separate the felids from other nonrelated forms.
The writer is at present working on a field and laboratory manual
for the identification of mammal remains from archaeological sites.
The first part of this work will cover those sites that are found in the
southeastern and southwestern United States. At least sixty-four mammals will be treated in this contribution, with the bones of the postcranial skeleton as well as the skulls being illustrated, described, and
compared. The drawings will be keyed with arrows or dashed lines to
indicate differentiating characters. No date has been set for the completion of this project, but it is hoped that publication will be in the
not too distant future.

Bibliography
Bigelow, H. B., and W. C. Schroeder
1948. Sharks. In: Fishes of the Western North Atlantic. Memoir of Sears Foundation for Marine Research, No. 1, Part I, pp. 59-546. Woods Hole, Mass.
(Detailed drawings of the teeth of sharks.)
1953. Sawfishes, Guitarfishes, Skates, Rays. In: Fishes of the Western North
Atlantic. Memoir of Sears Foundation for Marine Research, No. 1, Part
II, pp. 1-514. Woods Hole, Mass. (Detailed drawings of the dentitions of
these forms.)
Brainerd, G. W.
1939. An Illustrated Field Key for the Identification of Mammal Bones. The
Ohio State Archaeological and Historical Quarterly, Voh 48, No. 4, pp.
324-327. Columbus, Ohio. (An illustrated key which compares the skulls
and skeletal elements of many of the mammals found in the northeastern
United States.)
Brown, G. H.
1952. Illustrated Skull Key to the Recent Land Mammals of Virginia. Co6perative Wildlife Research Unit. Blacksburg, Virginia. 75 pp. (Contains identification keys and skull drawings of mammals found in the Virginia region,
but the drawings lack detail.)
Burr, W. H.
1954.. The Mammals of Michigan. The University of Michigan Press. Ann Arbor.

IDENTIFICATION OF VERTEBRATE REMAINS

253 pp. (Contains an identification key and distribution maps for many
North American mammals.)
Carr, A.
1952.

Handbook of Turtles. Cornell University Press. Ithaca, New York, 542 pp.
(Contains distribution maps, identification keys, and skull drawings.)

Cornwall, I. W.
1956.

Bones for the Archeologist. Macmillan Company. New York.

(A well-

illustrated introductory volume on the osteological methods used by the
archaeologist.)
Ellenberger, W., H. Baum, and H. Dittrich
1949.

An Atlas of Animal Anatomy for Artists. Dover Publications. New York.
153 pp.

(Excellent drawings of articulated skeletons of the horse,

dog,

lion, cow, stag, roe, and goat.)
Flower, W. H.
1876.

An Introduction to the Osteology of the Mammalia. Macmillan and Company. London. 139 pp. (A fine old book covering the osteology of many
mammals. Currently being reprinted by Dover Publications, New York.)

Gilmore, C. W.
1938.

Fossil Snakes of North America. Geological Society of America, Special
Papers, No. 9, pp. 1-96. Washington, D. C. (An illustrated discussion of
the snake skull and post-cranial skeleton.)

Glass, B. P.
1951.

A Key to the Skulls of North American Mammals. Oklahoma Agricultural and Mechanical College.

Stillwater, Oklahoma. 54 pp.

(Contains

identification keys and skull drawings, but the latter lack the detail needed
for close determination.)
Gray, H. (edited by W. H. Lewis)
1942.

Anatomy of the Human Body. Lee & Febiger. Philadelphia. 24th edition
(other editions as well). 1428 pp. (A generally accepted text covering the
human skeleton in detail.)

Gregory, W. K.
1933.

Fish Skulls: A Study of the Evolution of Natural Mechanisms. Transactions
of the American Philosophical Society, N. S., Vol. XXIII, Part II, pp.
75-481. Philadelphia. (The best single volume which covers the fish skull.
Iteprinted in 1959 by Eric Lunberg, Laurel, Florida.)

1951.

Evolution Emerging. The Macmillan Company. New York. Vol. II, pp.
1-1013. (Contains fine illustrations of many vertebrate skeletons and dentitions.)

Hall, E. It.
19~6.

Mammals of Nevada. University of California Press. Berkeley. 710 pp.
(Contains distribution maps and skull drawings for the mammals of this
area.)

Hall, E. It., and K. R. Kelson
1959.

The Mammals of North America. 2 volumes. Roland Press. New York.
1373 pp. (A classification containing many skull drawings and distribution
maps.)

220

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Hay, O. P.
1908. The Fossil Turtles of North America. Carnegie Institution, Publication 75.
Washington, D. C. 568 pp. (Contains many illustrations of complete and
fragmentary turtle remains. Much of the classification as set down by Hay
is no longer in use.)
Hildebrand, M.
1954. Comparative Morphology of the Body Skeleton in Recent Canidae. University of California Publications in Zoology, Vol. 52, No. 5, pp. 399-470.
Berkeley. (An illustrated comparison of the post-cranial skeletons of various
1955.

canids.)
Skeletal Differences between Deer, Sheep and Goats. California Fish and
Game, Vol. 41, No. 4, pp. 327-346. (An illustrated discussion of how to
separate these forms on osteological evidence.)

Hill, J. E.
1937. Morphology of the Pocket Gopher Mammalia Genus Thomomys. University of California Publications in Zoology, Vol. 42, No. 2, pp. 81-172.
Berkeley. (An illustrated discussion of the anatomy of this form.)
Howard, H.
1929. The Avifauna of Emeryville Shellmound. University of California Publications in Zoology, Vol. 32, No. 2, pp. 301-394. Berkeley. (An excellent
illustrated osteo!ogical discussion of this form that can be used to determine
most bird material from skeletal collections.)
Howell, A. B.
1926. Anatomy of the Wood Rat. Williams & Wilkins Company. Baltimore. 225
pp. (A good anatomy applicable to most rodents.)
Krogman, W. M.
1939. A Guide to the Identification of Human Skeletal Material. F. B. I. Law
Enforcement Bulletin, Vol. 8, No. 9, pp. 1-29. Washington, D. C. (Identification of the human skeleton from fragmentary remains.)
1946. The Reconstruction of the Living Head from the Skull. F. B. I. Law Enforcement Bulletin, July, pp. 11-I7. Washington, D. C. (Restoration of
soft tissues of the head based on dimensions of the skull.)
Lawrence, B.
1951. Post-cranial Skeletal Characters of Deer, Pronghorn, and Sheep-Goat,
with Notes on Bos and Bison. Papers of the Peabody Museum of American
Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, Vol. XXV, No. 3, pp.
9-44. Cambridge, Mass. (Keyed descriptions of the forms with outline
drawings of the articular ends of many of the limb bones.)
Leopold, A. S.
1959. Wildlife of Mexico. University of California Press. Berkeley. 545 pp. (Distribution maps and many fine drawings of skulls and dentitions of mammals from this region.)
Miller, M. E.
1952. Guide to the Dissection o[ the Dog. M. E. Miller. Ithaca, New York. 369
pp. (A well illustrated and clearly written volume covering the osteology
of the dog.)

IDENTIFICATION OF VERTEBRATE REMAINS

2 21

Mook, C. C.
1921.

Notes on the Post-cranial Skeleton in the Crocodilia. Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History, Vol. XLIV, Art. VIII, pp. 67-100.
New York. (A well illustrated osteological discussion of this form.)

Murie, 0.3.
1957.

The Elk of North America. Wildlife Management Institute (Washington,
D. C.)

and The Stackpole Company

(Harrisburg, Pa.). 376 pp.

(Con-

tains an illustrated section on the development and wear of the dentition
as an age indicator.)
Noble, G. K.
1954.

The Biology of the Amphibia. Dover Publications. New York. 577 pp.
(Contains a section on the osteology of the Amphibia.)

Ols-m, S. J.
1959.

Similarity in the Skull of the Bison and Brahman. American Antiquity,
Vol. 24, No. 3, pp. 321-322. University of Utah Press. Salt Lake City. (An
illustrated comparison of the skulls of Bison with those of the domestic cow
and the Brahman.)

1960.

The Fossil Carnivore Amphicyon longiramus from the Thomas Farm
Miocene. Part II, Postcranial Skeleton. Bulletin of the Museum of Comparative Zoology at Harvard College, Vol.

123, No. 1, pp.

1~5. Cam-

bridge, Mass. (An illustrated comparison of the post-cranial skeletons of
the black bear, puma, and domestic dog with that of a large Miocene
carnivore.)
1960.

Post-cranial Skeletal Characters of Bison and Bos. Papers of the Peabody
Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University,
Vol. XXV, No. 4, pp. 1-61. Cambridge, Mass. (An illustrated discussion
of the post-cranial skeletons of Bison and Bos.)

Reese, A. M.
1915.

The Alligator and Its Allies. G. P. Putnam’s Sons. New York. 358 pp.
(Contains a section on the osteology of the alligator.)

Romer, A. S.
1955.

Vertebrate Paleontology. University of Chicago Press. Chicago. 687 pp.
(A well-illustrated volume covering the osteology of fossil as well as recent
groups of vertebrates.)

1956.

Osteology of the Reptiles. University of Chicago Press. Chicago. 772 pp.
(The most complete single volume covering fossil and recent reptiles.)

Schwartz, C. W. and E. R.
1959.

The Wild Mammals of Missouri. University of Missouri Press. Columbia.
341 pp. (Excellent keyed skull drawings of mammals found in this area.)

Sisson, S., and J. D. Grossman
1953.

The Anatomy of the Domestic Animals. W. B. Saunders Company. Philadelphia. 4th edition. 972 pp. (The best single volume describing the skeletons of the domestic horse, cow, sheep, and pig.)

Taylor, W. T., and R. J. Weber
1956.

Functional Mammalian Anatomy. D. Van Nostrand Company. New York.
575 pp. (Contains a good section on the osteology of the domestic cat.)

222

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Vaughan, T. E.
1959.

Functional Morphology of Three Bats: Eumops, Myotis, Macrotus. University of Kansas Publications, Vol. 12, No. I, pp. 1-153. Lawrence. (Contains a section on the osteology of the bat.)

Florida Geological Survey
Tallahassee, Florida

Three Central Texas Aspect Sites
in Hill County, Texas
JOSEPH K. LONG III
Introduction
winter of 1957 and the spring of 1958, several Dallas
and Fort Worth amateur archeo!ogists carried out excavations at Buzzard, Little Buzzard, and Forrester "caves" (Texas quadrangle numbers 26D7-12, 26D7-i4, and 26D7-i5 respectively) in Hill County,
Texas. Robert E. Forrester of Fort Worth did all the work on Forrester and Buzzard Caves; Loyd Harper of Dallas and the writer were the
principal excavators of Little Buzzard Cave. Other excavators included
Mrs. Loyd Harper, Loyd Harper, Jr., Jan Owen Harper, R. King
Harris, and Lester Wilson, all of Dallas, and Isabelle Lobdell and Roy
Padget of Fort Worth.
DUltIR~G THE

Acknowledgments
The above-mentioned excavators have been helpful in providing
the writer with artifacts found and with detailed notes taken during
excavation. Forrester and Harris have made helpful suggestions as to
analysis of materials.
In 1947 and 1950 Dr. R. L. Stephenson of the Smithsonian Institution conducted excavations in the Whitney Reservoir. Buzzard Cave
was one of the sites excavated, and the writer is grateful for comments
from Dr. Stephenson on the site and its cuhural analysis.
Mr. Edward B. Jelks, University of Texas research archeologist, has
provided helpful criticism regarding the interpretation of the three
sites and of their relations to the Archaic and Neo-American cultures
of central Texas.
Dr. E. Mort Davis, University of Texas research archeologist, has
corresponded with the writer constantly, giving him much-needed
advice toward the preparation of this paper.

TEXANS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Excavation and Stratigraphy
All the earth excavated from the three shelters was sifted through
screens of quarter-inch mesh.
BUZZARD CAVE

No attempt was made either to plot a grid system or to collect by
depths at Buzzard Cave. Because the site had been badly disturbed by
looters subsequent to the completion of Stephenson’s work there, it
appeared that close controls were unnecessary; consequently no attempt was made to record either the horizontal or vertical location of
the artifacts found. No stratigraphic zoning of the deposits was observed.
At Buzzard Cave, Stephenson (1949) reported finding two triangular dart points, one dart point of the Martindale type, 30 Perdiz
type arrow points, five Cliffton arrow points, seven Alba arrow points,
and two arrow points identified as "Tahuaconi" type.
LITTLE BUZZARD CAVE

Because of its superficial appearance, Little Buzzard Cave was originally thought to consist of a cultural layer only about three inches
deep. Excavation thus proceeded to some degree before it was discovered that the deposits were of sufficient depth to warrant vertical controls. Eventually excavation was done by six-inch levels, excluding
the top layer of fallen rock. Of the nine artifacts (3.0% of total artifacts) found below the upper two six-inch levels, all occurred immediately below the second six-inch level except in three cases: the
two burials, occurring 18 inches below the top of the cultural layer,
and a mano (Fig. 9, A) occurring 20 inches below. The only further
indications of occupation at these lower levels were scattered flint
flakes, river pebbles, flecks of charcoal, and snail shells (Bulirnulus
sp.).
No stratigraphic distinctions between any of the arrow point types
were discerned, nor was there any vertical separation between dart
points and arrow points. There are several factors that might possibly
explain the failure to recognize any stratification of artifact classes or
types--(1) the shallowness of the deposits, (2) the fact that vertical
provenience of artifacts was not recorded during much of the excavation, and (3) irregularities in the zoning.
The coSordinate method used in excavating Little Buzzard Cave
(Fig. 1) follows standard mathematical procedure (May, 1952: 113-

CENTRAL TEXAS A~SPECT SITES

22~

~z

1

/

I
I

/

m

i

ROGK

I
!

BURIAL

2

BURIAL

I

FALLEN

EXCAVATED

DECAYING

FROM

ROOF

AREA

LIMESTONE

X

SOLID

LIMESTONE

ZONE OF
DEBRIS

0
I

OCCUPATIONAL

I0
20
I
I
SCALE
IN

FEET

Fig 1. Little Buzzard Cave. Left, horizontal plan of cave, showing area excavated and
the location of Burials 1 and 2. Right, cross-section of cave, showing stratigraphy of deposits.

117, 564-566) with datum point as indicated in Fig. 1. The thickness
of the layer of rock fallen from the top as indicated in Fig. 1 is slightly
exaggerated. In actuality, it averaged only three inches in thickness
and was of negligible thickness in some places.
FORRESTER CAVE

No stratigraphy was observed at Forrester Cave. Bedrock was not far
beneath the surface, and the occupational layer was only 8 to 10 inches
thick. The shelter was dug in the hope of obtaining human skeletal
material to supplement the present scanty information on the physical
type of the Central Texas Aspect peoples. Forrester Cave is a small
rock shelter 14 feet in length, six feet in depth (front to rear), and with_
a maximum ceiling height of six feet.

226

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Description o[ the Arti[acts
CERAMICS

Buzzard Cave
Vessel I. Fourteen sherds (Fig. 2, A) of a vessel identified as type
Leon Plain were recovered. The vessel had an oral diameter of 22 +
1 cm, and there were two suspension (?) holes 1.5 cm. below the lip.
The paste is black, and the sherds indicate a wall thickness of from
4.5 to 5.5 ram.
Vessel II. Another Leon Plain vessel is represented by 17 reddishbrown sherds (Fig. 2~ H), one of them pierced by a hole showing rotational drill marks. This hole was probably for crack-lacing, although it may have been a suspension hole. The sherds are all 5 to 6
ram. thick. The paste characteristics of Vessels I and II correspond to
those cited for the Leon Plain type by Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954:
386).
Vessel III. Five sherds of a Holly Fine Engraved vessel (Fig. 2, C,
E)) were found, thickness ranging from 3~ to 5 ram. Paste color is
dark brown.
Vessel 1V. One sherd (Fig. 2, B) is similar to those of Vessel III in
texture~ temper, color, and finish, but the engraved design is more
typical of the Sanders Engraved type than of Holly Fine Engraved
(Suhm, Krieger~ and Jelks~ 1954: Pls. 34~ 35, 61). On the basis of surface finish and fineness of engraving, however, the sherds is tentatively designated as type Holly Fine Engraved. Oral diameter of the
vessel is estimated to have been 9 ± 2 cm. The sherd is 6.5 mm. thick.
Vessel V. One sherd (Fig. 2, E) was similar in paste characteristics
to the lighter-colored Holly Fine Engraved sherds. A crude attempt
was made to scratch a design on the vessel after a smooth finish had
been applied and the vessel had been fired. These rough scratches were
later filled with ocher. The sherd is 5 ram. thick.
Vessel VI. Four sherds possibly of the Goose Creek Plain type were
recovered, the identification having been made mostly on the basis of
sand tempering. These sherds are all about ram. thick. The writer
had originally recognized the possibility that these might be Goose
Creek Plain sherds but had rejected the identification because of the
improbability of this coastal type being found in central Texas. Since
that time, he has read Suhm’s discussion (Suhm, 1957: 32) of the
possibility of (1) cultural affiliation, (2) contemporaneity, and (3)
intergrading of the Leon Plain and Goose Creek Plain types. She

CENTRAL TEXAS ASPECT SITES

Fig.

2.

227

Pottery from Buzzard Cave. A, Vessel I, type Leon Plain; B, Vessel IV, type Holly

Fine Engraved; C-D, Vessel III, type Holly F~ne Engraved; E, Vessel V, type Holly Fine Engraved; F, Vessel VII, type Dunkln Incised; G, Vessel VIII, type Dunkln Incised.

pointed out that the Galveston Bay Focus (of which Goose Creek Plain
is considered diagnostic) shares arrow point types and other traits with

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the Central Texas Aspect. Similar sandy-textured sherds reported at
the Blum Rockshelter (Jelks, 1953: 205) were also associated with the
Central Texas Aspect.
Vessel VII. One sherd (Fig. 2, F), 7 ram. in thickness, has been
identified as type Dunkin Incised (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954:
268-269).
Vessel VIII. One sherd (Fig. 3, G) of a second Dunkin Incised vessel
was recovered. This sherd is 8 ram. thick. R. K. Harris, who has examined the sherds, thinks that Vessels VII and VIII might possibly
both be of the Weches Fingernail Impressed type (Suhm, Krieger, and
Jelks, 1954: 364-365).
Little Buzzard Cave
Vessel I. The two sherds of this vessel were tentatively identified as
Holly Fine Engraved on the basis of collective paste characteristics,
although no engraving was present. Thickness is 5.5 to 6.5 ram.
Vessel II. This is tentatively identified as Sanders Engraved on the
basis of paste, carinated vessel form, and an engraved line (Fig. 5, H)
~)n the one sherd recovered. These characteristics agree with the type
description in An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology
.(Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954: 352-555).
Vessel III. One sherd, 7 to 8 ram. thick, is identified as type Goose
Creek Plain.
Vessel IV. Three sherds (Fig. 5, J, note differential firing), 5 to 8
ram. thick, were identified as Goose Creek Plain.
Vessel V. One sherd (Fig. 5, I), 6 to 8 ram. thick, is probably Holly
Fine Engraved.
Vessel VI. One sherd with grit and bone temper is eroded beyond
identification. It is 3 to 4 ram. thick.
Discussion. No pottery was found at Forrester Cave. The sherds recovered and identified from the other two sites seem to indicate four
possible sources of pottery: (1) locally made wares, represented by
Leon Plain (and possibly by Goose Creek Plain) ; (2) Galveston Bay
Focus trade from the Texas coastal area as indicated by Goose Creek
Plain pottery; (3) trade with Alto (or possibly Gahagan) Focus from
east Texas as indicated by Holly Fine Engraved, Dunkin Incised,
and/or Weches Fingernail Impressed; (4) Sanders Focus trade from
the Red River area of northeastern Texas as indicated by a single
sherd tentatively identified as Sanders Engraved.

CENTRAL TEXAS ASPECT SITES

229

Fig. 3. Arrow points from Buzzard Cave. A-C, Cliffton; D-G, Scallorn; H-N, Perdiz; O-R,
Alba; S-T, Cuney; U-V, Young; W-X, Fresno; Y-Z, serrated flake scrapers; AA, Washita.

230

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ARROW POINTS
Arrow points were the most numerous class of artifacts found at
each of the three shelters. The identification of arrow point types was
based on the descriptive criteria set forth by Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks
(1954), except in the case of the Reed and Washita types, which were
identified on the basis of type descriptions in Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points (Bell, 1958).

Perdiz Type
A total of 133 specimens of the Perdiz type was found at the three
sites, their distribution being: Buzzard Cave, 87; Little Buzzard Cave,
44; and Forrester Cave, two. These points conform to the type description of Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954: 504-505).
At the Smith Rocksheher, Suhm (1957: 35) recognized eight variants of the Perdiz type. Since all the variants were concentrated in a
single zone at the Smith Site, probably they all should be regarded as
a single type. The shelters reported herein produced similar varieties
with the possible inclusion of another (Fig. 3, L, M; Fig. 7, I; Fig. 12,
J) which has been referred to as the "Foyle Flake" point (Miller and
Jelks, 1952: 177-178).
Scallorn Type
Scallorn points from the three sites total 84. There are 32 from
Buzzard Cave, 38 from Little Buzzard Cave, and 14 from Forrester
Cave. The writer found several variations within the Scallorn type.
One variety is a very small side-notched form (Fig. 3, D, E; Fig. 7, R;
Fig. 12, B, E). Another variety is large, crudely made, and basally
notched (Fig. 3, G; Fig. 7, P). Another is a well-made, basally notched
form (Fig. 7, Q). Some are long, thin, and serrated (Fig. 12, A) ; others
have markedly concave blade edges (Fig. 12, G). The rest are intermediate corner-notched varieties. Again, there was no basis for separation of these variations into distinct types, since they all seem to be
gradations and are apparently culturally homologous. The ratios of
corner-notched to basally notched Scallorn points are 25-6, 25-!4, and
12-2 at Buzzard, Little Buzzard, and Forrester Caves respectively.
Cliffton Type
Fourteen Cliffton points were found at Buzzard Cave, eight were
found at Little Buzzard Cave, and two were recovered from Forrester
Cave. Suhm (1957) has suggested that Cliffton may be a variety of the
Perdiz type. This observation was borne out by the writer’s findings

GENTRAL TEXAS /~SPEGT SITES

in Hill County. His classification of certain arrow points as Cliffton
(Fig. 3, A, B, C; Fig. 7, A, B; Fig. 12, H, I) was completely arbitrary.
He simply felt that the examples so classed were either slight deviations from the norm or were unfinished Perdiz points. The classification of Cliffton as Perdiz would not significantly change the percentage ratios of Scallorn to Perdiz except at Forrester Cave, where
the number of Perdiz would be doubled. In certain cases, Young points
resemble the Cliffton type, being distinguishable only on the basis
of chipping technique (Fig. 12, P, Q).
Alba Type
Of 19 Alba points, six came from Buzzard Cave, five from Little
Buzzard Cave, and eight from Forrester Cave. It was observed that the
specimens called Alba here (Fig. 3, O-R, Fig. 7, N, O; Fig. 12, K-M)
may be varieties of the Perdiz type. Suhm (1967: 36) has suggested
the name "Eddy" for similar points. She saw a possibility that Eddy
may be a link between the Scallorn and Perdiz types and the respective loci with which they are identified. Since the writer is unable to
distinguish between the Eddy and Alba types, he has chosen 1o use the
more familiar term "Alba." In at least one case, the Alba type seems
to grade into the Bonham type (Fig. 12, M).

Fresno Type
Fourteen Fresno points were found, nine at Buzzard Cave (Fig. 3,
W-X), and five at Little Buzzard Cave (Fig. 1, C-D). No Fresno points
were found at Forrester Cave.
Young Type
Thirty-two Young points were distributed among the three sites as
follows: Buzzard Cave, 15 (Fig. 3, U-V); Little Buzzard Cave, 12
(Fig. 7, E-F) ; Forrester Cave, 5 (Fig. 12, P-R).
Cuney Type
Two arrow points of the Cuney type were recovered from Buzzard
Cave (Fig. 3, S-T).
Washita Type
The single Washita type arrow point was found at Buzzard Cave
(Fig. 3, AA). It is pitch-stained.
Reed Type
The two Reed points both came from Little Buzzard Cave (Fig. 7,
L-M). Bell (1958: 76) associates the Reed type with both the Gibson
and Fulton Aspects in the Caddoan Area.

Fig.

4.

Chipped stone ar?ifacts from Buzzard Cave. A, Carrol]ton dart point; B, Gary dart

point; C, Yarhrough dar? point; D, Palmillas dar~" point; E, Pedernales dart point; F, Type I1
blade; G-H, drills with unworked bases; I-J, spokeshaves; K-M, O-R, side scrapers; N, snubnosed scraper.

CENTRAL TEXAS ASPECT SITES

Discussion
The percentage ratios of Perdiz to Scallorn were 54-46, 73-27, and
37-63 for Little Buzzard, Buzzard, and Forrester Caves, respectively.
Assuming diagnostic trait values for Scallorn and Perdiz points, it can
be stated that Little Buzzard is of a conglomerate culture, that Forrester represents predominately a Scallorn type culture, and that Buzzard Cave was occupied principally by peoples who favored the Perdiz
type arrow point. There may be significance in the fact that, whereas
Alba points represent a negligible percentage when compared to Scallorn and Perdiz at Buzzard and Little Buzzard Caves, they represent
a third of this total at Forrester Cave. Although the percentages mathematically indicate an association of Alba and Scallorn points at Forrester Cave, the small number of arrow points found there is not
sufficient for statistical reliability.
Miller and Jelks (195£: 209) have pointed out that three Perdiz
points and two Cliffton points were found at the Davis Site, all in
levels which contained Alto Focus material--thus suggesting contemporaneity of the Perdiz and Cliffton types with the Alto Focus.
However, one of the Perdiz points at the Davis Site was found in the
plow zone, two Perdiz and one Cliffton were found directly beneath
the plow zone, and only one Cliffton, "possibly within the range of
Alba Barbed also," was found in tight association with Alto Focus material (Newell and Krieger, 1949: Table 18). Thus the question of
whether the Alto Focus was coeval with--or earlier than--the Perdiz
arrow point is still unanswered.
Washita points in Texas are estimated by Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks
(1954: 500) to date between 1100 and 1500 A.D., although they note
that the type may occur earlier outside Texas Thus both types are
considered by Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks to be later than the estimated
date for Alto Focus of somewhere between 500 and 1000 A.D. (Suhm,
Krieger, and Jelks, 1954: 166). The Cuney point is generally considered to date after 1600 A.D. (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954: 498),
which would eliminate the possibility of its association with Alto Focus
pottery types according to accepted chronological concepts. Since no
stratigraphy was observed at Buzzard Cave, the Cuney and Washita
points found there cannot be related with assurance to the Alto Focus
pottery also found there. But the possibility that all was left by the
same group of people remains. If future research should demonstrate
an association between Alto Focus pottery and the Cuney and Washita
arrow point types, then an earlier date would be indicated for Cuney
and Washita than has previously been proposed.

TEX~S AI~CHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Fig. 5. Chipped stone artifacts, polished stone artifacts, and pottery from Little Buzzard
Cave. A-D, scrapers; E-F, celt-like blades; G, gorget fragment; H, Vessel II, type Sanders
Engraved; I, Vessel V, type Holly Fine Engraved; J, Vessel IV, type Goose Creek Plain; K,
graver.

CENTI~AL TEXAS ASPECT SITES

It is interesting to note that some of the arrow point forms are similar in outline to some of the dart point forms and perhaps could have
been copied directly from them (cf. Fig. 7, Q with Fig. 6, G; Fig. 3, S
with Fig. 6, J).
DART POINTS

Palraillas Type
The most prevalent dart point type was Palmillas, represented by
15 examples from Little Buzzard Cave and two from Buzzard Cave.
Were it not for the fact that two of these specimens (Fig. 7, Y, Z) were
reworked some time after the time of the original manufacture, as
revealed by differences in patination, it would be assumed that they
in all cases were made by Central Texas Aspect people. Most examples
(Fig. 6, A-D) are, however, unpatinated. It is assumed, therefore, that
Palmillas points at these sites represent both specimens picked up off
earlier sites and specimens made on the sites. It is considered to be a
survival from the Edwards Plateau Aspect; such a survival has been
considered before (Suhrn, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954: 462).
Yarbrough Type
The second most common dart point type was Yarbrough. One was
found at Buzzard Cave (Fig. 4, C) and 11 (six of them with beveled
blades) at Little Buzzard Cave (Fig. 6, K-M). These fall into two
groups, one group made of a foreign material and having patination in
evidence, the other group made of native unpatinated chert river pebbles. The survival of the Yarbrough type into the Central Texas Aspect
has been suggested (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954: 492). These excavations indicate the validity of the suggestion.
Other Dart Points
In addition to Palmillas and Yarbrough, several other types of dart
points were recovered, a!l of them occurring in very small quantities.
Two Gary points, three Darl, one Williams, one Kent, three Pandora,
one Wells, three Bulverde, two Pedernales, two Carrollton, and one
Ensor were found. For provenience data on these dart points see
Table 1.
It has been suggested that there is a marked similarity between Yarbrough and Darl points (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954: 492). The
single Darl point found at Little Buzzard Cave (Fig. 6, N) is a poor
example made of native unpatinated material. It bears only slight
resemblance to the Yarbrough type. The two Darl points from Forrester Cave (Fig. 12, N, O) are of a foreign material, are patinated, and

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig. 6. Dart points from Little Buzzard Cave. A-D, Palmillas; E, Gary; F, Kent; G-I, Bulverde; J, Pedernales; K-M, Yarbrough; N, Darl; 0, Wells; P, Williams.

CEtNTIRAL TEXAS A,SP]KCT SITES

resemble some patinated specimens of the Yarbrough type from Little
Buzzard Cave (Fig. 6, L). At the Collins Site, both Darl and Ensor
dart points were found in Central Texas Aspect levels (Suhm, 1955:
30). Thus the evidence suggests that Darl probably represents a carryover trait from the Edwards Plateau Aspect into the Central Texas
Aspect.
With the exception of one Kent point (Fig. 6, F), all other dart
points are patinated. Several of these (notably the Pandora, Fig. 8, K)
were identified as being of a distinct type of chert found in Coryell
County, Texas (Forrester, personal communication). Several dart
points have been reworked, iudging from condition of patination
and/or smoothness on some surfaces (Fig. 6, I, if, 0; Fig. 7, Y, Z; Fig.
8, L). Suhm recognized a complex system of the picking up of earlier
points by Central Texas Aspect people and their manufacturing of
similar points. This has been indicated by many past excavations and
is becoming increasingly evident as work proceeds. In regard to this,
the writer observed that, as a rule, patinated dart points of foreign materials are generally of better workmanship than the rough-surfaced,
unpatinated points. Harris (personal communication)has observed
that dart points associated with later cultures of north-central Texas
generally tend to be smaller within a given type. Jelks (personal communication) says: "Historical records indicate that most Indian tribes
were using spears in addition to the bow and arrow at the time of
contact with Europeans: This includes tribes of Central Texas. If they
were using spears, it is logical to suppose that at least some of them
had stone points, and since arrow points are too small for effective
use on spears, it is reasonable to assume that the spear points were in
the size range of Edwards Plateau Aspect dart points."
In summary, it may be stated that the Central Texas Aspect people
probably obtained dart points by (1) manufacture, (g) by collecting
from "extinct" Edwards Plateau Aspect sites (in some cases beneath
their own), and possibly (3) by trade with late-surviving Edwards
Plateau Aspect tribes. Darl, Palmillas, Yarbrough, Ensor, Ellis, and
Kent dart point types may have been manufactured in Central Texas
Aspect times.
CHIPPED STONE BLADES

Type I Blades
From Little Buzzard and Forrester shelters there were respectively
41 and two examples of crude blades with rounded bases and no secondary chipping (Fig. lg, V, W). These might be classified as either

2~8

TEXA,S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig. 7. Arrow points and drills from Little Buzzard Cave. A-B, Cliffton; C-D, Fresno; E-F,
Young; G-K, Perdlz; L-M, Reed; N-O, Alba;

P-T,

Scallorn;

U,

drill

base

unworked;

V,

drill, base serrated; W, drill, large squared base; X, drill, small squared bases; Y-Z, drills,
reworked Palmillas points.

CENTltAL TEXAS A,SPECT SITES

knives, dart points, or blanks--or even, if it were not for their extreme
crudeness, as Refugio type dart points. They are herein classed as
Type I blades.
Type II Blades
Thirty-six thin blades with square bases and with some secondary
chipping were recovered (Fig. 8, A-D, H), 12 examples having been
found at each of the three sites. These might be classified as Pandora
points were it not for their crudeness and asymmetry. They are assumed to be knives, but are given the classification of Type II blades.
Type III Blades
Twenty-one biracial implements (Fig. 8, E-G; Fig. 12, U) were
designated Type III blades. Six came from Buzzard Cave, 14 from
Little Buzzard Cave, and one from Forrester Cave.
Type IV Blades
Three very thin, well-worked blades with serrated edges are here
labeled Type IV blades (Fig. 8, I-J). Two of them are asymmetrical
and therefore it is assumed that they are knives. R. KingHarris called
the writer’s attention to the fact that these specimens are similar to
others found in central Texas and called "Copena knives:" With some
research, the writer found that these are actually poor examples of a
kind of artifact found at Belton Reservoir by Miller and Jelks (1952:
181, P1. 26) and called by them Copena knives. The first reference to
this type in central Texas was probably that which mentioned the
occurrence of Copena knives in the non-pottery Round Rock Focus of
the Edwards Plateau Aspect in Coryell County (Kelley, 1947a). The
writer questioned this classification on the grounds that the great majority of specimens were widely divergent from those generally accepted as "classics" of the Copena culture of the eastern United States
(Lewis and Kneberg, 1954: 126; Webb and DeJarnette, 1942: 301306). He later found that near-classic examples had been found at the
Davis Site (Newe!l and Krieger, 1949: 173-175) and that a few examples of a certain type found at the Gahagan Mound were nearclassic Copena knives (Webb and Dodd, 1939: P1. 27, Panel 1). Since
that time, he has found many examples of the general type represented
by the range at Gahagan, both in collections and in illustrations in
literature (although there are few references to their being Copena
type blades). It was found that the range includes Copena points,
Kinney points,* points such as were found at Little Buzzard Cave,
* Recently Robert Forrester excavated a Central Texas Aspect burial in the vicinity of the Buzzard Cave group of shelters. The burial contained three of the type
under discussion, one having a deeply-concave base, making it a near-classic Kinney
point.

TEXA,S ARCHEOLOGICAL

Fig.

8.

SOCIETY

Blades from Little Buzzard Cave. A-D, H, Type II blades; E-G, Type III blades;

I-J, Type IV blades; K-L, Pandora points.

CENTRAL TEXAS ASPECT SITES

Pandora points in a few cases, and in one case a blade made into a
corner-tang knife.t Krieger seems to be of the opinion that the Copena
point of the eastern states might just as easily have been "borrowed"
from the Gahagan-Davis culture(s) as the reverse case (Newell and
Krieger, 1949:174). The general consensus seems to be that this type
spread from east to west. Considering the reported association with
Round l%ock Focus and corner-tang knives, the writer can find no
positive evidence concerning the direction of diffusion, although he
does strongly suspect that this type diffused over a wide area.
It has been observed that, in contrast to the classic examples of
Copena points (Webb and DeJarnette, 1942: 301-306; Lewis and
Kneberg, 1954: 126; and the writer’s personal observation of the collection of point types assembled by Robert E. Bell, University of Oklahoma), similar western forms have a wider range of variation, are
thinner, are in many instances serrated, and, in some cases, are nearly
three times as long as classic Copenas.$
On the basis of this evidence the writer draws the following conclusions: (1) Copena-like knives had a pre-pottery appearance both in
the eastern United States and in Texas;§ (2) on the basis of findings
thus far, Texas varieties cannot be definitely assigned to any particular
culture; (3) the term "Copena" should be dropped from the classification of western types in most cases; (4) the western types should
not be classified by names until further investigation and subsequent
division can be made. Bell (personal communication) supported these
conclusions in stating to the writer that he felt that "none of the varieties so-called in Texas are true Copena points."

MISCELLANEOUS CI-tlPPED STONE IMPLEMENTS

In this category are included gravers (Fig. 5, K); crude scrapers,
choppers, and!or cores (Fig. 5, A-D) ; crude celts or adzes (Fig. 5, E,
F; Fig. 12, T) ; spokeshaves (Fig. 4, I, J) ; side scrapers (Fig. 4, K-M,
O-B); snub-nosed scrapers (Fig. 4, N); and serrated flake scrapers
(Fig. 3, Y, Z). All are of the usual forms found in the region and they
are considered to have only slight diagnostic value. Several of the drills
i The writer recently observed such a knife among corner-tang knives from western Texas in the collection of Robert Forrester.
$ Texas size!
At least part of the Copena culture appears to ba pre-pottery.

242

TEXA,S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig. 9. Ground and pecked stone artifacts from Little Buzzard Cave. A, subrectangular
mano; B, pitted mano; C-D, cooking pebbles (?); E-H, hammerstones.

CENTRAL TEXAS A, SPECT SITES

were worked from arrow or dart points (Fig. 3, L, O; Fig. 7, J, Y, Z).
Other drill forms have unworked bases (Fig. 7, U; Fig. 4, G, H), serrated bases (Fig. 7, V), large squared bases (Fig. 7, W), or small
squared bases (Fig. 7, X).
PECKED~ GROUND AND BATTERED STONE

This classification includes crude sandstone and limestone hammerstones, flint and quartzite hammerstones (Fig. 9, E-H), quartzite river
pebbles (for stone boiling?) (Fig. 9, C, D), subrectangular manos with
flat, parallel faces (Fig. 9, A), and irregular manos with a pit on one
face (Fig. 9, B).
POLISHED STONE

A fragment of a polished, fine-grained limestone gorget with a hole
and side notches (Fig. 5, G) was recovered at a depth of about one
foot in Little Buzzard Cave. The limestone is apparently not of local
origin.
MINERALS

A single crystal of gypsum from Little Buzzard Cave was the only
unusual mineral specimen recovered.
ARTIFACTS OF BONE AND ANTLER

Antler flakers (Fig. 10, F-I), deer ulna awls of flaking tools (Fig. 10,
J-M), long bone perforators (Fig. 10, C), a perforator made from the
dorsal spine of a catfish (Fig. 10, D), and a bone fishhook (Fig. 11)
were recovered. One antler flaker had been sawed in half and broken
(Fig. 10, E); in another case, one was chopped on and then broken
through, indicating that in at least some cases, these implements were
not worn down by use, but rather were sawed or chopped off before
use.
ARTIFACTS OF SHELL

Two perforated shells (Amblema), perhaps used as net sinkers,
were recovered from Little Buzzard Cave. The holes were made by
battering, rather than by drilling (Fig. 10, A, B).
Thousands of snail shells (Bulimulus) were found throughout the
shelter, about 4~o of them perforated. Perforated snail shells strung
into a necklace were found in a shelter in Val Verde County, Texas, by
Pearce and Jackson (1933:119). Despite the similarity of the perfo-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig. 10. Shell and bone artifacts from Little Buzzard Cave. A-B, perforated mussel shells;
C, long bone perforator; D, perforator made of catfish dorsal spine; E, cut, but unused,
antler flaking toot; F-I, antler flaking tools; J-M, deer ulna awls or flaking tools.

CENTRAL TEXAS ASPECT SITES

rated snail shells at the Hill County shelters to those from Va! Verde
County, there is no evidence that they were used here for necklaces.
Snails which had died naturally and had accumulated at the interface
of the cultural and rock fall layers were perforated in the same percentages as those found throughout the midden.

Burials
0nly two burials were found, both at Little Buzzard Cave (see
Fig. 1 ).
BURIAL 1
The absolute depth of the skeleton was £4 inches; height above bedrock was 6 inches. No burial pit was in evidence, nor were there any
stones in association. The body was flexed on the right side with skull
facing south. The jaw was open. The right hand and arm were near
the head; the left hand and arm were near the thigh. The left leg and
foot were flexed, but the right leg and foot were missing. A Scallorn
point was behind the left knee, and a Fresno point lay beh{nd the skull.
The cephalic index is 76.0, and the estimated age was 8 or 9 years.
Data on this burial were taken from notes made by the excavator,
I~obert E. Forrester, Jr.
BURIAL 2
The absolute depth of this burial was 27 inches; height above bedrock was 3 inches. No stones were in association, nor was a burial pit
discernible. Only the frontal, parietal, and occipital bones and the
enamel of the teeth were present, along with a few limey deposits.
However, it appeared that the body was lying on the left side, judging
from the position of the fronto-parietal system. One bone awl, apparently a burial offering, was placed on the left side of the head. The
awl was in a good state of preservation. The estimated age of the infant
burial was 3 months or less. There was no evidence that the teeth had
erupted.

Faunal Remains
The following animal remains were identified by William Blackburn Stallcup, Jr., Associate Professor of Biology, Southern Methodist
University, and are assumed to be representative of the diet of the
peoples who inhabited the shelters--with the exception of Gioniobasis,
a fossil, probably from the limestone ceiling, and with the possible exception of Bulirnulus, which could have been deposited naturally.

TEXANS

Mollusca:

Ayes:
Mammalia:

AI~CHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

BulimuIus (c. 10,000)
Amblema (c. 1,000)
Gioniobasis (fossil)
A large bird: eagle, crane, heron, or goose? (1)
Deer: Odocoileus virginianus (white-tailed) (c. 5)
Skunk: Mephitis (striped?) or Conepatus (hog-nosed)

(1)
Opossum: Didelphis virginiana (3)
Swamp rabbit: Sylvilagus aquaticus (1)
Reptilia:
Turtle: ? (2)
0steichthyes: Catfish: Order Ostariophysida ( 1 ) *

0

I

!

I

GM
Fig.

11.

Carbonized bone fishhook from Little Buzzard Cave.

Drawing

by Robert For-

rester.

Conclusions and Conjectures
Knowledge of the Central Texas Aspect, its age and cultural affiliations, has gone through several stages of analysis in the last fifteen
years. Kelley (1947a: 97-109) hypothesized that an Austin Focus of
the Central Texas Aspect, characterized by Scallorn points (with
* Identified by Joseph Pollard Harris, Associate Professor of Biology, Southern
Methodist University.

~ENTIRAL TEXAS ASPECT SITES

247

Perdiz points often present), represented remains of historic and prehistoric Tonkawa Indians of central Texas, and that a Toyah Focus
of the same aspect, characterized by Perdiz points, represented remains of the Jumano Indians who moved periodically from the central to the western part of the state in historic and protohistoric tinles.
Kelley assumed from relations between Central Texas Aspect components and Edwards Plateau Aspect components that the Edwards
Plateau Aspect survived as late as the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries (Kelley, 1947b: 127). Miller and 7elks (1952) later found it
unfeasible to separate the Central Texas Aspect remains in the Belton
I~eservoir area into two distinct complexes. 7elks (1955) subsequently
discovered a separation of expanding stem arrow points (types Scallorn and Alba) and contracting stem types (Perdiz and Cliffton) at
the Blum l~ockshelter in Hill County. The expanding stem forms
were stratigraphically earlier than the contracting stem forms. Later,
Suhm (1957) found a separation of Perdiz-Cliffton (upper levels),
Scallorn (middle levels), and Edwards Plateau Aspect remains (lower
levels) at the Smith l~ockshelter in Travis County.* Suhm reviewed
the previous literature in regard to cultural associations and chronology~ and reached the following conclusion: whereas the Perdiz and
Cliffton arrow point types--because of their relatively late temporal
placement--could have had a direct relationship with the Jumano
and/or Tonkawa Indians, no positive evidence has yet demonstrated
such a connection. Because of a distinct separation of the Scallorn type
from the Perdiz and Cliffton types at the Blum and Smith sites, she
adopts the Toyah Focus-Austin Focus terminology of Kelley, but rejects Kelley’s proposed 7umano-Tonkawa relationship pending further
evidence.
Following Suhm’s interpretations, it is here concluded that Buzzard
Cave is predominantly of the Toyah Focus, that Little Buzzard Cave
contained a more or less equal mixture of Toyah and Austin Focus
elements, and that Forrester Gave is essentially an Austin Focus component. All three sites seem to be contemporaneous, at least in part,
with the Alto Focus of eastern Texas, judging from the presence of
Alto Focus pottery and Alba type arrow points.
* [Since Mr. Long’s manuscript was received, The Texas Archeological Salvage
Project has excavated the Kyle Rockshelter (located less than a mile from the three
shelters here reported) where deep deposits containing Central Texas Aspect material revealed the same arrow point sequence found at the Blum and Smith sites-that is, Scallorn points were consistently found in stratigraphically earlier zones
than were the Perdiz and Cliffton typ:s. Ed.]

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 1
Distribution of Artifacts by Site
Buzzard

Little Buzzard

2
3
1
2
0

0
2
2
0

1

0
0
0
0
0

87
14
6
9
15
32
0
2
1

44
8
5
5
12
38
2
0
0

2
2
8
0
5
14
0
0
0

!
0
0
0
0
1
2
0
0
l
1
0

1
1
i
1
3
11
15
1
3
1
0
0

0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
I
1

I
II
III
IV

0
12
6
0

41
12
14
3

2
12
1
0

IMPLEMENTS
Graver
Scrapers & choppers
Crude celts or adzes
Spokeshave
Side-scraper
Snub-nosed scraper
Serrated chips

0
12
0
2
15
1
5

1
46
3
0
0
0
0

I
1
1
0
0
0
0

DRILLS
Unshaped base
Serrated base
Small squared base
Large squared base
Reworked Pahnillas
Reworked Perdiz
Reworked Alba

8
0
0
0
0
0
1

6
3
1
1
2
1
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

CERAMICS
Leon Plain
Holly Fine Engraved
Goose Creek Plain
Dunkin Incised
Sanders Engraved
ARROW POINTS
Perdiz
Cliffton
Alba
Fresno
Young
Scallorn
Reed
Cuney
Washita
DART POINTS
Gary
Darl
Williams
Kent
Pandora
Yarbrough
Palmillas
Wells
Bulverde
Pedernales
Carrollton
Ensor
BLADES
Type
Type
Type
Type

Forrester

CENTRAL TEXAS ASPECT SITES

249

TABLE 1--Continued
Distribution of Artifacts by Site

Buzzard

Little Buzzard

HAMMERSTONES
Sandstone
Limestone
Flint
Quartzite

0
0
0
0

3
1
1
7

0
0
0
0

MANOS
Subrectangular
Irregular flat
Irregular pitted

0
0
0

3
2
1

0
0
0

2
0
3
0
3

4
1
5
1
1

0
0
1
0
1

Forrester

SHELL
Perforated mussel shell
BONE
Ulna awl
Fish hook
Antler flaker
Fish needle
Perforator

If the dart point analysis for Little Buzzard Cave is correct, it must
be a multi-component site which gradually accumulated a mixture of
material left by different cultural groups. The earlier inhabitants were
probably transitional with respect to the Edwards Plateau and Central
Texas Aspects.
Using estimated time spans for the different pottery types as given
by Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954), an age span of from 500 to 1200
A.D. is indicated for the Central Texas Aspect occupation at the three
sites. The estimated dates of Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954) for the
various arrow point types suggest a date somewhere between 700 and
1600 A.D.
According to Troike (1955: 113-143) the Central Texas Aspect
shares 20 (52.6%) of its total traits with the Henrietta Focus. Henrietta Focus shares 67% of the traits listed by Troike for use as norms
and found to be present in Little Buzzard Cave. Edwards Plateau Aspect shares 56%. But Central Texas Aspect shares only 51%. While
this serves to illustrate the limitations of Troike’s methods--because
an absolute trait list was used rather than a percentage trait list--it
also helps to point up certain other cultural relationships. The writer
feels that the consistently high percentage of Central Texas Aspect
traits shared with the Edwards Plateau Aspect is further evidence for
historical descent of the former from the latter. The high percentage
of Edwards Plateau Aspect traits shared with the Henrietta Focus

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

250

Fig. 12. Chipped stone artifacts from Forrester Cave. A-G, Scallorn arrow points; H-I,
Cllffton arrow points; J, Perdiz arrow point; K-M, Alba arrow points; N-O, Darl dart points;
P-R, Young arrow points; S, Ellis dart point; T, adz-like implement; U, Type III blade; V-W,
Type I blades; X, Carrollton dart point.

CENTRAL TEXAS ASPECT SITES

suggests that the Edwards Plateau Aspect is also ancestral to the Henrietta Focus. It is possible, too, that the Henrietta Focus was influenced
directly during its period of development by the Central Texas Aspect.

Re]erences Cited
Bell, Robert E.
1958. Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points.
Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Special Bulletin No. 1.
Jelks, Edward B.
1953. Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter. Bulletin of the Texas ArcheologicaI
Society, Vol. 24, pp. 189-207.
Kelley, J. Charles
1947a. The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Position of the Clear Fork
Focus. American Antiquity, Vol. 13, No. 2, pp. 97-109.
1947b. The Lehmann Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the Toyah, Uvalde, and
Round Rock Foci. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society, Vol. 18, pp. 115-128.
Lewis, T. M. N., and Madeline Kneberg
i’
1954. Early Projectile Point Forms, and Examples from Tennessee. Ten Years
of the Tennessee Archaeologist, pp. 124-127.

May, Kenneth O.
1952. Elementary Analysis. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. New York.
Miller, E. O., and Edward B. Jelks
1952. Archaeological Excavations at the Belton Reservoir, Coryell County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 23,
pp. 167-217.
Newell, H. Perry, and Alex D. Krieger
1949. The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, No. 5.

Pearce, J. E., and A. T. Jackson
1933. A Prehistoric Rock Shelter in Val Verde County, Texas. The University of
Texas, Anthropological Papers, Vol. 1, No. 3.
Stephenson, Robert L.
1949. Archaeological Survey of Whitney Basin, Bosque and Hill Counties, Texas,
A Preliminary Report. River Basin Surveys, Smithsonian Institution.
Mimeographed report.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1955. Excavations at the Collins Site, Travis County. Bulletin of the Texas.
Archeological Society, Vol. 2’6, pp. 7-54.
1957.

Excavations at the Smith Rocksheher, Travis County, Texas. The Texas
Journal of Science, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 26-58.

Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.

TEXA,S AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Troike, Rudolph C.
1955.

Anthropological Theory and Plains Archaeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 26, pp. 113-143.

Webb, Clarence H., and Monroe Dodd, Jr.
. .
1939. Further Excavation of the Gahagan Mound; Connections with a Florida
Culture. Bulletin of tlle Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
Vol. 11, pp. 92-127.
Webb, William S., and David L. DeJarnette
1942. An Archaeological Survey of Pickwick Basin in the Adjacent Portions of
the States of Alabama, Mississippi, and Tennessee. Bureau of American
Ethnology, Bulletin 129.

University of Kentucky
Lexington, Kentucky

The Devils Mouth Site: A River Terrace
Midden, Diablo Reservoir, Texas1
LEROY JOHNSON~ JR.

Introduction
THE DEVILS MOUTH SITE (University of Texas Site No. 41VV188) is
located in southern Val Verde County, Texas, approximately 12 air
miles northwest of the city of De1 Rio. The site is composed of numerous lenses of occupational debris within a relatively high terrace
which overlooks the disemboguement of the Devils River, being situated directly to the northwest of the point where the Devils empties
into the sluggish Rio Grande (Fig. 1). The Devils Mouth Site is one
of several which have been excavated in the Diablo Reservoir area by
the Texas Archeological Salvage Project of The University of Texas,
a participant in the Inter-Agency Archeological Salvage Program.
During the winter months of 1958, Messrs. John A. Graham and
W. A. Davis (1958: 8, 37) of the Austin office of the U.S. National
Park Service found and recorded the Devils Mouth Site while making
a boat reconnaissance of a portion of the Rio Grande in connection
with their survey of the reservoir. Their report gives the fo!lowing
description of the site:
"The Rio Grande terrace in this area achieves a considerable length
and breadth and reaches a depth of some 20 feet. Midden material is
scattered over the surface of the terrace across an area of three to four
acres. In the eroded face of the terrace a number of small lenses composed of fire-cracked stone and other detritus were observed. The large
extent of this site, its considerable depth, and the excellent prospect
of clear-cut stratification promise great archeological potential. Its
1 The archeological investigation of the Devils Mouth site was carried out by the
Texas Archeological Salvage Project as a cooperative project of the National Park
Service and The University of Texas. The following report was prepared in partial
fulfillment of the terms of Contract No. 14-10-333-528 between The University of
Texas and the National Park Service.

254

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

location near the deepest part of the proposed Diablo Reservoir strongly
calls for intensive excavation prior to inundation" (Graham and
Davis, 1958: 37).
As a result of this strong recommendation, a small field party was
sent out by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project to investigate
the site more thoroughly and to carry out preliminary excavations
and stratigraphic tests. The field party, under the leadership of Mr.
Lathel F. Duffield, was composed of Messrs. Richard E. Ross, LeRoy
Johnson, Jr., Carlos Sotomayor, and Alberto Trevifio. The results of
the work at the site, carried on from December 3 to December 12,
1959, are presented in this paper.
The writer wishes to express his sincere thanks to Mr. Federico
Figueroa of Del Rio, on whose ranch the site is located, for permission to dig on his land and for the wholehearted assistance and aid
which he gave the field crew during their stay in the area.
Thanks are also due Mr. Edward B. Jelks, executive-director of the
Texas Archeological Salvage Project, and Dr. J. F. Epstein of the
Department of Anthropology of The University of Texas--both of
whom have extensive knowledge of the archeology of western Texas-for the aid which they freely gave the writer in interpreting the data
from this site.

Environment
Diablo Reservoir lies within the northeastern fringe area of the
Chihuahuan biotic province, which extends from southern New Mexico and western Texas southward into Chihuahua, Coahuila, and
parts of Nuevo Ledn, San Luis Potosl, and Zacatecas (Dice, 1943).
This province is an arid desert land with many plains, hills, and a
few mountains.
In their description of the immediate vicinity of the reservoir,
Graham and Davis (1958: 3-4) give the following account:
"Topographically, the Diablo Reservoir area is a semi-arid hilly
region of 900 to 1,500 feet elevation, dissected by numerous steepwalled canyons, including the gorges of the Pecos, Devils River, and
the Rio Grande. Cretaceous limestone of the Comanche Series forms
the country rock and is responsible for the rugged, sharply eroded
terrain. Thin limestone-derived soils are found on the uplands while
alluvial soils occur along the Rio Grande and to a much lesser extent
along the Pecos and the Devils.
"Except along the three rivers--the Devils, the Pecos, and the Rio

DEVILS MOUTH SITE

25~

Fig. 1. View of Devils Mouth site looking southeast from cliff above site. Terrace (site)
in foreground; Devils River, left background; Rio Grande, right background.

Grande--water is extremely scarce throughout the region. Virtually
all the tributary canyons are dry and carry water only during periods
of rain.
"... The climate of the Diablo area is semi-arid. Based on a 47
year record at the nearest weather station, Del Rio, the average rainfall is 15.58 inches. Temperature varies from an average of 60° F. in_
January to 85° F. in July. The maximum recorded is 110° F. and the
minimum 11° F. The wind speed averages 10.7 miles per hour.
"... Common fauna include peccary, deer, coyote, iackrabbit,
beaver, rock squirrel, raccoon, skunk, fox, and ring-tail. The gray
wolf, the mountain lion or panther, and the black bear were formerly
numerous but are rarely seen now. Reptiles are represented by various lizards and snakes, with the poisonous diamond-back and rock
rattlers being notable examples of the class. Centipedes, millipedes,
scorpions, and a variety of spiders are the typical myriapods and

256

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

arachnids. Vultures, ravens, sparrows, wrens, turkeys, ducks, doves,
and quail are the most common birds."
The vegetation of the area for the most part consists of thorny
shrubs and cacti, although a few trees grow along the rare permanent
streams. Ocotillo (Fouquieria splendens) is found on the rocky slopes,
as wel! as Agave lechuguilla, particularly on limestone soils in the
northern part of the reservoir (see Fig. 1 ). Since the reservoir lies on
the fringe of the Chihuahuan biotic province, many plants from adjacent regions to the north and east occur there too, and the total number of plants is larger than it would be for a locality deep within the
limits of one province or another. Of these, Fouquieria splendens, the
desert members of the Liliaceae, Compositae, and several of the grasses
are relatively abundant around the mouth of the Devils River.

Description oi the Site
The terrace in which the midden deposits occur rests against the
south slope of a high limestone cliff which rises some 150 ft. above the
present level of the Rio Grande and Devils River at their conflux (Figs.
1 and 2). The slopes of the cliff are rough, but not at all difficult to
scale as are the sheer canyon walls of the Rio Grande farther upstream~
there the river is much more entrenched and the channel narrower
and considerably deeper. The surface of the terrace, now approximately 50 ft. above the water level, is comparatively flat and is covered
by a rather lush assemblage of low bushes and grasses which seem
to have checked the erosion which would otherwise result from rainfall. The edges of the terrace, however, show evidence of severe cutting by the rivers during periods of inundation. At the present time
both the Rio Grande and the Devils are quite shallow, and at several
points near the site one can wade across either without particular
difficulty.
The terrace extends, on an average, about 150 ft. southward from
the cliff face toward the Rio Grande, although at one point it attains
a width of some 200 ft. Cultural detritus was observed on the surface
of the terrace for a distance of approximately 1000 feet along the Rio
Grande, although the excavations were confined to the extreme eastern part of the site. The faces of the terrace tend to be perpendicular
near the top, which fact facilitated the observation and recording of
-the natural zones occurring therein. East of the terrace, just above the
level of the water, is a long, fiat exposure of bedrock limestone with
several deep, oval mortars worn into the rock (Fig. 2).

DEVILS MOUTH SITE

DEVILS

RIVER

PRESENT FLOODPLAIN

/
!
/

RIO GRANDE

[

DEC 1959

Fi9.

2.

Sketch map of Devils Moufh site.

On the surface of the terrace mesquite is quite common, and several
species of grass grow abundantly. Contrariwise, Acacia seems to replace mesquite almost entirely on the rocky cliffs above the site, and the
grass is not nearly so profuse. Also, presumably because of the rich
soil, the plants growing on the terrace surface attain a higher and
fuller growth than those on the nearby hills.

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Unfortunately, the Pleistocene and Recent terraces of the Rio
Grande have not undergone correlative studies in the area of the Devils
Mouth Site, and no statements can be made at this time concerning
their geologic affinities. Future work in the area should have as a goal
correlation with terrace sequences of other regions--for instance, with
those of the Big Bend area. Such studies, however, were outside the
scope of work of our field party.
Work Done at the Site
To begin with, a rather hasty sketch map of the site was prepared
by plotting in the edge of the terrace, using a transit and an alidade,
and by correlation with U. S. Geological Survey topographic sheets.
A future field party should construct a complete, detailed contour
map of the site and surrounding terrain.
In order to facilitate recording procedures, an orange-colored metal
stake was driven horizontally into the rock face of the cliff adjacent
to the terrace, was designated "primary datum," and was assigned
an arbitrary elevation of 100 ft. (Fig. 2). All measurements at the
site, both vertical and horizontal, were calculated in relation to this
point. Next, two lines of metal stakes were laid out across the site,
one going from north to south, the other from east to west. The former
was given the designation "W500," the latter, "N500."
It was then decided to clean the exposed face of the terrace at several
points in order to record the gross natural stratigraphy of the site.
Three profiles were taken: No. 1, approximately 60 ft. away from the
rock cliff and facing towards Devils River; No. 2, about 90 ft. from
the cliff and likewise facing Devils River; and No. 3, which was 170
ft. out from the cliff and facing the confluence of the two rivers. After
the profiles had been cleaned, a series of occupation zones, extending
from the top to the bottom of the terrace and separated by apparently
sterile strata, was clearly discernible.
Next, three test pits were sunk into the terrace surface in the hope
of acquiring artifacts which might reveal cultural stratigraphy. Each
pit consisted of two contiguous 5-ft. squares; each square was given
the north-south designation of the stake in its southeast corner. Although digging was done by half-foot, artificial levels, care was taken
to record natural stratigraphy in the excavating process as well.
Test Excavation No. 1, consisting of 5-ft. squares N480-W350 and
N480-W355, was opened just inside the terrace edge at the point
where Profile 2 had been recorded, and the stratigraphy encountered

i ...........

DEVILS R’IOUT]~I SITE

259

therein was for all practical purposes identical to that of the profile.
A maximum depth of 6.5 ft. was reached.
Test 2, which included squares N390-W390 and N390-W395, was
put down near Profile 3 in the area where the upper midden deposits
seemed to be thickest. This excavation attained a depth of Z ft. and
yielded more artifacts than either of the other two tests.
Test 3 was placed far back from the terrace edge, and it reached a
depth of 3.5 ft. This third test embraced 5-ft. squares N495-W495 and
N490-W495.
All of the soil removed from the three pits was passed through hardware cloth having a ¼-inch mesh, and all bone fragments, shells,
spalls of chert, etc., were placed in paper bags labeled with appropriate depth and square designations, and were taken back to the laboratory for s’tudy and description.
In order to determine the desirability of having a palynological
study done at the site at some later date, three soil samples were collected from Test 1 and sealed in glass tubes. Also, soil samples were
collected for all the strata represented in Profile 3 for purposes of
lithological and other analyses. Unfortunately, because of time limitations, these particular studies have not yet been completed.

Internal Structure of the Site
The natural zoning of the site was determined from the three profiles cleaned along the terrace face and from the three test excavations. Because of their greater depth, the profiles proved most useful
in providing an overall picture of the bedding and zoning. A general,
but tentative, correlation has been made between these profiles and is
presented graphically in Fig. 3. Because the deeply buried beds at
the bottom of the columns could not be studied and defined as thoroughly as those occurring higher up, the designation of the strata
could not proceed from bottom to top, as is customary in describing
geologic columns, but rather it was necessary to progress from the surface downward. This seems to be the most practical procedure, since
future work may reveal as yet unrecognized zones at the base of the
sequence. The designations for these new zones can be easily added in
their proper sequence to the end of the series presented here (see Fig.
3).
Zone .4, the surface zone, consists of humus-stained, brown, unconsolidated sand and a small amount of occupational debris; it ranges from
0.4 to 1.5 ft. in thickness.

TEXA,S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

~

"burnt

rock

r

C ~block
burnt sand
rock

WHITE

SAND

COARSE TAN
SAND

Q
Q

76’

O’

Fig.

3.

I’

2’
iI

Natural stra?igraphy of Devils Mouth site.

DEVILS

MOUTH

SITE

Zone B, a relatively thin zone of somewhat clayey, whitish-brown sand,
is sterile of artifacts; this bed ranges from 0.2 to 0.5 ft. in thickness.
Zone C is a thick occupation deposit of tan-colored sand containing a
large amount of burnt rock and midden material; though more or less
consistent in Profiles 1 and 2, where it ranges from 1.3 to 1.5 ft. in
thickness, Zone C divides into five distinct lenses in Profile 3, attaining there a thickness of 4.3 ft. These lenses are labeled Zones C1
through C5 in sequence from top to bottom.
Zone C1 consists of dark black midden soil with a large amount of
burnt limestone fragments of small size.
Zone C2 is a lens of dark brownish-black, sandy soil with abundant
charcoal flecks.
Zone C3 is a relatively thick layer of dark-brown sand and burnt rock.
Zone C4 contains a tan, sandy soil with charcoal flecks.
Zone C5 is a layer of burnt rock and charcoal flecks. All of these subdivisions of Zone C show evidence of heavy occupation, and from
them came a maiority of the artifacts from Test 2.
Zone D, ranging from 0.2 to 0.9 ft. in thickness, is a bed of compact
clayey sand of a whitish-brown color very similar in texture and
composition to Zone B. It likewise seems to be sterile of artifacts and
cultural debris.
Zone E is an occupation zone of dark brown sand and abundant burnt
rocks, ranging in thickness from 0.7 to 2.8 ft.
Zone F is a thick layer of light tan sand with a small amount of burnt
rock. This bed ranges from 1.] to 2.1 ft. in thickness.
Zone G is composed of apparently sterile, whitish, clayey sand similar
to that of Zone B and D except that G seems to have more clay present. It ranges from 0.1 to 0.9, ft. in thickness.
Zone H, a thick layer of light tan, compact sand, contains very little
in the way of occupational materials. It ranges from 2.2 to 3.3 ft. in
thickness. In Profile 2, Zone H is cut by a thin lens of whitish clayey
sand, which, however, could be detected neither in Profile i nor in
Profile 3. For that reason it has not been assigned a letter designation.
Zone I consists of sterile, white sand; this zone did not appear at all
in profile 1, and only very faintly in Profile 2. It ranges in thickness
from 0.1 to 0.3 ft. Below it, but only in Profile 3, is found a thin~
local lens of dark gray sand with charcgal particles.
Zone 7is a layer of brownish-white sand which evidences some light
occupation. This zone is quite thin in Profile 3, but is well represented
in both 1 and 2. It ranges in thickness from 0.4 to 2.0 ft. Below this
zone, in Profile 3, occur two local, thin lenses of reddish sand with
abundant charcoal flecks.

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Zone K, consisting of a grayish-white sand showing some occupation
debris, is well represented in al! three profiles, ranging from 0.6 to
2.8 ft. in thickness.
Zone L, a stratum of light tan sand, contains a few fire-cracked stones.
Although the indications are few, it seems that this layer constitutes
the deepest occupation zone which can be seen in the terrace faces. The
thickness of Zone L ranges from 0.5 to 0.8 ft.
Zone M is a very thin zone of white clayey sand, lacking any indication
of occupation. It ranges in thickness from 0.1 to 0.3 ft. Just below
Zone M the recording of Profile 2 was terminated.
Zone N, in Profile 1, follows Zone M, and consists of light tan sand 1.5
ft. thick, which is seemingly sterile.
Zone 0 is a thin bed of white, clayey, sterile sand 0.2 ft. thick which
was observed only in Profile !.
Zone P is a relatively thick deposit of hard, compact, tan sterile sand
appearing in Profile 1. The recording of Profile 1 was terminated at
a distance of 15 ft. below the surface of the terrace, the base of Zone
P not being reached.

In Profile 3 the N--O--P sequence could not be recognized. Bather,
Zone M, the layer of sterile clay and sand, is there underlain by a
group of il!-defined zones of light tan and buff-colored sand, 5.4 ft.
thick, which seems to extend downward to the low exposure of bedrock 23 ft. below the top of the terrace. These beds are represented,
collectively, by the letter Q in Fig. 3. Because of the sharp inclination
of the terrace faces near the bottom, the profile cuts had to be offset
several times in the direction of the rivers as work progressed downward, in order to avoid moving a tremendous quantity of soil. Consequently the lower portions of the profiles were not cut in vertical
planes, a factor that may have some bearing on the diNculty of correlating the lower zones in Profiles 1 and 2.
In general, the picture we have gained of the natural stratigraphy
from these three profiles is the following. Several (at least eight)
superimposed natural geologic zones are present which show signs of
human occupation, separated, for the most part, by apparently sterile
zones of sand and clayey sand evidently deposited on the site in times
of inundation. These sterile zones served, it seems, to seal off from
each other the several different occupational beds, thereby making the
possibility of acquiring clear-cut cultural stratigraphy ’excellent. Unfortunately our field crew could only test the upper few strata, and it
remains for a future expedition, with ample time and funds, to
excavate a complete column of the 30 ft. of sediments present in the
terrace.

-o63

DEVILS MOUTH SITE

Occupational Features
Only one occupation feature was found at the site: the partial outline of a large pit (Fig. 4) discovered in the eroded face of the terrace
only a few feet from the spot where Profile 2 was recorded. The surviving portion of the pit measured approximately 3.5 ft. in diameter
and 2.5 ft. in depth, and contained dark black soil in which were
many small fire-cracked limestone rocks. Unfortunately the major
part of the pit’s fill had been eroded away, and though the soil was
passed through screens, no artifacts were recovered.
It seems that the original surface from which the pit was dug is the
line dividing Zone E from Zone F. Much of the soil in Zone E, Profile
2, is like that found in the pit.
The use to which the pit could have been put remains a problem.
The soil immediately under it shows no signs of alteration due to
heating.

Description o] the ArtiJacts
Considering the amount of soil moved in the three test excavations
(850 cubic ft.), a relatively small number of artifacts, 1 i3, was recovered. These include dart points, arrowheads, scrapers, knives, potsherds, and other miscellaneous artifacts. In spite of the somewhat
disappointing returns, some interesting evidence on cultural stratigraphy was acquired from these implements (see section entitled
"Provenience of the Artifacts").
TECHNIQUES

oF FLINTKNAPPING

Before beginning the description of the lithic artifacts, it seems
appropriate to present a short discussion of the knapping techniques
involved in their manufacture. Dr. J. F. Epstein (1960) has prepared
a comprehensive analysis of the lithic technology of nearby Centipede
(VV191) and Damp rockshehers (VV189)including precise classification of the different kinds of flakes, cores, etc., which are distinguishable from each other by their diverse methods of manufacture.
Dr. Epstein kindly let me read his manuscript report of excavations
at Centipede and Damp shelters, and has permitted me to borrow
from his classification of knapping techniques.
Several classes of chipped artifacts were made from cores: choppers,
perhaps a few of the knives, and rarely a scraper. The rest of the
artifacts were made from flakes, the classification of which, following
somewhat the terminology developed by Epstein, is given below.

TEXAS AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

264

o

o~

-i

~5
WO

N

z

o2

a

I--

E.

b~

DEVILS MOUTH SITE

(1) Initial cortez flakes--the first flakes knocked from a rounded chert
nodule, resulting in a piano-convex shape for the flakes, with the
convex surface retaining the patina (or cortex) of the nodule.
(2) Cortex flakes--large flakes knocked from the nodule after the removal
of initial flakes but without the advantage of any prepared striking
platform. The exterior surface of the nodule, the cortex, still shows
clearly on one or more edges of these flakes; hence their name.
(3) Flakes struck from a core having a prepared platform--long, narrow
flakes that exhibit a positive bulb of percussion and a flattened area
above the bulb representing a small part of the original platform;
they occur very rarely at the Devils Mouth Site.
(4) Billet flakes--wide, thin flakes, somewhat longer than most pressure
[lakes, exhibiting a small positive bulb of percussion as evidence of
conchoidal fracture. They have a rather small flat area above the bulb,
or frequently lack this flattened area altogether. Laboratory experiment has shown that these flakes can best be produced using a bone
or antler billet, although hammerstones sometimes produce the same
kind of [lakes.
A technique used frequently for retouching artifacts is the pressure
method of removing very small flakes, often employed inthe making
of dart points and arrow points. Most pressure flakes, unfortunately,
are too small to be caught by the ¼-inch mesh screens used in excavation, but use of the pressure technique is evident on several of the
artifacts themselves, particularly the dart and arrow points.

DART POINT TYPES

In all, 40 identifiable dart points and dart point fragments were
recovered. Many of these fit existing type categories fairly well, while
others show only general resemblances to recognized types. For those
points of recognized types, the current taxonomic names will be employed. Groups of points, however, which do not conform to established
taxonomic designations will be considered as provisional types and will
be assigned letters of the alphabet for identification purposes. Although
an extensive analysis was not made, it seems that locally acquired
gray cherts were used almost exclusively in the manufacture of the
dart points.
Montell (Fig. 5: e, f, g)
No. of specimens: 12
Overall proportions: large and relatively broad
Blade:
shape--triangular to leaf-shaped with considerable variation

266

TEX~S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig. 5. Artifacts from Devils Mouth site. a-b, cortex flake scrapers; c, prepared platform
scraper; d, burin; e-g, Montell dart points; h-i, Abasolo dart points; j, Shumla dart point
fragment; k, Pedernales dart point.

267

DEVILS MOUTH SITE

edges--generally straight, sometimes markedly convex
shoulders--pronounced; extremely well developed barbs on all
but 4 specimens
Stem: one-fifth to one-fourth the length of the entire point
shape-slightly expanded and bifurcate
edges--straight but diverging toward the base
base--divided by a deep V-shaped notch; the base of each half of
the stem is fiat to slightly convex
Length: range, 40 to 70 ram.; average, 55 mm.
Width across the shoulders: range, 27 to 42 mm.; average, 35 ram.
Thickness: range, 4 to 7 ram.; average, 5 ram.
Workmanship: These large points are very thin in cross section, and
were made by the removal of thin, wide flakes from the surface.
According to Dr. J. F. Epstein (personal communication), these
Montell points could well have been thinned by the billet technique.
Remarks: Although considerable variation is present in the sample
of Montell points from the Devils Mouth Site, the range 0f variation
exhibited falls within the definition of the type given bySuhm et al.
(1954: 452, Plate 105). Because of the limited sample at hand, no
varieties can be set up at the present time.
Abasolo (Fig. 5: h, i)
No. of specimens: 2
Overall proportions: medium-sized; triangular-shaped
Blade:
shape--roughly triangular
edges--straight to slightly convex; left edge of both faces markedly
beveled
Stem: none
Base: slightly convex
Length: first specimen, 45 mm.; second specimen, 51 mm.
Width at base: first specimen, 28 ram.; second specimen, 21 mm.
Thickness: first specimen, 8 mm.; second specimen, 8 mm.
Workmanship: These points are thicker in cross section than the
Montell points and do not seem to exhibit the billet flaking of the
latter type. On the contrary, narrow and deep flakes were removed
from the surface of the points, perhaps by percussion with a
hammerstone.
tlemarks: These points fit the definition for the Abasolo type as defined
by Suhm et al. (1954: 400, Plate 79).

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Shumla (Fig. 5: j)
No. of specimens: 1 fragment lacking the distal part and one shoulder
General proportions: undeterminable
Blade:
shape--undeterminable
edges--undeterminable
shoulders--pronounced with long barbs reaching to the base of the
stem
Stem:
shape--subtriangular
edges--very slightly convex
base--slightly rounded
Length: undeterminable
Width: undeterminable
Thickness: 5 mm.
Workmanship: The billet technique of removing long, wide flakes is
not evidenced. Rather, the flake scars are deep and narrow.
Remarks: Although the point identified here is fragmentary, the stem
and barb are peculiar to the Shumla type (Suhm el al, 1954: 480,
Plate 119).
Pedernales (Fig. 5: k)
No. of specimens: 1 (lacking tip of the blade)
Overall proportions: long and narrow
Blade:
shape--triangular
edges--straight
shoulders--slight, lacking barbs
Stem: approximately one-third the length of the entire point
shape--straight and bifurcate
edges--straight
base--divided by a deep V-notch; the base of each half of the stem
is pointed
Length: 65 mm. (estimated)
Width across shoulders: 26 mm.
Thickness: 6 mm.
Workmanship: Relatively wide, thin flakes, possibly representing the
billet technique, were removed from the surface; little secondary
flaking is evidenced.
Remarks: This point conforms to the definition of the type given by
Suhm et al. (1954: 468, Plates 113, 114, 115).

DEVILS MOUTH

SITE

Frio (Fig. 6: a)
No. of specimens: 1
Overall proportions: short and broad
Blade: (fragmentary, lacking the tip)
shape--triangular
edges--straight
shoulders--prominent but without barbs
Stem: approximately one-third the length of the entire point
shape--sharply expanding and bifurcate
edges--concave
base--concave and recurved
Length: 37 ram. (estimated)
Width across the shoulders: 24 ram.
Width across the base: 23 ram.
Thickness: 6 ram.
Workmanship: some secondary pressure flaking; no evidence of billet
flaking
Remarks: This point resembles closely several examples of the Frio
type defined by Suhm et al. (1954: 428; Plate 93, S, V, and Y), but
also shows resemblance in stem outline to the Martindale type
(ibid.: 446, Plate 102).
Langtry (Fig. 6: b)
The basal and medial portion of a Langtry point could be identified.
This fragment shows the weak shoulders, contracting stem and flattish base so characteristic of that type.
PROVISIONAL DART POINT TYPES

Provisional Type A (Fig. 6: c, d)
No. of specimens: 3 (fragmentary; tips lacking)
Overall proportions: medium-sized, somewhat narrow
Blade:
shape--triangular or laurel leaf-shaped
edges--straight to slightly convex
shoulders--well developed, with moderately long barbs on 2 specimens
Stem: one-fifth to one-fourth the length of the entire point
shape--expanding slightly toward the base
edges--straight to very slightly concave
base--slightly concave

Fig. 6. Artifacts from Devils Mouth site. a, Frio dart point; b, Langtry dart point fragment; c-d, Provisional Type A dart points; e-f, Provisional Type B dart points; g-h, Variety
C1

dart points (Provisional Type C); i-j, Variety C2

dart points (Provisional Type C); k,

Variety C3 dart point (Provisional Type C); I-m, Provisional Type D dart points; n, Perdiz
arrow point; o, arrow point; p, Toyah arrow point; q-s, potsherds.

DEVILS MOUTH SITE

Length: 60 ram. (estimated average)
Width across shoulders: first specimen, 35 ram.; second specimen,
35 ram.; third specimen, 33 ram.
Thickness: first specimen, 7 ram.; second specimen, 5 ram.; third
specimen, 5 ram.
Workmanship: All three examples are thin and show the removal of
large, wide flakes as well as some amount of secondary flaking.
l~emarks: These points belong to the tradition of stemmed points
represented by the Marshall and Lange types. The points of Type
A, however, fall within the extreme limits of both those types as
defined by Suhm et al. (1954: 436,444), but fit the norm for neither.
Their stems are too wide for Marshall, yet do not expand enough for
the Lange category.

Provisional Type B (Fig. 6: e, f)
No. of specimens: 2
Overall proportions: long and narrow
Blade:
shape--somewhat lanceolate
edges--slightly convex
shoulders--fairly well developed, but without barbs
Stem: about one-third the length of the entire point
shape--very slightly expanding
edges--concave; beveled on one face only
base--slightly rounded
Length: first specimen, 60 ram.; second specimen, 50 ram.
Width across the shoulders; first specimen, 29 ram.; second specimen,
26 ram.
Thickness: first specimen, 6 ram.; second specimen, 7 ram.
Workmanship: These examples exhibit short, deep flake scars and
very little secondary flaking. Evidence is lacking for billet flaking.
Remarks: These two points are very much like the Nolan type in
general outline and in stem shape. However, both specimens have
stems with the edges beveled only on one face, while true Nolan
points usually have stems beveled on both edges but on opposite
faces. These points can, perhaps, be considered as variants of the
Nolan type.
Provisional Type C
Type C is made up of 10 rather small dart points with expanding
stems and short blades. They will here be broken down, for descriptive

272

TEX2~S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

purposes, into three varieties. These points may form part of a large
group of small stemmed dart points (including Darl and Fairland
types) that seem to be relatively late in the Archaic Stage over much
of Texas.
Variety C1 (Fig. 6: g, h)
No. of specimens: 4
Overall proportions: small and relatively wide
Blade:
shape--triangular
edges--straight
shoulders--weak, without barbs
Stem: about one-third the length of the entire point
shape--expanding and short
edges--concave
base--concave
Length: range, 30 to 40 ram.; average, 36 ram.
Width across the shoulders: range, 17 to 22 ram.; average, 19 ram.
Thickness: range, 4 to 7 ram.; average, 6 ram.
Workmanship: These points are proportionately thicker in cross section than the Montell points and show shorter and deeper flake scars.
The workmanship gives the impression of being quite poor.
I~emarks: Variety CI is distinguished here from the other varieties
of C by its concave base. C2 has a markedly convex base, while the
base of C3 is flattened. All three, however, are small, have expanding stems, and seem to be closely related to each other. The shoulders
of C1 are less strongly developed than those of C2, however, with the
latter variety exhibiting small barbs. CI is quite similar to the
Uvalde point (Suhm et al., !954: 486) and to the Martindale (ibid.:
446) and Dad points (ibid.: 414). It seems probable that all represent a common stemming tradition.

Variety C2 (Fig. 6: i, j)
No. of specimens: 3
Overall proportions: small and broad
Blade:
shape--triangular to subtriangular
edges--straight or slightly convex
shoulders--well developed with short barbs
Stem: approximately one-fourth the length of the entire point
shape--short and expanding

Dt~VILS MOUTH SITE

073

edges--concave
base--convex
Length: first specimen, 32 ram.; second specimen, 55 ram. (estimated) ; third specimen, 40 ram.
Width across the shoulders: first specimen, 17 ram.; second specimen,
21 ram.; third specimen, 17 ram.
Thickness: first specimen, 6 ram.; second specimen, 5 ram.; third
specimen, 5 ram.
Workmanship: The flake scars are short and deep, with little secondary
flaking.
Remarks: This variety is distinguished from the other varieties of
Type C by its convex base and short barbs.
Variety C3 (Fig. 6: k)
No. of specimens: 3
Overall proportions: small and thick
Blade:
shape--subtriangular
edges--slightly convex
shoulders--slight, without barbs
Stem: one-fourth to one-third the length of the entire point
shape--sharply expanding
edges--concave
base--straight
Length: first specimen, 22 mm., second specimen, 37 mm.; third
specimen, 40 ram.
Width across the shoulders: first specimen, 16 ram.; second specimen,
17 ram.; third specimen, 18 ram.
Thickness: first specimen, 4 ram.; second specimen, 5 ram.; third
specimen, 5 ram.
Workmanship: The flake scars are short and rather deep, and the
points exhibit little secondary flaking. These were not made by the
billet technique.
Bemarks: Variety C3 is distinguished from CI and C2 by its straight
base. Also, this variety shows some resemblance to the Ensor dart
point type, but is somewhat under the size range for Ensor (Suhm
et al., 1954: 422, Plate 90).
Provisional Typed (Fig. 6: 1, m)
No. of specimens: 3
Overall proportions: large and long

TEXi%S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Blade:
shape--sharply expanding
edges--concave
base--concave to almost straight
Length: first specimen, 50 ram. (estimated); second specimen, 50
ram.; third specimen, 53 ram.
Width across shoulders: first specimen, 21 ram.; second specimen,
21 ram.; third specimen, 22 ram.
Thickness: first specimen, 8 ram.; second specimen, 6 ram.; third
specimen, 9 ram.
Workmanship: Chipping was done by the removal of short, deep
flakes, presumably by percussion.
tlemarks: Type D is quite close to the Ensor type described by Suhm
et al. (1954: 422, Plate 90). However, the present points have
wider side notches and a more concave base than points illustrated
by Suhm et al.
MISCELLANEOUS DART POINTS

Among the points which could not be typologically identified or
described are one large, leaf-shaped point with very shallow side
notches, and three basal fragments of medium-sized, expanding stem
dart points. These latter points are too fragmentary to allow for a fuller
description.
ARROW POINTS

Only one intact arrow point and two arrow point fragments were
found at the Devils Mouth Site. The first (Fig. 6: n) is a small, thin
point whose dimensions are 32 mm. (length) by 21 ram. (width) by
3 mm. (thickness). It is of the Perdlz type (Suhm et al., 1954: 504),
having a long, contracting stem and relatively long barbs.
One of the fragmentary points (Fig 6: p) belonging to the Toyah
type (Suhm et al., 1954: 508), has a triangular outline, and side and
base notches. The other fragment (Fig. 6: o) is an extremely narrow
specimen with small contracting stem and barbs. It resembles, in a
very general way, the Perdiz arrow point, but is much narrower and
proportionately longer, having an estimated length of 35 ram. and a
width of only 11 mm. All three points were made by pressure flaking.
BUlllN

Dr. J. F. Epstein (1960), in his excavation of the nearby Centipede
tlockshelter, found an abundance of burins throughout the whole

275

DEVILS MOUTH SITE

sequence of artifacts from that site. Only one artifact (Fig. 5: d) from
the Devils Mouth Site, however, fits the burin category. This is an
apparently reworked knife or blade from which two long flakes were
struck to produce a burin cutting bit. The bit has an angle of approximately 70 degrees. This implement is 61 ram. long, 30 ram. wide, and
5 ram. thick (for provenience see Table 1).

FIST AXES

Two small fist axes (Fig. 7: a, b) were recovered from the site, one
70 ram. in length, the other 88 ram. Each has a well worked, pointed
distal end, while the other extremity is relatively broad and thick;
these are the definitive characteristics of fist axes. Both faces have
been worked, presumably by percussion flaking, and the edges of the
larger specimen show some signs of secondary pressure flaking as well.
Much of the cortex of the original core can be seen on the basal part
of the larger specimen.

CHOPPER

One large implement (Fig. 7: d) is a slightly reworked flint core,
having been flaked by percussion on one edge and adjacent parts of
both faces into a chopper. The maximum diameter of this artifact is
93 ram. Choppers, in contrast to the pointed fist axes, have wide cutting
edges which may be straight or somewhat convex.

KNIVES

A group of 17 fragmentary bifacial tools are here classified as
knives. They can be divided into two groups: knives of a general
rounded or oval outline. (3 specimens), and those which seem to have
been originally leaf-shaped (14 specimens, Fig. 7: c), having more or
less pointed ends. There is a considerable size range in both groups
with specimens varying from 50 to 80 ram. in length. The workmanship is generally quite crude, and it appears that all the work was
done by the percussion technique. As far as can be determined, al!
specimens were manufactured from large, irregular flakes and not
from cores. Two specimens stand out from the others because of their
thinness, and because their edges show some evidence of secondary
pressure flaking. None shows evidence of the billet manufacturing
technique.

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Fig. 7. Artifacts from Devils Mouth site. a-b, fist axes; c, knife fragment; d, chopper;
~e, initial cortex scraper; f, mano; g, pitted mano.

277

DEVILS MOUTH SITE

SCRAPERS

All artifacts that have a cutting edge or edges worked from only
one face of the piece, leaving a flat opposing face, have been included
within the scraper category. These, in turn, are grouped in three divisions, following in part the terminological designations used for material from the Centipede and Damp rockshelters by Dr. J. F. Epstein
(1960). These are (1) initial cortex flake scrapers, (2) cortex flake
scrapers, and (3) scrapers made from flakes that were removed from
cores with prepared striking platforms. Unfortunately the descriptive
terminology long in use in central Texas and other areas--of which
such terms as "end-scraper," "side-scraper," etc., are a part--could
not be conveniently employed in describing the scrapers from the
Devils Mouth Site. The explanation for this seems to be a difference
in techniques of lithic manufacture between this and other areas. The
scrapers of the Diablo Reservoir region for the most part are much
cruder than those of central Texas and their irregular shape has not
lent itself to existing classificatory terms. For this reason the system
proposed by Epstein has been used here. His descriptive system is based
more on techniques of manufacture than on the shape of the end
product.
Initial Cortex Flake Scrapers (Fig. 7: e). Eleven very crude scrapers
were made from the initial or outside flakes struck from large nodules
or cobbles (see section entitled "Techniques of Flint Knapping." These
flakes are generally piano-convex, the convex side representing the
original surface of the chert nodule. A small amount of percussion
flaking was usually done on the cortex face, but there is rarely any
evidence of secondary pressure flaking. These crude scrapers contrast
sharply in quality of workmanship with the well made piano-convex
scrapers of the central Texas and Abilene regions. Most of the examples show very little in the way of effective cutting or scraping edges,
some being worked only on one small part of the edge, while others
exhibit irregular percussion flaking around the whole circumference
of the artifact. A considerable variation occurs in size, the maximum
diameters running from 59 to 74 ram.
Cortex Flake Scrapers (Fig 5: a, b). Sixteen cortex flake scrapers
were recovered. These scrapers are made of large, irregularly worked
flakes which were struck from medium-sized nodules after removal
of the initial flakes. In all instances some part of the cortex of the
nodule was left intact, hence the name "cortex flake scraper" (Epstein,

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

1960). Evidence of a small amount of percussion flaking is found along
the edges of many specimens, but only on a limited section of the edge.
The average diameter of these artifacts is 55 mm.
Prepared Platform Scrapers (Fig. 5: c). Five rather crude and
irregular scrapers were made from flakes struck from the prepared
striking platforms of large chert cores. A large bulb of percussion and
a small remnant of the striking platform can be seen on all the specimens. The general outline of these scrapers is quite irregular, but the
"sharpening," done by percussion, is found generally on the end opposite the bulb of percussion. In all instances retouching is foufi’d only on
one face. The average diameter of these scrapers is 55 mm.
Miscellaneous Scrapers. Aside from the aforementioned scrapers,
three others were found which did not fit any of the above categories.
The first of these is long, approximately rectangular, and was made
from a flake struck from the fiat, unworked surface of a nodule. This
artifact has a square bit at the end opposite the striking platform and
perhaps was used as an adz or gouge. The other two scrapers are very
similar in outline to the leaf-shaped knives discussed earlier, differing
only in that one face is flat and unworked.
GROUND STONE ARTIFACTS

Eleven manos--hand stones used for grinding purposes--were found
at the site. Of these, four are very flat, showing smoothed areas resulting from use on both faces. Two (Fig. 7: g) have small, pecked areas
on their surfaces and resemble strongly the so-called "nut stones" or
"pitted stones" of eastern Texas (Jelks and Tunnell, 1959: 50; Suhm et
al., 1954: 207). Another hand stone (Fig. 7: f) has only one grinding
surface; the back is sharply humped and ridge-shaped. Aside from these
complete manos, six fragments of manos were found; unfortunately it
is not possible to be certain of the original shapes. On three specimens
one broken edge has been sharpened by percussion flaking, and it seems
probable that they were reused as choppers.
MISCELLANEOUS STONE MATERIAL

Nineteen small, elongate river pebbles occurred at the site, similar
in form to the painted pebbles characteristically found in the dry caves
of western Texas. The specimens from the Devils Mouth Site may
originally have had paintings on their surfaces which weathered away
as a result of the exposed nature of the site. Several fragments of ochre
(limonite and hematite) were also recovered from the excavations.

279

DEVILS MOUTH SITE

UNALTERED

FLAKES

Unworked flakes of the four major forms (i.e., initial flakes, cortex
flakes, prepared platform flakes, and billet flakes) were found in practically all the excavation levels. Because many of the flakes recovered
were broken and of a minute size, the writer could not make accurate
statistical counts of the flakes for the various stratigraphic levels.
From a cursory examination, however, it seems that both cortex and
billet flakes are very common in all the levels excavated, while the
prepared platform flakes are rare. Initial flakes are also common, but
most of them have been worked and utilized as scrapers.
POTTERY

Three small potsherds (Fig. 6: q, r, s) were recovered from the
upper levels of Test 2. Their surfaces are smooth, but not polished,
and of a tan or cream color. The hardness of the surface is between
2.5 and 3 on Moh’s scale. The paste is of the same color as the exterior,
and is porous and soft. Abundant bone fragments, clay hlmps or
ground potsherds, and a small amount of sand constitute the tempering
materials. Two of the sherds measured 7 ram. in thickness, the other
8 ram.

These sherds are similar, except for their lighter color, to sherds of
type Leon Plain found at the Oblate Site in central Texas (G. D.
Tunnell, personal communication). The affiliations of the sherds from
the Devils Mouth Site as well as the type Leon Plain from central
Texas seem to lie with the Caddoan ceramic tradition of the southeastern United States, as evidenced by the paste, tempering agents, and
softness of the surfaces.

Provenience oi the Artifacts
Even though the number of artifacts recovered from the three test
excavations is relatively small, there are some rather interesting differences in the vertical distribution of the types represented. Because
of the small size of the sample these stratigraphic data are not statistically conclusive, yet they clearly point out several possibilities which
future work at the site should be able to verify or reject.
The artifacts and their distribution will be presented here by areas:
Tests 2, 1, and 3 respectively.
Test 2 (see Table 1) provided by far the largest sample of artifacts
and the greatest amount of distributional information. In all, 67 arti-

280

TEX~S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCI~ETY

TABLE I
Provenience of Artifacts
Test 2

o

~
0

~

0

%

0

~

%

1
..
2
1
..
1
1
..........................
..............
1
1
1
..
1
1
1
..
..
2
..
1
................
1
..
1
..........
1
....
1
1
..
2
2
....
..................
I
1
..
1
1
1
1
..
1
1
........
2
1
..
1
1
4
1
3
........
2
..
1
2
2
5
2
......
3
4,
..
....
1
............
1

0.0-0.5
0.5-1.0
1.0-1.5
1,5-2.0
2.0-2.5
2.5-3.0
3.0-3.5
3,5-4,0
4,0-4,5
4.5-5.0
5.0-5.5
5.5-6.0
6,0-6,5
6.5-7.0

facts were recovered from this pit. The excavations at Test 2, reaching
a depth of 7 ft. below the surface, were limited to Zones A through C as
defined from the three profiles of the terrace face (Fig. 3). Although
this test pit was put down only a short distance from the edge of the
terrace near Profile 3, the zoning encountered correlated only
roughly with that of Profile 3. It could be determined, however, that
the strata of the pit corresponded to Zones A through C, although the
constituent beds and lenses were not comparable to the five divisions
of Zone C which appeared in Profile 3.
With regard to the provenience of the artifacts from Test 2, there
were some interesting differences in the occurrence of several dart
point types, the arrow points, and the potsherds. The main utilitarian
artifacts, however, showed no important change in styles from the
bottom to the top of the column, indicating a certain degree of cultural
uniformity for the whole period of occupation evidenced by Test 2. On
the basis of the differences in the distribution of artifacts mentioned

DEVILS 5’IOUTIK SITE

281

above, two tentative periods are hypothecated for the site on the basis
of Test 2 (Table 1 ) :
Periorl I, representing the artifacts found from depth 4.5 ft. to 7 ft. below
the surface, is characterized by the Montell dart point type (11 specimens), and Provisional Type A dart points (2 specimens). One Shumla
point was found in the lowest excavation level. The only burin recovered
was associated with artifacts of this period.
Perio~,t lI, represented by the artifacts found from the surface to a depth
of 4 ft., is characterized by Provisional Type C dart points (7 specimens), three arrowheads (Perdiz, Toyah, and an unclassifiable, fragmentary specimen), and the three potsherds. Also occuring in Period II
are one dart point of Provisional Type D and one At)asolo point.
The half-foot excavation level 4.0-4.5 ft. falls between the two
periods, and seems to represent a mixture of them. In it were found
one Montell point, one point of Provisional Type C, and one Frio
point.
Running through the whole stratigraphic column, but somewhat
more frequent in the lower zones, are bifacial knives, initial flake
scrapers, prepared platform scrapers, and cortex scrapers.
Viewing this tentative periodification of the site in toto, then, it
seems that we have a more or less consistent culture pattern represented from the lowest stratum to the highest, characterized by the
knives, sundry scrapers, and manos. In Period I the Montell dart point
seems to have been the dominant type, while in Period II it was apparently replaced by Provisional Type C, and arrow points and pottery
were added to the general culture. Based on our knowledge of culture
history from other areas, it would seem possible that the arrow points
and pottery were intrusive into Period II, and do in themselves represent a latter occupation of the site by people of the Neo-American
Stage. Data to substantiate this assumption, however, are not present,
and these artifacts can not be factored out of Period II without further
evidence.
We do not have to assume that the site was necessarily occupied
continuously, even at the time during which Zone C was being built
up, a period of time which seems to have been relatively free from
flooding. Rather it is quite possible that the site was used only intermittently by bands of roving food-gatherers and hunters, possessing
similar, but not identical artifact assemblages. This is one possible
way to account for the difference in the distribution of the various dart
point types and to account for the presence of the potsherds in Period
II.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Unfortunately very few artifacts were recovered from Tests 1 and
3 and their provenience is not presented in the tables.
In Test 1, which extended from Zone A through Zone E, were found
4 bifacial knives, 2 cortex flake scrapers, 6 initial cortex flake scrapers,
2 Provisional Type C dart points, one Langtry point, and 8 mano
fragments. Except for two initial cortex flake scrapers from Zone E, all
the artifacts came from Zone C, but the column can not be broken into
two periods, as at Test 2. The two C dart points and the one example
of Provisional Type D might suggest affinity with Period II.
In Test 3, only 6 artifacts were recovered: 2 knife fragments, 1
prepared platform scraper, 1 Provisional Type D dart point, 1 Abasolo
dart points, and 1 mano. Test 3 included Zones A through C.
On the surface of and along the base of the terrace were found one
Pedernales point, one Provisional Type A and two Provisional Type
B dart points as well as sundry scrapers, manos, and other miscellaneous artifacts.

Faunal Remains
In the course of excavation, a few animal bones and bone fragments,
a few mussel shells, and a large quantity of snail shells were recovered.
These were kindly identified by Mr. Holmes A. Semken of the Vertebrate Paleontology Laboratory of The University of Texas, and their
generic names are presented below. Unfortunately, identification
could not be made on the specific level because of the fragmentary
nature of the remains.
Two genera of snails were recognized, Bulimulus spp. and Polygyra
sp., the former occurring in all levels of the three test excavations,
while the latter was much less common, occurring primarily in the
upper levels of Test 1. Small mussel shell fragments (Unio sp.) were
also found in quantity throughout the site, but were not nearly so
common as Bulimulus.
The few bone fragments represent two genera of hares (Lepus and
Sylvilagus), two genera of rats (Neotorna and Sigrnadon), and deer
(Odocoileus). Several bones of snakes and fish were recovered as
well. Most of the bone material came from Test 2, the excavation made
in the rich midden area, although a few bones were found in Tests
1 and 3. Distribution studies by depth revealed no important differences in the relative percentages of the various genera except for
Polygyra, which was more common in the upper levels of Test 1.
The large number of snails may suggest that these small animals

283

DEVILS 5IOUTH SITE

were gathered and used for food. Such was certainly the case in many
of the sites of the Edwards Plateau Aspect of central Texas. It may be
assumed that the various animals represented were also used for food,
although the rat bones may possibly represent debris from burrows.

Cultural Affiliations
The assemblage of artifacts from Period I at the Devils Mouth Site
consists of manos, crude knives and scrapers, fist axes and dart points.
Later, in Period II (as defined in Test 2) arrow points and pottery
appear and the dart point forms are different from those in Period I;
but there seems to be a continuity of knife and scraper forms throughout the whole period of time represented in Test 2.
We have a picture, then, of a hunting-gathering people (or peoples)
who probably utilized the animal and plant foods of their environment quite efficiently. That they were hunters is attested by the presence of deer, small mammal, and rodent bones, and that they were
food-gatherers can be inferred from the manos, bedrock mortars, and
abundant snail and mussel shell. Fishing seems also to have been
practiced.
Projectile points have been used throughout North America as "index fossils," or as keys to cultural classification, and it is to these artifacts that we must turn to make some inferences regarding possible
affiliation of the Devils Mouth materials with defined archeological
culture units. The projectile points of Period I (Test 2) are of the
Archaic Stage, specifically the Edwards Plateau Aspect of central
Texas, a division of the Balcones Phase as defined by J. Charles Kelley
(1947, 1959). Kelley earlier (1947: 124-125) divided the Edwards
Plateau Aspect into three loci--Round Rock, Uvalde, and Clear Fork
--defined primarily on the basis of dart point types.
Period I at the Devils Mouth Site shows strong affinity with the
Uvalde Focus, which is characterized by dart point types Montell,
Frio, Smithwick Small Stem (Kelley, 1947: 124). Montell is the most
common dart point type from the lower levels of Test 2. According to
Kelley (1959: 282), the Uvalde Focus is relatively late in the Archaic
Stage of central Texas and correlates on a time level with the Chisos
Focus of the Big Bend area. Since the validity of the Uvalde Focus as
a culture unit has not as yet been demonstrated in print, it can only
be suggested here that Period I relates to it.
There are two possible ways to interpret the material represented
by Period II: (1) two distinct occupations, one by late Archaic and

TEXAS AltCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the other by Neo-American peoples, are present but stratigraphically
inseparable, or (2) Period II belongs exclusively to a Neo-American
Stage culture that used Provisional Type C dart points as well as
arrow points and pottery. The Perdiz type arrow point (of which one
specimen was found in the Period II level) is common both in central
and western Texas; the Toyah type arrow point occurs in many NeoAmerican sites of Trans-Pecos Texas.
The materials represented by Periods I and II from the Devils
Mouth Site contrast somewhat with the nearby Pecos River Focus sites
of Diablo Reservoir, primarily in the relative percentages of dart point
types. Only one each of dart point types Shumla and Langtry, characteristic of the Pecos River Focus, were found at the Devils Mouth Site.
The Shumla point occurred in the deepest part of Test 2, below the
Montell points, while the Langtry point came from Test 1.

Conclusions
The following conclusions have been reached regarding the Devils
Mouth site:
1. At least 8 occupational zones, separated by sterile alluvial beds, have
been identified in the terrace.
2. Excavation of the uppermost of these zones (A through C) yielded an
assemblage of artifacts divisible into two tentative culture periods.
3. Period I, characterized by a high frequency of Montell points, shows
strong

affiliation with the

Uvalde

Focus

of the

Edwards

Plateau

Aspect.
4. Period II, characterized by Provisional Type C dart points, and including arrow points and pottery, may represent (]) a late or transitional Archaic occupation within intrusive pottery and arrow points;
(2) occupation by Neo-American peoples that used dart points, arrow
points, and pottery; or (3) intermittent occupations by both Archaic
and Neo-American cultures.
5. The affinity of the excavated portion of the site is with central Texas
more so than with western Texas, especially in Period I.

In view of the clear-cut stratigraphy in the terrace, it is strongly
recommended that more extensive work be done at the site. The possibility of obtaining good cultural stratigraphy appears excellent since
many more occupation zones occur below the ones analyzed in this
report.
The presence of a Shumla type dart point near the bottom of Test 2
suggests that the deeper occupational levels, not excavated in 1959,

DEVILS h~OUTH SITE

285

may well contain remains of the Pecos River Focus. Consequently,
further work at the Devils Mouth Site might well provide significant
data on chronological and other relationships between the Uvalde and
Pecos River foci. Such data would be of considerable importance in
reconstructing the prehistory of the Devils River area.

Reierences Cited
Dice, Lee R.
1943.

The Biotic Provinces of North America. Ann Arbor.

Epstein, J. F.
1960.

Centipede and Damp Caves: Excavations in Val Verde County, Texas,
1958. Manuscript.

Graham, John A., and William A. Davis
1958.

Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Diablo Reservoir, Val Verde
County, Texas. Unpublished report by the Austin Office of the U. S. National Park Service, River Basin Surveys Program, on file at the Regional
Office of the National Park Service, Santa Fe, New Mexico, and at the
Department of Anthropology of The University of Texas, Austin, Texas.

Jelks, Edward B., and Curtis D. Tunnell
1959.

The Harroun Site; A Fulton Aspect Component of the Caddoan Area,
Upshur County, Texas. Archaeology Series, No. 2, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas.

Kelley, J. Charles
1947.

The Lehmann Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the Toyah, Uvalde, and
Round Rock Foci. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society, Vol. 18, pp. 115-128.

1959.

The Desert Cultures and the Balcones Phase: Archaic Manifestations in
the Southwest and Texas. American Antiquity, Vol. 24, No. 3, pp. 276£88.

Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954.

An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.

The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

The Boggy Creek Sites of Washington
County, Texas
ROBERT A. HASSKARL~ JR.

Introduction
AN ARCHEOLOGICAL survey of the Boggy Creek area was initiated in
July, 1955, when mention of it was made by Nathan L. Winfield, Jr.
of Chappe!l Hill, Texas. The Boggy Creek sites (53D5-2) are located
ten yards west of Farm Road 1155 at Long. 96° 15’ and Lat. 30° 122
approximately fourteen miles east of Brenham, Texas.
The initial phase of work done at Boggy Creek involved locating the
main shell midden and testing and locating several nearby sites in
the immediate area. In August, 1955, Dee Ann Suhm and Rudolph C.
Troike of The University of Texas visited the Boggy Creek area and
aided in the work. This basic phase culminated in the partial excavation of the largest site in November, 1955.
The archeology of the surrounding area is very poorly known.
Several small sites have been located, but only at the Boggy Creek sites
have large shell middens been found. "Occasional collecting of projectile points has been under way there since before World War I,"
relates Henry Hughes, a local landowner familiar with the region.
Henry Stzeleske, the present owner of the Boggy Creek sites reports
that, "the hill has always bothered people and in the past several have
dug for gold in it. The time selected for digging was always at night
when the moon was full. Whiskey was poured in a circle around the
area to be dug and then set afire. The fire and the whiskey were to
keep away evil spirits. No one has ever found any gold." Since the late
1800’s, this locality has been populated by Polish immigrants and their
descendants. The folklore of these people about hidden gold is stilI
strong and there are four or five favorite spots which are believed to
contain Indian or Spanish gold.
The landowner’s family was told that they could have all the gold

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

found as a result of the excavations, and at least one member of the
family was always present while this work was being carried out.
Henry Stzeleske further relates that, "because no crop will grow
on that hill my family has left it alone." As for projectile points found,
he states that he has collected "two shoe boxes of arrow points in the
past and sold them to strangers." Projectile points that members of
his family have found in the fields used for crops "were broken, because they will get wedged in the horses’ hoofs."

Geology and Topography
The surface of this general area is composed of overlapping formations that dip in the direction of the Gulf of Mexico, which is about
eighty miles away. Boggy Creek is located on the edge of the coastal
plain, and is a tributary to New Year Creek, a small stream that flows
into the Brazos River from the west. The present land surface is of
Pleistocene, Oligocene System and Gueydan group origin. The strata of
the Gueydan group are largely pyroclastic sediments consisting of
light-colored ash, tuff, and tuffaceous clays interbedded with lentils of
quartzitic sand and conglomerate (Sellards, Adkins, and Plummer,
1954: 700).
The topography of this region is characterized by rough, rolling,
and dissected terrain about twenty miles wide and located west of the
Brazos River in Washington County.
The stream course of Boggy Creek is fringed with large, old trees
and a discontinuous natural levee of sand and silt. This stream joins
New Year’s Creek, which flows into the Brazos River approximately
four miles away. During flood periods, this stream frequently overflows its banks and inundates wide areas of bottomland, so that the
natural knolls upon which the two larger sites are located are the
only land above water. Perhaps for this reason these locations were
selected by the Indians as places of habitation.
The center of the larger knoll (53DS-2A) was completely excavated
during the 1930’s by the Texas Highway Department (see Fig. 1).
The dirt which was removed from the heart of the knoll was used to
fill county roads. This excavation greatly impaired future archeological work.

The Historic Indians o] the Boggy Creek Area
The Boggy Creek sites are located on the edge of the northern geographic range of the Akokisa Indians. The Han or Akokisa, occu-

BOGGY CREEK SITES

CONTOUR

INTERVAL

=

289

2

Feet

X

~,o
Fig.

1.

,?o
,~
SCALE (FEET)

,,2°°

The Boggy Creek sites, showing the Central Midden (53D5-2A), the South Knoll

(53D5-2B), and the Creek site (53D5-2C). Map drawn by Arthur AI Gelck, civil engineer,
Brenham, Texas.

TEXA.S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

pied the eastern end of Galveston Island while the Capoques (Cocos)
of Karankawa affiliation lived on the western end of the island. From
Orobio Bazterra’s information, the location of four or five groups of
Indians in this general area can be made. The Bidai, who occupied
the area around Huntsville, Texas, informed Orobio that the Akokisa
ranged from the Neches River to a point halfway between the Trinity
and Brazos. The Mayeye (Tonkawa) lived west of the Bidai, and
south of them, toward the coast, lived the Cocos. By 1779, these tribes
had united and could be found on the coast between the Colorado and
the Brazos. Occupying the coast, westward from the mouth of the
Brazos, were the Karankawa (Wheat, 1953: 160-161 ).
Other Indian groups occupying Washington County included the
Wacos, on the northern border of the county. Situated between the
Wacos and the Akokisa were the Tonkawa proper. In the west and
southwestern sections were the Tamique and the Xarame.
The Akokisa and related tribes depended upon hunting, fishing, and
food-gathering as their main subsistence. Larger game such as deer
and bear were often hunted. De Bellisle mentions the gathering of
bird eggs in quantity, and the use of shellfish as food. Many local types
of flora were also utilized by these Indians (Wheat, 1953: 161).
Cannibalism is said to have been practiced by the Akokisa, but was
not economically important to them. Only one human bone was found
in the Boggy Creek sites.
No accurate data exists as to the exact house type used by the
Akokisa. Orobio Bazterra mentions that the winter habitations of the
Bidai were bear-skin tents. Because of the geographical closeness of
the" Akokisa and their affiliation with the Bidai, perhaps some similar type of impermanent structure was used by the Akokisa.
Pottery was used by the Akokisa, but descriptive details are lacking. Much of the pottery used by them came from trade with other
Indians rather than being of local manufacture (Wheat, 1953: p. 162).
Since flint is not common in the Boggy Creek area, it also probably came to these people as a result of trading or was transported to
the sites by them. The most common flint found is similar to flint
found in large quantities in the northwestern section of Washington
County in the region occupied by the Tonkawa. However, other varieties of flint were found in the excavations.

Description o] the Boggy Creek Sites
Three sites (Fig. 1) were recorded during the survey of the Boggy
Creek area. Two of these sites occupy high kno!ls south of Boggy

BOGGY CREEK SITES

291

Creek. These are the Central Midden (53D5-2A) and the smaller
South Knoll (53D5-2B). The third site, named the Greek Site, 53D52C) is located at the base of the larger knoll (Central Midden) on the
banks of Boggy Creek. Other sites reported to exist in this region could
not be verified upon investigation.
Central Midden(53DS-2A). As mentioned, this midden has been
the victim of much indiscriminate digging, collecting, and road work
excavation. On the northern slope there remain many shallow depressions, all less than one foot in depth, possibly the result of digging by
both man and animals. The site itself is completely exposed and devoid of any flora with the exception of several local types of grasses.
One of its outstanding characteristics is the presence of inmamerable
mussel shells.
The area for excavation was selected because the surface had the
appearance of having been undisturbed and the dig would cut through
the maximum depth of the midden. A grid system of four-foot squares
was staked off, and excavation was done by levels of 35 crn. Originally
smaller levels were planned, but the low yield in artifacts prompted
a change to 35 cm. levels. All material was screened and the artifacts
were segregated by square and level. Depth was measured from the
surface at the level of the designator stake for that square.
The soil of this site consists of a loose, sandy, dark-colored mixture
of varying proportions of clay. No definite stratification could be seen.
Numerous flint flakes, bone fragments, mussel shells, and small gastropod shells were found in each level. Mussel shells in all levels frequently showed the effects of fire, but fire-fractured rocks (hearthstone fragments) were noted only in levels 4 and 5.
Arrowpoints (Perdiz and Scallorn) were confined to the top level
(see Table 1), in which dart points of types Gary, Morrill, and Palmillas also occurred. Below the top level only dart points were found,
but potsherds were collected from all levels. Gary points are represented in all levels. Kent and Pedernales points were found only in
the three lowest levels (3, 4, and 5) ; and Edgewood, Ellis, and Ensor
points occurred only in levels 2 and 3. Yarbrough points were clustered
in intermediate levels (99,, 3, and 4). Other chipped flint artifacts (gravers, knives, scrapers, and choppers) show no significant vertical distributions.
South Knoll (53DS-2B). This is located about 450 feet south of the
Central Midden and is 10 feet lower in elevation. Here cultural debris
is thickest in the central portion of the knoll, thinning out towards the
perimeter. As at the Central Midden, no plants except native grasses

TEXAS AI~CHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 1
Chipped Stone Artifacts from Central Midden

1
0-35
Projectile points
Edgewood
Ellis
Ensor
Gary
Kent
Lange
Morrill
Palmillas
Pedernales
Perdiz
Scallorn
Yarbrough
Unclassifiable frags.

Levels
2
3
4
5
35-70 70-105 105-140 140-1’60

1

..

1
1

1

1

..

3
3

2
2

1
4
1

2
2

1

3

2

1
3
4
2
3

1

1

1

..

2

2

1

Gravers

5

1

Knives

1

1

Scrapers
End-scrapers
Side-scrapers

1

1

....

1

1

6

..

Chopper
Unclassifiable

12

grow on the surface. Prior to excavation only a few mussel shell fragments could be seen on the surface.
The same excavation procedure was followed as is described above
for the Central Midden. The top layer consists of a tan, sandy soil
with a maximum thickness of eight inches. Below is a dark, sandy
midden deposit having a maximum thickness of l0 inches, and this
stratum produced all of the artifacts found at this site. Below the midden is a very thin (one-inch) layer of white sand, which in turn lies
upon limestone bedrock.
The dark midden zone contained numerous deer bones, one antelope
tooth, and also one human bone. Mussel shells were rarely encountered. Included in the midden were Lange, Morrill, Pandora, and
Pedernales dart points, two knives, and part of a large ceremonial
knife or blade. No arrowpoints or potsherds were encountered. The remainder of the artifacts consisted of gravers, scrapers, and misce]-

BOGGY CREEK

SITES

TABLE 2
Chipped Stone Artifacts from South Knoll
Projectile points
Lange .............................................................................................

5

Morrill .........................................................................................

1

Pandora ........................................................................................

1

Pedernales ....................................................................................

6

Unclassifiable point fragments ......................................................

6

Gravers

..................................................................................................

4

Knives

...............................................................................................

2

Knife or blade, ceremonial ....................................................................

1

Scrapers
End-scrapers ...............................................................................

1

................................................................................

5

Side-scrapers

Unctassifiable fragments .................................................................. 17

laneous flint flakes. Frequencies of the classes and types of artifacts
are given in Table 2.
Creek Site (53D5-C2). This is located near the main channel of
Boggy Creek about 200 feet north of the Central Midden. The site is
a small oval midden that rests on a sandy natural rise on the east
bank of Boggy Creek at the point where the stream makes a 90° turn
to the northeast. The midden is about 12 feet long (north-south) and
nine feet wide.
Human occupation was indicated by surface debris--hearthstone
fragments, animal bones, mussel shells, and a few artifacts (gravers,
scrapers, heavy bifaces, a chopper, and one unshaped grinding slab).
A small test pit was dug in order to determine the thickness of the
midden deposit. From the grass roots to a depth of 1.8 feet sparse camp
debris occurred in a dark, sandy soil. In this zone (see Table 3) were
both arrowpoints (Perdiz and Scallorn) and dart points (Ellis and
Kent), gravers, knives, scrapers, heavy bifaces, a chopper, a hand
stone, and a few potsherds. The only identifiable animal bones consisted of an antelope tooth and a fragment of deer bone. Although
animal bones were very rare, mussel shells were numerous in this
midden deposit.
Below 1.8 feet to a depth of 3 feet (limit of excavation) no artifacts
were encountered. This zone contained less sand and was somewhat
more consolidated than the midden zone above it.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 3
Stone Artifacts from Creek Site

SHr[aee

Level 0-45 cm.

Projectile points
......................................................................

_

2

Kent ......................................................................

_

2

Perdiz .....................................................................

_

l

Scallorn .................................................................

2

Unclassifiable fragments ....................................

5

Ellis

Gravers
Knives

......................................................................

l1

6

...........................................................................

3

Scrapers
End-scrapers ......................................................

2

2

Side-scrapers ......................................................

5

1

Heavy bifaces ................................................................

2

I

Choppers

.....................................................................

1

1

Unclassifiable chipped flint ..........................................

-

4

Hand stone (milling tool) ..........................................

1

Food Remains at the Boggy Creek Sites
Throughout the period of occupation represented by the Boggy
Creek sites fresh-water mussels were consistently and abundantly
used for food. The only exception is South Knoll, where mussel shells
were rare. Deer was probably the second most important local source
of food. In the Central Midden deer bones (see Table 4) were found
at all levels, although the concentration in level 5 was heavier than in
the four levels above. In the South Knoll site (see Table 5) there was
much less bone refuse than in the Central Midden, but it was concentrated at depths between 8 and 18 inches. Excavation at the Creek
site yielded no animal bones, yet three fragments were collected from
the surface, one an antelope tooth and the others probably from deer.
Although the excavation sample is small at the Creek site, it would
appear that the occupants relied more on mussels than deer for food.
The rarity of antelope remains suggests that it was not commonly used
for food. As only one human bone occurred at the three sites, it is an
open question as to whether this indicates cannibalism. The low frequency of milling tools at the Boggy Creek sites suggests that certain
plant foods were not commonly utilized in the immediate area.

BOGGY CREEK SITES

TABLE 4
Deer (Odoeoileus) Bones from Central Midden
Level I (0-35 era.)
Long bone fragments ........................................................................
Long bone fragments (humerus?) ....................................................
Flat bone fragment (pelvis?) ..............................................................

2
2
1

Level 2 (35-70cm.)
Femur ...................................................................................................
Long bone fragments ...........................................................................
Bone fragment with tendon sheath markings ..................................

1
2
1

Level 3 (70-105 cm.)
Vertebra, body fragments .................................................................
Patella ...................................................................................................
Long bone fragments .......................................................................
Unclassifiable fragments ......................................................................

3
1
2
4

Level 4 (105-140 cm.)
Parietal fragment ..............................................................................
Tibia, shaft fragment ..........................................................................
Unclassifiable fragments ...................................................................
Level 5 (140-160 era.)
Parietal fragments ................................................................................
Vertebra, body fragment ....................................................................
Scapula fragments
Articular surfaces .......................................................................
Body ...............................................................................................
Femur fragments
Shaft ...............................................................................................
Articular, distal ...........................................................................
Tibia fragments
Articular, proximal ....................................................................
Shaft .............................................................................................
Miscellaneous long bone fragments ..................................................
Additional long bone fragments, burned .........................................
Unclassifiable fragments .....................................................................

1
1
6

2
1
2
1
2
1
2
2
14
2
6

TABLE 5
Animal Bone from South Knoll Site
Antelope (Antilocapra) .................................... Tooth ..................................
Man (Homo sapiens) ........................................ Femur ..................................
Deer (Odocoileus sp.)
Parietal fragment ................................................................................
Vertebra, body fragment ......................................................................
Scapula, body fragments ......................................................................
Humerus, fragments .............................................................................
Tibia ........................................................................................................

1
1
1
1
2
4
1

296

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Ceramics
A total of 14 potsherds was found at the Boggy Creek sites, seven in
the Central Midden and an equal number in the Creek site. These
sherds appear to fall within the type defined as Goose Creek Plain
(Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954: 378-380).
All of the sherds are small body sherds (Fig. 2, J) and give no indication of vessel forms. Possibly some three to five vessels are represented, judging from wall thickness, temper, and other criteria. Wall
thickness ranges from 5 to 9 ram., with an average of 6 ram. Seven of
the sherds are sand-tempered, and the remaining seven also include
pulverized bone in small amounts. Of the seven sherds from the Central Midden, three show pulverized bone; and of the seven from the
Creek site, four show pulverized bone. Paste texture ranges from
coarse to fine and rather compact. Surface color ranges from orangered through brown, brownish-gray, dark gray and black; core color
ranges from orange-red to black. Both surfaces (interior and exterior)
have been smoothed.
The sherds from the Central Midden were well distributed through
the midden deposit--Level 1 (top), one sherd; Level 2, one sherd;
Level 3, two sherds; Level 4, one sherd; and Level 5, two sherds. Bone
temper was noted in one sherd each from Levels 2, 4, and 5. tt would
appear that pottery was used throughout the occupation of the Central
Midden and that pottery came into use before the introduction of the
bow and arrow. The same situation occurs in the Addicks I~eservoir
some 40 miles southeast of the Boggy Creek sites (Wheat, 1953: 243).

Stone Artifacts
Projectile points from the Boggy Creek sites have been classified
according to the Handbook (Suhm et al., 1954). Most of the points
have also been examined by T. N. Campbell and Dee Ann Suhm of
The University of Texas. No new or provisional types were found at
the Boggy Greek sites.
The types of projectile points found in each of the three sites are
listed in Tables i-3 (see also Fig. 2, A-K). Analyses of these artifacts
and their stratigraphic positions permit certain conclusions to be
drawn about the probable sequence of occupation in the Boggy Creek
area.
Arrowpoints, which appear only in the upper part of the Central
Midden and in the Greek site, evidently represent the latest phase of

Fig.

2.

Artifacts from the Boggy Creek sites. A, Perdiz point; B, Scallorn point; C,

point;

D,

Pandora

point;

I,

Pedernales

point;

E,

point; J,

Palmillas

point;

potsherd; K,

F,

Gary

Morrill
point;

point;
L,

knife;

G,

Lange

point;

M, ceremonial

H,

Ellis
Kent

knife;

N,

heavy biface fragment; O, hand ax. Provenience: Central Midden--E, J, K; South Knoll~
D, F-G, I, L-M; Creek site--A-C, 14, N-O.

TEXANS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

occupation. These arrowpoints (Perdiz and Scallorn) were confined to
the top level in the Central Midden (see Table 1), but a few dart
points (Gary, Morrill, and Palmillas) also appeared in the same level.
Below the top level only dart points were found; however, some potsherds were collected from each of the five levels. Lange, Kent, and
Pedernales points were found only in the three lowest levels (3, 4, and
5). Edgewood, Ellis, and Ensor points were found in higher levels (2
and 3, but not in 1), bearing out the common supposition that sidenotched and corner-notched points are relatively late in the Archaic
Stage of Texas.
Other lithic artifacts from the Boggy Creek sites (Fig. 2, L-O) include knives (11 specimens), heavy bifaces (3), choppers (3), endscrapers (6), side-scrapers (20), gravers (20), miscellaneous chipped
flint fragments and unclassifiable specimens (33), and hand stones
(1). As most of these classes of artifacts occurred in each of the three
sites, it is believed that they are best referable to Archaic occupations.
In the Central Midden, with some measure of vertical control, there
seemed to be no significant stratigraphic segregation of any of these
artifact classes.
In October, 1960, after this report had been prepared, four lanceolate knives (Fig. 3) were exposed by erosion in the road cut through
the Central Midden. As these knives were all found at one spot, it is
likely that they represent a cache. They differ from other knives
found at the Boggy Creek sites, and their status cannot be determined
until further work is done in the area.
Summary and Conclusions
As a result of archeological survey work and limited excavation in
1955, information has been obtained on three sites near Boggy Creek
in eastern Washington County, Texas. These sites are in a part of
southeastern Texas that is poorly known archeologically.
The three sites, which are designated Central Midden, South Knoll,
and Creek, are midden sites. The Central Midden and Creek sites contained an abundance of fresh-water mussel shells and can be characterized as shell middens. The Creek site is located on a slope near the
stream, but the other sites are on low elevations farther away from the
stream. No structural features or burials were encountered during
excavation at these sites.
The Central Midden, although badly disturbed, yielded the best
information on the sequence of human occupations along Boggy Creek.

BOGGY CREEK SITES

Fig. 3. Three knives and basal fragment of a fourth

299

knife found on the surface in

October, 1960, on the road cut through the Central Midden. Apparently this was a cache
of knives, as all four artifacts were found together.

Its lower levels contained artifacts, particularly dart points, attributable to the Archaic Stage, but small amounts of pottery indicate a
transition from the Archaic to the Neo-American Stage. Only in the
uppermost level did arrowpoints occur. The appearance of pottery
before the bow and arrow duplicates a similar sequence reported in the
Addicks Basin some 40 miles to the southeast. The undecorated pottery
from the Central Midden appears to be Goose Creek Plain, which was
found abundantly, along with Goose Creek Incised, in the Addicks
Basin sites (Wheat, 1953).
The Creek site yielded undecorated pottery and arrowpoints, as
well as late Archaic styles of dart points, and presumably had the
same occupational history as the Central Midden. The South Knoll
site, however, contained no pottery and no arrowpoints and appears
to represent occupation earlier in the Archaic Stage than at the other
two sites.
The various peoples who lived along Boggy Creek seem to have
lived by hunting, fishing, and food collecting. No evidence of horti-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

culture was found. Presumably a seasonal abundance of natural food
products in the Boggy Creek area led to repeated occupations of these
three sites over a considerable span of time.
Acknowledgment. Animal bone identifications from the Boggy
Creek sites were made by Robert A. Hasskarl, M.D.

ReJerences Cited
Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1954. The Geology of Texas. Vol. I. Stratigraphy. The University of Texas Bulletin 3232. Austin.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25. Austin.
Wheat, Joe Ben
1953. An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin, Southeast Texas. In:
River Basin Surveys Papers, No. 4, The Addicks Dam Site. River Basin
Surveys Papers, Inter-Agency Archeological Salvage Program. Bureau
of American Ethnology, Bull. 154, pp. 143-252. Washington, D. C.

Blinn College
Brenham, Texas

Researches in Coahuihecan Ethnography1
BY RUDOLPH C. TROIKE

THE TERM "Coahuiltecan" is applied ethnologically tO a number of
linguistically related bands of nomadic hunting-and-gathering Indians who ranged through southern Texas and northeastern Mexico
until the beginning of the 19th century. They belonged to the area referred to by Swanton (1940) as the "ethnographic sink," which was
inhabited by groups with relatively simple, subsistence-oriented cultures. Due to the extremities of their environment and the limitations
of their technology, the Coahuihecans were obliged to spend most of
their time in search of enough food to a11ow of bare survival. They had
to move frequently as the available food resources were exhausted
quickly in any one locale. As a result their inventory of material culture items was largely restricted to what they could easily’ carry with
them.
The entry of Spanish missionaries, settlers, and soldiers in the area
had an enormous impact upon the Coahuiltecans. Those who survived
European diseases, forced labor, and war were gradually Mexicanized
and were largely assimilated by the end of the 18th century.
Except for the work of Anderson (1932), archeological interest in
the Coahuihecan area has been rather recent and excavation has been
limited to only a few places. Sites in this area are usually campsites
which were apparently occupied only for short periods of time, and
material remains are scanty, so that excavation does not yield very
rewarding results. The work of Krieger (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks
1954: 134-143) at Falcon Reservoir and of MacNeish (1958) in
Tamaulipas has added a great deal to our knowledge of Coahuiltecan
archeology, but much remains to be done before an integrated pictm’e
can be drawn.
Archeology and ethnology often complement one another in the rei I should like to express my appreciation to my wife, Nancy P. Troike, for her
assistance in the translation of the Spanish passages and for the preparation of the
manuscript.

302

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

construction of extinct cultures. Archeology provides information
about aspects of a people’s culture or way of life often omitted from
the best contemporary accounts. On the other hand, archeological interpretations of cultural materials often depend upon extrapolation
from ethnographic data, which also tell of many non-material or
perishable cultural features not preserved in the archeological record.
Unfortunately, information on Coahuiltecan culture is quite limited
since few Spanish writers considered it worthy of remark. Consequently almost any observation on Coahuiltecan customs by a contemporary source, no matter how brief, is of interest and value.
The principal sources on Coahuiltecan ethnography, Alonso de
Le6n (1909) and Vicente Santa Maria (1930), have been available
in published form for some time, and the information which they
and a few others recorded has been thoroughly analyzed (Ruecking
1953, 1954a, 1954b, 1955). However, a small amount of additional
information is to be found in scattered notes among civil and ecclesiastical documents preserved in various archives in Mexico. Considering
the fragmentary nature of the materials and the time and difficulty
required to uncover them, it seems desirable that such data be translated and published in full so as to make them freely available to other
workers in the field. The following notes concern just such material
and help to supplement the information on the Coahuiltecans provided by De Le6n and Santa Maria.
Ruecking (1955: 370) has observed that polygamy is frequently
mentioned in early historic accounts, but the specific form is rarely
indicated. It should be noted that De Le6n (1909: 52) describes both
the sororate and levirate, as well as an unusual marriage involving
both mother and daughter:
They do not observe degrees of affinal relationship, [and] of consanguinity, very few; they are accustomed for an Indian to have a daughter and
mother at the same time, and two or three sisters and other very close
[female] relatives, without scruple or novelty, and also those women
whom his brothers have had, the same law running for the [women] as
for the [men].
Ruecking (1955:381) has found that among the published sources,
"Nearly all Spanish authors say that the Coahuiltecans had no deities."
The following excerpts from two reports on the missions of San Antonio, Texas, provide a little additional information on the subjects of
marriage and beliefs and give very explicit references to the presence
of polygamy, the levirate, and belief in some sort of supreme being in
Coahuiltecan culture.

COAHUILTECAN ETHNOGRAPHY

303

Those who come married from the hills are ratified [in] the [marriage]
contract (leaving only one woman to those who bring several) before
their baptism; and the Christians are married in due time by the Church
and in the conformance with the Holy Council of Trent. (A.G.N., Ramo
Historia, Vol. 28, Expediente 7, p. 174r, dated March 6, 1762.)
The most light that these barbarians have in their gentile state is that
there is a great thing [which is] author of all things. They observe that
the brother inherits the wife of another brother, [whether] she has children or not. They observe nothing in the affinal relationship; and too
much in that of consanguinity for permitted sexual unions, [but] of illicit
[unions] no account is made. In all other things they are like blank tablets~ and, once pacified, one can imprint upon them any aptitude, since
for all [things] they have skill. (A.G.N., Ramo Historia, Vol. 28, Expediente 12, p. 202r, year 1740.)

A few additional inferences may be drawn from the confessional
written in Coahuilteco by Bartholomfi Garcla (1760: 15-16, 78, 81).
He gives questions for asking whether a person has had sexual relations with near or distant relatives. Apparently the number of illicit
(in Spanish eyes, at least) sexual relations a person might have could
become so great as to be wearisome to inquire after, so he also provided a blanket question for all cases. It is especially interesting to note
that the Coahuilteco terms given for "concubinage" (as it is expressed
in Spanish) have the same linguistic form as the kin-terms for steprelatives. The Coahuilteco terms may be translated therefore as "stephusband" and "step-wife," thus perhaps revealing something of the
native attitude toward such relationships (although the possibility
should not be ignored that these were compounds invented by Garcia
to explain the Spanish concept to the Indians).
Also, in the marriage ceremony, Garcia inserts questions as to
whether either one of the couple have had sexual relations with relatives of the other, giving as examples the man with the older sister
of his bride or the woman with the younger brother of the groom.
These various questions suggest that restraints upon sexual relations
even within the kin group were not very strong, but the limits are not
clearly defined, for De Ledn and the San Antonio records disagree on
the respect accorded consanguinal kinship. However, it must be remembered that these accounts differ in time and in the area and
groups concerned.
The use of "sign language" among the Coahuiltecans in the San
Antonio missions is attested by one source.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Although there are many languages in these five missions, the most common are four .... The language of using only signs is universal in all of
the nations, [being used for] making long discourses of whatever intent,
as if it were any other language that is pronounced. We availed ourselves
of this at the beginning because of not having other means and totally
lacking interpreters for many [languages]. (A.G.N., Ramo Historia, Vol.
28, Expediente 12, p. 204f, year 1740.)

Ruecking (1954b) has pointed out that local bands of Coahuiltecans
were organized into larger groupings which he has called "bandclusters," one of which he has called the Carrizo cluster (1954b: 8-9).
He infers that the Cadima band was dominant in this cluster, and locates the cluster between the Nueces River in Texas and the Rio San
Fernando in Tamaulipas. He lists 51 bands in the cluster. New light
is shed on this group by a document written in Linares, Nuevo Ledn,
and dated March 29, 1732, in which Fray Juan Lozada relates his
efforts to secure peace with the Indian groups of that area.
The peace agreements being now concluded, I sent three Indians of the
mission of San Christoval with word to the nations that live on the bar,
near the sea (which seems to be the Sound), [of] which [nations there]
are several, giving them special charge that they, the questioners, visit
in passing an Indian [who is] general of twenty-six nations named Pedro
Botello, [that] they insinuate to him on my behalf the matter referred
to (with the Zirnas), and that they bring me a report of everything ....
[Botello replied to them:] "Do not forget that I already have sent memorias to Father Lozada with the Canaynas Indians, and they have not
informed me. See, I am Captain-General of all these nations--Cadimas,
Pelones, Nazas, Pamoranos, Quedejefios, Palmitos, Pintos, Quiniguanos,
Maquiapemes, and others--and I govern all [these] and they are at my
orders!" (A.G.N., Ramo Historia, Vol: 30, Expediente 15, pp. 199r, 2001-.)

These new data permit some revisions in Ruecking’s discussion of
the Carrizo cluster, while at the same time confirming his inference
that the Cadima band was the dominant group. From the foregoing it
is evident that in 1732 this band-cluster contained only 26 bands and
was situated toward the Gulf coast east of Linares, near the Rio San
Fernando. It is uncertain to what time-period Ruecking’s data relate,
but at least for the situation described in 1732 his list must be shortened considerably and the territorial extent of the cluster reduced.
However, the Pelones, Palmitos, Quiniguanos, and Maquiapemes
must be added to his list. Of these, he does not assign the Palmitos to
any band-cluster and the rest are not given in his general list of bands.
Unfortunately, it is not possible to determine which bands from the

305

COAHUILTECAI~ ETHNOGRAPHY

list of 51 were members of the cluster and which were not. Since the
Cadima band is given prominence in this cluster, it would seem preferable to re-name it the Cadima cluster, especially since the term
Carrizo seems to have been used for groups living along the Rio Grande
(Saldivar 1943: map). The amount of power claimed by Botello over
the bands of this cluster is somewhat surprising and unexpected, but if
true, provides a significant expression of an important feature of
Coahuiltecan political organization.
Documents from the archives of Monterrey, Nuevo Ledn, provide
some of the earliest information about native groups in that area.
These data are scattered sparsely through legal documents dealing
with land grants and other matters. One claim to an encomienda of
Indians contains information of considerable interest (A.A.C.M.,
Legajo 5, Expediente 11, year 1662). Sebastian Garcia claimed that
some of the Alazapa Indians living on the hacienda of Pedro de la
Garza belonged to him. He secured testimony from various old people
that these Alazapas had originally lived in two rancherlas, one of
which was named Catomao’ (meaning "large prickly pears") and the
other, Estequenepo’ (or Estequenego’). The Catomao’ band was said
to have been named for its headman of that name. Each rancheria had
its separate leader, but both spoke the Alazapa language.
Originally the two groups had lived near one another, on the two
crests of a sierra by a large river. They were said to have come together "at the time of the tuna"--when the prickly pear ripened-and for dances (ceremonial mitotes) and wars "which some Indians
are accustomed to have with others." At these times many other
rancherias united with them in one place. When tunas were not available they went up in the Sierra to drink agua mid, a beverage obtained
from the agave plant. A census of the Catamao’ rancheria is given,
containing demographic data which is unique for this area and very
valuable in giving a picture of the actual make-up of a Coahuiltecan
band with regard to size, composition of households, etc.
Olazaran (son of former head man) ............................................
His brother, wife, and two children ............................................
Vicente, his wife, and one child ....................................................
Pixone and his wife ........................................................................
Picota (old man), with his wife ..................................................
An old man ......................................................................................
Another old man ............................................................................
Gabrielillo ........................................................................................
Bernabelillo, with his wife and child ..........................................

1
4
3
2
2
1
1
1
3

306

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Antofiuelo ........................................................................................
Tuchi’. ...............................................................................................
Another Pixone with his wife ......................................................
Dieguillo and his wife ...................................................................

1
1
2
2

Others at the house of Pedro
de la Garza (from memory) :
Juan Perez with his wife and a son and a daughter ..................
Mategue!o, with two wives ............................................................
Gasparino (nephew of Bernabelillo) ..........................................
A boy, Bocalito ................................................................................
Sister of Juan Perez Bozas ............................................................

4
3
1
1
1

Total ............................................. 34
It is, of course, impossible to estimate what effect years of Spanish
contact had already had on the aboriginal situation. However, it
would be quite significant for the analysis of Coahuiltecan culture,
demography, and ecology if other such records could be discovered and
published.
A few band-names of the Borrado Indians are given with Spanish
-translations (A.A.C.M., Legajo 5, Expedientes 8 and 9). These groups
lived in the Sierra de Tamaulipas and in the basin on the west.
Xinipiguara small thickets.
Opaguiguara--marsh. They lived in a marsh with many reeds between the Pablillo and Potosi rivers.
Caguiraniguara--little painted birds. They lived along a stream which
ran and made pools and had many reeds.
Curya.capo, Cruyacapa, Cuiya.capa--large mountain near running
water.
Cuya.capo--water inside the mountain.
Passa, Guiguara--painted like chapules (dragon-fly).
Passa Guaniguara--painted like chapules (dragon-fly). This probably refers to a distinguishing tattoo mark used by the band (cf.
Ruecking 1955: 358-361).

Other Borrado bands mentioned without translation were the Guaripa
.and the Mohiguara. The latter were said to have joined with the Xinipiguara in dances and to have spoken the same language. It is also
.evident from the records that intermarriage occurred between these
-two bands. One case involved the daughter of such an interband marriage. The father was a Mohiguara and went to live with his wife
who was a Xinipiguara. Subsequently their daughter was kidnapped
during a mitote and taken to the Mohiguara rancheria, where she was

COAHUILTECAI~ ETHNOGRAPHY

307

put to work in the kitchen of the hacienda owner. The judgment ordered her returned to the hacienda where the Xinipiguara lived, on
the grounds that "the children follow the nature of the mother"
(A.A.C.M., Legajo 5, Expediente 9, p. 23f, year 1661 ).
Both the decision of the case and the residence of the man in his
wife’s rancheria strongly suggest a matrilineal-matrilocal organization in contrast to the patrilineal-patrilocal character of all Coahuiltecan groups for which information is available (Ruecking 1955: 367373). However, the location of the Borrados near the border of the
Huasteca suggests that their unexpected possession of these social patterns could be due to diffusion from the Mesoamerican area.
The use of peyote as a narcotic by the Coahuiltecans is known from
several sources (see Ruecking 1954a: 336-337). Morfi (1950:311 ) in
1777 visited the Misi6n del Dulce Nombre de Jesus de Peyotes near
Villa Uni6n, Coahuila. He explains the unusual appellation of the
mission as follows:
It is called "of the Peyotes" for a plant named thus, in which the land
abounds, as useful for various medicinal uses as pernicious for the Indians,.
who are accustomed to derive from it a sort of drink or beverage of much
vigor and strength, [and] by its use in dances and merriments deprive
themselves of reason and judgment.

He aso notes (ibid.) that the dominant Indian group in the mission was
the Sijame band, whose name meant "fish," and that their name was
extended to all of the other bands there.
Garcia (1760: 15) mentions the use of peyote in his confessional,.
along with several other questions of interest:
Have you eaten human flesh?
Have you eaten peyote?
Did it intoxicate you?
Have you eaten fri]olillo2
Did it intoxicate you?
Have you danced the raitote2

This reference to fri]olillo, or mescal bean, is one of the earliest references known to the use of the seed of the Texas Mountain Laurel
(Sophora secundiflora) as a narcotic. The juxtaposition of the two~
questions about peyote and mescal beans seems to be a strong indication of their contemporaneous usage by the Coahuiltecans (see Campbell 1958: 156-160). It may be inferred also that the consumption
of human flesh, peyote, and fri]olillo were associated with the cere-

TEXA~ ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

308

monial dances of the Coahuiltecans, as is known from other sources
(Ruecking 1954@. The native terms for peyote and fri]oliHo were
pa]e and samin, respectively (Oarcla 1706: I 5).

Re/erences Cited
The following abbreviations have been used in citations of documents:
A.G.N.--Archivo General de la Nacion. Mexico, D. F., Mexico.
A.A.C.M.~Archivo del Ayuntamiento de la Ciudad de Monterrey, Nuevo Leon,
Mexico.
Anderson, A. E.
1932. Artifacts of the Rio Grande Delta Region. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 4, pp. 29-31.
Campbell, T. N.
1958. Origin of the Mescal Bean Cult. American Anthropologist, Vol. ’60, No. 1,
pp. 156-160.
De Ldon, Alonso
1909. Ilelacidn y Discursos del Descubrimiento, Poblacidn, y Pacificacidn de este
Nuevo Ileino de Ledn (1689). In: Documentos Indditos o muy Ilaros
para la Historia de Mdxico. Ed. by Genaro Garcia. Vol. 25, pp. 5-188,
Mexico.
Garcla, Fray Bartholomd
1760. Manual para administrar los santos sacramentos de penitencia, eucharista,
extrema uncidn, y matrimonio. Mexico.
MacNeish, Richard S.
1958. Preliminary Archaeological Investigations in the Sierra de Tamaulipas,
Mexico. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, Vol. 48,
Part 6.
Morfi, Fray Juan Agustin de
1950. Descripcidn del Territorio del Ileal Presidio de San Juan Bautista (1778).
Ed. by Jorge Cervera Sfinchez. Boletin de la Sociedad Mexicana de Geografia y Estadistica, Vol. 70, Nos. I-3, pp. 287-319.
lluecking, Frederick, Jr.
1953. The Economic System of the Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern Texas and
Northeastern Mexico. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 5, pp. 480-497.
1954a. Ceremonies of the Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern Texas and Northeastern Mexico. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 6, pp. 330-339.
1954b. Bands and Band-clusters of the Coahuiltecan Indians. Student Papers in
1955.

Anthropology, Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 1-24.
The Social Organization of the Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern Texas
and Northeastern Mexico. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 7, pp.
357-388.

.Saldivar, Gabriel
1943. Los Indios de Tamaulipas. Instituto Panerrnicano de Geografia e Historia,
Pub. No. 70. Mexico, D. F.

COAHUILTECAN ETHNOGRAPHY

3o9

Santa Maria, Vicente
1930. Belacidn histdrica de la Colonia del Nuevo Santander y Costa del Seno
Mexicano. Publicaciones del Archivo General de la Nacidn, No. 15, Part
2, pp. 353-489,.
Swanton, John B.
1940. Linguistic Material from the Tribes of Southern Texas and Northeastern
Mexico. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 127.

The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

A List of Radiocarbon Dates from
Archeological Sites in Texas
Compiled and edited by

T. N. CAMPBELL

TI-IUS FAR 17 radiocarbon dates have been announced for archeologicaI
sites in the Texas area. A total of 11 sites is involved (see Table 1),
three of which are Neo-American, three are Archaic, and five are
Pateo-American. Most of these sites are represented by one date only;
however, four Paleo-American sites are represented by two or more
dates. Additional radiocarbon dates from these and other sites have
been determined, but these have not yet been announced in print.
The dates in the following list are arranged in reverse chronological
order, beginning with the most recent dates and proceeding backward
in time to the oldest dates. In each case the essential facts are presented
under four headings: (1) sample number and name of laboratory that
produced the date; (2) sample provenience--material of sample,
stratigraphic position, major associations, and culture dated; (3) dating in years before the present and also in terms of the calendar; and
(4) references to published literature. In the last category a distinction
is made between (a) published date lists and (b) archeological publications that interpret and evaluate the dates.
As the earlier literature on Texas radiocarbon dates is widely scattered, this list should be especially convenient for workers in the Texas
field. At present most radiocarbon dating laboratories present their
age determinations annually in a single publication, the American
Journal of Science Badiocarbon Supplement, and dates are much
easier to find.
Two useful radiocarbon bibliographies have appeared recently, one
by Johnson (1959), the other by McNutt and Wheeler (1959). Johnson’s bibliography is broader in scope and therefore more usefu!.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

312

TABLE 1
Summary List of Texas Radiocarbon Dates
Dates
Sites

Years Ago

Calendar

Neo-American Stage
Elm Fork (Henrietta Focus)

375±

145

A.D. 1584±145

1212±
1553±

300
175

A.D.
A.D.

Kincaid Shelter (mixed Central
Texas and Edwards Plateau)
Davis (Alto Focus)

740-+-300
398±175

Archaic Stage
Eagle Cave (Pecos River Focus)
Site 78B9-4 (Falcon Focus)
Wood Pit (Carrollton Focus)

4550± 130
4650-+" 300
5945± 200

2593± 130 B.C.
2696± 300 B.C.
3986+__ 200 B.C.

Paleo-American Stage
Scharhauer

Gray Sand

7100 ± 1000
20,4.00 ± 900
8670 ± 600
13,400 ± 1200
7100 ± 160
9800 ± 500
9700 ± 450
9883 ± 350
10,000 -- 175
more than 37,000
more than 37,000

White Sand
Plainview
Lubbock
Levy Rock Shelter
Lewisville

5144 ± 1000 B.C.
182441 ± 900 U.C.
6715 ± 600 B.C.
11,443 ± 1200 B.C.
5143 ± 160 B.C.
784.3 ± 500 B.C.
7743 ± 450 1~.c.
7932 ± 350 B.C.
8041 ± 175 B.c.
earlier than 35,043
earlier than 35,043

B.C.
B.C.

Site on Elm Fork of Trinity River, Dallas County
Unnumbered Sample (Humble)

Sample Provenience: Material not specified, but the culture is identified as Henrietta Focus.
Dating:

375 ±

145

years ago, orA. D.

1584 - 145.

References:

Published date list: none.
Announced by: Harris, 1959.

Kincaid Shelter, Uvalde County
Sample C-dP8 (Chicago)
Sample Provenience: Charcoal from Zone 6 (uppermost zone inside

TEXAS RADIOCARBON DATES

shelter), which yielded a mixture of artifacts from the Edwards
Plateau Aspect (Archaic Stage) and the Central Texas Aspect (NeoAmerican Stage).
Dating: 1212 - 300 years ago, orA. D. 740 -- 300.
References:
Published date lists: Libby, 1952a, 1955.
Archeological evaluation: Suhm, 1960.
Davis Site, Cherokee County
c-153 (Chicago)
Sample Provenience: Charred corn cobs from floor pit of Feature 31,
a large circular house outline in the village below the Davis mound.
Culture identified as Phase 1 of the Alto Focus, Gibson Aspect
(Neo-American Stage).
Dating: 1553 -- 175 years ago, orA. D. 398 -+ 175.
References:
Published date lists: Griffin, 1952; Johnson, 1951; Libby, 1951, 1955.
Archeological evaluations: Griffin, 1952; Krieger, 1951a, 1952;
Suhm et el., 1954; Willey and Phillips, 1958.

Eagle Cave, Val Verde County
0-317 (Humble)
Sample Provenience: Charcoal from Zone B. Culture represented is
identified as the Pecos River Focus (Archaic Stage).
Dating: 4550 --- 130 years ago, or 2593 -- 130 B. C.
R4erences:
Published date list: none.
Archeological evaluations: Epstein, 1960; Schuetz, 1957.

Site 78B9--4, Starr County
M-12P (Michigan)
Sample Provenience: Charcoal (a composite of numerous tiny fragments) from Zone I, lowest occupation zone, at a depth of 8 to 9
feet in the Rosita Terrace, the second of three post-glacial terraces
on the lower Rio Grande. The surface of Rosita Terrace is 44 feet
above the present normal water level of the Rio Grande. Culture
represented is the Falcon Focus (Archaic Stage).

314

TEXA,S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Dating: 4650 --- 300 years ago, or 2696 --- 300 B. C.
References:
Published date list: Crane and Griffin, 1958.
Archeological evaluations: Anonymous (Alex D. Krieger), 1954;
Campbell, 1960; MacNeish, 1958; Mangelsdorf et al., 1956.

Wood Pit Site, Dallas County
Unnumbered sample (Magnolia)
Sample Provenience: Mussel shells from near the base of a deposit
equated with the Pattillo formation in the Union TerminalCarrollton Terrace (T-l) of the Trinity River. Culture represented
is the Carrollton Focus (Archaic Stage).
Dating: 5945 --- 200 years ago, or 3986 -- 200 B. C.
References:
Published date list: none.
Announced and interpreted by: Crook and Harris, 1959.

Scharbauer Site, Midland County
M-411 (Michigan)
Sample Provenience: Animal bones from Gray Sand stratum.
Dating: 7100 4-1000 years ago, or 5144 4- 1000 B. C. This sample
originally yielded an age of between 4000 and 5000 years on the
standard 48-hour count; a two-weeks count gave the age cited above.
References:
Published date list: Crane, 1956.
Archeological evaluations: Hester, 1960; Wendorf et al,, 1955;
Wendorf and Krieger, 1959; Wormington, 1957.
L-347 (Lamont)

Sample Provenience: Carbon extracted from catiche thought to have
been used as hearthstones (carbon believed to have been produced by
charring of fats and oils from cooked foods). Derived from Gray Sand
stratum that contained the remains of Midland man, as well as one
Midland point and two side-scrapers. The caliche was found from
18 to 24 inches below present surface of Gray Sand.
Dating: 20,400 -- 900 years ago, or 18,441 4- 900 B. C.
References:
Published date list: 01son and Broecker, 1959.

TEXAS RADIOCARBON DATES

315

Archeological evaluations: Hester, 1960; Krieger, 1957b; Wendorf
and Krieger, 1959; Wormington, 1957.
M-388 (Michigan)
Sample Provenience: Fossil bones from White Sand stratum. This
sample is a combination of Samples M-389, M-390, and 5/[-391,
which were too small to give individual dates.
Dating: 8670 +- 600 years ago, or 6715 +-- 600 B. C.
References:
Published date list: Crane, 1956.
Archeological evaluations: Hester, 1960; Krieger, 1957a; Wendorf
et al., 1955; Wendorf and Krieger, 1959; Wormington, 1957.
L-304C (Lamont)

Sample Provenience: Fresh-water snail shells from White Sand
stratum.
Dating: 13,400 - 1200 years ago, or 11,443 +- 1200 B. C. (Krieger,
1957a, reported this date as 12,500-- 1200 years, but laboratory
recalculation produced an older date).
References:
Published date list: Broecker and Kulp, 1957.
Archeological evaluations: Hester, 1960; Krieger, 1957a, 1957b;
Sellards and Evans, 1960; Wendorf and Krieger, 1959; Wormington, 1957.

Plainview Site, Hale County
0-171 (Humble)
Sample Provenience: Fossil bison bone from bone bed that yielded
bison bones and Plainview points.
Dating: 7100 - 160 years ago, or 5143 - 160 B. C.
References:
Published date list: Brannon et al., 1957.
Archeological evaluations: Hester, 1960; Krieger, 1957a; Wendorf
and Krieger, 1959; Wormington, 1957.
L-303 (Lamont)
Sample Provenience: Fresh-water snail shells from bone bed that
yielded bison bones and Plainview points.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Dating: 9800 -- 500 years ago, or 7843 --4- 500 B. C. (Krieger, 1957a,
reported this date as 9171 --4- 500 years, but later laboratory recalculations gave an older date).
References:
Published date list: Broecker and Kulp, 1957.
Archeological evaluations: Hester, 1960; Krieger, 1957a; Sellards
and Evans, 1960; Wendorf and Krieger, 1959; Wormington,
1957.

Lubbock Site, Lubbock County
L-283G (Lamont)

Sample Provenience: Fresh-water snail shells from diatomaceous stratum that yielded fossil bison and Folsom points. Slightly higher in
the deposit than Sample C-558, given below.
Dating: 9700---450 years ago, or 7743 +-450 B. C. (Krieger, 1956,
reported this date as 9300 - 200 years, but laboratory recalculations gave a greater age).
References:
Published date list: Broecker and Kulp, 1957.
Archeological evaluations: Hester, 1960; Krieger, 1956; Sellards
and Evans, 1960; Wendorf and Krieger, 1959; Wormington. 1957.
C-558 (Chicago)
Sample Provenience: Burned bone from diatomaceous stratum that
yielded fossil bison and Folsom points.
Dating: 9883 - 350 years ago, or 7933 -+ 350 B. C.
References:
Published date lists: Griffin, 1952; Johnson, 1951; Libby, 1951,
1952b, 1955.
Archeological evaluations: Hester, !960; Krieger, 1951b, 1953,
1956; Roberts, 1951, 1952, 1953; Sellards, 1952a, 1952b; Sellards
and Evans, 1960; Suhm et al., 1954; Wendorf et al., 1955; Wendorf and Krieger, 1959; Willey and Phillips, 1955, 1958; Wormington, 1953, 1957.

Levy Rock Shelter, Travis County
Unnumbered sample (Humble)
Sample Provenience: Material not designated. Found immediately

TEXAS RADIOCARBON DATES

below a zone containing numerous Angostura points and burins.
The dated stratum yielded three projectile point fragments (apparently not in the Angostura tradition) as well as burins. The culture
dated is not identified.
Dating: 10,000 --- 175 years ago, or 8,041 +- 175 B. C.
References:
Published date list: none
Archeological interpretation: Epstein, 1960.

Lewisville Site, Denton County
0-235 (Humble)
Sample Provenience: Carbonized fibrous vegetable material from
Hearth 1, buried at a depth of approximately 20 feet in the Union
Terminal-Carrollton Terrace. The surface of this terrace is 70 feet
above the normal level of the present Trinity River. The sample is
from the same level as and only 20 inches away from a Clovis point.
The terrace formation containing the sample and the projectile point
is identified as Upper Shuler.
Dating: More than 37,000 years ago, or earlier than 35,043 B. C.
References:
Published date list: Brannon et al., 1957.
Archeological evaluations: Crook and Harris, 1957, 1958; Hester,
1960; Krieger, 1957a; Sellards, 1960; Willey and Phillips, 1958;
Wormington, 1957.
0-248 (Humble)

Sample Provenience: Charcoal from several small logs in Hearth 8,
approximately 300 feet northeast of Hearth 1 and at essentially the
same stratigraphic level as Hearth 1 (see Sample 0-235 above).
Dating: More than 37,000 years ago, or earlier than 35,043 B. C.
References:
Published date list: Brannon et al., 1957.
Archeological evaluations: Crook and Harris, 1957, 1958; Hester,
1960; Krieger, 1957a; Willey and Phillips, 1958; Wormington,
1957.

ReIerences Cited
Anonymous (Alex D. Krieger)
1954. A Radiocarbon Date on the Falcon Focus. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 25, p. 5’65.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Brannon, H. R., Jr., A. C. Daughtry, D. Perry, L. H. Simons, W. W. ~¢Vhitaker, and
Milton Williams
1957.

Humble Oil Company Radiocarbon Dates I. Science, Voh 125, No. 3239,
pp. 147-150.

Broecker, W. S., and J. L. Kulp
1957.

Lamont Natural Radiocarbon Measurements IV. Science, Voh 126, No.
3287, pp. 1324-1334.

Campbell, T. N.
1960. Archeology of the Central and Southern Sections of the Texas Coast. In:
Edward B. Jelks, E. Mott Davis, and Henry B. Sturgis (editors), A Review
of Texas Archeology: Part 1. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
Voh 29 (for 1958), pp. 145-175.
Crane, H. R.
1956. University of Michigan Radiocarbon Dates I. Science, Vol. 124, No. 3224,
pp. 664-672.
Crane, H. R., and James B. Griffin
1958. University of Michigan Radiocarbon Dates II. Science, Vol. 127, No. 3305,
pp. 1098-1105.
Crook, Wilson W., Jr., and R. K. Harris
1957. Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man near Lewisville, Texas, and Associated Faunal Material. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Voh 28,
pp. 7-97.
1958.

A Pleistocene Campsite near Lewisville, Texas. American Antiquity, Vol.
23, No. 3, pp. 233-246.

1959.

C-14 Date for Late Carrolhon Focus Archaic Level: 6,000 Years B. P.
Oklahoma Anthropological Society Newsletter, Vol. 8, No. 3, pp. 1-2.
Epstein, Jeremiah F.
1960.

Burins from Texas. American Antiquity, Voh 26, No. 1, pp. 93-97.

Griffin, James B.
1952.

Radiocarbon Dates for the Eastern United States. In: James B. Griffin
(editor), Archeology of Eastern United States, pp. 355-370. University of
Chicago Press. Chicago.

Harris, R. K.
1959. C-14 Date on Henrietta Focus in Texas. Oklahoma Anthropological Society
Newsletter, Voh 8, No. 3, p. 2.
Hester, Jim J.
1960. Late Pleistocene Extinction and Radiocarbon Dating. American Antiquity,
Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 58-77.
Johnson, Frederick (editor)
1951. Radiocarbon Dating. Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology,
No. 8.
A Bibliography of Radiocarbon Dating. American Journal of Science Radiocarbon Supplement, Vol. 1, pp. 199-214.
Krieger, Alex D.
1951a. A Radiocarbon Date on the Davis Site in East Texas. American Antiquity,
1959.

Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 144-145.
1951b. In: Notes and News: Early Man. American Antiquity, Vol. 17, No. 2,
p. 17’6.

TEXAS RADIOCARBON DATES
1952. Review: James A. Ford, Greenhouse: A Troyville-Coles Creek Period Site
in Avoye!les Parish, Louisiana. American Antiquity, Vol. 18, No. 2, pp.
175-179.
1953. New World Culture History: Anglo-America. In: A. L. Kroeber (editor),
Anthropology Today, pp. 238-264. University" of Chicago Press. Chicago.
1956.

In: Notes and News: Early Man: Texas. American Antiquity, Vol. 22,
No. 1, pp. 106-107.

1957a.

In: Notes and News: Early Man: Texas. American Antiquity, Vol. 22~
No. 3, pp. 321-323.

1957b. In: Notes and News: Early Man: Texas. American Antiquity, Vol. 22,
No. 4, pp. 434-435.
Libby, W. F.
1951. Radiocarbon Dates, II. Science, ¥ol. 114, No. 2960, pp. 291-296.
1952a. Chicago Radiocarbon Dates, III. Science, Vol. 116, No. 3025, pp. 673-681.
1952b. Radiocarbon Dating. University of Chicago Press. Chicago.
1955. Radiocarbon Dating. Second Edition. University of Chicago Press. Chicago.
MacNeish, Richard S.
1958. Preliminary Archaeological Investigations in the Sierra de Tamaulipas,
Mexico. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, Voh 48,
Part 6.
McNutt, Charles H., and Richard P. Wheeler
1959. Bibliography of Primary Sources for Radiocarbon Dates. American Antiquity, Vol. 24, No. 3, pp. 323-324.
Mangelsdorf, Paul C., Richard S. MacNeish, and Walton C. Galinat
1956. Archaelogical Evidence on the Diffusion and Evolution of Maize in Northeastern Mexico. Botanical Museum Leaflets, Harvard University, Vol. 17,
No. 5, pp. 125-150.
Olson, Edwin A., and W. S. Broecker
1959. Lamont Natural Radiocarbon Measurements V. American Journal of Science Radiocarbon Supplement, Vol. 1, pp. 1-28.
ROberts, Frank H. H., Jr.
1951. Radiocarbon Dates and Early Man. In: Frederick Johnson (editor), Radiocarbon Dating. Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, No. 8,
pp. 20-22.
Carbon-14 Dates and Archeology. Transactions of the American Geophysical Union, Vol. 33, No. 2, pp. 170-174.
1953. Earliest Men in America: Their Arrival and Spread in Late Pleistocene
and Post-Pleistocene Times. Journal of World History, Vol. 1, No. 2, pp.
255-277.
1952.

Schuetz, Mardith K.
1957. A Carbon-14 Date from Trans-Pecos Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 28, pp. 288-289.
Sellards, E. H.
1952a. Age of Folsom Man. Science, Vol. 115, No. 2978, p. 98.
1952b. Early Man in America: A Study in Prehistory. University of Texas Press.
1960.

Austin.
Some Early Stone Artifact Developments in North America. Southwestern
Journal of Anthropology, Vol. 16, No. 2, pp. 160-173.

320

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Sellards, E. H., and Glen L. Evans
1960. The Paleo-Indian Culture Succession in the Central High Plains. Selected
Papers of the Fifth International Congress of Anthropological and Ethnological Sciences, Philadelphia, September 1-9, 195’6, pp. 659-64,7.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1960. A Review of Central Texas Archeology. In: Edward B. Jelks, E. Mort
Davis, and Henry B. Sturgis (editors), A Review of Texas Archeology:
Part 1. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 29 (for 1958),
pp. 63-107.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Wendorf, Fred, and Alex D. Krieger
1959. New Light on the Midland Discovery. American Antiquity, Vol. 25, No.
l, pp. 66-78.
Wendorf, Fred, Alex D. Krieger, Claude C. Albritton, and T. D. Stewart
1955. The Midland Discovery: A Report on the Pleistocene Human Remains
from Midland, Texas. University of Texas Press. Austin.
Willey, Gordon R., and Philip Phillips
1955. Method and Theory in American Archeology II: Historical-Developmental
Interpretation. American Anthropologist, Vol. 57, No. 4, pp. 723-819.
t958. Method and Theory in American Archaeology. University of Chicago
Press. Chicago.
~¢Vormington, H. M.
1955. Origins: Indigenous Period. Program of the History of America, Comision
de Historia. Instituto Panamericano de Geografia e Historia Publicaciones
153. Mexico, D. F.
1957. Ancient Man in North America. Denver Museum of Natural History,
Popular Series No. 4, Fourth edition.

The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

Book Reviews
The Belcher Mound: A Stratified Caddoan Site in Caddo Parish, Louisiana, by Clarence H. Webb. Memoir No. 16, Society for American Archaeology, Beloit College, Beloit, Wisconsin, 1959. 212 pp.,
142 figs., 4 tables. $3.00
Dr. Webb has written a technical monograph of major importance
to everyone interested in the archeology of the Caddoan area---the
area made up of the adjacent parts of Texas, Louisiana, Arkansas, and
Oklahoma. The Belcher Mound (now destroyed) was near Shreveport,
Louisiana, and was dug in the late 1930’s and early 1950’s by Dr.
Webb and associates, all skilled non-professionals. Within it were the
remains of four successive stages of occupation representing a gradual
change from late Gibson Aspect (early Caddoan) to Fulton Aspect
(late Caddoan). The mound, together with an occupation area nearby, seems to have been a minor ceremonial center serving small
settlements scattered along this part of the valley of the Red River.
The mound was made up of a series of houses, mainly ceremonial
in nature, which had been burned in connection with important burial
ceremonies. Graves were dug, usually through the burned remains
of the houses, and in the graves were buried important individuals
along with a number of other people who were probably put to death
as part of the funeral ceremonies for the major personage. Subsequently an earth layer was added and later houses built, to be destroyed
in turn as part of later funeral observances.
The earliest houses were on the original ground level and the associated burials were of the Haley Focus, late Gibson Aspect. Some Fulton
Aspect traits (such as Pease Brushed-Incised pottery) were already
appearing. The second level was a Bossier-like occupation, in reality
a Haley-Belcher transition on the same time level as Bossier Focus and
in contact with Bossier. The third and fourth levels represented the
full flowering of the Belcher Focus, the major ceremonial centers of
which were farther up the Red River at the Foster and Battle sites.
The monograph is a model of archeological reporting. The description of methods used in digging is detailed and clear, and should be of
great use to anyone contemplating work in similar sites. All finds are

TEXAS AI/CttEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

adequately described and are compared with other finds from the
Caddoan area and, where pertinent, with similar finds throughout
the continent. For instance, after the descriptions of the houses there
is a section which discusses the resemblances and possible relationships
of Caddoan houses to prehistoric house types throughout North America. A similar treatment is given burial types. The report is especially
striking in that many of the artifacts are illustrated twice--once by a
drawing (the author is skilled with pen and ink) accompanying the
description of the house or burial with which the specimen was associated, and once by a photograph.
The final summarizing section pulls all the material together, reviewing the story of the site and presenting a cogent reconstruction
of its place in Caddoan prehistory. Dr. Webb sees the Fulton Aspect
foci--Belcher, Bossier, Texarkana, Titus, and probably others--deriving from inter-action between peoples of the Haley, Alto, and Coles
Creek cultures. Only in Belcher Focus did many of the more striking
ceremonial traits of the Gibson Aspect survive. Belcher Focus seems to
derive primarily from Haley Focus, with a strong admixture of Southern Cult ceremonialism coming from an unknown source.
With the publication of this report we now have detailed studies of
two major Caddoan sites, one from the Gibson Aspect (Newell and
Krieger, The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas) and the
present one primarily from the Fulton Aspect with information on the
change from Gibson Aspect to Fulton Aspect. The Caddoan area, one
of the significant archeological areas of North America, is at long last
coming into its own.
Dr. Webb has asked reviewers to mention that he inadvertently
neglected giving credit to a number of individuals who helped prepare
the illustrations in the report. Many of the pottery photographs are
by Alex D. Krieger; other artifact photographs are by Steve Sanchez
and Gordon W. Maxcy. The aerial photographs are by the Caddo
Parish Agriculture Department and Win. Grabill. All the drawings
and field photographs, and some of the artifact photographs, are by the
author.
E. Mort Davis
The University of Texas
The Aztecs: People of the Sun, by Alfonso Caso. Illustrated by Miguel
Covarrubias. Translated by Lowell Dunham. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman, 1958. xvii + 125 pp., 42 color drawings,
16 plates, index. $7.95.

323

BOOK REVIEWS

This volume is a translation from the Spanish of Alfonso Caso’s
book, El Pueblo del Sol, published in Mexico in 1953 by the Fondo de
Cultura Econ6mica. It represents a very important and extremely
welcome addition to the scanty literature in English dealing authoritatively with the pre-Hispanic people of Mexico and is by a writer
who is internationally recognized as a leader in the fields of Mexican
archeology and historical research. In this book he presents a concise
and accurate accout of the religious concepts and practices of the
Aztecs, based on modern research. The most important of the many
Aztec deities are described and briefly discussed. From codices and
other Mexican sources the late Miguel Covarrubias has derived fullcolor drawings of most of these gods which aid in understanding their
physical appearance and symbolism.
The religion of the Aztecs formed the core of their life-way and
permeated all their activities. Their spiritual concepts were complex,
well developed, and logical. They were based on the Aztecs’ consideration of themselves as a "chosen people" with the special religious duty
of supplying the gods with their essential nourishment, human sacrifices. In the Aztec view, men and the gods were mutually dependent;
the gods created and sustained men, and men’s sacrifices kept the gods
strong. Even war became a form of worship because the principal
purpose was to capture prisoners to sacrifice to the gods.
There are a few errors of translation, mostly minor, but two more
serious one should be mentioned. On page 56, the name of the goddess
Cihuac6atl should be deleted from the paragraph referring to the goddess Tlazolt~otl. On page 20, the star observed by the Aztecs was either
Aldebaran or the constellation of the Pleiades, hut the constellation of
Aries, the "Ram," was not involved.
The book is a credit to the University of Oklahoma Press in the
beauty of its composition, printing, and binding. The 42 handsome
six-color drawings by Covarrubias are flawlessly reproduced, and the
16 black-and-white photographic plates are full of detail. Use of the
book has been greatly facilitated by Dr. Dunham’s compilation of a
detailed index, which was lacking in the Spanish edition. This volume
can be recommended without reservation.
Nancy P. Troike
The University of Texas

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Poverty Point, A Late Archaic Site in Louisiana, by James A. Ford and
Clarence H. Webb. Anthropological Papers of the American
Museum of Natural History, Vol. 46, Part 1. 136 pp., 6 plates,
45 figs., 9 tables. New York, 1956. $2.00.
The Poverty Point site in northeastern Louisiana, with its huge,
oddly shaped mound, has long been known as one of the most mysterious and intriguing, and probably one of the most important, prehistoric sites on the North American continent. The thousands of artifacts which have been collected from the surface of the site over the
years--clay balls, plummets, gorgers, roughly smoothed adzes, beads,
and others, are of types whieh are ordinarily ascribed to the Archaic
period of the Southeast, before the Indians had pottery or agriculture.
But mound-building is known as a trait of the pottery-making Indians
of the Southeast, not of the earlier Archaic Indians, and for this reason
the Poverty Point site has never made sense as far as surface evidences
have been concerned. The site has, in fact, been so baffling that until
recent years most archeological effort in the area has been directed at
other sites where the problems were simpler.
Within the last 20 years Dr. Clarence H. Webb has published several notes arising from his studies of materials collected at Poverty
Point. Then Dr. James A. Ford excavated the Jaketown site in Mississippi and found it to have a zone with Poverty Point artifacts, stratigraphically below the earliest pottery complex of the Lower Mississippi valley This proof of the early date of Poverty Point only served
to heighten the mystery surrounding the Poverty Point site itself, a
mystery which was further intensified when Dr. Ford found, upon
examining an aerial photograph of the site, that next to the great
Poverty Point mound there was a huge octagonal earthwork nearly
three-quarters of a mile in diameter, made of six rows of ridges too
low to be noticed from the ground but easily seen from the air. The
earth-works, the Poverty Point mound, and two other mounds on the
site contain nearly a million cubic yards of earth--surely one of the
more extensive construction iobs in American Indian history.
The work under review here is a report by Dr. Ford of the first
intensive archeological exploration at Poverty Point, mainly in 1956,
and an exhaustive analysis of artifacts from the site--most of them
from the surface--by Dr. Webb. Their work has by no means cleared
up the mystery of Poverty Point, but it has dispelled much of the
fog surrounding it.
Dr. Ford’s field work indicated that the ridges of the earthworks

BOOK REVIEWerS

32~

were lived upon. However, no evidences of structures were found.
Several thousand people, living in more than 600 dwellings, are estimated to have occupied the site. The Poverty Point mound, 70 feet
high, is shown to be entirely of artificial construction, and is interpreted as a bird effigy, now much eroded. One of the other mounds,
the Motley mound, appears to be an unfinished structure of the
same type as the Poverty Point mound. The third mound, which is
conical~ was built in four stages and seems to have been erected upon
a cremation burial.
By comparing Poverty Point projectile poin~t types with those from
stratified sites in the Tennessee Valley and surface collections in
Louisiana, Dr. Webb shows that Poverty Point dates from the very
end of Archaic times. There are even a very few fiber-tempered potsherds in the collection, probaby traded in, signaling the closing years
of the Archaic. The well-known clay balls ("Poverty Point objects")
which occur by the thousands on the site, are shown to be artificial
cooking stones, serving the same purpose as the fire-cracked stones
found in abundance at many Archaic sites such as the Texas burnedrock middens. The plummets which have been collected in large
numbers are interpreted as bolas weights. (Similar objects in California are known to be charm stones there, and this reviewer feels
that the bolas weight idea must be considered very tentative.)
The artifacts are made of materials from many different places-Mississippi, Arkansas, the southern Appalachians, and even north of
the Ohio River. The trading patterns manifested are truly impressive.
The site seems to have been occupied only for a few decades at most.
Combining cultural, geological, and radio-carbon dating evidence, the
authors place the occupation at about 800-600 B.C.
We still do not know how an Archaic people, living by hunting and
fishing, had the time or organization to do such a tremendous construction job; but Dr. Ford suggests that the Archaic occupants of
the site were ruled by a caste of northern invaders who bore the
traditions that were eventually to cuhimate in the spectacular Hopewell culture of the Middle West: Under the direction of the conquering invaders, according to this hypothesis, the earthworks were built.
But, guesses Dr. Ford, the conquest did not last for long and the
northern traditions soon died out. The Archaic peoples then returned
to their simpler way of life. Dr. Ford further believes that the Poverty
Point people did have agriculture, since no other method of foodgetting would permit the time or population concentration necessary
to construct such a site. Unfortunately there is no direct evidence

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

backing up these hypotheses, credible though they be. The mystery
remains.
This report and Ford’s earlier one on the Jaketown site have
partially revealed a most intriguing chapter in American prehistory,
and one which, even with this excellent work, is still far from being
understood. Writers of archeological reports can use this monograph
as one of their models, because the difficult job of clearly describing
the excavation is very well handled and the artifact analysis is
excellent.
There have been proposals, as yet not successful, to have the Poverty
Point site made a state park, or even a national monument. Louisiana
could do much worse than put this remarkable monument of a far-off
time under public protection. The work of Ford and Webb and associates has shown that the site represents a time when the North
American Indians were abreast of those in Central and South America
at least in political organization and architectural achievements. If
left in its present state the site will gradually disappear. As a park,
combining the benefits of a recreational facility with the educational
aim of giving man a broader view of himself, it would be a credit to
the state or to whatever other agency might undertake to preserve it.
Ford and Webb have done the main job of giving the site its proper
place in the American archeological scene.

E. Mott Davis
The University of Texas
Tribes That Slumber: Indian Times in the Tennessee Region, by
Thomas M. N. Lewis and Madeline Kneberg. 196 pp., many illustrations (unnumbered). University of Tennessee Press, Knoxville, 1958. $3.75.
This is a really fine book on the prehistory and the historic Indians
of the Tennessee region, by the two people who know it best. The
Preface begins, "This book has been written for students, for amateur
archaeologists, and for all other persons with curiosity about the Indians." It is actually very simply written, presupposing no previous
knowledge on the part of the reader, and is bound to be read with
interest by everyone from junior high-school age up.
There are ten chapters, of which the first five are on the archeology,
period by period, beginning with Nomadic Hunters of the Ice Age and
ending with The Age of Temple Mounds. Throughout, the authors
emphasize the continuity of their story, and the reader is constantly

3e7

BOOIi REVIE~¥S

made aware that the whole account leads up to the historic Indians,
the Creeks, the Yuchi, and the Cherokee, who are described in the
final five chapters. The archeological chapters are abundantly illustrated with drawings and photographs of artifacts, and with Kneberg’s illustrations of prehistoric scenes. The text is down-to-earth and
free of romantic theorizing. There are good summary accounts of the
traits which are found in the various complexes, with many artifact
illustrations, and these trait lists are woven into the general account
of life in the past, so that the whole story makes good reading for
everyone. It is possible even for the beginner to get some idea of how
the archeologist extracts an image of the past from his information.
The total result is a dynamic story of the development of an increasingly complex life, from the simple nomadic ice-age hunters up
through the ages to the sophisticated Temple Mound people who
emerge in historic times.
The final five chapters are quick surveys of the history and ways of
life of the Creeks, the Yuchi, and the Cherokee. This reviewer feels
that the discussions are a bit stiff, something of a parade of "interesting
customs of interesting natives" which fail to convey the sense of real
people really living; but it is doubtful that everyone will react this
way.
The book is fascinating and should be popular for many years.
It is most highly recommended for anyone interested in the native
history of the southeastern United States.

E. Mott Davis
The University of Texas

