Bulletin of the

TEXAS
ARC HEOLOGICAL
SOCIETY
Volume 57/1986
2.
2

i
PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY AT AUSTIN, TEXAS, 1987

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
The Society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking: the study of man’s past in Texas and contiguous areas. The Bulletin
offers an outlet for the publication of serious research on history, prehistory, and
archeological theory. In line with the goals of the Society, it encourages scientific
collection, study, and publication of archeological data.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to the members of the
Society. Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers and do not necessarily
represent the views of the Society or editorial staff.

Officers of the Society 1985-1986
President: Elton R. Prewitt (Austin)
President-Elect: J. Rex Wayland (George West)
Treasurer: C. K. Chandler (San Antonio)
Secretary: Anne A. Fox (San Antonio)
Bulletin Editor: James E. Corbin (Nacogdoches)
Newsletter Editor: Beth O. Davis (Austin)
Immediate Past President: C. K. Chandler (San Antonio)
Directors 1985-1986 (in addition to above): Sam D. McCulloch (San Marcos),
Laurie Moseley III (Springtown), Robert L. Smith (Stinnett), Norman G. Flaigg
(Austin), James C. Everett (Arlington), Roy Dickinson (Wichita Falls).

Regional Vice-Presidents 1985-1986: Meeks Etchieson (Canyon), Brownie
Roberts (Lamesa), Jimmy Smith (Cleburne), Bonnie McKee (Dallas), Sheldon
Kindall (Seabrook), Jimmy L. Mitchell (Converse), Gladys Short (Corpus
Christi), John H. Stockley, Jr. (Quemado), Carol Kehl (Temple), James D. Hall
(San Angelo), Carrol Hedrick (El Paso),
Membership and Publications
Membership in the Society is for the calendar year. Dues (current 1986) are as
follows: Individual (regular), $15.00; Family, $20; S tudent, $10; Contributing, $30;
Chartered Societies and Institutional, $15; Life, $300. All members of the Society
receive the Bulletin, published annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter issued
four times a year. A monograph series, Special Publications, also is published by
the Society. Back issues of the Bulletin are available, and price lists can be obtained
from the Secretary.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary,
Texas Archeologieal Society, Center for Archaeological Research, The University
of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78285.

Bulletin of the

TExAs
ARC HEOLOGICAL
~OCIETY Volume 57/1986
James E. Corbin, Editor
Beth O. Davis, Associate Editor
Cover design and layout by James E. Corbin

Published by the Society at Austin
1987(for 1986)

© Copyright 1987 by the Texas Archeological Society.

Editor’s Note
This Bulletin would not have been possible without the exceptional effort of
Associate Editor Beth O. Davis. I also wish to thank all of my reviewers and authors.
They were much more punctual than the Editor in returning manuscripts.

Contents
PAPERS
A Plague of Phases: Recent Sociocultural Taxonomy in Texas Archeology.
LeRoy Johnson, Jr ....................................................................................... 1
The Clovis Paleoindian Occupation of Texas: Results of the Texas
Clovis Fluted Point Survey.
David J. Meltzer ........................................................................................ 27
San Patrice and Dalton Affinities on the Central and Western Gulf
Coastal Plain
H. Blaine Ensor .......................................................................................... 69
The Lott Site (41GR56): A Late Prehistoric Site in Garza County, Texas.
Frank A. Runkles and E. D. Dorchester ..................................................... 83
Prehistoric Population Dynamics of Southeastern Texas.
L. W. Patterson ......................................................................................... 117
A Preliminary Assessment of Environmental and Cultural Determinants
of Settlement in Central Texas During the Nineteenth Century.
Shawn Bonath Carlson ............................................................................. 123
Post West Bernard (41WH16) - Republic of Texas Armory, 1837-1839,
Wharton County, Texas.
Joe D. Hudgins ......................................................................................... 143
Human Skeletal Remains from the Clark and Holdeman Sites,
Red River County, Texas.
Carol J. Loveland ..................................................................................... 165
Possible Cases of Endemic Treponematosis in a Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherer
Population on the Texas Coast.
Barbara E. Jackson, James L. Boone, and Maciej Itenneberg ................. 183
REVIEWS
Adobe Walls: The History and Archeology of the 1874 Trading Post,
T. Lindsay Baker and Billy R. Harrison.
Jimmy L. Mitchell .................................................................................... 195
Seminole Sink: Excavation of a Vertical Shaft Tomb, Val Verde County,
Texas. S. A. Turpin, L. C. Bement, T. M. Byrd, M. K. Marks, J. C. Rose,
E. L. Buie, R. Rosenberg, W. R. Elliott, and J. R. Reddell.
LeRoy Johnson, Jr .................................................................................... 198
Prehistoric Rock Art of the Cross Timbers Management Unit, East
Central Oklahoma: An Introductory Study. Charles D. Neel, with
original artwork by Kenneth Sampson.
William W. Newcomb, Jr ......................................................................... 202
COMMENTARY
Paul S. Storch ........................................................................................... 205

AUTHORS ...................................................................................................... 207

A Plague of Phases

LeRoy Johnson, Jr.

ABSTRACT
The phases named in the last decade by Weir (1976), Prewitt
(1981, 1983), Dibble (Turpin 1985), Bruseth and Perttula (1981),
and Thurmond (1983) are reviewed in terms of the writer’s views on
proper phase definition. The demonstration of strong contextual
associations among items in a phase’s site components is considered
a sine qua non for establishing sociocultural units that can correspond to single societies. Examples of both satisfactory and unwarranted phase definitions are discussed, and the recommendation is
made that many flawed phases can best be treated as named regional
periods or, when appropriate, general cultural patterns. The kind of
phase endorsed for much of Texas---for areas of semimobile aborigines or dispersed farmers--is a broadly construed unit allowing for
some functional and temporal variation among its components; it
should ideally represent an ethnic group or society as it existed
throughout a region. Local units should be called subphases.

THE PROBLEM

This paper is a short critique of several published descriptions of phases that
have appeared in Texas during the last 10 years. Without argument, defining
sociocultural units in the archeological record can be a step forward for the prehistorian. When established with understanding and care, the units are
representations in either of two senses--they can stand for the fairly consistent
material remains and behaviors of separate groups of bygone people, or can represent quite different periods in the history of a single society. In either case the
consequence is to set apart for scrutiny separate human groups that correspond to
multitribal, tribal, or other kinds of entities. Depending on whose system of
nomenclature and classification is followed, the smallest units are called foci,
complexes, phases, or whatever. Sadly, not many of the named phases proposed
in Texas during recent years are acceptable socioculturalunits. In many cases the
absolutely minimal methods necessary for establishing units have not been
followed, with the result that phases are named and described that are either speculative constructs or merely named regional periods. Although good integration
and interpretation of the archeological data have resulted from the use of proper
phase definitions, considerable confusion has been the result of publishing
flawed units.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeologieal Society 57 (1986)

2

Texas Archeological Society

As a matter of fact, having false or misbegotten phases in the archeological
literature is sometimes worse than having none at all, for they easily become dangerous and useless recipes for careless archeologists. This is the malady that I see
affecting the archeological community in Texas, infecting even the attitudes of
supervisory personnel who review salvage efforts. Because of the obsession to
tie new research into culture sequences, partly flawed schemes are accepted uncritically by people who should know better. So in various parts of the state,
some phases have been named in the past decade that ought to be rejected or
treated as entities of another sort. And there are rumors of even more phase
names in the works for other regions. It is my hope to inject a certain amount of
antibiotic into the literature and help slow the infection’s spread, though I am reminded of an old Spanish dicho to the effect that "it is easier to raise a devil than
to put him away." At the same time I want to encourage a scholarly search for
phases and recommend their use.
Before describing, again, the proper method for defining phases (for the first
description, see Johnson 1967:1-10), it needs to be underlined that such units are
hardly God’s gift to archeology; nor are they the Cosmic Glue that binds together
the archeological universe and keeps it from scattering to the four winds.
Problems have surrounded the use of even fairly well defined phases that have
hindered our understanding of past societies in terms of their total economies,
internal complexity, relationships to other peoples, and their rate of change
through the years. For example, as T. K. Perttula and others (1986:41-43) have
recently said, sociocultural units (in their case, in the Caddoan area) are usually
named with little appreciation for the diversity among sites of a given unit.
Sometimes sites resulting from different social and economic activities practiced
by a single society are not always placed in the same unit, and the proper variation is not allowed. E. B. Jelks (1961:74) wrestled with this problem long ago
in his work on the lower Stflphur River.
Serious problems also exist in setting unit boundaries in time, especially in
the case where a single society changed considerably but slowly through the
years, and warrants division into phases or subphases. In these instances, deciding upon phase markers, choosing the most appropriate number of phases for the
sequence, and setting phase limits in time can cause a brain snarl that will not
easily unravel. Regrettably, there are no firm guidelines to follow--only
common sense coupled with an understanding of local history. But if the age
limits of a phase are set too broadly, the result is an impression of stability and
uniformity that may belie reality. In the same vein, if the age span of a phase is
set too short, and very minor social and stylistic changes are overemphasized,
then a false picture of rapid change emerges. The recommended usage allows for
some temporal flexibility in phase definitions so that quite brief periods of
uniformity--in the neighborhood of a century or two--can be recognized as
subphases. But when a local society is replaced by interlopers, resulting in a
major cultural change, then it is relatively simple to establish main phase
boundaries that mirror this replacement.
However important functional studies may be, the importance of style in

Johnson w A Plague of Phases

3

archeological phases should never be belittled. Recent ethnoarcheological studies
(e.g., Wiessner 1983, 1984; Lemonnier 1986) have illustrated convincingly that
single societies---whether of the multitribal, tribal, or subtribal sort--often have
unique stylistic expressions in their tools, dress, etc., that furnish a means for
contemporary people, including ethnoarcheologists, to recognize ethnic identity.
As a consequence, it is perfectly legitimate for the archeologist to use cooccurring styles in defining phases, as long as he also concerns himself with reconstructing economic and other behaviors.
In spite of the foregoing problems, phases or other archeological units can
be helpful constructs for packaging masses of data, providing, albeit imperfectly,
units that should reflect past social reality. But phases will be most useful only
if certain instructions are followed: (1) use only major social and stylistic
changes for marking phase boundaries in time, (2) allow for spatial, age, and
functional variation that may be expressed, when appropriate, as subphases, (3)
recognize the dynamic nature of human life and social activity in the society
whose remains are being classified, and (4) fight the ever-present temptation to
reify a phase and consider it the prime actor in past human drama. Types, phases,
and the like do nothing. Only people act, and we should strive never to lose
sight of them in our analytic and classificatory machinations.
THE PROPER METHOD OF RECOGNIZING PHASES
With the preliminary comments about the nature and usefulness of phases
out of the way, we turn to the question of unit recognition: the mechanics of the
step-by-step definition. I beg the reader’s indulgence to repeat part of what I
wrote in 1967 (pp. 1-10), but those few lines directed at Texas archeologists
appear only rarely to have been read or pondered.
Not surprisingly, figuring out the formal content of units is the main act in
their definition. To assign a collection of artifacts to an archeological unit we
have to know, and demonstrate convincingly, that those things are truly the
residue (Gould 1980:42) of a discrete and linked series of local communities
(each a maximal group of persons in face-to-face association). Recognizing site
components is the first step, and a primary association is demanded for this kind
of assignment--a close contextual relationship among artifacts. In the best cases
of primary association, the context of the artifacts and other things that are found
together is such that there remains little doubt they were used or produced by the
same social group. For instance, if tools, ornaments, and garments were included
with a corpse at the time of burial, this provides an excellent case of primary
association; we know these items characterize a single community during one
period of time.
Even here there are lurking problems, since grave fill can fortuitously contain artifacts made in a different time period or by other societies who used the
site. So the archeologist is obliged to study the context of the grave he excavates. A group of arrowpoints lying near the corpse and all oriented alike indicates the deliberate placement of a bundle or quiver of arrows with the deceased.
For another example, stone tools found in a storage pit or as a cache can also be

4

Texas Archeologieal Society

viewed as an instance of primary association if, from their uniformity and
position, it can be inferred that they were deliberately stored there together and
were not included accidentally with fill later on.
I could continue with further examples of possible primary associations
among tools and site features: artifacts found on house floors, around and in
stone hearths, in baking ovens, and so on. The point, however, has been made.
In each case the context needs analyzing, and the archeologist should act out the
role of Sherlock Holmes or his clever brother Mycroft--carefully collecting and
weighing each piece of evidence to reach, when possible, a reasonable explanation. It is also extremely useful to recognize instances of likely secondary association so they will not be taken for primary ones. Examples of things in secondary association are tools made by different societies, or the same society
during quite distinct periods, that have come to lie together through human
agency such as pit digging, by deposition on a living surface stable for many
years, or from joint redeposition by some natural agency such as slope wash.
Returning to the main theme, when associations have been recognized in
graves, house floors, perhaps even in strata with homogeneous artifact styles,
then these associational lots are compared to see which artifact forms or types, as
well as inferred behaviors, are sufficiently similar to warrant their being lumped
together as a single phase component of the site. Physical evidence such as the
association of the features with a living surface, their similar depth below the
site’s surface, etc., may be used to verify this kind of component recognition.
The job can be difficult, but any definition of archeological units should adhere
to this approach. W. W. Taylor, in A Study of Archaeology (1948), affirms that
sociocultural units should represent given groups of people, for "since the local
human groups represented by... localized finds are the only empirical ones
with which the archaeologist.., deals, they are.., the starting point of all
archaeological taxonomy" (pp. 146, 147). In his Prehistoric Migrations in
Europe
(1950), V. Gordon Childe states that, to define cultures (his
archeological units), an archeologist must show that traits, artifacts, etc., relate
contextually to one anther in such a way that we know they are the concrete
expressions of the common social traditions of a single people.
W. C. McKern (1939:30) has stated, in presenting the procedure to be
followed in defining foci, that materials and associated data that have cultural
significance are first collected for a site; if a consistent complex of traits so determined also is found at other sites, then we have a true focus which, he says,
"may in instances correspond closely to the local tribe in ethnology" (p. 308).
Avoiding the question of whether foci represent tribes or some other social
entities, at least we see that McKern meant his focus to stand for the residue of a
definite group of people, recognizable at several archeological sites as individual
components. I can only add that there is almost no difference between a Midwestern focus and a phase as defined by Willey and Phillips (1958:22), except
that foci are explicitly required to have almost identical site components, thus
making it hard to allow for functional or other variation among the sites of a
single society. Perhaps through oversight, Willey and Phillips were not quite so

Johnson ~ A Plague of Phases

5

strict, but nonetheless failed to discuss intraphase variation and its significance.
For my purposes, the reason for discussing foci is to underline a necessary
step in defining sociocultural units: once associations are worked out at single
sites, moderately similar components need to be recognized at a number of sites.
Of course, the constituent components must be permitted to vary somewhat, to
allow for the economic, magico-religious, and other activities carried out by a
society at some sites and not others; when deemed helpful, minor variation in
age or geographic spread can be formalized in subphases, though their definition
is not required; such variation within a phase may merely be described.
In discussing their idea of phase, Willey and Phillips (1958:22) indicate that
it is an archeological unit having characteristic traits that set it apart from all
other such units, that it occurs within a locality or region, and that it is limited
in time to a relatively brief interval. And in treating the representational nature
of a phase, they say that its equivalent ought to be, and often is, society (p. 49).
Although it is obvious from their statement that phase components can be defined only by isolating archeological materials into associational units, it is
nevertheless difficult to understand why this methodology was not given more
attention by Willey and Phillips. The implications of their discussion in this
direction are perfectly clear, but Willey and Phillips’s failure to illustrate in more
detail the mechanics of phase recognition has brought more than one archeologist to grief.
THE ARCHEOLOGIST’S BANE

The siren who lures the hapless prehistorian onto the Rock of Misinterpretation uses no enticing melody; she merely presents him with site strata rich
in artifacts but obscure in origin. Clutching at the bait, the archeologist will too
often interpret the contents of the individual strata as if they were artifacts of a
single community in primary association, when very often they are not. This
temptation to misinterpret can become a curse, a true bane. So how should we
appraise artifacts discovered together in a single natural stratum lacking features
that connect them into associational lots--a situation common enough in open
middens and rockshelters? Are these tools and debris the remains of a single ethnic community or of several?
Although site strata may very well contain artifacts all made by one community and represent cases of true primary association, such zones can also result from the formation of soil horizons, clay lenses, etc., long after the original
deposition of the human tools. Artifacts and features from different peoples and
periods can come to lie in a single stratum. Then, too, artifacts migrate considerably in some soils through turbation caused by roots, animal burrowing, and
human pit digging. So even strata whose formation and origin are fairly well understood can contain artifacts that have been moved from their original places-particularly in the case of middens used continually (even off and on) over thousands of years. Generally, however, if a thin stratum preserves within it tools
that are stylistically all of a piece, it is more likely than not that they are the residue of one society. If there is much stylistic diversity, then the likelihood is

6

Texas Archeological Society

reduced that the stratum’s artifacts come from a single social group. Nevertheless, only tight associations of tools and fea~res discovered elsewhere usually
can help the archeologist decide (by interpolation) which artifacts in a homogeneous midden zone belong to which specific societies and periods. Lacking
hearths and graves, internal evidence is scarce and hard to read, and the soil itself
is often churned up. To define phases only on the bases of the association of artifacts with such a zone is to court trouble brazenly.
There is also an ethnographic explanation for the mixing together of artifacts from different social/ethnic groups in many sites. In parts of Texas away
from Formative farming communities, restricted or central-based wanderers
ranged over large areas, in some cases practicing seasonal transhumance. For
example, the Tonkawa and allied groups, the Karankawas, the so-called Coahuiltecans, and others were mainly nonhorticultural collectors and hunters without
much stability of settlement. Three patterns appear from their ethnographic
accounts dating to the sixteenth, seventeenth and eighteenth centuries: such
people moved their campsites readily, often traveled hundreds of miles to take
advantage of special food sources, and probably reoccupied old habitation sites.
Furthermore, there are indications that the bands were not strictly territorial and
that several different groups of people moved over some areas in certain seasons.
If the semiwandering habits of local Indians in Spanish colonial days were at
all characteristic of the prehistoric inhabitants of the state, especially during
Archaic times, then there is no support for the assumption that approximately
contemporary artifacts from a site stratum will necessarily be the relics of one
group. "Camp sites and cave sites and other stopping places of more or less transient peoples can conceivably preserve within a very limited space the products
of not a few separate cultural and political entities" (Taylor 1948:141).
But let us return to the penchant for misinterpreting site strata and their contents, although it is nothing new to the archeology of the state. Unfortunately,
the siren has been enticing her victims for many decades, and her handiwork can
be seen in numerous invalid sociocultural units from yesteryear, as well as in
mistaken beliefs about the contemporaneity of units and artifact types. For instance, J. Charles Kelley (1947, 1959) was led to believe that the Pedemales and
Nolan dart point types were of the same age because of their frequent stratigraphic cooccurrence, although he placed them in separate foci Round Rock and
Clear Fork, respectively. In 1959 (p. 282) he affirrned that "the contemporaneous
Round Rock... and Clear Fork... foci extend from very early to very late
times but are replaced locally on the west by the late Uvalde focus." The
evidence of a similar age for Pedernales and Nolan dart point was found
throughout the excavations of the 40-foot and part of the 20-foot terrace of the
Colorado River. As an aside, however, none of Kelley’s foci were defined by
careful study of primary associations in sites; they were merely areal and
temporal patterns in the distribution of artifact forms.
When Thomas C. Kelly (1960) found proof at the Crumley site that Nolan
was an earlier type than Pedernales, as this writer did soon afterwards at the
Wunderlich site (Johnson et al. 1962:15-48), resistance to this new evidence was

Johnson w A Plague of Phases

7

considerable. Some archeologists were strongly convinced of the contemporaneity of the two types because of their previous occurrence in the same
discrete terrace deposits and at the Williams site (Suhm [Story] 1959). Indeed, so
powerful was the prevailing misconception that one of the writers contributing
to the "Conclusions" of the Canyon Reservoir archeological publication spilt
considerable ink waffling about the possible meaning of the separation of the
two dart point types at Crumley and Wunderlich (Johnson et al. 1962:117-124).
Finally, however, she was willing to consider, among other possibilities, the
likelihood "that the materials from the sites analyzed by Kelley were
considerably mixed, in spite of the presence of apparently clear-cut geologic strata at most of the sites" (p. 119).
It was not until the 1970s that sondage (test) excavations were partly abandoned in the state in favor of clearing large living areas where chances were improved for finding artifacts in primary contextual association around hearths and
other activity areas, as recommended by Lewis Binford (1964). In 1971, the
Ram’s Head site of Crockett County (Young 1982) was dug in this fashion, and
in 1973 the Buckhollow site of Kimball County. Both pieces of work were
accomplished by the State Department of Highways and Public Transportation,
following techniques for stripping village and mound sites in North Carolina. It
is now fairly common to see living areas uncovered layer by layer, with the
result that more activity spots and instances of primary association among features and artifacts are being recognized; with them the likelihood increases that
sociocultural units will eventually be defined in much of the state.
The manner in which the Loeve-Fox site (Prewitt 1982) was cleared and a
fairly large area excavated stratum by stratum is an example of the proper manner
of digging sites, finding their features and activity areas, and studying in a
Holmesian fashion their cases of primary association. In the central part of Texas
there is enough evidence, right now, to recognize phases at several different
periods of time. But this has been done in an acceptable, yet minimal, way only
for the Austin and Toyah foci (Jelks 1962; Prewitt 1982), and for the Driftwood,
Twin Sisters, and Round Rock phases (Prewitt 1982). In other attempts to define
phases, sketchy or faulty procedures have been used, or else regional periods or
other units have been defined and mistakenly called phases. Five proposed phase
syntheses will be reviewed.
Weir’s Cultural Patterns
In his doctoral dissertation of 1976, Frank A. Weir presented a new framework within which the Archaic cultures of central Texas could be described in a
dynamic way. His search for intervals of stability and equilibrium, as well as
abrupt change, led Weir to name five uniform intervals that he inaccurately called
phases, borrowing some of their names from J. C. Kelley and earlier researchers:
San Geronimo (6000-2500 B.C.), Clear Fork (3000-2000 B.D.), Round Rock
(2200-600 B.C.), San Marcos (800 B.C.-A.D. 200), and Twin Sisters (A.D. 11300). Seventeen subject archeological sites, whose collections were divided
(using both function and style) into 34 artifact classes and 17 flake categories,

8

Texas Archeological Society

made up the raw material of the study, though the tallies and frequencies were
only occasionally put in the dissertation.
Weir depicts a sequence that begins with numbers of small, scattered human
groups during San Geronimo times, proceeds on to the Round Rock era of coalescense and uniformity, and finally ends in a proliferation of cultures and social
groups in the San Marcos and Twin Sisters phases. Yet Weir’s archeological
units were not proper phases, as he freely admits (1986). First, both the earliest
and latest units separately encompass the residue of several communities of
people who, though they shared some behaviors, may not have been terribly
close ethnic relatives. That can be seen, for example, in the diverse dart point
forms (Uvalde, Gower, Martindale, Early Barbed, etc.) allowed in the San Geronimo unit. Second, the units were not defined by phase-recognizing methods--by
comparing many cases of primary association to build up phase components that
wonld strongly resemble each other. Rather, since Weir’s interests were largely
behavioral, patterns or trends in the site data were discerned by general inspection. Then a numerical summary of each unit was acquired by pooling the artifact counts (by class) for all appropriate sites or parts of sites. This unusual summing of collections was quite clever, since it combined the tool classes from different kinds of specialized sites to produce a single picture of the artifact content
and range of the whole unit. Third, the final units are patterns of uniformity on a
level of conceptualization far above that represented by sociocultural phases.
Additionally, units such as San Geronimo lasted much too long ever to
represent phases. Hence, for all the foregoing reasons, they can best be labeled
cultural patterns, or simply just patterns---San Geronimo pattern, Clear Fork
pattern, and so forth. Each represents a generally uniform trend in behavior illustrated in detail in Weir’s dissertation. (No connection is implied between this
usage of the word pattern and that found in the Midwestern system of taxonomy.) So, simply by replacing the phase label with one more appropriate to the
creator’s actual interests, the scheme could easily be corrected and kept in use.
The reader should also note that some of the cul’tural patterns overlap each other
in age, which seems a reasonable phenomenon, and that they are partly dated by
interpolation using radiocarbon assays from the Lake Amistad area of the Rio
Grande (Weir 1976:Table 1), which may or may not be reasonable. Ten years,
now, after its appearance, Weir’s The Central Texas Archaic could benefit from a
general refurbishing that would incorporate recent discoveries and provide additional proofs of major social trends.
PREWITT’S CHRONOLOGIES: GOOD PHASES AND BAD
In the early 1980s, Elton R. Prewitt published a two-part synthesis for the
prehistory of central Texas, in which 13 phase names appeared. Although he
states that his purpose was to refine the culture history presented earlier by Jelks
(1962) and Weir (1976), Prewitt’s interests also touched upon population density
and prehistoric migrations. Some of his ideas regarding chronology and unit definition had appeared earlier in a manuscript (1976) on the Rogers Spring site,
while a later report (1982) actually identified several phases, component by corn-

Johnson ~ A Plague of Phases

9

ponent, at sites on Granger Lake. The major presentation was in the form of two
papers: Cultural Chronology in Central Texas (1981), which described each of
his phases briefly and gave its age span, and From Circleville to Toyah:
Comments on Central Texas Chronology (1983). This second work listed each
of the 147 radiocarbon assays consulted, revised the basic chronology in small
ways, and discussed ideas about changing demography.
As fascinating as all the studies are, it is felt here that Prewitt’s proposed
sociocultural units fall into two quality classes: a group of minimally defined,
"good" phases (Toyah, Austin, Driftwood, Twin Sisters, and Round Rock)1
(endnote) and, on the opposite shore, all the rest of the named phases (Uvalde,
San Marcos, Marshall Ford, Clear Fork, Oakalla, Jarrell, San Geronimo, and
Circleville), each seriously flawed.
When I say that some of the proposed phases are good, only one thing is
meant: that these units meet the minimal requirements for a phase--a preliminary phase. At least some associations of the primary sort have been described for
them and a number of components recognized. There is no implication that the
phase definitions are in any sense complete, that geographic boundaries have
been set, or that the full archeological content of each phase is known. The definitions of Prewitt’s good phases are quite preliminary, but will surely be added to
as additional associational information is uncovered.
The peculiar dichotomy in the quality of Prewitt’s work on phases is not
easy to understand, though it can be described as follows. When using borrowed
or published information, the treatment he gives phase data can be a bit cavalier.
But when good site data are produced by his own research, Prewitt takes all the
appropriate steps to find primary associations and recognize evidence for separate
human societies in the archeological record. His study at the Loeve-Fox site,
41WM230 (Prewitt 1982:3-229), of the distribution of features and associated
artifacts in the strata characterized by the Toyah, Austin, Driftwood, Twin
Sisters, and Round Rock phases, is a textbook example of how to go about
recognizing and presenting proof for site components, then interpreting them.
Let me cite a few examples from that insightful study.
In strata ld through lg, Austin-phase arrowpoints and marine-shell ornaments were found as grave goods or (in the case of the arrowheads) as weapons
that killed the people buried there. With two basin hearths and a burned-clay pit
were also found three Scallorn and two Granbury arrowpoints. Additionally, the
various features and concentrations of mussel shell were plotted to reveal a site
plan for the Austin phase component that was amenable to interpretation.
Among the sociological inferences and historical interpretations were these. Internecine warfare with other Austin phase people is bespoken by the Austin arrowpoints in several bodies, and various possible causes of intragroup fighting are
explored. Further, the ornaments of conch shell found in graves show that local
people acquired goods by trade or more direct methods from the Gulf of Mexico.
In earlier Driftwood times, however, the absence of marine shell from Loeve-Fox
and the lack of diagnostic Mahomet dart points near the coast can be used to
argue that the Driftwood people of eastern central Texas were an intrusive popu-

10

Texas Archeological Society

lation excluded, for some reason, from the coastal zone of the Gulf of Mexico.
To recapitulate, Prewitt has redefined the previously published Austin and
Toyah phases in a (barely) usable way, and has also presented minimal, yet
acceptable, evidence at Loeve-Fox and elsewhere (Prewitt 1981) that the
Driftwood, Twin Sisters, and Round Rock units are true sociocultural phases of
several components, though their definitions depend heavily on associational evidence from one well-studied site--Loeve-Fox. The other named Archaic phases
have to be considered false entities or else named regional periods that include the
residue of more than one human society, for published associational studies of
their artifacts and features are inadequate or lacking.
Since chronological schemes tend to be quoted often and religiously by
archeologists who never take time to review the underlying data, I think it behooves me to criticize parts of Prewitt’s study, as I have in fact done, and
suggest a few changes before the whole scheme becomes deeply embedded in
archeological folklore. Prewitt is always pleased, I believe, when his ideas stimulate interest and discussion. What I do not believe he would approve, however,
is a mindless apeing of his entire, unfinished system of Holocene phases for
central Texas. Regrettably, the parts of the system that I consider flawed are
being accepted as readily as are the five probably valid phases listed above.
I would like it better if Prewitt had researched his phases one at a time and
published them singly, rather than tossing in the ring an entire but incomplete
post-Ice Age chronology all at once. But, rather than reject the eight phase
names for which good primary associations and proved components are missing,
let us retain them as labels for provisional regional periods whenever possible.
Some, however, may be complete figments incapable of being viewed as time
units. But when feasible, the retained phases will enjoy a respectable existence as
periods through shedding their misleading "phase" labels. It is hoped that innocent bystanders will be forewarned not to judge each "phase" as a body of
information necessarily characterizing a separate society or ethnic group.
To underline the difference between regional periods and phases may seem
like academic nit-picking, but it is not. A regional period may set off the material culture and inferred behaviors of several communities or societies who,
though different, were contemporaneous or nearly so. A phase, on the other
hand, should always represent one society, or a society as it was at a certain
period in time. The definition of each kind of entity involves different processes
and requires somewhat different proofs. For regional periods one only needs evidence of rough contemporaneity or close similarity in age for the included materials, as well as a common geographic range. For phases something else is
wanted--fair evidence for the use of tools, sharing of behaviors, etc., by one
society. The reader who was not woolgathering earlier will remember the discussion of this subject in "The Proper Method of Recognizing Phases," above.
At this juncture I want to plead strongly against considering the eight flawed
phases as preliminary phases whose definitions can be improved later on with
new discoveries. This may indeed be an accurate prediction of what will transpire, but while waiting for the Christopher Columbus of Texas archeology to

Johnson ~ A Plague of Phases

11

emerge, let us not call these things phases or even preliminary phases. Why my
stubborn attitude? After all, Prewitt said that "the full configuration of a phase
need not be defined before that phase is recognized, and the key index markers are
essential for such recognition" (1981:69). Now, a preliminary definition of a
phase may certainly be published but, as said previously, in doing so some data
to prove associations are nonetheless required, though additional associated
materials may eventually be added to the phase’s definition. No associations, no
phases--not even preliminary ones. The reader must be told that such-and-such
phase component is represented, say, by dart types 4 and 7 found in burial lots A
and G, as well as by stone axes or whatever occurring on living surfaces 3 and 2.
Only when this proving is done publicly can the reader review the archeologist’s
actions and conclusions, and judge whether a true phase is involved or not. The
point to be made is that there are no published discussions of associational data
for Prewitt’s bad phases.
A preliminary phase definition may not be given if associations between
items are merely thought or expected to exist. That practice smacks of divination
and requires the reader to accept the archeologist’s intuitions on faith. If Prewitt’s
regional periods are accepted as preliminary, partially constituted phases, we
should all don the diviner’s robe, as has F. F. Schambach (1982) in Arkansas,
who sometimes names phases for regions yet to be properly researched. Phases
are a lot like pregnancies; either you have some acceptable associational information as proof (even if just a little bit) or you do not. It is a yea or nay matter.
Let me move to the argument that most of Prewitt’s bad phases are indeed regional periods. Consulting the trait list for the Circleville phase (Prewitt
1981:77), we find Angostura, Golondrina, Meserve, and Scottsbluff dart points
listed as diagnostics (see also Prewitt 1982:300-312). Given what is known
about the occurrence elsewhere of some of those dart points in pure complexes
such as Cody, it would be incredible to ask us to believe that all of those items
were the residue of one society and worthy of being encompassed within a single
phase. Where are the specific proofs of primary association among the several
dart point types? And after examining the trait list for the San Geronimo
(Prewitt 1981:77-78), Jarrell (p. 78), and San Marcos (pp. 80-81) phases, can the
reader truly sleep well at night secure in the belief that all the dart point types of
each are, together, the residue of single societies? Let us take a lesson from a
similar foul-up, and remember how convinced J. Charles Kelley (1959) once was
that Nolan and Pedernales dart points were of the same age because of their occurrence together in terraces.
I pose these rhetorical questions only to show that, in the case of Circleville, Jarrell, and some other phases, Prewitt is dealing not with sociocultural
units, but rather with historical time periods. There is no other plausible way to
explain the content of several of his phases. This being so, the main problem
with Prewitt’s scheme can be remedied easily, by calling the bad phases something else--regional periods or intervals. Then one can speak of the Jarrell period
in central Texas, the Clear Fork period, and so on should the archeologist deem
time units of relatively short duration helpful in organizing the Archaic. Regret-

12

Texas Archeological Society

tably, these periods are often too short to mirror the kinds of large-scale and longterm social patterns Weir describes with his entities, the ones I suggested calling
cultured patterns. Division has occurred to such a degree among Prewitt’s Archaic
cultures that the forest can no longer be seen for the many named coppices. Anticipatmg one kind of objection to my suggestion, above, let me say that it would
bother me not at all to use a culture-historical sequence made up of mixed phases
and periods, particularly if great accuracy were thereby gained. True phases can
also play the role of periods when one’s heuristic needs call for it.
The evidence Prewitt is very likely using to recognize the bad phases is stratigraphic. Tools that occur in the same zones and strata, or are believed to be of
the same age for other reasons, have been pigeonholed in his named units. And
whereas purely stratigraphic evidence is usually not sufficient for recognizing
phases, it is quite suitable for defining regional periods. But the success of the
units as named periods, after the matter of content is dealt with, will depend on
how well the temporal framework of each is handled. Here, most unfortunately,
we encounter the biggest snarl in Prewitt’s scheme of classification: his age data
often do not apply to the units for which they are claimed to be appropriate. In
many cases, radiocarbon assays said to date one period were in fact run on charcoal associated with the diagnostic dart points of another, or of several together. I
do not know how the problem in organizing his radiocarbon assays for each
phase arose, but it seems that the assays were put in chronological order (see
Prewitt 1983:Figure 1) with almost no regard for the artifacts associated with
each. Exceptions are the assays for the Toyah and Austin phases. Whatever the
cause of the poor correspondence of the phase assays and the phase diagnostics, it
clearly exists and places in doubt the temporal details of Prewitt’s entire central
Texas chronology.
A helpful listing of the artifact associations for all of Prewitt’s radiocarbon
assays has recently been prepared by another researcher (MS by Wayne C.
Young, n.d.), and is scheduled for publication. However, so that the reader of the
present critique will have some age data to get his teeth into, I include in Table 1
my own tabulation of dart-point associations for radiocarbon dates of six
periods/phases: Round Rock through San Geronlmo (though no dates were given
by Prewitt for the last), covering in all some 4,000 years. The sample is adequate to illustrate the serious problems in Prewitt’s assignment of many inappropriate dates to his various units.
Of the 17 assays said to belong to the Round Rock through San Geronimo
phases (Prewitt 1983:Table 1, assays 111 through 127), four (24 percent) are
from strata that have the diagnostic dart points of single units (’out not always
the one specified), seven come from mixed contexts representing two or more of
the named periods, and one comes from a zone whose diagnostic dart points are
incompletely known. Another three are soil assays thought to produce age estimates somewhat too recent for their associated artifacts (which represent several
different periods in any case, though one tends to dominate), one has no associated dart points, and the final assay was made on charcoal believed by the excavator of the site to have been introduced accidentally into the zone where it was

Johnson ~ A Plague of Phases

13

discovered. Inspection of Table 2 will show that, for all the early Archaic phases
and periods for which radiocarbon assays have been listed by Prewitt, only the
age limits of the Round Rock phase can even be estimated from the available
radiocarbon assays. The actual correspondence between the 17 assays and their
supposed phase markers, in contrast to what has been claimed, is miserable.
Table 1. Radiocarbon Assays and Associated Archaic Dart Points
(Pedernales Interval and Earlier)
ROUND ROCK PHASE
(Pedemales dart points)
SITE

ASSAY
No.

SAMPLE
No.

DATE
B.P.

CORRECTED
DATE, B.C.*

Greenhaw site
(Valastro, Davis, &
Righmaire 1968:896)

TX-453
2650-2:80
8505:95
111
28505=90
1100+_95
112
TX-451
TX-465
2900-2100
113
1165+105
41HY29 (Weir 1979:Table 6); three assays of soil containing charcoal
of several periods, possibly including recent charcoal (all pretreated to remove
humic acids); radiocarbon assays probably too recent for associated artifacts; soil
samples from midden F, zones C & D (zone D has much humic activity); C & D
plus zone of contact C/D contained 13 Pedemales, 7 Bulverde, 2 Marshall, 1 type
VII (narrow rectanguloid stem, barbs), 1 Lange; association between samples and
Pedemales points only fair.
Oblate shelter
114
Tx-104
2900-2180
1165+180
(Tamers, Pearson, &
Davis 1964:150)
41CM1
(TurmeU 1962:Table 3); lower zone 2 contained 1 Angostura,
1 Bulverde, 26 Ensor, 2 Fairland, 10 Frio, 1 Marshall, 5 Montell, 1 Pedemales;
dart points are diagnostic mainly of periods later than Round Rock.
Anthon site
115"*
Tx-2381
3~60
1295+70
31205:70
1450+_90
116"*
Tx-2385
(Valastro, Davis, &
Varela 1977)
41UV60 (Glenn T. Goode 1986); site analysis and
dating
incomplete;
assays are from lower early midden with ca. 20 Pedemales points, ca. 25 Kinney
points, and 3 points with small rectangular sterns plus long barbs (basal notches);
association of dated charcoal and Pedemales points is apparently excellent;
Pedemales and some Kinney points made by the same social group.
1585+_95
Hawes site
117
UGa-2480
3225+75
41WM56 (Hays 1982, vol.l:Table 7.1-1, Table 8.2-1; vol.2:14-27); area C,
level 5 contained 1 Darl, 1 Marcos, 1 Castroville, 2 Marshall, 4 Pedemales, 5
Bulverde, 2 Nolan, 1 Travis, and 1 group 4 (rect. stem); assayed charcoal
associated with dart points typical of several periods.

14

Texas Archeological Society

Table 1, continued
SITE

ASSAY
No.

SAMPLE
No.

DATE
B.P.

CORRECTED
DATE, B.C.*

1905+165
3470&160
Tx-1720
118
Horn shelter No. 2
(Valastro, Davis, &
Varela 1979:263)
41BQ46 (Watt 1978:122-123). Site analysis continuing; assayed charcoal
from S. half of shelter, square 52, depth 102-114 inches "in red alluvial sands that
also contained fishhooks and Pedemales points" (Watt 1978:122); other
associated dart-point types not identified, and dart point referents of assay
incompletely known.
MARSHALL FORD PERIOD
(Bulverde dart points)
1970-!--145
3520&60
119"* Tx-2442
Anthon site
(Acceptable for
(Valastro, Davis, and
Round Rock phase)
Varela 1977:306)
41UV60 (Glenn T.Goode 1986); site analysis and dating incomplete; this
assay is on charcoal from lower early midden with ca. 20 Pedemales points and 25
Kinney points from the zone, and three points with rectangular stems and basal
notches a bit like the Marshall type; no Bulverde points from the site; association
of dated charcoal and Pedernales points is apparently excellent; Pedemales and
some Kinney specimens made by one social group.
2095+145
Hawes site
120
UGa-2485
3615+60
41WM56 (Hays 1982 vol. 1: Table 7.1-1, Table 8.2-1, 8-36; vol. 2: 14-21,
14-27, 14-33); area C, level 7 contained 1 Pedemales, 2 Bulverde, 1 Buda, 1 group
2 (Travis-like), 1 group 4 (rect. stem), 1 group 5 (Buda-like), 1 group 7 (long,
rect. stem), 3 group 14 (rect. stem); assessment: points have rectanguloid stems,
related to Nolan-Travis or Bulverde time period.
CLEAR FORK PERIOD
(Nolan, Travis dart points)
Hawes site
121"* UGa-2473
37505:90
2275+130
41WM56 (Hays 1982, vol.l: Table 7.1-1, Table 8.2-1, 8-36, 8-41; vol. 2:1427, 14-33); feature 14b (hearth); area C, level 8 contained 2 Bulverde, 4 Nolan, 2
group 7 (long, rect. stem), 2 group 14 (rect. stem); assayed charcoal appears to
come from Nolan and Travis zone (level 8). However, zones 9 and 10 (below)
together produced 2 Pedernales, 2 Nolan, 2 Travis, 1 Martindale, 1 group 2 (Travislike), and 1 group 3 points.
4150&140
2790&-_175
122 Tx-2958
Bear Creek shelter
(Valastro, Davis, &
Varela 1979:268)
41HI17 (Lynott 1978, 1985); assay made from intrusive piece of charcoal;
Lynott agrees with present evaluation that charcoal does not date stratum in which
it was found.

Johnson --A Plague of Phases

15

Table 1, continued
SITE

ASSAY
No.

SAMPLE
No.

DATE
B.P.

CORRECTED
DATE, B.C.*

Cervenka site
123
RI-1087
4280-2-_240
2960+270
41WM267 (Hays 1982, vol. l:Table 7.1-1, Table 8.10-1; vol. 2:14-13, 1421, 2:14-13, 14-21, 14-27); feature 9 (hearth); area D, level 63/64; various
references in Hays do not agree as to number and type of points from level, which
at least contained 1 Bulverde, 1 Travis, 1 Dawson, 1 group 2 (Travis-like), 1
group 4 (rect. stem), and 1 group 7 (long, rect. stem); main association is with
Btdverde and Nolan-Travis periods (mixed). Hoxie and Uvalde points were found
below this level.
Cervenka site
124
RI-1086
4330-2420
3020&-_440
41WM267 (Hays 1982, vol. 1:Table 7.1-1, Table 8.10-1; vol. 2:14-13, 1421, 14-33); area D, level 69/70 contained 1 Uvalde dart point, 1 Hoxie, 1 group 1
(Nolan-like), 1 group 9 (lanceolate), 1 group 10 (Nolan-like?); main association is
with rectangular-stem and early Archaic points, mixed.
Below foregoing points
associated with assayed charcoal were 1 Travis, 1 Uvalde, 2 Wells, 2 Tortugas, 1
early expanding-stem point at several different elevations.
Evoe Terrace site

125

Tx-339

44301-_240

3145+_270

(Valastro, Pearson, &
Davis 1967:447)
41BL104 (Sorrow, Shafer, and Ross 1967:45-148); area B,

zone 7

produced

8 Bulverde and similar points with narrow and rectangular stems, 2 Travis, 5
points (groups 6, 7, 10, 12; Kent- or Yarbrough-like) with small rectangular
stems, 1 group 13 point (short expanding stem), 1 misc. point (contracting stem),
and 1 group 3 point (unidentifiable fragment); assayed charcoal associated with
artifacts of several periods mixed together.

JARRELL PERIOD
Calf Creek [Bell-Andice], Martindale, Uvalde
Tx-3684
4970-~90
Cervenka site
126
41WM267
(Hays 1982, vol. l:Table 7.1-1, Table
8.10-1);
(hearth), area D, level 117/118, large hearth with borer and graver in
feature 19, at level 103/104, was 1 Tortugas; at level 85/86, 2 Wells,
below feature 19, at level 131, was 1 expanding-stem point.

37905:140
feature 19
flU. Above
1 Tortugas;

41WM73
127
UGa-2482 5285+726
4140-2_736
(Hays 1982, vol. 1:Table 7.1-1, Table 8.4-1;
vol. 2:14-21);
charcoal from
level 19 of area B contained 1 Bulverde-like, 1 Nolan, 1 group 2 (Travis-like)
[level !8, above the assayed charcoal, contained 1 Bulverde and 1 Nolan; level 17
(above 18) yielded 4 Pedernales, 2 Bulverde, 1 group 7 (long, rect. stem), 1
unidentified]; assayed charcoal was in mixed Bulverde-Nolan zone.

16

Texas Archeological Society

Table 1, continued
SAN GERONIMO PERIOD
(Gower, Hoxie, Wells)
No assays listed
* Corrected years B.C., Arizona calibration of 1974 (Damon et al. 1974).
** Assay acceptable for periodization
Notes: Attributed phases/periods according to Prewitt 1983, Table 1

Table 2. Listing by Age of Seven Radiocarbon Assays
Known to Associate with Diagnostic Dart Points of One or Two
Periods (Mixed): San Geronimo to Round Rock Intervals.
Age in Corrected

Associated

Radiocarbon
Years B.C.*

Dart Points

Assay No.
~ewitt 1983)

Diagnostic
Interval

115, Tx-2381

1295+70

Pedernales

Round Rock

116, Tx-2385

1450-&_90

Pedemales

Round Rock

119, Tx-2442

1970£-_145

Pedernales

Round Rock

120, UGa-2485

2095+145

Nolan-Travis/
Bulverde mixed

Clear Fork/
Marshall Ford

121, UGa-2473

2275+130

Nolan-Travis

Clear Fork

123, RI-1087

2960+_.270

Nolan-Travisi
Bulverde mixed

Clear Fork/
Marshall Ford

127, UGa-2482

4140-&736

Nolan/Bulverde
mixed

Clear Fork/
Marshall Ford

*Corrected years

B.C.,

Arizona calibration of 1974

(Damon et al. 1974).

From inspecting Young’s manuscript on assays and associated dart points, I am
convinced that both major and minor adjustments will need to be made to all the
time spans set for the phases by Prewitt, and in some instances beginning and
ending dates will not be known. Consequently it is premature to estimate relative population densities for each phase by calculating a ratio of phase component occurrences to the duration of a phase in years (Prewitt 1983:216). Once
age ranges can be recalculated for some of the phases and periods, particularly the
more recent units, it may be possible to compare certain pairs by their estimated
population densities, but it will be decades, I predict, before firm age estimates
are available for the entire sequence of Archaic phases. Meanwhile, it is also too
early to try correlating phase length and the length of major climatic intervals
caused by precession and volcanism as in Gunn and Prewitt (n.d.).

Johnson m A Plague of Phases

17

As an aside, I need to add that if my recommendations are followed about
calling Wier’s phases cultural patterns and some of Prewitt’s periods, an overlap
of proper nouns will result, as in Clear Fork pattern vs. Clear Fork period. If
this transpires, one of the entities will need to be given a substitute name. That
bridge can be crossed when the water rises, although Weir’s names will take precedence because of their earlier use.
PHASES IN THE DESERT

Two first-rate publications have appeared of late that add to an understanding
of burial practices and Ice Age bone deposits in the Lower Pecos River region. I
refer to Seminole Sink: Excavation of a Vertical Shaft Tomb, Val Verde County, Texas (1985), written and compiled by Solveig A. Turpin; and Excavation
of the Late Pleistocene Deposits of Bonfire Shelter, 41VV218, Val Verde County, Texas, 1983-1984 (1986), by Leland C. Bement. To provide some historical
perspective for their readers, both workers describe and reference an unpublished
series of phases for the desert attributed to David S. Dibble, well known for his
studies of the nearby Arenosa and Bonfire shelters. Dibble (1978, n.d.) offered a
long series of phase names as follows: Aurora, Bonfire, Oriente, Viejo, Eagle
Nest, San Felipe, Cibola, Flanders, Blue Hills, Flecha, and Infierno---extending
from the end of the Ice Age to about A.D. 1725 (Turpin 1985:6-11). As things
now stand, associational and distributional information has been presented only
in part for the possibly Apachean Infierno phase (Dibble 1978), which should
perhaps be considered a valid sociocultural unit.
Some of the remaining phases also may be shown eventually to represent
proper units that stand for the residue and reconstructed behaviors of single societies, but for most, this hope is dim. They have far too many diagnostic artifact
styles. The Bonfire phase, for instance, includes both Folsom and Plainview dart
points which are known to belong to separate complexes elsewhere. I also find it
hard to believe that the Gower, Martindale, Uvalde, and Early Barbed dart points
of the Viejo unit will turn out all to be the remains of one society. Then, again,
the Perdiz and Livermore arrowpoints of the Flecha unit may be shown to belong to separate sociocultural units.
The remedy for the taxonomic problem can be the same suggested for
Prewitt’s taxonomy: for the time being, consider each of the so-called phases
regional periods or subperiods, but continue the same proper nouns. Hence Bonfire period, Eagle Nest period, Cibola period, etc. To harangue further on the
Lower Pecos taxonomy would be beating a dead horse, since Turpin has already
made the recommended shift in unit labels in a new synthesis she is composing
on the Lower Pecos region.
STRANGE PHASES ON THE SABINE RIVER

In 1981, J. E. Bruseth and T. K. Perttula published their Prehistoric
Settlement Patterns at Lake Fork Reservoir, which reports a wealth of ceramic
sites and artifact styles on the Sabine River. But in organizing the new information, the term phase was used in several different ways. First, there are some

18

Texas Archeological Society

lithic phases and ceramic phases that I take to be slightly different local styles
and patterns, each with a given span of years (Bruseth and Perttula 1981:87-96,
102-104). Finally, four cultural phases are named in the concluding section (pp.
139-143): Archaic (6000B.C.-A.D.1), Lone Oak (A.D. 1-850), Pecan Grove
(A.D. 850-1350), and Forest Hill (A.D. 1350-1650)--although an Archaic phase
of six millennia is a patent absurdity. Although the contents of the post-Archaic
cultural phases are described in some detail, associational evidence is not recapitulated for the reader’s benefit. However, settlement patterning, economic data,
age information, and stylistic modes are discussed. The trouble is, there is a hierarchy of phases here that is hard to keep straight. The lithic and ceramic phases
are each labeled I through III, but the ceramic units, especially, become part of
the local cultural phases that themselves somehow interdigitate with existing
large-scale phases (foci) such as Sanders and Titus. Perttula, however, is firmly
convinced that at least the localized Forest Hill phase (I would call it a subphase)
will be an important construct for understanding regional ethnic clustering along
streams and valleys ~erttula 1986), and one should lend an ear when such hopes
are expressed.
As useful as some of these cultural and temporal distinctions may eventually be, a great deal of associational information (as well as age data and distributional information) will have to be collected before the Lake Fork cultural phases
can be considered valid. Furthermore, it is very confusing to have such different
kinds of phenomena lithic, ceramic, cultural, etc.--all parading under the same
banner labeled phase. To remedy the problem, I hope Bruseth and Perttula will
assign easily separable labels such as facies, subphases, or subpatterns to their
small-scale phases, and free the phase label for sociocultural entities that represent the remains of major prehistoric ethnic groups. I suspect Bruseth and Perttula have already reached a similar point of view with no prompting from me.
FOCI, CLUSTERS, PHASES, AND SUBCLUSTERS
ON CYPRESS BAYOU
The most fascinating use of sociocultural units in recent years is J. Peter
Thurmond’s study (1981, 1983) of Caddoan pottery and arrowheads and their geographical clustering along Cypress Bayou and its tributaries. Using associated
batches of earthenware vessels from grave lots and potsherds from village middens, Thurmond was able to divide the old Titus focus into two phases of different ages, an earlier Whelan phase and later Titus phase, while lumping both in
the Cypress cluster. What is even more important, to me, is the recognition of
four subclusters during Titus phase times that are spatial groups of components
probably representing tribes or subtribes united at a higher level into a confederacy like those known historically on the Red River and among the Hasinai.
There are even suggestions in the preceding Whelan phase of the four geographic
groups, though those patterns may merely reflect a survey bias (Thurmond
1983:198).
In most respects, the study on Cypress Bayou imitates another useful reanalysis in the Piney Woods, this by Dee Ann Story and Darrell G. Creel (1982:30-

Johnson m A Plague of Phases

19

34). In the Hasinai area an Anderson cluster was recommended that contained the
earlier Frankston phase and later Allen phase, though there it was doubted that
"archeologists can ever command enough well-controlled data to make identification at [the subcluster] level practical" (Story and Creel 1982:33-34).
Turning to the smallest Cypress Bayou groupings, the Three Basins, Tankersley Creek, Swauano Creek, and Big Cypress Creek subclusters have slightly
different design motifs, or motif combinations, in shared pottery types, as well
as different proportions of various arrowpoint styles (Thurmond 1983:193-194).
These findings are important for people who have been following the debates
among ethnoarcheologists concerning the existence of ethnic and social-group
stylistic markers among aboriginal people (e.g., Wiessner 1985, Sackett 1985,
Lemonnier 1986). Behold, here is a case where both small- and large-scale group
marking can be discerned and used by the archeologist for ethnic-group identification-though with the aid, certainly, of a model of social relations dependent
on known historic social patterns among speakers of Southern Caddoan. A fascinating and useful contribution of Thurmond’s is that small-group ethnic marking
among his people is more a matter of differences in local combinations or proportions of styles, rather than in the simple presence of styles among one cluster
and their absence from others. Ethnoarcheologists will want to cast an eye on
these significant findings, which will probably fit Sackett’s (1982) model for ethnic styles (isochrestic variations) better than others.
Finally, I suggest a simple improvement in the system of labels Thurmond
used, stating at the outset that this is a minor point that in no way affects his
conclusions. I recommend organizing the Cypress Bayou Caddoan components
as follows:

Titus phase (Johnson)

Cypress cluster (Thurmond)

subphase I ~itus I)

Whelan phase

subphase II ~itus II)
(4 named clusters)

VS.

Titus phase
(4 named subclusters)

The advantages are two. First, the altered system is more economical in
terms of the number of proper nouns used--two usages of the term Titus take
the places of the names Cypress, Whelan, and Titus. Though a minor matter, the
fewer the number of names employed, the easier the learning and memorization
of the labels. Second, the term phase continues to be used the way it has
generally been applied (as phase or focus) elsewhere in the state, where the term
tends to correspond to fairly major ethnic or social entities. Further, by speaking
of a large-scale Titus phase divided into subphases, the terminology automatically expresses the continuity from earlier to later times. However, "That which we
call a phase, by any other name would smell as sweet"--at least almost as
sweet.

20

Texas Archeological Society

LOOKING FORWARD
The thread I have tried to trace in the foregoing lines is quite simple. Of interest to me are phases of the kind that can reflect entire hunting-gathering or
simple agricultural societies like those known from colonial days in Texas and
adjacent areas. I realize that phase can mean something different from this when
used by Mesoamerican scholars or Harvard archeologists, but those people have
their own interests that need not mesh with mine. However, the sort of phase
useful for effectively recognizing and organizing the residue and inferred behaviors of simple societies has to be treated in a special way. Phase limits in terms
of geographic range, time span, and content need to be fairly broad and variable.
If the archeologist finds it helpful also to define very small scale units in this
part of the world, then let him call them subphases (sociocultural patterns limited, say, to one river valley or range of hills, or to a brief period) instead of
phases.
What is most crucial is to define phases carefully and describe the evidence
for them to the reading audience. In doing this, the archeologist should imagine
he is truly a detective examining and interpreting all site clues that point to
primary associations among tools and features. When, in his study of the
evidence, he can prove to his readers the existence of similar components from
several sites that could be the product of a single people, at that point he has defined a new phase.
Within the last decade a plague of phases has been broadcast by the state’s
archeologists, showing--at least--that there is no little enthusiasm for doing
sociocultural integration in local archeology. But I recall the old adage, "act in
haste, repent at leisure," since many of the phase definitions will not hold as
much water as one would like. At the same time, the future of phases seems safe
and assured, since it is possible to remedy past faults and look for clues that will
reveal social units in the surviving debris and garbage of archeological sites. And
in looking for this evidence for primitive communities, it will help to recall that
we are mainly building taxonomies--social taxonomies, at that. For too long, a
series of phases has been looked upon as a chronological scheme. But the taxa
should be our main interest, even if they are floating around freely in time with
no anchors, since they are all that remains of the societies we claim to be interested in. Dating them is secondary to finding them in the first place. So I
hope the trend of the future will be toward more detailed, but flexible, taxonomies. It is at the point where we have (re)created phases that truly interesting,
large-scale comparative studies of prehistoric societies begin. As for small-scale
studies of economics, religious behavior, and so forth, they can be done with no
phases at all.
In leavetaking, let me say that the question of new phases and their worth is
merely one part of a larger matter--the criticism of archeological units in
general, of all kinds. The creation of named complexes, the application of preexisting Mexican phase names in southernmost Texas, and related actions all
want critiquing, though my purpose here has been to concentrate only upon
recently defined phases.

Johnson ~ A Plague of Phases

21

Endnote
1 To review all the evidence for each of Prewitt’s five good phases, the ones I
have judged minimally adequate, is a chore too large for the present paper, given
its restricted theme. Each serious archeologist working in the central part of the
state will, in any case, want to conduct his own review, perhaps producing judgments somewhat different from mine. In recommending that the Driftwood, Twin
Sisters, and Round Rock phases should be accepted, I rely very much on associational data from the Loeve-Fox site (Prewitt 1982). But the case of the Austin and
Toyah phases is somewhat different, since they were originally defined long
before the era of phase definition (which began in 1976) now being considered.
However, since Prewitt added to their definitions, especially by describing
associations at Loeve-Fox, these two phases warrant a short discussion.
As defined, the Toyah phase or focus (Jelks 1962; Prewitt 1981) is too broad
a unit, since traits are included in it for which primary associations have not been
discussed in print. Nevertheless, the material from stratum 5 of the Kyle site
(41HL1) is extremely consistent and may represent the residue of a social group
recognizable at other sites. At the Loeve-Fox site there is also some new evidence
for a separate Toyah component (Prewitt 1982). The described components occur
in a tight area near the eastern margin of the Edwards Plateau, as well as in
immediately adjacent areas. The Austin phase or focus suffers from all the
weaknesses of the Toyah, but has one well-defined component with examples of
primary associations at the Loeve-Fox site (Prewitt 1982). The major published
sites are found in the eastern half of the Edwards Plateau and some distance into
the prairies to the east (Jelks 1962; Prewitt 1981). Rather than citing the published trait lists, anyone wishing to make use of the Austin and Toyah phases, or
refer to them in print, needs to review very carefully the instances of good
association among the artifact forms of each. This advice applies, as well, when
using any of Prewitt’s Archaic phases.

REFERENCES CITED
Bement, Leland C.
1986 Excavation of the late Pleistocene deposits of Bonfire Shelter, Val Verde
County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, University of Texas at
Austin, Archeology Series 1.
Binford, Lewis R.
1964 A consideration of archaeological reserach design. American Antiquity
29(4):425-441.
Bruseth, James E., and Timothy K. Perttula
1981 Prehistoric settlement patterns at Lake Fork reservoir. Southern
Methodist University and Texas Antiquities Committee, Texas
Antiquities Permit Series, Report No. 2.
Childe, V. Gordon
1950 Prehistoric migrations in Europe. Institutet for Sammenlignende
Kulturforskning, Ser. A. Forelesninger 20(5). Oslo.

Texas Archeological Society

22

Damon, P. E., C. W. Ferguson, A. Long, and E. I. Wallick
1974 Dendrochronological callibration of the radiocarbon time scale.
American Antiquity 39(2):350-366.
Dibble, Davis S.
n.d.
Arenosa Shelter: the descriptive archeology. Report in preparation
(MS) for the U.S. National Park Service, Rocky Mountain Region.
Files of David S. Dibble, Austin.
1978

The Infierno phase: evidence for a late occupation in the lower Pecos
River region, Texas. Paper presented at the 43rd annual meeting of the
Society for American Archaeology at Tucson, Arizona.

Goode, Glenn T.
1986 Personal communication.
Gould, Richard A.
1980 Living archaeology. New Studies in Archaeology, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Gunn, Joel, and Elton R. Prewitt
n.d.
Theory of culture change on broad ecotones. Manuscript on file at
Prewitt and Associates, Austin.
Hays, Thomas R. (editor)
1982 Archaeological investigations at the San Gabriel reservoir districts,
central Texas. 4 vols. Report to U.S. Army Corp of Engineers, Fort
Worth District, by Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas State
University, Denton.
Jelks, Edward B.
1961 Excavations at Texarkana reservoir, Sulphur River, Texas. Bureau of
American Ethnology, Bulletin 179.
1962

The Kyle site: a stratified Central Texas aspect site in Hill County,
Texas. Department of Anthropology, University of Texas (at Austin),
Archaeology Series, No. 5.

Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1967 Toward a statistical overview of the Archaic cultures of central and
Southwestern Texas. Texas Memorial Museum, University of Texas at
Austin, Bulletin 12.

Johnson, LeRoy, Jr., Dee Ann Suhm (Story), and Curtis D. Tunnell
1962 Salvage archeology of Canyon reservoir: the Wunderlich, Footbridge,
and Oblate sites. Texas Memorial Museum, University of Texas (at
Austin), Bulletin 5.
Kelley, J. Charles
1947 The cultural affiliations and chronological position of the Clear Fork
focus. American Antiquity 13(3):97-108.

Johnson m A Plague of Phases
1959

The Desert cultures and the Balcones phase: Archaic manifestations in
the Southwest and Texas. American Antiquity 24(3):276-288.

Kelly, Thomas C.
1960 The Crumley site: a stratified burnt rock midden, Travis County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 31:239-272 (printed
1961).
Lemonnier, Pierre
1986 The study of material culture today: toward an anthropology of technical
systems. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 5(2):147-186.
Lynott, Mark J.
1978 An archaeological assessment of the Bear Creek Shelter, Lake Whitney,
Texas. Archaeological Research Program, Southern Methodist University,
Research Report No. 115. Dallas.
1985

Personal communication.

McKern, W. C.
1939 The Midwestem taxonomic method as an aid to archaeological culture
study. American Antiquity 4(4):301-313.
Perttula, Timothy K.
1986 Personal communication.
Perttula, Timothy K., Bob D. Skiles, Michael B. Collins, Margaret C. Trachte,
and Fred Valdez, Jr.
1986 ’This everlasting sand bed": cultural resources investigations at the
Texas Big Sandy project, Wood Upshur counties, Texas, Prewitt and
Associates, Austin, Report of Investigations No. 52.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1976 The Rogers Spring site: 1974 investigations (MS). Texas Archeological
Survey, The University of Texas at Austin, Research Report No. 49.
1981

Cultural chronology in central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 52:65-89.

1982

Archeological investigations at the Loeve-Fox, Loeve, and Tombstone
Bluff sites in the Granger Lake district of Central Texas. Vol. 4 of
Archeological investigations of the San Gabriel reservoir district,
central Texas, edited by Thomas R. Hays. Report to U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers, Fort Worth District, by the Institute of Applied Sciences,
North Texas State University, Denton.

1983

From Circleville to Toyah, comments on central Texas chronology.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:201-238. (printed
1985).

23

24

Texas Archeological Society

Sackett, James R.
1982 Approaches to style in lithic archaeology. Journal of Anthropological
Archaeology 1:59-112.
1985

Style and ethnicity in the Kalahari: a reply to Wiessner. American
Antiquity 50(1):154-159.

Schambach, Frank F.
1982 An outline of Fourche Maline culture in southwest Arkansas. In Arkansas
archeology in review, edited by Neal L. Trubowitz and Marvin D. Jeter,
pp. 132-197. Arkansas Archeologica! Survey, Research Series,15.
Sorrow, William M., Harry J. Shafer, and Richard E. Ross
1967 Excavations at Stillhouse Hollow reservoir. University of Texas at
Austin, Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, 11.
Story, Dee Ann, and Darrell Creel
1982 The cultural setting. In The Deshazo site, Nacogdoches County, Texas,
edited by Dee Ann Story, vol. 1, pp. 20-34. Texas Antiquities Committee
and Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Austin, Texas Antiquities
Permit Series, Report No. 7.
Suhm (Story), Dee Ann
1959 The Williams site and Central Texas archeology. Texas Journal of
Science 11(2):218-250.
Tamers, M. A., F. J. Pearson, Jr., and E. Mott Davis
1964 University of Texas radiocarbon dates II. Radiocarbon 6:138-159.
Taylor, Walter W.
1948 A study of archaeology. Memoir 69, American Anthropological
Association.
Thurmond, J. Peter
1981 Archeology of the Cypress Creek drainage basin, northeastern Texas and
northwestern Louisiana. M.A. thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.
1983

Late Caddoan social group identification and sociopolitical organization
in the upper Cypress basin and vicinity, northeastern Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 54:185-200 (printed 1985).

Tunnell, Curtis D.
1962 Oblate: a rockshelter site. In Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir:
the Wunderlich, Footbridge, and Oblate sites, by LeRoy Johnson, Jr.,
Dee Ann Suhm (Story), and Curtis D. Tunnell, pp. 77-116. Texas
Memorial Museum, University of Texas (at Austin), Bulletin 4.
Turpin, Solveig A.
1985 Seminole Sink: excavation of vertical shaft tomb, Vale Verde County,
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, University of Texas at Austin,
Research Report No. 93.

Johnson ~ A Plague of Phases
Valastro, S., Jr., E. Mott Davis, and Craig T. Rightmire
1968 University of Texas at Austin radiocarbon dates VI. Radiocarbon
10(2):384-401.
Valastro, S., Jr., E. Mott Davis, and Alejandra C. Varela
1977 University of Texas at Austin radiocarbon dates XI. Radiocarbon
19(2):280-325.
1979

University of Texas at Austin radiocarbon dates XIII. Radiocarbon"
21(2):257-273.

Valastro, S., Jr., F. J. Pearson, Jr., and E. Mott Davis
1967 University of Texas at Austin radiocarbon dates V. Radiocarbon 9:439453.
Watt, Frank H.
1978 Radiocarbon chronology of sites in the central Brazos valley. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 49:111-138.
Weir, Frank A.
1976 The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph. D. dissertation, Department
of Anthropology, Washington State University, Pullman.
1979

Greenhaw: an Archaic site in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 50:5-67.

1986

Personal communication.

Wiessner, Polly
1983 Style and social information in Kalahari San projectile points. American
Antiquity 48(2):253-276.
1984
1985

¯

Reconsidering the behavioral basis for style: a case study among the
Kalahari San. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 3(3):190-234.
Style or isochrestic variation? A reply to Sackett. American Antiquity
50(1):160-166.

Willey, Gordon R., and Philip Phillips
1958 Method and Theory in American archaeology University of Chicago
Press, Chicago.
Young, Wayne C.
1982 Excavations at the Ram’s Head site, 41PC35, Pecos County, Texas.
State Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Publications
in Archaeology, Report No. 23.
n.d.

Manuscript containing radiocarbon assays from Prewitt 1983: Table 1,
with counts of associated dart and arrow points. Files of Wayne C. Young
and State Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Austin.

25

Texas Archeological Society
Manuscript containing radiocarbon assays from Prewitt 1983: Table 1,
with counts of associated dart and arrow points. Files of Wayne C.
Young and State Department of Highways and Public Transportation,
Austin.

The Clovis Paleoindian Occupation of Texas:
Results of the Texas Clovis Fluted Poh t Survey
David Y. Meltzer

ABSTRACT
A survey of private and public archeological collections in
Texas produced data on 205 Clovis points. Areas with high densities of Clovis points are the High Plains, or Llano Estacado, the
Balcones fault zone, and the eastern and coastal region of the state.
Areas low in Clovis points are the lower Plains and the Trans-Pecos
region. These patterns result from differences in site exposure and
from the differences in the amount of careful archeological work in
the areas, but may also reveal differential land use by Clovis groups.
Analysis of functional and technological attributes in this sample of
points convirms that Clovis adaptive strategies varied across the
state and indicates the strong possibility that Texas Clovis points
had multiple uses: many functioned as knives, and some may not
have been projectiles at all.

INTRODUCTION

One of the most striking facets of the North American Clovis Paleoindian
archeological record is that it comprises largely isolated fluted points not in site
contexts. What is true of North America is true of Texas as well; here the Clovis
archeological record is dominated by scattered, isolated surface finds (Hester
1977; Mallouf 1981). In general, Clovis Paleoindian sites are uncommon,
though admittedly less so on the western Plains than in the forests of eastern
North America (Meltzer 1984).
This pattern may be the result of 10,000 years of erosion and other natural
and cultural destructive processes that have irretrievably drowned, buried,
dispersed, or destroyed the visibility, integrity, or cohesion of later Pleistocene
Clovis sites. Certainly one cannot account for the Clovis archeological record
without recognition of these processes.
Yet there is a second, more intriguing possibility to consider: it is
conceivable that the archeological record of isolated fluted points accurately
reflects the structure of Clovis subsistence and settlement strategies. Clovis
groups may have participated only rarely in the highly structured spatial behavior
that produces sites. This possibility raises some significant questions: what
kinds of adaptive strategies produce an archeological record that comprises
primarily largely scattered isolated points?, why no other tools?, and what
Bulletin of the Texas Archeologieal Society 57 (1986)

28

Texas Archeological Society

implications does this have for Clovis subsistence strategies? are just a few.
Clovis studies have not yet reached the point where answers to these questions are at hand, but although as yet unanswered, they guide researchers to potentially valuable lines of inquiry. For one thing, they highlight the importance of
careful study and analysis of all the Clovis fluted points that litter the landscape.
This consideration prompted the Texas Clovis Fluted Point Survey.
Studies of fluted points are not uncommon, particularly in the eastern
United States (for the most recent ones see Brennan 1982; Seeman and Prufer
1982). However, with the notable exception of an unpublished paper prepared
some 20 years ago (Hester 1967) and a survey of the published record for Clovis
points (Prewitt 1985), recent systematic studies do not exist for Texas or, for
that matter, for any area west of the Mississippi. Indeed, as Dee Ann Story has
noted (1981:142), our views of the Clovis occupation of Texas are based more
on speculation than on substantive information; there has not been in the last
two decades a systematic study or even inventory of Texas Clovis materials. So
the first aim of this study was to compile information on the amount and distribution of Clovis remains from Texas, beginning with Clovis points, their most
readily identified element.
Just as there is no current inventory of Texas Clovis points, so too there is
no study of their typology. It has long been known that Clovis points show
marked morphological variability across the continent and even in single sites
(e.g. Haury 1953, Haury et al. 1959). But what causes the variability, whether
in use or in style, is unclear and probably will not become clear until, as Alex
Krieger noted (1954), the problem is addressed on a large scale through statewide
and state-by-state detailed typological studies of Clovis points. So the second
aim of this study is to document the morphological diversity in Texas Clovis
points. In order to insure that this effort was not constrained by the writer’s or
others’ biases as to what constitues a Clovis fluted point, the analysis included
all non-Folsom fluted points. Basally thinned Plainview points were not included in the study.
Such a study has implications that go beyond simply detailing point
diversity. Take, for example, the matter of Clovis subsistence strategies. Although Clovis groups probably scavenged or occasionally killed mammoths,
there is no evidence that Clovis groups were solely specialized big game hunters.
But this is not surprising. As a host of authors have argued (Bryant and Sharer
1977; Collins 1976; Johnson 1977; Johnson and HoUiday 1984; Meltzer 1984;
Meltzer and Smith 1986; Shafer 1977; Story 1981), there are good theoretical reasons to hypothesize that Clovis groups probably practiced a mixed foraging or
generalized hunting and gathering, adaptation rather than a specialized big-gamehunting adaptation.
This suggestion, in turn, has significant archeological implications. It has
been assumed that the Clovis archeological record of scattered, isolated surface
finds represents the remains of highly mobile hunters. Yet the points themselves are rarely found in unequivocal association with faunal remains (Hester
1977:173). More important, the points may not be hunting implements. So the

Meltzer ~ Clovis Paleoindian Occupation

29

third aim of this study was to detect whether these points were used as anything
but projectiles and whether their distribution, when combined with paleoenvironmental data, would provide a glimpse into the foraging and gathering strategies in which they once functioned.
It was for these reasons that the Texas Clovis Fluted Point Survey was
undertaken.
THE TEXAS CLOVIS FLUTED POINT SURVEY:
METHODS AND BIASES
Any research project that aims to gather data on the abundance, distribution,
and diversity of Texas Clovis fluted points faces certain obstacles. The distribution of Clovis points in public and private collections is similar to their distribution in archeological settings, and the points often occur in isolation without meaningful contexts, so few archeologists are able to see many of them.
For these reasons collection of data for this study moved along two fronts.
All available published information on Texas Clovis points was recorded,
and as many points in private and public collections as was feasible were examined. These collections include the Haynes Collection at the Institute for the
Study of the Earth and Man at Southern Methodist University in Dallas, the collections at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory at The University of
Texas at Austin, the Bissell Collection at the Museum of the Southwest in Midland, and the collections at the Plains/Panhandle Historical Society Museum in
Canyon. These collections included Clovis points from several sites, though it
should be noted that many of the Clovis points found in archeological sites in
Texas are intrusive. See, for example, the Clovis points at the Crockett Gardens
(Hays 1982), Doering (Wheat 1953), 41SP69 (Chandler 1982), Fred Yarbrough
(Johnson 1961), La Perdida (Weir 1956), Meier (Meier and Hester 1972, 1976),
and Obshner sites (Crook and Harris 1955), to name just a few that have been
published.
In addition, in order to obtain information from unpublished collections
throughout the state a questionnaire was sent to the membership of the Texas
Archeological Society in the April and July 1985 (Vol. 29, Nos. 2 and 3) issues
of the Society’s newsletter Texas Archeology. This source provided the bulk of
the data used here.
Any conclusions drawn in this kind of analysis are constrained by the degree
to which the sample is reliable and representative. It is therefore important to
identify and assess potential biases in the data that might skew interpretations.
Use of published data on Clovis points is complicated by two potential
biases. First, because not all researchers are aware of what kind of information is
useful, data needed for my purposes were not always available. This bias should
not unduly influence the analysis, since most published reports provide data on
point location, size, and shape, as well as a photograph or drawing.
Second, the published record of Clovis material tends to emphasize areas
where more extensive archeologieal survey and fieldwark have been conducted.
Indeed, a map of Clovis finds based solely on the published record is likely to

30

Texas Archeological Society

conform closely to the distribution of major reservoir and highway projects
undertaken in the last few decades. This bias is largely offset by the inclusion of
unpublished data from private collections.
Data gathered by questionnaire through the TAS Newsletter comes from an
extensive network linking avocational and professional archeologists throughout
the state, but it has its own biases. There are the usual problems that plague
any effort to gather data by questionnaire. Will everyone with Clovis points respond to the survey? Will they fill out the forms correctly? Collecting data by
questionnaire limits the quantity of information received for each artifact.
There are also limits on the kind of data available. It would be wholly
unreasonable to burden survey participants with an extensive list of functional,
morphological, and technological attributes to identify, measure, and calculate
and to demand precise drawings and technical quality photographs. The information requested in the questionnaire was therefore kept to a minimum, focusing
largely on the measurement and description of attributes that carry important
functional, technological, and stylistic information (Meltzer 1984). A copy of
the survey form is included here as Appendix A, and the data compiled in this
study are available from the author. (Any readers who have data on so-far-unreported Texas Clovis points are urged to fill out this form or a facsimile and send
it to me.)
There are additional more subtle biases that attend the use of this data set.
For one, the questionnaire directly reached only TAS members. Yet, as Elton
Prewitt has observed (1985), nonmembers--casual collectors and "hard-core"
pothunters--probably control the bulk of the private archeological collections in
Texas. Although many TAS members worked to record Clovis points in
undocumented collections of nonmembers, most of that material remains
unrecorded. (Let me urge again the continued effort to document the collections
that exist in the archeological twilight zone.)
Collections of TAS members also may not comprise a representative
sample of the Clovis archeological resources of Texas. Visibility of archeological remains varies by region, according to several factors, including vegetation, degree and kind of cultivation, the age of the surface, rate of erosion, and
so on. Similarly, the intensity of collecting and survey also varies by region.
Because of these biases, blank spots on an archeological distribution map may
not reflect the absence of Clovis occupation, but rather the absence of archeological collections or fieldwork. Similarly, areas of high density may well reflect
particularly vigorous collectors rather than abundant archeological resources. Interpreting the distribution of Clovis material is complicated by the fact that not
all parts of the state have been under the same degree of archeological scrutiny.
Although one can never wholly correct for these biases, they are offset to a
certain extent here; part of the bias is eliminated by the splendid and enthusiastic
participation of TAS members in completing the survey forms. Equally important, certain biases will fade out as "background noise," owing to the spatial unit
(the county) used in the analysis of the distribution of Clovis points. Using the
county of discovery as the basic unit for spatial patterning compensates for often

Meltzer m Clovis Paleoindian Occupation

31

incomplete data on the precise location of many Clovis points, insuring that uneven data do not unduly influence the analysis.
More specific matters of bias are addressed in the discussion of spatial
patterning below.

THE TEXAS CLOVIS FLUTED POINT SURVEY: RESULTS
The Texas Clovis Fluted Point Survey produced data on 205 points,
distributed rather evenly among 95 (37 percent) of the 254 counties in Texas
~able 1, Figures 1, 2). This number is probably on the low side, but what

Table 1. Texas Clovis Fluted Points by County
County
Andrews
Angelina
Armstrong
Atascosa
Bailey
Bandera
Bee
Bell
Bexar
Blanco
Borden
Bosque
Brazos
Brewster
Brown
Calhoun
Callahan
Cameron
Camp
Cherokee
Coke
Comanche
Concho
Cooke
Crosby
Dallam
Dallas

(Site)

(41BX 52)

(41CB 64)
(Obshner)

Number of Clovis
Fluted Points
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
2
4
2
1
1
1
1
2
2
1
1
12
3
3

Reference

TCFPS
TCFPS
TCFPS
Hester 1974 (Fig. l:j)
TCFPS
TCFPS
Sellards 1940
TCFPS
TCFPS
TCFPS, Orchard & Campbell 1954
TCFPS
TCFPS
TCFPS
Enlow and Campbell 1955; Hester 1967
TCFPS
Suhm and Jelks 1962
TCFPS
Hester 1967
TCFPS
Hester 1967, TCFPS
TCFPS
TCFPS
Stacey Reservoir Report, THC
Jensen 1968
TCFPS
TCFPS
TCFPS; Crook and Harris 1955
Suhm and Jelks 1962

32

Texas Archeologieal Society

County

(Site)

Number of Clovis

Reference

Fluted Points

Deaf Smith
Denton
De Witt
Dimmit
Duval
Ellis

Erath
Fayette
Floyd
Foard
Gaines
Garza
Gonzales
Gray
Grayson
Hamilton
Harris
Harrison
Hays
Henderson
Hill
Hockley
Hood
Howard
Jasper
Jefferson
Johnson
Jones
Kendall
Kerr
Lamar
Lubbock
McLennan
McMuUen
Marion
Martin
Medina
Midland
Montague
Moore

1
1
1
6
1
2
3
(Little Pin Oak) 3
(Meier)
1
(41FL6)
1
16
1
1
2
1
1
2
(Galena)
(Doering)
5
(Spring Lake)
4
1
2
1
1
3
2
10
(McFaddin)
2
1
1
1
2
(Lubbock Lake) 1
3
2
4
2
1
5
(Scharbauer)
1
6

(Lewisville)

Suhm and Jelks 1962
Crook and Harris 1957
Prewitt, unpublished
Hester 1967, 1974 (Fig.l:a,c,f,g)
Hester 1967, 1974 (Fig.l:b)
TCFPS
TCFPS
Wilson
Meier and Hester 1972, 1976
TCFPS
Etchieson et al. 1979
TCFPS
TCFPS
Hester 1967
TCFPS
TCFPS
TCFPS
Hester 1967; Suhm and Jelks 1962
Wheat 1953
Hayner 1955, Hester 1967
TCFPS, Hester 1967
TCFPS
TCFPS
Parker, n.d.
Skinner and Rash 1969
TCFPS
TCFPS
TCFPS; Long 1977
TCFPS
TCFPS
Chandler 1983
TCFPS
TCFPS
Johnson 1983
TCFPS
Cooper 1974; Kelly 1983
Hayner 1955; TCFPS
TCFPS
TCFPS
TCFPS
TCFPS
TCFPS

Meltzer ~ Clovis Paleoindian Occupation
County
Navarro
Nolan
Oldham
Panola
Parker
Pecos
Roberts
Robertson
Runnels
San Augustine
San Patficio
Schackleford
Schleicher
Start
Swisher
Taylor
Titus
Travis
Tyler
Uvalde
Val Verde
Van Zandt
Victoria
Ward
Williamson

(Site)

Number of Clovis
Fluted Points

(41PN6)

(Miami)

(41SP69)

(La Perdida)
(McLean)
(Levi;
41TV139)
(41UV20)
(Fred
Yarbrough)

(Crockett Gar.)
Wilson Leonard)

Winkler
Yoakum
Zavala
Unknown
TOTAL

33

Reference

1
2
2
1
1
1
3
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
1
5
1
4

TCFPS
TCFPS
TCFPS
Surlock and Davis 1962
TCFPS
Hester 1967
Sellards 1952
TCFPS
Hester 1967, TCFPS
TCFPS
Chandler 1982, Hester 1980
TCFPS
TCFPS
Weir 1956
TCFPS
Ray 1930; Sellards 1952; TCFPS
TCFPS
Alexander 1963; Hester 1967

1
1
1
2

Suhm and Jelks 1962
Hester 1967
Greer 1968
Johnson 1961

1
3
2

Hester 1974 (Fig.l:i)
TCFPS
Hays 1982
TCFPS
TCFPS
TCFPS
Hester 1974 (Fig.l:d,e)

2
1
2
1
205

NOTES: TCFPS indicates that the source of the data was the Texas Clovis
Fluted Point Survey.
The listing of a site on this table does not indicate that all points in the
county came from that site.

34

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Map of Texas showing the occurrences of Texas Clovis fluted
county. Data from the Texas Clovis Fluted Point survey.

points

by

proportion of Texas Clovis materials it represents cannot be determined in any
statistical sense since so tittle is known of the relevant population parameters.
However, although 205 points may be only a fraction of the points
recovered or recoverable in Texas, it nonetheless becomes a substantial sample
when compared with tallies from two other surveys of Texas Clovis fluted
points. Systematic examination by Prewitt (1985) of 428 published and unpubfished site, survey, and salvage reports for the state of Texas resulted in a
list of 14 sites and 16 Clovis points. Thomas R. Hester has made a distributional study of Paleoindian points in Texas (Hester 1967), based on an inventory
of the published record and public and private collections. He recorded 50 Clovis
fluted points scattered among 31 counties in Texas. Although the Texas Clovis
Fluted Point Survey may not have produced data on all Texas Clovis points, the
sample is at least a fourfold increase over previous tallies.

Meltzer ~ Clovis Paleoindian Occupation

35

Figure 2.
Computer-generated map of Texas showing frequency of Texas Clovis
fluted points by County. The highest of the spikes, in Gaines County, represents
16 clovis fluted point occurrences.
Data from the Texas Clovis Fluted Point
Survey.

36

Texas Archeological Society
The Spatial Distribution of Texas Clovis Points

Of the 95 Texas counties with Clovis points, only three have produced more
than six points: two of these, Gaines and Crosby, are High Plains counties, and
the third, Jefferson, is a coastal county. In Crosby and Jefferson counties the
points come from relatively small sites, 41CB64 and McFaddin Beach respectively. In Gaines County the points were not in site contexts but were dispersed
throughout the county. The large number of points from Gaines county is apparently due to the fact that this county has been under more intense scrutiny
than have other areas of comparable size.
The three counties just mentioned notwithstanding, Clovis points are fairly
evenly distributed. Indeed, the average comes to roughly two points per county,
though the statistical mean in this case is somewhat misleading, inflated as it is
by the high numbers of points in the three counties mentioned. The modal
tendency in this case is more informative (Table 2); 51 of file 95 counties (54
percent) have only one Clovis point, and 87 percent (82/95) of all counties with
points have three or less.
Table 2.

Modal Distribution of Clovis Fluted Points by County

Number of Clovis Points
Number of Counties

1
51

2
23

3
8

4
4

5
3

6
2

<10
3

Oddly enough, not only do isolated Clovis points fail to cluster
significantly in any one county, they do not even appear to reflect the
distribution of Paleoindian sites--sites dated between 12,000 and 7000 B.P.
(Biessart et al. 1985:40) across the state. A comparison of the distribution by
county of isolated Clovis points with the distribution of Paleoindian sites (data
from Biessart et al. 1985:107-200, 203-214) reveals that there is no concordance
or correlation between the two (Kendall’s W=.0001 [n=95]; Kendall’s W was used
in this instance because of the large number of tied observations). For comparative purposes, there was nearly complete agreement in the frequency distribution
by county of Paleoindian sites and the total number of sites of any age (Kendall’s
W=.957 [n=95]). The distributions of isolated Clovis points and Paleoindian
sites by county across the state are unrelated.
One must exercise caution in drawing any conclusions of great moment
from this result, given the nature of the data being analyzed and possible distributional biases in the record of Paleoindian sites. But it is worth speculating
that this analysis lends credence to the suggestion raised earlier that there might
be something distinctive about the distribution of isolated Clovis points in comparison with the distribution of later Paleoindian material. Perhaps this in turn
indicates differences in settlement systems through the Paleoindian period.
Obviously this possibility warrants further inquiry, though such inquiry is
beyond the scope of this paper.
The number of points by county is also unrelated to collector activity, as
seen in a comparison of the distribution of Clovis points and collector activity

Meltzer ~ Clovis Paleoindian Occupation

37

(where TAS members reside is used as a proxy measure of where collecting
activity takes place, on the assumption that collecting tends to be done near
where one lives). If the distribution of points were a function of the intensity of
collector efforts (Hester 1977:173; Lepper 1983), then a map of the distribution
of Clovis points by county 0~igures 1, 2) would correspond to a map of TAS
aember residence by county ~igures 3, 4, Table 3 ). Comparison of Figures

Figure 3.
Map of Texas showing the occurrence of TAS members by county.
Membership data from TAS membership list, December 22, 1984.

1 and 2 with Figures 3 and 4 shows little overlap between Clovis finds and
membership. The two distributions are statistically unrelated(Kendall’s W=.221
for counties with both points and TAS members In=61]; Kendall’s W=.179 for
all counties with either TAS members or points [n=171]); one would expect the
reverse if the number of Clovis points were a function of the amount of

38

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 4. Computer-generated map of Texas showing frequency of TAS members
by county. The highest of the spikes, in Harris County, represents 105 TAS
members. Membership data from TAS membership list, December 22, 1984.

collecting activity. There may be a relationship between the distribution of
archeological finds and collector activity, but the relationship is not evident in
this analysis. Low numbers of fluted points in counties of high membership
density (e.g. Bexar, Dallas, Denton, Harris, and Travis) are probably not a result
of recovery bias. But although the presence or abundance of Clovis points per
county is not a direct function of the presence or abundance of TAS members per
county, there still remains the possibility that the absence of TAS members in a
given county may account for an absence of Clovis points in that county.

Meltzer ~ Clovis Paleoindian Occupation
Table 3.

County
Anderson
Andrews
Angelina
Aransas
Armstrong
Atascosa
Bailey
Bandera
Bastrop
Bee
Bell
Bexar
Blanco
Borden
Bosque
Bowie
Brazoria
Brazos
Brewster
Briscoe
Brown
Caldwell
Calhoun
Callahan
Cameron
Camp
Cass
Chambers
Cherokee
Childless
Coke
Collin
Colorado
Comal
Comanche
Concho
Cooke
Coryell
Crockett
Crosby
Dallam
Dallas
Dawson
Deaf Smith
Denton

Frequency of TAS Membership and Texas
Clovis Fluted Points by County.

TAS
Members
1
3
3
1
1
2
0
2
1
3
12
85
0
0
0
3
8
12
3
2
2
1
4
0
2
1
1
5
2
1
0
7
1
4
0
0
3
2
4
1
0
65
2
2
67

39

Clovis
Points
0
2
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
2
1
1
1
0
0
1
2
0
4
0
2
1
1
1
0
0
1
0
2
0
0
0
2
1
1
0
0
12
3
3
0
1
1

County
De Witt
Dimmit
Duval
Ector
Ellis
E1 Paso
Erath
Fayette

Fisher
Floyd
Foard
Fort Bend
Gaines
Galveston
Garza
Gillespie
Gonzales
Gray
Grayson
Gregg
Grimes
Guadalupe
Hamilton
Harris
Harrison
Hays
Henderson
Hidalgo
Hill
Hockley
Hood
Houston
Howard
Hunt
Hutchinson
Irion
Jasper
Jefferson
Jim Wells
Johnson
Jones
Kaufman
Kendall
Kerr
Kimble

TAS
Members
1
0
0
6
1
20
7
0
1
6
0
6
0
8
1
1
1
0
1
2
1
2
0
105
0
7
0
2
1
0
2
2
1
1
3
1
2
11
1
4
0
1
5
9
1

Clovis
Points
1
6
1
0
2
0
3
3
0
1
1
0
16
0
1
0
1
2
1
0
0

13
2
5
4
1
0
2
1
!
0
3
0
0
0
2
10
0
2
1
0
1
0

40

Texas Archeological Society

County
Kleberg
Knox
Lamar
Lampasas
La Salle
Lavaca
Liberty
Limestone
Live Oak
Lubbock
McLennan
McMullen
Marion
Martin
Matagorda
Maverick
Medina
Midland
Milam
Mills
Mitchell
Montague
Montgomery
Moore
Morris
Nacagdoches
Navarro
Nolan
Nueces
Ochiltree
Oldham
Orange
Palo Pinto
Panola
Parker
Parmer
Pecos
Polk
Potter
Randall
Roberts

TAS
Members
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
14
15
0
1
0
2
1
3
29
1
2
1
0
15
2
1
4
4
0
4
2
1
3
2
0
2
1
4
1
9
16
0

Clovis
Points
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
3
2
4
2
0
0
1
5
0
0
0
1
0
6
0
0
1
2
0
0
2
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
3

County

TAS
Members

Robertson
Runnels
Sabine
San Augustine
San Ptricio
San Saba
Schacldeford
Schleicher
Sherman
Smith
Somervell
S tart
Stonewall
Sutton
Swisher
Tarrant
Taylor
Terry
Throckmorton
Titus
Tom Green
Travis
Tyler
Upshur
Uvalde
Val Verde
Van Zandt
Victoria
Ward
Washington
Webb
Wharton
Wichita
Williamson
Wilson
Winlder
Wood
Yoakum
Young
Zavala
Unkown

0
0
1
0
4
1
0
1
1
4
1
0
!
2
0
49
5
1
1
2
15
98
1
1
1
3
0
8
1
1
7
5
19
10
1
0
1
1
2
1
0

NOTE: Membership data from TAS Membership List, December 22, 1984.
Number of Texas counties = 254
a. Texas counties with TAS members and 0 Clovis points = 76
b. Texas counties with TAS members and Clovis points = 61
c. Texas counties with Clovis points and 0 TAS members = 34
d. Texas counties with 0 Clovis points and 0 TAS members = 83

Clovis
Points
1
2
0
1
2
0
1
2
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
5
0
0
1
0
4
1
0
1
1
2
1
3
0
0
0
0
2
0
2
0
1
0
2
1

Meltzer ~ Clovis Paleoindian Occupation

41

In a plot of Clovis points by county certain broad patterns emerge. Points are
found from southernmost Cameron County to far northwestern Dallam County, so
in a general sense they cover the entire state of Texas. But they do not cover the state
evenly; there are clusters of contiguous counties with and without Clovis points.
Briefly, the pattems are summarized below (see Figures 1 and 2). Regional designations Figure 5) follow the geographic and cultural boundaries in The Handbook of
Texas Archeology (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks 1954).
1) There is an apparent concentration of Clovis points in the Plains/Panhandle
region, specifically in the Llano Estacado or High Plains of West Texas (Brown et
al. 1982).
2) There is a scarcity of Clovis points on the lower Plains (Brown et al. 1982);
Clovis points are uncommon in a north-south swath 100-km (60-mile) wide and
more than 600 km (400 miles) long just to the east of and below the Llano Estacado.
3) The Trans-Pecos region is lowest in the state in both abundance and density
of Clovis points.

N

Figure 5. Map of Texas showing the geographical features mentioned in this report. From
Erwin Raisz, Landforms of the United States, 1939, Revised 1941.

42

Texas Archeological Society

4) Clovis points occur frequently and are rather evenly distributed in a slightly
elliptical pattern of contiguous counties extending through Central Texas, from
Uvalde County in the southwest to Bell County in Central Texas.
5) Clovis points appear at first glance to be relatively scarce in the coastal
region, but some concentrations are found there together with some areas of
apparent high versus low densities of point materials.
6) An apparent abundance of Clovis points has been recorded from East Texas.
Table 4.

Frequency and Density of Clovis Fluted Points by Region

Region"

Plains/Panhandle
High Plainsb
Lower Plains
Central
East
Coast
Southwest
North Central
Trans-Pecos
Unknown

No. of
Points
73
66
7
59
22
19
13
12
4
1

Area
(m2)
65,388
41,965
23,423
67,235
26,765
21,527
21,683
24,719
34,797
0

Clovis Points
(10,000 m2)
11.2
15.7
3.0
8.8
8.2
8.8
6.0
4.9
1.1
0

NOTE: Data on area compiled from Arbingast et al. 1976:78, 79
a All regional divisions except High Plains and lower Plains from Suhm et al. 1954
b High Plains and lower Plains divisions by Brown et al. 1982

The density of Clovis material (Table 4) in the Plains/Panhandle area of West
Texas is the highest, by an order of magnitude, in the state. Archeological visibility
in the area is high, owing to low vegetation cover and extensive tracts of wheat, grain
sorghum, and cotton (Arbingast et al. 1976). S urveys and collecting for Paleoindian
remains in the area have also been more common here than in other parts of the state.
It was on the Llano Estacado that the Clovis occupation was first discovered and
systematically described (e.g. Howard 1935, Sellards 1952). Since that time the
area has been scrutinized by archeologists on almost an annual basis.
As a result, there is an extensive record of Clovis material from the High Plains,
indeed over one-third (73/205) of all Clovis points in Texas come from this region.
In late Pleistocene times the area was undergoing substantial vegetational change.
As parklands gave way to extensive grasslands (Bryant and Holloway 1985), a wide
variety of Plains floral and faunal resources would have been available, particularly
in well-watered settings. Based on both site data and admittedly sketchy information from this survey, Clovis points in this area are found near fossil lakes and
marshes and, of course, in association with the draws that today are dry but in the
Pleistocene carried substantial amounts of water, perhaps in the form of beaded
lakes, across the Plains.

Meltzer ~ Clovis Paleoindian Occupation

43

Lithic resources on the Llano Estacado, an area blanketed by extensive Quaternary deposits, are limited to highly localized outcrops or exposures of the Caprock
along its west, north, and east margins (Collins 1971:92; Hester 1975:254; Johnson
and Holliday 1984:67; Holliday and Welty 1981:202). Clovis projectile points
from the Llano Estacado recorded by the Texas Clovis Fluted Point Survey were
made from a variety of rocks including Alibates agatized dolomite, Tecovas (or
Quitaque) jasper, Edwards chert, and, in the northern counties, Dakota quartzite
(see also Hester 1975:254,255). Unidentified cherts cover a veritable rainbow of
colors and a wide range of quality, but no points made from obsidian were recorded
(see also Holliday and Welty 1981).
But more important than the diversity of the raw material is the condition of the
Clovis points. Johnson and Holliday (1984:67) have suggested that the limited
availability of lithic resources on the Llano Estacado led Paleoindian groups to
conserve their raw materials through reworking and reuse of artifacts. The data
gathered here support this suggestion.
The relative scarcity (Table 4) of Clovis points in a broad, north-south swath
on the lower Plains (east of and below the Caprock of the Llano Estacado is
intriguing, but the lack of Clovis debris may be more apparent than real. Examination of the data (Table 4, Figures 3, 4) reveals that there are few TAS members living
in this 100-to-660-km (60-to-400- mile) corridor, which stretches from Hall and
Childress counties in the north to Sterling and Coke counties in the south. The
rolling plains and mesquite savanna here probably have not been as intensely
surveyed as have other parts of the state.
Perhaps equally important is the fact that even Archaic sites in this corridor are
covered by thick overburden. The most striking example of this is a series of hearths
associated with chipping debris buried some 8 to 9 meters (24 to 27 ft.) below the
surface in the Elm Creek Drainage (see Ray 1930:50, 51; Ray 1940; Figure 6). If
this extraordinary report is correct, it demonstrates the potential depth of deposits
in the alluvial valleys of the region. In these areas of deeply buried Pleistocene
deposits Clovis materials will be less visible than in other parts of the state.
Obviously, further work is needed on the surface age and amount of deposition in
this corridor.
Fewer Clovis points have been found in the Trans-Pecos region than in any
other part of Texas and, given its size, these few points translate into an extremely
low Clovis point density (Table 4). The significance of the low frequency and density figures is unclear. It is conceivable that Clovis materials are there in abundance
but simply havenot yetbeen found, since surface visibility is low from the TransPecos eastward onto the Edwards Plateau, a region where livestock ranches
occupy large tracts of desert scrub and (further east)juniper-oak-mesquite savanna.
In addition, many large tracts in this area simply have not been surveyed for
archeologieal remains (Hedrick 1985) and research in the area has been concentrated on sites of later periods (Hester 1967). So the blank spot on the map may result
from incomplete sampling.
Nonetheless, it is possible that Clovis groups did not occupy the area in great
numbers. Clovis Paleoindian remains are scarce even in the more intensely surveyed parts of the Trans-Pecos (Collins 1976; Mallouf 1981, !985), suggesting that

44

Texas Archeological Society

further survey work may not produce a substantial addition to the Clovis record.
Perhaps this should be expected, for, owing to severe environmental constraints on
human adaptation, later Paleoindian and prehistoric occupations are only "scattered
thinly" throughout the region (Mallouf 1985:100). During the terminal Pleistocene
the Trans-Pecos had more water and was more habitable than it is today (Mallouf
1985:16), but theprocess of PoStglacial warming and drying was already underway,
and by latest Pleistocene times the area probably could support only the kinds of
dispersed and fairly mobile populations that occupied the Trans-Pecos in later
periods (MaUouf 1981:134).
The distribution of Clovis points through Central Texas forms an ellipse along
the east edge of the Edwards Plateau, the Balcones Fault zone. During the glacial
period the area supported a mosaic of deciduous and boreal plant and animal taxa,
but toward the end of the Pleistocene there was steady warming with a corresponding reduction in forest cover and expansion of grasslands (Bryant and Shafer
1977:14). The Texas Clovis Fluted Point Survey produced little data on the precise
settings of Clovis point finds, but the evidence suggests that most were found along
streams or on terraces. Prewitt (1984:8) found a similar pattern in the San Gabriel
drainage where most sites were on terraces near springs.
In fact, S hiner (1983) has observed that many Clovis and later Paleoindian sites
and high concentrations of Paleoindian lithic materials occur along the Balcones
Fault zone, particularly at spring heads that emerge at intervals where aquifers
breach the fault. He infers that the high density of archeological material at these
sites is the result of continuous occupation by Clovis groups who exploited the
water, plant, and animal resources that were available yearround at the springs
(Shiner 1983:5, 6). Shiner’s suggestion is a provocative departure from the common belief that Clovis groups were highly mobile, and appears to rest on sound theoretical principles: sedentary occupations, although uncommon among hunting and
gathering groups, are possible when resources in a small area are abundant, reliable,
and readily available.
However, an additional, equally important resource occurs along the Balcones
Fault zone that influences the character of the archeological record, raising a
question as to the validity of the evidence for a sedentary occupation. The same
geological process that created the springs also exposed extensive deposits of chertbearing Cretaceous limestone of the Fredericksburg Group, producing an abundance of high-quality chert in the area. Data collected by the Texas Clovis Fluted
Point Survey on rock types used in point manufacture in this area confirm the dominance of the local Edwards cherts. It would be unreasonable to suggest that Clovis
settlement patterns were determined by the presence of chert deposits, but certainly
the chert deposits would have been a focal point in the settlement system and, more
important, would have survived as a highly visible, spatially concentrated component of the archeological record.
When stone is abundant, a substantial archeological record can be produced by
a series of brief periods of occupation. Repeated visits to quarry or spring sites will
produce interleaved components that, in terms of the sheer amount ofarcheological
debris, mimic a single more sedentary, longterm occupation. Confirmation of the

Meltzer ~ Clovis Paleoindian Occupation

45

provocative suggestion that Clovis and later Paleoindian groups were almost
sedentary (Shiner 1983:6) can be achieved only by an empirical demonstration that
goes beyond the observation that lithic materials are there in abundance. Johnson
and Holliday (1984:67) reach a similar conclusion.
The figures (Table 4) for the abundance and density of Clovis materials on the
Coastal Plain are relatively high. Roughly half of the points came from McFaddin
Beach in Jefferson County, an extensively collected locality that has yielded a
startling diversity of projectile points and a late Pleistocene fauna (Long 1977).
Although it is now on the shoreline, it was far inland during Clovis times, on a vast
plain crossed by the Sabine-Neches, Trinity, and smaller rivers (Long 1977:6).
Artifacts are not in situ, but are found on the modem beach, where they have been
deposited after being eroded out offshore and carried in by currents.
Like the McFaddin Beach material, most of the Clovis points recorded from the
coastal region were found in counties bordering the Gulf (Calhoun, Cameron,
Jefferson, San Patricio), often just inland, on the beaches, or by drainages that run
into the Gulf (e.g. Chandler 1982). The modem Gulf beaches are a Holocene
phenomenon, representing the high water mark ofpostglacial sea levels; the Pleistocene coastline is under water. So any association between Clovis points and modem
beaches is significant only for what that association reveals about Clovis materials
now lying beneath coastal waters on drowned river terraces and other landforms.
Unfortunately, the paleoenvironmental habitat of the Coastal Plain during the
Pleistocene is virtually unknown (Bryant and Holloway 1985).
So the relatively high density of Clovis remains in the coastal region (Table 4)
is both an underestimate and an overestimate: an underestimate insofar as there is
probably a substantial coastal Clovis record under the Gulf waters; an overestimate
insofar as the count from McFaddin Beach significantly inflates the density figure
for Clovis remains from the inland counties (Bee, Harris, Victoria) of the presentday coastal region, which, in Pleistocene times, were even farther inland. For if the
density of Clovis remains is calculated for only the inland counties, the figure--3.9
points in 2,600,0000 hectares (10,000 square miles)--is less than half the figure
for the entire coastal region.
It is relevant to add here that although the bulk of the Clovis points from the
coastal region are made of Edwards chert from Central Texas (Long 1977), Clovis
groups may not have traveled to the Central Texas outcrops for their stone supplies.
Several rivers that empty into the Gulf traverse the Edwards Plateau and the
Balcones Escarpment, transporting cobbles and gravels of Edwards chert downriver. Although these gravels rarely reach the Gulf Coast (Story 1986), Edwards
chert used on the coast may have been transported substantial distances from the
outcrops by nonhuman means. It would be valuable to determine whether Clovis
lithic debris in Coastal Plain sites shows evidence of rounded, water-smoothed, or
pebblelike cortical flakes (Meltzer 1985).
A Clovis point made of Alibates "flint" that has been reported from McFaddin
Beach (Long 1977:7) shows little of the wear and attrition that is routinely seen on
points that are far from their sources, so it seems oddly out of place on the Gulf Coast
of Texas.

46

Texas Archeological Society

The pine and oak forests of East Texas, particularly those in Marion, Harrison,
and Panola counties along the Louisiana border, have yielded a number of Clovis
points. But 64 percent (14) of the 22 Clovis points from the area recorded in this
survey have only minimal documentation, and eight of those have no documentation at all (Hayner 1955). In 1955, using Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks’s just-published
Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology (1954), Hayner (1955) identified
eight Clovis points from Marion and Harrison counties, together with 23 Meserve
points that he thought, based on the presence of flutes (Hayner 1955:241), were
reworked from original Clovis forms. Unfortunately, none of the pmlgorted Clovis
points are illustrated. There is no reason for immediate rejection of Hayner’s point
identifications, but there is room for question. The three Marion County points were
purchased from farm hands and could not be documented. Moreover, since the
frequency of points for these two counties is rather high (Table 1), a substantial
number of Clovis points should have turned up in the 30 years between his report
(Hayner 1955) and this survey. Recent work in this area has yielded but one Clovis
point, certainly not what is expected from Hayner’s report, so these data should be
used with caution.
At the time of the Clovis occupation the paleoenvironmental setting of East
Texas was probably a complex woodland with a wide variety of deciduous trees and
perhaps an occasional boreal species such as spruce. In all likelihood this forest did
not support large herds of megafauna (Shafer 1977), save on the north and east
edges, where the forest gave way to prairie (Story 1981). Clovis points, together
with later Paleoindian material, have been reported from along the North Sulphur
River in Lamar County, in an area that has yielded and continues to yield fossils of
late Pleistocene megafauna, including mammoth, mastodon, horse, and bison, but
there are no associations of Clovis points with the megafauna. If we accept Shafer’s
(1977) argument (independently developed in Meltzer and Smith 1986), it is likely
that any such associations will be rare in this area. Clovis groups in complex forests
were probably generalized foragers.
Function, Technology, and Style in Texas Clovis Points
The patterning evident in the distribution of Texas Clovis points raises an
interesting question. Are there corresponding differences in point style, function,
or technology? Based solely on paleoenvironmental data, one would anticipate
significant differences between the Clovis occupations of, for instance, the Llano
Estacado andthoseofthe forestedeast (Bryant and Shafer 1977). Those differences
could be manifested in any of a number of ways, including point function or use,
technology, and style.
FuncHon

Ideally, a study of the function of Texas Clovis fluted points would include
analysis of macro- and microwear patterning. Unfortunately, such analysis was
impossible, since most of the data were compiled from questionnaires. This constraint does not preclude the possibility of making statements about tool use, but
instead forces the consideration of alternative, less direct clues for information on

Meltzer ~ Clovis Paleoindian Occupation

47

wear, such as grinding, breakage, and reworking patterns.
In keeping with pattems in other regions--grinding is present on virtually all
Clovis points, east and west (Meltzer 1984)--basal and lateral grinding was
reported on 96 percent (147/153) of the points recorded for the survey. Grinding is
an important element of point function, for it prolongs the life of hafts by preventing
the edges of hafted tools from cutting the bindings that attach the tools to the shafts.
Judge (1973:263, 264) has suggested that the purpose of grinding---especially
lateral grinding--is to allow the final fitting of the point to the haft, and in their
studies of the manufacturing process of Folsom points, Tunnell (1977) and others
(e.g. Frison and Bradley 1980) support this suggestion, showing that grinding is one
of the last stages in point production.
It has also been argued (Frison 1978; Goodyear 1974) that heavy basal and
especially lateral grinding is necessary where a biface is used for cutting. When a
halted tool is used as a knife, the haft area is under extreme lateral stress while the
blade is being worked back and forth in the process of cutting, so butchering tools
require strong hafts with heavy binding (Frison 1978:336).
By contrast, a projectile does not make the same demands on the haft, for the
projectile haft has only a split second of critical use-life. The stress in a projectile
is directed predominantly against its base, making basal--but not lateral--grinding
a critical need for effective use.
Heavy lateral and basal grinding on Texas Clovis points suggests their use as
knives as well as projectiles. This is not to suggest that all laterally ground points
are knives. The fact that heavy lateral grinding would enhance the value of these
points as knives does not mean that it did serve that purpose. Rather, instances of
heavy lateral grinding on projectiles are important because they indicate that the
points may have been used as knives as well as, or instead of, projectiles. But it
should be noted here that the sharp-bladed points from the Casper site, a Hell Gap
bison kill in Wyoming, although heavily ground along their lateral edges, were used
as projectiles and have impact fractures, and they have no wear patterns indicating
their use as knives (Frison 1974:71, 82).
Analysis of the breakage patterns in Texas Clovis fluted points revealed that
only 37 percent (66/180) were complete; the remaining 63 percent (114/180) were
broken (Table 5). This frequency of breakage is comparable to fluted point samples
from other areas (Meltzer n.d.). If anything, the Texas Clovis Fluted Point Survey
recorded fewer broken points than would be expected in a sample of this size, but
it is not suprising when the difficulty of identifying Clovis fragments is considered.
Although 10 breakage categories used here are largely morphological (a
limitation imposed by the available data), they do have implications for technology
and use. Broken tips, bases, and comers, for example, result from actions that occur
when points are unprotected by hafts, during both manufacture and use; tips and
corners are structurally the weakest parts of a point. In contrast, lateral snaps,
reworking, and impact fractures most often occur when the points are buried in the
hafts and commonly result from actions that occur while the points are in use. The
pattern of use-related breaks supports the suggestion that these points may also have
been knives, and reveals variation across Texas in point use.

48

Texas Archeological Society
Table 5.

Breakage Patterns of 25 Texas Clovis Fluted Points
Frequency

Type of Break
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

No break (point complete)
Base only (lateral snap)
Reworked (distal end)
Distal tip broken
Base only (lateral snap) with broken comers
Broken comers
Distal tip broken with broken comers
Broken base
Distal tip broken with broken base
Reworked (distal end) and impact fracture
Edge damage
Total

66
34
23
20
7
9
8
4
4
4
1
180

Lateral snaps (Figure 6) were the most common breaks recorded in this sample
(Table 5) and also in a larger sample of points from the eastern United States
(Meltzer n.d.). A lateral snap commonly results when an artifact is bowed beyond
the limits of its tensile strength (Frison and Bradley 1980:43), which can happen
during either manufacture or use (Bradley 1974:197). In the Texas Clovis Fluted
Point Survey sample nearly all of the snaps occur at the furthest extent of fluting

0

lcm

Figure 6. Drawings of Clovis fluted points with lateral snaps: left, from Borden County;
right, from Brazos County. Drawn by David Meltzer and Suzarme Siegel.

Meltzer m Clovis Paleoindian Occupation

49

and lateral grinding, indicating that the breaks occurred during use, while the basal
parts of the points were anchored in hafts.
Determining the kind of use that caused these breaks is not a simple task, since
lateral snaps can result from use of hafted points as either projectiles or knives
(Frison 1974:90, 91; Frison and Stanford 1982:105-107; Purdy 1975:134, 135).
However, breakage patterns in Hell Gap projectile points from the Casper site
(Frison 1974:72-80) shed some light on this matter. Frison (1974:90, 91) convincingly argues, based on independent evidence including site context and impact fractures, that the Hell Gap points are projectiles that snapped as a result of impact and
shock. Examination of the Hell Gap points revealed that less than 15 percent broke
at the widest part of the blade, which would coincide with the furthest extent of the
haft; most snapped across the lower part of the tang, which would have been buffed
deep inside the haft; and a smaller percentage snapped above the haft (Frison
1974:90).
Without claiming that this pattern is universal, for much more data and,
perhaps, experimentation are needed for such a claim, it is reasonable to assume that
all lateral snaps caused by impact and end shock do not occur at the same place on
the point, and only rarely do they occur at the distal end of the haft. Based on that
assumption, breakage patterns in the Texas Clovis points take on some significance,
since in that sample lateral snaps almost uniformly occur at or just beyond the distal
end of the haft. In other words, although impact-caused snaps occur at virtually any
place along the point--but most often within the haft--Texas Clovis points
routinely broke at or just beyond the edges of the hafts. This is the break pattern that
would be expected in points that were levered in hafts. If the levering that produced
these breaks occurred when the hafted points were used as knives, it can be inferred
from their breakage patterns that the Texas Clovis points were multifunctional.
Judge (1974:126) has suggested that resharpening and reworking is indicative
of multifunctional points. These attributes also occur in areas where stone supplies
are scarce. Several reworked points were recorded in the Texas Clovis Fluted Point
Survey (Figure 7), but 12.8 percent (23/180) is probably low, since in many cases
it was dificult to determine from the sketches and photographs whether a point had
been reworked or resharpened. The obvious clues: abrupt changes in thickness,
interruptions in the flaking patterns, distal ends that taper asymmetrically in outline
and cross section, and remnants of breaks (Bradley 1982:196), were not always
evident. When there was any doubt, points were not included in the reworked
category.
Reworking generally took place while the points were still set in the hafts.
Statistical analysis, using the T test, indicates that width and basal width are
identical in points with and without reworking (Table 6, a, b), but that points with
and without reworking differ significantly in their overall length (Table 6, c),
clearly demonstrating that reworking affects the point length. The constancy in
width of points with and without reworking is explained by the fact that reworking
took place while the points were still socketed in the hafts, so the sides were
protected.

50

Texas Archeological Society

O.
i

lcrn
m

Figure 7. Drawings ofreworked Clovis fluted points: left, from Hays County; right, from
Monahans Sand Hills. Drawn by David Meltzer and Suzarme Siegel.

This finding is corroborated by Bradley (1982:196, 197), who states that the
width:length ratios might be useful for distinguishing points with reworking from
those without. Statistical analyses of Texas Clovis data indicate a significant
difference in the width:length and base-width:length ratios of points with and
without reworking (Table 6, d, e). Overall, width:length ratios are higher in points
that have been reworked (Figure 8). These data indicate that it may be possible to
use measures of point width:length ratios to determine reworking when direct
examination of the points is not possible.
Impact fractures, "small to medium-sized flakes originating at the tip of the
point and extending along the face of the blade toward the base" (Wheat 1979:90;
Bradley 1974:194), are rare in the Texas Clovis point survey (seen on only two
percent of the points). Impact fractures (Figure 9) result from the kind of compressive stress that would be applied to the distal end of a point that made forceful impact
with a highly dense material such as bone. Frison (1978:153, 173) indicates that
such fractures can result from the use of both hand-thrust spears and thrown spears,
suggesting that the angle of attack and impact is as important as the degree of force
in producing this breakage pattern. However, experimental work by Dennis Stanford (1985) indicates that hand-thrust spears may not produce sufficient force to
cause impact fractures, so more work is needed on this problem.

Meltzer ~ Clovis Paleoindian Occupation
Table 6.

Comparison of Metric Dimensions in Points
With and Without Reworking
Number

Mean Standard
Deviation
cm

a) Width (T=0.36, df =767, p=0.717)
Reworking absent
Reworking present
b) Base width (T=0.21, dr=76, p=0.833)
Reworking absent
Reworking present
c) Length (T=5.19, df=77, p <0.001)
Reworking absent
Reworking present
d) Width:length ratio (T=-8.15, df=77, p <0.001)
Reworking absent
Reworking present
e) Base width:length ratio (T=-6.93, df=76, p <0.001)
Reworking absent
Reworking present
NOTE:

51

cm

54
25

2.718
2.672

.465
.593

53
25

2.289
2.264

.437
.565

54
25

7.463
4.963

2.129
1.654

54
25

.381
.564

.081
.113

53
25

.327
.478

.005
.102

T - T value
df - Degrees of freedom
p - Probability

Impact fractures are common in Plains Paleoindian and Archaic bison-kill sites
(e.g. Bradley 1982:197; Frison 1974:83; Frison 1978:125, 153, 167, 173, 200;
Frison et al. 1976:44-46; Stanford 1978:92; Wheat 1979:90), even in those that
predate the earliest record--ca. 9000 B.P. (Wheat 1979:135, 136)--for use of the
atlatl. Yet impact fractures are rare, often absent, in most of the classic Clovis
mammoth-kill sites, including Blackwater Draw locality No. 1 (Hester 1972:9799), Dent (Wormington 1957:45), Domebo (Leonhardy 1966:21), Lehner (Haury
etal. 1959:16, 17, but see specimen A-12684), McLean (Sellards 1952:39), Miami
(Sellards 1952:25, 26), and Naco (Haury 1953:8, 9).
The scarcity of impact fractures among Texas Clovis points again implies that
few of these points were in fact used as projectile points. All points with impact
fractures have been subsequently reworked and repointed, as is common on bisonkill sites (Frison 1978:200; Wheat 1979:90).
Points from the Llano Estacado have been reworked more often (20 percent)
than have points from any other region, and impact fractures on Clovis points occur
only in those from the Llano Estacado. This hints at possible functional differences
in Clovis points from different parts of the state, differences that could be easily
explored by analyzing breakage patterns by regions (Table 7),

52

Texas Archeological Society

Wldth:Length Ratio

-I

Unreworked
Reworked

Poinf

Poinf

15-

rI
|

0.1

0.2

0.3

OA

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

Base-Width:Length Ratio
Figure 8. Histograms ofv alues for width: length and base-width:length ratios in Clovis fluted
points with and without reworking.

Meltzer ~ Clovis Paleoindian Occupation

0

53

lcm

Figure 9. Drawing ofreworked Clovis fluted point from Gaines County with impact fracture.
Drawn by David Meltzer and Suzanne Siegel.

distinguishing between use and nonuse breaks (see Bradley 1982:197, 198 for a
similar discussion).
Chi-square analysis of the data in Table 7 indicates that breakage patterns do
not differ significantly by region, but there is some variation in certain regions.
Adjusted residual values 0~veritt 1977), read as standard normal deviates, reveal
that two regions vary significantly from the expected pattern: in the PanhandlePlains region, use breaks occur more often than would be expected by chance
(adjusted residual value=2.12, p=0.0170). By contrast, in the coastal region, whole
points and points with nonuse breaks occur more often than would be expected by
chance (adjusted residual value=2.73, p=0.0032).
Those data indicate that reworking is relatively high among points from the
High Plains and further corroborates the suggestion by Johnson and Holliday (1984)
that a shortage of abundant raw material in the region led to use and reuse of the
existing supplies. The disproportionately high number of whole points and nonuse
breaks from the coastal region may be a function of more abundant raw material, a
tendency to collect and record data only on complete or nearly complete points, or

54

Texas Archeological Society

different uses for these points.
One feature not identified in Table 5, but worthy of mention, is that none of the
points examined had the needle-sharp tips and blade edges characteristic of points
in kill sites Orison 1978:337,338).

Table 7.

Frequency of Whole Points and Nonuse Breaks
Versus Use Breaks by Region

Region
Plains-Panhandle
North-Central
East
Central
Coastal
Southwest
Trans-Pecos

Whole Points and
Nonuse Breaks~
38
7
9
34
15
7
1

(-2.08)
(0.11)
(0.18)
(0.38)
(2.74)
(0.11)
(-0.35)

Use Breaksb
34
4
5
19
1
4
1

(2.08)
(-0.11)
(-0.18)
(-0.38)
(-2.74)
(-0.11)
(0.35)

NOTE: Adjusted residual values
Chi-square=9.72, df=6, 0.10 < p < 0.25
a Comprises categories 1, 4, 6-9, and 11 from Table 5
b Comprises categories 2, 3, 5, and 10 from Table 5
Based on the heavy grinding of the edges and bases of these points, the high
frequency of lateral snaps and bend breaks, the scarcity of impact fractures, the
incidence of reworking, and the absence of sharp tips or blades, there is a strong
possibility that many of the Texas Clovis fluted points had multiple uses as projectiles and as long-handled hafted knives. Following a different line of argument,
Judge (1973:128, 1974:126) reaches a similar conclusion, but it is here suggested
that at least some of the High Plains Clovis points were used primarily as projectiles,
as evidenced by substantial impact fractures. This conclusion must be considered
tentative, based as it is on only indirect evidence of tool function. Further intensive
work is needed on wear patterns on Texas Clovis points.
Technology
Only half a dozen points recorded in the Texas Clovis Fluted Point S urvey
were manufacturing rejects, so few direct clues were provided concerning Clovis
point technology and manufacturing processes. It is curious that so few unfinished
points or preforms were recorded by the survey; the scarcity of unfinished Clovis
points from Central Texas is especially puzzling since point production often took
place at stone sources, resulting in deposits of manufacturing debris and failed
efforts. In areas without abundant stone sources, manufacturing failures probably

Meltzer ~ Clovis Paleoindian Occupation

55

were carried along and used as other tools in order to stretch the supply of the scarce
resource. So it is likely that careful examination of stone source localities will yield
evidence of point manufacture as well as a record of used-up points abandoned at
the quarry after replenishment of the stone supply (e.g. Gramly 1980).
There are three different techniques for fluting projectile points: (1)
Enterline or multiple fluting using guide flakes, (2) straight-based fluting from a
beveled edge, and (3) fluting from a prepared nipple or striking platform (see
Meltzer 1984:277-282 for a detailed discussion). Multiple fluting of the sort that
produces three flute scars--two of which guide the third and main flute--appears
to be characteristic of reworking and refluting or perhaps of less proficiency on the
part of the knapper. In any case, multiple fluting--three or more flutes--is rare in
Texas Clovis points (Table 8).
Table 8.

Number of Flute Scars on Texas Clovis Fluted Points

0
Obverse
Reverse

5
17

Number of Flute Scars
1
2
3
114
91

29
37

10
9

Total
4
0
3

158
157

Most Texas Clovis fluted points are singly fluted. Single flutes can be produced
from a straight base or from an isolated raised platform. Fluting from a straight base
begins with the preparation of a striking platform by beveling one of the faces of the
base. On this prepared platform a blow is struck, detaching the flute from the face
of the point. This procedure is repeated on the opposite face. In the other process,
fluting is accomplished after the careful preparation of a convex or nipple-shaped
striking platform on the base. This platform serves as the seat for indirect percussion, which removes the channel flake and creates the flute scar ~oberts 1935;
Tunnell 1977).
The primary distinguishing attributes of these techniques are the slriking
platforms, which are commonly lost in the process of point production. However,
the process used for fluting can be recognized from the morphology of the flute scar
(Judge 1973:250). In general, short, flakelike---length less than twice the width-flute scars result from striking a straight base; long, bladelike---length twice the
width--flute scars result from fluting off a prepared nipple.
Among the points reported in this study, each of these techniques is represented
in roughly equal numbers. Of the 205 points, 59 have bladelike flute scars and 57
have flakelike flute scars. In 10/205 cases both blade and flake fluting are present;
no data are available for the remaining 79 points in the sample.
Summary statistical data are presented for length, maximum width, maximum
width to base, basal width, and thickness (Table 9). Two of these--base and width
thickness--clearly are dictated by the technology of hafting and demonstrate that
the manufacture of Texas Clovis points was a remarkably precise activity. There
were evidently very specific limits within which the finished products could vary.

Texas Archeological Society

56

Table 9.

Variable
Length
Width
Width to Base
Base Width
Thickness
NOTE:

Statistical Data for Selected Variables
of Texas Clovis Points

n

Mean

153
153
130
143
135

5.75
2.73
2.79
2.34
.73

Standard
Minimum Maximum Deviation
1.10
1.71
.00
1.38
.07

13.04
4.80
6.50
4.50
2.80

2.71
.49
1.27
.47
.24

Kurtosis
-.311
1.369
.025
2.343
40.014

Table includes all points for which measurements are available.
All values except number of observations (n) and kurtosis are in
centimeters.
Broken points are included in these calculations. Reanalysis excluding broken
points significantly changes the values only forLength, since most breaks affect
the length of the point. Mean value of Length in unbroken points is 7.42 cm,
standard deviation, 2.13 cm.

This is most readily seen in the positive kurtosis values. Kurtosis measures the
relative peakedness or flatness of cases distributed about a mean. Normal distributions have a kurtosis value of zero; in distributions where the curve is flat (cases
spread widely about the mean), kurtosis values are negative. In cases where the
distribution is more akin to a spike (cases clustered narrowly about the mean),
kurtosis values are positive. As is evident in Table 9, kurtosis values for width, base
width, and especially, thickness are significantly positive. As mentioned above,
because of the reworking of the points, length values vary much more.
These statistics indicate that substantial precision was required in the manufacture of Clovis points; certain dimensions of the points are remarkably standardized.
But why the precision? Judge (1973:264) and others, among them Keeley
(1982:800), have argued that more time was required to produce a haft than to make
a tool, at least when that tool was flaked rather than ground. The obvious implication
of this argument is that points were made for hafts, and not vice versa, and that hafts
were maintained and curated through the lifetimes of several points. Making a new
tool was more efficient than making a new haft.
The disparity in cost between tool making and haft making would have selected
for production of many points to fit a few hafts. The resulting standardization in the
manufacturing process is reflected in the high kurtosis values for the hafting
dimensions: width, basal width, and thickness.
Style
Analysis of stylistic diversity in Texas Clovis fluted points and of the
relationship of Texas Clovis points to fluted points in other regions is incomplete,
but some preliminary comments can be made.

Meltzer ~ Clovis Paleoindian Occupation

57

The great diversity in the morphology of Texas Clovis fluted points (Figure 10)
covers forms that mimic both the classic Clovis style and other fluted points.
Someofthe Texas forms resemble points from the east and particularly the southeast

0

lcm

0

lcm

Figure 10. Drawings of Texas Clovis fluted points showing examples of morphological
variation. Left to right, from McLerman, McLerman, Winkler, and unknown counties.
Drawn by David Meltzer and Suzarme Siegel.

(though there are no Cumberland forms in Texas), but it is noteworthy that the most
common point form in the eastern United States----parallel-sided, flake-fluted,
elliptical-based points with no "ears"-- is not well represented in Texas, comprising
less than 5 percent of the points in the Texas Clovis Fluted Point Survey. The Texas
sample is dominated by points with tapered sides, and bases that are significantly
narrower than the widest parts of the blades.
Presumably this morphological diversity reflects changes in point styles over
space and time, but analysis of attributes such as base size and shape failed to
produce any significant spatial patterning that might in turn reveal variation in time.
The presence or absence of"ears" on the points may have a nonrandom distribution
in space. Apparently there are no "ears" on the points from Central Texas, but the
significance of this is unclear. Fluting technology is the attribute of fluted points that
has the greatest promise for significant variation over space and time. Certainly,
fluting from a prepared nipple--producing bladelike flute scars--appears to come
late in the Clovis sequence, and by Folsom times it was the dominant fluting
technology. However, as noted earlier, fluting from a straight base and from a
prepared nipple occur in roughly equal frequency in the sample of Texas Clovis

58

Texas Archeological Society

points, and there is no apparent difference in the distribution of blade and flake
fluting. Blade and flake fluting appear to be as common on the High Plains as in
other parts of the state.
The fact that blade and flake fluting overlap in space does not mean that they
necessarily overlap in time. It would be interesting to pursue--through further
analysis of the points and through excavation--the hypothesis that flake fluting
occurs earlier than blade fluting in Clovis points. If this could be demonstrated, it
would provide a valuable indicator of age in the absence of other dating.
It has been suggested that certain exotic fluted point styles, specifically
Cumberland points, are found in Texas. In 1935, E. B. Howard (1935: Plates 30(1)
and 37(1) illustrated two Clovis points from Texas. One was a classic Cumberland:
a large, blade-fluted, fish-tailed point, but no information was given on its provenience, though Howard credited Cyrus Ray and W. E. Baker as having provided him
with Texas specimens. Hester (1967:13) later reported that the Galena site in Harris
County yielded a point"quite similar to the so-called Cumberland Fluted point" of
the eastern United States. There is no way to determine whether the points
mentioned by Howard and Hester are one and the same. Whether they are the same
or not, this identification poses a problem, for there is no evidence that any other
Cumberland forms have been found in Texas. Since Cumberland points are
restricted largely to Ohio, Tennessee, and Kentucky, they would be well out of their
range in Texas, so in both cases an effort should be made to determine whether the
points were actually found in Texas.
SUMMARY

AND

CONCLUSIONS

Aided by the membership of the Texas Archeological Society and through
studies of museum and private collections, the Texas Clovis Fluted Point Survey
recorded data on 205 Clovis points from 95 Texas counties. It is not known how
representative that sample is of Clovis material recovered in Texas, since an
unknown number of points lie out of sight in undocumented collections. And it is
not known how representative that sample is of the Clovis archeological record in
Texas, since not all parts of the state have been under the same degree of archeological scrutiny, nor do all areas have equivalent exposures of Pleistocene deposits. These limitations notwithstanding, the Texas Clovis Fluted Point S urvey data
provide a measure of the density and distribution of Clovis points across the state.
Texas Clovis points are distributed evenly by county (mode of one per county).
Only a few counties have disproportionately large samples; these are probably
counties in which there are particularly active collectors. Texas Clovis points are
concentrated generally on the High Plains ~lano Estacado), along the Balcones
Fault zone, and in north-central and East Texas. The concentrations in north-central
and East Texas may reflect the high intensity of collecting activities there.
However, the dense concentration of points on the High Plains and along the
Balcones Escarpment probably has archeological significance.
In contrast, Clovis points are relatively scarce off the caprock in the lower
Plains (Brown et al. 1982), in the Trans-Pecos region, and perhaps in the coastal

Meltzer m Clovis Paleoindian Occupation

59

area. These patterns may simply reflect sampling patterns or, in the case of the
coastal regions, geological processes that have obscured the archeological record.
There is a great deal of morphological diversity in Texas Clovis points, but no
clear-cut patterns can be found in the distribution of particular attributes across the
state. This does not preclude the possibility that such attributes may ultimately
reveal temporal patterning, but the possibility remains that differences such as
differences such as those in fluting technology will help sort out some of the
temporal variation in the Texas Clovis occupation.
It appears from this study that many or most of the Texas Clovis fluted points
were multifunctional, serving as both handled or hafted knives and projectiles.
These uses are in keeping with the patterns of breakage, reworking, fracture, and
grinding evident in this sample. Obviously, more detailed macro- and microwear
studies are needed.
Although the Texas Clovis Fluted Point Survey has uncovered a substantial
sample of data on the Texas Clovis occupations, much is still unknown. Attention
should be paid to several parts of the archeological and paleoenvironmental record,
including documenting the now undocumented collections of Clovis Paleoindian
materials, gathering detailed paleoenvironmental data on Texas in the late Pleistocene (Hester 1977), gathering more precise information on locations of Texas
Clovis material and relating that information to paleotopography and paleoenvironments, identifying primary and secondary sources of lithic raw material and
documenting the use of those sources by Clovis groups, examining macro- and
microwear traces on Clovis points in order to understand tool use better, and
continuing to explore the spatial and temporal variation of the Texas Clovis
Paleoindian occupation through stylistic variations in the points.
The call then is not simply for new data, but also for better refinement of
existing data. Obviously many of the most pressing issues regarding the Clovis
Paleoindian occupation can be answered only by the discovery and careful excavation of Clovis sites. In the interim, much can be learned from the distribution of
Clovis points across Texas.

60

Texas Archeological Society
APPENDIX:

TEXAS CLOVIS FLUTED POINT SURVEY FORM

TEXAS CLOVIS FLUTED POINT SURVEY
1. Please lxace the outline of the fluted point on the back of this page. Be sure to show
the outline of the flute(s). A photocopy of the point would be fine. Please be sure
to show both faces.
2. Maximum length

(cm or inches)

3. Maximum width

(cm or inches)

4. Length from base to site of maximum width
(If widest part of point is at the base, this value is 0).
5. Maximum thickness
6. Width of base

(cm or inches)

(cm or inches)
(cm or inches)

(On items (2) through (6), above, be sure to circle whether measurements
were taken in centimeters [cm] or inches).
7. Is the base of the point ground smooth? Yes
8. Are the sides of the point ground smooth? Yes

No
No

9. If the answer to (8) is Yes, please show the extent of the grinding on your sketch
or photocopy of the point (see figure).
10. How many flute scars are on each face of the point?
a. Flute scars on obverse: 1 2 3 4 (circle one)
b. Flute scars on reverse: 1 2 3 4 (circle one)
11. Is the largest flute scar on the obverse face twice as long as it is wide?
Yes No
12. Is the largest flute scar ont he reverse face twice as long as it is wide?
Yes No
13. Location where point was discovered:

&lease be as specific as possible: include County name)

Meltzer ~ Clovis Paleoindian Occupation

61

14. Associated artifacts or features found with point:

15. Describe the color and type of stone material:

Please print your name and address: Please mail the completed form to
David J. Meltzer
Department of Anthropology
Southern Methodist University
Dallas, Texas 75275
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The Texas Clovis Fluted Point Survey could not have been accomplished
without the cooperation of scores of individuals who provided information on their
Clovis points, reported on points in other collections, allowed me to gain access to
Clovis points in their charge, or otherwise insured the success of the survey. The
list is long, and it is with gratitude that I acknowledge the help of
Tom E. Adams
Strain Armstrong
Darrell E. Ballew
Eunice Barkes
Milton Bell
James Boone
Chris Callaway
Denny Carley
C. K. Chandler
Darrell Creel
Wilson W. Crook, Jr.
E. Mott and Beth O. Davis
E. David Dorchester
Julian D. Driscoll
Bransford Eubank
R. E. Forrester
Riley and Susan Goates
Kelly Hardin
Billy R. Harrison
Keith L. Harrison
L. Cliff Hazlewood
Jack Hedrick
Jesse J. Howard
Nancy Kenmotsu

Russell J. Long
David Lusk
O. M. McMillan
H. Edward Mattox III
A. D. Maynig
Bo Nelson
Peter W. Nichols
Hoss and LaVeme Newsome
Wayne Parker
Victor Palyak
Donald J. Priour
Albert J. Redder
Richard A. Rose
Joel L. Shiner
Darral M. Shirey
S. Alan Skinner
J. B. Sollberger
Paul Tanner
Richard Walter
David J. Warner
Frank A. Weir
Joseph B. Wilson
James H. Word
Bill Young

62

Texas Archeological Society

I also thank Joe Saunders for assistance in compilation and analysis of data, and
Michael B. Collins, Keith C. Glasscock, Thomas R. Hester, Elton R. Prewitt, Dennis
J. Stanford, and Dee Ann Story for sharing with me their data and extensive
knowledge of the Texas Clovis occupation. Tom Hester, Vance T. Holliday, and
Henry T. Wright provided valuable comments on an early draft.
This paper is for my wife Suzanne, who, during her maternity leave, kindly
drafted many of the figures, and my daughter Emily Dana, who graciously delayed
her arrival until her father had finished the revisions.
REFERENCES

CITED

Alexander, H. J.
1963 The Levi site: a pale.o-Indian campsite in Central Texas. American Antiquity
28:510-528.
Arbingast, Stanley A.; L. G. Kennamer; R. H. Ryan; J. R. Richardson; W. L.
Hezlep; L. T. Ellis; T. G. Jordan; C. T. Cranger, and C. P. Zlatkovich
1976 Atlas of Texas. Bureau of Business Research, The University of Texas At Austin.
Biesaart, L. A., W. R. Roberson, and L.C. Spotts
1985 Prehistoric archeological sites in Texas: a statistical overview. Office of the State
Archeologist, Special Report [Number] 28. Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Bradley, Bruce
1974 Comments on the lithic technology of the Casper site materials. In The Casper Site,
edited by G. Frison, pp. 191-197. Academic Press, New York.
1982 Flaked stone technology and typology. In The Agate Basin site, edited by G. C.
Frison and D. J. Stanford, pp. 181-208. Academic Press, New York.
grennan, e.

1982

A compilation of fluted points of eastern North America by count and distribution:
an AENA project. Archaeology of eastern North America 10:27-46.

Brown, T. K. Killen, H. Simons, and V. Wulfkuhle
1982 Resource protection planning process for Texas. Texas Historical Commission,
Austin.
Bryant, V. M., and R. G. Holloway
1985 A Late-Quaternary paleoenvironmental record of Texas: an overview of the pollen
evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quarternary North American Sediments,
edited by V. M. Bryant and R. G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists, Austin.
Bryant, V. M., and H. J. Shafer
1977 The Late Quaternary paleoenvironment of Texas: a model for the archeologist.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 48:1-25.
Chandler, C. K.
1982 Paleo-Indian projectile points form San Patricio County, Texas. La Tierra 9(3):2628.

Meltzer ~ Clovis Paleoindian Occupation
1983

63

Paleo-Indian projectile points from Kendall County, Texas. LaTierra 10(4):36_37.

Collins, M. B.
1971 A review of Llano Estacado archaeology and ethnohistory. Plains Anthropologist
16:85-104.
1976

Terminal Pleistocene cultural adaptations in southern Texas. In Habitats humains
anterieurs a l’Holocene en Amerique, edited by J.B. Griffin, pp. 102-135. UISPP,
Nice, France.

Cooper, B.
1974 A fluted point from McMullen County, Texas. La Tierra 1(3): 18.
Crook, W. W., and K. Harris
1955 Scottsbluff points in the Obshner site near Dallas, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 26:75-100.
1957

Hearths and artifacts of early man near Lewisville, Texas and associated fauna.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 28:7-97.

Enlow, D., and T. N. Campbell
1955

Some Paleo-Indian projectile points from the southeastern periphery of the Great
Plains. The Panhandle-Plains Historical Review 28:29-38.

Etchieson, G., R. Speer, and J. Hughes
1979 Archaeological investigations in the Crowell Reservoir area, Cottle, Foard, King,
and Knox counties, Texas. Report submitted to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
by the Archaeological Research Laboratory, Killgore Research Center, West
Texas State University, Canyon, Texas.
Everitt, B.S.
1977 The analysis of contingency tables. Chapman and Hall, London.
Frison, G.
1974 Archaeology of the Casper site. In The Casper Site, editedbyG. Frison, pp. 1-111.
Academic Press, New York.
1978

Prehistoric hunters of the High Plains. Academic Press, New York.

Frison, G. C., and B. Bradley
1980 Folsom tools and technology at the Hanson site, Wyoming. University of New
Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Frison, G. C., and D. J. Stanford
1982 Agate Basin components. In The Agate Basin Site, edited by G.C. Frison and D.J.
Stanford, pp. 76-134. Academic Press, New York.
Frison G., M. Wilson, and D. Wilson
1976 Fossil bison and artifacts from an early Altithermalperiod arroyo trap in Wyoming.
American Antiquity 41:28-57.

64

Texas Archeological Society

Goodyear, A. C.
1974 The Brand site: a techno-functional study of a Dalton site in northeast Arkansas.
Arkansas Archaeological Survey, Research Series, [Number] 7.
Gramly, R. M.
1980 Raw materials source areas and "curated" tool assemblages. American Antiquity
45:823-833.
Greer, J. W.
1968 Some unusual artifacts from Val Verde county, Texas. Texas Journal of Science
20:183-192.
Haury, E. W.
1953 Artifacts with mammoth remains, Naco, Arizona. 1. Discovery of the Naco
mammoth and associated projectile points. American Antiquity 19:1-14.
Haury, E. W., E. B. Sayles, and W. Wasley
1959 The Lehner mammoth site, southeastern Arizona. American Antiquity 25:242.
Hayner, E. W.
1955 Research in East Texas projectile points. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 26:235-243.
Hays, T.
1982 Archaeological investigations of the San Gabriel Reservoir Districts, Central
Texas. Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas State University, Volume 1.
Hedrick,L
1985 Personal communication
Hester, J. J.
1972 Blackwater Locality No. 1. A stratified early man site in eastern New Mexico. Fort
Burgwin Research Center, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
1975

Paleoarchaeology of the Llano Estacado. In Late Pleistocene environments of the
southern High Plains, edited by F. Wendorf and J.J. Hester, pp. 247-256. Fort
Burgwin Research Center, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

Hester, T. R.
1967 A distributional study of Paleo4ndianprojectile point types inTexas. Unpublished
paper, on file with the author.
1974

On fluted points and South Texas archaeology. Texas Archeology, The Newsletter
of the Texas Archeological Society, 18(2):11-14.

1977

The current status of Paleoindian studies in southern Texas and northestern
Mexico. In Paleoindian Lifeways, edited by E. Johnson, pp. 169-186. Texas Tech
University, Lubbock.

1980

A survey of Paleo-lndian archaeological remains along the Texas Coast. In Papers
on the Archaeology of the Texas Coast, edited by L. Highly and T. R. Hester, pp.

Meltzer ~ Clovis Paleoindian Occupation

65

1-12. Special Report No. 11, Center for Archaeological Research, The University
of Texas at San Antonio.
Holliday, V., and C. Welty
1981 Lithic tool resources of the eastern Llano Estacado. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 52:201-214.
Howard, E.B.
!935 Evidence of early man in North America. The Museum Journal 24 (2-3).
Jensen, H.
1968

Report on excavations at the Field Ranch site (X41CO-10) Cooke County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 39:133-146.

Johnson,

E.

1977

Animal food resources of Paleoindians. In Paleoindian Lifeways, edited by E.
Johnson, pp. 65-77. Texas Tech University, Lubbock.

1983

The Lubbock Lake paleoindian record. In Guidebook to the Central Llano
Estacado, edited by V.T. Holliday. Lubbock, Center for Arid Land Studies.

Johnson, E., and V. T. Holliday
1984 Comments on "Large Springs and early American indians" by Joel L. Shiner.
Plains Anthropologist 29:65-70.
Johnson, L.
1961 The Yarbrough and Miller sites of northeastern Texas, with a preliminary definition of the La Harpe Aspect. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
32:141-284.
Judge, W. J.
1973 Paleoindian occupation of the central Rio Grande Valley in New Mexico. University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
1974

Projectile point form and function in late Paleo-indian period assemblages. In
History and prehistory of the Lubbock Lake site, edited by C. Black, pp. 123-132.
Texas Tech University, Lubbock.

Keeley, L. H.
1982 Hafting and retooling: effects on the archaeological record. American Antiquity
47:798-809.
Kelly, T. C.
1983

The Brom Cooper Paleo-Indian collection from McMullen County, Texas. La
Tierra 10(3): 17-40.

Krieger, A. D.
1954 A comment on"Fluted point relationships," by John Witthoft. American Antiquity
19:273-275.

66

Texas Archeological Society

Leonhardy, F.
1966

Domebo: a Paleo-Indian mammoth kill in the prairie-plains. Contributions of the
Museum of the Great Plains, [Number] 1. Lawton, Oklahoma.

Lepper, B. T.
1983 Fluted point distributional patterns in the eastem United States: a contemporary
phenomena. Midcontinental Journal of Archaeology 8:269-285.
Long, R. J.
1977 McFaddin Beach. The Patillo Higgins Series of Natural History and Anthropology, [Number] 1, Spindletop Museum, Larnar Unviersity, Beaumont.
Mallouf, R. J.
1981 Observations concerning environmental and cultural interactions during the termi
nal Pleistocene and early Holocene in the Big Bend of Texas and adjoining regions.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 52:121-146.
1985

A synthesis of eastern Trans-Pecos prehistory. Unpublished Master’s Thesis,
Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas, Austin.

Meier, C. J., and T. R. Hester
1972 Notes on the Meier site, Fayette County, Texas. Bulletin of the Lower Plains
Archeological Society 3:69-72.
1976

Paleo-Indian artifacts from the Meier site, southeast Texas. LaTierra 3(1): 16-19.

Meltzer, D. J.
n.d.
Unpublished data
1984

Late Pleistocene human adaptations in eastern North America. Unpublished Ph.D.
dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of Washington, Seattle.

1985

On stone procurement and settlement mobility in eastern fluted point groups.
North American Archaeologist 6:1-24.

Meltzer, D. J., and B. D. Smith
1986 Paleo-Indian and early Archaic subsistence strategies in eastern North America. In
Foraging, collecting and harvesting: Archaic period subsistence and settlement in
the eastern Woodlands, edited by S. Neusius. Center for Archaeological Investi
gations, Southern Illinois University, Carbendale.
Orchard, C., and T. Campbell
1954 Evidences of early man from the vicinity of San Antonio, Texas. Texas Journal of
Science 4:454-465.
Parker, W.
Preliminary notes on a Clovis point associated with mammoth tusk
n.d.
fragments in Hockley County, Texas. Unpublished paper on file with the author.
Prewitt, E. R.
1984 Paleo-Indian archaeology: San Gabriel river drainage, Texas. Paper presented at
the 1984 meeting of the Texas Academy of Sciences, San Antonio, Texas.

Meltzer ~ Clovis Paleoindian Occupation
1985

67

Personal communication

Purdy, B.
1975 Fractures for the archaeologist. In Lithic technology: making and using stone tools,
edited by E. Swanson, pp. 133-141. Mouton, The Hague.
Ray, C. N.
1930 Report on some recent archaeological researches in the Abilene section. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 2:59-78.
1940

The deeply buried Gibson site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 12:223-237.

Roberts, F. H.
1935 A Folsom complex: preliminary report on investigations at the Lindenmeier site in
northern Colorado. Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections 94(4).
Scurlock, J., and W. Davis
1962 Appraisal of the archaeological resources of Toledo Bend Reservoir, Panola,
Newton, Sabine, and Shelby Counties, Texas; Sabine and De Soto Parishes,
Louisiana. Report submitted to the National Park Service by the Texas Archaeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas, Austin.
Seeman, M., and O. Prufer
1982 An updated distribution of Ohio fluted points. Midcontinenta! Journal of Archaeology 7:155-169.
Sellards, E. H.
1940 Pleistocene artifacts and associated fossils from BeeCounty, Texas. Bulletin of the
Geological Society of America 51:1627-1658.
1952

Early man in America. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Shafer, H. J.
1977 Early lithic assemblages in eastern Texas. In Paleoindian Lifeways, edited by E.
Johnson, pp. 187-197. Texas Tech University, Lubbock.
Shiner, J. L.
1983 Large springs and early American Indians. Plains Anthropologist 28:1-7.
Skinner, S. A., and R. Rash
1969 A Clovis fluted point from Hood County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:1-2.
Stanford, D.
1978 The Jones-Miller site: an example of Hell Gap bison procurement strategy. In
Bison procurement and utilization: a symposium, edited by L. Davis and M.
Wilson. Plains Anthropologist, Memoir 14:90-97.
1985

Personal communication

Texas Archeologieal Society

68

Story, D. A.
1981 An overview of the archaeology of EastTexas. Plains Anthropologist 26:139-156.
1986

Personal communication

Suhm, D. A., and E. B. Jelks
1962 Handbook of Texas archeology: type descriptions. Texas Archeological Society,
Special Publication !: 1-299.
Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An introductory handbook of Texas archaeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25.
Tunnell, C.
1977 Fluted projectile point production as revealed by lithic specimens from the AdairSteadman site in northwest Texas. In Paleoindian Lifeways, edited by E. Johnson,
pp. 140-168. Texas Tech University, Lubbock.
Weir, F.
1956 Surface artifacts from La Perdida, Start County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 27:59-78.
Wheat, J. B.
1953 An archaeological survey of the Addicks Dam basin, southeast Texas. River B asin
Surveys Papers 4, Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 154:143-252.
1979

The Jurgens site. Plains Anthropologist, Memoir 15.

Wilson, J.
1979 A preliminary report on the Little Pin Oak Creek site (41FY53): a campsite with
Clovis, Plainview, and subsequent artifacts in Fayette County, Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 50:135-140.
Wormington, H. M.
1957 Ancient man in North America. 4th ed. Denver Museum of Natural History,
Denver.

San Patrice and Dalton Affinities on the
Central and Western Gulf Coastal Plain
1t. Blaine Ensor

ABSTRACT
This paper recommends integrating the San Patrice phenomenon of
Texas and Louisiana as defined by Webb (1946), Webb, Shiner, and Roberts
(1971), and Duffield (1963) into a broader regional perspective. Recent research on the Gulf Coastal Plain of Alabama and Mississippi has produced
evidence for widespread similarities between San Patrice and Dalton in morphology, technology, and environment. Supporting data are presented for the
inclusion of San Patrice as a local Gulf Coastal expression of the eastern
Woodlands Dalton horizon, and evidence for a Dalton subhorizon marker is
discussed. Finally, a plea is made for the increased use of interregional taxonomic classifications and standard artifact descriptions.

INTRODUCTION
This paper attempts to place the San Pa~ice phenomenon of Louisiana and East
Texas as defined by Webb (1946) and Webb, Shiner, and Roberts (1971) into a
broader regional perspective. Recent syntheses and reviews of the archeology of
East Texas and Louisiana offer somewhat conflicting interpretations of San Patrice
and its cultural and chronological position (cf. Patterson 1980). The San Patrice
finds of East Texas and Louisiana have been variously associated with the Paleoindian period by Story (1981) and Webb, Shiner, and Roberts (1971), and with other
late Pleistocene-early Holocene manifestations by Shafer (1973, 1977) and Duffield (1963). Wallace (1982:221) discusses the overall cultural and chronological
placement of San Patrice occupations in Louisiana and also notes that in general,
San Patrice occupations have been designated terminal Paleoindian. Story (1981),
in her overview of East Texas archeology, considers San Patrice a part of the
Paleoindian period, although she points out that this is by no means certain. In basic
agreement with Sharer (1977), she indicates that the traditional Plains model of big
gmne hunting is probably not applicable in East Texas.
Duffield (1963:138) suggests that San Patrice points at the Wolfshead site in
East Texas are associated with a pre-Archaic manifestation that occurs before corner- and side-notched expanding-stem forms such as Edgewood and Neches River.
He further assigns San Patrice points to the same general time period with lanceolate
projectile points of the Paleoindian tradition. Webb, Shiner, and Roberts (1971:46)
state that the San Patrice assemblage at the John Pearce site is technologically closer
to Plains Paleoindian. Morse (1973:30) considers San Patrice a southern variant of
Dalton but notes that San Patrice is usually referred to as Paleoindian in the lower
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57 (1986)

70

Texas Archeological Society

Mississippi Valley. The general consensus, however, has been that data for
adequately distinguishing San Patrice from earlier, later, or contemporaneous
manifestations are not available (Patterson 1980). Radiocarbon dates and stratigraphic sequences are badly needed to aid in clarifying much of the conflicting data
(Story 1981).
Recently, Goodyear (1982) has argued for temporal placement of the Dalton
horizon in the eastern Woodlands between 10,500 and 9,900 years ago. Other estimates place the age of Dalton between 10,000 and 9,500 years ago (Walthal11980;
Ensor 1981). The Dalton horizon is believed by many to bridge the gap between
Paleoindian manifestations and later Early Archaic assemblages characterized by
comer- and side-notched bifaces. Projectile points resembling the Dalton type are
generally believed to date between 11,000 and 9,000 years ago over a wide area of
the Gulf Coastal Plain from the Mississippi River to East Texas and northward into
Oklahoma, Arkansas, and Missouri (Webb et al. 1971).
DISTRIBUTION OF SAN PATRICE AND DALTON SITES
ON THE GULF COASTAL PLAIN
Recent research on the Gulf Coastal Plain of Alabama and Mississippi has produced evidence of widespread similarity in patterns of cultural expression from
about 11,000-9,000 years B.P., or the terminal Pleistocene-early Holocene interface, over much of the southeastern United States (Ensor 1981, 1982; Brookes
1979). The distribution of Dalton, San Patrice, and related lanceolate forms across
the Gulf Coastal Plain (Figure 1)suggests that the Dalton horizon extends over much

OWER

I

2 WOLFSHEAD
3 JAKE MARTIN
4 JOHN PEARCE
S

WHATLEY

6 HEBE
I

PLANTATION

BRAND

S SLOAN
9 JOE

POWELL

t0

PACKARD

11

NUCKOLLS

12

STANFII--’LO-WORLE Y

13 TENSAW
t4

THE

CR[EK

ROCK HOUSE

15 HARDAWAY
16 HESTER

GULF

OF

MEXICO

200

Figure 1. Map showing selected San Patrice and Dalton sites in the central andwestemGulf
Coastal Plain. Drawn by Kathy Reese.

Ensor m San Patrice and Dalton Affinities

71

of East Texas and Louisiana.
Attempts at integrating the vast and largely unknown terminal Pleistoceneearly Holocene cultures of the Gulf Coastal Plain have been impeded by the lack of
comparative data and precise descriptive/taxonomic practices. Fenwick and
Collins (1975) point out that traditional archeological lithic analysis in the southeastern United States and Texas has often fallen short of producing the wellrounded studies needed to complement other data and permit in-depth interpretation
of cultural systems. The number of terminal Pleistocene-early Holocene sites on the
Gulf Coastal Plain that have been adequately described is still limited.
Recent work on the coastal plains of Alabama and Mississippi has provided
some initial insights into this largely unknown area. A stratigraphic sequence at the
Hester site (Brookes 1979) and data from the Joe Powell site in the Gainesville Lake
area of west-central Alabama (Ensor 1985), have provided much needed data on
terminal Pleistocene-early Holocene cultures on this part of the Gulf Coastal Plain.
Close technological and morphological affinities between San Patrice and Dalton
forms are apparent from these investigations.
The work of Clarence Webb and others at the Pearce site in northwestern Louisiana has clearly isolated an early lithic horizon consistent with Dalton morphologies on the coastal plains of Alabama and Mississippi (Webb et al. 1971). Westward
extensions of San Patrice are found in East Texas at the Wolfshead (Duffield 1963)
and Jake Martin sites (Davis and Davis 1960), among others.
The western limits of San Patrice forms, according to Webb, Shiner, and
Roberts (1971), occur in the Brazos River valley of east-central Texas, but they are
more common in East Texas. Morphologically similar forms such as Brazos Fishtail (Watt 1978) and Rodgers Side-Hollowed (Willey et al. 1978) from north-central
Texas reflect more of a Plains adaptation and should not be confused with the San
Patrice type. Local chronological constructs in Central Texas do not recognize San
Patrice as a major component (cf. Weir 1976; Prewitt 1981). Webb, Shiner, and
Roberts (1971), Gagliano and Gregory (1965), Thomas and Campbell (1978), and
Yarborougb (1981) have demonstrated that San Patrice and related forms are common throughout most of Louisiana, western Mississippi, and southern Arkansas (cf.
Morse 1973). Patterson (1980) has noted San Patrice points in Harris and Wharton
counties of southeastern Texas, and Greenwell (1984:129) has described an apparent San Patrice variant from coastal Mississippi.
MORPHOLOGICAL AND TECHNOLOGICAL RELATIONS
Dalton varieties from the Hester site in northeastern Mississippi (Brookes
1979) and the Joe Powell site in west-central Alabama (Ensor 1985) closely parallel
morphological and technological diversity found in the San Patrice Hope and St.
Johns varieties (Duffield 1963; Webb et al. 1971) from Louisiana and East Texas
(Figures 2, 3). Dalton varieties from Alabama and Mississippi include a lanceolate
version (Cochrane) and another (River Bend) with incipient side notching (Ensor
1985;Brookes 1979). Smith(1986:10-14)hasnotedthatearlyHoloceneprojectile
points, including Dalton and related forms, characteristically have been reshar-

72

Texas Archeological Society

pened. In the case of Dalton points, Goodyear (1974:19) demonstrates several different stages of bifacial blade modification. However, none of these appears to affect the haft element to a large degree. The designation of neither Dalton nor San
Patrice varieties is based herein on blade modification; both varieties of each type
have been resharpened, some with beveling. Rather, the variety designations are
determined by differences noted in haft element morphology. The cultural and
chronological significance of these differences is unclear, given the lack of stratigraphic data. At this time one can only make these distinctions and hypothesize
concerning their meaning. The two Dalton varieties defined for the Tombigbee
drainage may represent chronologically and spatially restricted forms. These may
prove eventually to be indicative of local or regional cultural groups and provide
markers for local phase definition. The varieties discussed by Webb, Shiner, and
Roberts (1971) appear to parallel the morphological variation found in Dalton
forms over much of the southeastern United States (Ensor 1985:39) and may represent differences in local phase content. Morse (1973) has noted a similar breakdown
of Dalton morphology in the lower Mississippi alluvial valley that includes both
lanceolate and side-notched variants. Coe (1964) has demonstrated similar morphological distinctions from North Carolina, where the Hardaway-Dalton and
Hardaway Side-Notched types are found in an early context below corner-notched
forms. As noted by Ensor (1985:39), these data indicate that there may be a broad
subhorizon marker within the Dalton horizon as it is currently defined.
The San Patrice Hope and Dalton Cochrane varieties (Figures 2, 3) have overall
morphological and technological similarities. They are basically triangular forms
with incurvate ground bases and no definite lateral haft-element modification.
Blade edges are straight, and most have been resharpened. There is strong evidence
that flutelike flakes have been removed from the basal edge of the San Patrice Hope
variety, but this is not characteristic of the Dalton Cochrane variety.
The San Patrice St. Johns and Dalton River Bend varieties (Figures 2, 3) also
have strong morphological and technological similarities. Both have incurvate to
recurvate ground basal edges, expanding lateral haft elements, and straight, tapered
shoulders. Blade edges are straight and intensively resharpened. Perhaps the most
striking similarity is in the removal of broad, flutelike flakes from the base. The
Dalton and San Patrice varieties are also similar in size.
Evidence for other close technological relations between Dalton and San
Patrice is also apparent. Technological similarities include the use of local chert
resources in tool manufacture and the use of flakes to make many tools such as
projectile points, hafted end scrapers, and other scrapers. By themselves, these
proposed similarities offer no direct basis for comparison, since they could be
applied to many prehistoric lithic assemblages in North America. However, when
viewed from a regional perspective, they do reveal some interesting trends. As
noted by Smith (1986:14, 15), early Holocene lithic assemblages in the Southeast
are dominated by resharpened projectile points and demonstrate the use of bipolar
flaking to produce usable flake blanks and to recycle tools. Woodworking tools
such as the Dalton adze (Morse and Goodyear 1973) and unifacial scraper-planes
~nsor 1981, 1985) are common at Dalton sites in the Southeast. Uniface end and

Ensor m San Patrice and Dalton Affinities

A

[3

73

C

[3

0

I

2

3

t

I

I

I

cm
Figure 2. Drawings of San Patrice points. A-E, Hope variety; F-I, St. Johns variety. Redrawn
by Kathy Roemer from Webb 1946, Plate 1.

lateral scrapers, burins, gravers, and other notched tool forms are also common at
Dalton sites (Goodyear 1974; Brookes 1979). San Patrice assemblages have similar
content and, except for the Dalton adze, include all of the above forms, albeit under
different names in some cases (Webb, Shiner, and Roberts 1971; Duffield 1963).

74

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

C

D
0

I

2

3
I

cm

G

H

Figure 3. Drawings of Dalton points. A-E, Cochrane variety; F-I, River Bend variety.
Redrawn by Kathy Roemer from Ensor 1985, Figure 5.

Ensor m San Patrice and Dalton Affinities

75

In summation, the use of local chert to manufacture the greater number of tool
forms is seen in this case as evidence for close technological affinity in the Dalton
and San Patrice assemblages. Both are directly preceded by Paleoindian tool kits
that are dominated by nonlocal materials (Goodyear 1979). San Patrice and Dalton
points on the Gulf Coastal Plain are most often made from local materials, but earlier
lanceolate froms such as Clovis, Folsom, and Plainview are more often made from
exotic materials. The use of bipolar flaking to produce adzelike scraper-planes,
wedges, burins, and flakes for tool manufacture is common in western Alabama and
northeastern Mississippi. Although bifacial Dalton adzes do not seem to be present
in San Patricie assemblages, functional equivalents may be present (cf. Duffield
1963:107-114). Comparing this aspect of coastal plain Dalton and San Patrice assemblages is difficult due to differences in the availability of raw materials and in
techniques of artifact description. Certain tools referred to as scaled pieces at the
Pearce site resemble bipolar cores that have been rotated and turned over for additional flaking (Webb et al. 1971:23). Duffield (1963) illustrates several quadrilateral forms manufactured from petrified wood, which he terms knives. Some of
these may or may not have been produced by a bipolar technique. The diversity of
technology and use of San Patrice and Dalton assemblages on the Gulf Coastal Plain
is apparently similar if differences in local raw materials are held constant. In
general, both the San Patrice and Dalton assemblages on the coastal plains of
Alabama and Mississippi are made up of small artifacts, their size limited by the raw
materials available. This appears to reflect both the small size of natural raw
materials and the nature of the local settlement system. The need for procuring large
pieces of knappable stone evidently had diminished, compared to earlier Paleoindian resource exploitation.
CULTURE AND ENVIRONMENT

As already noted, Goodyear (1982a) has proposed a chronological position for
the Dalton horizon in the southeastern United States, which places it between 8500
and 7900 B.C. (10,500 -9,900 B.P.). His estimate is based on radiocarbon dates of
major hafted-biface styles from sites in the Eastern Woodlands. He postulates a
post-Pleistocene adaptation to a mesic deciduous forest for the Dalton culture.
Along the Gulf Coastal Plain it has been difficult to pinpoint a particular time period
for late glacial and early postglacial forest transition. Current evidence suggests
that a general warming and drying took place over much of the area from South
Carolina to Central Texas during late glacial and early postglacial times, from about
11,000 to 8,000 B.P., which apparently resulted in the establishment of a xeric oakhickory- southern-pine forest along the Gulf Coastal and southern Atlantic plains
(Delcourt and Delcourt 1979). The mixed deciduous forest environments covering
much of the southeastern United States by 10,000 B.P. provided the environmental
conditions to which Dalton culture was adapted. The westward extensions of San
Patrice into East Texas corresponds closely to modem-day extensions of the eastern
Woodlands or the Austroriparian Biotic Province as defined by Blair (1950).
If San Patrice belongs culturally and environmentally to the eastern Woodlands

76

Texas Archeological Society

Dalton horizon, it can be inferred that a hunter and gatherer adaptation to essentially
modem floral and faunal species was made. Dalton groups over much of the eastern
Woodlands were at least partially adapted to modem floral and faunal regimes
(Goodyear 1982a).
Shafer’s (1977) interpretation of early lithic assemblages and environmental
adaptations in East Texas points to a mixed hunter and gatherer economy between
the eastern High Plains and the eastern Woodlands. Wyckoff (1985:23) has argued
for complex late Pleistocene-early Holocene hunter-gatherer adaptations along the
prairie-eastern Woodlands interface in eastern Oklahoma. Some San Patrice
groups may have adapted to this transitional zone in East Texas and focused on the
exploitation of a mixed deciduous forest; other late Pleistocene-early Holocene
groups further west and north may have adapted to more of a big game-plains
environment (Shafer 1977; Story 1981). Both Shafer and Story suggest that
cultural and environmental forces may differentiate Paleoindian or big game
hunting cultures from San Patrice groups in the East Texas area. They cite shifts in
lithic procurement systems and an increase in frequency of San Patrice points as
evidence for more restrictive adaptive patterns and perhaps for increased population. As Goodyear (1979) has noted, this may reflect changes in economic
orientation and attendant settlement systems or a settling-in of ethnic populations.
Gunn (1982:224) has pointed out that Gagliano and Gregory’s survey of Paleoindian points in Louisiana upholds Goodyear’s thesis; data from Clovis and Dalton
sites in west-central Alabama (Ensor 1982) also support this trend.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

In summary, current research points to the existence of widespread uniformity
in Dalton-San Patrice technology and morphology, with regional environmental
differences apparent from roughly 11,000-8,000 B.P. on the Gulf Coastal Plain
across Louisiana, southern Arkansas, Mississippi, and western Alabama (Figure 1).
Data from Alabama and Mississippi suggest that terminal Pleistocene-early Holocene occupations reflect increased territorialism and regional diversity over earlier
fluted point cultures. It is suggested here that the San Patrice phenomenon, based
on stylistic, technological, and environmental considerations, represents a central
and western Gulf Coastal Plain extension of the eastern Woodlands Dalton horizon.
Taxonomic schemes conducive to integrating widespread areas from both cultural and environmental viewpoints are relatively scarce. Stoltman’s (1978) recent
attempt to provide such an areal framework for eastern North America is a noteworthy example. Although there has been improvement in descriptive and taxonomic
practices, it is felt that until such concepts are systematically applied across diverse
regions, differences and similarities in local phases will continue to be masked. The
San Patrice-Dalton example provided here is clear indication of a need for the application ofinterregional taxonomic schemes that stress cultural and environmental
relations. Admittedly, much of the data, both cultural and environmental, is still
sketchy with regard to the prehistoric record. However, it is imperative that an attempt be made to integrate regional constructs into larger interregional schemes.

Ensor ~ San Patrice and Dalton Affinities

77

Wyckoff (1985) has offered some timely criticisms on the use of projectile
points or a few other tools for horizon markers. Use of such markers uncritically,
without regard to strict definitions and purpose, undoubtedly leads to pitfalls.
There are systems of projectile point or hafted biface typology, such as the cluster/type approach advocated by Faulkner and McCollough (1973), Ensor (1981),
and Futato (1983) for parts of Tennessee and Alabama, for integrating widespread
cultural phenomena. The cluster/type concept has close parallels with the horizon
style; both serve to integrate phenomena that are widely distributed in space and of
relatively short duration (Willey 1945; Willey and Phillips 1958). Under such a
scheme the Dalton horizon as defined by Tuck (1974), Morse (1973), and Goodyear
(1982) for theeastern Woodlands area would extend into Louisiana and East Texas
to integrate local manifestations such as San Patrice. San Patrice would reflect local
adaptations to microenvironments but, on a broader scale, through common
elements such as style, technology, and environment, would be tied to Dalton manifestations over eastern North America.
Smith (1986:9, 10), in discussing the nature of early Holocene environments
in the southeastern United States, indicates that a picture of environmental homogeneity is not accurate. Regional diversity abounds in terms of resource potential
and species diversity. Smith restates an opinion (Clausen et al. 1979) and deduces
that"as a result, one might reasonably expect the documented, if often over-emphasized, geographic variation that does exist within early Holocene projectile point
type categories to be paralleled by regional diversity in tool kits and subsistence
patterns (Smith 1986:9)."
The approach taken to projectile point typology, including variety designation,
is that formal variation should be explicitly documented within a regional setting.
The creation of varieties is useful only if they are articulated within an overall
regional taxonomic scheme that allows meaningful assessment of local phase
content.
Under such a scheme, it is doubtful that the term Dalton should be applied at
the type level to all morphologically similar forms equivalent in age to the Dalton
horizon as defined by Goodyear (1982). Type designations should reflect regional
diversity and adaptations. The terms San Patrice and Hardaway-Dalton (Coe 1964)
conform to this concept, since they appear to reflect regional traditions. The term
Dalton, as construed, is best used as a horizon marker. Continued referral to morphologically similar forms that date to the Dalton time period as typologically Dalton, regardless of their geographic distribution or cultural context, will only confuse
cultural-historical reality. In retrospect, referral to the Gainesville Lake area Dalton
horizon forms as Dalton contributes to this confusion and tends to obfuscate important regional differences that undoubtedly obtain among various early Holocene
cultures of the Gulf Coastal Plain.
Type designations generally should reflect local culture and environmental
adaptations. At a different level of classification, phase content could be signified
through variety designations, where plausible, and could reflect local variations in
phase content. Therefore, the different varieties of San Patrice and Dalton noted
herein may lead eventually to definition of local phase content.

78

Texas Archeological Society

Crucial to the successful adoption of such a system, however, are both precise
techniques for describing artifacts and terminological clarity. Metrical analysis is
obviously an important part of description, but there are formal qualitative and
quantitative descriptive techniques that make it possible to describe hafted biface
morphology and eliminate many descriptive ambiguities (cf. Futato 1983; Ensor
1981). Only when overall taxonomic purpose is articulated with precise description
will communication among researchers grow and the utility of various regional
models be evaluated. Evaluation and refinement are necessary, but perhaps even
more is required for growth and maturity in the discipline of archeology.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I thank David L. Carlson, of the Archeological Research Laboratory at Texas
A&M University, for his critical review of the manuscript. Harry J. Sharer, of the
Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, also offered input into the
questions surrounding San Patrice occupations in Texas. I have benefited from
conversations and correspondence with Albert C. Goodyear, of the Institute of Archaeology and Anthropology, University of South Carolina; Sam Brookes, of the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Vicksburg District; Frank Weir, of the Texas Department of Highways and Public Transportation; Leland W. Patterson, of Tenneco,
Inc.; and an anonymous reviewer.
The help of Kathy Roemer and Kathy Reese, who drew the illustrations, is
gratefully acknowledged, as is the help of William Moore and Celinda Stevens, of
the Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, who typed the
manuscript. Any errors in fact or content are the sole responsibility of the writer.
REFERENCES

CITED

Blair, W. Frank
1950 The biotic provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science. 2(1):93-116.
Brookes, Samuel O.
1979 The Hester site, an Early Archaic site in Monroe County, Mississippi.
A Preliminary report. Mississippi Department of Archives and History.
Jackson.
Clausen, C., D. Cohen, C. Emiliani, J. A. Holman, and J. J. Stipp
1979 Little Salt Spring, Florida: a unique underwater site. Science 20:609-614.
Coe, Joffre L.
1964 The formative cultures of the Carolina Piedmont. Transactions of the American
Philosophical Society 54 (new series).
Davis, W. A. and E. Mort Davis
1960 The Jake Martin site, an Archaic site in the Ferrell’s Bridge Reservoir area, north
eastern Texas. Archaeology Series, 3. Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.

Ensor m San Patrice and Dalton Affinities

79

Delcourt, Paul A. and Hazel R. Delcourt
1979 Late Pleistocene and Holocene distributional history of the deciduous forest in the
southeastern United States. Contribution No. 12, Program for Quaternary Studies
of the Southeastern United States, University of Tennessee, Knoxville.
Duffield, Lathel F.
1963 The Wolfshead site: An Archaic-Neo-American site in San Augustine County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 34:83-141.
Ensor, H. Blaine
1981 Gainesville Lake area lithics: chronology, technology, and use. Report of Investigations 13, Office of Archaeological Research, University of Alabama.
1982

Paleo-Indian and Archaic studies in the Gainesville Lake area. In: Archaeology of
the Gainesville Lake Area. Synthesis, by Ned J. Jenkins, pp. 15-47. Vol. 5 of
Archaeological Investigations in the Gainesville Lake Area of the TennesseeTombigbee Waterway. Report of Investigations No. 23, Office of Archaeological
Research, University of Alabama.

1985

The Joe Powell site (1Pi38): a Dalton manifestation on the Alabama Gulf Coastal
Plain. Journal of Alabama Archaeology 31(1): 1-47.

Faulkner, Charles H. and Major C.R. McCollough
1973 Introductory report of the Normandy Reservoir Salvage Project: environmental
setting, typology, and survey. Report of Investigations No. 11, Department of Anthropology, University of Tennessee, Knoxville.
Fenwick, Jason M. and Michael B. Collins
1975 Lithic analyses in the southeastem United States and in Texas. Paper presented at
the 40th Annual Meeting of the Society for American Archaeology. Dallas, Texas.
Futato, Eugene M.
1983 Archaeological investigations in the Cedar Creek and Upper Bear Creek
Reservoir. Report of Investigations 29. Office of Archaeological Research. University of Alabama.
Gagliano, Sherwood M. and Hiram F. Gregory
1965 A preliminary survey of Palm-Indian points from Louisiana. Louisiana Studies
4(1). Louisiana Studies Institute, Northwestern State College, Natchitoches.
Goodyear, Albert C.
1974 The Brand site: a techno-functional study of a Dalton site in Northeast Arkansas.
Arkansas Archaeological Survey Research Series No. 7.
1979

A hypothesis for the use of cryptocrystalline raw materials among Paleo-Indian
groups of North America. University of South Carolina, Institute of Archaeology
and Anthropology, Research Manuscript Series 156. Columbia.

1982

The chronological position of the Dalton horizon in the southeastern United S tates.
American Antiquity 47(2):382-395.

Texas Archeologieal Society

80

Greenwell, Dale
1984 The Mississippi Gulf Coast. In: Perspectives on Gulf Coast prehistory, edited by
David D. Davis, pp. 125-155. Ripley P. Bullen Monographs in Anthropology and
History No. 5. The Florida State Museum.
Gunn, Joel
1982 Paleo-Indian technology and demography in northwestern Louisiana In: Eagle
Hill: A Late Quarternary upland site in western Louisiana, by Joel Gunn and David
O. Brown, pp. 223-227. Special Report 12, Center for Archaeological Research,
The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Morse, Dan F.
1973 Dalton culture in Northeast Arkansas. The Florida Anthropologist 26:23-28.
Gainesville.
Morse, Dan F., and Albert C. Goodyear
1973 The significance of the Dalton adze in Northeast Arkansas. Plains An thropologist 18:316-322.
Patterson, Leland W.
1980

The S an Patrice point type in Southeast Texas. Newsletter of the Louisiana Archaeological Society 8(1):22-23.

Prewitt, Elton R.
1981 Cultural chronology in CentralTexas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-89.
Shafer, Harry J.
1973 Lithic technology at the George C. Davis site. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation,
The University of Texas at Austin.
1977

Early lithic assemblages in eastern Texas. The Museum Journal 17:187-197. West
Texas Museum Association, Lubbock.
Smith, Bruce D.

1986

The archaeology of the Southeastern United States: from Dalton to de Soto,
10,500-500 B.P. In Advances in World Archaeology, edited by Fred Wendorf and
Angela E. Close 5:1-92. Academic Press, Inc., New York.

Stoltman, James B.
1978 Temporal models in prehistory: an example from eastern North America. Current
Anthropology 19:703-746.
Story, Dee Ann
1981 An overview of the archaeology of East Texas. Plains Anthropologist
26(92):139-156.
Thomas, Prentiss M. and L. J. Campbell
1978 Multicomponent site on the Happyville Bend of Little River: 16LA37 - The
Whatley site. New World Research, Report of Investigations No. 11.

Ensor ~ San Patrice and Dalton Affinities

81

Tuck, James A.
1974

Early Archaic horizons in eastern North America. Archeology of Eastern North
America 2:72-80.

Wallace, Patricia
1982 Paleo-Indian projectile point chronology in western Louisiana. In: Eagle Hill: a
late quaternary upland site in western Louisiana by Joel Gum and David O.
Brown. pp. 220-223. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas
at San Antonio. Special Report, No. 12.
Walthall, John A.
1980 Prehistoric Indians of the Southeast, archaeology of Alabama and the middle
South. The University of Alabama Press. University, Alabama.
Watt, Frank H.
1978

Radiocarbon chronology of site in the Central Brazos Valley. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological society 49:111-138.

Webb, Clarence H.
1946 Two unusual types of chipped stone artifacts from Northwest Louisiana. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 17:9-17.
Webb, Clarence H., J. L. Shiner and E. W. Roberts
1971 The John Pearce site (16CD56): a San Patrice site in Caddo Parish, Louisiana.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 42:1-49.
Weir, Frank A.
1976 The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Washington State
University. Pullman.
Willey, Gordon R.
1945

Horizon styles and pottery traditions in Peruvian archaeology. American Antiquity
2:49-56.

Willey, Gordon R. and Philip Phillips
1958

Method and theory in American archaeology. University of Chicago Press.
Chicago.

Willey, Patrick S., B. R. Harrison, and J. T. Hughes
1978 The Rex Rodgers site. In: Archeology of the MacKenzie Reservoir, by J.T.Hughes
and P. S. Willey, pp. 49-68. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical
Commission, Survey Report 24. Austin.
Wyckoff, Don G.
1985 The Packard complex: Early Archaic,Pre-Dalton occupations on the PrairieWoodland border. Southeastern Archaeology 4(1): 1-26.
Yarborough, Kate
1981

A preliminary report of the Hebe Plantation site: chronology and function. Missis_
sippi Archaeology 16(1):30-38.

The Lott Site (41GR56): A Late Prehistoric
Site in Garza County, Texas
Frank A. Runkles and E. D. Dorchester

ABSTRACT
A prehistoric site in southern Garza County, Texas has yielded several
specimens of a distinct, previously undescribed arrowpoint type that is named
here the Lott point. Because of the large number of distinctive pottery sherds,
this site is also important in providing a link in the transfer of traits among the
cultures of the southern Plains and the Caddoan culture ofnortheasternTexas,
southeastern Oklahoma, and southwestern Arkansas.

INTRODUCTION

The Lott site (41GR56), about 3 km (2 miles) east of the Llano Estacado in
Garza County (Figure 1), was discovered in 1961 by Emmett Shedd and Frank
Runkles, who were surveying an area about 26 km (16 miles) south of Post for
prehistoric sites that had not been recorded. As Shedd walked from the streambed
of Sand Creek, he came upon a gently sloping, relatively flat area between two
ravines (Figure 2), on which lay a great profusion of chips, hearths, potsherds, and
other artifacts where the thin covering of soil had weathered away. This was after
the severe drought of the 1950s, when little or no vegetation was left on much of
the land, and the few remaining cattle had pulverized the soil. Then, as the rains
came, the loosened soil was gradually eroded away where there was no vegetation
to hold it. This gentle sheet erosion left cultural material exposed essentially as it
would have been had controlled excavation exposed it. Shedd realized that this was
a site of major importance, so he, Runkles, and members of the South Plains Archeological Society staked it out in 10-foot squares so records could be kept of the
locations of features and artifacts. This report is based on a surface collection rather
than one resulting from controlled excavation. A review of the literature (Varner
1968 and others) indicates that the locations of surface materials can be useful
evidence if the materials were exposed in such a way that they are not badly
displaced laterally or vertically. The investigators of this site believe there was little
or no lateral displacement of artifacts, in fact many were still partially covered and
were definitely in situ. The limited excavations described later have verified that
the cultural m aterial had only a thin covering of the sort that would leave the artifacls
exposed in situ when it was gently eroded away.
This site is unique in several ways. For many years arrowpoints of a previously
unknown form had been found by collectors in very small numbers around Post. On
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57 (1986)

84

Texas Archeological Society

EDD

Figure 1. Map of Texas showing Oarza County and the Lott site. Drawn by E. D. Dorchester.

this site, however, this type was found in considerable numbers in a relatively small
area. The site was on the property of John Lott, of Lubbock, so in proposing a new
point type we are calling it the Lott Point.
The other unique feature of the site was the large number of sherds of well-made
and distinctive pottery. Except for three sherds, all of the pottery appears to have
been made or manufactured at or near this site. Although some sites in the High
Plains have large numbers of potsherds, a large percentage of the sherds are from
vessels imported from the Rio Grande drainage area of New Mexico. Pottery was
made on the Texas High Plains, but it is generally thick, coarse, and not plentiful
except in the upper Panhandle where Borger Cordmarked is common. The pottery
from the Lott site is made from Triassic clays found in the area and is tempered with
burned or calcined bone.
More than 750 sherds were found at the Lott site, and a great number of them
show traits of Caddoan pottery from East Texas. In fact many of the sherds could

Runkles and Dorchester ~ The Lott Site

85

@

0

0

[--,

%

o

L~
t~

©
o
p.,

&d
e,i ,-o

%

e,.0

86

Texas Archeological Society

,&

0

0

0

©

Runkles and Dorchester w The Lott Site

87

be easily identified as Caddoan except for the fact that they are made from the
Triassic clays that are exposed below the Caprock.
The site is unusual in another way. Three types of arrowpoints were found:
Lott, Garza, and Perdiz, each in sufficient numbers to indicate that the people using
them occupied the site several times. With few exceptions each of the three types,
to the best of the writers’ knowledge, was found in a separate part of the site (Figure
3). Lott points were found in areas designated A and F, Garza points in areas C and
D, and Perdiz points in areas B and E. Very few Harrell points were found on the
site, and triangular preforms were found in Lott- and Garza-point areas. Perdiz
points are relatively scarce on the Texas High Plains, and they are not found in large
numbers on any site.
Some limited excavation was done about 3-6 meters (10-20 feet) east of the east
edge of area A to verify that the exposed cultural material probably had been covered
by only a thin layer and that its surface occurrence represented a true distribution
of the artifacts (Figure 4). In this limited area, a triangular preform, three Lott points,

Figure 4. Photograph showing Frank Runkles working at the excavation to test still-buried
parts of the site.

and two drills were recovered from the top 8 cm (3 inches). Below this level there
was no evidence of cultural material. This excavation seems to verify that there was
a thin cultural layer and that Lott points were concentrated in area A. Additional
excavation should be carried out to define better the occupation areas on which the
different point types were found.

88

Texas Archeological Society
GEOGRAPHY

AND

ENVIRONMENT

The Lott site is about 3 km (2 miles) east of the eastern edge of the Llano
Estacado, or Staked Plains. The Llano Estacado is a vast, fiat, largely treeless
grassland that is the southern extension of the Great Plains, which extend through
the central United States. This fiat plain terminates along its eastern edge in an
escarpment (the Caprock), marking an abrupt drop from 15 to more than 60 meters
(50-200 feet). Below the Caprock are canyons, hills, creeks, washes, and gently
sloping terraces that were formed as the Caprock eroded (Figure 1).
The Plains were an ideal habitat for large mammals such as bison and pronghorns, and there were large populations of rabbits, badgers, skunks, coyotes,
wolves, bobcats, deer, prairie chickens, quail, and others. On the Plains are many
playa lakes that were originally small depressions that filled with water during
spring thunderstorms, killing the vegetation. As the water receded, bison or antelope pulverized the bare dirt as they went out to the water, and when the lakes dried
up, winds carried away the loose soil, making the depressions larger and deeper.
Some of these depressions, popularly known in West Texas as buffalo wallows,
reached several acres in size. This area, with its vast grassland and playa lakes, could
support large numbers of animals when there was sufficient moisture, but changing
climatic conditions on the Plains resulted in mass migrations of the bison herds. In
his detailed study of many sites on the Plains, Dillehay has determined that there
were periods when bison were absent from the Texas plains and other periods when
the large bison herds returned (Dillehay 1974:181). Since bison are short-grass
animals, they were not found on the Southern Plains for several hundred years
before A.D. 1200 when moisture levels were high and the tall grass varieties predominated. During the next 250 years, as the shorter varieties of grass predominated, the bison population literally exploded, and when this happened, more prehistoric people migrated into the area and moved with the game. Campsites were
occupied for only short periods of time, or seasonally, as these people followed the
herds, but they came back to good sites again and again for many years. The Lott
site shows evidence of occupation by several groups; people making Lott, Garza,
and Perdiz points apparently occupied different parts of the site, leading the writers
to believe that these groups occupied the site over and over, but not at the same time.
Most of the High Plains is underlain by the Ogallala aquifer, a vast fresh-water
reservoir. Above the Caprock in prehistoric times, the distance to the water table
was only 9-15 meters (30-50 feet), and below the caprock the water table was
exposed in many places, resulting in springs and seeps that provided water to ideal
campsites for the roving groups of hunting and gathering people. The escarpment
also provided some shelter from winter winds and, at some times of the year, the
springs and water seeps provided the only water available in this part of Texas.
THE SITE
The Lott site is on the higher of two terraces on the west bank of Sand Creek,
a tributary of the South Fork of the Double Mountain Fork of the Brazos River
(Figure 1). The occupation area is about 45 meters (150 feet) from north to south

Runkles and Dorchester ~ The Lott Site

89

and about 100 meters (350 feet) from east to west. The area is generally flat with
a few north-to-south-trending washes; it slopes gently southward toward the creek
with a drop of about 3.5 meters in 100 meters (10 feet in 350 feet). The site is
bounded on the west by a ravine with a sharply defined bank that has a drop of about
1.5 meters (5 feet) (Figure 5). It is likely, from the appearance of this ravine, that

Figure 5. Photograph showing the Lott site (outlined by dashed white line) from anearby hill.

there was a spring in the area. A circular ravine with a 1-meter (4-foot) cut extends
into the site about 45 meters (150 feet) to the east. Sand Creek is about 100 meters
(110 yards) south and 150 meters (165 yards) east of the site (Figure 2). About 140
meters (150 yards) to the north are small rises, about 3 -4.5 meters (10-15 feet) above
the terrace.
FEATURES
The features in this site consist of 10 hearths (Figure 6), a young, nearly complete bison skeleton, and two separate chipping stations with concentrations of chips
and flakes (Figure 3). Features 1-10 are hearths consisting of flat limestone rocks
that have been arranged to contain the fire; in many, bits of charcoal have been
exposed by erosion. Three of these (features 1,4, and 6) were the source of charcoal
samples from which radiocarbon dates were obtained (Figure 20). Hearth feature
10 was uncovered during test excavations in square 60N/30E. Feature 11, the site
of workshop debris consisting of about 750 chips and flakes, was exposed by
erosion; limited excavation in the area exposed many more flakes. A 10-foot square
whose southwest comer was 70N/20 E was excavated; artifacts were found in the

90

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 6. Photograph of a typical hearth at the Lott site.

northeast quarter in the upper 8 cm (3 inches), and below this was sterile soil.
Feature 12, the site of another concentration of workshop debris, consisting of about
375 flakes and chips, was excavated during work in square 70N/20E. The debris
from both features indicates a complete range of flaking operations: cortex removed
by percussion from nodules, thinning flakes removed by percussion, and trimming
flakes removed by direct pressure. Since tools were manufactured at these two
workshops, the site apparently was occupied for extended periods of time. Undoubtedly other chipping or work stations will be revealed by further excavation, for the nearby creek and hills provide a ready source of lithic material. The
absence of larger cores from which material has been removed could indicate that
most of the tools made here were made from small nodules.
A nearly complete young bison skeleton (feature 13) had been partially eroded
out when the site was discovered. No photographs were taken, and the bones, which
were in extremely poor condition, have since weathered away.
ARTIFACTS
The artifacts from the Lott site include flaked arrowpoints, knives, scrapers,
drills, gravers, a few bone tools, shell beads, arrow-shaft abraders, many hammerstones and choppers, and a great many potsherds. As workers picked up the exposed

Runkles and Dorchester -- The Lott Site

91

artifacts on the surface, reasonably good records were kept of the numbers, types,
and locations of most of the artifacts, but many of them were kept by those who
worked on the site, and the writers have been able to examine and photograph only
a small percentage of them. However, the artifact descriptions and photographs are
of a completely representative assemblage retained by the senior author, which
included almost all of the potsherds.
Most of the artifacts apparently were made from local materials. Thesiteis near
outcrops of the Dockum Group (Triassic) (Holliday and Welt,.,, 1981:205, 207),
which contains coarse- to medium-grained, light colored quartzite, red jasper, flint,
and light, glossy, fine-grained, tan and light to medium gray cherts that are suitable
for the manufacture of tools. The only nonlocal material found was a very small
amount of obsidian.
Two obsidian Garza points were recovered, together with an unknown number
of obsidian flakes. The Garza points and three flakes were submitted to the
Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory at the University of California for x-ray fluorescence analysis, which determined that two of the Lott specimens came from the
Valles Caldera area of northem New Mexico (Table 1); the source of the three
Table 1.

Neutron Activation Analysis of Trace Elements
in Obsidian from the Lott Site (41GR56)
Ba

Ce

Nb

Zr

Sr/Zr

Rb/Zr

8137-E
Lott-1 15±5
-F
-2 16±4
-G
-3 13±4
Average
15
RMSD
±2
Artifacts assigned provenience
of a Valles Caldera source

93_+9
96±8
90±7

52
47
46

211
206
187

.059±.017
.048±.012
.027±.013

.869£-_.040
.871±.034
.850±.034

93
+__3

48

201

.045
±.016

.863
±.012

-H

Lott-4

-I
Average
RMSD

-5

81+7
81+_8
81

85

219
221

<.037
<.027

1.138±.038
1.117+.043

85

220

<.032

Artifacts from Texas Panhandle,
unknown provenience

<8
<8
<8

1.078
±.056

Ref. group
Valles Caldera Source
<4 78+1
(Valles Caldera Composition Group)

85

192

<.026

1.07±.05

SOURCE: Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, University of California
NOTE: The ratios are precise, but the absolute values of Nb and Zr will not be accurate
because of uncertainties inherent in our nondestructive analyses due to the varying shapes and
sizes of the samples. These errors would tend to make the Zr and Nb values larger than the
reference Valles Caldera source.

92

Texas Archeological Society

other Lott samples is unknown, but they came from the same source as an obsidian
biface from Blackwater Draw Locality No. 1 that was submitted for sourcing by
Texas Tech University (Table 2) (Johnson: 1984).
Table 2. Neutron Activation Analysis of Trace Elements in
Obsidian From Lubbock Lake and Blackwater Draw
Ba

Ce

Nb Zr

Sr/Zr

83+7
81+6

91
79

225
200

<.023 1.013+.014
<.017 1.044_+.013

<4 77.7_+.9

85

192

<.026

1.07_+.05

Artifacts assigned to Valles Caldera
8138-ELUBK-1TTU-A39314 FAS-17<8
8138-C BLWD-2937--862 Bed C
<6

Rb/Zr

Ref. group
Valles Caldera Source
Unassigned Source
8138-F BLWD-1 937-33 Bed A
Texas Panhandle Artifacts
Lott Specimens 1, 2, 3

13_+3

107_+7

45

192 .018_+.006

.865_+.012

15+_2

93_+3

48

201 .045_+.016

.863_+.012

SOURCE: Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, University of California
NOTE: The ratios are precise, but the absolute values of Nb and Zr will not be accurate
because of uncertainties inherent in our nondestructive analyses due to the varying shapes and
sizes of the samples. These errors would tend to make the Zr and Nb values larger than the
reference Valles Caldera source.

Lithic Artifacts

Loft Points (N=56)
The Lott point (Figure 7) is named for John Lott, owner of the ranch in Garza
County on which the site is located1. It is basically triangular; most have indented
bases and all have central basal notches. The sides are trimmed parallel to the edges
from the base about a third of the way to the tip to form shoulders (Figure 7, C-F),
most of which are slight and nearly perpendicular to the edges; a few specimens have
small barbs (Figure 7, A, B). The sides are straight or slightly convex, and some
specimens are slightly serrated. Most of the points from this site are thin and finely
made fromlocal cherts and flints. Many are widest at the shoulders, but in the typical
or classic Lott point ~igure 7, C) the "ears" flare at the base, making them wider
there. The "ears" formed by the basal notches vary from pointed (Figure 7, C, D)
to square (Figure 7, E).
On the basis of about 75 specimens, the length ranges between 18.8 and 45 mm,
with an average of 27 mm. Width at the shoulders varies from 7.4 to 20 mm, with
1 A preliminary description of the type has been published by Turner and Hester (1985:182).
A more complete description is given here.

Runkles and Dorchester ~ The Lott Site

A

B

93

D

0
L

2
¯ CB

I

G

H

Figure 7. Lott points from the Lott site. A-E came from the surface of the site; F-H came from
the test excavation at 70N/20E.

an average of 12.37 mm. The width at the base varies from 9.1 to 19.4 mm,
averaging 12.44 mm.
The Lott points at this site cover the range of Lott varieties (Figure 7).
Specimen A has a deeply indented base with a very slight U-shaped notch at the
bottom and side trimming deep enough to form barbs. Specimen B has a deeper U
notch in the base and only very slight barbs. Specimen C is a typical Lott point; its
slightly concave base has a very distinct U notch and the sides are trimmed to form
square shoulders. Specimen D has a slightly concave base with a much wider U
notch and slight shoulders. Specimen E has a straight base with a wide, deep U notch
and typical shoulders. About 82 percent of the points are like specimens B, C, D,
and E; only 18 percent have barbs like specimen A. One Lott base (Figure 7, I-I) and
a complete Lott point (Figure 7, F) were recovered from the top 8 cm (3 inches) of
the test excavation in the northeast quarter of square 70N/20E about 6 meters (20
feet) east and 20-25 meters (70-80 feet) north of the reference datum point (Figure
3). Another Lott base (Figure 7, G) came from the southeast comer of the same test
square. All of the Lott points came from areas A and F.

94

Texas Archeological Society

Garza Points

~=49; Figure 8)

Specimens A-E are typical of the Garza points as defined by Turner and Hester
(1985:176) found at the Lott site as well as at other sites in the area. The G arza points
were found in areas C and D (Figure 3). Specimen D is made from obsidian.
Specimen C is of special interest: the sides are straight from the base for about a
third of the way to the tip, where there is the hint of a shoulder. It is possible that
this is a Lott Point in a not-quite-finished stage of manufacture, or perhaps the maker
had started to trim these edges to make the Lott shoulders but did not finish the work.
On the other hand, since the Lott point appears from existing data to be the older of
these two, specimen C may be a transition point between the Lott and Garza points,
when the makers were beginning to leave the side trimming off to form shoulders.

2cm

A

B

C

Figure 8. Garza points found at the Lott site.

Triangular Preforms (N=52; Figure 9)
The triangular points recovered at the site are preforms for manufacturing both
Lott and Garza types. Most of the triangular points examined have defects, are
broken in two, or are apparently unfinished. Both pieces of many broken points
were found, which indicates that the makers broke the points before completing
either Lott or Garza points. The triangular preforms were found only in areas A, C,
D, and F, which are the areas containing the Lott and Garza specimens. One (Figure
9, F) was recovered from the test excavation at 70N/20E.
Perdiz Points (N=58; Figure 10)
Perdiz points (Turner and Hester 1985:187) are not common on the Llano
Estacado or on the sites along the Caprock. The 58 specimens found at the Lott site
put it among the most prolific Perdiz sites in the area. The Perdiz points were in
the relatively small areas B and E on the northern edge of the site. No hearths have
been found in areas B and E, so no radiocarbon dating has been possible.

Runkles and Dorchester ~ The Lott Site

95

D

0
I

i

2
Icm

Figure 9. Triangular prefom]s found at the Lott site. Point F was recovered during the
excavation of square 70N/20E.

o

I

2 cm

};

A

B

C

D

E

F

Figure 10. Perdiz points from the Lott site. Specimen F has been sharpened so much that very
little is left of the blade.

96

Texas Archeological Society

Harrell Points (N=6)
Only six Harrell type points (Turner and Hester 1985:178) were found; none
were available for photographing. Harrell points are common on the High Plains
and were found at the Garza site as well as at many other sites.
Drills (N=35; Figure 11)
Most of the drills or awls from the site have slender shafts and are made on
flakes. They are well made, but none have bifacially worked bases. About half of
the artifacts originally classified as drills consist of the shafts only; reexamination
indicated that these are probably Perdiz stems that were removed from arrow shafts
and discarded after the points were broken.

A

o
I

,

2
I cm

Figure 11. Drills from the Lott site. A-D were surface finds; E was recovered from the
southeast comer of the test excavation 70N/20E.

Gravers (N-12; Figure 12, A-C)
All of the gravers were manufactured from flakes that had one or more points
worked onto them. The graver points are well worked and steeply chipped on both
sides of the points, but they are generally unworked on the undersides; resulting in
points that are sharp and hooklike in appearance. They would have been ideal for
cutting shell, bone, or wood, or for incising pottery.

Runkles and Dorchester ~ The Lott Site

97

Serrated Flakes (N=2; Figure 12, D)
Two heavily serrated flakes were found.

J

0
I

2
Icrn

E

i

A
C
B
Figure 12. Gravers, A-C, and a serrated flake, D, from the Lott site.

Knives (N=34; Figure 13)
A total of 34 exceptionally well worked bifacial alternately beveled knives
(Figure 13, C-F) made from high quality materials were recovered. These
alternately beveled knives were created by resharpening knives that were otiginally
long and leaf shaped, generally with rounded ends. Resharpening of both sides
beveled the edges on opposite sides along about two-thirds of the length. Specimen
F (Figure 13) is a knife that has been sharpened several times; it would eventually
have become sharp pointed and shorter if sharpening had continued.
Another variety of knife (Figure 13, A, B, and G) is relatively small, round or
oblong, and bifacially worked. The knives in this category show no signs of
sharpening. What cutting chore these knives were used for is not apparent; they
would have been less effective for butchering and meat cutting than the larger,
beveled knives (Figure 13, C-F). In any event the larger, beveled knives seemed to
be preferred at this site. Knives were found only in Areas A, B, and D (Figure 3).

G
Figure 13. Two kinds of knives found at the Lott site: alternately beveled, C-F, and small
round bifacially worked, A, B, and G.

98

Texas Archeological Society

Scrapers (N=81; Figure 14)
The most prevalent scraper was the snub-nosed end scraper (Figure 14, B, E)
represented by 41 specimens. These scrapers were generally made from thick flakes

5

Figure 14. Scrapers from the Lott site.

that were worked and shaped on one face so one end was steeply beveled. The
resulting tool was very effective for scraping meat or fat from hides or bones. The
junior author has experimented with scraping hides with both snub-nosed scrapers
and scrapers with thin edges; the steeply beveled edge is more effective. Three of
the scrapers were round, with longer steeply beveled scraping edges. A third form
(Figure 14, D), represented by 26 specimens, many with some of the cortex, came
from flakes that were worked on only one edge. The scraping edges have been
steeply beveled, but they are not as well made as the totally worked tools. Another
form represented by 11 specimens, has one worked concave edge (Figure 14, A).
These scrapers could have been used as spokeshaves to shape arrow shafts or bows,
or to remove fat and tissue from bones or from hides that were laid across logs.
Modified Flakes
An examination of the workshop debris from features 11 and 12 revealed
several flakes measuring about 1.5 by 2 cm, with exceedingly fine chipping along
one edge. This chipping is fairly steep, and the flaked edges are less than 1 mm wide.
If these flakes originally had sharp edges and were used for scraping, this fine
chipping could be the result of wear from dragging, but if the edges were flaked
intentionally, the flakes were used as tiny knife blades.
Choppers and Hammerstones (Figure 15, A, B)
Several stream-bed cobbles have been used as hammerstones (Figure 15, B),
and several have b~en modified on one edge for use as choppers (Figure 15, A). The
hammerstone could have been used to break bison or other mammal bones for
marrow or to prepare local chert for flaking.

Runkles and Dorchester -- The Lott Site

99

Arrowshaft Smoother (Figure 15, C)
Two tools, one of sandstone and the other of black lava rock (Figure 15, C),
were recovered at the Lott site that are believed to be arrowshaft smoothers. Both
tools have grooves that are approximately 11-12 mm wide, 4 mm deep, extend
across the tool, and are very smooth, apparently from use.

A

B

C
0

L

,

,

,

,

5

Icm

Figure 15. Chopper, A, and hammerstone, B, made by modifying river cobbles. Arrowshaft
smoother, C, is made of black volcanic rock.

Shell Artifacts
About 13 shell beads and part of a shell pendant were recovered in area D
(Figure 16). The beads are about 5 to 6 mm long and 9 mm in diameter. The walls,
which are between 1 and 2 mm thick, have rings similar to tree rings. The beads are
thought to have been made from a Pacific coast marine shell, Dentalium semipolitum, since similar beads positively identified as being made from this shell were
found at Casas Grandes. The Casas Grande area became a commercial manufacturing and trade center for shell beads (DiPeso et al. 1974). One of the apparent trade
routes was to the Jemez Mountains in New Mexico, in the same general area
determined to be the source of some of the Lott site obsidian samples.

100

Texas Archeological Society

0
I

2
Icrn

Figure 16. Shell artifacts from the Lott site. Beads and--top row center--part of a pendant,
about a millimeter thick, made probably from a local mussel shell.

Bone Artifacts
Two nearly identical bone beads were found, but only one was available for
examination (Figure 17, A). This bead, 25 mm long and 9 mm in diameter, was
made by scribing a ring around the bone and snapping it off. The other end has

o
I

~

2
I cm

Figure 17. Bone artifacts from the Lott site. A bead, A, is made from a foot bone of a coyote
or wolf; an awl, B, is made from an unidentified bone.

indications of the ringing procedure, but the bone evidently broke before it was
finished. Specialists at the bone analysis laboratory at North Texas State University,
who examined the bead, believe it could be a coyote or wolf foot bone (Yates 1985).
These two bone beads are almost identical to four bone beads that were found at the
Garza site (41GA40).
A finely made and highly polished bone splinter awl, broken on the end, is
6.3 cm long and 2 mm thick (Figure 17, B), but the bone has not been identified.

Runkles and Dorchester u The Lott Site

101

Pottery
Four kinds of pottery were found at the Lott site. In Figure 18, Group I is represented by specimen A, Group II by specimen B, Group III by specimens C and D,
and Group IV by specimens E-I. Specimen J (Figure 18) is one of several pieces of
fired clay that were found near two hearths. Color codes in the descriptions that
follow are from the Munsell Color Charts (Munsell 1975).

C

A

~ii!~ i ~ i¸ i~i

G

2
Icm

Figure 18. Pottery from the Lott site. Specimen A illustrates Group I; B illustrates Group
II; C and D illustrate Group ]lI; E-I illustrate Group IV. Specimen J is a fragment of fired
clay.

Group 1
Group I is represented by only one sherd (Figure 18, A), which differs from all
other sherds at the site.

102

Texas Areheological Society

Method ofManufacture: Breaks along welds indicate that coiling was the form
of construction. The exterior is fairly well smoothed; the interior is well finished.
Paste: Compact and even paste, with crushed clay particles and occasional
particles of quartz sand. The exterior is gray (5Y5/1), shading into light gray (5Y7/
1); the interior is very dark gray (10YR3/1), shading into light gray (5Y7/1); the
cores are black (10YR2/1).
Form: Since this sherd has no apparent curvature, the vessel shape cannot be
determined.
Decoration: The exterior has light diagonal brushing by corn cob or other
means. Over the brushing are incised rectangles at a slight diagonal to the coil welds
and slanted opposite to the angle of the brushing (Figure 18, A).
Dimensions: Maximum thickness, 7.5 mm.
Comments: Sherds of this type are commonly associated with sites affiliated
with the Edwards complex in southwestern Oklahoma (Swenson 1985); this
specimen probably represents a trade vessel fxom one of these sites.
Group H
Group II (Figure 18, B) is represented by at least 75 sherds. Fourteen sherds
(9 body sherds and 5 rim sherds), representing at least five vessels, have been
studied in detail.

Method of Manufacture: Coiling is indicated by several breaks along welds.
Both interiors and exteriors are well smoothed.
Paste: A finely crushed bone temper is visible throughout the fabric of these
sherds together with small pieces of chert, gypsum, igneous quartz, and small
pebbles typical of weathered sedimentary materials in the Triassic clays. Most of
the tempering materials measure less than 1 mm. Mica is visible; a natural inclusion
in the clay. Exterior colors are brown (10YR5/3), pale brown (10YR6/3), very pale
brown (10YR7/3), light brown (7.5YR6/4), reddish yellow (5YR6/6 and 5YR7/6),
light reddish brown (5YR6/4), yellowish red (5YR5/6), and pink (7.5YR8/4). One
specimen has a very dark gray (7YR3/0) firing cloud. Interiors are light yellowish
brown (10YR6/4), pale brown (10YR6/3), very pale brown (10YR7/3 and 10YR7/
4), light brown (7.5YR6/4), pink (7.5YR7/4), and reddish yellow (7.5YR7/6).
Cores are dark gray (10YR4/1), very dark gray (10YR3/1), gray (10YR5/1 and
10YR6/1), light brownish gray (10YR6/2), light yellowish brown (10YRr/4), and
dark gray (7.5YR4/0).
Form: Three rim sherds have simple direct lips (Figure 19, A-C), one has a
simple flattened lip, and one has a simple rolled lip (Figure 19, D). Four have flaring

Runkles and Dorchester ~ The Lott Site

103

walls and one has relatively straight walls; these are probably jar rims. One body
sherd suggests a carinated bowl. The other sherds are too small to provide any
information about vessel shape.
Decoration: All of the Group II sherds are fingernail punctated. On only the
two largest can the overall pattern--parallel rows of chevrons--be seen.
Dimensions: The mean maximum thickness of the rim sherds is 6.52 mm, with
a standard deviation of .94 and a range of 5.5 to 7.9 mm. The mean maximum
thickness of the body sherds is 7.14 mm, with a standard deviation of .52 mm and
a range of 6.6 to 8.1 mm.
Comments: Group 11 and III sherds are the ones that first got the attention of
the writers. The decorations are similar or even identical to Caddoan pottery from
East Texas, Arkansas, and Louisiana. The pottery is also similar to Caddoan pottery
in method of manufacture, color, and in its bone tempering. The writers have not
seen similar pottery sherds from this area of West Texas. Reid Ferring has prepared
thin sections of sherds from Groups II, III, and IV, and has done a petrographic
analysis. It is his opinion that the pottery could not have been made from East Texas
materials. He further states that the materials are consistant with those found in the
Triassic clay beds exposed along the Caprock, and there is no evidence that would
preclude the pottery’s manufacture in West Texas (Ferring 1986).

Group III
Group III (Figure 18, C, D) is represented by at least 60 sherds. Eight body
sherds were studied in detail.
Method ofmanufacture: Several of the sherds have visible coil welds. Interior
surfaces are well smoothed to burnished; exteriors are smoothed.
Paste: Group III sherds have compact, even paste with fine bone temper
(generally less then 1 mm in size) that can be seen on the exterior surfaces, and with
very small pebbles, feldspar, gypsum, and other weathered sedimentary materials.
Exterior colors range between pale brown (10YR6/3) and light brown (7.5YR6/4).
Interiors very from pale brown (10YR6/30) and light yellowish brown (10YR6/4)
and between very pale brown (10YR7/3 and 90YR7/4) and light yellowish brown
(10YR6/4) to very pale brown (10YR7/3 and 10YR7/4). Most cores are gray
(10YR5/1 and 5YR5/1), yellowish brown (10YR5/4), pale brown (10YR6/3), and
dark gray (10YR4/1).
Form: One body sherd may be a bowl fragment. The others are too small to
afford any inferences concerning vessel shape.

Decoration: All of the Group III sherds have parallel incised lines. Six have
either vertical or slightly diagonal incised lines originating at the coil welds.

104

Texas Archeologieal Society

Dimensions: The mean maximum thickness of Group III sherds is 6.57 mm,
with a standard deviation of .74 mm and a range of 5.8 to 7.8 mm
Comments: See Group II comments.
Group IV
Group IV (Figure 18, E-J) is represented by at least 500 sherds. Twenty-seven
sherds from at least six vessels were studied in detail.
Method ofmam~acture: Coiling is indicated by breaks along welds. Exteriors
are well smoothed to burnished; interiors are well finished.
Paste: Compact and even, with fine bone temper measuring less than I mm in
addition to very small pebbles, feldspar, gypsum, and other weathered sedimentary
materials. Exterior colors are light red (2.5YR6/8), yellowish red (5YR5/6 and
5YR5/8), reddish yellow (5YR6/6, 5YR6/8, and 5YR7/6), pinkish gray (5YR6/2),
dark gray (10YR4/1), dark grayish brown (10YR4/2), brown (10YR5/3), light
yellowish brown (10YR6/4), light gray (10YR7/2), very pale brown (10YR7/4),
light brown (7.5YR6/4), and brown (7.5YR5/2). Interiors vary in color from gray
(5YR6/1), pinkish gray (5YR7/2), pink (5YR7/4), and reddish yellow (5YR7/6)
through light brown (7.5YR6/4) and reddish yellow (7.5YR6/6 and 7.5YR6/8) to
very pale brown (10YR7/4), light yellowish brown (10YR6/4), dark gray (10YR4/
1), and dark brown (10YR4/4). Cores are very pale brown (10YR7/3 and 10YR7/
4), reddish yellow (7.5YR6/6), dark gray (10YR4/1 and 7.5YR4/0), very dark gray
(10YR3/1 and 5YR3/1), pinkish gray (7.5YR6/2), brown (7.5YR5/2), gray
(10YR5/1 and 5 YR5/1), light yellowish brown (10YR6/4), and black (7.5¥R2/0).
Form: Threerimsherds (Figure 19, A-C) have simple direct lips. Seven (Figure
19, G-M) are direct rounded, one (Figure 19, L) with an overlap of clay on its exterior
surface, and one (Figure 19, M) probably from a miniature bowl. Three rimsherds
(Figure 19, D-F) are simple rolled. Three bowls and one jar are apparently
represented by these rims.
Decoration: None.
Dimensions: The mean maximum thickness of the rim sherds is 6.42 mm, with
a standard deviation of 1.82 mm and a range of 4.7 to 9.9mm. The mean maximum
thickness of the body sherds is 6.8 mm, with a standard deviation of 1.12 mm and
a range from 5.4 to 9.9 mm.
Comments: Group IV sherds are all from plainware vessels. These vessels are
well made, hard and smooth, and are similar in appearance to Caddoan plainware.
They do not resemble other locally made plainware sherds from the southern High
Plains examined by the writers.

Runkles and Dorchester ~ The Lott Site

105

Rim Sherds (Figure 19)

D

B

A
Simple

Simple

Direct

G

I

K

H

Direct

Rolled

M

Rounded

Figure 19. Rim outlines: A-C, simple direct; D-F, simple rolled; G-M, direct rounded.

Sixteen of the rim sherds recovered were sufficiently large that vessel shapes
and diameters of the openings could be determined from them (Table 3).Additional
rim sherds were found at the site, none large enough for inferring size or shape, but
representing at least 16 to 18 vessels, including at least one carinated bowl. A high
percentage of the sherds are of a ware of extremely high quality; most are hard and
smooth, and many are highly burnished. The paste is, without exception, fine and
compact.
Rio Grande Area Sherds
Three of the sherds from the Lott site have been identified by Helene Warren,
of Albuquerque (Warren 1984), as Agua Fria or Glaze 1 from the Rio Grande
drainage area. They came from one vessel, but its size and shape could not be
determined.

106

Texas Archeological Society
Table 3.

Vessel Shapes and Orifice Diameters Inferred From
Rim Sherds at the Lott Site

Sherd No.

PT-1
PT-2
PT-3
PT-4
PT-5
PT-6
PT-7
PT-8
PT-9
PT-10
PT-11
PT-12
PT-13
PT-14
PT-15
PT-16

Sherd, from
Figure 19
A
B
D
G
H
E
C
I
F
J
K
L
M

Oriface Diameter
inches
cm
15.24

7.62
12.70
10.16
10.16
7.62
10.16
7.62

6
4
7
3
5
4
4
3
4
3

10.16
15.24

4
6

10.16
17.78

Shape

Jar
Bowl
Jar
Jar
Bowl
Jar
Jar
Jar
Jar
Jar
Jar
Jar
Jar
Bowl
Bowl

DATING
The Lott site is believed to have been occupied periodically by people who
made and used Lott points, from the middle 1300s of the Christian Era into the early
1400s. That the site was not occupied continuously during this time is evidenced
by the very thin cultural layer, the small number of hearths, and the apparent lack
of permanent living structures. However, a considerable number of fire-hardened
clay lumps that have impressions of grass and sticks and finger prints were found
in and near two hearths. The lumps could have come from wattle-and-daub structures that caught fire, but there has been no excavation where the clay lumps were
found that might have yielded evidence of post holes or other structural features.
The number of arrowpoint preforms, arrowpoints, other tools, bison bones, and
chipping stations indicates that the site was probably a base camp for hunting
expeditions, where tools were made and limited butchering and meat drying was
done. The number of potsherds, representing at least 16 to 18 vessels, further
supports this base-camp theory. The Lott site was probably used intermittently and
seasonally, but only in the years when there were concentrations of bison or other
game in the area.
Only the part of the site where Lott points were concentrated has been dated by
the radiocarbon method. Most of the features, including most of the hearths where
charcoal samples could be found, were in this part of the site. The parts of the site
where Garza and Perdiz points have been found will be investigated further in an
attempt to establish reliable dates.

Runkles and Dorchester ~ The Lott Site

107

The time from A.D. 1350 to1400 is suggested for the Lott site by several lines
of evidence. Three radiocarbon dates, listed below, were obtained on charcoal samples from three different hearths in the area of the site on which Lott points were
found almost exclusively. One of the hearths, Feature 4, from which radiocarbon
sample Tx-4600 was obtained, was excavated by entering from the side rather than
from the top in order to obtain a suitable amount of wood charcoal with a minimum
of disturbance to the hearth. During this excavating a Lott point was found in situ
(Figure 20), further indicating that the hearth was in use during the Lott period of
occupation.

Figure 20. Photograph of Feature 4, from which a charcoal sample was taken for radiocarbon
dating. The arrow points to the base of a Lott point found during the excavation for the
charcoal sample.

The radiocarbon dates of the three samples, which were run at the Radiocarbon
Laboratory at The University of Texas at Austin (Valastro n.d.), with their
dendrochronological corrections according to the calibration table of Klein, Lerman, Damon, and Ralph (1982), are as follows:
Sample NQ,
Tx-4442
Tx-4600
Tx-4788

Radiocarbon Ag~
450-2_70 B.P.
510!-_60 B.P.
540-2_50 B.P.

Corrected Date
A.D.1390-1505
A.D.1335-1435
A.D.1325-1435

108

Texas Archeological Society

This dating is further supported by the quantity of bison bones at the site. One
virtually intact skeleton was found, and all of the hearths examined contained
burned and fragmented bison bones. Bison bone and tooth fragments are scattered
over the entire site. There were almost no bison in this area before A.D. 1200;
however, they became much more plentiful on the Llano Estacado beginning about
A.D. 1200 (Dillehay 1974:181). In addition, three sherds of Agua Fria or Rio
Grande Glaze 1 pottery were found on the site. This pottery, which originated in the
Albuquerque area, was widely traded during the 1300s, the peak trade period being
A.D. 1315-1400 (Warren 1970:6). These dates indicate that the Lott point was in
use as much as 50 years earlier than the Garza point. The suggested date for occupation of the Garza site, which is only about 3 km (2 miles) from the Lott site, is
before A.D. 1500 (Runkles 1964:123). Excavations at the Lubbock Lake site
revealed Garza occupation zones that were dated by two radiocarbon samples, one
of which came from the hearth in which a Garza point was found in situ. The dates
were A.D. 1635 and 1665, but these dates may be 50 years too young (Johnson et
al. 1977:105). However, most of the few Lott points found at other locations in the
Garza County area have been found on Garza types of sites. So there probably was
a transition from the Lott point to the Garza point. The writers believe that Lott and
Garza points represent not two different cultures, but rather a change in the making
of the arrowpoint over a period of time. Such a transition fits in with the general
trend of simplification of artifact manufacture that, in this case, amounted to simply discontinuing trimming the lateral edges of the points. In many areas through
which there was a diffusion of Plains traits and traits from the East, the simple triangular point became predominant in later periods.
DISCUSSION

The Lott site differs from other prehistoric sites on the southern High Plains in
ways that make it an important link in the study and interpretation of the archeology
of the southern High Plains.
The writers are not aware of any other site in the southern High Plains with such
a concentration of arrowpoints. The site has yielded more than 60 Lott points, more
than 50 Garza points, more than 60 Perdiz points, and more than 60 triangular
preforms. The count of Perdiz points is probably falsely low because, as noted
above, about half of the artifacts originally classified as broken drills are believed
to be Perdiz stems that were removed from arrow shafts after the points were broken
off. In addition, 50 to 75 other points were broken so badly that type could not be
determined. The site is small, covering only about a halfa hectare (1.25 acres), the
zones from which artifacts were recovered covering less than a fifth of a hectare
(less than half an acre). The number of Perdiz points is especially noteworthy, since
they are scarce in this part of Texas. On sites at the edges of the Llano Estacado there
are rarely more than 3 or 4 Perdiz points.
In addition to the large number of arrowpoints, this site has produced more than
750 sherds of a distinctive pottery representing at least 16 to 18 vessels. The sherds
were found in areas A, C, D, and F, as shown on Figure 3. No sherds were found

Runkles and Dorchester ~ The Lott Site

109

in areas B and E. Only three of the sherds are from the Rio Grande drainage area
of New Mexico; all the rest appear to have been made locally. Most of the sherds
resemble Caddoan pottery and are tempered with burned or calcined bone, which
is found in 20 to 30 percent of Caddoan sites (Davis 1961:6). Bone tempering is
found in other pottery as far west as west-central Texas (Suhm and Jelks 1962:95),
but only rarely on the Llano Estacado. The writers have examined sherds from at
least 90 sites in West Texas and found none that resemble the most common group
of the Lott site sherds. Our observation is that the typical pottery from Llano Estacado sites is thick, coarse, tempered with grit or sand, and not well finished. Apache
pottery on these sites is coarse and usually black, with mica inclusions. In addition,
pottery from the Rio Grande drainage is common on West Texas sites. On most sites
there is a mixture of pottery, with a high percentage from the Rio Grande drainage
together with locally made vessels.
By contrast, the Lott site had only three Rio Grande sherds, and the locally made
Lott pottery is extremely well made. It has a fine paste, is highly smoothed and hard,
and some is burnished. The intentional temper is not sand or clay, but burned bone.
There are some inclusions of small weathered rocks, gravel, and minerals that, as
we have found, occur typically in the Triassic clays of the area. The decoration on
three varieties closely resembles the decoration on some Caddoan vessels.
Ceramics have long been used by archeologists to help establish dates, cultural
associations, diffusion of cultural traits, and social changes. Ceramics are especially useful for these purposes because temper, firing techniques, finish, and
decoration can be used to support some assumptions. Pottery of a distinctive type
manufactured in a known area is often found in another locale. The assumption is
then often made that the pottery was brought by the makers or traded to the other
place. But assumptions based on pottery for establishing cultural backgrounds
cannot be made blindly without in-depth investigation. For example, some of the
sherds found at Edwards complex sites in southwestern Oklahoma have long been
thought to have been traded from Caddoan areas in East Texas. Recent thin-section
and petrographic analyses, however, have indicated that this pottery was made at the
Edwards complex sites (Ferring 1986). People in different areas and of different
cultures used their own techniques in making ceramics, and when they moved, their
techniques usually went with them, so their techniques could be easily recognized
in their new locations. Researchers must make sufficient tests and investigations to
determine if the pottery was traded into the area, if its presence represents a movement of people, or if it represents diffusion of traits or techniques. Since thepottery
found at the Lott site appears from our examination to be made from local materials
and yet has Caddoan decorative elements, its presence there is clearly an important
manifestation of the movement of traits from the Caddoan area to the Plains.
The large quantities of arrowpoints, chipping debris, and pottery strongly
suggest that this site is more than a temporary or short-term campsite. Rather it is
most likely a base camp for hunting expeditions in the area, used seasonally for
making and repairing hunting equipment. Further investigation should be made of
the pieces of fired-clay with imprints of grass and sticks, described earlier, to try to
determine if they came from wattle-and-daub shelters.The writers believe there is

110

Texas Archeological Society

a definite relationship between Caddoan and Plains cultures and that the Lott site is
an important link in this relationship. In the rest of this discussion we will consider
many of the factors beating on related changes in Caddoan and Plains prehistory.
In the last 10 years, a great deal of work has been done that is beginning to
provide explanations for the conditions and factors that brought about changes in
the southern Plains and Caddoan cultures. Much archeological information has
been obtained from research in Central Texas, East Texas, and Oklahoma,dealing
with population declines or increases, population shifts, and changes in culture.
Several researchers are beginning to discem patterns of climate and weather
changes that parallel changes in archeological patterns; these parallels may lead to
the most logical solutions to many archeological puzzles.
In the eastern half of Texas the density of archeological sites suggests that for
1600 years, from 1000 B.C to A.D. 500, there was an increase in population, after
which the population remained about static. In Central Texas an apparent decline
in population began in the late Prehistoric period, or about A.D. 500 (Skinner
1981:114). Then, after A.D. 1200, the population in north-central and East Texas
apparently began to decline (Peters 1986). The decline in prehistoric populations
seems to have begun in Central Texas around A.D. 500 and to have moved after that
to the north and east.
Bruseth has made extensive studies as part of the Richland Creek Archeological Project (RCAP)(Bruseth et al. 1986), dealing with the paleoecological conditions for the late Holocene period. A variety of disciplines were exploited, the principle ones being pollen analysis, radiocarbon dating, and studies of alluvial stratigraphy. When these studies are combined with archeological data, a clear picture
of cause and effect emerges. From archeological data and study of utilization of
bison and other mammals through faunal analysis, it is possible to trace fluctuations
in prehistoric populations and, especially, movements of people and cultures.
The Richland Creek Project has been ideally suited to make these studies of
climatic change. Its geographic setting is along the Prairie Margin, a major ecotone
separating the eastem Deciduous Forest Biome from the Grassland Biome in Texas
and Oklahoma (Shelford 1963), where the forests of eastern Texas and Oklahoma
give way to the Great Plains, sharply and distinctly in some parts of the zone, and
through a complex mixture of forest, prairie, and savannah in other parts. The zone
has not been static during the Holocene but has advanced and retreated as temperature and moisture conditions have changed (Borchert 1953). These changes
have had a major impact on the adaptations of prehistoric peoples because grasslands and forests have markedly different subsistence potentials. The overall
change that occurs during drought conditions is a retreat and replacement of forests
by tall grasses. The existing tall grasses are in turn replaced by medium grasses and
by short grasses, which are very tolerant of drought conditions.
The studies by Bruseth have established some patterns of climatic changes.
Although each site is different, his studies of pollen remains and fluvial or floodplain deposition at many sites indicate a wet period from 1000 B.C. to about A.D.
800 (Bruseth 1986). From A.D. 800 to 1170 the climate began a drying trend, and
from A.D. 1170 to the present the climate in the study area has been dry. Studies

Runkles and Dorchester w The Lott Site

111

by Hail in eastern, central, and southwestem Oklahoma have indicated a similar
pattern (Hail 1982:391). In southwesten Oklahoma, 650 B.C. to A.D. 950 was a
moist period; A.D. 950 to 1290 began a dryer period; and A.D. 1290 to the present
was a dry period. Studies by Ferring in Delaware Canyon in southwestern Oklahoma also indicate that A.D. 1 to 1000 was moist. Other research (Hall 1982) suggests that the area has been dry from A.D. 1000 to the present.
These better-defined climatic changes relate exceptionally well to changes
noted among the southern Plains cultures and the Caddoans of eastern Oklahoma
and Texas. Wyckoff has made extensive studies of the Caddoan cultures in the
Arkansas River basin C/gyckoff 1980:514), dividing the sequence into four periods.
We are interested in his Period III (A.D. 1200-1400) and Period IV (1400-1550).
The changes noted during these periods are definitely related to events on the
southern High Plains. The Caddoans were farmers, who supplemented their diet
with hunting and gathering. They lived in scattered villages and houses on the rich
soil of stream and river terraces. Their pottery, arrowpoints, houses, mounds, and
religious items resembled the Mississippian cultures to the east. Around A.D. 1200,
a decrease in the number of houses demonstrates that the villages began to disperse
to other areas. At about the same time, Plains traits began to appear in Caddoan sites,
and by A.D. 1400 Caddoan villagers were using southern Plains flints, turquoise,
and tool types, and the farmers were using bison scapulas for digging tools.
All of these changes coincide with the drying trend that began in A.D. 1200 and
has continued to the present. This drying trend adversely affected farming activities; the short-grass prairies moved to the east where bison herds became much
more plentiful. In fact, the ratio of deer to bison usage changed from 10.6:1 (A.D.
950-1200) to 1.04:1 (A.D. 1400-1550). These ratios are based on bone counts in
dated sites (Wyckoff 1980:500). The Plains people apparently were moving into
eastern areas following and hunting bison, and the Caddoan farmers began to move
westward onto the plains on hunting expeditions. These events could explain the
mixing of Plains and Caddoan traits seen at the Lott site and other sites from northcentral Texas to western Oklahoma. It is possible that groups of Caddoan hunters
actually reached the Llano Estacado by traveling up the Brazos River basin from
known Caddoan sites such as Stansbury and Chupek in the Waco area. It is also possible that groups traveled up the Red River and then southward down the east edge
of the Llano Estacado along the Caprock, where water and campsites were readily available. The radiocarbon dates from the Lott site fit very well into the time
frame proposed here for the movement and intermixing of the Plains and Caddoan
people.
CONCLUSIONS
The writers believe the Lott site is a distinct manifestation of the movement of
Caddoan traits to the southern High Plains and that the people used the site
seasonally as a base camp for hunting, manufacturing stone tools, and perhaps for
making pottery. The site was used for 50 to 100 years beginning in the mid A.D.
1300s and continuing into the early 1400s. During this time their arrowpoint

112

Texas Archeological Society

making went through a transition, and with elimination of the side trimming, the
Lott points became Garza points. Sherds of one Rio Grande glaze vessel and two
obsidian Garza points, obsidian flakes, and shell beads made from Pacific Ocean
shells found at the site indicate that in the late 1300s some limited trade with areas
to the west took place.
Since the tools and arrowpoints, generally thought to have been made by the
men, are Plains varieties, we believe they were from Plains rather than Caddoan
groups. On the other hand, ceramics are generally thought to have been made by
women, so it is possible that men in Plains hunting parties that encountered Caddoan
groups to the east may have married Caddoan women who went with them to the
plains. This could account for the Caddoan-style pottery that was made on or in the
vicinity of the Lott site. However, we cannot see any way to test or validate this
explanation, although it has plausibility on its side.
We are unable to explain the large number of Perdiz points on this site. They
are common in many parts of Texas, including parts of the Caddo area, in very late
prehistoric times. Their distribution on this site does not correspond to the
distribution of Caddoan-style pottery. This problem will be investigated further and
we hope to deal with it in a later report.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors express a great deal of appreciation to several people who have
contributed their time, talent, and ideas to this report. Mary Dorchester, wife of the
junior author, deserves many thanks for the hours of typing, retyping, and changing
that are always necessary in a report of this kind. We especially single out and thank
the many professional archeologists who have been helpful and cooperative and
have gone out of their way to share their expertise and to assist in many ways. This
kind of cooperation does a great deal to encourage amateurs not only to do thorough
research, recording, and reporting of prehistoric sites, but also to seek the help of
professionals. We thank Don Wyckoff, Timothy Baugh, and Fern Swenson, all of
the Oklahoma Archeological Survey. Don Wyckoff very kindly supplied information of importance to this report from his unpublished dissertation, and personal
conversations with him were especially helpful. Baugh examined Lott site pottery
and shared his knowledge of the Edwards complex cultures in southwestern
Oklahoma, and special thanks are due Fern Swenson for her technical description
of the pottery. Thomas R. Hester, of The University of Texas at San Antonio,
submitted five Lott site obsidian samples to the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory,
University of California, for x-ray fluorescence examination for sourcing the
samples. We especially appreciate the support of this sourcing project by the Center
for Archaeological Research at The University of Texas at San Antonio. Reid
Ferring, of North Texas State University, prepared thin sections of Lott site
potsherds and prepared a petrographic analysis. Bonnie Yates, also of North Texas
State University, examined bone artifacts and specimens. Dee Ann Story, of the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin,
provided encouragement, advice, her expertise on Caddoan cultures, and identifi-

Runkles and Dorchester -- The Lott Site

113

cations of the shells from which beads at the Lott site were made. Thomas N.
Campbell, of The University of Texas at Austin, offered advice on radiocarbon
dating. Alan Skinner arranged for radiocarbon funding from the Texas Archeological Research Foundation. Elton Prewitt, of Prewitt and Associates, was especially
helpful when we visited with him on numerous occasions for practical counseling
and advice. Helene Warren examined the Lott site pottery and assured us that none
of it originated in the Rio Grande drainage. We appreciate the permission given by
Eileen Johnson, of Texas Tech University, to use the x-ray fluorescence data on
specimens from the Lubbock Lake and Blackwater Draw sites.
Finally, it is not possible to thank properly Michael B. Collins, who offered
much guidance, especially editorial comments and organizational suggestions.
John Lott, owner of the ranch on which the Lott site is located, is to be especially
thanked for allowing the writers and others to work at the site. Lott has supported
the project in other ways, and this support is especially appreciated, for it allowed
us to obtain some data that otherwise would have been difficult to get. The report
has been improved by all of these people. The junior author was able to write the
paper only because of the help of very detailed notes, representative artifacts, and
the senior author’s long-term knowledge of this site.
REFERENCES

CITED

Baugh, Timothy G., and Swenson, Fern E.
1985 Personal communication.
Borchert, J. R.
1953 The Climate of the central North American grassland. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 40(1):1-39.
Bruseth, James E., Raab, Mark, and Mcgregor, Daniel E.
1986 Richland Creek Technical Series, Chapter 5, Volume 1. Archeological Research
Program. Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Davis, E. Mott
1961 The Caddoan area: an introduction to the symposium. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 31:3-10.
Dillehay, Tom D.
1974 Late Quaternary bison population changes on the Southern Plains. Plains Anthro pologist 19-65:180-196.
DiPeso, Charles C., Rinaldo, John B., and Fenner, Gloria J.
1974 Casas Grandes--a fallen trading center of the Gran Chichimeca. The Amerind
Foundation/Dragoon, Vol. 6, Chapter 7. Northland Press, Flagstaff.
Ferring, Reid
1986 Personal communication.

114

Texas Archeological Society

Hall, S. A.
1982 Late Holocenepaleoecology of the Southern Plains. Quaternary Research 17:391407.
HoUiday, Vance T., and Welty, Curtis M.
1981 Lithic tool resources of the eastern Llano Estacado. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 52:201-214.
Johnson, Eileen
1984 Personal communication.
Johnson, Eileen, Holliday, Vance T.; Kaczor, Michael J.; and Stuckertrath, Robert
1977 The Garza occupation at the Lubbock Lake site. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 48:83-109.
Klein, Jeffrey, Lerman, J. C., Damon, P. E., and Ralph, E. K.
1982 Calibration of radiocarbon dates. Radiocarbon 21(2):103-150.
Munsell, A. H.
1975 Munsell soil color charts. Macbeth Division of Koll Morgen, Baltimore
Peters, Duane
1986 Report on the Joe Pool Lake archeological investigations. Unpublished draft.
Runkles, Frank A.
1964 The Garza site: a Neo-American campsite near Post, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 35:101-125.
Shelford, V. E.
1963 The ecology of North America. University of Illinois Press, Urbanna.
Skinner, S. Alan
1981 Aboriginal democraphic changes in Central Texas. Plains And~ropologist
26-92:111-118.
Suhm, Dee Ann, and Jelks, Edward B.
1962 Handbook of Texas archeology: type descriptions. Texas Archeological Society Special Publication 1 and The Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin 4, Austin.
Swenson, Fem
1985 Personal communication, March.
Tumer, Ellen Sue, and Hester, Thomas R.
1985 A field guide to stone artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Field Guide
Series, Texas Monthly Press, Austin.
Valastro, S., Jr.
n.d. Written communication.

Runkles and Dorchester n The Lott Site

115

Vamer, Dudley M.
1968 The nature of non-buried archeological data: problems in northeastem Mexico.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 38:51-65.
Warren, A. H.
1970 Centers of manufacture and trade of Rio Grande glazes. Apreliminaryreport from
the Laboratory of Anthropoloty, Museum of New Mexico, Santa Fe.
Warren, Helene
1984 Personal communication, March.
Wyckoff, Don G.
1980 Caddoan adaptive strategies in the Arkansas Basin, eastern Oklahoma. Unpublished dissertation, Washington State University, University Microfilms, Ann
Arbor.
Yates, Bonnie
1985 Personal communication.

Prehistoric Population Dynamics
of Southeastern Texas
L. W. Patterson

ABSTRACT
A study is presented on development of tentative models of
population dynamics for prehistoric periods o f southeastern Texas.
The inland and coastal margin areas of this region, which appear to
have significant differences in population dynamics, are considered separately.

INTRODUCTION

Demography is of general interest in the study of prehistoric lifeways and
cultural change, but population studies are often limited by problems in obtaining
and interpreting data from archeological sites. There now appear to be enough data
available to begin development of models for prehistoric population dynamics in
southeastern Texas, especially for the later postceramic periods.
The only demographic model published for this region is one proposed by Aten
(1983:Figure 17.1), which covers mainly postceramic and historic Indian time
periods for the upper Texas coastal margin. This article considers prehistoric
population dynamics of both the coastal margin and inland parts of the Coastal Plain
of southeastern Texas (Figure 1); there appear to be significant demographic differences between the two.
STUDY PROBLEMS
Several factors that make demographic studies for prehistoric periods difficult
are listed below.
1. The limitations of radiocarbon dating diminish its value for determining the
populations of areas for short time periods.
2. Most cause-effect studies are of limited value because they do not have
usable data. For example, there are problems in relating cultural dynamics to
climatic changes (Butzer 1983:301).
3. Sampling patterns can cause problems, especially if there are intraregional
differences in population densities.
4. The time ranges established for many artifact types that are commonly used
as time indicators for archeological sites are not sufficiently accurate for demographic use.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57 (1986)

118

Texas Archeological Society

5. The kind of data needed for dating sites are available for only a limited
number of sites.
6. Chronological data from one region may be of limited value for dating an
adjacent region because of interregional differences in chronologies for specific
artifact types.
7. The data base for early preceramic periods is generally limited.
8. Possible differences in interpretation of identical data can make conclusions
meaningless. For example, was a large site occupied by a large group for a long
period or by small groups for several short periods.

I. Grimes
2. Walker
3. San Jacinto
4. Polk
5. Tyler

KEY TO COUNTIES
6. Jasper
I I. Montgomery
7. Newton
12. Liberty
8. Washington
13. Hardin
g. Austin
14. Orange
I O. Wailer
15. Fort Bend

16. Harris
17. Chambers
18. Jefferson
I g. Brazoria
20. Galveston

Figure 1. Map of the eastern part of the Gulf Coastal Plain of Texas, showing the coastal
margin and inland areas.

Patterson ~ Prehistoric Population Dynamics

119

SOUTHEASTERN TEXAS
Data published by Patterson (1979:Tables 1,2) on recorded prehistoric sites of
various time periods for a 20-county area in southeastern Texas can be used for
developing tentative models of population dynamics in this region. At this stage of
study, available data are useful for judging population changes, but not for
establishing absolute population densities. The time period for occupation for a
large number of sites in this region is unknown (Patterson 1979:Table 1). For this
study, the following time periods have been used:
Late Prehistoric, 900 years, from A.D. 600 to 1500
Early Ceramic, 500 years, from A.D. 100 to 600
Middle/Late Archaic, 3100 years, from 3000 B.C. to A.D. 100.
The time ranges shown above are the same ones used previously in a discussion
(Patterson 1985:Table 1) of southeastern Texas prehistoric settlement patterns. The
Paleoindian and Early Archaic periods have not been used because the data base for
those periods is insufficient. The term Early Ceramic period (Story 1981:145) is
used here rather than the term Woodland (Patterson 1979:108).
Population density factors (PF) for each prehistoric time period are calculated
here by taking the number of sites in a region for the time period in question (Table
1) and dividing this by the number of years in the time
Table 1.
Time Period

Summary of Population Factors
Inland
No. of Sites

PF

232
214
104

25.8
42.8
3.4

Late Prehistoric
Early Ceramic
Middle!Late Archaic

Coastal Margin
No. of Sites PF
74
27
8

8.2
5.4
0.3

PF: Population Factor
SOURCE: Patterson 1979
period. The result is here termed the Population Factor (PF). For the convenience
of dealing with large numbers, all results have been multiplied by 100. This is
essentially the same method used by Prewitt (1983:216) to examine population
densities for various time periods in Central Texas. Population Factors have been
calculated here separately for inland sites and coastal margin shell middens (Table
1; Figure 2). The curve for the coastal margin shows population increasing from
the Archaic through the Late Prehistoric periods. This is in agreement with Aten’s
population model for this area (1983:Figure 17.1). In comparison, it can be seen
(Figure 2) that for the inland area there is a population peak in the Early Ceramic
period and a population decline in the Late Prehistoric.
The population decline in the Late Prehistoric for the inland area of southeastem Texas may be underestimated here. It has been noted (Patterson 1976) that

Texas Archeological Society

120

5O

A

i/
Y
._.___ _____--,------O’

4~

3O0O

L~)O0

1000

BC

AD

I000

CO00

Figure 2. Graph showing population density estimates for the inland and coastal margin
areas.

Indians on the inland part of the Coastal Plain of southeastern Texas may have been
more mobile in the Late Prehistoric, using smaller sites perhaps for shorter periods.
A given number of mobile people would occupy more sites in a time period than
would the same number of sedentary people.
DISCUSSION
This study establishes for the inland part of the Coastal Plain of southeastern
Texas during the Early Ceramic period a population density peak that is similar to
the peak shown by Prewitt (1983:Figure 6) for Central Texas during roughly the
same period. Still unexplained is why a population decline occurred in the Late
Prehistoric after continuous population increases in all preceding prehistoric time
periods. Some common reasons for population decreases are climatic change,
disease, and warfare, but this question remains a subject for future research in
Central and southeastern Texas. As noted by Story (1981:144), reasons for
population change can be difficult to determine.
In contrast to the inland Coastal Plain, th e population density of the upper Texas
coastal margin seems to have continued to increase from the Late Archaic through
the Late Prehistoric, as shown by both this study and Aten’s (1983:Figure 17.1)
model. Apparently the marine food resources of the coastal margin could be
exploited more intensely, supporting a larger population. There are several indications too that the Indians of the coastal margin continued to follow a sedentary lifeway while Indians of the adjacent inland areas were becoming more mobile
(Patterson 1983:260) in the Late Prehistoric. Large amounts of pottery are generally

Patterson ~ Prehistoric Population Dynamics

121

found at coastal margin shell middens during the Early Ceramic and Late Prehistoric
periods, one indication of a fairly sedentary lifeway. Inland sites, however, do not
have large amounts of pottery in the Early Ceramic period and have even less in the
Late Prehistoric.
Artifact assemblages at inland sites in postceramic periods differ significantly
from artifact assemblages at coastal margin sites in southeastern Texas, indicating
not only differences in lifeways, but also suggesting relatively little communication
between the two areas. For example, inland sites usually have large lithic assemblages and coastal margin sites have small lithic assemblages. Too, incised pottery
comprises a small percentage of the ceramics at inland sites but is common at coastal
margin sites. It is concluded that potentialpopulation shifts from inland to the coastal margin did not contribute much to population increases on the coasta! margin.
SUMMARY

This study has provided two patterns of population dynamics for southeastern
Texas. In the inland area there seem to have been continuing population increases
from the Archaic through the Early Ceramic periods, followed by a leveling off, or
more likely a decline, in population density in the Late Prehistoric. In contrast, on
the coastal margin, population density seems to increase from the Late Archaic continuously through the Late Prehistoric. These conclusions are, of course, subject to
change as more data become available. More research is needed to determine why
population changes have occurred and to refine the data on the magnitude of
population changes.

REFERENCES CITED
Aten, L. E.
1983 Indians of upper Texas Coast. Academic Press, New York.
Butzer, K. W.
1982 Archaeology as human ecology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Patterson, L. W.
1976 Technological changes in Harris County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 47:171-188.
1979 A review of the prehistory of the upper Texas Coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 50:103-123.
1983 Prehistoric settlement and technological patterns in Southeast Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeologica! Society 54:253-269.
Prewitt, E. R.
1983 From Circleville to Toyah: comments on Central Texas chronology. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 54:201-238.
Story, D. A.
1981 An overview of the archeology of East Texas. Plains Anthropologist 26:139-156.

A Preliminary Assessment of Environmental
and Cultural Determinants of Settlement in
Central Texas During the Nineteenth Century
Shawn Bonath Carlson

ABSTRACT
An archeological survey was conducted for the Department of the Army
at Fort Hood in Central Texas during the winter of 1982-1983 by the Texas
Areheological Survey at The University of Texas at Austin. The results of the
survey were later analyzed by the Archeological Research Laboratory at
Texas A&M University. Of the nearly 200 sites recorded, 88 were historic.
This paper strives to identify possible trends in historic settlement through the
use of basic environmental data observed and recorded in the field. Combined
with historical documentation pertaining to the project area and chronological
data obtained from the recovered artifacts, suggestions are made concerning
preferred site locations and periods of settlement.

INTRODUCTION
Eighty-eight historic sites were recorded during a 35 km2 survey at the Fort
Hood Military Installation in Central Texas and are summarized here for the
purpose of identifying possible trends in historic settlement (Figure 1). Environmental and cultural determinants are examined and regular patterns of settlement
found in regard to zone of settlement, landform, vegetation, distance to water,
beginning date of settlement, length of settlement, ethnicity, and occupations.
Environmental data and historical documentation are particularly stressed at Fort
Hood because of impacts to the cultural remains by military activities that have
destroyed their contextual integrity. Initial impacts occurred at the time of acquisition in the 1940s when all domestic structures were razed or moved to nearby
Killeen. Since then, tracked and wheeled vehicles, bulldozing, artillery fire,
ordnance, and bivouac operations have caused daily impacts to the sites. In spite of
these weaknesses, the United States military installation at Fort Hood offers a
unique opportunity to examine historic site settlement in a contiguous area covering approximately 546 km2 (339 square miles).
The survey was conducted for the army during the winter of 1982-1983 by the
Texas Archeological Survey (TAS) at the University of Texas at Austin under
contract to Science Applications, Inc., of LaJolla, California. The results of the
survey were analyzed for the army during the summer of 1983 by the Archeological Research Laboratory (ARL) at Texas A&M University under contract to SCubed, also of LaJolla, California.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57 (1986)

Texas Archeological Society

124

\
\
"\
\

’\
\
"\
k
’\
\
’\
\

\

’\

Copperas

\

Cove

"\

’\

Temple

’\
"\
"\
’\
"\
"\
j"

’\
t

0
i

0

Figure 1. Map of parts of Bell and Coryell Counties, Texas, showing the location of Fort
Hood Military Installation.
BACKGROUND

Fort Hood, one of the largest military installations in the world, is located in
Bell and Coryell counties in Central Texas. The sites discussed here are in Coryell
County in the northern part of the fort (Figure 1). Characterized by varying relief
within the Lampasas Cut Plains, Fort Hood lies adjacent to Texas’s major physiographic feature, the Balcones Escarpment (Arbingast et al. 1976:8,12,13). It also
lies near thej uncture of three physiographic regions: the Edwards Plateau, the Cross
Timbers, and the Blackland Prairies (Figure 2).
The cultural history of Coryell County does not begin until after the establishment of Fort Gates in 1849 (Scott 1965). As one of a series of forts established by
the War Department to protect the frontiersmen from marauding Indians, it was
located beyond the fringes of westernmost settlement in Texas. Within two years,

Carlson ~ Environmental and Cultural Determinants

125

High Plains

Low or
Blackland

Plains

Vor

Central
ricultural
and Timber
Basin and
Mountmn
Country

ueea

Region

Lampasas Cut Plain

Edwards Plateau

South Texas
Plains

Figure 2. Map showing the relation of Fort Hood to the natural regions of Texas, according
to Richardson, Wallace, and Anderson 1981.

settlement had advanced to this permanent line of defense, and Fort Gates was
abandoned. During the early years of settlement, the problem of straying livestock
was complicated by the threat of Indian theft. The Assistant Marshall stated in the
population schedules of Coryell County in 1860 that"the dwellings in the southwest
portion of this county are unoccupied, the inhabitants were forced to abandon for
the purpose of self preservation from Indian depredations" (United States Bureau
of the Census 1860a).
Indian dissension continued for many years, and it was not until the 1880s that
settlement intensified and the development of Coryell County really began. Industrial manufacturing was never significant, and farrning and stock raising were the
critical industries. The interpretation of historic sites at Fort Hood presupposes
knowledge of these industries, which dominate the archeological record.

Texas Archeological Society

126

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Hill
Bosque
Hamilton
Mills
Coryell
McLennan
Falls

8
9
10
11
12
13

Lampasas
Belt
Milam
Burnett
Williamson
Travis

Figure 3. Map of Texas showing the 13-county area for which a search of the literature was
conducted.

A literature search for previously known historic sites in the Fort Hood vicinity
was conducted for a 13-county area extending from the Colorado River to the
Brazos River and slightly north and south of the project area (Figure 3). The counties
chosen encompass the Fort Hood area and lie within the Central Texas Prairies
(Richardson et al. 1981). The search was admittedly limited to current indices of
Texas archeology (Simons 1981, 1983), but it does acknowledge most of the major
historic sites that have been previously recorded for the area. With the exception of
recent studies at Fort Hood (D. Carlson et al. 1980; S. Carlson 1984; Dibble et al.
1984a, 1984b; Guderjan et al. 1980; Jackson 1982; Jackson et al. 1982a, 1982b;
Prewitt et al. 1983; Roemer et al. 1985; Skinner et al. 1981, 1984), no reports of
investigations could be found for eight of the thirteen counties (Bell, Bosque,
Bumet, Coryell, Falls, Hamilton, Lampasas, and Mills), including the counties that
encompass Fort Hood. For the remaining counties (Hill, McLennan, Milam, Travis,
and Williamson), most of the studies were outdated descriptive survey reports.

Carlson ~ Environmental and Cultural Deterrainants

127

The high number of historic sites recorded at the Fort Hood Military Installation, which to date number more than 800, suggests the need for pattern recognition.
Though the project area discussed in this paper does not cover a contiguous area,
subsequent surveys have been completed recently for more than 200 contiguous
square kilometers and shouldprovide more reliable data (D. Carlson et al. 1986; S.
Carlson, Ensor, et al. 1987; S. Carlson, D. Carlson, et al. 1987). These Central Texas
sites represent a unique "time capsule." Most were settled during the latter part of
the nineteenth century (ca. 1880) and were purchased by the army beginning in
1942. It is likely that many of these sites represent continuous occupations. As a
group, they are similar to many other settlements throughout Texas during the
nineteenth century and may reflect adaptations peculiar to later settlers of the
western frontier.
RESEARCH DESIGN

The investigations at Fort Hood required only inventory and assessment of the
cultural resources, since the sites were not being threatened immediately. Research
objectives were developed using only the basic information necessary for inventory
and assessment and primarily included locational, documentary, and chronological
data. Those objectives focused upon the following six expectations:
(1) It was expected that fewer sites would be found per square kilometer in
either the uplands or flood plain areas than in the intermediate zone.
(2) The early settlers were expected to favor easily accessible drinking water
from streams, cisterns, or wells.
(3) It was expected that a relationship would be found between site complexity and site function.
(4) The distributions of sites by landform were expected to be an indicator of
site function.
(5) It was expected that the increased manufacturing and production of goods
during the late nineteenth century would be reflected by a higher deposition of
artifacts during that period.
(6) It was expected that the increased manufacturing and production of the late
nineteenth century would be reflected by increased size of activity areas.
The locational data were recorded in the field and ranged from grid coordinates
and site size to a variety of environmental data such as elevation, slope, landform,
vegetation, and distance to water. These data were coded for computer analysis and
provided a variety of answers regarding preferences of the early pioneers for
settlement of the project area.
The research questions also assumed the availability and use of a limited
number of primary documents, which included (1) title abstracts, (2) population,
agricultural, and industrial manuscript census schedules, and (3) General Land
Office records. These documents generally provided information on land ownership, length of land use, use of the land through time, population density, ethnicity,
etc. Although many other documents could have been consulted, these records
provided a wide variety of information that could be examined quickly and used in

128

Texas Archeological Society

the assessment of site significance.
Research questions addressing the chronological data were difficult to construct, due to the limited number of diagnostic cultural remains. Because of the
minimal collection policies established by the Fort Hood archeologist, many
historic artifacts have been recorded simply as being present or absent. Only a
representative sample of those believed to be diagnostic was collected. Usually this
included decorated ceramics, bottle lips and bases, the characteristic lavender glass,
and any items with trademarks or patent numbers. However, the frequently
occurring undecorated whitewares may be useful eventually as diagnostic markers
for the late nineteenth century and early twentieth century (Lebo and Marcaurelle
1983). Because the chronological data were so limited at Fort Hood, the date ranges
presented here represent the range of manufacture for the artifacts observed or
collected at each site and not the occupational range of the site. However, the range
of manufacture is currently our best estimate for when sites may have been occupied
and should overlap the range of occupation.
ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS OF SETTLEMENT

Three broad environmental zones have been identified by the Fort Hood archeologist: (1) the lowlands, which include bottomland associated with perennial and
intermittent streams, (2) the intermediate uplands, which encompass land higher
than the lowland zone but do not include the massive limestone found in parts of Fort
Hood, and (3) the uplands, which encompass only the areas where limestone is
exposed (Briuer 1983; Roemer et al. 1985:III-1, 2). The 88 historic sites were primarily in the lowland and intermediate uplands (Figure 4). More than half of these
occurred in the intermediate uplands and were defined as domestic dwellings, farm/
ranch complexes, and trash dumps. Slightly fewer sites of similar functions occurred in the lowlands. The fewest sites occurred in the uplands, and most were trash
dumps.
More than half of the sites were distributed between 244 and 251 meters (800
and 825 feet) above mean sea level (AMSL), with the range of elevations extending
from 213 to 305 meters (700 to 1000 feet) AMSL. However, previous studies using
statistical methods have suggested that there are no preferred site locations for
historic sites at Fort Hood based on either elevation or environmental zone (Carlson
et al. 1983). The chronological distribution of the 88 historic sites by elevation,
however, appears to suggest some regularities (Figure 5). Using the range of
beginning dates of manufacture for artifacts recovered, a preliminary range of
occupation was established. Sites located between 244 and 274 meters (800 and 900
feet) AMSL tended to be both the earliest settled and the longest occupied. A
distribution based on the average range of beginning and ending dates of manufacture suggested other regularities as well. The lowland sites seemed to be somewhat
earlier and were also abandoned earlier. The remaining sites were probably
occupied until the time of purchase by the army beginning in 1942.
Similar analyses of the site distribution of landforms have suggested that
slopes, secondary terraces, and knolls were preferred site locations, with

Carlson ~ Environmental and Cultural Determinants

45-

129

45

40

35

30

>’, 25

o
t’-

(1)
ET
(1)
u_

20

15

10
7

221
C

Q.

Figure 4. Bar graph showing distribution of historic sites at Fort Hood according to
environmental zone,

130

Texas Archeological Society

200

-

1800-1849
3OO
2OO
25O

300

1850-1874

-

2OO
25O
1875-1899

S

3OO y
2OO
25O

1900-1924

500
200 250 ~]
>

1925-1950

-

50(
0

I
1

I

I

i

I

I

I

I

I

I

2

3

4- 5

6

7

8

9

I0 II

I

FREQUENCY
Figure 5. Frequency polygon showing distribution of historic sites at Fort Hood according
to elevation and date.

interfluvials and banks also somewhat favored ~igure 6). Slopes and knolls seemed
to be the preferred locations for farm/ranch complexes characterized by multiple
structmes, while secondary terraces, knolls, and interfluvials were the most frequent choices for domestic dwellings (Figure 7). Trash dumps corresponded with

Carlson m Environmental and Cultural Determinants

Landform

131

Frequency

Butte

3

Plateau
Bench
Spur
Primary Terrace
Secondary Terrace
Tertiary Terrace
Escarpment
Knoll
Slope

18

Interfluvial

11

Bank

9
,

0

~

2

I
4

I
6

I
8

I
10

I
12

I
14

I
16

I
18

Frequency
Figure 6. Bar graph showing distribution of historic sites at Fort Hood according to landform.
secondary terraces, slopes, and interfluvials but did not seem to be associated with
individual dwellings or farm/ranch complexes. On the whole, all historic sites in the
study area favored prominent locations.
The vegetation recorded at these sites had little diversity (Figure 8). Most sites
were in open grassland, and the remainder were in mixed forests. The nearest water
was generally available from on-site concrete-ringed wells and cisterns or nearby
streams. More than half were within 150 meters, though none was more than 330
meters distant (Figure 9). The distance to these water sources from the main site
areas generally increased after 1880. The availability of permanent water also
appeared to have no bearing on the choice of site location (Figure 10). All sites in

132

Texas Archeological Society

SITE TYPE

~

/ ’/
Secondary
Terrace

Tertiary
Terrace

~1

; ’/ ’. C.,,2Jooo
Knoll

Slope

Interfiuv)at

Sank

/
Oth.r

LANDFORM

Figure 7. Frequency block chart showing historic sites at Fort Hood according to landform
and type.
the study area were between 15 and 75 km from a major drainage, suggesting that
nearness to water was not a critical factor. The poor navigability of many Texas
rivers may also have detracted from settlement near permanent water (Puryear and
Winfield 1976:xvi). Overland routes to the Brazos River, about 80 to 113 km (50
to 75 miles) to the east, may have been used more frequently than the locally unreliable waterways (Puryear and Winfield 1976:4). Lastly, a chronological plot of the
site locations along each of the major drainages revealed that initial settlement
occurred in waves at periodic intervals (Figure 11), each successive wave filling in
the gaps remaining from the previous influxes. The resulting pattern is chronologically mixed, probably reflecting the partitioning of the original land grants through
time.
CULTURAL DETERMINANTS OF INITIAL SETTLEMENT

The cultural determinants for initial site setdement in the study area were
identified from documentary data concerning the original land grants, ethnicity of
the original settlers, and the local industries.
Nine types of land grants were issued in the study area (Table 1). Of the original
46 grantees, only 13 had been issued title to their land by 1860 (Texas General Land
Table 1. Types of Original Land Grants in Project Area
1 st class
2nd class
3rd class
Bounty
Donation
Preemption
School
Scrip
Unknown
TOTAL

6
1
5
5
2
17
5
4
1
46

Carlson -- Environmental and Cultural Determinants

39
38,36
34323028-

26

26>, 240
t--

22:::3

2O

~"
20i_
ct
18161412108642-

2
1

0

Figure 8. Bar graph showing historic sites at Fort Hood according to vegetation zone.

133

Texas Archeological Society

134

800C
$
o

600G

o

!

o

o

o

o

*

e

o

~

o

o
o
e

$

500C

I

6

eO

S

o

i

I

o

400C

0

o

E

o

So
o

o 3ooc

o
o

o
¯

EL

o
o
2O0O

IOO0

00

1810

1

0

1830

1840

1

0

1

0

1870

1

0

1

1900

1910

1

0

1930

1940

1950

Estimated Beginning Date

Figure 9. Scattergram showing distance of Fort Hood sites from nearest water according
to date of first settlement.
350
o

300

o

¯

~" 250
o)
o

,~ 200

oo

¯

o

150

o
o

Z

o

=o

o

lOO

a
50

e

o

¯

,~

¯

¯

o
¯

¯
8

.

¯

oo

o

o

0
=
~’ ° i o ~
~
,°
?
T/
,o , ~:,
,
,
*
1800 1810 1820 1830 1840 1850 1860 1870 1880 1890 I~ 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950
l=stimated Beginning Date

Figure 10. Scattergram showing distance of Fort Hood sites from permanent water course
according to date of first settlement.

Carlson u Environmental and Cultural Determinants

135

No~hing
7000
6900
6800

Henson Creek

6700

+

/"

Legend

O

Creek
~J
~ Turnover
~

m

18O0-1850

O

185o-1874

+

19oo-1924

x

1925.1950

1875-1899

6600
6500
6400
6300

A Brown Creek

620C

~

61o(3
6000

AO

5900
5800
5700
1500

1

÷

6’00 ......
1700

1800

1900

2000

2100

2200

2

2o0 ’

2400

25

’00 ’

2600

’

’

2700

2800

;

29 O

’

3000

’

3100

Easting

Figure 11. Maps of major creeks in Fort Hood showing Universal Transverse Mercator
(UTM) locations and dates of initial settlement of historic sites.

SITE TYPE
Farm/Ranch

@

Domestic Site

OuN

2

1800-1850

1850-1874

1875-1899

1900-1924

1925-1950

ESTIMATED BEGINNING DATE

Figure 12. Frequency block chart showing historic sites at Fort Hood according to
estimated beginning date and type.

Office 1941). These grants included first-, second-, and third-class headrights,
military bounties, and battle donations. Many of these were given for military
service, either during the 1836 fight for independence or on the frontier afterwards.
The first-, second-, and third-class grants issued in the study area before 1860
largely indicate settlement in Texas before 1840. The first-class grants were
intended to reward those who assisted during the war for independence. The second-

136

Texas Archeological Society

and third-class grants were issued to encourage settlement in Texas (Miller
1967:151,739).
Titles issued after 1860 in the project area were for preemption, school, and
Confederate scrip certificates. The greatest number of settlers in the project area
acquired their land by preemption; that is, they settled vacant lands in the public
domain and were given first choice at purchase of those lands (Miller 1972:35).
School certificates were issued for lands set aside by the Texas congress in
1840, the proceeds of which were invested in Texas or United States bonds (Miller
1972:110). Confederate scrip certificates were issued to permanently disabled
veterans or to widows (Miller 1972:52-53).
The variety oflandgrants available and the criteria for eligibility were designed
to encourage settlement on the Texas frontier. Many of the earliest settlers, before
statehood, were required to swear allegiance to Mexico and adherence to the
Catholic faith (Miller 1972:16, 22). Some came to escape the law and others to
continue the southern practice of slavery (Miller 1972:21). The influence of these
grants upon settlement was significant. In particular, they caused settlement to
occur earlier and faster, and they influenced large waves of Europeans to settle in
Texas. Finally, they attracted a certain breed of settler who was willing to accept the
conditions of settlement in order to obtain free or inexpensive land.
The original settlers in Coryell County, which encompasses part of Fort Hood,
were largely Texas born (33 percent), while the greatest migrations came from
Tennessee (16 percent), Arkansas (7 percent), Alabama (7 percent), Missouri (6
percent), Georgia (4.5 percent), and Mississippi (4.5 percent) (United States Bureau
of the Census 1860b). Similarly, the leading states of birth for the surrounding
counties in 1860 were Arkansas, Missouri, and Tennessee (Jordan 1970:413).
Recent studies by Jordan (1970:426) have successfully demonstrated the similarities of the hilly area, in which all of Fort Hood is included, to the Ozarks and
Appalachians. These similarities are attributed to transplantation of economy and
culture. In particular, they are similar in cultural landscape, educational levels, place
names, feuding, and the use of log structures. Economically, their underdevelopment, lack of urbanization and industrialization, and dependence on stock raising
are comparable. Jordan (1970:427) suggests that "the migration of these people to
the hills of central Texas was in part guided by their perception of the environment,
by their desire to find another milieu similar to that they had left behind."
Though Coryell County was largely a stock-producing county in 1860 (Scott
1965:47), not a single person gave his occupation as stock raiser in the 1860 United
States Census. Ironically, this was in contradiction to some of the earliest land-grant
policies that conveyed one labor (71.6 ha, 177.1 acres) of land to farmers and one
league (1720 ha,4251 acres) of farm land to ranchers (Miller 1972:17). That is, the
land policies favored those claiming to be stock raisers by granting them more
acreage than they did the farmers. Of the 596 people (male and female) over the age
of 15 who listed their occupations with the census taker in 1860, 235 were farmers
and 118 farm laborers (United States Bureau of the Census 1860b). These men
accounted for more than 59 percent of the working population. Though the third
most frequently listed occupation was herdsman (87), these were mostly young

Carlson ~ Environmental and Cultural Determinants

137

teenage boys and the sons of men who claimed to be farmers.
The county tax rolls also support stock raising as the primary industry in
Coryell County, particularly between 1860 and 1870, when the number of cattle
being raised was at its per-capita peak (Coryell County Tax Rolls 1855-1985).
During this early period, limited quantities of feed corn and wheat were the major
crops. By 1870, sheep were becoming an important commodity, replacing cattle in
importance and reaching their peak production in 1890. Hogs were also raised in
quantity, but never to the same extent as sheep and cattle. The Assistant Marshall
for Coryell County concluded the 1860 census schedule for industrial productions
by stating that the land was well adapted to stock raising due to the "mountainous"
and rocky terrain. The massive limestone was the only industrial product listed and
was used extensively in building throughout the country (United States Bureau of
the Census 1860c).
SUMMARY

The preceding discussion has summarized the historic sites data from the 19821983 survey of 35 km2 at the Fort Hood Military Installation in Central Texas. Based
primarily on the environmental data, the documentary evidence, and the archeological remains, a series of six research objectives were identified and tested for the 88
historic sites recorded. The expectations of this research are summarized here.
(1) It was expected that fewer sites would be found per square kilometer in
either the uplands or flood plain areas than in the intermediate zone, which was
believed to have the most favorable environment. Also, the most densely settled
zones were expected to be the earliest settled. However, the lowlands were found
to be the most densely settled environmental zone, probably due to the varying relief
at Fort Hood which ranges from 213 to 305 meters (700 to 1000 feet) AMSL in the
project area. In addition, the lowlands were also found to be the earliest settled zone,
confirming the expectation that the earliest settled zone would also be the most
densely settled zone.
(2) The early settlers were expected to favor easily accessible drinking water
from streams, cisterns, and wells. Nearness to rivers for transport of marketable
goods would have been desirable and low flood-prone areas avoided. Also, sites
located adjacent to permanent streams and rivers were expected to be the earliest
settled. However, no sites were closer than 1500 meters to permanent water. The
nearest available water, which included cisterns and wells, was within 150 meters.
The negative results of this test suggest that the distance to permanent water had
little influence on the early settlers, who were more likely to depend on overland
travel and artificial sources of water. However, since the lowlands were the most
densely settled zone, it is likely that these sites were located above flood stage at the
interface of the lowlands with the intermediate uplands.
It was also expected that sites adjacent to water would reflect the choronology
of population movements upstream. Though the data were insufficient to support
this expectation, it appeared that higher ranked streams were settled first and that
settlement along each stream occurred at periodic intervals, with later settlement

138

Texas Archeological Society

resulting from the partitioning of the original land grants.
(3) It was anticipated that a relationship would be found between site complexity and site function. In particular, it was expected that farm/ranch complexes would
be larger in size, contain more structural remains, and have a wider variety of
artifacts. Not one of these assumptions held true when tested, a finding that may be
attributed to inaccurate site definitions or multiple site use. Similarly, it was
expected that domestic dwellings would contain more household items. Household
items were defined as personal, kitchen, and craft or activity items (as opposed to
hardware such as hand tools, wagon/carriage remains, and agricultural implements). This implication was supported by the archeological data when tested.
(4) The distributions of sites by landform were expected to be an indicator of
site function (Figure 11). Habitation sites were most frequently found on knolls,
secondapj terraces, slopes, and tertiary terraces, all above flood stage. Trash
disposal tended to correspond with the same natural features as the habitation areas,
but isolated incidents of trash disposal occurred on ridges, benches, and primary
terraces.
(5) It was expected that the increased manufacturing and production of goods
during the late nineteenth century would be reflected by a higher deposition of
artifacts during that period. This difference in depositional history could be used as
a distinguishing marker between early and late sites. Unfortunately, sites containing
both early and late components were not analyzed separately. However, they were
found to contain a wider variety of artifacts by virtue of their longer occupations.
(6) It was expected that the increased manufacturing and production of the late
nineteenth century would also be reflected by increased size of activity areas. The
production of new and unique materials might result in additional buildings per site
(garages, machine sheds, tool sheds, etc.). Large sites were found, instead, to result
from continuous occupation of early sites.
CONCLUSIONS

In conclusion, it appears that most of the historic settlement in the northern part
of Fort Hood occurred in the lowland areas, probably at the interface with the
intermediate uplands. Because of the poor navigability of many Texas rivers and the
distance to navigable waterways, nearness to permanent water did not appear to be
a significant factor in settlement. However, the remnants of wells and cisterns
indicated that all sites had access to drinking water within 150 to 300 meters.
Prominent landforms, such as knolls and secondary terraces, were most frequently
settled as habitation sites, although isolated trash dumps occurred on benches and
ridges (Figure 7). Sites were located primarily in open grasslands and secondarily
in mixed forests. The vast quantities of land available in the public domain of Texas
and the variety of land grants issued for that land were probably the single most
important cultural factor in determining settlement in Texas.
Most of the original settlers of the project area had migrated from the Upper
South, bringing with them a variety of traits peculiar to the Ozarks and Appalachians
where they originated. In particular, stock raising was identified as the primary

Carlson n Environmental and Cultural Determinants

139

industry in many of the public records examined. The predominance of historic site
locations in open grasslands further suggests that stock raising was the major
industry. It is well documented that grasslands were commonly burned by the early
settlers for pasture land, a practice that was originated by the Indians for grazing
bison (Jordan 1973:252).
The limited archeological remains did not distinguish activities peculiar to
stock raising from those peculiar to farming or other activities, but stone fences and
large tanks, apparently for stock use, were quite common. Many above-ground
features had been dismantled by the army, but were still recognizable as the
remnants of farmsteads and ranches. Ongoing investigations at Fort Hood will be
concerned primarily with determining rural land usage and the characteristics of
rural activities that can be identified from the archeologicai record.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank Frederick L. Briuer, Fort Hood Archeologist, for allowing information
from the Fort Hood Archeological Survey (FY82/83) to be used here. Appreciation
is also expressed to David L. Carlson, of Texas A&M University, who prepared the
computer graphics. Both Briuer and Carlson provided thoughtful and encouraging
comments for which I am grateful.
REFERENCES

CITED

Arbingast, Stanley A., Lorrin G. Kennamer, Robert H. Ryan, James R. Buchanan, William
L. Hezlep, L. Tuffly Ellis, Terry G. Jordan, Charles T. Granger, and Charles P. Zlatkovich
1976 Arias of Texas. Bureau of Business Research. The University of Texas at Austin.
Briuer, Frederick L.
1983 Incorporating problem-oriented research into archaeological resource management strategies. Proceedings of the American Society for Conservation Archaeology.
Carlson, David L., Frederick L. Briuer, and Henry Bruno
1983 Selecting a statistically Representative sample of Archaeological sites atWest Fort
Hood, Texas. U.S. Army, Fort Hood Archaeological Resource Management
series, Research Report 8.
Carlson, David L., Shawn Bonath Carlson, Frederick L. Briver, Erwin Roemer, Jr., William
E. Moore, and Eli Mishuck
1986 Archaeological surveys at Fort Hood, Texas: FY83 Eastern Training Area,
Volumes I and 1I. U.S. Army, Fort Hood Archaeological Resource Management
Series, Research Report 11.
Carlson, Shawn Bonath
1984 Ethnoarchaeological studies at a 20th century farmstead in Central Texas: the W.
Jarvis Henderson site (41BL273). U.S. Army, Fort Hood Archaeological Resource
Management Series, Research Report 12.

140

Texas Archeological Society

Carlson, Shawn Bonath, David L. Carlson, H. Blaine Ensor, Elizabeth A. Miller and Diane
E. Young
1987 Archaeological surveys at Fort Hood: The FY85 Delivery Order Number 3,
Volumes I and II. U.S. Army, Fort Hood Archaeological Resource Management
Series, Research Report 15.
Carlson, Shawn Bonath, H. Blaine Ensor, David L. Carlson, Elizabeth A. Miller, and Diane
E. Young
1987 Archaeological surveys at Fort Hood: The FY84 Northern Sector, Volumes I and
II. U.S. Army, Fort Hood Archaeological Resource Management S eries, Research
Report 14.
Coryell County (Texas)
1855-1895 Tax Rolls. Reels 1 & 2, Texas State Library Archives at Baylor University.
Waco.
Dibble, David S., Frederick L. Briuer, and Eli Mishuck
1984a Archaeological survey at Fort Hood, Texas, Spring 1980. U.S. Army, Fort Hood
Archaeological Resource Management Series, Research Report 3.
1984b Archaeological survey at Fort Hood, Texas, Fall 1980. U.S. Army, Fort Hood
Archaeological Resource Management Series, Research Report 4.
Guderjan, Thomas H., George B. Thomas, and Howard R. Cramer
1980 Finalreport, existing data inventory ofculturalresource and paleontological information, Fort Hood, Texas. Soil Systems, Inc. Marietta, Georgia.
Jackson, Jack M.
1982 Okay: the archeological reconsla-uction and settlement pattern analysis of a
dispersed hamlet in Bell County, Texas. Unpublished MA thesis, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Jackson, Jack M., David S. Dibble, and Frederick L. Bruier
1982a Archival information search and archaeological survey for the proposed aircraft
maintenance facility, Robert Gray Army Air-Field, Bell County, Texas. U.S.
Army, Fort Hood Archaeological Resource Management Series, Research
Report 6.
Jackson, Jack M., David S. Dibble, and Frederick L. Briuer continued
1982b Archival research on the "Mayberry Community". U.S. Army, Fort Hood
Archaeological Resource Management Series, Research Report 7.
Jordan, Terry G.
1970 The Texas Appalachia. Annals of the Association of American Geograhers
60(3):409-427.
1973

Pioneer evaluation of vegetation in frontier Texas. Southwestern Historical
Quarterly 76(3):233-254.

Carlson ~ Environmental and Cultural Determinants

141

Lebo, Susan A. and Debbie L. Marcaurelle
1983 Seriation of refined earthenware tableware vessel fragments from six late 19th and
early 20th century farmstead sites in eastern Texas. Paper presented at the 54th
Annual Meeting of the Texas Archeological Society, Dallas, Texas,
November 4-6, 1983.
Miller, Thomas Lloyd
1967 Bounty and donation land grants of Texas, 1835-1888. University of Texas Press.
Austin
1972

The public lands of Texas, 1519-1970. University of Oklahoma Press. Norman.

Prewitt, Elton R., Frederick L. Briuer, Eli Mishuck, and George B. Thomas
1983 Archaeological analysis of airphotos, Fort Hood: A feasibility study. U.S. Army,
Fort Hood Archaeological Resource Management Series, Research Report 5.
Puryear, Pamela Ashworth and Nath Winfield, Jr.
1976 Sandbars and stemwheelers: steam navigation on the Brazos. Texas A&M University Press. College Station.
Richardson, Rupert H., Ernest Wallace, and Adrian N. Anderson
1981 Texas: The Lone Star State. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Roemer, Erwin, Jr., Shawn Bonath Carlson, and David L. Carlson
1985 Archaeological surveys at Fort Hood: the FY 82 range construction projects,
Volumes I and II. U.S. Army, Fort Hood Archaeological Resource Management
Series, Research Report 10.
Scott, Zelma
1965 A history of Coryell County, Texas. Texas State Historical Association. Austin.
Simons, Helen (compiler)
1981 Index: Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vols. 1-50. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 52:237-312.
1983

Microfilm archive of Texas archeology index, sections I and II, rolls 1-33. Office
of the State Archeologist Special Report 27, R. J. Mallouf, series editor. Texas
Historical Commission.

Skinner, S. Alan, Frederick L. Briuer, George B. Thomas, Ivan Show, and Eli Mishuck
1981 Initial survey of archaeological resources at Fort Hood, Texas, 1978. Science
Applications, La Jolla, California.
Skinner, S. Alan, Frederick L. Briuer, Woody A. Meiszner, Ivan Show, and Eli Mishuck
1984 Archaeological survey at Fort Hood, Texas, 1979. Science Applications, La Jolla,
California.
Texas General Land Office
1941

Abstract of all original land titles comprising grants and locations to August 31,
1941, Vol. 3. General Land Office.

142

Texas Archeological Society

United States Bureau of the Census
1860a Agricultural productions, Coryell County, Texas. Microcopy 403, Roll 4, National
Archives Microfilm Publications at Texas A&M University. College Station.
1860b Population schedules of the United States, Coryell County, Texas. Microcopy 653,
Roll 1292, National Archives Microfilm Publications at Texas A&M University.
College Station.
1860c Products of industry, Coryell County, Texas. Microcopy A403, Roll 45, National
Archives Microfilm Publications at Texas A&M University. College

Station.

Post West Bernard (41WH16) - Republic of Texas
Armory, 1837-1839, Wharton County, Texas
Joe D. Hudgins

ABSTRACT
Post West Bemard was one of the major ordnance depots for the
Republic of Texas Army from 1837 to 1839. Initial surface collections
and later excavations yielded more than 2,000 artifacts, most of which
apparently represent the residue of f’trearrns refurbishing.

INTRODUCTION
The Post West Bernard site is in Wharton County about 6 km (4 miles) west of
Hungerford, near a spring about 69 m (75 yards) west of the present channel of the
West Bernard River. This site, recorded as 41WH16 with the Texas Archeologieal
Research Laboratory at the Balcones Research Laboratory of The University of
Texas in Austin, is in a cultivated field, so the artifacts were exposed on the surface.
Initial surface collecting was done by the writer, who took note of the heaviest concentrations of various types of artifacts.
Cultivation of the site area was to be continued, so the writer, with the consent
of the landowner and the farmer, asked the Houston Archaeological Society to survey the site further and salvage the remaining artifacts. The site was mapped, and a
grid of 5-meter squares was set up covering the roughly rectangular area in which
artifacts were found (Figure 1). A systematic search for metal artifacts was made
using a metal detector; they and nonmetal artifacts such as fragments of glass, ceramics, and gun flints, were plotted on the grid, and each was recorded, bagged, and
labeled. Artifact distribution plans (Figures 7-11) were made, but vertical placement of the artifacts was not recorded, since all were found in the disturbed plow
zone.
The metal artifacts were taken to the Department of Nautical Archeology at
Texas A&M University in College Station, where they were treated by electrolysis
to prevent further oxidation. They were photographed before and after cleaning,
then they were cataloged and identified (Hudgins 1984).
HISTORY
Post West Bernard was established soon after the mass furlough of the troops at
Camp Bowie in May and June of 1837. Much of the army’s ordnance and military
stores were apparently taken to this small outpost. Lt. H. L. Gush commanded about
two dozen men of the Permanent Volunteers in 1838 and 1839. As late as January
1839, sheds were built to protect the artillery. Lt. Gush was ordered to discharge the
Permanent Volunteers as soon as they could be replaced by the new First Infantry,
commanded by Capt. Martin K. Snell (Pierce 1969:179).
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57 (1986)

144

Texas Archeological Society

\

\

SPRING

POND

0

DATUM:

~,~ 8.5
Ceramics and
ROAD

\

O
©

I
Gridded area shorn in

!

I

t

I

i

I

METERS

Figures 7 - 11

0 10 20 50 40 50

Figure 1. Topographic map of the Post West Bernard site (41WH16) showing gridded area
and areas of greatest concentration of artifacts. Contours are in meters above datum. Map
by David E. Atherton and Sheldon Kindall.

Hudgins ~ Post West Bernard

145

Information concerning military camps and outposts of the Texas Army is
scarce. Many of the small outposts existed for only a short time, and very little has
been recorded concerning the duties of the men who garrisoned them pierce 1984).
However, insight into the living conditions and some information about the location
of Post West Bernard were revealed in the following letter from Thomas Anderson,
a medical officer stationed at the post, to Ashbel Smith, Surgeon General of the
Texas Army (Briggs 1983).
West Bernard Station
June 12, 1838
To Ashbel Smith, M.D.
Surgeon Genl. T. A.
My Dear Sir,
You will no doubt be somewhat surprised to received my letter of resignation so soon aftermy arrival at this Post. I assure you sir it is no small degree
of reluctance that I solicit its acceptance. It has never been my wish to leave
the service nor would I do so, could I remain with the slightest comfort to
myself or without doing very great violence to my feelings. Our Station is in
a perfect wilderness, some five or six miles from any human habitation, we
have but five men and they are all on duty, consequently I am forced to bring
my own wood and water, make my own fire and cook my own meals in the hot
sun without a shelter to protect me from the weather and no place to sleep but
in the open air, we are eight miles from a post office and thus I am cutt off from
all communications with my friends here or in the U.S. All this I could bear
had I books to read but there is not one I presume within twenty miles of us.
I dislike very much sir, to admit the foregoing reasons as the cause of my
desire to leave the service, a soldier should never compain of such things and
did I conceive that there was the slightest necessity for it, I would remain
without a murmur.
Could I be removed to any other station, I would still be plaeased to retain
my commission, or should this station be removed to any other point, I will
have no objection to remain, but under existing circumstances, I hope sir, that
you will relieve me.
Most Respectfully your friend,
[signed] Ths. P. Anderson

Anderson’s complaint that the post is "eight miles from a post office" is an
important clue to the location of the post. The nearest post office in the summer of
1838 was at Egypt, Texas (Williams 1972:31). The small community of Egypt
exists today 7.5 miles west of the site of Post West Bernard. There is no description
available of the duties of the five men stationed at the post with Anderson.
Orders dated as late as 1839 indicated that wagoneers were making trips between Houston and Post West Bernard carrying ordnance to the new armory at
Houston. On April 22, 1839 a shipment of muskets was delivered by W. T. C. Pierce
from Post West Bernard to Houston. On April 26 Pierce delivered about 5,461 lbs.

146

Texas Archeological Society

of ordnance from Post West Bernard to Houston, and on May 4, two howitzers, two
iron cannon, and one brass cannon (Williams 1984). No other orders from the post
have been found and, considering the amount of ordnance shipped to the Houston
armory, it is probable, although no official record of the closing has been found, that
the armory at Post West Bernard was no longer in existence after 1839.
The arms at the Post West Bemard armory came from several sources. The U.S.
Government shipped 440 flintlock muskets into Texas from New Orleans in 1836,
and the Texians captured 200 muskets from the Mexicans a year earlier during the
Goliad and San Antonio campaigns of 1835 (Gilbert 1971). Personal arms such as
flintlock muskets, rifles, pistols, and shotguns arrived with volunteer units coming
to Texas, but most of the weapons by far were captured from the Mexican Army at
the Battle of San Jacinto (Koury 1973:8).
In October 1838, the Republic of Texas’s military stores consisted of the following items located at Houston, Galveston, and Post West Bernard: 25 cannons
(both fit and unfit for service), two howitzers, one mortar, 992 cannon balls, 110
shells, 988 complete muskets, 440 muskets needing repair, 129 muskets unfit for
service, seven rifles, musket balls, powder, bayonts, and other military equipment.
At Post West Bernard there were 653 muskets described as out of order (Nance
1963:44).
Records of arms purchased by the Mexican Government have not been found,
but one Mexican weapon of that period was the .75 caliber Indian Pattern Brown
Bess musket marked with the eagle and snake of Mexico. This weapon was made for
the British East India Co. until 1815. In 1833, British Ordnance had 440,000 India
Pattern arms, of which 176,000 were still serviceable. It was, however, no longer the
standard weapon, and it is likely that unless the British considered these muskets
outmoded, they would not have sold so many of them (Koury 1973:8). However,
Wilson (1985) points out that no contracts for arms sales between the British and
Mexican governments have been found, and it is therefore more likely that the
British muskets were supplied to the Mexican government by Birmingham gunmakers and contractors, who had also supplied the British government with muskets. Although the India Pattern muskets were undoubtedly the most readily available at the time, several other flintlock British Brown Bess models that were made
from 1715 to 1815 would have been considered surplus. These were the Pre-Land
Pattern and New Land Pattern (Bailey 1971:13).
Information is vague concerning the models of U.S. flintlock muskets shipped
into Texas between 1836 and 1840, and also about the various models of private
muskets, pistols, and shotguns brought in by volunteers. Before this time the U.S.
Government was manufacturing several models of flintlock muskets that would
have been available to the Texas Army. These include models 1795, 1798, 1808,
1812, and 1816, type I & II, all .69 caliber (Gluckman 1965:37).
The first U.S. Government contract with a private gunsmith to produce flintlock pistols was in 1799. The .69 caliber pistols were based on the French Army’s
model 1777. In 1805 a .54 caliber horseman’s pistol was produced by the National
Armory at Harpers Ferry, and in 1819 the U.S. Ordnance Department contracted for
20,000 pistols to be patterned after an English type (Hicks 1968:19-22). Kentucky

Hudgins ~ Post West Bernard

147

flintlock pistols were also available in .44 and .48 caliber sizes (Chapel 1961:24).
Rifles produced in the United States after 1700 were .54 caliber; some of the models
were the Kentucky rifle,U.S, model 1817, and the U.S. model 1819. The 1819 model
rifle, known as Hall’s rifle, was .52 caliber. The armory at Harpers Ferry was also
directed to produce a model 1803 rifle (Hicks 1968:19-22).

MILITARY ARTIFACTS
Most of the artifacts found at the Post West Bernard site were iron or brass gun
parts from British and U.S. flintlock arms (Crowley and Brezik 1985).
The most difficult gun parts to identify as to type or model were the lock plates.
Models of both the U.S. and foreigh muskets were identified from the shields,
letters, or numbers stamped in the centers of the lock plates under the flash pans and
on the tails of the lock plates behind the hammers (Darling 1931 :Figure 37; Gluckman 1965:Plate 1). Due to their exposure to the elements on or near the surface for
about 150 years, no markings could be seen on any of the lock plates found at Post
West Bernard; identifications had to be made by comparing lock plates from the site
with present-day lock plates, and from photographs and drawings of flintlock arms.
Only one of the 31 lock plates found at the site was complete. The degree of
competeness of these lock plates shows how much repair work and cannibalization
would havebeennecessary to refurbish these arms (Hudgins 1985a) (Table 1).
Table 1. Degree of Assemblage of 29 Lock Plates, Showing
Cannibalism that has Occurred and Repair Work that Would be
Required for Refurbishing
CATALOG MODEL
NO.

MECHANISM ASSEMBLY

COMMENTS

1401

British Brown
Bess India
Pattern

Side screw and pan screw
are only mechanisms
removed

Lock completelyassembled,
except for screws. Frizzen in
open position, hammer in
resting position

1402

British Brown
Bess India
Pattern

Hammer screw, cap side
screw, and upper part of
frizzen spring removed

Hammer in resting position,
frizzen dosed

1403

British Brown
Bess India
Pattem

All mechanisms
removed except iron pan

Lock plate broken behind iron.
pan at side screw hole

1404

British Brown
Bess India
Pattem

All mechanisms removed
except iron pan

Lock plate straight

1405

British Brown
Bess India
Pattern

All mechanisms removed
except iron pan, frizzen
screws, and frizzen

Lock plate broken in front of
iron pan and behind pan at
tumbler screws hole. Frizzen
in closed position

148

Texas Archeological Society

CATALOG MODEL
NO.

MECHANISMASSEMBLY

COMMENTS

1406

British Brown
Bess India
Pattern

All mechanisms removed
except iron pan, bridle,
tumbler, and tumbler
screw

Lock plate broken in front of
pan and slightly bent
between pan and tumbler
screw hole

1407

British Brown
Bess India
Pattem

All mechanisms removed
except iron pan, frizzen,
and frizzen screw

Lock plate broken behind pan
at tumbler screw hole.
Frizzen in open position

1408

British Brown
Bess India
Pattern

All mechanisms removed
except iron pan

Lock plate is straight

1409

British Brown
Bess India
Pattern

All mechanisms removed
except iron pan, frizzen,
and frizzen screw

Lock plate broken behind pan
at tumbler screw hole
Frizzen in closed position

1410

British Brown
Bess India
Pattem

All mechanisms removed
except iron pan

Lock plate slightly bent
behind pan at tumbler screw
hole

1411

British Brown
Bess India
Pattem

All mechanisms removed
except iron pan

Lock plate slightly bent at
frizzen screw hole

1412

British Brown
Bess Land
Pattern

All mechanisms removed
except iron pan

Lock plate slightly bent
behind pan at tumbler screw
hole

1413

British Brown
Bess Land
Pattem

All mechanisms removed
except iron pan

Lock plate bent behind pan
at tumbler screw hole

1414

British Brown
Bess Land
Pattern

All mechanisms removed
except iron pan

Lock plate straight

1415

British Brown
Bess Early
Land Pauem

All mechanisms removed
except iron pan, bridle
screw, tumbler, tumbler
screw, and sear spring

Lock plate broken at side
screw hole

screw

1416

British Brown
Bess Long
Land Pattern

All mechanisms removed
except iron pan, frizzen,
frizzen screw, frizzen
spring, and frlzzen
spring screw

1417

U.S. Model 1816 All mechanisms removed
except brass pan frizzen,
frizzen screw, frizzen
bridle, bridle screw, tumbler,
tumbler screw, sear spring,
and sear spring screw

Lock plate broken behind
pan at tumbler screw hole;
frizzen in closed position

Lock plate straight; frizzen in
closed position

Hudgins ~ Post West Bernard
CATALOG MODEL
NO.

MECHANISMASSEMBLY

149

COMMENTS

1418

U.S. Model 1816
Contract

All mechanisms removed
except brass pan bridle,
bridle screw, tumbler, and
tumbler screw

Lock plate straight

1419

U.S. Model 1816

All mechanisms removed
except brass pan

Lock plate broken in front and
behind pan

1420

U.S. Model 1808

All mechanisms removed
except iron pan, frizzen
spring, frizzen spring
screw, tumbler, tumbler
screw, sear, sear spring
screw, andpart of sear
spring

Lock plate straight

1421

U.S. Model 1808

All mechanisms removed
except iron pan, frizzen,
and frizzen screw

Lock plate straight; frizzen
in closed position

1422

U.S. Model 1808

All mechanisms removed

Lock plate straight; hammer
in cocked position

except iron pan, tumbler,
tumbler screw, and main
spring

1423

U.S. Model 1808

All mechanisms removed
except frizzen spring
screw, iron pan, frizzen,
frizzen screw, tumbler,
bridle, sear, tumbler screw,
sear spring, sear spring
screw, and hammer

Hammer in resting position

1424

U.S. Model 1812

Only mechanisms removed
are hammer, frizzen
spring, and part of sear
spring

Lock plate almost completely
assembled; frizzen in open
position

1425

U.S. Model 1795
Springfield or
U.S. Contract
Model 1798

All mechanisms removed
except iron pan, frizzen,
frizzen screw, tumbler,
tumbler screw, bridle,
sear, and sear spring screw

Lock plate broken at side
screw hole; frizzen in closed
position

1426

Shotgun

All mechanisms removed
except iron pan

Lock plate straight

1427

Shotgun

Al! mechanisms removed
except iron pan

Lock plate straight; iron pan
broken

1428

Possible pistol

All mechanisms removed
except iron pan

Lock plate broken at side
screw hole

1429

Possible pistol

All mechanisms removed
except iron pan, tumbler,
tumbler screw, bridle, and
bridle screw

Lock plate bent between pan
and tumbler

150

Texas Archeological Society

A
¢

B
o

5

~crn

D

Figure 2. Lock plates and hammers: A-C, lock plates from British Pattem muskets missing
one or more mechanisms; D, unreinforced hammer from an early India Pattern or Long Land
Pattern British musket missing cap and cap screw; E, reinforced hammer from India Pattern
British musket missing cap and cap screw.

Most of the lock plates (65 percent) were from British muskets (primarily the India
Pattern) (Figure 2, A-C); lock plates from U.S. muskets accounted for 25 percent of
the total. These include models 1795, 1798, 1808, 1812, and 1816. Two lock plates
from pistols and two from shotguns were also found at the site. British and United
S tares flintlock arms manufactured in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries had basically the same working mechanisms (Figures 3, 4).
Detached lock plate mechanisms and parts from various arms were found in
abundance (Hudgins 1985a, 1985b), together with detached hammers from both
U.S. and British arms. Fifteen hammers from British Brown Bess muskets were of
the reinforced design ("ring-necked cock," Figure 2, E) typical of the India Pattern
made after 1809. Seven hammers were the older, unreinforced variety (swan-neck
cock, Figure 2, D), but since the cap screws were missing on all seven, it was difficult
to tell whether they were from the early India Pattern made before 1809 or from the
even older Long Land Pattern musket. Hammers from a U.S. model 1812 musket
and a U.S. model 1816 musket were also found together with two hammers from
shotguns and two from nonmilitary rifles. Frizzens were also found from a variety
of arms: five from the British Brown Bess musket, one from a U.S. model 1808
musket, three from the U.S. model 1816 musket, five from the U.S. model 1812
musket, and three smaller frizzens from nonmilitary arms. Preservation of lock
plate mechanisms such as sears, sear springs, tumblers, bridles, main springs, and
frizzen springs was poor, and no identification as to model could be made.
Other gun parts found at the site include 25 sling swivels, eight butt plates, 12

0

152

Texas Archeological Society
hammer, screw
i~ca~ ~"
Zfrizzen
hamme_r -~/pan
~’~--’~
l
lock

plate~:~,,,, ~frizzen screw
~~side screw hole
frizzen spring

tumbler screw

frizzen spring screw

Front view, pan open

hammer screw
bridle screw ~
cap
frizzen
pan
"~7Z- hammer
,(~)~... sc arcarSpring
sp r IngSCrew
lock pie te k~i

~s

side screw hole-~ .~

main spri gJ

i/ scar

screw

main spring screw
~aOnr,saclee w’SCa r
tLimbler

Interior view at full cock, pen closed
Figure 4. Sketches showing working mechanisms of a flintlock musket. From Gluckman

1965.
side plates, 32 rampipes, nine nose caps, 65 trigger guards and trigger guard fragments, three breech plugs, and five bayonet fragments. The brass trigger guards,
brass rampipes, and nose caps from the British muskets were the most altered or
damaged of all the gun parts (Figure 5). Most of the trigger guards had both front and
rear tangs removed. Some had been cut and hammered, and several tangs were
partially melted (Figure 4). Most were from the India Pattern Brown Bess musket,
but two were from U.S. arms: one from a U.S. model 1803 Harpers Ferry rifle, the
other from a U.S. model 1805 pistol (Figure 6). The rampipes and nose caps were all
from the India Pattern British musket. Most of the butt plates and side plates were
also from the India Pattern British Brown Bess musket, with the only exceptions a
butt plate from a U.S. model 1803 Harpers Ferry rifle and a side plate from a New
Land Pattern British musket.
More than half of the brass rampipes and the trigger guard tangs from British
India Pattern muskets were incised with Roman numerals. These numerals are
identification marks put on in storage when the gun parts were collected to be

Hudgins ~ Post West Bernard

153

C
B

A

D

0
G

5

H

I , , , , Icm

Figure 5. Selected group of British gun parts: A, brass butt plate fragment, unidentified as
to model; B, C, brass trigger guards from British India Pattern muskets with rear tangs
missing at the screw holes; D, brass nose cap from British India Pattern musket; E, brass side
plate from British New Land Pattern musket; F, G, brass side plates from British India Pattern
muskets; H, brass upper rampipe from British India Pattern musket.
mounted together as firearms (Wilson 1985). Several gun parts were stamped or
engraved with contractors’ marks representing individual companies or private
contractors who made musket parts for the British ordnance (Wilson 1985). For
example, a side plate was stamped with the letter B; a terminal rampipe was stamped
C on the tang; the tang of a butt plate was engraved with a rack number, 1456.
Darling (1931) notes that rack numbers occasionally were engraved on the buttplate tangs of India Pattern muskets made by private contractors. One side plate
found at the site was stamped with a short, flaring arrow, one of several used by the
British to signify government ownership (Darling 1931). Another side plate had
punctation marks that formed the letter A (Figure 3, A). This is not typical of
identification marks on British military firearms; they were probably added in
Mexico or in Texas (Wilson 1985).
Two of the three barrel fragments were from .75 caliber British muskets. One
barrel (breech plug in place) was cut in half and bent at a 10° angle. The other British

Texas Archeological Society

154

C

B

A

D

G
H

K

O

M

N

L_,

,_._,

,

5
I cm

Figure 6. Altered and damaged gun parts: A.B. brass butt plate tangs from British India
Pattern muskets; C, brass upper rampipe from India Pattem musket; D, brass terminal
rampipe from India Pattern musket with tang removed; E, brass intermediate rampipe from
India Pattern musket with one end partially melted; F-I, brass trigger fragments from British
muskets; J, K, fragments of brass side plates from British muskets; L, fragment of brass butt
plate from a British musket; M, N, melted brass; O, brass trigger guard from a United States
model 1805 pistol.803 Harpers Ferry rifle and a side plate from a New Land Pattem British
musket.

musket barrel was cut at both ends. One end had been heated and hammered into
a rectangle with a small hole through the center. The remaining barrel fragment was
the muzzel from a .44- or .45-caliber octagonal rifle that had been removed by
sawing (Briggs n.d.).

Hudgins m Post West Bernard

155

o

¯
°

o

2

N

o

°o

oo

¯

o
o
o

oQ
o

o
o
o

¯

¯

o
K

OoO

¯

o
o

o

¯

o
o

o

o

15
J
meters

o

e

o

o
o

Figure 7. Plan of gridded part of the Post West Bernard site (41WH16), showing locations
of gun parts. By Richard L. Gregg.

Most of the sling swivels were from British muskets. Many of were broken and
without swivel pins. Front and rear sling swivels from U.S. muskets werealso found,
some of the front swivels with parts of the barrel bands attached.
All of the lock plates and most of the brass furnishings were found in one small
area of the site (Figure 1). Smaller gun parts--lock-plate mechanisms and sling
swivels--were found over a larger area (Figure 7), but there were none in the
northwestern part of the site where the heaviest concentration of gun parts was found
(Figure 1).
Evidence of bullet manufacturing at the post came with the discovery of an iron
lead-dipper, tongs, dipper handles, melted lead, melted brass, rolled lead, rectangu-

156

Texas Archeological Society

o

I

@
o

o

0

~
0

o
0

0

0

o @o~
O

o

o

o

o0@

°

°

[

G

o
o

o

@

o~

15
I

0
I
me’ters

"1

Figure 8. Plan of gridded part of the Post West Bernard site (41WH16), showing locations
of lead artifacts. By Richard L. Gregg.

lar lead bars, and 24 lead musket shot ~igure 8). Thirteen lead musket shot were
.69 caliber, three were .75 caliber, and six, smaller than .69 caliber, were distorted
to some extent and, although difficult to measure, appear to be .52 or .54 caliber.
Several lead shot of different calibers had been flattened from impact. Iron and brass
shot were also found: three iron shot were 1 inch and three were 1.5 inches in
diameter; four brass shot were 1 inch and two were 1.25 inches in diameter.
NONMILITARY ARTIFACTS
Seventy ceramic sherds and 44 fragments of glass were collected from the
surface. These artifacts, found throughout the site, were concentrated in the
southern area ~igures 1, 9, 10). The entire collection of ceramics apI~ars to be of

Hudgins ~ Post West Bernard

o

o

157

N

o

o

o

o
o

o

@
o

l

L
o e
¯°

o
oo

o

e

15

0
meters

o

o

¯

o oo

¯

o

¯

o

o

,,
°

"
o

o

Figure 9. Plan of gridded part of the Post West Bernard site (41WH16), showing
locations of ceramic artifacts. By Richard L. Gregg.

the Regency period (1810-1830) and none appear to be of the post- 1837 Victorian
era. During the early years of the Texas Republic the army did not issue mess kits,
therefore these sherds may represent dinnerware that was used by the men at the post
(Briggs n.d.).
Preliminary analysis of the glass fragments was based on the necks and bases
of wine, ale, or spirit bottles (’vVetze11985). Further analysis of the glass fragments
is in progress to determine if they are from the same time period as the ceramics.
Several brass buttons (Figure 10) from men’s clothing and fragments of a brass
spur were recovered (Hudgins 1985c). Other personal items such as pocket-knife

158

Texas Archeological Society

1

F

N

l\

o
oo
o
o

A -button
® -glass

o
oo
o
o

O
1

15

@

o

oo o

meters
e

@
@

O

O

[

e

°

#

O

Figure 10. Plan of gridded part of the Post West B ernard site (41WH 16), showing locations
of glass artifacts (.); buttons (A). By Richard L. Gregg.

fragments and a brass thimble were found at the north end of the site.
More than 600 square nails and spikes were scattered over most of the site, but
due to extensive oxidation, only fragments remain, making it difficult to determine
accurately their exact sizes or types. The nails may have come from the structure
that was erected in 1839 to protect the artillery. Two areas of the site have the
heaviest concentrations of nails: one is the area that yielded most of the gun parts;
the other is at the south end of the site and may represent an additional structure
(Figure 11).

Hudgins ~ Post West Bernard

° I

159

I

1

N

o~

e

0

°-o
o

°

¯

Q~

$o-

8

**S~*e*o
u

°

e

o %

o

°’~°o
o e~

oo~

°

o

Q

*

o"

o~

:o

l\
:::
I~o°

o

°%

°

o

o

00

°

o

o

o

o

o

o

o
o

o~%o ~°

~ ,,° : .....
0

15

0
L

J

reefers

#o
0~
o

0 ~
o

o
o

o

@

Figure 11. Plan of gridded part of the Post West Bernard site (41WH 16), showing locations
of nails. By Richard L. Gregg.

An iron object (Figure 12) that appears to be an ox goad (Taylor 1986) was
found in the part of the site that had the heaviest concentration of gun parts (Figure
1). It is 20 cm (8 inches) long and has a conical base that tapers to a square-sectioned
point or handle.
There were several iron and brass artifacts that could not be identified
positively. Most were simply pieces of irregularly shaped metal, but some are
interesting enough to warrant further investigation.

160

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 12. Iron object: ox goad.

CONCLUSIONS
Historical records indicate that Post West Bernard served as the armory for the
Republic of Texas Army from 1837 to 1839. Documents concerning the armory
indicate that it consisted of personal weapons brought to Texas by volunteers from
surrounding states and included flintlock muskets supplied by the U.S. Government, but most of the weapons were captured Mexican arms from the Goliad and
San Antonio campaigns of 1835 andtheBattleofSan Jacintoin 1836. TheMexican
army was thought to have been armed primarily with surplus British flintlock
muskets, and the predominance (65 percent) of parts from British muskets found on
the site supports this view.
Gun parts such as lock plates in various stages of assembly and lock plate
mechanisms that are apparently results of cannibalizing (Blaine 1980), together
with a sawed rifle muzzle, two cut and reworked musket barrels, and tools indicate
that gunsmith work, of the kind required to refurbish the arms, was being done.
The predominance of broken, cut, and melted brass from the furniture of the
British muskets may indicate that many of these muskets were damaged beyond
repair and that the brass parts were being removed and used for scrap metal. In fact
the brass shot found at the site may have been made from these parts.
No records of daily activities and duties of the soldiers stationed at Post West
Bernard have been found, but Anderson’s letter stating that all five men stationed
at the post in 1838 were on duty and not available for routine orderly duties raises
the possibility that they could have been involved in reconditioning arms. Documents in the Texas Archives show that a wagonload of muskets and large amounts
of ordnance were being shipped from Post West Bernard to the armory at Houston
in 1839 (Williams 1984), adding further to the evidence that the men at Post West
Bernard were reconditioning arms.
The existence of such a large number of flintlock gun parts, together with
evidence from correspondence in the Texas Archives (Brigg 1983; Williams 1984),
strongly suggests that 4 lWH16 is indeed the site of the Post West Bernard armory.
Work continues at the site in the seasons when the area is not under cultivation.
The Wharton County Historical Museum in Wharton, Texas will be the curator of
all artifacts from the site.

Hudgins N Post West Bernard

161

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Members of the Houston and Brazosport Archeological Societies, faculty
members and students from the North Harris County College, and others who
helped with the field work at Post West Bernard are Texas Anderson, Edgar Ash,
David Atherton, Gregg Dimmisk, Alan, Bruce, and Gary Duke, C. R. Ebersole,
Cassy Gaddy, Dick Gregg, Troy Hemdon, Stephanie Horn, Marybeth Howard,
Rebekah Jaap, Mike Johnston, Sheldon Kindall, Debbie Leffler, Marene Manness,
Raymon McCausland, Ron, Suzanne, Craig, Eric, and Kevin Murk, Bernard
Naman, Tom Nuckles, Start Perkins, Johnny Pollan, Mike Sheets, Drusilla Singleton, Gerald Slagel, James Smith, Anne Sullivan, Vernon Williams, and Mike
Woods.
The gun parts found on site 41WH 16 were identified by Houston Archeological
Society members Frank Brezik, Jr. and David Crowley. David Atherton, Sheldon
Kindall, and Richard Gregg, also of the Houston Archeological Society, prepared
the maps. Jay C. Blaine, of the Dallas Archeological Society, made comments and
gave advice during the early stage of the investigation; G. M. Wilson, Deputy
Master of Armouries, H.M. Tower of London, made valuable comments on the gun
parts from the British muskets.
Alton Briggs, of the Lone Star Archeological Service, and Vernon Williams,
professor of history atNorth Harris County College, provided archival research, and
Don Hamilton, of the Department of Nautical Archeology, Texas A&M University,
was responsible for the preservation of the metal artifacts.
I thank Mrs. Will Merriweather and Carl Reynolds, landowner and farmer
respectively, for their permission to investigate this site.
REFERENCES

CITED

Briggs, Alton K.
1983 Cultural property assessment of West San Bernard Station, an ordance depot of
the Army of the Republic of Texas, Wharton County, Texas. Unpublished;
copy in writer’s files.
n.d.

Personal communication.

Bailey, D. W.
1971 British military longarms, 1715-1815. Stockpole Books, Harrisburg.
Blaine, Jay C.
1980 Personal communication.
Chapel, Charles Edward
1961

Guns of the old West. Coward-McCann, New York

Crowley, David, and Brezik, Frank, Jr.
1985 Personal communication

162

Texas Archeological Society

Darling, Anthony D.
t931 Red Coat and Brown Bess Historical Arms Series, 12. Restoration Service.
Bloomfield, Ontario.
Gilbert, Randal B.
1971

Military history of Texas and the Southwest, 9(3):192,193.

Gluckrnan, Arcadi
1956 United States martin pistols and revolvers. Bonanza Books, New York.
1965

Identifying old U.S. muskets, rifles and carbines. Bonanza Books, New York.

Harris, R. King, Inus M. Harris, Jay C. Blaine, and Jerrylee Blaine
1965 A preliminary archeological and documentary study of the Womack site, Lamar
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 36:287-363.
Hicks, James E.
1968 Notes on U.S. ordnance. Vol. H 1776-1941. Modem Books and Crafts, Inc., Green
Farms, Corm.
Hudgins, Joe D.
1984 Post West Bernard 1837-1839. Houston Archaeological Society
Journal, 80.
1985a Post West Bernard 1837-1839, Part II. Houston Archeological Society
Journal, 81.
1985b Post West Bernard 1837-1839, Part IlL Houston Archeological Society
Journal, 82.
1985c Post West Bernard 1837-1839, Part IV. Houston Archeological Society
Journal, 83.
Koury, Michael J.
1973 Arms for Texas. The Old Army Press, Fort Collins, Colorado.
Nance, Joseph Milton
1963 After San Jacinto, the Texas Mexican frontier. University of Texas
Press, Austin.
Pierce, Gerald S.
1969 Texas under arms. The camps, posts, forts and military towns of the Republic of
Texas 1836-1846. Encino Press, Austin.
1984

Personal communication.

Taylor, A. J.
1986 Personal communication
Wetzel, Shirley
1985 Personal communication.

Hudgins ~ Post West Bernard
Williams, Annie Lee
1972 The history of Wharton County, Texas 1846-1961. Von BoeckmannJones, Austin.
Williams, Vernon
1984

Post West Bemaxd station, Republic of Texas armory and frontier outpost.
Unpublished; copy in writer’s files.

Wilson, G. M.
1985 Personal communication.

163

Human Skeletal Remains From the Clark and
Holdeman Sites, Red River County, Texas
Carol J. Loveland

ABSTRACT
About 6.5 km (4 miles) apart, the Clark and Holdeman sites are situated on
terraces adjacent to the Red River in Red River County, Texas. The 26
individuals from the Holdeman site (41RR11) are dated from A.D. 1000 to
1650. The Clark site (41RR77), from which 39 skeletons were recovered, is
dated from A.D. 1300 to 1600+. Skeletal material from both sites is in fragmentary condition; age and sex determinations were not possible in many
cases. Sixty-nine percent of the skeletal remains recovered were adults. The
ratio of adult to subadult skeletons is similar to that found in other Caddoan
populations. Stature estimates suggest that the Clark and Holdeman people
were comparable in size to other Caddoans. Among the skeletal anomalies
noted were caries, degenerative conditions, infections, traumatic lesions, and
hematologic disorders. Information obtained from this study demonstrates
that small studies are worth the attention of skeletal biologists.

INTRODUCTION
The Clark and Holdeman sites are on the south bank of the Red River in Red
River County, Texas. The Holdeman site (41RR11), which is situated on a river
terrace on the east side of Texas Route 37, was excavated by Gregory Perino, of the
Museum of the Red River, Idabel, Oklahoma, in 1983. Earlier, in 1981, Perino
directed excavation of the Clark site (41RR77), located about 6.5 km (4 miles)
downriver from the Holdeman site.
Burials at both sites span occupation periods of several hundred years. The 26
skeletons recovered from the Holdeman site are dated, by pottery types found with
the human remains, from A.D. 1000 to A.D. 1650. The remains of an additional 15
individuals were not retrieved due to their poor preservation (~erino 1985).
The 39 skeletons from the Clark site are dated to the period between A. D. 1300
and 1600+. The acidity of the soil at both sites contributed to considerable
disintegration of the bones, so almost all of the skeletons are in fragmentary
condition. Although both sites were occupied over an extended period of time, the
poor state of preservation coupled with small sample size necessitated treating
human remains from each site as a single sample.
All of the burials from the Clark and Holdeman sites were extended inhumations, which is the typical pattern followed by the prehistoric Caddo. There was
some difference in burial orientation, however. Nineteen of the 26 individuals from
the Holdeman site were buried with their heads toward the east, ranging between
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57 (1986)

166

Texas Archeological Society

southeast and northeast. The remaining seven were interred with their heads to the
west or southwest. At the Clark site, 32 individuals were buried headed west through
northwest. One subadult’s bones were so scattered that no orientation could be
determined; the remaining individuals were headed east to southeast.
At the Holdeman site, the burials, which averaged 127 cm in depth, were
recovered from 66 to 163 cm below the present ground surface. The Clark site
interments were excavated from depths ranging between 15 cm (subadult) and 158
cm, with an average depth of 109 cm. An average depth of 99 cm was recorded for
the burials from Kaufman-Williams (Loveland 1980).
Many objects had been placed in the graves with the dead, including ceramics,
bone tools, arrowpoints, plant and animal food items, clay pipes, rattles, and
jewelry.
This paper summarizes the available bioarcheological information about the
biological adaptation of the prehistoric inhabitants of the Holdeman and Clark sites
to their environment. Unfortunately, due to the fragmentary nature of the remains,
only provisional interpretations are possible.
METHODOLOGY
The skeletal material from both sites was cleaned, labeled, and arranged in
anatomical position for study. Standard anthropological techniques were followed
in all observations and measurements. Because the innominate, the most reliable
indicator of both age and sex, was missing from most of the skeletons, it was
necessary to use less reliable characteristics.
Cranial features, such as robusticity of the brow, occipital, and mastoid regions
and morphology of the eye orbits, chin, and posterior part of the zygomatic process
(Bass 1971; Krogman 1978), proved most useful for adult sex determination.
Diameter of the femoral head (Dwight 1905) and circumference of the femoral shaft
(Black 1978) were used as sexing criteria when possible. No attempt was made to
sex subadults.
Adult age determination was based on evaluation of dental attrition (Miles
1963; Brothwell 1965) and closure of endocranial and ectocranial skull sutures
(Krogman 1978; McKern and Stewart 1957). These skeletal changes were compared within each sample, resulting in the establishment of two adult age categories:
(a) individuals 20 to 30 years old, and (b) individuals over 30. A few individuals
could only be classified as adults, due to the fragmentary nature of the remains.
The age of immature skeletons was determined by three methods: (a) evaluation of epiphyseal closure (Johnston 1961; McKern and Stewart 1957; McKem
1970), (b) analysis of dental development (Ubelaker 1978; Schour and Massler
1941), and (c) length of long bones without epipheses (Merchant and Ubelaker
1977).
The formulas established by Trotter and Gleser (1952, 1958) for white females
and Mongoloid males, and by Neumann and Waldman (1968) for American
Indians, were used in stature determination. Long-bone measurements were taken
following the proc’edures outlined in Bass (1964, 1971).

Loveland ~ Human Skeletal Remains

167

Skeletal anomalies were observed and recorded as skeletons were inventoried
for completeness. In each case the bone involved, as well as the extent and type of
lesion, was documented. S tandard paleopathology references (Ortner and Putschar
1981; Steinbock 1976; Morse 1978; Zimmerman and Kelley 1982; Manchester
1983) were frequently consulted.
DISCUSSION

The poor preservation of the skeletal material from the Clark and Holdeman
sites complicated the paleodemographic analysis. Age and sex determinations of
skeletons from both sites was difficult, and failure to recover 15 skeletons from the
Holdeman site certainly skewed the sample.
The subadult mortality profile was probably affected by bone preservation and
recovery techniques. Gordon and Buikstra (1981) stress that bone maturity is an
important factor in preservation; fragile immature bones are more susceptible to
deterioration than adult bone. Underrepresentation of subadults in a skeletal
population may also occur if children are interred away from cemetery areas.
Furthermore, subadult bone, which is difficult to recognize, may be included in the
faunal sample if archeologists are not careful (Buikstra and Mielke 1985).
The skeletal remains from both sites represent individuals who lived over a
span of several hundred years. Ideally, human remains associated with each time
period at a single site should be evaluated as separate samples; however, due to the
fragmentary nature of the skeletons and the small number of individuals available
for study, only two samples were delineated--one from each site. The Holdeman
sample consists of 26 skeletons and the Clark, of 39.
Paleodemography
Eighteen (69 percent) of the 26 skeletons at the Holdeman site are adults; eight
(31 percent) are subadults (Table 1). One-third of the subadults at the Clark site
(Table 2) were under five at the time of death, whereas half of thesubadults at the
Holdeman site were under five. The subadult mortality rate at both sites falls within
the range of juvenile mortality in preindustrial populations recorded by Weiss
(1973) and is similar to that reported at other Caddoan sites such as KaufmanWilliams (28 percent) (Loveland 1980) and Roden (22 percent) (Rose et al. 1981).
At the Clark site, 45 percent of the adults were classified as female, 48 percent
were males, and for 7 percent, sex determination was not possible. There was
considerable disparity in age at death between males and females. Only 20 percent
of the Clark females were over 30 at the time of death, whereas 75 percent of the
males were over 30. Fifty-six percent of those of unknown sex were over 30. Several
suggestions have been made to account for such differences in adult mortality.
These include the high female mortality during the reproductive period of life
associated with pregnancy, childbirth, or post-partum complications (Powell and
Rogers 1980). Coupled with this is the possibility that women may have been
overworked and underfed, which may have made them more susceptible to lifethreatening illnesses (Manchester 1983). Bass, Evans, and Jantz (1971 ) sugges t that

168

Texas Archeological Society

Table 1. Human Remains from the Holdeman Site Represented in
Each Age and Sex Category by Time Period
Age Groups
Sex

Number

0-6

7-12

13-18

20-30

30+

Adult

1

1

Skeletons Dated A.D. 1000
Male
Female
Undetermined
Adult
Subadult

2
1
Skeletons Dated A.D. 1200

Male
Female
Undetermined
Adult
Subadult

10
4
2
6

3

1

8
2

2
2

1

1

11

6

2

Skeletons Dated A.D. 1650
Undetermined
Subadult
Totals

1

1

26

4

2

2

1

young males may be underrepresented in skeletal populations due to their having
been buried elsewhere after raiding or hunting accidents.
Ten of the 18 Holdeman adults (56 percent) were males, four (22 percent) were
females, and sex determination was not possible for four (22 percent). Since almost
one-fourth of the Holdeman skeletons could not be sexed, no particular significance
is attached to the sex ratio disparity.
Fifty percent of the Holdeman females and 80 percent of the males were under
30 when they died. This is in stark contrast to the situation at the Clark site, where
female mortality was higher in the 20 to 30 group than among the males, who tended
to survive longer. No explanation of this disparity seems satisfactory except perhaps
that the recovery and analysis of the 15 skeletons that had disintegrated would have
created a more typical mortality profile.
Stature
It was possible to provide stature estimates for five individuals from the
!toldeman site and three from the Clark site (Table 3). The fragmentary condition
of the bones necessitated using whichever long bones were available, but whenever
possible the lower limb bones, especially the femora, were used since they provide
the most accurate estimates of stature.

Loveland m Human Skeletal Remains

169

Table 2. Skeletons from the Clark Site Represented in Each Age
and Sex Category by Time Period
Age Groups
Sex

Number Subadult

0-6

7-12

13-18

20-30

30+

Adult

Skeletons Dated A.D. 1300-1450
Male
Female
Undetermined
Adult
Subadult

4
5

Male
Female
Undetermined
Adult
Subadult

2
5

7
5

1
4

4
2
Skeletons Dated A.D.

2
6

3
1

1450-1600
4

2
1
1

2

2

1

1

Skeletons Dated A.D. 1600+
2
Male
Undetermined 1
Totals

39

1
4

4

1

3

12

13

2

Trotter and Gleser did not provide stature formulas for Mongoloid females, so
the formulas for white females (Trotter and Gleser 1952) and for Mongoloid
females (Neumann and Waldman 1968) were used. Use of the femur in estimating
stature provided close agreement between the two methods as reflected in the
estimated stature of the female from the Clark site. A greater difference occurred in
the estimated stature based on the two methods when the tibia of the Holdeman
female was used. Stature formulas are developed according to measurements based
on distinct landmarks, so use of the tibia, which can be measured several ways,
provided less satisfactory results.
Stature estimates for two Clark males were derived from the formulas developed by Trotter and Gleser (1958) for Mongoloid males. The Neumann and
Waldman (1968) formulas are based only on the femur and tibia and hence could
not be used. The four Holdeman males whose femora contributed to the stature
estimate were evaluated using both formulas. Scarcely a centimeter separated the
stature estimates for each individual when both methods were used. The estimated
statute of a Clark female was 161.79 cm, following Trotter and Gleser (1952), or
161.54 cm, using the Neumann and Waldman (1968) formula. Clark male stature
estimates ranged between 166.81 cm and 174.16 cm. Use of the Neumann and
Waldman (1968) formula produced a stature estimate for a Holdeman female of
163.15 cm. The estimate for the same individual, based on the Trotter and Gleser

170

Texas Archeological Society

Table 3. Stature Estimates of Clark and Holdeman Individuals
Burial
No.

Sex

Bone

Measurement

Trotter and
Gleser
(1952,1958)

Newmann
and Waldman
(1968)

Clark Site
1
3
38

F
M
M

Femur (R)
Fibula (R)
Humerus (R)

436
390
312"

161.79+3.72cm
174.16+3.24 cm
166.81+4.16 cm

161.54 cm
---

Holdeman Site
7
2A
3
10
13

F
M
M
M
M

Tibia (R)
Femur (L)
Femur(R)
Femur (L)
Femur (L)

374
446
433
430
434

169.99+3.66 cm
168.46+3.80cm
165.67+3.80cm
165.02+3.80cm
165.88+3.80 cm

163.15
168.31
166.83
166.50
166.94

cm
cm
cm
cm
cm

*Estimated measurement

(1952) formula, was 169.99 cm. The estimated stature of four males from the
Holdeman site ranged between 165.02 cm and 168.46 cm, using the Trotter and
Gleser (1958) formula, and between 166.50 cm and 168.31 cm, using the Neumannand Waldman (1968) formula.
Since the sample sizes are so small, little can be said about the stature of the
Clark and Holdeman people except that it was probably comparable to other
Caddoan populations (Table 4).
Skeletal Anomalies
Because the Clark and Holdeman remains are fragmentary, the skeletal
anomalies tend to appear as isolated occurrences, often not reflecting the health of
either the individual or the group. This is especially true for abnormalities such as
degenerative conditions and infections. A single bone may show evidence of an
abnormality, but it is difficult to gauge the severity of the condition when much of
the skeleton is missing. For this reason, analysis of the anomalies observed in each
age and sex category at the two sites (Tables 5, 6) suggests areas of possible health
concern for the people, but it does not permit accurate assessment of the health status
of the two populations.
The abnormalities noted in the Clark and Holdeman skeletons have been
divided into the following categories: degenerative conditions, developmental
abnormalities, neoplasms, traumatic lesions, infections, and hematologic conditions. However, it must be stressed that the cause and development of specific
conditions is not always certain, and the etiology of many anomalies often overlaps
these arbitrary classifications.

Loveland ~ Human Skeletal Remains

0
oo

t"-

t~
0

0
o
~
e,l

o
0
t’~

0

o.

o

m

o~

0
o
0
0o

o
O~

¢’4

t--

r-:

M:~

"~

0
oo

0
oo

t-tt3

t,,%

+1

o

,4
;.~0

[+1

-H

o~

o~.
oo

’~0
,-00~
"0

o

"0

: "~[

171

172

Texas Archeological Society
Table 5. Anomalies Observed on Skeletons From the Clark Site

Abnormality

Number of Males

Number of Females

Number of Undetermined Sex

20-30 30-L-_ Adult 20-30 30+ Adult 20-30 30+
Degenerative
Osteophytosis
4
1
Osteoarthritis
Developmental
None
Neoplasms
1
Button osteomas
Trauma
Skull Fracture
Schmorl’s Node
Infection
1
1
Periostitis
1
1
Dental Abscess
Hematologic
Cribra Orbitalia

Adult

1

-

Degenerative Conditions
Degenerative conditions were noted on skeletal remains at both sites, but evidence of osteophytosis, which is common among the older segments of most populations, was not observed on any of the skeletons from tile Holdeman site. This is
probably attributable to sampling error, since few vertebrae were recovered. The
four males from the Clark site who displayed evidence of osteophytosis were over
30. One individual from the Holdeman site was afflicted with tempomandibular
joint disease, and two skeletons from the Clark site exhibited evidence of osteoarthritis. The distal humeri of one young Clark male indicated very heavy elbow
wear.

Developmental Abnormalities
Developmental anomalies were noted on four Holdeman skeletons. Enamel
hypoplasia was observed on the maxillary incisors of two individuals: a young male
and a subadult. This condition develops in response to general disease processes
and/or nutritional deficiencies occurring during the period of enamel formation, but
E1-Najjar, De Santi, and Ozebek (1978) suggest that the specific etiology is still
idiopathic. Ortner and Putschar (1981) include infectious diseases (especially
tuberculosis and congenital syphilis), metabolic and endocrine disorders, and nutritional deficiencies as factors reponsible for the development of hypoplastic defects.
A lesion on the lateral surface of the right distal femur of a 12-to-18-year-old
subadult from the Holdeman site (Figure 1) was evaluated by Gregg (1985) as

Loveland ~ Human Skeletal Remains

173

Table 6. Abnormalities on Holdeman Remains

Abnormality

Number of
Subadults

Degenerative
Tempomandibular
Joint Disease
Developmental
Benign Fibrous
Cortical Defect
Fibrous Dysplasia
Enamel Hypoplasia
Neoplasms
Button Osteomas
Trauma
Skull Fracture
Vertebral Compression
L5
Infection
Periostitis
Dental Abscess
Hematologic
Cribra Ortoitalia
Porotic Hyperostosis

Number of
Males

Number of
Females

Number of
Undetermined
Sex

1

1
-

1
1

1

-

!

-

1

1

-

1

1

1

1

2
1

Figure 1. Located on the lateral surface of the right distal femur, 25 nun proximal to the
epiphyseal plate, a benign fibrous cortical defect has a smooth base and edges. The medullary
space is not involved.

174

Texas Archeological Society

a benign fibrous cortical defect. The base and edges of the 27-by- 11-mm lesion are
smooth, although the edges are slightly raised peripherally. These localized defects
are found in 30 to 40 percent of all children during the period of ossification, but they
usually disappear as growth proceeds (Paul and Juhl 1973).
An abnormality on a long bone of an unsexed adult from the Holdeman site was
evaluated as fibrous dysplasia in the late inactive stage (Gregg 1985) (Figures 2, 3).
An intramedullary lesion expanded and thinned the cortex for a distance of about
12.5 cm along the shaft of the bone. In one place the cortex is less than 1 mm thick;
in another the bone has expanded to 36 x 32 mm. The medullary space is filled with
trabeculated bone. The bone surface remains intact except in one area where the
cortex is broken, exposing the medullary space.
According to Ortner and Putschar (1981) fibrous dysplasia is~ a disease of
unknown etiology that affects females more frequently than males. It usually begins
in childhood and often ceases development in early adulthood. It never involves the
entire skeleton, although more than one bone may be affected.
Similar lesions may be produced by hyperparathyroidism and Paget’ s disease,
but they can usually be distinguished on the basis of age and lesion pattern and
appearance (Zimmerman and Kelley 1982:132).
Neoplasms
The only neoplasms observed on the skeletal material from either site were
button osteomas, small benign tumors composed of osseous tissue.
Traumatic Lesions
Traumatic lesions of the skull and vertebral column were seen on skeletal
remains from both the Clark and Holdeman sites. At the Clark site a healed
depressed fracture was seen on the occipital bone of an unsexed adult and a

Figure 2. A lesion attributed to fibrous dysplasia has affected the shaft of a long bone for about
12.5 cm. The cortical bone is roughened, and vascular markings are accentuated.

Loveland ~ Human Skeletal Remains

175

Figure 3. The medullary space is filled with trabeculated bone as a result of fibrous dysplasia.
The interstices within the bone’s medullary space were probably filled with fibrous tissue
during life.

Schmorl’s Node was observed on a thoracic vertebra of a young adult of unknown
sex. According to Knowles (1983), Schmorl’s Nodes are caused by severe strain,
especially from carrying heavy weights during childhood or adolescence. Such
activity may cause gelatinous material in the intervertebral disks to rupture and
create pressure against adjacent vertebrae. As the vertebra yields to pressure, a small
pit or cavity is formed in its body. The presence of Schmorl’s Nodes suggests that
the "workload was fairly severe for teenagers and was probably already imposed on
young persons in their late childhood" (Knowles 1983:69).
At the Holdeman site, a male over 30 years of age had a healed depressed
fracture on the left frontal. Another male, 20-30 years old, had anterior compression
of the fifth lumbar vertebra, probably of traumatic origin.

176

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

Infections
Three individuals---two from the Clark site and one from the Holdeman site--had dental abscesses. All of the abscesses were associated with caries in the molars.
The Holdeman male had lost the first right maxillary molar antemortem and had a
carious second molar.
Periostitis was observed on tibiae from two skeletons from the Holdeman site
and on lower limb bones of three Clark site individuals. The incidence of periostitis
(7.7 percent) in both the Clark and Holdeman skeletal remains must be regarded
with suspicion, since the skeletons are fragmentary. The combined adult/subadult
infection rate at the Kaufman-Williams site is 25.3 percent (Loveland et al. 1985).
At the Roden site, Rose, Clancy, and Moore-Jansen (1981) fotmd an adult infection
rate of 19.2 percent and a subadult infection rate of 77.8 percent.
Hematologic Conditions
Cribra orbitalia was observed on skeletons from both sites, and porotic
hyperostosis was found on the skeleton ofa subadult from the Holdeman site. These
conditions are usually attributed to iron-deficiency anemia resulting from illness
and nutritional stress (E1-Najjar et al. 1975; Mensforth et al. 1978). Blood loss
caused by intestinal parasites has been suggested by Walker (1985) as a cause of the
anemia.
Although evidence of these conditions appears on only 11.5 percent of the
Holdeman skeletons (all under five) and 2.6 percent of the Clark skeletons, it does
suggest that the people were under some stress. In fact, hematologic disorders may
have played a significant role in childhood morality at the Holdeman site, where
37.5 percent of the subadult skeletons show evidence of either cribra orbitalia or
porotic hyperostosis.
Summary
In summary, the anomalies associated with the Clark and Holdeman skeletons
are similar to those in other Caddoan populations. Infections, hematologic disorders, and degenerative diseases are indicated as health problems of possible severity
faced by the people, but the fragmentary nature of the skeletal remains makes it
impossible to assess the impact each of these conditions actually had.
Dental Caries
At both sites males had a higher incidence of caries than did the females (Table
7). In all categories, the Holdeman population had higher caries rates than
theClark population. The biggest contributors to this disparity, however, were two
individuals whose remains were too fragmentary to either age or sex.
The caries rate at the Clark and Holdeman sites is lower than that reported for
other Caddoan populations such as Bentsen-Clark (14.1 percent) (Buikstra and
Fowler 1975), Roden (23.3 percent) (Rose et al. 1981), and Kaufman-Williams
(15.3 percent) (Loveland 1980). Rose (1982) proposed that caries rates at Caddoan
sites are tied to differential reliance upon maize; populations that depended most
heavily upon maize would have the highest caries rates.

Loveland ~ Human Skeletal Remains

177

Table 7. Incidence of Caries Among Adults At the
Clark and Holdeman Sites
Age

Sex

20-30

30+

Adults
No Age

Total

% of Teeth
with Caries

10/116
8/166
1/55
19/337

8.6
4.8
1.8
5.6

13/169
5/93
15/64
33/326

7.7
5.4
23.4
10.1

Clark Site
Male
Female
Undetermined
Total

0/55"
8/166
8/221

10/61
1/55
11/116
Holdeman Site

Male
Female
Undetermined
Total

13/157
1/50
0/26
14/233

0/12
4/43
5/24
9/79

10/14
10/14

*Number of Caries/Number of Teeth Observed

CONCLUSIONS
The people who lived at the Clark and Holdeman sites encountered many of the
same adaptive problems faced by other Caddoan populations. The subadult mortality rate, which is similar to that documented at other Caddoan sites, is somewhat
lower than the rate for many Native American populations (Bass et al. 1971). It
remains to be determined whether the lower childhood mortality observed reflects
a true incidence of childhood death or some aspect of disposal or recovery of the
dead. Caddoan children were frequently buried under house floors rather than in
cemetery areas, so it is possible that not all subadult remains were recovered.
Furthermore, the poor skeletal preservation at many Caddoan sites may result in the
loss of some subadult skeletons.
The demographic profile at the Clark site suggests a high mortality among
young females, whereas 75 percent of the males were over 30 when they died. This
may be a reflection of obstetrical complications, although it is possible too that
young males who died away from home were buried elsewhere. At the Holdeman
site, on the other hand, 80 percent of the males were under 30 when they died. Adult
males are overrepresented there by a ratio of 10 to 4. Four individuals could not be
sexed, and an additional 15 skeletons were not recovered during excavation. The
unequal sex distribution is probably the result of the loss of this skeletal data rather
than an indication of differential burial practices. The Holdeman mortality profile
may be skewed because of sample size and poor preservation.

178

Texas Archeological Society

The anomalies observed on the skeletons from the two sites are among those
most commonly noted on individuals from other Caddoan sites. These include
caries, degenerative conditions, infections, developmental defects, and hematologic disorders. The presence of cribra orbitalia and porotic hyperostosis in both
populations provides evidence of disease or nutritional stress. Whether these conditions were the result of heavy dependence upon maize agriculture, use of maize
gruel as a weaning food, culinary practices, or diarrheal or helmith infections remains to be determined. Their occurrence in both populations, coupled with the presence of dental caries and enamel hypoplasia, suggests a health burden whose magnitude cannot be fully assessed because of the fragmentary nature of the remains.
Although the seletons were fragmentary, evaluation of the human remains from
the Clark and Holdeman sites contributes to our understanding of the Caddoan
people. As Westbury (1978:185) stated, "if enough small studies are undertaken,
eventually sufficient data will be available to draw valid conclusions about the
peoples who prehistorically populated the area."
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank Gregory Perino of the Museum of the Red River, Idabel, Oklahoma and
Dr. William M. Bass, of The University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee, for
making it possible for me to study this skeletal collection. Dr. John B. Gregg, School
of Medicine, The University of South Dakota, Sioux Falls, South Dakota, kindly
evaluated two of the skeletal lesions. I extend my appreciation to him.
REFERENCES CITED
Bass, William M.
1964 The variation in physical types of the prehistoric Plains Indians
Memoir 1. Plains Anthropologist 9:65-145.
1971

Human osteology. Missouri Archaeological Society, University of Missouri,
Columbia.

Bass, William M., David R. Evans, and Richard L. Jantz
1971 The Leavenworth site cemetery: archaeology and physical anthropology. University of Kansas Publications in Anthropology, Number 2. University of Kansas,
Lawrence.
Black, Thomas K.
1978 A new method for assessing the sex of fragmentary skeletal remains: femoral shaft
circumference. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 48:227-231.
Brothwell, Don R.
1965 Digging up bones. British Museum, London.
Buikstra, J., and D. Fowler
1975 An osteological study of the human skeletal materials from the Bentsen-Clark site.
In: Tile Bentsen-Clark Site, Red River County, Texas: A Preliminary Report,
edited by L. D. Banks and J. Winters. The Texas Arcbeological Society. Specia!
Publication No. 2.

Loveland ~ Human Skeletal Remains

179

Buikstra, Jane E., and James H. Mielke
1985 Demography, diet, and health. In: The Analysis of Prehistoric Diets, edited by
Robert I. Gilbert and James H. Mielke. Academic Press, Orlando.
Butler, Barbara H.
1969 Analysis of human skeletal remains: In: Archaeological Investigations at the Sam
Kaufman Site, Red River County, Texas, edited by S. Alan Skinner, R. K. Harris
and Keith M. Anderson. Southern Methodist University Contributions in Anthropology, Number 5. Southern Methodist Univerity, Dallas.
Dwight, Thomas
1905 The size of the articular surfaces of the long bones as characteristics of sex. An
anthropological study. American Journal of Anatomy 4(1):19-31.
E1-Najjar, Mahmoud Y., Mike V. De Santi, and leon Ozebek
1978 Prevalence and possible etiology of dental enamel hypoplasia. American Journal
of Physical Anthropology 48(2): 185-192.
E1-Najjar, Mahmoud Y., B. Lozoff, and D. J. Ryan
1975 The paleoepidemiology of porotic hyporostosis in the American Southwest: radiological and ecological considerations. The American Journal of Roentgenology,
Radium Therapy, and Nuclear Medicine 125:918-924.
Gordon, Claire C., and Jane E. Buikstra
1981 Soil pH bone preservation and sampling bias at mortuary sites. American Antiquity 46(3):566-571.
Gregg, John B.
1985 Letter dated April 26, 1985, on file Utah State University, Logan, Utah.
Johnston, Francis E.
1961 Sequence of epiphyseal union in a prehistoric Kentucky population from Indian
Knoll. Human Biology 33:66-81.
Krogman, W. M.
1978 The human skeleton in forensic medicine. Charles C. Thomas, Springfield.
Knowles, A. Keith
1983 Acute traumatic lesions. In: Diseases in Ancient Man, edited by Gerald D. Hart.
Clark Irwin, Toronto.
Loveland, Carol J.
1980 The skeletal biology of the Caddo Indians of the Kaufman-Williams site, Red
River County, Texas. Ph.D. Dissertation, The University of Termessee. University
Microfilms, Ann Arbor.
Loveland, Carol J., John B. Gregg, and William M. Bass
1985 Ancient osteopathology from the Caddoan burials at the Kaufman-Williams site,
Texas. Plains Anthropologist 30:29-43.

180

Texas Archeological Society

Manchester, Keith
1983 The archaeology of disease. University of Bradford, Bradford, West Yorkshire.
McKem, Thomas
1970 Estimation of skeletal age" from puberty to about 30 years of age. In: Personal
Identification in Mass Disasters, edited by T.D. Stewart. National Museum of
Natural History, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.
McKern, Thomas, and T. D. Stewart
1957 Skeletal age changes in young American males, analyzed from the standpoint of
identification. Technical Report EP-45. Headquarters Quartermaster Research
and Development Command, Natick, Massachusetts.
Mensforth, R. P., C. O. Lovejoy, J. W. Lallo, and G. J. Armelagos
1978 The role of constitutional factors, diet, and infectious disease in the etiology of
porotic hyperostosis and periosteal reactions in prehistoric infants and children.
Medical Anthropology 2(1).
Merchant, Virginia I., and Douglas H. Ubelaker
1977 Skeletal growth of the protohistoric Arikara. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology 46(1):61-72.
Miles, A. E.
1963 The dentition in the assessment of individual age in skeletal materials. In: Dental
Anthropology, edited by Don R. Brothwell. Pergamon Press, New York.
Morse, Dan
1978 Ancient disease in the Midwest. Illinois State Museum, Springfield.
Navey, Liane
1975 Human skeletal remains from the East Fork of the Trinity River. In: Archaeological Excavations at Lake Lavon 1974, edited byMark J. Lynott. SouthernMethodist
University Contributions in Anthropology. Number 16. Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.
Neumann, George K. and Cheryl G. Waldman
1968 Regression formulae for the reconstruction of the stature of Hopewellian and
Middle Mississippi Amerindian populations. Proceedings Indiana Academy of
Sciences 77:98-101.
Ortner, Donald J. and Walter G. J. Putschar
1981 Identification of pathological conditions in human skeletal remains. Smithsonian
Contributions to Anthropology, Number 28. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.
Paul, Lester W. and John H. Juhl
1973 The Essentials of Roentgen Interpretation. Harper and Row, New York.
Perino, Gregory
1985 Letter dated March 12, 1985, on file Utah State University, Logan, Utah.

Loveland ~ Human Skeletal Remains

181

Powell, Mary L. and J. D. Rogers
1980 Bioarchaeology of the McCutchan-McLaughlin site (34Lt11), biophysical and
mortuary variability in eastern Oklahoma. Oklahoma Archaeological Survey
Studies in Oklahoma’s Past, Number 5. Norman.
Rose, J. C.
1982 Agriculture and the Fourche Maline-Caddo Transition. Paper presented at the 24th
Caddo Conference, Fayetteville, Arkansas.
Rose, Jerome C., Phyllis Marie Clancy, and Peer H. Moore-Jansen
1981 Bioarchaeology of the Roden site. In: Archaeological Investigations at the Roden
site, McCurtain County, Oklahoma, edited by Gregory Perino. Potsherd Press,
Publication Number 1, Museum of the Red River, Idabel, Oklahoma.
Schour, I., and M. Massler
1941 The development of the human dentition. Journal of the American Dental Association. 28:1153-1160.
Steinbock, R. Ted
1976 Paleopathological diagnosis and interpretation. Charles C. Thomas, Springfield,
Illinois.
Trotter, Mildred, and Goldine C. Gleser
1952 Estimation of stature from long bones of American Whites and Negroes. American
Journal of Physical Anthropology 10:463-514.
1958

A re-evaluation of estimation of stature based on measurements of stature taken
during life and of long bones after death. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 16(1):79-123.

Ubetaker, Douglas H.
1978 Human skeletal remains. Aldine, Chicago.
Walker, Philip L.
1985 Anemia among prehistoric Indians of the American Southwest. In: Health and
Disease in the Prehistoric Southwest, edited by Charles F. Merbs and Robert J.
Miller. Anthropological Research Papers No. 34. Arizona State University.
Tempe.
Weiss, K. M.
1973 Demographic models for anthropology. Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, Number 27. Society for American Archaeology, Washington, D.C.
Westbury, Marilyn Stark
1978

Osteological analysis. In: Archaeological Research at Proposed Copper Lake,
Northeast Texas, 1974-1975, edited by Karen Doehner and Richard E. Larson.
Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

Zimmerman, Michael R., and Marc A. Kelley
1982

Atlas of human paleopathology. Praeger, New York

Possible Cases of Endemic Treponematosis
in a Prehistoric Hunter43atherer Population
on the Texas Coast
Barbara E. Jackson, James L. Boone,
and Maciej Henneberg

ABSTRACT
A case study of possible endemic treponematosis in a prehistoric huntergathererpopulation from the Gulf Coast of Texas is presented. A chief interest
of the study is the high incidence of skeletal lesions indicative of infectious
disease in a nonsedentary hunter-gatherer population, which may be indicative of seasonal aggregation.

INTRODUCTION
This paper describes a case study of possible endemic treponematosis in the
skeletalpopulation from Callo del Oso (41NU2) on the Central Gulf Coast of Texas.
Cultural and temporal context of the population is discussed, and a differential
diagnosis arguing for treponematosis is presented, together with an analysis of the
location and incidence of skeletal lesions. One of the chief interests of this case study
is the apparent high incidence of skeletal lesions compared to the incidence reported
for any of the recognized treponemal syndromes. Similar cases on the Texas coast
and in the eastern United States are discussed, and it is suggested that the high
incidence of infectious disease may be due to seasonal aggregations among this
population of hunter-gatherers.
The prevalence and distribution of treponemal infections has been the topic of
scholarly debate for more than a century (see Steinbock 1976:87-97 and Ortner and
Putschar 1981:200-207 for review of this debate). Formerly, much of this debate
centered around the question of whether one particular manifes tafion of this disease,
venereal syphilis, originated in the Old or the New World. Theoretical advances and
closer examination of evidence in the past two decades have changed considerably
the emphasis and character of this debate. Hudson’s Unitary hypothesis (1965)
argues that the four existing clinical manifestations: pinta, yaws, endemic syphilis
(bejel, treponarid), and venereal syphilis form a pathological continuum and are
caused by different strains of the same infectious agent, Treponema pallidum.
Differences in clinical manifestations of the infection are attributable to differences
in the mode of transmission of the infectious agent, which are in turn affected by
environmental factors such as climate and by level of sociocultural development.
Hackett’s theory (1963) emphasizes that there has been a continual coevolution of
Bulletin of the Texas Areheological Society 57 (1986)

184

Texas Archeological Society

host and infectious agent. Both points of view carry the implication that the
prevalence, distribution, and specific clinical manifestations of treponemal infection in the past may have been very different from what they are now, and that the
question of geographic origin of a specific manifestation of the disease, such as
venereal syphilis, may be misplaced.
Paleopathological studies of treponematoses remain an important area of study
because they are among the [relatively] few widespread infectious diseases that
leave recognizable skeletal lesions in a consistent fashion and because varying clinical manifestations of the disease appear to be linked in part to levels of social and
demographic development. Studies of the prevalence and distribution of treponematoses in the past have the potential to tell us much about the coevolution of disease
and human populations. Such studies are complicated, however, by the fact that
different clinical manifestations of the disease can leave identical lesions (Steinbock 1972:111,139; Ortner and Putschar 1982:180, 182). Steinbock argues that a
differential diagnosis of a specific known clinical manifestation of the disease from
skeletal remains necessarily involves specification of type and location of lesions,
incidence of skeletal involvement, and a consideration of the sociocultural and
climactic context of the population in question. So, adequate descriptions of treponemal infections in the past, which may differ from those of the present, should take
the same approach. Because of the prevailing emphasis on identification of specific
cases of venereal syphilis, this population approach has not always been followed.

GEOGRAPHIC AND ARCHEOLOGICAL CONTEXT
The Callo del Oso Burial site (41NU2) is located within the present-day city
limit of Corpus Christi, [Texas] on a clay dune overlooking the Corpus Christi and
Oso Bays on the central Gulf coast of Texas. Callo del Oso has been noted as a burial
site for more than a century (Martin 1930). The skeletal sample dealt with here was
excavated in the summer of 1933 by a team from the University of Texas under the
direction of A.T. Jackson (n.d.). Jackson recorded a total of 101 burials, including
a number of partial skeletons that had been disturbed by later burials and by erosion.
Sixty-eight individuals were sufficiently intact for determination of burial
position and orientation. Many of the skeletons were recovered as groups of
interments, each of which was given a feature number. Thirty-nine such burial
features were excavated, each containing between one and fourteen individuals.
Most of the group burials were single interments that had intruded upon one another,
although there are a few multiple interments, particularly of infants together with
adult females. Due to the accessioning procedure that prevailed at the museum
where the bones were curated, individual skeletal integrity Was lost, and bones were
ultimately labeled only by feature number. This greatly complicated the rematching
of skeletal parts, a problem that was compounded by the eroded and fragmentary
nature of many of the bones. As a result, our analyses of skeletal-lesion location and
incidence are by bone element rather than by individual. The minimum number of
individuals in the existing collection is 68, based on the number of left femorae. It
was possible to rematch relatively complete skeletons for 21 of these individuals.
Attrition of the collection appears to have been the result of poor preservation and

Jackson, Boone, and Henneberg ~ Endemic Treponematosis

185

of recovery by relatively crude excavation methods.
Temporally diagnostic grave goods at Callo del Oso were scarce, but several
lines of evidence indicate that the burial site dates to late in the Archaic sequence
of the Central Gulf Coast. Cl~ronological precedence to the Rockport period
beginning some time after 1250 A.D. (Story 1968; Corbin 1974) is indicated by the
conspicuous absence ofRockport sherds in the burial fill or the dune deposit, despite
the face that more than 400 m2 of the dune was excavated (Jackson n.d.). Known
Rockport burials occur in campsites or middens where Rockport or other sherds are
among the most common artifact class recovered in the burial fill (cf. Hester and
Corbin 1975; Hole and Wilkinson 1973; Wingate and Hester 1972).
Consistency in burial positioning and orientation (Jackson n.d.) argues for a
high degree of cultural-temporal continuity within the cemetery. All 68 of the
relatively undisturbed burials were flexed, and 59 of the 68 (86.7 percent) were
placed on the left side with the head oriented in an easterly to southerly direction
(facing Oso Bay). Twenty-seven of the 68 were placed specifically in a southeasterly direction, on the left side, with the hands placed over or near the face.
It should be emphasized that Archaic settlement and subsistence patterns
persist until very late on the central and southern Texas coast, as well as in the
adjacent interior. The introduction of local pottery manufacture in the Rockport
period may indicate a degree of decreased mobility, but there is no evidence for the
development of sedentary agricultural communities such as those that existed in the
equidistant Huastecan and Caddoan regions during the same period. When Cabeza
de Vaca and his companions explored the Gulf Coast of Texas between 1527 and
1536, they met with small groups of semisedentary hunter-gatherers (Campbell and
Campbell 1981), and there is no evidence to indicate that subsistence and settlement
there had been radically different in previous centuries.

DESCRIPTION OF SKELETAL LESIONS
Analyses of stature, cranial morphology, and pathologies, which include parts
of the Callo del Oso skeletal series, have appeared in earlier publications (Goldstein
1957; Neuman 1952; Woodbury 1935). Goldstein (1957:302) suggested that
lesions on the long bones of the collection"may be due to syphilis." Recent analysis
by the authors confirms that the Callo del Oso skeletal series has a high incidence
of inflanunatory bone disease characterized by subperiosteal remodeling, cortical
thickening, expansion of trabecular bone growth, and occurrence of destructive
lesions. Periostitis is evident in all of the affected bones and is concentrated on the
metaphyses of the long bones. In the least severe cases, subperiosteal bone
apposition on the midshaft forms a thickened area defined onthe surface by a pattern
of longitudinal striations (see Figure 2, A-C). In some tibiae, subperiosteal bone
apposition on the anterior surface of the midshaft produces the saber-shin appearance characteristic of treponematosis (Figure 1, A: Steinbock 1972:102-104).
Further bone changes involve the increased growth of the endosteum to the extent
that cancellous bone sometimes entirely closes the medullary cavity (Figure 2, D).
In the most severe cases, the formation of destructive gummata occurs (Figure 2, C).
The most frequently affected bone is the tibia (23.4 percent of 94 left and right

186

Texas Archeological Society

A

B

Figure 1. Right (A) and left (B) tibiae showing saber-shin effect bone changes typical of
treponemal infection.

Jackson, Boone, and Henneberg m Endemic Treponematosis

187

D

A
B
C
Figure 2. A, Stage one: midsection of right tibia showing beginning subperiosteal remodeling characterized by striations and cortical thickening. B, Stage two: midsection of left
tibia showing extensive striations, appearance of bone lesions, and continued cortical
thickening resulting in narrowing of medullary canal. C, Stage three: left tibia with marked
deformation of bone shaft with cortical apposition and exostoses accompanied by continued
bone lesioning and cloaca formation. D, Cross section of left tibia shown in Figure 2, C, with
third-stage internal changes characterized by nearly complete closure of the medullary canal.

188

Texas Archeological Society

tibiae, see Table 1), followed by the clavicle (11.5 percent of 26 left and right, note
low sample size), fibulae (8.9 percent), ulnae and humerii (both 4.7 percent), radii
(3.8 percent), and femorae (2.3 percent). Of 21 rematched skeletons in the series,
five were affected on three or more bones. Of 29 relatively complete crania and
frontal and parietal fragments of about 40 other individuals, not a single individual
showed cranial lesions. The frontal, parietal, and nasal bones are the first or second
most frequently affected bones in venereal syphilis (Steinbock 1972:112, 113;
Ortner and Putschar 1981:188), but are much less commonly affected in endemic
syphilis or yaws (Steinbock 1972:139). Steinbock further notes that cranial lesions
are present in nonvenereal syphilis in about 4 percent of individuals involving bone
lesions, so the population analyzed here is probably too small to determine
definitively whether a low frequency appearance of cranial lesions was a characteristic of the syndrome in this population. Projecting from Steinbock’s figures, it is
clear that a sample of at least 25 affected individuals would be required before a
single case involving specifically cranial lesions could be expected due to nonvenereal treponemal infection.
No dental stigmata typical of congenital syphilis were observed among the 33
individuals with teeth. Dactylitis, frequently associated with yaws (Ortner and
Putschar 1982:180), was not observed. The nasal and palatal bones were generally
too poorly preserved to determine whether lesioning occurred there, as is noted in
venereal syphilis and less commonly, in yaws (Ortner and Putschar 1982:180-181)
Nasal lesions have been reported in a skeletal series from the nearby Palm Harbor
site (Commuzzie et al. 1984). Two infant tibiae (out of a total of eight infants in the
series) exhibited periostitis characterized by thin successive layering of bone with
pitting and formation of destructive lesions.
A scale was developed to characterize the degree of bone affectation (Figure
2, Table 1). The first stage of affectation is characterized by appearance of
longitudinal striations and cortical thickening at the midshaft. In the second stage,
cortical thickening increases and involves more of the midshaft; endosteal growth
results in the narrowing of the medullary cavity (Figure 1, B). In stage three, the
entire diaphysis is heavily involved, and there are frequently destructive gummata
(Figure 1, C). Table 1 shows that few cases reached stage three of affectation and
all of these were adults. These data suggest the disease was a chronic, progressive,
but subacute disease in this population. The markedly high stature, robusticity and
sexual dimorphism of the Callo del Oso series suggest that the population was
healthy and well nourished, except for the subacute condition described here.
DISCUSSION
The form, incidence, and location of bone lesions in the Callo del Oso skeletal
series argue for a diagnosis of a chronic, progressive, subacute form of treponematosis that was endemic to the population. The incidence of skeletal involvement
appears to be much higher than in any of the described syndromes. Steinbock
(1972:139) estimates that skeletal lesions should be present in 1 to 5 percent of a
skeletal series where nonvenereal syphilis is endemic. He arrives at a similar figure
for yaws (page 143), while the prevalence of skeletal lesions in a population where

Jackson, Boone, and Henneberg ~ Endemic Treponematosis

ca

O0

~

O0

~

~

~

o.
°~

¯ =- ~.

o
~3

ca

2:
ca

[-

~

.,.~

,

i

i

i

~<
i

I

i

189

190

Texas Archeological Society

venereal syphilis is present is estimated to be lower: .5 to 1 percent (page 110). Using
tibiae as an index (i.e. assuming that the tibia is always affected in any case with
skeletal involvement), the incidence of skeletal involvement in the Callo del Oso
population was at least 23.4 percent. So even if 100 percent of the population had
active cases of the disease, the degree of skeletal involvement would be much higher
than any of the known syndromes of treponematosis.
The level of incidence of the disease at Callo del Oso is close, however, to the
figure obtained by Cassidy (1972:89) for the Hardin Village skeletal series. This
series was associated with a sedentary agricultural population of the Fort Ancient
Tradition in Kentucky, dating to just prior to historic contact. Cassidy found evidence of varying degrees of periosteal inflammation in about 30 percent of the population. Cassidy concluded that the periostitis was due to a form of endemic treponematosis, and found similar cases of the disease in nearby cemetery sites, including
Indian Knoll. At Indian Knoll, however, which was associated with an earlier
gatherer-hunter population, the incidence was much lower: only about 2 percent.
At Callo del Oso the high incidence of an infectious disease in what appears to
be a small, dispersed hunter-gather population is worth further discussion. Endemic
treponematosis is typically associated with small populations living under primitive, unhygienic conditions (Steinbock 1972:138). It is spread by skin contact or by
common use of drinking and eating vessels and is commonly spread among
children, whereupon the disease becomes chronic, with long periods of latency, in
the adult population. With the introduction of urbanization and modem systems of
hygiene, the disease generally disappears and may be replaced by venereal syphilis
(Steinbock 1972:139). Most recognized forms ofnonvenereal endemic treponematosis are associated with primitive fanning communities or pastoral nomads.
However, Hudson (1963:22) reports that endemic treponematosis was "able to
maintain itself in nomadic aboriginal family groups [in Australia] which conjugated
into larger groups for only a few weeks a year." Such seasonal aggregations are
likely to have occurred among some of the Texas Coastal Indians (see Ricklis 1986),
so it is possible that the disease of the Callo del Oso population was maintained
through seasonal groupings.
St. Hoyme and Bass (1962:376-378; Cassidy 1972:99) cite a historical observation of what may be the syndrome in question among the Carolina Indians of the
early eighteenth century. The disease was described as a "burning of the limbs,"
which caused considerable discomfort to some of the older members of the village.
St. Hoyme and Bass suggest this affliction may have been the disease responsible
for bone lesions they observed in a skeletal population from the Clarksville site in
Virginia. The lesions they observe resemble very closely those observed by Cassidy
(1972:92-100) and in the Callo del Oso population. This syndrome, which may well
corrspond to the endemic nonvenereal syphilis of the Old World, may have been
widespread in North America before European contact. It may well account for
many of the isolated reports of Precolumbian "syphilis" in North America.
Skeletal lesions similar to those described here have been noted in other skeletal
samples from the Texas coast. In their report of the Palm Harbor burials (41AS80),
Marek, and Steele (1984) report lesions characteristic of ~eponemal infection on the

Jackson, Boone, and Henneberg ~ Endemic Treponematosis

191

tibiae and other long bones in the sample, as well as on the nasal bones of one of the
crania. Three of eight individuals recovered at the Shell Point site (41B046; Hole
and Wilkinson 1973) were afflicted with a "progressive periostitis" characteristic
of treponematosis. Interestingly, these three skeletal series have morphological
similarities in the form of marked robusticity and sexual dimorphism (Comuzzie et
al. 1984). At the same time it is worth noting that the Shell Point burials were
definitely associated with pottery, possibly making them somewhat later than the
Callo del Oso burials. The authors have noted lesions characteristic of treponematosis on many other skeletons from the coastal and inland regions of Texas during
their reinventory and reorganization of the skeletal collection at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory at The University of Texas at Austin, although it is
beyond the scope of this paper to describe all of these. In order to trace the
development and distribution of this syndrome through time, more reports are
needed that describe the specific lesion location and incidence of osteoperiostitis.
Such studies may well provide answers to questions of more general interest
involving population dynamics and settlement patterns.
REFERENCES CITED
Campbell, T. N. and Campbell, T. J.
1981 Historic Indian groups of the Choke Canyon area, southern Texas. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Cassidy, C. M.
1973 A comparison of nutrition and health in preagricultural and agricultural Amerindian skeletal populations. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Wisconsin. Ann
Arbor: University Microfilms.
Collins, M.B., Hester, T. R. and Weir, F. A.
1969 Two prehistoric cemetery sites in the Lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 40:119-157.
Comuzzie, A. G., Marek, M. and Steele, D. G.
1984 Analysis of human skeletal remains fromthe Palm Harbor site (41AS80): a Central
Texas coast mortuary site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 55:213249.
Corbin, J. E.
1974 A model for cultural succession in the Coastal Bend area of Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 45:29-55.
Elting, J.,

1984

and Starna, W.
A possible case ofpre-columbian trepanematosis from New York state. American
Journal of Physical Anthropology 65:267-273.

Goldstein, M. S.
1957 Skeletal pathology of early Indians of Texas. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology, n. s., 15:299-307.

192

Texas Archeological Society

Hackett, C. J.
1963 On the origin of the human trepanematoses. Bulletin of the World Health
Organization 29:7-41.
Hester, T. R.
1969a Human bone artifacts from southern Texas. American Antiquity 34:326-328.
1969b Archeological investigations in Kleberg and Kenedy counties, Texas in August,
1967. State Building Commission Archeological Program, Report No. 15.
Hester, T. R. and Wingate, R. J.
1972 Ten burials from Green Lake, San Patricio County, Texas. Florida Anthropologist
25:119-127.
Hole, F., and Wilkinson, R. G.
1973 Shell Point: a coastal complex and burial site in Brazoria County. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 44:5-50.
Hudson, E. H.
1965 Treponematosis and man’s social evolution. American Anthropologist 67:885901.
Jackson, A. T.
Excavation of the Callo del Oso burial site. MS on file at the Texas Archeological
n.d.
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Martin, G. C.
1930 Two sites on the Callo del Oso, Nueces County, Texas. Bulletin of the Archeologi
cal and Paleontological Society 2:7-17.
Neuman, G. K.
1952

Archeology and race in the American Indian. In Archeology of the Eastern United
States, edited by J. B. Griffin. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Ortner, D. J. and W. G. J. Putschar
1981 Identification of pathological conditions in human skeletal remains. Smithsonian
Contributions to Anthropology No. 28. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washing
ton, D.C.
Powell, M. L. and Rodgers, J. D.
1980 Bioarcheology of the McCutchan-McLaughlin site. Oklahoma Archeological
Survey, Studies in Oklahoma’s Past, 5.
Ricklis, R. A.
1986 Archeological investigations at the McKinzie site (41NU221): description and
contextual interpretations. M.A. Thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.
Story, D. A.
1968 Archeological investigations at two Central Texas Gulf Coast sites. State Building
Commission Archeological Program Report 13.

Jackson, Boone, and Henneberg ~ Endemic Treponematosis

193

St. Hoyme, L., and Bass, W. K.
1962 Human skeletal remains from the Tolliferro and Clarksville sites, John H. Kerr
Reservoir Basin, Virginia. Bureau of American Ethnology bulletin 182:329-400.
Saul, F. P.
1972 The human skeletal remains of Alter del Scrificios. Peabody Museum Papers 63,
no. 2.
Woodbury, G., and Woodbury, E.
1935

Prehistoric skeletalremains from the Texas coast. Lancaster Press, Lancaster, Pa.

Book Reviews
Adobe Walls: The History and Archeology of the 1874 Trading Post.
By T. Lindsay Baker and Billy R. Harrison; Foreword by B. Byron
Price. Texas A&M University Press, 1986. xx + 413 pp., 284 figs., 2
maps, 22 tables. Hardcover $39.50.
The Texas A&M Press has published a definitive history and comprehensive
archeological analysis of the Adobe Walls site (41HC 1), situated just north of the
Canadian River in Hutchinson County. Steely describes this National Register site,
a historic occupation from March to September 1874, as a site of short occupation
by buffalo hunters; contains ruins of sod and picket structures, well, grave markers,
subsurface artifacts and foundation remains, and stone monuments to Second Battle
of Adobe Walls. Named for adobe ruins of 1843 William Bent trading post a mile
distant. On 27 June 1874 a group of hunters here repelled 5-day attack and seige by
Indian force under command of Quanah Parker and Lone Wolf [Steely 1984:107].
This site and the battle have been the subject of myths for more than a century,
and the authors have rendered an exceptional service in seeking out the facts. The
volume has two major sections. In the first, T. Lindsay Baker, Curator of
Agriculture and Technology at the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum, interprets
the history of Adobe Walls within the broader context of the sweeping trends of
nineteenth century developments on the Southern Plains. He concludes that the
battle was more than a local incident; it was an Indian reaction to Anglo hunters’
destruction of the Southern Plains buffalo herds in areas believed by the Indians to
be their exclusive hunting range. But in the Texas Panhandle, unlike the Indian
Territory of Oklahoma, there were no federally protected public lands, since all
common lands in Texas had been reserved to the State when Texas entered the
Union. So the Indians had no legal claim to buffalo herds in the Texas Panhandle,
in spite of the fact that the Panhandle had been part of their hunting range for
centuries.
The confrontation at Adobe Wails was also a critical test of the spiritual
leadership of the young Comanche medicine man Isatal among his people. He had
toured several camps of the Comanche and their Cheyenne, Arapahoe, and Kiowa
allies, boasting of the powers of his protective medicine to make warriors invulnerable to the buffalo hunters’ bullets. So when they rode out to fight, the Comanche
bands were accompanied by Cheyenne and other allies who wanted to observe
Isatal’s medicine at work.
Baker outlines both the Indian and Anglo events that led up to the battle, details
the specific actions during the five days of the battle, and traces the history of the
site and the participants through the years that followed. He is remarkably successful--through his evaluation of the often exaggerated historical accounts and his
blending of logical analysis with archeological evidence. He validates several
phenomenal occurrences, including Billy Dixon’s famous long shot with the new
.50-caliber Sharps rifle that killed several attackers at ranges between 800 and 1500
Bulletin of the Texas Archeologieal Society 57 (1986)

196

Texas Archeological Society

yards. Concerning the killing of Isatal’s horse, Baker notes that"the death of Isatal’s
horse demoralized the warriors, who now realized that no supernatural power would
help them in their fight" (pages 65, 66). Quanah Parker was also hit, a fact that
"definitely affected the course of the battle" (pages 64, 65.) Outgunned, the
Comanche withdrew after five days of harassing raids.
The battle immediately made national headlines from San Antonio and Denver
to New York and Washington, and the resulting furor helped create an atmosphere
of crisis that provided justification for the final Plains Indian Wars of the late 1870s.
Tales of the battle and the Indian "threat" continued to grow, and by the end of
September 1874, the Adobe Walls site was abandoned by the traders and buffalo
hunters, who removed as much of their goods as possible back to Dodge City,
Kansas, where they had been outfitted originally. The structures at the site were later
looted and burned by the Indians.
In the second half of this volume, Billy Harrison, Curator or Archeology at the
Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum, reports on systematic excavations that began
at the site in 1975. His well-written and extremely well illustrated section provides
a wealth of information, not only about this important battle site, but also about the
life-style of Southern Plains buffalo hunters, their food preferences, and other
characteristics. The construction and destruction of the buildings at the site-stores, stable, mess hall, saloon, blacksmith shop, and privy--are examined in
considerable detail. Artifacts recovered are remarkably varied, ranging from
whiskey and medicine bottles to Ironstone dinnerware and tobacco pipes.
Several metal Indian arrowpoints document the survival of the bow and arrow
as a weapon of the Comanche as late as 1874, and the elegant English dinnerware
shows that the buffalo hunters dined in style. From some tin cans recovered and
from the historical record, we learn that they also enjoyed fresh peaches, dried and
canned fruit, and canned tomatoes. Medicine bottles suggest their ailments, and
buckles, buttons, and purchase receipts help illustrate their taste in clothes. Much
of the archeological evidence shows that this trading post, a well-equipped outpost
of American popular culture, carried imported goods and was not simply a rude
place to swap buffalo hides for beans and bacon. The archeological evidence proves
that the site was a mercantile colony rather than just a hunters’ temporary campsite,
and that the Comanches’ fears of territorial intrusion and possible colonialism were
well founded.
This study of the history and archeology of the Adobe Walls site is extremely
well done, but it has a few minor defects. Although both the historical and
archeological sections have detailed descriptions of the structures, maps of the site
and drawings of the buildings are confined to the archeology section in the second
half of the book; consolidation of these descriptions, together with the maps and
drawings, into an expanded introduction probably would have helped readers
develop a perspective of the site. The photographs of both Anglo and Indian
participants are reproduced very early on eight unnumbered pages between pages
10 and 11 and on eight more between pages 42 and 43. They would have been more
helpful as single pages of photographs placed near where the individuals or events
were discussed, as was done in the archeology section.

Book Reviews

197

In the history section there are a few trite expressions: "through 1872 and 1873,
the numbers of shaggies were so depleted that the hide men were forced to look
farther afield" (page 8), and on page 9 there is a minor error; where "the Indians were
permitted to hunt on federally owned plains south of the Arkansas River and east
of the reservations" probably should read west of the reservations.
In the archeology section the site number is missing from both maps and text.
Most measurements are in English units (inches, feet, miles), although metric
measurements are standard in American archeology. Moreover, 135 pages into the
archeological section, on page 261, when buttons are discussed, measurements
suddenly shift to metric, and on page 270, where the topic shifts to buckles,
measurements are again in English units without explanation. References to
commercial sources, comparative collections, and other archeological investigations are sometimes inserted into the narrative and are sometimes just cited in the
"Chapter Notes" at the end of the text. This is a distinct difference from the in-text
citation format that is standard in archeological literature. This practice is understandable, considering the dual historical-archeological thrust of the volume, but it
is awkward for archeologists and requires much thumbing back and forth. There is
very little comparison of the artifacts from Adobe Walls to those from other Texas
sites, although some types of nineteentah century artifacts such as beads (Harris and
Harris 1967; Davison and Harris 1974), conchas and hair pipes (Word and Fox
1975), and metal arrowpoints (Baker and Campbell 1959; Thompson 1980) are well
documented in the Texas and Oklahoma archeological literature.
Overall, this volume makes a considerable contribution to our knowledge of the
nineteenth century Panhandle, one of the last frontiers in the history of Texas and
the United States. The authors are to be commended for an outstanding analysis of
the history and archeology of this important battle site. Their work is extremely
significant for anyone interested in understanding the final days of freedom for
the Southern Plains Indians in general and the Comanche in particular. By examining both Anglo and Indian perspectives on the Battle of Adobe Walls, Baker and
Harrison have destroyed many stereotypes and challenged many myths. Their work
should stand for a long time as the definitive analysis of both the battle and the site.
Jimmy L. Mitchell
Converse, Texas
REFERENCES
Baker, W. E., and Campbell, T. N.
1959 Metal projectile points from the Oklahoma Panhandle and vicinity. Bulletin of the
Oklahoma Anthropological Society, 7:51-54.
Davison, C. C., and Harris, R. K.
1974 Chemical profile of glass trade beads from archeological sites in Texas and
Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 45:209-217.
Harris, R. K., and Harris I. M.
1967 Trade beads, projectile points, and knives. In A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian

198

Texas Archeological Society
Archaeology and Ethnohistory (Compiled by Robert E. Bell, Edward B. Jelks, and
W.W. Newcomb). National Science Foundation, Final Report (Grant GS-964).

Steely, James Wright, and THC Staff
1984 A catalog of Texas properties in the National Register of Historic Places. Texas
Historical Commission, Austin, Texas.
Thompson, Marc
1980 A survey of aboriginal metal points from the Apacheria. The Artifact, E1 Paso
Archaeological Society, 18(1):1-10.
Word, James H., and Fox, Anne
1975 The Cogdell burial in Floyd County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 46:1-63.

Seminole Sink: Excavation of a Vertical Shaft Tomb, Val Verde
County, Texas. By S. A. Turpin, L. C. Bement, T. M. Byrd, M. K.
Marks, J. C. Rose, E. L. Buie, R. Rosenberg, W. R. Elliott, and J. R.
Reddell. Texas Archeological Survey, University of Texas at Austin,
Research Report No. 93. 1985. xii + 216 pp., 58 figs., 28 tables.
It was a happy event when the nine scholars and graduate students from the
universities of Texas and Arkansas combined their specialized abilities to analyze
Seminole Sink in the desert of Val Verde County, Texas. Spelunking, entomology,
paleontology, soils analysis, and prehistoric archeology were among the specializations possessed by the group, whose work was financed by the Texas Parks and
Wildlife Department and encouraged by Ron Ralph, of that organization. Additionally, the various technical sections of the resulting report were wedded to the
archeological interpretations and to each other in a way almost never seen in the site
reports produced in Texas during the past two decades. Surely editor Deborah L.
Smith is due credit for the clear, straightforward writing style and lack ofjargon that
characterize the report.
The study’s leading claim to glory, however, is its attempt to explain the
archeology of the sinkhole in terms of human behavior. The possible actions and
beliefs of prehistoric people are not usually treated, even speculatively, in local
archeological publications---certainly not in the way they are dealt with in Seminole
Sink. The report suffers from only one flaw, and that one can be easily compensated
for by the alert reader, as will be shown at the end of this review.
A quick summary is appropriate. The skeletal remains of 22 people were
exhumed below the vertical shaft opening of an underground solution cavity in
Seminole Canyon State Park, not far from the mouth of the Pecos River. Twentyone of them rested in a conical talus directly beneath the sinkhole’s opening, while
the remains of a single cremated male lay atop the cone. Both the discovery of one
Early Comer Notehed dart point in the cone and the results of the technical studies

Book Re~ews

199

support an assigned age of several millennia, putting the main part of the find firmly
in the early part of the Archaic period. I shall sketch here a few of the principal
findings.
The detailed review of similar sites shows that sinkhole bt~al was practiced
throughout prehistory, and the sinkholes so used occur mainly along the westernmost margins of the Edwards Plateau and in Terrell and Val Verde counties;
Radiocarbon assays from Seminole Sink, presented as uncorrected years before the
present, produced age estimates of (1) 19,000 years for the site’s travertine zone,
which underlies the burials, (2) about 4,000 years for the 21 Archaic burials, and (3)
400 years for the overlying cremation. However, the dates for the Archaic burials
came from soil that probably contained some amount of carbon from the much
younger cremation, and so are too recent. According to the authors, a comparison
of age calculations for Early Corner Notehed dart points found elsewhere, one of
which was definitely associated with the Early Archaic burials at Seminole Sink,
suggests a true age of 5,000 plus years for those human remains. My own belief is
that an age of 8,000 or 7,000 years is probably a more accurate figure, interpolating
from the older assays of carbon from the base of Eagle, Baker, and Hinds caves
(Ross 1965; Word and Douglas 1970; Lord 1984). Turpin and associates also allow
for this possibility.
The technical study of the cave’s sediments included ph determinations, x-ray
diffraction of clays, and a textural analysis. From these, the cave’s entire history was
divined, showing that the underground environment acted as a repository of ancient
surface soil free from subsequent environmental change. It was learned that the Ice
Age climate was more humid than in later episodes and a trend toward xeric
conditions during the Holocene was also documented. These conclusions were
carefully compared with other climatological reconstructions.
The fascinating analysis of the fragments of human skeletons showed several
important things. The first is that some evidence of bacterial infection exists, though
it is not high; that iron-deficiency anemia can be inferred from porotic hyperostosis,
indicating a plant diet with only minimal amounts of iron; and that one adult was
wounded with a wide-bladed, sharp instrument, though he later healed. There is also
evidence for considerable physical stress, but not at the high levels predicted by
Neumann (1967). Additionally, the angled wear on the teeth, which have many
caries, is thought to bespeak the mastication of plants with high fiber content that
mainly produced carbohydrates. The evidence for such an early emphasis on plants
in the local diet and for violence (note, also, that the single associated dart point may
have been imbedded in flesh) is worthy of note.
It is the social interpretation, however, that raises the report above the level of
those that treat sites as collections of artifacts suitable only for classifications
designed for trilobites. In chapter 5, Turpin calculates the span of years during which
the site was used as a cemetery by relating reasonable population figures to the
duration of local residence (Table 26); she further suggests that the living group
responsible for the burials spent the greater part of any year within a limited distance
of the sinkhole. Corroboration of that view can be found in the physical evidence
that death came to the sinkhole population during different seasons of the year. From

200

Texas Archeological Society

this conclusion it is reasonable to infer a limited territoriality for the prehistoric
community. Turpin also suggests that some cave art in the area, and the art sites
themselves, may have served as ethnic or territorial markers.
It is also inferred that primary interment is represented by the Archaic burials,
but that the bodies were not flexed and bound---else they would have been too bulky
to be cast down the sinkhole’s chimney. Additionally, bodies would have been
transported from living sites where death occurred in marches probably of only a
few hours. Within a radius of 1.6 km (1 mile), using the sinkhole as the circle’s center, numerous rockshelters, open camping sites, and one burned rock midden were
located. Fate Bell shelter is suggested as a very likely home for the sinkhole band.
Since there were apparently no distinctions among the burials at this and other
sites in age, sex, or social status, and for other reasons, several ideological interpretations are offered, as follows. Death is an emotionally disturbing event, and funeral
rites must serve the needs of the individuals who survive, whatever else they may
show about role and status in the society. Interestingly, infant burials in the Lower
Pecos area received all the attention due adults, though this fact flies in the face of
the idea that young children were nonpersons of no real status in hunting-gathering
societies (see p. 161). I like the speculations from reasonable ethnographic analogies that Turpin introduced at this point, one of which is that if the ghost is perceived
as malevolent and seeks to torment the living, sinkholes may have served as sealed
sepulchres to lock in the spirits. Another possibility is that a sink may have been
analogous to a womb, and "the chimney is both the means by which the earth is
fertilized and the birth canal, passage from the underworld. In terms of the lexicon
of rites of passage, the shaft symbolizes a life portal" (p. 162). If even partly true,
the main importance of such inferences is to dispel the notion that throwing the
corpse into a sinkhole was a hasty act devoid of emotion and meaning. Other
enticing ideas are also offered, though I lack space for their review.
To recapitulate, an excellent attempt is made to use ethnographic knowledge
about treatment of the dead to suggest how the burials at Seminole Sink may have
been dealt with by the prehistoric people of the Lower Pecos. The suggestion of a
concept of limited territories is also stimulating, though Turpin is careful not to take
extreme positions in either argument.
The single error I see in Seminole Sink is a borrowed one---the use of a series
of phases for the Lower Pecos region that promises to cause trouble. Citing a
manuscript by D. S. Dibble, the Bonfire, Oriente, and Viejo phases are discussed for
the Paleoindian and Early Archaic "stages" in terms of their age-diagnostic tool
types and radiocarbon assays (pp. 6-11). Note that both Plainview and Folsom dart
points are listed for the bonfire phase, and Gower, Martindale, Uvalde, and Early
Barbed points for the Viejo. Such a construction of phases, as presented, is entirely
in error. I should add, however, that the earliest Lower Pecos phases were only
meant to be named local periods (Dibble 1986), although the much later.Infierno
phase is intended by Dibble (1978) to be a true cultural-social unit in the system of
Willey and Phillips. But since the phase label has been used for the early periods,
the following comments are called for to prevent confusion.
In discussing the idea of phase, Willey and Phillips (1958:22) indicate (1) that

Book Re~ews

201

it is an archeological unit having characteristic traits that set it apart from all other
such units, (2) that it occurs within a locality or region, and (3) that it is limited in
time to a relatively brief interval (see discussion by Johnson 1967: 1-10). All
components of any phase must be consistent, allowing, of course, for functional
differences in the sites themselves. In dealing with file problem of recognizing
components of phases, Willey andPhillips (1958:49) say that"the social equivalent
of the component is ’community’ as defined by Murdock and others....The equivalent of phase, then, ought to be ’society’ and in a good many cases it probably is."
Now, the only way that phase components can be defined is by isolating
archeological materials into associational units. Even W. C. McKern’s (1939:30)
prcedure for defining foci state that the investigator must collect materials that have
cultural (i.e., social) significance. If the complex of traits so determined recurs in
purity, the recurring complex establishes the focus. So associational complexes are
the stuff of foci and phases. I believe that anyone can see that Folsom and Plainview
dart point belong to different tool complexes, and it is highly likely that the many
dart points of the Viejo phase will also be shown to associate with distinct
complexes. At any rate, it is the archeologist’s duty, always, to demonstrate the
existence of site components, then consistent intersite complexes, before naming
phases. Showing the approximate contemporaneity of a number of dart point types
will not do for phase definition, for the types may represent the remains of distinct
communities of people with different tools, even in one natural region.
This same mistake has been made in Central Texas with the provisional early
phases suggested by Prewitt (1981, 1983). In that case the error is magnified by the
fact that the radiocarbon assays said to date the earliest phases are not often
associated with the diagnostic tool types. In fact, the first test of Prewitt’s phases
(Peter et al. 1982:21-1 to 21-8) tends to show a sequence different form the one that
has been proposed.
In the case of the Lower Pecos phases, a simple change in thinking will make
the proposed names quite usable. We can view them as names for fairly broad
periods, each of which may encompass the material remains of several different
complexes comparable in the way they are made up to the Folsom, Dalton, and Cody
complexes of late Paleoindian days. If the reader of Seminole Sink makes this
simple mental adjustment when using the Lower Pecos chronology, the report can
be used for what it is: a clever and avant-garde reconstruction of prehistoric
economic and social practices.
LeRoy Johnson, Jr.
Austin, Texas

202

Texas Archeological Society
REFERENCES

Dibble, D. S.
1968 Personal communication.
n.d.

Arenosa shelter: the descriptive archeology. Report in preparation for the U.S.
National Park Service, Rocky Mountain Region.

1978

The Infiemo phase: evidence for a late occupation in the Lower Pecos River
region, Texas. Paper presented a the 43rd annual meeting of the Society for
American Archaeology at Tucson, Arizona.

Johnson, L.
1967 Toward a statistical overview of the Archaic cultures of central and southwestern
Texas. Texas Memorial Museum, Bulletin 12, Austin.
Lord, J.
1984

The zooarchaeology of Hinds cave (41VV456). Department of Anthropology,
Texas A&M University, College Station.

McKem, W. C.
1939 The midwestern taxonomic method as an aid to archaeological culture study.
American Antiquity 4(4):301-313.
Neumaun, H. W.
1967 The paleopathology of the archaic Modoc rock shelter inhabitants. Illinois Museum, Report of Investigations, No. 11, Springfield.
Peter, D. E., T. R. Hays, and M. Demuynck
1982 An evaluation of uhe "phase" concept. In Archaeological investigations at the San
Gabriel reservoir district, Central Texas II, pp. 21-1 to 21-8. Institute of Applied
Science, North Texas State University, Denton.
Prewitt, E. R.
1981 Culture chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:63-89.
1983

From Circleville to Toyah: comments on central Texas chronology. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 54:201-238.

Ross, R. E.
1965 The archeology of Eagle cave. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
No. 7. Austin.
Willey, G. R. and P. Phillips
1958 Method and theory in American archaeology. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.

Book Reviews

203

Prehistoric Rock Art of the Cross Timbers Management Unit, East
Central Oklahoma: An Introductory Study. By Charles D. Neel, with
original artwork by Kenneth Sampson. Archeological Resource
Survey Report Number 27. Oklahoma Archeological Survey, Norman Oklahoma, 1966. 48 figs., 4 tables, 21 sketches, appendices, 130
pp., $8.50 postpaid.
This study describes seven petroglyph and two pictograph sites in east-central
Oklahoma. But its goals are broader, "to make Oklahomans, its diverse bunch of
everyday citizens as well as the professional archaeological community, aware of
a genuine art form--that left in stone by Oklahoma’s native Americans" (p. 1). That
it succeeds in this respect is doubtful, considering the crude, unspectacular, limited
nature of the art at these sites.
By way of figures and tables, individual rock-art elements from sites in Kansas,
Colorado, New Mexico, and Texas (but not Oklahoma) have been arranged in a
section titled "Regional Perspectives." Its usefulness is severely limited, since the
elements are divorced from their contexts, their colors and relative sizes are ignored,
and the criteria for their classification vary from table to table and even within tables.
A hunchbacked flute player from New Mexico is appropriately classified with
Kokopelli Figures (Table 3, p. 13), but a similar figure from Mesa Verde, Colorado
is classified with Naturalistic Animate Figures in Table 2 (p. 7). Similarly, a
distinctive Pecos River Style, Period 3 shaman from Texas is lumped with
Butterflies and Other Insects in Table 4 (p. 19), but later in the same table (p. 21)
it is listed with Feathered Headdresses. Even if objective categories could be
established, how significant would many of them be? A rakelike figure to one
investigator may be a rain-cloud symbol to another and may have been either or
neither to the artists. That the artists who created such simple figures at various
widely scattered sites shared a common purpose and artistic tradition is to be
seriously doubted. In short, the attempt to find connections between the rock art of
various regions is of course laudable but unattainable by these techniques.
Following brief discussions of the biotically ecotonal"Cross Timbers Management Region" and the "Geology of the Cross Timbers," the description of the area’ s
rock art is divided into "The Sites and Their Petroglyphs" and ’The Sites and Their
Pictographs." Helpful and generally clear photographs accompany the text, including six (Figures 37-42) outstanding color photographs. The sketches by Sampson,
particularly of the appearance of the sites, are an effective and attractive means of
communicating their nature. A brief"Concluding Statements" section completes
the study. Its final sentence is curious, suggesting that further studies of Oklahoma’s
rock art will serve "our enjoyment and wonder," apparently implying that they will
do little or nothing to enhance our understanding of how these prehistoric peoples
perceived themselves and their world. Bibliographic appendices for Kansas, Missouri, Arkansas, Texas, and Oklahoma round out the study. Unfortunately, the text
is marred by frequent misspellings and typographical and grammatical errors.

W. W. Newcomb
Austin

Commentary
The article written by Elaine R. Hughes on the care of prehistoric ceramics
(Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:331-343) fills what has been an
unfortunate gap in archeological literature by discussing modern conservation
practice as applied to practical techniques for archeologists. However, there are
several technical points in her article that I believe need some clarification.
It is made clear that the article is not intended as a substitute for the advice or
work of a trained conservator. In that light, I believe that the paragraph on removing
calcium carbonate deposits with hydrochloric acid should have been omitted. It is
a risky treatment even when performed by a conservator, and then is used only as
a last resort. It is not necessay to mention such treatments when addressing general
audiences in articles such as this. What should have been mentioned but was not,
was that the current practice of soaking sherds and bones in a solution of the
proprietary product Limeaway should be discontinued immediately. Limeaway
contains hydroxyacetic and phosphoric acids and is intended for use in water heaters
and other appliances for the removal of hard-water scale. It will harm archeological
objects. Its use was originally advocated in a thesis that dealt with artifacts from
West Texas, where caliche encrustations are much more obscuring and indurate
than they are in Central Texas where this technique was being applied. The use of
tetrasodium EDTA is a much more appropriate treatment and should have been
described further. The pH of the solution can be adjusted with ammonium acetate
in order to increase the chelation power and rate. Sodium hexametaphosphate, and
sodium triphosphate for that matter, will sequester calcium carbonate, calcium
sulphate, and the other slightly soluble and soluble salts that are found in caliche
crusts, when applied in a poultice at a higher concentration than when used as a
surface-cleaning agent.
A second point concerns the terminology used to describe polyvinyl acetate
resins. In the currect conservation literature, polyvinyl alcohol resins are referred
to as PVAs, whereas polyvinyl acetate resins are called PVAc’s to avoid confusion.
Also, some nail polishes that are formulated with acrylic resins may be appropriate
for labeling purposes if they are thinned properly and when nothing else is available
in the field. On page 337, PVC is accidentally written for PVAc in the discussion
of sherd-margin consolidation.
The author does not state why Vinac B-25 was chosen over other PVAc resins
(such as the four grades manufactured by Union Carbide) or the difference between
Vinac B-15 and B-25.
The proprietary aerosol resin product Krylon 1301 Clear Acrylic Spray, is not
Acryloid B-72 in toluene, as stated on page 335. Krylon 1301 is manufactured by
Borden, Inc., whereas B-72 is manufactured by Rohm and Haas Corp. B-72 is an
internally plasticized ethylmethacrylate-methylmethacrylate copolymer. Krylon
can be described as a methyl butyl methacrylate copolymer, which, while still being
an acrylic ester resin, is a completely different product from B-72 and has different
Bulletin of the Texas Archeologieal Society 57 (1986)

206

Texas Archeological Society

properties. We have found that Krylon spray lacks long-term durability and is not,
therefore, a conservation-quality product. The spray formulation contains a mixture
of ketone, aliphatic and aromatic solvents, which also distinguishes it from B-72.
I am curious as to why incorrect practices of infilling were not completely
addressed in the section entitled "Concerning Restoration." In the recent past and,
most likely, currently, such materials as wood putty, masonry putty, and hydrocal
(resin-impregnated quick-setting dental plaster) were being used to fill and restore
gaps in ceramics. Wood, metal, and cloth have been used to support the mended
sherds and the fills, creating bizarre composite sculptural parodies of the original
vessels.
Finally, in the Appendix listing sources for materials, the firm Conservation
Materials, Ltd. was referred to erroneously as Conservation Warehouse Materials
Limited. It should be noted that the proprietors of this firm orient the sales of
conservation chemicals and resins toward trained conservators rather than to the
general public, since many of these products are classified as hazardous materials
and must be used with proper safety facilities and precautions.
Paul S. Storch
Austin

Authors
James L. Boone received his Ph.D. in anthropology at the State University of
New York at Binghamton. In addition to teaching archeology at New
Mexico State University, he has conducted research on medieval Islamic
sites in northern Morocco and historical demographic research on the Late
Medieval Period in Portugal. He is now Head of Collections at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory at The University of Texas at Austin.
His present interests are in the evolution of complex societies in the Old
World, applications of demographic theory and methods to archeology,
and collections research. Address: Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Balcones Research Center, 10100 Burnet Rd., Austin, TX 787584497.

Shawn Bonath Carlson is a historical archeologist with the Archeological Research Laboratory at Texas A&M University. She has conducted field
projects on historic sites in Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Illinois, Mississippi, North Carolina, Tennessee, and Texas, ranging from the early eighteenth century through the early twentieth century. She has served as
Secretary-Treasurer of the Council of Texas Archeologists. Address:
Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College
Station, TX 77843.
E. D. (Dave) Dorchester is a registered professional engineer by vocation and an
archeologist by avocation. He was honored by the Texas Society of Professional Engineers as Engineer of the Year for the State of Texas in
1984. He is a long-time member of the Texas Archeological Society and
is a past president of the Midland Archeological Society. He has done
research in north-central and East Texas, the Rio Grande and lower Pecos
River areas, and West Texas. Address: 1902 Sparks St., Midland, TX
79705.
H. Blaine Ensor is a Research Assistant in the Archeological Research Laboratory at Texas A&M University. Previous positions include Associate in
Archaeology at the University of West Florida and Staff Archaeologist at
the University of Alabama. Current research efforts focus on prehistoric
cultural sequences in East and southeastern Texas and lithic craft specialization in the southeastern United States.
Maciej Henneberg received his Doctor of Science degree in in anthropology at
A. Mickiewicz University in Posnan, Poland in 1974 and was on the
faculty of that university until 1983, carrying out research in physical
anthropology on modern and prehistoric populations in Poland. Because
of his activites as a leading member of Solidarity, he was imprisoned and

208

Texas Archeological Society
then expelled from Poland. From 1984 to 1986 he was a Visiting Professor
of Anthropology at The University of Texas at Austin, and carried out
analysis of skeletal populations at a number of archeological sites in
Texas. He has also been on the staff of the University of Texas archeological project at Metaponto, Italy. He is now a member of the Department of
Anatomy at the University of Capetown, South Africa.

Joe D. Hudgins is an avocational archeologist and a member of the Texas
Archeological Society, the Houston Archeological Society, and the Wharton County Historical Commission. His archeological interests, which
date back to his childhood, are in survey and field work. A 1960 graduate
of Texas A&M University in animal husbandry, he is a lifelong resident of
Hungerford, where he and his brothers operate their registered Brahman
cattle ranch. Address: P.O. Box 225, Hungerford, TX 77448.
Barbara E. Jackson received her M.A. in anthropology at the University of
Missouri at Columbia. She is now in Lima, Peru doing research on health
care in the barrios under the Department of Physical and Health Education
of The University of Texas at Austin.

LeRoy Johnson, Jr. is a researcher at the Texas Historical Commission in Austin.
A past Associate Professor of Anthropology at the University of Oregon,
he has published on obsidian-hydration dating, statistical analysis, and
Texas archeology. Address: 1801 W. St. Johns, Austin, TX 78757.
Carol J. Loveland is Assistant Professor of Anthropology at Utah State Univer-

sity at Logan, Utah. She is interested in skeletal biology, particularly of
the Native Americans in the southern Plains and Great Basin. Address:
Department of Sociology, Social Work, and Anthropology, UMC 0730,
Utah State University, Logan, UT 84322.
David J. Meltzer, Assistant Professor in the Department of Anthropology at
Southern Methodist University, joined that faculty in 1984 after receiving
his Ph.D. in anthropology from the University of Washington. His research interests include late Pleistocene human adaptations in North
America, paleoenvironments and Pleistocene extinctions, the history of
archeology, and archeological theory. His archeological field experience
in North America has been in the East, the Southwest, and the Pacific
Northwest; most recently he has been working on Clovis and Archaic
adaptations on the southem High Plains of West Texas. His most recent
publications include two edited volumes: with Don D. Fowler and Jeremy
A. Sabloff, American Archaeology: Past and Future (1986, Smithsonian
Institution Press), and with Jim I. Mead, Environments and Extinctions:
Man in Late Glacial North America (1985, Center for the Study of Early

Man).

Authors

209

Jimmy L. Mitchell is a behavioral scientist with McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company. He holds a Ph.D. in I/O Psychology from Purdue University and is a retired U.S. Air Force Lt. Colonel. He is the author of a
number of publications, including many papers on the archeology of
South Texas and the Texas Panhandle. He serves as Vice-President for
Region 6 of the Texas Archeological Society and is a Steward for Bexar
County with the Office of the State Archeologist. Mitchell is the editor of
La Tierra, the journal of the Southern Texas Archaeological Association.
Address: 926 Toepperwein Road, Converse, TX 78109-2420.
William W. Newcomb, Jr. has taught anthropology at the universities of Michigan, Colgate, Utah, and Texas, and was director of the Texas Memorial
Museum from 1957 to 1978. He is now Professor Emeritus of Anthropology at The University of Texas at Austin. A specialist in North American
Indians, he has done ethnographic field work with the Delaware Indians,
various Plains Indians, and is engaged in ethnohistoric research on the
Wichita and Delaware Indians. He has also participated in archeological
investigations in Arkansas and Texas. Author of The Indians of Texas and
numerous articles on American Indians, his book The Rock Art of Texas
Indians was awarded the Texas Institute of Letters prize for the "most
informative and useful book in the field of general knowledge" published
in Texas in 1967, a prize his earlier book also won. Other books reflecting
his continuing interest in North American Indians are The North American
Indians: An Anthropological Perspective, The People Called Withita, and
German Artist on the Texas Frontier, Richard Friedrich Petri. Address:
6206 Shoal Creek Blvd., Austin, TX 78757.
Leland W. Patterson is an active avocational archeologist with major interests in
the southeastern and south-central regions of Texas. He has published
many papers and articles on archeological research, lithic technology, and
cultural resource management. He is a member of the Texas Archeological Society and the Houston Archeological Society. Address: 418
Wycliffe, Houston, TX 77079.
Frank A. Runkles is an avocational archeologist of long standing. He has been a
member of the Texas Archeological Society for many years and was
cofounder of the South Plains Archeological Society in 1957. He has
done research in north-central Texas and especially in West Texas in the
lower High Plains. He wrote "Indian Artifacts of Comanche County,
Texas," published in volume 2 of The Central Texas Archeologist and
"The Garza Site, a Neo-American Campsite near Post, Texas," in the
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, vol. 35. Address: Box 86,
Post, TX 79356.

210

Texas Archeological Society

Paul S. Storch received his M.A. in anthropology/archeology from George
Washington University and his professional conservation training at the
Smithsonian Institution. He has done field work at several archeological
sites, including Tel Yin’am in Israel and, most recently, at the WS Ranch
in New Mexico. He is Conservator of Archeological and Ethnographic
Objects at the Materials Conservation Laboratory, Texas Memorial Museum, The University of Texas at Austin. Address: Conservation Laboratory, Balcones Research Center, 10100 Burnet Rd., Austin, TX 78758.

INFORMATION FOR CONTRIBUTORS
The Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society publishes original papers in
the field of American archeology. Emphasis is placed on Texas and adjoining areas
in the United States and Mexico; papers on other areas also are considered. Articles
concerning archeological technique, method, or theory are encouraged.
Manuscripts must be typed, double-spaced throughout, on 8-1/2-by-11-inch
white paper, with a margin of at least one inch all around. Footnotes should be
avoided. References to published literature (by author, date, and page or figure
numbers) should be placed within parentheses in the body of the text, with full
bibliographic citations at the end. See this issue of the Bulletin for examples.
Authors also should consult "Style Guide for Authors," which is available from the
editor on request. Manuscripts that do not conform to the style guide will be returned
to be put into compliance.
The proportions of full-page illustrations (photographs or drawings plus
captions should be suitable for reduction to effective Bulletin page size of 4-1/2 by
7-1/2 inches. Illustrations can be printed horizontally or vertically; allowance must
be made made for the captions to be printed in the same direction.
A complete manuscript is one with a rifle, abstract, main body with subdivisions, completed (camera-ready) photographic or drafted illustrations, and
author’s biographical note. Submit three copies of the typed manuscript. Manuscripts are subject to peer review; final decision rests with the editor.
Papers published in the Bulletin are abstracted and indexed in Abstracts in
Anthropology.
Manuscripts should be addressed to Dr. James E. Corbin, Department of
Sociology, Stephen F. Austin State University, P.O. Box 13047, SFA Station,
Nacogdoches, TX 75962-3047.

