Bulletin of the

TEXAS
ARC HEOLOGICAL
SOCIETY

Volume 60/1989

Jimmy L. Mitchell, Editor
Beth Ogden Davis, Associate Editor

Published by the Society at Austin
1991 (for 1989)

FOREWORD:
CELEBRATING SIXTY YEARS
With the publication of this bulletin (BTAS), Volume 60, we celebrate 60 years
of TAS publication and more than 60 years of TAS as a viable, active organization.
It is entirely appropriate for the focus of most of this volume to be the Texas
Panhandle and South Plains, where formal archeology in Texas began. To celebrate
these years, this volume includes a long-awaited summary of the archeology of the
region, reports of two TAS field schools in the two subregions, and a variety of
related and relevant papers. The publication of a summary review of the Panhandle
Plains and the South Plains substantially fulfills the promise made in the foreward
to A Review ofTexasArcheology (BTAS Volume 28,1960, for 1958); a later volume
will present papers on the Panhandle, the South Plains, North Central Texas,
Southwest Texas, and the southeastern Coastal Plain (Foreword by Editors Edward
B. Jelks, E. Mott Davis, and Henry F. Sturgis). A summary of Southwest Texas (the
Lower Pecos and Trans-Pecos) was included in the most recent bulletin (Volume
59), and one on the southeastern Coastal Plain was included in Volume 50 (1979).
Such regional summaries and syntheses are difficult to accomplish; they
require a tremendous amount of research and years of understanding on the part of
the authors. Likewise, it is awkward and time-consuming to put together such a
focused, coordinated volume. Furthermore, reports of past field schools are extremely
difficult to write, particularly when the materials and information have been
scattered in the intervening years among several individuals. The TAS Board of
Directors and the Field S chool Committee are determined to recoup this in formation
and publish summary reports of past field schools as soon as possible. The reports
of two field schools (1975 and 1987-1988) in this volume are an indication that
substantial progress is being made. Additional field school reports will be included
in future BTAS volumes or will be published separately as Special Publications.
This, then, is the long-awaited 1989 issue of the Bulletin, and the beginning of
tangible results of efforts of the Board of Directors and the Field School Committee
in recent years. As was the case in 1960, it is our hope and belief that the members
of the Society will find the papers of general interest and that members who are
engaged in active research will find them of particular value.
Jimmy L. Mitchell, Editor
July 1991

CONTENTS
Foreword ............................................................................................................... ii
Dedication (to Jack T. Hughes) ........................................................................... iv
Prehistoric Cultural Developments on the Texas High Plains
Jack T. Hughes .............................................................................................. 1
The 1975 Field School of the Texas Archeological Society
James H. Word ............................................................................................ 57
Investigations of the Buried City, Ochiltree County, Texas,
With an Emphasis on the Texas Archeological Society Field
Schools of 1987 and 1988.
David T. Hughes ........................................................................................ 107
The Lipscomb Bison Quarry: Continuing Investigation at a
Folsom Kill-Butchery Site on the Southern Plains.
Jack L. Hofman, Lawrence C. Todd, C. Bertrand Schultz,
and William Hendy .................................................................................... 149
Pestles for Boat-Shaped Mortars in Texas.
R. E. Forrester ........................................................................................... 191
The Byrd Mountain Lithic Cache (34GR149), A Find of Edwards Chert
From Greer County, Southwestern Oklahoma.
Van Tries Button ........................................................................................ 209
Crosby County Lunate Stone Burial
John Redding and Wayne Parker.............................................................. 217
A Late Archaic/Woodland Lunate Stone Burial in Far Western Oklahoma.
J. Peter Thurmond ..................................................................................... 241
Additional Radiocarbon Dates from the Twilla Bison Kill Site,
Hall County, Texas
Christopher Lintz, John D. Speth, David T. Hughes, and
Jeffery A. Huebner ..................................................................................... 257
Sin Nombre and E1Fortin: Pecos River Style Pictographs in Northern
Mexico
Solveig A. Turpin ....................................................................................... 267
Perdiz Point Damage Analysis
Kim A. Cox and Herman A. Smith ............................................................. 283
An Archeological Footnote to History
Kathleen Gilmore, with H. Gill-King ........................................................ 303
An Examination and Appraisal of Malakoff Heads No. 1 and No. 3
Thomas H. Guderjan ................................................................................. 325
REVIEW
From Mountain Peaks to Alligator Stomachs: A Review of Lithic Sources
in the Trans-Mississippi South, the Southern Plains, and Adjacent
Southwest. Larry D. Banks.
Michael B. Collins ..................................................................................... 335
AUTHORS ....................................................................................................... 339
ERRATA, BTAS 21 ......................................................................................... 343

DEDICATION
This volume is dedicated to Jack T. Hughes (pictured here in comanchero
dress), who is regarded by many as the Dean of Panhandle Archeology. He is
undoubtedly the most knowledgeable individual about the Panhandle Plains and
South Plains areas of Texas. Jack graduated summa cum laude from the University
of Texas at Austin in 1937, with a double major in anthropology and geology. He
completed his doctorate at Columbia University in 1968 with a dissertation entitled
"Prehistory of the Caddoan-Speaking Tribes," which was later published as a book.
He was for many years a teacher of geology at West Texas State University (WTSU)
and also served as curator of paleontology at the Panhandle Plains Historical
Museum in Canyon. Until his retirement in 1985 he was Professor of Anthropology
at WTSU, where he impacted the thinking of literally thousands of interested
students. Dr. Hughes has been a member of the TAS for more than 39 years and was
named a Fellow of the TAS in 1980. In 1989, at the annual meeting of the TAS in
Amarillo, Jack was honored with the publication of Panhandle Archeological
Society Publication No. 5, In the Light ofPast Experience: Papers in Honor ofJack
T. Hughes (Beryl C. Roper, Ed.). A more detailed accounting o.f his accomplishments
can be found in the introduction to that volume.

Prehistoric Cultural Developments
on the Texas High PlainsI
Jack T. Hughes

ABSTRACT
This paper accomplishes two aims: 1) it presents a brief synthesis ofthemain
cultural developments on the High Plains of northwestern Texas from the end of
the Paleoindian stage to the beginning of the Historic period, and, simultaneously,
2) it examines the possible effects of changes in the regional environment on these
cultural developments and on the surrounding cultures. Both climatic changes and
contact with other cultural groups appear to have been important in shaping the
prehistoric developments on the Texas High Plains.

INTRODUCTION

This necessarily brief synthesis is based upon nearly eight decades of work by
scores of dedicated prehistorians, both professional and avocational. It is obviously
impossible in a short paper to provide a detailed review of all their findings or a
complete bibliography of their publications. For the benefit of the reader who would
like to pursue the subject further, however, some of the more useful reviews and
bibliographies that have been published are mentioned, some other sources of data
are indicated, and the history of archeological research on the Texas High Plains is
summarized very succinctly.
PREVIOUS RESEARCH
Since few of the reviews and bibliographies published to date deal with the
entire region and all of its cultures, the coverage provided by each of the sources
mentioned is indicated. Readers are reminded that in addition to the sources listed
below, most of the hundreds of survey and excavation reports pertaining to the
region contain summaries of cultural developments and lists of references cited.
In chronological order, some of the major reviews are by Sayles (1935), on the
whole sequence of the region as part of his survey of Texas archeology; Krieger
(1946) on the Antelope Creek focus in the Texas Panhandle, as part of his study of
1 Author’s note: Photocopies of an earlier unpublished version of this paper, finished
in 1981 except for the summary, figures, and list of references cited, have been provided to
several people and have been cited in several reports as Hughes n.d. Obviously, any future
citations should favor the present version over the unpublished, outdated, and incomplete
version.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 60 (1989)

2

Texas Archeological Society

Puebloan-Caddoan ties; Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954), on the sequence of the
region as part of their introduction to Texas archeology; Kelley (1964) and Collins
(1971), on the s equenc e in the Llano E stacado part of the region; Hughes (1976) and
Bandy (1977), on the Panhandle Archaic; Campbell and Judd (1977), on the
sequence in a large area of the South Plains as part of a survey report on the area;
Hughes and Willey (1978), on the sequence in the Llano Estacado and its borders
as part of an excavation report on Mackenzie Reservoir, and Hughes (1978), on the
sequence in the Palo Duro Canyon area. By far the best studied and reported
sequence on the Texas High Plains is at the Lubbock Lake site (Johnson 1987).
Bibliographies include a classified bibliography by Campbell (1960), as part
of his bibliography of Texas archeology, a chronological bibliography by Hughes
(1977) for the Texas Panhandle, a list of holdings of the Lower Plains Archeological
Library by Riggs (1977), an Antelope Creek focus bibliography by Lintz (1982),
and most recently, a northern Panhandle bibliography by the Office of the State
Archeologist (Simons 1988).
The main regional research centers for the archeology of the Texas High Plains
are at the museums and anthropology departments at West Texas State University
at Canyon in the Panhandle and at Texas Tech University in Lubbock in the South
Plains. A great deal of information, however, is in the colleclions, files, and libraries
of some other institutions, several local archeological societies, and many avocational archeologists. Most of the documents that pertain to the archeology of the
region have been microfilmed recently by the Texas Historical Commission in
Austin.
Archeology in the United States may have begun with the beginning of history
in the Texas High Plains. It is possible that a bison bone bed at Silver Lake in
Hockley County was the first archeological site to be recorded in the region and
perhaps in the whole United States. This site is probably the bone bed described by
Castafieda with the Coronado expedition in 1541 (Kiser 1978).
Although the archeological priority of the Silver Lake site may never be
proven, there is no doubt that the best known site in the Texas High Plains was
recorded as early as 1845, when Lt. J. W. Abert described the Alibates flint quarries
as "Agate bluffs" (Carroll 1941:64). The quarries may therefore be one of the first
archeological sites recorded in Texas as well as the only national monument in the
state.
Another well-known site in the region was also recorded at an early date, when
Lt. A. W. Whipple (1856) camped an extra day at Rocky Dell in order to copy the
Indian paintings and carvings on the cliffs. The giant rattlesnake depicted at this site
has served as a"feathered serpent" to introduce the Hall of the Northern Frontier at
the National Museum of Anthropology in Mexico City.
Until native American domination of the Texas High Plains was ended with the
defeat of the Comanches and their allies in the Red River Wars of 1874, no real
progress could be made in the study of native American archeology in the region.
By the early 1900s, however, T. L. Eyerly (1907), a teacher at the former Canadian
Academy in Canadian, Texas, conducted and reported systematic excavations at the

Hughes ~ Prehistoric Cultural Developments

3

OldBuried City ruins on Wolf Creek in Ochiltree County. This is one of the earliest
excavation reports in the state.
One of Eyerly’s students was Floyd V. Studer, who commenced a survey of
Panhandle archeology, including excavations in slab-house ruins (Studer 1931,1934),
which continued throughout his life. Eyerly’s report of Pueblo-like ruins on the
High Plains also aroused the interest of W. K. Moorehead of the Phillips Academy
in Andover, Massachusetts. With Studer’s collaboration, from 1919 to 1920
Moorehead conducted surveys and excavations of the Panhandle ruins as part of a
study of the archeology of the Arkansas River valley (Moorehead 1921, 1931). In
1929 S tuder helped in the founding of one of the first archeological societies in the
nation, the Texas Archeological Society, at Abilene. In 1932 he helped found one
of the first major museums in Texas, the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum on
the campus of West Texas State University in Canyon.
Reports of the Moorehead expedition attracted further attention to the Panhandle
ruins during the late 1920s and early 1930s by J. Alden Mason, of the University of
Pennsylvania Museum (1929); Ronald Olson, of the American Museum of Natural
History in the same year; W. C. Holden, of Texas Tech University (1929, 1930,
1931, 1932, 1933); andE. B. Sayles, of Gila Pueblo (1935). SomeofHolden’s work
was also reported in theses by Haynes (1932), Lowery (1932), and T. Holden
(1934).
During the rest of the 1930s, in spite of the Great Depression but partly because
of depression-spawned projects of the Works Progress Administration (WPA),
archeological activities continued to accelerate on the High Plains as elsewhere in
the state. In addition to the reports mentioned above, work included a survey in Palo
Duro Canyon by Erik K. Reed (1936) for the National Park Service, a survey in
Lamb and Bailey counties by W. M. Pearce (1936), of Texas Tech, a survey of rock
art sites in the region as part ofa statewide study by A. T. Jackson (1938), excavation
of the Miami mammoth kill by E. H. Sellards (1938), excavation of the Blue
Mountain rockshelter by Holden (1938), a survey of lake sites in the South Plains
by W. C. Watts (1939), and excavations at the Antelope Creek and Alibates ruins
by Ele and Jewel Baker (1939, 1941; see also Johnston 1939).
During the 1940s, the High Plains suffered in the nationwide abatement of
archeological work caused by World War II, and growth did not really resume until
the 1950s. Several important investigations, however, were reported during the
1940s: the Lipscomb bison kill (Barbour and Schultz 1941; see also Hofman et al.
1991, this volume), Panhandle rock art (Kirkland 1942), the Quaternary of the
Texas High Plains (Evans and Meade 1945), the Antelope Creek focus (Krieger
1946), and the Plainview bison kill (Sellards et al. 1947).
Since the 1950s, archeology in the High Plains has experienced the same
accelerating growth as has archeology nationwide. The two principal trends
involved in this growth have been the impressive increases in organized avocational
archeology and in subsidized public archeology. These two developments have
often interacted to their mutual benefit. Most of the scores of writers and hundreds
of their helpers who have contributed so greatly to the archeology of the region

4

Texas Archeological Society

during the last four decades are still actively pursuing their interests. It is obviously
impossible in this context to recognize all of them for their contributions.
Although it has been more than 80 years since Eyerly’s pioneering excavations
in the Wolf Creek ruins, the fundamental task of descriptive archeology, of
chronology-building by answering the basic questions of who, what, where, and
when, is still far from finished on the Texas High Plains. Work is far enough along,
however, so that in recent years some tentative efforts toward explanatory archeology (to answer the ultimate questions of how and why) have become possible.
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
Since the cultural system consists of interactive subsystems, as does the
environmental system, and the two systems are themselves interactive (Wedel
1986), any attempt at tracing native cultural changes on the Texas High Plains, as
elsewhere, must consider both the modern environment of the region and the
environmental changes that have taken place during human habitation of the region.
The Modern Environment
The Texas High Plains includes all of the Southern High Plains except for
relatively small areas to the north and west of the state (see Figure 1). The Southern
High Plains is the part of the High Plains that stretches southward from the Arkansas
River valley in Colorado and Kansas to the Edwards Plateau in Texas. The High
Plains is a vast elevated piedmont plateau, an outwash plain that runs like a gigantic
ramp along the eastern base of the Rocky Mountains. It is an exceptionally well
defined physiographic province, blanketed as it is throughout its great expanse by
the Ogallala Formation (Miocene-Pliocene, Tertiary) (Holliday 1988), which is a
thick layer of sediments derived from the Rockies as they were uplifted during tens
of millions of years of late Tertiary time.
The Texas part of the Southern High Plains is more than 240 km (150 miles)
wide and 480 km (300 miles) long, and has an area of more than 64,000 kmZ(40,000
square miles) covering more than 40 counties. Although the upland surface
everywhere appears to be almost as level as the Gulf Coastal Plain, it actually has
a gradual slope from an elevation of more than 1370 meters (4500 feet) at the
northwestern corner near Texline to less than 760 meters (2500 feet) at the
southeastern edge near Big Spring.
Except for the Rio Grande, all of the major rivers of Texas have their
headwaters on or around the Southern High Plains. The northern part of the region
is drained by the headwaters of the Arkansas and Red rivers going eastward toward
the Mississippi River; the southern part is drained by the headwaters of the Brazos
and Colorado rivers going southeastward toward the Gulf of Mexico. The plains
have been separated from the mountains to the west by the headward erosion of the
South Canadian River in northeastern New Mexico and by the headward erosion of
the Pecos River in eastern New Mexico.

In northwestern Texas, the South Canadian River is known simply as the
Canadian. The plains to the north of the river are called the North Plains, and those
to the south of the river are called the StakedPlains orLlano Estacado. Alternatively,
the plains in the Panhandle are called the Panhandle Plains, and those to the south
of the Panhandle are called the South Plains.

6

Texas Archeological Society

The Canadian is the only river that cuts entirely across the Southern High
Plains. It crosses the middle of the Panhandle Plains, where it has cut a swath 30 km
(20 miles) wide and several hundred feet deep. The broad, deep valley is dissected
along both sides by scores of small tributary creeks that constitute the Canadian
breaks. These breaks form the northern edge of the Llano Estacado; the Pecos valley
forms the western edge, and the eastem edge, overlooking the Rolling Plains, is a
great escarpment formed by the headward erosion of the Red, Brazos, and Colorado
rivers. This scarp is especially rugged to the north, where the Palo Duro Canyon on
the Prairie Dog Town Fork of the Red River is 300 meters (a thousand feet) deep;
to the south, the scarp gradually diminishes in height until it merges, with a barely
perceptible break, into the Edwards Plateau. Throughout its length the scarp is
rimmed by vertical cliffs of massive Ogallala caliche forming what is appropriately
called the Caprock.
The uplands of the Texas High Plains are a vast expanse of level ground
relieved only by thousands of playa lake basins and, at rare intervals, a long shallow
valley tributary to one of the rivers that drain the great plateau. In the old days, the
region was essentially a gigantic buffalo pasture with countless waterholes.
The surface geology of the Southern High Plains has layer-cake simplicity. The
plateau is perched on top of Permian marine redbeds, which are the oldest rocks
exposed all around its margins. These rocks are overlain by Triassic continental
redbeds and Cretaceous marine sediments, except in the northeastern part of the
Panhandle Plains and northward, where the Triassic and Cretaceous formations are
missing. Capping the entire plateau is the Ogallala Formation, which has a thin
mantle of Quaternary cover sands.
Climatically, the plateau is a semiarid temperate-zone steppe with summer heat
and winter cold relieved somewhat by the low humidity. Precipitation comes mainly
from summer rainstorms and partly from winter snowstorms. The region is one of
the windiest of the continent, with prevailing winds usually from the southwest but
subject to sudden reversals by winter northers. The region is also one of the sunniest
in the nation. With so much wind and sun and so little moisture, the evaporation rate
exceeds the precipitation rate by almost three to one. Periods of drought are
characterized by blinding duststorms. During wet spells, the uplands become a
series of shallow lakes separated by broad expanses of lush green grass.
The weather year-round is so pleasant that people tend to take the good days for
granted and to comment only on the rare bad days. However, the usual mild
conditions are subject to abrupt and violent changes. For people caught without
shelter on the open plains, the awesome lightning and hail of summer thunderstorms
and the biting cold of winter blizzards can be "hazardous to their health."
The Southern High Plains are part of the Kansan biotic province. The uplands
are dominated by short grasses, the edge-breaks by junipers, and the stream banks
by cottonwoods and other deciduous trees. Sandy areas have oaks, sagebrush,
yucca, and prickly pear. The flora of the valleys and canyons is a rich mixture of
woodland, plains, and mountains species that provides a sharp contrast to the
monotony of the open grasslands. The chief game animals on the uplands were bison

Hughes ~ Prehistoric Cultural Developments

7

and pronghorn, in the valleys, deer and bear, but the region had a wide variety of
smaller game and is a major flyway for migratory waterfowl.
In Texas, although there is only a gradual transition from the South Plains
northward into the Panhandle Plains, there are some contrasts between the two
regions. The South Plains are drained to the southeast by the headwaters of the
Colorado and Brazos, whereas the Panhandle Plains are drained to the east by the
headwaters of the Red River and by the Canadian River and other tributaries of the
Arkansas River. The playa basins in the South Plains are fewer, larger, deeper, and
more saline than those in the Panhandle Plains. The South Plains soils tend to be
loose reddish sands in contrast to the tight brownish loams of the Panhandle Plains,
and the vegetation has somewhat more desertlike character, although mesquite
extends as far northward as the Canadian breaks. In recent decades, with irrigation
from the Ogallala aquifer, the uplands have become almost entirely cultivated, with
cotton the principal crop on the South Plains and wheat, on the Panhandle Plains.
On the uplands, the chief environmental zones are the grasslands, the frequent
playa basins (often with lee dunes to the south and east), and the occasional stream
valleys (sometimes bordered by sand hills). Environmental zones in the marginal
scarps and Canadian breaks are much more varied---canyon rims, cliffs, slopes,
benches, terraces, floodplains, and stream channels.
From the standpoint of early man, although the uplands at most places were
short of everything (water, shelter, wood, foodplants, and mineral resources) except
bison and some smaller game, the edge-breaks had all of these necessities in great
abundance. Springs from the vast Ogallala aquifer are found in most of the canyons.
The bedrock seldom forms good overhangs, but sheltering cliffs are common. Much
of the varied plant life has parts that are edible during one season or another. Stones
of various kinds for hearths, structures, and tools are always available. Some kind
of flint for chipped stone tools is seldom far away: Permian Alibates agate in the
Canadian breaks north of Amarillo, Triassic Tecovas jasper upstream from the same
area and in the Palo Duro Canyon, Cretaceous Edwards chert along the southern part
of the Eastern Caprock Escarpment, Cretaceous Dakota quartzite along the northwestern edge of the Llano Estacado, Tertiary Ogallala chalcedony at many outcrops
in the Panhandle Plains, and an assortment of siliceous materials in the widespread
Ogallala and Quaternary gravels.
The Llano Estacado in many ways is like a great sea of grass surrounded by a
rugged shoreline of upside-down hills. Just as fish are the principal resource of a sea,
bison were the principal resource of the Llano Estacado, and, like many seas, the
Llano appears, for the people who lived on opposite shores, to have served more as
a bridge than a barrier. As with sea travel, although storms were a hazard, crossings
were relatively easy and swift, either along the upland valleys or from one valley to
the next.
Environmental Changes
In recent years there have been increasing numbers of studies of various kinds
dealing with late Pleistocene and Holocene environmental changes on and around

8

Texas Archeological Society

the Texas High Plains. Comparisons among these studies indicate that most are in
general agreement, but reveal some differences from one kind of study to another
and from one region to another. Most studies at most places seem to be fairly well
in accord with the Antevs (1955) model of climatic changes for Arizona and other
parts of the western United S tates. This model proposes three main climatic periods:
a cool moist Anathermal from 8000 to 5500 B.C., a warm dry Altithermal (Long
Drought) from 5500 to 2000 B.C., and a moderate Medithermal from 2000 B.C. to
the present. Some of the implications of this model for the Texas High Plains are
suggested below.
During the cool, moist Anathermal, stream valleys and lake basins had ample
water, alluvial sediments were accumulating, soils were forming, dune fields were
stabilizing, uplands were covered with grass, and there were many bison herds.
With gradually increasing temperatures and decreasing precipitation during the
period, however, vegetation was deteriorating, the giant bison were disappearing,
and the modem bison were declining.
During the Altithermal--the Long Drought--frequent spells of warm dry
weather, with heightened evaporation and lowered precipitation, diminished the
grass cover and exposed the ground to erosion by soil-scouring dust storms and
gully-washing cloudbursts. Streams and ponds were generally dry. Along the
drainages, channel sands were blowing, floodplains were accumulating dust layers,
and dune fields were expanding. At the playa basins, floor deposits were deflating
and lee dunes were growing. With water scarce and grazing poor, bison herds and
other game animals virtually disappeared from the Texas High Plains.
During the cooler and moister Medithermal, water returned to the streams and
ponds. Fluviatile and lucastrine deposition resumed, as did soil development and
dune stabilization. As water supplies and grazing conditions improved, bison and
other game returned to the region. Throughout the Medithermal, however, the
climate may have been gradually warming and drying (Antevs 1955:330).
The Antevs model is partly supported by Dillehay’s (1974) study of bison
population changes in the Southern Plains. His Bison Absence Period I from 6000
or 5000 to 2500 B.C. corresponds well with the Altithermal. His Bison Absence
Period II from A.D. 500 to 1200 or 1300 seems to have ended with an increase in
bison population during the 1200s on the middle Pecos (Jelinek 1967), on the
southern Llano Estacado (Collins 1968), and in the Panhandle Plains (Duffield
1970), although Duffield suggests a decrease in bison remains in Panhandle aspect
sites after A.D. 1300 or 1350. It should be noted, however, that the applicability of
Dillehay’s model to North Central Texas has been questioned by Lynott (1979),
although he does see an increase in bison population in that region from A.D. 1200
to 1600.
Henderson’s (1976) study of pollen changes in the middle Pecos supports the
Altithermal concept but differs from the Antevs model in other respects. Equating
arboreal pollen with mesic conditions and nonarboreal pollen with xeric conditions,
he infers a xeric period from 4500 to 2500 B.C., a mesic peak at 500 B.C. (instead
of Antev’s Fairbank Drought), a xeric period from 100 B.C. to A.D. 700, a mesic

Hughes ~ Prehistoric Cultural Developments

9

period from A.D. 700 to 1400, a xeric peak at about A.D. 1400, expanding grassland
until about 1880, and scrub desert during the last century.
A model of late Quaternary environmental changes in Texas proposed by
Bryant and Shafer (1977) differs in some ways from the Antevs model. Although
both models postulate gradually increasing aridity since the end of the Pleistocene
about 10,000 years ago, the Antevs model sees the overall drying trend as
interrupted by a series of droughts (the Long Drought from 5500 to 2000 B.C., the
Fairbank Drought at 500 B.C., the Whitewater Drought at A.D. 330, and the Great
Drought from A.D. 1276 to 1299), whereas the Bryant and Shafer model sees the
general xeric trend as punctuated by brief mesic intervals (especially one at about
500 B.C. in the Texas High Plains and lower Pecos regions). The latter corresponds
with Henderson’s mesic peak at 500 B.C. on the middle Pecos.
Although Bryant and Shafer cite Patton’s (1977) evidence of much flooding on
the lower Pecos from 5000 to 2000 B.C., they fail to note the coincidence of this
episode with Antev’s Long Drought. Shafer (1989) also notes a northward expansion of grasslands in the lower Pecos from 5000 to 2000 B.C.
Further support for the Altithermal concept is provided by Stafford’s (1981)
study of alluvial geology on the Southern High Plains in Texas. Stafford infers
increasing aridity between about 11,000 and 2000 B.C., with maximum aridity
occurring between 3000 and 2000 B.C. He sees a scarcity of archeological and paleontological remains between 6000 to 4000 B.C. and A.D. 1 as implying"decreased
use, if not selective abandonment, of the valleys during that interval," and notes a
significant increase in occupation of the valleys between A.D. 1000 and 1400
(1981:563). At the Lubbock Lake site, Johnson and Holliday (1986) and Holliday
(1988) have been able to refine the Antevs model with a more detailed and betterdated record of paleoenvironmental events, including evidence of a "two drought"
Altithermal.
To the east of the Texas High Plains, the Antevs model is generally supported
in geoarcheological studies by Gustavson (1986) for the Rolling Plains near
Quitaque, by Abbott (1990) for the Lower (Rolling) Plains near Justiceburg, and by
Hall (1982, 1988) for the Osage (Rolling) Plains in Oklahoma. In western Oklahoma, paleoenvironmental evidence for a moist first millennium A.D. has been
reported at Delaware Canyon (Ferring 1982, 1986) and at Carnegie Canyon (Lintz
and Hall 1983). As will be explained later, several sites in the Palo Duro Canyon area
have produced good evidence of mesic conditions during much of the first
millennium A.D. (Hughes 1978:43--44).
Baerreis and Bryson (1965) have suggested that the Texas and Oklahoma
panhandles were receiving more precipitation from A.D. 1250 to 1450 than were
other regions in the Central and Southern Plains. However, studies by Duffield
(1970) in the Texas Panhandle and by Wilson (1972) and Lintz (1978a) in the
Oklahoma Panhandle fail to support this idea.

10

Texas Archeological Society
CULTURAL CONTEXT

Since archeology on the Texas High Plains shows that the region was used
throughout prehistory by groups from all of the neighboring regions, one cannot
deal with the cultural developments in the region without some background on the
sequences found in the surrounding regions, in other states as well as in Texas.
On and around the Texas High Plains, there has been general usage of four main
temporal units for tracing native cultural developments, but much diversity in
naming, defining, and dating the units. In essence the four main units are 1) an early
prehistoric time of late Pleistocene big-game hunters with lance points, 2) a middle
prehistoric time of foragers with dart points, 3) a late prehistoric time of gardeners
(usually) with arrowpoints and/or pottery, and 4) historic time.
Although these units are generally thought of and frequently referred to as
periods, in Texas they have usually been called stages, as recommended by Suhm,
Kreiger, and Jelks (1954), who pointed out that they actually are stages of cultural
development that differ somewhat in time from one place to another. There is now
a tendency among Texas writers to call them periods, but in this paper they will
continue to be called stages.
Except for the Historic era, which has seldom been called anything else, each
of the four stages has been variously labeled, especially the third, which still has no
generally accepted label. In Texas the first three stages have usually been called
Paleo-American, Archaic, and Neo-American, as proposed by Suhm, Krieger, and
Jelks, but many writers have continued to use Paleoindian for the first stage, and in
recent years, some have preferred Late Prehistoric for the third stage. For the Texas
High Plains, this paper will call the four stages Paleoindian, Archaic (although
Mesoindian is preferred), Neoindian, and Historic, and both the Archaic and
Neoindian stages will be subdivided into Early and Late substages.
The terms Paleoindian, Mesoindian, and Neoindian are barbarous neologisms,
but they have the virtue of inviting valid comparisons with the Paleolithic,
Mesolithic, and Neolithic stages in the Old World. We seem to be stuck with the
term Archaic, but the author cannot accept Late Prehistoric for a stage that begins
as early as the time of Christ. In the Justiceburg area (Boyd and Tomka 1990), we
already have Late Prehistoric I and Late Prehistoric II, in order to avoid the
ridiculous alternatives of Early Late Prehistoric and Late Late Prehistoric. If the
term Neoindian must be discarded, a Ceramic stage would be better than a Late
Prehistoric stage.
In reviewing the archeological literature pertaining to the Texas High Plains
and surrounding regions, it has become painfully obvious that there is little
agreement on how to define the boundaries of the stages and substages of the native
cultural development, and therefore on the dates for these boundaries. The Late
Paleoindian/Early Archaic boundary is placed by some at the last lanceolate points
and by some at the first stemmed points, whereas others recognize a transitional
period for the assemblages with both kinds of points, and others prefer a definition
based on changing subsistence patterns. One of the worst boundary problems
concerns the beginning and ending of a Middle Archaic substage, where the

Hughes -- Prehistoric Cultural Developments

11

differences are acute and the issue is seldom explicitly addressed. The Late Archaic/
Early Neoindian boundary is also variously and vaguely defined, beset not only by
regional differences in the time of appearance of pottery and the bow, but also by
a gradual size reduction of dart point forms into arrowpoint forms, as well as by a
lingering use of the atlatl long after the bow was known, differentially in different
regions. The Early Neoindian/Late Neoindian boundary problem is similarly
unsettled, the boundary being variously defined on the basis of arrowpoint changes,
pottery changes, or lifestyle changes. And finally, the Late Neoindian~arly
Historic boundary is notoriously variable from place to place, depending on how
early or late the first significant European influences appear in a particular region.
With regard to culture units, the position of the Texas High Plains between the
Great Plains and the Southwest has left the region influenced by various taxonomic
systems from both directions. To the north, east, and south, the aspects and foci of
McKern are giving way in some regions to the phases of Willey and Phillips. To the
southwest, the Gladwin system of branches and phases for the Mogollon tradition
still prevails, but to the northwest, the Kidder system of Basketmaker I-III and
Pueblo I-IV periods for the Anasazi tradition seem to be giving way to phases. In
this paper the terminology appropriate to each region and/or writer will be used, and
complexes will be used for ill-defined units and as a general term.
In summarizing the culture sequences on and around the Texas High Plains, it
is convenient to examine the Panhandle Plains and its surroundings separately from
the South Plains and its surroundings, since the sequences in both regions generally
resemble the surrounding sequences more than they resemble each other and have
been investigated more in conjunction with their surroundings than with each other.
The Panhandle Plains
On the Panhandle Plains and in the surrounding regions to the north, east, and
west, much similarity is recognizable in native cultural developments through the
Archaic and Neoindian stages, although a great deal is yet to be learned, especially
for the Archaic. In the High Plains of southeastern Colorado, southwestern Kansas,
and the Oklahoma and Texas panhandles, in the Rolling Plains of Oklahoma, and
in the headwaters of the Canadian River in northeastern New Mexico, the Archaic
stage has generally been seen as having vague Early and Late subdivisions, the Early
starting at about 5000 B.C. (with the start of the Altithermal) and the Late at about
2000 B.C. (with the start of the Medithermal). The start of the Early Archaic is
perhaps best marked by a few kinds of stemmed dart points replacing stemless lance
points. No culture complexes have been identified for the Early Archaic in these
regions, although one candidate may be the complex represented by the Gore Pit site
in western Oklahoma.
The start of the Late Archaic is perhaps best marked by the appearance of
several kinds of barbed dart points in large numbers. Only a few ill-def’med
complexes have been proposed: the Little Sunday complex (J. Hughes 1955) in the
Panhandle Plains, and a Summers complex and Lawton aspect in western Oklahoma
(D. Hughes 1984).

12

Texas Archeological Society

The Neoindian stage in these regions is much better known, and is generally
seen as consisting of Plains Woodland (Early) and Plains Village (Late) subdivisions, the Early substage starting at about A.D. 200 (with the first arrowpoints and/
or pottery) and the Late substage at about A.D. 1100 (with side-notched triangular
arrowpoints replacing barbed arrowpoints). Several Early Neoindian complexes
have been recognized in these regions. In southeastern Colorado is the Graneros
focus with the usual Plains Woodland corner-notched arrowpoints and conical
cordmarked vessels from about A.D. 200 to 1000. In southwestern Kansas are
components possibly representing the Keith focus with typical Woodland points
and pots at about A.D. 700. In the Oklahoma Panhandle are unassigned Woodland
components. In the Panhandle Plains of Texas, from the Canadian breaks northward, is the Lake Creek focus with Woodland points and pots, of uncertain temporal
span. Also in the Panhandle Plains, from the Canadian breaks southward, is the Palo
Duro complex with long-barbed (Deadman) arrowpoints and plain (Mogollon)
brownware pottery, from about A.D. 200 to 1000. In western Oklahoma is the Pruitt
complex, with Woodland points and pots at about A.D. 700 to 800. In northeastern
New Mexico, in the plains to the east, are unassigned Woodland components; also
in northeastern New Mexico, in the foothills to the west, are two named Basketmaker
II and III phases, from about A.D. 400 to 900.
In western Oklahoma, although the Custer focus has generally been regarded
as a Village complex, it has been seen recently as transitional out of Woodland, and
to this observer it seems to be much more a late Woodland than an early Village
complex in both cultural character and temporal position. There is some evidence
of houses, but the complex has barbed arrowpoints and conical cordmarked vessels
and has few bison remains and bison-bone tools. It is dated from about A.D. 800 to
1100.
Some Late Neoindian complexes have been recognized on and around the
Panhandle Plains. In southeastern Colorado is the Apishapa focus with slab houses,
side-notched triangular arrowpoints, and globular cordmarked vessels, from about
A.D. 1000 to 1300. In southwestern Kansas are possible components of the Upper
Republican culture, with points and pots like the Apishapa focus, but semisubterranean houses, from about A.D. 1100 to 1250. In the Oklahoma Panhandle is the
Optima focus, with diagnostics like the Apishapa focus, from about A.D. 1100 to
1450. In the Panhandle Plains is the Antelope Creek focus with diagnostics and span
like the Optima focus. In western Oklahoma is the Washita River focus with surface
houses, side-notched triangular arrowpoints, and plain pottery, from about A.D.
1100 to 1450. In northeastern New Mexico, in the eastern plains, are unassigned
Village components. Also in northeastern New Mexico, in the western foothills, are
three named Pueblo I-III phases from about A.D. 900 to 1300.
Throughout the Panhandle Plains and adjoining regions to the north, east, and
west, it seems likely that there was ethnic continuity from Early Neoindian time, and
possibly from Late Archaic time, leading into historic Plains Caddoan groups-except for the foothill phases in northeastern New Mexico----of probable Tanoan
affiliation.

Hughes -- Prehistoric Cultural Developments

13

The South Plains
The South Plains and surrounding regions are perhaps more diverse both
naturally and culturally than the Panhandle Plains and its surroundings. This
diversity is reflected in a plethora of systems for designating and subdividing the
four main stages of native cultural development and in dating the stages and their
subdivisions.
During the Archaic stage, the strongest cultural influences on the South Plains
seem to have been coming from the Edwards Plateau to the southeast, from the lower
Pecos to the south, and Rolling Plains to the east. During the Neoindian stage, the
strongest influences seem to have come from the middle Pecos to the west.
The Archaic stage is best known in Central Texas, fairly well known in
southwestern Texas, and poorly known in North Central Texas, on the South Plains,
and in southeastern New Mexico. The Archaic in these regions is usually regarded
as starting at about 5000 B.C., except in Central and southwestern Texas, where the
start is usually placed at about 6000 B.C. The difference, however, appears to be a
matter of definition. Prewitt’s (1981) initial Archaic Circleville phase in Central
Texas from 6500 to 5000 B.C. is characterized solely by lance points elsewhere
regarded as terminal Paleoindian rather than as initial Archaic.
The Central Texas Archaic has been subdivided into early, middle, and late foci
(Clear Fork, Round Rock, and Uvalde) by Kelley (1947); into a sequence of five
named phases by Weir (1976); and recently into a sequence of 11 named phases
(four early, four middle, and three late) by Prewitt (1981, 1985). The southwestern
Texas Archaic has been subdivided into an early Pecos River focus and a late Chisos
focus by Kelley, Campbell, and Lehmer (1940); into Periods 1,2, and 3 by Epstein
(1963); now, for the lower Pecos, into early, middle, and late periods by Shafer
(1989), and for the eastern trans-Pecos, into the same periods, except that they are
preceded and followed by transitional periods, by Mallouf (1985, 1987). In the
Rolling Plains of North Central Texas, a five-fold subdivision of the Archaic into
Initial, Early, Middle, Late, and Terminal substages, analogous to Weir’s five
named phases in Central Texas, has been proposed by Etchieson, Speer, and
Hughes (1978). An Early Archaic Bitter Creek complex and a Late Archaic Twilla
complex have also been proposed for this region by Hughes (1978). In the South
Plains, a three-fold subdivision of the Archaic into early, middle, and late has been
proposed by Campbell and Judd (1977). In southeastern New Mexico, a two-fold
subdivision of the Archaic into early and late is implicit in the general use of a Late
Archaic Hueco phase as the start of the Jornada branch of the Mogollon tradition.
All of the proposed subdivisions of the Archaic in all of the above regions are
marked chiefly by changes in dart point types, and there is some disagreement over
which types mark which subdivisions, and on time spans involved. The Neoindian
stage on the South Plains and in surrounding regions is relatively brief, unevenly
known, and variously subdivided and dated. Although the strongest influences on
the South Plains during the Neoindian stage may have come from southeastern New
Mexico, elements from Central, southwestern, and North Central Texas are also
discernible. The starting date of the Neoindian stage in these regions, with the first

14

Texas Archeological Society

arrowpoints and/or pottery, is variously estimated at before A.D. 900 for the South
Plains, about A.D. 700 in Central Texas, about A.D. 1000 in southwestern Texas,
an unknown date in North Central Texas, and before A.D. 900 in southeastem New
Mexico.
In much of the South Plains the Neoindian stage has not been subdivided, and
no complexes have been recognized, but in the southwestem part there has been
proposed an eastern extension of the Jomada branch, with three named phases
marked by changes from pit to surface houses, corner-notched-to-triangular arrowpoints, and plain-to-polychrome pottery, from about A.D. 900 to 1500. In Central
Texas, an Austin phase with Scallom arrowpoints from about A.D. 700 to 1300. is
followed by a Toyah phase with Perdiz and Cliffton arrowpoints and Leon Plain and
Doss Redware pottery from about A.D. 1300 to 1700. In southwestern Texas,
directly south of the South Plains, is the Toyah focus; further south in the TransPecos is the Livermore focus with Livermore points from about A.D. 900 to 1300;
still further south in the Presidio area is the Bravo Valley aspect with both pit and
surface houses, triangular arrowpoints, and polychrome pottery from about A.D.
1300 to 1600. In North Central Texas is the Henrietta focus, with triangular
arrowpoints and Nocona Plain pottery, from before A.D. 1400 to about 1600. In
southeastern New Mexico is a Southern Jornada sequence (also in the northern part
of the eastern trans-Pecos and in the E1 Paso area), a Northern Jomada sequence, an
Eastern Jomada sequence, and a Middle Pecos sequence, each with its own set of
three named phases and all dated from before A.D. 900 to about A.D. 1300 or 1400
or 1500. All are characterized by changes from pit to surface houses, corner-notched
to triangular arrowpoints, and plain to painted pottery.
From the above summary of Neoindian sequences on and around the South
Plains, it becomes apparent that a good marker for an early-late subdivision of the
stage would be the shift from comer-notched (Scallorn-like) arrowpoints into
various triangular types (and Perdiz). This shift seems to have occurred at about
A.D. 1200 in the southwestern part of the South Plains, about A.D. 1300 in Central
and southwestern Texas, an undetermined date in North Central Texas, and about
A.D. 1200 in southeastern New Mexico. In each region the arrowpoint change
seems to be about contemporaneous with other changes of more importance but
with less utility as boundary markers.
Ethnic continuities on and around the South Plains seem to have been quite
diverse. Ethnic affiliations on the South Plains may have been mainly those of
various adjoining regions. Ethnic continuity has been suggested throughout the
Archaic and Neoindian stages into historic Tonkawans for Central Texas and into
historic Coahuiltecans for southwestern Texas, except that the Toyah focus of both
regions may have been ancestral to the mysterious Jumanos. In North Central Texas
the Henrietta focus is probably ancestral to some historic Plains Caddoan group
such as the Kichai. In southeastern New Mexico the Jomada branch may have been
ancestral to historic Tanoans.
Throughout the Texas High Plains and in most surrounding regions, the
immigrant Apache groups constitute a strong cultural unit that requires special

Hughes m Prehistoric Cultural Developments

15

treatment. To the north and west of the Panhandle Plains and in the Panhandle
Plains, the resident Late Neoindian complexes apparently were being replaced by
these Apache groups during the 1300s and 1400s. In southwestern Kansas, these
groups are represented by the Dismal River aspect from about A.D. 1650 to 1750;
in southeastern Colorado, the Oklahoma Panhandle, northeastern New Mexico, and
the middle Pecos by as yet unassigned components after about A.D. 1300; in the
Texas Panhandle by a proposed Tierra Blanca complex after about A.D. 1400; and
in the South Plains by a proposed Garza complex after about A.D. 1500. By the start
of the 1700s the various Apache groups on and around the Texas High Plains were
being forced out by Comanches.
THE EARLY ARCHAIC SUBSTAGE
(About 5000 to 2000 B.C.)
For the Texas High Plains and bordering regions, the Early Archaic substage
is here defined as coinciding essentially with the Altithermal Long Drought and
characterized by a pattern of localized foraging for wild plant food and small game
replacing a pattern of unrestricted bison hunting, as evidenced by the disappearance
of bison kills, replacement of stemless lance points with stemmed dart points,
decreasing use of end scrapers, and increasing use of gouges, grinding implements,
hearth stones, and boiling pebbles. It should be noted that the Early Archaic thus
defined also corresponds essentially with Dillehay’s (1974) first period of bison
absence on the Southern Plains.
The Altithermal interval on the Texas High Plains, when not represented by a
wind- or water-scoured erosional unconformity, seems to be represented by
geological deposits (fluviatile, lacustrine, and eolian) that are remarkably devoid of
organic remains, including cultural materials. Any evidence of the above-mentioned
cultural developments--and indeed of any human presence at all--on the Texas
High Plains during the 3000-year span of the Long Drought is so scarce as to suggest
the possibility that the level uplands were largely abandoned in favor of the broken
country to the west, east, and south, where conditions may have been better suited
to a foraging existence. It should be pointed out, however, that although surface
evidence of early Archaic occupation appears to be much better in the breaks to the
west, and especially in the breaks to the east, than on the intervening uplands, except
for the Gore Pit site in the Rolling Plains of southwestern Oklahoma, it is only in the
Edwards Plateau to the southeast and in the lower Pecos to the south that any artifact
assemblages of this substage have been encountered in stratified deposits and dated
by radiocarbon.
The Gore Pit site is puzzling, however, in that a deeply buried assemblage of
features and artifacts dated at 5150, 4190, and 4066 B.C. includes a Meserve point
and Clear Fork gouges together with dart points identified elsewhere as Late
Archaic types. This seeming anachronism leads Hammatt (1976) to question the
utility of dart point styles for dating Archaic sites, but his illustrations suggest that
some of his typological identifications are questionable.

16

Texas Archeological Society

Only three kinds of evidence for human presence on the Texas High Plains
during the early Archaic substage appear to be available: 1) cultural remains that
have been radiocarbon dated between 5000 and 2000 B.C.; 2) dart points of types
that have been assigned to that time span in Central and southwestern Texas; and
3) Clear Fork gouges, which flourished during the Early Archaic, although they
started during Late Paleoindian times and may have lingered in some regions into
Late Archaic time.
It appears that the only cultural material on the Texas part of the Southern High
Plains to have been radiocarbon-dated for this interval so far is at the Lubbock Lake
site, where a date of 3010 B.C. has been reported for a large ash concentration
covered with caliche cobbles in Stafford’s (1981) Stratum 4. Just outside of Texas,
at the Clovis site, the Portales complex above the diatomite has been dated (on bone)
at 6230 and 6300 B.P., and stemmed and notched Archaic points in the upper jointed
sand have been dated (also on bone) at 4950 B.P. (Wendorf and Krieger 1959).
The only other radiocarbon dating of cultural remains to this interval that the
author has been able to find for the Southern High Plains is at the Pigeon Cliff site,
which is in New Mexico near the northwestern corner of the Texas Panhandle. At
this site a buried living surface labeled the Clayton Horizon yielded a Williams dart
point, a kni fe (retouched blade-flake), two end scrapers, a shallow firepit, and bones
of an extinct bison like those at the Plainview site (Steen 1976). Soil samples
impregnated with barely enough charcoal for dating produced a date of 8280 B.P.
for the firepit in 1955 and, in 1966, a date of 5420 B.P. for the firepit and a date of
6070 B.P. for the bone area.
The Pigeon Cliff findings constitute a puzzle that is not likely to be resolved.
Inadequate charcoal may explain the wide difference between the dates for the
firepit and bone area and the considerable difference between the dates for the
firepit and bone area in 1966--differences that suggest that all of the dates may be
unreliable. There is no ready explanation for the association of a supposedly Late
Archaic type of dart point with a supposedly late Pleistocene species of bison.
Dart point types (other than Paleoindian lanceolate types) that appear to be
older than 2000 B.C. in Central and southwestern Texas include Andice, Baird,
Baker, Bandy, Bell, Bulverde, "early barbed," Gower, Hoxie, Martindale, Nolan,
Pandale, Taylor, Tortugas, Travis, Uvalde, and Wells (Weir 1976; Prewitt 1981;
Mallouf 1985; Shafer 1989). In these two regions, some of these types have been
found associated with lanceolate points generally identified as Late Paleoindian in
deposits antedating 5000 B.C.; they have been regarded as "pre-Archaic" or "early
Archaic" by some writers, but are considered in this paper to be a notched form that
was developing during Late Paleoindian time. The difference has to do with
defining the Late Paleoindian/Early Archaic boundary: they place it at the first of
the notched points, whereas the author places it at the last of the lanceolate points.
Others solve the problem with a transitionalperiod for the time of overlap between
lanceolate and notched forms.
These terminological differences have not helped to simplify the complicated
problem of cross-dating between Central Texas, southwestern Texas, and the Texas

Hughes -- Prehistoric Cultural Developments

17

High Plains. It seems likely that Late Paleoindian~arly Archaic typological
developments on the Texas High Plains resembled some of the developments not
only in Central and southwestern Texas but also in other bordering regions; it seems
unlikely, however, that developments were identical in any of these regions. In other
words, the typology and chronology of one region cannot be transferred blindly to
another region. Although some of these point types that are known to be early in
Central and southwestern Texas have been reported occasionally as surface finds on
the Texas High Plains, only two specimens appear to have been found in controlled
excavations in the region.
At the Lubbock Lake site, Wheat (1974) found a Bulverde point in the upper
part of S tratum IVb or in the top of S tratum IVc. S tratum IV, which "forms the upper
limit of aboriginal occupation" (Wheat 1974:21), yielded three additional points,
however, that do not appear to be early: a Desmuke, an Ellis, and a Trinity. Holliday
(1977) and Stafford (1981) place Wheat’s finds near the top of their Stratum 4,
deposition of which ended at about 1000 B.P.
At the Marks Beach site, Honea (1980) found an "anomalous Frio-Uvalde like"
point (p. 267 and Figure 14c on p. 262) in his Zone IIIA. The overlying Zone IIIB
yielded two Marcos points with a variety of other cultural remains, and a well had
been dug from the base of the zone. Honea regards the entire Zone III as Archaic and
dating from the onset of the Altithermal, but the fact that the bones in Zone IIIA were
mineralized suggests the possibility that this zone is Late Paleoindian, that its upper
surface with the well may be an erosional unconformity representing the Altithermal,
and that the overlying Zone IIIB with the Marcos points is Late Archaic.
The possibility that Honea’s "Frio-Uvalde like" point is Paleoindian rather than
Archaic is strengthened by finds at the Clovis site, where a point that Honea regards
as similar was found under similar but much-better-dated conditions (Haynes and
Agogino 1966). Here a "notched Archaic" point (p. 817 and Figure 7 on p. 819) was
found on an erosional surface at the top of Unit E, 1.5 meters (5 feet) from a hearth
with charred bone that gave a date of 6520 B.C. This surface also produced Eden
and Scottsbluff points and showed many wells that had been dug into Unit E, the
upper part of which gave a date of 7940 B.C. The wells were filled with sand that
was regarded as dating to the Altithermal.
Excavations at the Rattlesnake Draw site on the Llano Estacado in southeastern
New Mexico produced one or two transitional points (Smith et al. 1966) that
resemble the Uvalde-like specimens at the Marks Beach and Clovis sites, as well as
one or two Paleoindian points, and also revealed a well that is interpreted as filled
with Altithermal sand, but the associations among these findings are not described.
The surface of the site yielded several of the transitional points together with a
variety of Paleoindian points. Meltzer and Collins (1987) have recently reviewed
the above-mentioned water wells on the S outhern High Plains as clues to Altithermal
climate.
It should be added that the Uvalde-like points excavated at the Marks Beach,
Clovis, and Rattlesnake Draw sites are at least vaguely reminiscent of the three
notched points found together with two lanceolate points (all with quasi-fluted

18

Texas Archeological Society

concave bases) among the skeletons of six extinct bison at the Rex Rodgers site in
the Mackenzie Reservoir (Willey et al. 1978). The bones gave a date of 7441 B.C.
A few reports of surface finds on the Texas High Plains have explicitly
identified some of the dart point types regarded as early in Central and southwestern
Texas: aBulverdeandaUvaldepointatasanddunesite(LY-4) nearTahoka (Riggs
1965); some Bulverde, Martindale, Travis, Tortugas, Uvalde, and Wells points in
a survey in the east central part of the Llano Estacado (Campbell and Judd 1977);
and a Martindale point at the Marks Beach site (Honea 1980).
Elsewhere on the Southern High Plains, Bulverde points have been identified
at two sites in east Central New Mexico (Wamica 1965); Nolan points at the Nail
site in the Oklahoma Panhandle (Baker et al. 1957); and Pandale and Travis points
at sites in southeastern Colorado (Campbell 1976). At the Johnson-Cline site in the
Oklahoma Panhandle, Lintz (1978a) regards four dart points (one Palmillas, one
Type D, and two Type E) as indicative of Early Archaic occupation, between 5000
and 1500 B.C. A great many published reports of surface finds on the Southern High
Plains describe and illustrate dart points that appear to represent some of the early
types, but, without access to the actual specimens, few of these points could be
assigned with any confidence to one type or another, especially considering the
primitive state of our typological understandings at present.
Although Clear Fork gouges are scarce on the Southern High Plains of
northwestern Texas and eastern New Mexico, they are common to the west in the
breaks of the upper Canadian and upper and middle Pecos, especially to the east in
the Rolling Plains drained by the Canadian, Red, and Brazos rivers (Hughes 1980),
to the southeast in the Edwards Plateau drained by the Brazos and Colorado rivers,
and to the south in the canyons of the lower Pecos River. It appears, however, that
these tools have been reported in excavated and dated deposits only in Central and
southwestern Texas, except for three exceptions noted below.
In Central Texas, Prewitt (1981) attributes gouges to all five of his 11 Archaic
phases that antedate 2000 B.C., including the oldest, his Circleville phase, dated at
6500 to 5000 B.C., the markers of which (Angostura, Golondrina, Meserve, and
Scottsbluff points) are generally regarded as Late Paleoindian. He also attributes
gouges, however, to one of his Late Archaic phases, the Twin Sisters, dated at A.D.
200 to 550, and to one of his "Neo-Archaic" phases, the Austin, dated at A.D. 700
to 1300. Are the late gouges truly gouges?
In southwestern Texas, on the lower Pecos, Shafer (1989) mentions gouges
with lanceolate and early stemmed points at about 9000 B.P., and in the eastern
trans-Pecos, Mallouf (1985) records them in his Early Transitional period at about
6000 to 4500 B.C. Outside Central and southwestern Texas, three reports of
excavated and dated gouges have been found. In the Rolling Plains of the southeastern Panhandle, Cruse (1989) recovered a gouge in S tratum 2b at the Kent Creek site,
with dates of A.D. 690 to 1010. In northeastern New Mexico, at the Old Coyote
rockshelter in Los Esteros Reservoir on the upper Pecos, Mobley (1978) has
reported five gouges from Stratum III, dated at A.D. 60 to 1096. As mentioned
earlier, an assemblage including gouges at the Gore Pit site in southwestern

Hughes ~ Prehistoric Cultural Developments

19

Oklahoma was dated at 5150, 4190, and 4066 B.C. Farther afield, Hughes (1980)
has called attention to the occurrence of gouges at two Late Paleoindian sites on the
northern fringes of the High Plains; the Allen site in Nebraska, and the Long site in
South Dakota.
It seems that gouges are indicative mainly of the Early Archaic, from about
5000 to 2000 B.C., but appeared somewhat earlier, in Late Paleoindian time, and in
some regions, may have lingered into Late Archaic and even into Neoindian times.
What is puzzling about the late occurrences reported for Central Texas and
northeastern New Mexico, however, is that scores of excavations in late components in the regions where gouges occur have failed to produce any of these tools.
One wonders if the few seemingly late occurrences are intrusions from earlier
cultures, like the occasional occurrences of Paleoindian points in more recent sites.
The only reported excavation of gouges from a site on the Southern High Plains
that the author has been able to find is at the Blue Clay site in Mackenzie Reservoir
in Tule Canyon (Willey et al. 1978). This was a small, open campsite with projectile
points, indicating multiple occupations during Late Archaic and Neoindian times.
Two gouges were found in the top 15 cm (6 inches) of the deposits.
S urface finds of the gouges have been reported at a few other place on the Texas
High Plains. These finds include two gouges at the Little Sunday site on the rim of
Palo Duro Canyon, where dart point types indicate a mainly Late Archaic occupation, although a Folsom point was also found (Hughes 1955); one gouge in the lower
Tule Canyon (Katz and Katz 1976); two gouges in the South Plains Archeological
Reconaissance area in the east Central part of the Llano Estacado (Campbell and
Judd 1977); one gouge in the Red Deer Creek valley in the northeastern part of the
Panhandle (Hughes et al. 1978); and one gouge in the Palo Duro Creek valley in the
North Central part of the Panhandle (Hughes 1979).
Gouges are also seldom reported on the Southern High Plains outside of Texas.
In southeastern New Mexico, one of the tools illustrated in a report on the
Rattlesnake Draw site resembles a gouge (Smith et al. 1966:Plate VI, No. 18). In the
Oklahoma Panhandle, in a survey of Black Mesa State Park (Saunders 1978), four
gouges were found: one with Archaic, two with Woodland, and one with Village
associations. In addition to the reported finds of gouges on the Texas High Plains,
the author recalls a few rare findings of gouges in the Palo Duro Canyon part of the
eastern Caprock Escarpment, in the Canadian breaks across the Panhandle, and one
in a playa basin in Amarillo’s Southeast Park (Hughes 1980).
From the foregoing review of what little evidence has been produced for
ctfltural developments on the Texas High Plains during Early Archaic time, after
several decades of archeological search it can be inferred that the region was
generally so unattractive during the 3000-year span of the Altithermal Long
Drought as to minimize human utilization. Geographic distribution of the scanty
evidence available, in the form of dated remains, early dart points, and Clear Fork
gouges, suggests that the playa basins and stream valleys on the uplands were
seldom visited, and that even the sheltered, spring-fed canyons along the Caprock
escarpment and in the Canadian breaks across the Panhandle Plains were only

20

Texas Archeological Society

lightly occupied. It may also be predicted that information on the Early Archaic
lifestyles on the Southern High Plains in general will come much more slowly and
be harder to acquire than in some of the bordering regions, and that as the evidence
accumulates, cultural differences from north to south and from east to west on the
High Plains will be found to reflect the differences among the Early Archaic cultures
in the bordering regions.
The Middle Archaic of Central Texas, characterized by Pedemales dart points
and associated artifacts, is almost absent from the Llano Estacado. Interestingly, in
Central Texas there appears to be a general increase in population in this same time
period (Prewitt 1981; Brown 1989).
THE LATE ARCHAIC
(About 2000 B.C. to A.D. 200.)
The Late Archaic substage on the Texas High Plains is defined as starting at
about 2000 B.C. with the beginning of Medithermal (modem) climatic conditions
in the region. This substage is marked primarily by the use of various kinds of barbed
dart points for hunting bison and other large game. The terminal date of about A.D.
200 is an arbitrary figure that splits the difference between about A.D. 1 and A.D.
400 or 500. Barbed arrowpoints and Woodland cord-marked and Mogollon brownware pottery may have appeared on the Texas High Plains as early as the time of
Christ, whereas barbed dart points seem to have continued in use alongside of these
innovations and to have been used in bison kills, until about A.D. 400 or 500 (see
Lintz et al. 1991, this volume). Archeological remains that are dated within or near
the 2000 B.C. to A.D. 200 span, or that include dart points of types supposedly used
during this span, are assigned to the Late Archaic substage.
In contrast to the Early Archaic on the Texas High Plains, the Late Archaic is
represented by thousands of sites of various kinds, many with quantities of features
and artifacts that demonstrate the presence of many groups of foragers who had
achieved a high degree of effectiveness at making a living by hunting and gathering.
Late Archaic components are not only far more numerous than Early Archaic (and
Paleoindian) components, but also appear to be about as numerous as Neoindian
components.
Despite this wealth of evidence, however, Late Archaic manifestations have
received much less attention than have the more intriguing Paleoindian sites and the
more prolific Neoindian sites. Although hundreds of Late Archaic components have
been recorded (but not reported) in ongoing survey programs and reported in special
survey projects on the Texas and adjoining parts of the Southern High Plains, only
a few dozen of these components have been encountered in excavations, and no
more than two or three dozen of these tested components have been reported. Many,
if not most, of the reported surface manifestations have an admixture of later
materials (the Little Sunday site (Hughes 1955) appears to be one of the rare
exceptions); and very few of the reported subsurface findings provide data on a
discrete, ample, and dated assemblage (the lower midden at the Chalk Hollow site
(Wedel 1975) is one of the best of these).

Hughes m Prehistoric Cultural Developments

21

Pitifully few of the Late Archaic components on the Southern High Plains have
been radiocarbon dated. Three of these are in the Palo Duro Canyon area. At the
Canyon City Club Cave, the lowermost Level 5 produced no diagnostic items but
was dated at 880 and 150 B.C.; the overlying Level 4 contained transitional Late
Archaic-Early Neoindian remains, including dart points like Ellis and Lange, and
was dated at A.D. 300 and 680 (Hughes 1969; Duffield 1970). At the Chalk Hollow
site, the lower midden produced dart points like Castroville, Marcos, Palmillas, and
Williams and was dated at 1650 to 400 B.C. (Wedel 1975). At the Deadman’s
shelter, the lowermost S tratum D contained transitional Late Archaic-Early Neoindian
remains, including dart points like Edgewood, Elam or Kent, Ellis, and Lange, and
was dated at A.D. 120 and 210 (Willey and Hughes 1978). Several Late Archaic
dates have been reported for the Lubbock Lake site (Johnson and Holliday 1986;
Johnson 1987; Lintz et al. 1991, this volume). In southeastern Colorado at the
Medina rockshelter a Late Archaic component was dated at 20 B.C. (Campbell
1976),
In the eastern part of the Texas Panhandle, a series of Late Archaic bison kills
located on the High Plains and the Rolling Plains below have yielded dart points like
Ellis, Marcos, Palmillas, and Williams, and radiocarbon dates falling mainly in the
A.D. 1 to 500 range (D. Hughes 1977). No cultural complexes have been identified
for the Late Archaic on the Southern High Plains and defined as to cultural content
and affiliations, spatial range, and temporal span. The author (1955) has suggested
that a Little Sunday complex be postulated to account for the remains at that site,
but the complex cannot be defined until the site has been explored and compared
with others in the Panhandle Plains. Late Archaic components in the southwestern
part of the S outh Plains have been assigned by Corley (1965) and others to the Hueco
phase that Lehmer (1948) proposed for preceramic remains in the Jornada area of
the Mogollon culture. However, whether all of the Late Archaic remains throughout
the widespread eastern, northern, and southern districts of the Jornada Mogollon are
similar enough to constitute a single complex is a question that does not yet seem
to have been fully addressed. Although dart points in Late Archaic components on
the South Plains have sometimes been attributed to the Edwards Plateau aspect of
Central Texas and the Pecos River and Chisos foci of southwestern Texas, no one
seems to have assigned an entire component to any of these complexes.
Late Archaic sites on the Southern High Plains represent a wide variety of
functions and are found in a wide variety of locations. Most of the sites are open
camps that were briefly occupied by small groups. Some of the sites appear to have
been occupied repeatedly or protractedly by sizeable groups and were probably base
camps. The open camps are usually near a water supply, around the playa basins and
along the stream valleys on the uplands, and in the canyons that cut the margins of
the High Plains and drain the Canadian breaks. The base camps tend to be near
permanent sources of good water, and some of the best are in sheltered places in the
canyons, around headsprings and pouroffpools. High places were used as lookouts,
and wherever rock overhangs afforded any protection from the weather, they were
used as shelters. Quarries and workshops are located at outcrops of Alibates agate,

22

Texas Archeological Society

Tecovas jasper, Dakota quartzite, Edwards chert, and Ogallala chalcedony, and
gravel beds of all ages were prospected for lithic materials. Bison kills were made
in arroyo traps, especially in the Red River drainage along the eastern fringes of the
Panhandle Plains. Some of the rock carvings in the shelters and on the cliffs around
the High Plains probably date to Late Archaic time.
Various kinds of features characterize Late Archaic camps. Little or no
evidence of dwellings or other structures has been found, but fires are usually
evidenced by clusters and scatters of pieces of burned caliche, quartzite pebbles,
sandstone slabs, and sometimes by patches of baked earth, charred wood or bone,
soot, and ash. Slab-lined pit, basin, and level hearths are sometimes preserved. The
various kinds of hearths and other evidence of heating and cooking doubtless have
important chronological as well as functional implications that await exploration.
Layers of burned rocks are found at some of the sites, but burned rock middens like
those of Central Texas and ring middens like those of southwestern Texas seem to
be absent. In addition to hearth areas, features at some of the sites include supplies
and dumps of boiling pebbles, chipping stations, caches of raw materials, pockets
of waste flakes, refuse deposits, caches of grinding slabs, bedrock mortars, and
burials.
The mortar holes, usually deep and tapered cylindrical or elliptical ~orrester
1991, this issue) are sometimes clustered in large numbers on talus boulders or on
bedrock ledges. The burials tend to be in the foetal position under a few slabs at the
bottoms of small, shallow, oval graves, usually devoid of diagnostic artifacts but
sometimes with a few personal possessions. Although few of these burials have
been reported, a great many have been found both in and away from camps. The
skulls tend to be long and low, with low foreheads and strong brow ridges; the teeth
are much worn from eating stone-ground food, and are sometimes grooved or
notched (Willey 1978; Willey and Ubelaker 1976).
Late Archaic assemblages on the Southern High Plains include many different
kinds of dart points and a considerable variety of other artifacts. The dart points are
potentially among the most useful of the artifact classes, and as their typology
becomes better understood, they should prove to be very helpful, not only for dating
High Plains sites, but also for tracing connections with adjoining regions. Most
writers who have attempted to fit High Plains dart points into the Texas typology,
however, have found that their specimens seldom fall neatly into one type or
another. The High Plains specimens are often smaller than their counterparts in
Central Texas, where many of the types were established and where the Edwards
chert is a more abundant and tractable material than the materials generally
available on the High Plains.
Of the more-than-two-dozen dartpoint types thathave been explicitly identified
in a Late Archaic context on the High Plains by various writers, the types that seem
to be mentioned most frequently resemble what Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954)
called Edgewood, Ellis, Marcos, and Palmillas, followed by Ensor, Trinity, Williams,
and Lange. These are mainly North Texas and Central Texas forms. They are also
common in Oklahoma (Chris Lintz, personal communication). Influences from

Hughes m Prehistoric Cultural Developments

23

other directions are suggested by mentions of Duncan and Hanna points to the north,
Augustin and Pinto Basin to the west, and Langtry and Paisano to the south.
There is some evidence from a few sites on the High Plains, sometimes agreeing
with evidence from Central and southwestern Texas, that earlier dart point types
during the Late Archaic substage include Castroville, Marcos, Marshall, Palmillas,
and Williams, whereas later types include Edgewood, Elam, Ellis, Ensor, Kent,
Lange, and Trinity. Most of the earlier types are notably larger, broader, and more
strongly barbed than the later types.
Most of the High Plains dart points are made of various local materials, but
occasional specimens made of exotic material evidently were imported from fairly
remote sources--hornfels from northeastern New Mexico, Niobrara jasper from
northwestern Kansas, Florence chert from North Central Oklahoma, and Edwards
chert from Central Texas (although the last is also available in places along the
southeast edges of the Llano Estacado). Obsidian from central New Mexico is rare
to nonexistent in Late Archaic assemblages on the High Plains.
Chipped stone artifacts other than dart points found in Late Archaic components
on the Southern High Plains include an abundance of knives (large, thin, triangularto-ovate bifaces, usually fragmentary); key-shaped drills; crude bifaces (possibly
preforms for points and knives); bifacial and unifacial choppers; many and varied
scrapers (large end scrapers, small side scrapers, spokeshaves, discs, turtle-backs,
retouched flakes and flake fragments); and gravers and denticulates. Chipping
technology as indicated by cores and flakes has yet to receive much attention.
Hammerstones include large cobble pounders and small discoidal knappers.
Grinding implements are abundant; metates are thin sandstone slabs with unshaped
or partially shaped edges and shallow oval basins pecked and worn on one or both
faces; the one-hand manos are small, unshaped or partially shaped quartzite or
sandstone cobbles pecked and worn on one or both faces; they are round to subrectangular in outline and flat, convex, or wedge shaped in cross section.. Other stone
items include grooved sandstone awl sharpeners, worn and scratched pieces of
paintstone, and rare stone beads and pendants.
Scarce bone artifacts include awls of split deer cannon bone, flaking tools,
gaming pieces, beads, and pendants. Food remains include bones of both large and
small game animals. Some information on bison slaughtering and butchering
techniques is available (D. Hughes 1977). Shell items are rare; disc, tubular, and
Olivella beads and mussel and conch pendants have been reported.
To recap Late Archaic cultural developments on the Southern High Plains, it
appears that Indian groups who had developed typical Archaic foraging efficiency
during the Altithermal in surrounding regions less hostile than the High Plains
grasslands began to return to the region with the onset of modem Medithermal
climate and to redevelop bison-hunting skills reminiscent of their Paleoindian
predecessors. Weapons, tools, faunal remains, and grinding implements indicate
extensive exploitation of available food resources--game animals both large and
small as well as wild plants--but most details remain to be explored.

24

Texas Archeological Society

The evidence for a gathering and hunting subsistence, the presence of brief
camps wherever water was available, the location of base camps in the ecotonal
scarps and breaks around and across the High Plains, and the heavy use of local lithic
resources all are suggestive of seasonal rounds within limited territories. Occasional
dart points of flints from remote sources, however, suggest some fast and far travel
by hunting parties, and rare marine shells indicate some trade in coastal directions.
Except for some changes in dart point styles, the technological developments
during the two millennia of Late Archaic life on the High Plains are still unknown.
Work in bone and shell seems to have been minimal compared with stone, but the
lack of perishable organic materials in the artifact inventory is more likely a
reflection of the scarcity of dry cave deposits on and around the High Plains. Animal
and plant materials probably were at least as important as stone. It seems likely that
the Late Archaic cultures were so well adapted to the region that technological and
other changes during the period were minimal, but it would not be surprising to find
evidence that climatic fluctuations induced some cultural responses, such as a mesic
interval at about 500 B.C. promoting more bison and more kills.
With regard to social organization, it may be speculated that Late Archaic
people on the High Plains, like most of the world’s foragers, lived most of the year
in small patrilineal, extended family groups under the leadership of a headman,
temporarily joining other groups only on special occasions. Interests beyond
survival are barely hinted at in the form of rare gaming pieces, beads and pendants,
paintstones, petroglyphs, and burials in the foetal position under protective slabs.
THE EARLY NEOINDIAN SUBSTAGE
(About A.D. 200 to 1100)
The Early Neoindian substage era on the Texas High Plains is defined as
starting about A.D. 200 (between about A.D. 1 and 400 or 500) with the appearance
of barbed arrowpoints and Woodland cordmarked and/or Mogollon brownware
pottery; these are the chief diagnostic artifacts of the substage. The terminal date of
about A.D. 1100 splits the difference between about A.D. 1000, when a Woodland/
Village transition was taking place in the northern part of the Panhandle Plains, and
about A.D. 1200, when a pit-to-surface-house transition was taking place on the
southwestern part of the South Plains. As will be seen later, the transition in both
areas was marked, not only by changes in house ty~es, but also by a shift from barbed
arrowpoints to side-notched triangular arrowpoints, and by many other developments.
The Early Neoindian substage on the Southern High Plains seems to have been
a time when some of the Late Archaic foraging groups who had been hunting and
gathering in the region for more than 2000 years without much change began to add
some potentially revolutionary new ideas to the cultural inventory--the bow and
arrow, pottery, pit houses, and doubtless some gardening or horticulture. Under
influences from the Mogollon tradition to the southwest and the Woodland tradition
to the northeast, they began a transformation from a nomadic camper-forager
existence toward a sedentary villager-gardener lifestyle. The bulk of the items in the

Hughes ~ Prehistoric Cultural Developments

25

Late Archaic assemblages continue on into the Early Neoindian assemblages,
suggesting that the innovations represent mainly influxes of new ideas rather than
new peoples. The extent to which collecting of wild plant food in the Late Archaic
may have been preadaptive to the acceptance of horticultural ideas is an interesting
matter for speculation.
On the Texas part of the Southern High Plains, three Early Neoindian complexes have been recognized. In the Panhandle Plains, a Lake Creek complex is
found mainly in the Canadian breaks and northward, with some extension southward into the northern part of the Red River drainage, whereas a Palo Duro complex
is found mainly in the Red River drainage and northward into the Canadian breaks
and somewhat beyond. In the southwestern part of the South Plains, a sequence of
two Early Neoindian phases (Querecho and Maljamar) occurs mainly in southeastern New Mexico but is well represented eastward into Texas.
The Lake Creek Complex
This complex was first identified on the basis of test excavations at a site on
Lake Creek, a north-side tributary of the Canadian River in Hutchinson County
(Hughes 1962). The complex is characterized primarily by a combination of
Woodland cordmarked pottery with Sca!lom-like arrowpoints, often accompanied
by Mogollon plain brownware.
The Lake Creek complex has been tested and reported at eight or nine sites and
tested but unreported at several others. S urface surveys have identified the complex
at several dozen sites, a few of which are described in various survey reports. Sadly,
there are no radiocarbon dates for any of these components, but a Woodland sherd
at the Tascosa Creek site near Old Tascosa (now Cal Farley’s Boys Ranch) has been
dated by thermoluminescence at A.D. 520 (Couzzourt 1985, 1988). Radiocarbon
dates at several Woodland sites in western Oklahoma and a couple in southeastern
Colorado indicate a span of about A.D. 200 to 800 or 900.
Most of the known components of the Lake Creek complex are open camps on
terraces along the Canadian River and its tributary creeks, usually in buried soil
zones. Very little material is exposed at most sites, but some are extensive and rich
enough to represent base camps. Features at the sites are little known; a possible
dwelling at one site is yet to be exposed. Rock hearths are seldom well preserved.
Refuse deposits are composed mainly of hearth stones, boiling pebbles, waste
flakes, and animal bones. Bison bones are scarce at most sites, lending some
credence to Dillehay’s postulated Bison Absence Period II (A.D. 500 to 1200 or
1300). Human skeletal remains at three or foar sites, and a few isolated burials with
Scaltorn-like points, indicate flexed burials, sometimes accompanied by a few
personal tools and ornaments.
The diagnostic pottery is typical Plains Woodland ware. It is seldom abundant,
usually consisting of a few big thick fragments of large conoidal vessels, tempered
with liberal quantities of coarse particles of crushed rock and/or bone (in the
northeastern Panhandle the rock is often scoria from pebbles in the Ogallala
Formation), and boldly impressed with long parallel cordmarks. A few sherds of

26

Texas Archeological Society

Mogollon brownware are sometimes present, generally large thick pieces resembling
Alma Plain, an early type with a smooth finish and dark paste speckled with whitish
angular cleavage fragments of crushed plagioclase feldspar.
Most of the projectile points are small Scallorn-like arrowpoints, but other
kinds of corner-notched arrowpoints are also found together with occasional
specimens ranging from Ellis-like corner-notched dart points to Reed-like sidenotched arrowpoints. The rest of the artifact inventory appears to be basically
similar to the Late Archaic inventory, but future studies may be expected to reveal
some significant differences. Grinding implements are impressively abundant at
some sites.
The Palo Duro Complex
This complex was first identified on the basis of test excavations at the
Deadman’s shelter in Mackenzie Reservoir on Tule Canyon, a major tributary of
Palo Duro Canyon (WiUey and Hughes 1978). The complex has been much further
defined on the basis of excavations at the Kent Creek site in Hall County near
Turkey, Texas (Cruse 1989). The complex is characterized primarily by a combination of Mogollon plain brown pottery with a distinctive arrowpoint type called
Deadman, often accompanied by Scallorn-like arrowpoints.
The Palo Duro complex has been tested and reported at a half a dozen sites and
has been found in unreported tests at several others. A great many components have
been described in survey reports, and dozens of others have been recorded but not
published. Unlike the Lake Creek complex, radiocarbon dates have been obtained
for several components of the Palo Duro Complex: A.D. 300 to 680 for Level 4 at
the Canyon City Club Cave (Hughes 1969); A.D. 370 to 870 for the upper midden
at the Chalk Hollow site (Wedel 1975); A.D. 120 to 710 at the Deadman’s shelter
(Willey and Hughes 1978); A.D. 690 to 1010 at the Kent Creek site (Cruse 1989);
and A.D. 815 to 1110 at the Blue Spring shelter (unreported). These dates suggest
that the Palo Duro complex spans most of the first millennium A.D.
Sites of the Palo Duro complex seem to occur at a wider variety of locations than
do those of the Lake Creek complex. The Palo Duro sites are found mainly in the
broken country in the upperRed River drainage, but they are also found in the breaks
of the Canadian River, along the valleys and canyons, on high places and low, in
exposed areas, sheltered areas, and rock overhangs, near and sometimes not so near
water. Some large, deep, and rich components probably represent base camps.
Except for Mogollon-style pithouses at the Kent Creek site (Cruse 1989), and
probably at another site near B uffalo Lake (Hays 1986), features at the sites, insofar
as they are known, do not seem to differ appreciably from those at the Lake Creek
sites. Both rock-lined and unlined fireplaces have been found. Bison bones are
scarce to nonexistent in the middens. The few burials referable to the complex are
flexed, with some personal possessions, like the burials of the Lake Creek complex.
Artifact assemblages are also similar, except for the peculiar Deadman arrowpoints that are diagnostic of the Palo Duro complex. These points are deeply notched
from the base so as to produce long slender stems and equally long slender barbs.

Hughes u Prehistoric Cultural Developments

27

Complete specimens are rare; the fragile stems and barbs that survived the notching
process have seldom escaped postmanufacturing breakage. The points are usually
accompanied by distinctive thin, ovate preforms. Deadman points are reminiscent
of other long-stemmed arrowpoints in Texas--not only the early Alba and Bonham
types of eastern and North Central Texas, but also the late Perdiz and Livermore
types of Central and western Texas. As with Lake Creek components, Palo Duro
components usually have a few sherds of Mogollon brownware resembling the
early Alma Plain type. The sherds often have repair holes, suggesting that the
imported vessels were highly regarded and reluctantly abandoned.
The Palo Duro complex may represent groups of nomadic foragers who were
based in the upper Red River drainage, but who served as intermediaries between
Mogollon groups to the southwest on the Pecos River and the Rio Grande and
Woodland groups to the north on the Canadian River. If so, they may have carried
more important, but less tangible, items than Mogollon pots, such as ideas about
houses and horticulture.
Faunal evidence from some of the Palo Duro components, together with the
buried soil zones containing some of the Lake Creek components, suggests that
Panhandle climate may have been moister around the middle of the first millennium
A.D. than it is today. The Palo Duro levels at the Canyon City Club cave, the Blue
Spring shelter, and the Deadman’s shelter all have yielded remains of the prairie
vole (Microtus ochrogaster), which no longer lives in the Panhandle, preferring the
moister regions to the east.
The Querecho-Maljamar Phases
On the basis of test excavations at several sites on the South Plains in
southeastern New Mexico and surface collections at many others, Corley (1965)
proposed an eastern extension of the Jornada branch of the Mogollon culture with
a sequence of Querecho, Maljamar, and Ochoa phases. Tested sites included Boot
Hill (Corley and Leslie 1960) and Merchant (Leslie 1965). Since 1965, components
of the Eastern Jornada phases have been reported in excavations at several other
sites, not only in southeastern New Mexico, but also at the Andrews Lake sites in
Texas (Collins 1966, 1968) and are recognizable in excavation and survey reports
at many other sites in the Texas part of the South Plains.
According to Corley (1965) and Collins (1966, 1968, 1971), the Querecho
phase, which is thought to have evolved out of a local version of the Late Archaic
Jornada-wide Hueco phase, is dated at A.D. 950 to 1100, and is characterized by
sites without houses, a locally made plain brownware, a few kinds of intrusive
wares, corner-notched arrowpoints, and, until A.D. 1000, some small dart points.
(It should be noted that Querecho is an unfortunate label for a phase that is unrelated
to the Querechos encountered by Coronado in 1541.) The Maljamar phase is dated
at A.D. 1100 to 1300, and is characterized by pithouses, locally made plain and
corrugated brown wares, more kinds of intrusive wares, corner-notched arrowpoints until A.D. 1200, and side-notched triangular arrowpoints thereafter. The
Ochoa phase is dated at A.D. 1300 to 1450, and is characterized by jacallike surface

28

Texas Archeological Society

houses with rock and adobe foundations, locally made Ochoa Indented Brown
Ware, still more kinds of intrusive wares, and side-notched triangular arrowpoints.
In this Eastem Jomada sequenc e, the Querecho phase clearly is Early Neoindian.
The Maljamar phase appears to represent a transition from Early to Late Neoindian,
with a shift from comer-notched to side-notched arrowpoints in the middle of the
phase (at about A.D. 1200), and shifts from pit to surface houses and from local plain
and corrugated brownware to local indented brownware at the end of the phase
(about A.D. 1300).
All of the dates for the Eastern Jornada sequence are estimates based on various
intrusive types of earlier Mogollon and later Anasazi pottery 0~unyan and Hedrick
1987). Ages of some of the types--especially the earlier Mogollon types--are
merely estimates in themselves, and one wishes for some direct radiocarbon dating
of the Eastern Jomada manifestations. Although events in the Eastern Jomada
region did not necessarily occur at the same time as similar events in surrounding
regions, comparisons suggest that some of the estimates for the Eastern Jomada may
be a bit late. In the middle Pecos region (Jelinek 1967), the ceramic sequence has
been dated from A.D. 900 to 1300 rather than A.D. 950 to 1450, although the
replacement of comer-notched arrowpoints with the side-notched arrowpoints has
been dated at the same time (A.D. 1200) as in the Eastern Jomada sequence. The
ceramic sequence in the Guadalupe Mountains ~helps 1974) has been dated from
A.D. 850 to 1350. In the Hueco Basin beyond the Guadalupes (Whalen 1981), the
ceramic sequence has been dated from A.D. 1 to 1400, with a much earlier starting
date and with surface houses replacing pithouses between A.D. 1100 and 1200,
rather than at A.D. 1300 as in the Eastern Jomada. Finally, it is curious that
brownwares from the Mogollon seem to have reached the Panhandle Plains several
centuries earlier (about A.D. 200) than they reached the South Plains (about A.D.
950).
Since no evidence of horticulture has been found at Eastern Jomada sites, it has
been suggested (Collins 1971) that these sites represent people who managed to turn
a Late Archaic foraging existence under influences from Jornada Mogollon cultures
to the west, into a semisedentary lifestyle with villages and pottery, centered on the
spring-fed draws and playas of the southwestern Llano Estacado and based mainly
on hunting buffalo and gathering acorns. Collins notes, however, that in the Eastem
Jomada sequence (Jelinek 1967), bison were scarce during the earlier phases, until
about A.D. 1200. This accords well with the evidence from the Panhandle Plains and
from the Southern Plains in general (Dillehay 1974).
From the Red River drainage southward across the drainages of the Brazos and
Colorado rivers, along the eastern and southern margins and the uplands of the
Llano Estacado, at least a dozen tested and reported sites (and many reported but
untested sites) have yielded Scallom-like arrowpoints, sometimes without pottery
but usually with Mogollon plain brownwares that may be early, and occasionally
with painted types that are known to be early. Unfortunately, these Early Neoindian
materials are almost always mixed with later types of points and pottery and lack
radiocarbon dates. These components appear to represent the spread of Querecho-

Hughes m Prehistoric Cultural Developments

29

Maljamar influences entirely across the South Plains at an early date. (Perhaps Qu6
Mal would be an appropriate name for the complex!)
Along the western edge of the Southern High Plains, in eastern New Mexico,
the combination of corner-notched arrowpoints and plain brownware pottery
extends all the way up the Pecos Valley and across the low divide into the upper
Canadian drainage. In the Brantley Reservoir area below Carlsbad, Henderson
(1976) reports the combination in some of the 35 sites he assigns to his Ceramic
Period, which he estimates as starting at about A.D. 900. In the middle Pecos area
below Fort Sumner, Jelinek (1967) recorded 64 sites and found the combination in
the sites that he assigns to his 18 Mile and Mesita Negra phases, dating from A.D.
900 to 1200. In the Los Esteros Reservoir area above Santa Rosa, Mobley (1978)
found the combination in several sites that he assigns to his Pueblo Period, dating
from A.D. 900 to 1300. These include three tested and radiocarbon dated components: Stratum IIIA at Old Coyote shelter, dated earlier than A.D. 1096; Stratum II
at Helter shelter dated at A.D. 1158; and the Spillway site, dated at A.D. 1074 and
A.D. 1141. In the upper Canadian drainage, the combination was reported by
Roberts (1942) in the top level at the San Jon site; by Dick (1953) in one of two rock
shelters at the Hodges site near Tucumcari; and by Hammack (1965) at three sites
in the Ute Reservoir area north of Tucumcari, including the top Level 1 at site
LA5573.
From the above review, it is now apparent that during the Early Neoindian
substage, Scallorn-like and other barbed arrowpoints blanketed the entire Southem
High Plains and bordering areas and that the Canadian River breaks were the
meeting ground for Woodland cordmarked pottery from the north and Mogollon
plain brown ware from the south, and perhaps for the exchange of important ideas
between the bearers of these two radically different ceramic traditions of widely
separated origins.
LATE NEOINDIAN
(About A.D. 1100 to 1541)
The phase of the Late Neoindian on the Texas High Plains is defined as starting
at about A.D. 1100 with the appearance of side-notched triangular arrowpoints
(Washita, Harrell), which together with other triangular arrowpoints (Fresno),
become the principal diagnostic artifacts of the substage. As indicated previously,
the initial date of about A.D. 1100 splits the difference between about A.D. 1000,
when a Woodland/Village transition was underway in the northern part of the
Panhandle Plains, and about A.D. 1200, when a pit-to-surface-house transition was
underway in the southwestern part of the South Plains.
In the Panhandle Plains, the Woodland-Village transition involved not only a
shift from barbed arrowpoints to side-notched triangular arrowpoints, but also many
more important if less diagnostic changes, including expanded bison hunting and
corn-bean-squash horticulture, growing populations in many homesteads, hamlets,
and villages, increasing complexity in architecture and in stone, bone, shell, and
ceramic technology, intensified exploitation of the Alibates agate quarries, and a

30

Texas Archeological Society

growing trade network, especially with the Anasazi pueblos of northem New
Mexico.
In the South Plains, the shift from comer-notched arrowpoints to side-notched
triangular arrowpoints, and from pithouses to surface houses, seems to have been
accompanied by similar but somewhat less spectacular changes, including increased bison hunting, more numerous villages with more numerous and complex
structures, some technological innovations, and more Anasazi as well as Mogollon
trade.
Although the arrival of the Coronado expedition on the High Plains in 1541
may mark the beginning of the historic stage, this event is more an arbitrary than a
real terminus for the Late Neoindian substage of cultural development, which did
not really end until the acquisition of horses by the Plains Indians in the late 1600s
initiated what was perhaps the greatest cultural revolution in their long history--the
Historic stage.
The small, thin, sharp, side-notched triangular arrowpoint seems to be a
perfected bison-killing point designed for quick manufacture, damage resistance,
and deep penetration; it is less significant in itself than as a readily recognizable
signal of the renewed importance of bison hunting on the Texas High Plains. It
seems to have come out of the northwestern Great Plains (Kehoe 1966) and to have
been moving southward down the Southern High Plains from about A.D. 1000 in
the north to about A.D. 1200 in the south, perhaps together with the returning bison,
and only a century or two ahead of various Apache groups who were following the
bison herds southward.
The triangular arrowpoint seems to have been accompanied on its southward
journey by the lozenge-shaped Harahey knife with its four alternately beveled
cutting edges, which appears to be a perfected bison skinning and butchering knife
designed for prolonged use before having to be resharpened (Sollberger 1971).
At least four main complexes are recognizable on the Texas High Plains during
the Late Neoindian substage: in the Panhandle Plains, the Antelope Creek focus of
the Plains Village tradition, followed by a proposed Tierra Blanca complex
representing an Apache group; and in the South Plains, the Ochoa phase of the
Eastern Jomada sequence, followed by the Garza complex, which appears to
represent another Apache group. A fifth complex has recently been postulated in the
northeastern Panhandle--the Buried City complex (D. Hughes 1987, 1989).
The Antelope Creek Focus
Although a great deal remains to be learned about this complex, it is much better
known than any other complex on the Texas High Plains and has been described so
thoroughly and summarized so frequently that it will be given only minimal
consideration in this paper.
The type site of this complex was on Antelope Creek, a south-side tributary of
the Canadian River in Hutchinson County, in the oil fields between Fritch and
Borger (Krieger 1946). A few years ago the extensive ruins were almost totally
wiped out with a pass or two by a curious bulldozer operator during a lunch break

Hughes ~ Prehistoric Cultural Developments

31

from work on a nearby pipeline project. The Antelope Creek focus is marked by an
association of many distinctive traits, including slab-house ruins, Borger Cordmarked pottery, triangular Washita, Harrell, and Fresno arrowpoints, "guitar-pick"
arrowpoint preforms, large, oval-to-lozenge-shaped beveled knives, flake-base
drills, large, thin end scrapers, big, thick grinding slabs with deep, oval basins, bison
tibia, scapula, and rib tools, and mussel shell scrapers, among many other characteristic artifacts.
Hundreds of Antelope Creek components have been recorded, and many of
these have been described in survey reports; nearly all of the sites have been
vandalized, often beyond salvation. Scores of sites have been tested, and dozens of
these have been described in excavation reports; few of the reports are scientifically
adequate. Antelope Creek components are concentrated mainly in the Canadian
breaks in the central part of the Texas Panhandle, but they are found at many other
places in the Panhandle Plains, southward into the Red River drainage, westward
into northeastern New Mexico, northward into the Oklahoma Panhandle, where
similar remains have been assigned to the Optima focus (Watson 1950), and
eastward toward the edges of the High Plains, where they mingle with components
of the Washita River focus in the eastem Texas Panhandle.
A great many Antelope Creek components have been dated by radiocarbon
analyses and by Anasazi trade pottery. The dates range from the 1100s into the
1500s with most of them falling between A.D. 1200 and 1450, the dates usually
given for the focus (Baerreis and Bryson 1965; Lintz 1978b).
Most of the Antelope Creek sites are slab-house ruins at isolated homesteads,
small hamlets, and large villages. The ruins are found mainly in the Canadian
breaks, where the sites are so dense that when they were inhabited, the smoke of
several neighboring settlements would have been visible from most of the settlements, but the ruins are known as far south as the Tule Canyon in Briscoe County.
Some of the sites appear to be hunting camps, in the open and in rockshelters, and
at least one of the open camps, as far south as the Little Red River in Briscoe County,
is associated with a bison kill. Most of the hundreds of quarry pits at the well-known
Alibates quarries, which are surrounded by large mining, manufacturing, and
trading villages of the Antelope Creek focus, doubtless were dug by these people.
The ruins of the Antelope Creek settlements are found in many kinds of
locations--along rivers and creeks, around headsprings and pouroff pools, in
canyons and valleys, sometimes on highly defensible mesas and buttes (later,
Apache-period fortresses?), but more often on indefensible ridges, bluffs, benches,
and terraces (earlier, pre-Apache habitations?). Antelope Creek ruins may comprise
from one to scores of structures. The dwellings generally were beautifully designed
for serving environmental and social needs with available materials and technology.
Many of the structures are large, rectangular, semisubterranean houses with vertical
slabs lining the walls of the excavation, an east-west traffic channel with a central
firepit surrounded by holes for four roof-support posts, wide benches along both
sides of the channel for working and sleeping, a household altar bench or niche at
the west end of the channel, a slab-lined entry tunnel at the east end of the channel,

32

Texas Archeological Society

small storage rooms adjoining the tunnel, large bell-shaped storage pits outside the
tunnel exit, and a trash dump beyond.
The architecture of the Antelope Creek ruins is highly variable (Lintz 1984).
The structures range from separate to contiguous, small to large, square to round,
deep to shallow, and with or without some or all of the aforementioned features, plus
others, depending apparently on resources and functions, experiments and idiosyncrasies, and spatiotemporal style changes. Perhaps much of the architectural
variability reflects a coalescence of diverse building ideas--not only from Mogollon
and Anasazi influences, but also from Apishapa and Upper Republican refugees-added to local traditions.
Middens consist largely of ashes, boiling pebble fragments, animal bones,
waste flakes, pot sherds, and discarded tools, except that in the industrial villages
around the quarries they consist chiefly of debris from reduction of big, thick,
bifacial quarry blanks. The faunal remains are mostly splinters of crushed and boiled
bison bones, but many kinds of smaller game are represented. Charred remains of
corn, beans, squash, and other plants have been recovered.
Many burials have been found under floors, in cache pits, and in sizeable graves
partially filled with rocks. The skeletons are usually flexed and are seldom
accompanied by more than a few personal possessions, except that the bison tibia
dibble blades that were used to dig the graves were consistently left among the rocks
in the grave fill (so these implements of death would not be used in gardening?).
Some comparative typological studies have been made on the skulls, which are
distinctively round and high.
The technology in stone, bone, shell, and pottery is rich and varied, practical,
resourceful, and skillful. It gives the impression of thorough and effective exploitation of every material available. The chipped stone tools often exhibit the
consummate craftsmanship of full-time professional flintknappers. The large, thin,
sharp, oval knives are on a par with the best flint work anywhere in the world. An
array of specialized knapping tools of stone, bone, and antler awaits expert study.
Small elbow pipes were laboriously carved from a hard pinkish siltstone, at least
some of which evidently came from nodules in the Triassic redbeds around
Landergin Mesa. Paired shaft-smoothers and grooved awl-sharpeners of sandstone
are among the several kinds of grinding tools. Bison tibia hoes, scapula trowels, rib
rasps, and various kinds of awls and punches are common among the bone tools.
Mussel shells were used for several kinds of tools and ornaments. Many kinds of
beads and pendants were made from stone, bone, and shell; Olivella shell beads
were favorites.
The Borger Cordmarked cooking pots were thoroughly functional: large,
undecorated, ollalike vessels, wide mouthed for easy filling and emptying, highnecked for control of boiling, globular-bodied for maximum volume with minimum
dimensions, round bottomed for stability on small firepits and soft ground, part
tempered with angular fragments of crushed quartzose boiling pebbles for strong
bonding with clay, thin walls compacted with a nonsticking cord-wrapped paddle
for more strength and less weight, and cord-roughened exteriors to increase the

Hughes ~ Prehistoric Cultural Developments

33

surface area for faster heating with less fuel. Exotic items of many kinds indicate a
strong trade network, especially with the Anasazi Pueblos to the west; obsidian,
turquoise, painted pottery, and Olivella shell beads are some of the more common
intrusives. Without much doubt, Alibates agate was the principal export.
The terminal culture of the Antelope Creek focus is basically so similar to that
of many of other late prehistoric villagers in the Southern and Central Great Plains,
who appear to have evolved into the historic Caddoan-speaking Kichai, Wichita,
Pawnee, and Arikara tribes in different parts of the plains that the linguistic and
ethnic affiliations of the group seem most likely to have been Caddoan (Hughes
1968). Future studies of the economic, social, and religious patterns implicit in the
Antelope Creek evidence may therefore benefit greatly from the careful use of
analogy with the ethnography of the historic Plains Caddoans.
The Antelope Creek focus in the Texas Panhandle may have been rooted in the
Lake Creek complex, just as Village cultures elsewhere in the Plains seem to have
evolved out of local Woodland cultures. In the Panhandle, however, the development may have received some special stimuli, at first from Mogollon, and later from
Anasazi sources. Whether or not the Palo Duro complex was also involved in this
development remains to be explored. Horticultural improvements, fortuitously
coupled with an abundance of bison, seem to have promoted a rapid population
increase, which may have been augmented by increases of related Apishapa and
Upper Republican groups escaping from the drought at about A. D. 1300 in eastern
Colorado and western Nebraska and Kansas, as some writers have suggested
(Campbell 1976, Baerreis and Bryson 1965).
There is considerable circumstantial evidence to suggest that an Antelope
Creek focus thus strengthened may have constituted a final holdout of the Caddoan
villagers on the High Plains until about the middle of the fifteenth century, when
increasingly hostile relationships with less sedentary trading together with raiding
Apache immigrants forced a withdrawal to the northeast to join other Plains
Caddoan relatives in fortified villages on the Arkansas and Platte (Hughes 1968).
The Ochoa Phase
Although it is not nearly so well known, the Ochoa phase seems to represent
a development on the South Plains somewhat similar to but less spectacular than that
of the Antelope Creek focus in the Panhandle Plains. As indicated earlier, the Late
Neoindian Ochoa phase is thought to have evolved out of the Early Neoindian
Querecho phase via a brief transitional Maljamar phase as part of an Eastern Jornada
sequence on the South Plains.
The Ochoa phase has been identified at most of the sites where the earlier
phases are recognizable; it is generally much better represented than they are, and
is found at additional sites as well. The phase is marked mainly by a shift from
pithouses to jaeallike surface houses with stone and adobe foundations, increased
dependence on bison, side-notched arrowpoints rather than corner-notched arrowpoints, beveled knives, locally made Ochoa Indented Brown Ware replacing locally

34

Texas Archeological Society

made plain and corrugated brownwares, and increased quantities and varieties of
imported Mogollon and Anasazi painted wares.
Late Neoindian trade in the South Plains was not exclusively Puebloan. Sherds
of shell-tempered Nocona Plain from the Henrietta focus of North Cenlral Texas,
of clay-tempered Bullard Brushed from the Frankston focus of East Texas (or Little
Deer Brushed from the Wheeler complex of western Oklahoma), and bonetempered Leon Plain and Doss Red Ware from the Toyah focus of Central Texas
have been found at several sites, especially along the eastern fringes of the Llano
Estacado, but also far to the west in the valleys on the uplands. The Puebloan trade
potter/indicates a span of A.D. 1300 to 1450 for the Ochoa phase. If these dates are
reliable, the Ochoa phase may have been a holdout in the South Plains as the
Antelope Creek focus was in the Panhandle Plains. The terminal dates that have
been proposed for all of the local ceramic sequences from southeastern New Mexico
northward into southeastern Colorado form a remarkably consistent pattern: A.D.
1350 for the Late Ceramic phase in the Guadalupe Mountains (Phelps 1974), A.D.
1300 for the McKenzie phase in the middle Pecos valley (Jelinek 1967), A.D. 1300
for the Pueblo Period in Los Esteros Reservoir (Mobley 1978), A.D. 1300 for the
Cimarron phase in the Cimarron district (Kirkpatrick 1976), and A.D. 1300 for the
Apishapa focus on the Chaquaqua Plateau (Campbell 1976).
In most of these localities, there are some later materials that have been
tentatively identified as representing one Apache group or another. Were the
Antelope Creek and Ochoa people like islands in an encroaching sea of alternately
trading and raiding Apaches, who were spreading rapidly southward down the
foothills and plains at about A.D. 1300 and forcing small isolated frontier Tanoan
groups westward to their mountain pueblos and similar Caddoan groups eastward
to their prairie villages or southward into the Canadian breaks? Was some of the
Puebloan exchange manifested in the Antelope Creek and Ochoa cultures mediated
by Apaches? Did the Great Drought of A.D. 1276 to 1299 in the Southwest have
the same effect on the tiny Puebloan settlements of the eastern frontier along the
Rocky Mountain foothills that it had on the mighty cliff-dwellings and pueblos in
the Four Corners country?
One of the most fascinating problems remaining in the prehistory of the
Western Great Plains is how the Tanoan-speaking Kiowa became bison-hunting
Plains nomads closely allied with the Athapascan-speaking Kiowa Apache. Jelinek
(1967) has suggested the possibility of Kiowa-Kiowa Apache roots in the McKenzie phase of A.D. 1200 to 1300 on the middle Pecos. The Ochoa phase of A.D. 1300
to 1450 on the South Plains would seem to be another likely possibility, perhaps
even more likely.
Apache Complexes
Evidence that has been coming to light with increasing frequency in recent
years seems to indicate that Apache occupation on the Texas High Plains may be
represented by materials that are separable into two distinguishable complexes: a
Tierra Blanca complex in the Panhandle Plains and a Garza complex in the South

Hughes ~ Prehistoric Cultural Developments

35

Plains. Although the two complexes are identifiable at a great many sites scattered
over their respective regions, much more work must be done before either can be
characterized in any detail.
The type sites for the Tierra Blanca complex are the Tierra Blanca ruin on the
creek of that name in Deaf Smith County (Holden 1931; Spielmann 1982, 1983),
and the Fifth Green site on Palo Duro Creek in Randall County (Kalokowski n.d.).
The complex seems to be manifested at two kinds of sites: some, like the Tierra
Blanca ruin, are large villages marked mainly by stone foundations of jacallike
structures, triangular side-and-base-notched Harrell, side-notched Washita, and
unnotched Fresno and Talco-like arrowpoints, and much Anasazi trade material,
including many sherds of glaze-polychrome and plain utility ware. Others, like the
Fifth Green site, are small camps marked mainly by the same kind of utility ware
accompanying the same kinds of arrowpoints.
The utility ware resembles Apachean Perdido Plain (Gunnerson 1971) and
Puebloan Pecos faint-striated; it has recently been defined as Tierra Blanca Plain
(Habicht-Manche 1987). The vessels were small, squat, olla-shaped cooking pots
of the kind that might be worth taking along on hunting trips. The sherds are thin and
dark, smooth and hard, with temper of fine sand, usually micaceous.
The Tierra Blanca complex seems to represent a semisedentary and seminomadic, bison-hunting and possibly corn-growing people who were much involved
in trade with the Anasazi pueblos, with sites like Tierra Blanca their base villages
and sites like Fifth Green their hunting camps. Several of the base villages have been
recorded, mainly along Tierra Blanca Creek and Palo Duro Canyon, but only a few
have been tested, and only two of the excavations have been reported. Many of the
hunting camps have been recorded in various parts of the Panhandle Plains, and
more than a dozen of these sites have been described in survey reports; a few have
been tested and reported.
Some of the base villages of the Tierra Blanca complex, including the type site,
are in exposed locations on valley or canyon rims. Others are on broad terraces in
sheltered parts of the canyons. Exposed sites like the Tierra Blanca ruin may have
been summer villages, whereas the more protected sites may have been winter
villages. The Tierra Blanca village overlooks a broad floodplain in a well-watered
part of the creek valley; charred corn was found in the excavations.
The glazewares from some of the base villages have been identified as mainly
glazes C and D, dating at about A.D. 1450 and 1500. Radiocarbon dates have been
determined for two probable components of the Tierra Blanca complex: A.D. 1550
and 1650 for the top Level 1 at the Canyon City Club Cave (Hughes 1969), and A.D.
1590 for the South Mouth site in the lower part of Tule Canyon (Katz and Katz
1976). The descriptions of the bison-hunting Querechos encountered on the
Panhandle-Plains by the Coronado expedition in 1541 and of the corn-growing
Faraones discovered by the Onate expedition in 1601 probably constitute eyewitness accounts of the lifestyle of the Tierra Blanca complex in both of its two main
aspects.

36

Texas Archeological Society

The type site for the Garza complex is the site of that name in Garza County
~unkles 1964). A review of much of the data available for the Gavza complex has
been published (Johnson et al. 1977). The complex seems to be marked by Harrell,
Washita, Fresno, and Talco-like arrowpoints and by glaze-polychrome and plain
utility ware like that of the Tierra Blanca complex, but to have two additional distinctive arrowpoint types, the base-notched triangular Garza and Lott points, which
are rare to absent in the Panhandle Plains, and to lack evidence of fixed dwellings,
at least at any of the known components ~unkles 1964; Word 1991, this volume).
At the Bridwell site, which is enclosed by a large, low, circular mound, glazepolychrome sherds dating as early as the 1300s were found (Parker 1982). Was the
mound formed by blowsand trapped in a brush pile surrounding a winter tipi camp?
Survey reports indicate that scores of Garza components have been encountered all over the South Plains; at least a dozen components have been described in
excavation reports. Some of the components, including the type site, have produced
no pottery; some, like the Lubbock Lake site (Johnson et al. 1977), have produced
only utility ware; a few, like the Montgomery site (Word 1965; Northern 1979),
have produced both utility ware and large quantities of gl~e-polychrome sherds.
This suggests that the Garza complex has the same kind of hunting camp/base
village contrast as the Tierra Blanca complex.
Glaze-polychrome pottery at some of the Garza components suggests approximate contemporaneity with the Tierra Blanca complex. The gl~eware of the
Montgomery site is mainly E and F, dating from A.D. 1550 to 1700. Two
radiocarbon dates of A.D. 1635 and 1665 for the Garza components (three camping
areas and one processing station) at the Lubbock Lake site may be as much as 50
years too young (Johnson et al. 1977:105).
The Tierra Blanca complex in the Panhandle Plains and the Garza complex in
the South Plains appear to represent two main groups of late prehistoric to early
historic Apaches on the Texas High Plains, traceable perhaps to the Lipans and
Mescaleros of later historic time. It should be noted, however, that Baugh (1986),
in redefining the protohistoric Wheeler complex of western Oklahoma, suggests
that the Garza complex may be a westward extension of the Wheeler complex, since
Wheeler components sometimes have Garza arrowpoints, and Garza components
sometimes have pottery identified as Edwards Plain and Little Deer Plain and
Decorated, characteristic of the Wheeler complex. If the Garza complex is not
Apache, there is the intriguing possibility that it as well as the Wheeler complex
represents the Teyas, probable Caddoan-spcakers found by Coronado in the
barrancas to the southeast of their Querecho enemies. The Teyas directed Coronado
to the Quiviran Wichitas in Kansas, who were painted like the Teyas and otherwise
resembled them.
SUMMARY
An effort has been made here to assess the present state of our knowledge of
prehistoric cultural developments on the Texas High Plains during Paleoindian,

Hughes m Prehistoric Cultural Developments

37

Archaic, and Neoindian times and to explore the possible effects on those
developments of changes in the regional environment and in the surrounding
cultures.
This synthesis is based on archeological investigations spanning all but the first
and last few years of the twentieth century. Archeological research started earlier
in the Texas High Plains than is some other parts of the state but has been pursued
less intensively. As elsewhere in Texas, however, the research has been accelerating
since midcentury, and enough progress has now been made with descriptive
archeology (who, what, where, and when) to permit some beginnings on explanatory archeology (the how and why).
The Texas High Plains are part of a huge piedmont-plateau comprising the
northwestern one-sixth of the state, looming over the Rolling Plains to the east and
the Edwards Plateau to the southeast, seemingly level on top but actually sloping
toward the east in the Panhandle and to the southeast in the South Plains (see Figure
1). This vast plateau, with its high rugged edges and flat uplands (the landscape, like
the weather, is mostly mild but sometimes harsh) may seem like a barrier between
the prairies and forests to the east and the mountains and basins to the west, but in
reality it appears to have been more of a bridge than a barrier to prehistoric foottravelers, since ample evidence indicates that it was traversed both eastward and
westward by most of the native cultures from Paleoindian through Historic times.
The Texas High Plains are breached by the Canadian breaks across the
Panhandle, and southward the uplands are interrupted by the shallow eastward- and
southeastward-draining valleys of the headwater tributaries of the Red, Brazos, and
Colorado rivers. These watercourses must have been like highways for east-west
travelers and like rest stops for north-south trekkers. The intervening plains are
dotted with thousands of playa lake basins that should have facilitated travel in all
directions except during severe droughts.
There is a variety of vegetation along the watercourses, but over the thousands
of square miles of level uplands between the valleys there was nothing but short
grasses, and bison were about the only resource--but what a resource[
The valleys and canyons on and around the Texas High Plains have several
kinds of megascopically distinguishable lithic resources that provide unusually
favorable opportunities for lithic analyses and paleocultural interpretations.
Just as short-range weather changes strongly affect life on the Texas High
Plains in modern times, so did long-range climatic cycles affect life during
prehistoric times, especially since the uplands were little more than a great buffalo
pasture-essentially a single-resource region. Increasingly numerous and varied
kinds of paleoenvironmental studies seem to be approaching a consensus on the
general trends of prehistoric climatic changes, but not yet on specific events and
times (see Table 1). From about 11,000 years ago (circa. 9,500 B.C.) until around
6,000 B.C., there was an Anathermal climate, which was much cooler and wetter
than the present. This climate moderated slowly, very gradually becoming less cool
and wet.

38

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

Table 1. A Chronology of Hunting Cultures
on the Southern High Plains of Texas.

9,500 B.C.-Anathermal climate. Much cooler and wetter than now; LatePleistocene
fauna: mammoth, horse, camel, giant bison; Early Paleoindian substage; freeroaming mannoth hunters; mass kills with lances; Llano culture; fluted Clovis
points.
8,000 B.C.-Anathermal climate continues. Less cool and wet; Late Pleistocene
fauna extinct except giant bison; Middle Paleoindian substage; free-roaming giantbison hunters; mass kills with lances; Folsom, Plainview, and similar cultures;
fluted Folsom points, unfluted Plainview points, and others.
6,000 B.C.-Anathermal climate ending. Less cool and wet; giant and modem
bison; Late Paleoindian substage; free-roaming bison hunters; mass kills, some with
lances, some with atlatls; Piano cultures; parallel-flaked points of several types,
some stemless lance points like Texas Angostura, and some shouldered dart points
like Scottsbluff.
5,000-2,000 B.C.-Altithermal climate. The Long Drouth--much wanner and
drier than present climate; bison scarce; Early to Middle Archaic substage; territorial foragers; cultures like Bitter Creek, with barbed dart points like Bulverde, and
Clear Fork gouges; barren summit of High Plains virtually abandoned in favor of
brush breaks of the Rolling Plains; much use of hearthstones and boiling pebbles.
2,000 B.C.-A.D. 200.-Medithermal (modern) climate begins. Bison abundant;
Late Archaic substage; foraging and renewed bison hunting; mass kills with atlatls;
cultures like Little Sunday, with comer-notched dart points like Williams and Ellis,
on the High Plains as well as the Rolling Plains; much use of bison-processing tools
(trianguloid knives, end scrapers) and food-grinding implements (milling stones).
A.D. 200-1100.-Medithermal climate continues. Somewhat cooler and wetter
than present; bison scarce; Early Neoindian or Ceramic substage; semisedenatry
foraging, deer-hunting with bow and arrow, incipient horticulture; Plains Woodland cultures from Red River northward, like Lake Creek in the Texas Panhandle
and Custer in western Oklahoma, with conical cordmarked cooking pots and barbed
arrowpoints like Scallom; Palo Duro culture in the Texas Panhandle, with Mogollon
plain brownware trade pottery and barbed arrowpoints like Deadman; Querecho
ctflture (early pit house phase of Eastern Jornada branch of Southwestern Mogollon)
tradition) on southwestern Llano Estacado, with plain brownware and Scallorn-like
arrowpoints.

Hughes -- Prehistoric Cultural Developments

39

A.D. ll00-1500.-Medithermal climate continues. Turning warmer and drier;
bison abundant. Late Ceramic substage; village-based bison hunting, developed
horticulture (corn, beans, squash); Plains village (Caddoan) cultures like Anasaziinfluenced Antelope Creek in the Texas Panhandle, with Borger Cordmarked
pottery; Washita River in western Oklahoma, with Lindsay Plain; and Henrietta in
North Central Texas, with Nacona Plain pottery; globular-bodied, wide-mouthed
cooking pots; Ochoa culture (late surface-house phase of Eastern Jornada) on the
southern Llano Estacado, with Ochoa Indented; all villagers with perfected bisonhunting Washita arrowpoints (side-notched triangular) and bison-butchering Harahey knives (diamond-shaped beveled); various bison-bone tools, large bison-bone
middens.
About A.D. 1300-1700.-Continued warm and dry. Bison still abundant; Late
Prehistoric to Historic stage; foot-nomad to horse-nomad bison hunting; Apache
cultures like Tierra Blanca in Panhandle and possibly Garza in South Plains;
triangular arrowpoints like Harrell and Garza; Anasazi trade wares like Rio Grande
Glaze polychrome, Tierra Blanca Plain.
1700-1874. Continued warm and dry.-Bison still abundant; horse-nomad bison
hunting by Comanche bands in northwestern Texas; short bows, metal-tipped
arrows; Hispanics from New Mexico visiting the region seasonally as ciboleros
(mounted bison hunters with large iron lance points), comancberos (Comanche
traders), and pastores (sheepherders).
1870s.-Southern Plains bison being exterminated by Anglo hunters with modern
rifles; 1874-The Red River Wars, Comanche placed on Oklahoma reservations;
1876-Cattle ranching begins.

Much evidence supports the concept of an Altithermal Long Drought from
about 5000 to 2000 B.C., when bison (and people) were scarce (because of too little
short grass?), and of a mesic interval during most of the first millennium A.D., when
bison (but not people) were scarce (this time because of too much tall grass?).
The various cultural sequences that have been proposed for the Texas High
Plains and surrounding regions generally are based on essentially the same four
main temporal units (Early, Middle, and Late Prehistoric, and Historic), but these
units are still somewhat variably named, defined, and dated. Significantly, the least
variability occurs in treatments of the Paleoindian stage, no doubt reflecting the
free-roaming, far-ranging nature of the late Pleistocene big-game-hunting cultures.
In sharp contrast to the abundant evidence of Paleoindian presence on the
Southern High Plains, including the Texas part, the evidence for Early and Middle
Archaic presence during the Altithermal is scarce, and the much more abundant
evidence of Late Archaic hunters-gatherers has not yet received the attention it

40

Texas Archeological Society

deserves. In the bordering regions to east and west, the Archaic sequence seems to
be more complete but is still poorly known; to the south and southeast in TransPecos and Central Texas, the entire Archaic stage is well represented and much
investigated, especially in Central Texas, where there is good evidence for transitional Paleoindian/Archaic cultures.
The Neoindian sequence in the Panhandle Plains generally resembles the
sequences in the neighboring regions to the north, east, and west; Plains Woodland
complexes followed by Plains Villages components, all of the sequences being
marked by a shift from Late Archaic barbed dart points for bison hunting to
Woodland barbed arrowpoints for deer hunting at circa A.D. 1 to 200, and another
shift to Village triangular arrowpoints for renewed bison hunting at about A.D. 1000
to 1100. It seems likely that all of these changes involved groups ancestral to historic
Plains Caddoan-speaking tribes. A far west exception to this general picture is the
Anasazi Basketmaker-Pueblo sequence in the Canadian River headwaters region in
the Sierra Madre foothills.
On the South Plains and surrounding regions, the Neoindian sequences are
more varied. To the west of the South Plains and up onto the southwestern part of
the plains are early (pithouse) to late (surface house) Jornada Mogollon complexes,
with the sequences marked by shifts in projectile point styles comparable to those
to the north, but generally somewhat later. The Mogollon-influenced Palo Duro
complex, stretching from the Canadian breaks southward along the eastern Caprock
escarpment of the Llano Estacado, was coeval with Woodland and early Mogollon
complexes. In Central Texas, to the southeast of the South Plains, the "Late
Prehistoric" sequence begins with a shift from barbed dart points to barbed
arrowpoints, as elsewhere, but possibly later. At about A.D. 1300, new styles of
barbed arrowpoints and some triangular arrowpoints appear. In the Rolling Plains
to the east and in the Trans-Pecos region to the south, the shift is to triangular
arrowpoints about this time.
Available evidence (in the form of dated remains, early dart point types, and
Clear Fork gouges) for an Early to Middle Archaic presence on the Southern High
Plains in Texas and elsewhere indicates that the upland valleys and basins were
seldom visited during the Altithermal Long Drought, and that if the sheltered,
spring-fed breaks along the eastern and northern edges of the Llano Estacado were
more frequently occupied than the uplands, Altithermal arroyo-scouting may have
removed most of the remains.
With the end of the Long Drought at about 2000 B.C., it seems that grass and
bison began returning to the uplands of the Southern High Plains, followed by
groups who had been developing a foraging lifestyle involving several new
technologies, in the comparatively resource-rich environments of the neighboring
broken lands since the end of Paleoindian big game hunting. Coming mainly,
perhaps, from the Rolling Plains to the east and the Edwards Plateau to the southeast,
these groups apparently started a revival of Paleoindian bison hunting techniques
which, added to their Early Archaic foraging strategies, enabled them to develop a
new, highly efficient hunting-gathering lifeway that led to a Late Archaic population

Hughes ~ Prehistoric Cultural Developments

41

increase and endured for at least two millennia. The Little Sunday complex in the
Palo Duro Canyon area may be representative of this Late Archaic substage on the
Texas High Plains.
In the breaks of the eastern and southeastern Panhandle are numerous arroyotrap bison kills with barbed dart points, like the Twilla site near Turkey, Texas. Since
some of these kills have been radiocarbon-dated to between 90 B.C. and A.D. 970,
it has been suggested that they may be Woodland rather than Late Archaic in age
(Lintz et al. 1991, this volume). The dates may be too late, however, since they are
on bone, which is notoriously unreliable (cf. Cox and Smith 1991, this volume).
Bison bone is abundant at most Late Archaic camps, but it is scarce at most
Woodland campsites in the region.
The masses of bison bones in most of these kills are deeply buffed at the heads
of old arroyos, where they are exposed in the cutbanks of modern arroyos that have
eroded headward and somewhat beyond along the courses of the earlier healed-over
arroyos. These circumstances indicate that the kills took place near the end of the
last episode of arroyo-cutting (xeric interval) before the present climate and just
before an episode of arroyo-filling (mesic interval). Bison must have been extremely abundant and killing extremely effective during this xeric interval, since
butchering is minimal at most of the sites. The mesic interval seems likely to be the
one that spanned most of the first millennium A.D. More reliable dating of these
very significant kills is sorely needed.
It appears that with the onset of cooler and moister conditions on the Southern
High Plains near the beginning of the Christian era, the many bison herds on which
Late Archaic foragers depended for much of their subsistence began to disappear
from the region, and a new lifestyle, which can be labeled Early Neoindian, began
to evolve. This transition is marked not only by increasing numbers of deer remains
over bison remains in the campsites, but also by increasing numbers of barbed
arrowpoints over barbed dart points, implying changes not only in the principal
game being hunted but also in the main weapons and techniques being employed.
Coevally, the appearance of pottery throughout the region--of the Woodland
tradition in the north and the Mogollon tradition in the south--suggests a shift to a
less nomadic existence. This inference is more directly supported by evidence of
houses at some of the Woodland components and especially at some of the
Mogollon components. Although it seems likely that some horticultural experimentation was beginning at this time, little or no direct evidence of incipient gardening
has yet been reported.
In the Panhandle Plains area, Late Archaic complexes such as Little Sunday
were being replaced by Woodland complexes such as Lake Creek and by Mogolloninfluenced complexes such as Palo Duro. In the South Plains, Late Archaic
complexes such as Hueco were being replaced by Mogollon complexes such as
Querecho/Maljamar. The frequent present of Mogollon brownware at Woodland
sites in the Texas Panhandle suggests that the region may have played a significant
role in an exchange of horticultural, housing, and other important ideas between the

42

Texas Archeological Society

Woodland tradition to the north and east and the Mogollon tradition to the south and
west during Early Neoindian times.
Toward the end of the first millennium A.D., it appears that the mesic interlude
on the Southern High Plains was giving way to a wanning and drying trend that
continues to this day. Bison herds evidently began returning to the region in
increasing numbers, perhaps attracted by a renewed dominance of nutritious short
grasses on the uplands. The herds may have been spreading southward from the
Northwestern Great Plains, where--in contrast to the Southern High Plains--they
were abundant throughout the first millennium A.D. This is indicated by many bison
kills attributed to the Avonlea complex, which is marked by the earliest known
appearance of Washita-like arrowpoints and Harahey-like knives. The Avonlea
complex may represent former Arctic caribou-hunting Athapascans who were
migrating southward during the early Christian era into Montana and Wyoming,
where they perfected this specialized tool kit for killing and butchering bison.
As the first millennium A.D. was ending on the Southern High Plains, a new
millennium was beginning both literally and figuratively. It seems likely that the
southward-migrating bison herds were accompanied by the southward-diffusing
tool kit, and that the bison herds were so abundant and the tool kit was so effective
that by A.D. 1000 the Early Neoindian Plains Woodland deer-hunting campers were
rapidly being transformed into Late Neoindian sedentary bison-hunters, represented by complexes such as Upper Republican, Apishapa, Optima, and--in the
Texas Panhandle---Buffed City and Antelope Creek. Sedentary hunting is a rare
phenomenon, perhaps best exemplified elsewhere in this country by the marinemammal-hunting villages of the Northwest Coast.
Bison must have been so numerous that individual animals could be taken as
needed from herds surrounding the villages. Kill sites are rare, and household
middens are full of bison bones representing all parts of the animals, which suggests
that they were often procured at no great distance from home.
On the Texas South Plains, a comparable transition was taking place in the
Eastern Jornado Mogollon sequence at a somewhat later date, around A.D. 1200,
producing the Late Neoindian Ochoa complex. Meanwhile, along the eastern
Caprock escarpment of the Llano Estacado, the deer-hunting Palo Duro complex,
with Scallorn and Deadman arrowpoints, may have been drifting southward to
become the bison-hunting Toyah complex of Central and West Texas, with Perdiz
and Toyah arrowpoints. At some Palo Duro components along the southern part of
the scarp, Deadman points seem to be changing into Perdiz points.
In the Rolling Plains to the east, similar Plains Village developments were
producing the Washita phase in western Oklahoma and the Henrietta focus in North
Central Texas. To the west, Jornada Mogollon surface-house village complexes
were developing along the Pecos River valley in eastern New Mexico and spreading
northward into the upper Canadian River drainage in northeastern New Mexico,
whereas frontier Anasazi Pueblo settlements were being established in both
drainages along the Rocky Mountain foothills.

Hughes ~ Prehistoric Cultural Developments

43

During the next two or three centuries, on the Southern High Plains and in the
prairies to the northeast and east, there was a florescence of the bison-based Plains
Village tradition, as populations increased and countless homesteads, hamlets, and
villages appeared. A far-flung trade network developed among the villagers and
with the Pueblos to the west, contributing to significant horticultural, architectural,
and other innovations in material, social, and ideological culture.
By the A.D. 1300s, however, the Apishapa and Upper Republican villages to
the north and northeast were disappearing, as were the Anasazi and Mogollon
pueblos to the west, while the first traces of Apachean bison-hunting nomads were
appearing in those regions and on the Texas High Plains as well. Although the Great
Drought of A.D. 1276 to 1299 in the Southwest may have been partly responsible
for these abandonments, a great southward movement of the sometimes trading,
sometimes raiding Southern Athapascans down the mountain-plains borderlands
seems likely to have been the main factor.
The foothill Puebloans probably withdrew westward, seeking refuge among
the large pueblos in the mountains; some of the Apishapa and Upper Republican
villagers may have retreated southward, forming a coalescence with their Antelope
Creel< kindred in a kind of great refugium along the Canadian breaks in the
Panhandle Plains (Campbell 1976). As of now, this postulated coalescence is based
mainly on circumstantial evidence such as a shift in Antelope Creek architectural
styles at about A.D. 1300 (Lintz 1978b, 1984). The hypothesis needs to be tested by
searching for more direct evidence in the form of possible immigrant communities
in the Antelope Creek area; for example, further study is needed of a few sites with
peculiar architecture and Upper Republican-like collared-rim pottery.
For the next century and a half, until about A.D. 1450, the Antelope Creek
villages in the Panhandle Plains and the Ochoa villages in the South Plains may have
endured like islands in a sea of Apaches, represented by the Tierra Blanca complex
to the north and, perhaps the Garza complex to the south. During this period the
Apaches appear to have become semisedentary and increasingly involved in trade
with the mountain Pueblos, perhaps to some extent as intermediaries in trade
between the Pueblos and the plains villages.
On the Texas High Plains of late prehistoric times, however, the pattern of
Apache-Pueblo interaction of the 1600s in New Mexico may have already been
anticipated--good-times trading interrupted occasionally by hard-times raiding.
As Alex Krieger suggested long ago (1946), severe droughts at around A.D. 1450
may have left the Antelope Creek villagers without any surplus crops for trading,
bringing on Apache raids that made their already precarious position intolerable and
forcing them to abandon their ancestral homeland in favor of the comparative safety
afforded by kindred Caddoan-speaking villages in the prairies to the northeast
(Hughes 1968).
Did some of the Ochoa villages holding out on the South Plains find a different
solution to the Apache problem? Did they trade their village life for a nomadic
existence with the Apaches? Does this help explain the enigmatic Kiowa-Kiowa
Apache alliance (of Tanoan- and Athapascan-speaking groups) during historic
times on the western plains? If you can’t lick ’em, join ’em!

44

Texas Archeological Society
REFERENCES CITED

Abbott, J. T.
Geomorphic and Geoarcheological Investigations. In: D. K. Boyd et al., Phase
1990
H Investigations at Prehistoric and Rock Art Sites, Justiceburg Reservoir,
Garza and Kent Counties, Texas, Volume I. Prewitt and Associates, Inc. Reports
of Investigations No. 71. Austin.
Amevs, E.
1955
Geologic-Climatic Dating in the West. American Antiquity 20(4):317-335.
Baerreis, D.A., and R. A. Bryson
Historical Climatology and the Southern Plains:
1965

A Preliminary Statement.

Bulletin of the Oklahoma Archeological Society 13:69-75.

Baker, E. M., and J. A. Baker
1939
2nd Quarterly Report (1939) West Texas State College-WPA.Archeological
Project. Manuscript on file at the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum, Canyon,
Texas.
1941

Final Report WPA-West Texas Archeological Project 9249. Manuscript on file
at the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum, Canyon, Texas.

Baker, W. E., T. N. Campbell, and G. L. Evans
The Nall site: Evidence of Early Man in the Oklahoma Panhandle. Bulletin of
1957
the Oklahoma ArcheologicaI Society 5:1-20.
Bandy, P. A.
1977
A Review of Archaic Cultures of the Texas Panhandle. Transactions of the 12th
RegionalArcheologica! Symposiumfor SoutheasternNew Mexico and Western
Texas, !5-25. E1 Paso Archeological Society, E1 Paso.
Barbour, E. H., and C. B. Schultz
A New Fossil Bovid from Nebraska with Notice of a New Bison Quarry in
1941
Texas. B uUetin of the University of Nebraska State Museum 2(7): 63-68.
Baugh, T. G.
Culture History and Protohistoric Societies in the Southern Plans. Plains
1986
Anthropologist 31 (114, Part 2): 167-187.
Boyd, D. K., and S. A. Tomka
1990

Summary and Conclusions. In: D. K. Boyd et al., Phase H Investigations at
Prehistoric and Rock

Art Sites, Justiceburg Reservoir, Garza and Kent

Counties, Texas, Volume I, Chapter 8:235-273. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.
Reports of Investigations 71, Austin.

Brown, D. O.
Prehistoric Subsistence Strategies in Northeastern Central Texas. Bulletin ofthe
1989
Texas Archeological Society 59 (for 1988):201-244.

Hughes m Prehistoric Cultural Developments

45

Bryant, V. M., and H. J. Shafer
1977
The Late Quaternary Paleoenviromnent of Texas: A Model for the Archeologist.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Soc&ty 48:1-25.
Campbell, R. G.
1976
The Panhandle Aspect of the Chaquaqua Plateau. Texas Tech University
Graduate Studies No. 11. Lubbock.
Campbell, R. G., and S. J. Judd
1977
Archeological Reconnaissance of Portions of the South Plains Region. Texas
Tech University, Department of Anthropology, Report No. 4, Analysis of
Archaeological Materials.
Campbell, T. N.
1960
Texas Archeology: A Guide to the Literature. Bulletin ofthe Texas Archeological Society 29 (for 1958):177-254.
Carroll, H. B. (Editor).
1941
The Journal of Lt. J. W. Abert from Bem’s Fort to St. LoUis in 1845. ParthandlePlains Historical Review 14:1-113.
Collins, M. B.
1966
The Andrews Lake Sites: Evidence of Semi-Sedentary Prehistoric Occupation
in Andrews County, Texas. Transactions ofthe Second Regional Archeological
Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and :Western Texas, 27-43.
1968

The Andrews Lake Locality: New Archeological Data from the Southern Llano
Estacado, Texas. M.A. Thesis, Department of Anthropology, University of
Texas, Austin.

1971

A Review of the Llano Estacado Archeology and Ethnohistory. PlainsAnthropologist 16(52):85-104.

Corley, J. A.
1965
ProposedEastemExtensionoftheJomadaBranchoftheMogollon.Transactions
of the First Regional Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western
Texas, 31-36.
Corley, J. A., and R. H. Leslie
1960
The Boot Hill Site. Lea County Archeological Society Bulletin 5.
Couzzourt, Jim
1985
Preliminary Report: Testing at the Tascosa Creek S ite, Oldham County, Texas.
In: Transactions of the Twentieth Regional Archeologica! Symposium for
Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas, 65-142.
1988

Tascosa Creek Site. In: Transactions of the 23rd Regional Archeological
Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas, ,14-79.

Cox, K. A., and H. A. Smith
1991
Perdiz Point Damage Analysis. Bulletin of the TexasArcheological Society 60
(for 1989):this volume.

46

Texas Archeological Society

Cruse, J. B.
Archeological Investigations at the Kent Creek Site (41HL66): Evidence of
1989
Mogollon Influence on the Southern Plains. M.A. Thesis, Department of
Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Dick, H. W.
The Hodges Site, I: Two Rock Shelters near Tucumcari, New Mexico. Bureau
1953
of American Ethnology Bulletin 154, River Basin Surveys Papers 5, Pt.
1:267-284.
Dillehay, T. D.
1974
Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains. Plains
Anthropologist 19(65):180-196.
Duffield, L. F.
Some Panhandle Aspect Sites in Texas: Their Vertebrates and Paleoecolo-v.
1970
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of
Wisconsin, Madison.
Epstein, J. F.
1963
Centipede and Damp Caves: Excavations in Val Verde County, Texas, 1958.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 33 (for 1962): 1-129.
Etchieson, G, M., R. D. Speer, and J. T. Hughes
1978
Archeological Investigations in the Truscott Reservoir Area, King and Knox
Counties, Texas. Archeological Research Laboratory, Killgore Research Center, West Texas State University, Canyon.
Evans, G. L., and G. E. Meade
Quaternary of the Texas High Plains. University of Texas Publication
1945
4401:485-507.
Eyerly, T.L.
1907

The Buried City of the Panhandle. Kansas Academy of Science Miscellneous
Papers 21:219-228.

Ferrin, C. R.
1982
The Late Holocene Prehistory of Delaware Canyon, Oklahoma. Institute of
Applied Sciences, Contributions to Archeology 1, NorthTexas State University,
Denton.
Forrester, R. E.
Pestles for Boat-Shaped Mortars in Texas. B,dletin of the Texas Archeological
1991
Society 60 (for 1989):this volume.
Gunnerson, J. A., and D. A. Gunnerson
1971
ApacheanCulture: A Study in Unity and Diversity.In: ApacheCulturalhistory
and Ethnology, edited by K. H. Basso and M. E. Opler, 7-27. Anthropological
Papers No. 21. University of Arizona, Tucson.

Hughes -- Prehistoric Cultural Developments

47

Gustavson, T. C. (Editor)
1986
Geomorphology and Quatemary Stratigraphy of the Rolling Plains, Texas
Panhandle. Bureau of Economic Geology Guidebook.22, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Habricht-Manche, J. A.
1987
Southwestern Style Culinary Ceramics on the Southern Plains: A Case Study
ofTechnological Innovation and Cross-cultural Interaction. PlainsAnthrpologist
32(116):175-189.
Hall, S. A.
1982
Late Holocene Paleo-ecology of the Southern Plains. Quaternary Research
17:391-407.
1988

Environment and Archaeology of the Central Osage Plains. Plains Anthropologist 33(120):203-218.

Hammack, L. C.
1965
Archeology of the Ute Dam and Reservoir, Northeastern New Mexico. Museum
of New Mexico Press. Santa Fe.
Hammatt, H. H.
1976
The Gore Pit Site: An Archaic Occupation in Southwestern Oklahoma and a
Review of the Archaic Stage in the Southern Plains. Plains Anthropologist
21:245-277.
Hays, J. S.
1986
An Archeological Survey of Portions of the Buffalo Lake National Wildlife
Refuge, Randall County, Texas. Report prepared for the U.S. Department of the
Interior, Bureau of Reclamation, Southwest Region, Amarillo.
Haynes, G. H.
1932
A Report on the Excavations of Saddleback Ruin. M.A. Thesis, Department of
Anthropology. Texas Tech University, Lubbock.
Haynes, C. V., and G. A. Agogino
1966
Prehistoric Springs and Geology of Blackwater No. 1 Locality, Flew Mexico.
American Antiquity 31(6):812-821.
Henderson, Mark
1976
An Archaeological Inventory of Brantley Reservoir, New Mexico. Southern
Methodist University Contributions to Anthropology 18. Dallas.
Holden, Tom
A Study of the Pottery of Saddleback Ruin. M.A. Thesis, Department of
1934
Anthropology, Texas Tech University, Lubbock.
Holden, W. C.
1929
Some Recent Explorations and Excavations in Northwest Texas: The Canadian
Valley. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 1:23-35.

48

Texas Archeological Society
1930

The Canadian Valley Expedition of March 1930. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 2:21-32.

1931

Texas Tech Archeological Expedition, Summer 1930. Bulletin of the Texas
ArcheoIogical Society 3:43-52.

1932

Recent Archaeological Discoveries in the Texas Panhandle. Southwestern
Social Science Quarterly 13(3):287-293.

1933

Excavation of Saddleback ruin. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
5:39-52.

1938

Blue Mountain Rock Shelter. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
10:208-221,

Holliday, V, T.
1977
Cultural Chronology of the Lubbock Lake Site. M.A. Thesis, Department of
Anthropology, Texas Tech University, Lubbock.
1988

Late Pleistocene and Holocene Stratigraphy, Southern High Plains of Texas.
Geological Society ofAmerica Centennial Field Guide, South-Central Section.

Honea, Kenneth
1980
Marks Beach, Stratified Paleoindian Site, Lamb County, Texas: Preliminary
Report. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 51: 243-269.

Hughes, D. T.
1977
Analysis of Certain Prehistoric Bison Kills in the Texas Panhandle and Adjoining Areas. M.A. Thesis, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville.
1984

The Foragers: Western Oklahoma. Chapter 6 In. Robert E. Bell (Editor)
Prehistory of Oklahoma. Academic Press, New York.

1987

The 1987 Courson Archeological project and Texas Archeological Society
Field School. Paper presented at 58th annual meeting of theTexas Archeological
Society, Oct. 30-Nov. 1, Waco.

1989

Terminal Archaic Bison Kills in the Texas Panhandle. In: Beryl C. Roper
(Editor) In The Light of Past Experience (183-204). Panhandle Archeological
Society Publication No. 5, Amarillo.

Hughes, J. T.
1955
Little Sunday: An Archaic site in Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 26:55-74.
1962

Lake Creek: A Woodland site in the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeo!ogical Society 32:65-84.

1968

Prehistory of the Caddoan-speaking Tribes. Ph.D. dissertation, Columbia
University. University Microfilms, Ann Arbor.

1969

The Canyon City Club Cave in the Panhandle of Texas. Unpublished report on
file, Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

1976

The Panhandle Archaic. In: The Texas Archaic: A Symposium, edited by
Thomas R. Hester, pp. 28-38. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio Special Report 2.

Hughes ~ Prehistoric Cultural Developments

49

1977

A ChronologicalBibliography ofPanhandleArcheology. Archeological Research
Laboratory, Killgore Research Center, West Texas State University, Canyon.

1978

Archeology of Palo Duro Canyon. In: The Story ofPalo Duro Canyon, edited
by D. F. Guy, 35-57. Panhandle-Plains Historical Society, Canyon, Texas.

1979

Cultural Resources. In: Final Report: An Environmental Profile of the Palo
Duro Creek Basin, V1-Vll8. Report submitted to Corps of Engineers, U.S.
Army, Tulsa, by Faculty of Biology and Geosciences, Killgore Research Center.
West Texas State University, Canyon.

1980

Some Early and Northerly Occurrences of the Clear Fork Gouge. In: (T. R.
Hester, Editor) Papers on the Prehistory of Northern Mexico and Adjacent
Texas. The University of Texas at San Antonio, Center for Archaeological
Research, Special Report 9:143-146.

1980

Letter report, final: Archeological Survey of Southeast Regional Park, City of
Amarillo. Copy on file, Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical
Commission, Austin.

Hughes, J. T., H. C. Hood, and B. P. Newman
1978
Archeological Testing in the Red Deer Creek Watershed in Gray, Roberts, and
Hemphill Counties, Texas. Archeological Research Center, West Texas State
University, Canyon.
Hughes, J.T., and P. S. Willey
1978
Archeology. In (Jack T. Hughes and Patrick S. Willey, Editors) Archeology at
Mackenzie Reservoir, 24-31. Texas Historical Commission, Office of the State
Archeologist Survey Report 24.
Jackson, A. T.
1938
Picture Writing of Texas Indians. University ofTexas Publication 3809. Austin.
Jelinek, A. J.
1967
A Prehistoric Sequence in the Middle Pecos Valley, New Mexico. Museum of
Anthropology, University of Michigan, Anthropological Papers 31. Ann Arbor.
Johnson, Eileen
1987
Lubbock Lake: Late Quaternary Studies on the Southern High Plains. Texas
A&M Press, College Station.
Johnson, Eileen, and V. T. Holliday
1986
The Archaic Record at Lubbock Lake. Plains Anthropologist 31(114, Part
2):7-54.
Johnson, Eileen, V. T. Holliday, M. J. Kaczor, and Robert Stuckenrath
The Garza Occupation at the Lubbock Lake Site. Bulletin of the Texas
1977
Archeological Society 48:83-109.
Johnston, C. S.
1939
A Report on the Antelope Creek Ruin. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 11:190-202.

50

Texas Archeological Society

Kalowkowski, H. P., Jr.
n.d.
Archeological Testing of the Fifth Green Site (A1363), Randall County, Texas.
Manuscript report on file at the Archeological Research Laboratory, Killgore
Research Center, West Texas State University, Canyon.
Katz, S. R., and P. R. Katz
1976
Archaeological Investigation in Lower Tule Canyon, Briscoe County, Texas.
Archeological Survey Report 16:1-147. Texas Historical Commission, Office
of the State Archeologist, Austin.
Kehoe, T. F.
The Small Side-Notched Point System of the Northern Plains. American
1966
Antiquity 31:827-841.
Kelley, J. C.
The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Position of the Clear Fork Focus.
1947
American Antiquity 13(2):97-109.
Kelley, J. C., T. N. Campbell, and D. J. Lehmer
1940
The Association of Archeological Materials with GeologicalDeposits in the Big
Bend Region of Texas. West Texas Historical and Scientific Society 10:9-173.

Kelley, J. H.
Comments on the Archeology of the Llano Estacado. Bulletin of the Texas
1964
Archeological Soc&ty 35:1-17.
Kirkland, Forrest
1942
Indian Pictographs and Petroglyphs in the Panhandle Region of Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeo!ogical Society 14:9-26.
Kirkpatrick, D. T.
1976
Archeological Investigations in the Cimarron District, Northeastern New Mexico:
1929-1975. Awanyu, (Publication of the Archeological Society of New Mexico)
4(3):6-15.
Kiser, E. L.
The Re-examination of Pedro de Castafieda Bone Bed by Geological
1978
Investigations. Bulletin of the Texas Archeolog&al Society 49:331-339.
Krieger, A. D.
Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. University of Texas
1946
Publication 4640. Austin.
Lehmer, D. J.
1948
The Jornada Branch of the Mogollon. University of Arizona Social Science
Bulletin 17. Tucson.

Hughes m Prehistoric Cultural Developments

51

Leslie, R. H.
1965
The Merchant Site, L.C.A.S. E-4. Transactions of the First Regional
Archeological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas,
23-29.
Lintz, C. R.
1978a The Johnson-Cline Site (34-TX-40): An Upland Dune Site in the Oklahoma
Panhandle. Oklahoma Anthropological Society Bulletin 27:111-140.
1978b

Architecture and Radiocarbon Dating of the Antelope Creek Focus, A Test of
Campbell’s Model. PIainsAnthropoIogist 23(82):319-329.

1982

A Selected Bibliography of the Antelope Creek Focus of Texas and Oklahoma.
Transactions of the 17th Regional Archeolog&al Symposium for Southeastern
New Mexico and Western Texas, 15-35. Panhandle and Midland Archeological
Societies.

1984

Architecture and Community Variability Within the Antelope Creek Phase of
the Texas Panhandle. Doctoral Dissertation, Department of Anthropology,
University of Oklahoma, Norman.

Lintz, C. R., and S. A. Hall
1983
The Geomorphology and Archeology of Carnegie Canyon, Fort Cobb Laterals
Watershed, Caddo County, Oklahoma. Oklahoma Conservation Commission
Archeological Research Report 10.
Lintz, C. R., J. D. Speth, D. T. Hughes, and J. A. Huebner
1991
Additional Radiocarbon Dates From the Twilla Bison Kill Site, Hall County,
Texas. Bullethz of the Texas Archeological Society 60 (for 1989):this volume.
Lowery, E. J.
1932

The Archaeology of the Antelope Creek Ruin. Unpublished M.A. thesis, Texas
Tech University, Lubbock..

Lynott, M. J.
1979
Prehistoric Bison Populations of North-Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 50:89-101.
Mallouf, R. J.
1985
A Synthesis of Eastern Trans-Pecos Prehistory. Unpublished M.A. thesis.
Department of Anthropology, University of Texas at Austin.
1987

Las Haciendas: A Cairn-Burial Assemblage From Northeastern Chihuahua,
Mexico. Texas Historical Commission, Office of the State Archeologist Report
35.

Mason, J. A.
1929
The Texas Expedition. University of Pennsylvania Museum Journal
20(3-4):318-338.

52

Texas Archeological Society

Meltzer, D. J., and M. B. Collins
1987
Prehistoric Water Wells on the Southern High Plains: Clues to Altithermal
Climate. Journal of Field Archaeology 14:9-28.
Mobley, C. M. (Editor)
Archeological Research arm Management at Los Esteros Reservoir, New
1978
Mexico. Archeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Moorehead, W. K.
1921

Recent Explorations in Northwestern Texas. American Anthropologist n.s.

1931

Archeology of the Arkansas River Valley. Yale University Press, New Haven.

23(1):1-11.

Northern, M. J.
Archaeological Investigations of the Montgomery Site, Floyd County, Texas.
1979
Unpublished M.A. thesis, Texas Tech University, Lubbock.

Olson, R. J.
1929
Letters to Clark Wissler. American Museum of Natural History, New York.
Parker, Wayne
Archaeology at the Bridwell Site. Crosby County Pioneer Memorial Museum,
1982
Crosbyton, Texas.
Patton, P. C.
Geomorphic Criteria for Estimating the Magnitude and Frequency of Flooding
1977
in Central Texas. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Geology, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Pearce, W. M.
1936
A Survey of the Sand-Hill Campsites of Lamb and Bailey Counties. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 8:184-186.
Phelps, A. L.
1974
An Analysis of the Ceramics of the Guadalupe Mountains National Park.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 45:121-150.
Prewitt, E. R.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 52:65-89.
1985

From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas Chronology. Bulletin
of the Texas ArcheologicaI Society 54 (for 1983):201-238.

Reed, E. K.
Special Report on Archaeologica! Work at Palo Duro Canyon. National Park
1936
Service report on file, Review and Compliance Department, Texas Historical
Commission, Austin.

Hughes ~ Prehistoric Cultural Developments

53

Riggs, A. D. (Editor)
1965

LY-4: A Surface Site of the South Plains. South Plains Archeological Society
Bulletin 2:1-35

1977

Guide toArcheologicalLibrary. Lower Plains Archeological Society, Midland,
Texas.

Roberts, F. H. H. Jr.
1942
Archeological and Geological Investigations in the San Jon District, Eastern
NewMexico.SmithsonianMiscellaneousCollections 103(4): 1-30. Washington,
D.C.
Runkles, F. A.
1964
The Garza Site, a Neo-American Campsite near Post, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 35:101-126.
Runyan, J. W., and J. A. Hedrick
1987
Pottery Types of the Southwest Federation of Archeological Societies Area. The
Artifact (Publication of the E1 Paso Archeological Society) 25(4):23-59.
Saunders, R. S.
1978
Archeological Resources of Black Mesa State Park, Cimarron County, Oklahoma.
Archeological Resource Survey Report 7, Norman.
Sayles, E. B.
1935
An Archaeological Survey of Texas. Medallion Papers No. 17. Gila Pueblo,
Globe, Arizona.
Sellards, E. H.
1938
Artifacts Associated with Fossil Elephant. Bulletin of the GeologicalSociety of
America 49:999-1010.
Sellards, E. H., G. L. Evans, and G. E. Meade
1947
Fossil Bison and Associated Artifacts from Plainview, Texas. Bulletin of the
Geological Society Of America 58:927-954.
Sharer, H. J.
1989

The Prehistory Legacy of the Lower Pecos Region of Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 59 (for 1988):23-52.

Simons, Helen
1988
Archeological Bibliography for the Northern Panhandle Region of Texas. Texas
Historical Commission, Office of the State Archeologist Special Report 30.
Smith, Calvin, John Runyon, and George Agogino
A Progress Report on a Pre-Ceramic Site at Rattlesnake Draw, Eastern New
1966
Mexico. Plains Anthropologist 11 (34):302-313.
Sollberger, J. B.
1971
A Technological Study of Beveled Knives. Plains Anthropologist
16(53):209-218.

54

Texas AreheologieaI Society

Spielmarm, K. A.
1982
Inter-Societal Food Acquisition Among Egalitarian Societies: An Ecological
Analysis of Plains/Pueblo Interaction in the American Southwest. Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of Michigan.
1983

Late Prehistoric Exchange Between the Southwest and Southern Plains. Plains
Anthropologist 28(102):257-272.

Stafford, T. W. Jr.
Alluvial Geology and the Archaeological Potential of the Texas Southern High
1981
Plains. American Antiquity 46(3):548-565.
Steen, C. R.
Excavations at Pigeon Cliff. In: Collected Papers in Honor of Marjorie
1976
Ferguson Lambert. ArcheoIogicaI Society of New Mexico Papers 3:19-36.
Smder, F. V.
1931
Archeological Survey of the North Panhandle of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 3:70-75.
1934

Texas Panhandle Culture Ruin No. 55. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 6:80-96.

Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
1954
ArcheologicaI Society 25.
Warnica, J. M.
1965
Archaic Sites in Eastern New Mexico. Transactions of the First Regional
ArcheologicaI Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas,
3-8.
Watson, Virginia
The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect: Description and Analysis. Bulletin
1950
of the Texas Archeological Society 21:7-68.
Watts, W.C.
Lake Sites of the South Plains of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
1939
Society 11:77-91.
Wedel, W. R.
Chalk Hollow: Cultural Sequence and Chronology in the Texas Panhandle.
1975
Actas del XLI Congreso Internacional de Americanistas 1:270-278. Mexico
City.
1986

Central Plains Prehistory : Holocene Environments and Culture Change in the
Republican River Basin. University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.

Weir, F.A.
1976
The Central Texas Archaic Reconsidered. In: (T. R. Hester, editor) The Texas
Archaic: A Symposium. The University of Texas at San Antonio, Center for
Archaeological Research Special Report 2:60-66.

Hughes m Prehistoric Cultural Developments

55

Wendorf, Fred and Alex Krieger
1959
New light on the Midland discovery. American Antiquity 25(1 ):66-78.
Whalen, Michael E.
1981
Origin and Evolution of Ceramics in Westem Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 52:215-229.
Wheat, J. B.
First Excavations at the Lubbock Lake Site. West Texas Museum Association.
1974
Museum Journal 15:15-42.
Whipple, A. W., Thomas Eubank, and W. W. Turner
1856
Report Upon the Indian Tribes. In Reports of Explorations and Surveys...for
a Railroadfrom the Mississippi River to the Pacific Ocean. 33rd Congress, 2nd
Session, Senate Executive Document No. 78, 1856, Vol. 3.
Willey, P. S.
Human Skeleton from the Deadman’s Shelter Site. In: (Jack T. Hughes and
1978
Patrick S. Willey) Archeology at Mackenzie Reservoir. Texas Historical
Commission, Office of the State Archeologist Survey Report 24:198-204.
Willey, P. S. and J. T. Hughes
1978
The Deadman’s Shelter Site. In: (Jack T. Hughes and Patrick S. Willey)
Archeology at Mackenzie Reservoir. Texas Historical Commission, Office of
the State Archeologist Survey Report 24: 149-197.
Willey, P. S., B. R. Harrison, and J. T. Hughes
1978
The Rex Rodgers Site. In: (Jack T. Hughes and Patrick S. Willey) Archeology
at Mackenzie Reservoir. Texas Historical Commission, Office of the State
Archeologist Survey Report 24:51-114.
Willey, P. S., B. R. Harrison, and J. T. Hughes
1978
The Blue Clay Site. In: (Jack T. Hughes and Patrick S. Willey) Archeology at
Mackenzie Reservoir. Texas Historical Commission, Office of the State
Archeologist Survey Report 24:138-148.
Willey, P. S. and D. H. Ubelaker
1976
Notched Teeth from the Texas Panhandle. Journal ofthe Washington Academy
of Science 66(4):239-246.
Wilson, L. R.
1972
Geomorphology of Tesesquite Creek Valley, Cimarron County, Oklahoma.
Oklahoma Geology Notes 32(6): 195-208.
Word, J. H.
The Montgomery site in Floyd County, Texas. Bulletin of the South Plains
1965
Archeological Society 2:55-102.
1991

The Texas Archeological Society’s 1975 Field School-The Floyada Country
Club Site. Bulletin oftheTexasArcheologicalSociety 60 (for 1989):this volume.

57

The 1975 Field School
of the Texas Archeological Society
James H. Word
ABSTRACT
The 1975 Field School of the Texas Archeological Society was held at the
Floydada Country Club site (41FL1) in Floyd County. Surface collections and
previous excavations at the site suggested that three differing cultures at the site
were very closely associated geographically and dated from the Late Prehistoric to
Historic periods. The most intensive occupation of the site dates from A.D. 1200
to 1500, when there were trade relationships in Protohistoric to Early Historic
times among three ethnic groups: the Apache, eastern and southern Pueblos, E1
Paso Mogollon, and perhaps a Caddoan-related group. A subsequent occupation
of the site, demonstrated by historic artifacts, dates after the invasion of the
Comanche, who used the site from the mid-1750s until Col. Mackenzie’s successful campaign secured western Texas from the Indians in 1874.

DEDICATION

This report is dedicated to Dorothy (Dot) Word, my deceased wife. She
willingly contributed her time and talents to many Texas Archeological Society
activities. Without her support, concern, and love, the’1975 TAS field school could
not have succeeded. Her death in 1981 was a great loss to me.
James H. Word

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 60 (1989)

58

Texas Areheological Society
INTRODUCTION

In 1954 the author started collecting surface materials, predominantly of Late
Prehistoric and Historic age, from roads and erosional areas adjacent to the White
River at the Floydada Country Club site (41FL1). In the early 1960s, test pits were
excavated in an attempt to determine a sequence of occupation. A report on this
work (Word 1963:37-63) was published by the South Plains Archeological Society.
The large number of artifacts collected from this site prompted the Texas
Archeological Society to hold its annual field school there in 1975. Dr. S. Alan
Skinner, of Southern Methodist University, was the field archeologist; he visited the
site and examined the author’s collection of arrowpoints, scrapers, drills (perforators), bifacial tools, bone artifacts, and shell and bone beads associated with Late
Prehistoric times. Archaic projectile points were few in number, but suggested that
there had been some occupation before Late Prehistoric times. Historic artifacts
consisted of metal projectile points, glass beads, metal awls, gun parts, and early
rifle cartridges of the 1870s.
Because play continued on the golf course (Skinner 1975c), the field school
activity had to be in areas where it would not interfere with the golfers and where
the safety of the field school participants would not be compromised. As a result of
these two factors, the areas searched were limited.
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
Francisco Vasquez de Coronado in 1541 was the first European explorer to
cross the area of which the Floydada Country Club is a part. He made contact with
the Apaches on the Llano Estacado, and with the Teyas--who, according to
Newcomb (1961:99) could have been the Plains Caddo---near the headwaters of the
Brazos River (Newcomb 1961:105). Bolton (1970:2) stated that the Caddo hunted
bison on the western prairie and that the Wichita who were located on the Red River
at Spanish Fort were of Caddoan extraction. The Wichita were allied with the
Comanche in the 1740s ~ewcomb and Field 1967:241) and were trading with the
French for weapons (ibid.:268), which they supplied to the Comanches in exchange
for horses, mules, and Indian captives (Bolton 1970:121).
Vincente de Saldivar Mendoza came into the area in 1599 to hunt bison for fat
and encountered the Apache (Newcomb and Field 1961:105), and Don Juan On ate
explored the Llano Estacado in 1601. However, Onate’s expedition, in the part of
the Canadian River area near the present boundary between Texas and Oklahoma,
went north of the Floydada Country Club area (Bolton 1916:250-255).
Little contact with the Apache is recorded until the early eighteenth century
when in 1702 they began to raid Spanish settlements (Thomas 1935:23-24). The
Comanches, who are a branch of the Shoshones, began an invasion of the Llano
Estacado in 1705 and were in control of much of the area by the mid-1750s,
dominating the area that includes the Floydada Country Club ~homas 1935:57). In
1786, Pedro Vial’s expedition, trying to establish a more direct route from San
Antonio to Santa Fe (Loumis and Nasatir 1967:xvi, 29, 291,313), described what

Wordm1975 TAS Field School

59

is probably the Mont Blanco area on the White River in the extreme northern part
of Crosby County and the southern part of Floyd County.
The Comanche were raiding the early settlements of western Texas and had
established trade with the New Mexican-Spanish traders, who became better known
as Comancheros. During the Civil War the U.S. Army was not a deterrent to this
trade; many of the Texans were soldiers of the Confederacy. Texas cattle and
captives became important trade items with the Comancheros, who traded guns,
knives, cloth, and other items for livestock and captives (Wallace and Hoebel
1942:268).
After the the Civil War ended, the U. S. Army was again active in attempts to
control the Comanches C/gallace 1964: 33-57). In 1871 Colonel Randall S. Mackenzie
was unsuccessful in an attempt to force the Comanche from the Llano Estacado to
the reservation in Oklahoma. He followed the Comanche up the Blanco Canyon, but
a mid-November blizzard thwarted his efforts (Ratgen 1973:199). In 1872 another
effort by Mackenzie to drive the Comancheros from the Llano Estacado and to
eliminate trade with the Comanches was unsuccessful (ibid.:60-76), but in 1874 he
finally defeated the Comanche in the Battle of Palo Duro Canyon. Before the Battle
of Palo Duro Canyon, one of Mackenzie’s forces came up Blanco Canyon and was
met by another of his forces that that had moved northeastward from the present
Slaton area; they met near the Floydada Country Club. Mackenzie’s various forces
met near the junction of the White River and the North Fork of the Brazos River at
Camp Supply in southeastern Crosby County (Ratgen:60-76). The army then
proceeded to its successful encounter at Palo Duro Canyon, which ended the
Comanche occupation of the Llano Estacado and the adjacent Rolling Plains
(ibid.: 128-149).
After the Comanches were driven from the Llano Estacado, the New MexicanSpanish traders, or Comancheros, returned to the area as sheep herders and were
called Pastores. Anglo ranchers eventually moved into the area and displaced the
Pastores, and by 1890 farming was becoming an increasingly important factor;
today agriculture is dominant.
PRIOR INVESTIGATIONS
The author published a report on the Floydada Country Club site in 1963, and
reports have been published on sites with similar characteristics downstream on the
White River. The Montgomery site (Word 1965) is about 11 km (7 miles)
downstream, and a more recent research project on this site was reported by
Northern (1979). Parker (1982) published a report on the Bridwell site about 24 km
(15 miles) further downstream in the northeastern part of Crosby County. In the
southwestern part of Dickens County, about 48 km (30 miles) southeast of the
Bridwell site, is the Pete Creek site, which has been reported by Parsons (1967). The
Floydada Country Club site, Montgomery site, and the Bridwell site are on the
White River drainage, but the Pete Creek site is on the North Fork of the Double
Mountain Fork of the Brazos River, just below its confluence with the White River.

60

Texas Archeological Society

All of these sites have similar artifact assemblages, but eastern Puebloan pottery
decreases southeastward. Locally made and Caddoan-like sherds continue to
dominate, and the percentage of Edwards chert increases.
Among more distant sites with similarities in time of occupation and artifact
assemblages are the Garza site ~unkles 1964) about 100 km (62 miles) to the south,
the Garza occupation at the Lubbock Lake site (Johnson, Holliday, Kaczor, and
Stuckenrath 1977) about 38 km (24 miles) west southwest, and the Lott site
(Runkles and Dorchester 1986).
GEOGRAPHY AND ENVIRONMENT
The Floydada Country Club site (41FL1) is on the White River Canyon in the
southern part of Floyd County near the eastern edge of the Llano Estacado (Figure

1).
As soon as the Running Water Draw cuts through the Caprock of the Llano
Estacado and forms a canyon, it becomes the White River, the northernmost
tributary of the Brazos River. The Floydada Country Club site, which is bisected by
the White River, is in the first widening of the canyon, on the first terrace above the
river at the western boundary of the Country Club property (Figure 2). Cochran’s
Mesa, to the south of the White River, is the southern boundary of the site, and the
northern boundary of the site is below the Caprock where the land surface slopes
upward; so from north to south the site measures about 250 meters. The canyon
narrows at the northeastern boundary of the Floydada Country Club property and
is the eastern limit of the site; the western limit is the western boundary of the
Country Club property; the site measures about 825 meters from east to west.
The elevation of the site is 3015 feet (920 meters) high, and of the adjacent
Llano Estacado is 3150 feet (960 meters). The average rainfall is 51 cm (20.18
inches), most of which comes in May, June, and September, generally in association
with strong winds and thunderstorms. Most of the winter moisture comes as snow
and sleet in December and January, but the amount is normally insignificant. The
lowest temperature, usually coming in January, averages -4 degrees C. (26 degrees
F.). The warmest month is July, with a mean temperature of 34 degrees C. (94
degrees F.) (Kingston 1986).
The White River was an active stream until 1944, when the lowering of the
underground water table--a result of exploitation of the Ogalalla aquifer for
irrigation purposes---dried up the springs that fed it.
The vegetation on the Floydada Country Club property is an extension of the
Roiling Plains flora. Gould (1969) described the vegetation of the Rolling Plains as
various bluestem, buffalo, and Bermuda grasses. Shinnery oak and sand sage are
common on the Rolling Plains, but they are not dominant at the Country Club site.
Other vegetation commonly found on the Rolling Plains includes hackberry, pecan,
willow, eastern cottonwood, western soapberry, algerita, little sumac, juniper, and
ephedra. Various cacti are common in the grassland; prickly pear is the most
common variety. Forbs are represented by sunflower, buffalo weed, Russian thistle,
cattail, and less common weeds (Gould 1969).

Word~1975 TAS Field School

COLORADO

61

K AN S AS

Vegetation on the adjacent part of the Llano Estacado differs considerably
(Gould 1969). Grasses and forbs are similar, but trees and shrubs were practically
nonexistent before the area was settled by early ranchers and farmers. Mesquite was
introduced when cattle were brought into the area in the latter part of the nineteenth
century.

62

Texas Archeological Society

o
I
0

Llano

Estacado

White ~ Rive,
¯ t

N

I

Figure 2. Map of part of Floyd County, showing the relation of the Floydada Country
Club to US 62, the White River, and the Caprock.

The slope of the Caprock and of the White River Canyon is a transitional biotic
zone between the Rolling Plains and the Llano Estacado. The slightly greater
moisture resulting from runoff from the slopes of the canyon nurtt~es a limited flora
not common on the Llano Estacado, such as little leaf sumac,juniper, and infrequent
shinnery oak, algerita, and ephedra. Various species of cactus are common.
The soil at the Floydada Country Club site is of the Berda-Potter Association
(Neitsch and Blackstock 1978); it varies from deep to shallow, gently sloping, and
moderately permeable loams overlying thick beds of caliche. These soils are in
general not suitable for agriculture.
Animal life in aboriginal and early pioneer times consisted of bison, antelope,
coyote, wolf, white-tailed prairie dog, mule deer, raccoon, panther, bobcat, black
bear, black-tailed jackrabbit, desert cottontail, striped and hog-nosed skunk, and a
wide variety of small rodents.
Birds common to the area include both permanent residents and migratory
species. The lesser prairie chicken, bobwhite, scaled quail, killdeer, mourning dove,
roadrunner, blue jay, various owls, red-shafted flicker, cactus wren, mockingbird,

Word

1975 TAS Field School

63

cardinal, and western meadowlark are native to the area. Vultures and some species
of hawks live there the year around, and various ducks, geese, plovers, flycatchers,
scissortails, and robins are the most common migrants.
Snakes are the most common reptiles; bullsnakes, puff adders, and rattlesnakes
are found throughout the area. Horned lizards and tortoises are common in both the
Rolling Plains and on the Llano Estacado. The habitat of the collared lizard
(mountain boomer) is confined to the crevices of the Caprock.
Amphibians are generally confined to the Rolling Plains environment, but in
excessively wet years toads are common on the Llano Estacado in association with
playa lakes.
AREAS OF THE SITE
Analysis of collections, consisting of lithics, potsherds, bone, and historic
artifacts from the Floydada Country Club site suggested that the site was in fact three
very closely associated sites, so the Field School Archeologist, S. Alan Skinner,
divided the site into three areas (Figure 3) for testing (Skinner 1975a).
Area 1 (41FL 1 - 1 ) is centrally located. The dom inant pottery type represented
by the sherds recovered by the author from surface collecting and four test pits
(Word 1963) is eastem Puebloan; the dominant lithic material is Edwards chert from
the Edwards Limestone (Lower Cretaceous). Area 2 (41FL1-2), about 100 meters
from Area 1, is across the White River. Here, southwestern sherds from the E1 Paso
and southeastem New Mexico areas dominate. At Area 3 (41FL1-3), about 250
meters east of Area 1, the principle types, represented by locally made pottery, are
Caddoan and imitation Caddoan wares, and most of the lithic debris is of Tecovas
jasper (Tecovas Formation, Dockum Group, Upper Triassic; Holiday and Welty
1981).
RESEARCH DESIGN
It was hoped that dividing the site into these three areas would make it possible
to determine what happened in the past. It appeared from the author’s collections
that occupation of all three areas was contemporaneous, in the Late Prehistoric and
Historic periods, and it was hoped that the excavations would also reveal evidence
of Archaic and Paleoindian occupations.
The major goal of testing the three areas (41FL 1-1,41FL 1-2, 41FL1-3) was to
gather data to determine how the site was used and how the three areas related to
each other (Skinner 1975a). More specifically, the research program of the field
school was designed to test four hypotheses.
The first hypothesis was that the area had been intensively occupied from
Paleoindian through the Historic periods. The second hypothesis was that, in the
intensive occupation between A.D. 1200 and 1500 by indigenous groups, there was
close trade with eastern and southwestern New Mexico and with the Antelope focus
to the north, that there were ties to Caddoan areas to the east as well, and that the site
was a rendezvous area.

64

Texas Archeological Society

rESTED A.tAs

!___I

CLUB H OUSt
SWIMMING POOL

FENCE

0

GRASSY DRAW

...... "-,

ORIGINAL CHANNEL

~-, ,,.~

500 FEET
i

0

500 METERS

Figure 3. Plan of site 41FL1, showing Areas 1, 2, and 3.

Word--1975 TAS Field School

65

The third hypothesis was that immigrant groups from the southeastern and
eastern Puebloans were coming into the area for bison hunting and meat preparation.
The fourth hypothesis was that Historic Indian occupation of the site was of
short term by late (perhaps Protohistoric) Apachean groups or by the succeeding
Comanches, who dominated this area from early historic times until the aboriginal
occupation was terminated by the Mackenzie campaign of 1874.

Gdd
N ~i/~N

METERS

[]

Figure 4. Topographic map showing excavated units in Area 1.

PROCEDURES AND RESULTS
Area 1 (41FLl-1)
Before work was started in Area 1, a nail was driven into a mesquite tree; all
elevations were recorded from this datum point (Figure 4). An east-west base line
was established from the datum point, and locations of all units were related to the
base line. Stakes were sunk at 1-meter intervals to form the site grid, and line levels
were used to determine depths. Eighty 1-meter units were laid out in case there

66

Texas Archeological Society

should be sufficient time to test them, but only 52 1-by- 1-meter units ere excavated.
When features were discovered, partial units were opened around them to expose
as much of the features as time allowed. This resulted in excavation of three partial
units. The units, numbered from the grid readings at their southwest comers, were
excavated to a depth of 60 cm in 20-cm levels. Unit 26 was excavated to a depth of
100 cm to determine the depth of occupation.

Soil Description
No features were recorded from Unit 26, but, since it was tested to a depth of

100 cm (Figure 5), the soils encountered are described in the field notes.
Level 1 (0-20 cm)
The soil is dark brown and very compact. The surface was covered with native
grasses and the roots extended through Level 1. The soil consists of a sandy loam
of very fine texture. Specks of charcoal are common from the surface down to 20
cm.

Level 2 (20-40 era)
The soil continues to be dark brown, sandy loam compact in consistency. Grass

roots continue to a depth of 23-25 cm. Specks of charcoal were recorded as in Level
1.
Level 3 (40-60 cm)
The soil is compact and gradually becomes less dark brown. Charcoal flecks
am less common.
Level 4 (60-80 cm)
The soil contains charcoal specks, but in diminishing frequency. Small,
rounded nodules of caliche appear at about 70 cm. The lighter brown soil continues
to be fine grained and very compact.
Level 5 (80-100 cm)
The soil becomes light brown or tan and continues to be very compact. No
charcoal specks were recorded, and the occurrence of small nodules of caliche
increases.
It is evident that no stratification is present. The density of charcoal gradually
diminishes with depth, small caliche pebbles appear in the lower depths and
increase in frequency with depth, and there is a gradual change in soil color from
dark brown to light brown to tan from the surface to the 100-cm depth. There was
very little moisture in the soil and, when it was dry, its color changed to a very light
gray-brown. The soil is very compact from the surface to the 100-cm depth and is
very fine in texture. Small nodules of caliche, which appear at about 70 cm and
increase in frequency down to the 100-cm level, are the result of percolation of
moisture containing calcium and magnesium, a common occurrence in the South
Plains area.

Word--1975 TAS Field School

67

cm
Ground Level-

10
20
3040506070

80
9O
100

Charcoal stain
Dark brown soil
Lighter brown soil
Tan soil
Caliche nodules

[~

Grass roots

[~

Figure 5. Profile of Unit 26, Area 1.

Area 1-Historic Cultural Materials (Historic Artifacts)
Both glass and metal artifacts were recovered in Area 1, indicating both very
recent and historic use of the site.

68

Texas Archeological Society

Glass
The most common historic artifacts recovered were of glass, well distributed
over the site. All but two of the specimens were badly fragmented.
Type 1
All Type 1 specimens were badly fragmented, patinated, and of a lightly tinted
green color. Seventeen small fragments were recovered, but the vessel types cannot
be determined. All came from Level 1 (0-20 cm) except for one from Level 2 (20-40
cm).

Type 2
A very small (3 by 4 mm) fragment of brown glass, probably from a beer bottle,
was recovered from Level 1.
Type 3
Two small unidentifiable fragments of clear glass were recovered from Level
1.
Type 4
Seven green-tinted unpatinated glass fragments recovered from the surface and
Level 1 vary from 6 mm to 5 mm in thickness and have slightly oval lengthwise
ridges; the largest specimen (37 by 31 mm) is slightly convex on the outer surface,
reminiscent of a Coca Cola bottle.
Type 5
Two examples of clear glass were recovered from level 1. The largest fragment
(Figure 6, A) is 81 mm long and 50 mm thick, apparently the center of a large
container. The interior is slightly convex, and the exterior is flat. In the center of this
specimen is an a in a circle 16 mm in diameter. Along the edge of the base of this
triangular fragment is what appears to be a 5, followed on the right by a 1, a short
dash, and an E. The trademark is 51-E. The smaller specimen has no identifying
marks, but it appears to be from the same vessel; it is curved--probably part of the
vessel body near the bottom.
Glass Bead
A single large, sky blue, opaque, round necklace bead of simple construction
was recovered from Unit 23 in Level No. 1 (Figure 6, B). It measures 8 mm in
diameter. Harris and Harris (1967:153) state that this type usually has a ridge around
the circumference suggesting pressed construction. This specimen does not have
the ridge, but it has all the other characteristics of the Harris and Harris Bead Type
159.
Metal
Six metal objects were recovered, all from Level 1 (0-20 cm).
Type 1
A fragment of badly rusted sheet metal is probably from a tin can, since it is .05
mm thick and measures 20 by 15 mm. There is no indication that it was cut from the
original object, since the edges are irregular.

Word

1975 TAS Field School

A

B
G

¢
D
0

5 CENTIMETERS

Figure 6. A, glass fragment; B, glass bead; C, metal object with cut and file marks; D,
horseshoe nail; E, metal tinkler; F, .22 caliber cartridge; G, ox bow pin.

69

70

Texas Archeological Society

Type 2
This specimen is 1 mm thick, 23 mm long and 12 mm wide at the widest part.
One edge has coarse file marks, and another edge appears to have been cut (Figure
6, C). It cannot be identified, but it may be a scrap from making a projectile point.
Type 3
A fragment of a horseshoe nail, broken at the distal end, 28 mm long (Figure
6, D).

Type 4
A tubular metal tinkler contained a glass bead in the narrow part (Figure 6, E).
Jay C. Blaine (personal communication, June 14, 1975) stated that it was a common
practice--in order to prevent loss of the tinkler--to string a sinew with a bead at the
end through the narrow or distal opening. The sinew was then attached with the
tinkler to the garment. The tinkler was made from a thin iron strip which was
possibly from a metal can. It is conical, 23.5 mm long, 7 mm wide at the proximal
end, and 3 mm wide at the distal end.
Type 5
A .22 caliber rimfire short cartridge case was found. The base has an H
trademark (Figure 6, F). The time of its use can not be determined. The H was first
put on the heads of cartridges in the early 1870s and has continued into recent times
(Wilson, personal communication, January 23, 1987).
Type 6
A hand-forged iron artifact (Figure 6, G) has the proximal end rounded on one
side, forming a blunt end. The distal end was split along the forged union of the two
pieces comprising the shaft and curled outward on the proximal end. There is no
evidence of pounding to separate the forged parts. Faint evidence of screw threads
can be discerned near the proximal end just above the rounded part. Apparently two
pieces of iron 106 mm long were forged to form a flat unit. The distal end was then
separated along the seam and curled outward. The unseparated parts were originally
54 mm thick. The edge with the screw threads is slightly battered. The author was
unable to find a similar object reported, but it was examined by Jay C. Blaine
(written communication, February 7, 1987), who suggested that it might be a pin
to join an ox bow to the yoke. Examination ofox bows and yokes at the Texas Tech
Museum in Lubbock and the Panhandle Plains Museum in Canyon appears to

support Blaine’s opinion.
Area I-Prehistoric Cultural Materials
Lithics
Dart Points
One of two basal fragments of dart points of Edwards chert (Figure 7, A), was
recovered from the surface, and one (Figure 7, B) came from Level 1. They are
corner notched with slightly expanding stems; the bases are slightly rounded and
resemble the Palmiltas point (Suhm and Jelks 1962:229-230).

Word~1975 TAS Field School

71

D
A

B

C

G
H
0

5 CENTIMETERS

Figure 7. Stone artifacts: A and B, Palmillas point fragments; C, Fresno point; D, Cuney
point; E, preform; F, Combination tool; G and H, scrapers.

Arrowpoints
Two complete arrowpoints and two basal fragments were recovered; one from
the surface, two from Level 1, and one from either Level 1 or 2 (the field notes are
not precise as to location).

72

Texas Archeological Society

Type 1.--A complete Fresno point (Suhm and Jelks 1962:273-274) from either
Level 1 or 2 is of Tecovas jasper, with convex sides, 25 mm long and 14 mm wide
at the base (Figure 7, C). It is crudely made and could be a preform. Two basal
fragments of Edwards chert with slightly concave bases were recovered from Level
2.
Type 2.--A Cuney point of Edwards chert (Suhm and Jelks 1962:271-273)
from Level 1 (Figure 7, D) is well barbed from the comer of the slightly bifurcated
base. It is about 22 mm long, and 12 mm wide at the barbs; the edges of the blade
are straight. It does not correspond exactly to the illustrations and description of the
Cuney point as defined by Suhm and Jelks, but there is a strong similarity in
characteristics other than the basal notch.
Bifaces
One complete biface of Tecovas jasper, probably a preform (Figure 7, E), from
either Level 1 or 2 is 62 mm long and 24 mm wide. There are also six midsections
of bifaces and the distal end of a biface that could be the end of a dart point. None
have evidence of bevelling, but they could be midsection knives. One fragment is
an off-white Alibates agate from the Alibates Dolomite (upper part of the Quartermaster Formation, Permian; Holliday and Welty 1981), and the other six are of
Edwards chert.
Scrapers
Four scrapers, two of Edwards chert and two of Tecovas jasper.
Type 1.--This specimen, found on the surface, is a fragment of a side scraper
that was converted into a combination tool, 48 mm long and 24 mm wide. A small
spokeshave 6 mm wide and 2 mm deep was formed on the edge of the scraper, and
a graver was formed from the fractured part, the fracture being used to form the beak
of the graver (Figure 7, F).
Type 2:-- The other three scrapers are end scrapers. The smallest, 25 mm long
and 18 mm wide, was made from Tecovas jasper (Figure 7, G). The other two are
more typical of the type since they match the usual size of this artifact. One is of
Tecovas jasper, measuring 37 mm by 30 mm, and the third scraper, 39 mm long and
26 mm wide, is of Edwards chert (Figure.7, H). Two were recovered from Level 1,
and the third was found in Level 2.
Spokeshave
A single white quartzite spokeshave was recovered from Level 1 (Figure 8, A).
The notch is 8 mm wide and 4 mm deep.

Drills
Two drills or perforators of Edwards chert were recovered from Level 1; one,
a fragment and the other, a complete specimen (Figure 8, B and C). The bit of each
specimen is well worked on both surfaces. The complete specimen is 22 mm long;
the proximal end, or base, is convex and only 8 mm long, not altered from the
original flake.
Pigment
A small (12 mm) piece of malachite was recovered from Level 1. The surface
is irregular and lumpy, and there is no evidence of smoothing.

Wordm1975 TAS Field School

73

E

0

5 CENTIMETERS

Figure 8. Stone artifacts: A, spokeshave; B and C, drills; D and E, mano fragments; F,
metate fragment.

Abraded Stone
Three fragments of abrading artifacts were recovered.
Type 1.--Two fragments of manos were recovered from Level 1. One is of a
relatively coarse, dark tan sandstone (Figure 8, D) and has a slightly convex
abrading surface. The second specimen is of very light red or dark pink quartz with

74

Texas Areheological Society

a convex surface. The manner in which it was fractured suggests that it may have
been used as a boiling stone (Figure 8, E).
Type 2.--The third fragment was also recovered from Level 1. It is off-white
and is of very fine grained limestone with fine sand inclusions. Its slightly concave
surface suggests that it was a metate (Figure 8, F).
Lithic Debris
Only 4 of 52 units were excavated below Level 2 (20-40 cm), so these four units
are not included in the analysis of lithic debris to determine the density of
occupation. In all, 1,120 lithic flakes and chips were analyzed.
Level I (0-20 cm).--The total of lithic debris from Level 1 was 874 specimens.
Edwards chert totaled 485 specimens (55.52 percent), Alibates agate totaled 55
specimens (6.21 percent), and Tecovas jasper was represented by 169 flakes and
chips (19.31 percent). Obsidian totaled 14 specimens (1.61 percent). Quartz,
available just to the east of the site where the Ogalalla gravels are exposed, accounts
for 14 specimens (1.61 percent). Local materials from the limestone exposures in
the face of the nearby Caprock account for 101 specimens (11.60 percent of the
total), and a lithic material whose source is unknown is called Other, for a total of
36 (4.13 percent).
Level 2 (20-40 cm) .~The sum of all lithic debris for Level 2 was 247.
Edwards chert was the dominant material with 134 specimens (54.36 percent).
Alibates agate continued to be a minor lithic source with 17 specimens (6.25
percent). Tecovas jasper was represented by 50 specimens (20.48 percent). Three
obsidian flakes and chips (1.08 percent) and four specimens of quartz debris were
recovered (1.75 percent). Local material was the third most common lithic material
utilized, accounting for 30 specimens (12.20 percent), and Other material accounted for 9 specimens (3.78 percent).

Table 1. Analysis of Lithic Debris: Area 1 (41FLI-1)
Level 1
0-20 cm

N

%

Total
0-40 cm
N

Lithic Type

N

Edwards
Alibates
Tecovas
Obsidian
Quartz
Local
Other

485
55
169
14
14
101
36

55.52
6.21
19.31
1.61
1.61
11.60
4.13

134
17
50
3
4
30
9

54.36
6.25
20.48
1.08
1.75
12.20
3.78

619
72
219
17
18
131
45

874

99.99

247

99.99

1,121

TOTAL

%

Level 2
20-40 cm

%
55.22
6.42
19.53
1.52
1.61
11.69
4.01
100.01

Word

1975 TAS Field School

75

Bone and Shell

Awl
The distal fragment of a bone awl was recovered in Level 1 (Figure 9, A). It
was formed from a segment of a large bone, is subrectangular in cross section (at
the extreme distal part it is triangular in cross section), and 22 mm long. Wear is
visible along the entire length of the fragment, and the inner (calcareous) surface has
been worn or removed by use.
Butchering Marks and Alteration by Percussion
Type 1. Four fragments of ribs with transverse cut marks (Figure 9, B, C) were
recovered from Level 1
Type 2.--This type has evidence of battering or percussion (Figure 9, D). Level
1 produced five specimens. A single rib altered by percussion and three battered
phalanxes were recovered from Level 1, and a battered phalanx and vertebra were
recovered from Level 2.
Faunal Remains
One hundred ten animal bones were recovered in Area 1. Of this total, 99 were
bison (Speer 1976:1-3), and Schultz (n.d.) identified four antelope or deer
metapodials, four bird bones, and three snake bones. No information as to level
number was provided in Schultz’s analysis of the animals smaller than bison.
Seventy-five identifiable and fragmentary bison bones were recovered from
Level 1 (Speer 1976). Lower foot bones consisting of phalanxes, tarsals, metacarpals, carpels, and sesamoids accounted for 41 specimens (54.67 percent). Upper
limb bones consisting of femurs, tibiae, and fragments of sufficient size for
identification as limb bones totaled 9 specimens (12 percent). There were six ribs
(8 percent), fragments of three mandibles (4 percent), 6 vertebra fragments (8
percent), 6 teeth and molars (8 percent), and 3 (4 percent) fragments too small to be
identified but probably from bison.
Eighteen specimens were recovered from Level 2:9 lower foot bones (50
percent), consisting of phalanxes, tarsals, metacarpals, carpels, and sesamoids, a
single tibia and radius (11.11 percent), a fragment of a cranium (5.56 percent),
vertebrae (11.11 percent), two teeth (11.11 percent), and two fragments too small
to be identified but probably from bison (11.11 percent).
Only six specimens came from Level 3: two phalanxes (33.33 percent), a
fragment of a femur (16.16 percent), and a fragment of a limb bone, a fragmentary
vertebra, and a fragment too small to be identified (16.67 percent each).
Shell Bead
One round, flat shell bead was recovered from Level 1 (Figure 9, E). It is 5 mm
in diameter and 1 mm thick. The perforation for stringing, which is 1 mm in
diameter, does not have the typical cone shape characteristic of beads of this type
that are drilled with a lithic drill, so a historic metal drill probably was used to make
the perforation.

76

Texas Archeological Society

A

B

C

/

D
0
I

l

I

!

I

5 CENTIMETERS
,!

Figure 9. Bone and shell artifacts: A, awl; B and C, artifacts with transverse cut marks; D,
battered bone with cut marks; E, shell bead.

Word--1975 TAS Field School

77

Pottery
Seventy prehistoric sherds were recovered from Area 1. Of this total 43 were
described as Local Wares by Runyon and Hedrick (n.d.) based on clay samples from
nearby sources provided by the author. Six sherds probably originated in eastern and
central New Mexico, and 25 are possibly of Caddoan origin. A single sherd of
Jornado Mogollon Brown was recovered, and four specimens are of Pecos Glaze II
or III. Runyon and Hedrick classified all of the sherds.
Type 1 (Local Variety)
This group was the most numerous, with 29 specimens. The tan to orange-buff
to gray sherds are of coiled construction. The paste is fine and slightly porous, with
moderate density, the surface is smooth and floated, and the core is sharply defined
by a light gray central streak. The temper, which accounts for 30 to 35 percent of
the sherd mass, is 80 percent very fine, clear quartz, 15 percent small tan clay balls,
and 5 percent white dolomite. The vessels are small bowls and jars, with rounded
rims; this type accounts for 36.71 percent of the total sherds recovered.
Runyon and Hedrick’s description of Type 1 (Local Variety) resembles the
Little Deer sherd type as described by Parker from the Bridwell site (1982:58-59)
and by Baugh from the Edwards I site (1982:75-81).
Type 2 (Local Variety)
This type was represented by 14 specimens (17.72 percent of the total
recovered sherds). Thirty percent of the sherds have temper consisting of 70 percent
very fine quartz and 30 percent crushed limestone. The sherds are dark gray with
fine-to-medium porous paste and gray cores with no streaking. The method of
construction of the vessels (small jars and bowls) could not be determined. No rim
sherds were recovered.
Type 3 (Eastern and Central New Mexico)
Type 3 vessels are of coiled construction and are represented by six sherds (7.60
percent of the total). The exteriors are dark gray, corrugated, and slipped with a
carbon wash. The interiors are smooth but not carbon slipped. Temper comprises
30 percent of the sherd mass, of which 60 percent is white to brownish feldspar of
very fine texture. Colorless subrounded quartz comprises 30 percent of the tempering material, and golden mica flakes make up the remainder of the tempering
material. The origin of these sherds was probably eastern and central New Mexico.
Type 4 (Caddoan)
The second most common sherd type is represented by 25 percent of the
specimens (31.65 percent of the total). It was not possible to determine the vessel
types due to the small size of the sherds. They are of coiled construction, tan to light
gray, and have gray-to-black cores with well-defined central streaks. The surfaces
are smoothed and semifloated. The temper makes up 30 percent of the sherd mass;
it consists of very fine, colorless, subrounded sand (90 percent) and white crushed
shell (10 percent). The sherds are weathered from leaching of the shell temper.
Runyon and Hedrick (n.d.) postulated that the source of this variety is Caddoan
because of the shell temper and the similarity to Caddoan utility wares.

78

Texas Archeological Society

Type 5 (Jornado Mogollon Brown)
Jornado Mogollon Brown is represented by a single sherd (1.27 percent of the
sherds recovered) (Mera 1943; Runyan and Hedrick n.d.; Lehmer 1948; Jelinek
1967), of coiled construction from an undecorated tan-to-gray bowl with a tan,
slightly porous core. The sherd is 40 percent temper, of which 60 percent is white
feldspar of very f’me quality and white in color, made angular from crushing. Very
fine clear-to-opaque quartz comprises 30 percent of the temper; 10 percent is golden
platy mica.
Type 6 (Pecos Glaze H or lll)
Pecos Glaze II or III (Kidder and Sheppard 1936) is represented by four tan-tolight red sherds (5.06 percent of the sherds recovered). Surface decoration is a
glazed, black design 30 mm below the rim. The paste is fine to medium and slightly
porous. The core is tan with no streaks; it is the same color from the surface to the
interior of the sherd. The clay is from the Rio Grande basin. Thirty percent of the
sherd is the temper, 60 percent of which is very fine white feldspar and 40 percent
of which is very fine black, angular hornblende. There is very slight evidence of
magnetite.
The author reported (Word 1963:56-57) that other western varieties were
recovered from Area 1; Pecos Glaze wares and MogoUon types were recovered in
the western part and local varieties and Caddoan sherds were more dense in the
eastern part of this area.
Features
Five hearths were exposed. However, due to shortage of time, none were
completely excavated, but estimates of size based on extending the curvature of the
exposed edges of the feature indicate that the hearths varied in diameter from about
.5 to 1.35 meters and were bowl shaped in cross section. The basins of the hearths
were lined with limestone from the nearby Caprock escarpment. Reuse of the
hearths was evident, for in one instance a hearth had been cleaned out and reused
0~igure 10). The original hearth had a light charcoal stain, and some of the hearth
stones had been discarded. No lining of hearth stones had been added when the
hearth was reused.
One hearth has been used as a trash pit; in it were 35 pieces of lithic debris, only
one of which had been fire fractured. Other cultural material in the hearth included
11 bone fragments, only one of which was burned,a graver, a utilized flake, a single
fragment of a bifacial tool, and a basal fragment of a triangular point similar to a
Fresno point (Suhm and Jelks 1962:273-274). It is evident from these artifacts that
the hearth had two episodes of use.
Area 2 (41FL1-2)
Area 2 is about 100 meters south of Area 1, on the south bank of the White
River. It is on the east side of the Floydada Country Club’s No. 7 fairway and just
south of the No. 7 green.
In order to establish a base line for testing, an arbitrary north was established
at 45 degrees west of true north; the baseline parallels the White River.

Word--1975 TAS Field School

U45

79

U46

0

Q

4O
t
CENTIMETERS

[]
c:~

Figure 10. Cross section of reused hearth, Units 45 and 46, Area 1.

Nineteen randomly located 1-meter squares were excavated in Test Area 1 to
determine whether the occupation varied over the area (Figure 11). Eleven 1-meter
units in Test Area 1 were excavated to 40 cm depth, two were excavated to 50 cm,
and six, to 60 cm. The author (Word 1963:46) made a test in the extreme eastem
part of the area and found there a concentration of bison bones that were exposed
in the bank of a borrow pit, so 12 more 1-meter squares were sunk in this part of the
site (Test Area 2) to investigate the possibility of more bone concentration and to
determine whether different periods of occupation were separated stratigraphically
(Figure 11). Four units "stair-stepped" down the slope of the borrow pit were
excavated to a depth of 40 cm. Just to the east, another test of five stair-stepped units
was excavated to a depth of 40 cm, and three units to the east of the previous test also
were excavated to 40 cm.
In general, in the main part of the site (except for the stair-stepped tests) there
was no evidence of any sudden soil change; the soil changed gradually from light
reddish brown to light brown. The soil contained fine particles of charcoal, lithic
debris, fragmented bone scraps, and an occasional hearthstone, but the soil was
generally homogeneous in texture. Rodent burrows and nests, and insect burrows
containing deposits of seeds were common. The soil had a high percentage of windblown sand mixed with clay; when it was dry, it became very hard, compact, and
difficult to trowel.
In Test Area 2, light brown, sandy clay extended to the depth of the stairstepped excavation. Because Area 2 is from 1 to 2 meters lower, it is subject to
flooding, which is probably the cause for its consistency of soil color and texture.
The soil contained lithics, sherds, and fragmented faunal remains, but, since this
area is subject to flooding, no rodent burrows.

80

Texas Archeological Society

\

Figure 11. Topographic map of Area 2, showing units tested and Test Areas 1 and 2.

Area 2-Cultural Materials
Historic Artifacts
Nine historic artifacts were recovered, two of which were on the surface and
were obviously associated with Floydada Country Club golfing activities. One is an
aluminum pop top device used to open a beverage can; the second is a wooden golf
tee.

Glass and Ceramics
Type 1.--Two small fragments of brown bottle glass were recovered, one of
which has small round raised dots. It is slightly concave and is probably a basal
fragment.The circular dots are 1.5 mm in diameter, spaced 1.5 mm apart. This
fragment is 13 mm long, 11 mm wide, and 5 mm thick. The second fragment of glass
is 15 mm long, 8 mm wide, and 1.5 mm thick. Both were recovered from the surface
and were probably fragments of beer bottles.

Wordw1975 TAS Field School

81

Type 2.--Five sherds of white crockery were recovered, all from the surface.
Four were recovered from Unit 8 and fit together to form what appears to be part of
the base of a large vessel, since they are flat and have potter’s wheel impressions.
These sherds are white on both the inner and outer surfaces and are 8 mm thick, with
highly glazed outer surfaces and not as heavily glazed inner surfaces. The paste is
very fine grained white clay; occasional small air pockets exposed on the surface do
not exceed 1 mm in diameter.
The fifth sherd, recovered from Unit 33, which is 21 meters to the east in Area
2, Test Area 2, is similar to the previously described crockery sherds. Both the inner
and outer surfaces are highly glazed and slightly curved, suggesting that it was a
body fragment of a large crockery vessel. It is 6 mm thick. In spite of the significant
distance separating the fifth sherd from the others, all five sherds are believed to be
from the same vessel.
Unfortunately, because the sherds have no trademarks or decoration, it is
impossible to identify the manufacturer or to determine the approximate date of
manufacture. Crockery of this type has been made since the nineteenth century and
is still being produced.
Lithics
Arrowpoints
Three projectile points and 10 fragments of projectile points were recovered.
Type 1. Two Fresno arrowpoints were recovered (Suhm and Jelks
1962:273-274). One of the points, from Level 1 (0-20 cm), is of light gray Edwards
chert and has a broken basal comer (Figure 12, A). It is 26 mm long, and the width
at the slightly concave base is estimated to have been 14 mm. The second specimen,
made of Tecovas jasper (Figure 12, B), was recovered from Level 2 (20-40 cm). It
is a complete specimen, 14 mm long and 11 mm wide at the base. The sides are
convex and the base is concave. It is probably reshaping of the distal end that
accounts for its short length.
Type 2.--A single fragmented projectile point of Tecovas jasper recovered
from Level 1 is either a Harrell (Bell 1958:30) or a Washita arrowpoint (ibid.:99).
The basal part has been broken off just below the side notches, and the distal end is
broken off; the original length is estimated at 22 mm. It is 12 mm wide just above
the lateral notches (Figure 12, C).
Ten fragments of arrowpoints were recovered, three of Edwards chert and
seven of Tecovas jasper. Two proximal fragments cannot be identified as projectile
points, and six distal fragments are probably from points.
Scrapers
Six scrapers were recovered, five of Tecovas jasper and one of Alibates agate.
Type 1.--No side scrapers or fragments of this type were recovered.
Type 2.~The six end scrapers vary considerably in size. The smallest, 18 mm
long and 13 mm wide at the distal end (Figure 12, D), was made from Alibates agate.
The largest, 38 mm long and 16 mm wide (Figure 12, E), is of Tecovas jasper. The
remaining four specimens are fragments of this variety. Four of the six specimens
were recovered from Level 1, one, from Level 2, and one was at unknown depth.

82

Texas Archeological Society

D

F

E

G

K
0

5 CENTIMETERS
i

Figure 12. A and B, Fresno point; C, Harrell or Washita point; D and E, end scrapers; F,
drill; G, spokeshave; H, graver; I, biface; J and K, bone beads; L, shell bead.

Drill
A single drill, or perforator, of Tecovasjasper was recovered from Level 1. The
unaltered proximal end is 33 mm wide, and the drill stem is 20 mm long. The distal
end is broken, so the exact length cannot be determined (Figure 12, F).

Wordm1975 TAS Field School

83

Spokeshave
A single spokeshave of Alibates agate, made from a large flake 49 mm long,
29 mm wide, and 12 mm thick, was recovered from Level 2 (Figure 12 G). The
lateral part has a slight concave indention 15 mm wide and 5 mm deep. On one end
a small spokeshave 6 mm wide and 3 mm deep was formed.
Graver
A single graver recovered from Level 1 was made by lightly chipping a flake
of Tecovas jasper (Figure 12, H).
Bifaces
Two fragments of unidentifiable bifaces were recovered. One, found in Level
1, is of limestone from the nearby Caprock. Two complete preforms were also
recovered. One of the specimens, made from Tecovas jasper (Figure 12, I), is
triangular, 34 mm long, has a maximum width of 22 ram, and convex sides and base;
its provenience was not recorded. The second specimen, a flake altered by
percussion, was also formed from Tecovas jasper; it is 59 mm long and 23 mm wide.
Utilized Flakes
Twenty utilized flakes were recovered. Five (25 percent) were made from
Edwards chert. A single specimen of Alibates agate (5 percent) and 14 (70 percent)
are of Tecovas jasper. Five were recovered from Level 1, 12 from Level 2, and the
remaining 3, from Level 3.
These artifacts were not intentionally made, but are the result of usage. Nine of
the 20 specimens appear to be complete. The other 11 are fragments that were
probably originally flakes. The complete specimens vary in size from 19 mm to 31
mm. The use flakes are on the convex surfaces.
The author, in experimenting with small flakes to butcher deer and groove
bones, discovered that during these operations small flakes varying from .05 mm to
1 mm were removed from the convex surfaces. It was also found that continued use
of flakes for severing bone created relatively steep edges, similar to the edges of
scrapers, but that the flakes removed were of the previously mentioned dimensions.
Lithic Debris
Thirty-two units were excavated in Area 2. Twenty of these were excavated to
Level 2 (20-40 cm), and in one unit, Levels 2 and 3 (40-60 cm) were combined into
one level extending from 20 cm to 60 cm.
To determine if the density of occupation varied in time, comparisons were
confined to the 20 units excavated through Level 2. Amounts of lithic debris were
calculated by level. From the total of 894 flakes and chips recovered, Level 1 yielded
557 specimens (62.30 percent), and Level 2 had 337 specimens (37.70 percent).
From these statistics it appears that Area 1 was more heavily occupied in Protohistoric times. Occupation tended to be less dense in the Late Prehistoric period. This
bears out Hughes’s (n.d.) theory in his "Chronology of Hunting Cultures on the
Southern Plains" that bison were not plentiful until after about A.D. 1~.
In order to determine what lithic sources were exploited by the people
occupying this area, the lithics were analyzed by type. In Level 1 Edwards chert was
represented by 62 specimens (11.13 percent), Alibates agate by 156 specimens

84

Texas Archeological Society

(28.01 percent), Tecovas jasper--the most common type--by 252 specimens
(45.24 percent), Local material from the nearby Caprock by 42 specimens (7.54
percent), and Other lithics of unknown source, by 41 specimens (7.36 percent).
Quataz and Potter chert (Pliocene) produced two examples each, or .36 percent.

Table 2. Analysis of Lithic Debris: Area 2 (41FL1-2)
Level 1
0-20 cm

Level 2
20-40 cm

Lithic Type

N

Edwards
Alibates
Tecovas
Obsidian
Quartz
Local
Other
Potter

62
156
252
2
42
41
2

11.13
28.01
45.24
.36
7.54
7.36
.36

32
117
158
1
25
4
-

9.50
34.72
46.88
.30
7.42
1.19
-

94
273
410
1
2
67
45
2

10.51
30.54
45.86
.11
.22
7.50
5.03
.22

557

100.00

337

100.01

894

99.99

Total

%

N

%

Total
0-40 cm
N

%

There were 337 fragments oflithic debris in Level 2:32 of Edwards chert (9.50
percent), 117 of Alibates agate (34.72 percent), 158 of Tecovas jasper, which
continued to be the most common material with 46.88 percent, a single obsidian
flake (.30 percent), 25 Local lithics (7.42 percent), and 4 Other lithics (1.9 percent).

Ground Stone
Type 1.--A complete mano was recovered from Level 2. The abrading surface
is slightly convex and was pecked to enhance its efficiency. The opposite surface
is slightly concave and smooth, suggesting that it is a mano. It is subrectangular with
rounded comers, 117 mm long, 83 mm wide, and from 12 to 28 mm thick.
Two fragments of quartzite manos were also recovered from Level 2. Their
strongly convex grinding surfaces are the basis for their classification as manos.
Type 2.--A fragment of a metate identified by its slightly concave surface was
recovered from Level 1. The abrading surface was pecked to enhance its efficiency,
but the opposite surface was not altered. This fragment is 53 mm long and wide and
is 34 mm thick.
Type 3.---Three fragments of an abrading stone that probably was a palette for
grinding pigment were recovered from the same unit (Unit 25) in Level 2. Two of
the fragments fit together, but it is impossible to determine the original dimensions
of the artifact. It is 5 mm thick at its rounded edge and 4 mm thick toward its inner
surface. It was made from a single piece of fine-grained sandstone containing
minute particles of mica.

Wordm1975 TAS Field School

85

Cores

Two cores of stone from the nearby Caprock were recovered, one from Level
2 and the other from Level 3. They were reduced from their original size by
percussion. Flakes were removed from all sides of the larger specimen, which
measures 69 ram. Percussion flakes were removed from only one side of the second
specimen, which is 95 mm long, 60 mm wide, and 33 mm thick.
Pigment
Type !.--Four small fragments of hematite were recovered, two from Level 1
and two from Level 2. One specimen contains very fine grained sand and has a
smoothed surface. The second specimen contains fine-grained sand and is smoothed
on one surface. The third specimen is of greater density and does not have a
smoothed surface. The fourth example is a fragment of petrified wood of soft texture
with no smoothed surface.
Type 2~.-A single small, pebblelike specimen of limonite was recovered from
Level 2. It is very soft in texture.
Faunal Remains
Bone and Shell
Type !.--Two fragments of ribs, one from Level 1 and the other from Level 2,
had cut marks resulting from butchering processes.
Type 2.--A single rib fragment recovered from Level 2 had evidence of sawing
at both ends.
Type 3.--A fragment of a scapula with smoothed surfaces was found in Level
3.
Type 4. A scapula fragment with a notched edge was recovered in Level 2. Its
function could not be determined.
Type 5.--A battered fragment of a vertebra was recovered from Level 1.
NOTE: The faunal remains with evidence of processing were not included in
the cultural material received by the author. The descriptions above are based on the
analysis of faunal remains by Speer (1976).
Type 6:--A circular bone bead 5 mm in diameter and 1 mm thick Figure 12,
J) was recovered from Level 2. The slightly biconical perforation for stringing is 2
mm in diameter.
Type 7.---A fragment of what was possibly a tubular bone bead made from a
bird bone was recovered from Level 4 (from the stair-stepped excavation in subTest Area 2). There is evidence that one end was cut, and a groove on the vertical
axis varies from 1 mm to 2 mm from the cut to the end. Two other diagonal grooves,
parallel to the previously described groove are from 6 to 7 mm long. These two
grooves are 4.5 mm apart, and inside them are two grooves 8 mm long that angle
toward the distal third groove and join to form a triangular design Figure 12, K).
Type 8:--A small fragment of burned bone was recovered from Level 5 (in the
stair-stepped excavation in sub-Test Area 2). Due to the small size of the fragment,
its original size and function cannot be determined. A V-shaped groove has been
cut into the bone.

86

Texas Archeological Society

Shell Bead
A circular shell bead 4.5 mm in diameter with a perforation 1 mm in diameter
and 1 mm thick was recovered from Level 1 (Figure 12, L). The perforation has
parallel sides, possibly the result of being drilled by a metal drill.
Other Faunal Remains
One hundred twenty-one animal bones were recovered in Area 2. Of this total,
85 (70.25 percent) were bison (Speer 1976:4-6); Schultz (n.d.) identified 36
specimens of animals smaller than bison (29.75 percent). An antelope third phalanx
and a canine molar were also recovered. The remaining 24 faunal remains consisted
of one prairie dog ulna, 11 mole remains, one gopher bone, one cotton rat bone, and
three pocket mouse bones. Reptiles were represented by two snake vertebrae and
fragments of a tortoise carapace and plastron. Two frog or toad limbs were
recovered, and bird bones consisted of a pelvis, a scapula, and a corpus.
Level 1 yielded 14 bison bones: two lower foot bones (14.29 percent),
consisting of a single metapodial and phalynx, one radius and one rib (7.14 percent
each), four vertebrae (28.57 percent), two fragments (14.29 percent), obviously of
limb bones, a single skull fragment (1.74 percent), and three teeth (21.43 percent).
Sixty-three bison bones were recovered from Level 2:. 11 lower foot bones
(17A6 percent), consisting of metapodials, tarsals, carpals, phalanxes, sesamoids
(17.46 percent), nine upper limb bone fragments, consisting of femurs, humeri,
tibiae, and radii (14.29 percent), 12 fragments of what were obviously limb bones
(19.05 percent), a single fragmentary scapula (1.59 percent), eight ribs (12.70
percent), five vertebrae fragments (7.94 percent), two pelvis fragments (3.17
percent), four fragments of skulls and mandibles (12.70 percent each), and seven
teeth (11.11 percent of the faunal remains recovered).
Level 3 yielded only eight bison bone fragments: three lower foot bones (one
phalanyx, one carpal, and one sesamoid (7.50 percent), one rib fragment, one
fragment of a scapula, and one skull fragment (12.50 percent each of the total).
Pottery
Twenty-seven prehistoric sherds were recovered from Area 2, eighteen of
which probably originated in eastern and central New Mexico. Five specimens were
of El Paso Brown Ware, and four were of Chupadero Black-on-White. Eighteen
sherds are of a corrugated type of pottery. Runyon and Hedrick (n.d.) classified the
sherds.

Type 1 (El Paso Brown)
This sherd variety is represented by five specimens from an undecorated bowl
(18.52 percent of the total sherds recovered) (Mera 1943; Runyon and Hedrick
1973; Lehmer 1948; Jelinek 1967). The sherds are tan to gray, and the tan core is
slightly porous. The sherds are 40 percent temper, of which 60 percent is very fine
textured white feldspar that is angular from crushing. Very fine clear to opaque
quartz makes up 30 percent of the temper, and golden, platy mica makes up 10
percent.

Word--1975 TAS Field School

87

Type 2 (Corrugated Variety)
This type is of coiled construction and is represented by 18 sherds (66.67
percent of the total sherds recovered). The exterior is dark gray, corrugated, and
slipped with a carbon wash. The interior is smoothed but not slipped with carbon.
Temper comprises 30 percent of the sherd mass, of which 60 percent is very fine
white to brownish feldspar. Colorless subrounded quartz sand makes up 30 percent
of the temper, and golden mica flakes make up 10 percent. These sherds probably
originated in eastern and central New Mexico ~unyon and Hedrick n.d.).
Type 3 (Chupadero Black-on-White)
The four sherds of this variety (14.82 percent of the total sherds recovered)
(Mera 1931; Hawley 1950; Runyon and Hedrick 1973; Breternitz 1966) are of
coiled construction, grayish white with black paint on the slip, of silky fine, dense
paste, and have a gray, very dense core, with no central streak. Kaolinite was used
in the vessels, and the surfaces are smooth and thinly slipped. The tempering
material is 20 percent of the sherd mass, 90 percent very fine to fine colorless
subrounded quartz sand, and 10 percent yellowish white limestone.
Feature
Grass-impressed daub weighing 3,547 g was recovered from Level 1 (0-20 cm)
and 5,251.8 g was recovered from Level 2 (20-40 cm). The area comprising Units
2 and 4; Units 3, 31,33, 34, and 35; and Units 7, 10, and 26 yielded 3,420.4 g of daub
(96.44 percent of the total recovered from Level 1). The same units yielded 5,117.2
g from Level 2 (97.43 percent of the recovered daub). The outlining units that were
tested yielded only 3.56 percent of the daub from Level 1 and 2.57 percent of the
daub from Level 2. This indicates that the feature was confined principally to an area
of about 105.0 cm from east to west and 60.0 cm from north to south ~igure 13).
Within this concentration of grass-impressed daub was evidence of a structure
of undetermined size and construction. In Units 7,10, and 26 and Units 2 and 4, there
were compacted surfaces varying from 4 to 10 cm in diameter at about 14 cm depth.
Unfortunately the excavations were watered down each evening in order to
facilitate the removal of the matrix. Dr. Jack T. Hughes (oral communication, June
13,1975), upon examining these compacted surfaces, stated that the excavators had
inadvertently dug through remnants of a floor or living area, not realizing that a floor
or living surface was there.
Field notes recorded what were possibly three post holes in Unit 4, but none
were cross sectioned to determine whether they were post holes or rodent burrows.
Area 3 (41FL1-3)

Area 3 is about 250 meters east of Area I on the south hank of the White River,
west of an older oxbow of the river. The area tested is east of the Floydada Country
Club’s No. 1 fairway.
Following the same procedure as in Area 1, a nail was driven into a hackberry
tree to serve as the datum point for Area 3, and all elevations were recorded from
this point. An east-west base line was extended westward from this datum point, and

88

Texas Archeological Society

Grid N

~~

1/N

L//

i

"

Daub concentration

10

\\

3
\

0

’

\
\\

I

35

2

34
....

~ METER

Figure 13. Plan of the area of daub concentrations, Area 2, Test area 1.

a north-south base line was laid out intersecting the first line 11 meters west of the
datum point (Figure 14). Twenty-four 1 by 1-meter units were tested. Twenty units
were excavated to the 30 cm depth, 14 to the 40 cm depth, nine to the 50 cm depth,
and a single unit was excavated to a depth of 70 cm. When a feature was discovered,
additional units were opened to expose as much of the feature as time allowed. Units
were excavated in 10 cm levels; a line level was used for horizontal control. The
reference point for each unit was the grid reading at its southwest comer.
Area 3-Soil Description
Of the 24 units tested, only Unit 10 was excavated to 70 cm. No features were
recorded in this unit, but the excavation provides an opportunity to describe the soils
(Figure 15).
Level 1 (0-10 cm)
The soil is brown, sandy, compact loam. The roots of the native grasses that
covered the surface extend down throughout this level. Specks of charcoal and signs
of rodent activity are common throughout.
Level 2 (10--20 cm)
The soil color and consistency are unchanged. Grass roots, charcoal specks,
and signs of rodent activity continue.

Wordm1975 TAS Field School

[]

89

[]

[]
Area 3

N
22
27

x Datum point

[] Excavated unit

~

Tree

0

5

10 METERS
I

Figure 14. Topographic map of Area 3, showing units tested.

Level 3 (20-30 cm)
Soil characteristics are similar to Levels 1 and 2. Grass roots do not penetrate
below the 25 cm level, but signs of rodent activity continue.
Level 4 (30--40 cm)
The matrix is similar to but less dense than that in the upper levels. However,
an irregular surface was found from 32 cm to the 40 cm depth ~igure 15). Color
changes below this irregular surface to a light brown-gray loam with small caliche
nodules varying in size from 1 to 5 mm. Charcoal specks decrease in number, and
signs of rodent activity disappear in the lower part of the level.

90 Texas ArcheologicaI Society

cmI
~,round Level-

10
20
30

405O
60
7O

Brown sandy loam
Light brown sandy loam
Dark brown-gray soil
Rodent activity
Grass roots

~

Figure 15. Profile of Unit 10, Area 3, showing soil changes.

Level 5 (40-50 cm)
The soil is of the same texture and color as in the lower part of Level 4. Charcoal
specks are scarce.
Level 6 (50-60 cm)
The content and texture of the matrix are similar to those of Level 5.
Level 7 (60-70 cm)
The soil gradually changes from light brown-gray to darker brown-gray at the
63 cm level. From 63 cm to the 70 cm level caliche pebbles increase in frequency
and measure as much as 10 cm. Charcoal becomes scarce, with only an occasional
small speck appearing.

Wordm1975 TAS Field School

91

Area 3-Cultural Materials
Area 3 was excavated in 10 cm levels in contrast to Areas 1 and 2, which were
excavated in 20 cm levels. In order to facilitate statistical comparison of the density
of occupation of Area 3 with that of Areas 1 and 2, pairs of 10 cm levels in Area 3
are combined. That is, Levels 1 and 2 of Area 3 are combined to make a 20 cm level,
which corresponds to Level 1 in Areas 1 and 2. The other 10 cm levels in Area 3
are similarly combined in pairs for comparison with Areas 1 and 2.
Historic Artifacts
Eighteen fragments of glass were recovered from the upper part of Level 1
(0-10 cm). The units from which these specimens were recovered are in an area that
has been actively used by golf carts; this accounts for the small size of the glass
particles.
Glass
Type 1.--Five pale, clear translucent green glass fragments vary in size from
6to 11 mm andareas large as 12to21 ram. Itis notpossibletoidentify the original
objects, but they are reminiscent of Coca Cola bottles.
Type 2.---Nine green translucent glass fragments varying from 3 to 6 mm to as
large as 9 to 16 mm were recovered, but the original objects cannot be determined.
Type3. Three clear glass fragments varying in size from 4 to 6 mm to as large
as 7 to 8 mm were recovered. The nature of the original container can not be
determined.
Type 4. A single brown glass fragment was recovered. It measures 12 to 15
mm and has the characteristics of a beer bottle.
Lithics
Arrowpoints
Type 1.--The basal part of a probable Fresno point made from Edwards chert
was recovered from Level 1 (Suhm and Jelks 1962:273-274). The base is 12 mm
wide and slightly concave. The length can not be determined, since the distance
from the base to the distal part is only 14 mm.
Type 2.~A Harrell arrowpoint (Bell 1958:30) of Tecovas jasper recovered
from Level 1 is 28 mm long and 12 mm wide at the base. The edges are highly
convex. The lateral notches are 8 mm from the base. The base is concave and the
basal notch is an open U ~igure 16 A).
Type 3:--A fragment of a Washita arrowpoint (Bell 1958:99) made from
Edwards chert was recovered from Level 1. The base is straight and is estimated to
have been 15 mm wide; the length is estimated to have been 21 mm. The sides are
slightly convex 0~igure 16, B), and the lateral notches are 6 mm from the concave
base.
Type 4. Two Perdiz arrowpoints (Suhm and Jelks 1962:283-284) were
recovered from Level 1. One, made of light gray Edwards chert, lacks a distal end.
The blade is estimated to have been 38 mm long. The sides of the blade are gently
convex, and the shoulders are slightly barbed. It is 25 mm wide at the base of the
blade. The stem is contracting, and the tip, which was about 10 cm long, is broken

92

Texas Archeological Society

[3

D

E
F

G

K

H
0
.......... J.~,,,,,,,,, t

t

I

5
..~

CENTIMETERS

Figure 16. A, Harrell point; B, Washita point; C and D, Perdiz points; E and F, side
scrapers; G, end scraper; H, combination end and side scraper; I, stem of drill; J, preform;
K~ core.

(Figure 16, C). The second specimen is of obsidian. The distal end is broken, but the
original length is estimated to have been 30 mm. The blade is straight, and the
shoulders are at right angles to the blade. The contracting stem is 3 mm long (Figure
16, D).

Word--1975 TAS Field School

93

Three fragments of what, based on point characteristics, were arrowpoints,
were recovered from Level 1. Two are distal ends, one of Edwards chert mad the
other, of Tecovas jasper. The third specimen is a midsection of Edwards chert.
Scrapers
Scrapers are the most common lithic artifact recovered from Area 3. Four are
made of Tecovas jasper and one each of Alibates agate and Edwards chert. There
are two side scrapers, two end scrapers, and one combination side-end scraper. One
is a fragment too small to classify.
Type 1.--Both of the side scrapers recovered from Level 1 are made from
Tecovas jasper. The largest is 45 mm long and 29 mm wide (Figure 16, E). The
smaller specimen is 37 by 32 mm (Figure 16, F).
Type 2.--One of the two end scrapers recovered from Level 2 is made from
Edwards chert (Figure.16, G). It is 33 mm long and 27 mm wide. The distal end is
steep, or blunt from resharpening. The second specimen, recovered from Level 1,
is a fragment; it is not possible to estimate its original length, but the fragment is 13
mm long and 27 mm wide at the point of fracture. The working surface is blunt,
indicating that it had been resharpened and reused many times.
Type 3. A single combination side-and-end scraper recovered from Level 1
(Figure 16, H) was made from Alibates agate. It is 51 mm long and 26 mm wide.
The side-and-end scraping edges extend from the proximal to the distal end. One
side is broken; it cannot be determined whether the fracture occurred when the
artifact was made or at a later date.
Drill
The distal part, or stem, of a drill or perforator of Tecovas jasper was recovered
from Level 2 (Figure 16, I). The fragment is 20 mm long; in cross section it is slightly
bevelled, suggesting that it had been resharpened. At the broken or proximal end it
is 6 mm wide; at the distal end it tapers to a point.
Preform
A single fragment of a preform made from Tecovas jasper was recovered from
Level 1 (Figure 16, J). It is 52 mm long and 31 mm wide at the point of fracture.
Both sides are percussion flaked.
Core
A core of Tecovas jasper reduced by percussion (Figure 16, K) was recovered
from the lower part of Level 1. It is 47 mm long, 31 mm wide, and 19 mm thick.
Utilized Flakes
Six utilized flakes were recovered, two from Level 1 and four from Level 2.
Four are of Tecovas jasper and two are of Edwards chert. The largest is 41 mm long
and 27 mm wide. The smallest is a fragment 16 mm long and 12 mm wide.
No other lithic artifacts such as manos, metates, or pigments were found in the
1975 TAS Field School excavations.
Lithic Debris
In order to analyze the lithic concentration to determine if there is an increase
or decrease in density of occupation represented by lithic debris, the 14 units

94

Texas Archeological Society

completed through Level 2 (0-40 cm) are compared. Three hundred forty-one
pieces of lithic debitage were recovered. Level 1 (0-20 cm) yielded 194 specimens
(56.89 percent), and Level 2 (20-40) yielded 147 specimens (43.11 percent of the
total.lithics). Lithics were identified by type. Outcrops of Tecovas jasper, of the
Tecovas Formation (Dockum Group, Upper Triassic; Holliday and Welty 1981) are
found 48 to 96 km (30 to 60 miles) north of the Floydada Country Club site. Tecovas
jasper is represented by 121 specimens (62.37 percent). Twenty lithics of Alibates
agate, which occurs in the upper part of the Quartermaster Formation (Permian)
(ibid.) constitute 10.31 percent. Thirty-five specimens (18.04 percent) are of
Edwards chert, which is not found in this area. Seven obsidian flakes (3.61 percent)
came from eastern central New Mexico. Four specimens (2.06 percent) are of
quartz, commonly found as cobbles in the Ogallala Formation (Tertiary). Local
material from the nearby Caprock escarpment accounts for four specimens (2.06
percent). A single flake of Potter chert (.52 percent of the total) came from the
Ogallala Formation (Pliocene). Two specimens (1.03 percent) are of quartzite from
the nearby Tecovas outcrops (Table 3).

Table 3. Analysis of Lithic Debris: Area 3 (41FL1-3)
Level 1
0-20 cm

N

Lithic Type

N

Edwards
Alibates
Tecovas
Obsidian
Qtmrtz
Local
Potter
Tecovas Qtz

35
20
121
7
4
3
1
2

18.04
10.31
62.37
3.61
2.06
2.06
.52
1.02

2"]
15
92
5
3
3
1
1

194

100.00

147

Total

%

Level 2
20-40 cm

Total
0-40 cm
N

%

18.37
10.20
62.59
3.40
2.04
2.04
.68
.68

62
35
213
12
7
7
2
3

18.18
10.26
62.46
3.52
2.05
2.05
.59
.88

100.00

341

99.99

%

Level 2 (20-40 cm) yielded 147 lithics (43.11 percent of the total of 341). There
was a slight variation in the percentage of each type. Ninety-two (62.59 percent) are
of Tecovas jasper; 15 (10.20 percent) are of Alibates agate. Twenty-seven (18.37
percent) are of Edwards chert, and five (3.40 percent) are of obsidian. Quartz and
Local material from the nearby Caprock escarpment were represented by three
examples each (2.04 percent each). Potter chert and Tecovas quartzite were
represented by one specimen each (.68 percent). Judging from the lithic debris
recovered, there appears to be a slightly less density of occupation in Level 2 than
in Level 1.

Word--1975 TAS Field School

95

In the six units excavated through Level 3 (40-60 cm), only 12 lithic specimens
were recovered. Levels 1 and 2 yielded 190 lithics (94.06 percent), and the total for
all three levels was 202, Level 3 accounting for only 5.94 percent. However, six
units---only one-fourth of the total units tested--are not sufficient for accurate
determination of the density of occupation, but it is probable that the density of
occupation was considerably less in the time represented by Level 3.
Bone
Butchering Marks and Alterations from Percussion
Type 1--Twelve specimens with cut or butchering marks were recovered: six
ribs, one humerus, and five fragments of upper limb bones. Two ribs and two upper
limb bone fragments (33.33 percent) were recovered from Level 1. One humerus,
three ribs, and three upper limb bone fragments (58.33 percent) came from Level
2, and a single rib (8.33 percent) was recovered from Level 3.
Type 2.--An axis vertebra was recovered from Level 2 that had transverse cut
marks and was also battered.
Type 3.--A carpal from Level 1 and a larsal from Level 2 had evidence of
battering.
Bones with butchering or cut marks constituted 80 percent of the total. A single
specimen (6.6 percent) had evidence of butchering and battering, and 13.33 percent
of the bones had evidence of battering only.
Fragmented Fa unal Remains
Small fragments of bone too small to be identified are not included in the
following analysis. Thirty-eight fragments that could be identified were recovered.
Fourteen were recovered in Level 1: five lower foot bones (two metatarsals, one
tarsal and two phalanxes), upper limb bones (fragments of one possible femur, one
radius, one humerus, and two limb bones), two rib fragments, and two tooth
fragments. Twenty-one specimens were recovered from Level 2: eight lower foot
bones (five carpals and tarsals, two sesamoids, and a single phalanx), upper limb
bones, four ribs, a single axis vertebra, and four tooth fragments. Level 3 produced
only three specimens consisfi.ng of a single carpal, a fragment of a tibia, and a rib.
The bison remains were analyzed by Speer (1976:7, 8).
Pottery
One hundred seventy-nine prehistoric sherds were recovered from Area 3; 150
were identified as Local wares based on clay samples provided by the author from
sources adjacent to the Floydada Country Club, and six specimens were probably
from the eastern New Mexico and eastern Rio Grande areas. Thirteen specimens
were Jornado Brown (Mogollon), and one Rio Grande Pecos Glaze II or III
specimen was recovered. Runyon and Hea~ck (n.d.) classified all of the sherds,
using microscopic analysis and hydrogen chloride tests.
Type I (Local Variety)
One hundred forty-two sherds are of coiled construction. Sherd color varies
from tan to orange buff to gray; paste is f’me and slightly porous with moderate
density; surfaces are smoothed and floated; cores are sharply defined by light gray

96

Texas Archeological Society

central streaks; temper comprised 30 to 35 percent of the mass. The temper varies
from 100 percent very fine, clear quartz to 80 percent very fine quartz sand, 15
percent small tan clay balls, and 5 percent white dolomite; vessels are small bowls
and jars with rounded rims, occasionally incised in the interior just below the rim.
Type 1 represented 85.53 percent of the total sherds recovered.
Type 2 (Local Variety)
Eight sherds (4.75 percent of the sherds recovered) varied from Type 1. Thirty
percent of the sherds have temper consisting of 70 percent very fine quartz and 30
percent crushed limestone. The sherds are dark gray and smoothed and floated both
inside and out. The cores are gray with no streaking. Due to the small size of the
sherds, the type of vessel could not be determined.
Las Lunas Smudged
Six sherds were identified as Las Lunas Smudged of the Cederville Phase
(Breternitz 1966). Temper comprises 30 to 35 percent of the sherd mass; it is 85
percent white subangular feldspar, 10 percent very fine black magnetite, and 5
percent very fine mica.The sherds are dark gray on the exterior and black on the
interior. The exterior and interior are smoothed and floated. The sherds came from
two bowls and represented 3.53 percent of the recovered sherds.
Brown Wares
Roswell Brown.--Two sherds were classified as Roswell Brown (Jelinek
1967). They are of coiled construction and varied from tan to brown in color with
smoothed and floated surfaces and interior streaks. Temper is 30 to 35 percent of the
sherd mass and consists of 60 percent very fine feldspar, 30 percent quartz sand, 10
percent very fine white limestone, and a very slight trace of black magnetite.
Roswell Brown ware makes up 1.12 percent of the total.
Jornado Brown (Mogollon).--Eleven Jornado Brown Mogollon ware sherds
(7.65 percent) varying from tan to redish tan to gray, and coiled, were recovered. The
surfaces vary from smoothed and floated with occasional striations and are slightly
porous. Tempering material varies from 50 to 80 percent very fine feldspar, 10 to
30 percent very fine quartz, and 10 to 20 percent very fine magnetite. Three Jornado
Brown sherds had 40 percent temper, consisting of 60 percent very fine feldspar, 30
percent quartz, and 10 percent very fine golden mica. The contours of the sherds
indicate that the vessels were jars and bowls (Mera 1943; Runyan and Hedrick
1973).
Pecos Glaze H or III
A single body sherd ofa Pecos Glaze II or III bowl (Kidder and Sheppard 1936)
was recovered. It is coiled, tan to light red with a black carbon glazed band 33 mm
below the rim, has smoothed and polished surface, and temper comprising 30
percent of the sherd mass. The temper is 60 percent very fine feldspar and 40 percent
very fine black hornblende. This specimen represents .59 percent of the total sherds
recovered.
Local sherds, as defined by Runyan and Hedrick, represented 88.24 percent of
the total, which implies that there was very little influence from the southeastern and
west central New Mexican cultures.

Word--1975 TAS Field School

97

Features
Feature 1
Feature 1 (not illustrated), in Unit 27, extended from the lower part of Level 1
(0-20 cm) beginning at 15 cm and continuing into Level 2 (20-40 cm) to a depth
of 22 cm. A small cluster of fire-fractured hearth stones measuring 15 to 30 cm in
diameter was discovered. Small pockets of charcoal varying from about 2.5 cm to
5 cm in size were scattered among the hearth stones. The uppermost part of this
feature consisted of a scatter of 172 very small fragments of bison bone. A fragment
of the distal end of a tibia was in the eastern edge of the unit; other large fragments
of bone were in the northern and western limits of the unit. Five of the fragmented
bones were burned, and a fragment of tooth enamel was recorded.
Six flakes and chips were scattered randomly throughout the feature area.
Three sherds of Local Variety (Type 2) and a single Local Variety (Type 1)
fragment were scattered about the cluster of fire fractured hearthstones. Two
fragments of burned clay were also noted.
This feature probably was a dump area resulting from cleaning out a nearby
hearth which was not discovered in Testing Area 3. No evidence of a burned soil area
above or below the feature was recorded.
Feature 2
Feature 2 was in the eastern part of Unit 22 (Figure 17). In 1961, the steep banks
of the White River were graded to a slope to facilitate maintenance of the golf
course. This grading caused the surface of Unit 22 to slope to the east and exposed
Feature 2. While surveying after the bank was sloped in 1961, the author recovered
a metate and fragments of a large Harrell point in the disturbed hearth midden. It is
estimated from the 1961 survey field notes and the field notes of the 1975 field
school that the hearth was about 60 cm in diameter.
Associated with the undisturbed part of the feature were a single chert flake, 17
fragments of bison bone, and, between the surface and the 5 cm depth, four small
green glass fragments. Below the 5 cm level the hearth bottomed out at 20 cm (Level
1). A Harrell point of Edwards chert and a utilized flake of Tecovas jasper were
recovered from the lower part of Level 1. Eleven flakes were scattered throughout
the deposit. Two fragments of limb bones with butchering marks, 116 very small
bone fragments, and a fingemail-punctated sherd of Tierra Blanca variety (HabichtMauche 1987) or Local Variety 2 (Runyon and Hedrick n.d.) were associated with
this feature.
There were charcoal stains throughout the hearth and closely associated with
the surrounding area.
DISCUSSION

The Floydada Country Club site on the Southern High Plains of the Llano
Estacado provided an opportunity to study both cultural and temporal relationships
among three differing cultural groups in Late Prehistoric times (Skinner 1975a).
The author is unaware of any other area that provides an opportunity for study of

98

Texas Archeological Society

Heath

Charcoal concentration
Charcoal and ash
Hearthstones
Bone fragments

~’

Projectile point

Figure 17. Hearth, Feature 2, Unit 22, Area 3.
three distinct cultural groups in such close geographic and temporal association
(Figure 3). The lithic artifacts of the three groups are similar, but the pottery styles
of the three cultures differ.
In the 30 years during which the author has collected surface material from
service roads eroded by wind action and from the eroded bank of the White River,
the site has yielded a variety of projectile points such as Washita, Harrell, Fresno,
Lott, Garza, and Perdiz. In addition, bevelled knives, scraping tools, gravers,

Wordm1975 TAS Field School

99

utilized flakes, drills or perforators, spokeshaves, and pipe fragments were recovered,
together with bone artifacts consisting of awls, a serrated rib (music rasp?), a
metapodal fleshing tool, and a finely serrated rib of unknown function. Ornaments
collected are turquoise beads, olivella beads, tubular bone beads and a single olivia
bead. Artifacts associated with the Historic Period are metal projectile points, steel
awls, rifle cartridge cases, and parts of rifle locks; several home-made flints for a
flintlock rifle were also found on the surface of the site.
Pottery was the most common artifact recovered in the surface survey. The
sherds vary considerably and include eastern Puebloan, Mogollon, and Caddoan
sherds consisting of Killough Pinched and La Rue Neck Banded (written communicationm, R. King Harris, April 22, 1971). Most of the sherds were unlike any
classified sherds.
In 1962 the author (1963:40-49) put three tests into the central part of the site
(Field School Area 1) to a depth of 24 inches (61 cm) to determine whether cultural
changes could be detected. In 1963 a test pit was put into the eastern part of the site
(Field School Area 3) where a KiUough Pinched sherd was exposed on the surface.
It was hoped that material could be found associated with this sherd variety, but no
other cultural materialwas discovered. In 1964 another test was excavated to a depth
of 5 feet (1.5 meters) in the bank and into the first terrace of the White River in the
southeastern part of the central area (Field School Area 1). Small flecks of charcoal
and an occasional flint flake pointed to occupation to the bottom of the test, but no
diagnostic artifacts were recovered below 15 inches (38 cm) from the surface.
By accepted definition, the site is not a permanent base camp, but it is evident
that throughout the Late Prehistoric Period it was occupied over and over by a
nomadic people (Apaches) and by two other divergent cultural groups. If Runkles
and Dorchester’s (1986:109) definition of a base camp is adapted to use in the
Southern High Plains of the Llano Estacado, it is indeed a base camp.
As previously mentioned, the site was divided into three areas based on the
more than 1,000 sherds in the author’s collection (Skinner 1975a), which also has
more than 400 identifiable fragments and complete lithic artifacts.
The Floydada Country Club site is unique in that the three areas tested are so
closely related. Until the author became aware of differences in percentages oflithic
types in each area as well as variations in sherd types recorded, the areas seemed to
be parts of one site. However, after analysis there appear to be significant differences. The dominance of Edwards chert and Puebloan sherds in Area 1 implies a
Late Prehistoric Apachean people. The dominance of Tecovas jasper and Alibates
agate, as well as Mogollon Brown Wares, in Area 2 suggests some association with
peoples to the southwest and west. Emmet Shedd (personal communication) has
found Tecovas jasper and Alibates agate cobbles in the northern Brazos River
drainages to the south of the Floydada Country Club site.
In Area 3, Tecovas jasper and Edwards chert are the dominant lithic materials.
Imitation (locally made?) and genuine Caddoan wares and sherds classified as
Unknown are the dominant cultural material.

100

Texas Archeological Society

It is theorized that the routes taken into the area can be determined by analysis
of the lithic samples (see Tables 1, 2, 3). Evidence from Area 1 suggests active trade
with eastern Puebloan groups. Data from Area 2 suggest that people there were
associated with Mogollon groups from the E1 Paso region and as far to the north as
mideastern New Mexico. Evidence from Area 3 identifies a Late Prehistoric people
associated with both the western Caddoan people who migrated to the west and the
eastern Caddoans. In their journey to the west, if they followed the Red River or
Brazos River drainage, they would have come into contact with outcrops of Tecovas
jasper and Edwards chert, which would account for most of the Tecovas jasper and
Edwards chert lithics.
Ceramics are a basis for determining cultural origins and dating when funds are
not available for radiocarbon dating (Skinner 1975b). Analysis of the sherds from
each area by Runyon and Hedrick (n.d.) supports the suggestion that the occupants
of the three areas actively moved about in their search for meat (primarily bison) and
in trading with other groups. What are the possible items of trade? The Apachean
people in Area 1 had access to ample quantities of bison; they produced dried meat
and processed hides for trade. The Apachean peoples in Area 1 used bows for
hunting buffalo, which were plentiful, but bois d’arc wood--shown from collections at the Panhandle-Plains Museum in Canyon, the Texas Memorial Museum in
Austin, and the Texas Tech Museum in Lubbock to be the wood of choice for
bows--is not common in the Southern High Plains (Gould 1969:38), so it is quite
possible that the Apachean people traded their surplus dried buffalo meat and hides
to the Caddoan people of Area 3 in return for the bois d’arc wood they needed for
bows. In the same way, the Mogollon people in Area 2 may have exchanged their
surplus salt with their neighbors for materials that were scarce in Area 2.
However, invasion of the area by the Comanchean people and their dominance
by the mid-1750s put an end to the trade relationships that had existed among the
earlier cultural groups. Historic materials such as metal tinklers and awls, glass
beads, and gun parts are probably associated with the Comanches. The pins that join
yokes to ox bows are associated with either the Comancheros (Wallace 1974:23-52)
or the Pastores, who returned to the Llano Estacado after the defeat of the
Comanches at the Battle of Palo Duro in 1874.
Modern artifacts such as golf tees and fragments of beverage bottles are the
result of more recent Country Club activities (Skinner 1975c).
CONCLUSIONS

Skinner (1974, 1975a) proposed four hypotheses to be tested. The first
hypothesis was that the Floydada Country Club site had been intensively occupied
from the Paleoindian through the Historic periods. Due to the limited duration of the
Texas Archeological Society Field School, this hypothesis could not be tested
adequately (Skinner 1975b). It is hoped that future investigators can examine this
issue.

Word~1975 TAS Field School

101

The second hypothesis was that intensive occupation between A.D. 1200 and
1500 was by indigenous groups that had close ties to eastern and southwestern New
Mexico Puebloans and the Antelope Creek focus to the north, as well as some ties
to the Caddoan areas. Was the site a rendezvous area? It was demonstrated that there
was a trade relationship between indigenous people (Apache) and the eastern and
southwestern Puebloan people as evidenced by items of trade such as pottery,
obsidian, and turquoise, which were probably traded for processed meat and hides.
From examination of the pottery, Runyon and Hedrick (n.d.) determined that the
Caddoan people, who probably both traded bois d’arc wood for processed bison
meat and hides and hunted bison, also were occasional occupants of the site. There
is no evidence of contact with the Antelope Creek focus people, since no cordmarked sherds were recovered, nor have any been found on the surface by the
author. However, Alibates agate lithic debris and artifacts indicate that there was
possibly a contact with the area to the north where this type of material originates,
probably after the Antelope Creek focus people abandoned the Panhandle area. The
three distinct subdivisions of the site (Areas 1,2, and 3) and the variations in lithic
material percentages imply a rather intensive occupation of the site from A.D. 1200
to 1500.
The third hypothesis was that immigrant groups from the southwestern
Mogollon and eastern Puebloan groups came into the area to hunt and process bison.
There is some evidence that the southern and eastern Puebloans hunted bison, but
there is no evidence that these cultural groups were at the site for that sole purpose.
Various Brown Ware and Chupadero sherds were recovered in Area 3, but the
faunal remains of bison were sparse. These people had access to salt, which was
probably an item of trade, since the Apache had no access to a ready source of salt,
so they may have come to trade rather than just to hunt and process meat.
The fourth hypothesis was that the historic Indian occupation was a short-term
occupation by Protohistoric Apachean groups and the succeeding Comanche, who
dominated this area from Historic time until the aboriginal occupation was terminated by the Mackenzie campaign of 1874. Such occupations were identified by the
presence of historic artifacts (metal artifacts, glass, etc.) associated with contact
with people of European origin.
The limited time spent in testing the areas of the site by the 1975 TAS Field
School was sufficient for the establishment of some chronology. Obsidian dating
(Baugh, written communication, January 22, 1985) indicates that the occupation
lasted from the first quarter of the fifteenth century to the late seventeenth century.
It is possible that the site was occupied from as early as A.D. 900 to as late as A.D.
1400, based on the ceramic analysis by Runyon and Hedrick (n.d.) of sherds of
various Brown Wares and Chupadero. However, the scarcity of bison before A.D.
1100 (Hughes, n.d.) implies that the greatest density of occupation by various
indigenous groups probably occurred from A.D. 1100 to the late nineteenth century.
Point types such as Harrell and Washita (Bell 1958:30, 98) indicate an occupation
from A.D. 1100 to 1600. Although no Lott or Garza points were recovered in
excavations, a few specimens of these types are known from surface collections.

102

Texas Archeological Society

Based on Runkles and Dorchester’s report (1986:106-108) on theLott site and their
radiocarbon dates, there was some occupation from A.D. 1325 to 1505. Johnson,
Holliday, Kaczor, and Stuckenrath (1977:104-106), in their report on the Garza
occupation at the Lubbock Lake site, date the Garzapoint by radiocarbon assay from
A.D. 1635 to the mid-1600s. Harris and Harris (1967:158) identified a glass bead
dated from A.D. 1820 to 1836 recovered from Area 1.
It is concluded that the Floydada Country Club site was occupied intermittently
from as early as A.D. 1100 to the mid-1750s by the Apache and eastern and
southwestern Puebloans as well as the E1 Paso Mogollon and a Caddoan-related
people. It is evident that an active wade relationship existed among these cultural
groups. The subsequent reoccupation of the site by the Comanche was eventually
terminated by Mackenzie’s defeat of the Comanche in 1874.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The participants in the 1975 Texas Archeological Society Field School are
specially thanked for their hard work and their tolerance of the mosquito infestation.
Without those dedicated people the information that makes this report possible
could not have been collected. More than 210 people participated (Richmond,
Richmond, and Greer 1985); too many to recognize individually here.
Area Supervisors and crew chiefs assumed an important responsibility and
contributed their skills to make the 1975 field school a success. Their field notes
were indispensible to the completion of this report.
Area 1 site supervisor and crew chiefs were R. L. Smith, R. L. Carter, Norma
Hoffrichter, Jimmy Smith, Jay C. Blaine, Billy Bunch, William L. Fullen, Bransford
Eubank, and Emmet Shedd.
Area 2 site supervisor and crew chiefs were C. K. Chandler, James E. Warren,
Jack Hedrick, Teddy Lou Stickney, Jack Klatt, and Jane Schweitzer.
Area 3 site supervisor and crew chiefs were Robert L. Turner, Roy Thompson,
Norman G. Flaigg, Tommy Hicks, Paul Lorrain, Ralph Vinson, Elizabeth Perry, and
Roy Dickerson.
Special appreciation is given to Drs. E. Mott Davis and Jack T. Hughes, for
without their advice and encouragement this report would not have been completed.
The dedication and skill of Dr. S. Alan Skinner, Field School Archeologist, made
the field school a success. Jay C. and Jerry Lee Blaine contributed their time as
assistant camp boss and registrar. The analysis of sherds by John Runyon and Jack
Hedrick was a contribution that was most important in determining cultural
relationships. The analysis by Roberta D. Speer and. Dr. Gerald E. Schultz was
important in identifying and determining the utilization of faunal remains. The skill
of William L. Richmond in mapping the areas tested contributed greatly to the
report, and Claude Brown gave enthusiastically of his time to a successful children’s
program. Charles M. Carr contributed his time to tow the cook trailer to the site, and
he provided a front-end loader that was helpful for backfilling the excavated units.
Guy W. Wilson shared his knowledge and identified a rifle cartridge recovered from
the site.

Wordm1975 TAS Field School

103

REFERENCES CITED
Baugh, Timothy
1982
Edwards 1 (34BK1): Southern Plains Adaptations in the Protohistoric Period.
Oklahoma Archeological Survey. Studies in Oklahoma’s Past, No. 8. Norman.
Bolton, H. E. (Editor)
1916 Spanish Exploration in the Southwest, 1542-1706: Original Narratives of Early
American History. New York.
1970 Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century, Studies inSpanish Colonial History and
Administration. The University of Texas Press, Austin.
Bretemitz, D. A.
1966
An Appraisal of Tree-Ring Dated Pottery in the Southwest. Anthropological
Papers of the University ofArizona No. 10. Tucson.
Gould, F.W.
1969
Texas Plants, A CheckList and Ecological Summary. Texas A&M University,
Texas Agricultural Experimental Station, College Station.
Habicht-Mauche, J. A.
1987
Southwestern Style Culinary Ceramics on the Southern High Plains, A Case
Study of Technological Innovation and Cross-Cultural Interaction. Plains
Anthropologist 32-116:175-189.
Harris, R. K., and I. M. Harris
1967
Trade Beads, Projectile Points, and Knives. In: A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian
Archeology and Ethnohistory. (Robert E. Bell, E.B. Jelks, and W. E. Newcomb,
Eds). National Science Foundation Report 120--162.
Hawley, F.M.
1950
Field Manual of Prehistoric Pottery Types (Revised Edition). University ofNew
Mexico Bulletin, Anthropological Series 1(4). Albuquerque.
Holliday, V. T., and C. M. Welty
1981
Lithic Tool Resources of the Eastern Llano Estacado. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 52:201-214.
Hughes, J. T.
n.d.
A Chronology of Hunting Cultures of the Southern Plains. Draft Manuscript.
Jelineck, A. J.
1967
A Prehistoric Sequence in the Middle Pecos Valley, New Mexico. Museum of
Anthropology, University ofMichigan, Anthropolog ical Papers 31. Ann Arbor.
Johnson, Eileen, V. T. Holliday, M. J. Kaczor, and R. Stuckenrath
1977
The Garza Occupation at the Lubbock Lake Site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 48:83-109.

104

Texas Archeological Society

Kidder, A.V., and A. D. Sheppard
1936
The Pottery of Pecos, Volume II. Phillips Academy, Papers ofthe Southwestern
Expedition, No. 7. Yale Press, New Haven.

Kingston, Mike (Editor)
1986
Texas Almanac. A. D. Belo, Dallas.
Lehmer, D. J.
1948
The Jornado Branch of the Mogollon.University of Arizona Social Science
Bulletin No. 17. University of Arizona, Tucson.
Mera, H. P.
Chupadero Black onWhite. Laboratory of Anthropology Technical Series, Bul1931
letin 1. Santa Fe.
1943

An Outline of Ceramic Development in Southern and Southwestern New
Mexico. Laboratory of Anthropology Technical Series, Bulletin 9. Santa Fe.

Neitsch, C. L., and D. A. Blackstock
Soil Survey of Floyd County, Texas.. Soil Conservation Service. U.S. Depart1978
ment of Agriculture in Cooperation with Texas Agriculture Experimentation

Station.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
The Indians of Texas: From Prehistoric to Modem Times. The University of
1961
Texas Press, Austin.
Newcomb, W. W., and W. T. Field
1967
An Ethn°hist°ric Investigati°n °f the Wichita Indian Arche°l°gy and Ethn°history. In: A Pilot Study of WichitaIndian Archeology and Ethnohistory. (Robert
E. Bell, E. B. Jelks, and W. W. Newcomb, Jr., Eds.). National Science
Foundation Report.
Northern, M. J.
1979
Archeologica! Investigations of the Montgomery Site, Floyd County, Texas.
Unpublished Masters Thesis, Texas Tech University, Lubbock.
Parker, Wayne
1982
Archeology of the Bridwell Site, Crosby County. Pioneer Memorial Museum in
Cooperation with Crosby County Historical Commission, Crosbyton.
Parsons, M. L.
1967

Archeological Investigations in Crosby and Dickens Counties, Texas During
the Winter of 1966-1967. OJfitce of the State Archeologist, State Building
Commission. Archeological Program Report 7.

Ratgen, F. W.
1973
The Texas Panhandle Frontier. The University of Texas Press, Austin.

Word--1975 TAS Field School

105

Richmond, J. A., W. L. Richmond, and J. W. Grecr.
1985

Texas Archeological Society Field Schools 1962-1982. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 54 (for 1983): 105-184.

Runkles, F. A.
1964
The Garza Site. A Neo American Campsite Near Post, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeolog ical Society 35:101-125.
Runkles, F. A., and E. D. Dorchester
1986
The Lott Site (41GR56): A Late Prehistoric Site in Garza County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57:83-115.
Runyon, J., and J. A. Hedrick
1973
Pottery Types of the Southwestern Federation of Archeological Societies.
Transactions of the Eighth Regional Archeological Symposium for Southwestern New Mexico and Western Texas, 19-45. Lea County Archeotogica! Society,
Hobbs.
Runyon, J., and J. A. Hedrick
n.d.
Ceramic Analysis of Sites 41FLI-1, 41FL1-2, 41FL1-3: Texas Archeological
Society 1975 Field School (Unpublished Manuscript).
Eo

Analysis of Micro Faunal Material of Sites 41FL1-1,41FL1-2, 41FL1-3; Texas
Archeological Society 1975 Field School (Unpublished Manuscript).
Speer, R. D.
Analysis of Bison Remains of Sites 41FLI-1,41FL1-2, 41FL1-3; Texas Arche1976
ological Society 1975 Field School (Unpublished Manuscript).
Skinner, S. Ao
1974
Proposals for Hypotheses to be Tested at the Texas Archeological Society Field
School.
1975a

Goals for the 1975 TAS Field School. Texas Archeology 19(2):3-5.

1975b

Archeologist’s Report. Texas Archeology !9(3):6-7.

1975c

The TAS Golf Course B attle. Paper presented at the 46th Annual Meeting of the
Texas Archeological Society, San Antonio.

Suhm, D. A., and E. B. Jelks
1962
tlandbook ofTexasArcheology. A Cumulative Compendium of Type Descriptions. Published Jointly by the Texas Archeology Society, Special Publication
No. 1, and The Texas Memorial Museum, Bulletin No. 4. Austin.
Thomas, A. B.
1935
After Coronado: Spanish Exploration Northeast of New Mexico, 1696-1727.
University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.

106

Texas Archeological Society

Wallace, Emest
1964
Ranald S. Mackenzie on the Texas Frontier. West Texas Museum Association,
Lubbock.
Wallace, Ernest, and E. A. Hoebel
1942
The Comanches, Lords of the Plains. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Word, J. H.
FloydadaCountry Club Site (41FL1). Bulletin oftheSouthPlainsArcheological
1963
Society 1:37-63.

1965

The Montgomery Site in Floyd County, Texas. Bulletin of the South Plains
Archeological Society 2:55-102.

107

Investigations of the Buried City,
Ochiltree County, Texas:
With an Emphasis on the Texas Archeological Society Field
Schools of 1987 and 1988
David T. Hughes

ABSTRACT
The first four seasons of investigations on the Courson ranch on Wolf Creek
in Ochiltree County resulted in excavation of six prehistoric house sites, intensive
archeological survey of several square miles of the creek bottom, and the salvage
of a Pleistocene mammoth. The results of these investigations have provided us
with information on an unusual village assemblage in the northeastern Texas
Panhandle that dates from about A.D. 1200 to A.D. 1400 and includes large, stonebased houses, ornamented pottery, and excellent information about the distribution
of trash and artifacts in relation to the houses. These investigations have shown that
the Buried City and adjacent sites are a unique resource that has been too long
overlooked or misplaced in interpretations of Southern Plains prehistory.

INTRODUCTION

After 80 years of investigations, evaluation of the sites and archeological
resources of the Buried City of the Texas Panhandle and its surrounding area is
definitely in order. This locality is the site of the earliest documented archeological
excavations in Texas (Eyerly 1907; see Hughes and Hughes-Jones 1986). For 10
days in the summer of 1987, and again in 1988, more than 300 members of the Texas
Archeological Society (TAS) participated in the excavation of six prehistoric
village-period sites, test excavations of two areas on another site, archeological
survey of several square miles of the Wolf Creek valley, and salvage of a Pleistocene
mammoth that was eroding into a tributary of Wolf Creek.
The three major expeditions to the Buffed City before the inception in 1985 of
the Courson Archeological Projects were directed by T. L. Eyerly in 1907 (Figure
1), Warren King Moorehead in 1917, 1919, and 1920 (Moorehead, 1931), and
Thomas S. Ellzey (1966).
The activities of the previous investigators, interested laymen, and vandals
seriously disturbed some of the ruins. Today, dimensions and orientation of the
individual houses cannot be determined from surface inspection alone. One of the
goals of all investigations so far has been to determine the extent of damage and loss
of information from these sites. For this report, rather than making an attempt at a
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 60 (1989)

108

Texas Archeological Society

\

SP~her

Figure I. T. L. Eyerly’s map of the Buffed City. (Reproduced~om "The Student,"
Bulletin o/ the Canadian Academy 1907).

comprehensive review of the nature of the whole complex of prehistoric slxuctures
and villages, the author will endeavor to provide the flavor of the local settlement
system and to offer some details about the areas that have been investigated since
1985.
The Sites
There are five major groups of sites on the Courson ranch and at least two kinds
of ancillary activity sites beyond the houses (Figure 2). The first, and best known
of the site groups is the Buried City proper, defined by T. L. Eyerly in 1907 and
renamed in error the Ilandley (a misspelling of the landowner’s name) ruins by
Moorehead (1931) in honor of Sam Handly, the owner of the property. Directly to

Hughes--TAS Buried City Field Schools

I

w h--

|

I
I

o

/
/

W

"7"
no
o
ILl

I
I

0
0
~"’O

CC
W

00o

UJ

0
"I-

i
!

f

,°

I
Z
../

I

o

(~

t>i
J
k
\

\

p

".°

f...

109

110

Texas Archeological Society

the west of the Buried City are the Courson ruins, the focus of most of the Courson
Archeological Projects and the TAS Field School efforts (Figure 3). North of the
Courson ruins, on the north side of Wolf Creek, is a newly rediscovered area, here
named the Moorehead ruins in honor of Professor Warren King Moorehead, whose
original field map found during background research for the 1985 investigations led
to their identification. West of the Moorehead ruins on the north side of Wolf Creek
are the Kirk Courson ruins. West of these and south of Wolf Creek are the Kit
Courson ruins, an area studied during the 1986 and 1987 Courson Archeological
Projects and in 1987 and 1988 by the TAS Field School. Still more sites upstream
from the Courson ranch await further study.

Figure 3. Aerial photograph of Wolf Creek showing the setting of the Courson ruins and
the Buried City, looking east.

The subdivision of the locality into these groups of sites is based both on
physiography and the distribution of cultural materials. Each group has five or more
prehistoric house sites that date from the middle to late Village periods. Distance
between structures within any given group is substantially less than the distance
between any two or more adjacent groups. In addition to the houses, each set appears
to have many external activity areas for tasks relating to the daily lives of the
occupants. Evidence from the Buried City and the Courson ruins suggests a separate
cemetery at each locality. All localities have earlier occupations, but only on the
Courson ruins has sufficient information been obtained to suggest continuity from
Woodland time into the Village period.

Hughes--TAS Buried City Field Schools

111

Ancillary activity sites beyond the structure and house sites include caim
burials (of undetermined antiquity) on the promontories above the sites, crevice or
overhang burials in the bluffs along the valley margin, and probable occupied bluff
shelters and overhangs. No direct evidence of bison jumps, lithic workshops, or
other activities has been found yet on the Courson ranch.
The Buried City
Eyerly published four major reports on his investigations ~yerly 1907a,
1907b, 1910, and 1912). The first of these (1907a) is the source for much of the
following discussion. "The place has been known as ’The Buried City’ so long that
the appellation is retained... [and] the place has been visited by a number of
scientists and a superficial examination of the ruins made a number of times"
(Eyerly 1907a:29). Within the 70-acre area Eyerly defined as the Buffed City, he
noted that there were 12 mounds, that some of the mounds were about .61 meters
(2 feet) above the surface, and that on each it "is easy to distinguish the outline of
an enclosure made of stone" (Eyerly 1907a:30). In addition to the 12 mounds in the
Buried City, Eyerly noted a circular mound about 7.5 meters (25 feet) in diameter
on the butte south of the Buried City.
The key structure in the catalog of prior investigations is the large, rectangular
structure known locally as the "Temple" at the turn of this century and so identified
by Eyerly (1907:33). Additional sites were found west of the Buried City (marked
C on Eyerly’s map). On the north side of the creek are "indications of an Indian
village.., and the adjacent ground cultivated .... Parts of tepee poles, in a state of
fair preservation lie abut the field" ~yerly 1907:34). Eyerly concluded his
presentation by arguing that the stone enclosures along Wolf Creek are not the
remains of a village or of houses but that they were established solely for burial.
Ten years after the Eyerly investigations were first published, Warren King
Moorehead, of The Robert S. Peabody Foundation of the Phillips Academy at
Andover, Massachusetts, contracted with Fred H. Stems, then a recent Harvard
graduate, to visit the Buried City as part of a survey of the Arkansas River Valley
under Moorehead’s general direction (Moorehead 1920, 1931). The three Phillips
Academy expeditions in 1917, 1919, and 1920, were fraught with interpersonal and
procedural difficulties. Some reconstruction of the events of those expeditions has
been attempted (see Hughes and Hughes-Jones, 1987).
The Andover Academy expeditions identified 12 houses and tested or excavated
at least six of them. Because of the difficulties with the Moorehead expeditions and
records, there are several important points of confusion that may never be adequately
clarified. First, and most important to placing the Courson Archeological Projects
and TAS Field Schools in perspective, is the question of the Bluff No. I ruin
identified by Moorehead as being 180 meters (600 feet) southeast of the Franklin
ruin (Moorehead 1931:103) and shown in the extreme left of his Figure 30 (a
photograph purportedly showing "the plain where the Handley ruins lie"). A
rephotograph of Moorehead’s Figure 30 shows that the promontory on the extreme
left of that photograph is in fact the location of site Courson A, 41OC26 (Hughes

112

Texas Archeological Society

and Hughes-Jones 1987:Figure 7). The problem is that this location is more than .8
km (half a mile) west of the probable Franklin site; not 180 meters (600 feet)
southeast as Moorehead indicates. Except for the location, the bulk of the description
of Bluff No. 1 ruin (Moorehead 1931:103) adequately describes site Courson A.
Despite these difficulties, some agreements between Eyerly’s and Moorhead’s
studies can be found. The unusual size of Moorehead’s Gould ruin clearly shows it
to be the same as Eyerly’s Temple or ruin No. 10.
Moorehead concluded his observations about the Handley ruins (Buried City)
by suggesting that

because of the peculiarities here in evidence that this small and picturesque
plain may be justly considered one of the strategic centers in American
archaeology. Apparently all agree that the remains are not Pueblo. Admitting this, yet it is a distinct departure from the ordinary Plains or buffalo
culture, as we understand the term [Moorehead 1931:106].
In his 1920 field report, Moorehead concluded that these people may have been
the ancestors of the Pueblo cliff dweller people (Moorehead 1920:8), a conclusion
attested to by the stone marker that still stands on the site of the Moorehead
excavations.
For 50 years after the Phillips Academy expeditions, no visits to the Buried City
were reported or published. In 1966, Thomas S. Ellzey, the son of a local rancher,
returned from his studies in anthropology at the University of Texas and undertook
test excavations at a midden in the Buried City (41OC4) and at the Eyedy ruin
(41OC3). Ellzey’s excavations included the eastem half of the north wall and the
east wall of the Eyerly ruin. The east wall of the house was about .61 meters (2 feet)
thick and averaged as much as .75 meters (2.5 feet) in height (Ellzey 1966:61). A
large hearth was found in the gap [entryway?] in the east wall but was destroyed by
vandals before it could be fully traced. Vandalism of the excavations and severe
weather forced Ellzey to abandon the excavations before he could obtain more
information about the structure. Ellzey’s conclusions offer yet a different interpretation of the sites, that was more in keeping with then current knowledge about
Texas Panhandle cultures.
From the evidence it is rather conclusive that we are dealing with
plains influence. The decorations of the pottery from the midden especially indicates this influence (Wedel 1959). The architecture indicates a
Pueblo influence, but this seems to be emphasized less in the other cultural
remains. It is my opinion that at this site we are dealing with a Plains people
who had come into contact with a culture, probably the Puebloans, from
which they learned the trait of stone architecture [Ellzey 1966:64-65].
Throughout the 80 years of known investigations on the Buried City, several
of the archeological sites were reported to the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory at The University of Texas at Austin, andwere assigned trinomial site
numbers by that agency. The Buried City proper became site 410C 1. Part of the site

Hughes--TAS Buried City Field Schools

113

is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. Within 41OC1 are sites 41 OC2,
41OC3, and 41OC4. A revision of the site numbers was suggested in 1986, to
include seventeen subareas, identified as 41OC1-A through 41OC1-Q, to replace
existing and previous nomenclature and site numbers.
Courson Ruins (4IOC26, 27, 28, 29)
These sites are west of and across a broad ravine from the Buried City (Figure
4). Eyerly (1907a) discussed them as Area C, Moorehead (1931) as ruins V, VI, and
VII (and possibly Bluff No. 1, see above). Four primary archeological sites have
been defined here: 41OC26 (site Courson A), 41OC27 (site Courson B), 41OC28
(site Courson C), and 41OC29 (site Courson D). Each of these comprises one or
more houses and is separated from others within the group by topographic breaks
and by an apparent thinning of cultural debris between the sites. Each is on a distinct
elevation or ridge adjacent to one of the shallow swales that run through the locality.
Most of the sites are obscured by recent accumulations of eolian silts and sands.
Courson A (41OC26) is on the west side of a caliche-capped knoll at the
northwest limit of the Courson ruins. It has been largely destroyed by erosion, or
possibly by earlier excavation.
Courson B (41OC27) is south of Courson A on a promontory that is being cut
by Wolf Creek and an arroyo that drains into Wolf Creek. Moorehead’s ruin V may
be the same as Courson B. East of Courson B is site Courson C (41OC28),
apparently a single large house. Courson C may be Moorehead’s ruin VI.
On a knoll east of Courson A and north of Courson C is site Courson D
(41OC29). Courson D may have five or more house sites. Moorehead’s ruin VII
may be the same as the main Courson D structure excavated by the TAS in 1987 and
1988.
The Courson ruins have been the focus of much of the activity for the 1985
through 1988 investigations. The sites are similar in age and content to those of the
Buffed City proper. The Courson ruins may represent a separate contemporaneous
community or a slightly different period of occupation of the valley by the same
people who built and lived in the Buffed City.
Moorehead Ruins (410C46)
The Moorehead ruins lie north of and across Wolf Creek from the Courson
ruins on an elevated floodplain of the creek. The sites were first identified during
the 1986 field season and were further recorded by the TAS in 1987. The entire area
has been assigned site number 41OC46. It encompasses the remains of three, or
possibly, four house sites, which are almost completely obscured by deep accumulations of modem alluvium and eolian silts and sands that prevent more information
from being obtained without intensive field investigations. The limited number of
artifacts and debris found on the surface suggest contemporaneity with the Courson
ruins and the Buried City proper.

114

Texas Archeologica! Society

,9
t~r
,t

Courson

50

"i.

Courson B

METERS

Courson

Courson C

A

Bronze grid marker
Excavation

Figure 4. Topographic map of the Courson Ruins, showing locations of Courson sites A,
B, C, and D.

Hughes--TAS Buried City Field Schools

115

Kirk Courson Ruins (410C47, 410C48)

The Kirk Courson ruins are adjacent and to the west of the Moorehead ruins,
north of Wolf Creek, on the inside of Horseshoe Bend, on a second terrace of the
creek. The location is topographically identical to the setting of the Moorehead ruins
and is separated from them by a small arroyo. At least two discrete areas have been
identified and assigned site numbers 41OC47 and 41 OC48. Site 41 OC47 is west of
the Moorehead ruins across a small south-draining wash and 10 meters north of the
eroding bank of Wolf Creek. The site is a single structure on a low promontory; one
east-west-trending line of stones more than 7 meters long is barely visible on the
surface. No other walls of the structure are visible. No midden debris or features that
could be useful in identifying additional sites or components show in the creek bank
at this point. Although site 41OC47 is geographically midway between the
Moorehead and Kirk Courson ruins, it is included here because of its topographic
similarity to the Kirk Courson nfins.
Site 41OC48 of the Kirk Courson ruins is a large area on the second terrace that
almost certainly comprises remains of several houses. It is completely obscured by
modern soil mantle; disturbance from rodent activity and farm improvements have
limited the surface expression, but three probable house sites and a possible
cemetery complex have been identified. Artifacts recovered from excavations for
a water well indicate that this site is generally contemporaneous with the others. In
addition to the Plains Village components, the recovery of a Deadman point and
scoria-tempered pottery suggest a Woodland component in the roughly 1.5 meters
of deposit. Because so little information is available for the Kirk Courson ruins, no
precise subdivision of the site(s) into separate structural sites or areas can be made
at this time.
Kit Courson Ruins (410C40, 41, 43, 51)

The Kit Courson ruins (named in honor of Harold Courson’s father) is the
westernmost group of sites on the Courson ranch. It occupies the second and third
terraces of Wolf Creek, and, like the Courson ruins, it consists of sites and structures
on elevations surrounding low swales that run through the complex. Five distinct
areas have been identified within the Kit Courson ruins: site 41OC40 is at the
northeast end of the locality on a ridgelike projection of the second terrace. Sites
41OC41 and 41OC42 occupy the northwest and southeast ends, respectively, of a
long, low ridge projecting northwestward from the bluffs into the Wolf Creek
valley, and sites 41OC43 and 41OC51 are on the east edge of the second terrace,
separated by a low swale. This complex includes at least four house sites and several
middens and related habitation features.
Excavations at 41OC43 and 41OC51 by the 1986 Courson Archeological
Projects and the 1987 and 1988 TAS Field Schools indicated contemporaneity
between these sites and the others. In 1987, a TAS survey crew led by Emmett Shedd
located a house 100 meters southeast of the main Kit Courson site. They recorded
chert flakes and cores, a potsherd, mussel shell, marine shell, burned limestone, and

116

Texas Archeological Society

quartzite flakes from the vicinity of the house. This part of 41OC43 measures 35
meters east to west and 80 meters north to south. As with the Kirk Courson and
Moorehead ruins, a complete evaluation of the structural remains and probable
contents of these sites will require a substantial field investigation because of the
modem silt mantle that obscures most of the remains.
EXCAVATIONS

The Courson Archeological Projects and the TAS work of 1987 and 1988
approached these sites with several specific goals. At Courson A (41 OC26), testing
in 1985 disclosed a trash-filled pit and a dense ceramic scatter. One of the goals of
the TAS was to identify the nature of the ceramic scatter and evaluate the remaining
contents of the site.
At Courson B (41OC27), 1985 and 1986 explorations defined deep and
extensive deposits. The TAS sought to delimit the vertical and horizontal boundaries of the site, to identify the specific components, and to find exterior activity areas
related to the prehistoric houses. Since Courson C had been badly damaged by relic
collectors, our primary goal with the TAS was to determine the condition of the site,
delimit it, and obtain information on the distribution of cultural material.
Investigations at the fourth area, the Courson D site (41OC51), began in 1987
with the evaluation of a disturbed prehistoric house in Area A and the securing of
a controlled surface collection from Area D. In 1988 we added test excavations of
a large area (Area B) north of the main structure where there might be additional
structural and nonstructural features. Area C was set aside for test excavations to
evaluate possible damage from farm improvements.
At the Kit Courson site, the 1986 excavations exposed a large, well-preserved
house that contained several clearly defined activity areas but no indication of an
adjacent midden. The goals of the TAS were to excavate around the house to locate
exterior activity areas, midden, and dump area, and, if possible, find additional
earlier or later components.
The final prehistoric cultural site excavated by the TAS was the Temple (Eyerly
1907a) or Gould ruin (Moorehead 1920, 1931), site 41OC1, Area A. Because this
unusually large structure had been so thoroughly excavated by virtually all previous
visitors, the only goal for beginning the 1988 excavation was to evaluate the
condition of the site and identify the nature and extent of the previous excavations.
In addition to the sw~ific excavation goals of the project, TAS survey crews
went out to gather information on other sites in the vicinity in order to place these
sites in local perspective. As part of the 1987 investigation, an extensive survey of
much of the Wolf Creek valley upstream from the Courson ranch was undertaken.
The final episode of activities at the TAS Field Schools was the salvage of a
Pleistocene mammoth on the Dutcher ranch, a few kilometers below the Wolf Creek
Park.
One of the perpetual problems in presenting summary results of such an
extensive series of excavations is how to provide the most information in the least

HugheswTAS Buried City Field Schools

117

space. In the following discussions related to distribution of artifacts, a series of
charts showing frequencies of different classes of artifacts and debris are offered in
the form of contour maps (Figures 6-9, 13b, 14, 16, 17, 19, 20). These maps were
prepared with the aid of the SURFERc system and related series of routines using
data from the catalog database of the project.
A few special cautions are in order about reading the plots. First, the numbers
plotted are the "raw" quantities or weights of material. No allowance has been made
at this stage for variations caused by depth of deposit, cultural features, or other
factors. Second, in areas beyond excavations the software that created the plots used
the best information from surrounding areas to predict the probable amounts of
material present. The results are useful for providing information on the gross nature
of the findings and tell much about the horizontal distribution of material across the
sites.
Courson A (41OC26)
On Courson A was what may be one of the earlier houses in the Texas
Panhandle, dating to or before about A.D. 1200 (Figure 5). An attempt to secure an
archaeomagnetic date was inconclusive, perhaps because magnetic alignments
have been disturbed by slumping of the point on which the site is situated (Jeff
Eighmy, personal communication, 1988). A 1985 radiocarbon date from an
associated feature yielded an uncorrected date of A.D. 1210&50 (DIC-3281).
Samples from the 1988 investigations were submitted to Beta Analytic in fall 1990,
but results have not yet been returned.
There is excellent evidence for identification of activities in and around the
house (Figure 6). Mussel shell is distributed throughout the interior area of the
house, which is otherwise relatively clean of debris (Figure 6, a). The Courson A
house is square with a central firepit, southeast entryway, post wall, and an
unplastered floor; all of these make the outline irregular and difficult to interpret.
Two trash or cache pits were found; Pit 1, found and partially tested in 1985 and
excavated completely in 1987, yielded charred corn, a canid maxilla, and Toyahlike arrowpoints, together with Fresno points or preforms. There was very little bone
or debris in the pit, but a substantial amount of daub suggests that it had been
backfilled. Pit 2 was found in 1988 at the end of the field school; the sample of its
contents, from an arcuate area about 20 cm in diameter truncated east and south,
yielded substantial amounts of debris, including most of the bison bone found on the
site. There may be an adult male burial in the unexcavated part of the pit.
Comparison of this map with the plan of Courson A (Figure 5) shows that in
addition to recognizable peaks of material from Pits 1 and 2, there are two main areas
of increased material concentration in the vicinity of the house (Figure 6, b). One
is south and southeast of the house in squares 21-23E/20-21N. The other is in
squares 19E/21-24N. Square 31N/23E yielded an unusually high concentration of
artifacts and debris, none of which is directly associated with the house and hearth
but all of which seems to relate to ancillary or later activities.

118

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

t

0 Plastered floor remnant
Da ubing
Potsherd conce ntratio ~
Charcoal scatter
o

Post mold

/ Edge of trash/cache pit

Probable house wall

8747

=

o

--20

15E

20E

I

GRID EAST

f

I

Figure 5. Courson A: plan of excavations and features.

ZSE

I

Hughes--TAS Buried City Field Schools

119

[]

ig

17

o

Figure 6. Courson A: contoured diagrams showing distribution of shell (a), all debris (b),
burned rock (c), and daub (d). Contour numbers indicate number of items recovered.

120

Texas Archeological Society

The discrete patterning of bone in relation to the two pits--very little bone next
to Pit 1 and quite a bit at Pit 2 suggests either functional or temporal differences;
the latter may be likely. There is also a substantial increase of bone and burned
rock--the only material found in this region in any concentration---on the northern
end of the site associated with Feature 88-5 (Figure 6, c). There are several
anomalous post molds west of the house that may be more closely associated with
the scoria-tempered pot. Since this is where most of the daubing is, perhaps the post
holes represent an earlier house that the square house (Figure 5) cut through during
construction.
Although daub (Figure 6, d) was found over much of the site, the greatest
concentration was found in 23N/17E, near the broken pot. Daubing does not seem
to be associated with the square house. Bone debris that is not from Pit 2 seems to
be located mainly south of the house; more is on top of the hill at the extreme north
end of the site. There is very little bone debris from Pit 1 and little from inside and
around the house. Mussel shell, on the other hand, is predominantly inside the house
around the hearth, and there is some in the southwest and southeast grid quadrants
of the site. Little or no shell came from the northern tests, suggesting that shell and
bone mark two functionally different sets of activities. The shell may have come
from food preparation or consumption or it may be fragments of ornaments.
Except for the dense concentration surrounding the broken pot in 23N/18E,
pottery is extremely scarce. There is a slight increase in pottery sherds north and
south of the presumed entryway of the house. Flakes are distributed irregularly
across the site; the greatest concentrations are south and east of the house, with a
slight increase in flakes just north of the hearth. Square 31N/23E yielded only flakes,
but in relatively high concentration. Pit 1 yielded substantially fewer flakes than the
surrounding sheet midden, suggesting that the pit was not filled with general
habitation debris.
Courson B (41OC27)
At the Courson B site--the most complex site we have dealt with--several
series of occupations are represented (Figure 7). They begin at or near the same time
as the Courson A house, perhaps early in the current millennium. Excavations in
1985 and 1986 showed a basic architectural sequence beginning with a small,
roughly circular pit that may represent a pithouse with a central hearth but no
evidence of wall posts. This was overlain by the main Courson B house, which was
about 8 meters square, inside the nearly 1-meter-thick stone wall bases. The main
house had a long, extended east entryway, four primary support posts with two
auxiliary support posts, and the central one-third of the floor surrounding the
prepared, cylindrical fire pit was lowered. Following abandonment and filling-in of
the main house, a small, stone-outlined house, apparently with a wall-gap entry and
post walls with stone bases was built over the filled main house area. The work of
the 1987 and 1988 TAS Field School investigations uncovered evidence of an
isolated hearth south of the main site area that could represent another prehistoric
house in the same style as the Courson A house, but there was no evidence of posts

HughesmTAS Buried City Field Schools

121

or other structural features to support this interpretation. Additionally, the testing of
the Courson B site yielded many small areas that appeared to be plaster or fragments
of architectural features, indicating that there has been a complex history here of
construction, reconstruction, and abandonment.

-?5

6O

-55

2-7 Pit features
8

Late square house

9

Main house fire pit

- 5O

01
i

I

2
I

3
¯

METERS
215 9rid Eost

Figure 7. Courson B: plan of excavations and features.

45
!

|

122

Texas Archeological Society

Two trash or cache pits were excavated in 1985 and 1986 by the Courson
Archeological Projects, and several others were identified. One of these, which was
more thoroughly investigated by the TAS Field Schools in 1987 and 1988, turned
out to be at least three interlocking pits. All of the pits identified to date on this site
appear to be roughly cylindrical, about 1 meter in diameter, and about a meter or
slightly less deep. Much of the TAS effort focused on an area directly south of the
main Courson B house that may be a large area of interlocking trash/cache pits, an
early structure, a large borrow area backfilled with trash, or some other kind of
expedient or constructed feature. Some unusual aspects of all of the pits in the main
structure of the Courson B site seem to predate the construction of the large house,
and in almost all cases the pit fills were relatively sterile, containing some bone and
mussel shell and large quantities of daub, but otherwise often having less cultural
debris than the surrounding thinner areas of sheet midden. The 1988 TAS investigations at Courson B did detect south of the main house a distinct area of sheet
midden that comes to an abrupt end some 20 meters south of the house. This midden
varies in thickness and in it there may be one or more other structures or related
features from time periods earlier or later than that of the main house. An additional
concentration of midden debris was found northeast of the house, apparently along
the swale margin northeast of the house entryway.
The final event at the Courson B site was identified in the 1986 Courson
Archeological Project and consisted of reuse of rocks and other structural elements
from the houses for the construction of a cairn over what appears to be a mass burial
of at least five individuals: four adults and one juvenile (Hughes and Hughes-Jones,
1986). The skeletons were in various orientations, and, although there were no
obvious grave goods or funerary offerings with any of the adults, a stone pendant
was found with the juvenile.
The heaviest density of material on the Courson B site is from the interlocking
trash-filled pits beneath the south wall of the main house and from the pit directly
west of them (Figure 8, a). Most of this material, whether by weight or by count, is
bone--principally Bison bone--and daubing. Northeast of the house a sharp
increase in density of material suggest midden debris. South of the house another
increase in density of material suggests a trash area rather than merely a sheet
midden or another residence, but the distribution here is more diffuse, covering an
area of perhaps 20 square meters; it is not a point source, as are the other trash-filled
pitlike features. There is no special accumulation of trash that could indicate the
house, but distribution maps for specific classes of artifacts suggest that the
distribution of burned rocks differs obviously from the distribution pattern of
general debris. The concentrations of pottery (Figure 8, b), bone (Figure 9, a), daub
(Figure 9, b), and shell (Figure 9, c) coincide with the trash-filled pits and midden
areas. Burned rock (Figure 9, d) follows the same pattern except for a substantial
increase in burned rock directly southeast of the main entry of the house. These
burned rocks, even though they are principally caliche, may be boiling pebbles-stones heated for use for secondary wanning of other substances. Caliche pebbles
seem to bear up well when used for stone boiling of water, with only a slightly lower
thermal efficiency than other rock.

Hughes--TAS Buried City Field Schools

123

7[}

78

~ 78

78

76

76

74

74

74

72

72

72

72

7O

70

70

70

68

68

68

68

66

66

66

64-

64

64-

62

62

62

60

60

60

5B

58

~.8

56

56

56

54

54

54

76

54

52

48

52

52

52

50

50

50

#B

48

4"8

46

46

46

$~

44

44

a

b

Figure 8. Courson B: contoured diagrams showing distribution of all materials (a) and
pottery (b). Contour numbers indicate number of items recovered.

Courson C (41OC28)

The condition of 41OC28, the Courson C site ~igure 10), was at best
disappointing. The work was remarkably unproductive of artifacts and debris. The
very deep but filled pothunter trench that crosses from north to south through the
center of the site could be one of the later excavations that we have only hints of (e.g.
Studer or efficient local people) and may well be screened backfill. Although all of
the houses were characterized by lower concentrations of debris within their walls,
this house yielded the least material. Material densities were so low that contour
plots of density here are meaningless. Concentrations of bone, shell, and flakes at
about 47N/190E could reflect either residuum from activity areas or a screen dump
from a previous excavator.
An unusual feature recorded in profile during the 1988 excavations was a
double depression in the subsoil suggestive of two parallel trenches beneath the
rocks that may have marked the northernmost wall of the suspected house. A
virtually identical feature was later seen beneath the north wall of 41OC29 and may
give us an important clue to how many of these houses were built. The possibility
of a double-post wall has been offered for the primary house construction (D.
Hughes, in press). It is conceivable that a wide, deep trench was dug to outline the

124

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 9. Courson B: contoured diagrams showing distribution of bone (a), daub (b), shell
(c), and burned rock (d). Contour numbers indicate number of items recovered.

Hughes--TAS Buried City Field Schools

125

I"

i 9

I

I

,.’i

Pl

I

i°

o

o
I

Q&

i
Q

P85

GRID EAST

KEY
Rock

Vandal’s trench

Metates

North edge of disturbance

Wall trenches

Inside edge of house wall

Figure 10. Courson C: diagram of excavations and features.

construction site, followed by a double picket of posts set 50 cm to 80 cm apart. The
trench was then backfilled, and rocks were set on top to keep the poles from pulling
in while the pickets were woven into a pair of parallel wickerwork walls. This would
explain the double postmolds, the erratic placement of rocks, their lack of association with the house floor, and the double wall trench; the edges of the trench would
have been dug deeper to accommodate the posts, but the center would have been
scooped out only enough to make excavation easier.

126

Texas Archeological Society
Courson D (41OC29)

Three distinct areas of Courson D, site 41 OC29, were investigated by the TAS
field schools (Figure 11). These investigations included controlled surface collections, broad-area testing, evaluation of a disturbed house site, and evaluation of an
area disturbed for the drilling of a water well. Area A, the disturbed house (Figure
12), was the focus of most of our activities for the two seasons.
The house site apparently had suffered rather severely from previous digging.
Upon reviewing the notes and records of the work, it is apparent that some of the
digging may have been undertaken as part of prehistoric remodelling of the house.
The central hearth, found in 1988, was not the kind of fire pit the other houses have,
but was rather a flat surface of extensively burned soil that appeared to have been
planed smooth. Evidence from confusing possible wall alignments has lead the
author to believe that this house may have gone through several stages of remodelling or reconstruction, and that each new phase of the process began with new
excavations inside the structure. The little evidence of interior features other than
the hearth suggests that the house probably conformed, at least in broad outline, to
the large stone-based houses at Courson B and the Kit Courson site. A rock pile in
the southeast corner of the house was thought to be a burial cairn like the one at
Courson B, but exploration of the pile revealed no graves, and, in retrospect, this
particular rock pile is more than likely a discard pile left by some previous but
historic digger at the site who left only the traces in the soil to record his passage.
No pit features or other ancillary features were found during our investigations here.
Areas A and C (Figure 13, a) are nearly contiguous, and a plot of materials from
both ~igure 13, b) clearly shows a difference in the densities of material between
the two areas, suggesting that they supported different activities.
In Area A, two distinct concentrations of material are apparent in the overall
pattern of material recovered (See Figure 14, a). The first and greatest concentration
is in the south center of the house where a deep north-south trench was cut to the
house floor. The second appears to be just southeast of the entryway. Both of the
concentrations are caused primarily by the bone and, near the hearth, burned bone
recoveries (Figure 14, b). Leaving those out of the analysis, several other discrete
increases in material are apparent. In the north and northwest quadrant of the house
is the greatest density of flakes (Figure 14, c) except for a small accumulation just
south of the center of the east wall, suggesting that the first concentration may reflect
some kind of interior activity and the second concentration may reflect an exterior
activity. Shell distribution here, as on the other sites, appears to have its own unique
distribution, with concentrations in the center of the east wall, roughly in line with
the probable entryway and another main concentration in the center of the south half
of the house, just south of the hearth. The quadrant of the site directly southeast of
the structure is relatively free of trash and debris, as if this area had been left
intentionally trash free or had been periodically cleaned.
Testing in area B, the north and east flanks of the hill that is Courson D ~igure
15), yielded one child burial, which was first thought to represent a cemetery
because fragments of human skull were found over an area of roughly 400 square

HughesmTAS Buried City Field Schools

9~

.......

o
o
<
O °\\° C’~\° ~

Bronze

Area A

Area C

0

I0

20

marker

30

METERS
95

Figure 11. Courson D: topographic map showing subareas of the site.

40

50
J

127

\

.

\\

i\\

\

\\

\\

\
\
\.

\

\
\

0

\

\

130:

\\\
\,

--~Heartl~

....
-\

’..

"3’\

\

,,

~

\

DO

~

""

Rock pile
"U’<>%

-----

~.

\

Rock
~.~ CQIIche plaster llne
.....

Inferred strut ?ufol
alignment

t

I

I

!

5METERS
I

Hearth
o

290

GRiD EhST

2~5

Possible post mold
300

Figure 12. Courson D, Area A: plan of features and excavation areas.

meters. However, forensic anthropologists at the Wichita State University, who
examined the fragments, suggested that all of the skull fragments could have come
from the same individual, a juvenile in the 8-to-10-year age range. There were no
offerings or direct associations that could be useful for inferring a date for this burial,
and because there had been rodent disturbance in the grave pit, all charcoal at the
level of the skeleton is suspect, so no definite age can be assigned to it. Other testing
disclosed a possible additional house area at the east center of the main Courson D
hill.
Test excavations in Area C showed one substantial concentration of material
at the southern edge of the test block (Figure 16). However, this concentration may
be material moved in by rodents or other burrowing animals from a nearby trashfilled pit that was damaged or destroyed in preparation for drilling the water well
and putting it in service.
Surface collections from the Courson D site yielded several areas of material
concentration. The greatest concentrations are on the southwest and east slopes of
the hill; there is relatively little material on the hill crest (Figure 17). Several

305

Hughes--TAS Buried City Field Schools

0

0
r’O

0
Cq

0
~

0
0

4,

OO2

0

"0

06~ 0
"0

I

Og~7
0

0
r’O

©

o

0
0

Cq

r.,.)
o

0
j

o~

io

~

~.~

o

o

-

~:~’~

t

r.)

129

130

Texas Archeological Society

134

1.34

132

152

130

1,30

128

12B

126

126

124

124

122

122

a
O~

CO

0

o4

!34

1.34

1.32

132

i30

1.30

12B

128

126

126

i24

124

122

122

132
130

~ 12B
126

i
122

124
122

c
Figure 14. Courson D, Area A: countoured diagrams showing distribution of all materials
(a), bone (b), and flakes (c).

Hughes--TAS Buried City Field Schools
i

I

350 E

131

I

400 E

9O ~

~--~-~’-~’~’~

91

92

c

Cintou~EeTrvEl~l S me:er

!

Figure 15. Courson D, Area B: topographic map showing test excavations.

concentrations of debris, centering roughly on coordinates 215N/250E, 220N/
365E, 270N, 350E, and 275N/315E, may mark individual houses or other related
activities.

Kit Courson Site (41OC43)
The main Village period component of the Kit Courson site, 41 OC43, has been
extensively studied, and the TAS excavated test units east of the house, looking for

132

Texas Archeological Society

r.q
0’~
O4

1

109

-

107

-

105

-

1

I

t

111

I

105

101

101
04

~

0,1

0,,I

Figure 16. Courson D, Area C: contoured diagram showing distribution of al! debris
recovered.

the midden and activity areas associated with the main structure (Figure 18). The
primary goal of the TAS--to identify the midden area for this structure--was
clearly achieved. A substantial deposit of midden debris was found east of the house,
bounded by grid coordinates from 39E to 46E and from 30N to 42N. There is a
distinct decline in trash and debris that forms a buffer zone about 4 meters wide
between the house and this midden area (Figure 19, a). Concentrations of shell seem,
as at the other sites, to mark a special activity that is distinct from the routine
household processing tasks (Figure 19, b). Daubing is distributed in a tight cluster
well separated from the main house, suggesting a second house southeast of the one
already studied (Figure 19, c). The distribution of flake debris presents a similar
picture (Figure 20, a); the midden reaches its greatest density between 8 and 15

Hughes--TAS Buried City Field Schools

133

310

,310

29O

290

27O

27O

250

25O

230

250

2!0

210
0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Figure 17. Courson D: contoured diagram showing distribution of material recovered
from the surface.

meters east of the house. There is a small amount of charcoal distributed to the
northeast of the doorway and around the hearth ~igure 20, b).
A relatively complete description of the Kit Courson house has already been
published (Hughes and Hughes-Jones 1987). The house is similar to those described
above, measuring some 9 meters east to west and 7 meters north to south, inside the
50-cm-to-1-meter-thick walls ~igure 21). The entryway was not stone lined, but a
distinct compaction of the soil and an opening in the rock in the center of the east
wall clearly marked its beginning. The compact soil of the entry floor could be
traced for slightly more than 2 meters before it became indistinguishable from the
other soils in the area. The house had a central firepit about 45 cm in diameter, four
deep primary support posts that were as much as 50 cm in diameter, and plastered
faces on the raised north, south, and west benches. In addition, it was suspected that
there was a series of small post molds on each side of the rock wall bases that
surrounded the house. The post molds were identified in 1986 by probing, and the
regularity of their pattern and the few that could be traced lend credence to the theory
that the rocks at this house served as footing or foundation stones at the base of a
double-pen wicker wall with vertical uprights.
Attached to the south wall of the house, and extending beyond its southeast
corner, was a small, lightly constructed addition of posts and rocks that had its own
clay-lined central firepit and appears to have had relatively clean floors except for
parts of two broken pots found inside the west edge of this structure. Between the
north wall of this addition, which was made by extending the south wall of the main
house, and the extended entryway of the main house, was a distinctive exterior

134

Texas Archeological Society

84

8O

Figure 18. Kit Courson site: topographic map of the area.

Hughes--TAS Buried City Field Schools

135

53
49
45
41
37

33
29
25
21

25
2t

C

Figure 19. Kit Courson site, Part 1: contoured diagrams showing distribution of all debris
(a), shell (b), and daub (c).

activity area for food and material processing (Figure 22). The area yielded several
grinding stones, several deer antler tines, a large part of one complete antler, halves
of two different pots, and a deer-jaw sickle.
Test excavations by the TAS east of the house disclosed several discrete areas
of material concentration including the midden area discussed above. Billy Harrison,
site supervisor for this part of the work, believes that there may be a Woodland
pithouse southeast of the main house at Kit Courson.
Dutcher Mammoth (P404)

The TAS began salvaging the Dutcher Mammoth in 1988, and the work was
completed by volunteers and members of the Courson Archeological Projects later
in that season. Part of the skull and much of the postcranial material from one
mammoth, including pelvis, femorae, one tibia, and two humeri were recovered,
together with one tusk and an assortment of vertebrae and ribs (Figure 23). During
the excavations, evidence of additional riverine deposits of gravel, coarse sediments,

136

Texas Archeological Society

II

IIIIIIIIIIIIIIII

53
49

49

45

°~
41

41

37

37

33
29

25

25

21

21

a

32
2B

28

b
Figure 20. Kit Courson site, Part 2: contoured diagrams showing distribution of flake
debris (a) and charred materials (b).

and reworked Pleistocene fossils were found to be mixed in with the mammoth
remains. This could indicate a pluvial event after burial of the carcass had begun,
perhaps a terminal Wisconsin event. No artifacts or evidence of human activity were
found with the remains, and no estimate of the age of the mammoth’s death can be
offered at this time. The bones are being restored by employees of Courson Oil and
Gas in Perryton for interpretive display.
Temple, or Gould, Ruin (41OC1:A)
The final area of primary investigations by the TAS was at site 41OC 1, Area
A (41OC1A), known variously as the Temple (Eyerly 1907a, 1907b, 1910, 1912)
or the Gould ruin (Moorehead 1920, 1931). The TAS exposed the west wall and
tried to find the northeast and southeast comers in order to define the limits of the
structure. These investigations were undertaken despite many excavations of this
structure since 1907 because none of the records of previous work included an

Hughes--TAS Buried City Field Schools

137

o

0

a

o

.......

D
,Do

o~o.

Cp

o

N

"o.
$(=3

o ~

c~

-7
11 °~
~0 Q29

o

a r%’~-.- -g- ~- ---:~,"--q

"oo

¯ ,,o

0o

0 ~

"g..

°

oO

o

-%
,V::5

o

oO

O

0

(})co

o

0
0

¯

(~

o

Po s thole

o,o,~,,dg,,

~

He arlh 0

~)

<~ ,~o

9c~

o&

°o

o0%
Q

o

~(~0° oo~ O~

Figure 21. Kit Courson site: plan of the house and related features.

adequate map of the building layout or contents. Conflicts in publications and field
notes made even the rough dimensions questionable. However, the TAS found
several floor features in good condition
Post molds lined the inside of both the east and west walls about 50 cm from
the base of the rocks. These may represent structural wall posts along the inner
margins of a stone foundation. The main cross trench encountered one of two large
central support posts and part of a small hearth near the center of the excavation that
probably was one of the firepits in use when the building was occupied. Also
exposed in the cross trench were a Irash or cache pit southeast of the small hearth
and the clearly defined trench Moorehead excavated in 1920 from north to south
through the center of the structure. Jeff Eighmy, from Colorado State University,
secured an archaeomagnetic dating sample from the clay rim of the firepit that was
exposed in 1988. The results suggest an age for the firepit of from A.D. 1250 to 1375
(personal communication, J. Eighmy 1990).

138

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 22. Kit Courson site: photograph of the material in a possible processing activity
area southeast of the entryway to the house.

At the end of the brief excavations in 1988, several important questions were
left unanswered. The north and south walls had not been clearly defined, but enough
information was obtained to support an educated guess about the north wall; the
south wall was still a complete question. Excavations within the walls suggested
that enough structural features might be found to make it possible to deal with
several important questions about the house. Among these are

1) Is this a single, open-room structure, or was it subdivided into several
rooms?
2) Is this in fact a single structure or could it be two (or more) closely
spaced structures that have been considered a large single structure
through accidents and interpretations of previous excavations or site
development processes?
3) Does this structure reflect an initiation or termination of the locally
defined culture--the Buried City Complex? Or does it reflect another
facet of the primary cultural development?
To answer these questions and several others, the Wichita State University field
school was held at the Temple site in the Summer of 1990. Although analysis is still
in progress on the results, the field map and tentative interpretations conclude that
this is in fact a single structure, probably a large open room without partitions, and
that it had three firepits, a large central fire pit almost 1 meter in diameter, an
auxiliary firepit in the center of the south half of the building (identified by the TAS

HughesmTAS Buried City Field Schools

139

Thoracic
Radius

Tusk

Sacral vertebra

J
Left femur

o
I

METER

Figure 23. Dutcher Mammoth site: plan of bones and associations.

as noted above), and probably another auxiliary firepit in the northern half of the
structure (alluded to in Moorehead’s field notes). The north wall was found to run
at an oblique angle from the west wall, giving the structure a rather unusual shape,
and the south wall was still not found. However, detailed examination of the
southern part of the site, together with study of the vertical and horizontal
distribution of material, indicate that the wall may have been in about the position
shown on the map (Figure 24).
Of continuing interest is what may have happened to the south wall. A close
examination of Moorehead’s published and field photographs from the 1990
investigations suggest that there was no south wall when Moorehead dug here, and
there is every indication that it had been removed in prehistory, or perhaps never
existed. More details about the conclusions from the Temple ruin investigations will
be included in a report planned for completion in spring 1991.
OTHER TASKS
The extensive archeological survey conducted in 1987 discovered many sites
directly upstream from the Buried City, but the main group of sites and village
material does not extend more than a few kilometers upstream from the Courson

140

Texas Areheological Society

25E

20E

30E
Fire pit
40N

o

Post mold

\~’~ Pit (trash or cache)
O Caliche Boulder
88-X Feature number

©

b

35N
%
0

1

2

I

f

!

METERS

o

o

%

0
<3o

o

30N

<5
oo"~

oI

©

c
88-5

88-9

88-8

25N

88-7

(~u

20N

Q0

I

i

Figure 24. Temple site (Gould ruin): plan of TAS excavations and features.

Hughes--TAS Buried City Field Schools

141

ranch. One of the questions addressed during the survey was whether settlement was
restricted to the main valley of Wolf Creek or there are components in the tributary
valleys that have not been found. No such other components were found during the
survey in 1987 or during subsequent investigations in 1988, 1989, and 1990. For
some reason, the major settlement pattern seems to have focused on the main
drainage of Wolf Creek.
Many isolated sites and nonarchitectural sites--beyond the defined site groups-have been found and recorded during the past 80 years; information on these sites
was expanded by the Courson Archeological Projects and the TAS survey. Included
here as miscellaneous sites are one site of undetermined function (41 OC5), two rock
overhangs that may have had some limited prehistoric occupations, one possible
crevice or overhang burial, one possible disturbed crevice or overhang burial, and
three cairns, possibly for burials on the valley rim. Several other likely overhangs
for bluff shelters were identified by the TAS survey crews, but review of these sites
showed no direct evidence of occupation. In addition to these nonstructural sites,
one possible house site was found west of the Kit Courson ruins.
Two of the cairns identified were apparently burial cairns, as indicated by the
presence of some human bone in the disturbed fill around them. Both had been
excavated at some time in the past by persons unknown; age and cultural affiliation
of the cairn burials on the rim cannot be assessed from observations made at the sites.
No diagnostic artifacts or other remains were associated with the cairns. According
to Danny Witt (personal communication), one of the burials (possibly 41OC44) was
dug at some time during the past 30 years and may have yielded a flintlock and other
metal fittings, suggesting an early Historic or Protohistoric time for that site.
Southeast of the Buried City proper is an isolated promontory known locally
as "Lookout" or "Signal" Peak. The promontory is an ideal location for some kind
of special activity. Eyerly (1907) mentions this site as a burial ground, and
Moorehead refers to it but offers no information about it. In 1987 there were no
artifacts or other prehistoric debris on the clean caliche bedrock, but there were
substantial quantities of plaster of paris scrap were found there, together with
enough stone-work to indicate that something had been built there.
A series of late prehistoric or protohistoric sites is situated south of the Kirk
Courson sites on the second terrace of Wolf Creek. There is only minimal
archeological material in this area, shown by Eyerly as an old Indian camp where
he noted the presence of tepee poles. Local collectors have gathered several metal
arrowpoints from these sites through the years, adding some confidence to Eyerly’s
assessment of the site function and age.
To the west of the Kit Courson ruins, a long, bevelled projectile point or knife
reminiscent of the Meserve type projectile point was found eroding out of a wash
that flows into Wolf Creek. No additional material was found with this specimen to
suggest whether it represents terminal Paleoindian, Archaic, or some other time
period more closely related to the Village period sites that are so abundant.
A lithic scatter of chert flakes and burned pebbles was found by TAS survey
crews in a field about 6.5 km (4 miles) west of the Buried City. It is a small scatter

142

Texas Archeological Society

encompassing about 100 square meters on a low rise above a constructed pond.
Another lithic scatter that includes an arrowpoint is on upper Wolf Creek about 7
km (4.5 miles) west of the Buried City. This scatter encompasses some 750 square
meters and includes some burned caliche cobbles.
SUMMARY

Both the excavations and the surveys conducted by the TAS were extremely
successful and yielded important information on the archeology of this unique part
of the Wolf Creek valley. Research in the area is continuing, but several observations can be made from the information developed to date.
Site Distribution
All of the observed architectural sites or communities are above the first terrace
or active floodplain level of Wolf Creek. In the Buried City, Moorehead, Kirk
Courson, and Kit Courson ruins, the houses are more than 200 meters from the base
of the bluffs that line the Wolf Creek valley. Frequently, the houses were built on
the terrace margins or on the crests of the terraces near the terrace margins. The
Courson ruins has one house, Courson B (41OC27), relatively close to the bluffs and
two structures (Courson C and Courson D) well back from the terrace margin. The
latter structures are set on low rises adjacent to broad swales with almost level or Ushaped channel floors.
The general pattern throughout this small area is one of isolated, single-room
houses of about 64 square meters of floor space, situated on low knolls, rises, or
ridges adjacent to shallow swales that drain the flanks of the Caprock Escarpment.
In all cases, the houses are high enough to be well out of the floodplain of Wolf
Creek, but they are below the maximum elevations of the valley floor. Where
several structures are apparent on the surface, they seem to be at least 30 meters apart
and may be somewhat further apart. The primary controlling factor is probably
microtopographic variations in the valley floor. Despite very intensive survey work,
no indication of structures or related long-term habitation activities or features have
been found on any of the side channels entering Wolf Creek at the Buried City, and
upstream survey suggests that the structural sites do not extend more than 1.5 to 3
km (1 or 2 miles) upstream from the area that has been the focus of our study.
Information from local informants suggests that the main concentration of sites may
extend some 3 to 5 km (2 or 3 miles) downstream from the study area, and a study
of the Wolf Creek Park, adjacent to the Courson ranch, suggests equally high density
for at least 1.5 km (1 mile) below the Courson ranch (Ellzey 1985, 1987).
Time

The Courson ranch on Wolf Creek encompasses archeological sites representing time periods from at least the early Woodland through the late prehistoric
Village period and--perhaps with a hiatus during the terminal prehistoric--into the

Hughes--TAS Buried City Field Schools

143

protohistoric and Historic periods (Table 1). There is a possibility of Archaic
material, reflected by the Meserve-like point. Other time periods and events are
undoubtedly represented, but evidence of them is obscured by the recent soil
mantle; it will require an extensive geomorphic assessment to determine the age of
the land surfaces and test excavations to identify specific components.

Table 1. Radiocarbon Dates From Selected Sites
on the Courson Ranch
Sample No.
DIC-3227
DIC-3228
DIC-3280
DIC-3281
DIC-3300
DIC-3301
DIC-3302
DIC-3303
DIC-3338
BETA-20276
BETA-20277
BETA-20871

Site
42OC27
42OC27
41OC27
41OC26
41OC27
41OC27
41OC48
41OCI:K
41OCI:M
41OC27
41OC43
41OC43

Material
Charcoal
Charcoal
Bone
Charcoal
Charcoal
Charcoal
Charcoal
Charcoal
Charcoal
Charcoal
Charcoal
Charcoal

14C

Age

520+60-55 B.P.
610+__50 B.P.
240+60-70 B.P.
740!-_50 B.P.
800+50-60 B.P.
710+50-40 B.P.
630-L-_40 B.P.
590+50-40 B.P.
740-L-_60 B.P.
770_+80 B.P.
840-&-_100 B.P.
580-L-_60 B.P.

Date A.D.
1430_+55
1340+50
1710-2_65
1210-L-_50
1150_+55
1240_+45
1320_+40
1360-L-_40
1210-L-_60
1180-L-_80
1110-L-_100
1370-L-_60

SOURCE: Hughes and Hughes-Jones 1987:Table 7.

Appraisal of Cultural Resources
This small part of the Wolf Creek valley is a truly unique archeological setting.
Site densities during the Late Prehistoric period are high enough that extensive
components of the cultural complex are found on every second and third terrace
setting for at least 1.5 km (1 mile) above the Buried City and for perhaps 3 km (2
miles) or more downstream. Despite this dense settlement, there is no indication of
such habitation on the side drainages of Wolf Creek, and there is little or no evidence
of even secondary activities associated with the primary habitations. Earlier
cultures, representing Woodland and earlier times, are poorly represented in all
samples, but this is because they have been obscured by rapid deposition in this part
of the Wolf Creek valley and the extensive mantling of the sites with the Village
period materials.
The Village period pottery recovered from these sites is particularly interesting;
perhaps the primary characteristic of Buffed City complex pottery is diversity
(Hughes and Hughes4ones 1987:104). Ceramics of most Panhandle sites are
tempered with crushed rock and are thin, hard, and simply cordmarked (Hughes,

144

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

1986:11); the ceramic tradition of the Courson ruins, however, is thick, poorly fired,
rounded, globular or subconoidal vessels tempered with fine to very fine quartz sand
(Hughes and Hughes-Jones 1987). The neck, shoulder, and rim sherds show that
vessels frequently had high, slightly flaring rims. Body sherds of comprise about
equal proportions of smoothed ware (including manufactured plain wares) and
smoothed-over cordmarked wares, and cordmarked wares. Larger sherds normally
have additional surface treatments---chevron-incised plain and cordmarked wares,
crenelated, filleted, pinched, gouged, incised, punctated, and fluted rims, and many
other treatments (Figures 25 and 26). Virtually any surface treatment or rim
treatment imaginable can be found among the sherd collections from these simms.
Pottery types from these simms are closer to the Kansas Geneseo types than to other
Texas and Oklahoma Panhandle tytms (Hughes and Hughes-Jones 1987:106).
The unusual character of this site complex may be largely the result of the
unique ecological setting of this part of the Wolf Creek valley. At the point where
the sites seem to begin on the upstream end of the valley, the creek has just begun
to cut through the Ogallala aquifer, and the house sites continue downstream until
the creek widens out and the Ogallala is mantled completely by silt and sand. Hence,
the area where most of the sites are found is the part of the creek where seeps and
springs from the Ogallala would have been most abundant. The probability is
excellent that the prehistoric levels of the aquifer would have kept the terrace
settings here subirrigated, providing optimum conditions for gardening and habitation as well as nourishing the abundant timber and other materials that were essential
to living on the Plains.
Such a dense concentration of village period sites is almost unknown in the
Texas Panhandle; some of the areas around Lake Meredith on the Canadian River
only approximate this settlement situation. However, several questions about the
individual sites need to be addressed, as do several questions about the internal
community structure within each site or village and the interactions between the
simms or villages. Because of the unusual setting, these sites should be considered
singly and together as of the utmost importance to our understanding of the local and
regional prehistory. The potential of these sites for answering questions about
prehistoric community structure and interactions, cultural growth and development, human response to environmental change, and the impact of low-technology
horticulturists on a strictly limited microniche is very high.
In order to address any of these questions, a long-term program of investigation
by a multidisciplinary team on several individual structures and nonstructural areas
on each site focusing on developing environmental data, precise chronological data,
and examination of cultural and aesthetic microevolutionary trends as reflected in
the stylistic attributes of the buildings, external activity areas, and artifacts will be
required. Because of the potential of these simms for helping to solve significant
archeological research questions and the possibility that the information developed
could help us understand the impact of modem low-technology fanning on
marginal environments, they are a resource that should be treasured and managed
with the greatest care.

Hughes--TAS Buried City Field Schools

145

146

Texas Archeological Society

B

A

D
E
0

1

2

3
!

CENTIMETERS

Figure 26. Examples of decorated pottery. A, B, notched rims; C, notched lip tab; D, E,
rolled lips on low rims; F, alternative fingernail gouge pattern. A. D. amd E fom the Kit
Courson site.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

These investigations have been supported since 1985 materially, financially,
and with the labor and patience of the Courson family. Such a degree of personal
commitment in the current age is as refreshing as it is unusual, so I would like to
express a very special thanks to all of them for their deep concern with helping us
preserve and understand this small piece of the past. The Texas Archeological
Society provided some funding for the field seasons with them in the summers of
1987 and 1988. Trailers and heavy equipment were made available by Zenith
Drilling, and water wells and services were maintained by Howards Well Service.
The North Plains Electric Cooperative donated the use of a cherry picker for several

Hughes--TAS Buried City Field Schools

147

seasons to aid in the recording of the final excavations on many of the sites, and
laboratory space and facilities have been provided by the University of Oklahoma
Archaeological Research and ManagementCenter and The Wichita State University
Anthropology Laboratory.
Foremen for the early investigations included Nick Petruccione (1985) and Jim
Couzzourt (1986), who dutifully served as crew chiefs, records clerks, confidants,
and tour guides as needed. During the TAS investigations, the able involvement of
the various site archeologists including Doug Boyd, Jim Couzzourt, E. Mott Davis,
James Everett, Joan Few, Billy Harrison, Johnney Pollan, Ron Ralph, Emmett
Shedd, and Jim Word made the work not just go more smoothly; they made it
possible. Alicia Hughes-Jones devoted many long hours to helping develop the
recording, concordance, and analysis system that made this report possible. The
courageous efforts of several special expediters throughout the several seasons
work, including Greg Mason, Danny Witt, and Dee Fuchs, were seldom seen but
always felt, for their arduous duty was to insure that what was needed was present
in a timely manner. Danny Witt also served yeoman duty in setting up and closing
each season’s work and in maintaining the equipment between seasons.
The work reported here has spanned halfa decade and has involved perhaps as
many as 1,000 people in one capacity or another. To thank each individually would
require a more lengthy document than this report. The many names not listed here
represent the greatest contribution of all. I hope each of you who has been involved
will accept my personal thanks and debt of gratitude.
REFERENCES CITED
Ellzey, T. S.
1966
A Panhandle Aspect site (Preliminary Report). Transactions of the Second
Regional Archeological Symposium for Southeastem New Mexico and Westem Texas. Midland Archeological Society Special Bulletin No. 1: 59-65.
1985

Field Survey of Archeological Sites on Lake Fryer County Park, Ochiltree
County, Texas. Paper presented at the 56th annual meeting of the Texas
Archeological Society, November 2, San Antonio.

1987

Appendix I: Archeological Activities on Wolf Creek Park, Including Site
41OC32. In: An Archeological Survey of Wolf Creek Park, Ochiltree County,
Texas. (Jack T. Hughes andT. S. Ellzey): 52-127.Texas Antiquities Committee
Permit 527. Draft report on File, Texas Antiquities Committee, Austin.

Eyerly, T. L.
1907a The Buried City of the Panhandle. The Student (Bulletin of the Canadian
Academy, Canadian, Texas), pp. 28-36.
1907b

The Buried City of the Panhandle. Transactions of the Kansas Academy of
Science 21(1):219-228.

1910

The Indian Remains of the Canadian River Valley. TheArchaeologicalBulletin
1(3):77-80.

1912

The Buried City of the Panhandle. The Archaeological Bulletin 3(1): 1-5.

148

Texas Archeological Society

Hughes, D. T.
The Courson 1986 Archeological Project. Paper presented at the Texas
1986
Archeological Society annual meeting, Laredo, Texas.
Hughes, D. T. and A. A. Hughes-Jones
1987
The Courson Archeological Projects. Final 1985 and Preliminary 1986.
Innovative Publishing, Perryton, Texas.
Moorehead, W. K.
1920
The Origin and Development o f the Pueblo CliffDweller Culture; A Preliminary
Paper on Explorations Recently Conducted. Andover.
1931

Archaeology of the Arkansas River Valley. Phillips Academy, Andover.

149

The Lipscomb Bison Quarry:
Continuing Investigation at a Folsom Kill-Butchery
Site on the Southern Plains
Jack L. Hofman, Lawerence C. Todd, C. Bertrand Schultz,
and William Hendy
ABSTRACT
Since the initial investigations by the Nebraska State Museum in 1939, the
Lipscomb Bison Quarry in Lipscomb County, Texas has been a key Paleoindian
site. Although repeatedly cited in discussions on Folsom lifeways, published
information on Lipscomb is limited to a brief repor t on the first excavation. Recent
study of collections and field work allow an expanded documentation of the site.
Within the 138 square meters excavated at Lipscomb, the remains of more than 50
bison and more than 40 Folsom artifacts have been collected. Significant variation
exists in the state of preservation, articulation, and fragmentation of the bone.
Distributional patterning in the chipped stone assemblage is also indicated but the
extent and degree of spatial variation is yet to be determined for either lithics or
fauna. Information on excavations in 1939, 1946, and 1988, together with recent
analysis of collections are summarized in terms of Lipscomb’s rote in the
interpretation of early Paleoindian adaptations on the Southern Plains.

INTRODUCTION
The 1930s was a dynamic and exciting period for research in Early Man in
North America (e.g., MacCurdy 1937; Wormington 1957). Following the Folsom
discovery in 1926 and its widespread acceptance by 1928, there was a flurry of
research pertaining to the association of prehistoric Americans and Pleistocene
faunas. Much of this activity was centered at the University of Nebraska State
Museum (Barbour and Schultz 1932, 1936; Schultz 1932, 1938, 1943, 1983;
Schultz and Eisley 1935, 1936).
Roberts’s (1935, 1936, 1940) detailed research at the Lindenmeier Folsom
Campsite in Colorado, however, overshadowed most other Folsom studies of the
period. Investigation of the Lipscomb site in 1939 provided relatively anticlimactic
documentation of a second key Folsom bison kill site. A preliminary report on the
investigation at Lipscomb (Schultz 1943) has provided the source for continuing
discussion and speculation concerning the nature of the site and circumstances of
this highly significant Folsom bison kill. This paper provides an up-to-date account
of the history of investigations at the site and an assessment of the place of the
Lipscomb site in Folsom period research and Paleoindian studies in general. The
Lipscomb site is in the northeastern corner of the Texas Panhandle (Figure 1).

Bulletht of the Texas A rcheological Soc&ty 60 (1989)

150

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Physiographic map of Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas, Colorado, and New Mexico,
showing location of the Lipscomb and other Folsom sites. From Physiographic Map of
the United States by Erwin Raisz.

HOT AND COLD RUNNING BISON:
PREVIOUS INTERPRETATIONS OF THE LIPSCOMB SITE
The first published documentation on the Lipscomb site appeared in the
Bulletin of the University of Nebraska State Museum (Barbour and Schultz
1941:67-68). Because this early report includes information about the history of
investigations at Lipscomb, it is included here in full, with the exception of a table
listing measurements of a bison skull from the site.

In the fall of 1938 a large deposit of bison bones was reported to the
University of Nebraska State museum by bar. Charles H. Falkenbach of the
Frick Laboratory, American Museum of Natural History. The deposit was
located on the farm of Mr. Commodore Hopper, 16 miles north of
Canadian, near Lipscomb County, Texas, on Sand Creek, a branch of Wolf
creek. A preliminary examination had been made by Mr. Falkenbach, who
arranged to exchange the prospect with the University of Nebraska for

Hofman, Todd, Schultz, and Hendy-- Lipscomb Bison Quarry

151

excavating privileges in certain Nebraska quarries. On May 20, 1939, the
Texas bison locality was visited by a field party consisting of Messrs.
Charles H. Falkenbach, John C. Blick and N. Z. Ward of the Frick
Laboratory, and Messrs. E. E. Brier, John Adams, Lynn Robert Wolfe, and
C. Bertrand Schultz of the University of Nebraska State Museum.
A careful examination of the bone deposit showed that the remains,
although they were very near the present surface of the ground, were well
fossilized and at one time had been deeply buried. Several terraces are well
developed along Sand Creek and the bones appear to be located in the
highest (35 to 40 feet) terrace.
A flint scraper was found in situ among the bones and it was at once
decided to make further excavations to determine the species of bison and
the type of artifact. A field party composed of Messrs. John Adams,
William Hendy, and James Crosby was sent from the University of
Nebraska to the Lipscomb Bison Quarry, as it is called in the field records.
The group arrived at the quarry on June 10 and immediately began
excavations. A grooved Folsom-type dart point was found in situ on the
first day of excavation. Work at the site continued until August 26, with
Messrs. Harry Tourelot and Robert Kubicek joining the party on July 31.
Mr. and Mrs. C. Bertrand Schultz visited the site three different times
during the season, and aided in the excavating.
A total of nine essentially complete grooved Folsom points, nine
partial Folsom points, four large scrapers or knives, and a snub-nosed
scraper were found. A number of chips of flint, including a longitudinal
channel flake from a groove of a Folsom point, gave evidence that Early
man probably camped at the site and chipped artifacts there. Charcoal and
burned bones were found at various places throughout the quarry, especially
along the borders. Some of the skeletons of the bison were almost
completely ,articulated, but the bones around the fringe of the quarry were
disartic ulated and badly broken. Most of the skulls were closely associated
with each other at the south end of the excavation.
A total of thirty-eight boxes and crates of fossil bison material was
collected from the site to add the Morrill Paleontological Collections. a
study of the specimens shows that the bison is identical with the form found
at the Folsom quarry in New Mexico, i.e., Bison antiquus taylori. The
measurements of one of the largest male skulls is given here for reference.
A complete report on the bison from the Lipscomb quarry, together with
a record of the fossil bison from other localities in America, will be
published in a forthcoming paper.
The more extensive 1943 report by Schultz included more details about the site
and excavation as well as two tables, one describing the artifacts collected from the
site and the second providing the metric description of a large bison skull. The 1943

152

Texas Archeological Society

report (Schultz 1943:244-248) is in part redundant to the 1941 paper, but contains
substantial information published for the first time and is reproduced here in part.
The bones appeared to be larger than typical Bison bison, and since the
members of the staff of the University of Nebraska State Museum were
anxious to obtain comparative material of late Pleistocene and early recent
bison, excavating privileges were obtained from the Frick Laboratory in
exchange for rights in certain Nebraska fossil quarries.
The members of the field party making this preliminary investigation
found a "snub-nosed" scraper ~1. XII, No.17001-39) in situ among the
bones protruding from the bank, but this type of artifact was, of course, not
diagnostic. On the slope of the hill west of the bone deposit, however, a
fragment ofa Folsom point (No. 17000-39) had been previously found on
the surface, so it was considered a possibility that more artifacts would be
encountered when the bones were excavated .... Dr. and Mrs. Loren C.
Eiseley of the University of Kansas, Dr. and Mrs. E. H. Sellards of the
University of Texas, and Mr. Floyd Struder of Amarillo, Texas were
visitors at the site during the excavations.
The location of the bones had been known for at least twenty years by
persons in the neighborhood, and some excavating had been done by local
citizens. There was no visible excavation showing previous work but
undoubtedly the numerous bones and bone fragments in the talus below
the outcrop were the result of digging rather that erosion.
Excavations were begun on the west side of the deposit in the area
where the bones were the thickest. A trench was started but it soon became
evident that this method of removal would have to be altered because there
were a number of articulated skeletons in the quarry and the bones lay close
together. The quarry was marked off in five-foot squares and the outlines
of the various important specimens were plotted on a large-scale sketch
map. A topographic map was also made showing the region along Sand
Creek in the vicinity of the site. Several terraces are well developed along
this drainage, and the bones appear to be located in the highest (35 to 45
feet), or oldest, of these.
Most of the overburden covering the bones had been removed as a
result of erosion by wind and water, only six or seven inches remaining at
the northeast side of the deposit and thirty inches at the southeast edge. On
the west side, where the bones were exposed along the bank, the depth of
the deposit varied from seven to fifteen inches. The bones nearest the
surface were in a poor state of preservation because of the penetration of
grass roots.
The quarry extended for a distance of about one hundred feet from

north to south and twenty feet from east to west. At the north end of the
quarry the fossils were badly broken and scattered, but those to the south
were mainly complete and in most cases articulated. Fourteen articulated
skeletons, including skulls, were located in a section which was only

Hofman, Todd, Schultz, and Hendy m Lipscomb Bison Quarry

twelve feet wide and twenty feet long. The skeletons were headed chiefly
in an easterly or southerly direction and overlapped one another,
considerably. Nine additional skulls were unearthed in the area immediately
surrounding the skeletons. The skeletal remains of some individuals were
entire, even including the caudal vertebrae. From a paleontological
standpoint, the Lipscomb Bison Quarry is an important site because of the
completeness and preservation of the bones, including skulls. At the
original Folsom quarry in New Mexico many of the bones were crushed
and incomplete, and accurate measurements were difficult to obtain.
Twenty-two artifacts and a number of flint chips, all in situ, were
found scattered throughout the quarry. Four additional specimens were
recovered from the quarry talus. The artifacts compare favorably with
those of the Folsom complex which Dr. Frank H. H. Roberts, Jr., reported
from the Lindenmeier site in Colorado, but show much more variation in
form than do those the original Folsom locality. Some of the most
diagnostic specimens from the Texas site are figured in P1. XII, and all of
the archaeological material recovered is listed in Table 1. One of the chips
(17013-39) which was found in situ in the quarry resembles the "gravers"
found by Roberts, but no evidence of worked bone was observed. The
artifacts are made of a light to dark gray flint and flinty chalcedony which
is occasionally streaked with red.
Charcoal and ashes were associated with the bones in many parts of
the quarry, especially in the southern part, where there was evidence of
individual fires. Along the north and east sides of the deposit the bones
were scattered and many of them had been split and cut by the ancient
hunters. The artifacts as well as the bones often were incrusted with lime
on the lower side and the flint itself was found to be deeply patinated. Some
large pieces of limestone, foreign to the immediate area, were uncovered
among the bones in the northern part of the quarry. The stones may have
been employed in the breaking and shattering of the bones.
The chips of flint found in the quarry would suggest that tools were
resharpened at the site, but the presence of the complete channel flake 0~1.
XII, No. 17070-39) ofa Folsom point would not necessarily mean that the
projectile points were made there. This flake had probably been used as a
knife by the hunters.
It is difficult to postulate why so many articulated animals had been
left in the concentration which was mentioned in a previous paragraph.
Perhaps there was more food than necessary, and after the butchering of
a sufficient supply had been completed, only the pelts were taken from the
remaining animals. Burial must have taken place shortly afterward, or the
carnivores would have dismembered the skeletons.
Thirty-eight boxes and crates of fossil bison material were collected
from the Lipscomb site to add to the Morrill Paleontological Collections.
Although the specimens show a great amount of variation, they compare

153

154

Texas Archeological Society
Table 1. Inventory of Lithic Artifacts from the
Llpscomb Bison Quarry
(Modified from Schultz 1941, Table 1)

Specimen
Type

Catalog
Number

17000-39
Folsom point
17001-39
End scraper
Folsom point
17002-39
Folsom point
17003-39
17004-39
Folsom point
17005-39
Folsom base
Folsom base
17006-39
Folsom point
17007-39
Folsom fragment
17008-39
Folsom point
17009-39
17010-39
Folsom tip
17011-39
Side scraper
Seven flakes:
17012-39
6 retouch flakes
i retouch flake
4 retouch flakes
Four flakes:
17013-39
2 retouch flakes
I possible point midsection
1 tertiary flake
Gastropods
17014-39
Folsom point
17015-39
Side scraper
17016-39
Side scraper
17017-39
Folsom tip
17018-39
Folsom fragment
17019-39
Channel flake
17020-39
Folsom base
17021-39
Folsom point
17022-39
Folsom point
17023-39
Folsom tip
17024-39
Flake tool
17025-39
Folsom point
17026-39
Flake tool
17027-39
Flake tool
17028-39
Folsom point
7545
Folsom base
7546
Flake tool/spur
7547
Flake tool
7548
Folsom base
7549
Folsom base
7028

Date
Found
Oct. 1938
May, 1939
6-10-1939
6-11-1939
6-11-193
6-11-1939
6-22-1939
6-22-1939
6-23-1939
6-27-1939
6-1939
7-1-1939
6-29-1939

In
Situ?
no
yes
yes
yes
no
no
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
no
yes

Raw

Material Type
Edwards chert
Edwards chert
Alibates agate
Edwards chert
Edwards chert
Edwards chert
chert
Edwards chert
Edwards chert
Edwards chert
Edwards chert
Edwards chert
Edwards chert
Alibates agate
Edwards chert

7-2-1939

noEdwards chert
Alibates agate
Alibates agate

1939
7-3-1939
7-7-1939
7-14-1939
7-31-1939
8-7-1939
8-11-1939
8-11-1939
8-11-1939
8-21-1939
8-22-1939
8-22-1939
1939b
1939b
1939b
1946
1946
1946
1946
1946
1946

yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
no
no
yes
yes
no’
no

Edwards chert
Alibates agate
Alibates agate
Edwards chert
Alibates agate
Alibates agate
Alibates agate
Edwards chert
Edwards chert
Edwards chert
Alibates agate
Edwards chert
Edwards chert
Edwards chert
Edwards chert
Edwards chert
Alibates agate
Edwards chert
Edwards chert
Edwards chert

Hofman, Todd, Schultz, and Hendy m Lipscomb Bison Quarry

155

Table 1. (Continued)

Specimen
Type
Flat rock
Smoothed stone
Folsom point,
broken
Flake tool
Channel flake
Flake tool fragment
Flake fragment
Flake fragment

Catalog
Number

m

A78-28-1
41LP1-86-1
41LP1-86-2
41LP1-88-1
41LP1-88-2
41LP1-88-3

Date
Found

In
Situ?

Raw
Material Type

1946
1946

yes
yes

limestone
quartzite ?

1978
12-2-1986
12-2-1986
2-26-1988
8-11-1988
8-11-1988

-no
no
no’
no"
no’

Alibates agate
Edwards chert
Edwards chert
brown quartzite
Edwards chert
Edwards chert

¯ Pieces found in screening.
b Artifacts found in situ when excavating block in museum.

favorably with the collection of Bison antiquus taylori from the Folsom
Quarry in New Mexico (see Table 2). There is a certain amount of
overlapping in the size and form of the smallest Lipscomb individuals and
modem Bison bison. The bison material from Lipscomb is also being
compared with the extensive collection from the Scottsbluff Bison Quarry
in western Nebraska, where Yuma points were collected in 1932, in order
to determine whether the bison associated with the two artifact complexes
differ from each other.
Several important aspects of Schultz’s (1943) report are summarized as
follows:
1.
2.

3.
4.

5.

There was a distinct concentration of articulated and partially articulated
bison in a small area of the site.
There were at least 23 bison represented by 14 partially articulated skeletons
and 9 additional skulls. A concentration of skulls was noted in the southern
area (Barbour and Schultz 1941).
The skeletons were oriented primarily toward the east and south.
There was evidence of fire and probable hearth areas located primarily on
the margins of the dense bone bed. Other evidence of processing activity on
the margins of the bone bed were split bones and limestone cobbles found
in the northern part of the excavation.
Variation in the condition of the bone was correlated with depth below the
surface and was apparently due to differential weathering and the action of
grass roots. Bone at the north end of the quarry was relatively shallow and

156

Texas Archeological Society

Table 2. In Situ Artifact Positions With Bison Elements at
Lipscomb Bison Quarry, 1939
Catalog
Number
17002-39
17003-39
17006-39
17007-39
17008-39
17009-39
17012-39
17011-39
17013-39
17015-39
17016-39
17017-39
17018-39
17019-39
17021-39
17022-39
17020-39
-17023-39
17024-39
17025-39
17026-39

Specimen
Type
Folsom point
Folsom point
Folsom point
Folsom point
Folsom point
Folsom point
Flakes
"Knife" tool
Flakes
Folsom point
"Knife" tool
"Knife" tool
Folsom point
Folsom point
Folsom point
Folsom point
Channel flake
Flake
Folsom point
Folsom point
"Knife" tool
Folsom point

Condition of
Specimen
complete
complete
base
complete
tip
complete

complete

tip
broken
base only
complete
midsection
complete
tip
complete

Associated
Skeletal Elements
unknown1
proximal radius
ulna
distal humerus
none2
ribs behind scapula
among ribs
none2
none2
radius
none3
radius & ulna
unknown4
unidentified bones
base of skull
skull
scapula
mandible
radius
unknown5
unknown5
with bones6

Date
Found
6-10-39
6-11-39
6-22-39
6-22-39
6-23-39
6-27-39
6-29-39
7-1-39
7-2-39
7-3-39
7-8-39
7-15-39
7-31-39
8-7-39
8-11-39
8-11-39
8-11-39
8-17-39
8-21-39
8-22-39
8-22-39
--

1 West edge of the central bone concentration
2 Eroded terrace slope wesst of the bonebed
3 Perimeter trench
4 Eastern extension trench
5 Northern part of excavation area
6 Found in Museum during preparation of cast

poorly preserved, whereas bone at the south end was more deeply buried and
better preserved.
6. The articulated skeletons were seen as evidence for very limited postoccupation carnivore disturbance to the bonebed. Also, encrusted lime or
carbonates on the lower surface of bones and tools indicated that they had
not been greatly disturbed.
7. The limited evidence for butchering of the many articulated units were
interpreted to reflect overkill or a surplus of usable bison products.
8. The central area of the bone bed was interpreted to have been buried soon
after the kill, judging by its intactness, lack of carnivore evidence, and
degree of preservation.

Hofman, Todd, Schultz, and Hendy m Lipscomb Bison Quarry
9.
10.

157

The significance of the site as a paleontological resource is noted by
comparison with the less well preserved remains from the Folsom site.
The number of projectile points, flakes, and tools in conjunction with the
evidence of hearths suggested processing and perhaps camping by Folsom
hunters adjacent to the kill.

Most interpretations and discussions of Lipscomb that have appeared to date
are based on Schultz’s 1943 paper, but there has been considerable variation in the
interpretations offered for the Lipscomb kill as witnessed by the following quotations. These are ordered chronologically and are only a selection intended to show
the perspectives of various researchers on the Lipscomb site.
Sauer (1944:543) has suggested that fire drive was used to trap the bison at
Lipscomb an interpretation noted subsequently by Wedel (1961:76). Sauer’s
comments follow.
A herd of lumbering animals, feeding on the plains, could be cut off
by a line of fire before they gained the shelter of a valley. Or, panicstricken, they could be driven toward a valley in such a fashion that they
piled up in the ravines at its edge of tumbled over the rimrock that hems
many plains valleys. In either case the fire hunters had only to dispatch
maimed and injured animals. That such kills sometimes far exceed the
needs of the hunters is indicated the the piling up in one spot of numerous
complete skeletons. The conditions at the Lipscomb Bison Quarry are
especially illustrative.

Sellards (1952:58-59), who visited the Lipscomb site during excavations in
1939, provides an extended discussion of the site.
In the Lipscomb County, Texas, Schultz (1943) excavated a site
which evidently represents a bison kill by Folsom man. The bones at this
place were distributed over an area about 100 by 20 feet. In the part of the
quarry where the bones were most concentrated Schultz reports fourteen
articulated skeletons, including skulls, in an area 12 by 20 feet. "The
skeletons were headed chiefly in an easterly or southerly direction and
overlapped one another considerably. The skeletons of some individuals
were entire, including even the caudal vertebrae" (Schultz, 1943, p. 246).
Twenty-two artifacts were found by Schultz at this locality in 1939.
Of these were eighteen were projectilepoints, and of the eighteen projectile
points (whole or broken) fifteen were found situ in the bone bed and three
in the talus removed in excavating. The remaining artifacts include
scrapers, flake knife, and one channel flake. The projectile points are of the
Folsom culture.
The description of the skeletons as heading in one direction, one
overlapping the other, suggests that the animals, during a storm, entered
one of many depressions of the plains where the snow was of such depth
as to compel them to stop, some to freeze, and others to be killed by man.

158

Texas Archeological Society

Certain it is that the skeletons were in a natural depression and many of the
animals, if not all, entered the depressions at the same time as a herd or part
of a herd.
An incident of modern bison caught by a snowstorm and falling an
easy victim to hunters is relatedby Garreston (1938, p. 88) from Shoemaker
as follows: "The buffalo were all huddled together, up to their necks in
snow, in a great hollow space known as the sink in the heart of the White
Mountains, near the present town of Weiket, Union County, Pennsylvania.
The animals were numb from cold and hunger, and were unable to move,
so deep were they crusted in the great drift. The hunters started at once to
slaughter the helpless bison. Some were shot, but most of them were killed
by cutting their throats with long bear knives. Many of the tongues were
saved, and that was about all, as the snow was too deep to attempt skinning
them."
Hornaday (1899, p. 384) records an incident in which bison in the
vicinity of Hay and Peace Rivers near Great Slave Lake, Canada, caught
in an exceptionally heavy snowstorm of 1821, froze to death by the
thousands, their skeletons having persisted on the plains until at least as
late as 1871.
S uhm, Kfieger, and Jelks (1954:65) described Libscomb somewhat inaccurately
as follows:
Pleistocene lake bed site 11 miles southwest of Lipscomb, Texas.
Extinct bison the principle fauna. Eighteen points of Folsom type, two
scrapers, a flake knife, and a channel flake in association with the bison.
Excavated in 1939 by C. Bertrand Schultz for Nebraska State Museum.
Wormington (1957:40), provided this paragraph concerning theLipscomb site.

Another interesting site, which was reported by C. Bertrand Schultz
(1943), is the Lipscomb Bison Quarry, which lies eleven miles southwest
of Lipscomb, Texas. Here were found fourteen articulated bison skeletons
and nine skulls which, for the most part are like those found at the Folsom
Quarry. Eighteen artifacts were found scattered among the bones, and four
were found in the quarry talus. They closely resembled those obtained at
the Lindenmeier Site. They included Folsom points, scrapers, channel
flakes, and utilized flakes that probably served as knives.
Wedel (1961:62), in his widely used source book, summarized the t-mdings at
Lipscomb.

At the Lipscomb bison quarry, sixteen miles north of Canadian,
Texas, eighteen projectile points, several side scrapers, an end scraper, two
flake knives, and a number of chips were found in association with a mass
of fossil bison skeletons. Charcoal and ashes were noted among the bones,
as well as indications of hearths; and some of the bones had been split and

Hofman, Todd, Schultz, and Hendy ~ Lipscomb Bison Quarry

159

cut. Many of the skeletons are reported to have been in articulation,
including fourteen with skulls in an area measuring but twelve by twenty
feet. Of these, it was said that the "skeletons were headed chiefly in an
easterly or southerly direction and overlapped on another considerably."
It has been suggested that the animals may have been a herd which, caught
perhaps in a snow storm, wandered into a depression, stopped, and
perished by the hand of man.

In his 1968 dissertation, Henry Irwin commented on the Lipscomb site as a kill
having no campsite debris and stated that
Lubbock and Blackwater are kill sites by pond edges, while the type
site and Lipscomb are kill sites of the kind where the bison were undoubtedly
captured by drive and surround techniques. Bonfire shelter represents an
excellent instance of a drive over the cliff, and in [is] the earliest evidence
we have for such a kill technique.
Wheat (1972:160) provided this discussion of the Lipscomb situation.
There is one Folsom period site which indicates the use of a mass kill
technique, although the published evidence is not detailed enough to
reconstruct more than the broad outlines of the kill. This is the Lipscomb
Bison Quarry site (Schultz 1943:244-248). Here the evidence suggests
that a pond or gully in or near S and Creek had been used as a trap for a small
herd of bison driven or stampeded over a low hill to the west. The bone bed
extended about 30m. north to south, and 7m. east to west, and varied from
18 to 38 cm. in thickness. At the south end of the quarry there were 14
articulated skeletons, including skulls, in an area only 3.6 m. wide and 7.0
m. long. All were oriented east or south, and overlapped each other to a
considerable extent. Some of these skeletons were entire, but others had
been partly butchered. In the area immediately surrounding the skeletons
were 9 additional skulls. At the north end of the quarry most of the
skeletons had been more heavily butchered and the bones were badly
broken and scattered. Folsom points and other artifacts were scattered.
Folsom points and other artifacts were scattered throughout the quarry,
and charcoal and ashes were associated with the bones in several parts of
the bone bed, especially in the southern part where separate fires were
indicated. The fact that many of the bison were not completely butchered
suggests the the hunting party was not large, or that only meat, skins, and
so forth, for immediate need were taken.
Frison (1974:12) suggests that "the Lipscomb site (Schultz 1943) could have
been a trap or drive over bank of a stream. Unfortunately the actual number of
animals is not given, but complete specimens were found."
Frison (1978:114, 247) also mentions Lipscomb in his discussion of Folsom
culture and the evolution of bison hunting on the plains.

160

Texas Archeological Society

The Lipscomb site on the Southern Plains (Schultz 1943) with 14
articulated or partially articulated bison skeletons may be a communal kill.
Analysis of the Lipscomb dentitions should yield information on the
nature of the kill (whether a single event or several events over a period of
time) and possibly also some information of seasonality ....The evidence
suggests that systematic, communal hunting began early. Folsom groups
were aware of bison jumping methods if the data from Bonfire Shelter have
been properly interpreted. Trapping methods appear almost certain to have
been around considering the age structure of the Folsom site bison and the
number of animals at the Lipscomb Bison Quarry.
Johnson (1978:99) suggests that Lipscomb represented a single-event bison
drive.
These localities, such as Plainview, Lipscomb, and Rex Rodgers, are
multiple-animal bison drives into narrow draws or stream channels.., the
bison were all killed in single drives, and none of these areas was used
again for that purpose.
Nicholson (1982) has argued that Paleoindian bison hunting was a small group
affair with no convincing evidence for organized communal bison hunts until
Archaic times. He incorporates Lipscomb into the discussion (1982:7).

Several sites such as the Lipscomb Bison Quarry (Schultz 1943) and
Plainview (Sellards 1947) indicate that the bison were driven over low
hills or shallow escarpments which, in themselves, would not have
constituted a trap or a serious fall. A further indication of seasonality is the
presence [sic] at Plainview of several near full term fetal skeletons
(Sellards 1947). If these low areas were filled with snow, they would have
constituted an effective trap. Many of the areas where Paleoindian kills are
recorded are locations where, due to the growth of tall reeds or brush such
as willows, concealment would be offered to waiting hunters, and snow
could accumulate in deep drifts so that a stampeded herd would flounder
and be severely restricted in mobility. Hunters, wearing rawhide or
basketry snowshoes, would be able to approach and dispatch the animals
under these circumstances.
Evidence for something as ephemeral as a snowdrift trap is going to
be extremely difficult to recover or to demonstrate in a convincing manner.
If it can be assumed that gestation and seasonality of birth are identical in
extinct and extant species of bison, then the precise aging of thanatic
assemblages may indicate whether these "open spaces" kills occurred at a
time when the digging of holes in frozen ground would have been a
problem, and when deeply drifted snow could have been present. The same
sort of precision in aging, coupled with exact provenience, might indicate,
through vertical and/or horizontal stratigraphy, whether kills were
catastrophic single events or accretional deposits built up over several

Hofman, Todd, Schultz, and Hendy -- Lipscomb Bison Quarry

161

months. It may be that some distinctive pattern associated with processing,
such as the restriction of elements associated butchering artifacts to
pathways which had been trampled in the snow, could be identified as
winter bison procurement complex, utilizing snow entrapment, developed
on the High Plains, the technology may have been lost with the reduction
in both precipitation and the number of bison available during the
Altithermal, a period of supposed desiccation of the environment.
Johnson (1987:157) mentions Lipscomb in what has become a fairly common
perspective on Folsom bison hunting as a small-scale version of the larger kills of
later times.
By Folsom times the scaled-down version of large-scale bison kills
was beginning to occur. Twenty-three animals each were recorded at
Folsom (Wormington, 1957) and Lipscomb (Schultz, 1943), and a larger
number from Bonfire Shelter (Dibble and Lorrain, 1968). The kill at Lake
Theo (Harrison and Smith, 1975; Harrison and Killen, 1978) appears to be
another smaller version of the large-scale kill. Such kills continued into
post-Folsom times, exemplified by Jurgens (Wheat, 1979) with 35 bison.
In their recent general discussion of Folsom bison hunting, Bonnichsen and
others (1987:413) use Lipscomb as a possible example of an arroyo trap.
Folsom bison-hunting techniques include cliff drives such as at
Bonfire, arroyo knickpoint traps at Folsom and possibly Lipscomb, and
especially simple ambush around springs and playa lakes such as at the
Linger and Zapata sites. Compared to later Piano kill sites, Folsom kill
sites have usually less than 10 animals. These small and under-utilized
bison kills may reflect an opportunistic hunting strategy rather than the
larger well-organized communal bison kills seen in the ensuing Paleoindian
periods on the Plains.

Gunnerson (1987:15) recently summarized the Lipscomb site.
The Lipscomb Bison Quarry, located in the northeast comer of the
Texas Panhandle, is interesting and potentially important, but excavation
there has never been fully reported. In a preliminary article Schultz (1943)
lists 26 stone artifacts, several of which are illustrated. Included are 18
projectile points or fragments (of the 10 illustrated, all are fluted and some
conform to the classic Folsom shape), one end scraper, 4 side scrapers, 2
possible flake knives, and a channel flake. Eleven chips were also
recovered. Bison antiquus remains included 14 articulated skeletons with
the bones well fossilized; detailed measurements are given on one of the
largest male skulls. Charcoal and ash from the site gave evidence of fire.

162

Texas Archeological Society

Summary of Previous Interpretations:
What Was Lipscomb Really Like?
There have been a variety of interpretations offered for the Lipscomb site as to
nature of the kill, number of bison present (cf. Agenbroad 1978; Hester 1967:180;
Wendorf and Hester 1962), hunting methods used, and topography and geomorphology of the site area. The Lipscomb site has been interpreted as a fire drive, a
snow drift trap, a surround, and a possible arroyo trap. The land surface has been
reported as a pond, gully, Pleistocene lake bed, shallow escarpment, and natural
depression. The question or possibility of multiple kills has been noted, and the site
has been said to lack campsite evidence, to have campsite evidence, and to represent
a simple kill and processing site.
These diverse interpretations highlight the need for further investigation of the
site’s geochronology, seasonality studies, paleoecology, bone bed analysis, and
functional-technological lithic analysis. Detailed reconsideration of the 1939
investigations and further field work are needed in order to clarify misunderstandings and erroneous interpretations, and to develop an accurate picture of the site’s
history. S tudy of the seasonality and taphonomic aspects of the bone bed have been
discussed (Toddetal. 1988). Aspectsofthegeology, geomorphic history, soils, and
paleoecology must await further fieldwork.
1939 EXCAVATIONS AT LIPSCOMB

The most extensive field work at the Lipscomb site was in 1939, and by far,
most of materials recovered from the site came from the 1939 field season. As noted,
this work extended from June 10 through August 26, with a field crew consisting
of three to five. Schultz’s (1943) report has provided some interpretation of the 1939
work in terms of geological setting, taphonomic circumstances, nature of the bone
bed, description of the artifacts, and comparison with other localities. These aspects
of the analysis will be considered in more detail below, and deserve continued
research. The 1939 field notes prepared by William Hendy (1939) are very
insightful, of high quality, and provide an important body of information about the
Lipscomb site. Aspects of these notes that pertain to the field methods, historical
information about the site, the nature of the bone bed, condition of the bone, and the
associated artifacts are reproduced here. Catalog numbers assigned each day are
also listed in the field notes. For many days, the last number listed was the first to
be used on the following day.
Saturday. June 10. 1939.---The bones are exposed along a bank for
about 50 feet and are about 6" to 1 foot beneath the surface. The bank is
about 3’ high and is about 20 feet above an intermittent stream to the west.
We screened some of the wash at the base of the bank without any results.
We started to follow some of the exposed bones back and found those near
the surface quite soft and rotten though hard and in good condition where
exposed. John Adams found a Folsom point in place and partially exposed.

Hofman, Todd, Schultz, and Hendy ~ Lipscomb Bison Quarry

The bone in which the point was found was pretty well disintegrated but
was probably a scapula.
Sunday. June 11. 1939.--William Hendy uncovered another Folsom
point in place near the upper end of radius (?) and about 15" from point
found yesterday. John Adams found a point at the base of the bank
associated with some fragmentary bones. The upper part of a small point
was also screened out of the material removed.
The procedure followed was to skim offthe sod with a shovel and then
work back from the exposed ends of the bones with hand tools.
Bones collected mostly lower extremities of limbs 16,100-39 to
16,110-39.
Monday, J0ne 12, 1939.---Rain soaked into the working face of
quarry making the bones very fragile and hard to work out. Bones collected
mostly limb bones. 16,111-39 to 16,120-39.
Tuesday. June 13. 1939. Bones are so thrown together that it is
difficult to work individual bones out. Many of them are scattered. Are
beginning to uncover some vertebra. One small flint chip was collected.
Bones collected included a number of ribs and limb bones, 16,121-39 to
16,124-39.
Wednesday. June 14. 1939.--Work progresses rather slowly due to
the bones being so jumbled together. Many of the limb bones are in an
articulated condition, also a number of vertebra but usually a number of
miscellaneous bones are scattered in with these. Bones collected 16,125-39
to 16, 135-39.
Thursday. June 15, 1939.--Work still progresses rather slowly due to
jumbled mass of bones which necessitates slow work with hand tools.
Uncovered several ramii but all in poor condition... Bones collected
16,136-39 to 16,138-39.
Friday. June 16, 1939.--Uncovered a fair scapula and a number of leg
bones which usually have poor ends. Quite a few of the bones are those of
immature animals. Bones collected 16,139-39 to 16,150-39.
Saturday. June 17.1939.--Spent the morning in sieving and working
wash at base of ledge with hand tools but only found one possible flint chip.
Continued work on bone pile in afternoon. Bones collected 16,151-39 to
16,156-39.
Sunday. June 18. 1939.--Met H. Tourtelot who had a tent, sack of
plaster, and a sure seal for us.
Monday. June 19.1939.--Uncovered a horn core today but did not get
it worked out enough to tell much about its size or condition of skull to
which it is attached. Only seems to be one horn on the skull and probably
several skulls in close proximity to one another. Bones collected 16,15739 to 16,174-39.
Tuesday. June 20. 1939.--Bones collected 16,175-39 to 16,182-39.

163

164

Texas Archeological Society
Thursday, J0ne 22, 1939.--One skull minus one horn was removed,
also an immature skull and another large skull was uncovered. A number
of vertebra were removed.
John Adams found the top of a small point while digging out the skull.
It was evidently associated with as ulna found under the skull. William
Hendy uncovered a small point at the lower end of a humerus.
Bones collected 16,183-39 to 16,197-39.
Friday. June 23. 1939.---The tip of a point was found by John Adams
in the wash at the base of the bank to the north of the main area.
SundaY, Jone 25.1939.--The large skull does not seem to have been
hurt by the rains and as far as it is uncovered is complete. A Mr. Baldwin
who once owned the land on which the quarry is located visited the site and
said he first noted the bones exposed here about 30 years ago. Commodore
Hooper said he first noted the bones at this exposure about 1911 or 1912.
Bones collected 16,197-39 to 16,207-39.
M0ndav, June 26, 1939. Are still working at the same spot and the
bones are still in abundance. So far we have not found a scapula, ulna,
pelvis and some of the vertebra complete, but with the amount of material
apparently at the site we should be able to get a complete skeleton. Bones
collected 16,207-39 to 16,230-39.
Tuesday, June 27,1939.--William Hendy uncovered a point in place
between the ribs of a young specimen. It was some distance back of the
scapula which was articulated with the rest of the front leg bones. The point
was protruding from between the ribs toward the outside on the fight side.
It had apparently entered from the left side and had worked through to the
fight side during burial.
A small skull partly disintegrated was removed from over the large
skull which is complete. The left horn is partly gone but the fight horn is
complete. Bones collected 16,230-39 to 16,240-39.
Wednesday, June 28, 1939.--Bones collected 16,240-39 to 16,24339.
Thursday, June 29. 1939.--Completed the removal of the large skull
today. It was articulated with a number of vertebra which were in good
condition except for the spines. A large radius and ulna were articulated
with this skull and vertebras but the scapula was in poor condition. A
number of ribs in good condition are showing up. John Adams found
several flint chippings in some fibs. Bones collected 16,243-39 to 16,25039.
Friday, June 30,1939.--Worked out a number of vertebra articulated
with the large skull and also a number of ribs. Bones collected 16,400-39
to 16,410, 16, 250-39 to 16, 265-39.
Saturday. July 1.1939. bAr. Schultz suggested that we sieve some of
the wash along the base of the cliff in preparation for putting a trench

Hofman, Todd, Schultz, and Hendy ~ Lipscomb Bison Quarry
around the site to determine its limits. A knife was found in the wash at the
south end. Bones collected 16,410-39 to 16, 431-39.
Sunday, July 2, 1939. --C. B. Schultz began the digging of a trench
at the south end of the site and work was also started at the northern limit
of the bones which were found to be scattered and only to extend about 18"
back from the face of the bank. Some articulation of metapodials and
phalanges was found. A few pieces of flint were found in the wash while
sieving.
Monday. July 3. 1939.--WiUiam Hendy found a point.., associated
apparently with a radius. The radius was broken off near the lower end and
[the] point was in a matrix lying on two phalanges as if it may have been
associated with them.
The afternoon was spent in wrapping all bones, cleaning up all
fragmentary bones and fencing in the site. Bones collected 16,265-39 to
16,290-39.
Saturday, July 8, 1939.--Continued working on the trenches to
outline the extent of the site today. Found a knife in the trench.
Monday, July 10,1939.---Continued work on the trenches this morning.
Worked on a trench through the center of the site to intersect the trench
outlining the area. Bones collected 16,290-39 to 16,300-39.
TuesdaY, July 11, 1939. Finished the trench around the outside of
the area. Found bones in only a few scattered places and at approximately
the level of the floor making them deeper than in [the] main part of the
quarry. Made two extensions of the trench at the southeast corner of the
site. Found a few fragments of bone 6’ south of the corner and some teeth
11’ east but nothing beyond these extremities.
Wednesday, July 12, 1939. Made casts and collected the bones
exposed. Bones collected 16,301-39 to 16,331-39.
Thursday. July 13, 1939.--Continued work on the trench through the
center of the quarry. Began the removal of a second articulated skeleton
which runs off in a southerly direction. Bones collected 16,331-39 to
16,341-39.
Friday, July 14, 1939.--Completed the trench through the center of
the quarry. The bones thin out as the outer trench is reached and the present
picture seems to indicate there was a pile of carcasses here. Bones collected
16,341-39 to 16,350-39.
Saturday, July 15, 1939.---Laid off the area in 5’ squares in order to be
able to plot the position of important finds. James Crosbie found a knife
associated with a radius and ulna. Bones collected 16,350-39 to 16,364-39.
Monday, July 17, 1939.--Uncovered a square (5 x 5) north of the
central trench and began working down from the top. Two skulls in poor
condition and one with one hom and upper part of skull gone due to
proximity to the surface werepartially uncovered. Most of the bones in this
area are articulated. Bones collected 16,364-39 to 16,379-39.

165

166

Texas Archeological Society
T0~sday. July 18. !939.--Began the uncovering of a square in the
south east comer. The bones are scattered here and are from 1’ to 2’ below
the surface. The bones are better preserved in this area much of which
seems to be overlain with a calcareous soil, the bones being at the edge of
this or in a sandy zone below.
Wednesday. July 19. 1939.--Continued work in same area in which
we were working yesterday. Uncovered a skull in fair condition. Removed
two small but complete scapulas and a number of scattered metapodials
and phalanges, all in good condition. Bones collected 16,379-39 to 16400-39.
Thursday. July 20. 1939---Completed casting and removal of the
skull today. One ramus was broken off and lay underneath the skull. A
complete scapula lay underneath and to the back of the skull.
Did some work in the area worked the t-n’st of the week. Uncovered a
mandible lying across the nasals. This skull is apparently twisted and
turned so that it lies top up on its own vertebra. The atlas and axis are visible
at the back. Removed several articulated bones, one piece including the
entire front leg from humerus on.
Friday. July 21, 1939.--Mr. Schultz and Dr. Eiseley accompanied by
their wives arrived about 10:00. A few minutes later Dr. Sellards, State
Geologist of Texas and wife arrived to inspect the work which apparently
has his approval, bar. Schultz and Dr. Eiseley did some digging in the
afternoon. Removed a skull in poor condition and several leg bones. Mr.
Schultz said he did not believe it worth while to save unassociated and
badly broken bones. Bones collected 16,451-39 to 16,476-39.
$~urday. July 22. 1939.--Removed an unassociated ramus and
scapula from the southwest comer both in good condition. Bones collected,
16,476-39 to 16,487-39.
M0ndav. July 24. 1939.--Worked around skull which appeared to be
lying on its own vertebra but find that there is no skull attached to the
vertebra underneath it and the skull is attached to vertebra at its side some
of the spines of which lie across the skull. The vertebra underneath have
two scapulas and front leg bones articulated with them. Bones collected,
16,487-39 to 16, 494-39.
Tuesday. July 25. 1939.--Had a visit this morning from Judge Mead
of Miami, Texas and W. D. Mateer, late of Oklahoma but now with the
Bureau of Economic Geology of Texas. Both men seemed to be interested
in doing some excavating at our site. Continued work on northeast part of
quarry. Bones collected, 16,494-39 to 16,510-39.
Wednesday, July 26, 1939.--Worked out several more vertebra
belonging to the large skeleton and uncovered part of the sacrum and
pelvis. Continued work on the two skeletons on the north side of our site
(skeletons A & B) but they are so closely associated that it is difficult to
block our parts to be cast.

Hofman, Todd, Schultz, and Hendy ~ Lipscomb Bison Quarry

Thursday, July 27, 1939.---Cast the skull and the vertebra and
scapulas belonging to another skeleton which lay underneath it. The entire
front leg bones are also there. Removed the top toward the northeast and
found a skull with the mandible and maxillary left. Toward the edge the
bones are almost at the surface and scattered. The[re] were a number of
calcareous rocks associated with the bones here. Found two rounded
pieces of quartz associated with the bones in this area. Bones collected,
16,510-39 to 16,539-39.
Friday, July 28. 1939.--Found a mandible and maxillary partly
overlaying the vertebra of skeleton C. to the cervical vertebra of this
skeleton we found a scapula and front leg attached. Underneath was
another complete leg but no scapula was found. Toward the edge of the site
just west of here there seems to be a concentration of limb bones and
lumbar vertebra. Bones collected, 16,431-39 to 16,438-39 and 16,539-39
to 16,550-39.
Saturday, July 29, 1939. ---Continued work this morning on skeleton
C and completed its removal. Bones collected, 16,550-39 to 16,560-39.
Sunday. July 30. 1939.---C. B. Schultz arrived about 7:00 and we
spent an hour and a half at the site receiving directions for the continuation
of the work. Tourtelot and Kubicek are to join us tomorrow.
Monday. July 31. 1939. Uncovered 3 more skulls and parts of
several others in the same area. The skeletons seem to be completely
articulated and do not appear to have been butchered though they are much
twisted in the position they occupy.
Harry Tourtelot and Robert Kubicek arrived about 10:30 P.M. John
Adams found a broken point on the bank of [the] eastern extension of the
trench on the southern edge of the quarry. It was partly in the matrix
characteristic of this area and was probably thrown out with some of the
loose dirt worked away from the bones. Bones collected, 16,660-39 to
16,671-39.
Tuesday. Auuust 1. 1939.--Dug a trench to the north along the edge
of the bone bed. Found no bones more than 3’ from the bank so that there
is not a very great concentration of bones to the north of the main area.
Uncovered more in the afternoon and began to work out some blocks.
Wednesday. Auuust 2. 1939. --Jack Crosbie, Harry Tourtelot and
William Hendy made a map of the quarry this morning. In the afternoon
they began a general map of the area while John Adams and Robert
Kubicek continued work in the quarry. Bones collected, 16,674-39 to
16,678-39.
Thursday. August 3. 1939.--Work was continued on the map and at
the quarry by the parties mentioned yesterday. The party at the quarry is
working on several blocks of bones. Bones collected, 16,678-39 to 16,68739.

167

168

Texas Archeological Society

Friday, August 4.193%--Work was continued in the afternoon at the
quarry and on the map. One large block was removed at the quarry. Bones
collected, 16,687-39 to 16,692-39.
Saturday, August 4. 1939.--The mapping party finished work this
morning. All of the personnel worked at the quarry this afternoon. Are
starting to block out several large areas of bones to be case.
Bones collected, 16,692-39 to 16,698-39.
Sunday, A0~ust 6. 1939.--Jack Crosbie and William Hendy made a
traverse to measure the elevations of the various terraces.
Monday, August 7. 193%--Robert Kubicek found a piece of a point
associated with the bones. All work is being concentrated on the northern
part of the area in working out several large blocks of bones.
The bones near the edge at the north are only a few inches below the
surface, though they become deeper and the thickness of the layer
increases rapidly to the south. There have been a number of rather large
calcareous rocks (2" to 6" in largest dimension) found associated with the
bones around the periphery of this area. A definite slope to the south and
west is noticeable which in the floor which contains many calcareous
concentrations (lumps crumble when dug out).
Tuesday, Ao~ust 8. 1939.--Continued work on several large blocks.
In order to get them out it is necessary to remove some of the bones which
interlace the area together but by careful work it is possible to save most
of the bones. Bones collected, 16,698-39 to 16,706-39.
Wednesday, August 9. 1939.---Continued work on the blocks being
taken out and got most of them blocked out and ready to be cast. Began
work on the south side of the quarry. Uncovered several scapulas and ramii
about 18" below the surface. The matrix is more sandy and the[y] rest on
the sandy floor. Quite a number of invertebrates are recovered in this area
(Gastropods). Bones collected 16,706-39 to 16,710-39.
Thursday, August 10,193~.--Continued work on the south part of the
quarry. The bones lie about 15" to 18" below the surface and are in a more
sandy matrix. They are more scattered and are in better condition. Two
skulls were uncovered about in the center along the south trench.
Friday, August 11.1939.--Harry Tourtelot found the base of a point
at the back of a skull and on turning the skull over found a point in the
matrix of the maxillary, no mandible being attached. William Hendy found
a knife or a flake from the center ofapoint near a scapula and slightly below
the floor on which the bones rest. Another skull upside down also found
close to the one carrying the point. Bones collected, 16,710-39 to 16,72439.
Saturday. Auzust 12, 1939.--Continued work on the south side. In
one area six scapulas were found, a few front limb bones and a few
scattered vertebra. Bones collected, 16,724-39 to 16,736-39.

Hofman, Todd, Schultz, and Hendy m Lipscomb Bison Quarry

Monday. August 14. 1939.--Continued work on the south side.
Along the bank on the west the bones are only a few inches below the
surface and are in poor condition, deeper several columns of vertebra were
found. Bones collected, 16,736-39 to 16,741-39.
Tue~clav. August 15.1939.~Mr. F. V. S tuder paid us a visit today and
seemed pleased with the finds we were making. He was very much
interested in the artifacts. Work was continued on the south side of the
quarry. Bones collected, 16,741-39 to 16,571-39.
Wednesday. August 16. 1939.---Removed two skulls and uncovered
a third one, which is upside down and in poor condition. Bones collected,
16,745-39 to 16,751-39.
Thursday. August 17.1939.--Continued work on the south side again
today. Uncovered a small skull complete with mandible. A large flint flake
was found at the front of the mandible. Bones collected, 16,751-39 to
16,759-39.
Friday. August 18. 1939.---Along the bank on the west side of the
quarry a skeleton complete, except that due to the nearness to the surface
the skull and parts of the spines on the vertebra and the ribs are in poor
condition, has been uncovered. Bones collected, 16.759-39 to 16,767-39.
Saturday. August 19. 1939.--Removed the skull found Thursday.
Several ramii were near itbut it had a complete mandible. Bones collected,
16,560-39 to 16,568-39.
Sunday. August 20. 1939.--Worked at the quarry all day casting all
possible material in preparation for removing remaining bones the first of
this coming week.
Monday. August 21. 1939.--Uncovered the remaining bones in the
main part of the quarry and began to work out several blocks. Found two
skulls in the area and the back of another including the horn cores. John
Adams found a point associated with a radius and ulna. Bones collected,
16,568-39 to 16,578-39.
Tuesday, August 22, 1939.--Worked on the north end of the quarry
and took out most of [the] dirt along the edge with a shovel. The bones were
very scattered with a concentration of bones being found at intervals and
with few or no bones between the spots where they are concentrated.
William Hendy found the tip of a point and John Adams found a knife.
Upon discovery of these artifacts more pains were taken is removing the
matrix but no more artifacts were found. Most of the bones in this area were
limb bones, but a few vertebra, ribs, scapulas and teeth were also found.
These bones were from 4" to 8" below the surface and the grass roots had
broken up all but smaller heavier bones. We worked back to the trench
previously excavated along the eastern side of this and removed all
material between it and the from the bank.
Commodore Hopper informed me that the land had been sold to Mr.
Sam Waters who expects to take over next May when Com’s lease is up.

169

170

Texas Archeological Society

Bones collected, 16,578-39 to 16,586-39.
Wednesday. August 23. 1939.---Continued work on the center of the
quarry. Removed two blocks and cast up the last block. The plaster which
we had to purchase in Canadian was not too good and it was necessary to
go to town this evening and order more plaster which is to be sent from
Amarillo tomorrow morning.Bones collected, 16,438-39 to 16,446-39
and 16,767-39 to 16,796-39.
Thursday. August 24. 1939.--William Hendy went to town early this
morning to get the plaster. The other boys spent the time in filling in the
quarry. Completed the removal of all material and filled in the quarry in the
afternoon. Bones collected, 16,796-39 to 16,803-39.
Friday. August 25.1939.--Spent the [day] building boxes and loading
the freight car.
Saturday. August 26. 1939.--Broke camp and finished our business
in Canadian.
Summary of the 1939 Lipscomb Excavations

Several key aspects of Hendy’s 1939 excavation field notes should be emphasized:
1. The field methodology was quite good and was geared to recovery and
preservation of the bison fauna; care also was taken to locate and record artifacts in
situ (Table 1). Screening (seiving) of the fill was apparently standard practice, but
it is uncertain whether the fill that was removed from around the dense bone
concentrations was always screened. The five-square grid map with plotted bones
has not been found
.2. Clusters of skulls are noted in the excavation. Some of these were still
articulated, but others may reflect butchering/processing activities or even intentional postprocessing arrangement. Patterned placement of crania was evident at the
Vore site (Reher and Frison 1980), and patterned distribution of elements is noted
for other Paleoindian kill sites (e. g., Wheat 1972). An illustration of the Folsom site
bone bed (Wormington 1957:Figure 3) shows two overturned skulls adjacent to one
another. A unique Folsom feature at the Lake Theo site located near the Caprock
escarpment 120 km south of Lipscomb, contained a small circular arrangement of
selected elements, consisting of a thoracic vertebra, mandibles, tibiae, and a femur
all placed in an upright position in a small pit (Harrison and Killen 1978). It has been
suggested that a bison skull was placed atop this feature as an offering.
3. Patterned occurrence of projectile points with forelimb elements is indicated
by the in situ finds of Folsom points mentioned in the field notes (Table 2, Table 3).
All eight projectile points found in situ were associated with the front half of the
bison, from the ribs just behind the scapula to the crania. This information provides
some limited clues to the actual tactics used in bison hunting by Folsom hunters.
4. Differenttypes ofsedimentunderlie thebone bed; sediments on the south end
of the deposit contain sand and gastropods. The presence of gastropods in the bone

Hofman, Todd, Schultz, and Hendy -- Lipscomb Bison Quarry

171

Table 3. Crosstabulation of Point and Tool Associations With
Skeletal Elements at Lipscomb Bison Quarry, 1939
Points/
T o ol s
Points
Tools
Flakes
Totals

Upper Forelimb
(Scapula, humerus,
ulna, radius)

Other Locations
(Skull, rib cage)

5
2
01

3
1
present2

7

4

Totals

8
3
11

1 The single excavated channel flake was found in association with a scapula and
is included here with the tools.
2 One flake was found in association with a mandible, and several flakes were
found together among the ribs.
bed level and a sandy substrate was also noted in the southern area during the 1988
testing.
5. The land surface on which the bone bed occurs, which was apparently the
surface at the time of the kill, slopes to the southwest. This lower southwest part is
also where the sandy substrate occurs and where the gastropod fauna is common.
If the animals were moving to the south and east, as suggested by the orientation of
the articulated units in the bone bed, they would have been moving downgrade, but
perhaps also up the east bank of a stream, pond, or gully located to the west of the
kill spot.
6. Different kinds of materials, such as the large rocks and charcoal
concentrations, and uneven frequencies of elements in different areas of the
excavation may reflect butchering and processing activities at the margins of the
bone bed. Present evidence suggests possible processing and camp activities at the
northern end of the bone mass and, possibly, similar activities in the less well
documented areas to the east and south.
7. Nothing in the field notes (or in the present topography) suggests any natural
features that might have contained, impeded, or demobilized the bison. This is
similar to many other Paleoindian sites that lack evidence for natural or man-made
features that might have aided in procurement (Frison and Todd 1987; Stanford
1978; Emory and Stanford 1982). It had been interpreted that a common Folsom
hunting tactic was the simple stalking and ambush of small herds 0~mory and
Stanford 1982; Bonnichsen et al. 1987:413).
1946 EXCAVATIONS AT LIPSCOMB
Information for the 1946 field work comes primarily from small maps that were
made by W. D. Frankforter from field notes and are now in the University of
Nebraska State Museum. These maps have been redrafted ~igures 2 and 3) and

172

Texas Archeological Society

indicate the extent of excavations at Lipscomb in 1946 which were less intensive
than during 1939. This is also corroborated by participants in the work (Lloyd G.
Tanner, personal communication). Only 44 catalog numbers were assigned to
materials from the 1946 work, whereas more than 1000 numbers had been assigned
to materials collected during the 1939 season. The most important part of the 1946
work was documentation of the relationship of the excavation units of the two
seasons and of the specific provenience of test pits and artifacts found during the
1946 work (Figure 2).
According to Hendy’s (1939) notes, the excavated area was outlined with a
narrow trench, and two exploratory extensions of this trench were extended from the
southeast comer of the excavation (Figure 2). It is uncertain whether the entire area
within the 1939 perimeter trenches was excavated. In 1946, one flake was recovered
from an irregular excavation made in the northwest part of the 1939 excavation area
(Figure 3). The obtuse angle at the northeast comer of the 1939 excavation was
encountered during the 1988 excavation, and the area directly inside the perimeter
trench did not appear to have been previously excavated. It is likely that the
excavation in 1939 extended only to the perimeter trenches in the locations where
bone was still being encountered.
No artifacts were mapped in the 1946 excavation units that were east and south
of the 1939 area. Three Folsom points---one complete point and two base fragments-were collected in 1946 from the west slope of the terrace; two of these were
found on the surface; the third was from screening of the slope sediment. A fourth
Folsom point base was found in 1946 on the high terrace about 400 meters southeast
of the site. A flake tool, flake, smooth stone, and flat rock were mapped in the actual
excavation. Also, 20 pieces of bone that were considered worked were plotted in the
1946 excavation area. These pieces have not been restudied, and, considering the
difficulty in distinguishing natural from purposeful human modification of bone
pieces, the presence of bone tools at Lipscomb remains to be verified. The flat rock
and cobble from the 1946 excavation are concordant with the 1939 records, which
indicate that several limestone rocks were found in the northern part of the bone bed
where the bones were more scattered and fractured. As initially suggested by
Schultz (1943), this may have been a processing area adjacent to the main area of
the kill.
1988 EXCAVATIONS AT LIPSCOMB
Goals of the 1986 survey and 1988 testing at Lipscomb were fairly simple, but
further investigation is needed before they will be attained. The goals are as follows:
1. Relocate the site and assess its situation with regard to potential disturbances.
2. Relocate the earlier excavation units.
3. Prepare a map of the site vicinity.
4. Determine whether intact buried deposits remain at the site.
5. Assess the potential for dating the site.
6. Evaluate the topographic and geologic setting.

Hofman, Todd, Schultz, and Hendy ~ Lipscomb Bison Quarry

173

Quarry Face

®

Test Pits, May, 1946
[] 1939
1~ 1946

@

5
!

10 FEET
I

N

Quarry Face

®
@

Figure 2. Plan of the 1939 and 1946 excavation areas, test pits, and units at the Lipscomb
Bison Quarry.

174

Texas Archeological Society

10 FEET
I

Quarry Face

&
A Folsom point

0 Flake knife

O Flake
;:,’-

[]

Flat rock

[]

Smooth stone

Figure 3. Detail map showing locations of stone artifacts from the 1946 excavation,
Lipscomb Bison Quarry.

Hofman, Todd, Schultz, and Hendy ~ Lipscomb Bison Quarry

175

7. Evaluate the site’s long-term research potential.
8. Provide a better understanding of the geologic context from which the
Lipscomb bison fauna was collected.
Upon relocating the Lipscomb site, it was leamed that the land-owners were
very much aware of the site, had controlled access to it, and had not allowed any
indiscriminate digging there. Some erosion of the western edge of the site has
occurred during the past decades, so the shallowness of the deposit leaves the site
highly susceptible to future disturbance.
A depressed area about 6 meters (20 feet) long (north to south) and 3 to 3.5
meters (10-12 feet) wide (east to west) was noted on the edge of the terrace where
many small pieces of bison bone had eroded out. Testing at the edge and outside of
this depressed area was done to evaluate whether it represented part of the
University of Nebraska State Museum excavation (Figure 4). Based on the current
information from testing in February and August of 1988, this depressed area does
correlate well with the location, size, and shape of the primary 1939 excavation
(Figure 5). The distinctive obtuse angle of the northeast comer of the 1939
excavation (perimeter trench) was encountered during the 1988 test work (Figure
6); this angle provides a key reference point for correlating the current testing efforts
with the previous excavation. Unfortunately, the 1946 excavation plan was not
found until after the 1988 test work was completed, more testing will be required
in order to gain full confidence in the precise location of the various earlier
excavation units with regard to the 1988 tests (Table 4) and the modem edge of the
terrace.
The results of the 1988 testing were significant in several ways. Because the
primary concern of the original University of Nebraska State Museum excavations
was the collection of a comparative sample of late Pleistocene to early Holocene
bison, the portions of the site which did not yield well preserved bone or which had
only a limited amount of bone were not fully investigated. These marginal areas are
the ones most likely to contain evidence of bison processing or camping activities.
The finding of artifacts north of the main bone bed during the 1946 excavation, the
presence ofapoint in the eastern extension trench excavated in 1939, and the finding
in 1988 of two flakes at the north edge of the 1939 excavation area and a flake tool
10 meters further to the north (Figure 7) all suggest that there remains much to be
learned about the type and positioning of activities surrounding the main bone bed
at Lipscomb.
In 1988, evidence of intact bone bed on the fringes of the 1939(?) excavation
unit was also found The bone is in a relatively poor but variable state of preservation,
and the nature and extent of the remaining bone bed is unknown. Testing at the south
end revealed in place a poorly preserved and overturned bison skull, a sacrum, a
metacarpal, and a tibia, as well as many small bone fragments (Figures 8 and 9). In
the matrix surrounding these elements were scattered flecks of charcoal and
gastropods were common. The extremely small samples of charcoal have been
submitted for radiocarbon dating to the University of Arizona and to Beta Analytic.
The feasibility of dating the samples has not yet been determined. However, if the

176

Texas Archeological Society

100

@
1939
Excavation

-99.5

DATUM #1

5

99

10 METERS
!

Figure 4. Topographic map showing location of the primary 1939 excavation and the
initial 1988 test units.

sample should prove too small to date, it should be possible to collect a more
substantial charcoal sample from the site.
S tudy of the stratigraphy and geomorphology of the Lipscomb site remains one
of the key issues, for this information should aid in deciphering the nature of the land
surface on which the kill occurred. Paleoecological study, through analyses of
snails, phytoliths, and perhaps pollen, will also enhance understanding of the site
area at the time of the kill.

Hofman, Todd, Schultz, and Hendy g Lipscomb Bison Quarry

177

’101

99

98
97.5

5

IOMETERS

Figure 5. Topographic map showing area grid and all 1988 test units at the Lipscomb
Bison Quarry.

Research on the Lipscomb bison bone collection, reported in more detail
elsewhere (Hillerud 1970; Todd et al. 1988), indicates that a minimum of 54 bison
are represented in the kill at Lipscomb. This figure is based on the number of left
astraguli, and is significantly higher than the MNI of 23, which is usually cited for
the site. This larger size of the kill herd has implications for better understanding of
Folsom period bison hunting, which usually has been interpreted as a small group
activity involving few animals (e.g., Hofman and Ingbar 1988:Table 3), although

178

Texas Archeological Society

125W

120W

G

115W

H

110W

N100

2O

N95

2/88 Test

19
llrITl

~

8/88 Excavation

Edge of Terrace
Previous excavation
(University of Nebraska State Museum)

N90

18

N85

17

NS0

16

5 METERS
|

N76

Figure 6. Plan of the 1988 excavations at Lipscomb showing the grid and the edge of the
1939 excavation.

Hofman, Todd, Schultz, and Hendy -- Lipscomb Bison Quarry

Table 4

Block
Unit

F20-4

Coordinates
(SE Comer)

N99-W123

179

Summary of 198g Excavation Units at
Lipscomb Bison Quarry
Dry or Water
Recovery
Screem Size

Final Depth
Below
Surface

In
Number
of
Situ
Levels Deposits

Inches

Centimeters

Percent

1/4, dry

20

2

50, NE 1/4

5

2

100

4
4
4
5

100
50
40
10

1/16, water
1/16, water
1/4, dry

20
30, SW 1/4
40
40
40
50
(NE Comer Only)
40
30 (E 1/3)

4
3

65
30

80 (W 2/3)

8

1/4, dry (W 1/2)
1/16, water (E)
1/16, water
1/16, water
1/16, water
1/4, dry
flotation
1/4, dry
1/4, dry
1/t6, water

60 (W 1/2)
55 (E 1/2)
40
40
50
25
40
20
20
40

6
6
4
4
5
1
1
2
2
4

F20-5

N99-W124

1/4, dry

F18-1
F18-2
F18-3
F18-10

N89-W120
N89-W121
N89-W121
N88-W120

1/16, water
1/4, dry
1/4, dry

G18-6
F17-20

N88-W119
N81-W120

F17-21

N80-W120

G17-1
G17-24
G17-25
G17-16

N84-W115
N80-Wl18
N80-Wl19
N81-W119

F16-1
F16-10

N79-W120
N78-W120

1/4, dry

100

50
100
100
100
100
70
90

the possibility of a communal hunt at Lipscomb was noted by Frison (1978). The
large number of bison at Lipscomb makes any interpretation of an ambush kill
unlikely, unless there was some form of containment such as a snow drift, brush
corral, of arroyo. Considering the season, a snow drift is unlikely but not
impossible, and there is not yet any documented evidence for a natural or man-made
trap or enclosure.
Study of dental eruption and wear documents the time of year of the kill as late
summer or early fall (Todd et al. 1988). This, of course, could represent the end of
or just after the rutting season. This season has implications for the physical
condition and composition of the bison herd and the weather conditions which are
likely to have existed at the time of the kill. The mature male bison tend to be in their
poorest condition at this time of year, just following the rut, and the daily
temperature at the time of the kill and during subsequent processing may have been
to high for the beneficial effects of natural refrigeration (Frison 1982). In early fall,

180

Texas Archeological Society

W130

W125

E

F

W120

W115

G

w110

H

N105

21

NIO0
2
2O

A

Flakes

N95

lg

~

N90

Edge of Terrace

II -

18

N85

L_

17

N80

16

0
I

I

!

1

M -ZT ER S

N75

Figure 7. Plan showing distribution of flakes recovered from 1988 testing.

I

5;

Hofman, Todd, Schultz, and Hendy-- Lipscomb Bison Quarry

@c®

b

a

181

CENT [M ET ER S

e

d
g

h
Figure 8. Folsom Artifacts from the Lipscomb Bison Quarry. a) Folsom point made from
a flake blank of Edwards Chert with an impact damaged tip (41LP1/89-3, found 10-89);
b) Folsom point base made on a flake blank of Alibates or Tecovas, (2740/158 Panhandle
Plains Historical Museum, found 7-18-70); c) Folsom point tip of Alibates (41LP1/89-2,
found 6-7-89); d) Folsom point midsection with impact damaged, burinated tip, made of
Alibates (2705/294 Panhandle Plains Historical Museum, found 5-16-69); e) Folsom
channel flake midsection made of Edwards Chert (41LP1/86-2, found 12-2-86); f)
Unifacial backed flake tool of Edwards Chert (# 41LP1/86-1, found 12-2-86); g) Notch
made on a brown quartzite flake fragment (41LP1/88-1, found 2-26-88); h) Unifacial
flake tool with a graver spur manufactured from Alibates (41LP1/89-1, found 5-19-89).

neither the fat content nor the quality of the bone marrow of the bison skeletons
would have been prime. This, together with the probable warm weather and limited
immediate need for fats by the hunters, may account in part for the limited
butchering and processing of the Lipscomb bison.

182

Texas Archeological Society

Metaca~

I

Figure 9. Photograph, looking east, showing bison elements in unit 80N-120W and the
edge of the 1939 excavation.

DISCUSSION OF THE LIPSCOMB QUARRY
AND OTHER FOLSOM SITES
The true significance of the Lipscomb Quarry becomes apparent upon
comparison with other Folsom sites in the region, including Folsom, Lubbock Lake,
Lake Theo, Adair-Steadman, Shifting Sands, and Blackwater Draw. Without
exception, the bison fauna from Lipscomb is the premier Folsom bison assemblage
in existence. Through Hillerud’ s (1970) research and continuing study, the Lipscomb
bison can serve as a comparative baseline for investigation of terminal Pleistocene
bison in the Southern Plains. Eruption and wear study of the Lipscomb bison
dentition has allowed an accurate assessment of the season of the kill, which appears
to have been late summer or early fall, and which indicates either a single event or
several very closely spaced events (Todd et el. 1988). The importance of Paleoindian
kills during this time of the year is discussed elsewhere. Taphonomic analysis
documents the limited amount of carnivore attrition and probable rapid burial of the
carcasses after the kill, thus supporting Schultz’s original interpretation of the
situation. Lipscomb was originally excavated primarily as a paleontological site,
rather than an archeological one, and this resulted in extreme care being taken with
the bison remains both in the field and during subsequent curation.
The lithic assemblage from Lipscomb is more extensive than those from the
Folsom site and Lubbock Lake and is enhanced with better contextual information

Hofman, Todd, Schultz, and Hen@ m Lipscomb Bison Quarry

183

than exists for from Lubbock, Folsom, and most of the Folsom material from
Blackwater Draw. Lipscomb provides a highly useful complement to campsites
such as Frank’s site (Stanford and Broilo 1981), also referred to as the Mitchell
locality (Bouldurian et al. 1987), Shifting Sands (Amick et al. 1988), and Elida
(Hester 1962). It is also complementary to the study of woP~shop/camp and tool
production sites such as Adair-Steadman (TunneU 1977).
Documentation of the resharpening of projectile points at Lipscomb indicated
that the Edwards chert pieces are more commonly reworked than are the Alibates.
It has been argued (Hofman 1988a) that this reflects prior usage and retooling of the
Edwards chert projectiles before they were used at Lipscomb, whereas no such
evidence exists for the Alibates artifacts. On this basis it is plausible, considering
the sources for these materials, to postulate a south to north (or southeast to
northwest, then northeast) movement of this particular Folsom band prior to the kill
atLipscomb. If it is assumed that the season of the kill is late summer or slightly later,
the authors suggest that the group moved northward during the summer from central
Texas (where the Edwards chert was acquired). Movement may have been along the
eastern Caprock of the Llano Estacado, which would have provided easy hunting
access to the short-grassed, playa dotted High Plains to the west and to the more
protected well watered dissected rolling plains to the east. Sites such as Lake Theo,
just east of the Caprock, and Blackwater Draw and Lubbock Lake on the Llano
Estacado, attest to the use of these different Plains environments by Edwards cherttoting Folsom groups. The possibility of seasonal variation in the most intensive use
of these distinct environments has been addressed (Hofman 1988b), and it is likely
that the well-watered, more protected and wooded settings in the lower dissected
plains would have been preferred in times of severe weather. The authors therefore
postulate a pattern of movement for the Lipscomb group and perhaps other Folsom
bands in the region, as follows:
1.

2.

3.

4.

The Lipscomb group spent the winter in the dissected Low Plains (of
Central or North Central Texas?) where there were both adequate fuel and
good lithic resources.
The Lipscomb group spent the spring and summer on the High Plains and
along the Caprock Escarpment in pursuit of bison and in general foraging.
They brought Edwards chert assemblages into the region during this part
of the cycle, and they reworked used assemblages at sources such as the
Tecovas Alibates outcrops.
In the Fall groups were oriented toward making substantial kills to garner
the products of a prime bison herd in preparation for winter. By late fall,
they probably moved toward the low dissected Plains, with their more
adequate fuel supply and protected settings.
By midwinter, the groups, which might be significantly further south or
east than they were during the late summer and fall, would be investing
time in retooling equipment, as long as there was adequate food on reserve
or to be foraged for in the vicinity.

184

Texas Archeological Society

This scenario, though oversimplified, is provided as a target for evaluation and
discussion. The authors do not assume that Folsom people occupied stringently
defined territories, within which they followed an entrenched seasonal subsistence
cycle (Kelly and Todd 1988). It is evident, however, that Folsom groups who
camped and hunted in western Oklahoma, western Texas, and eastem New Mexico
relied heavily upon cherts from the Cretaceous Edwards Formation of Central
Texas (Broilo 1974; Hester 1972; Hofman 1986; Stanford and Broilo 1981).
Considering the substantial elevation and the topographic and vegetational variation in the Southern Plains between the Llano Estacado and the dissected Prairie
Plains to the east, it is reasonable to predict that these regions may have been used
with differing seasonal intensity. An important factor to consider, however, is that
the extremes of seasonal temperatures may have been notably less severe during late
Pleistocene times than they are today (Graham and Lundelius 1984).
In summation, evidence from Lipscomb indicates that a Folsom group made a
kill of more than 50 bison in late summer or early fall. The group used implements
made of both Edwards chert and Alibates agatized dolomite; there is evidence
evidence of reworking before final breakage or loss of the Edwards, but not of the
Alibates pieces. This suggests that the Edwards pieces had been in the tool kits
longer and had been curated after use in previous kill-butchery episodes. The
relation of the Lipscomb site to the geographic locations of Edwards and Alibates
source areas supports the interpretation that the group had moved from the south or
southeast before the time of the Lipscomb kill. Collection of Alibates dolomite may
have involved movement of the whole group, or it may have been accomplished by
a special task group. Where the group went from the Lipscomb site is unknown, but
the incomplete butchering of the bison at Lipscomb may indicate that 1) the group
had all the resources it needed or could use from the kill, 2) the group was too small
to fully utilize the bison killed before they spoiled, or 3) they elected to follow and
monitor another herd or the remainder of the Lipscomb herd, rather than lose touch
with this key resource. The time of the kill, during or soon after the rutting season,
has implications for the herd composition and condition of the animals. The limited
evidence for marrow extraction and the apparent incomplete butchering may reflect
gourmet butchering (Todd 1983, 1987), or simply warm weather conditions. It
seems lighly likely that there were associated processing, hide working, and camp
area(s). The nature of the kill and topographic setting in which it happened remains
to be determined.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Our sincere thanks are offered to Jerry and Hollene Perry, who have been most
supportive of our work at Lipscomb. The help of the staff of the University of
Nebraska State Museum, under the direction of Hugh Genoways, is greatly
appreciated; the efforts of George Comer and Tom Myery have been extremely
helpful. Support for this research has been provided in part by the Oklahoma
Archaeological Survey, under the direction of Don Wyckoff. The field crew in 1988

Hofman, Todd, Schultz, and Hendy-- Lipscomb Bison Quarry

185

deserves special thanks for careful and talented work; they are Dan Amick, Richard
Drass, Jack Hofman, Pat Hofman, Dave Rapson, Pete Thurmond, Susan Thurmond,
Larry Todd, and Don Wyckoff.

REFERENCES CITED
Agenbroad, L.
1978
The Hudson-Meng Site: An Alberta Bison Kill in the Nebraska High Plains.
University Press of America, Washington, D. C.
Amick, D. S., J. L. Hofman, and R. O. Rose
1988
The Folsom-Midland Assemblage at the Shifting Sands Site in Western Texas.
Paper presented at the 46th annual Plains Anthropological Conference. Wichita,
Kansas.
Barbour, E. H., and C. B. Schultz
1932
The Scottsbluff Bison Quarry and Its Artifacts. Bulletin of the Nebraska State
Museum 1 (34):283-286.
1936

Paleontologic and Geologic Consideration of Early Man in Nebraska, with
Notice of aNew Bone Bed in the Early Pleistocene of Morrill County, Nebraska.
Bulletin of the Nebraska State Museum 1 (45):431--450.

1941

A New Fossil Bovid from Nebraska with Notice of a New Bison Quarry in
Texas. Bulletin of the University of Nebraska State Museum 2 (7):63-68.

Bonnichsen, R., D. Stanford, and J. L. Fastook
1987
Environmental Change and Developmental History of Human Adaptive Patterns; the Paleoindian Case. In: North America an adjacent oceans during the
last deglaciation. Edited by W. F. Ruddiman and H. E. Wright, Jr. The Geology
of North America, Volume K-3:403-424. Geological Society of America,
Boulder.
Boldurian, A., G. Agogino, H. Shelley, and M. Slaughter
1987
Folsom Biface Manufacture, Retooling, and Site Function at the Mitchell
Locality of Blackwater Draw. Plains Anthropologist 32(117):299-311.
Broilo, F. J.
1974
An Investigation of Surface Collected Clovis, Folsom, and Midland Projectile
Points from Blackwater Draw and Adjacent Localities. M. A. Thesis, Eastern
New Mexico University, Portales.

Dibble, D. S., and D. Lorrain
Bonfire Shelter; A Stratified Bison Kill Site, Val Verde County, Texas. Texas
1967
Memorial Museum, Miscellaneous Papers 1.
Emery, S. and D. Stanford
1982
Preliminary Report on Archaeological Investigations at the Cattle Guard Site,
Alamosa County, Colorado. Southwestern Lore 48(1): 10-20.

186

Texas Archeological Society

Frison, G. C.
1974
The Casper Site: A tlell Gap Bison Kill on the High Plains. Academic Press,
New York.
1978

Prehistoric Hunters of the High Plains. Academic Press, New York.

1982

Paleoindian Winter Subsistence Strategies on the High Plains. In, Plains Indian
studies: A Collection of Essays in Honor of John C. Ewers and Waldo Wedel,
Edited by D. H. Ubelaker and H. J. Viola, 193-201. Smithsonian Contributions
to Anthropology 30.

Frison, G. C., and L. C. Todd
1987
TheHornerSite: TheTypeSitefortheCodyCulturalComplex.AcademicPress,
Orlando.
Grahm, R. W., and E. L. Lundelius, Jr.
1984
Coevolutionary Disequalibrium and Pleistocene Extinctions. In, Quarternary
Extinctions: A Prehistoric Revolution, edited by P. S. Martin and R. G. Klein,
223-249. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Gunnerson, J. H.
1987
Archaeology of the High Plains. Bureau of Land Management, Colorado State
Office, Cultural Resource Series 19. Denver.
Harrison, B. R., and H. C. Smith
A Test Excavation of the Lake Theo Site, Briscoe County, Texas. Panhandle1975
Plains Historical Review 48:70-106.
Harrison, B. R., and K. L. Killen
1978
Lake Theo: A Stratified, Early Man Bison Butchering and Camp Site, Briscoe
County, Texas: ArchaeologicalInvestigations Phase II. Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum Special Archeological Report I.
Hendy, William
Field Notes on the Lipscomb Bison Quarry Excavation. On file, University of
1939
Nebraska State Museum.
Hester, J. J.
1962
A Folsom Lithic Complex from the Elida Site, Roosevelt County, New Mexico.
El Palacio 69(2):92-113.
1967

The Agency of Man in Animal Extinctions. In: Pleistocene Extinctions, The
Search for a Cause. Edited by P. S. Martin and H. E. Wright, Jr., 169-192. Fort
Burgwin Research Center Publication 8.

Hillerud, J. M.
1970
Subfossil High Plains Bison. Ph.D. dissertation, Geology Department, University
of Nebraska, Lincoln.

Hofman, Todd, Schultz, and Hendy ~ Lipscomb Bison Quarry

187

Hofman, J. L.
1988a
Folsom Sites in Oklahoma and the Texas Panhandle: Recognition and
Interpretation of Folsom Technological Variability. Paper presented at the
symposium, "Ice-Age Hunters of the Rockies." April 8-10. Denver Museum of
Natural History.
1988b

Folsom Research in Westem Oklahoma: Rethinking the Folsom Occupation of
theSouthem Plains.Transactionsofthe23rdRegionalArcheologicalSymposium
for Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas, 6-30. Amarillo.

Hofman, J. L., and E. Ingbar
1988

A Folsom Hunting Overlook in Eastem Wyoming. Plains Anthropologist
33(121):337-350.

Irwin, Henry
1968

The Itama: Early Late-Pleistocene Inhabitants of the Plains of the United States
and Canada and the American Southwest. Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard.

Johnson, Eileen
1978
Paleo-Indian Bison Procurement and Butchering patterns on the Llano Estacado. In Bison Procurement and Utilization: A symposium, edited by L. B.
Davis and M. Wilson. Plains Anthropologist 23(82, part 2 Memoir 14):98-105.
Johnson, Eileen (editor)
1987
Lubbock Lake: Late Quarternary Studies on the Southern High Plains. Texas
A&M Press. College Station.
Kelly, R. L. and L. C. Todd
1988

Coming into the Country: Early Paleoindian Hunting and Mobility. American
Antiquity 52(2):231-244.

McCurdy, G. G. (editor)
1937
Early Man. J. B. Lippincott, Philadelphia.
Nicholson, B. A.
1982
An Examination of the Evidence for Paleo-Indian Bison Procurement Practices.
Manitoba Archaeological Quarterly 6(4):2-15.
Reher, C. A., and G. C. Prison
1980
The Vore Site, 48CK302, A Stratified Buffalo Jump in the Wyoming Black
Hills. Plains Anthropologist Memoir 16.
Roberts, F. n.n.
1935
A Folsom Complex: Preliminary Report on Investigations at the Lindeumeier
Site in Northern Colorado. SmithsonianMiscellaneous Collections 94(4): 1-51.
1936

Additional Information on the Folsom Complex: Report on the Second
Season’s Investigations at the Lindenmeier Site in Northern Colorado. Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections 95(10).

188

Texas Archeological Society

1940

Developments in the Problem of the North American Paleo-lndian.Smithsonian
Miscellaneous Collections 100:51-116.

Sauer, C. O.
1944
A Geographic Sketch of Early Man in America. Geographical Review
34(4):540-554.
Schult~ C. B.
1932
Association of Artifacts and Extinct mammals in Nebraska. Bulletin of the
Nebraska State Museum 1(33):271-282.
1938

The First Americans. Natural History 42(5):346-356, 378.

1943

Some Artifact Sites of Early Man in the Great Plains and Adjacent Areas.
American Antiquity 8(3):242-249, 291-293.

1983

Early Man and the Quaternary: Initial research in Nebraska. Transactions ofthe
Nebraska Academy ofSciences 11 (special issue): 129-136.

Schult~ C. B., and L. C. Eiseley
Paleontological Evidence of the Antiquity of the Scottsbluff Bison Quarry and
1935
its Associated Artifacts. American Anthropologist 3:306-318.
1936

An Added Note on the ScottsbluffQuarry. AmericanAnthropologist 3:521-524.

Sellards, E. H.
1952
Early Man in America, A Study in Prehistory. University of Texas Press.
Stanford, D. J.
1978
The Jones-Miller Site: An Example of Hell Gap Bison Procurement Strategy.
In Bison Procurement and Utilization: A symposium, edited by L. B. Davis and
M. Wilson. Plains Anthropologist 23(82, part 2, Memoir 14):90-98.
Stanford, D. J., and F. Broilo
1981
Frank’s Folsom Campsite. The Artifact 19:1-13.
Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954
An Introductory Handbook to Texas archaeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 25.
Todd, L. C.
The Homer Site: Taphonomy of an Early Holocene Bison Bonebed. Ph.D.
1983
dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of New Mexico.
Albuquerque.
1987

Analysis of Kill Butchery Bonebeds and Interpretations of Paleoindian Hunting.
In, The Evolution ofHumanHunting, edited by M. H. Nitecki and D. V. Nitecki,
225-266. Plenum Press, New York.

Todd, L. C., J. L. Hofrnan, and C. B. Schultz
1988
Faunal Analysis and Paleoindian Studies: The Lipscomb BisonBonebed. Paper
presented at the 46th Plains Anthropological Conference. Wichita.

Hofman, Todd, Schultz, and Hendy m Lipscomb Bison Quarry

189

Turmell, Curtis.
1977
Fluted Projectile Point Production as Revealed by Lithic Specimens from the
Adair-Steadman Site in Northwest Texas. In, Paleoindian Lifeways, edited by
Eileen Johnson, 140-168. The Museum Journal 17.
Wedel, W. R.
1961
Prehistoric Man on the Great Plains. University of Oklahoma Press.
Wendorf, F., and J. J. Hester
1962
Early Man’s Utilization of the Great Plains Environment. American Antiquity
28:159-171.
Wheat, J. B.
The Olsen-Chubbock Site: A Paleo-Indian Bison Kill. Society for American
1972
Archaeology Memoir 26.
1979

The Jurgens Site. Plains Anthropologist Memoir 15.

Wormington, H. M.
1957
Ancient Man in North America. Denver Museum of Natural History, Popular
Series No. 4.

191

Pestles for Boat-Shaped Mortars in Texas
R.E. Fo~es~r
ABSTRACT
A previously unreported stone arti fact--an elongated fiat sandstone implement
about 35 cm long with a sharpened broad, oval end--found in western Central
Texas is identified as apesfle used in conjunction with the boat-shaped mortars that
axe also found in western Central Texas. Efforts to ascribe the pestles and mortars
to a specific cultural group are unsuccessful, but a linkage with Zephyr projectile
points is established.

INTRODUCTION
Boat-shaped mortars---elliptical mortar holes cut rather deeply into massive
bedrock, usually of sandstone (Figure 1)--have been described in a large area of
western Central Texas (Sayles 1935; Fox 1939). The name boat-shaped comes from
the cross section, which resembles a canoe. As the mortars deepen, the length and
width decrease, so near the bottom a horizontal cross section, though still canoe
shaped, is smaller. E. B. Sayles (1935) plotted the distribution of deep circular
mortars and boat-shaped mortars in Texas, demonstrating that distribution of the
boat-shaped type is usually to the north and east of the round type, with little overlap
(Figure 2). Several groups of boat-shaped mortars are known in Texas. Two groups
are in southeastern Shackelford County and southwestern Stephens County, about
24 km (15 miles) apart; there is a third group in this region whose exact location has
been lost since it was seen in 1939. Destruction has reduced the number of other
boat-shaped mortars by half since 1939. A fourth group is near Brownwood in
Brown County (the subject of a paper presented in Waco by Bransford Eubank at
the 1968 annual meeting of the Texas Archeological Society). A fifth group of about
ten heavily eroded mortars near Santo in Palo Pinto County was inspected and
photographed, but not measured, by the author, and a sixth group of boat-shaped
mortars has been reported in the Abilene region (Suhm 1960:73).
Boat-shaped mortars probably are diagnostic of an occupation by a specific but
as yet unknown cultural group; that was the case according to Sayles in 1935 (Sayles
1935) and according to Suhm in 1960 (Suhm 1960), and it still appears to be the case
today. Nonetheless, recognition of these elliptical mortars at a site should be an aid
in determining the presence there at some time of this unknown cultural group.
When the mortar holes are visible at all, they are extremely easy to identify, but
when they are filled with soil and covered with grass, leaves, or other debris, they
can go undetected indefinitely. Too, some deep mortars may have been completely
removed by erosion, so it may be of some value to be able to demonstrate, by the
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 60 (1989)

192

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Photograph showing boat-shaped mortars in sandstone bedrock. Scale is in
inches.

presence of the boat-shaped pestles, that the as yet unidentified cultural group was
once in the area.
BOAT-SHAPED PESTLES

If it can be demonstrated that boat-shaped pestles--until now unrecognized in
the literature---were made for use in boat-shaped mortars, the pestles would be
indicators of the presence at some time of boat-shaped mortars that might not have
been detected at the surface or that might have been lost through erosion. With the
help of sufficient identifying factors, archeologists may be able to conclude that the
pestles were indeed associated with boat-shaped mortars.
The author has found and recorded 15 boat-shaped pestles from the surface in
the vicinity of Moran in southeastern Shackelford County between 1935 and 1941.
He collected five of these to help document the type (Figure 3).
No pestles were found in situ in mortars, but all were found in campsites that
had outcrops of massive sandstone in or very near them. Four were found in a
campsite (Site 1, 41SE17) where 13 mortars had been counted in 1940 (Table 1).
The author believes that in these campsites there are probably other undetected boatshaped mortars.

Forrester--Pestles for Boat-Shaped Mortars

193

100 MILES

0
0

100 KILOMETERS
s

D
o

¯

~

-° °
o¯
oo ¯

o

"

T E x A S
¯
°

o

¯

¯

¯

¯

i

0
Boat-sh~
Cylindrical mortars
( ] Forrester’s additions

\

Figure 2. Map of Texas showing locations of round and boat-shaped mortars.

There is no proof that the tools described here as boat-shaped pestles are in fact
pestles for use in the boat-shaped mortars. Their identification as such is made on
the basis of their occurrence in areas where there are boat-shaped mortars and on
their physical appearance and dimensions. Two groups of elliptical mortar holes
about 24 km (15 miles) apart in southeastern Shackelford County and southwestern
Stephens County were measured and recorded (Table 1). For the seven examples
that could be studied, the maximum depth is 28 cm, maximum length at the surface
is 38 cm, and maximum width is 13 cm. Erosion at the surface of the outcrop has
reduced the dimensions of several of the examples.
Measurements made on the boat-shaped pestles show that they would fit nicely
into the mortars (Table 2). The expanded ends are beveled from each side to form
dull edges, and the tips would fit the sharp V-shaped bottoms of the mortars. Under
low magnification, one specimen (Catalog No. AUM), which still has polish on the
beveled area, has fine scoring on all polished areas. The scoring is oriented toward
the point of the bevel on this thick specimen.
The smaller end of the artifact has been shaped by flaking or pecking to provide
an area suitable in size, shape, and texture for a one- or two-handed grip ~igure 4),

194

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

Figure 3. Photograph showing five pestles for boat-shaped mortars, sharp ends up. Scale
is in inches.

and the total length is such that enough of the tool will protrude from the mortar hole
to permit both hands to grip it without coming in contact with the bedrock. One of
the five specimens (Catalog No. 437) is squared rather than tapered opposite the
beveled end.
Obviously there must have been pestles for the boat-shaped mortars, and these
tools are the only stone tools found in the area that could possibly have served that
purpose. Barfing the use of wooden pestles, these tools would logically be pestles
made to fit the boat-shaped mortars. If a wood or stone pestle should be fashioned
to fit a boat-shaped mortar, it would look exactly like the tools described here.
Therefore, the author believes that these tools were in fact made specifically for the
boat-shaped mortars.
CULTURAL ASSIGNMENT
In an attempt to assign the boat-shaped mortars and the pestles to a specific
cultural group, data are presented here on artifacts collected from the surface of a
very large site (Site S-Y; 41SE17 in the records of the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory), on which at one time at least 13 boat-shaped mortars were
visible.
This site, which is in the southwest comer of Stephens County on both sides of
Big Sandy Creek, covers more than a hundred hectares (several hundred acres) and

Forrester--Pestles for Boat-Shaped Mortars

195

Table 1. Dimensions of Boat-shaped Mortars
No.

Maximum Length

Maximum Width

Maximum Depth

Site 1 S-Y; 41SE17, Big Sandy Creek, southwestern Stephens County
Seven mortars counted in 1971; 13 counted in 1940.
36
11
15
38
13
25
36
13
28
38
13
18
30*
11"
10"
28*
10"
9*

1
2
3
4
5
6

Site 2, Post Oak Creek, southeastern Shackelford County,
R. L. Cannon farm, one mile north of Moran, Texas
One mortar counted in 1971, three in 1940.
28
10
15
Site 3, Unnamed tributary of Battle Creek,
northeastern Callahan County
No mortars counted in 1971; three or four in 1939.
Averages of Sites I and 2 (excluding eroded mortars)
35.2

12.0

20.2

NOTE: Measurements are in centimeters.
* Excluded from averaging.

Table 2. Dimensions of Pestles for Boat-shaped Mortars-Random Surface Finds Recovered Near Mortars Listed in Table 1.
Forrester
No..Catalog No.
1
2
3
4
5

S-Z
AUM
M-M
437
367

Averages

Maximum
Length

Maximum
Width

Maximum
Thickness

48.9
38.1
36.2
32.4
25.4

15.2
9.5
17.8
18.4
12.0

4.4
5.7
3.8
2.5
1.9

36.2

14.6

3.7

NOTE: Measurements are in centimeters

196

Texas Archeological Society

I- 8

I_ a’

b

L b’

Side

Edge

Cross sections
0
!

0

2

4 CENTIMETERS

’

~; INCHES

Figure 4. Idealized sketch of a pestle for a boat-shaped mortar.

ForrestermPestles for Boat-Shaped Mortars

197

is being exposed by erosion, but large areas are still covered by a thin layer of sandy
soil. The sandstone bedrock into which the boat-shaped mortars have been
excavated is at the south end of the site near a two-meter-high waterfall, which is
itself unusual in the region.
When the author started collecting from the surface of site S-Y in 1940, at least
one other collector had been working there for several years. There is reason to
believe that his collecting had been selective, since hammerstones and scrapers
were on the site in numbers that are excessive when compared to the number of
projectile points found.
Together with his father, the author collected all tools from the site, broken or
otherwise, but, unfortunately, they cataloged and labeled only those considered
suitable for display. They did not catalog broken tools, but irretrievably mingled
them with other broken and uncataloged tools from many sites in widely disparate
areas, so the data from site S-Y cover only perfect or near-perfect specimens.
Although the absence of the total artifact assemblage is lamentable, it is believed
that the effect of this limitation on the data is mitigated by the fact that even without
the discarded artifacts, the sample is still large. Also, since the site had already been
collected, it must be considered that even had the writer retained all of the artifacts,
he would not have had a true sample.
The collection from site S-Y no longer includes cores, manos, and one boatshaped pestle, which were abandoned during removal of the writer’s collection from
Moran to Fort Worth in 1954.
Of the 759 items listed from site S-Y (Table 3), about 165 (22 percent) are of
hematite. This number of hematite artifacts would be considered unusually high in
most sites, but here it is not unusual since the site has an outcropping of nodular
hematite readily available for use as hammerstones or for production of the
ubiquitous flaked and ground celts. There was much hematite flaking debris on the
site. Most of the celts recovered had not been ground and polished; many of these
unground celts ap~ar to be misshapen rejects. This site probably was a major
manufacturing center for the ground hematite celts commonly attributed to people
of the Neo-American Henrietta focus.
There was at least a minor occupation at site S-Y (41SE17) in the Historic
Period Fable 3). The sheet copper or brass arrowpoint and the small snub-nosed
end-scraper of clear glass (recovered from a small fire pit) are positive indicators of
this period. Possible additional indicators are the unusually high percentage of
Fresno arrowpoints (Table 4) in relation to the number of side-notched triangular
arrowpoints (28 Fresno points:33 side-notched points). The Fresno type is considered by some to be a preform for side-notched triangular points and is regularly
found associated with them. The writer’s investigations of many rockshelter sites
suggest that for each point type found there will be half as many of its discarded
preforms. The 67 Scallorn points and 33 Granbury points (Scallorn preforms) found
at the site also bear this out.
But the Fresno point, also a finished type, was not always a preform. The Fresno
was the only significant stone arrowpoint found at the Gilbert site, a Historic

198

Texas Archeological Society

Table 3. Artifacts Recovered from Site S-Y (41SE17)
Description

Quantity

Arrowpoint, stone (3 hematite, 1 obsidian)
Arrowpoint, sheet copper/brass
Awl, bone (deer?)
Bead blanks, mussel shell
Biface, 4-bevel, double pointed
Clear Fork tool
Club spike (?), flint
Core, small.
Dart Point
Drill, scraper, knife combined
Edge grinder, sandstone
Graver
Hammerstone (not hematite)
Hematite objects (excluding 3 arrowpoints)
Celt, flaked
41
Celt, polished
14
Clear Fork tool
1
Concretion bead 1
Hammerstone 100
Paint source
2
Scraper."
5
End
2
Side
1
Flake
1
Side & end 1
Knife, diagonal comer-tang.
Mano, one-handed
Paint pigment, copper ore
Perforator (drills, awls)
Short tip on dart base 4
Small diameter shaft
4
Large diameter shaft
5
Pestles for boat-shaped mortars
Plains maul, vA grooved
Scraper, mussel shell.
Scraper, snub-nosed, clear boule glass
Scraper, stone
TOTAL ARTIFACTS

180
1
2
3
1
1
1
24
90
1
1
42
70
164

1
16
1
13

4
1
1
1
140
759

ForresterMPestles for Boat-Shaped Mortars

199

Nortefio focus site (Jelks 1967) where only three side-notched triangular points
were recovered. The excess percentages of Fresno points at site S-Y could be
interpreted as coming from the Nortefio focus, which could have produced the glass
scraper and the copper or brass arrowpoint as well.
Table 4. Arrowpoints from Site S-Y (41SE17)

Possible
Focus

Possible
Time
Period

Quantity

Percent
of Total

Metal
(copper/brass

Nortefio

Historic

1

6

Fresno
Reed
Washita
Harrell
Huffaker
Cliffton
(Type II)
Alba

Henrietta
Henrietta
Henrietta
Henrietta
Henrietta
Henrietta

28
3
16
1
13
2

15.5
1.7
8.8
0.6
7.2
1.1

Henrietta

4

2.2

Toyah

1

0.6

4
1
1

2.2
0.6
0.6

67
33

37.0
18.1

Late Prehistoric

6

3.2

TOTALS

181

Type

Perdiz
Young
Bonham
Maud

Scallom
Granbury
Parker, 21
Joshua, 8
Bono, 4
Untyped,
stemmed

Late Prehistoric
Late Prehistoric
Late Prehistoric

Austin
Austin

Unknown

100

On the other hand, this interpretation could be in error, since at the Harrell site
(Krieger 1946), type site for the Henrietta focus and only 61 km (38 miles) northeast
of site S-Y, theratio of 77 side-notched triangular to 115 Fresno points (1:1.5) shows
an even greater percentage of Fresno points than does site S-Y. The Nortefio focus
may not be represented at site S-Y at all; the glass and metal objects could have been
left by the Comanche, known historically to have been in this area repeatedly, later
than the Nortefios. What is certain is that the site did have some Historic occupation,
although the precise degree is unknown, and the source of that occupation is

200

Texas Archeological Society

suspected to be the Nortefios or the Comanche. The boat-shaped mortars could have
been created by either of these two groups, but the mortar distribution pattern
reported by S ayles (1935) and expanded here matches neither the Comanche nor the
Nortefio area of occupation as these are now understood. The Comanche are less
likely than the Nortefios to be the creators of the boat-shaped mortars, since the
eroded mortars there could hardly have been eroded to their present degree in the
hundred years since the Comanche occupied the area.
The next earlier cultural group that could be considered as the boat-shaped
mortar builders is the people of the Henrietta focus, which is strongly represented
at the site, since at least 21.5 percent and possibly as many as 37 percent of the
arrowpoints there---depending on whether Fresno points are included in the
count--are directly attributable to that focus. The ground hematite celts are
diagnostic of the Henrietta focus, which also has a small component of Alba type
points. Therefore, based on numbers alone, it is possible that the Henrietta focus
people created the mortars. But on the other hand, the distribution of the mortars
only partly matches the Henrietta focus area of occupation, so this connection
should be considered tenuous.
Preceding the Henrietta focus was the Toyah focus of Central Texas, with its
characteristic projectile point, the Perdiz arrowpoint. But only one Perdiz point was
found in the collection from site S-Y, and no preforms (Type I Cliffton) were found.
This single point is considered insignificant, so the Toyah focus is ruled out as a
likely source of the boat-shaped mortars, since their creation must have been a laborintensive enterprise requiring considerable time, during which a significant number
of projectile points associated with the mortar makers should have been discarded
or lost.
The next oldest arrowpoint-using group---and the first to use arrowpoints-was the Austin focus. Their arrowpoint was almost exclusively the Scallorn with its
preform, the Granbury. These two types together account for 55.5 percent of all
arrowpoints at site S-Y, so the Austin focus people have a strong potential to be the
makers of the boat-shaped mortars. However, the mortars are found only at the
northwesternmost edge of the Austin focus area.
Quite possibly Scallorn points were not produced by the Austin focus people
at all, since Scallom points were widespread in areas well beyond Central Texas, so
in this instance the high percentage of Scallorn points at site S-Y might well be
attributable to some other group.
Since it is apparent that none of the arrowpoint-using Neo-American groups are
likely to have been the makers of the boat-shaped mortars, the possibility that these
mortars relate to the earlier Archaic Period must be considered. The Archaic
~dwards Plateau aspect) was a long-lived period in Central Texas; from about 6500
B.C. to about A.D. 700 ~rewitt 1981). It embraced 11 phases, with a large number
of dart point styles.
At least 41 of the 90 dart points from site S-Y can be safely attributed to the
Central Texas Archaic (Table 5). The remaining 49 dart points are not ascribable.
The fact that 47 percent of the dart points at the site are associated with the Central

Forrester~Pestles for Boat-Shaped Mortars

201

Texas Archaic proves its influence on the site even though the site is in the extreme
northern end of the Central Texas Archaic geographic range. However, since the
mortars are not found in or near the core area of the Central Texas Archaic (Edwards
Plateau aspect), it seems reasonable to conclude that they are not associated with
that cultural group.
Inasmuch as the Historic, Neo-American, and the Central Texas Archaic each
have been ruled out as the source of the boat-shaped mortars, the source of these
mortars most likely lies among the residuals. Excluding the three Paleoindian and
three untyped dart points, the 43 remaining points represent seven named types,
none of which is f’uanly associated with a recognized cultural pattern.
What is outstanding in the list of dart points is the high proportion of the new
Zephyr type (Figure 5, Table 6); it comprises 59 percent of the dart points that are
not attributed to the Central Texas Archaic, and 32 percent of all dart points
recovered from the site. The Zephyr type ~rewitt 1982) was originally included in
the Darl type (Suhm et al. 1954), but for many years the Darl type has been thought
to be too inclusive. Prewitt has dropped the name Darl and has split it into three
newly named types, one of which is the Zephyr. He ascribes the Zephyr to an
"undifferentiated Middle (?) Archaic, West Central and North Central Texas."
The author agrees completely with Prewitt’s separation and also with his
ascription of the Zephyr point to the west-central and north-central Texas areas.
These two areas, when combined, also coincide very well with the distribution
pattern of the boat-shaped mortars.
Prewitt’s "undifferentiated Middle (?) Archaic" leaves the chronological and
cultural affiliations of this point type in limbo, but does separate them from the
Central Texas (Edwards Plateau) Archaic. Turner and Hester give a date of about
A.D. 200 as "transitional Archaic" and a distribution of Central Texas, but this
includes all forms of what was previously labeled Darl (Turner and Hester 1985:84).
The author has not found Zephyr points in any excavated Central Texas burned rock
middens, but they are common surface finds along the upper Brazos River and its
tributaries, as well as on the upper reaches of the Leon and Colorado rivers.
No point that would now be classified as Zephyr was reported from the Ham
Creek site, a stratified Edwards aspect site about 55 km (35 miles) upstream from
the Horn Shelter Number 2 site (Forrester 1964). The north end of the Horn Shelter
Number 2 has produced 1114 dart points to date, of which 16 (1.4 percent) have been
classified as Zephyr (Forrester 1985). These specimens document an extension of
the Zephyr distribution southward on the Brazos River to as many as 16 km (10
miles) downstream from the Lake Whitney dam.
The stratigraphy and associations in the Horn Shelter Number 2 offer some aid
in placing the Zephyr type into a time frame. From the same levels that yielded the
Zephyr points were also found Alba, Bonham, and Scallorn arrowpoints, and dart
point types represented by more than one specimen are Palmillas (2), Godley (5),
Marcos (3), Ellis (4), Mahomet (5), Yarbrough (7), and Ensor (3). The Palmillas,
Godley, and Yarbrough points are not yet ffl-mly placed in time, but the combination
of Alba, Bonham, Scallorn, Marcos, Ellis, Mahomet, and Ensor points places the

202

Texas Archeological Society

~.~
°~

r,-~ ,--~

tc~oo ¢,’~

o~¢-1

,--,-,~1- ~1~

r~r~ ~o~ ~/¢,i r~¢,i~-4~"
=I

Z

.=.

o~

¯ . ~ ~ ~

~~~
¯~’~=
~ ~~~
~-~ ~

i

E-

$
J=

<

~.~ ~ ¯ .~

s~N~

m

o

Z

Forrester~Pestles for Boat-Shaped Mortars

¯

Figure 5. Zephyr Dart Points from Site S-Y (41SE17).

°o

203

"

204

Texas Archeological Society

Table 6. Attributes of Zephyr Dart Points from
Site S-Y (41SE17), Stephens County

R
+
S-7
+
T-B
+
T-Ra +
T-Rb +
250a +
250b +
250c +
337
+
242a 242b 396a +
396b +
409a 409b +
499a +
499b +
509
+
617
+
628
+
727a +
727b +
727c 727d +
727e +
727f 727g 747
+
857
+
Present 79%
Average
Nfmimt~n
Maximtra

+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
100%

+
-

+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-

-

+

-

+

06
07
06
07
06
06
07
07
07
07
08
07
07
07
06
07
05
07
07
07
06
06
07
06
07
06
07
06
06

37
42
33
37
33
36
30
36
59
32
31
38
49
40
40
43
36
47
32
53
43
37
35
41
35
37
42
49
48

18
21
17
20
22
21
17
18
17
16
19
22
17
19
19
17
19
21
20
21
21
16
18
19
18
16
21
18
20

11
15
13
17
16
16
14
18
16
15
19
17
17
18
16
15
16
17
18
19
17
15
18
15
17
15
20
17
14

16
08
10
14
11
10
10
10
13
08
08
10
08
11
09
13
11
09
11
08
09
10
08
10
08
08
09
13
11

6.6
5
8

39.7
30
59

18.9
16
22

16.2 10.1
14
8
16
20

16
13
13
16
15
14
12
14
15
13
16
15
15
13
11
15
14
16
15
16
15
11
14
14
14
14
16
17
11

+0
000
+01
+03
000
000
-4)1
+01
+04
+01
+01
+01
000
+03
+01
000
000
000
-01
000
-01
000
000
+01
+01
000
+01
+03
+01

3% 48%

NOTE:Measurementsare in millimeters
+ Present
- Absent.

14.2 +.72
-1
11
+4
17

Forrester--Pestles for Boat-Shaped Mortars

205

associated Zephyr points somewhere between A.D. 200 and 700. This is somewhat
later than Prewitt’s estimate, but the finn associations from a well-stratified site
such as Horn Shelter Number 2 give weight to the conclusion.
Krieger apparently reported Zephyr points in the Harrell site excavations,
under Kelley’s name Sabana Stemmed (Krieger 1946), but his illustrations and
descriptions are not sufficiently clear for positive identification. These and all the
other dart points in the Harrell site may have been collected by its inhabitants from
the surrounding area for use as secondary tools or as a source of flint.
In the light of the data presented, by far the most likely projectile point
associated with the boat-shaped mortars is the Zephyr dart point, with a probable
date of about A.D. 200 to 700. Their areas of distribution essentially coincide, far
more so than do those of any other point type, and the numbers found at site S-Y
imply a reasonably long occupation there. Such a long-term occupation probably
would have been necessary for excavation of the 13 boat-shaped mortars found
there.
CONCLUSIONS

The author’s personal observations and records indicate that the pestles for the
boat-shaped mortars in Texas were flat, elongated sandstone tools, sharpened on the
broad ends and dressed at the smaller ends for hand-holds. It is proposed that these
tools were in fact the pestles for the boat-shaped mortars, and may be used as
indicators of boat-shaped mortars at a site.
The evaluation of the lithic collection from site S-Y (41SE 17) in southwestern
Stephens County has led, by process of elimination, to the conclusion that the
projectile point most likely associated with the makers of the boat-shaped mortars
is the Zephyr point. This point has been dated by its association with better-known
types to somewhere between A.D. 200 and 700, but its cultural aff’diations have not
yet been defined. Therefore, we are only a little further along in defining the cultural
affiliations of the boat-shaped mortars than we were in 1935 or in 1960.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The writer thanks Roy Padgett and the late Isabelle Lobdell Padgett for their
review of the manuscript and suggestions concerning its organization, most of
which were accepted. However, any errors of fact or interpretation are solely the
responsibility of the author. In addition, Roy Padgett found the boat-shaped mortars
near Santo, Texas and arranged for the author to visit them.
REFERENCES CITED
Forrester, R. E.
1964

TheHamCreekSite:AnEdwardsPlateauAspectSiteinJohnsonCounty, Texas.
Publication of the Tarrant County Archeological Society, Ft. Worth.

Texas Archeological Society

206

1985

Hom Shelter Number 2: The North End, A Preliminary Report. Central Texas
Archeologist (Journal of the Central Texas Archeological Society) 10:21-35.

Fox, G. R.
1939

A Preliminary Study of Boat-Shaped Mortar Holes in the Region About the
Upper End of the Possum Kingdom Dam Basin in Jack, Young, Palo Pinto, and
Stephens Counties, Specifically Located on the Brazos River and Its Tributaries.
Draft Report for the Works Progress Administration Project 10662 and the
University of Texas (State Archeological Survey). On file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Austin.

Jelks, E. B. (Editor)
1967

The Gilbert Site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 37:194-197.

Kirkland, Forrest
1941

Petroglyphs of the Abilene District. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society 13:63-76.

Krieger, A. D.
1946

Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. University of Texas
Publications No. 4640:87-168.

Prewitt, E. R.
1981

Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 52:65--89.

1982

Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox, Loeve, and Tombstone Bluff
Sites in the Granger Lake District of Central Texas. Archeological Investigations ofthe San Gabriel Reservoir District, Central Texas, Volume 4 (Edited by
R. R. Hays). Archaeology Program, Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas
State University, Denton.

1985

CircleviUe to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas Chronology. Bulletin of the
Texas ArcheologicaI Society 54:201-238.

Ray, C. N.
1930

Report on Some Recent Archaeological Researches in the Abilene Section.
Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society 2:52-53.

1931

Recent Archaeological Researches in the Abilene Section. Bulletin ofthe Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 3:83-89.

1936

Some Unusual Cremated Burials Found Near Colorado, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 8:9.

ForresterDPestles for Boat-Shaped Mortars

207

Sayles, E. B.
1935

An Archeological Survey of Texas. Medallion Papers No. XVIII, Globe

Suhm, D. A.
1960

A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 29 (for 1958):63-108.

Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954

An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25.

Tumer, E. S., and T. R. Hester
1985

A Field Guide To StoneArtifacts ofTexas lndians. Texas Monthly Press, Austin.

Watts, O. O.
1937

A Possible Explanation of Deep Mortar Holes. Paper presented at the 1937
Annual Meeting of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
Abilene.

209

The Byrd Mountain Lithic Cache (34GR149),
A Find of Edwards Chert From Greer County,
Southwestern Oklahoma
Van Tries Button
ABSTRACT
An isolated cache of 21 Edwards chert lithic specimens, found by construction
workers at the toe of Byrd Mountain in southwestern Oklahoma, has a mix of
attributes that other scholars cautiously suggest are indicators of age. The Byrd
Mountain lithics were cached in a very distinctive place in regard to local
landmarks. I suggest that exchange of the ownership of caches of exotic lithics may
have played a role in prehistoric economies. Seeing cache ownership, not the
lithics themselves, as the medium exchanged may provide a better expl anation than
owners’ forgetfulness for the failure to retrieve such caches.

INTRODUCTION
The 21 lithic specimens reported here were discovered by Lugert-Altus
Irrigation District workers in August 1987 during repair of a major break in the Altus
Canal, part of the B ureau ofReclamation’s W. C. Austin Project ~igure 1). The find
was made with a backhoe while the bottom of the canal was being dug down to a
deposit of natural gravels below, probably an ancient steam channel. The excavation was needed for replacement of the washed out canal embankment with one on
a more solid footing.
THECACHE
The materials were reported to have been recovered at about 1 meter below the
precanal ground surface in a tight cluster, right in the path of a small unnamed
drainage in a reach of the canal that was built by compacting fill over the existing
ground as it skirts the toe of Byrd Mountain. The repair work apparently cut into a
zone that had not been disturbed by the original construction. When the new
embankment was in place, the coffer dam that had held back the water was removed,
and the site of the cache was again submerged, making further examination of its
context impossible. No other archeological artifacts have been seen in the area.
The recovered artifacts were found in a tight cluster, as if they had been placed
in a small hole. They consisted of 21 pieces of blue-gray and mottled tan and gray
Cretaceous chert from the Edwards formation of Central Texas, and, when they
were all taken out, they half filled a five-gallon container. Three are ovate bifaces
(Figure 2). Five of the flakes (Figures 3, 4, 5) are without cortex, and thirteen have

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 60 (1989)

210

Texas Archeological Society

KING MTN.

%

1000

2
0

0

1000

2000

0.5

3000 FEET
1 KILOMETERS

Contour interval 100 feet

Figure 1. Topographic map of the Byrd Mountain area in southwestern Oklahoma showing
the location of the Byrd Mountain cache. From U.S. Geological Survey 7.5 minute series,
Blair, Oklahoma.Quadrangle.

some cortex preserved. An exhaustive attempt at refitting the flakes has not been
made, but there are no obvious refits, although the range of material is visually
homogeneous, and all the material could have come from just a few blocks of chert.
The flakes have not been worked into any recognizable finished tools and show no
uambiguous evidence of use. Some edges have some retouch that looks like
trimming. The general ratio of width to length suggests a flake---not a blade--technology (Table 1).
The bifaces are fully worked by the removal of large multidirectional flakes.
They are not finished points, nor are they bifacial cores; they are preforms.

Button ~ Byrd Mountain Lithic Cache

B

Figure 2. Photographs, both sides of bifaces A-C.

O

211

212

Texas Archeological Society

C

Figure 3. Photographs, cortex flakes A-G.

Button --ByrdMountain Lithic Cache

213

A

0

F

Figure 4. Photographs, cortex flakes A-F.

214

Texas Archeological Society

A

Figure 5. Photographs, interior flakes A-E.

Button -- Byrd Mountain Lithic Cache

215

Table 1. Attributes of Cached Artifacts
Figure
No.

Length
cm

Width
cm

Thickness
cm

2, A
2, B
2, C

9.0
9.1
8.3

3.9
4.0
4.2

1.1
1.2
1.2

Flakes with cortex
3, A
3, B
3, C
3, D
3, E
3, F
3, G
4, A
4, B
4, C
4, D
4, E
4, F

7.9
8.4
7.1
8.1
7.6
7.4
7.5
8.8
8.2
7.4
5.9
7.8
7.4

5.3
4.2
5.1
9.3
7.7
5.4
4.9
4.4
4.0
4.7
7.5
4.1
4.0

0.8
1.1
0.9
1.3
1.2
1.2
1.0
1.1
1.1
1.9
1.9
1.2
1.5

7.9
8.1
5.8
8.5
6.7

5.6
7.7
5.6
5.6
6.7

0.8
1.3
0.7
1.5
0.9

Bifaces

Interior Flakes
5,
5,
5,
5,
5,

A
B
C
D
E

SETTING

The cache was found at the toe of the northern face of Byrd Mountain, an
isolated prominence that is the southwesternmost peak of the Wichita Mountains,
just south of the junction of the Elm Fork and the North Fork of the Red River. The
cache was among jumbled granite outcrops 10 meters above and 100 meters south
of the flat floodplain of the Elm Fork, either close to or in the bank of an intermittent
drainage that rather neatly halves the north face of the mountain, which rises
precipitously above.
DISCUSSION
Lithic caches of the Southern Plains have been exhaustively addressed by
Tunnell (1978), and Edwards caches, more particularly, by Wykoff (1984). Wykoff
(ibid.:Tables 1 and 2) discusses five Edwards caches in Oklahoma and five in New

216

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

Mexico that have been documented. There are probably more undocumented
Edwards caches (written communication, Robert Brooks, Norman, Oklahoma,
September 18, 1987). Edwards caches quite far from the sources from which they
were quarried are a regular, though certainly not a common, occurence.
Some of the attributes suggested (Tunnell 1978, Wykoff 1978) for distinguishing caches are (1) close to or distant from the quarry, (2) made up of bifaces or flakes,
or both, and (3) isolated or associated with camp or village sites. The Byrd Mountain
cache documents further the diversity of westem Oklahoma caches, for like the two
other isolated caches (Brush Creek and Patterson) known in the area, Byrd
Mountain is a mix of flakes and bifaces. But unlike those two sites, the Byrd
Mountain bifaces are ovate-acuminate (i. e., not ellipsoidal, but more triangular in
outline). The site of the Byrd Mountain cache suggests another attribute that may
be useful in evaluating isolated caches. This cache is in a very distinctive location,
and it would be easy to provide directions to it. Ease of relocation is, indeed, an
attribute that cannot be objectively defined, but even so, it is probably an important
one.
A speculative thought, offered to explain isolated caches, is that those who
deposited the caches may not have intended to retrieve them (Wykoff 1984:11,12).
They may have been making offerings like those made in the course of vision quests;
at the risk of being too speculative, the author suggests that some caches that were
buried where they could have been relocated easily may have been left in place on
purpose. Caches of exotic lithic artifacts are plausible components of primitive
exchange systems where the caches function like money; the ownership of the
caches is exchanged, but the caches themselves are never unearthed. Like kula
objects, Yap money, and gold in Fort Knox, the intrinsic value of the object (i. e.,
the worth of what it can do or make) is replaced by the greater value of what it has
in the past been traded for. A cache, to function this way, would need to be hidden
where it could be easily relocated. Once the cache has achieved a value greater than
its intrinsic worth, there would be a strong reason for not recovering it.
REFERENCES CITED
Tunnell, Curtis
1978 The Gibson Lithic Cache from West Texas. Office of the State
Archeologist Report 30, Austin.

Wykoff, D. G.
1984 Oklahoma Bifaces and Southwestern Plains Adaptions. Paper given at
1984 Plains Conference, Lincoln, Nebraska.

217

Crosby County Lunate Stone Burial
John Redding and Wayne Parker
ABSTRACT
A single slab-lined Archaic burial in southern Crosby County, Texas was
excavated in April of 1986 by South Plains Archeological Society members
Wayne Parker, of Crosby County, and John Redding, of Floyd County. Due to the
extreme fragmentation and absence of some skeletal parts, it was impossible to
determine the exact position of the body at interment. The burial was of an adult,
probably male, who most likely lived sometime between 2000 B.C. and A.D. 1000
Artifacts recovered in direct association with the burial are one Ensor dart point,
three Olivella shell beads, and one polished quarter-moon shaped stone with 24
notches cut into the convex edge. This artifact is called a lunate stone throughout
this report.

SETTING
Crosby County covers the southeast edge of the Llano Estacado and the
adjacent rolling plains. Atop the Llano is the geographical region called the Texas
High Plains. Although appearing to be a flat plain, it in fact slopes gradually to the
southeast at an average of 2.44 meters (8 feet) per 1.5 km (J. Hughes,, this volume).
Many playa lakes on the plains vary in size from several to several hundred
hectares. Occasional gullies meander southeastward to the escarpment of the Llano
and eventually to the Brazos River. Near the escarpment, constant erosion has
created deep, narrow canyons in these drainages. The largest canyon in Crosby
County originates in Floyd County to the north and cuts several miles into the Llano
Estacado.
Below the escarpment lies the region known as the Rolling Plains (J. Hughes,
this volume) made up of low hills, many gullies, and occasional springs. A few flattopped mesas, scattered along and usually near the escarpment, vary in size from
mere flat-topped peaks to mesas a few hundred meters long.
The elevation of Crosby County ranges between 975 meters (3200 feet) atop
the Llano in the north and 640 meters (2100 feet) below the escarpment in the south
(Koos et al. 1966). Average temperatures range between 21.8°C (53.8°F) to -6.7°C (25.3°F) in January and 62.1°C (94.1°F) to 34.3°C (66.3°F) in July. The
annual rainfall averages 54 cm (21.42 inches), with a 206-day growing season.
Plant life consists of many grasses; buffalo and mesquite are the most common.
Yucca, cactus, shin-oak, broomweed, wild sunflower, and mesquite are common.
Below the escarpment, along the many drainages, cottonwood, hackberry, wild
plum, cedar, and sagebrush flourish. Animal life consists of mouse, rat, rabbit,
prairie dog, raccoon, porcupine, skunk, opossum, badger, bobcat, coyote, deer, and

Bulletin of the Texas ArcheoIogical Society 60 (1989)

218

Texas Archeological Society

antelope. Native birds are quail, turkey, sparrow, mockingbird, bluejay, blackbird,
field lark, and cardinal; the many migratory birds include duck, goose, dove, crow,
hawk, buzzard, and an occasional eagle. Reptiles include homed toad and several
other kinds of lizards, tortoise, snapping turtle, and snakes in abundance,---most
commonly rattlesnake, bullsnake, and prairie racer. Amphibians include many
species of frog and toad. catfish, perch, minnows, and fiver clams are found in the
few water holes along the drainages below the escarpment.
Archaic sites are plentiful along the escarpment, both near the upper rim and
along the waterways below. Unfortunately, very few have been studied and
documented, for most archeological attention in the region has been centered
around the Paleoindian and Neoindian periods; most evidence of the Archaic is
in surface-collected artifacts.
Within a few kilometers of the burial are many sites that have yielded an
abundance of surface-collected Archaic material. The most prominent sites are in
southern and southwestern Crosby County in the sandhills atop the Llano. Archaic
artifacts can also be found around nearly all of the larger playa lakes of this region.
As the drainages of the High Plains approach the escarpment, they form deep,
narrow canyons that create peninsulalike ridges of varying width and length.
Several of these points, though only a few hundred yards wide, extend for more than
a kilometer between the canyons. To geologists and to ordinary lovers of nature,
the view from one of these points is, to say the least, spectacular as the eye scans
the narrow gorges on each side and drifts southeastward across the Rolling Plains
below to the Double Mountain Fork of the Brazos River some 80 km (50 miles)
away. Undoubtedly this magnificent panorama must have played at least some part
in the decision of Archaic people of the region to use these projections as places
of interment. This lunate stone burial was on such a projection in south-central
Crosby County (Figure 1).
DESCRIPTION OF SITE

The burial site was near the center of the projection and about 140 meters (150
yards) back from its point, atop a small knoll some 9 to 12 meters (30 to 40 feet)
in diameter. Burned rock is scattered along the top of the escarpment, and an
occasional hearth has been exposed by erosion. A few flint flakes and quartzite
hammerstone fragments have been found nearby.
Below the escarpment along the banks of the many drainages there is limited
evidence of prehistoric man; a few hearths are exposed: flint flakes of Edwards
chert, Tecovas jasper, and Alibates dolomite have been found, but no major
campsite has been discovered.
Many fragments of quartzite hammerstones and sandstone grinding tools have
been found, but the only known artifact collected from the area directly surrounding
the burial site is a sandstone mano about 18 cm (7 inches) in diameter, discovered
near a dry stream bed below the escarpment.

Redding and Parker E Crosby County Lunate Stone Burial

219

CROSBY COUNTY
ON

RALLS
US 62/82

CROI

O4

E
HIGH PLAINS

Crosby County
Lunate Stone Burial

_~

Cap Rock

I"

0

ROLLING

2-

PLAINS

5 MILES

0
i

I

5 KILOMETERS

CAPROCK ESCARPMENT
)

Figure 1. Map of part of Crosby County showing the location of the lunate stone burial.

EXCAVATION

Before excavation was begun, magnetic north was established, photographs
were taken, and it was decided to make scale drawings and field notes as well as
photographs at different levels during the excavation (Figure 2). Smaller loose
surface cobbles and fill were removed by trowel and brush in order to pinpoint the
exact location of the burial crypt, which was encountered at about 15 cm (6 inches).
At this level larger slablike stones of the local escarpment rock the only rock type
used in the burial--were exposed (Figure 3). These slabs were from 28 to 48 cm
(11 to 19 inches) long, 15 to 35 cm (6 to 14 inches) wide, and 5 to 13 cm (2 to 5
inches) thick.
At this depth most of the stones were laid horizontally, but five were vertical
to near vertical. The five vertical slabs---only two of which were partly exposed
at the surface---made a circular pattern with a diameter of about 120 cm (4 feet).
Only small parts of two of these stones were exposed at the surface. These stones
and fill were removed, and the excavation continued to a depth of about 35 cm (14
inches), where, near the center of the crypt, two large, fiat, horizontal slabs were
uncovered (Figure 4). These stones were about 61 cm (2 feet) long, 23 to 30 cm
(9 to 12 inches) wide, and 5 to 8 cm (2 to 3 inches) thick.
After the two slabs were removed and troweling continued for about 3 cm (one
inch) to a depth of 46 cm (18 inches), the first bones, identified as the femurs, tibias,

220

Texas Archeological Society

\

0

0

0

0
!

1 CENTIMETER

\
Figure 2. Map showing the surface of the site before excavation.

and fibulas, were exposed Figure 5). The two femurs, about 47 cm (18 1/2 inches)
long, above and nearly parallel to the lower leg bones, were lying in a northeastsouthwest position with the pelvic area to the southwest. These bones were
extensively fractured, and much of the pelvic region was absent, making precise
measurements impossible; no foot bones were recovered. Directly north of the
pelvic area were fragments of three vertebrae, and near the northern part of the
burial pit were one humerus, ulna, radius, and parts of three ribs. The arm bones

Redding atul Parker ~ Crosby County Lunate Stone Burial

Part of rock exposed

~i~

at surface

D

Rocks placed vertically
around burial

0
I
0

1
i
,
1 CENTIMETER

Figure 3. Plan showing placement of vertical rocks around the burial. 3.5x4.5

o

1 INCH
w

0

J

l CENTIMETER

Figure 4. Drawing of the horizontal slab rocks covering the burial.

221

222

Texas Archeological Society

were folded, with the wrists to the west. North of the leg bones, near the edge of
the burial pit, were two Olivella shell beads, and another was found north of the
leg bones near the pelvic region (Figure 5). Two small fragments of the skull were
excavated just northwest of and below the pelvic region at a depth of 61 cm (24
inches); one fragment included part of the left eye guard, with the exterior of the
skull facing the bottom of the pit (Figure 5). No more skeletal remains were
recovered from the burial.
An unusual artifact was discovered in the southwest sector of the pit about 7.5
cm (3 inches) from the pelvic region at 51 cm (20 inches). This artifact was a

t
I

N

Burial pit
about 1 meter (3 ’)

Animal burrow
at 56 cm (22 "),
about 18 cm (7") diameter

/

diameter

"
,

/

Arm bones
,

at 46 cm (18")

t¢I

Vertebra
fragments
at 51 cm(20")
Two
I

Ollvella
shell bead
at 51 cm (20’)

I

t

ollvella
shell
beads
i at 48 cm (19")

t

I

!
t

I

\

Lunate ~’~
stone
at 51 cm (20")

Leg bones
at 46 cm (18")

Two skull
fragments
at 61 cm (24")

Ensor point
at 56 om (22")
(below all leg bones)

Figure 5. Drawing of the burial showing locations of skeletal remains and artifacts.

Redding and Parker m Crosby County Lunate Stone Burial

223

quarter-moon-shaped, highly polished stone of greyish green material that measured 16.5 by 5 by 1.5 cm (6 ½ by 17A by 9/16 inches). The convex side had been
ground to a nearly sharp edge, with 24 notches cut or ground into it from both sides,
giving the convex side of the artifact a saw-toothed appearance. The artifact was
oriented nearly north-south, with the flat side up and the notched convex side down.
For a more thorough description of this stone, see the "artifacts" section.
At this point in the excavation, all bones were removed from the pit in order
to trowel the remaining f’dl. Directly below and near the center of the leg bones at
about 56cm (22 inches) was anEnsor dart point of Edwards chert lying horizontally
and pointing to the southwest (Figure 5). Final troweling yielded no more artifacts.
There are at least two possible explanations for the unnatural arrangement and
absence of some skeletal parts. Death may have occurred at another location, and
the body may have been abandoned for some reason. In this event, surely
scavengers (birds and animals) would have devoured or carried away part of the
remains. At a later date the balance of the remains might have been gathered for
interment. Such bundle burials have been reported previously. Grant Hall (1981),
in his extensive work at Aliens Creek, excavated and described two bundle burials.
Two other individuals, distinguished by virtue of the energy expended
in preparing them for interment, were group 2 burials 65 and 93, representing
about 1.4 percent of the known group 2 population. Both bundle burials,
the flesh of these individuals was apparently removed and the bones
disarticulated prior to interment. Several artifacts were placed amidst the
bones of burial 93; one tubular shell bead was possibly associated with
burial 65. It is interesting to note, that, unlike the four cremations, there
were grave goods associated with the bundle burials. Whether defleshing
of the bodies took place at the site of interment or at some other locality
could not be determined from available evidence.
Another possible explanation is that an animal whose 18 cm (7 inch) burrow
was discovered entering the northern part of the burial pit at about 56 cm (22
inches), could account for the disarray and absence of some skeletal parts.
ARTIFACTS
Olivella Shell Beads

Three small Olivella shell beads were recovered from the burial, each 1.5 cm
(½ inch) long and .75 cm (¼ inch) in diameter. Under magnification, all of the beads
show some erosion due to decay, and each has the apex and canal opening abraded
off, but no other abrasion or engraving is evident (Figure 6)
Marine shells were obtained either by trade with inhabitants of the Gulf of
Mexico, the Gulf of California, or the Pacific Coast, or by excursions to those areas.
That such trade was extensive is evidenced by the number of shell artifacts

224

Texas Archeological Society

0

I ~NO

0

1 CENTIMETER

Figure 6. Artifacts from the Crosby County burial. A, Ensor dart point; B, C, D, Olivella
shell beads; E, side view of lunate stone; F, bottom view of lunate stone; G, top view of
lunate stone.

recovered from sites in the Southwest. Charles Amsden (1949), in his survey of the
basketmaker period of the Southwest (A.D. 11 to 600), made the following
reference to marine shell ornaments:
If the basketmakers dressed sparingly, they adorned themselves with
a great variety of simple jewels and trinkets. Beads are abundant in
basketmaker caves. There are beads of stone in varying colors, carefully
ground, polished, and perforated for stringing; beads of Olivella and
abalone shell from the Pacific prove a widespread commerce in luxuries
among people whose necessaries must often have been but slenderly
provided.

Redding and Parker m Crosby County Lunate Stone Burial

225

Marine shell is also found in abundance at sites in East Texas. In his study of
the Aliens Creek sites, Hall (1981) concluded that

marine shell omaments in Archaic context are distributed across the
eastern half of Texas in much the same way as are boatstones. The major
exceptions are the shell artifacts found at sites around the three bays along
the south central Texas coast. Because most of these shell artifacts are
utilitarian rather than ornamental objects, it has been concluded that the
Texas coast was probably not the origin of the shell ornaments found in
Late Archaic components at Aliens Creek and elsewhere in the state.
Other than the Texas Coast, the next most likely source of the shell would
be the Gulf Coast of Florida. The evidence now available suggests that
the Florida Coast was indeed the source of shell artifacts circulating
through the import-export system, both during Late Archaic and Late
Prehistoric (Caddoan) times.
All shells had to be worked before they could be worn as ornaments or used
as charms. Univalve shells were worked in several ways. The most common was
abrading the apex of the Olivella spire to make a hole for stringing. Some Olivella
shells were also abraded at the opening of the canal, producing cylindrical beads.
Ensor Point
One Ensor dart point was excavated from the burial. It is 4 cm (1% inches) long,
1.5 cm (11A6 inches) wide, and .5 cm (¾6 inches) thick and was made from greytan Edwards Plateau chert (Figure 6). Under magnification, the point shows
evidence of abrasion, possibly from boring, and the edges show evidence of
resharpening. These two characteristics suggest that it might have been hafted and
used as a small knife.
Suhm and Jelks (1962) describe the Ensor point as follows:
Blade triangular and varying considerably in length and width; edges
are often quite straight, otherwise slightly convex, occasionally finely
serrated. Shoulders vary from slight to pronounced; barbs, if present, are
short. S tems are very broad across neck, due to notches being shallow, and
bases are commonly wider than shoulders so that basal comers are in line
with blade edges. Occasionally the base is less wide than the shoulders but
shallow notches and broad stem neck suggest Ensor type. Bases are most
commonly straight but may be concave or convex.
Distribution: Occurs most frequently in Central Texas and the Lower
Pecos River area, decreasing southward toward the lower Guadalupe
River and eastward to the upper Sabine River. Estimated Age: Possibly
1000 or 2000 B.C. to 500 to 1000 A.D.

226

Texas Archeological Society

Of the several distinct Archaic complexes that have been studied and documented
in Texas, the one nearest to Crosby County is the Edwards Plateau (Central Texas
Archaic). The authors believe that its northern extent should be extended to include
the southern High Plains of Texas because of the large number of chipped stone
artifacts that are common to this area and to the Edwards Plateau, especially in the
late terminal period.
Prewitt, in his summary of this aspect (1974), divided the Archaic into four
periods spanning 5900 years (Table 1). He dates the Ensor point to the end of the
Archaic period.

Table I. Prewitt’s Division of the Archaic with their
Corresponding Projectile Points

Period

Dates

4650 B.C. to 2050 B.C.
Early Archaic
2050 B.C. to 450 B.C.
Middle Archaic
450 B.C. to A.D. 25
Late Archaic
Terminal Archaic A.D. 250 to A.D. 750

Projectile Points
Bell, Travis, Nolan, Bulverde
Pedemales
CastroviUe, Marcos, Montell
Darl, Fairland, Ensor

A significant number of the many Archaic sites in and around Crosby County
have yielded Ensor points. The authors know of one site---about 16 km (10 miles)
south of the burial site in extreme southern Crosby County--in which Ensor points
predominate.
Lunate Stone

Due to the rarity of these artifacts, little is known of their origin, distribution,
or purpose. One lunate stone measuring 16.5 by 5 by 1.5 cm (6 ½ by 1 7~ by 9A6
inches) was found among the burial artifacts (Figure 6); its workmanship is nothing
short of artistic. The base of the stone has been ground nearly perfectly flat, giving
the basal edges a sharp feel. The sides have been ground evenly toward the top and
ends of the convex part of the artifact to a nearly sharp edge. The entire surface of
the stone has been finely polished. Twenty-four distinct and precise notches have
been made in the narrow convex edge, apparently cut into the stone---rather than
ground by some abrasive material---probably with upward motion from each side
rather than straight down from the convex edge. One notch near the center appears

Redding and Parker m Crosby County Lunate Stone Burial

227

to be wider and deeper than the others, and close examination proves that there is
higher polish through this notch, down the adjacent sides, and across the base,
indicating friction wear (Figure 6). There is no evidence of wear polish in any of
the other 23 notches or on any other part of the artifact. This indicates that the stone
may have been bound to some other object, or may have been bound for suspension.
The lunate stone was examined by Vestal Yeats, retired Professor of
Geosciences, of Lubbock. He identified the stone, concurring with the identification
made by Jack T. Hughes, as igneous metamorphic rock, nearly slate, possibly
greenstone. The nearest westward source for such rock is the Davis Mountains
region; the most likely eastern source would be Arkansas, or possibly Alabama or
Georgia.
OTHER LUNATE STONES

Descriptions and Comparisons
Only limited information is available about lunate stones. Chipped stone
artifacts of similar outlines are known in the Great Basin, where they are called
crescents, but these lunate stones are considered to be related more to projectile
points than to ground stone objects (Mitchell, Rosa, Castagnetto, and Hester 1977).
Speculation varies among archeologists as to the purpose of these artifacts; some
of the most popular suggestions are atlatl weights (Parker 1981; Parker and Parsons
1979), bannerstones (Mitchell, Hester, and Parker 1980), pendants, and ceremonial
axes. The authors will compare all of the information available about these stones
from publications and from personal contacts in the hope that they can shed some
light on, or at least inspire further study of these unique stones.
Mitchell County Site

In 1935, Cyrus N. Ray, while examining a series of mortar holes, discovered
and excavated a burial near Colorado City in Mitchell County. Among the burial
artifacts were two lunate stones. Some quotations from his account of this excavation, which was titled "Some Unusual Cremated Burials Found Near Colorado,
Texas," (Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society Vol. 8,
September 1936), follow.
When we examined the top of the mountain a rock structure of
circular form, consisting of large stones set into the earth closely, was
found. This rock structure was 14 feet in diameter and consisted of one
layer of stones. Below the stones was 11/2 feet of hard, dry earth filled with
small stones. Much to our disappointment after the hard labor of clearing
the stones and earth away under a temperature of above 100 degrees we
came to hard, flat bed rock, and apparently projecting out of the center of

228

Texas Archeological Society

this were some large rough stones which we supposed were part of the
same ledge.
Reluctantly we came to the conclusion that we had wasted our efforts
on a gas blowout or some other natural formation. However, the writer had
always wondered about this site, after later digging up some long headed
burials in stone lined graves which were buried 4 and 5 feet deep. In 1932
the writer dug up a similar structure situated about about 30 miles north
of this site, and found a flexed long headed skeleton, buried below the
earth and stone covering in a pit cut into the solid rock beneath it.
However, nothing was done about it until the summer of 1935, when
the writer returned to the site with James G. Morrow, and we again dug
out the refilled earth down to the projecting stones, and then found that
we were able to pry them loose in the center.
There were six large stones wedged in tightly, and when these were
removed, more black earth was found beneath them. The space the
occupied was a round hole three feet across, which had been cut down into
the solid bed rock for about a foot in depth. We found this filled earth to
be full of small burned bone and shell fragments and soon the writer
unearthed the largest stone pendant that he ever saw, an oval gray stone
pendant, with an hour glass shaped hole at one end. It was nicely
proportioned but was a rather large ornament for the small child that wore
it. The fragments of bones were quite small and fire-blackened, and the
finding of two very small milk teeth showed that the cremation was that
of a very young child. This child must have been that of an important chief
when one considers the number of artifacts of unusual nature found with
the cremation. In addition to the large pendant there were four other oval
stone pendants; one was 3 inches long and7/16 inches wide, rounded at the
top and pointed at the bottom; one was 2 1/2 inches long and 14/16 inches
wide; one was 21/4 by n/16 inches; one was 2 inches by 1 inch. In addition,
a smaller pendant of shell 1 14/16 inches long and a shell bead 7/16 inches
across were found. A curved stone object, 2 2/16 inches long on the inside
of the curve, was found. A hole was drilled in each end and a groove
connects the two end holes on the inside of the curve; the object is lfl inch
wide. The use probably was as a bandeau ornament, probably worn on the
forehead to hold back bobbed hair. Its curve would be about fight to fit
the head of a small child. A large stone ring 115/16 inches in diameter was
found. Two peculiar polished gray-green stones of the shape of about a
third of a circle, or of about the shape of the visible part of the sun when
a little more than a third has risen, were found. The rounded portions of
both are notched or serrated. One is 57/16 inches long, and 23/16 inches wide
in the middle and it has 18 serrations. The other one is 5 1°/16 inches long
and 1 x5/~6 inches wide in the center, and it has 19 serrations, but there is
a small piece of the edge missing at one end where two more serrations
probably were. There were a great number of small polished fire blackened

Redding and Parker ~ Crosby County Lunate Stone Burial

229

quartz pebbles scattered all through the cremated materials; these varied
from a third to a half inch in diameter, and probably were used inside dry
land terrapin shells as rattles. Portions of broken polished bone tubes were
found, and much burnt shell which was too fragmentary for one to
determine from what it came. Three thick, roughly made, stemmed and
shouldered, flint projectile points, probably spear of atlatl points, were
found with the burial.
Reconstructing the scene the best we can, we visualize the death of
a small child of some important chieftain. The selection of a site on the
point of a mountain overlooking all the wide valley below. The removal
of the earth covering the bed rock and then the laborious cutting with flint
tools of a hole in the hard rock three feet in diameter and a foot deep. Then
filling this hole with fuel, laying the body thereon with all its toys, rattles,
beads, and most valuable ornaments and then setting fire to the pyre, to
the end that this fire, sacred agency of their sun god, would consume the
remains, and the burial fixtures, and carry their spirits to their home in the
sun. When the fire had cooled then six large stones were wedged tightly
into the opening, earth heaped above, and then a wide circular pavement
of stones set on top Ray, 1936].
The Cyrus Ray artifacts are now in the Texas Tech University Museum, where,
with the cooperation of the staff, the authors examined and photographed those that
were associated with this burial (Figure 7). Of particular interest for this report are
the Shumla, Marcos, and Fairland dart points and the two lunate stones.
Sh umla Dart Points. Distribution is centered about the area of the PecosRio Grande confluence, becoming less frequent down the Rio Grande
and Nueces rivers in southwestern Texas; may also extend into the
Big Bend and Northern Coahuila, Mexico west of the mouth of the
Pecos; estimated age is from an unknown time before Christ to A.D.
700 or 800 [Suhm, Kreiger, and Jelks 1954; Suhm and Jelks 1962].
Marcos Dart Point. Distribution is from the lower Pecos River Valley
across Central Texas to the middle Brazos River and from the Possum
Kingdom Reservoir area on the Upper Brazos southward to the
central part of the Texas coast; estimated age is from 2000 B.C. to
A.D. 100, or most of that time span [Suhm, Kreiger, and Jelks 1954;
Suhm and Jelks 1962].
Fairland Dart Point. Distribution includes the entire Central Texas Region; probably not as long-lived as the more common types associated with the Edwards Plateau aspect; estimated age from 1000 B.C.
to A.D. 500 or part of that time span
[Suhm, Kreiger, and Jelks 1954; Suhm and Jelks 1962].
The two lunate stones had suffered extensive damage during cremation of the
burial, but the authors believe that both were made of greenstone. Friction wear is
evident in the main center notches of both artifacts. This wear polish is visible down

230

Texas Archeological Society

one side of Lunate A. Although no wear can be seen down the sides of the center
notch of Lunate B, wear is quite evident across the base in line with this notch.
There is no indication of friction polish in any other notches of either lunate, but
an interesting feature of both is the absence of notches near the ends of the artifacts.
Either the makers decreased the size and depth of the serrations toward the ends
of the stones or, possibly, the size and depth were decreased by abrasion. The five
stone pendants were made from materials that are common in the region of the
burial.
Garza County Site (41GA60)

In 1960, Dan Cockrum and John Bullard discovered four burials (site no.
41GA60) 24 km (15 miles) northeast of Post on a sandy ridge above McDonald
Creek in Garza County (Cockrum 1963); the Garza Chapter of the South Plains
Archeological Society helped excavate the burials. A keel-shaped polished stone

A
1 ~CH

0

I

,

0

1 CENTIMETER

J

B
0

1 t,~--’H
1

0

1 CENTIMETER

Figure 7. Lunate stones A and B from Mitchell County, Texas (Courtesy of Texas Tech
University Museum).

Redding and Parker ~ Crosby County Lunate Stone Burial

231

artifact nearly 18 cm (7 inches) long, 5 cm (2 inches) wide, and 1.27 cm (half an
inch) thick in cross section on the straight edge was discovered between the knees
and against the rib cage of skeleton no. 3. The gray-green stone was polished on
all surfaces (Figure 8). Earl Green, of Texas Tech University, identified the stone
as a diorite material whose nearest source is New Mexico. No other artifacts were
found in direct association with the burial.

0

1 INCH

I
0

~
1 CENTIMETER

Figure 8. Lunate stone from site 41GA60, Crosby County, Texas.

Old Tom Burial

Ronnie Hill and Mike Martin, of Spur, Texas, excavated a lunate stone from
a slab-lined burial near Mud Creek in Dickens County. The burial site, 41DK16,
is on the high point of a hill on the McGinty Ranch (Parsons, Hill, and Parker 1979).
Also excavated from the burial were three conch shell pendants (Figure 9). The
pendants and lunate stone were laid on edge in the burial pit in the four directions
around the skeletal remains; the lunate stone was at the south. Only partial skeletal
remains were found in the slab-lined burial, which was similar to the Crosby
County lunate stone burial. The dark green lunate, made from greenstone, measures
about 19 by 5 by 1 cm (7A6 by 1 15A6 by 7A6 inches). The highly polished artifact has
26 notches cut into the convex edge; one notch near the center is larger than the
others. Upon close examination, the authors found that the lunate has wear polish
through this larger notch, down the sides, and across the base. No other notches
have this kind of wear. This artifact and the one from Crosby County lunate stone
burial are so similar in size, workmanship, and material that they could have been
made by the same person.
The shell pendants associated with this burial are remarkably similar to the
Form 7 pendants excavated by Grant Hall at Aliens Creek (Figure 10; see Hall
1981:203 Figure 47). One pendant from the Old Tom Burial and one from Aliens
Creek are especially similar in that both have parallel rows of small conical

232

Texas Archeological Society

depressions drilled into the surface of the shell. These depressions form an inverted
T when the shell is viewed with the apex up. This description by Grant Hall could
apply to either pendant.
The T is composed of four sets of dotted lines, two sets running across the
posterior edge (bottom) of the pendant and the other two sets perpendicular to the first and following the long axis up the center, roughly half the
length of the shell [Hall 1981].

At Aliens Creek the shell pendants were associated with Ensor points in Late
Archaic burials.
Other Sites

Fairy McWiUiams, of Silverton, Texas found a lunate stone on the surface of
a site near Silverton in Briscoe County. It measures about 11 by 1 cm (4 3A6 by
7A6 inches). It is made from a fine-grained siltstone composed of minute particles
of quartz cemented by a quartz solution. The reddish brown artifact has 19 notches
cut into the convex edge; the center notch is deepest and largest.
On close examination wear polish was noted in this center notch. Although it
was not visible on one side of this artifact, the wear polish was very obvious down
the other side and across the base. Both ends of the stone are damaged, as if it had
been used for striking other objects (Figure 11); no wear is evident in any other of
the other serrations.
Rick Waiters, a member of the Southern Plains Archeological Society,
formerly of Lubbock, found a small fragment of a lunate stone made of greenstone
on the surface of a site in Lubbock County.
Another lunate stone, obtained from a collector in Gaines County (Figure 12),
measures about 9.5 by 3 by 1 cm (3 ¾ by 1 1A by ~ inches). It was a surface find
at a sandhill site about 8 km (5 miles) southeast of Seminole, Texas. The artifact
is made from a grey igneous material speckled with black. There are seven evenly
spaced grooves across the convex edge of the artifact. This particular lunate stone
differs from all the others in that the convex edge is wide and flat rather than sharp.
The seven serrations appear to have been abraded rather than cut into the artifact,
probably because this stone is so much harder. The hardness of the stone may be
the reason why there is no visible indication of strapping wear through the center
groove, down either side, or across the base.
Jim Hogue, also a member of the Southern Plains Archeological Society,
found about two-thirds of a lunate stone at a sandhill site in Hockley County (Figure
13) near Sundown, Texas. If the main notch was near the center, the artifact was
about 11.5 cm (4 ½ inches) long, 4.5 cm (1 ¾ inches) wide, and 1.5 cm (~ inches)
thick.
There are 8 notches between the large notch and the end, indicating that the
artifact probably had a total of 17. This lunate is heavily weathered, but the material

Redding and Parker m Crosby County Lunate Stone Burial

0

1~

o

1 CENTIMETER

233

J

Figure 9. Lunate stone (A) and shell pendants ~, C, D) from the Old Tom burial, site
41DK16, Dickens County, Texas.

234

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 10. Shell Pendants from the Allens Creek site (From Hall 1981:203, Figure 47).

Figure 11. Siltstone lunate from Briscoe County, Texas.

is apparently greenstone. The only visible indication of strapping wear is through
the center notch, which is worn deeper than the others into the convex edge.
Other lunate stones have been brought to the attention of the authors, but little
information is available about them; one is from Mitchell County, one is from
Hemphill County, and an undetermined number are from Dickens and Crosby
counties. The one from Hemphill County is unique in that there are no serrations
along the convex edge (possibly unfinished). Those from Dickens and Crosby
counties were excavated from burials by a state game warden several years ago with
no documentation. The origin of the Mitchell County artifact is unknown.

Redding and Parker ~ Crosby County Lunate Stone Burial

o

235

1NCH

o

I

f

0

1 CENTIMETER

Figure 12. Lunate stone from the Sandhill site in Gaines County.

0

1NCH

I

,

0

1 CENTIMETER

J

Figure 13. Fragment of a greenstone lunate from Hockley County.

SUMMARY

From the evidence obtained from the Crosby County burial and similar burials
in this region, the following conclus’ons have been reached.
°

2.

Based on the length and size of the femurs and the thickness of the skull
fragments, the burial was of an adult male.
The estimated age of the burial is between 650 B.C. and A.D. 450, based
on the following:
A) The Ensor point recovered from the Crosby County burial and the
Fairland point from the Mitchell County burial; both are common
to the late-terminal Archaic of the Edwards Plateau aspect (Central
Texas Archaic).

236

Texas Archeological Society
B) There are similarities between the shell pendants from the Dickens
County lunate stone burial (Old Tom) and those from excavations
at Aliens Creek, which Grant Hall has dated to the late-terminal
Archaic.
C) The absence of most of the smaller skeletal parts is an indication that
the burial was in all probability a bundle burial.

These unusual artifacts apparently have been found along and near the
escarpment of the Llano Estacado of the northwestern part of Texas (Figure 14).
Perhaps with more time and research, the area of their distribution will increase.
There appears to be no evidence of these stones before the Late Archaic.
Also important is consideration of the materials from which these stones were
made, for none of the lunates described in this report are of local material. This,
together with the fact that polished stone is not common in the region, suggests that
the lunates have ceremonial significance.
Grant Hall (1981) suggested an extensive import-export network to the east
from Texas during the Late Archaic, but there is little evidence of trade to the west
during this period. This suggests that the materials for the lunate stones were either
traded in from or obtained by eastward excursions; Arkansas is the nearest eastern
source. Patterson, in his report on boatstones in 1937, concluded that boatstones
were manufactured in southwestern Arkansas and were found in northern Louisiana,
southeastern Oklahoma, and Central Texas, with their numbers decreasing with the
distance from southwestern Arkansas. At this time, however, there is no direct
evidence suggesting that lunate stones were made at some other location and traded
into northwestern Texas.
For the present, the purpose served by these artifacts must be left to speculation. Many polished stone artifacts, especially throughout the eastern states, have
been called atlatl weights. Patterson, in his study of boatstones in 1937, concluded
that all boatsones are atlafl weights. Many tests have been conducted using atlatls
with and without weights, with the conclusions being variously: increased effectiveness, decreased effectiveness, and no effect at all. That stone weights were
sometimes used on atlatls is known because some atlatls have been recovered with
small stones attached to them (Hester 1974).
The evidence set forth here does not seem to support the use of lunate stones
as atlad weights. Although it has been speculated that these artifacts were strapped
to the bases of aflatls through the notches on their convex edges, the only evidence
of strapping of these stones is through the main center notch, which would not
create a very secure bond between the weight and the atlatl, and the wear polish
on these artifacts itself indicates a looseness of strapping. The fact that this wear
polish continues from the main notch down both sides and across the base seems
to indicate that it was not strapped to another object unless perhaps it was strapped
to that object along the flat base, as an axe or a bannerstone would be.
But there is another possible explanation of the wear pattern on these artifacts.
The main notch of the Crosby County lunate stone is a little off center, and the wear
polish down the sides from this "center" notch is not exactly perpendicular to the

Redding and Parker-- Crosby County Lunate Stone Burial

237

I

i
1
t
.t
A

Lunate Stone

¯rcn~ Caprock Escarpment
"--" County Boundary
m~ State Boundary

0
t"

~
0

MI
’ ~
KM

50

50

Figure 14. Map showing the distribution of lunate stones on and near the Caprock
Escarpment in the Texas Panhandle (Map drawn by Sandy Hannum; courtesy of J. Peter
Thurmond).

238

Texas Archeological Society

flat base but, in fact, angles slightly toward the end nearest the main notch. Perhaps
this wear pattern came about from suspension of the artifact from the flat base, for
in this case the longer end, being heavier, would hang down slightly causing the
strapping to ride upward on the basal edge of the artifact, so it is possible that these
artifacts may have been worn suspended around the neck. The lunate stone of the
McDonald Creek burial was found between the flexed knees and the rib cage, where
it would be if it had been suspended around the neck of the individual.
Bruce Dickson (1985) considered it highly unlikely that most polished stone
artifacts were used as atlatl weights, especially the large, heavier ones. The authors
must agree with this conclusion and suggest that most of these stones should remain
in the category of problematical polished stone artifacts, pending further research.
REFERENCES
Amsden, C. A.
Prehistoric Southwesterners from Basketmaker to Pueblo. Los Angeles
1949
Southwest Museum.
Cockrum, Dan
A Multiple Burial from the Caprock Area. Bulletin of the South Plains
1963
Archeological Society 1:26-31.
Dickson, Bruce
1985
The Atlatl Assessed. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 56:1-38.
Hall, G. D.
Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower Brazos River
1981
Valley, Texas, Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 61, The University of Texas at Austin.
Hester, T. R.
1974
Archaeological Materials from Site NV-WA-197, Western Nevada: Atlatl and
Animal Skin Pouches. Contributions of the University of California Archaeological Research Facility 21:1--43.
Hughes, J. T.
1991
Prehistoric Cultural Developments of the Texas High Plains. Bulletin of the
TexasArcheological Society 60 (for 1989); this volume.
Koos, W. N., L. A. Putnam, and W. D. Mitchell
1966
Soil Survey of Crosby County, Texas. U.S. Soil Conservation Service. Series
1961, No. 36. Washington, D.C.
Mitchell, J. L., T. R. Hester, and Wayne Parker
1980
A Bannerstone from Padre Island on the Texas Coast. La Tierra 7:23-25.
Mitchell, J. L., Paula Rosa, Stanly Castagnetto, and T. R. Hester
1977
A Preliminary Statistical Analysis of Chipped Crescents from the Great Basin.
Archeological Research Facility Un&ersity of California 35:23--48.

Redding and Parker ~ Crosby County Lunate Stone Burial

239

Parker, Wayne
1981
A Keel Grooved Atlatl Weight from Arkansas. Crosby County Historical
Commission. Artifacts Society 11:6.
Parker, Wayne, and M. L. Parsons
1979
Camiform Atlatl Weights from Westem Texas. Artifacts 9(2).
Parker, Wayne and John Redding
1985
An Archaic Bundle Burial from Crosby County, Texas (Unpublished
Manuscript).
Parsons, M, L., Ronnie Hill, and Wayne Parker
1979
The Old Tom Burial. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 50:69-87.
Patterson, J. T.
1937
Boat-Shaped Artifacts of the Gulf Southwest. The University of Texas Bulletin
3732.
Prewitt, E. R.
1974
Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site, Williamson County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 49.
Ray, C. N.
1936
Some Unusual Cremated Burials Found Near Colorado, Texas. Bulletin ofthe
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Soc&ty 8.
Suhm, D. A., Alex Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society Vol. 25.
Suhm, D. A. and E. B. Jelks
1962
Handbook of Texas Archeology; Type Descriptions. Texas Archeological
Society Special Publication I and Texas Memorial Museum Special Publication
4.

241

A Late Archaic/Woodland Lunate Stone Burial in
Far Western Oklahoma
J. Peter Thurmond

ABSTRACT
A dorsally notched lunate stone, a comer-notched dart point, and two bifaces
have been found associated with a prehistoric human burial at the Beaver Dam site
(34 RM208) within the upland canyon of a Washita River tributary in far western
Oklahoma. Lunate stones are quite rare but have been previously documented at
nine sites in a narrow north-south band along the Caprock Escarpment in western
Texas. These artifacts consistently are found in Late Archaic/Woodland contexts
and probably date between 1000 B.C and A.D. 500. The geographic distribution
of lunate stones in archeological sites along the eastern margin of the Llano
Estacado may delimit the territory of a Late Archaic/Woodland hunter-forager
macroband adapted to this ecotonal environment.

INTRODUCTION

In the fail of 1980, William and Edith Yowell, of Reydon, Oklahoma,
discovered a human burial eroding out of the near-vertical wail of a gully on
Brokenleg Creek in southern Roger Mills County, Oklahoma (Figure 1). The burial
had been preserved up to that time in a narrow remnant of valley fill sandwiched
between the gully and the main Brokenleg canyon. This site was recorded as
34RM208, the Beaver Dam site, in 1983. At the time the burial was discovered, most
of the skeleton had fallen downslope and had been washed downstream. The gully
forms a very narrow, deep defile, and the skeletal material, once displaced, would
have fallen rapidly to the gully floor and been flushed out. The burial, near the top
of the profile, was contained within a thick, darkly melanized epipedon (upper soil
horizon) that has yielded a considerable quantity of Late Archaic/Woodland
habitation debris. Part of this deposit was excavated by the Oklahoma Anthropological
Society in 1988 (Thurmond 1988 a--c).
The burial was near the center of the vertical extent of this epipedon, about 75
cm below the modem surface. Only the right tibia, right humerus, and both scapulae
were still in place. Cranial, vertebral, and rib fragments downslope on the talus were
not collected. It was the Yowells’ impression that the individual had been buried in
a flexed position, facing east, on a north-south axis. Adjacent to the left scapula, a
single comer-notched dart point and a lunate stone were recovered in situ. Two
bifaces that were found on the talus directly below the burial in a litter of weathered
bone fragments ap~ared to have come from the burial.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 60 (1989)

242

Texas Archeological Society

54RM208

St_H/Y0

Figure 1. Map of the central part of Roger Mills County, Oklahoma, showing location of
the Beaver Dam site, 34RM208. (Drawn by Sandy Hannum.)

DESCRIPTION OF THE COLLECTION

Skeletal Material
All skeletal element measurements follow Bass (1971).
34RM208-197

A human left scapula without the inferior two-thirds of the body, but with most
of the axilliary and superior borders intact; form of scapular notch and vertebral
border not determinable; epiphyses completely fused; no atrophic spots; moderate
osteophytic lipping evident around the border of the glenoid fossa; maximum length
about 16.0 cm; maximum breadth about 11.5 cm; spine length about 14.5 cm;
scapular index 71.875.
34RM208-198
A human right scapula, lacking the inferior half of body and the greater part of
the acromion, but with most of the axilliary and superior borders; form of scapular
notch and vertebral border not determinable; no atrophic spots; moderate osteophytic lipping about the border of the glenoid fossa; maximum length about 16.0
cm; maximum breadth 11.5 cm; spine length about 14.5 cm; scapular index 70.968;

Thurmond n Lunate Stone Burial

243

both this scapula and No. 324RM208-197 suggest an adult male between 35 and 45
years of age, suffering from a moderate case of degenerative arthritis.
34RM208-199

A complete human tibia; epiphyses are entirely fused; localized but fairly
severe postmortem damage to the margins of the epiphyses; the medial maUeolus
is missing. It is impossible to determine if there was osteophytic lipping over most
of the epiphyses, but small areas of pronounced arthritic lipping are preserved on
the posterior side of the medial condyle and about the intercondyloid eminence. The
locations of the postmortem damage around the margins of the epiphyses suggest
weakening of the bone, probably also due to degenerative arthritis. There is
substantial scarring of the bone tissue at all muscle attachment points, indicating
robust musculature. Maximum length 37.4 cm; anterior-posterior diameter at the
nutrient foramen 4.1 cm; transverse diameter at the nutrient foramen 2.6 cm;
platycnemic index 63.42 (mesocnemic); data suggest an adult male over 18 but
presenilic; estimated stature 191-197 cm (following Trotter and Gleser 1952,
1958).
34RM208-200

A complete human fight humerus; epiphyses entirely fused; some minor
postmortem damage about the margins of trochlea, olecranon fossa, and head; all
muscle attachment points strongly pronounced, indicating very substantial musculature; moderate osteophytic lipping apparent about the margins of head, trochlea,
and capitulum; septal aperture absent; maximum length 31.8 cm; epicondylar width
5.9 cm; maximum midshaft diameter 2.6 cm; minimum midshaft diameter 1.8 cm;
maximum vertical head diameter 4.6 cm; transverse head diameter 4.4 cm; least
diaphysis circumference 7.3 cm; robusticity index 22.956; specimen is definitely an
adult, but its characteristics are equivocal as to sex. The dimensions of the head,
maximum length, and epicondylar width are all intermediate between the male and
female means; the absence of a septal aperture and the presence of pronounced
muscle attachments argue for a male between 20 and 45; evidence of degenerative
arthritis suggests the upper end of that range.
Chipped Stone Tools
34RM208-1026 (Figure 2)
A medium-sized comer-notched dart point, referrable to the Marcos type,
knapped from a flake of brown-and-gray silicified wood of quite varied silification.
The marginal quality of the material caused problems with the final thinning and
shaping of the point. The blade is large and triangular, but asymmetrical, with
strongly convex lateral edges and a fairly blunt tip. There is a pronounced barb on
one shoulder but none on the other side. The stem is short, wide, and strongly
expanding, with a convex base. One basal comer has been lost to postmanufacture

244

Texas Archeological Society

0

1

2

3

CENTIMET ERS

Figure 2. Comer-notched dart point associated with the burial at 34RM208.

damage. The specimen is biconvex in cross section. Overall length 56 mm; blade
length 45 mm; stem length 11 mm, maximum stem width at basal corners 21mm
(estimated); minimum stem width at blade/stem juncture 15 mm; maximum
thickness 10 mm; tip angle 41 degrees; blade angle 66 degrees; haft angle 90
degrees; weight 11.8 g. All measurements follow Gunn and Prewitt (1974). The
asymmetry of the blade gives the initial impression ofa hafted knife, but there is no
visible edge damage or wear on the blade edges.
34RM208-I027 0~igure 3, A)
A poorly thinned biface of medium gray Ogallala quartzite (sometimes called
Potter chert by northwest Texans) of mediocre knappability. The specimen has an
elongated, fairly symmetrical ovaloid outline, biconvex transverse cross section
and gently curved longitudinal cross section. It was obviously made from a long,
narrow flake. There are several unreduced nocks bordered by hinge fractures on
both faces. The edges are rather sinuous and have no discernible damage or wear
from use, but this is very hard material. Length 94 mm; maximum width 32 mm;
maximum thickness 11 mm; weight 35.5 g.

Thurmond ~ Lunate Stone Burial

245

A
0

I
2
3
CENTIMETERS

B

Figure 3. Bifaces associated with the burial at 34RM208. A, No. 1027; B, No. 1028.

34RM208-1028 ~igure 3, B)
Another poorly thinned biface, knapped from a cobble of dark brownish gray
silicified wood of advanced silicification but poor homogeneity. Although
recognizably ovaloid in outline, the shape is quite asymmetrical, with one lateral
edge strongly convex and the other nearly straight. The asymmetry may have been
unintentional, since the knapper had a lot of trouble with the straight edge, which
is bordered by a continuous line of hinge fractures and a ridge ofunreduced material.
The biface is biconvex in cross section; the lateral edges are fairly straight, but there
is no discemible wear or damage; length 86 mm; maximum width 42 mm; maximum
thickness 15 mm; weight 53.0 g.

246 Texas Archeological Society
Lunate Stone
34RM208-1025 (Figure 4, A-C)

A polished stone object of the form that has alternatively been referred to as a
"cariniform atlatl weight" (Parsons, Hill, and Parker 1979) and a "lunate stone"
(Redding and Parker 1991). The latter term is preferred, due to its lack of any
functional assumption and its more common usage. The specimen has an elongated
planoconvex outline, with the base curving up slightly at each end. In cross section
the base is flat, and both faces are symmetrically convex, curving up to a rounded
top. Length 90 mm; maximum height 30 mm; maximum thickness 19 mm; weight
76.5 g.
Twenty-two notches have been cut into the dorsal (convex) edge. The notches
are narrow and V shaped, and appear to have been cut into the surface by the sawing
motion of a narrow cutting tool (flakes of Ogalalla quartzite would probably serve
the purpose). The grooves average 2 mm in span at the top, narrow to a point at their
floors, and average 1 mm in depth.
The notch at the apex of the convex edge is much larger than the others, some
4 mm across at the top, and has a more rounded U-shaped cross section. Deeper than
the others, it is cut nearly 2 mm into the surface. A transverse groove 4 mm wide and
1 mm deep extends down both faces of the artifact from this notch to the base.
Although the notch does not extend onto the base, there is a visible worn area some
5--6 mm wide running transversely across the center of the base. The entire exterior
surface is well polished except for the floors of the notches cut into the dorsal edge.
It is apparent that the transverse groove is polished and grades into the surfaces on
both sides except at the apex of the dorsal edge, where its floor and sides are rough
and unpolished.
Interestingly, this lunate stone was manufactured from the yellowish brown
fossiliferous shale that is common in local lag gravels derived from the Ogalalla
Formation. This shale was also used by Late Prehistoric groups in the vicinity to
temper their pottery (Moore 1984:61). The ferruginous shale is packed with
fragmented Texigryphaea fossils. S imilar material is available on the surface within
100 meters of 34RM208.
DISCUSSION

The distribution of dorsally notched lunate stones like the one from the Beaver
Dam site appears to be limited to the vicinity of the Caprock Escarpment on the east
side of the Llano Estacado, south of the Canadian River and mostly north of the
Colorado River (Figure 5). Although there was a dubious surface association of a
HarreU arrowpoint with a lunate stone at the Old Tom Burial (41DK16) in Dickens
County, Texas (Parsons, Hill and Parker 1979:72), lunate stones generally appear
to be associated with corner- and side-notched dart points of the Marcos, Marshall,
and Ensor types---especially the last--(ibid.:79; Redding and Parker 1991). Lunate
stones usually are found in areas where sites with these dart points are predominant

Thurmond ~ Lunate Stone Burial

247

A

B

C

0

1

2

3
w

CENTIMETERS

Figure 4. Lunate stone associated with the burial at 34RM108. A, side view; B, top view;
C, bottom view.

248

Texas Archeological Society

(ibid.). This is certainly the case for 34RM208, since 55 percent of the components
in its vicinity are Late Archaic/Woodland (Thurmond In press).
It is tempting to assume that sites in northwest Texas and far western Oklahoma
that yield only Marcos, Marshall, and Ensor dart points in the absence of pottery and
arrowpoints are of Late Archaic age (cf. D. Hughes 1977, 1984, 1989; J. Hughes
1988; Leonhardy 1966; Thurmond In press), but the radiocarbon dates from the
region belie this assumption. Both sites yielding comer- and side-notched dart
points and those yielding comer- and basally notched arrowpoints and early pottery
seem to date to about the same time span (Tables 1, 2, 3). Estabhshment of a solid
chronology for the region has barely begun. Nonetheless, it appears that sites
yielding lunate stones are of Late Archaic/Woodland age (the author does not
believe the two are clearly separable at present) and probably date somewhere
between 1~ B.C. and A.D. 500.
The lunate stone from Beaver Dam differs from the northwest Texas examples
in two respects. The Texas specimens are as a rule manufactured from exotic
materials, particularly from a metamorphic greenstone of undetermined origin
(Parsons, Hill, and Parker 1979; Redding and Parker 1991), but, by contrast, the
lunate stone from 34RM208 was made from material that was available within
crawling distance of the site. The Texas specimens that have been reported also tend
to be quite narrow and distinctly triangular in cross section, whereas the lunate stone
from Beaver Dam is much wider than the Texas specimens and has a more rounded
cross section.
The author, in all honesty, has no clue as to what these artifacts were used for.
Parsons, Hill, and Parker (1979) lean towards atlatl weights; Redding and Parker
prefer to interpret them as decorative pendants (1991). In two replicative experiments Howard (1974) found atlatl weights functionally counterproductive, but
Dickson (1985) beheves the jury is out on whether the addition of weights could
improve atlatl performance. We know weights were attached to atlatls by some
Amerindian groups, since examples have been recovered from dry caves in the
Southwest (Guernsey 1931; Fenenga and Wheat 1940; Hester 1974; Mildner 1974).
Whatever their specific use, lunate stones were clearly deemed important by
their makers, since, in this environment where most artifacts are quite utilitarian,
considerable time must have been invested in the production of these objects of
beauty. Keeping in mind the very restricted geographic range of lunate stones, the
author believes they may serve as a a useful cultural marker. It is quite possible that
all lunate stones were made by a single sociocultural group adapted to the margin
of the High Plains over a limited span of time. We badly need some radiocarbon
dates from solid associations with lunate stones, and the author is considering
sacrificing some of the skeletal material from 34RM208 to try for a bone date after
first obtaining a chemical analysis of the bone to determine its degree of weathering
in order to assess the reliability of any radiocarbon assay.
Lunate stones are interesting in their own right as both rare prehistoric artifacts
and art objects. They may also have considerable interpretive value in our attempts
to understand Late Archaic/Woodland chronology and social group boundaries.

Thurmond-- Lunate Stone Burial

’i

OK L A H O M A

/

34RM208

!
i
j

A

L.--

River

I

GAINES

I
Lunate Stone
TT’r,T~ Coprock Escarpment
.--, County Boundary
----State Boundary

MI

0
0

KM

50
50

.,eL H/90

Figure 5. Map of the High Plains of Texas and part of westem Oklahoma showing
distribution of lunate stone sites along the Caprock Escarpment Texas site locations
follow Redding and Parker, 1991. (Drawn by Sandy Hannum.)

249

250

Texas Archeological Society

Table 1. Late Archaic/Woodland Radiocarbon Dates From
Northwest Texas and Far Western Oklahoma
Sample
N o.

Date
B.P.

Material

Reference

S i te

Leonhardy 1966:
29-30
Lintz et al.b
Hughes 1977:109
Lintz et al,b
Thurmond n.d.
Willey & Hughes
1978

GaK-694

2770-+150

Particulate charcoal

34GR 12/Summers

Beta- t 929
RL-571
Beta-1927
NZA-1246
SI-1900

1970"2-85
1930"2-_110
1925_+95
1901+88
1830-2-60

Bison bone fragments
Bison vertebra rib
Bison bone fragments
Woody charcoal
Woody charcoal

41HLl/Twilla
41HL64/Collier
41HLl/Twilla
34RM334C/T.R. 13C
41SW23-II
Deadman shelter

Beta-18433

1820-2100

Particulate charcoal

34RM5011
Swift Horse

Briscoe 1987

NZA-712

t789-+81

Charmdtwigs

34RM334C/T,RfI3C

Thurmond 1989

SI-1899

1740L-_40

Woody charcoal

4tSW23-II
Deadman shelter

Willey & Hughes
1978

Briscoe 1987

Beta- 18429

1680-+80

Particulate charcoal

34RM510/Swift Horse

Beta-18432
Beta-18430
Beta-18431

1650-2_70
1610£_90
1590L-_70

Particulate charcoal
Particulate ctuarcoal
Particulate charcoal

34RM510/Swift Horse Briscoe 1987
34RM5 !0/Swift Horse Bdsece 1987
34RM510/Swift Horse Bdscoe 1987

RL-573
NZA-1388
Beta-37430

15202-110
1514-+79
1500-2_80

Bison vertebra & rib
Woody charcoal
Burned pit fill

Hughes 1977:81-82
41HL65/Bell
34RM208MBeaver Dam Thurmond n.d.
Unpublished
34RM334C/T.R. 13C

SI-1897

1485+70

Woody charcoal

41SW23-II/
Deadman shelter

Willey & Hughes
1978

NZA-1247
Beta-28121

1425-+70
1400-2-70

Woody charcoal
Bison humerus

34RM334C/T,R, 13C
34BK46iCertain

Beta-1928
SI-1898

129~_95
1240-2_65

Bison bone fragments
Woody charcoal

41HLl/Twilla
41SW23-II/
Deadman shelter

Thurmond n.d.
J. L, Hofman,
Pers. commun.
Lintz et alb
Wiltey & Hughes
1978

RL-570
NZA-1248
RL-572
SI-1901a

1120+__100
990"2_190
980£-_100
630-2_140

Bison vertebra & rib
Woody charcoal
Bison vertebra & rib
Woody charcoal

41HL1/Twilla
34RM334C[I’.R. t 3C
41CG31/Strong
41SW23-II/
Deadman shelter

Hughes 1977:N)-61
Thurmond n.d.
Hughes 1977:96
Willey & Hughes
1978

Associated
Diagnostics
Ensor, Marshall,
Lange
Marcos, Williams
Ensor, Marcos
Marcos,Winiams
Ensor, Palmillas
Deadman,
Scallom
Etam, Ellis,
Lange,
Brownware puttrty
Williams
Ensor, Marcos,
Palmillas
Deadman,
Scalloro,
Elam, Ellis,
Lange,
Brownware pottery
Comer-notehed
arruwpoint
Williams
Williams
Williams,
cordmarked
sherd
Marcos, Palmillas
Ensor, Palmillas
Ennsor, Marcos,
Palmillas
INzadman,
Scaltora,
Bmwnware pottery
Ensor, PalmiUas
Marcos

Marcos, Williams
Deadman,
Scallom,
Bmwnware pottery
Marcos, Williams
Ensor, Palmillas
None
Deadman, Scallom,
Brownware pottery,
Elam,
Ellis
Lange

a Almost certainly inaccurate; sample from same horizon as SI-1899 and S1-1900.
b Elsewhere in this volume,
¢ T. R.: Thurmond Ranch

Readers with any knowledge of the specific locational origin of lunate stones not yet
recorded are encouraged to contact the author or Wayne Parker so these artifacts can
be recorded to further our understanding of the people who made them.

Thurmond -- Lunate Stone Burial

251

Table 2. Fractionation Corrections of the Late Archaic/Woodland
Radiocarbon Dates From Western Oklahoma

S am pl e
No.
GaK-694
Beta-1929*
RL-571
Beta-1927*
NZA-1246*
SI-1900
Beta-18433
NZA-712*
SI-1899
Beta-18429
Beta-18432
Beta-18430
Beta-18431
RL-573
NZA- 1388
Beta-37430
SI-1897
NZA-1247*
Beta-28121
Beta-1928*
SI-1898
RL-570
NZA- 1248*
RL-572
SI-1901*

Assayed
Date B.P.
2770+150
1970+85
1930+110
1925+95
1901+88
1830+60
1820+100
1789+81
1740+40
1680+80
1650+70
1610+90
1590+70
1520+ 110
1514+79
1500-+80
1485-+70
1425+70
1400+70
1290+95
1240_+65
1120_+ 100
990-+ 190
980+ 100
630+140

~3C/~2C Ratio Fractionation
or
Corrected
Material 13C Correction
Date
Charcoal
Bone
Bone
Bone
Charcoal
Charcoal
Charcoal
Charcoal
Charcoal
Charcoa!
Charcoal
Charcoal
Charcoal
Bone
Charcoal
Charcoal
Charcoal
Charcoal
Bone
Bone
Charcoal
Bone
Charcoal
Bone
Charcoal

0+70
(16.58)
80-+35
(.07)
(24.31)
0+70
02-_70
(24.85)
0+70
0+70
0_+70
0+70
0_+70
80_+35
(24.53)
0-+70
0+70
(25.47)
80+35
(8.98)
0+70
80+35
(20.30)
80-+35
0-+7

2770+220
2110+85
20102_145
2335+100
1901+88
1830+130
1820+170
1789+81
1740+110
1680+150
1650+140
1610+160
1590+140
1600+ 145
1514+79
1500+ 150
1485-+140
1425+70
1480+105
1550+100
1240-+135
1200-+ 135
990+ 190
1060+ 135
630_+210

*’3C/~zC ratio assessed when sample assayed. All others corrected following
Stuiver & Polach 1977:Figure 1,Table 2.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

My thanks to William and Edith Yowell, of Reydon, Oklahoma, for their
discovery of this site and the preservation of the burial. The Yowells very graciously
lent the four skeletal elements and four lithic specimens for analysis and so made
this report possible.

252

Texas Areheological Society

Table 3. Summary of Dendrochronological Calibrations of the Late
Archaic/Woodland Radiocarbon Dates from the Texas Panhandle and Western
Oklahoma, Using University of Washington Quaternary Isotope Laboratory
Radiocarbon Calibration Program of 1986.
Fractionation

Calibrated Age B.P.

Sample
No.

Corrected
Age B.P.

Confidence
95%
68%

GaK-694
Beta-1927
Beta-1929
RL-571
NZA-1246
SI-1900
Beta-18433
NZA-712
SI-1899
Beta-18429
Beta-18432
Beta-18430
RL-573
Beta-18431
Beta-1928
NZA-1388
Beta-37430
SI-1897
Beta-28t21
NZA-1247
SI-1898
RL-570
RL-572
NZA-1248
SI-190P

2770+200
2335_+100
2110-+85
2010-+145
1901-+88
1830+130
18205:170
1789_+81
1740_+110
1680_+150
1650:t:140
16102:160
1600+_145
1590_+140
1550_+100
1514_+79
1500_+150
1485_+140
1480_+105
1425_+70
1240+135
1200_+135
1060_+t35
990£_190
630-2-_210

Type
1
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
1
1
1
2
1
I
2
2
t
1

3209-2739
2469-22t6
2301-1988
2139-1820
1939-1731
1922-1610
1940-1540
1822-1615
1820-1530
1804-!410
1720-1400
1710-1340
1695-1340
1689-1340
1550-1340
1518-1321
1550-1290
1530-1290
1510-1290
1392-1285
1290-990
1280-970
1130-798
1068-712
730--500

3459-2349
2729-2129
2339-1880
2339-1617
2054-1618
2059-1500
2149-1350
1885-1536
1920-1400
1940-1300
1880-1290
1880-1260
1840-1270
1830-1270
1697-1290
1560-!290
1720-1097
1700-I 150
1600-1191
1507-1236
1400-920
1350-837
1280-700
!285-652
960-290

Calibrated Calendric Age
Confidence
95%

68%
1260 B.C.-790 B.C.
520 B.C.-267 B.C.
352 B.C.-39 B.C.
190 B.C.-A.D. 130
A.D. 11-A.D. 219
A.D, 28-A.D. 340
A.D. 10-A.D. 410
A.D. 128-A.D. 335
A.D. 130-A.D. 420
A.D. 146-A.D. 540
A.D. 230-A.D. 550
A.D. 240-A.D. 610
A.D. 255-A.D. 610
A.D. 261-A.D. 610
A.D, 400-A.D. 610
A.D. 432-A.D. 629
A.D. 400-A,D. 660
A.D. 420-A.D. 660
A.D. 440-A.D. 660
A.D. 558-A.D. 665
A.D. 660-A,D. 960
A.D. 678-A.D. 980
A,D. 820-A.D. 1152
A.D.882-A.D. 1328
A.D. 1220-A.D. 1450

1510
780
390
390
104

B,C.-400 B.C.
B.C.-180 B.C.
B.C.-A.D. 70
B.C.-A.D. 333
B.C. -A.D. 332

I10 B.C, -A.D. 450
200 B.C.-A.D. 600
A.D. 65-A.D.
A.D. 30-A.D.
A.D. 10-A.D.
A.D. 70-A.D.
A,D. 70-A.D.
A.D. ll0-A.D.
A.D. 120-A.D.
A.D. 253-A.D.
A.D. 390-A. D.
A.D. 230-A.D.
A.D. 250-A.D.
A.D. 350-A.D,
A.D. 443-A. D.
A.D. 550-A.D.
A.D. 600-A.D.
A.D. 670-A.D.
A.D. 665-A.D.
A.D. 990-A.D.

414
550
650
660
690
680
680
660
660
853
800
759
714
1030
1113
1250
1298
1660

I Charcoal Date.
2 Bone Date.
3 Date inconsistent with other dates from same deposit, and probably inaccurate.
NOTE:
The 68% confidence intervals (1.~,) of the dendrochronologically calibrated calendric spans average AD200-496.
The 95% confidence intervals (2,Y,,) of the dendrochronologically calibrated calendric spans average AD58-611.
(These averages exclude Sample No. SI-1901.)
References for data.sets and intervals used: Pearson and Stuiver 1986, Stuiver and Pearson 1986.

REFERENCES CITED
Bass, W. M.
Human Osteology: A Laboratory and Field Manual of the Human Skeleton.
1971
Missouri Archaeological Society. Columbia.
Briscoe, James
1987
Analysis of Cultural Remains from the Swift Horse Site, An Early Plains
Woodland Site on the Black Kettle National Grasslands, Roger Mills County,
Oklahoma. Briscoe Consulting Services, Butler, Oklahoma.
Dickson, D. B.
1985
The Atlatl Assessed: A Review of Recent Anthropological Approaches to
Prehistoric North American Weaponry. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 56:1-38.

Thurmond m Lunate Stone Burial

253

Fenenga, Franklin, and J. B. Wheat
1940
An Atlatl from the Baylor Rock Shelter, Culberson County, Texas. American
Antiquity 5:221-223.
Guernsey, S. J.
Explorations in Northeastern Arizona. Peabody Museum of American
1931
Archaeology and Ethnology Papers 12(1).
Gurm, Joel, and Elton Prewitt
1974
Automatic Classification of Projectile Points from West Texas. Plains
Anthropolog&t 20(68): 139-149.
Hester, T. R.
1974
Supplementary Notes on a Great Basin Atlatl. In: Great Basin Atlatl Studies,
edited by T. R. Hester, M. P. Mildner, and L. Spencer. Ballena Press Publications in Archaeology, Ethnology and History 2:29-31.
Howard, C. D.
1974
The Atlatl: function and Performance. American Antiquity 39(1):102-104.
Hughes, D. T.
1977
Analysis of Certain Prehistoric Bison Kills in the Texas Panhandle and Adj acent
Areas. M.A. Thesis. University of Arkansas, Fayetteville.
1984

The Foragers: Western Oklahoma. In: Prehistory of Oklahoma, edited by
Robert E. Bell. Academic Press, New York.

1989

TerminalArchaicBisonKillsintheTexasPanhandle.Pat~handleArcheological
Society Publication 5:183-204.

Hughes, J. T.
1988
A Chronology of Hunting Cultures on the Southern Plains. Texas Archeology
(Newsletter of the Texas Archeological Society) 32(3):7.
Leonhardy, F. C.
1966
Test Excavations in the Mangum Resevoir Area of Southwestern Oklahoma.
Contributions of the Museum of the Great Plains 2.
Lintz, Christopher, J. D. Speth, D. T. Hughes, and J. A. Huebner
1991
Additional Radiocarbon Dates From the Twilla Bison Kill Site, Hall County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 60 (this volume).
Mildner, M. P.
1974
Descriptive and Distributional Notes on Atlatls and Atlatl Weights in the Great
B asin. In: Great Basin Atlatl Studies, edited by T. R. Hester, M. P. Mildner, and
L. Spencer. Ballena Press Publications in Archaeology, Ethnology and History
2:7-27.

254

Texas Areheological Society

Moore, M. C.
1984
A Reconnaissance Survey of Quartermaster Creek. In: Archaeology of the
Mixed Grass Prairie, Phase I: Quartermaster Creek, edited by Timothy G.
Baugh. Oklahoma Archeological Survey, Archeological Resource Survey
Report 20:51-214.
Parsons, M. L., Ronnie Hill, and Wayne Parker
1979
The Old Tom Burial, Dickens County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 50:69-87.
Pearson, G. W., and Minze Stuiver
High-Precision Calibration of The Radiocarbon Time Scale, 500-2500 B.C.
1986
Radiocarbon 28(2B):839-862.
Redding, John, and Wayne Parker
CrosbyCountyLunateStoneBurial.BuIletinoftheTexasArcheoIogicaISociety
1991
60 (this volume).
Stuiver, Minze, and G. W. Pearson
1986
High Precision Calibration of the Radiocarbon Time Scale, A.D. 1950-500 B.C.
Radiocarbon 28(2B):805-838.
Stuiver, Minze, and A. A. Polach
1977
Discussion: Reporting of 14C Dates. Radiocarbon 19(3):355-363.
Thurmond~

J.P.

1988a

The 1988 Oklahoma Anthropological Society Field School: The Beaver Dam
Site, 34RM208, Roger Mills County, Oklahoma. Oklahoma Anthropological
Society Newsletter 36(4):2-5.

1988b

An Update on Investigations at the Beaver Dam Site, 34RAM208. Oklahoma
Anthropological Society Newsletter 36(6):3-9.

1988c

Update on the Fall 1988 Oklahoma Anthropological Society Dig at 34RM208.
Oklahoma Anthropological Society Newsletter 36(8):3.

1989

An Accelerator Mass Spectrometry Date from a "Late Archaic" Component in
Roger Mills County, Oklahoma. OklahomaAnthropologicalSociety Newsletter
37(8):3-4.

1990

Late Paleoindian Utilization of the Dempsey Divide on the Southern Plains.
Plains Anthropologist Memoir 25.35 (131 ).

Trotter, Mildred, and G. C. Gleser
Estimation of Stature from Long Bones of American Whites and Negroes.
1952
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 10:463-514.
Trotter, Mildred, and G. C. Gleser
1958
A Re-evaluation of Estimating of Stature Based on Measurements of Stature
Taken During Life and of Long Bones After Death. American Journal of
Physical Anthropology 16:79-123.

Thurmond ~ Lunate Stone Burial

255

Willey, P. S., and J. T. Hughes
1978
The Deadman’s Shelter Site. In: Archeology at Mackenzie Reservoir, edited by
Jack T. Hughes and Patrick S. Willey. Texas H&tor&al Commission, Office of
the State Archeologist, Archeological Survey Report 24:149-232.

257

Additional Radiocarbon Dates
from the Twilla Bison Kill Site,
Hall County, Texas
Christopher Lintz, John D. Speth, David T. Hughes,
and Jeffery A. Huebner
ABSTRACT
Three radiocarbon dates from the Twilla Site (41HL1) in Hall County, Texas
are reported and compared to previous dates from Twilla and three other bison kill
sites in the upper Red River-Pease River drainage of the Texas Panhandle. Some
inconsistencies suggest that these new dates must be used with caution. Nonetheless, the dates now available from the Red and Pease River drainage bison kill sites
suggest that dart points were used for bison kills during the Late Archaic and early
centuries of the Woodland/Neoindian (Late Prehistoric) periods in the lower Texas
Panhandle.

INTRODUCTION: PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS

Since 1977 a single radiocarbon date has been available from each of the
Twilla, Collier, Bell and Strong bison kill sites in the Texas Panhandle (Hughes
1977). This report announces three more radiocarbon dates from the Twilla site. The
Twilla site (41HL1 in the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory site files; A73 in the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum site files) is almost 5 km (3 miles)
east of Turkey, Texas, and about 1.5 km (1 mile) above the mouth of a dry arroyo
that drains into Mockingbird Draw and Cottonwood Creek, a tributary of the North
Pease River ~igure 1). The bone bed was reported by I. R. Twilla to Curtis Tunnell
who visited the site several times during 1953. Two Lange points were collected
from the surface of this site (Tunnell and Hughes 1955), and on March 29, Curtis
Tunnell and Jack T. Hughes recovered two retouched flakes and two "percussion
flaked fragments" from the surface near the 6-meter-long (20 foot) exposure of the
bone bed. From a single testpit, one large unifacial retouched flake of Ogallala chert
was recovered directly associated with the bones. Additional points were collected
from the surface on unknown dates before 1968 (Collins 1968). Samples of bone
from the 30-cm-(1 foot)-thick bone bed were collected but were not submitted for
radiocarbon dating immediately.
Test excavations were conducted at the TwiUa site between August 10 and
September 5,1968, under the supervision of Billy R. Harrison. The testing of Twilla
and several other bison sites in the rolling red-bed plains of the lower Panhandle was
supported by funds provided by the Office of the State Archeologist, which was then
part of the Texas Building Commission, to West Texas State University. At Twilla,
a grid of eight 5x5 ft. squares was laid over the western two-thirds of the site. The
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 60 (1989)

258

Texas Archeological Society

Canadian

Figure 1. Map of part of the Texas Panhandle and western Oklahoma showing sites for which
there are radiocarbon dates.

overburden was removed to within one foot of the bones as an undifferentiated unit;
small hand tools were used to expose elements, and measured drawings were
maintained for all exposed bones (Hughes 1977:4). Field records indicate the
possible presence of two bone beds separated by a thin horizon of sterile silt (Hughes
1989:187).
David and Jack Hughes revisited in the site in 1977 to record the site location
accurately for the Panhandle-Plains site files, to obtain soil samples, and to examine
the geologic setting of the site in preparation for analysis and drafting of a report.
Detailed analyses of excavated remains from the Twilla (41HL1), Doc Bell
(41H~5), Strong (41CG31) and Collier (41HL64) sites together with surface
materials from Hoover (41HH12), Sitter (41DY18), Finch (41DY19), R. O. Ranch
(41DY20), and Buzzard’s Roost (41CG30) sites were the basis of an M.A. thesis on
bison kills in the lower Texas Panhandle (Hughes 1977). Except for the maintenance

Lintz, Speth, Hughes, and Huebner--Radiocarbon Dates

259

of separate field maps, the bison elements and cultural materials from the possible
two layers at Twilla were not segregated by layer during the 1968 excavation or
during subsequent storage, processing, analysis, or reporting.
The excavations at Twilla yielded 1,647 partially articulated and disarticulated
identifiable bison elements. Left mandible counts indicate that these remains
represent at least 23 individuals; dentition wear indicated that the bison herd was
composed of animals ranging between 1 and 12 years of age. Postcranial elements
suggested that at least three immature/juveniles, 19 early mature and mature cows,
and one bull were represented (Hughes 1977:49). Reanalysis of the Twilla site
mandibles by Fawcett (1987:402, 417, Appendix D and F) resulted in evidence of
at least 50 individuals and, on the basis of tooth eruption and wear data, placed the
time of death in the fall of the year.
Cultural materials recovered from the excavations were 15 complete and
fragmentary projectile points, one unifacially retouched flake, six unmodified
"chips/spalls/flakes," and two "chunks"; surface materials were three cobble
fragments, one flaked cobble, two bifacially retouched cobbles, two possible flake
cores, one naturally backed tool, one utilized flake, three unifacially retouched
flakes, one bifacially retouched flake, 13 unmodified "chips/spalls/flakes," and
three "chunks" (Hughes 1977:Table 1; 1989:Table 1).
There is some variability among the projectile points, but they are dominated
by large, thin, weakly barbed, comer-notched dart points with relatively short,
straight-to-slightly-expanding stems, pointed-to-rounded barbs, and straight-tomarkedly-convex bases. Hughes (1977, 1989) recognizes three dominant varieties
of projectile points (Figures 2, 3). Variety I is a large, broad point with a sharp tip,
convex blade edges, prominent-to-weakly-barbed shoulders, broad but shallow
comer notches that leave short, straight-to-slightly-expanding stems, prominent
basal tangs, and straight-to-slightly-concave bases. Hughes (1989:188) sees a
similarity between Variety I points and the Marcos or Ellis types. Variety II points
are shorter than either Variety I or III forms, but they are nevertheless dart forms
with broad blades. The tips are usually rounded, blade edges are convex, with
prominent-to-weakly barbed shoulders that are not as pronounced as the Variety I
points, comer-to-side notches are broad but shallow, stems are slightly-to-moderately expanding, tangs are rounded, and bases are straight-to-recurve/concave.
Hughes (1989:189) suggests that these specimens resemble Palmillas or Williams
types. Variety III points are large, broad blade points with relatively straight blade
edges, prominent-to-weakly-barbed shoulders, broad but shallow comer notches,
rounded tangs, and convex bases. No comparisons to known types are suggested.
Elsewhere, although Hughes (1977) is wary of classifying these points, he does
acknowledge some similarities with the Marcos, Williams, Ellis, Ensor, Trinity, and
Palmillas types, which traditionally date between 1000 B.C. and A.D. 1000.
Locally available gravels dominate the lithic materials: Potter chert (n=36; 66
percen0, Tecovas jasper (n--4; 7 percen0, petrified wood (n=2; 4 percen0, chalcedony (n=l; 2 percen0, quartzite (n=4; 7 percen0 and unidentified cherty materials
(n=2; 4 percent). The presence of Alibates (n=3; 6 percent) and Kay County or

260

Texas Archeological Society

I

\

f

I

1

A

D

C

B

\

E

I,

VARIETY I

F

G

H

VARIETY II

\

C ENTIM ETE RS

I

J

K

VARIETY I11

Figure 2. Drawings of Variety I, II, and HI projectile points from the Twilla site.

Florence chert (n=l; 2 percent) possibly indicate movement through or interaction
with groups in the north and northeast.
In 1977, samples of ribs and vertebrae from Twilla, which had been stored in
paper, plastic, and waxed-paper bags for almost a decade, were submitted, together
with bone samples from other bison kill sites, to Radiocarbon, Ltd. for dating
(Hughes 1977,1989). The uncorrected results of these four samples ranged between
A.D. 20!-_110 (RL-571) at the Collier site and A.D. 970!-_ 100 ~..L-572) at the Strong
site (Table 1). The uncorrected radiocarbon date from Twilla was A.D. 830 + 100
(Hughes 1977:131, 1989:201). The radiocarbon dating of large Archaic Period dart

Lintz, Speth, Hughes, and Huebner--Radiocarbon Dates

A

B

C
0

1

1

I

2
!

!

261

>

D

3

CENTIMETERS

Figure 3. Drawings of projectile points collected earlier by Tunnel and Collins from the
Twilla site.

points to times traditionally assigned to the Woodland period suggested to Hughes
that the radiocarbon samples might have been contaminated during storage.
However, Hughes notes that the occurrence of bone beds at the bottoms of filled
gullies suggests that the kills took place at the end of a climatic episode that caused
the gully cutting and that the wetter climatic conditions of the first half of the first
millennium A.D. could account for the gully filling.
In an attempt to resolve the apparent chronological contradiction, and to
remove the factor of possible contamination of samples by the storage bags,
additional bone samples were collected from the Twilla site on September 15, 1980,
by John D. Speth and Billy R. Harrison. During this visit, however, the bison bone
bed was found to have been almost totally destroyed by vandals; fresh pick marks
and footprints were still visible. Most of the identifiable bone fragments found on
a large spoil pile were collected in plastic bags. From these unprovenienced
remains, three composite samples consisting of half a dozen articular and shaft
fragments, each weighing between 700 and 800 grams, were selected and submitted within three weeks of collection to Beta Analytic, Inc. for dating and ~3C#~
analysis. Although the results of these analyses have been available for several
years, they have been reported only in a doctoral dissertation (Fawcett 1987:370,
Appendix B).

262

Texas Areheological Society
THERADIOCARBONDATES

The three additional radiocarbon dates from Twilla are based on bone collagen
and range between 20-L-_85 B.C. and A.D. 660-&-_95 (Table 1). Ratios obtained from
13CP2C analyses of the three samples showed no consistency. The values, varying
from -0.07 per mil to-8.98 per mil to -16.58 per mil, are difficult to interpret. The
variation in stable isotope ratios in bison bone is a product of their diet, which
comprises predominately grass species. These plants fix carbon from atmospheric
carbon dioxide by one of two photosynthetic pathways, which produce distinctly
different stable isotope ratios. When the plants are consumed by herbivores, the
carbon is incorporated into their bone collagen, and the amount of each type eaten
can be calculated (DeNiro and Epstein 1978). Most grasses (e.g., Stipa sp.) use the
C3 Calvin-Benson pathway, which has an average isotopic fraction of-26.5 per mil;
C4 grasses (e.g., Buchloe dactyloides, Bouteloua sp.), which use the Hatch-Slack
pathway, average -12.5 per mil (Smith and Epstein 1971). When these plants are
consumed by animals, they undergo a fractionation of approximately +5 per mil
(van der Merwe 1982). This enrichment caused by metabolic processes would give
the bones of a pure C4 plant consumer a stable isotope ratio of-7.5 per mil; a pure
Ca plant diet would produce a ratio of-21.5 per mil. The percentage of C3 and C4
species in a herbivore’s diet can be figured from a simple linear interpolation
(Chisholm, 1989). If a consistent chronometric trend was reflected in the 13C/a2C
ratio values, this might indicate that the dated materials came from separate bison
bone beds derived from kills that bridged the postulated climatic change towards
more mesic conditions during the early part of the first millennium A.D. (Hall 1982;
1989). Unfortunately, no consistent pattern emerges when the 13C/~C values are
organized chronometrically; the lowest ~3C/12C value is from the middle date. The
cause of the variability is therefore uncertain.
The Beta Analytic laboratory mentioned that the wide variability of the ~3C/a2C
values "would be indicative of possible in situ contamination" (written communication, M. Tamers to J. Speth, December 11, 1980). The source and extent of
contamination are unknown, as are the effects of the contamination on the chronometric age (cf. Stafford et al. 1987). For these reasons it is inappropriate to apply the
various correction and calibration procedures to these dates.
SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION

The chronologically inconsistent pattern of the 13C/azC results from the three
new dates from the Twilla bison kill site suggests that there may have been some in
situ contamination. Therefore, these dates must be used cautiously.
The three new Twilla site dates, nevertheless, contribute to the chronology of
bison kill sites on the Southern Plains. The seven available uncorrected radiocarbon
dates from the bison kills in the Red River drainage span a period from 20-&-_85 B.C.
to A.D. 970-2-_100 (Table 1). The one-standard-deviation intervals for three of the
dates from the Twilla and Collier sites overlap the period from 90 B.C. to A.D. 120;
no dates fall between A.D. 120 and 320. Single-standard-deviation intervals span

Lintz, Speth, Hughes, and Huebner--Radiocarbon Dates

263

Table 1. Radiocarbon Dates From Selected Bison Kill Sites
in the Texas Panhandle

Lab
Number

Material

t4C Age B.P.
+1 s.d.

13c/t2c
Per Mil

Twilla Site (41HL1, A73)
Beta-1927
Bone
1925+95 B.P -0.07
Collagen
A.D. 25+95
Beta-1928
Bone
1290&-_95 B.P -8.98
Collagen
A.D. 660!-_95
Beta-1929
Bone
1970&_85 B.P -16.58
Collagen
20+85 B.C
RL-570
Bone
1120!-_100 B.P.
Collagen
A.D. 830_+100
Collier Site (41HL64, A373)
RL-571
Bone
1930!-_110 B.P.
Collagen
A.D. 20+110
Strong Site (41CG31, A694)
RL-572
Bone
980!-_100 B.P.
Collagen
A.D. 970!-_100
Bell site (41HL65, A696)
RL-573
Bone
1520!_110 B.P.
Collagen
A.D. 430!-_110

Fractionation
Corrected
14C Age
2335+100 B.P.
385+100 B.C.
1550!-_100 B.P.
A.D. 400&_100
2110+85 B.P.
160!-_85 B.C.

NOTE: No dendrochronological calibrations have been used in this study.

the period from A.D. 320 to 540 and A.D. 560 to 1070, with slight one-standarddeviation overlaps at A.D. 730 to 760 and A.D. 870 and 930. Although the
diagnostic artifact assemblage consists exclusively of large Archaic-style dart
points, the radiocarbon dates tenuously suggest a transitional Late Archaic to early
Neo-Archaic/Woodland (Late Prehistoric) period affiliation. This pattern has been
recognized recently for other sites in western Oklahoma (Thurmond 1989); a
radiocarbon sample from a nonkill site, 34RM334, which contained Ensor, Marcos,
and Palmillas points, yielded a mass speclIometer radiocarbon date of A.D. 16+81
(NZA712).
Indigenous complexes (e.g., Lake Creek and Palo Duro) in theTexas Panhandle
include arrowpoints as early as A.D. 170; however, it seems probable that atlatl
technology persisted. The large points probably represent a specialized atlatlBance
weaponry, or hafted knives used for butchering bison, during the first millennium
A.D. Although subsequent Plains Village (Late Prehistoric) groups (Antelope
Creek, Custer, Washita River, etc.) perfected abow-and-arrow technology primarily
for killing solitary bison, it seems reasonable to believe that the bow would not
immediately replace the atlatl. Since considerable body motion is required for

264

Texas Archeological Society

launching projectiles with atlatls, they may have been used for the dispatch of bison
in small herds in situations that were topographically favorable for stampedes or
drives. In contrast, bows and arrows, which require little body movement, could
have been used contemporaneously with atlatls in the stalking of single animals,
without alarming entire herds. Similar nonstampeding hunting stratagies were used
effectively by Anglo bison hunters in the 1870-1880s, who used powerful rifles to
eliminate bison herds on the Southern Plains (Baker and Harrison 1986).
The contemporaneity of atlatl and bow hunting technologies in the Texas
Panhandle is not an isolated occurrence. Recent obsidian hydration dates on large
dart points found in high altitude sites in the Southwest indicate that they were used
by Puebloan hunters into the 1200s, even though the bow-and-arrow technology had
appeared in the Southwest nearly a millennium earlier (Bemam et al. 1989). In the
Southwest, their size and velocity may have made atlatl darts very effective in the
immediate felling of large game such as elk when they were used in meadow margin
hunting strategies from concealed forest-edge blinds (tracking of wounded animals
through thick forest underbrush increases the risk of failure). There is no inconsistency in the logic of recognizing the retention of atlatl dart hunting strategies as a
complement to bow hunting. After all, archers persist in this modem age of
ballistical hunters.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank the Office of the State Archeologist for funding excavations at Twilla
and other bison kill sites during the summer of 1968. Funding for the initial dates
was also provided by the Office of the State Archeologist; the three more recent
dates were financed by the Museum of Anthropology of the University of Michigan.
We also thank Charles Tucek of Radiocarbon, Ltd. of Lampasas, Texas and Dr.
Murry Tamers of Beta Analytic, Inc. of Coral Gables, Florida for processing the
radiocarbon dates from these sites.
REFERENCES CITED
Baker, T. L., and B. R. Harrison
1986

Adobe Walls: The History and Archeology of the 1874 Trading Post. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.

Bertram, J. B., J. A. Schutt, Steven Kuhn, A. C. Earls, W. N. Trierwefler, Christopher Lintz,
J. C. Acklen, Charles Carrillo and Janette Elyea
1989

Report of surface collection and testing at 18 sites near Abiquiu Reservoir,
Northern New Mexico. Report submitted to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
Albuquerque District under contract DACW-47-86-D-0002, by Mariah
Associates, Inc., Albuquerque.

Lintz, Speth, Hughes, and Huebner--Radiocarbon Dates

265

Chisholm, B.
1989

Variation in Diet Reconstructions Based on Stable Isotopic Evidence. T. D.
Price, Editor. In: The Chemistry ofPrehistoric Human Bone, pp 10-37. School
of American Research, Advanced Seminar Series, Cambridge University Press

Collins, M. B.
1968

A Note on Broad Corner-Notched Projectile Points Used in Bison Hunting in
Western Texas. BullRoarer, Newsletter of the University of Texas Anthropological Society 3(2): 13-14.

DeNiro, M. J., and Samuel Epstein
1978

Influence of Diet on the Distribution of Carbon Isotopes in Animals. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta 45:341-351.

Fawce~,W.B.
1987

Communal Hunts, Human Aggregations, Social Variation and Climatic
Change:Bison Utilization by Prehistoric Inhabitants of the Great Plains. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst.

Hall, S. A.
1982

Late Holocene Paleoecology of the Southern Plains. Quaternary Research
17:391-407.

1989

Environment and Archaeology of the Central Osage Plains. Plains Anthropologist 33:203-218.

Hughes, D. T.
1977

Analysis of Certain Prehistoric Bison Kills in the Texas Panhandle and Adj acent
Areas. Unpublished M.A. Thesis, Department of Anthropology, University of
Arkansas, Fayetteville.

1989

Terminal Archaic Bison Kills in the Texas Panhandle. B. C. Roper, Editor. In:
In The Light of Past Experience: Papers in Honor of JackT. Hughes. Panhandle
Archaeological Soc&ty Publication 5:183-204, Amarillo.

Smith, B. N., and Samuel Epstein
1971

Two Categories of 13C/lZC Ratios for Higher Plants. Plant Physiography
47:380-384.

Stafford, T. W., A. J. Tull, Klaus Brendel, R. C. Duhamel and Douglas Donohue
1987

Study of Bone Radiocarbon Dating Accuracy at the University of Arizona NSF
Accelerator Facility for Radiocarbon Analysis. Radiocarbon 29:24 44.

266

Texas Archeological Society

Thurmond, Peter
1989

An Archaic Mass Spectrometry Date from a "Late Archaic" Component in
Roger Mills County. Oklahoma Anthropological Society Newsletter 37(6):3-4.

Tunnell, Curtis, and Jack Hughes
1955

An Archaic Bison Kill in the Panhandle. Panhandle-Plains Historical Review
23:63-70.

van der Merwe, N. J.
1982

Carbon Isotopes, Photosynthesis and Archaeology.AmericanScientist 70:596606.

267

Sin Nombre and E1 Fortin:
Pecos River Style Pictographs
in Northern Mexico
Solveig A. Turpin
ABSTRACT
The Archaic-age Pecos River style polychrome pictographs are a defining
characteristic of the Lower Pecos River region of Texas. The recognition of four
examples of this distinctive art style in two localities on the southern periphery of
the Serrardas del Burro extends the range of this cultural area at least 145 km (90
miles) south of the Rio Grande into northern Mexico.

INTRODUCTION

The boundaries of the Lower Pecos cultural area, surrounding the confluences
of the Pecos and Devils rivers with the Rio Grande, are usually defined by the
distribution of the most ancient of the regionally defined pictographs--those of the
Pecos River style---and by the commonality of the cultural materials found in dry
rockshelter deposits (H. Taylor 1948; Kirkland and Newcomb 1967; Shafer 1977;
Brown et al. 1982). The recent recognition of four Pecos River style pictograph
panels south of the Serranfas del Burro in northern Coahuila necessitates redefinition of the extent of this cultural area and affords a broader view of the movement
of people and ideas in prehistory (Figure 1).
THE LOWER PECOS CULTURAL AREA

The concept of cultural areas can be criticized as a simplistic attempt to cram
complex multidimensional data into a unidimensional form. It is clear, however,
that boundaries exist (Barth 1969), and one traditional means of defining them is
through the analysis of style (Conkey 1983). The transience of cultural boundaries
mandates that cultural areas be fixed in time as well as space. Presumably, in the case
of the Lower Pecos River region, the characterstics that define the cultural area
reflect the behavior of a related group of people (Shafer 1977) during a specific
period in history. Here, the discussion is limited to the Archaic period, probably
between 3000 and 4000 years ago, when relatively homogeneous groups of hunters
and gatherers, well adapted to the arid environment of southwestern Texas and
northern Mexico, evidenced their increasing social complexity by painting elaborate mural art (Turpin 1990). Thus, during this time period, the Lower Pecos cultural
area can be equated to (I) a regional Archaic study unit (Brown et al. 1982), (2) the
territory of a related group (Shafer 1977), (3) a unified belief system ~urpin 1990),
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 60 (1989)

Texas Archeological Society

268

Modern City

o

Archeological Site

A

\
!i

Previous boundary
0zona o

of Lower Pecos

Cultural Area
0

I0

\
50

km

TEXAS
/

I
I
I
\

s

D

Ciudad

El Fort[n ~

Del Rio

\

Negras~

COAHUILA

~oNueva

Rosita

Sabinas

Figure 1. Map of the Lower Pecos Region of Texas and Mexico showing sites in the
northern part of Coahuila, Mexico.

(4) a sociocultural unit, and 5) an ethnic unit, defined as having a community of
physical and mental u’aits produced by common heredity and cultural tradition.
The Lower Pecos region is the smallest of the designated cultural areas of Texas
(Brown et al. 1982) and is generally considered to extend along the Rio Grande from
below the mouth of the Devils River, now beneath Lake Amistad near the modem
cities of Del Rio and Ciudad Acufia, to west of the historic hamlet of Langtry (Figure

Turpin--Pecos River Style Pictographs in Northern Mexico

269

1). On a north-south axis, the outer perimeter crosses the Pecos River about 100 km
(60 miles) north of the Rio Grande. Differences in estimates of the southern limits
have long been attributed to the dearth of archeological data from northern
Coahuila, but the Rio Grande certainly presented no physiographic barrier to the
exchange of people, material goods, or ideas.
Now arid rangeland, the region topographically comprises broad rolling upland
plains dissected by tributaries of three major rivers, the Rio Grande and the Pecos
and Devils rivers. Rockshelters hollowed from the limestone walls of the entrenched
canyons were home to Archaic inhabitants from the end of the Pleistocene until
about A. D. 1000. Preserved in these dry rock shelters are accumulations of
domestic debris deposited over several millenia and the remarkable pictograph
sequence for which the region is famous.
The most ancient of the rock art styles, the polychrome Pecos River style, is
considered the manifestation of a shamanic religious tradition (Kirkland and
Newcomb 1967). The central figures are elaborately dressed faceless anthropomorphs
equipped with, or surrounded by, setrepertoires of accessories. Newcomb suggested
that the main characters were shamans or members of medicine societies dressed in
their ritual garb and, elaborating upon an idea first presented by Campbell (1958),
that the pictographs were visions, conceived by artists in trance states and made
permanent on the walls of the shelters (Kirkland and Newcomb 1967). The frequent
illustration of the atlatl and the absence of the bow and arrow place the Pecos River
style within the long Archaic period, from 9000 to 1000 years ago in this region.
Turpin (1990) recently presented arguments for a Middle Archaic age for the Pecos
River style, suggesting that it flourished during the San Felipe period in the local
chronology, between 3000 and 4000 years ago (Turpin 1988:Figure 4).
Previous Pictograph Research in Northern Coahuila
In 1948, Herbert Taylor (1948) located five pictograph sites during his
reconnaissance of the south bank of the Rio Grande between Langtry and the mouth
of the Peeos. He described two sites as remnant paintings, but one, E1 Sefs, was still
clearly Pecos River style. The two Pecos River style sites that overlook the river, El
Elephante and San Martin, have been almost totally destroyed, and the deep cultural
deposits at a third, Coahuilan Shumla shelter, have been severely vandalized by relic
hunters.
Ten years later, Taylor (1958:88; Taylor and Rul 1960:159) reported that the
typical Pecos River style of rock painting was virtually absent in the area surveyed
for the Mexican part of the Amistad Reservoir. The description of their only
pictograph site matches that of a Red Monochrome panel, INAH 203, now
inundated by the reservoir (Turpin 1986). However, an INAH number, 180, was
assigned to Coahuilan Shumla shelter where H. Taylor described the few surviving
paintings as cowheads. In fact, in INAH 180, locally known as Cueva Chumbla,
there are three identical Pecos River style shaman figures, one solid red, one
outlined in red, and one infilled with white. Only the upper half or torso is shown,
a not uncommon convention (see Kirkland and Newcomb 1967:Plates 7, 16, 33);

270

Texas Archeological Society

their upraised arms give these human figures passing resemblance to stylized
longhorns.
In 1989, a sixth Pecos River style pictograph, Abrigo Diego, was located in
Coahuila by Turpin and Zintgraff about 1.5 miles above the confluence of an
unnamed tributary with the Rio Grande. Once a gallery of paintings more than 60
meters long, Abrigo Diego now has only a few decipherable segments, but the
surviving figures are as intricate and elaborate as the well-known classic Pecos
River style panels at Panther Cave and Rattlesnake Canyon. Taken in composite,
Abrigo Diego, E1 Elephante, and San Martin demonstrate an intensity of ritual
activity equal or superior to that evidenced on the north bank.
All the known examples of the Pecos River style recorded in northern Coahuila
are within a few miles of the Rio Grande, where similarities between the north and
south banks are expected. The two pictograph localities described below expand the
range of the Pecos River style more than 145 km (90 miles) into northern Mexico
and raise broad questions about the nature and direction of the interaction that
produced them.
The Sin Nombre Pictographs
The Sin Nombre pictograph locality is south of the Serranfas del Burro in the
Sierra del Carmen on a north-flowing tributary of the Arroyo de la Babia above its
confluence with the Valle E11nfante ~igure 1). As the crow flies, the site is 145 km
(90 miles) south-southwest of the mouth of the Pecos River, but the intervening
Serranfas del Burro may have doubled the distance for pedestrian travelers.
The similarities between the Sin Nombre pictographs and those of the Pecos
River style were first noted in 1974 in an undergraduate term paper in an anthropology course at The University of Texas at Austin. Fifteen years later, rock art
photographer Jim Zintgraff and archeologist Tom Guderjan visited the sites and
documented the paintings.
Most of the pictographs are in a large northeast-facing rockshelter. The site has
two ledges, or shelves; pictographs were painted from both. Most of the paintings
are spread across the 50-meter-long top shelf; only a few figures are found along the
lower ledge. Water seeping through the porous limestone has obliterated or
damaged several pictographs, and collapse of the ledges has left others isolated high
above the present floor. Higher in elevation in the same canyon, a small shelter now
contains only the remnants of pictographs painted in the same style and with the
same pigments. These paintings have deteriorated too much to make reconstruction
of the original figures and groupings possible.
From their quantity and variety, the pictographs at Sin Nombre suggest several
episodes of painting. One panel of geometric designs, composed of dots and lines,
resembles art styles found farther south near Monterrey more than any Lower Pecos
styles. Most of the anthropomorphs, animals, and sinuous geometric motifs,
however, reflect themes and stylistic conventions common to the Archaic art
concentrated along the Rio Grande and the Pecos and Devils rivers.

Turpin--Pecos River Style Pictographs in Northern Mexico

271

The most prominent figure in the largest panel is modeled after a specific type
of shaman most commonly found around the mouth of the Pecos River and
illustrates the ability of the shaman to transmogrify (to adopt the form of an animal
familiar), combining feline and human characteristics (Turpin 1990). The Sin
Nombre version has the characteristic ear headdress, frontal posture with upstretched
arms, and blank face, but lacks the hand-held objects such as atlatls, darts, and
fending sticks, wielded by the shamanic prototype in Panther Cave (Figures 2, 3; see
also Kirkland and Newcomb 1967:Plate 25).
In another typical Pecos River style motif that appears at Sin Nombre,
described by New comb (1976:184; see Kirkland and Newcomb 1967: Plates 13, 29,
33),
an antlered headdress is associated with an odd variation of the shaman
figure. Wide, squared-off "wings" extend outward from either side of the
body at shoulder level in this variation, and hands and arms project upward
from them. They have a curious resemblence to the old Ford tri-motored
airplane and long since have had this appellation attached to them.

Conceptually, these winged figures (Figure 4) illustrate one of the tenets of
shamanic religions, that shamans can fly. This belief is mirrored in another panel at
Sin Nombre and in other sites in the Lower Pecos where horizontal anthropomorphs
apparently soar through clouds of dashed lines or dots. Another convention
consistent with Pecos River iconography is the recurrence of frontally posed
anthropomorphs with undulating streamers (Figure 5) flowing down from their
upstretched arms (Newcomb 1976:185). In addition, parallel wavy lines or streamers, another attribute common to the Pecos River style, appear repeatedly at Sin
Nombre. Although most of the Sin Nombre figures are empty handed, unlike the
classic Pecos River shamans with their elaborate paraphernalia, one anthropomorph
holds a three-pronged rod, a motif found on the Devils River and at Rattlesnake
Canyon on the Rio Grande, where it has been mistaken for a sword (see Kirkland
and Newcomb 1967:Plate 2).
E! Fortln Pictographs
In 1966, two pictograph sites in the Cation E1Forffn, a tributary of the Valle El
Infante above its juncture with Arroyo de la Babia, were visited by Lorraine
Heartfield and Ronald Ralph (Figure 1). Heartfield and Ralph were part of Jeremiah
Epstein’s Northeastern Mexico Archeological Project funded by the National
Science Foundation, and their objective was to evaluate the excavation potential of
El Fortfn, a large rockshelter on the Rancho Las Margaritas. Coincidentally, they
toured two nearby pictograph sites, where they took black-and-white Polaroid
photographs (Figures 6 and 7).
Cation El Forffn penetrates the southern rim of the Serranfas del Burro about
30 km (20 miles) northeast of Sin Nombre and 110 km (70) miles south-southwest
of the mouth of the Pecos (Figure 1). However, a small mountain range, the Sierra

272

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 2. Photograph, feline shaman of Sin Nombre. The figure is about 1.25 meters tall.
(Courtesy of Jimmy Zintgraff.)

Turpin--Pecos River Style Pictographs in Northern Mexico

273

Figure 3. Photograph, feline shaman of Panther Cave. The figure is about 1.5 meters tall.
(Courtesy of Jimmy Zintgraff.)

274

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 4. Drawing of winged figure at Sin Nombre. (Drawn by David G. Robinson.)

Turpin--Pecos River Style Pictographs in Northern Mexico

Figure 5. Photograph, shaman with streamers at Sin Nombre. (Courtesy of Jimmy
Zintgraff.)

275

276

Texas Archeological Society

©

,,...,-%

o

I

5

lO

I I
cm

Figure 6. Pecos River style figure at C-18, E1 Fortfia. This example of Pecos River style art,
is reconstructed from faded and deteriorated photographs taken in 1966, augmented by a few
color and black-and-whiteprints found later at theTexas Archeological Research Laboratory
(TARL) under the name San Jose de las Piedras and dated 1962. The scale is approximate,
and the relationships between the figures are largely unknown. (Drawn by David G.
Robinson.)

Turpin--Pecos River Style Pictographs in Northern Mexico

:277

(
~t

f

!
0
I

10
I

20
I

cm

Figure 7. Pecos River style figure at C-139, E1 Fortfia, reconstructed from a faded and
deteriorated photograph taken in 1966. The scale is approximate, and its relationship to the
figure in Figure 6 is unknown. (Drawn by David G. Robinson.)

278

Texas Archeological Society

0

10

20

I

I
cm

I

Figure 8. Outlined feline shaman from C-139, E1 Fortfi-a, reconstructed from a faded and
deteriorated photograph taken in 1966. The scale is approximte. (Drawn by David G.
Robinson.)

TurpinmPecos River Style Pictographs in Northern Mexico

279

del Cedral, intervenes between Sin Nombre and E1 Fortin, and the Serranfas del
Burro rise directly to the north.
C- 138 is a rockshelter 20 meters long and 6 meters deep, situated more than 100
meters above the valley floor on the west side of a canyon north of the headquarters
of the Rancho Las Margaritas. The pictographs were described as primarily red,
with some black, and very badly deteriorated. Color prints without negatives on file
at TARL show both red and black figures, but it is impossible to determine their
exact provenience, since at least three sites are apparently included under the name
San Jose de las Piedras. Definite Pecos River style designs in C- 138 include shaman
figures (Figure 6), insects, and winged figures with branching appendages that fit
within the variant "trimotor" design cited above (Figure 4).
C-139 is a smaller shelter, 6 meters wide and 2.5 meters deep, with shallow
cultural deposits, also high above the valley floor in a canyon west of the Cation E1
Fortfn. The red and yellow pictographs include two fringed shaman figures (Figure
7), one associated with a series of circles and streamers (Figure 8). The latter is a
variation of the were-feline motif also recognized at Sin Nombre, this time drawn
in outline. In addition, one small birdlike shaman is detectable in the Polaroid prints.
Apparently, none of the C-139 pictographs were included in the photographic
collection at TARL.
The rock art in C-138 and C-139 is very similar to that of Sin Nombre and, in
composite, the two localities demonstrate that this southernmost expression of the
Pecos River style is not an isolated occurence. In fact, these small enclaves suggest
that many more sites await recording in the rugged terrain between the Arroyo de
la Babia and the Rio Grande.
IMPLICATIONS
The pictographs of Sin Nombre and E1Fortfn demonstrate that, during at least
one period ofprehistory, the Lower Pecos cultural area extended at least 145 km (90
miles) south of the Rio Grande, encircling or encompassing the Serranfas del Burro.
All four sites are near Arroyo de la Babia, one of the historically documented travel
routes between Musquiz (then Santa Rosa) and the Rio Grande (Weddle 1976:413).
Although different constraints applied to prehorse populations, the mountain ranges
of northern Coahuila always would have affected broad movements of people,
channeling travel and exchange routes into valleys, passes, or the near-desert
rangeland that fringes the mountains.
At first glance, these few pictographs appear to be outliers, remote from the
heartland of the style (Figure 1), but this impression is more a function of the
intensity and orientation of archeological research in northern Coahuila than of
cultural reality. Studies either concentrated along the banks of the Rio Grande (H.
Taylor 1948; Taylor and Ru11961) or, like Epstein’s Northeastern Mexico Project,
sampled areas farther south and east, leaving a zone of ambiguity in between. The
commonality between Lower Pecos and Coahuilan archeological remains has long
been noted (H. Taylor 1948; W. Taylor 1966). Specifically, shared fiber (Andrews

280

Texas Archeological Society

and Adovasio 1980) and lithic industries (Johnson 1964), burial practices (Turpin
and Bement 1988), and art (H. Taylor 1948; Kelley 1974) bespeak a unity of culture
that spanned the Rio Grande at various times in prehistory. However, the nature and
direction of these relationships remain speculative until archeological survey is
undertaken around and including the Serranfas del Burro.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Manuel Diego, owner of the Rancho Santa Rosa, granted permission to visit
Abrigo Diego, and Jorge Ramon, Bob Perry, and Garner Fuller helped us get there.
Robert Goldsbury first drew the Pecos River style pictographs in the Sierra del
Carmen to my attention. Jim Zintgraff photographed the Diego and Sin Nombre
sites and provided copies for reproduction and for this analysis. Tom Guderjan
commented on a draft of this paper, lending knowledge based on his personal
experiences at Sin Nombre. Lorraine Heartfield and Ron Ralph shared their
experiences at El Forffn and helped track down the photographs and notes. Dr.
Jeremiah F. Epstein freely granted permission to use the information gathered
during the Northeastern Mexico Archeological Project. Herbert Taylor discussed
his maiden expedition into Coahuila in 1948 with the author. Dan Julien constructed
the site location map, and all of the line drawings are the work of David G. Robinson,
who used both old and recent photographs in their preparation.
REFERENCES CITED
Andrews, R. L., and J. M. Adovasio
1980 Perishable Industries fr°m Hinds Cave’ Val Verde C°unty" Texas" The University
of Pittsburg Department ofAnthropology Ethnology,Monograph 5.
Barth, Frederick
1969
Ethnic Groups and Boundaries. Little-Brown, Boston.
Brown, T. M., K. L. Killen, Helen Simons, and Virginia Wulfkuhle
ResourceProtectionPlanningProcessforTexas.TexasHistoricalCommission,
1982
Austin.
Campbell, Thomas N.
1958
Origin of the Mescal Bean Cult. American Anthropologist 60:156-160.
Conkey, M. W.
1983 Boundedness in Art and Society. In: Symbolic andStructuralArchaeology, edited
by Ian Hodder. Cambridge University Press, London.
Johnson, Leroy, Jr.
1964
The Devil’s Mouth Site: A Stratified Campsite at Amistad Reservoir, Val Verde
County, Texas. The University ofTexas at Austin, Department ofAnthropology
Archeology Series 6,

Turpin--Pecos River Style Pictographs in Northern Mexico

281

Kelley, J. C.
1974
Pictorial and Ceramic Art in the MexicanCulmral Littoral of the Chichimec Sea.
In: Art and Environment in Native America, edited by M. E. King and I. R.
Taylor, Jr. Texas Tech University, The Museum Special Publications 7.
Kirkland, Forrest and W. W. Newcomb, Jr.
1967
The Rock Art of Texas Indians. The University of Texas Press, Austin.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1976
Pecos River Pictographs: The Development of an Art Form. In: Cultural
Change and Continuity: Essays in Honor of James Bennett Griffin. Edited by C.
E. Cleland. Academic Press, New York.
Sharer, H. J.
1977
Art and Territoriality in the Lower Pecos Archaic. Plains Anthropologist
22(75):13-21.
Taylor, H. C., Jr.
1948
An Archeological Reconnaisance in Northern Coahuila. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontolog&al Soc&ty 19:74-87.
1958

Archeological Survey of the Mexican Part of Diablo Reservoir. In: Graham, J.
A., and W. B. Davis. Appraisal of the Archeologieal Resources of Diablo
Reservoir, Val Verde County, Texas. Report of the National Park Service by the
Inter-Agency Archeological Salvage Program, Field Office, Austin, Texas.

Taylor, W. W., and F. G. Rul
1961
An Archeological Reconnaissance Behind the Diablo Dam. Coahuila, Mexico.
Bulletin of the Texas A rcheological Society 31:153-165.
Turpin, S. A.
1990
Speculations on the Age and Origin of the Pecos River Style Pictographs,
Southwest Texas. American Indian Rock Art 16:99-122. Las Ojos, California.
1986

Pictographs in the Red Monochrome Style in the Lower Pecos River Region.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeolog ieal Society 55:123-144.

Turpin, S. A., and L. C. Bement
1988
The Site and its Setting. Chapter 1 in: Seminole Sink: Excavation of a Vertical
Shaft Tomb, Val Verde County, Texas. Compiled by S. A. Turpin. Plains
Anthropologist Memoir 22.33-122, Pt 2:1-4.
Weddle, R. S.
1976
The Vanguard. In: La Hacienda. An Official Bicentennial Publication of the
Whitehead Memorial Museum and the Val Verde County Historical Commission, Del Rio, Texas.

283

Perdiz Point Damage Analysis
Elm A. Cox and Herman A. Smith
ABSTRACT
Experimental damage of Perdiz points resulted in two major types of
breakage patterns--snaps and impact fractures. Analysis of wear and breakage
patterns on Perdiz points from several archeological sites in South Texas revealed
that some points were probably being salvaged for use as hafted cutting tools.
Whole points were discarded after use as cutting tools, probably due to edge
dulling. Evidence of variations in breakage patterns among sites and the possible
implications of the patterns of variation are discussed.

INTRODUCTION
Recently, the Coastal Bend Archeological Society conducted an archeological
investigation of the McGloin House site (41SP135) in western S an Patricio County,
Texas, along the lower Nueces River (Figure 1). It is a multicomponent site with at
least three Late Prehistoric components, characterized by Perdiz arrowpoints. Only
one other arrowpoint type is represented in the assemblage; a Starr point was
recovered from the upper component (Table 1).
The three levels have been radiocarbon dated at 210 BP-L-_ 100 (TX5394), 340
BP-L-_70 (TX5395), and 540 BP-L-_60 (TX5393), which equate to uncorrected A.D.
dates of 1740, 1610, and 1410. Since their standard deviations do not overlap, these
dates suggest three discrete components, apparently confirming the stratigraphic
evidence of three distinct layers of occupational debris.
All three components are characterized primarily by Perdiz arrowpoints, which
are found in the Rockport complex (Campbell 1960) along the central and lower
Gulf Coast of Texas (Suhm, Kreiger, and Jelks 1954; Story 1968; Smith 1984a).
Since there are no significant differences in the other artifacts in the three levels,
41SP135 seems to be a site that was repeatedly occupied by the same cultural group
(or at least groups sharing a common material culture) at three different times in
slightly more than 300 years.
The sample of more than 100 Perdiz projectile points is large enough for valid
statistical analysis, so this site provides us with an exceptional opportunity to assess
possible variability in Perdiz arrowpoints over an extended time period. The Perdiz
specimens were classified according to manufacturing technique (bifacial versus
unifacial) and degree of completeness (Table 1). More than 75 percent of the Perdiz
specimens for all three components are predominantly unifacial, and this is
consistent across levels (mean =78.66, range +2.66). The percentage of resharpened specimens is small and inconsistent. The proportion of whole specimens,
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 60 (1989)

284

Texas Archeological SocieU
Table 1. Arrowpoints from 41SP135 by Level
Variable/Level or Component
Upper
(1740AD)

Middle
(1610AD)

Lower
(1410AD)

Number of Arrowpoints
32
56
17
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
9
4
0
0
0
Attributes of Perdiz Points
81%
Unifacial
79 %
76%
19%
24%
21%
Bifacial
47%
Essentially whole
18%
30%
Resharpened
2%
19%
12%
3.20mm
2.64mm
Average Length
3.13mm
(23)
(28)
(based on n = )
(8)
Condition of Perdiz Points (Percent of total sample)
Tip damage
28
29
38
Base damage
19
53
30
Condition of Damaged Perdiz (Percent of broken points)
Tip damage
54
53
36
44
Base damage
64
35
Perdiz
Expanding Stem
Fresno
Starr
Tip fragments
Base fragments

however, varies dramatically in the three components, and the trend appears to be
a systematic reduction of complete Perdiz points across time (47 percent complete
in the lower level to only 18 percent complete in the upper level). This intriguing
result deserves further analysis.
Of particular interest is the amount and type of damage such arrowpoints
evidence. Since the number of points in each level varies markedly, comparisons
can be made most realistically by calculating the percentage of the total number in
each level by category or condition (Table 1). Note that the proportion of Perdiz
points with damage to the tip remains constant across levels. Damage to bases,
however, systematically and substantially increases across time, whether expressed
as a percentage of all specimens or as a percentage of just the broken points.
This variability in wear and breakage patterns of Perdiz points across time
implies some change in their use during this timespan. Further analysis and perhaps
some experimental verification are needed, but before this analysis was done it was
necessary to determine whether this variability was a general trend at other sites in
the region, or was unique to 41SP135. To this end, the same kinds of data from
comparably dated Perdiz components at other sites in the region were examined.

Cox and Smith--Perdiz Point Damage

285

Three Rivers

J

!.°
Figure 1. Map of the Central Coastal Bend area showing sites discussed.

Only a few such sites have been documented; the three sites with sufficient data for
comparison are the Rockport complex site 41KL13 (Smith 1984b) and two inland
sites 41LK201 (Highley 1986) and 41JW8 (Black 1986), which are relatively
close to 41SP135 (Figure 1, Table 2).
The dates of these components generally parallel the three levels at 41SP135,
but, of course, they are not exact matches. The other sites are dated in various ways;
the date for 41KL 13 is a guess based on the presence of historic artifacts at the site,
and dates from the other two sites are averages of the published radiocarbon dates
(corrected). Since the objective here is to compare contemporaneous components,
these three sites are excellent choices for comparison and analysis.
None of the comparison sites is as much a pure Perdiz site as 41SP135 appears
to be. At 41SP135, more than 99 percent of the arrowpoints identified are Perdiz,
at 41KL13 only 59 percent are Perdiz; at 41LK201, 91 percent are Perdiz; and at

286

Texas Archeological Society
Table 2. Comparison of Arrowpoints from Sites 41KL13,
41KL201, and 41JW8
Variable/Level or Component
41KL13
(AD1750)*

41LK201
(AD1530)*

41JW8
(AD1370)*

Number of Arrowpoints
Perdiz
Expanding Stem
Fresno
Starr
Tip fragments
Base fragments

61
2
22
19
15
5

43
4
0
0
2
0

111
6
0
4
22
18

Attributes of Perdiz Points
Unifacial
Biracial
Essentially whole
Resharpened
Average Length
(based on n = )
Tip damage
Base damage
Tip damage
Base damage

36%
54%
70%
64%
46%
30%
34%
58%
43%
10%
5%
16%
2.46mm
3.07mm
2.49mm
(45)
(27)
(37)
Condition of Perdiz Points (% of total sample)
45
35
39
36
9
18
Condition of Damaged Perdiz (% of broken points)
69
31

83
22

68
55

*For dating information, see Smith (1984b), Highley (1986), and Black (1986).
41JW8, 92 percent are Perdiz, so, in this respect, 41SP135 is more similar to
41LK201 and 41JW8 than it is to 41KL13.
There are also differences among the comparison sites in the proportions of
unifacial and biracial Perdiz arrowpoints. At 41JW8, 64 percent of the Perdiz are
bifacially worked; at 41KL13, there are almost equal percentages of bifacial and
unifacial points. Only at 41LK201 is the percentage (70 percent) roughly comparable to 41SP135.
As at 41SP135, the percentage of resharpened points at 41LK201 is relatively
small, and there appears to be no trend across time. Neither does the pattern of
decreasing percentages of whole points at 41SP135 hold for the other three sites.
There also appears to be no general trend in average length, and only at 41LK201
is the average length of points comparable to the average length at 41SP135.
At 41SP135 there is a trend of increasing percentages of Perdiz points with
basal damage across later time periods, but this trend also is not confh’med at the

Cox and Smith--Perdiz Point Damage

287

other Perdiz sites. Rather, the data are very mixed or, in some cases, seem to support
op~site trends. Since there is no confirming evidenceofthe trends seen at 41SP135
in these other comparably dated Perdiz sites, another hypothesis must be sought to
explain the damage to Perdiz arrowpoints at the McGloin House site.
EXPERIMENTS
If the damage to the Perdiz points is not a general cultural phenomenon, it may
be the result of some other changing factor, such as the use made of these artifacts
at different times and at different sites, as suggested by Ahler (1971), Ahler and
McMillan (1976), and Roper (1979). To evaluate this possibility, a series of
experiments were conducted, using Perdiz arrowpoints in a variety of ways and then
assessing the physical evidence of wear and damage.
The design of the first experiment was patterned after Flenniken and Raymond
(1986). Arrows were modeled on historical descriptions of Karankawa arrows
(Kilman 1959; Kuykendal11903; Gatschet 1891); they hadreed shafts and foreshafts
and were tipped with unprovenienced Perdiz points acquired from local collectors.
Due to the abundance of white-tailed deer remains at all four of the sites studied,
and the association of Perdiz points with those remains (Smith and Cox 1987;
Highley 1986; Black 1986; Smith 1984b), a recently killed white-tailed deer carcass
was the target. A 45 lb compound bow was then used to shoot 18 arrows into the deer
carcass from a distance of three meters.
Of the 18 arrowpoints that struck the deer, all or parts of 17 were recovered
(Figure 2). Four suffered very minor damage, and among the others were at least six
distal breaks, four proximal breaks, and nine barb breaks. The greatest damage was
sustained by arrowpoints shot into shoulders; those shot into the neck and ribs
suffered less damage.
In the second experiment, five foreshafted Perdiz arrowpoints were used to skin
and butcher white-tailed deer. Wear was examined at intervals of continued use.
In the third experiment, three Perdiz arrowpoints affixed to modem wooden
arrow shafts were repeatedly shot into a series of 10 white-tailed deer hides mounted
on a plywood backing. A 15 lb compound bow was used in this experiment to
prevent the arrow’s penetrating all 10 hides and destroying the points. Use wear was
ascertained and documented after each shot.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Construction of Arrows
In the first experiment, arrow shafts were made, according to aboriginal
standards, of native reed (cane) and were fitted with reed foreshafts (Figure 3). A
notched wooden peg was inserted in one end of the main shaft and a stone-tipped
foreshaft in the other. All connections between the shafts and foreshafts were
tapered and bound. As results were noted, some modifications were made; in the last

288

Texas Archeological Society

P

I

e

h

g

o

d

c

b

q
4 CENT IMET ERS

I

Figure 2. Perdiz arrowpoints from the first experiment showing damage from use.

Cox and Smith--Perdiz Point Damage

289

eight foreshafts, the connection between the point and the foreshaft was also bound,
an improvement that prevented splintering of the foreshafts.
A wide variety of shafts, foreshafts, and points were tried out, and minor
improvements were made in efficiency during the experiment. It was discovered
that small foreshafts penetrate much easier than larger ones, but they are unable to
withstand as much battering. The ideal design was a relatively large arrow shaft
(approximately 1.2 cm in diameter) with a long, slender foreshaft (.5 to .7 cm in
diameter) narrowing to the stone point; the best results were achieved with this
design. A single, unforeshafted reed arrow shaft ranging between .6 and .8 cm in
diameter penetrated well at first, but disintegrated completely in the process.
The greatest advantage of the foreshafted reed arrow is the ease with which
another foreshaft can be attached, making it possible for the hunters to carry only
a few arrow shafts together with any number of foreshafts. The only problem with
this design was some wedging of the foreshaft into the main shaft on impact. This
became less of a problem when the foreshafts were butted to the last joint in the reed
(cane) main shaft so the joints absorbed the recoil.
The strength of the main shaft was never a problem. Even when the arrows
missed the target, sudden and violent impact left the main shafts relatively
unscathed.
Halting

The main advantage of the contracting-stem Perdiz arrowpoint is that it can be
socketed in a reed or cane foreshaft with relative ease, and whole points can be
interchanged for broken ones in a matter of seconds. In the first experiment, four
Perdiz points were socketed, without the use of an adhesive substance, without any
loss of effectiveness. It is quite probable, however, considering the multitude of
sources for adhesive substances available to aboriginal hunters, that some sort of
adhesive was used. Several of the Perdiz points recovered at 41SP120 and 41AS3
had traces of asphalt on the stems.
Snaps Versus Impact Fractures
In the analysis of point damage from the four sites studied, two distinct types
of breakage---transverse and irregular--were initially noted. Breakage patterns
were similar to those described by Abler and McMillan (1976) and Roper (1979).
Transverse breaks are referred to as snaps, and most others, including Roper’s
angular, oblique, and crenated breaks, for reasons to be discussed later, are assigned
to the generic category, impact fractures (Abler and McMillan 1976).
Most snaos are caused by tensile forces perpendicular to the longitudinal axis
of the point. In the assemblages examined, there were two principal locations of
snaps--on the distal part of the stems and on the upper half of the body of the
projectile points (Figure 4). Snaps almost always leave a sharp disjuncture on one
side and either slight crushing or a minor hinge disjuncture on the opposite side.
Breaks almost invariably are transverse, running perpendicular to the longitudinal

290

Texas Archeological Society

Y
¢3

O
3

0
3
"ID

taa

i"

0

0

C~
N

G)
r~

6

Cox and Smith--Perdiz Point Damage

291

Figure 4. Drawings of Perdiz points showing snaps. (Points are three times actual size.)

axis of the point (although in recent excavations at 41AS3, the only broken Perdiz
arrowpoint has a sharply oblique snap showing damage as a result of torque rather
than perpendicular tensile force).
Impact fractures, on the other hand, usually evidence a high degree of crushing
and irregular breaking on both lateral edges of the disjuncture (Figure 5). Also,
impact will sometimes result in cone fracturing on the surface of the disjuncture.

292

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 5. Drawings of Perdiz points showing impact damage. (Points are three times
actual size.)

It is nevertheless quite often difficult to distinguish basal snaps from basal
impact fractures. Snaps and impact fractures on the body of the point are much
easier to distinguish since body impact fractures are almost always obvious. Impact
breaks are the result of parallel force vectors to the longitudinal axis of the points.

Cox and Smith--Perdiz Point Damage

293

Such breaks often end in a type of feather termination (Crabtree 1972:64) and less
frequently in hinge or step termination (Ahler 1979). Facial and, usually, bilateral
asymmetry are characteristic of body impact fractures and cannot be duplicated by
pressure from use as a tool.
Both types of breaks are quite prevalent on specimens from all four sites. One
of the purposes of our experimental studies was to see if arrowpoints create both
snaps and impact fractures upon penetration, as implied by Roper (1979) and
Brown, Potter, Hall, and Black (1982). They do not; in fact, our results were the
opposite of those suggested. All eleven proximal and distal breaks created in the first
experiment and three of the distal breaks in the third experiment were obvious
impact fractures. Snaps are not caused by impact. Ahler and McMillan indicate the
same findings for dart points, saying "moderate to large size and transverse blade
fractures are direct indicators of points that were used for purposes other than as tips
for projectiles" (1976:167).
This finding is interesting, but the practical application is not readily apparent-there are other easy explanations for snaps on projectile points. The significance, however, does not lie with the presence of the snaps, but rather with the
presence of the impact fractures. All projectile point types must evidence impact
fractures.
This idea gives rise to a method of analysis for reexamining what are being
identified as projectile point types. For instance, since the inception of modem
projectile point typology, archeologists have called the small, thin, triangular,
bifacial stone artifacts found almost all over Texas, Fresno arrowpoints (eg. Turner
and Hester 1985; S uhm and Jelks 1962). They are found in Late Prehistoric sites and
in surface collections from the Coastal region (Hudgins 1984; Steele and Mokry
1983; Corbin 1974), including site 41KL 13 (Smith 1984b). Ignoring the fact that an
inordinate percentage of these Fresno points from the South Texas coast are whole,
the important issue is that all of the breaks in the more-than-200 specimens
examined are snaps; there are no impact fractures.
On the other hand, a very high percentage of impact fractures are noted among
the similarly hafted Starr arrowpoint, often found in association with Fresno points
in South Texas (Smith 1984b). When considered in the overall context of arrowpoint damage analysis, this evidence certainly suggests that the so-called Fresno
arrowpoints of the Texas coastal zone were probably never intended or used as tips
for arrows.
Typology
The dramatic disparity in results achieved in the impact experiment led to the
inescapable choice of the ideal stone point--it was long and thin and sharp. Shot
from a 45-1b bow at a distance of 3 meters, a wide blunt point (Figure 2, e) bounced
off a deer, whereas a thin sharp point (Figure 2, f) passed through neck vertebrae
virtually undamaged.
Modem bow hunters prefer the razor-sharp, thin steel arrowheads that can now
be purchased in many sporting goods stores. Their advantage, of course, is in their

294

Texas Archeological Society

killing ability--the arrow does its damage by causing hemorrhaging and the farther
it goes into the deer, the better the results. Most bow hunters are finicky about their
arrowheads, for if they are dulled by carelessness or use, they lose their maximum
penetrating power, and although they still look sharp to the uninitiated, such points
are not favored by experienced bow hunters. To those whose freedom from hunger
depended on their arrow’s killing ability, this fact could not be ignored. It is simply
not possible that all of the many broad, dull artifacts with the configuration of Perdiz
arrowpoints are, in fact, projectile points.
Projectile Points Versus Tools
For many years, people have noted a disturbingly high ratio of whole projectile
points to broken ones. L. W. Patterson (1980), for instance, comments that in
excavations of Archaic sites, there is about one whole dart point found for every two
and a half broken ones.
In the first experiment, only one entire point was lost; presumably it is still in
the deer. It is assumed that even this point could have been recovered. Had the
authors been Late Prehistoric hunters, modern archeologists would have found parts
of nine projectiles, none of which would be reusable. Had a hundred projectiles been
fired into the animal, there still would be no whole or reusable points to be found;
they would have been salvaged.
This underscores an intriguing fact about virtually all Late Prehistoric sites-there is a preplexingly large number of whole and apparently reusable points found.
At 41SP135, for instance, there were 35 essentially whole points found out of a total
of 105 Perdiz specimens.
Two possibilities present themselves for the prevalence of these whole and
reusable points they were intentionally discarded or they were lost. Neither of
these possibilities is appealing; it is highly unlikely that, through carelessness, they
lost or failed to retrieve whole points in such high percentages and so universally,
particularly in a region where good lithic resources are scarce. On the other hand,
religious taboos and poison immediately come to mind as possible reasons for
intentionally discarding points, but neither shows up in the historical record.
But what if what we are calling projectile points are not really points? Would
their use as other tools affect the Late Prehistoric hunter’s inclination to discard
them?
Ahler and McMillan (1976), in their analysis of the Rodgers Shelter artifacts,
identified what they believed were foreshafted projectile points that were also used
as hafted cutting tools. In addition, they identified a previously described point type,
which they believed served strictly as a halted cutting tool and not as a projectile
point. This latter group showed greater wear, a much lower percentage of impact
fractures, and a much higher percentage of transverse breaks. Wear analysis
demonstrated that the hafted cutting tools were used for slicing, cleaving, sawing,
and scraping, among other things.
Edge wear on the points from the four Perdiz sites studied was microscopically
indistinguishable from wear created by skinning andbutchering,but was inconsistent

Cox and SmithmPerdiz Point Damage

295

with use as scraping tools. In all other respects, however, wear analysis was
consistent with Ahler and McMillan’s findings. Several observations are of note.
First, of the 124 essentially whole points from the four sites, all but three tiny
points from 41JW8, when viewed microscopically, showed wear resulting from
longitudinal cutting. In addition, the whole points tended to show heavier wear, and
more points actually showed wear than either the ones with snaps or the ones with
impact fractures.
Second, points bearing major impact fractures from 41SP135, 41KL13, and
41LK201 showed little wear, and most showed virtually no wear at all. The minor
wear that was present could easily be attributed to impact and penetration. Some
points with minor distal impact fractures had apparently been used as tools
subsequent to their use as projectiles, which caused longitudinal wear patterns on
the fresh edges created by impact. At 41SP135, several points with minor distal
impact fractures also had proximal snaps.
Third, virtually all of the points with snaps showed some degree of longitudinal
wear. In the skinning and butchering experiment, the points with flared barbs were
not useful for skinning (which is easier done by hand) but were very useful for
cutting meat from bones. For this task, the barbs were used most heavily. It is
interesting that many points, whole and with snaps, evidence heavy wear, principally on their barbs.
Apparently, some foreshafted Perdiz arrowpoints were multipurpose tools
which were used for butchering, among other purposes. As anyone who has
processed a deer knows, a knife dulls rapidly and, once dulled, makes the job much
more difficult. At 41SP135, what were initially believed to be Perdiz arrowpoints
probably were, in fact, simply hafted cutting tools that had been discarded by their
users.

Whole Points and Broken Points

Three other facts are relevant to an understanding of the relation of whole to
broken points. First, as previously mentioned, the points with major impact
fractures from 41SP135 showed either no wear or very small amounts of wear.
When considered vis-a-vis the wear patterns on whole points, this fact would
indicate that there was a propensity against reusing points with even moderate wear
patterns. If they had been reused as projectile points, they would have shown up in
the group with major impact fractures. On its face, this is reasonable, because
nobody would deliberately use a dull point when a sharp one was available.
However, in some instances, there is no way to tell by sight or feel that the points
have been used--a fact which raises the interesting prospect that a Perdiz point,
once used, was never reused as a projectile point.
Second, in the first experiment, barb damage was caused to a surprising number
of points. On closer evaluation of all four collections, many of the points that were
labelled as essentially whole (Tables 1 and 2) did in fact suffer very minor barb
damage. This raises the possibility that essentially whole points were being

296

Texas Archeological Society

salvaged at the kill sites to be used later as knives. The barb damage could not be
replicated by using the points as butchering tools, but all the other purposes for
which these tools may have been used are not known.
Third, points tend to be shorter in areas like 41JW8 and 41KL13, where flint
is not naturally available (Highly 1986; Smith 1984b), and there are moreresh_arpened
points from these sites (Table 2). Apparently, points were being resharpened when
it was absolutely necessary, but not as a preferred strategy. Considering the savings
in time and effort, the fact that the aboriginal hunters preferred not to salvage broken
points raises questions about the structural integrity of used points.
Impact Damage on Repeated Use
In the third experiment, three Perdiz points without wear were shot repeatedly
through a stack of deer hides. Performance decreased noticeably upon continued use
due to dulling, and all points eventually suffered structural failure. No point
survived more than four shots, and damage generally occurred to the tips. Each shot
produced additional wear, and once tip damage became noticeable, the projectile
point decreased markedly in performance. It appears that even minimal repeated
impact adversely affects the structural integrity of a point, resulting in its ultimate
structural failure.
A Final Analysis

The experiments were undertaken with the primary purpose of explaining the
statistical variations in breakage patterns among the four sites studied, but to that
end they were not wholly successful. However, several comments can be made
about the Perdiz point collections from these and neighboring sites.
First, the lack of basal parts from three of the four sites is significant (Table 1,
Table 2). Large numbers of basal breaks were found at all three sites, but the broken
parts were not found. The presence of basal parts at the fourth site,41JW8, suggests
reloading (fitting a new arrowpoint on the arrow shaft), but why are the results from
this site different from those at the other three sites?
The answer may lie in the hafting technique. Basal parts attached to foreshafts
were probably discarded on the run, whereas basal parts attached to unforeshafted
wooden arrows had to be taken to a spot where arrows were meticulously reworked.
So at least some of the hunters at 41JW8, where cane was perhaps not readily
available, may have used wooden arrow shafts (perhaps cane was not readily
available) whereas those at 41LK201,41KL 13, and 41SP 135 used cane foreshafts.
This suggestion is further strengthened by the high percentage of basal impact
fractures at 41JW8 and the low percentages of basal breaks--most of which are
snaps--at the other sites. When a point is hafted to wood, the stem absorbs the shock
of impact, but when it is hafted to cane socketing, the body of the point absorbs the
shock.
At 41NU54, a recently excavated site, Perdiz points that were found in
association with historic artifacts had a high percentage of impact fractures. Of the

Cox and Smith--Perdiz Point Damage

297

16 Perdiz arrowpoints recovered from this site, one is unfinished, two are whole
except for slight barb and tip damage, and all the rest have impact fractures; there
are none with snaps. According to historical accounts, at least some local Indian
groups, such as the Lipan Apache, used wooden arrow shafts (Banta 1977).
A Perdiz arrowpoint attached to a short cane foreshaft makes a much more
impractical hafted cutting tool than a Perdiz arrowpoint attached to a wooden shaft.
This fact could account for the lack of Perdiz points with snaps at41NU54, but, more
importantly, it underscores the fact that cultural differences probably influence
breakage patterns. In addition, the collection from 41NU54 suggests that Perdiz
arrowpoints do not suffer snap damage after impact to the extent previously
believed (cf. Brown, Potter, Hall, and Black 1982:42-43).
Third, no valid statistical analysis of projectile points can be made without first
eliminating stone artifacts that were never intended to be used as projectiles. Stone
artifacts that were apparently used as Perdiz arrowpoints are usually long and thin-ranging from 2.5 to as much as 5 times in length (not counting the stem) to width
half way up the point, though this does not hold true for the smaller points.
Fourth, the length of whole points may or may not be significant. As would be
expected, the farther away from flint resources one goes, the shorter the points
become due to conservation of material. It is also quite possible that size of
projectile points is affected by targets. Most points from 41SP135 found in
association with bison were more than 3 cm long. Corresponding information from
41JW8 and 41LK201 is not available.
Fifth, a caveat about basal snaps. The Corpus Christi Museum has an undocumented collection of mostly Starr and Perdiz arrowpoints, believed to be from Sarita
in northern Kenedy County. Eighteen of the 23 Perdiz points have basal snaps--in
the same place at the top of the stem--as their only damage.
If the people who used Start points were taking Perdiz points and snapping the
bases from them to facilitate hafting in a fashion that resembles the stemless Starr
point, this would be another explanation for basal snaps that, in South Texas at least,
would have to be taken into consideration.
CONCLUSIONS

Although there are many variables, wear and damage analysis contributes
significant information to an archeological investigation and site analysis:
1. There are many reasons for projectile points appearing in the archeological
record (see Roper 1979), but the four Perdiz point sites studied reveal only four
reasons for their appearance at those sites:
a. Points with major impact damage were not salvaged and were, as no
longer viable, either discarded or simply not retrieved.
b. Some arrowpoints with minor impact damage appear to have been
salvaged to be used later as cutting tools. Most of these exhibit minor distal,
proximal, and barb impact damage but subsequent use has caused wear on the edges
created by earlier impact fractures. In this regard, points with distal impact fractures

298

Texas Archeological Society

may have proximal snaps. These were discarded principally due to breakage or
dulling, but perhaps also due to the unreliability of points that have suffered the
stresses of impact.
c. Some points with major snaps show heavy wear and some do not,
depending upon at what stage of use they broke. They were discarded as no longer
viable.
d. Most whole points and many of those with only minor snaps revealed
at least moderate wear and were discarded probably due to dulling.
2. The study of varying percentages of types of breaks and location of breaks
between types has tremendous potential as an analytic tool and warrants further
research. All four Perdiz point sites studied evidenced multifunctional uses of points
for both killing and longitudinal cutting. However, at 41SP135, the lower zone
contained a high percentage of essentially whole points (Table 1).
Faunal analysis at this site showed a schlepp effect (Perkins and Daly 1968)
in that lower leg bones and mandibles were very much in evidence, but other bones
were totally absent or present in insignificant numbers (Smith and Cox 1987). It is
believed that this accounts for a rarity of impact damaged points from that level,
since they were lost in other parts of the carcasses which were not brought to camp.
Conversely, in the upper levels at 41SP135, bison were being butchered at
the location (Smith and Cox 1987). Most impact-damaged points from these levels
are probably the results of shooting bison, which may also account for the statistical
differences between these points and those from the other sites. Ideas of this kind
can be very useful in site analysis, but their true tests await further excavations.
3. Finally, there is a strong possibility that certain cultural groups produced
their own damage patterns. An understanding of these patterns not only will reveal
cultural affiliations, but also will help to identify distinctive traits within cultures.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Sheila Kersey and Don Kindler for their help in preparing this paper,
and special thanks to all our friends in the Coastal Bend Archeological Society, who
put in long hours in the hot sun at the McGloin House site (41SP135). Without the
tremendous assistance of dozens of overworked and underpaid volunteers, this
report would not have been possible.

REFERENCES CITED
Ahler, S.A.
1971

Projectile Point Form and Function at Rodgers Shelter, Missouri. Missouri
Archeological Society, Research Series No. 8.

Cox and SmithmPerdiz Point Damage
1979

299

Functional Analysis of Nonobsidian Chipped Stone Artifacts: Terms, Variables,
and Quantification. In: Lithic Use-Wear Analysis, edited by B. Hayden, pp.
301-328. Academic Press, New York.

Abler, S. A., and R. B. McMiUan
1976

Material Culture at Rodgers Shelter: A Reflection of Past Human Activities. In:
Prehistoric Man and His Environment: A Case Study in the Ozark Highland,
edited by W. R. Wood and R. B. McMillan, pp. 163-199. Academic Press, New
York.

Banta, S. E.
1977

Buckelew, the Indian Capt&e, as Related by Himself. Garland, New York.

Black, S. L.
1986

The Clemente and Herminia Hinojosa Site, 41JW8: A Toyah Horizon Campsite
in Southern Texas. The University ofTexas at San Antonio, Centerfor Archaeological Research, Special Report No. 18.

Brown, K. M., D. R. Potter, G. D. Hall, and S. L. Black
1982

Excavations at 41LK67. A Prehistoric Site in the Choke Canyon Reservoir,
SouthTexas. The University ofTex~s at San Antonio, Centerfor Archaeolog&al
Research, Choke Canyon Series 7.

Campbell, T N.
1960

Corbin, J..

1974

Archeology of the Central and Southern Sections of the Lower Texas Coast.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 29:145-175.
E.
A Model for Cultural Succession for the Coastal Bend Area of Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 45:29-54.

Crabtree, D. E.
1972

An Introduction to Flintworking. OccasionaIPapers ofthe Idaho State University Museum, Number 23.

Flenniken, J. J., and A. W. Raymond
1986

Morphological Projectile Point Typology: Replication Experimentation and
Technological Analysis. American Antiquity 51" 603-614.

Gatschet, A. S.
1981

TheKarankawalndians’Arche°l°gicalandEthn°l°gicalPapers°fthePeab°dy
Museum 1(2).

300

Texas Archeological Society

Highley, C. L.
1986

Archeological Investigations at 41LK201, Choke Canyon Reservoir, Southern
Texas. The University of Texas at San Antonio, Center for Archaeological
Research, Choke Canyon Series 11.

Hudgins, J. D.
1986

A Historic Indian Site in Wharton County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 55 (for 1984):29-51.

Kilman, E.
1959

Cannibal Coast. The Naylor Co., San Antonio.

Kuykendall, J. H.
1903

Reminiscences of Early Texas. Quarterly of the Texas Historical Association
6:236-253.

Patterson, L. W.
1980

The Significance of Dart Point Stem Breakage. Bulletin of the TexasArcheological Society 51:309-316.

Perkins, D., and P. Daly
1968

A Hunter’s Village in Neolithic Turkey. Scientific American 219(5):96-109.

Roper, D. C.
1979

Breakage Patterns of Central Illinois Woodland Projectile Points. Plains
Anthropologist 24-84 (Part 1):113-121.

Smith, H, A.
1984a

Origins and Spatial/femporal Distribution of the Rockport Archeological
Complex, Central and Lower Texas Coast. MidcontinentalJournal ofArcheology 9(1):27--42.

1984b

Prehistoric Settlement and Subsistence Patterns of the Baffin Bay Area of the
Lower Texas Coast. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

Smith, H. A., and K. A. Cox
1987

The McGloin House Site: A Rockport Complex Campsite in San Patricio
County, Texas. Manuscript on file, Corpus Christi, Texas.

Steele, D. G., and E. R. Mokry, Jr.
1983

Archeological Investigations of Seven Prehistoric Sites Along Oso Creek,
Nueces County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54 (for
1982): 287-308.

Cox and Smith--Perdiz Point Damage

301

Story, D. A.
1968

Archeological Investigation at Two Central Texas Gulf Coast Sites. State
Building Commission, Archeological Program Report No. 13.

Suhm, E. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks.
1954

An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 25.

Suhm, E. A., and E. B. Jelks.
1962

Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Archeological
Society Special Publication No. 1 and Texas MemoriaI Museum Bulletin No. 4,
Austin.

Turner, E. S., and T. R. Hester
1985

A Field Guide to the Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press,
Austin.

303

An Archeological Footnote to History
Kathleen Gilmore
with the collaboration of H. Gill-King
ABSTRACT
Historical, archeological, and skeletal evidence shows that a male adult burial
that had two round lead projectiles in the rib cage area, excavated by A. T. Jackson
in 1932 at a Caddo Indian site, has the high probability of being that of Sieur de
Marie, a member of LaSalle’s colony that was established on the Gulf Coast of
Texas in 1685. However, exploration of the combined evidence does not conclusively answer the question of murder raised by Jackson.

INTRODUCTION
In 1932, A. T. Jackson (1932) excavated seven burials from a low rise at the Eli
Moore.s site (41BW2) in Bowie County, Texas. Six of these burials were of children
nine years old or less; the other was an adult male with two lead balls in the area just
below the rib cage. Jackson speculated that the lead balls were "the missiles that
inflicted death." The burial was lying on the right side with arms flexed and the
hands near the face. Jackson noted that this was an unusual position for an East
Texas burial; most Late Prehistoric Caddoan burials in the general area are extended
on their backs. Except for the lead balls, no historic artifacts were found in any of
Jackson’s excavations at the site.
Who was this man--a lone adult among children--and was he murdered?
There is a high probability that this was one Mr. Marle, a Frenchman and a member
of LaSalle’s colony established in 1685 on Garcitas Creek near Matagorda Bay. The
historical, archeological, and skeletal evidence for his identity (the last presented by
H. Gill-King, forensic anthropologist) may settle the question of murder.
THE HISTORICAL EVIDENCE

On March 20, 1687--300 years ago--Robert Cavelier, Sieur de LaSalle, was
ambushed and murdered (probably somewhere near the Trinity River in Texas) with
a bullet shot to his head. Three days before, LaSalle’s nephew Moranget and two
of LaSalle’s servants, Nica and Saget, had been murdered by axe blows to their
heads. The scenario leading to the murders is described in the diary of Henri Joutel,
a member of LaSalle’s colony (Joutel 1962; Margry 1886, V. 3).
Seventeen persons had left the destitute French colony near Matagorda Bay on
January 12, 1687, intending to go for help to France by way of Canada. Sixteen of
these individuals were LaSalle, Abbe Cavelier (LaSalle’s brother), Father
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 60 (1989)

304

Texas Archeological Society

Anastasious, LaSalle’s nephews Moranget and young Cavelier, Duhaut,
L’Archeveque, Heins, Liotot, young Talon, Nica (the Indian hunter), Saget
(LaSalle’s footman), Tessier (the pilot), Marie, Bartholomew (a youth from Paris),
and Joutel. The seventeenth person was not identified.
After two months of arduous trekking through dense woods in rain and cold,
food was becoming scarce, so a camp was made on March 15 to retrieve food that
had been cached by LaSalle on a previous journey. To their dismay, the food was
spoiled, but on March 16, about 3 to 5 miles from the main camp, Liotot, Duhaut,
Heins, Nica, and Saget were smoking two bison that Nica had killed. Word was sent
to LaSalle of their activities, and LaSalle sent Moranget and Marie to obtain some
of the meat. As was usual, the men who made the kill had laid aside the choice
marrow bones that were their reward to eat after they had been roasted. When
Moranget arrived at the place where the men were smoking the bison, he flew into
a rage and seized all the meat, saying the hunters had too much and that "he would
manage it some other way" (Joutel 1962).
Because of this treatment and other real and perhaps imagined complaints
against Moranget, the group decided to kill him, Nica, and Saget--the last two
because of their loyalty to LaSalle. That night, while Duhaut, Heins, Tessier, and
L’Archeveque stood guard, Liotot took an axe to the three men with "many strokes
to the head" (Joutel 1962). Moranget did not die instantly; he sat up but could not
speak, and "the assassins obliged the Sieur de Marie to make an end of him, tho’ he
was not in the conspiracy" (Joutel 1962).
Two days passed, and LaSalle set out with Father Anastasious for the hunting
camp to see why the men had not returned. As they approached the camp, LaSalle
was shot by Duhaut and died instantly. Gathering back at the main camp, Joutel and
those who were friends of LaSalle "guarded themselves to sustain their lives"
(Joutel 1962). Joutel and young Cavelier, LaSalle’s nephew, wanted revenge
against the murderers, but Abbe Cavelier (LaSalle’s brother) always opposed it and
restrained them.
It was not until June 13, 1687--three months later--that Joutel and his
companions, Abbe Cavelier, young Cavelier (about 17 years old), Father Anastasious, the Sieur de Marie, Tessier, and Bartholomew, could extricate themselves
from the assassins and their companions and start the journey toward Canada, about
2000 miles away, mainly through unknown and trackless wilderness.
Two weeks later, on June 26, they arrived near a village of the Cadohadacho.
On the instructions of the chief of the nearby village, who had been informed of their
arrival, the group waited on the bank of a river for other Indians to come and
welcome them. All the Frenchmen were carried on the backs of the Indians for more
than a quarter of a league (about 3500 feet) to a place near the chief’s "cottage." It
took three men to carry Joutel, who was a large man and was carrying, among other
things, a firelock (probably a flintlock), a case of pistols, and a kettle; two held up
his legs.
On the next day, June 24, as Joutel relates it,

Gilmore ~ Archeological Footnote to History

305

Monsieur de la Marie, one of the prime men in our company, having breakfasted, would needs go bathe himself in the river we had passed the day
before, and not knowing how to swim he went too far and stepped into a
hole, whence he could not recover himself and was unfortunately drowned.
Young Monsieur Cavelier, having been told that Monsieur de Marie was
going to bathe himself, ran after him, and coming to the river, saw he was
drowning, he ran back to acquaint us [Margry 1886 V. 3:407].
The Frenchmen and some Indians rushed to his rescue, but it was too late.
According to Joutel, after the last "duties" were performed, Marie was buried in a
"little field behind the house." Joutel noted that every day the chief’s wife placed
a little basket of corn on Marie’s grave.
Father Anastasious had a slightly different story of the tragedy. He did not keep
a journal on the trip, and his story was written some years after his return to France.
According to the good father, who was known to elaborate on occasion to enhance
his image in performing priestly duties (Delanglez 1938),
the Sieur de Marne [sic], in spite of all we could say, went to bathe on the
evening of the 24th; the younger Sieur Cavelier accompanied him to the
river side, quite near the village. De Marne sprang into the water and
immediately disappeared .... A few hours afterward his body was
recovered and brought to the chief’s cabin .... The chief’s wife herself
wound him in a beautiful cloth while the young men dug the grave .... Our
friend was interred on an eminence near the village and his tomb surrounded
by a palisade, surmounted by a large cross... [Cox 1968 V. 1:250f].
The small, sad, and bedraggled party, now comprising only six persons, left on
June 30 to continue their homeward journey to France. On October 9, 1688, they
finally arrived back at Rochelle, where they had embarked in July 1684, looking for
a brave new world.
Three years later, in November 1691, Domingo Teran was sent by the Spanish
government to investigate the Cadohadacho country for the presence of Frenchmen
(Hatcher 1932). He visited a Cadohadacho village and drew a map of the settlement
(Figure 1). Mildred Wedel (1978:10) has shown convincingly that Teran visited the
same village as the Joutel party and that this village is represented by the archeological sites of Hatchel, Mitchell and Moores in Bowie County (Figure 2). Therefore,
the Teran map, drawn only four years after the visit of Joutel and his group, should
show the layout of the settlement much as it was when the Frenchmen visited and
Marle was buried.
The word templo is shown on the map near the mound, and Cadi, a short
distance to the southeast. Teran noted that this distance was half a league or 1.33
miles, which is the distance between the Hatchel Mound site and the Eli Moores site.
Near the place marked Cadi, there is a cross on a low rise; this is probably the cross
placed at the Cadi’s house by Father Massenet, who accompanied the Teran
expedition. No mention was made of a cross being there when the Teran expedition
arrived, making it doubtful that a cross had been placed on Marie’s grave.

306

Texas Archeological Society

cJ
-2"

L)

0

o

o

0

~D

O

0
e~

E

Gilmore -- Archeological Footnote to History

307

Old channel
McKinney

0

I
0

1 MILE
I

1

I LEAGUE

Figure 2. Map of part of Texas and Arkansas showing archeological sites in the area.
Modified from U.S Geological Survey, Barkman quadrangle (U.S. Geological Survey
1950a) and Ogden quadrangle (U.S. Geological Survey 1950b).

On the Teran map, the southern boundary of the site is curved, as if it follows
a creek or small river. The distance from the river where the Frenchmen waited for
their hosts to carry them piggyback to a place in the village near the chief’s cottage,
according to Joutel, was more than aquarter of a league (more than 3500 feet). Using
the approximate scale of the Teran map (half a league from the templo to the Cadi’s
house), it is about a quarter of a league from the river bank to the Cadi’s house on
the Teran map. Modern maps (U.S. Geological Survey 1950) show that it is about
4000 feet from the Eli Moores site (the location of the Cadi’s house) to an old
channel of McKinney Bayou 0~igure 2). The stream where Joutel and his party
waited for the Indians therefore must be McKinney Bayou. The Bayou must also be
the stream they "passed the day before," so it is the stream where Mr. Marie went
to bathe and met his demise.
Both Joutel and young Cavelier, as already noted, wanted to avenge the
murders of LaSalle and the others, and they had many opportunities to do so, but

308

Texas Archeological Society

LaSalle’s brother Abbe Cavelier vetoed the action. It has also been noted that Marie
was forced by the assassins "to make an end" to Mornaget’s life. Could young
Cavelier, who was at the river with Marie, have harbored such resentment of Marie’s
act that he shot him, causing his death? Furthermore, could it be more than
coincidence that Book 10 of Joutel’s original diary, which describes this part of the
experience, was lost? Delanglez (1938:18), discussing the vicissitudes that befell
Joutel’s diary, notes that three notebooks, among them Book 10, were lost, and other
sections were mutilated. He attributes most of this destruction to the Renandot
Coterie, a political group whose hero was LaSalle. A greatly abridged and edited
version of Joutel’s diary was published by Michel (Joute11962), who reconstructed
Book 10 from the diary as later published by Margry (1886 V. 3) and from notes
made from the original diary by DeLisle, the mapmaker. The translation of the
Michel edition has been used for this investigation, as well as the account in Margry
V. 3. For this purpose, they differ little, but was something omitted from these
abridged accounts that would have cast a bad light on the Cavelier family?
THE ARCHEOLOGICAL EVIDENCE
The burial of the adult male (J-3, Figure 3) with two lead balls just below the
left rib cage, was found by Jackson on a low rise or mound at the Eli Moores site
about 20 feet southeast of a posthole pattern that he interpreted as a hut (Figure 3),
but the pattern is irregular and may represent more than one house or more than one
building episode. The burial is on a low rise, so it fits the descriptions of both Joutel
and Father Anastasious, especially if the posthole pattern does indeed represent the
Cadi’s house. The case for this burial being that of Marie is strengthened further by
the fact that the Teran map shows a low rise near the Cadi’s house.
As already stated, the body was buried on the right side with the hands near the
face; the position of the lower limbs is uncertain because they had been disturbed.
The burials of all the six children were extended supine (Jackson 1932). Jackson
noted that since the flexed position of the adult was unusual, a thick midden-andash deposit covered the grave, and there were none of the offerings usually found
in aboriginal burials, the burial must date from Late Prehistoric times. A turkey bone
and a crude Young point found with the burial in all probability were inclusions in
fill dirt. All but one of the other six graves excavated by Jackson had burial goods.
The lead balls found with the burial were examined by Alan Jones, firearms
examiner, and Patrick Besant Matthews, M.D., medical examiner, both of the
Criminal Investigation Laboratory in Dallas, and Jay C. Blaine, an authority on
guns, also from Dallas.
The balls weigh 194.5 g and 165 g and are about half an inch in diameter. The
smaller ball is ramrod marked, and both are scarred. Jones (1986) notes that
although they are small for late seventeenth or early eighteenth century muskets,
they are not of the Civil War era. Blaine (1986) agrees with Jones, but adds that the
size is all right for pistols of the late seventeenth or early eighteenth century. The
fact that the two balls were found close together in the body cavity argues for shots

Gilmore ~ Archeological Footnote to History

@

........................

~

309

Post molds

Bufiats

Figure 3. Modified field drawing by A. T. Jackson, showing post molds and burials; J-3
is the grave of an adult male. (Courtesy of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
(TARL), The University of Texas at Austin.)

fired at fairly close range, probably from two pistols at the same time. Two balls
were seldom loaded into one gun, and, according to Jay Blaine, double-barrelled
guns were in only limited use at that time; nevertheless, although it is still possible,
it is unlikely, in view of the positions of the balls, that the shots were fired by two
persons at different times.
Being shot with these balls would not necessarily cause instant death. A person
could survive for two weeks or more (Besant-Matthews 1986) if vital organs were
not injured. According to Bell, Jelks, and Newcomb (1965:269), for example, one
Antonio Trevifio was still alive and apparently well six months after he received four
bullet and two lance wounds in an attack by Indians in 1765.
Was it murder? This question can’t be answered with the present evidence.
Assuming that the remains are indeed those of Marle, it is true that he was shot twice,
but when and where the shooting took place is unknown. Most likely he was shot
by a Frenchman who was perhaps holding a pistol in each hand, since at this time
of early contact, few Indians had guns, and the few Indians who had guns seldom

310

Texas Archeological Society

used pistols. Marie could have been shot at the French village near Matagorda Bay
before the group set out for Canada; no mention is made of such a shooting by the
diarists, but, on the other hand, the diarists seldom mentioned fights or violent
quarrels. Or, to indulge in wild and romantic speculation, had Marie, being a
gentleman, (as evidenced by the title Sieur) survived a duel or duels in France that
precipitated his joining the LaSalle Expedition? The shooting could have occurred
as much as three and a half months before his death when the assassins "obliged"
him "to make an end to Moranget’s life." Would the murderers have resorted to such
drastic means? And would Marie have been so reluctant that only by shooting him
could they force him to do the deed? The murderers were a bloodthirsty lot indeed,
but was Marie that courageous?
Finally, was it drowning in the river near the Indian village that caused Marie’s
death? Joutel had a case of pistols, but it seems most unlikely that he would have
risked the success of the rescue mission he was part of (getting help for the
beleaguered colony) by shooting one of its prime members. It is also unlikely that
young Cavelier shot Marie; however, youths are impetuous and seldom consider
consequences. But is it mere coincidence that the original of Joutel’s diary for this
part of the trip is missing? The question of murder remains unanswered. This time
the body was found, but the crime was missing.
In summary, the following evidence indicates that the skeletal remains containing
two lead balls excavated in 1932 by A. T. Jackson have a high probability of being
the remains of Sieur de Marie, a member of LaSalle’s colony established in 1685
near Matagorda Bay, Texas.
1. Marie was among the Frenchmen of the LaSalle Expedition who were
headed to France by the way of Canada.
2. Marie died on June 24, 1687 and was buried at a village on a small rise near
the Cadi’s house.
3. A map of this village drawn four years later by the Teran Expedition shows
the Cadi’s house and a rise nearby.
4. This village survives as the Hatchel, Mitchell, and Moores archeological
sites in Bowie County, Texas; the temple was on the Hatchel Mound and the Cadi’s
house was on the Moores site.
5. The distance from the temple to the Cadi’s house on the Teran map coincides
with the distance from the Hatchel Mound to the Eli Moores site (US Geological
Survey 1:24,000, Barkman and Ogden 7.5 minute quadrangles).
6. The distance from the Cadi’s house to the stream where Marie went to bathe
coincides with the distance from the Eli Moores site to McKinney Bayou (US
Geological Survey 1:24,~, Barkman and Ogden quadrangles).
7. Skeletal remains of an adult male were found on a low rise near a posthole
pattern at the Eli Moores site.
8. The lead balls found with the remains could date to the late seventeenth
century, which is contemporaneous with LaSalle’s colony.
9. Skeletal evidence indicates that the remains have a very low probability of
being Indian. The analysis of the remains that leads to this conclusion follows.

Gilmore E Archeological Footnote to History

311

Skeletal Analysis of Individual 571-A, (J-3)
H. Gill-King
A positive identification made from skeletal remains ordinarily requires that
known unique features, or unique combinations of features from a suspected match
be noted in the sample at hand. The challenge in this instance lies partly in the fact
that no details except for gender and implied good health or robustness are available
for the Sieur de Marie. Evidence that the burial feature known as J-3 (Goldstein
1940) is indeed that of Mr. Marie must be considered circumstantial, and this
circumstantial evidence is marred by the curious fates of the various diaries that
describe the events laid forth by Gilmore above. If it can be demonstrated beyond
reasonable doubt that the remains known as individual 571-A are those of an adult
male European, the likelihood that this person was in fact Mr. Marie increases
considerably.
A limitation imposed upon the investigation is the absence of the cranium and
mandible from the set of remains conserved at The Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory (TARL),The University of Texas at Austin. Available for analysis were
(1) three half-scale photographs taken in standard anatomical views (Figures 4, 5,
6); (2) two cranial data forms prepared by Marcus S. Goldstein in 1940 and revised
and expanded by William R. Maples in 1962 (Figure 7), and (3) the fragmentary
postcranial remains of individual 571-A (conserved at TARL).
Goldstein’s and Maples’s observations of cranium 571-A include 26 standard
measurements, five indices, annotations on the dentition and pathology, and
comments on the three standard views of the skull. Fortunately, detailed craniometric
analysis was a prominent feature of the physical anthropology of the era, and
Goldstein, and later Maples, were two of the best practitioners.
DETERMINATION OF SEX

Goldstein assigns the remains to the male sex on the basis of "large mastoid
processes, robusmess and angulation of the jaw, and notable occipital crest." To this
might be added the observation that the zygomatic arch or cheek bone inserts into
the skull well behind the ear hole. Although Goldstein’s notes on the postcranial
materials, if they exist, have not been discovered, his diagnosis of sex can be
supported by an iliac crest fragment with prominent gluteal muscle insertions. The
proximal phalanx of the right thumb shows roughened adductor muscle insertions
signifying a strong grip, and all four of the proximal phalanges recovered have
prominent crests where flexor muscles insert. A large and roughened xiphiod
process extends from the sternum (breast bone). This pattern of robustness generally
persists throughout the postcranial remains (Stewart 1979:88).

312

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 4. Front view of the cranium of burial 571 (J-3). Reproduction of half-scale
photograph made in 1940 by Marcus S. Goldstein. (Courtesy of(TARL, The University of
Texas at Austin.)

Gilmore ~ Archeological Foomote to History

313

Figure 5. Side view of the cranium of burial 571 (J-3). Reproduction of half-scale
photograph made in 1940 by Marcus S. Goldstein. (Courtesy of TARL ,The University of
Texas at Austin.)

314

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 6. Top view of the cranium of burial 571 (J-3). Reproduction of half-scale
photograph made in 1940 by Marcus S. Goldstein. (Courtesy of TARL The University of
Texas at Austin.)

Gilmore m Archeological Footnote to History

315

AGE AT DEATH

The overall picture is of a muscular male of middle years, perhaps between 40
and 50 at death. Goldstein assigned an age of"circa 40 yrs" (Figure 7), based upon
the degree of dental wear and obliterated "basilar" skull slructure (spheno-occipital
synchondrosis), which is an indication of age beyond about 35 years in modem
populations (Krogman and Iscan 1986:111). Maples later revised this estimate to 45
years (Figure 7); the second estimate may be a more realistic one, but it is impossible
to specify age so closely without making many assumptions about the history of the
subjects’s life activity.
Osteoarthritic lipping and severe wear that extend into the cervical (neck)
vertebrae, suggest an age of somewhat beyond 40 years (Stewart 1958:140-156).
The left humerus (upper ann) is broken open proximally, revealing a medullary
cone that has advanced almost to the surgical neck, suggesting an age of perhaps 50
years (Acsadi and Nemeskeri 1970:124-125).
RACE:THE CENTRALISSUE
American Indians are considerably more generalized Mongoloids than are
modem Asians, and consequently may share several craniofacial characteristics
with European Caucasians (Newman 1953:311-13). During the original excavation of this skeleton, A.T. Jackson had no reason to question the racial affinity of
individual 571-A (then known as Burial J-3), and Goldstein, in his detailed cranial
observations, made no comment on the race of this individual. Perhaps it is
significant that the space on the cranial data sheet labelled tribe was left blank. Did
Goldstein muse upon the dolichocranic (long headed) proportions of this skull with
the knowledge that most Caddo were mesocranic (round headed)? Whatever doubts
he may have had, another 22 years passed before the development of discriminant
function techniques that could resolve such issues with reasonable reliability. Our
downstream position in time now affords us the opportunity to apply these
techniques to the remains in question.
Two techniques are commonly used for the statistical discrimination of Anglo
vs. American Indian crania; the technique of Giles and Elliot (1962) and another
developed by Gill (1979) that is particularly useful in the northwestern Plains of the
United States. Because Gill’s method requires measurements that were not recorded
for the now missing skull, only the Giles-Elliot (G-E) technique could be applied
to this individual. It is likely that this method would have proved more useful in any
event because of greater similarity of the Caddo to the archeological population
(Indian Knoll) upon which the technique was developed; Stewart assigns an
accuracy of 93-95 percent to this technique. A lower estimate of usefulness, 86
percent, has been given by Birkby (1966:22). Using Goldstein’s original measurements and Maples’s revisions, the Giles-Elliot discriminant function was calculated
to be 18.1, which falls within the Anglo range (i. e., less that 22.3).

316

Texas Archeological Society

Gilmore -- Archeological Footnote to History

317

,-1

l!
"_

o~

~’oiI

-~ "~

~iI

o .~

~1~ ~+~

"~
..~’,

¥ ~o.~
~

318

Texas Archeological Society

Also revealing are three indices computed from intact limb segments and the
left clavicle; the brachial, platymetric, and claviculo-humeral indices, together with
the Giles-Elliot result, were completed for individual 571-A and various historic
Europeans populations (Table 1).

Table 1. Measurements and Indices Used to Distinguish
American Indian and European Skeletons.
Measurement/Index
Giles-Elliot
Brachial 1
Platymeric 2
Claviculo-humeral 3

571- A
18.1
74.6
88.3
44.1

Control
W<22.4
75.5 a
85.0 c
47.0

Amerindian
A>22.4
78.2 b
74.0 d
49.0 b

1 Radius length/humerus length
2 Subtrochanteric anterior diameter/Iransverse diameter for femur
3 Clavicle length/humerus length on same side
a, b Krogman and Iscan 1986:294-95
c Brothwell 1965:91
d Bass 1986:214

Goldstein noted a 95 percent incidence of shovelled incisors and a 4.5 percent
incidence of trace shovelling in the central incisors of Texas Indians of this period
and region (Goldstein 1948:71-82). This observation stands in sharp contrast
against the data for 571-A, which explicitly indicates no shovelling or trace
shovelling (Figure 7); Maples did not change or add to this observation in 1962.
Since dental and craniofacial structures are genetically independent in their
development (Ranly 1980:112-113), the statistical likelihood of discovering a
particular Giles-Elliot value in combination with shovelling (or nonshovelling) in
the same individual is equal to the product of the independent chances of having
either. From the null-hypothesis perspective, one might ask "what are the chances
of a Caddo having a Giles-Elliot value below 22.4 and no shovelling?" Since the
minimum reliability of the G-E function is 86 percent, and the likelihood of a Caddo
having shovelling is about 95 percent, the issue may be restated as follows: The
chance of a Caddo having a G-E value above 22.4 is about 14 percent, and the chance
of a Caddo being without shovelling is about 5 percent. Therefore, the chance of a
Caddo having this combination of characteristics is 5 percent times 14 percent, or
0.7 percent (or less if trace shovelling is counted). Goldstein also notes a slight
overbite in his analysis of 57 l-A, a departure from the typical edge-to-edge bite
expected in American Indians of the region.
A separate line of reasoning based upon presumed dietary differences between
seventeenth century Europeans and their Caddo contemporaries was also pursued.

Gilmore ~ Archeological Footnote to History

319

Katzenberg and Krouse (1987:156) demonstrated the use of stable isotope ratios of
12C and 1~C and 15N and 14N to identify population membership in forensic contexts.
Because stable isotope data for late prehistoric and early historic Caddo of the
northeast Texas area were available, it seemed useful to compare these data with
isotopic data on individual 571-A (Figure 8). These data indicate that individual
571-A differs appreciably from the Caddo samples by having had a diet that was not
only more varied but also richer in condensed (animal/marine) protein sources
(Kruger and Sullivan 1984:219-220).

+25,

o
+20

o
Z
uq

+10’

+5

o%

)

J
I

)
)

J
f

t

A

-20

-15

-’~o

-5

~13Cgelatin
0 - Northwest Coast Eskimo (fish, seals, and occasional car;Dou
- Coast of Mame (fish and shellfish)
- 41HPI06 and DN 97 Caddo (maize supplemented by hunting)
!ndv~dual 571-A (presumed European m~xed diet)

Figure 8. Isotopic profile of individual 571-A compared to profiles of groups with known
diets.

320

Texas Archeological Society

Such findings are by themselves inconclusive, but they round out the picture
developed from dental, morphological, and metric observation.
THE LIVING APPEARANCE OF THE INDIVIDUAL
Standard procedure in determining individual identity from skeletal remains
begs an attempt to describe how the person might have looked near the time of death.
This involves assessment of sex, age, race, stature, some estimate of general
physique, and, where feasible, any probable abnormality of posture or gait and any
pathology that might have been noticeable in life. In this case, the observations are
summarized in the hope that a more thorough description of the suspected match,
de Marie, from personal accounts, diaries of others, ship’s rosters, or other
historiographic sources that may become available to researchers in the future.
These observations are divided into (1) characteristics that would have been evident
in the appearance or possibly in mechanical functioning of the living subject and (2)
cryptic traits revealed only in the skeleton (Table 2).

Table 2. Observations of Skeleton 571-A
Traits Possibly
Noticeable in Life
1.Inflammatory bone reaction left frontotemporal
2.Pronounced left deviation
of xiphod process\ (visible in posture).
3.Missing right upper second incisor
4.Stature, (from left humerus)
is 17 1.5 cm ~ 3.9cm (Trotter and
Gleser 1977:355-56)

Cryptic
(Skeletal) Traits
1.Fracture of proximal left.
humerus
2.Schmorrs nodes T-21>L1a
3. Left sided compression of
two thoracic vertebrae
4.Herniated centrum (T-4?)

5.Prominent insertions on flexor
surfaces
a Ortner and Putschar 1986:331

Although it is impossible to know with certainty, it is likely that the extensive
osteoarthritic condition of the spine, together with the compressions and herniation
noted, imposed some limitations on the flexibility of the upper body and suggests
some degree of right-sided scoliosis. These observations merge into an impression
of a robust male European of late middle years whose skeleton belies a history of
rigorous upper body effort of a bending/lifting nature. The fracture noted on the
proximal left humerus and the inflammatory bone reaction on the temporal region
of the same side may have occured as part of a single, massive traumatic event.

Gilmore -- Archeological Footnote to History

321

CAUSE AND MANNER OF DEATH

The central position of the two lead projectiles in the region of the diaphragm
suggests that gunshot was the cause of death. Neither of the soft lead pellets is
damaged beyond indentations that represent primer signatures, whereas, had either
pellet struck a rib or a vertebra, it is likely that more damage to these soft lead
projectiles would be evident. About 40 to 50 percent of the linear surface of the ribs
was recovered, and these fragments give no indication of ballistic damage. The
foregoing suggests that the projectiles entered through the soft tissues of the anterior
abdomen.
The events and circumstances immediately surrounding the demise of a person
are know as the manner of death. Here, few inferences are possible. As already
stated, it is reasonable to conclude that two pistols were used to shoot the subject,
since neither ball had the contact or impactfacet often seen when pistols of that day
were loaded with more than one pellet. Yet, if we are to assume that two pistols were
used, we must decide whether one or two assailants were involved. The close
placement of the two shots could be interpreted equally well as good marksmanship
by two parties or by one. In either case, the victim was in all likelihood shot at close
range and from the front. Does all this mean that individual 571-A allowed his
murderer to move within close range, and, if so, what can be made of it? Here the
issue of manner of death must remain unclear.
SUMMARY

The remains analyzed here were brought to the writer’s attention by Gilmore
because of their unusual disposition and by the high probability that the grave from
which they came was that of one Sieur de Marie. The skeleton in question is, with
little doubt, that of a European male of late midlife. Why was this adult individual
laid out in a flexed position, which was inconsistent with the local practice, in a
children’s burial plot? Was the interment a deliberate attempt to obscure the
circumstances of death or a practical solution dictated by circumstances? Whether
the findings described represent vengeful premeditation or rage at a moment of
opportunity may never be known. Yet it is hoped that this analysis provides a basis
for comparison against whatever biographical or historic data concerning Mr. Marie
may emerge in time.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank all who have been interested in this problem, those who reviewed the
manuscript and offered suggestions, and especially those who had a solution to the
"crime"--all too numerous to list. We are also grateful for the detailed records left
by all who have examined the osteological remains and for the cooperation of the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory of The University of Texas at Austin and
the Southwestern Institute of Forensic Sciences in Dallas.

322

Texas ArcheologicaI Society
REFERENCES CITED

Acsadi, G., and J. Nemeskeri
1970 History of Human Lifespan and Mortality. Kiado Academy Press,
Budapest, Hungary.
Bass, W. M.
1987 Human Osteology : A Laboratory and Field Manual (third edition).Missouri Archeological Society, Columbia.

Bell, R. E., E. B. Jelks, and W. W. Newcomb
1967 A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory. Final
report to the National Science Foundation, Grant GS964, Washington,
DC.
Birkby, W. H.
1966 An Evaluation of Race and Sex Identification from Cranial
Measurements. American Journal ofPhysical Anthropology 24:21-28.
Brothwell, D. R.
1965 Digging Up Bones: The Excavation, Treatment, and Study of Human
Skeletal Remains. British Museum of Natural History, London.
Cox, I. J.
1968 The Journeys of Sieur de la Salle. The Pemberton Press, Austin.

Delanglez, J.
1938 The Journal of Jean Cavelier. Institute of Jesuit History, Chicago.
Giles, E., and O. Elliot
1962 Race Identification from Cranial Measurements. Journal of Forensic
Science 7:147-57.

Gill, G. W.
1984 A Forensic Test Case for a New Method of Geographical Race Determination. In: Human Identification: Case Studies in Forensic Anthropology, edited by T. A. Rathbun and J. E. Buikstra, 44-87. C. C. Thomas,
Springfield, Missouri.
Goldstein, M. S. J.
1940 Skeletal Material from E. H. Moore’s Farm. Manuscript on file, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, Austin.
1948 Dentititon in Indian Crania from Texas. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology 6:63-84.

Gilmore ~ Archeological Footnote to History

323

Hatcher, M. A.
1932 The Expedition ofdon Domingo Teran de los Rios into Texas.Prelim2nary
Studies of the Texas Catholic Historical Society, Vol. 2, No. 1, Austin.
Hamilton, T. M.
1980 Colonial Frontier Guns. The Furr Press, Chadron, Nebraska.
Jackson, A. T.
1932 Exploration of a Burial Site on E. H. Moore’s Plantation in Bowie
County, Texas. Manuscript on file, Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, Austin.
Joutel, Henri
1714 Jouters Journal of La Salle’s Last Voyage. (1962 Reprint) Corinth
Books, New York.
Katzenberg, M. A., and H. R. Krouse
1987 Forensic Applications of Stable Isotope Analysis. Journal of the Canadian Society of Forensic Sciences 20(3): 156.
Krogman, W. M., and M. Y. Iscan
1986 The Human Skeleton in Forensic Medicine, second edition, C. C.
Thomas, Springfield, Missouri.
Kruger, H. W., and C. H. Sullivan
1984 Models for Carbon Isotope Fractionation between Diet and Bone.
American Chemical Society Symposium Series 258:205-220.

Maples, W. R.
1962 The Morphological Comparison of Skeletal Material from Sanders
Focus and from Fulton Aspect. Unpublished M.A. thesis, Department of
Anthropology, University of Texas, Austin.
Margry, Pierre
1888 Decouvertes et Establissments des Francais dans l’ Quest et darts le Sud
de l’Amerique Septentrionale (1614-1754), Vol. 3. Paris.
Nemeskrri, J~inos, Lfiszl6 Harsfinyi, and Gy,3rgy Acsfidi
1960 Methoden zur Diagnose des Lebensalters von Skellettfunden.
Anthropologischer Anzeiger 24(1):70-95, Stuttgart.
Newman, M. T.
1953 The Application of Ecological Rules to the Racial Anthropology of the
Aboriginal New World. American Anthropologist 55(1):311-327 and
313-325.

324

Texas Archeological Society

Ortner, D. J., and W. G. J. Putschar
1985 Identification of Pathological Conditions in Human Skeletal Remains.
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC.

Ranly, D. M.
1980 A Synopsis ofCraniofacial Growth. Appleton-Century-Crofts,Norwalk,
Connecticut.
Stewart, T. D.
1958 The Rate of Development of Vertebral Osteoarthritis in American
Whites and Its Significance in Skeletal Age Determination. The Leech
28(3): 140-156.
1979 Essentials of Forensic Anthropology, Especially as Developed in the
United States. C. C. Thomas, Springfield, Missouri.
U.S. Geological Survey
1950a Barkman Quadrangle, Tex.-Ark. 7.5 Minute Series, Photorevised 1970.
1950b Ogden Quadrangle, Ark.-Tex. 7.5 Minute Series, Photorevised 1970.
Wedel, M. M.
1978 La Harpe’s 1719 Post on Red River and Nearby Caddo Settlements.
Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin 30, University of Texas, Austin.

325

An Examination and Appraisal of Malakoff Heads
No. 1 and No. 3
Thomas H. Guderjan
ABSTRACT
The three boulders known as the Malakoff Heads, found more than 50 years
ago in gravel quarries, were thought by several professional people to be the work
of Pleistocene man, but intensive archeological work has turned up no new
evidence of related materials. Indeed, careful and detailed examination of the
heads by the author leads to the conclusion that none of the three heads is the work
of early man.

INTRODUCTION
The Malakoff Heads, also called Malakoff Man, have been enigmatic since
their discovery more than 50 years ago. These three boulders were found in gravel
quarries near Malakoff, in Henderson County, Texas, along Cedar Creek in the
Trinity River Basin. Interpretations of the carved anthropomorphic images have
ranged from evidence ofpre-Clovis man to outright frauds. Though the finds could
well have faded into the obscurity of a small footnote to archeology, claims that they
are authentic persist in nonprofessional journals (Agogino 1987) and in Texas
newspapers (Greene 1986).

History and Context of the Finds
The first of the three Malakoff Heads was found on November 2, 1929, by
workers in Pit No. 1 of the Texas Clay Products Co.’s quarries 8 km (5 miles) from
Malakoff. On November 4, 1929, Head No. 1 was moved to the company’s offices
in Malakoff. Five days later it was reported to E. H. Sellards at the University of
Texas, who visited the site on November 26, 1929 (Athens Daily Review 1967).
Sellards was apparently convinced of the authenticity of the find and prepared an
article for American Antiquity that he later withdrew, expecting that more and better
evidence would soon surface (Sellards 1941). Sellards determined that Head No. 1
had come from an Eocene formation underlying the 50,000-to-100,000-year-old
Trinity gravels (Athens Weekly Review 1930). Since the head was friable, a gum
arabic solution was used to arrest its decay on January 4, 1930.
Malakoff Head No. 1 is a calcareous, ferruginous sandstone concretion
measuring 41 by 36 cm and weighing 44.5 kg (Sellards 1941). Head No. 1 is the most
distinct of the three, with the eyes, ears, mouth, nose, and eyebrows of a human
carved in the stone (Figure 1).
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 60 (1989)

326

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Malakoff Head No. 1. (Courtesy of the Texas Memorial Museum.)

Guderjan m Malakoff Heads

327

As Sellards expected, a second head was found in September 1935 in Texas
Clay Products Pit No. 2, very near the fh’st find. Head No. 2 measures 38 by 31 cm
and weighs 28 kg. This image is not as distinct, since it has only carved eyes and
mouth (Figure 2). Head No. 2 was also found by workmen and reported to Sellards,
who believed it too was authentic.
Excavations of the Works Progress Administration (WPA) were then undertaken by Glen Evans, of the University of Texas, from April to August 1938 and by
George Shafer from May 1939 to July 1940. In November 1939 Head No. 3 was
found in situ at Texas Clay Products Pit No. 1 at a depth of 6.5 meters. This boulder
has a 51-cm diameter and weighs 61 kg ~igure 3). However, no cultural remains
were found either in association with or in the vicinity of the boulder. Despite the
extremely crude appearance of Head No. 3, Sellards was still again convinced that
it was the work of prehistoric man (1941).
Contrary to newspaper reports, Sellards did not specify a date for the finds.
However, based upon his analysis of the terraces and fauna from the excavations,
he placed the gravels in the Pleistocene (1941). The redating of the Trinity River
terraces to the Late Pleistocene or Quaternary (Slaughter 1962), has led some
archeologists to consider that a Paleoindian date for the heads is feasible (Parker
Nunley, personal communication).
Other Similar Finds
Since 1935, no new evidence for related materials has come from the Malakoff
region, despite intensive archeological work (Story 1965; Richner and Lee 1977;
Richner and Bagot 1978; Guderjan 1981). However, a smaller carved stone effigy
is in the possession of Mary Ann Perryman, of Athens, Texas (personal communication). It has not been examined, but judging from her oral descriptions, this head
is no more than an ecofact. Although no other confirming evidence has been found
in the region, several similar finds have been reported from other areas.
In 1987, a human effigy was brought to the attention of Larry Pete at San Jacinto
College South by Bebe Morgan; it had been found near Cross Plains in Callahan
County and was purportedly given to her uncle by an "old Indian" who originally
found it. This sandstone sculpture is much smaller than the Malakoff Heads. It
measures 30 by 18 cm and weighs 10 kg (Larry Pete and Bebe Morgan, personal
communications). The Morgan Head has Negroid features that are much more
distinct than those of the Malakoff Heads.
Although both are carved human effigies, no relationship is assumed between
the Morgan and Malakoff heads. However, A. C. Greene reported that"in 1928 what
was termed ’a finely sculptured sandstone head, wearing a conical shaped cap’ was
found near a gravel pit south of Cross Plains in Callahan County, the head having
similarly shaped eyes [to a Xipe-Toltec figurine] and a patina indicating ’some
age’" (Greene 1986). Both of the Callahan County heads seem to bear a general
relationship to Olmec heads from Veracruz.

328

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

Figure 2. Malakoff Head No. 2. (Courtesy of the Texas Memorial Museum.)

Guderjan ~ Malakoff Heads

Figure 3. Malakoff Head No. 3. (Courtesy of the Texas Memorial Museum.)

329

330

Texas Archeological Society

George Agogino reports that two other carved effigies have been found in
South Texas and northern Mexico. One, which he states is quite similar to Malakoff
Head No. 1--weighing 41 kg, and measuring 31 cm across--was found during
dredging of the Rio Grande floodplain in 1963 (Agogino 1987). Another was found
in 1965, 30 km south of Juarez, Mexico, from a "deep earth deposit" (Agogino
1987). This one was smaller, only 36 by 33 cm and weighed 14 kg.
Supporters and Detractors

Opinions regarding the validity of Malakoff Man vary greatly. Sellards
believed them to be evidence of Pleistocene Man (1941),but it must be remembered
how different from now the view of early Americans was at that time. Only recently
had the Folsom site been authenticated, and the concept of great antiquity for
American Indians was being validated. Yet, Slaughter’s restudy of the Trinity
terraces has led some to believe that Malakoff Man may be related to early
Paleoindians. Agogino considers the heads "pale copies" of the Olmec heads and
places them in the Archaic period (1987). Glen Evans, who interviewed the discoverers of Heads No. 1 and 2, was convinced of the authenticity and antiquity (Story
1960:176).
Recent investigators in the Cedar Creek-Trinity River region have been less
positive. Jeff Richner chose simply to avoid discussing the topic (Richner and Lee
1977; Richner and Bargot 1978), and this author once termed Malakoff Man" a
likel y fraud," though he had not yet examined the actual heads (Guderj an 1981 ). Dee
Ann Story has recently taken the most diplomatic of all approaches, saying that it
"remains a matter of opinion" (MS, 5-52), but she clearly doubts that Head No. 3
is man-made (MS, 5-51).
AN EXAMINATION AND APPRAISAL OF HEADS NO. 1 and.3

The issues raised in evaluating the authenticity of MalakoffMan are clear. First,
are the heads man-made? Second, if so, then by whom and when? Finally, if they
are authentic, then what meaning do they have? There is a consensus that Heads No.
1 and 2 are indeed man-made, so the first concern in these cases may be considered
to be satisfied. Head No. 3, however, is not nearly as well accepted.
In May 1989, this author was able to examine the Malakoff Heads No. 1 and
3 at the Texas Memorial Museum. Head No. 2 is stored in Corsicana, Texas and was
not examined.
Head No. 1

Malakoff Head No. 1 was examined to determine whether evidence existed
regarding the technology used in its manufacture. Several facts indicate that it was
quite recently made with modern metal tools. First, the nose was formed by abrading
the areas on both sides. The nose is much more heavily oxidized than are either of
the sides, where very little oxidation has occurred. This lack of oxidation is an

Guderjan ~ Malakoff Heads

331

indication that the abrading was done fairly recently.
The eyes, mouth, and ears of Head No. 1 were made by chiseling into the
sandstone with a very thin, sharp, hard object that was then twisted to remove
material from the stone, but it is unlikely that a stone or bone tool could have been
used repeatedly as a gouge in this manner without shattering. In the left eye there
are two marks of a pointed gouge used this way, in the mouth there are 10 to 13, in
the right eye there is one, and, more importantly, there is also a rectangular gouge
mark in the left eye that measures nine thirty-seconds by five thirty-seconds of an
inch ~igure4), only one thirty-second of an inch larger than a common quarter-inch
steel chisel. Furthermore, the left eye has been stained darker than the surrounding
oxidized surface in an apparent attempt to disguise the work of the modem maker.
The only conclusion that can be reasonably drawn from this examination is that
Head No. 1 was made with metal tools, probably at the time of its discovery. This
author can only conclude that Head No. 1 is a forgery.

Figure 4. Macrophotograph of left eye of Head No. 1, showing gouge marks from a
metal tool.

Head No. 3
There are several indications that Head No. 3 is not man-made. In fact, only
two areas of Head No. 3--the mouth and right eye--are potentially man-made. In
the mouth area there are vague marks that may have been made by a back-and-forth
cutting action, but calcareous material has formed in the eye, and, further, sedimentary quartzite crystals or some type of similar deposits have formed in a crack in
the eye and are large enough that they protrude into the eye. Since Head No. 3 was

332

Texas Archeological Society

found in a gravel deposit rather than its original geologic context, it is highly
improbable that these crystalline deposits formed since any reasonable (Quaternary) time of possible human manufacture. Further, a clear shovel mark has
produced a spall, which has not oxidized, but extends to the eye. All of this indicates
that Head No. 3 is not chemically active in its present state and that there is little
likelihood of rapid crystalline formation in the past. It is more likely that the
quartzite crystals formed within the rock in its original geological context (some bed
of cemented ferruginous sandstone) and that the"eye" is the result of natural erosion
around the crystals.
In the light of the extreme crudeness of this specimen, it is quite unlikely that
it ever would have been considered man-made had it not been for the tantalizing
possibilities offered by the first two specimens. The almost irrefutable evidence-presented by the crystalline deposit---of the very great antiquity of the mark that has
been called an eye, Head No. 3 can be assessed only as an ecofact without any
archeological meaning.
SUMMARY

Despite subsequent finds similar to the Malakoff Heads, no other confirming
evidence for their authenticity has been found in the Cedar Creek-Trinity River area
where they were found. The only possible exception is the Perryman specimen,
which has not been examined. The case for authenticity of the Heads has rested upon
their clearly man-made nature and faith in the information given by the "discoverers" of the Heads No. 1 and 2.
The case for the provenience of Head No. 3 is strong, considering the wellcontrolled circumstances of its discovery. However, it is almost certainly an ecofact
without archaeological significance. The case against the great antiquity that has
been claimed for Head No. 1 is as strong. The use of metal tools in the English system
of measurement indicates small likelihood that Head No. 1 predates November
1929.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Elaine Sullivan, of the Texas Memorial Museum, facilitated and joined in the
examination and photography of Malakoff Heads No. 1 and 3. A. C. Greene,
Roberta McGregor, Bebe Morgan, Mary Ann Perryman, Larry Pete, and Dee Ann
Story graciously shared information with the author.
REFERENCES CITED
Athens Daily Review
1967
Malakoff Man Described as One of Oldest Art in Americas.August 12, 1967.

Guderjan ~ Malakoff Heads

333

Athens Weekly Review
1930
Image Found at Malakoff Thousands of Years Old. February 20, 1930, 1.
Agogino, G. C.
1987
The Large Stone Heads from MalakoffTexas! Their Age and Cultural Origins.
The Thesopian 25:2-6.
Greene, A. C.
1986
The Mystery of Texas’ Sculptured Heads. Houston Chronicle, 10-11, October
26.
Guderjan, T. H.
1981
Archeological Investigations in the Forest Grove/Big Rock Areas: NorthCentralTexas. Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University,
Dallas.
Richner, Jeffery, and J. T. Bagot
1978
A Reconnaissance Survey of the Trinity River Basin. Archaeology Program,
Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Richner, Jeffery, and Reed Lee
1977

Archaeological and Ethnohistorical Survey at Tennessee Colony Lake 1975.
Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

Sellards, E. H.
1941
Stone Images from Henderson County, Texas. American Antiquity 7:1:29-38.
Slaughter, Robert, W. N. Koos, L. A. Putnam, and W. D. Mitchell
1962
Report No. 48. Bureau of Economic Geology, University of Texas.
Story, D. A.
1965
Archaeology of Cedar Creek Reservoir. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 36:163-251.
1990

Cultural History of the Native Americans. Chapter 5 in Archeology and
Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain, Vols. 1 and 2, by Dee Ann Story, Janis
A. Guy, Barbara A. Burnett, Martha Doty Freeman, Jerome C. Rose, D. Gentry
Steele, Ben W. Olive, and Karl J. Reinhard. Arkansas Archeological Society
Research Series, 38, pp. 63-366

335

Book Review
FROM MOUNTAIN PEAKS TO ALLIGATOR STOMACHS:
A Review of Lithic Sources in the Trans-MississippiSouth, the
Southern Plains, and Adjacent Southwest. By Larry D. Banks.
Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Memoir 4. Norman,
Oklahoma. vi + 179 pp., 84 figures, and 13 plates. $25.00.
This memoir is the long-awaited compendium of Larry Banks’s widely
recognized knowledge about the kinds and sources of raw material for stone tools
in the south-central United States. It was originally intended to be published as part
of the 14-volume series of overviews covering the cultural resources in the districts
comprising the Southwestern Division of the Corps of Engineers (all of Oklahoma,
Texas, and New Mexico, and most of Arkansas and l_~uisiana, as well as bits of
Missouri, Kansas, and Colorado); however, funding constraints stalled that effort.
The Oklahoma Anthropological Society deserves considerable credit for undertaking its publication.
This reviewer approached the volume with the anticipation of a flint knapper
sizing up an exceptionally fine nodule of chert. Unfortunately, like a hapless
knapper, as I began to chip away at it, I was disappointed to find many flaws and
feared that the piece might not be salvageable; however, as I persevered, the flaws
paled and the merits were revealed.
The reader will find many distracting but not insurmountable defects, primarily
of an editorial nature, such as "quarries generally do not usually contain diagnostic
artifacts" (p. 5), and"analytical analyses are not available" (p. 31). Lack of verb and
subject agreement is common, and there are some spelling errors; For example,
diapheneity is misspelled in the glossary (p. 150). Most disheartening is the quality
of the color plates that are intended to overcome the severe limitations of words in
describing the subtle mixes of color, color pattem, luster, and texture that distinguish one chert from another. Well-known cherts are barely recognizable in some
of the plates; for example, the Alibates chert in Plates 9 and 10 looks dull and lacks
almost completely the reds and purples that are so characteristic of the Alibates
material. But my advice is to pass over the flaws and read on--there is much to be
gained.
Banks’s discussion covers chert and other chippable stones as well as selected
rocks and minerals used aboriginally in the manufacture of pecked/ground/polished
artifacts. In all cases, rocks and minerals and their occurrences are treated, as they
should be by using principles, definitions, and concepts from the geological
sciences. If heeded, Banks’s advice (page 3) that archeologists should avail
themselves of the accomplishments of geologists would improve the prospects for
lithic source studies.

336

Texas Archeological Society

The presentation is organized geographically, with a chapter on each of five
areas (Ozark-Arkansas-Ouachita; CoastalPlains of Texas, Arkansas, and Louisiana;
Central Texas; Basin and Range; and Great Plains). Banks discusses the lithic
sources of each area according to the mapped geologic units in which they occur.
This approach is greatly preferable to the too common discussion of lithic sources
in folk geographic terms, often by specific quarries--what Koldehoff (1987:160)
appropriately dubbed the "lithic landscape." I hope Banks’s lead will be followed
and that future studies of lithic sources will be soundly based on geologic mapping.
I suspect that most readers will be surprised at the diversity of lithic sources-especially of chippable stone--in the areas with which they are not familiar.
An important strength of this monograph is in the recurrent discussions of the
full range of occurrences manifested by each kind of lithic material: bedrock
outcrops, stream gravels, lag gravels in soils, and other complexities usually glossed
over in source area studies. With the same thoroughness, Banks covers such easily
overlooked lithic sources as the Antlers Formation, a sandstone that crops out in
patches over a wide expanse of western Texas. In some places in the Antlers there
are pebbles and cobbles of chippable stone, including chert.
It is inevitable that the coverage in any attempt to synthesize information over
a wide and diverse area will be uneven, and that those who are intimately familiar
with local conditions will want to quibble over details. My quibble is over the
coverage of Texas where, although he produces the best synthesis to date, Banks
oversimplifies the nature of the occurrence of chippable stone. The discussion of
chippable stone sources in the Coastal Plains Province (Chapter 2) is accurate when
it makes the points that (1) the most abundant and important occurrences are in the
form of gravels, and (2) that gravel sources pose severe difficulties for archeological
lithic source studies. However, the discussion fails to convey adequately the fact
that some of these sources are abundant, that the stone is often of very high quality,
and that specimens from some localities have attributes (primarily cortical) that are
fairly distinctive; for example, cherts from the Willis and Goliad formations. In a
wide band from near La Joya in Hidalgo County on the Rio Grande to the lower
Sabine Valley, nearly parallel to the coast, there is enough chippable stone in gravels
to support most aboriginal needs. Banks gives more legitimacy to Uvalde Gravels
than strict adherence to the rules of stratigraphic nomenclature would permit, but he
does accurately characterize the difficulty that such widespread lag gravels pose for
lithic sourcing. In the chapter on Central Texas (3), Banks does not discuss the
extensive limestone region of West Central Texas, in spite of the presence there of
many outcrops of high quality cherts. The inclusion of chert sources identified by
Jack Hedrick, of E1 Paso, would have added important information to the account
of the Basin and Range sector of Texas (Chapter 4), particularly in the vicinity of
Van Horn. There are similar relatively minor omissions in the section on the Great
Plains (Chapter 5).
The agonizing truth, as Banks repeatedly stresses, is that in spite of efforts to
date, we really know rather little about lithic sources, their characteristics, and

Book Review

337

especially their complexities. The message of this monograph is clear--that lookalikes are probably more common that we care to believe, and we are all probably
guilty of impressionistic identifications based on piecemeal experience rather than
on rigorous systematic comparisons with samples from documented geologic
sources. Visual comparisons of unknowns with knowns will remain the most
important means for most lithic source identifications, in spite of increasing use of
chemical and physical tests. This means that our identifications must be made as
carefully and with as much knowledge and experience as possible. Banks’s treatise
is the place to begin organizing that knowledge. A much-needed first step is to build
more comprehensive reference collections. Each of us should be systematically
collecting and exchanging samples widely from the geologic sources that are
available to us. Should this be done for the full range of sources Banks presents and
should his approach be applied to additional sources, a comparative data base of
sources would be established, and, with such a data base, we might begin to
comprehend the complex human behaviors related to these sources and their
counterparts in the past.
Do not expect to use this monograph as a key to the identification of lithic
specimens. It is not intended for that purpose and, even if it were, the difficulty of
communicating sufficient information for reliable identification would have been
immense. Instead, the volume guides you to the materials that, on the basis of sideby-side comparison or chemico-physical tests, might match your specimens. It also
provides a basic reference to be cited in support of your lithic identifications and
their geologic origins.
The alligator stomachs? You’ll just have to read the monograph and find out
for yourself.

Michael B. Collins
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
The University of Texas at Austin

REFERENCE CITED

Koldehoff, Brad
1987
The CahokiaFlakeTool Industry: Socioeconomic Implications for Late Prehistory
in the Central Mississippi Valley. In: The Organization of Core Technology,
edited by Jay K. Johnson and Carol A. Morrow. Westview Press, Boulder.

339

AUTHORS
Van Tries Button is a staff archeologist with the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation,
formerly with its Southwest Region office in Amarillo, Texas, and now in
New Orleans, Louisiana. He has been with Reclamation since 1978 and, in
administrative aspects, assisted the archeological investigations at the agency’s
mostrecently built Texas reservoirs: Choke Canyon (Live Oak and McMullen
counties) and Palmetto Bend (Jackson County). He has also done archeological
research in Colorado, Oklahoma, New Mexico, and Israel. He received his
B.A. in Anthropology from Reed College and his M.A., also in Anthropology,
from the University of Arizona in 1976.
Michael B. Collins is a Research Fellow of the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin. He specializes in the
prehistoric archeology of Texas and has maintained a long-standing interest
in lithic technology. Address: Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
Balcones Research Center, Austin, TX 78712-1100.
KimA. Cox is an attorney in Corpus Christi, Texas and a member of the Coastal Bend
Archeological Society, The Southern Texas Archaeological Association,
and the TAS. He has participated in fieldwork in Texas, New Mexico, and
Belize. Address: 500 North Water, Corpus Christi, TX 78471.
Robert E. Forrester is a semiretired chemist and an active avocational archeologist
with many years of field experience in Central and North Central Texas, and
in western New Mexico. He has been a member of the Texas Archeological
Society since 1939, is a founding member of the Tarrant County Archeological
Society, and also belongs to the Dallas Archeological Society, the Southern
Texas Archaeological Association, the Oklahoma Anthropological Society,
the Plains Anthropological Society, the Arizona Archaeological and Historical
Society, and the Archaeological Society of New Mexico. He has published
several articles and many reports. Address: 6229 Malvey Ave., Fort Worth,
TX 76116.

Kathleen Gilmore, a Past President of the Texas Archeological Society and the
Society for Historical Archaeology, received her doctorate in anthropology
from Southern Methodist University in 1973. She has been a Research
Associate at the University of North Texas, Institute of Applied Sciences,
until her recent retirement.
H. Gill-King received his Ph.D. from Southern Methodist University in Physical
Anthropology (1974) and conducted postdoctoral work at the Southwest
Institute of Forensic Sciences in Dallas. He currently serves as Director of the
Laboratory ofForensic Anthropology and is Associate Professor of Biological
Sciences at the University of North Texas. He is also a consultant to the
medical examiners of Dallas, Tarrant, and Collin counties.

340

Texas Archeological Society

Thomas H. Gtuterjan is a Senior Research Associate at The University of Texas
Institute of Texan Cultures and the Director of the Maya Research Program
in San Antonio. He received his graduate degrees from Southern Methodist
University and is currently engaged in long-term research in the Medina
Valley of Texas and the Rio Bravo area of northwestern Belize. Address:
University of Texas Institute of Texan Cultures, P.O. Box 1226, San
Antonio, TX 78294.
William Hendy Address: 2904 N. Britton Rd., Irving, TX 75062.
Jack T. Hofman is a native of Oklahoma who received his training at the University
of Oklahoma (B.A. 1976), the University of Wyoming, and the University
of Tennessee (Ph.D. 1986). He is currently a staff archeologist in the
Oklahoma Archeological Survey and has also served as Adjunct Assistant
Professor at the University of Oklahoma. His research has focused on the
regional investigation of prehistoric hunter-gatherers, with emphasis on the
Pleistocene-Holocene transition period on the Southern Plains. He has
published several works on his Folsom research, including a recent report in
the Plains Anthropologist on the Shifting Sands site in West Texas. He has
published in Current Research in the Pleistocene and Current Anthropology
and has also written (1988) a chapter in Ice-Age Hunters of the Rockies,
edited by D. J. Stanford and J. S. Day. Address: Oklahoma Archaeological
Survey.
Jeffery A. Huebner was born in Pennsylvania and came to Texas while in the U.S.
Army. He developed a keen interest in Texas archeology and in 1985
completed his B.A. in anthropology at The University of Texas at San
Antonio (UTSA). He subsequently completed gaduate work at UTSA and is
now a doctoral candidate at The University of Texas at Austin. Jeff is well
known in South Texas for his work at the Burris site in Victoria County, as
well as his analysis of burials from the Rudy Hadiak site in Kames County.
He and his wife Elizabeth live with several cats in North Austin. Address:
Texas ArcheologicalResearch Laboratory, BalconesResearch Center, Austin,
TX 78712-1100.

David T. Hughes was raised in Canyon, Texas and became involved with Panhandle
archeology at about age five. His baccalaureate in geology was obtained
from West Texas State University, and, on threat of having to earn a living,
he went on to the University of Arkansas for his M.A. and to the University
of Oklahoma for his Ph.D., both in anthropology. He has done archeological
work from the Yukon River to the Rio Grande and from the Pecos to the
Mississippi. Today he teaches anthropology and directs acontract archeology
program for The Wichita State University, Wichita, KS.
Jack T. Hughes received his undergraduate training in anthropology at The
University of Texas and his Ph.D. in anthropology from Columbia University
in 1968. He taught anthropology and geology at West Texas State University
from 1951 until his retirement as Professor of Anthropology in 1985. His

Authors

341

specialty is the archeology of the Southern Plains, but he has also done field
research in the Caddo area of Northeast Texas and on the Central and
Northern Plains. Address: 1903 3rd Ave., Canyon, TX 79015.
Christopher Lintz is the cultural resource program director for the Austin, Texas
branch office of Mariah Associates, Inc. He received his Ph.D. in anthropology
from the University of Oklahoma in 1984 for his investigations of Antelope
Creek adaptations in the Texas Panhandle. He is the author of many reports
on archeological investigations on the Southern High Plains and Caddoan
areas. In Texas, he directed the 1984 fieldwork at Landergin Mesa for the
Office of the State Archeologist and serves at the Principal investigator for
the 1989-1990 testing and data recovery fieldwork at the O. H. Ivie
Reservoir near San Angelo and the data recovery fieldwork on the Palo Duro
Reservoir project near Spearman. He can be reached at 8312 Adirondack
Trail, Austin, TX 78759.
Wayne Parker is an avocational archeologist and a member of the Crosby County
Museum Association, the TAS, the Southern Texas Archaeological
Association, and other groups promoting archeology and cultural heritage.
He is a relative of the famous Comanche chief Quanah Parker and has a
particular interest in the ethnohistory and archeology of Late Prehistoric and
Historic Indian groups of the Southern Plains. Wayne has previously
published reports in the Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, La
Tierra, Central States Archaeological Journal, and Artifacts. He is the
author of a major report on the Bridwell Site, which was published by the
Crosby County Museum Association (1982). Wayne ranches in Crosby
County near Rails, Texas.
John Redding is a member of the South Plains Archeological Society and has
collected Indian artifacts in various parts of West Texas for many years. In
recent years he has collaborated with Wayne Parker in a variety of projects,
such as the one documented in their report in this volume. Mr. Redding and
his family live in rural Floyd County, Texas.
C. Bertrand Schultz, retired Professor of Geology and Director of the University of
Nebraska State Museum, has conducted research for many decades on the
Tertiary and Quaternary geology and vertebrate paleontology of the Central
and Southern Plains and on late Paleoindian sites in those areas. Address:
Nebraska Academy of Sciences, Morrill Hall, University of Nebraska,
Lincoln, NE 68588.
Herman A. Smith is the museum archeologist at the Corpus Christi Museum in
Corpus Christi, Texas. He holds a Ph.D. in anthropology from the Southern
Methodist University, where his dissertation focused on the archeology of
the Baffin Bay area. He has conducted fieldwork in Texas, Honduras,
Mexico, and Belize, studying coastal adaptations and maritime trade.

342

Texas Archeological Society

John D. Speth received his Ph.D. in anthropology from the University of Michigan
in 1971. His research interests include hunter-gatherer adaptations, human
nutrition, and North American archeology. He has conducted extensive
research on late prehistoric bison kill and camp sites near Roswell, New
Mexico and has recently been involved in Paleolithic investigations in Israel.
He holds the joint title of Professor of Anthropology and Curator of North
American Archaeology at the Museum of Anthropology at the University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, M148109.
J. Peter (Pete) Thurmond is the President and Chairman of the the First National
Bank of Leedy, Leedy Bancorporation, Inc., and Thurmond Ranch, Inc., and
a director of the First National Bank and Trust Co. of Elk City, all in western
Oklahoma. He serves on the Northeast Texas Advisory Council for the Texas
Historical Commission, and is the Secretary-Treasurer of the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society. Pete received his B.A. in anthropology and M.A.
in anthropology/archeology from The University of Texas at Austin in 1976
and 1981. He has been a member of the Texas Archeological Society for 11
years. His particular research interests are the Late Paleoindian and Late
Archaic/Woodland periods of the Southern Plains, and the Caddoan area of
Northeast Texas. He has recently published several articles--one a Memoir
issue---in the Plains Anthropologist. Address: P.O. Box 374, Leedy, OK
73654.

Lawrence C. Todd, Department of Archaeology, Boston University, 675
Commonwealth Ave., Boston, MA 02215.
Solveig A. Turpin received her doctoral degree from The University of Texas at
Austin, where she is the Associate Director of the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory. Her special interests include hunter-gatherer adaptations
to add lands, the art of preliterate societies, and the archeology of the Lower
Pecos River Region of Texas and northern Mexico. Address: Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, Balcones Research Center, 10100
BumetRd., Austin, TX 78712-1100.
James H. Word, retired from the insurance business in Floydada, is a Fellow and
Past President of the Texas Archeological Society and has also been active
for many years as an avocational archeologist and member of the Panhandle
and Southern Plains Archeological societies. Two of his many publications
are Excavations at Baker Cave, Val Verde County, Texas (with Charles L.
Douglas; Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin 16, 1970) and ’"l~he Dunlap
Complex in Western Central Crockett County" (TAS Bulletin 42:271-318,
1971). Address: P.O. Box 755, Floydada, TX 79235.

Errata, BTAS 21 and 11
Dr. Virginia D. Watson, now Affiliate Curator with the Thomas Burke
Memorial Washington State Museum in Seattle, Washington recently wrote to
correct an error in her 1950 article, "’The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect:
Description and Analysis" (Bulletin ofthe Texas ArcheologicalSociety 21:7-68).
References in this article and in the bibliography to C. Stuart Johnson as excavator
of the Stamper site should be corrected to read C. Stuart Johnston. Dr. Watson
reports, "Kent Buehler of the Oklahoma Archaeological Survey has checked the
field notes and in Stuart’s own handwriting it is JOHNSTON" (Letter, Virginia D.
Watson to the BTAS Editor, September 12, 1989).
This error resulted from typographical errors in Volume 11 (1939), where Mr.
Johnston is listed as "C. Stuart Johnson" on the title page of his article, "A Report
on the Antelope Creek Ruin" (Bulletin ofthe Texas Archeological and Paleontol.
ogicalSociety 11:190-202). He is listed erroneously as"C. Stewart Johnston" in the
Table of Contents of that volume, but is correctly cited in a footnote noting his recent
death on thefirst page of the article (p. 190) and on its final page (p. 202). At the time
he submitted his article, Mr. Johnston was a member of the Department of
Anthropology, West Texas State College, Canyon, Texas.

