Bulletin of the

TEXas

AaC HEOLOGICAL
SOCIETY Volume 58/1987

James E. Corbin, Editor
Beth O. Davis, Associate Editor
Cover design and layout by James E. Corbin

Published by the Society at Austin
1988 (for 1987)

Dedication
This issue of the Bulletin is dedicated to Dee Ann Story, who recently retired from the
staff of The University of Texas at Austin after a long and influential career that involved
administration, teaching, and research. This career was closely intertwined with expansion
of the Texas Archeological Society after 1950 and recognition of its Bulletin as an important
regional journal. Story’s first publication, themuch-thumbedAnIntroductory Handbookof
Texas Archeology, of which she is senior author, appeared at Vol. 25 (1954) of the Bulletin,
and later she contributed a series of informative reports on sites in various parts of Texas that
collectively represented all stages ofhuman occupation. Thereafter she served for four years,
from 1962 to 1965, as Editor of the Bulletin and was elected President of the Society
(1969-70). The Texas Archeological Society owes much to Dee Ann Story, and not just for
her more formal efforts in its behalf. She has been accessible to everybody and, through
letters, personal conversations, and addresses before local groups, has promoted greater
interest in the Society.
Story grew up in Houston, and most of her life has been spent in Texas. She took two
degrees (B.A. and M.A.) from The University of Texas at Austin and did her terminal
graduate work at the University of California at Los Angeles (Ph.D., 1963). After two years
at the University of Utah, during which she supervised excavations in Glen Canyon, she
returned to Texas in 1960 to become Curator of Anthropology at the Texas Memorial
Museum. Two years later she joined the staff of the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory and eventually became its director. She simultaneously held a teaching
appointment in the Department of Anthropology, rising through the ranks to become Professor of Anthropology.
Her archeological research began with syntheses of data from all parts of Texas, and this
breadth of interest is reflected in her later publications. Two areas have been of special
interest to her--Centra! Texas and East Texas--and she has published syntheses for both
areas. In recentyears her attention has been directed mainly toward East Texas and the larger
Caddoan area, and she has extracted new kinds of data from two sites--George C. Davis and
Deshazo. The quality of Story’s research was recognized in 1985, when she received a
Distinguished Service Award from the Society for American Archeology.
Story has always read widely and, in her courses and seminars in the Department of
Anthropology, she presented the latest developments, not only in archeology but also in other
disciplines that contribute to better archeological interpretation. In her summer field courses
she has been notably innovative in her approaches to excavation, and those who worked with
her in the field have learned that the best tool for use in excavation is an alert human mind.
Those who prepared reports, theses, and dissertations under her direction found that she does
not tolerate fuzzy writing. E. Mott Davis, who is interested in the history of Texas
archeology, has compiled a list of more than 80 individuals who either were Story’s graduate
students or were influenced by association with her. Many of these are now on university
faculties or employed by state or national agencies concerned with the study and preservation
of archeological resources.
The results of Story’s administrative work deserve special recognition. By persistent
effort over the years, she transformed the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in
Austin from a repository of artifacts into a first-rate research facility. Even in the leanest
years she somehow managed to find funds for its improvement. The physical plant was
remodeled and enlarged, collections and records were reorganized, a good working library
was accumulated, significant reports were published, and a start was made on computerization of the archeological information. One wonders how Story could be so effective in
administration, teaching, and research. My theory is that she never slept.
T. N. Campbell
Austin, Texas

CONTENTS

PAPERS
Archeological Investigations at the McKinzie Site (41NU221), Nueces
County, Texas: Descriptions and Contextual Interpretations.
Robert A. Ricklis ....................................................................................... 1
Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond, Brazoria County, Texas.
D. L. Ilamilton .......................................................................................... 77
The Swan Lake Site (41AS 16) on Copano Bay, Aransas County, Texas:
Settlement, Subsistence, and Sea Level.
Elton R. Prewitt and Jeffrey G. Paine ...................................................... 147
A Visual Key for the Identification of Otoliths.
Laurie S. Zimmerman, D. Gentry Steele, and Joffre D. Meyer ................ 175
Rangia Cuneata as a Seasonal Indicator for Coastal Archeological Sites
in Texas.
David L. Carlson ...................................................................................... 201
Utilization of Marine Mollusks by Inhabitants of the Texas Coast.
D. Gentry Steele ........................................................................................ 215
Stress and Survival Models of Adaptive Success in the Texas Late
Prehistoric.
Joseph F. Powell....................................................................................... 249
Recommendations for the Conservation of Archeological Shell Materials.
Paul S. Storch ........................................................................................... 267
OBITUARY
W. Armstrong Price.
Thomas N. Campbell ................................................................................ 275
REVIEWS
El Paso’s Prehistoric Past, Mark T. Bentley.
Thomas H. Guderjan ................................................................................ 277
The Rock Art of Seminole Canyon State Historical Park: Deterioration
and Prospects for Conservation, Constance S. Silver.
Paul S. Storch ........................................................................................... 278
COMMENTARY
San Patrice and the Early Archaic: Comments on San Patrice and
Dalton Affinities on the Central and Western Gulf Coastal Plain,
by H. Blaine Ensor:
Thomas H. Guderjan ................................................................................ 283
AUTHORS ....................................................................................................... 287

"We have left of them, bequeathed to us, only a few place names--names of
bays, inlets, points of land, straits and creeks...."
Roy Bedichek-Karankaway Country

Archeological Investigations at the McKinzie Site
(41NU221), Nueces County, Texas: Description and
Contextual Interpretations
Robert A. Ricklis
ABSTRACT
This paper decribes excavations and findings at the McKinzie site near
Corpus Christi, Texas. Two discrete components were identified; the earlier
Archaic component, recognized as a thin shell midden containing a profusion of
shells of the brackish water clam Rangiaflexuosa, is dated to about 5000 B. P. and
is inferred to represent an estuarine bayshore adaption at that time. The later
component, assigned to the Late Prehistoric Rockport complex, produced evidence for a seasonal, mulfifunctional, and residential occupation during which
small groups carried out various subsistence activities, apparently in circular huts
that had central hearth complexes and, possibly, small storage pits. A model of
seasonally oscillating settlement and subsistence patterns is developed for the Late
Prehistoric stage in the area, providing an ecological context for the Rockport
complex component.

INTRODUCTION
The McKinzie site (41NU221) is a multicomponent site on the dissected
Pleistocene river terrace that overlooks the modern floodplain of the lower Nueces
River near Corpus Christi, Texas ~igure 1). Excavations were carded out at the site
during 1984 and 1985; this paper describes the results of that work and offers
interpretations relevant to questions of prehistoric chronology and cultural adaptations for the Texas Coastal Bend area.
Investigations at the McKinzie site revealed two discrete prehistoric components. The earlier and stratigraphically lower component is from a fairly early
period in the long-lived Archaic stage of the region. Data for the Archaic component
are limited, but an approximate chronological placement of this component can be
made. Additionally, certain inferences can be drawn regarding seasonality of
occupation and subsistence activities for both components. The later component is
assigned, on the basis of diagnostic ceramic and lithic artifacts, to the Rockport
complex, a Late Prehistoric adaptation to the central Texas coast involving a
hunting-fishing-gathering subsistence base (see Suhm et al. 1954, Campbell 1958c).
The Rockport complex was the more extensively investigated of the two components. The spatial relationships among various features and the distributions of
cultural debris are inferred to represent a culturally significant pattern, which,
coupled with information on seasonality and length of occupation, sheds light on the
nature of a single seasonal occupational episode assignable to the Rockport
complex.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 58 (1987)

2

Texas ArcheologicalSociety

\

Calallen

,pus Christi
Bay

IVIcKinzie ~
C

Corpus
GULFOF

~~

MEXICO

"t/

!

KILOMETERS

Figure 1. Map of the Coastal Bend area of Texas showing location of the McKinzie site.

Data from previous limited surveys and test excavations in Nueces and San
Patricio counties, suggest too that Rock~ort complex sites, as defined by fairly
consistent artifact assemblages containing Rockport ware pottery (see Suhm and
Jelks 1962:131-135), Perdiz and Fresno arrowpoints (ibid., Turner and Hester
1985) and small end scrapers, do not have ecological homogeneity as reflected in
(a) spatial and microenvironmental locations, (b) the predominant faunal remains,
or (c) the apparent intensity of occupation. This ecological heterogeneity will form
the inferential basis for a preliminary model of settlement and subsistence patterns
for the Late Prehistoric occupation of the Corpus Christi Bay/Nueces River area.
The model, which will posit a pattern of seasonal oscillation between large fallwinter camps of aggregate groups and smaller dispersed spring-summer encampments, will offer a cultural ecological context for the Late Prehistoric occupation at
McKinzie. The model is testable and may serve not only as one basis for additional
systematic research into the nature of aboriginal adaptation in the Coastal Bend area
but also as one step toward an integrated perspective on the prehistory of this part
of the western Gulf Coast.

Ricklis ~ The McKinzie Site

3

THE ENVIRONMENTAL CONTEXT
The Texas Coastal Bend, part of the Gulf Coastal Plain ~enneman 1938),
consists geologically of sediments deposited by large Pleistocene river systems
during interglacial periods when sea levels approximated those of the present
(Brown et al. 1976:16). The topography is essentially flat, broken only by stream
channels, embayments, and dune formations. Because the sediments consist
primarily of fine-grained clay, the area today is devoid of any naturally occurring
lithic material larger than small pebbles.
The area is included in the Tamaulipan Biotic Province as defined by Blair
(1950), a region characterized on a large scale by mild winters, hot summers, and
a biotic matrix adapted to a xeric environment, but in which there are small-scale
variations in precipitation, net moisture, and associated biotic communities. There
is a trend toward increasingly xeric conditions from north to south along the central
part of the Gulf coast. The Corpus Christi Bay/Nueces River area is a zone of
transition, where annual rainfall averages about 85 cm (35 inches) to the north and
75 cm (30 inches) or less to the south. Vegetation cover north of this zone is
characterized by savanna grasslands, and south by higher incidence of various
thornbrush species and cacti (Brown et al. 1976; Jones 1983).
The shore of the mainland is characterized by bays, lagoons, and estuaries.
Several kilometers offshore is a long chain of barrier islands--sands deposited by
wave action since the establishment of modern sea level at about 2800 to 2500 B.P.
(Brown et al. 1976) ~igure 2).

San Patricio Co.

f¯
I

I

N

McKinzieJF

Nueces Co.
Island

0

15

30kin

Figure 2. Map showing San Patricio and Nueces counties, Texas.

g q~O

4

Texas ArcheologicalSociety

In the Corpus Christi Bay/Nueces River area, major geological soil zones and
associated floral assemblages are recognizable. The three barrier islands--St.
Joseph, Mustang, and Padre islands--that separate Corpus Christi Bay from the
Gulf of Mexico are mostly treeless, covered with grassy vegetation, predominantly
spikerush, fimbry, glasswort, and sea purslane (Jones 1983:13,14, 54, 65).
The outermost 5 to 10 km of the mainland is the Ingleside strandplain, a sand
of Pleistocene origin. The characteristic Galveston-Mustang soil here supports
several kinds of oak and sweetbay, and an understory of beautyberry and yaupon.
Directly inland from the strandplain are the Pleistocene clays, the most
extensive geologic formation in the Coastal Bend, on which are developed extensive blackland soils. These soils are largely under cultivation, but before the latter
part of the last century the area was grassland savanna. Common floral species were
short grasses such as buffalo grass, the taller bluestem, scattered mesquite, and
prickly pear cactus (Jones 1983).
The extensive and dense stands of mesquite and other thornbrush that abound
in the area apparently are largely modern phenomena. Before the mid-nineteenth
century, savanna conditions predominated (Bogusch 1952, Jones 1983). Apparently the spread and dominance of thornbrush has resulted from both the cessation
of aboriginal burn-offs and the disturbance of the natural groundcover by cattle
grazing.
Before this invasion of thornbrush, trees were confined largely to river valleys
and patchy groves on higher ground within the savanna matrix. River floodplain
moisture supported various species, including ash, elm, box elder, willow, retama,
huisache, and cottonwood. The scattered upland groves included hackberry,
chittimwood, anaqua, live oak, and mesquite (Jones 1983:xvii).
Terrestrial faunal species in the area are those listed by Blair for the Tamaulipan
Biotic Province--61 species of mammals, notably whitetail deer, coyote, javelina,
bobcat, cottontail, jackrabbit, mouse, and rat. Thirty-six species of snake, 19 of
lizard, two of land turtle, three urodeles, and 19 anurans are also noted.
Bison were reported in early historic times along the coastal littoral, though it
is unclear how dense the herds were. Dillehay (1974) has postulated that bison herds
pushed southward into Texas three times during the Holocene,
between 10,000 to 6000 and 5000 B.C.
between 2500 B.C. and A.D. 500, and
between A.D. 1200 and A.D. 1300 to 1500.
No data could be found indicating the presence of bison in southern Texas
before the 1200/1300 episode, but ample evidence has come to light of bison in the
area after about A.D. 1300 in interior southern Texas (Black 1986, Hall et al. 1982,
Hester and Parker 1970, Hester 1977), and this is true to some degree of the same
period on the coast.
Fish abound in the bays and lagoons, notably redfish (red drum), trout, croaker,
gafftop and hardhead catfish, and black drum, which enter the shallower parts of
bays and tidal passes in large numbers to spawn, primarily during the winter months
(Simmons and Breuer 1962).
Shellfish are abundant in the bays from the north shore of Corpus Christi Bay

Ricklis ~ The McKinzie Site

5

northward. South of Corpus Christi Bay, shellfish decrease in abundance until at
Baffin Bay they are virtually absent, apparently due to the hypersalinity of coastal
waters resulting from the low volume of discharge of fresh water in the more xeric
conditions of deep South Texas (see Hester 1980a).
PALEOENVIRONMENTAL PROCESSES
The scale and rapidity of environmental change along coastlines is accentuated
by processes of sea level change, erosion, and sedimentation, which have profound
effects on the localized primary productivity and dependent biotic communities
and, in turn, on the nature of human adaptations. Also, these geologic processes can
affect the quality of the archeological record so severely that sites (especially older
ones) representing important aspects of adaptive systems can be lost to investigation.
One fundamental process is the eustatic sea level rise during the Holocene. The
details of fluctuations in sea level rise have been interpreted differently (cf. Curray
1960, Nelson and Bray 1970, Frazier 1974), but there is general agreement on the
broader patterns in this process. Sea level began to rise rapidly at about 18,000 to
16,000 B.P. and fluctuated several times before about 1800 to 2500 B.P., when it
reached its present level (Brown et al. 1976:21). Between about 10,000 and 7500
B.P. a standstill was maintained, with sea level some 60 to 80 feet lower than at
present. At about 7500 B.P. the sea began to rise rapidly, so that by about 5000 to
4500 B.P. it was about 20 feet below the modem level. Between 5000 to 4500 and
2500 B.P., rise was gradual, with a level approximating modem sea level established by the latter date. With the stabilization of the coastline by the middle of the
third millenium B.P., wave action depositing offshore sediments resulted in the
formation of barrier islands. Except for some tidal passes, Corpus Christi Bay
became separated from the open Gulf, and continuous wave action in the bay
produced the present shoreline (Brown et al. 1976:21).
During the final stage of the Pleistocene, the valley of the lower Nueces River
was eroded into older Pleistocene fluvial deltaic deposits to such an extent that by
the beginning of the Holocene the valley was considerably deeper than at present.
With the rapid sea level rise beginning at 7500 B.P. the valley was innundated and,
about 4500 B.P., the lower Nueces valley was filled with estuarine waters at least
as far inland as a point just west of Calallen (Figure 1) where there are old wavereworked bars and berms (Brown et al. 1976:121). So during this time period a long
bay extended from the open Gulf inland to a point some 35 km west of the present
shoreline.
Unfortunately, there is no direct evidence regarding paleoclimatic change for
this area, and the general lack of good pollen preservation in South Texas
archeological contexts makes reconstruction of prehistoric floral communities and,
inferentially, climatic conditions, difficult at best. Recent research with plant
phytoliths, however, has demonstrated certain certain fluctuations in grass varieties
in the region during the Holocene (Robinson 1979), and such work may offer the
best possibilities for the reconstruction of paleoclimatic change.
Hester (1980b:35) has inferred a savanna parkland environment in South Texas

6

Texas ArcheologiealSociety

for the terminal Pleistocene, and floral and faunal remains recovered from an early
Holocene (about 7000 B.C.) hearth at Baker Cave in the lower Pecos area indicate
an essentially modern biotic assemblage (Hester 1980b: 139-142).
B ased on pollen evidence, Bryant and Holloway (1985) suggest a gradual trend
toward warmer and drier conditions during the Holocene for southwestern and
Central Texas. This generalization for the larger region is the best information
available at present for understanding the basic climatic trend in S outh Texas during
the Holocene.
THE SITE
The McKinzie site is on one of the many hilltops that are remnants of the
dissected Pleistocene terrace of the Nueces River and extend along the southern
edge of the present floodplain, from the head of Nueces Bay to near the west
boundary of Nueces County. The site is some 200 meters south of the present
channel of the Nueces River and 4 km upslream from the head of Nueces Bay. The
location offers a commanding view of the broad floodplain to the north and, under
prehistoric grassland conditions, also would have commanded a good view of the
surrounding uplands in other directions.
Shells of the brackish water clams, Rangia cuneata and Rangiaflexuosa, and
chert debitage are scattered over the entire hilltop, indicating that, at one time or
another, prehistoric human activity extended over every part of the rise.
Much of the site remains intact, but a significant amount of it has been damaged
(Figure 3). The roadcut of an unimproved dirt road crosses (roughly north-south)

of

t

dense

!
I
/

E ×cavetlon area A

:!/

Ma!

DalumNOEO~

I

cistern?
E XCeV

area B/"

O

2

4

6

m

meters
Contour interval .33 metera

Figure 3. Topographic map showing excavated parts of the McKinzie site.

N

Ricklis -- The McKinzie Site

7

the site at its eastern end, and a similar, though presently unused, north-south cut
crosses the approximate center of the site. An area of about 1 hectare (2 acres) of
the southeastern part of the site was severely disturbed by soil removal in February
1984. This activity exposed an extensive spread of Rangia flexuosa clamshell,
which, as will be indicated, was deposited during an Archaic occupation of the site.
According to Robert McKinzie (personal communication), the original
McKinzie family homestead was on the crest of the hilltop, near the easternmost end
of the site, from the nineteenth century to about 1930. Though this homestead is no
longer standing, evidence of its existence survives in the form of various metal,
glass, and ceramic artifacts of the period, especially in the roadcut at the east end of
the site. Though more thinly scattered, such items were noted on the surface near
the excavations, and a few fragments of clear bottle glass, some square and round
nails, and pieces of fence wire were recovered at depths of as much as 10 cm in the
excavations. A circular depression about 1 meter deep and 5 meters in diameter may
be the remains of a cistern said to have been associated with the McKinzie
homestead.
The several disturbances to the site have revealed a soil profile characterized
by an A horizon (roughly 50 cm thick) consisting of a dark brown sandy clay loam
and a tan sandy clay B horizon. This is typical of the Willacy complex, a neutralto-alkaline soil that characterizes the edge of the Pleistocene terrace on which the
site lies (Franki et al. 1960).
The vegetation cover on most of the site, and on the surrounding upland terrace,
is dominated by dense thornbrush of mesquite and hackberry and ground cover of
short grasses. Directly north of the site the floodplain is treeless, except for a narrow
zone along the river banks. Short grasses interspersed with barren sand patches
characterize the present floodplain.
Initial Reconnaissance and Testing
The first visit to the site was made in late May 1984, when the southeastern part,
which had been stripped largely of topsoil during the previous February, was still
exposed. Vegetation cover had not yet been reestablished due to drought conditions. Many Rangiaflexuosa shells and occasional chert flakes were on or close to
the recently exposed subsoil. In the northernmost edge of the exposed area, near the
crest of the hill, a bulldozer had cut through the original soil profile to reveal a dense
lens of Rangia flexuosa shell, some 10 to 15 cm thick, which seemed to be
concentrated particularly in the area later selected as excavation area B. Exposed
within this shell lens were several chert flakes, marine fish otoliths, and, in addition
to the profuse Rangiaflexuosa, a scattering of oyster shell fragments.
The dense thornbrush covering the crest of the hill made a thorough surface
survey impossible, but the general pattern of distribution of cultural debris was
obtained by careful examination of the ground surface along the various dirt
roadcuts. Scattered Late Prehistoric material--small sandy paste potsherds and
lithic debitage--was noted only where the roadcut cut across the crest of the hill.
Careful examination of the exposed areas on the hill to the south of the crest
produced no such material, suggesting that Late Prehistoric occupation was

8

Texas ArcheologicalSociety

restricted largely to a strip along the crest of the hill. In the areas of shallow
disturbance along the crest that produced Late Prehistoric material, most of the
visible shell debris was of the species Rangia cuneata. On the other hand, the dense
Rangia flexuosa lens, which was initially inferred to have originated during an
earlier Archaic occupation because of the apparent absence of pottery, contained no
cuneata.
So intial observations suggested that McKinzie was a multicomponent site with
(1) a preceramic Archaic component associated with a zone of Rangia flexuosa
midden, and (2) a Late Prehistoric component, the remains of which apparently
were in the upper part of the loam topsoil, primarily along the crest of the hill.
Although the Archaic component appeared to be associated with Rangiaflexuosa,
it seemed that the Late Prehistoric component was associated mainly with Rangia
cuneata, an inference later verified by excavation.
In order to test the validity of these inferences and to ascertain the degree to
which the components might be slratigraphically discrete, a 1-meter square test unit
was staked out near the crest of the hill within what would later be disignated
excavation area A. This unit was troweled in 10-cm arbitrary levels, and all soil was
put through a quarter-inch mesh screen.
Below about the top 2 cm of loose, windblown sandy soil containing grass
rootlets, four zones were defined in the test unit, numbered here from the top down.
Zone I (2-10 cm)
A dark brown sandy clay loam containing relatively abundant cultural material,
including 22 pieces of chert debitage, a sandstone milling stone fragment, and a
small sherd of sandy paste pottery with asphaltum coating the interior surface;
scattered bits of orange burned soil and gray-white ash, mostly between 7 and 10 cm,
also scattered Rangia shells and fragments, mostly Rangia cuneata. The small
sherd ofsandypastepottery suggested aLate Prehistoric occupation. Distinguished
from Zone II by soil differences and relatively abundant cultural material.
Zone I1 (10 to 37-40 cm)
Dark brown sandy clay loam containing scattered fragments and occasional
complete valves of Rangiaflexuosa and cuneata, occasional land snail shells, and
very little lithic debitage (eight pieces from level 2; four from level 3, and six from
level 4); has no ash and burned soil; a discrete, homogeneous stratum.

Zone Ill (37-40 and 50-55 cm)
Lying on the sterile tan B horizon Pleistocene clay was a profusion of Rangia
flexuosa (but noRangia cuneata), encountered throughout the unit between 37 and
40 cm and extending to the 50 to 55 cm depth--a 10-to-15-cm-thick shell midden
stratum Figure 5) from which forty-four pieces of chert debitage and a Catan dart
point were recovered; zone also had a scattering of oyster shells and marine fish
otoliths and relatively abundant lithic material; near base, dark loam soil became
mottled with clay particles, grading into the Zone IV clay below Gig. 4-6, 9, & 10).

Rick[is ~ The McKinzie Site

9

3

o
meters

ZONE I -Dark brown sandy clay loam, scattered ash, burned soil
ZONE 1} -Dark brown sandy clay loam
ZONE IH -Rangia Flexuosa midden
ZONE W -Culturally sterile tan clay
Redeposited soi~

Figure 4. North-south profile along grid line El, McKhazie site excavation.

Zone IV (beIow 50°55 era)
Cukurally sterile

mn Pleist~;ene clay,

THE EXCAVATIONS
Initial impressions from the excavation of the test unit (later integrated into the
mea A excavation as unit N2E0) suggested that this part of the McKinzie site had
a considerable potential to yield data. The narrow vertical disvibution of cukurai
material, ash, and btJ~ed soil in Zone I suggest~ a discrete Late Prehistoric
component, possibly representing no more than a single occupational episode.
(Figures 5-8).The dearth of infbrmation on in~asite patterning in the Coastal Bend
area has imposed severe liraitations on archeological interpretations of prehistoric
adaptations, and the possibility of obtaining such information f?om a Late Prehistoric com~nent was ar~ incentive to conduct further excavation at McKinzie. The
shallow depth of the Zone I deposit meant that exposure of Late Prehistoric features
and associated patterns of cnltrud debris distribution would be relatively easy.
Zone II appeared to have Iittle [~tential for data recovery, due to the dearth of
cultural material ~ere.
The potential of zone III, however, seemed to be sufficient to warrant further
work. The zone was vertically discrete and appeared to correspond to the lens of
dense Raw, gin f[cx~osa shell observed along the northern edge of the bulldozer
disturbance (Figures 9, 10, 11), suggesting a stratum of considerable horizontal
extent. If diagnostic material and a series of radiocarbon dates could be recovered
from Zone III, a step could be t~A(en toward filling the chronological void in the
amheotogical record, for the gzchaic in the Coastal Bend.

10

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 5. Excavation unit N2E0 (excavated to Zone IV). Zone HI Rangiaflexuosa midden
is clearly visible.

Figure 6. Test trench, looking south. Rangiaflexuosa shells in Zone I~ are visible in trench
walls.

Ricklis -- The McKinzie Site

11

Figure 7. Excavation of Zone I in progress. Arrows (lower right) show thickness of deposit
bearing Late Prehistoric materials. Looking northeast.

Figure 8. Northern part of Zone I excavation, looking east, showing Features 7, 6, and 5.
Arrow in Feature 6 points to cluster of bison bone fragments in sire.

12

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 9. Excavation areaB looking northwest. Note patchiness of Rangiaflexuosa concentration resulting from the undulations in the base of Zone m.

Figure 10. Profile along north wall of Area B excavation. Zone m Rangiaflexuosa midden
and undulating base of this zone are clearly visible.

Ricklis -- The McKinzie Site

Estimated

Ii

original

~/~

13

surface

,

,

I

1

I

t
I

I
I

E, 3

I- v"
I
I

E:

Q

meter

’

Rangia flexuosa

Figure 11. Sketch of profile shown in Figure 10. Ground surface beforebulldozer disturbance
is extrapolated from undisturbed surfaces in nearby areas.

With these goals in mind, two areas were selected for further excavation
(Figure 3). From a datum stake designated NOE0 a magnetic north-south base line
was established with the aid a transit, and a contour map was prepared with a contour
interval of .333 meters. The datum point NOE0 was arbitrarily assigned the
elevation of 100.00 meters.
With the north-south base line as a guide, excavation areas A and B (Figure 3)
were staked out in a 1-meter grid. The ground surface at point NOE0 was the vertical
datum; the elevations of the existing ground surface were determined and recorded
for each 1-meter unit.
The general procedure followed during the excavation of areas A and B was to
remove soil in about 1-cm increments within 10-cm arbitrary levels. Vertical and
horizontal positions of all artifacts, including lithic debitage and bone fragments,
were recorded on unit/level data sheets. Because of the large quantities involved,
shell debris was identified by species, counted and recorded by unit level. All soil
was put through quarter-inch screens. The use of eighth-inch screen was considered
and rejected; the sandy clay loam, which tended to crumble into hard lumps when
dry and to be sticky when moist, would have caused considerable difficulty in using
such a fine mesh.
Thirty-three and a half 1-meter units were excavated in area A (Figure 12). Of
these, 26.5 were excavated to a depth of only 10 cm, i.e., to the base of the Late
Prehistoric Zone I deposit. Time allowed the excavation of three of the remaining
seven units through the base of Zone III to depths ranging between 45 and 55 cm.
These units included the original test unit, N2E0, and two adjacent units, N2W 1 and
N2E1. Four units were excavated to 15 cm as a test to confirm that Late Prehistoric
material was contained within the upper 10 cm of the deposit.
Excavation area B was established in an area where the Zone III Rangia

14

Texas Archeological Society

- Chert flake, chip
® - Potsherd
- Utilized flake
- Bifacially modified chert
S

- End scraper

- Arrowpoint
ka - Milling stone fragment
0 - Core

- Bone fragment

Numbers indicate various features

~~> O -

Hearth
Burned soil patch
Ash patch
Apparent postmold

- Pit
- Possible pit indicated by
infrared photography

Figure 12. Plan of excavation area A showing features, bone fragments, and artifacts in Zone
I.

flexuosa midden was partially uncovered by the soil-stripping activity of February
1984. The bulldozer had removed all or part of the natural soil overburden, allowing

Ricklisw The McKinzie Site

15

ready access to the Zone III midden. Six units were excavated, again in 10-cm
arbitrary levels. Though a slight slope in the original surface upon which Zone Ill
lay was noted as excavation proceeded, horizontal unit levels were maintained
throughout the area. By using the profiles made of each unit wall in combination
with the recorded depths for all cultural material, it was possible to reconstruct
accurately a stratigraphic picture of Zone III and its contents.
It was assumed that the shell stratum in excavation area B corresponded to the
one encountered in the test area, area A (unit N2E0) (Figure 5). A north-south test
trench (Figure 6), 3 meters long by 70 cm wide, excavated between areas A and B
made it possible to evaluate the degree of stratigraphic continuity between the two
areas. Excavation here was with spades, though trowels were used to smooth out
the trench walls, and all soil was screened by 10-cm levels.
The progress of the excavations was recorded on 35 mm color slides and black
and white photographs. Upon completion, the excavations were backfilled and the
datum at point NOE0 was replaced with a stout steel pipe set in concrete for possible
future reference.

ARTIFACTS

Lithic
Dart Points (4 Specimens)
Four dart points were recovered from Zone III. A stemmed dart point oftheBell
type ~urner and Hester 1985:72) was recovered from excavation area B (Figure 13,
A).Both of the heavy barbs diagnostic of the type are broken off on this specimen.
The point has short, parallel, retouch flaking on both surfaces of both blade edges,
a common characteristic of Bell points (Elton Prewitt, personal communication).
Wide, shallow basal thinning flake scars extend to the medial section of the point.
The material is a fine-grained dark gray chert, and the workmanship is excellent.
Dimensions are length, 35 mm; maximum width (estimated with barbs present), 32
mm; thickness, 5.7 mm.
A small unstemmed dart point (Figure 13, B) recovered from the initial test unit
N2E0 conforms morphologically to the Catan type (Suhm and Jelks 1962:172,
Turner and Hester 1985:78). Edges have precise pressure flaking but no alternate
beveling. The material is fine-grained dark brown chert, and workmanship is
excellent. Dimensions are length, 31 mm; maximum width, 20 mm; maximum
thickness, 6.3 mm.
A small, triangular dart point (Fig. 13,C) with convex base and slightly convex
edges was recovered from excavation area B. This point does not conform well to
any established type, though it resembles most closely certain illustrated examples
of the Catan type (see Suhm and Jelks 1962, plate 88, C and D; Turner and Hester
1985, lower left specimen on page 78). Broad shallow basal flake scars extend to
the point’s midsection. There is no alternate beveling of the blade edges. Dimensions are: length, 32 mm; maximum width, 22 mm; maximum thickness, 5.4 mm.

16

Texas Archeological Society

A

B

?....

\

CM

E

ii

D

G

H

Figure 13. Drawings of lithic artifacts, Zone IlI. A, Bell dartpoint; B, Catan dart point; C,
Catan-like dart point; D, Tortugas dart point with medial break reworked to gougelike edge;
E, probable distal end fragment of Clear Fork tool; F, end scraper; G, biface fragment; HJ, utilized flakes.

A triangular dart point with a medial break reworked into a gougelike edge
(Figure 13, D) was recovered from the surface of the exposed Zone III shell midden
40 cm east of excavation area B, unit $6E2. Though a surface find, the context is
certain, since the point was securely embedded in the compact Zone III matrix. The
point has broad basal thinning flake scars and marked alternate edge beveling,
conforming well to the Tortugas type (Suhm and Jelks 1962:249; Turner and Hester
1985:152). The material is a tan, moderately fine grained chert; the workmanship
is good. Dimensions are maximum width. 23.6 mm; maximum thickness, 7.3 mm.

Scrapers (2 Specimens)
A thick unifacial specimen of gray chert has flaked beveling on the end and on
one side ~igure 13, F). The edge angle ranges between 48° and 63°. Dimensions

Ricklis ~ The McKinzie Site

17

are length, 39 mm; maximum width, 25 mm; maximum thickness, 17 mm. This
specimen was found on the exposed surface of the Rangiaflexuosa midden, so its
association with Zone III is open to question.
A fragment of a large flake with fine-flaked edge beveling was excavated from
unit $7E2 in area B. The material is light gray, medium-fine-grained chert. The
edge angle is 56°.
Probable Clear Fork Tool Fragment (1 Specimen)
This unifacial artifact (Figure 13, E) of moderately fine grained gray chert was
recovered from Zone III in the test trench. The inferred dorsal face has a slightly
convex flaked edge that is at a 56° angle to the unflaked ventral face. Minute flakes
along the inferred working edge indicate edge crushing resulting from usage.
Biface Fragment (1 Specimen)
This specimen is of moderately fine grained tan chert. It is roughly percussion
flaked and is possibly a preform fragment.
Utilized Flakes (10 Specimens)
Ten utilized flakes were recovered from the Zone III excavation (Figure 13, HJ). Three were found in area A, unit N2E0, one was found in the test trench, and the
remainder were scattered throughout the area B excavation. Four specimens have
use-wear along two edges, and one has concave use-worn edges (Figure 13, J).
Obsidian Flake (1 Specimen)
A single very small flake of gray-brown obsidian was recovered from unit
S7E1, excavation area B. This specimen is roughly circular and has a distinct bulb
of percussion. Diameter is 6-7 mm, and maximum thickness is 0.7 mm.
Chert Debitage (233 Specimens)
In all, 233 pieces of chert debitage were found in the Zone III excavations. No
patterning was seen in the distribution of this material. All specimens are slightly
to moderately patinated, as are all of the chert artifacts described above. One
hundred twenty-eight pieces are complete flakes; the sample comprises seven (5
percent) primary (cortex) flakes, 15 (12 percent) secondary (secondary cortex)
flakes, 47 (37 percent) tertiary (interior) flakes, and 59 (46 percent) biface-thinning
(lipped) flakes.
One hundred five specimens are either fragmentary flakes (i.e., proximal end
is missing) or amorphous chunks of shattered chert. Of the 95 flake fragments, eight
(8.5 percent) are primary, 16 (17 percent) are secondary, and 71 (74.5 percent) are
interior flakes.
The presence of the primary and secondary cortex flakes indicates that primary
reduction of chert cobbles was taking place on the site, despite the absense of lithic
resources in the vicinity. The source of the lithic material is not known, but a recent
paper by C. K. Chandler (1984) describes abundant chert cobbles along the banks
of the Nueces River some 20 km upstream from the site. This is the nearest known

18

Texas Archeological Society

ci-n

Figure 14. Drawings of shell artifacts: A, artificially perforated oyster shell from Zone III;
B, shaped oyster shell from Zone HI; C, conch shell adze fragment from Zone II.

source of workable chert.
The rather high proportion of biface thinning flakes in the Zone III sample
indicates some emphasis on bifacial tool production during this period of the site’s
occupation.

Shell (2 Specimens)
A complete oyster shell valve (Figure 14, A) has an artificial perforation 4.6
mm in diameter near the umbo. The function of the artifact is unknown, but
Campbell (1958a) has suggested that perforated oyster shells may have served as
net weights.
A single fragment of oyster shell (Figure 14, B) is unique in that it appears to
have been modified to a rectangular shape.
Zone II
Lithic (47 Specimens)
The only lithic artifacts from Zone II are a few pieces of chert debitage
scattered, apparently at random, throughout the zone. Of the 47 pieces recovered,
31 are complete flakes, 2 (7 percent) of which are primary flakes, 6 (19 percent) are
secondary, 14 (45 percent) are tertiary, and 9 (29 percent) are biface-thinning flakes.

Shell (2 Specimens)
A small fragment ofsunray venus (Macrocallista) clamshell with edge flaking
is similar to many reported from the Corpus Christi Bay area.

Ricklis M The McKinzie Site

19

A fragment of conch shell adze (Figure 14, C), a commonly reported artifact
from the Archaic sites in the Coastal Bend area (e.g. Campbell 1947, 1952, Mokry
1980), was found in the test trench, level 2 (10-20 cm).

Zone I
Lithic
Arrowpoints (3 Specimens)
Two arrowpoints are identifiable as the Perdiz type. One specimen (Figure 15,
B), recovered from unit N6E2, excavation area A, is unifacially flaked, except for
the contracting bifacially flaked stem. The shoulders on this point are barbed,
though one barb is broken off. The blade edges are serrated. Material is fine-grained
brown chert. Maximum thickness is 1.8 mm.
The second Perdiz type arrowpoint (Figure 15, A) is a surface find from the
roadcut at the east end of the hilltop. Though not from the Zone I excavation, it
clearly comes from the Late Prehistoric, so it is described here. It is unifacially
worked except on the contracting stem, which is bifacially pressure flaked; the blade
edges are serrated. Material is light brown chert, moderately fine grained.
Dimensions are length, 31 mm; maximum width, 23 mm; maximum thickness, 3.2
mm.
A third specimen (Figure 15, C), recovered from unit N6E0, apparently is the
distal end of a unifacial arrowpoint with serrated blade edges. It is made from
moderately fine grained brown chert.

Bifacially Modified Chert (2 Specimens)
One of the two specimens of bifacially worked chert recovered from Zone I
(Figure 15, E) is the distal end of an alternately beveled tool, possibly a knife or a
dart point recovered from unit N5E2, excavation area A. The material is a rather
coarse-grained chertlike moderately patinated purple stone, unique to the site.
Maximum thickness of this fragment is 8 mm.
The second specimen, recovered from unit N5E4, excavation area A, is a
relatively large secondary cortex flake of moderately fine grained brown chert
(Figure 15, D) that has been bifacially edge flaked to produce a triangular form.
Absence of edge pressure flaking suggests an unfinished tool, possibly an arrowpoint preform. Dimensions are length 38 mm; maximum width, 28 mm; maximum
thickness, 6 mm.
End Scraper (1 Specimen)
A unifacial secondary cortex flake of reddish brown chert (Figure 15, F),
recovered from unit N2E3, excavation area A, has a beveled end created by a series
of fine pressure flake removals. The edge angle is 68°. Dimensions are length, 28
mm; maximum width, 29 mm; thickness, 6.7 mm.

Prismatic Blades (12 Specimens)
Seven complete and five fragmentary small prismatic blades (Table 1; Figure

20

Texas Archeological Society

A

B
D
2
!

1
J

0
t

3
!

cm

!

!
F

(

t

I

j

G

M
Figure 15. Drawings of lithic artifacts. All are from Zone I excavation except A, which is
from the surface east of area A excavation. A-B, Perdiz arrowpoints; C, Distal end of
unifacial arrowpoint; D, biface; possibly arrowpoint preform; E, distal end of alternately
beveled biface; F, unifacfial end scraper; G-J, small prismatic blades; K-L, utilized flakes;
M, prepared platform core.

15, G-J) were recovered from zone I. All are manufactured from moderately fine
to fine-grained chert of various shades of brown.

RickIis ~ The McKinzie Site

21

Table 1. Dimensions of Complete Small Prismatic Blades from Zone 1

Length

Maximum Width

mln

mn2

mln

20.0
13.0
14.0
10.7
12.8
9.2
4.6

2.5
3.5
3.7
3.4
2.8
2.3
1.7

28.5
29.0
24.0
23.6
22.5
20.0
14.7

Maximum Thickness

Utilized Flakes (12 Specimens)
Twelve utilized flakes were recovered from zone I (Figure 15, K, L). Six
specimens are secondary cortex flakes and six are interior flakes. The material is
a moderately coarse to fine-grained chert. Ten are of various shades of brown, one
is light yellow-tan, and one is light gray. All are qtfite small; the largest is 35 by 28
mm.
Core (1 Specimen)
Only one core (Figure 15, M) was found in the Zone I excavation. The
specimen, from unit N5E4, is of reddish brown, moderately fine grained chert and
retains cortex on about five percent of its surface. Flakes have been struck from both
a flat, prepared platform and the lateral edge of the cobble. Dimensions are length,
45 mm; width, 50 mm; maximum thickness, 24 mm.
Quartzite Chip (1 Specimen)
A small chip of hard, fine-grained purple quartzite, recovered from unit N6E 1,
has minute pitting on its exterior surface. It is probably a chip from a hammerstone,
since cobbles of this material often served as hammerstones in southern Texas (e.g.
Hester and Hill 1972).
Debitage (596 Specimens)
Five hundred ninety-six flakes, flake fragments, and chert chunks were found
in Zone I. Because color variation within cobbles makes it impossible to determine
which cobble the flakes came from, it is difficult to determine how many cobbles
are represented by the Zone I debitage. A wide range of shades of brown
predominates in the sample, together with some reddish, light tan-yellow, and light
grays. The debitage was sorted by gross color and grain characteristics into 36
groups, which probably represent at least that many cobbles. Of the total sample of
596 specimens, 275 are flakes, 293 are flake fragments, and 28 are chunks. Most
flakes are quite small and, judging by the curvatures of primary flake exteriors,
cobbles were generally 10 cm or less in diameter. Flakes were sorted into primary
(23, or 8 percent), secondary ( 51, or 19 percent), tertiary (97, or 35 percent), and
biface-thinning (104, or 38 percent).

22

Texas Areheologieal Society

The 293 flake fragments were divided into primary (20, or 7 percent),
secondary (49, or 17 percent), and tertiary (224, or 76 percent).
These data clearly indicate that the Zone I occupants of the site were engaged
in all phases of lithic tool production, from initial cobble reduction to biface
manufacturing.

Milling Stone Fragments (2 Specimens)
Two specimens of modified sandstone, both of which have slight, relatively
smooth concavities on one surface, are identified as milling stone fragments. One
specimen was recovered from unit N2E0 in the Zone I excavation (Figure 16, B);
the other was in apparent association with a cluster of sandy paste potsherds on a
shallow dirt roadcut northwest of excavation area A (Figure 16, A).

A
0
!

1
i

2
I

3
I

ern

g.aL
B

Figure 16. Drawings of milling stone fragments from Late Prehistoric contexts. A, from
exposed surface in roadcut; B, from Zone I excavation. Arrows point to utilized surfaces.

Ricklis ~ The McKinzie Site

A

o

23

B

z

:2!

3i

¢1TI

C

D

E

Figure 17. Drawings of shell and bone artifacts from Zone I. A-B, Rang ia cuneata scrapers;
C-E, modified bone, possibly awl fragments.

Shell (2 Specimens)
Two edge fragments ofRangia cuneata valves (Figure 17, A and B) from Zone
I have serrated edges produced by flaking. These specimens presumably were used
as scraping or cutting tools.
Modified Bone (3 Specimens)
Due to their small size (Figure 17, C-E), the original forms from which these
small bone tool fragments came cannot be determined. Surface polish and minute
striations on all three indicate that they could be awl fragments. Interestingly, these
are the only fire-scorched bone fragments found, so it is possible that a firehardening technique was used in the production of bone tools.
Ceramic (197 Sherds)
In all, 197 sherds were recovered from Zone I. Except for a single bonetempered sherd, all are of sandy paste and conform well to the Rockport ware series
as defined by Suhm and Jelks (1962:131-135).
On the basis of color, paste, thickness, and surface treatment, the sherds have
been sorted into the nine groups described below.

24

Texas Archeologieal Society

A

1
17:33

E

F
Figure 18. Drawings of rim sherds. A, Rockport Black on Gray rimsherd with asphaltum
banding, from wide-mouthed vessel; B-F, Rockport Black on Gray rim sherd from smallmouthed vessels. All except B have asphaltum lip banding. B is a surface fred, all others are
from the Zone I excavation. Cross sections show contours of exteriors.

Group 1 (134 Sherds) (Figure 18, A and Figure 19, E)
The exteriors of these sherds are smoothed, and some have an asphaltum
coating or rather amorphous decoration; interiors are smoothed. The paste consists
of about 50 to 60 percent fine angular sand particles of fairly uniform size. Exteriors
are gray, grading to orange on a few sherds. Interiors are orange. Close to the
surface, cores have a fairly sharp gradient from the gray exteriors to the orange
interiors. The sherds range between 5 and 9 mm in thickness.
Eight sherds in this group are rim sherds. All have straight rim profiles and
slightly thickened lips. Rims are slightly flattened, with rounded interior and exterior lips. All have a narrow asphaltum band on the lip exterior (see Figure 18, A).
Since the sherds in Group 1 are a considerably homogeneous group they are
believed, with some confidence, to come from a single vessel. Curvatures of rim,

RickIis w The McKinzie Site

25

I
Icm

C

D

Figure 19. Drawings of sherds from Zone I excavation. A, bone-tempered basal sherd from
flat-bottomed vessel; B, D, E, F, Sandy paste sherds with asphaltum decoration; C, interior
of sherd with scoring and asphaltum coating.

neck, and body sherds suggest an open-mouthed, somewhat straight-necked,
globular-based vessel with an oral diameter of about 25 cm. On the basis of
asphaltum lip decoration, this vessel can be assigned to the Rockport Black on Gray
type (Suhm and Jelks 1962: 133).
Group 2 (36 Sherds) (Figures 18, E and F, 19, C and D)
The exterior surfaces in this sherd group are smoothed. Nine sherds are scored
and have asphaltum-coated interiors, and 10 sherds have interiors smoothed with
asphaltum coating; the remaining sherds have plain and smoothed interiors. Except
for two rim sherds that have asphaltum banding on lip exteriors, the exteriors of the
sherds are without asphaltum. The paste consists of about 50 percent fine sand
particles of fairly uniform size. The sherds are uniformly tan throughout, though a
few are tinged with pink at the cores. Thickness of the sherds varies from 4 to 6 mm.

26

Texas Archeological Society

Both of the rim sherds in this group have straight profiles, rounded lips, and
narrow asphaltum banding on lip exteriors (see Figure 18, E and F).
In view of the fact that some sberd interiors have asphaltum coating and others
have none, Group 2 may represent two vessels.

Group 3 (18 Sherds)
The interiors and exteriors of sherds in this group are smoothed. Most sherds
have traces of asphaltum on their exteriors. The paste consists of about 50 percent
fine sand particles. Exteriors are light tan-gray, and interiors and cores are gray.
Thickness ranges between 5 and 7 mm. The homogeneity of the sherds in this group
suggests that they came from a single vessel.
Group 4 (3 Sherds) (Figure 18, C)
Sherds in this group are smoothed on both surfaces. One rim sherd has a narrow
band of asphaltum on the lip exterior. The paste consists of about 40 percent fine
sand particles. Sherd color is uniformly yellowish tan throughout. Thickness
ranges between 4.5 and 6.5 mm.
The single rim sherd in Group 4 (Figure 18, C) has a straight profile and a
rounded lip with a band of asphaltum on the exterior edge. On the basis of the
asphaltum lip banding, this sherd can be assigned to the Rockport Black on Gray
type.

Group 5 (3 Sherds) (Figure 18, D)
A thin exterior grayish white film on the sherds in this group may be a slip or
a floated surface; interiors are smoothed. Paste consists of about 40 to 50 percent
fine sand particles. The sherds are oxidized to an orange-pink color throughout.
Thickness ranges between 3.5 and 3.7 mm.
On the exterior of the single rim sherd in the group is what appears to be
smoothed-over scoring and a band of asphaltum at the lip (Figure 18, D). The
asphaltum banding places this sherd in the Rockport Black on Gray type. In cross
section the rim is nearly pointed and slightly everted.
The thickness, sherd curvatures, and homogeneity within the group indicate
that a single very small vessel is represented.
Group 6 (1 Sherd)
Both the exterior and interior surfaces of this sherd are smooth and
highly burnished. Paste consists of about 50 percent very fine sand particles. Color
is very light tan throughout. Thickness is 3.6 mm.
The attributes of this sherd are distinctly different from those in other groups,
indicating that it is from a separate vessel.
Group 7 (1 Sherd) (Figure 19, F)
The exterior of this sherd is smooth; the interior is smooth and slightly
burnished. On the exterior surface are thin, roughly parallel vertical lines of
asphaltum. Paste consists of about 50 percent fine sand particles. The interior and

Ricklis ~ The McKinzie Site

27

exterior surfaces are light tan; the core is gray. Thickness varies from 5 to 6 mm.
The curvature of this sherd indicates that it is part of the neck of a bottle. On
the basis of the asphaltum decoration, the sherd can be assigned to the Rockport
Black on Gray type.
Group 8 (1Sherd)
The exterior of this sherd is smoothed; the interior is smoothed and coated with
asphaltum. Paste consists of about 60 percent fine sand particles. The exterior is
orange; interior and core are gray. Thickness is 4.9 mm.
Group 9 (1 Sherd) (Figure 19,A)
The exterior of this sherd is smooth and slightly burnished; the interior is
roughly smoothed. Aplastics in the clay body consist of about 20 percent sand
particles of variable size and 20 percent crushed bone. The exterior grades from
orange to dull yellow-orange; the core and interior are gray. Thickness ranges
between 5 and 7.5 mm.
This is the only sherd in the Zone I sample that does not belong in the Rockport
series. The sherd most closely resembles, in paste, color, and surface treatment
bone-temperd pottery reported from the interior of southern Texas (c.f. Hester and
Hill 1975, 1977). This sherd clearly is from the base of a flat-bottomed vessel, a
form that is not known in the central Texas coast area, and only one example of
which is reported from the interior of southern Texas (Hester and Hill 1975).

Discussion
With the exception of the single sherd in Group 9, all sherds fall within therange
of variability of Rockport ware. Though most sherds are small, curvatures indicate
diverse vessel forms, including open-mouthed jars, narrow-necked or bottle forms,
and a very small, thin vessel (Group 5) that probably was more of a cup than a pot.
These vessel forms demonstrate the possibility of a variety of functions for the Zone
I ceramics. It is not demonstrable, but it is reasonable to infer that the open-mouthed,
fairly large jar (Group 1) was a cooking pot, and the narrow-necked forms served
as water containers.
FAUNAL REMAINS
Zone III
Bone
Unfortunately, Zone III was characterized by a complete absence of bone,
almost certainly the result of decay.
Shell
The density of shell debris in Zone III was considerable and supports the
identification of the deposit as a shell midden (Table 2).
The Rangia flexuosa count is based on whole valves and umbo fragments, so
halving it accurately reflects the number of clams represented in the excavated part
of the zone. The ether aquatic species counts, however, are based on fragments, so

28

Texas Archeological Society
Table 2. Shell Sample From Zone HI
Shell
Rangia flexuosa
Oyster
Angel wing (Crytopleura costata)
Mussel (Ischadium recurvum)
Cockle (Laevicardiurn robustum)
Marginella
Marsh periwinkle (Littorina irrorata)
Land snail (Rabdotus sp.)

Quantity
12,722
293
15
6
3
1
1
239

the number of animals represented is somewhat less than the number in Table 2.
Clearly it can be concluded, however, that Rangia flexuosa was the significant
shellfish resource exploited by the Zone III occupants of the site and that oysters
played a very minor subsistence role.
The count of Rabdotus land snails is based on complete shells. Occasionally,
the smaller Polygyra and Helicina land snails were encountered, but these shells
were extremely fragile and disintegrated under the trowel. It is unclear whether the
Rabdotus snails were gathered for food, since the species is adapted to a terrestrial
habitat and the recovered specimens may represent natural deaths within the
population. This seems a reasonable conclusion, since these shells were not
particularly abundant in the midden. RecentRabdotus shells can be seen scattered
over the ground surface on, and in the vicinity of, the site.

Fish
Thirty-two marine fish otoliths were recovered from zone III (Table 3).
Table 3. Fish Otoliths Recovered From Zone HI
Fish
Gafftop catfish (Felicthyusfelis)
Hardhead catfish (Galeicthys milberti)
Croaker (M&ropogon undulatus)
Black drum (Pogonias cromis)
Redfish (Sciaenops ocellatus)
Sea trout (Cynoscion nebulosus)

Quantity
9
7
7
5
2

(28%)
(22%)
(22%)
(16%)
(6%)

2

(6%)

The season when marine fish died can be determined by microscopic examination of the cross sections of fish otoliths (see Casteel 1976, Smith 1983).
Although the method of determination of seasonality is essentially quite simple, it
can be complicated by two factors: (1) erratic growth patterns, possibly caused by
abnormal fluctuations in water temperatures, can obscure annual growth bands, (2)
the fish may have been too young at the time of death for the otoliths to have
accumulated a sufficient number of growth bands for a reliable estimation of the

Ricklis -- The McKinzie Site

29

width of the annuli.
So of the 32 otoliths recovered from Zone III, the season of death can be
determined with a reasonable degree of confidence for only 21 (Table 4).
Table 4. Season of Death of 21 Otoliths from Zone HI

Season
Late fall/winter

Total
Winter

Total

No.
2
2
1
5
4
4
2
2
1
13

1

Spring
Total

1

Total

2
2

Summer

Species
Gafftop catfish
Hardhead catfish
Black drum

Percent
of Sample

23
Gafftop catfish
Black drum
Trout
Hardhead catfish
Redfish
62
Croaker

Gafftop catfish
10

Though the sample is not large, the distinct seasonal clustering of otoliths in the
late fall-winter period strongly suggests that occupation of Zone III was primarily
during that season.
Zone II
Bone
Bone in Zone II is limited to sporadic occurences of small, unidentifiable
splinters, mostly in the upper part of the zone, becoming increasingly scarce with
depth until they are entirely absent in the lowest part of the zone.
Shell
A scattering of land snails (Rabdotus, Polygyra, and Helicina) with no apparent
horizontal or vertical clustering was encountered.
Both Rangia flexuosa and Rangia cuneata were present, and though these
shells occurred sporadically and without the association of time-diagnostic artifacts, an interesting and probably significant pattern can be seen in the vertical
distribution of the twoRangia species. The percentages of Rangiaflexuosa relative
to Rangia cuneata decrease by 10-cm levels from 100 percent in Zone III to about
27 percent in zone I (Table 5).

30

Texas Archeological Society
Table 5. Percentages of Rangia by
10-Centimeter Levels

Unit N2E0
Test Trench
Flexuosa
Cuneata
Flexuosa
Cuneata
%
No.
%
No,
%
No.
%
No.
72
39
7
15
28
Level 1
9
60
30
20
43
40
73
Level 2
27
16
Zone II:
41
34
55
45
61
Level 3
39
61
39
25
307
8
37
92
Level 4
127
23
77
Zone I~:I
717
0
11
!00
Level 5
313
4
96
0
100
40
0
Level 6
257
100
1 Zone ]I[ contained only Rangiaflexuosa. Levels 4 and 5 were primarily in Zone I]I, but
Zone and Level

Zone I:

extended slightly into Zone II.

From Table 5 it is clear that there is a shift in Zone II, where the species
percentages are intermediate between Zones I and III. The apparent discrepancy in
percentages per level between the test trench and unit N2E0 is due to the downsloping of the zones toward the south of the test trench (see profile, Figure 4) where the
arbitrary levels were horizontal. Percentages have not been calculated for level 1
in the test trench due to the small sample size. The percentages for unit N2E0, level
1, can be regarded as reliable, since the relative percentages for the two species in
the entire southern part of the area A, zone I (level 1) excavation (16 1-meter
squares) are virtually identical: flexuosa 27.3 percent; cuneata 72.7 percent. The
significance of these figures in a reconstruction of environmental change in the
lower Nueces estuary will be discussed below.
Zone I
Bone
Bone preservation in Zone I was good, presumably due to the recentness of the
occupation. In the list of fragments below, only one individual of each species is
definitely represented: nineteen bison (Bison bison) fragments (1 radius, 9 ribs, 9
long bones); two white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus); 22 carapace fragments
from an unidentified turtle; one radio-ulna fragment from an unidentified frog; 4
long bone splinters from an unidentified bird; and 51 small unidentified bone
fragments.
A tibia fragment of domestic pig, also recovered from Zone I, is in a markedly
better state of preservation than the other mammal bones and is presumed to come
from the historic occupation of the site.
Shell
The shells recovered from Zone I were Rangia cuneata (879 valves and
umbos), Rangiaflexuosa (456 valves and umbos), Oyster (Crassostrea virginica)
(45 fragments), and Sunray venus (Macrocallista) (2 fragments).
It is believed that the overall representation of Rangiaflexuosa in Zone I is
somewhat greater than its actual usage by the Zone I occupants implies. Much

Ricklis m The McKinzie Site

~
~
~

31

-~0

A~Ar

1-20

21-40

over 60

0
I

meters

Figure 20. Plan showing occurrences ofRangia cuneata v alves/umbos in Zone I, excavation
area A.

higher numbers of this species came from the northernmost units in the Area A
excavation than from elsewhere in the site. From examination of the area just to the
north of the excavation it was clear that at some time soil there had been disturbed
well into Zone III and that some of the Zone III soil had been redeposited onto the
original surface of Zone I during the historic occupation of the site. This was most
apparent in N7E4, where the top 5 to 7 cm produced more than 50 valves of Rangia
flexuosa, but no Rangia cuneata and no Late Prehistoric material. Beneath the 5to 7-cm level, however, the Zone I deposit was intact and produced the characteristic
association of sandy paste potsherds with unpatinated chert debitage.
Due to this bias in the quantities of Rangiaflexuosa, only the densities per
1-meter-square unit of Rangia cuneata are considered reliable. In general, the
highest densities ofRangia cuneata occur in a roughly U-shaped band in the area
A, Zone I excavation ~igure 20). The significance of this will be discussed below.
One hundred seventy-oneRabdotus and 67 smaller land snail shells (Polygyra
and Helicina) were recorded for Zone I. As in Zones II and IH, the significance of
these shells is problematical, though it can be stated again that no patterning or
clustering was observable in their distribution.
A sample of 77 complete Rangia cuneata valves was subjected to seasonality
analysis, using the method developed by Lawrence Aten (1981). The McKinzie
sample broke down into Aten’s analytical categories as follows: Early, 27 (35
percent); Middle, 17 (22 percent); Late, 5 (6 percent); Interrupted, 17 (22 percent);

32

Texas Archeological Society

Indeterminate, 11 (15 percent).
Aten has presented a series of two-week histograms based on patterns of
proportional representation of the above categories in modem Rangia samples from
the upper and central Texas coast. So ideally, for example, a site producing Rangia
cuneata and occupied in early April should yield a shell sample that, when broken
down into the Aten’s analytical categories, will conform to the two-week histogram
for the period between the end of March and the middle of April.
The McKinzie sample would fit best the period from the end of April to midMay (although this must be extrapolated from the two adjacent histograms in the
sequence because this interval is one for which Aten had no sample and, therefore,
no histogram. See Aten 1981:187), except for the fact that the interrupted category
is much too well represented. Aten’s samples show the representation of the
interrupted category to be 8 percent for end of April and 4 percent for end of May,
so to infer deposition of the McKinzie sample during that period would require that
the interrrupted category fall around 4 to 8 percent.
Clearly the Zone I sample indicates a spring occupation in the light of Aten’s
histograms. But at what time during the spring, and for how long, is not clear from
a glance at the histograms. Two possible explanations can be offered for the
discrepancy between the McKinzie sample and Aten’s histogram sequence: (1) The
sample shows an overrepresentation of interrupted shells due to admixture with
shells deposited during another occupation that was earlier in the year, or (2) the
sample represents a single occupational episode spanning more than the two-week
interval represented by each histogram.
As will be discussed below, there is a general spatial correspondence between
the distribution of Rangia cuneata and artifacts and features in Zone I. So the
Rangia cuneata shells recovered probably came from a single occupational episode.
Working on this assumption, the discrepancy between the McKinzie sample and
Aten’s histograms is most economically explained by postulating that the Zone I
occupation spanned a period of more than two weeks.
This postulate was tested by averaging the percentages of shells falling into the
respective analytical categories (Early, Middle Late, and Interrupted) in Aten’s
spring histograms (the middle of March to the end of May). Since the indeterminate
category is a more-or-less constant residual consisting of shells that could not be
placed in any other category, it was eliminated in order to simplify comparisons.
When the percentage figures for the six spring histograms were averaged, the results
compared very closely with the McKinzie sample (Table 6).
These figures strongly support the inference that the McKinzieRangia cuneata
sample indicates an occupational episode spanning all or the better part of the period
between the middle of March and the end of May. So apparently we are dealing here
with something approaching a full seasonal occupation. Since Aten’s histograms
cannot account for possible minor differences in samples due to location or seasonal
variation in any given year, attempts to make more precise estimates of the time of
occupation would be of little value. In any case, for the purposes of this report, the
inference of a single episode of occupation, the duration of which approximated the
spring season, is adequate.

Ricklis ~ The McKinzie Site

33

Table 6. Comparison of Aten’s Spring Histograms With the McKinzie Sample

Analytical
Category
Interrupted
Early
Middle
Late

Aten’s Spring Histograms:
Averaged
Category Percentages
27
45
23
7

McKinzie Sample:
Category~
Percentages
26
40
26
8

Does not include shells in the indeterminate category.

Fish
Despite reasonably good preservation of bone in zone I, only two marine fish
otoliths were found--one hardhead catfish and one trout. They were found in the
northern part of the excavation and may come from the thinly redeposited Zone III
soil in that part of excavation area A.
FEATURES

Zone IlI
No cultural features were encountered in Zone HI.
Zone II
Feature 6-A
A single distinct feature found in Zone II was designated Feature 6-A. The
feature was in the western part of unit N5E0 in excavation area A, and, because of
mottling of ashy and burned soil caused by animal burrowing between the two
features, was first believed to be a downward extension of Feature 6, which was
clearly a hearth associated with Zone I. Horizontal exposure of the feature surface
and a cross section, however, demonstrated that Feature 6-A actually originated at
about 20 to 25 cm below the modern ground surface and extended to as much as 55
cm below ground surface.
The exposed surface of the feature was roughly semicircular, and the profile
was roughly U-shaped. Fill was predominantly orange burned loam soil mixed with
a great deal of gray-white ash that contained only a few minute flecks of charcoal.
A 5-gallon bucket of fill was water-screened through fine mesh window screening
in a search for minute carbonized organic matter, but there was none. In the fill were
72 whole and fragmentary Rangia shells and three pieces of chert debitage.
Zone I
Hearths
Feature 4
This feature, located in units N4E0 and N4E1, originated between 7 and 10 cm
below the modern ground surface. The hearth was oblong and merged with an

34

Texas Archeological Society

adjacent hearth, Feature 6, in unit N5E0 to the north. It measured 37 cm east-west
by about 100 cm north-south.
The fill of Feature 4 was predominantly reddish-orange burned loam with
scattered ash, but no charcoal. Excavation of the fill revealed a shallow basinlike
depression with a maximum depth of 16 cm.
Feature 5
This hearth originated at 7 to 9 cm below modern ground surface. It is elongated
and irregular, measuring 218 cm north-south by 92 cm east-west. The fill was
reddish orange burned soil mixed sporadically with brown ashy loam and graywhite ash. The fill contained no charcoal.
Removal of the fill revealed a shallow basin with a maximum depth of 11 cm.
A single fragment of a large mammal long bone, probably bison, was recovered
from the surface of the feature.
Feature 6
This hearth ~igure 21) originated at 8 to 10 cm below the modern ground
surface in units N5E0, N5E1, N6E0 and N6E1. In plan it was an irregular oval
measuring 155 by 107 cm. The fill consisted of sizeable patches of reddish-orange
loam soil, gray-white ash, and dark brown ashy loam.
In the fill were several matching fragments of bison radius and three chert
flakes, all in the southeastern part of the feature. A fill sample was fine waterscreened for possible carbonized plant remains, but the results were negative. The
screening did yield 11 minute chert flakes and a handful of very small Rangia
fragments. Except for an occasional minute fleck, no charcoal was associated with
this feature.

Feature 7
This hearth ~igure 22) was exposed at a depth of 9 to 10 cm in the northern part
of unit N6W2. Only the southern part was excavated, since the feature extended into
unexcavated unit N7W2. Its maximum observable dimension was 51 cm. The fill
was a patchy mixture of reddish-orange burned loam, gray-white ash, and ashy
brown loam, but no charcoal. The basin-shaped profile had a maximum depth of
23 cm.
Burned Loam Patches
In addition to these distinct hearths, three patches of reddish orange burned
loam were noted at 7 to 10 cm below ground surface. Two were located to the east
of Feature 5; the third was to the south of Feature 4 in unit N1E0 (designated Feature
2 in the field). Though these may be small, short-term hearths, their small size and
shallow (1-3 cm) depth suggest scatters of burned soil, perhaps displaced from
Features 4 and 5 during the Zone 1 occupation.
Ash Patches
Several patches of gray-white ash, not assigned feature numbers, were exposed

Ricklism The McKinzie Site

35

Bison bone 15 cm

mag. N

Bison bone 15-18 cm

N5E1
t

w
10 cm level

E1

0
|

~ Burned soll

60cm
I

I

|

,

~Ash

I

I

!

~

shy loam

Figure 21. Plan of Feature 6, hearth in Zone I, excavation area A and west-east profile along
grid line N6.

in Zone I. These are indicated on the map of the Zone I excavation (Figure 12). All
were encountered between 7 and 10 cm below ground surface and ranged between
2 and 4 cm in thickness. In two instances the ash patches were adjacent to hearths
(Features 6 and 7). As indicated in Figure 12, all, except for the patch next to Feature
7, were within 2 meters of Features 4, 5, and 6, andpresumably are scatter from those
hearths.

Pit
A small pit (Figure 23), designated Feature 8, was found in the southwestern
part of unit N7E2, when, as the unit floor was brushed down at the 10-cm level, a

36

Texas Archeological Society

N7W2

.=N7W1

m

Rodent burrow
mag. N

UNIT

N6W2

!
J

10
ci level

20
I

~

Burned soil

~

40 ¢ m
,,,

Ash

I

I

~Ashy loam

Figure 22. Plan of southern part of Feature 7 hearth in Zone I, excavation area A, and westeast profile along grid line NT.

distinctly soft, oval spotwasnotedin aboutthecenterofathinpatchofash. Though
first believed to be a rodent burrow, careful removal of the fill revealed a clearly
oval, 32-by-21-cm U-shaped pit, as much as 18 cm deep. The soft, ashy fill
contrasted markedly in texture with the compact loam matrix. No burned soil or
fire-staining, which would indicate in situ burning, were seen.
In the fill were a single sandy paste potsherd (sherd Group 1) three chert flakes,
and 23 small Rangia fragments.
Possible Pits
At the time of the excavation of the northern part of excavation area A, Zone
I, infrared photographs were made of the floors of the 1-meter units at the 10-cm
level. The photographs were taken from directly overhead by using a lift bucket,
so it was possible to make each one cover a single excavation unit. Four dark

Ricklis ~ The McKinzie Site

37

W

N

~Ash

~’~ Ashy brown loam

Figure 23. Cross sections through pit, Feature 8, Zone I, excavation area A.

circular spots that could not be seen from the ground were detected on the
photographs (Figure 12). These spots, all about 30-35 cm in diameter, were rather
evenly spaced in an arc around the hearths, Features 4, 5, and 6. It is interesting, and
probably significant, that the definable pit, Feature 8, is about the same size as the
spots, and its location fits into the arclike pattern. Apparently a series of small pits,
including the pit, Feature 8, was arranged around the hearth area delineated by
Features 4, 5, and 6.
It must be stated, however, that, after the locations of these possible pits were
plotted on the field map, it was not possible, despite meticulous brushing, scraping,
and probing, to find any trace of pits. During the excavation at the site, however,
it was noticed that the excavated sandy clay loam, when backfilled and exposed to
a few rains, returned to its original compact state.Therefore, pits that existed during
the Late Prehistoric occupation had been filled with loam (without the admixture of
the ash that permitted the recognition of Feature 8), it is possible that no evidence
of pits could be found by ordinary field techniques.

Possible Post Molds
Four possible small post molds (Figures 24, 25, and 12) were exposed at the 10cm level. These features could not be seen, but were felt as distinct soft spots during

38

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 24. Possible post mold, Feature 3, exposed (with fill removed) at 10-cm level, Zone
I, excavation area A.

brushing of exposed, dry unit floors. More than two dozen small soft spots were
recognized in this way, and all were carefully scooped out from the dried, hardened
loam matrix. A few were also cross-sectioned. All but four were clearly small
animal burrows, but the four possible post molds were circular in plan and bluntly
conical in cross section (Figure 25).
The fill of these post molds was sandy, with little clay content, and the texture
was easily distinguishable from that of the surrounding sandy clay loam. It is
possible that they were the filled-in impressions of small posts that had been
removed from the ground (Table 7).
Table 7. Dimensions and Depths of Possible
Post Molds, Features 1, 3, 9, and 10
Feature No.

Diameter
cm

Depth Below 10-cm Level
crfl

1
3

8
7.5

11
8

9
10

7.5
7

9
9

Ricklis ~ The McKinzie Site

lOcrn

level

39

-~

~

3

10 c m

level

9

10
loom

0
a

m

*

.

~

|

Figure 25. Cross sections of possible post molds, Features 1, 3, 9 and 10, in Zone I, excavation area A.

DATING THE SITE COMPONENTS
Zone IH
Three samples of Rangiaflexuosa shell from three different parts of the zone
were submitted to the Radiocarbon Laboratory at the Balcones Research Center at
The University of Texas at Austin (Table 8).
Table 8. Radiocarbon Dates From Zone

Sample No.
Tx-5263
Tx-5264

Raw Date1
4450-L-_90 B.P
4630!-_90 B.P.

Tx-5265
4410-L-_90 B.P.
1 S. Valastro, personal communication.

Calibrated Date2
5220-L-_90 B.P.=3270 B.C.
5310!-_90 B.P.=3360 B.C.
5130-L-_90 B.P.=3180 B.C.

2 Calibrated by dendrochronology (Klein et al. 1982).

40

Texas Archeological Society

Aten (1983a, Appendix 1) has reported considerable success in obtaining
reliable radiocarbon dates from Rangia cuneata shells on the Upper Gulf Coast of
Texas. Salvatore Valastro (personal communication), of the Radiocarbon Laboratory of The University of Texas at Austin, states that Rangia flexuosa should
produce similar results.
Aten has suggested, on the basis of comparisons of dates obtained on charcoal
and on Rangia cuneata from the same archeological contexts, that dates obtained
fromRangia are generally slightly older than dates from charcoal (Aten 1983a:330341). In the Trinity River delta area on the Upper Texas Coast, Rangia cuneata
samples yield dates that are about 225 years earlier than those produced by charcoal.
Aten had postulated that the discrepancy is due to the absorption of carbon ions by
living clams and that the higher the levels of bicarbonate in the aquatic environment,
the greater the resultant discrepancy in radiocarbon dates. The amount of bicarbonate in turn correlates with the proximity of the estuary system where the clams lived
to the limestone formations of Central Texas. SoRangia samples from the mouth
of the Sabine River, for example, should produce dates very nearly the same as those
from charcoal in the same context, since the Sabine drainage is largely free of
dissolved carbonates from Central Texas limestone. In contrast, samples ofRangia
from the Lavaca River estuary are predicted to produce age determinations that are
some 800 to 1000 years too old, since much of the Lavaca drainage is in the Central
Texas limestone region.
Aten has summarized his correlations of the recorded bicarbonate counts (mg/
liter) in the waters of various Upper Coast estuaries and predicted age deviations of
shell samples as a logarithmic regression. The average bicarbonate count from test
locations in Nueces and Corpus Christibays for the mid- 1970s is 183 mg/liter (Lind
1980). Accordng to Aten’s regression model (Aten 1983a:340), this amount of
bicarbonate should produce a date on Rangia shell that is about 300 years too old.
Based on this prediction, the Rangia radiocarbon dates at McKinzie would indicate
a Zone III occupation at about 49~ B.P. However, it is probably unrealistic to be
so precise, since Aten’s regression model is, as he himself states (1983a:339),
preliminary. Furthermore, modern bicarbonate counts from Nueces and Corpus
Christi bays may be significantly different from those in the vicinity of the site
during the Zone III occupation due to differences in the bay environment over the
millenia. Bicarbonate counts are affected by the degree of interchange between
estuarine and sea waters; counts for estuary and bay waters become increasingly
uniform and, in the case of the Nueces/Corpus Christi Bay system, increasingly
lower from the heads of the bays toward the Gulf of Mexico (see Lind 1980). So
before the barrier islands were formed the bicarbonate count in the waters near the
McKinzie site probably was lower than at present. Only the recovery and testing
of paired charcoal/Rangia samples from the area will permit more accurate
assessment of the degree of age deviation possible in Rangia samples from the
charcoal norm.
The consistency of results in dating the Zone III samples and the general
reliability of Rangia suggests that the Zone III dates are reasonably reliable
approximations of the age of the occupations. Although it must be kept in mind that

Ricklis ~ The McKinzie Site

41

the dates may be too early, such deviation does not create serious interpretive
problems in the light of the roughly 5,000-year time frame involved.
Zone II
No samples were submitted for dating from Zone II, since, without associated
diagnostic artifacts, radiocarbon determinations would have been valueless for
cultural chronology.
Zone I
The tiny bits of charcoal that occurred sporadically in Zone I could have been
gathered for radiocarbon dating, but it was deemed that such dates would be
unreliable because of the strong possibility that, at their shallow depth, they had
been contaminated by charcoal of more recent origin and becauseRangia shell tends
to yield dates that are several centuries too early. Therefore no samples were
submitted from Zone I for radiocarbon dating. However, it can be inferred that the
Late Prehistoric occupation at McKinzie dates between about A.D. 1300/1400 and
the eighteenth century. Though to date no radiocarbon dates have been published
for the Late Prehistoric Rockport complex, the predominance ofPerdiz arrowpoints
in the Rockport assemblage (see Corbin 1974) suggests a post-A.D.-1300/1400
time, since this point type has been so dated in adjacent interior southern and southcentral Texas (see Prewitt 1985; Black 1986). The presence on Rockport sites of
European trade material and arrowpoints made from bottle glass (Campbell 1958b;
Corbin 1963, 1974) indicates that the Rockport complex persisted into the period
of European contact.
SITE-SPECIFIC INTERPRETATIONS
Zone III
On the basis of dart points and an average date of 5220+90 B.P. for the three
radiocarbon dates (Table 8), Zone III can be assigned to a fairly early period in the
Archaic stage. The radiocarbon dates are supported by the occurrence in Zone III
of a Bell dart point. Prewitt has estimated the time range for Bell points in Central
Texas as about 4100 to 3100 B.C. (Prewitt 1981, 1985). So the average of the
McKinzie Zone III dates appears to fit the Central Texas chronology suggested by
Prewitt.
The Tortugas point from Zone III is also probably at home within the time frame
suggested by the radiocarbon dates, since this point type has been estimated to date
to the Early and Middle Archaic in southern Texas (Turner and Hester 1985:152).
The presence of the small Catan and Catan-like points at about 5000 B.P.,
however, is at variance with the previously suggested time range for such points in
southern Texas. It has been suggested that the Catan point is a Late Archaic type
(see Hester 1980b:98; Tumer and Hester 1985:78), and Hester has postulated that
the type may represent the later end of a continuum involving progressive diminuition from the larger but morphologically similar Abasolo type.
Data from Nuevo Leon in northeastern Mexico, however, are not inconsistent
with a relatively early occurrence of Catan and Catan-like points and may have more

42

Texas Archeological Society

relevance for the southern Texas region than has been apparent. As indicated by a
series of radiocarbon dates, Catan and Catan-like points are found at the Cueva de
la Zona de Derrumbes site by about 3000 B.C. (Epstein 1972, 1980; McClurkan
1980:61). The type is also found in unit 32, alevel datedby uncorrected radiocarbon
determinations to between 3450 and 2450 B.C. (Nance 1980:43-44), at the La
Calsada site.
Although the McKinzie Zone III sample is small, the association of all four dart
points with the dated shell samples is excellent. Vertical displacement of materials
can be ruled out confidently since all of the nearly 13,000 Rangia specimens
recovered and identified as to species were Rangia flexuosa. Despite the
occurrence ofRangia cuneata at the base of Zone II, no specimens were found in
Zone III, indicating that there was no downward displacement of material. Too, all
chert debitage in Zone III had slight-to-moderate patination that was not characteristic of higher zones. The dart points were similarly patinated, suggesting undisturbed association with the Zone III debris.
On the basis of the Catan and Catan-like points in Zone III, dated to about 5000
B.P., and the well-established assignment of these points to a similar date in Nuevo
Leon, it appears that Catan points do not come only from a relatively late time period
in South Texas. The type may have a much longer time span than has been
previously thought or, alternatively, we may be dealing with two or more temporally
and/or culturally distinct types, which are, at least by current analytical standards,
morphologically indistinguishable. In either case, more information about the
chronological position(s) of the small, unstemmed, round-based dart point form in
southern Texas apparently is needed before the Catan type can be accepted as
chronologically diagnostic.

Environmental and Ecological Inferences
Both Rangia cuneata and Rangia flexuosa are brackish water clams, but
Rangiaflexuosa is known to prefer a higher salinity level than does Rangia cuneata
(Andrews 1977;220-221). Therefore the shift from 100 percent Rangiaflexuosa
in Zone III to a predominance ofRangia cuneata in Zone I suggests that a decrease
in salinity occurred in the estuarine waters near the site during the several millenia
between the occupations of the two zones. That this shift was gradual, reflecting
fundamental change in the estuary environment rather than relativly short term
oscillations in salinity levels, is suggested by the progressive shift in the proportional representation of the two species between successive 10-cm levels in the
excavations (Table 5). The percentages by level suggest that light and sporadic
occupations depositedRangia shell in the gradually accumulating loam soil of Zone
II, and that Rangia cuneata became increasingly well represented as aquatic
conditions became more suited to its requirements.
That such changes were not restricted to the area around the McKinzie site is
indicated by the following data from other sites along the southern margin of the
Nueces estuary.
1) The Means site (41NU184), several kilometers upstream from McKinzie,
can be described as a dense Rangiaflexuosa midden similar to McKinzie, Zone III.

RickIis n The McKinzie Site

43

All of the more-than-two-dozen projectile points recovered from the site, except for
a single Fresno arrowpoint, were Archaic dart points. There were no other Late
Prehistoric artifacts, such as potsherds. Excavations at this site revealed an apparent
aboriginal living surface that produced a crescentic post mold pattern in probable
association with a thin scatter of camp debris (Ricklis and Gunter 1986). Atthesame
level a cluster of Rangia flexuosa shells was uncovered. These shells were
submitted to the Radiocarbon Laboratory, Balcones Research Center, The University of Texas at Austin, and yielded a date of 5080+70 B.P. (Tx-5303-4390+70 B.P.
Callibration by dendrochronology, Klein 1984) (ibid.:25). So the profusion of
Rangia flexuosa at this site suggests an aquatic estuarine environment similar to and
at about the same time as that indicated at Zone III at McKinzie.
2) A shell stratum containing Rangia flexuosa exclusively was seen in an
exposed soil profile at the edge of an eroded wash at the Jackson Woods site
(42NU240), about 1 km upstream from McKinzie (R. Ricklis, field notes). The
stratum, 1 meter beneath the modem surface of a dark brown sandy clay-loam
topsoil, was about 10 cm thick. Eroding out of this stratum, together with several
chert flakes, was the medial section of a dart point, suggesting an Archaic
occupation. On the other hand, an exposed deposit of Late Prehistoric debris at this
site, which yielded chert flakes and Roc~rt ware pottery, had a scatter of Rangia
cuneata but no Rangia flexuosa.
3) At the Allison site (41NU185), halfa kilometer upstream from McKinzie,
test excavations yielded Late Prehistoric Rockport ware sherds in association with
Rangia cuneata (Carlson et al. 1983, Figures 15, 16).
So, though the data base ought to be expanded for greater certainty, Rangia
flexuosa deposits appear to correlate with relatively early occupations, whereas
Rangia cuneata is exclusively or predominantly in association with Late Prehistoric
material remains. The inference to be drawn from these data is that the changing
salinity in the Nueces estuary indicated by findings at the McKinzie excavation
happened throughout the area. This may appear to contradict the general paleoclimatic evidence that Texas (see Bryant and Halloway 1985) had increasingly dry
conditions during the Holocene, which would have resulted in progressively
reduced discharge of fresh water into coastal estuaries and a concomitant increase
in salinity levels. If the geological evidence is considered, however, a coherent
picture emerges that agrees with the archeological data. As already noted,
geological evidence indicates that by about 4500 B.P. the Nueces Valley was
inundated by Gulf waters at least as far inland as Calallen ~igure 1), about 8 km
west of the McKinzie site, creating a long embayment. At that time the high ground
on which the McKinzie site was situated would have been directly on the shore.
Since the present barrier islands had not formed, this embayment was susceptible
to tidal influence from the open Gulf, so general salinity levels would have be.en
high, decreasing toward more river-influenced areas near the head of the bay. With
the gradual formation of the barrier islands after about 2800 B.P. (Brown et al.
1976), the estuary would have become gradually less saline, until a habitat more
suited to the requirements ofRangia cuneata populations was established.
For these reasons it is postulated here that Zone III at McKinzie represents the

44

Texas Archeological Society

adaptation to an estuarine bayshore environment of aboriginal people by about 5000
B.P., with a varied subsistence base relying significantly on shellfish, primarily
Rangiaflexuosa clams, but also, to a minor extent, on oysters. The marine fish
otoliths in Zone III indicate that fall-winter fishing also played a role in their
subsistence economy. The importance of hunting is suggested by the fact that,
excluding debitage, dart points account for more than half of the lithic artifacts
recoverd. The complete absence of preserved bone in Zone III makes it impossible
to determine what species were hunted.
Zone II
Little can be said about Zone II. The sporadic and apparently random
occurrence of Rangia shell and occasional bits of unidentifiable bone suggests very
short term camping episodes that involved shellfish gathering and hunting activities. The sizeable and rather deep Feature 6-A, which had large amounts of ash and
burned soil, may have served as a roasting pit, but the absence of associated faunal
or floral remains makes further interpretation impossible.
Zone I
The artifact assemblage recovered from Zone I--Rockport ware pottery,
Perdiz arrowpoints, prismatic blades, and the small unifacial end scraper--is
characteristic of the Late Prehistoric Rockpert complex. These materials differ in
no significant way from those at many other sites in the Coastal Bend (cf. Campbell
1958b, Corbin 1963, Story 1968). Because of the controlled conditions of their
recovery, the findings from Zone I have the potential to reveal the nature of a single
Late Prehistoric occupation assignable to the Rockport complex.

Distributional Patterns
Though Zone I materials were found between 5 and 12 cm below the modern
ground surface, most specimens were found between 7 and 10 cm. All features-hearths, possible post molds, and the small pit--also came from the narrow range
of 7 to 10 cm. The contemporaneity of artifacts and features so implied is also
strongly supported by the horizontal distributions of features and debris.
Except for a dense cluster of debris in the northeastern part of the area A
excavation, most of the artifacts and bone fragments are clustered rather tightly
around the hearths, Features 4, 5, and 6 ffigure 12). In order to interpret this
distribution pattern, the densities of debris clusters in the excavated area were
examined. Three areas of debris clustering are suggested: (1) an area of moderate
density partially encircling the group of hearths, Features 4, 5, and 6, and contained
within a radius of about 1.5 to 2 meters to the northeast, east, and south of the hearths
where the average density of debris (sherds, chert debitage, and bone fragments)
is 27.I/square meter, (2) an area of high density in the northeastern part of the
excavation area where, except for very small splinters, there were no bone
fragments, and the density of sherds and debitage averages 48/square meter, and (3)
an area defined as all of the Zone I excavation outside of areas 1 and 2, where debris
is extremely sparse, averaging 5.3 specimens per square meter.

RickIis ~ The McKinzie Site

45

The presence of the moderately dense cluster around Features 4, 5, and 6
(Figure 26) is not believed to be fortuitous; it is probably debris accumulated during
daily activites around a central hearth complex. The location of the cluster to the
northeast, east, and south of the hearths is logical in the light of the fact that
prevailing winds during the spring, when the site was occupied, come from the eastsoutheast (Brown et al. 1976:29). Activities would have been concentrated on the
windward side of hearths.
In this light the area in the northeastern part of the excavation, which had
the highest density of debris, probably represents an episode of trash deposition.
The association of this debris with that around the hearths is certain, since the sherds
in both areas fall into the same groups--mostly Group 1--and all of the sherds in
Group 1 are from the same vessel.
This interpretation is further strengthened by the close correspondence in the
distribution of artifactual debris and Rangia cuneata fragments (Figures 20, 26).
The distribution pattern of Rangia (density per 1-meter unit) is a circle that
approximately duplicates, in both shape and location, the first of the artifactual
debris clusters described above. The 1-meter unit with the greatest density of
Rangia cuneata is also the unit with most sherds and debitage, a fact that further
supports the inference that the debris cluster in the northeast part of the excavation
is trash resulting from activites around the hearths.
Since the area around the hearths probably was a focal point of camp activity,
the area probably would have had a maintained surface, i.e., debris resulting from
various activities would have been deposited elsewhere. One area of deposition of
debris has been inferred; presumably there were others, since recovered potsherds
account for only small parts of the vessels from which they came. Also, the few
hundred pieces of chert debitage and the few bone fragments recovered probably
are only a fraction of the quantities of such debris that would be generated by an
occupation spanning all, or the better part, of a full season.
The inference that the debris that surrounds the hearths came from activities
that were performed inside a circular or semicircular structure is supported by
several findings:
1) Except for the cluster of relatively high density believed to result from trash
disposal, debris is distributed around the hearths in a circular pattern (Figure 26). It
will be noted that nearly all sherds, debitage, and bone fragments fall inside the
dashed circle, suggesting containment by a structure that minimized the natural
tendency for debris to be scattered by daily traffic.
2) Features 1,3,9,and 10 (Figure 26), possible post molds, are on or very near
the circle that marks the extent of debris around the hearths. Though every effort
was made during excavation to locate post molds, only these four seemed actually
to be post molds.
3) The small pit, Feature 8 (Figure 26), is just inside the circle. So, in
accordance with the postulation of structural containment, this feature represents a
pit located inside and near the wall of a structure. This placement of pits that served
as storage facilities in domiciles is well documented in a wide range of perhistoric
cultural contexts in North America.

46

Texas Archeologieal Society

4) The possible pits indicated by infrared photography form an alignment that
includes Feature 8 and closely follows the circular pattern (Figure 26). Also, the
consistent spacing of these possible pits and Feature 8 strongly suggests that the
spots visible in the photographs do indeed delineate a series of small pits just inside
a circular structural wall.
Taken together, these data strongly support the postulation of a circular or
semicircular hut about 5.5 meters in diameter with a central hearth complex. Such
a structure would be similar to the huts described for the historic aboriginal
inhabitants of the central Gulf Coast of Texas. Newcomb (1983:363) has described
the dwellings of the Karankawa as
constructed of a dozen or so slender willow poles approximately 18 feet long and
pointed at one or both ends. The sharpened ends were forced into the ground in a circle,
the upper ends interlaced and tied with thongs to form an oval framework over which
skins and woven rush mats were thrown. Often only the windward side was covered,
so it could as wellbe called a windbreak as ahut. The size of thehuts varied, butnormally
they were 10 or 12 feet in diameter and accommodated seven or eight people. They

could be dismantled quickly... Fires for cooking and for heat were built in the center of
the huts, the smoke easily finding its way out.

Functional Variability
Due to the temporary nature of the occupation and the apparent disposal of
debris outside the activity area on which the excavation was focused, the artifact
sample is small. Nevertheless, the material covers the range of daily activities
predictable for a seasonal multifunctional and residential occupation, as the
following list indicates.
1) Lithic tool production. The range of flake types covers all phases of tool
production, from primary cobble reduction to biface thinning. The most likely
source for lithic raw material is the gravel bed some 20 km up the Nueces River
(Chandler 1984). The presence of primary cortex flakes and the core indicates that
whole cobbles were brought to the site before initial reduction.
2) Plant processing. Two milling stone fragments (one from the Zone I
excavation) suggest that plants were being processed.
3) Storage. The one or more small pits that probably were inside a structure,
strongly suggests short-term storage, perhaps of gathered plants.
4) Various cutting and scraping tasks. The chert end scraper, twoRangia shell
scrapers, and several utilized flakes, all found in the debris cluster around the
hearths, indicate a variety of scraping and cutting activities.
5) Cooking. The dislribution of nearly all of the larger bone fragments and
sherds from what was probably a fairly large open-mouthed cooking pot (sherd
Group 1) around the hearths indicates that this area was a focal point for cooking and
eating.
Seasonality
As already discussed, analysis ofRangia cuneata valves indicates occupation
from about the middle of March through May. The close correspondence between
the distributions of Rangia cuneata shells and other debris, together with the

Ricklis E The McKinzie Site

47

~ - Bone fragment
~- Hearth
- Burned soil patch
Numbers indicate various features

- Ash patch
o

- Apparent p0~tmold
- Pit
- Possible pit indicated by
infrared photography

Figure 26. Plan of area A, Zone I excavation, showing suggested debris clusters outlined
by dashed lines.

48

Texas Archeological Society

reasonably inferred association of these distributions with the features, strongly
suggests that the Zone I findings are the result of a single episode of occupation
during these months.
Ecological Considerations
The location of the McKinzie site is ecotonal, situated as it is between the
ecologically different zones of the Nueces estuary and the grassland prairie of the
higher ground to the south of the floodplain. Nevertheless, all indications are that
subsistence was oriented primarily to the terrestrial prairie environment. Relatively
little use seems to have been made of the aquatic food resources that must have been
available in the nearby estuary. In spite of reasonably good bone preservation in
Zone I, no fish bones were recovered, and, although it is recognized that fish bone
in general is susceptible to rapid decay, it would be reasonable to expect preservation of at least some vertebrae. Fish otoliths, on the other hand, resist decomposition
very well, yet only two otoliths were recovered from Zone I, and both may have been
redeposited from the disturbance that intruded into Zone III to the north of the
excavation. Meticulous examination of the surfaces on the site that produced Late
Prehistoric artifacts also failed to yield any signs of fish bones or otoliths. So it can
be stated with confidence that fishing was, at most, an insignificant subsistence
activity during the Late Prehistoric occupation of the site. It is possible that
procurement and consumption of fish was taking place at a fishing station away
from the site, which would account for the absence of fish remains, but this is only
a weak possibility because (1) the site itself is adjacent to the Nueces River, (2)
Rangia cuneata obviously were being gathered in the estuary and brought back to
the site for consumption, and (3) the excavated area was the focal point of various
daily activities and, as indicated by the mammal bone and inferred plant processing,
was an area to which food resources were brought to be processed and consumed.
Rangia clams in Zone I are in what can be described best as a scatter. The
excavation yielded I235 identifiable umbo fragments and whole valves, which
would account for half as many clams--not an impressive amount of food. Granting
that much of the Rangia debris generated by the occupation presumably was
deposited beyond the limits of the excavation, the scattering of Rangia seen in the
parts of the site that yielded Late Prehistoric material supports the inference that
Rangia was an occasional rather than a primary food resource.
The data indicate that the most significant subsistence pursuit was hunting. The
faunal remains indicate that small animals--turtles, birds, and frogs--were eaten,
but the greatest source of meat apparently was large game, specifically white-tailed
deer and bison. Though these two species are represented by only one individual
each, they account for several hundred pounds of meat, far more than the meat in
all other species in the faunal sample combined. The small number of bones in the
excavated area, though, suggests that (a) food was shared with people occupying
other parts of the site, (b) bones were left at kill sites or butchering areas, or (c) bones
were deposited in so-far-unexcavated trash areas.

Ricklis ~ The McKinzie Site

49

Synthesis
The points made above regarding the Zone I occupation can be synthesized as
follows. The cultural remains were left by a small group of people; perhaps the
group stayed at this location for all or for the better part of the spring season,
subsisting largely on hunted mammals, together with plants and small animals.
Plant processing may have been of some significance; the evidence at least suggests
that plant foods were being stored on a short-term basis for ongoing use. Despite
their proximity to estuarine resources, these people appear to have made little use
of aquatic species.
Daily activity was centered around a small hearth complex, probably in a
circular or semicircular shelter that was the focal point to which foods were brought,
processed, and eaten. Tools were made here and used in a variety of daily tasks. The
length of residence at this encampment, combined with the varied tasks performed
and the variety of resources procured and brought back to camp, indicate a
residential, multifunctional occupation. The people who abandoned the Zone I
remains followed a variety of subsistence pursuits and do not appear to have
concentrated their efforts on any single resource.
Parts of the site where disturbances have exposed Late Prehistoric deposits
apparently are similar to the excavated part of Zone I; light scatters of sandy paste
sherds, lithic debitage, Rangia shell, and occasional mammal bone are the rule.
Therefore, the kind of temporary focused activity area defined for the excavated
area probably characterized the Late Prehistoric occupation in other parts of the site.
Whether the unexcavated areas represent recurrent occupations at different times or
concurrent activities of other small groups within a single band cannot be determined from the available data.
How a seasonal occupation of the kind defined here might fit into the broader
pattern of settlement and subsistence in the Coastal Bend area during the Late
Prehistoric is examined below.
AN ECOLOGICAL MODEL OF LATE PREHISTO~C SETTLEMENT
AND SUBSISTENCE PATTERNS IN THE
CORPUS CHRISTI BAY AREA
Based on the data and analyses presented above, it is concluded that the Zone
I occupation at the McKinzie site was a seasonal residential and multifunctional
encampment in which subsistence was based primarily on the terrestrial grassland
environment. A study of settlement and subsistencepatterns for the Late Prehistoric
Rockport complex in the Corpus Christi Bay area establishes a cultural context for
the Zone I occupation. There are two basic questions: (1) is there any discemable
variability in the nature of Rockport complex sites that can be correlated with a
pattern of spatial distribution and, if so, (2) what implications might this have for
understanding the relationships among settlement pattern, subsistence strategy, and
social organization within the cultural system?
Examination of the existing information on 26 sites in the Corpus Christi area
(Figure 27) in the light of these questions raises further questions:
1) What are the relative densities of occupational debris on Rockport complex

50

Texas Archeological Society

z

Ricklis-- The McKinzie Site

51

sites, and, by inference, what was the intensity of occupation at each site?
2) What kinds of faunal remains predominate at each site?
3) Is there spatial patterning of sites with different densities of debris and
different kinds of faunal remains from which variation in settlement and subsistence
can be inferred?
From the data presented below, the following conclusions are suggested.
1) The most intensively occupied sites in the area, i.e., the sites with the highest
densities of cultural debris, are directly adjacent to the shores of bays and lagoons.
2) These intensively occupied sites are relatively few in number.
3) Marine faunal remains (fish and shellfish) are abundant in these shoreline
sites.
4) Sites with markedly lower densities of cultural debris are away from the
shorelines, along the streams feeding the Corpus Christi Bay system.
5) There are many more low-density sites than high-density shoreline sites.
6) The low-density sites yield relatively few marine faunal remains.
The Sites
Many of the more-than-350 sites in the area have yielded Late Prehistoric
materials, but useful information has come only from the sites described below.
Unless otherwise stated, the data are taken from site records on file at the Balcones
Research Center (TARL), The University of Texas at Austin.
For convenience and clarity, the sites have been divided into two groups, based
on the density of cultural debris. Group 1 sites, according to the files at TARL or
other sources (including the author’s field observations), have yielded large quantities of cultural debris. Group 2 sites are sites for which the available information
indicates thin, low-density deposits. On these sites, artifactual finds are few, and
cultural debris in general (chert debitage, faunal remains) is thin and scattered. Sites
for which records were inconclusive on this point, and for which the quantities of
cultural remains could not be determined by field observations, were not considered, even though they were known to contain Late Prehistoric material. Therefore,
although there may be sites of intermediate density--neither very high nor clearly
low in the area, they are not included here because their density status could not
be determined.
Ideally, density of cultural debris should be quantified in terms of numbers of
artifacts and faunal specimens per unit volume of depositional matrix for each site.
This is possible in a few cases, but, since controlled excavations have not been made
at most sites, density must be evaluated by surface observation. Unless otherwise
stated, data have been obtained in this manner, but it is not as unreliable a procedure
as it might seem. Due to the semiarid climate, erosion has exposed significant parts
of many sites near streams and bays to such an extent that fairly useful observations
often can be made regarding the nature of cultural deposits. Clearly there is some
error inherent in this approach, but the differential distribution of high and low
density sites across the landscape that emerges from this inquiry indicates that we
are on the right track (Appendix Tables 3, 4).

52

Texas Archeological Society
Group 1 Sites

41NU1 (Webb Island Site)
This site was on an island (now destroyed) in Lagana Madre, very near the
mainland shore. The site has been known as a rich collecting ground for arrowpoints
since early in this century and has been referred to often as Arrowhead Island. The
site was tested in 1933 by A. T. Jackson, under the auspices of The University of
Texas. Jackson did not publish the results of his work, but the findings were
summarized by Campbell (1956). Jackson’s notes, on file at TARL, are cursory but
indicate that much of the island was capped with a midden containing abundant
artifacts in association with conch (probably whelk) and oyster shell and abundant
fish bones. The site is described (Texas Archeological Research Laboratory files)
by a local collector as one of the densest kitchen middens in the area. Campbell
(1956), in his review of materials collected from the site, noted the presence of
mammal bone, including some specimens of what appeared to be bison bone.
The collection from the site, stored at TARL, includes several thousand sherds
of Rockport Plain and Rockport Black on Gray pottery, and in the lithic material
attributable to the Late Prehistoric are Perdiz (109), Bulbar Stemmed (13), Starr
(11), Fresno (10), Cliffton (5), Cameron (2), and McGloin (1) arrowpoints and 45
small unifacial end scrapers.
41NUll (Kirchmeyer Site)
This site is on a clay dune overlooking Oso Bay. Testing by T. R. Hester and
J. E. Corbin in 1969 revealed only a patchy distribution of concentrated debris (field
notes on file at TARL), but the site has yielded large quantities of surface-collected
Late Prehistoric artifacts that indicate fairly intensive use.
A sizeable collection from this site, housed at TARL, includes several thousand
sherds of Rockport Plain and Rock~rt Black on Gray pottery, 56 Perdiz, 28 Fresno,
8 Bulbar Stemmed, 7 Starr, 5 Guerrero, 4 Lozenge and 1 McGloin arrowpoint; and
18 small, unifacial end scrapers.
The testing by Hester and Corbin documented a rather wide range of faunal
remains, including marine species (whelk, oyster, sunray venus clam, and black
drum fish) as well as terrestrial mammals (deer, bison).
41NU219
This recently discovered site is adjacent to Laguna Madre at the north end of
Padre Island on the edge of Packery Channel, a tidal pass that probably connected
the Gulf of Mexico and Laguna Madre when the site was occupied. The site was
discovered during an archeological reconnaissance of the area by James E. Warren
(Texas Archeological Research Laboratory files).
Late Prehistoric cultural debris is found on the surface of the sandy soil for at
least 240 meters parallel to Packery Channel. A 1-meter test unit excavated under
Warren’s direction yielded a large quantity of cultural debris, including several
hundred sherds of Rock~rt ware pottery, several hundred pieces of chert debitage,
a Perdiz arrowpoint, and abundant marine faunal material in the form of shell debris
and fish bones.
The author visited the site in the spring of 1985 and saw that the soil in the site

Ricklis ~ The McKinzie Site

53

area was markedly darker than that beyond the apparent limits of the site. Presumably this is the result of organic staining due to intensive aboriginal use of the
location.
41SP27
This site was on the top of the clay bluff overlooking the north shore of Corpus
Christi Bay. The site, now destroyed by recent residential expansion of the city of
Portland, was tested by Don Kindler, of Corpus Christi, shortly before its destruction (Kindler, personal communication). Kindler opened five 1-meter-square units
and found abundant Late Prehistoric material to a depth of at least 30 cm in an area
characterized by dense accumulations of oyster shell. Shell debris other than oyster
was notably scarce and consisted of only four whelk fragments and a single scallop
shell.
The author briefly examined the material recovered by Kindler and noted more
than 800 sherds of Rockport ware pottery, 448 pieces of chert debitage, 4 arrowpoints (3 Perdiz, 1 Fresno), 2 small unifacial end scrapers, several utilized flakes,
and 2 artificially perforated fish vertebrae that probably were beads.
Faunal remains collected by Kindler were 42 fragments of deer or deer-sized
bone, 6 turtle carapace fragments, and 15 rather large pieces of fish bone, including
2 black drum mandibles. The large size of the fish bones suggests that smaller bones
were present but not recovered.
41SPll (McGloin Bluff Site)
This site has been reported briefly by Corbin, who made surface examinations
there (Corbin 1963) and reported 3,381 sherds of Rockport ware pottery and several
stone artifacts. Among these artifacts are 18 arrowpoints (Perdiz, Bulbar Stemmed,
Starr, Young, and several untyped specimens), a small end scraper, 4 side scrapers
and a graver.
On visits in 1985, the author found an extensive site spread along the top of a
sand dune formation that parallels the Corpus Christi Bay shoreline for at least 400
meters. A borrow pit has intruded into the dune near the west end of the site, and
many potsherds were eroding out of the walls of this disturbance. Close examination of these walls, however, revealed no visible occupational midden, probably
because the dune had shifted since, and perhaps even during, the Late Prehistoric
occupation. On the other hand, recent erosion at the east end of the site has
revealed--buried under several feet of windblown, culturally sterile sand--a zone
at least 50 cm thick of dark-stained sand from which many artifacts have been
eroded and collected by LeAnne Weaver, of Corpus Christi (personal communication). The author examined this material briefly and noted, in addition to several
hundred sherds of Rockport ware, one Perdiz and one Start arrowpoint, a small
flaked drill, and many small flakes of chert.
The density of material at this site is difficult to evaluate with complete
confidence. Although artifacts, particularly potsherds, abound, much of the material seems to have been displaced by the shifting of the sand dune on which the site
is located. Faunal materials are scarce, but there is some bone, as well as many

54

Texas Archeological Society

fragments of poorly preserved whelk, oyster, scallop, and sunray venus shell. The
site is assigned to Group 1 on the basis of the abundance of artifacts recovered from
the surface.
41SP43/120
These sites, though assigned separate registration numbers, abut each other and
apparently are two parts of a continuous Late Prehistoric deposit along the sandy
loam bluff that borders Ingleside Cove, off Corpus Christi Bay. The exact extent
of these remains cannot be determined due to disturbances associated with modem
residential construction. The site is clearly extensive, however, as is indicated by
the sherds and other artifacts that are eroding out of several hundred meters of the
shoreline bluff. Site 41SP43 was tested by Dee Ann Story in 1967 (Story 1968).
Story’s findings will not be reiterated here, except to emphasize that the excavations
revealed a Late Prehistoric Rock~ort complex component overlying earlier Archaic
material, and that characteristic Rockport material was associated with both
terrestrial mammal and large quantities of fish and shellfish remains (ibid.).
Some 100 meters south of 41SP43 is 41SP120, on a particularly intensively
occupied part of the Cove shoreline. This site was discovered in the fall of 1984 by
LeAnne Weaver and Skip Kennedy, of the Coastal Bend Archeological Society.
The site was first recognized as a discrete, densely packed shell midden directly
adjacent to the shoreline bluff. Testing revealed a seemingly fairly discrete, largely
nonshell midden area, some 15 meters south of the shell midden.
In order to determine the density, depth, and nature of the Late Prehistoric
remains at this site, a 1-meter test unit was excavated in the nonshell midden, under
the author’s direction in December, 1985. Trowels were used, and control was in
arbitrary 5-cm levels. Due to time restrictions, this test unit was excavated only to
a depth of 55 cm. Late Prehistoric artifacts and a profusion of faunal remains, mostly
fish bone and small shell fragments, were found throughout the deposit 0~igure 28).
Except for a single Rockport Incised rim sherd (Suhm and Jelks 1962:134), all
of the 293 sherds from this test unit can be assigned to either the Rockport Plain or
Rockport Black on Gray types. Judging from the differences in thickness, color,
paste, and surface treatment, at least 20 vessels are represented.
Lithic artifacts consist of one Fresno arrowpoint and two narrow-stemmed
(probably Perdiz) arrowpoints with stems missing, together with a small end
scraper, two small bipointed chert drills, a trimmed prismatic blade, two utilized
flakes and 98 pieces of debitage.
Bone artifacts recovered are two tubular bird bone beads, an antler tine ground
to a point, and a modified deer ulna similar to others from south Texas referred to
as flaking tools (Corbin 1963:16, Hester 1980b: 120).
Shell artifacts consist of a perforated oyster shell and six edge-flaked sunray
venus clamshells.
More than 2,000 fragments of marine shell recovered represented, in order of
decreasing abundance, oyster, scallop, whelk, sunray venus, quahog, and crossbarred venus. Shell was far less abundant in this midden than in the nearby dense
shell midden mentioned above.

Ricklis ~ The McKinzie Site

55

Figure 28. Test unit excavation in nonshell midden, 41SP120. Late Prehistoric materials
were found throughout this unit. Note scattering of shell debris.

Since all excavated soil was put through an 1/8-inch mesh in a water-screening
process, several thousand, mostly very small, fish bones were recovered. In
addition, 212 marine fish otoliths from black drum (23 %), croaker (28 percent), sea
trout (22 percent), redfish (19 percent), and catfish (8 percent) were collected.
Mammal remains were relatively few and comprised 31 fragments of deer and
deer-sized bone and 3 bovid bone fragemnts, presumably bison. Eleven fragments
of bird bone were found.
Microscopic examination of fish otolith cross sections for determination of
season of death showed that the annuli in only 79 of the 212 specimens were clear
enough to be useful indicators of seasonality. Many of the otoliths were too small
to have clear annual ring patterns, and it was found that croaker otoliths generally
did not have clear patterns (Table 9).
Table 9. Seasons of Death for the 79 Usable Fish Otoliths From 41SP120

Species
Black drum
Trout
Catfish
Red fish
Croaker
Total

Winter
24
14
6
5
1
50(63%)

Season
Spring
Summer
1
3
1
5
0
1
1
1
1
4(5%)

0
10(13%)

Fall
6
5
3
0
1
15 (19%)

Total
34
25
10
7
3
79 (100%)

56

Texas Archeological Society

Since it is assumed that fish were caught as required during the site’s occupancy, these data suggest a predominantly winter, or perhaps fall-winter occupation. Spring is very poorly represented. It is probably significant that drum enter
the shallowerparts of coastal bays in large numbers during the winter (Simmons and
Breuer 1962). The predictablepresenceoflargeaggregates ofblackdrum may have
been a major factor in the choice of this location. At the same time, the preponderance of winter death otoliths among the other species shows that these numbers indicate the season of occupation, rather than simply the seasonal abundance of drum.
It is significant that this seasonal representation persists throughout the
sampled deposit. Calculation of seasonality of the otoliths according to occurrence
by 10-cm depth increments produced the same results. Assuming that the deep,
dense deposit represents occupation over a considerable (though undefined) time
span, recurrent emphasis on winter or fall-winter occupation apparently continued
throughout that period.
Group 2 Sites
41NU33.
On the northeast bank of Oso Creek, about 9.5 km upstream from the head of
Oso Bay (Figure 27), scattered cultural debris includes small quantifies of pottery,
as well as Perdiz and Fresno arrowpoints (numbers not specified in files of TARL).
41NU36.
Near the crest of a clay dune on the west bank of Oso Creek (Figure 27). A small
intermittent stream flows just south of the site. During the summer and fall of 1980
a very thin scatter of cultural debris exposed by sheet erosion was seen. Scattered
burned clay nodules and scant marine shell debris (sunray venus and whelk) were
seen in an area about 20 meters in diameter. Twenty-three pieces of chert debitage,
four sherds of Rockport ware potter,/, and a reworked dart point were collected. It
is possible that this site has an Archaic component.
41NU37.
On the west bank of Oso Creek on a clay dune just south of 41NU36 (Figure
27). In 1980 and 1981, Late Prehistoric material was thinly scattered along the
eroded edge of the sandy loam topsoil capping the dune’s tan clay subsoil. This
material was found along a stretch of about 50 meters at the crest of the dune, where
it was clustered in two areas, each about 15 meters long. A similar scatter was
observed at the base of the dune, toward Oso Creek.
About five hours of meticulous surface collection resulted in the recovery of
107 small sherds of Rockport ware pottery, 2 Fresno arrowpoints, 1 small bipointed
chert drill, 1 small unifacial end scraper, 2 prismatic blades, 2 utilized flakes, 23
pieces of chert debitage, and 1 sandstone mano fragment.
During a survey by the Texas Archeological Survey ~atterson and Ford
1974:35), a Perdiz arrowpoint, a fractured mano fragment, and an unspecified
number of potsherds and chert flakes were found. Notes in files of TARL describe
this material as scanty.

Ricklis m The McKinzie Site

57

Faunal remains recovered from 41NU37 are five long bone fragments and one
rib fragment ofbovid bone (almost certainly bison,judging from the green fractures
and apparent association with Late Prehistoric material) and six pieces of deer bone.
Except for a few small fragments of sunray venus clamshell, no aquatic faunal
remains were noted.
41NU46.
On a clay dune on the east bank of Oso Creek (Figure 27), this site is primarily
a large Archaic midden. Late Prehistoric material is relatively sparse. According
to Jerry L. Bauman, of Corpus Christi, who has carefully documented a large
collection of Archaic material from the surface of eroded parts of the site, Late
Prehistoric material is found only sparsely and in only a small part of the east end
of the site (Jerry L.Bauman, personal communication). Over several years Bauman
recovered a few small sherds of Rockport ware pottery and Perdiz, Fresno, and S tarr
arrowpoints from this area.
41NU47.
Adjacent to the south bank of Oso Creek, about 4 km upstream from the head
of Oso Bay (Figure 27). Cultural material is sparse; the only diagnostic artifacts
reported are four sherds of Rockport ware. No information on faunal remains is
available.

41NU99.
In a cultivated field on the west bank of Oso Creek, about 11 km upstream from
the head of Oso Bay (Figure 27), reported by Patterson and Ford (1974:38). Surface
material was shallow and scattered. An unspecified number of chert flakes, one
sherd, and a fragmentary Perdiz arrowpoint were recovered. Faunal material
consisted of scattered unidentified marine shell and mammal bone fragments.
41NU105.
On the east bank of Oso Creek, about 7 km upstream from the head of Oso Bay
(Figure 27). The site was surveyed by Patterson, who describes debris as scattered
(Patterson and Ford 1974:40), consisting of chert debitage, two sherds, and a
scattering of marine shell and mammal bone.
41NU107.
On the north bank of Oso Creek some 3.5 km upstream from the head of Oso
Bay (Figure 27). The files at TARL indicate that cultural debris is sparse, consisting
of three sherds of Rockport ware pottery, a light scatter of mammal bone, chert
debitage, and unidentified marine shell.

41NU157.
On a low rise at the west end of a small, shallow pond called Tule Lake, 2 km
south of the present mouth of the Nueces River (Figure 27). In 1979, a thin scatter
of Rangia shell and chert debitage covered an area about 50 by 15 meters. In the

58

Texas Archeological Society

files of TARL, fragments of burned mammal bone and several sherds of Rockport
ware are recorded for this site.
41NU178.
On elevated ground next to a small intermittent stream that flows into the
Nueces River 10 km upstream from the head of Nueces Bay (Figure 27). As reported
in the files of TARL, artifacts consist of chert debitage, utilized flakes, a Perdiz
arrowpoint, and 20 sherds. Faunal remains consist of Rangia shell and a small
amount of oyster, whelk, sunray venus, and mammal bone (species not stated).
41NU179.
Reported in TARL files as a thinRangia shell accumulation on the same small
stream as 41NU178 (Figure 27). The recovery of dart points shows that the site has
an Archaic component, and a very light Late Prehistoric occupation is suggested by
the recovery of a single sherd and a possible Perdiz arrowpoint.

41NU185 (Allison Site).
On a hilltop adjacent to the Nueces floodplain, about 0.5 km upstream from the
McKinzie site, this site has been reported by Carlson, S teele, and Bruno (1983), who
describe tests carried out at the site by a crew from Texas A&M University.
Three 1-meter test squares were opened to depths of as much as 150 cm. Units
2 and 3, near the crest of the hill, yielded 39 small sherds of Rockport ware, mostly
within the upper 20 to 40 cm of the deposits. Also in the levels producing pottery
were 18 pieces of lithic debitage, a graver, and a biface fragment (Carlson, Steele,
and Bruno 1983 :Tables 2, 3, and 4). Rangia cuneata valves and fragments also were
scattered throughout these levels, and faunal materials from these levels consist of
the bones of a juvenile deer (believed to have been from a spring-summer kill), a
probably juvenile bison humerus shaft, and the left scapula of a cottontail. Also
recovered in one of these units was a drum fish otolith, though it is not specified
whether this was found in the pottery-bearing levels (Carlson, Steele, and Bruno
1983:63-67).
41NU193.
On the east bank of Oso Creek (Figure 27),this is a very low density scatter of
unidentified shell and burned clay nodules. Late Prehistoric artifacts are six Perdiz
arrowpoints, two Fresno arrowpoints, a small end scraper, and one sherd.
41NU221. (McKinzie Site)
All indications, already discussed in detail, are that the Late Prehistoric
occupation at the McKinzie site was light and temporary. Surface observations of
both the site and the excavations, revealed only thinly scattered Late Prehistoric
materials.
41NU231.
On a low rise next to a small intermittent stream that flows into the Nueces River

Ricklis m The MeKinzie Site

59

some 7 km upstream from the head of Nueces Bay (Figure 27), the site is in a
cultivated field and has been intensively surface-collected by Don Kindler, of
Corpus Christi (Kindler, personal communication). Most artifacts recovered are
Archaic forms. A very light Late Prehistoric occupation is indicated by two Perdiz
arrowpoints and three sherds of Rockport ware. While working at the McKinzie
site, the author visited this site briefly and noted a scatter of Rangia shell on the
surface of the plowed field. Most of the shell was Rangia flexuosa, probably
associated with the Archaic artifacts (see"Site-specific Interpretations," above). A
scatter ofRangia cuneata, however, may have been deposited by the Late Prehistoric occupants of the site. No other information on faunal remains is available.
41NU235
This site, discovered by the author during a surface reconnaissance in 1979, is
on a narrow elevated point between two old erosional cuts on the east bank of Oso
Creek (Figure 27). Extensive sheet erosion had exposed a scatter of burned clay
nodules and scanty lithic debitage in an area no more than 8 meters in diameter. Two
Fresno arrowpoints and a few small splinters of deer bone were found in this area.
41NU239
This site, now destroyed by sand-quarrying operations, was on the crest of a
hill overlooking the Nueces floodplain, near a small intermittent stream. In 1978,
shallow (10 to 15 cm deep) bulldozer blading had exposed a sparse but discrete
scatter of occupational debris about 10 meters in diameter. Careful examination of
the surface resulted in the recovery of two sherds of Rockport Plain pottery, a
fragmentary Perdiz arrowpoint, and 41 pieces of lithic debitage. A thin scatter of
Rangia shell was noted, and six small fragments of deer or deer-sized bone were
recovered.
41NU240 (Jackson Woods Site).
On a hill adjacent to the Nueces floodplain, 1 km upstream from the McKinzie
site. Patches of Rangia shell scatter can be seen in exposed areas over several acres
along the crest and north slope of the hill. At the crest of the hill, the convergence
of several shallow (10 cm deep) roadcuts has exposed what appears to be a discrete
scatter ofRangia cuneata shell some 25 meters long by about 8 to 10 meters wide.
Careful surface inspection of this part of the site in 1984 resulted in the recovery of
81 pieces of lithic debitage and 5 small Rockport Plain sherds from at least 3 vessels.
Besides Rangia cuneata, the only faunal remains noted were one bovid (bison?) rib
fragment and a splinter of bird bone. A careful search was made for fish remains,
but none were found.
A sample of 37 Rangia cuneata was gathered for seasonality analysis according
to the method developed by Aten (1981). The shells fell into the five analytical
categories (see discussion under "Faunal Remains, Zone I’3 as follows: interrupted
8 (22 percent), early 8 (22 percent), middle 12 (32 percent), late 4 (11 percent), and
indeterminate 5 (13 percent).
As with the McKinzie sample, these results do not fit well into any of the single

60

Texas Archeological Society

two-week growth histograms presented by Aten (see Aten 1981:187), suggesting
that the occupation at this site (which appears to be a discrete episode, judging by
the low density and spatial restriction of the debris) spanned several of the two -week
periods. The procedure described above of averaging the category percentages (less
the indeterminate category) for several two-week periods was applied, but with less
clear-cut results than were yielded by the McKinzie sample. The McKinzie sample
fell into category percentages for mid-March through end-May presented by Aten,
but the Jackson Woods category percentages did not conform closely with any of
the several averagings of two-week percentages. The closest fit that could be
obtained was with the average of the category percentages for the period from endMarch through end-June (Table 10).
Table 10. Comparison of Aten’s Category Percentages With Those From the
Jackson Woods Sample

Category
Interrupted
Early
Middle
Late

Aten’s Sample
End of March to End of June
Percent
16
36
38
10

JacksonWoods
Sample
Percent
25
25
38
12

These data indicate a spring-early summer occupation. Why the results do not
conform better to Aten’s percentages cannot be determined, though several explanations are possible: 1) The Jackson Woods sample may be biased by (a) the
presence of shells from more than one occupational episode or by (b) emphasis on
Rangia gathering during a particular period within an occupational episode; 2)
Unusual temperature patterns during the time of site occupation may have skewed
the growth ring patterns on theRangia shells, or 3) The sample may be too small for
a high degree of analytical accuracy.
41SP103.
A small site on the clay bluff that overlooks the north shore of Corpus Christi
Bay, close to a small stream that flows into the Bay. When the site was visited in
1979, it had already been partially lost to landward erosion of the bluff, and it was
recently destroyed by residential development. Examination of the naturally
created soil profile along the bluff indicated that Late Prehistoric material was
eroding out of a thin (2 to 5 cm) zone of soil 5 tol 0 cm below modern ground surface.
This occupational zone could be traced along the bluff for about 10 meters.
Material recovered during several visits to the site includes 103 sherds (mostly
very small) of Rockport pottery, 384 pieces of chert debitage, 2 Perdiz arrowpoints,
4 small unifacial end scrapers, and 3 utilized flakes.
Marine faunal material was surprisingly scarce (considering the site’s shoreline location) and consisted of a few small fragments of whelk and oyster, as well
as a single stingray spine. Bone material includes three bovid (presumably bison)

Ricklis m The McKinzie Site

61

long bone fragments, eighteen deer and deer-sized fragments, and five splinters of
bird long bone.
Discussion
The information from the sites described above (Appendix, Table 3) indicates
that intensively occupied locations are found only in marine shore environments:
All sites with large samples of artifacts and relatively deep midden deposits are on
bay or lagoon shores. The information also indicates that all sites away from the
shorelines in riverine environments have only scattered cultural material, a conclusion that agrees with an observation by Steele and Mokry (1985:305) on the
scattered nature of site deposits along Oso Creek. Artifacts are few from these
slightly inland sites; even the sites in Group 2 that have yielded more than a few Late
Prehistoric artifacts have done so only because of rather intensive surface inspection (such as 41NU37 and 41S P 103 ) or excavation involving more than very limited
testing, as at McKinzie. On the other hand, the very limited testings at Group 1 sites,
as at 41NU219, 41SP27, and 41SP120, have yielded hundreds of diagnostic Late
Prehistoric, mainly ceramic, artifacts.
The data surveyed here also indicate that Group 1 sites are few, and Group 2
sites are relatively numerous.
Intensively occupied shoreline sites, according to the available information,
tend to yield large quantities of marine faunal remains, however, there does appear
to be variability in the density and nature of such remains. It is apparent, for
example, that fish and shellfish remains are not as abundant at sites 41NU11 and
41SP11 as they are at41SP43/120, 41NU1, and 41NU219. At41SP11, this may be
a factor of the general dispersal of remains in a shifting sand dune, whereas 41NU11,
which yielded a patchy concentration of debris, probably was not occupied as
intensively as were the other sites in Group 1.
Nevertheless, as a group, these sites can be distinguished readily from Group
2 sites, on which neither artifacts nor marine and/or estuarine faunal remains are
abundant. Many of the sites have shellfish scatters, which probably reflect minor
contributions of molluscs to the diets of their occupants. Recent studies have
suggested that even large quantities of shellfish were only of supplementary
significance in hunter-gatherer diets (e.g. Bailey 1978; Parmalee and Klippe11974).
Bailey, for example, has estimated that more than 57,000 oysters would be required
to provide the caloric and protein equivalent of a single European red deer (Bailey
1978:39), and Aten has estimated that the 680 Rangia cuneata clams at site
41CH170 on the Upper Texas Coast represent sufficient food for only one or two
meals for a group of four to six adults (see discussion in Aten 1983b: 13-16).
Group 2 sites appear to yield few if any fish remains. Many of the sites have
yielded inadequate data on this point, but the Group 2 sites examined by the author
(41NU36, 41NU37, 41NU221,41NU239, 41NU240, and 41SP103) have yielded
few or no fish remains. Much the same can be said for the Allison site (41NU185),
where only a single fish otolith was reported from test units bearing Late Prehistoric
artifacts (Carlson et al. 1983).
Since all of the sites, except for a few from which no faunal information is

62

Texas Areheological Society

available, have yielded at least some mammal remains, it is apparent that land
species were hunted regardless of location or intensity of occupation. The poor
representation of aquatic species on Group 2 sites suggests, however, that, proportionately, terrestrial mammals were of considerably greater significance at these
sites than at the shoreline Group 1 sites. This is in accord with the conclusions
already stated for the McKinzie site, the only Group 2 site from which there is a
substantial body of excavated data.
So the differential distribution of intensively occupied shoreline sites as
opposed to much less intensively occupied riverine sites can be correlated with
differences in relative quantities of marine as opposed to land faunal remains. This
has significance for the generation of a model of settlement and subsistence patterns,
which is discussed from a cultural-ecological perspective below.

The Model
It should come as no surprise that shoreline locations in this study area have
yielded evidence of intensive aboriginal occupation. The shallow bays and lagoons
between the mainland and the barrier islands of Texas produce a variety offish and
shellfish that are obtained easily with the simple technology of the inhabitants of the
area.
We have seen, however, that Late Prehistoric sites in the area vary considerably
both in the intensity of occupation and in the kinds of faunal species present. A
correlated spatial pattem appears to be involved, with the relativity few intensively
occupied sites only on marine shorelines, and the many lightly occupied sites inland
along stream courses.
What significance does this distributional pattern have for Late Prehistoric
settlement and subsistence patterns? Emerging clearly is the fact that certain
shoreline locations were focal points of settlement and subsistence activities and
that inland locations saw less intensive, more dispersed occupation. This is
ecologically significant, since all of the Group 1 sites are along shallow marine
waters containing concentrated and predictable marine resources. These resources
were not evenly available to the inhabitants at their respective levels of technological development. Shellfish would have been obtainable only in shallow and
generally quiet waters. Fish could have been taken in large quantities with nets and
fish traps, but, again, only in the shallower parts of the bays and lagoons. So the
Group 1 sites were ideally located in relation to these limitations.
It has been postulated by various authors that hunter-gatherer settlement will
generally increase in both intensity and size with a corresponding increase in the
concentration and predictability of food resources in a heterogeneous resource
mosaic (Butzer 1982:230-43, Hassan 1981:180, Jochim 1981:148-63). This point
has been discussed at some length, specifically for hunter-gatherer adaptation in
highly productive coastal environments. The high level of concentration and
predictability of marine resources at favorable locations is suggested to have been
conducive to a corresponding focus and intensity of human settlement ~earlman
1980, Yesner 1980, Rowley-Conwy 1983), and, for this reason, population aggregations such as Group 1 sites may have occurred at optimal coastal locations. This

RicklisD The McKinzie Site

63

may be viewed as both an opportunistic response and as a necessary precondition
for the successful extraction of large quantities of small-sized species.
The Group 1 sites are, then, ecologically predictable. The socio-cultural
implications here offer a potentially fruitful line of inquiry. If Group 1 sites do in
fact represent population aggregations, they probably were focal points for social
interaction beyond the minimal band level (The term minimum band is used here
to refer to the smallest population group thought to have been necessary for the
effective functioning of a hunter-gather adaptive system; see Hassan 1981:180-186,
Lee and DeVore 1968, Wobst 1974:170). A systemic linkage among subsistence,
settlement, and social organization strategies is likely. As favorable resource
availability enables minimal band groups to coalesce periodically into larger
groups, the opportunities for exchange of information, establishment and maintenanceofmating networks, and the performance of rituals and ceremonies that affirm
social and ideological ties beyond the minimal band level are both possible and
necessary (Wobst 1974, Hassan 1981:180-186).
Therefore it is postulated here that, within the Late Prehistoric settlement
patterns, Group 1 sites were base camps that served as focal points for relatively
large group aggregates and concomitant socio-cultural elaboration beyond the
minimal band level. However, although there can be no doubt that these locations
saw relatively intensive occupation, there are no archeological data available for
relatively large resident populations, so they simply could have seen more frequent
use by small bands than did locations less rich in resources. However, some
ethnohistorical and human biological evidences support the inference of population
aggregates.
Newcomb (1983:364) has suggested sizeable group aggregates, perhaps as
many as 350 to 500 people, among the early historic Karankawans of the region,
based on extrapolations from accounts of contemporary observers who reported
large groups of warriors. The 1720 account of the French navigator Jean Beranger
describes a shoreline encampment of some 500 people near Aransas Pass on the
northern edge of this study area (Beranger 1983). This observation, made during
the fall season, also refers to circular huts used (apparently by the same group) for
storage of fish, which suggests that large quantities of fish were caught and stored
for the support of a sizable population.
Research completed recently by Jackson, Boone, and Henneberg (1986)
suggested population aggregation during the Late Archaic. Sixty-eight skeletons
from a large cemetery site on Oso Bay (41NU2, excavated by A. T. Jackson for The
University of Texas in the 1930s) were studied. At least 24 percent of the individuals
suffered from what may have been endemic treponematosis, a disease that is likely
to be transmitted to such a high percentage of the population only under circumstances of at least part-time population aggregation. So the large groups postulated
here for the Late Prehistoric probably were already in the area during the Late
Archaic.
If Group 1 sites are seen to represent base camps with population aggregates
made possible by concentrated and predictable resources, how can we view the role
of the more numerous Group 2 sites? Two possible functions are suggested.

64

Texas Archeological Society

First, they may be short term, function specific sites that were locations for the
procurement of specific resources not readily available in the shoreline base camps.
Aggregate populations might easily exhaust important terrestrial resources (such as
deer, for example) if, as is indicated by substantial accumulations of debris, these
locations were occupied over considerable periods of time. Group 2 sites would
have served as intermediate procurement stations between the resources of the
interior and the consumer populations in the shoreline base camps that were more
or less permanent residences for relatively large groups, from which specialized
task groups made repeated forays. Smith (n.d.) has postulated such a permanent
base camp function for the large Late Prehistoric component at site 41KL13 on
Baffin Bay. The evidence at 41KL13, however, may preclude an interpretation of
year-round permanence, since black drum otoliths comprise the "overwhelming
majority" of fish otoliths collected, and, of the drum otoliths, 70 percent are from
winter fish kills and only 2 percent from summer kills (see Smith 1983:499).
A second interpretation of Group 2 sites--the one favored here--is that these
sites were not task-specific in function, but rather were the residences of small
groups that periodically spread out from base camps that were only recurrently
occupied in a seasonally oscillating settlement and subsistence strategy. The data
from the McKinzie site have strongly suggested this kind of occupation--a
residential, multifunctional seasonal camp. In this perspective, Group 2 sites were
the encampments of small groups who practiced a range of subsistence pursuits.
So both shoreline base camps and smaller seasonal camps were focal points for
the exploitation of different segments of the adaptive niche. The abundance of
marine resources, augmented by the influx into shallow bay/lagoon waters of large
quantities of drum fish, allowed the coalescence of significant band aggregates
during the fall-winter season. With the scattering of concentrations of drum
populations in the spring, the least risk response of the inhabitants of the area was
population dispersal. Although some groups may have remained at the temporarily
less productive shoreline locations, other groups moved into the riverine zones,
presumably attracted by game and plant resources.
At this writing, we have data on seasonality from only three sites in the Corpus
Christi Bay area. Clearly, much more information of this kind is needed, but it is
perhaps significant that the data we have are complementary rather than contradictory. Seasonality analysis offish otoliths indicates that at the Group 1 site 41SP120
the heaviest occupation apparently was during the fall-winter period. This is in
accord with the response postulated here to particularly abundant winter fish
resources. On the other hand, the analyses of theRangia cuneata samples from the
McKinzie and Jackson Woods sites (Group 2 sites) indicate spring and spring and
early summer occupations respectively--just the times of the year most poorly
represented by the otoliths from 41SP120. So the data, although limited, suggest
a seasonal cycle involving winter or fall-winter marine-oriented base camps and
spring-summer dispersal into smaller groups.
A relevant observation was made by Cabeza de Vaca. Though it pertains to his
Capoques and Han groups, who probably lived to the north of this study area around
the western end of Galveston Island (Newcomb 1983:361), the seasonal subsistence

Ricklis ~ The McKinzie Site

65

strategy is similar to the strategy suggested here.
From October through February every year, which is the season these Indians live on the
Island, they subsist on the roots I have mentioned, which the women get from under the
water in November and December. Only in these two months, too, do they take fish in
the cane weirs. When the fish is consumed, the roots furnish the staple. At the end of
February, the islanders go to other parts to seek sustenance, for the root is beginning to
grow and is not edible [Covey 1983:61].
Though Cabeza de Vaca seems to have been particularly impressed with the
importance of the roots, the mention of weirs suggests that fish were being taken in
sufficiently large quantities to be a significant factor in supporting a fall-winter
shoreline occupation.
It can be pointed out here, incidentally, that a comparison of the seasonal
breakdowns, presented above, of the fish otolith analyses from 41SP120 with those
from the Zone III Archaic component at McKinzie, which dates to about 5000 B.P.,
shows that they have virtually identical patterns of seasonality. So it is possible that
the McKinzie Zone III occupation falls into a long-lived pattern of fall-winter
emphasis on bayshore resource exploitation that had been established by the midHolocene, a possibility that fits in with Corbin’s suggestion (1976) of continuity in
adaptive patterns from the Archaic through the Late Prehistoric. Future research
might well focus on the question of continuity in adaptive patterns in the region from
the mid-Holocene to and through the Late Prehistoric [see Prewitt and Paine, herein
Editor].
Two groups of sites have been suggested here, but it is likely that there is in the
archeological record a third group that represents short term procurement camps the
temporal and spatial patterns of resource availability. The model posits a hierarchy
of archeological sites falling into two and, predictably, three groupings, each
reflecting differences in intensity of occupation, group size, and resource procurement. It is suggested that whereas the overall adaptation that characterized the
Rockport complex was strongly oriented toward marine resources, settlement and
subsistence activities oscillated seasonally between intensive use of shoreline zones
and a more dispersed pattern of exploitation of terrestrial resources.
that served specific functions. These will be difficult to recognize in the field, since
cultural debris is likely to be extremely sparse. Such sites, if found, would comprise
debris from short term hunting and/or plant-gathering activities by small groups
within the catchments of Group 1 and Group 2 sites. It is entirely possible that some
of the sites considered here Group 2 are in fact such function-specific sites, but
without excavation it would be very difficult to make such a distinction.
In summary, the model (Figure 29) proposed here is an ecological one, with
settlement pattern inextricably linked to subsistence strategy and the temporal and
Testing the Model
The following lines of research should be undertaken as tests of the proposed
model:
1. Quantification of site densities. Most of the site data reported here come
from surface observations, so controlled testing should be undertaken to quantify
the densities of artifacts and faunal remains per unit volume of deposit. Such a

66

Texas Archeological Society

.o

°.

:.’:~

Bay/lagoon

~m Shoreline base camp, fall-winter population
aggregate, heavy use of marine resources

I"1 .= Spring-summer camps, dispersed bands,
reliance on terrestrial resources
0 m Short-term procurement sites, small task groups

~. Residence move
¯..=m.=- Movement of task groups

Figure 29. Schematic representation of Late Prehistoric settlement/subsistence pattern
model in the Corpus Christi Bay area.

procedure would either put the present hypothesis on a firm footing or indicate the
need for revision of the model.
2. Determination of site seasonality. An oscillating pattern of seasonal settlement is postulated here on the basis of data from three sites; expansion of this small
data base would help in evaluating these inferences. A surge in research in recent
years has opened several lines of inquiry for determination ofseasonality, involving
the remains of fish (Casteel 1976, Monks 1981), shellfish (Aten 1981, Quitmeyer
et al. 1985), and mammals (Monks 1981). The use of as many seasonal indicators
as possible from a given site would insure the determination of the season(s) of
actual occupation and not simply the seasonal availability of specific kinds of
resources.

Ricklis ~ The McKinzie Site

67

3. Definition of intrasite pattems. At present the McKinzie site data provide
the only details of spatial patterns in a Late Prehistoric site in the study area. In order
to evaluate the postulation of both large base camps and camps occupied by small
groups, data are needed on spatial arrangements at other sites in the area.
Taken together, this model and the procedures suggested for testing it can serve
as a basis for a systematic approach to the Late Prehistoric stage in the cenlxal part
of the Texas coast. With expansion of the data base, the model would be either
strengthened or revised in accordance with the new data. Ultimately, these
procedures will make it possible to pursue a productive line of inquiry into the
interrelationships among patterns of settlement, economy, and social organization
in an adaptation by hunter-gatherers to a resource-rich coastal environment.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank Jeremiah F. Epstein and E. Mott Davis, of the Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin, for their critical reading of my M.A.
thesis, of which this is a condensed and slightly revised version. My sincere
appreciation goes to those individuals who assisted in various phases of the
excavations: Jerry Bauman, Rita Gunter, Rosa Lee Hoelscher, Floy Lee Hoelscher,
Skip Kennedy, Don Kindler, Tom Long, and Ray Myers. Special thanks are due to
John French and Lee Ann Weaver, who helped with the excavations through rain
and shine, and additional thanks are due to John French for financial assistance with
radiocarbon dates. My appreciation to Elton Prewitt for his comments on certain
of the lithic materials, to James Vanderhill for identifying certain of the faunal
remains, and to Salvatore Valastro, of the Radiocarbon Laboratory at the Balcones
Research Center, The University of Texas at Austin, for his patience in answering
my questions about radiocarbon dating shell remains.

68

Texas ArcheoIogical Society
APPENDIX, Tables

Table 1. Aritfact Occurrences by Zone, McKinzie Site (41NU221)
Zone

Artifact
I
Lithic
Arrowpoint
Perdiz
1
Indeterminate 1
Dart points
Bell
Catan
Catan-like
Tortugas
Bifaces (untyped) 2
End scrapers
1
Prismatic blades
12
Core
1
12
Utilized flakes
Quartzite chip
1
Clear fork tool
(fragmentary)
Obsidian flake
Debitage (totals)
596
Flakes
Primary
23
Secondary
51
Tertiary
97
Thinning
104
Flake fragments
Primary
20
Secondary
49
Tertiary
224
Chunks
28
Modified sandstone milling
stone
1
Ceramic
Rockport ware
196
Bone tempered
1
Bone
Awl(?) fragments 3
Shell
Conch shell adze Rangia scrapers
2
Edge-flaked
sunray venus
Perforated oyster Rectangular oyster -

II

III

w

1
1
1
1
1
2

m

10

47

1
1
233

2
6
14
9

7
15
47
59

2
3
11

8
16
71
10

m

1

1
1
1

Ricklis D The McKinzie Site
Table 2. Faunal Remains by Zone, McKinzie Site (41NU221)
Zone

Animal
I
Mammals (Number of fragments)
Bison
19
White-tailed deer
2
Birds
Sp. unidentified
Turtle
Sp. unidentified
22
Frog
Sp. unidentified
1
Fish (otoliths)
Black drum
Trout
1*
Redfish
Catfish
1"
Croaker
Shellfish
Rangia cuneata
879
Rangia flexuosa
456
Oyster
45
Angel wing
Mussel
Cockle
Marsh periwinkle
Marginella
Sunray venus
2
Land snails
Rabdotus
171
Others (Polygyra, Helicina)67

II

III

-

-

-

-

-

5
2
2
16
7

287
109
-

12,722
293
15
6
3
1
1
-

112
62

239
present

*-May have been redeposited from Zone HI disturbance. See text.

69

70

Texas Archeological Society
Table 3. Relative Densities of Cultural Debris, Kinds of Faunal Remains, and
Environments for Sites Summarized in Text

Site

Density of
Debris
Low
High

Environment

Fauna
Mammal
(Present)

x
41NU1
x
x
41NUll
x?
x
x
41NU219
x
x?
41SPll
x
x
41SP27
x
41NU120
x
41NU33 x
x
41NU36 x
x
41NU37 x
41NU46 x
41NU47 x
x
41NU99 x
x
41NU105 x
x
41NU107 x
41NU157 x
x
x
41N4178 x
41NU179 x
41NU185 x
x
41NU193 x
41NU221 x
x
41NU231 x
41NU235 x
x
41NU239 x
x
41NU240 x
x
41SP103 x
x
x?-Questionable categorization

Marine
(Abundant)
x
x?
x
x?
x
x
-

Shoreline

Riverine

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

-

-

x

- No data

REFERENCES CITED
Andrews, Jean
1977 Shells and shores of Texas. The Elma Dill Russell Spencer Foundation Series no.
5. The University of Texas Press, Austin.
Aten, Lawrence E.
1981 Determining seasonality of Rangia cuneata from Texas Gulf Coast middens.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 52:179-199.
1983a Indians of the upper Texas Coast: ethnohistoric archaeological frameworks.
Academic Press, New York.

Ricklis ~ The McKinzie Site

71

1983b AnalysisofdiscretehabitationunitsintheTrinityRiverDelta, upper Texas Coast.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Occasiona! Papers no. 2. Austin.
B ailey, GeoffN.
1978 Shellmiddens as indicators of post-glacial economies: a territorial pe
The early post-glacial settlement of northern Europe: an ecologica
Paul Mellars, editor. Duckworth, London.

ective. In:
;rspective.

Beranger, Jean
1983 Beranger’s discovery of Aransas Pass. Occasional Papers of the Corpus Christi
Museum, vol. 8. William Carroll, translator. Corpus Christi.
Black, Stephen L.
1986 The Clemente and Herminia Hinojosa site, 41JW8: a Tohah horizon campsite in
southern Texas. Center for Archaeologica! Research, The University of Texas at
San Antonio, Special Report 18.
Blair, W. F.
1950 The biotic provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2(1):93-117.
Bogusch, E. R.
1952 BrushinvasionintheRioGrandeplainofTexas. TexasJournalofScience4(1):8591.
Brown, L. F., J. L. Brewton, J. H. McGowen, T. J. Evans, W. L. Fisher, and C. G. Groat
1976 Environmental geologic atlas of the Texas coastal zone: Corpus Chrsti area.
Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Bryant, Vaughn M., and R. G. Holloway
1985 A Late-Quaternary paleoenvironmentalrecord of Texas: an overview of the pollen
evidence. In: Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments. V.
M. Bryant and R. G. Holloway, editors. American Association of Stratigraphic
Palynologists Foundation.
Butzer, Karl W.
1982 Archaeology as human ecology: method and theory for a contextual approach.
Cambridge University Press.
Campbell, Thomas N.
1947 The Johnson site: type site of the Aransas focus. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 18:40-75.
1952

The Kent-Crane site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 23:39-77.

1956

Archeologica! materials from five islands in the Laguna Madre. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeologica! Society 27:7-46.

1958a Probable function of perforated oyster shell in Aransas focus sites.
Archeology 2(2):7

Texas

72

Texas Archeological Society

1958b Archeological remains from the Live Oak Point site, Aransas County, Texas.
Texas Journal of Science 10(4):423-442.
1958c Archeology of the central and southern sections of the Texas coast. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 29;145-174.
Carlson, David, D.Gentry Steele, and Henry L. Bruno
1983 Archaeological investigations at the Allison site (41NU185), Nueces County,
Texas. Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, Reports of
Investigations 1.
Casteel, Richard W.
1976 Fish remains in archaeology and paleoenvironmental studies. Academic Press,
New York.
Chandler, C. K.
1984 Lithic resources in the Texas Coastal Bend. La Tierra 11(1):26-27.
Corbin, James E.
1963 Archeological materials from the northern shore of Corpus Christi Bay, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 34:5-30.
1974

A model of cultural succession for the Coastal Bend area of Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 45:29-54.

1976

The Archaic of the Texas Coast. In: The Texas Archaic: a symposium. T.R.
Hester, editor, pp. 91-97. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio, Special Report 2.

Covey, Cyclone (translator)
1983 Adventures in the interior of America by Alvar Nufiez Cabeza de Vaca. The
University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Curray, C. R.
1960 Sediments and history of Holocene transgression, continental shelf, northwest
Gulf of Mexico. In: Deltaic Sedimentation, Ancient and Modem. J. P. Morgan and
R. H. Sharer, editors. Society of Economic Paleontologists and Minerologists,
Special Publication 15.
Dillehay, Tom D.
1974 Late Quaternary bison population changes on the Southern Plains. Plains Anthropologist 19:180-196.
Epstein, Jeremiah F.
1972 Some implications of recent excavation and surveys in Nuevo Leon and Coahuila.
Texas Journal of Science 24(1):45-56.
1980

Some reflections on the nature of the Northeast Mexico lithic tradition and the
problem of its origin. In: Papers on the Prehistory of Northeastern Mexico and

Ricklis m The McKinzie Site

73

Adjacent Texas. J. F. Epstein, T. R. Hester, and C. Graves, editors. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio Special Report
9:81-92.
Fenneman, N. M.
1938 Physiography of eastern United States. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Franld, G. E., R. N. Garcia, B. F. Hajek, D. Arriaga, and J. C. Roberts
1960 Soil survey, Nueces County, Texas. U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Soil Conservation
Service Series, 26
Frazier, D. E.
1974 Depositional episodes: their relationship to the Quatemary stratigraphic framework in the northwestern portion of the GulfB asin. Bureau of Economic Geology,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Hall, Grant D., Stephen L. Black, and C. Graves
1982 Archaeological investigations at Choke Canyon Reservoir, South Texas: Phase I
findings. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio, Choke Canyon Series, 5.
Hassan, Fekri A.
1981 Demographic archaeology. Academic Press, New York.
Hester, Thomas R.
1977 Archaeological research at the Hinojosa site (41JW8), Jim Wells County, southern
Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.
1980a Changing salinity in Baffin Bay, Texas, and its possible effects on prehistoric
occupation. Papers on the archaeology of the Texas coast. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at S an Antonio. Special Report 11:105-108.
1980b Digging into South Texas prehistory. Corona, San Antonio.
Hester, Thomas R., and T. C. Hill, Jr.
1972

Prehistoric occupation at the Holdsworth and Stewart sites on the Rio Grande plain
of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 43:33-76.

1975

Some aspects of Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric archaeology in southemTexas.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio,
Special Report 1.

Hester, Thomas R., and R. Parker
1970 TheBerclairsite: aLatePrehistoricc°mponentinG°liadC°unty’s°uthernTexas"
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 41:1-24.

74

Texas Archeological Society

Jackson, Barbara E., J. L. Boone, and M. Henneberg
1986 Possible cases of endemic treponematosis in prehistoric hunter-gatherer population on the Texas coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57:183 - 193.
Jochim, Michael A.
1981 Strategies for survival: cultural behavior in an ecologicalcontext. Academic Press,
New York.
Jones, Fred B.
1983 The flora of the Texas Coastal Bend. Welder Wildlife Foundation, Sinton, Texas.
Klein, Jeffrey, J. C. Lerman, P. E. Damon, and E. P. Ralph
1982 Calibration of radiocarbon dates: table based on the consensus data of the
workshop on the radiocarbon time scale. Radiocarbon 24(2):103-150.
Lee, Richard B., and Irven DeVore (editors)
1968 Man the hunter. Aldine, Chicago.
Lind, William B.
1980 Chemical and physical characteristivcs of water in estuaries in Texas, October
1974-September 1975. Texas Department of Water Resources.
McClurkan, Burney B.
1980 The archaeology ofLaCuevade laZonade Derrumbes (NL92): abriefsummation
and suggestions for future research. In: Papers on the Prehistory of Northeastern
Mexico and AdjacentTexas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University
of Texas at San Antonio, Special Report No. 9. J. F. Epstein, T. R. Hester, and C.
Graves, editors, pp. 59-70.
Mokry, Edward R., Jr.
1980 Notes on conch shell adze technology, Texas coast. Papers on the archaeology of
the Texas coast. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at
San Antonio, Special Report 11:51-60.
Monks, Gregory G.
1981 Seasonality studies. In: Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory, 4:177219. Michael B. Schiffer, ed. Academic Press, New York.
Nance, Roger C.
1980 La CaNada and the prehistoric sequence in Northeast Mexico. In: Papers on the
Prehistory of Northeastern Mexico and Adjacent Texas. J. F. Epstein, T. R. Hester,
and C. Graves, editors. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio, Special Report 9:41-58.
Nelson, H. F., and E. E. Bray
1970 S tr atigraphy and history of the Holocene sediments in the S abine-High Island area,
Gulf of Mexico. In: Deltaic Sedimentation, Modem and Ancient. Society of
Economic Paleontologists and Minerologists, Special Publications 15.

Ricklis n The McKinzie Site

75

Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1983 Karankawa. In: Handbook of North American Indians, vol. 10: Southwestern,
pp. 359-367. Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D. C.
Parrnalee, Paul, and Walter Klippel
1974 Freshwatermusselsasaprehistoricfoodresource. AmericanAntiquity39(3):421434.
Patterson, Patience, and Mary Ford
1974 Oso Creek flood control project area, Nueces County, Texas: a report on the
archeological and historical resources. Research Report 35. Texas Archeological
Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Pearlman, Stephen M.
1980 An optimum diet model, coastal variability and hunter-gatherer behavior. Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory, vol. 3. Michael B. Schiffer, ed.
Academic Press, New York.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1981 Cultural chronology in CentralTexas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-89.
1985

From Circleville to Toyah: comments on Central Texas chronology. Bulletin of
the Texas Arcbeological Society:54:201-238.

Quitmyer, Irvy R., H. S. Hale, and D. S. Jones
1985 Paleoseasonality determination based onincremental shell growth in the hard clarn
Mercenaria mercenaria, and its implications for the analysis of three Southeast
Georgia shell middens. Southeastern Archaeology 4(1):27-40.
Ricklis, Robert A., and Rita R. Gunter
1986 Archaeological investigations at the Means site (41NU184), Nueces County,
Texas. La Tierra 13:15-32.
Robinson, Ralph L.
1979 The study of biosilica: reconstructing the paleoenvironment of the central coastal
plain of Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at
San Antonio, Special Report 7.
Rowley-Conwy, Peter
1983 Sedentary hunters: the Ertebolle example. In: Hunter-Gatherer Economy in
Prehistory: A European Perspective. Geoff Bailey, ed., Cambridge University
Press. pp 111-126.
Simmons, E. G., and J. P. Breuer
1962 A study of redfish, Sciaenops ocellata Linnaeus and black drum, Pogonias cromis
Linnaeus. Institute of Marine Science, The University of Texas, Publication 5.

76

Texas Archeological Society

Smith, Herman A.
1983 Determination of seasonality in archaeological sites through examination of fish
otoliths: a case study. Journal of Field Archaeology 10:498-500. n.d. Prehistoric
settlement and subsistence patterns of the B aff’m B ay area of the lower Texas co as t.
Unpublished Ph. D. dissertation, Anthropology, Southern Methodist University,
Dallas.
Steele, D. Gentry, and E. R. Mokry, Jr.
1985 Archeological investigations of seven prehistoric sites along Oso Creek, Nueces
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:287-308.
Story, Dee Ann
1968 Archeological investigations at two central Gulf Coast sites.
Commission Archeological Program, Report 13.

State Building

Suhm, Dee Ann, A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 AnintroductoryhandbookofTexasarcheology. BulletinoftheTexasArcheological Society vol. 25.
Stthm, Dee Ann and E. B. Jelks
1962 Handbook of Texas archeology: type descriptions. Texas Archeological Society
Special Publication 1 and Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin 4.
Turner, Ellen Sue, and T. R. Hester
1985 A field guide to stone artifacts of the Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press, Field
Guide Series, Austin.
Wobst, H. Martin
1974 Boundary conditions for Paleolithic social systems: a simulation approach.
American Antiquity 39(2):147-178.

Yesner, David R.
1980 Maritime hunter-gatherers: ecology and prehistory.
21(6):727-750.

Current Anthropology

Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond,
Brazoria County, Texas
D. L. Hamilton
ABSTRACT
Archeological investigation of two Rangia shell midden sites at Shy Pond, a
smallbody of water on the Brazos deltaic plain on the northwest edge of the town
of Lake Jackson, Brazoria County, Texas, was conducted in the summer of 1967
by the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) of The University of
Texas at Austin. The data indicate that hunting and gathering groups occupied the
area from late summer to early fall. The sandy paste ceramic tradition and the
cultural manifestation are most strongly affiliated with the Galveston Bay area to
the east, but the artifacts have less typological variation than is found there. The
Brazos deltaic plain apparently was an isolated area between Galveston B ay to the
east and the Central Texas co ast to the west. The data from the sites provide insight
into cultural developments and adaptations to the varied coastal environments of
the Gulf Coast of Texas.

INTRODUCTION
In the summer of 1967, from July 17 through August 4, archeological
excavations were carried out at two sites on the northwest side of Shy Pond, a small
pond in an old meander belt of the Brazos River. Situated between the present
channel of the Brazos River to the west and Oyster Creek to the east, the pond is on
the northwest edge of the town of Lake Jackson, in Brazoria County, Texas. It is
on the Colorado/Brazos deltaic plain, and is about 20 km (12 miles) from the Gulf
Coast, in an area that varies in elevation from 4.5 to 6 meters (15 to 10 feet) above
mean sea level.
Until these investigations were made, no extensive controlled archeological
excavations had been carried out in the area. The Archeology Club of the
Brazosport Museum of Natural Science, under the direction of the late Raymond
Walley, of Lake Jackson, carried out limited excavations of some of the sites, but
most have not been investigated and none has been published. Since this report was
started, Aten (1971) has reported on the Dow-Cleaver site, 8.8 km (5.5 miles) south
of Shy Pond.
Due to the enthusiasm and concern shown by Mr. Walley, Dee Ann Story and
Thomas R. Hester, of TARL, visited Lake Jackson to examine several sites near Shy
Pond. They noticed manyRangia shell middens of various sizes on slightly elevated
elongated ridges around the pond, several of which looked promising. Since the
prehistory of this part of the Gulf Coast largely has been ignored to date and archeological excavations would provide significant data about local developments and
possible relationships with the central and southwestern Gulf Coast, one extensive
Rangia shell midden, site 41B O 13, later named the Copperhead site, was excavated.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 58 (1987)

78 Texas Archeological Society
When rain interrupted work at the Copperhead site, time was spent testing the
Cleaver site (41BO 15), a smallRangia midden. The results of both excavations are
reported here.
Since both sites were excavated using English measurements, the excavation
measurements and site plans are in English units. However, metric equivalents are
given for most measurements.
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
The ColoradoiBrazos deltaic plain is a late Quaternary feature associated with
the development of the Gulf Coast shoreline in the last 5,000 years (LeBlanc and

N

Gulf of Mexico

(after LeBlanc &

Hodgson 1959

208)

Figure 1. Map of parts of Brazoria and Matagorda counties, Texas, showing the alluvial
valleys and deltaic plains of the Colorado and Brazos rivers.

Hamilton -- Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

79

left abandoned channels, meander belts, small lakes, and swamp areas. Shy Pond
is in a low-lying area next to a series of point bar ridges and swales in an Hodgson
1959:204). Upon this deltaic plain the Brazos River and other streams
old meander belt associated with the Oyster Creek Channel stage of the Brazos
River (Figare 2). The Brazos River diverged from the Oyster Creek Channel about
1,000 years ago (Bernard et al. 1970:8), but since the Shy Pond sites postdate this
divergence, the channel sequence of the Brazos River is not discussed here.
The sites around Slay Pond are on long, narrow point bar ridges slightly elevated
above the surrounding terrain (Figure 2).

41B015

41B013

Shy Pond

A

Archeological Sites

~Shy Pond
~ Swales filled during wet periods

o

400 feet

0

lOO meters

Figure2. Sketch planofShy Pondshowmg ~sociatedsites. Swales ~ebetween ~e
pomtb~s.

80

Texas Archeological Society

A point bar ridge is the principal depositional environment within a meander belt.
Point bars are parts of bar systems that are created when meanders cut rapidly into
eroding banks while arcuate systems of alternating low ridges and swales are
formed on the depositional banks (Bernard and LeBlanc 1965:171-172). They are
formed over varying lengths of time, depending on the volume of the water flow and
the rate at which the meanders travel, so point bar ridges--which are formed
sequentially--are separated from one another by a passage of time, and each ridge
in a meander belt represents a separate period in the depositional development of the
meander belt.
Local informants report that there is a sequence of at least five point bar ridges
along the northwest side of Shy Pond, and there are severalRangia middens on each
of these ridges (Figure 2). It has not been demonstrated archeologically, but it is
possible that the sites associated with each of the five or more point bar ridges of Shy
Pond represent chronological sequences of occupation in the area. However, all of
the sites investigated appear to postdate A.D. 1000.
The Shy Pond area of the Colorado/Brazos deltaic plain is in the coastal prairie
subdivision of the Texas Coastal Plain physiographic region, which is a nearly flat
strip of land 48 to 128 km (30 to 80 miles) wide, bordering the Texas Gulf Coast
(Moore 1970:127). The Shy Pond site is in a borderline area between the
Austroriparian and Texan biotic provinces (Dice 1943, Blair 1950). However, the
alluvial soils along the Brazos and other rivers support a floodplain cover of oaks,
blackberries, pecans, and other trees that provide environmental conditions more
favorable to the Austroriparian species (Blair 1943:97, 101).
According to Blair (1943:99) there are 47 species of mammals, 29 of snakes,
10 of lizards, two of land turtles, 17 of anurans, and 18 of urodeles in the
Austroriparian. In addition, alligators, various aquatic turtles, freshwater and
brackish water fish, various amphibians, and various freshwater and brackish water
mollusks such as Unio and Rangia live in the area. There are no species endemic
to the area.
ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Two late prehistoric artifact assemblages (loci) have been defined for the Gulf
Coast--one to the east and one to the west of the Brazos River. The Rockport focus
has been described in the Central Gulf Coast area from the Brazos River to Baffin
Bay, and the Galveston Bay focus has been described in the Galveston Bay area and
eastward to the Brazos River (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks 1954:132, 133). Readers
are directed to Ambler (1967), Aten (1967,1971,1979), Campbell (1960:145-175),
Corbin (1974:29-54), Dering and Ayers (1977), Story (1968), Suhm, Krieger, and
Jelks (1954), and Wheat (1953) for more information on the prehistory of the Gulf
Coast of Texas.
The artifact assemblages of the Rockport and Galveston Bay foci are differentiated primarily on the basis of the associated pottery. The diagnostic ceramics of
the Rockport focus are the Rockport ware consisting of Rockport Plain, Rockport
Black-on-gray, and Rockport Incised. Rockport ware can be described generally
as having a fine-textured sandy paste (with or without white inclusions believed to

Hamilton -- Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

81

be bone), smoothed surfaces, geometric incised designs on the rims, and, frequently,
asphaltum used for decoration or for mending cracks in vessel walls (Campbell
1962:331,332).
In the Galveston Bay focus, two pottery types--Goose Creek Plain and Goose
Creek Incised were identified (Suhm, Krieger, andJelks 1954:129). As originally
defined, the Goose Creek types had sandy paste that sometimes contained grog and,
rarely, pulverized bone, as additional temper, with a red wash applied to the exterior
surface in rare cases (Suhm and Jelks 1962:55-57). It soon became evident that the
Goose Creek types could be broken usefully into additional types that have definite
chronological and perhaps, regional, significance. Aten (1967), in the Jamison site
report, redefined Goose Creek Plain and Goose Creek Incised as having exclusively
sandy paste with no additional aplastics. Aten then established the Goose Creek Red
Filmed type for the red washed sandy paste pottery, the San Jacinto Plain and San
Jacinto Incised types for the sandy paste pottery with grog temper, and an unnamed
bone-tempered pottery type (Aten 1967:10-15). Aten found that Goose Creek
Plain and Goose Creek Red filmed were the earliest ceramics and that Goose Creek
incised, the grog-tempered San Jacinto types, and the bone-tempered pottery
appeared later, in that order.
Later work in the Galveston Bay area (Ambler 1967) has shown that the
Galveston Bay focus is too broad and, for that reason, invalid as defined. Similarly,
the Rockport focus is believed to be so broad that it oversimplifies the cultural
history of the area just as the Galveston Bay focus did (Story 1968:5, Corbin 1974).
It is clear that there were two ceramic traditions on the Texas Gulf Coast, but, on the
basis of present data, it appears that some Rockport ware has its origin in the sandy
paste pottery of Southeast Texas, since the sandy paste, the vessel forms, and the
incised decoration have earlier counterparts in the Galveston Bay area (Campbell
1962:335).
In the coastal area between Galveston and Matagorda bays there is an overlap
of Rockport ware and the Galveston Bay area types (Campbell 1962:335). It is in
this area that the least archeological investigation has been done. In order to answer
the many questions about the interrelationshps of the cenlxal part of the Texas Coast
and the Galveston Bay area, investigations must be made in the Colorado/13razos
deltaic plain, since that area is the center of the overlap of the two ceramic traditions.
ETHNOGRAPHIC BACKGROUND
From data presented by Newcomb (1961:59, 60), Campbell (1960:148, 149),
and Wheat (1953:16), it appears that in early historic times the Colorado~razos
deltaic plain was a transitional area between two major linguistic groups of the Gulf
Coast--the Karankawan speakers of the central part of the Coast who, at least in
part, are represented by both the Rockport and Galveston Bay loci (Corbin 1974)
and the Atakapan speakers of the Southwest Texas Gulf Coast, who must also be
represented in part by the Galveston Bay focus. The Karankawan speakers in the
Colorado/Brazos deltaic plain were the Capoques (Coco, Cocos, Coaque), who occupied the coastal area from Galveston Bay southwestward to the Brazos River, and
the Kohanis (Cujane), who occupied the area around the mouth of the Colorado

82

Texas Archeological Society

River (Newcomb 1961:315, Campbell 1960:148).
The Atakapan-speaking Akokisa (Arkokisa, Orcoquizac) are placed by
Newcomb (1961:315) in the area around the lower Trinity and San Jacinto rivers and
along the eastern shore of Galveston Bay. Wheat (1953:16), in addition, has the
Akokisa occupying the area north and northwest of Galveston Bay in the Addicks
Basin region. The Hans, who are believed to be linguistically Atakapan but
culturally similar to the Karankawas, shared the coastal area between Galveston
Bay and the Brazos River with the Karankawan Capoques (Newcomb 1961:59,
317).
In addition to these groups, some Lipan Apaches and Tonkawa were pushed to
the coast in the eighteenth century. The Mayeye band of the Tonkawa of Central
Texas moved to the coast in 1770 and, by 1779, the Mayeye had united with the
Capoque and ranged along the coast between the Colorado and Brazos rivers
(Wheat 1953:161). Despite our knowledge about the various groups that occupied
the Colorado~razos deltaic plain, few, if any, archeological sites can be identified
with a specific group. However, the archeological remains in the area usually are
attributed to the Karankawa.
Unfortunately, there is little ethnographic data on the subsistence patterns of
the coastal groups. The ethnographic information available indicates that the
coastal inhabitants followed a seasonal round regulated by availability of food,
climatic considerations, and the presence of other groups in the area. For example,
according to Newcomb (1961:66), the Capoque and the Hans of the coast camped
on the offshore islands, catching fish in cane weirs and eating the roots of an
unidentified underwater plant during the fall. By midwinter, the offshore islands
and bars were cold and wet, and the underwater plant roots were useless as food. The
bands were forced to move to the warmer mainland, where they subsisted on
shellfish until spring. In the spring they gathered blackberries, and apparently they
spent the summers on the lagoons and offshore islands and bars. This description
provides some insight into a seasonal round on the Gulf Coast, but it is important
to our understanding of the prehistory of the coast to determine what seasons were
spent in what regions or ecosystems (such as Shy Pond) of the coast. It should be
emphasized that sensitive and exacting archeological techniques must be used for
interpretation of seasonal occupation, and special emphasis must be given to
obtaining complete faunal samples. Only with data that are systematically obtained
from rigorously controlled excavations will it be possible to reconstruct seasonal
subsistence patterns.
THE COPPERHEAD SITE, 41BO13
Raymond Walley originally located the Copperhead site. A large pothole in the
center of the site revealed a concentrated Rangia shell midden and several sherds.
Other smaller potholes scattered through the midden revealed an extensive but thin
horizontal accumulation of shell.
The Copperhead site is aRangia shell midden 12.2 to 15.3 meters (40 to 50 feet)
wide that extends along a long, low ridge on the northwest side of Shy Pond. The
midden generally covers the higher central part of the ridge. Directly to the west,

Hamilton ~ ArcheoIogical Investigations at Shy Pond

83

on the same ridge, are two Rangia shell middens designated sites 41BOll and
41BO12. (Site designations at Shy Pond often are arbitrary, for site numbers have
been assigned to areas where shell midden lenses are exposed on the surface or in
excavations.) Sites 41BOll, 41BO12, and 41BO13 merge into one another,
forming an almost continuous shell midden for some 183 meters (200 yards).
The northwest shore of Shy Pond now comes to within 45 meters (150 feet) of
the Copperhead site, but, after a rain, the flat area between the ridge and the pond
fills to within 15 meters (50 feet) of the site. The ridge rises about.91 meters (3 feet)
above the level of Shy Pond.
Excavation Methods
Before excavation, after the heavy underbrush, shrubs, and vines had been
cleared, a horizontal datum point designated 00 (North 0, South 0) was established
and recorded on a wooden stake about 15.2 meters (60 feet) north of the Shy Pond
shoreline (Figure 3). A north-south base line was established, laid out through the
datum point, and excavation units were established on both sides. Because of
several large trees on the site, the excavation units varied in their dimensions (Table
1). The southeast comer stake was used to designate each unit. A large nail driven
into the base of a large oak tree near the N35/E10 coordinate served as a vertical
datum point, with the elevation arbitrarily designated 100 feet. The elevation of the
vertical datum point was used to determine the elevation in the excavation units and
in all of the site plans. A topographic map was made with the help of a telescopic
alidade. Because of the dense vegetation and lack of time, only the area adjacent
to the excavations was mapped.
In the first two 5-foot squares, it became apparent that the simple stratigraphy
and the shallow depth of the cultural deposits made digging by arbitrary elevation
levels unnecessary. The soil overlying the midden was essentially devoid of
cultural material; some was spot screened and some was removed and discarded
without screening. All of the matrix from the midden was screened through
quarter-inch wire mesh screen. All of the stone, sherds, clay lumps, bones, and
historic materials were collected.
The objectives of the excavation were to ( 1 ) expose an extensive horizontal area
of the midden, (2) sample the contents of the midden, (3) determine the extent of
the midden, and (4) investigate the intrasite variability. The materials found above,
on the surface of, and within the midden were cataloged separately. After the
surface had been carefully exposed and cleaned (Figure 3), elevations were taken,
and scale plans showing the extent of the shell in each unit were made. Adjacent
units were similarly excavated until a large area of the midden was exposed and
excavated. All of the shell matrix was screened, but time permitted excavation of
only about half of the exposed part of the midden.
Late in the excavation, in an attempt to determine the extent of the midden, 15
trenches, 30.48 cm (1 foot) wide and 1.5 to 5.49 meters (5 to 18 feet) long were dug.
Evidence from trenches failed to disclose the extent of the midden, but did show that
it was considerable (Figure 4), and shell scattered on the surface indicates that the
midden extends for about 183 meters (200 yards) along the ridge. The stratigraphy

84

Texas Archeological Society
Table 1. Dimensions of Excavation Units and I.~cations
of Trenches at the Copperhead Site (41BO15)

Unit 1

Dimensions

N50/00
N50~5
N50/E10
N45/00
N45/E5
N45/E10
N40/00
N40/E5
N40/E10
N25/W10
N25/W5
N25/W02
N20/W05
N15AV15
N15/Wl0

0.9xl.5 m (3x5 ft.)
1.5xl.5 m (5x5 ft.)
1.5xl.5 m (5x5 ft.)
0.9xl.5 m (3x5 ft.)
1.5xl.5 m (5x5 ft.)
1.5xl.5 m (5x5 ft.)
0.9xl.5 m (3x5 ft.)
1.5xl.5 m (5x5 ft.)
1.5xl.5 m (5x5 ft.)
2.1xl.5 m (7x5 ft.)
1.5xl.5 m (5x5 ft.)
0.9xl.5 m (3x5 ft.)
1.5xl.5 m (5x5 ft.)
0.6xl.5 m (2x5 ft.)
1.5xl.5 m (5x5 ft.)

Trench 1
Trench 2
Trench 3
Trench 4
Trench 5
Trench 6
Trench 7
Trench 8
Trench 9
Trench 10
Trench 11
Trench 12
Trench 13
Trench 14
Trench 15

Location

.3x3.04 m (lxl0 ft.)
.3x3.04 m (lxl0 ft.)
.3x3.04 m (lxl0 ft.)
.3x3.04 m (lxl0 ft.)
.3xl.52 m (lx5 ft.)
.3x3.04 m (lxl0 ft.)
.3x3.04 m (lxl0 ft.)
.3x3.04 m (lxl0 ft.)
.3x3.04 m (lxl0 ft.)
.3x 1.52 m (lx5 ft.)
.3xl.52m (lx5 ft.)
.3x3.04 m (lxl0 ft.)
.3x1.52 m (lx5 ft.)
.3xl.52 m (lx5 ft.)
.3x5.48 m (lx18 ft.)

Test Pit 1.9xl.52 m (3x5 ft.)
Test Pit 2.9x.9 m (3x3 ft.)

N of stake N30/W2
E of stake N55~10
N of stake N55/E10
N of stake N60/00
N of stake N55iE11
W of stake N30/W17
S of stake N30AV17
W of stake N20/W17
N of stake N30AV17
S of stake N20/W17
E of stake N55/E25
N of stake N00/00
E of stake N25/00
S of stake N54/E30
N of stake N30/W10

Not oriented with grid. Extends
northeast of N60/E22.
Not oriented with grid. Extends
southwest of N20/W23.

’ Unit designation is the coordinates at the southeast corner stake.

at the site is simple Figures 5, 6). Zone 1 (the uppermost zone) is a hard, compact
black sandy clay called gumbo, extending to as much as 39.6 cm (1.3 feet) below
the surface, averaging 30.48 cm (1 foot) in thickness. At the juncture of Zones 1 and
2 in some parts of the site the two zones are mixed.

Hamilton -- Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

85

Figure 3. Photographs of the Copperhead site: Above, view of excavations, looking north;
Below, view of main excavation area with shell midden exposed.

86

Texas Archeological Society

N

[] SFtELL
[] POTHOLES
UNEXCAVATED

0

10 fee(

0

3 mete,rs

[] ~F,,o

Figure 4. Topographic map of the Copperhead site showing excavation grid, trenches, and
potholed areas.

Stratigraphy
The stratigraphy at the site is simple (Figures 5, 6). Zone 1 (the uppermost zone)
is a hard, compact black sandy clay called gumbo, extending to as much as 39.6 cm
(1.3 feet) below the surface, averaging 30.48 cm (1 foot) in thickness. At the
juncture of Zones 1 and 2 in some parts of the site the two zones are mixed.
Lying entirely within Zone 1 is the shell midden, which forms elongated lenses.
The depth at the top of the midden averages 18.2 cm (0.6 feet), but ranges between
9 and 21 cm (0.3 and 0.7 feet). Except for a few isolated contacts with the top of
Zone 2, the bottom of the shell midden is 6 to 18 cm (0.2 to 0.6 feet) above the top
of Zone 2. The thickness of the midden seldom exceeds 18 cm (0.6 feet). Most
artifacts came from the surface and interior of the midden. The upper half of Zone
1 is largely devoid of cultural material. In Zone 1, cultural material was found at

Hamilton-- Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

87

A

N 45
E 10

I
30

2 }t

[] ZONE 1, GUMBO

6Ocm

[] ZONE 2, SAND

[
]SHELL
-"~’-N ~

MIDDEN

[] UNEXCAVATED

B
Figure 5. A, Photograph showing general view of excavations, looking northeast. The
stakes and string mark the line of profile. A burial is exposed in the foreground. B,
Profile along line El0 from N50 to N55.

88

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 6. Photograph of the profile along line El0.

the same elevations inside and outside the midden. The presence of artifacts in the
upper part of Zone 1 is largely the result of disturbance. In the distribution tables
and in the remarks about provenience, Zone 1 is always the part of Zone 1 that
overlies the midden. Zone 2 is a stratum of sterile red sand underlying Zone 1 and,
where it is present, the midden. This stratum begins 27.4 to 39.6 cm (0.9 to 1.3 feet)
below the surface and extends to an unknown depth.
Basically at the Copperhead site there is a lower stratum of medium-to-fine red
sand that was apparently deposited during the formation of the point bar in the old
meander belt of the Oyster Creek Channel stage of the Brazos River. The black
sandy clay gumbo of Zone 1 was then deposited on the uneven eroded red sand
surface of Zone 2. In some areas the gumbo became mixed with the red sand,
producing a light red to greenish red matrix. Since the midden lies directly on the
red sand surface of Zone 2 in several places, its accumulation obviously began soon
after the start of the deposition of the Zone 1 gumbo. In most instances, however,
the midden is 6 to 9 cm (0.2 to 0.3 feet) above the top of Zone 2, surrounded
completely by the gumbo matrix of Zone 1. It is assumed that floods and overflow
periodically covered the point bar ridge, depositing the layer of black sandy clay
gumbo.
Burial
The poorly preserved burial of a juvenile was found in the northern half of Unit
N50/E 10 and the southern third of Unit N55/E10 (Figure 7). The outline of a burial
pit 82.2 cm (2.7 feet)east to west and 103.6 cm (3.4 feet) north to south could be
traced from the lower part of Zone 1 into the red sand of Zone 2 along the outside

Hamilton ~ Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

89

Figure 7. Photograph of the burial exposed in the north end of unit NS0/E10, looking southeast. Trowel points to the north.

edge of the midden. The burial was semiflexed and on the right side, with the head
to the south and the face to the east Figure 7). The skull was at 40.84 cm (1.34 feet)
below the surface, well into the red sand of Zone 2. Four sherds, some Rangia
¯ valves, and a few fragments of animal bone were in the grave fill.
Since the burial was found at the close of the excavation, the skeleton was
exposed, photographed in situ, drawn to scale, and removed by the Brazosport
Museum under the direction of Raymond Walley, who found a small expanding
stem arrowpoint (Figure 14, B) about 6 cm (0.2 feet) from the base of, and at the
same elevation as, the spine. The tip of the point was oriented to the southwest, away
from the spine. There is no indication that it penetrated any bone, nor is there any
indication that it is a grave offering. All the artifacts could be accidental inclusions
from the midden debris. The skeletal remains have not been analyzed, and no other
features were recognized at the site.
Artifacts
Six hundred fifty-four artifacts were recovered from the Copperhead site
(Table 2). They were sorted into ceramic, stone, bone, and shell categories, which
were then broken down into more discrete groupings according to shared attributes.
Functional terms are used for some of the artifact categories, but they are merely
heuristic devices, and no specific functions are implied by their use. In most cases,
purely descriptive designations are used.
The materials recovered from the Copperhead site consist of ceramic, lithic,
bone, and some historic artifacts. Unutilized flakes have been treated as artifacts

90

Texas Archeological Society

O4

~

O4

tr~

I

~

o

O4

.r...4

Z

ll~ll

llO41~

O4

fill

Z
O4

°4

I

llO41

~O4O4

O4

t

<Rx

O4

O4

0
0.j

o
O4
~

O4
O4
O4
O4

.<

O4

0

l

O4

l

~

l

l

~

l

~

O4

o,.,~
O4

o
o

.~

.<
0

Hamilton ~ Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

e,t
e4
t.N

o

eq
e,l

,-..-t

e.I

0

v"l

e.l

e.I
t",l

i

,.-=1

I
I

e,I

0
0

_<

°o.a

0

0

rj

~s

91

Texas Archeological Society

92

0

,,.-.t

o
v

I

I

E~

©

~-~

E~

I

I

I

I

t~

I

I

,.~

I

I

o’,

,-~

I
0
,-~

I

el

I
I

<

q,%

o

o

(N

o

I

I

I

I

,~

I

I

~

I

<’~

e.I

Hamilton ~ Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

I

t

I

I

l’,-

I

I

v-,i

I

1

93

v-,.i

1

1

I

1
o

~

t

;>
III

I

I~~

III~Nt

I1111~t

IIit111

I

1

I

I

I

t~

0

~ m

o

~,~.~

.~

~~~

-~ ~~ ~ ~o~
o~

~-~
m

°
0

@

~s

94

Texas Archeological Society

because, as indicators of occupational intensity, they are considered as good as the
obvious artifacts such as sherds, utilized flakes, and fired clay lumps. The historic
objects--four metal cartridge casings and one potsherd--were recorded to give an
indication of the amount of mixing and disturbance that has taken place since the
aboriginal occupation, but they are not discussed.
Ceramics
Six hundred sixty-one sherds were recovered from the Copperhead site. One
rim sherd was decorated; the rest of the sherds were plain. For the analysis, a fresh
break on each sherd was inspected under a 10x binocular microscope in order to
identify the temper and grain size in the paste; the microscopic examination showed
that all had sandy paste. Twenty-two sherds had grog as an additional tempering
agent. Inclusions commonly found in the paste are organic materials such as
carbonized roots, small pieces of hematite, and scattered unidentified white particles that appear to be calcium carbonate. No significant variation or intrasite
distribution could be found in the size of the sand grains in the paste; on the
Wentworth scale they fell between the upper range of very fine (0.074 mm) and the
lower range of fine (0.49 mm). This grain size variation was found to be
characteristic of the basal red sand of Zone 2 below the occupational level. The
inclusions and the sand in the paste could result from the use of naturally occurring
sedimentary carbonaceous sandy clay for making the pottery.
As a group, the sherds can be characterized as poorly fired, with very fine to fine
sandy paste. All have soft paste and are very grainy and friable; none are harder than
2.5 on the Moh scale. The frequent breakage at poorly wedged coil junctures and
the high incidence of rectangular sherds indicate that the vessels were made by the
coiling technique. A study of sherds with breaks along the coils indicates that the
coils were commonly wedged together by pressing down on the inside and pulling
up on the outside.
In previous reports from Southeast Texas (Ambler 1967, Shafer 1968), sandy
paste plain ware has been separated into temper and grain size categories. Other
variations within temper and paste categories have been largely ignored or inadequately described. The regional variations in plain ware may have regional and
chronological significance and so may be important for comparison with adjacent
regions within a culture area. Unfortunately, these kinds of studies have not been
made. Different regions with single pottery traditions may have significant surface
treatment modes, so in the analysis the sandy paste plain ware was separated into
more discrete categories based on the treatment of the surfaces.
All surfaces were either (1) floated and/or lightly polished or (2) smoothed and/
or scraped. The exterior surfaces were generally buff to red; the interiors were buff
to red or gray to black or dark brown. For convenience, these colors are described
as oxidized (lighter colors--buff to red) or unoxidized (dark browns, gray to black).
Shepard (1956:103-106) states that the firing atmosphere cannot be determined accurately from the color of the pottery because the nature of the clay and impurities
in the clay also affect the color. However, the colors can be categorized as oxidized
or unoxidized.

Hamilton ~ Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

95

The term floated refers to the process of lightly rubbing the surface of the
vessel, while the clay is still wet, with a film of water that floats the finer particles
of the clay in the paste to the surface and results in a thin, lustrous film on the surface
of the vessel, giving the appearance of a slip. After firing, the floated surface is
darker than the paste and is often crazed. The floated surface is not durable; it erodes
easily and deteriorates with wear. It is sometimes difficult to distinguish between
floated and lightly polished surfaces. However, most of the surfaces appear to have
been floated, so no distinction is made between them here.
The term polished generally refers to the process of rubbing the partially dried
surface of a vessel with a hard object such as a smooth rock in order to compress the
clay particles, thereby smoothing and polishing the surface.
The term smoothed refers to the process of wiping the surface with a pliant
material such as the hand or a piece of leather, which causes a plastic flow on the
surface of the clay that produces a smooth finish.
Scraping refers to rubbing the surface with a hard object such as a potsherd,
gourd, rock, or piece of wood. The surface is thinned and made smooth by scraping,
but small striations and grooves remain. A few sherds may have a combination of
smoothing and scraping, but most appear to have been smoothed, so all are called
smoothed here. The exterior surfaces of many sherds are greatly eroded, whereas
the interior surfaces are not eroded at all. Many of the sherds without eroded
surfaces have been smoothed. The floated surfaces usually are eroded more
severely than the smoothed surfaces.
According to Shepard (1956:216-220), smudging is the result of an extreme
reducing atmosphere that causes carbon to be deposited on the surface of the vessel,
producing a gray-to-black color. When the unoxidized color is not dense gray or
black, but is instead light gray, the term reduced is used instead of smudged; the
difference between the two is a matter of intensity. Most of the sherds from the
Copperhead site have blackened or gray interiors. It is not certain, but the blackened
interiors may not be accidental, since the denseness of the black on many of the
interior surfaces is greater than what would have resulted from a reduced atmosphere in direct firing. Nonetheless, it is not clear whether the smudging was an end
product of manufacture or a byproduct of a cultural activity. Smudged is used here
to describe sherds that are dark gray to dense black over their entire interior surfaces.
The smudging frequently extends over the lip and onto the external rim surface.
The interior smudging, the overlapping of the smudging onto the external rim
surface, the cores with reduced zones along the inner surface and an oxidized zone
in a double band effect along the outer surface suggest that the pots were fired mouth
down. Firing a vessel mouth down would concentrate the smoke in the inside,
smudging the interior surface. If organic matter is deliberately placed inside the
vessel, the smudging effect is maximized, because the smoke builds up and pours
out of the vessel and up the outside. The smoke smudges the lower part of the
outside, around the rim, but the flames of the fire oxidize the carbon in the smoke
before any can be deposited higher up on the vessel. This type of firing process may
explain the distribution of the smudging on the sherds; a smoking fire alone does not
explain it.

96

Texas Archeological Society

On the basis of the tempering agent and the treatment of the surfaces, the sherds
at the Copperhead site are divided into three categories, (1) sandy paste decorated,
(2) sandy paste plain, and (3) grog-tempered plain. The sandy paste plain sherds
are further divided into (a) sherds with both surfaces oxidized, as indicated by the
surface color, (b) sherds with the interior surface floated and smudged, and (c)
sherds with the interior surface smoothed and smudged. Typologically the pottery
fits the description of Goose Creek Incised, Goose Creek Plain, and San Jacinto
Plain as described by Aten (1967). Detailed descriptions of each are given to show
the variation within the types. These variations may have regional significance and
may be valid varieties of the established types.
It should be kept in mind that (1) the variations described may not have any
cultural reality or significance to the makers, and (2) the descriptive categories are
based on sherds rather than vessels or even partly reconstructed vessels. The
differences described in these categories could result from variations in firing,
functional intent, varying lengths of use in any one function, and, of course,
technological variations.
Munsell (1942) color examples are given in the descriptions of categories.
These colors are taken from one or more typical sherds that represent the range of
colors in the category.
Goose Creek Incised (Figure 8, A, A’)
No. of sherds: 1
Wall thickness: 4 mm
Surfaces: Both surfaces smoothed, but very grainy due to the sandy paste.
Color: Both surfaces and core are oxidized throughout to a very pale even
brown (10YR 7/3).
Rim: Slightly everted with interior thinning and rounded lip.
Decoration: Six horizontal incised lines 2 mm apart, parallel to the rim. Series
of incised diagonal lines from third line from the top, through the fourth line,
stopping at fifth line.
Comments: This is the only decorated sherd from the site.
Goose Creek Plain, Category 1 (Figure 8, B-F) Surfaces and cores are oxidized;
interior surfaces of a few sherds are dark, but do not merge with interior surfaces of
Categories 2 and 3, which are smudged.
No. of sherds: 98
Wall thickness: 4 to 7 mm, but most are 5 to 6 mm.
Exterior surface: Most outer surfaces apparently floated, resulting in a thin, fine
film that gives the effect of a polished or slipped surface. Floated film is easily
eroded. Outer surfaces of other sherds were smoothed, but not well smoothed, while
the clay was still wet. Smoothed surfaces less lustrous and much grainier than the
floated surfaces because the coarser sand grains are left on the surface. Smoothed
surfaces are much more durable and more resistant to erosion and use wear.
Interior surface: Almost all interior surfaces are smoothed, but a few may have
been floated.

Hamilton ~ Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

97

z
¢

B
~

’i i,i,i ~

C

C~

E

!

E’

0

N

D

D

2

4

CM.

Figure 8. Body and rim sherds from the Copperhead site. The exteriors of rim profiles are
on the left; prime letters indicate interior surfaces. A, A’, Goose Creek Incised; B-F, Goose
Creek Plain, Category 1 sherds.

Color: Core colors are generally a reddish brown (5YR 6/8 or 7/8), yellowish red
(5YR 5/6), and very pale brown (10YR 7/3). Also present but not common are red
(2.5YR 5/8) and white (10YR 8/2). When the (primarily inner) surface is smoothed,
it tends to have the same color as the core; when the surface is floated, it takes on
a gray or light gray color (10YR 6/1 or 7/1) that is darker than the core.
Rim: The one rim sherd is direct, with a rounded lip.
Comments: Some sherds are very poorly fired. Sherds with both surfaces smoothed
are very grainy. A few sherds contain so much sand that they look like sandstone.
Very sandy sherds that have both surfaces smoothed are much darker than the rest
of the sherds in the category (Figure 8, E, E’).

98

Texas Archeological Society

Goose Creek Plain, Category 2 (Figures 9, 10) Sherds in this category have
smoother interior surfaces smudged a dense dark gray to black.
No. of sherds: 159
Wall thickness: Sherds cluster in two thickness groups, one of 80 sherds that are 5
to 8 mm thick, the other of 79 sherds that are 3 to 4 mm thick.
Exterior surface: Most exterior surfaces are floated, but a few may have been
smoothed. Floated surfaces often are crazed and heavily eroded.
Exterior color: Exterior colors generally are darker than those in Category 1, with
yellowish browns (10YR 4/3), brownish yellows (10YR 6/3 or 6/4), browns (10YR
5/2), and reddish yellows (7.5R 5/2) predominating. Floated surfaces are slightly
darker than smoothed surfaces, and cores are gray as in Category 1 and grayish
brown (10YR 5/2).
Interior surface: All inner surfaces are smoothed, with uneven surfaces, flowing
striations, and incomplete obliteration of the coils. Some interiors, especially of the
thinner group, are well smoothed and have a dense black, glossy, lustrous surface
finish. Many of the thicker group both feel and look very grainy. Smoothed surfaces
are durable, and, unlike many surfaces that are floated, none are eroded. Interior
surfaces are smudged; smudging permeates the core, producing a two-layered
effect with a dark reduced zone along the inner surface and an oxidized zone along
the outer surface. On several sherds the inner smudgingis only a filmlike layer that
does not penetrate into the core, resulting in a smudged film on an oxidized core with
the same color as the outer surface.
lnterior color: Smudged inner surfaces are dark gray (7.5YR 4/0) and very dark
gray (7.5R 3/0) to black (2.5Y 2/0). Core colors along the inside edge are generally
light grayish brown (2.5Y 6/2) and grayish brown (2.5Y 5/2). Color along the
outside edge of the core is generally the same as the outside surface.
Rims: Among the sherds 5 to 7 mm thick are five rim sherds; three are slightly
everted with interior thinning and rounded lips, and two are direct rims with flat lips.
Among the sherds 3 to 4 mm thick is one interior-thinned direct rim sherd that has
a sharp lip with a series of shallow nicks along the inside rim surface.
Comments: Sherds 3 to 4 mm thick generally are better made and fired, with
well-smoothed outer surfaces and well-smoothed, glossy, smudged inner surfaces.
The better quality of these sherds may be a result of their thinness, which promotes
better firing. The sherds of one vessel 5 to 7 mm thick are from a deep jar or bowl
(Figure 10). Also in this category are seven sherds perforated from the outside.
Goose Creek Plain, Category 3 (Figures 11, 12) The sherds in this category
have oxidized outer surfaces and floated and smudged inner surfaces. The inner
surface treatment cannot always be determined because the entire inner surfaces
of many of the sherds are heavily eroded, apparently as a result of thin-floated
surfaces.
No. of sherds: 271
Wall thickness: Sherds cluster in thickness ranges similar to those in Category 2.
In the 5-to-7-mm thickness range are 71 sherds; in the 3-to-4-mm thickness range
are 200.

Hamilton m Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

99

A
B

B

C

C

!

!

E

D

E’

0
L

i

2
4
~: _.l ....... J
CM

Figure 9. Body and rim sherds of Goose Creek Plain, Category 2, from the Copperhead
site. Prime letters indicate inner surfaces.

100

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

A

A

~

Figure 10. Goose Creek Plain, Category 2 body sherd from the Copperhead site: A, outer
surface; A’, inner surface.

Hamilton ~ Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

101

Exterior surface: Same as Category 2, but, in addition, six sherds from one vessel
have floated exterior surfaces, and two of these have small patches of asphalt on the
exterior surfaces.
Rims: Seven different rim forms were represented in the total of 12 rim sherds. In
the 5-to-7-mm thickness group, the vessel with the asphalt on it had a direct rim
with a rounded lip. In the thinner 3-to4-mm thickness group were the following
rim forms:
Direct with rounded lip (1)
Direct with flat lip (2)
Direct with interior thinning (2)
Direct with exterior thinning (1)
Direct with flat lip slightly overlapping outside edge (1)
Slightly everted with interior thinning and rounded or pointed lip (1)
Slightly everted with rounded lip (3)
Comments: This category predominates by far at the site and has both the most rims
and the widest variety of rim forms of any category of Goose Creek Plain. Four of
the sherds are perforated from the outside, one basal sherd has a rounded base, and
one is the only example of asphalt decoration on a vessel.
San Jacinto Plain ~igure 13) Sherds in this category are plain and have a fine
sandy paste with crushed fragments of sandy paste sherds as additional tempering.
No. of sherds: 22
Wall thickness: 7 to 9 mm
Exterior surface: Outer surfaces are floated and are severely eroded, except for the
areas around the rims, which are smudged. The smudging apparently results from
an extension of the inner surface smudging out onto the outside of the vessel.
Exterior color: Floated surface is light gray (5Y 7/1) on a core of a lighter light gray
(5Y 7/2). Cores of a few sherds are reddish yellow (5 YR 7/6). Fragments of very
dark gray to black crushed sherds that range between 1 and 4 mm in diameter are
interspersed freely in the paste. These are seen clearly against the light gray paste
wherever the floated surface has been eroded.
Interior surface: Interior surfaces are smoothed, with shallow striations and
incomplete obliteration of the coil junctures. All interior surfaces have dense dark
gray to black smudging.
Interior color: Interior colors are very dark gray to black, as in Categories 2 and 3.
Rims: The four rim sherds are direct, with interior thinning and rounded lips.
Exterior color: Same as Category 2.
Interior surface: All interior surfaces are either floated or completely eroded,
probably indicating that they originally were floated. Sherds retaining interior
surface are smudged like those in Category 2. Layered reduced and oxidized zones
of the core are the same as in Category 2. Six sherds of one vessel with floated and
heavily eroded surfaces have small, random, isolated streaks and specks of asphalt
on the inner surfaces, but there is asphalt on the outer surfaces of only two of the six
sherds.
Interior color: Eroded surfaces and interior reduced core zones are light grayish

Texas Archeological Society

102

A

C

C

!

D

D

B

!

E

E
F
0
1

~

2
l
CM

4
t._.J

Figure 11. Sherds of Goose Creek Plain, Category 3 are from the Copperhead site:
Prime letters indicate inner surfaces.

Hamilton ~ ArcheoIogical Investigations at Shy Pond

A

A

B

B’

103

!

C

C’

~i¸¸~
i,

D’

E

Figure 12. Sherds (A, B, and D), and reconstruction (E), of Goose Creek Plain ware from
the Copperhead site.Prime letters indicate inner surfaces.

104

Texas Archeological Society

brown and grayish brown (2.5Y 6/2-5/2). A few sherds, as in Category 2, have only
thin, dark, black smudged filmlike layers on oxidized cores of reddish yellow (7.5R
6/8), light yellowish brown, very pale brown ( 10YR 7/3-7/4), pale brown, and a few
light grays (5Y 7/1). Floated smudged surfaces are dark gray to black as in Category 2.
Comments: This is the only category at the site with a limited intrasite distribution.
Except for one sherd from Unit N50/-00, all grog-tempered sherds came from the
south end of the site. This difference in horizontal distribution could represent a
time difference, the occupation of the site by a different group, trade, or just that
grog-tempered pottery was not commonly made at the site. In the next site to the
west, 41BO12, which is on the same ridge and merges with the Copperhead site,
were several grog-tempered sherds. At least two vessels are represented in this
category; one is a partially reconstructed deep cylindrical jar.
Summary of the Copperhead Site Ceramics
Most of the pottery at the Copperhead site falls into the Goose Creek type as
originally defined by Wheat (1953:184-189). According to Aten’s (1967:10-15)
definition, the decorated rim is Goose Creek Incised, Categories 1, 2, and 3 are
Goose Creek Plain, and the grog-tempered pottery is San Jacinto Plain. The
ceramic types and vessel forms are consistent with those found in the Galveston Bay
series to the east. All of the sherds whose forms can be determined are from
cylindrical jars or deep bowls. All appear to be cooking vessels, and none are special
function vessels. Taken as a group, the pottery of the Copperhead site is most like
the pottery described for the Addicks Basin, some 90 km (55 miles) to the north
(Wheat 1953:184-189). In both regions the prevalent surface treatment technique
is floating fine particles of the paste onto the surface to produce a smooth finish or
pseudoslip that is easily eroded and often is crazed or crackled. Also in both regions
are sherds with dense black interior surfaces. In the Cedar Bayou-Wallisville area,
Ambler (1970:4) describes plain pottery with darker surfaces---especially the inner
surfaces--and speculates that they may be a later variant of Wallisville Plain or an
early variant of Goose Creek Plain.
On the basis of the pottery from the Copperhead site and Addicks Basin, and
perhaps other regions, floated surfaces might be characteristic of Goose Creek ware
in specific regions. Where they may have limited distribution, they may be
characteristic of certain time periods, or they may even represent an early stage of
ceramic development after the floated surfaces came into the region from the
Southeast Texas coast. Smudged or blackened inner surfaces may have similar
significance. Only from additional work in the coastal area can this be determined,
but pottery with dark inner surfaces apparently is one variant or variety of the sandy
paste pottery tradition in some areas of the coast. The dates of this pottery, however,
may not be comparably early in all areas.
According to the ethnographic and archeological data, the Indians of the upper
Texas coast were seminomadic hunters and gatherers. But why is pottery relatively
abundant among these groups when, generally speaking, pottery is not abundant in
hunting and gathering groups? Among the possible explanations are

Hamilton -- Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

105

B

A

!

Figure 13. San Jacinto Plain body and rim sherds with floated exteriors and smoothed,
smudged interiors, from the Copperhead site. Prime letters indicate inner sufaces. Note
smudging along outer surfaces of the rims.

106

Texas Archeological Society

1) The difficulties of transporting ceramics were offset by the development of a
food-processing technology.
2) Canoe travel made transporting these easily broken containers feasible.
3) Specific areas or sites were staging areas, or winter houses, where pottery was
cached, so it was not always necessary to carry it around.
Future research projects need to address this question and test the possible
answers.
Lithic Artifacts
Siliceous stone does not occur naturally in the Colorado/Brazos deltaic plain.
The small, irregularly shaped chert pebbles that were used at the Copperhead site
had to be obtained by trade or on trips inland. According to local informants, chert
pebbles occur at Damon Mound, 48 to 56 km (30 to 35 miles) north of the site, but
they may be too small to have been used. The nearest sources, other than Damon
Mound, for siliceous material are the gravel deposits in the alluvial valleys 136 to
145 km (85 to 90 miles) inland (Garner 1967).
Apparently because of the scarcity of siliceous material, lithic artifacts are not
abundant at sites in the region. Only two arrowpoints, one drill, three biface
fragments, 78 flakes, and one small core were found at the Copperhead site, making
a total of 85 lithic artifacts recovered. Because the siliceous pebbles they used were
so small, the flakes are naturally quite small; many fit Hester and Shafer’s (1975)
descriptions of small prismatic blades.
Bifacially Flaked Artifacts
Arrowpoints. Two arrowpoints were recovered. A Catahoula point (Figure 14, A)
recovered from the backdirt is well made, bifacially flaked, and has a lenticnlar
cross section. The material is fine-grained yellowish tan chert. It is 35 mm long
and as much as 6 mm wide. The expanding stem arrowpoint (Figures 14, B, B’),
found in the burial pit fill is bifacially flaked, but is crudely made, with an
asymmetrical lenticular cross section. The material is coarse, grainy, fossiliferous
chert. The crudeness of the workmanship may be due to the inferior material. This
point is 25.5 mm long, 14 mm wide, and 4.5 mm thick.
Drill. One well-made bifacially flaked expanding base drill (Figure 14, C, C’) was
recovered. The material is fine-grained tan chert. The bit is narrow, with an ovate
cross section, and expands abruptly to form the base. It is 15.5 mm long, tapers from
2 mm thick at the distal end, or bit, to 4 mm thick at the base, and ranges in width
between 3 mm at the distal tip and 13 mm at the base.
Fragments. Three bifacially flaked fragments were recovered in the excavations,
but they are too small to permit identification. The largest is a rather thick distal
blade fragment of reddish tan chert with a lenticular cross section (Figure 14, D,
D’). The maximum thickness is 5.5 mm, the length from the distal tip to the break
is 30 mm, and the width across the break is 17 mm. At the distal tip a flat section
of cortex 4-mm square forms a flat, blunt point. The flat cortex on the distal end
suggests either that it was not a projectile point or that it was broken before it was
completed.

Hamilton-- Archeologieal Investigations at Shy Pond

107

4

B

C

B’

C’

A

D

D’

F

F’

K

G

H"

H’

H

F"

K’

I

I’

L

K"

0

2
~, ,,I
CM

G

G’

I"

L’

{

L"

J

J’

M

M’

IlIf

J"

M"

4
I

Figure 14. Lithic artifacts from the Copperhead site. The scale to the right of A is for A only.
The bulb of percussion is down on all flakes. A, Catahoula point; B, expanding stem point;
C, expanding base drill; D, biface fragment, possibly dart point or knife; E, notched flake;
F-M, small steeply trimmed unifaces (F’-M’ show dorsal faces at a45° angle to show steep
retouch, F"-M" show bulbar faces, M is retouched on right lateral edge); G, flake scraper,
enlarged about 6X to show flake facets.

108

Texas Archeological Society

A very small bifacially chipped distal tip fragment of reddish chert has an ovate
cross section and may be the distal end of a drill bit, but, since the fragment is only
7.5 mm long, it is impossible to make a conclusive identification.
The third bifacially worked fragment of light tan chert is a small part of the
lateral edge of a thinned biface. The fragment is 7 x 4 mm, with a maximum
thickness of 3 mm.
Unifacial Artifacts
Flakes. Because of the dearth of lithics at the site, as much information as possible
was garnered from the flake sample. The flakes were sorted into four categories:
(1) cortex flakes, (2) secondary cortex flakes, (3) interior flakes, and (4)
nondescript flakes (Table 3). The first three categories were further divided
into subcategories based on natural and prepared striking platforms. Flakes in all
the categories were examined under a binocular microscope to determine whether
any flakes had been used or modified. The flakes were divided into these categories
in order to determine whether there had been apparent selection of specific flake
types for specific tools.
Both Epstein (1963) and Shafer (1969) have published descriptions of flakes
made of siliceous cobbles and pebbles. Similar terms are used, but there are
differences. However, when cobbles are used as the source for flakes, all of the
resulting flakes or pebbles, regardless of size, can be grouped into the same general
categories. The flint flake attributes and flake category definitions used here
generally follow Shafer (1969:3-5). A flake, in order to be placed in one of the
categories, must have the striking platform and the bulb of percussion; if they are
missing, the flake goes into the nondescript category. The following flake type
definitions are used.

Table

3.

Flake

Flake Type

Types

at

the

Copperhead

Utilized1

Cortex
Natural platform
Prepared platform
Secondary cortex
Natural platform
Prepared platform
Interior
Natural platform
Prepared platform
Nondescript
Minute flakes2
Cores with prepared platform
Total

Site

Unutilized

Total

1

2
6

3
6

2
18

2
7

4
25

7
14
1

1
3
14
22
1

8
17
15
22
1

43

1 Includes the small flake unifaces
2 Minute retouch flakes are not added into the total

Hamilton ~ Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

109

1) Cortex flake. A cortex flake has the dorsal face covered with cortex. The
striking platform can be natural or prepared.
2) Secondary cortex flake. A secondary cortex flake is any flake that has cortex
on some part of, and at least one flake facet on, the dorsal face. The amount of cortex
on the dorsal face can be large or small. The striking platform can be natural or
prepared.
3) Interior flake. An interior flake has no cortex on the dorsal face; however,
it can have cortex on the striking platform, but only when the platform is natural.
4)Nondescriptflake. A nondescript flake has no readily identifiable attributes,
such as a striking platform or a bulb of percussion. This category also includes flake
fragments on which no attributes can be identified.
As a result of the small size of the siliceous pebbles used, the flakes are very
small (Table 4). Measurements taken on the 25 utilized flakes, the 18 small
unifacially trimmed flakes, and 18 of the unutilized flakes showed a mean length of
12.7 mm, a mean width of 13.1 mm, and a mean maximum thickness of 3.4 mm. The
maximum flake length is 34 mm, the maximum width is 22.5 mm, and the maximum
thickness is 6 mm.
Most of the flakes are very thin with small, elongated narrow striking platforms
and very diffused, indistinct bulbs of percussion. Most of the flakes are rectangular
with expanding lateral edges. Two lipped flakes are strongly arched (Epstein
1963:29, Shafer 1969:4). Of the 63 flakes from the site with striking platforms
intact, 48 are prepared and 15 are natural. The striking platforms of the remaining
15 flakes are not intact. The one core from the site has a prepared platform. Because
Table 4. Scattergram Showing Lengths and Widths of Utilized Flakes at the
Copperhead Site, 41BO13
40

30

-r-

20

I¯

Z
IJJ

¯ ,

¯°
=¯

¯

,.

10

.d

0

0

I

I

|

10

20

30

WIDTH

(mm)

N=41
Mean length=15.7 mm
Mean width=13.4 mm
Mean thickness=3.2 mm

110

Texas Archeological Society

of the small size of the chert pebbles used, it was thought that evidence might be
found for a bipolar flake manufacturing technique, since bipolar technique has been
found in the Caddo area to the north, where pebbles of similar size were used (Shafer
1970). No evidence of the bipolar technique is detectable in the flakes or the one
core, but in the analysis it was noted that the small flakes are very suggestive of small
blades. Subsequent studies by Hester and Shafer (1975) and Patterson (1975), who
worked with more data, describe a blade technology on the Texas Gulf Coast. The
material described by them is analogous to the lithic sample at Shy Pond, so Shy
Pond should be listed as a site that has a similar blade technology, but since the
material from the Coast is not available for reexamination, their terminology is not
used in these descriptions.
From the microscopic analysis of the flakes, it was determined that 43 of the
78 flakes recovered have evidence of use or modification. However, several of the
36 unutilized flakes are fragmentary, and some undoubtedly have been used. A significantly high proportion--55 percent of the flakes recovered--have evidence of
use.

In addition to the 78 flakes already discussed, 22 very small flakes, ranging
between 2 and 4 mm in both length and width, were recovered during the fine
screening of shell/matrix samples in the laboratory. They represent debris from the
manufacture of chipped tools and were recovered only from the units with shell
samples that were fine screened in the laboratory.
Utilized Flakes. The 25 utilized flakes (Figure 14, E; 15, A-I; Table 2, 3) like the
rest of the flakes, are very small. The largest flakes in the sample are in this category,
but the mean length is still only 16.9 mm, the mean width, only 13.5 mm, and the
mean thickness, only 3.7 mm. All of the utilized flakes are unifacially retouched on
one or more edges from use or perhaps intentionally. The retouch is not extensive
and usually is concentrated at curved junctures or toward the end of an edge. The
angle of the retouched edge is very acute, and, for this reason, they are separated
from the 18 flakes classified as small steeply trimmed unifaces, described below.
The utilized flakes are retouched on one lateral edge, on both lateral edges, or on the
distal end opposite the striking platform. Twelve flakes are unilaterally modified,
and six are bilaterally modified; on six flakes, the distal ends opposite the striking
platforms are modified, and one flake has a unifacially chipped notch on the distal
end opposite the striking platform (Figure 14, E).
The utilized flakes are sorted according to the type of flake from which they are
made (Table 3). Sixteen flakes are on secondary cortex flakes, 14 have prepared
platforms, and two have natural platforms. Seven utilized flakes are made from
interior flakes, three have prepared striking platforms, and four have natural
platforms. One utilized flake was made from a cortex flake with a natural platform,
and one utili~d flake is on a nondescript flake. From the flake types in the sample,
it is apparent that secondary cortex flakes are predominant. This predominance may
be a factor of the use of raw material that apparently produced secondary cortex
flakes most often. However, it is interesting to note that the smaller interior flakes
seem to have been selected for the small steeply trimmed unifaces.

Hamilton ~ Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

111

Steeply Trimmed Unifaces. In the sample of 43 utilized and/or modified blades
from the site, 18 are classified as small, steeply trimmed unifaces. The functional
term scraper, often used for similar artifacts, is avoided here. These unifaces differ
from the utilized flakes in having a series of minute flakes removed from the edge
perpendicular to the long axis of the flake, producing a very steep, almost vertical,
working edge. The steepness of the retouch on the flakes is the basis for
differentiating them from the other utilized flakes with acute working edges. The
unifaces have expanding lateral edges and are piano/slightly convex or flat in cross
section, with very thin maximum thickness. Thickness, measured in the area of
maximum thickness on the flake, ranges between 1.1 and 4 mm, with a mean
thickness of 2.4 mm. The area of maximum thickness, however, is not a measurement of the modified working edge. The length of the scrapers ranges between 9
and 19.5 mm, with a mean length of 14.1 mm. The width ranges between 9 and 14.5
mm, with a mean width of 12.7 mm. The trimmed unifaces have had very small
pressure flakes removed from the ventral face to produce a very steep edge along
a straight line or a part of a straight line. The angle of retouch is about 55° to more
than 80°, forming an almost vertical working edge. In some cases, a snap, or hinge,
fracture has been retouched to produce the steep working edge. Under the binocular
microscope the ventral edge of the steep retouch characteristically has a crushed and
worn edge. No striations were seen on the working edges or on the ventral faces.
The working edges of the flake scrapers in this sample are always on a straight plane;
there are no steeply beveled ovate or circular forms. Several of the flakes have the
bulb of percussion on a thick noncutting part of the flake opposite the steeply
retouched edge, so the worked edges cannot be interpreted as backing opposite
cutting edges.
The straight working edges and the crushing along the steeply retouched
ventral edges suggest that these small unifaces could have functioned in shaping
thin bone, wood, or antler by shaving off fine slivers or by pulling or pushing the
ventral face of the flake against the object. One thinned pointed bone implement
fragment (Figure 14, E) has marks that apparently are the result of shaving and
shaping with a scraping tool. The small size of these tools and the other utilized
flakes suggests that they would have functioned more efficiently had they been
hafted in some manner or used in composite microblade tools. Fifteen of the
unifaces are steeply retouched on the distal end of the flake, perpendicular to the axis
of percussion. The remaining three are steeply retouched on a lateral edge at a right
angle to the axis of percussion, but, since the long axes of these three examples cross
at a right angle to the axis of percussion, they are wider than they are long, so, like
the other 15 examples, the working edges are perpendicular to the long axes of the
flakes. The three laterally retouched unifaces are so shaped that, because of the
thickness or shape of the flake, they are most easily held or hafted from a lateral
edge.
Ten of the 18 trimmed unifaces are retouched across most of the distal end,
perpendicular to the long axis of the flake, six are retouched on the left half of the
distal end, and two are retouched on the right half of the distal end. If the scraper
had been pushed along the ventral face of the working edge by a right-handed

112

A

D

G

Texas Archeological Society

D’

E

C!

C

a

B

A’

F

F

!

!

@

G!

H

0
j!

2

4

CM

Figure 15. Utilized flakes and core from the Copperhead site. The bulb of percussion is down
on all flakes. A-I, utilized flakes (prime letters show bulbar faces); C, Utilized thinning or
billet flake; J, small chert core.

person, the left half of the distal end would have been the area most extensively used
and most in need of being retouched. This might explain the placement of the steep
working edge, but, of course, this interpretation is highly hypothetical, for the
manner of using a tool is based on several motor habits and other factors.
Eleven of the 18 unifaces have steep retouching only on the distal ends of the
long axes of the flakes. The other seven are composite tools, for they have, in
addition, one or more acute edges with small, irregular, discontinuous marginal
flake scars on a lateral edge, probably the result of use as a cutting edge, as in the
case of the 25 utilized flakes.
Eleven of the 18 unifaces are on interior flakes with prepared platforms, three
are on interior flakes with natural platforms, and four are on secondary cortex flakes
with prepared platforms. The number of different flake types indicates that interior

Hamilton ~ Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

! i~!~~:i;

113

,~

B

B’

A

D

C

F

C

D’

E

E’

~

F

I

G

Figure 16. Bone artifacts from the Copperhead site. A-D, modified deer ulnas; E, bone
artifact; F, bone fragment; G, H, alligator bone fragments; I, J, deer metapodials.

flakes may have been deliberately selected for the small unifaces. In contrast,
secondary cortex flakes are the most commonly utilized flakes.
Similar small trimmed unifaces, referred to as scrapers, have been reported
from the Laguna Madre sites (Campbell 1956:28, 29) and the Ingleside Cove site
(Story 1968:27, 28) in the Central Gulf Coast. The Copperhead unifaces are much
thinner than the ones reported from either of these sites. The thinnest uniface
reported from the Ingleside Cove site is 5 mm thick, which is thicker than the largest
uniface, in fact, thicker than all but five flakes from the Copperhead site. The
Copperhead site unifaces also differ in that they have exclusively straight, or nearly

114

Texas Archeological Society

ol

I

I

I

i

I ol

I

I

0

0

Z
0

cat..-

I

I

0
Z

I

I

I

I

I

Z
o10

Iea

I
I

.-C

I

Z

I

I

°.
ta

E
"E
<

.~

.

~r~O~

,~.~ ~ ~ ~ o ~.~’r~

~~ ~ ~,~ °c~’~,=o
~

so

0

~

¯ ~"c~

.~.~

Hamilton m Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

115

o~
[
I

i

I

[

cf

ko

I

,-4

I

t~
[

I

[

I

I

I

I

~D
~D

(.4
~D

I

I

[

I

I

I

E

I

I

I

[

aO~

7~~
0 0

I

~D

~0
0

~

o

c~

~.~

~

~o~.~.~ ~ ~~.~~o~o
0

o.

0
~

0

116

Texas Archeological Society

,~- /¢’1

¢q

¢q
¢q

¢-.I ¢ ~

I

I

I

1

I

I

I

¯--,

I

,,DOO

I

I

I

¢q

I

~5

t’-,I

1

¢q
¢d
dl
I.
¢d

I

1 % Iz’~
¢-t

I

I

o%

l

O

1

t"
°m

I

1

I

¢.1 lt’~

,2"

o

o~
N
O

.~

~
,A

.~

<

~’~-’~"~
o ~o-~~-~~.:..

;~

oo~
0

"~’~

o

Hamilton ~ Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

117

v

l
ko

I

0

l

~.
t
c~

o"

l

o
t~
~0

l

I

I

I

I

I

o

.~
o

l

04

o

o~

0
t~

I
cq

l

i

cq

t’~0

t~3

"0

F~ ~.~

~So’~
~.~ ~

-

~o~o~o

118

Texas Archeological Society

straight, working edges. The scrapers from the Ingleside Cove site and the sites on
the small islands in the Laguna Madre are ovate or ovoid in form, with convex
working edges, and have thicker cross sections. It is possible that similar small flake
scrapers have not been reported elsewhere on the Gulf Coast because the flakes have
not been examined carefully, and they have been combined with the utilized flakes
with acute working edges. The absence of similar scrapers elsewhere on the coast
cannot be explained by the available raw materials, the technology, or different tool
function. The same raw materials are used elsewhere on the coast, and there is no
basis for assuming that a different technology or a different tool function was used
at the Copperhead site. The steeply trimmed unifaces, as well as the other utilized
flakes, have the characteristics of small blades as described by Hester and Shafer
(1975:175-185). From the data available at the time, they found that the blade
technology described in their paper was confined to the central and lower Texas
coast. However, the blades at the Copperhead site and subsequent work by Patterson
(1975) extend this technology into the upper Texas coast.
Bone Artifacts
Only five obvious bone artifacts were recovered--a thin, fiat, pointed bone
implement, two nearly complete deer ulna awls, and two distal tips of deer ulna awls.
Possible bone tools or residue from the manufacture of bone tools include a long,
slender fragment of alligator bone with a longitudinal groove incised in one surface
(Figure 16, G), a piece of alligator bone with a groove-and-snap break (Figure 16,
H, H’), a fragment of a long bone with a groove-and-snap break (Figure 16, F, F’),
and four split deer metapodials (Figure 16, I, J).
Pointed. This artifact fragment (Figure 16, E, E’) may be the distal end of a
projectile point, a compound fishhook, or an awl made from a piece of long bone
that has been ground and/or scraped very flat and thin. Under magnification, a series
of parallel striations can be seen along the lateral edges; they apparently are the
result of manufacturing and shaping with a scraping tool. No similar striations could
be seen on the flake surfaces, but this could be the result of differential preservation
of the bone. The artifact has a broken length of 25 mm and width, at the break, of
16 mm. The thickness at the distal point is 1 mm, at the break, 2.5 mm.
Ulna Awls. The four bone awls (Figure 16, A-D) are made from ulnae that have
the shaft and distal ends shaped. Two nearly complete awls are definitely made from
the ulna of the white-tailed deer, and the two distal ends also are probably
white-tailed deer. One nearly complete right ulna awl (Figure 16, B) has polish
along the edges and the distal end. Under the binocular microscope, striations
vertical to the long axis of the awl are easily detected. The proximal end of the ulna
awl is broken. Another nearly complete left deer ulna with the distal end broken
(Figure 16, A) has polish near the proximal end where it would have been held.
Distal fragments of two other ulna awls (Figure 16, C, D) are only slightly polished.

Shell Artifacts
No definite shell artifacts were recovered, but, since there was a dearth of lithic
tools, it is probable that unaltered and broken Rangia valves functioned as scraping

Hamilton ~ Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

119

and cutting tools. From a site near the Copperhead site there are, in the Brazosport
Museum of Natural Science, five large flat oyster shells whose anterior edges are
ground to knifelike sharpness. Another ground oyster shell was found at the
Dow-Cleaver site (Aten 1971:44). These ground oyster shells apparently functioned as cutting tools. Arectangular fragment of aconch whorl shows no indication
of modification or use.
Faunal Analysis
Vertebrate bones and invertebrate shells were abundant at the site (Table 5).
All the vertebrate bones found on the quarter-inch screen were kept, regardless of
size or condition. In addition, extensive samples of Rangia cuneata shell were
taken. All the shell was collected from Unit Nt5iW10 and from the northwest
quadrant of Unit N45/E 10. Smaller shell samples were taken from N20/W5, N25/
W5, N40/E5, N40/E10, N50/E10, and Trench 6. No matrix samples, as such, were
taken, but the matrix that adhered to the Rangia samples was water-screened
through sixteenth-inch wire mesh. The faunal debris was sorted from the rest of the
debris with the aid of low magnification. Almost the total sample of small rodent
bones and teeth, snake vertebrae, frog bones, fish vertebrae, scales, spines, teeth,
and miscellaneous small bones was secured in this manner. Because the shell
samples taken varied in size, the adhering matrix was disproportionate, so comparisons cannot be made among the units. The microfaunai sample does not necessarily
indicate what would have been recovered had matrix samples been taken or had fine
screening been an integral part of the excavation procedure. The units from which
shell samples were taken, especially N15/W10 and N45/E10, are given emphasis
disproportionate to the other units because of the addition of the microfauna to the
totals.

Vertebrate Fauna
Except for the fish, the bones of white-tailed deer are by far the most numerous
of the vertebrates, indicating that deer were a major source of food. Deer are
represented by virtually all skeletal elements (Table 5), sugges~ng that the animals
were butchered at the site. The absence of any antler and any but juvenile and adult
deer may indicated that the site was occupied in the summer or that deer hunting took
place in the summer. The white-tailed deer is represented by 95 identified bones,
and, in all probability, a major portion of the 324 unidentified medium-sized
mammal bones are of white-tailed deer. At least four deer are represented in the 95
identified bones.
Fish and turtle bones are the most numerous vertebrate remains. The 564 fish
bones are a very small part of what must have been at the site, since most came from
the matrix adhering to the shell samples. The small size (0.2 to 0.4 mm diameter)
of many of the fish vertebrae suggests that nets or weirs were used. Ninety-three
turtle shell fragments were recovered, all from hard-shell turtles called sliders,
which are common in the area; some were from quite large turtles. Duck, frog,
salamander, snake, and two small alligator bones are also in the sample.
Terrestrial species in addition to deer include raccoon, squirrel, opossum,

120

Texas Archeological Society

rabbit, cotton rat, and at least two Canidae sp. All of these species are found on
wooded ridges and prairies around Shy Pond.
Very few whole bones of large mammals were recovered. Some of the bones
are burned, and some are broken, apparently for recovery of the marrow and the
manufacture ofbone tools. Most ofthebones, even quite small ones, arebroken into
very small angular pieces. All metapodial shafts are split; two metapodials have a
conical protrusion between the condyles that would result from driving an object
between the condyles to split the bone (Figure 16, I, J). One long bone fragment has
a small groove that was made in order to snap the bone, either to reach the marrow
or to obtain a bone fragment suitable for making a tool (Figure 16, F). The only
whole bones are those that contain no marrow (calcanea, phalanges, astraguli,
metatarsals, and caudal vertebrae) and are not suitable for the manufacture of tools.
The two alligator bones from the Copperhead site were modified, the larger by
a large groove-and-snap fracture and the smaller by a deep longitudinal groove
incised in one surface (Figure 16, G, H).
Molluskan Fauna
The brackish water clam Rangia cuneata is the only mollusk found at the site
in quantity. Commonly found along most of the Gulf Coast, Rangia is an estuarine
species that is found landward but overlapping the range of oysters. It is most
abundant in the heads of estuaries and tidal bayous where water has a salinity of as
much as 15 ppt (parts per thousand), and its range extends for several kilometers up
the mouths of permanent freshwater streams where, at times, the salinity may be less
than 0.3 ppt (Hopkins 1969, Hopkins and Andrews 1970). Because Rangia can
tolerate a wide range of salinity and their range overlaps the range of freshwater
mollusks and higher-salinity mollusks such as oysters, it has been suggested that
environmental conditions and changes as well as dietary information might be
inferred from study of the shell characteristics of Rangia shell and shifts in the
percentages of Unio, Rangia, and Crassostrea in individual or groups of shell
middens in a limited area (Mclntire 1958:47, Story 1968:62).
The shell midden sites around Shy Pond are composed almost entirely of
Rangia, which range in anterior-posterior length between 15 and 61 mm, but most
of which are less than 30 mm long. Extensive Rangia samples were taken from two
units in N15/W10 at the Copperhead site. In this unit, 67 percent (14.5 kg, or 32
lbs.) of the Rangia range in anterior-posterior length between 15 and 30 mm, and
5.4 percent (1.3 kg, or 3 lbs.) are more than 30 mm long. The density of the shell
and the size percentages differ significantly in the two units. The differing volumes
and densities of shell might represent different lengths or intensities of occupation,
or repeated occupations at one area or the other over a period of years. The
differences in the percentages might result from any one or all of the following
factors.
1) Significant chronological difference between the two areas of the site.
2) Rangia collected at different times of the year.
3) Exploitation of discrete monotonic populations.
In all probability the low salinity in the area of Shy Pond supports a nonbreeding

Hamilton ~ ArcheoIogical Investigations at Shy Pond

121

monotonic subpopulation consisting of classes of clams of limited size. New populations are introduced only when spawn are introduced in salt water that pushes into
the area from the Gulf, so the presence of monotonic populations would affect
numbers 1 and 2 in the list above.
It is apparent that noRangia measuring less than 15 mm were collected by the
inhabitants of Shy Pond. This may be because the smaller Rangia represent such
a small amount of food, or it could be a result of the shell-gathering technique.
Fairbanks, in his study (1963) of theRangia of Lake Pontchartrain, Louisiana
reported thatRangia between 14.25 and 23.75 mm were uncommon and were found
only during the summer months. Fairbanks postulates that Rangia spawrred in
March or April will reach 15 mm in length, depending on environmental conditions,
by the end of one year, and during the next six warm months of the growing season
(March-April through September-October), will increase from 15 to 24 mm in
length. Relatively few clams stay within the size range of 14.25 to 23.75 mm very
long, so this size range is common for only a short time in the spring and summer
months (Fairbanks 1963:20, 21). In support of Fairbanks, Wolfe and Petteway
1968:102) worked out a von Bertalanffy growth curve for Rangia that shows that
Rangia one year old would be expected to be 16 mm long, andRangia two years old,
28.3 mm long.
Most of the Rangia from the Copperhead site range between 15 and 30 mm,
with the greater number in the lower end of the range. If the von Bertalanffy growth
curve is applicable to the Shy Pond area, then the small size of the Rangia indicates
that the inhabitants of the Copperhead site were collecting them during the late
spring and summer months. Also in support of this conclusion, the Rangia at the
site apparently were collected daring their growing season.
During the growing season, Rangia steadily add to the edge of their shells,
forming a series of shell accretion bands, one for each growing season. Between the
accretion bands are small narrow lines, or grooves, which are growth interruption
lines that are formed by a halt in the shell accretion during the nongrowing season.
By inspecting the edges of severalRangia shells, it is possible to determine from the
growth accretion bands or growth interruption lines whether the Rangia were
collected during a growing season. Observations made on the Rangia at the
Copperhead site show that they were collected during the growing season. At Lake
Pontchartrain, the growing season covers the months from March through September (Fairbanks 1963:20, 21). These data show that the Rangia at that site were
collected during the spring to fall growth period. In addition, by comparing the
width of the growth accretion bands of past growth seasons, it is possible to
determine if the Rangia were collected early or late in the growing season. The
Rangia at the Copperhead site, for the most part, were collected in the latter part of
the growing season, or late summer to early fall. Rangia 40 to 60 mm long were
used for the inspection of the growth accretion bands and growth interruption lines,
because at this size they have a number of bands and lines that are more readily
apparent and so more suitable for analysis.
Although a late summer to early fall occupation is indicated for the Copperhead
site, the applicability of the von Bertalanffy growth curve and the Lake Pontchar-

122

Texas Archeological Society

tmJn data to the Rangia in the Shy Pond area may be debatable. It has been found
that the size and growth rate of a Rangia population is affected by both salinity and
bottom substrata. Rangia attain greater size in water of low salinity (Parker
1955:209) and in sand bottom sediments over clay silt sediments (Tenore, Horton,
and Duke 1968). Originally it was thought that the small size oftheRangia indicated
age classes because the Shy Pond area is a marginal environment that might inhibit
the growth of the Rangia. However, it is known that Rangia can thrive in water of
very low salinity for several months with no apparent detrimental effects on growth
(Hopkins and Andrews 1970:868). So a lower salinity for the Shy Pond area
apparently does not explain the small size of the Rangia population. At present,
there are no studies that indicate how differing marginal environments affect the
growth rates and size ranges of Rangia. Studies similar to the Lake Pontchartrain
study by Fairbanks (1963) are needed if the growth rates and seasonal age classes
for the Shy Pond and adjacent areas are to be determined more accurately.
The fact that Rangia more than 30 mm long are not as common as might be
expected may be an indication of monotonic populations or an indication that the
pond was being so thoroughly exploited each year that few of the Rangia were left
to grow beyond 30 mm. If this is the case, then the Rangia in the midden represent
the yearly harvest of the one- to two-year-old Rangia that have matured since the
last harvest. The larger specimens would represent the ones that had escaped
harvesting in past seasons. If this interpretation is true, the oldest areas of
occupation around the pond would have higher proportions of Rangia more than 30
mm long.
Rangia shells are the most apparent faunal remains at the Copperhead site and
are definitely the most important food mollusk. However, the importance ofRangia
to the diet of the aboriginal inhabitants can be easily overemphasized. From
measurements on Rangia from the lower Neches River, it was found that Rangia
with mean lengths of 45 mm and mean shell weights of 22.2 g have mean wet meat
weights of 4.6 g (Hopkins 1969, Hopkins and Andrews 1970:868). This is a ratio
of 0.2 g of wet meat per 1 g of shell weight (0.2 lbs. of wet meat per 1 lb. of shell
weight). However, the ratio of meat weight to shell weight is variable, since meat
quality changes with the season, spawning, and the local environment. For
example, Rangia in sand sediments have a significantly higher ratio of meat to shell
than those in clay silt sediments (Tenore, Horton, and Duke 1968:241). In all
probability, the ratio differs for Rangia from the Copperhead site. which have a
mean length of 20 to 30 mm, but there is no other published meat to shell ratio for
Rangia cuneata. The ratio of 0.2 g of wet meat per 1 g of shell weight probably is
a reasonable approximation from which to calculate the food weight represented by
the two large shell samples taken from the Copperhead site.
Using this ratio, the 21.7 kg (48 lbs.) of shell from the entire 5-foot square Unit
N15/W10 represent 4.34 kg (9.6 lbs.) of meat. The 24.9 kg (55 lbs.) from the
northwest fourth of the 5-foot square Unit N45iE10 represent about 5 kg (11 lbs.)
of meat, or about 20 kg (44 lbs.) for the entire unit. In addition to the Rangia, the
two units yielded bones from white-tailed deer and unidentified canines, rabbits,
squirrels, cotton rats, birds, turtles, various fish, salamanders, and alligators (Table

Hamilton ~ Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

123

5). The Rangia from Unit N45~10 represent a significant percentage of utilized
food, but in no way do they constitute the greatest part, especially when the other
fauna represented at the site are taken into consideration. This contrasts with the
Trinity Bay area, where Dillehay (1975:11, 12) concludes that "the use of the
shellfish Rangia cuneata.., as a food source has not been overemphasized, for the
data show that it was the most important single food item in the diet of the prehistoric
inhabitants."
Except for Rangia, the only mollusks at the Copperhead site were five
fragments of oysters (Crassostrea sp.), one fragment of conch (Busycon sp.), one
fragment of a Dinocardium robustum, one fragment of a Mercenaria campechiensis, land snails (Mesodon romei, not collected), and a few freshwater mussels (Unio
sp.) that were so fragmentary that they could not be collected.
Summary
The four most important food sources at the Copperhead site were deer,Rangia,
fish, and turtles. Also represented in decreasing importance, as indicated by the
number of bones, are Canis sp., opossums, ducks, squirrels, raccoons, frogs,
alligators, salamanders, oysters, and freshwater mussels.
Again, it should be noted that the excavation techniques used at the site favored
the recovery of the bones of the larger vertebrates. The gumbo matrix around the
shell midden is difficult to dry-screen through quarter-inch mesh, and no water was
used. The lack of fine screening and the lack of adequate matrix samples result in
a disproportionate emphasis on the larger vertebrates, which presents an unbalanced
picture of the importance of the small fauna to the inhabitants. If a more
representative sample of the fauna at the site were available, it could be assumed that
a different picture would be presented here.
Except for the Rangia clams and the oysters, the fauna are what would be
expected in this riverine environment in the Austroriparian biotic province. The
Rangia and oysters are brackish water estuarine species. The Dinocardium is a
continental shelf species, and theMercenaria campechiensisis a tidal flat clam. The
Dinocardium and the Mercenaria campechiensis probably were beach--collected or
perhaps traded from the coast. The oysters from the site are small, smooth, rounded,
and white, characteristic of oysters from a marginal area of low salinity as is found
typically near the head of an estuary (Parker 1955:480). The oysters had to have
been brought to the S hy Pond area from somewhere nearer the coast. The freshwater
mussels indicated that freshwater mollusks were being exploited to a small extent.
Taken as a whole, the faunal assemblage at the Copperhead site indicates that a
variety of habitats such as the brackish- to freshwater ponds and tributaries, the
wooded levees and ridges, and the coastal prairies were being exploited. It should
be emphasized that canoe transportation, which, in all probability, was being used,
would put all of these environments within easy exploitation distance.
Summary of the Copperhead Site
The Copperhead site is a Late Prehistoric stageRangia shell midden that dates,
from geological evidence and the presence there of grog-tempered sherds, some-

124

Texas Archeological Society

time after A.D. 1000. The site is on a point bar ridge that parallels the northwest
shore of Shy Pond. The elongated accumulation of Rangia shell and midden debris
probably is the result of repeated seasonal occupations over a period of years by
smallgroups. The early historic accounts of the Capoques and the Hans indicate that
during the winter season they were on the mainland, where they subsisted on
shellfish. The faunal evidence indicates that the Copperhead site was occupied in
the late summer to early fall, with deer, Rangia, and fish the main food sources.
The faunal sample indicates that localized habitats were being exploited.
Bodies of brackish water to freshwater were being exploited for Rangia, ducks,
frogs, salamanders, alligators, snakes, turtles, gars, drums, and other fish. The
wooded ridges were being exploited for deer, opossums, raccoons, rabbits, and
squirrels. The absence of fauna from tidal flats and open bays indicates that none
of these habitats were close enough to be exploited to any extent, and the geological
history indicates that these habitats were no more available in the past than they are
now. The five oyster fragments, the one Dinocardium robustum fragment, the
conch whorl fragment, and the Mercenaria campechiensis clam were collected
elsewhere and brought to the site. Perhaps the coastal bay habitats were exploited
at another time of year, when the people were occupying areas closer to, or on, the
coast.
Sandy paste pottery was found throughout the excavations. With but two exceptions, all of the pottery is undecorated. The only decorated sherds were one
Goose Creek Incised rim with lines parallel to the lip and one plain rim sherd with
a nicked lip.
The Goose Creek Plain ware is grouped into three descriptive categories based
on the surface treatment and color. The inner surfaces have the most diversity; in
all three categories, most of the outer surfaces were floated with an oxidized buff
to red and brown. Most interior surfaces in Category 1 are smoothed, but a few are
floated. All of the Category 1 sherds have inner surfaces that are light red, yellow,
brown, and other similar oxidized colors. The interior surfaces of Category 2 sherds
are smoothed and smudged a dark dense gray or black. The interior surfaces of
Category 3 sherds are floated and have smudged or reduced dark gray or black
surfaces. The floated surfaces of Category 3 often are heavily eroded, apparently
because of their soft unstable surfaces.
In addition to the Goose Creek ware, 22 sandy paste San Jacinto Plain sherds
have grog as an additional tempering agent. All but one of the grog-tempered sherds
came from the southwestern part of the excavated area. This intrasite distribution
may represent a later occupation, for it is known from the Galveston Bay area that
grog-tempered wares are stratigraphically later than the sandy paste ware (Aten
1970).
Within all the pottery categories are a variety of similar rim forms. The most
common forms are straight and slightly everted, with interior thinning and rounded
or flat lips. From the rim and body sherds it is apparent that the predominant vessel
forms were deep bowls and jars.
Lithics are scarce, but a large percentage of the flakes are utilized. The most
common stone artifacts were rather distinctive small thumbnail-sized flake uni-

Hamilton-- Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

125

A

B

Figure 17. Cleaver site: A, view, looking north; B, main past of excavation with shell
midden exposed, looking south. Trench 1 in foreground; Trenches 2 and 4 to the right;
Trench 3 in background; Trench 5, with shell removed, to left.

126

Texas Archeological Society

N
D
D
0

0

DENSE SHELL
SCATTERED SHELL
SAND

3 feet

I meter

Figure 18. Cleaver site (41BO15): plan of excavation showing extent of midden in Trenches
1-5.

faces that provide some insight into how lithic resources were used in the Shy Pond
area. The only typed stone artifact recovered is a Catahoula point, but a bifacially
flaked expanding base drill, a small expanding stem point, and three biface
fragments also were found.

Hamilton m Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

127

THE CLEAVER SITE, 41BO15
For a day and a half, while the Copperhead site was drying out following a rain,
the Cleaver site was briefly investigated (Figure 17). The site is about 229 m (250
yards) north of the Copperhead site on a long sandy ridge that appears to be another
point bar ridge parallel to the northwest side of Shy Pond. According to local
informants, the site is on the second ridge from the northwest side of the pond. (The
Copperhead site is on the first ridge.) This second ridge is covered with dense brush
and a thick stand of trees. Unlike the Copperhead site, theRangia shell midden at
the Cleaver site is overlain by a layer of brown sand instead of black gumbo, but it
is not known whether other sites on this ridge also are overlain by sand.
The Cleaver site is a small Rangia shell midden, perhaps as few as 6.1 m (20
feet) long and about 4.6 m (15 feet) wide. In the center of the midden, C. L. Cleaver,
for whom the site is named, excavated a 5 x 5-foot unit called Trench 5 herein
(Figure 18). He donated his notes, artifacts, and faunal material from the unit to the
Brazosport Museum of Natural Science in Lake Jackson, Texas.
Excavation Methods
The objective of the excavation was to expose a large horizontal area of the
midden. To accomplish this, four 3 x 5-foot trenches (Trenches 1 to 4) were
extended from Cleaver’s unit, Trench 5. Trenches 1 to 4 were excavated down to
the top of the midden. Since the overlying sand is virtually sterile, it was not
screened. Arbitrary controls were not deemed necessary for the excavation, so the
surface of the midden was exposed and cleaned, and its limits as seen in the trenches
were plotted (Figure 18). The elevation of the midden was calculated from the
northwest stake, and photographs were taken of the excavation trenches. Time did
not permit excavation of the midden in Trench 5, so small pits were dug at the
periphery of the excavations; they failed to reveal additional shell accumulations.
The limited time available, combined with the very dense brush, prevented the crew
from making a contour map of the site.
Stratigraphy
S tratigraphically, the Cleaver site comprises two zones. Zone I is a grown sand
layer that extends from the surface to 36.5 cm (1.2 feet). The top 15 cm of Zone 1
is virtually sterile. Within Zone 1, about 15 cm below the surface and above the top
of Zone 2, are scattered thin clumps of Rangia cuneata that range in thickness
between 3 and 15 cm (0.5 and 1 foot). The shell concentrations are at varying
elevations; there is no single horizontal shell midden extending over the site. Zone
2 is a basal stratum of sterile reddish sand that extends from about 36 cm (1.2 feet)
below the surface to an unknown depth.
The stratigraphy is similar to that at the Copperhead site, except for the brown
sand that overlies the midden instead of the black sandy clay gumbo. At both sites,
Zone 2 evidently represents the sand deposited during the formation of the point bar
ridges. The brown sand of Zone 1 at the Cleaver site is the result of fluvial action
following the deposition of the basal red sand of Zone 2. As at the Copperhead site,
the shell midden of the Cleaver site lies entirely within Zone 1. The scattered thin

128

Texas Archeological Society
Table 6. Distribution of Ceramics at the

Ceramic
Category
Sandy Paste
Category 1
Category 2
Category 4
Category 5

Cut

Trench: 1

2

3

4

5

Zone1:1

1

1

2

1-2

1
7
-

3
19
-

-

6
11
2

8
33
8

-

3

1

-

-

-

4

8

25

1

19

49

5

107

1-2

Total

Plain

Bone-tempered

TOTALSHERDS

Cleaver Site

Plain

9
2
3

9
18
72
13

1 Zone 1, surface to top of shell midden
Zone 1-2, surface through shell midden

clumps of shell at varying elevations and the small size of the site is what would be
expected in the initial building process of a shell midden. The site apparently
represents a brief occupation, or a series of brief occupations, over a short period of
time, possibly by a single family group.
No definite features were found at the site, but there was a small, shallow
depression at the juncture of the southeast comer of Trench 2 and the northwest
comer of Trench 4. Several sherds were lying in the bottom and around the edge
of the depression, but no conclusive determinations were made concerning its
function.
Artifacts
The only recognizable artifacts recovered from the excavation at the Cleaver
site were 107 sherds, all plain, with sandy paste. No lithic material or artifacts of
bone or shell were recovered.
Ceramic Artifacts
The potsherds of the Cleaver site were analyzed and sorted, as far as possible,
in the same manner as the sherds from the Copperhead site. The 107 sherds were
sorted into five categories, only two of which are found at the Copperhead site
(Table 6).
The Cleaver and Copperhead sites share the Goose Creek Plain ware categories
1 and 2. Category 3, the largest category of sherds at the Copperhead site, and
grog-tempered sherds are not found at the Cleaver site, nor are the Goose Creek
Plain ware categories 4 and 5 or the bone-tempered sandy paste ware found at the
Cleaver site.
Goose Creek Plain, Category 1 (Figure 19, A-E). The same as Category 1 of
the Copperhead site, but this is a smaller and more uniform sample.
No. of Sherds: 9

Hamilton ~ Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

129

B

A

g

A’

C

C°

E

D

E’

!

D’

F

F’

0

2

4

ClvL

G

G’

Figure 19. Body sherds from the Cleaver site. Prime letters indicate inner surfaces. A-E,
Goose Creek Plain, Category 1; F, G, Sandy paste Category 2 sherds.

Wall thickness: 7 mm
Exterior surface: Floated
Interior surface: Smoothed, with uneven wavy surfaces.
Color: Both surfaces and the core are oxidized a yellowish red.

130

Texas Archeological Society

A’

A

B

B

!

C

0
t

2
1
CM.

1

4
1

Figure 20. Goose Creek Plain Category 4 sherds from the Cleaver site. Rim profiles have
exteriors to the left. Prime letters indicate interior surfaces.

Hamilton-- Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

131

A

B

B

D

C

D’

C’
0
k

2

4

’- _I

CM,

E

E’

F

F!

Figure 21. Body and rim sherds from the Cleaver site. Rim profiles have exteriors to the left.
A’-F’ are interior surfaces. A-B, Goose Creek Plain, Category 4; C-E, Goose Creek Plain,
Category 5; F is a sandy paste bone tempered sherd.

132

Texas Archeological Society

Goose Creek Plain, Category 2 (Figure 19, F, G). identical to Category 2 of the
Copperhead site, but all sherds have wall thicknesses of 5 to 7 mm,
No. of sherds: 9
Goose Creek Plain, Category 4 (Figure 20; 21, A, B). These sherds could fit into
Category 2 of the Copperhead site, but there are minor differences in color and the
interior surface. Only the thicker sherd group is found.
Wall thickness: 5 to 7 mm.
Exterior surface: Floated.
Exterior color: Same as Category 2 of the Copperhead site.
Interior surface: Smoothed.
Interior color: Gray (5Y 5/1).
Rims: The smudged or reduced gray of the interior spreads on to the exterior surface
of the rim. Among the rims are one direct with a rounded lip, two direct with fiat
lips, and two direct with interior thinning. It is sometimes difficult to determine
whether lips are fiat or rounded; perhaps these rims should be considered slight
variations that might occur on a single vessel. Some of the rounded lips could be
eroded fiat lips.
Comments: The interior surfaces may be smudged, but the light gray color and thick
core zone of the same color along the interior surface suggests that instead of being
smudged (as in Category 2) the interior surfaces have been reduced, but not to the
degree that could be called smudging. Firing the vessel with the mouth down could
result in such variations. Except for the fact that it does not have a dense dark gray
to black interior, this category is the same as Category 2 at the Copperhead site. Two
perforated sherds and one basal sherd from a round-based vessel are in this group.
Goose Creek Plain, Category 5 (Figure 21, C-E). Thin, dark sherds, most of which
probably are from one vessel.
No. ofsherds: 13
Wall thickness: 4 to 5 mm.
Surfaces: Both surfaces are smoothed. Color is dark, but surfaces are not smudged.
Color: Surfaces and core are dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2).
Rims: The two rim sherds are slightly everted, with interior thinning and pointed
lips.
Bone-Tempered Plain Ware (Figure 21, F, F’). Sherds have a very fine sandy
paste with many fragments of crushed bone as additional tempering agent.
No. ofsherds: 4
Wall thickness: 4 to 6.5 mm.
Surfaces: Both surfaces are well smoothed.
Color: Both surfaces and the core are very pale yellow (10YR 7/4).
Comments: These four sherds represent, at the most, two vessels. The incised
lip is the only example of decoration at the Cleaver site.

HamiItonm Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

133

Summary of Ceramics from the Cleaver Site
The Goose Creek Plain ware pottery of the Cleaver site differs from the pottery
of the Copperhead site in several respects. Category 4, the predominant category
of the Cleaver site, is similar to Category 2, the second largest category of the
Copperhead site. There are relatively few Category 2 sherds with dense black, often
glossy, well-smoothed interior surfaces at the Cleaver site. The Category 3 sherds,
with very dark gray to black floated interior surfaces are the largest category at the
Copperhead site, but are not found at the Cleaver site.
The bone tempering suggests that the Cleaver site may date later than the Copperhead site. In the Galveston Bay area, bone tempering appears stratigraphically
later than sandy paste ware and grog-tempering (Aten 1970). If the Copperhead site
is indeed earlier than the Cleaver site, the vessels represented by the Category 3
sherds with surfaces that were popular early in the Shy Pond area, probably were
later completely replaced in favor of the more durable and functional smoothed
vessels. From a functional point of view, the floated surfaces, especially floated
interior surfaces, may not have been less useful as cooking vessels because these
unstable surfaces are easily eroded and worn. This difference in popularily between
floated and smoothed interior surfaces may be chronological or it may merely
represent the different techniques of individuals or groups. This problem needs to
be investigated at other sites in the area.
The Cleaver site also differs in the absence of the thin (3 to 4 mm thick) sherds
that are typical of Categories 2 and 3 at the Copperhead site. The thin sherds in
Category 5 at the Cleaver site do not correspond to any of the categories at the
Copperhead site. The only example of decoration at the Cleaver site is the
bone-tempered rim sherd that has diagonal lines incised across the flat lip. No
grog-tempered sherds were found at the site.
As suggested earlier, the differences between the pottery of the Cleaver and
Copperhead sites may be an indication that there were different groups with
different finishing and firing techniques. The differences also may have chronological or functional significance, but we do not know enough of the prehistory of
the area to determine which interpretation is correct. More sites in the area need
investigation, and radiocarbon dates are needed to establish the sequence of changes
in the ceramic tradition and to plot the distribution of specific ceramic traits or
techniques.

Faunal Analysis
No part of the midden was excavated in Trenches I to 4; no fine screening was
done in these trenches, and no matrix samples were taken. For these reasons the
faunal remains recovered cannot be considered a good representation of the fauna
at the site. In addition, the methods of excavation were not favorable for the
collection of the microfauna at the site. However, the fauna collected by Mr.
Cleaver from the midden in Trench 5 contribute significantly to the faunal sample
from the site.
The vertebrate fauna of the Cleaver site follow essentially the same pattern as
the fauna at the Copperhead site, but at the Cleaver site there are some probable

134

Texas ArcheologieaI Society
Table

7.

Animal
MAMMALS
Bison
Bison bison
White-tailed deer
Odocoileus virginianus
Medium-sized mammal
fragments
Rabbit
Sylvilagus sp.
Cottontail
Sylvilagus floridanus
Jackrabbit
Lepus californicus
Raccoon
Procyon lotor
Opossum
Didelphis marsupial
Small-sized mammal
fragments
BIRDS
Duck
Anas sp.
Unidentified fragments
REPTILES
Alligator
Alligator
mtsstsstpptensts
Hard shell turtle
Pseudemys sp.
AMPHIBIANS
Frog
Rana sp.
FISH
Gar
Lepisosteus sp.
Unidentified fish spine
MOLLUSKS
Oyster
Crassostrea virginica
Freshwater mussel
Unio sp.
Land snail
Mesodon romeri
Clam
Rangia cuneata
TOTAL

Faunal

Remains

of the

Cleaver Site

Trench: 1

2

3

4

5

Cut

Zone1:1

1

1

1

1-2

1-2

-

-

31

1

2

34

-

-

-

2

10

12

1

2

7

-

16

26

-

-

3

-

-

3

-

-

l

-

-

1

....

1

1

....

1

1
m

-

-

4

1

Total

1
7

1

2
3

_

....

15

1

16

-

2

m

1
1

1

1

-

1

-

1

-

-

-

1

-

7

--

--

1

w

6
not collected
not collected
1

1 Zone !, surface to top of shell midden
Zone 2, surface through shell midden

3

62

3

55

126

Hamilton-- ArcheologicaI Investigations at Shy Pond

135

bison ribs and more alligator bones (Table 7). However, the 34 bison rib fragments
found at the Cleaver site represent, at the most, only a few ribs. The Cleaver site also
differs in having only a few turtle carapace fragments. There are very few data on
the microfauna, so comparisons of microfauna from the Cleaver site with the limited
microfauna sample from the Copperhead site cannot be made. As at the Copperhead
site, very few whole bones were recovered; the bones are broken into small angular
fragments, probably in order to obtain the marrow.
Because of the small sample and the excavation methods, all that can be said
of the fauna is that bones of white-tailed deer, bison, rabbit, raccoon, opossum,
duck, alligator, turtle, frog, and fish were found. The only invertebrate remains were
six fragments of freshwater mussels, one oyster shell fragment, and several
Mesodon romeri land snails. NoRangia samples were taken, however, Robert Cole,
of Lake Jackson, collected a small sample of Rangia from Trenches 2 and 4 for
analysis and radiocarbon dating.
The Rangia in the sample, as suggested by the width of the growth bands,
apparently were collected near the end of a growing season, suggesting, as at the
Copperhead site, a late summer to early fall occupation. Because there were so few
specimens in the sample and the collecting was so selective, size ranges were not
determined.
The faunal sample from the site is only partially representative of what could
be expected from the exploitation of the area. The deer, rabbits, opossums, and
raccoons came from the wooded ridges around the pond; theRangia, turtles, frogs,
alligators, and fish came from the brackish water to freshwater ecosystems of the
area. The presence of bison and jackrabbits indicates that there was some
exploitation of the coastal prairies.
Summary of the Cleaver Site
The Cleaver site is a small Late Prehistoric stage Rangia shell midden. The
compacmess of the site, together with the thin shell lenses, indicates a rather brief
occupation by a small family group or other social unit. Theshell lenses may bethe
remains of house floors. The fact that no artifacts except sherds were found
indicates a brief or a specialized occupation, and the homogeniety of most of the
sherds indicates that most were made by a similar process, possibly by one person
or by a few related individuals. The four bone-tempered sherds indicate that the site
may date somewhat later than the Copperhead site.
Comparison of the distribution of pottery with the distribution of faunal
remains brings to light some interesting details. In Trench 5, where the extent of the
shell midden was unknown because the shell had been removed when it was
excavated by Mr. Cleaver, there was an even proportion of ceramic (49) to faunal
(55) remains. Trench 1, with a limited distribution of shell midden, has few sherds
(9) and few faunal remains (1), except forRangia. Trenches 2 and 4, with the most
extensive amounts of shell, have a greater proportion of sherds (44) to faunal
remains (6). The most striking anomaly is in Trench 3, where half the trench was
covered with shell, and the most bones (62), but only one sherd, were found. The
reason for this distribution is not known, but it could be postulated that food debris

136

Texas Archeological Society

was tossed clear of the living floor. If the presence of pottery is an indication of a
living area, Trenches 2, 4, and 5 represent a living area, whereas Trench 3 and part
of Trench 5 are the areas where food debris was thrown. This interpretation is highly
speculative, but it would explain the intrasite distribution of the sherds and
vertebrate food debris. However, this uneven distribution does show that animal
and cultural remains are not distributed evenly across the site, and this fact has
implications for the reliability of determinations of prehistoric diets and subsistence
patterns made from small test excavations, a concern that has been expressed by
Dering and Ayers (1977:7). In order to eliminate similar problems in the future, all
research on coastal subsistence should take into consideration the sampling biases
built into the sites.
The limited faunal sample from the site, as at the Copperhead site, indicates that
several specific habitats were being exploited. The brackish water to freshwater
ponds and distributades were sources forRangia, mussels, alligators, fish, ducks,
and frogs, and the wooded ridges were exploited for deer, rabbits, opossums, and
other small mammals. In addition to the fauna found at the Copperhead site, several
probable bison rib fragments were found at the Cleaver site, suggesting that bison
from the coastal prairies were hunted and butchered elsewhere or that there was
contact with groups that hunted bison. Some bison bones have been noted in
collections from various Shy Pond sites in the Brazosport Museum, and local
informants state that bison bones occasionally are found in the area.
DATING
The absence of diagnostic artifacts makes the task of dating these two sites
difficult, but there are several possibilities. Grog temper appeared in the area by
A.D. 1000 and bone temper, by A.D. 1400 in the Galveston Bay area (Aten 1970),
and, according to Dillehay (1974), bison appearedby A.D. 1300. It should be noted,
however, that the ceramics of the Shy Pond area do not necessarily align perfectly
with other sequences and that a time lag is to be expected between areas. Radiocarbon dates are needed from sites in the area to assess the development of the ceramic
tradition in the Shy Pond area and the diffusion of ceramic traits from the Galveston
Bay area. It is assumed that the first ceramics and subsequent ceramic traits spread
by diffusion from the Galveston Bay area, since pottery appeared there earlier (by
A.D. 400) than in the areas of the coast to the west (Aten 1971).
Paired charcoal and Rangia samples from the Cleaver site were submitted for
dating to the Radiocarbon Laboratory at The University of Texas at Austin. The
shell samples were collected by Robert Cole from the surface of the shell midden
in Trenches 2 and 4, several months after the excavation was concluded. The
charcoal sample (Tx-1116B) yielded a date of 180-Z-_60 B.P. (A.D. 1770-L-_60), and
the Rangia sample (Tx-lll6A) yielded a date of 860L-_50 B.P. (A.D. 1090-L-_50)
(Valastro, Davis, and Varela 1975:81). No correction for dates on Rangia shell in
this area has been worked out (shells should give anomalously early dates due to
carbonates in estuarine water here) and the shell date Tx-1116A cannot be used. A
date on charcoal, however, should not be affected by environmental factors, and the
Tx-lll6B figure of A.D. 1770+_-60, giving a 67 percent chance that the true

Hamilton--Archeological lnvestigations at Shy Pond

137

radiocarbon age is between A.D. 1710 and 1830, can be used as a valid piece of
chronological evidence, even though a single radiocarbon date such as this can be
taken only as a preliminary approximation.
Other evidence suggests a time earlier than A.D. 1700. Presidio San Agustin
de Ahumada and Mission Nuestra Sefiora de la Luz were established in A.D. 1756
(Tunnell and Ambler 1967:12), and trade materials must have been available
during the eighteenth century from these and other sources such as shipwrecks. If
the Cleaver site had been occupied after A.D. 1700 one could reasonably expect it
to contain historic materials. Since there are no such materials, the site is most
probably earlier than A.D. 1700.
It is also probably later than A.D. 1400. There are bison remains in the site,
and we know from the work of Dillehay (1974) that bison were not present on the
coastalprairie until after A.D. 1300. In addition, if thebone tempering in thepottery
at the Cleaver site is, as we believe, a trait diffused from the Galveston Bay area,
then the site should be later than A.D. 1400.
The radiocarbon date does not contradict this evidence, since (1) it is a single
date, so must be taken only as a suggestion, and (2) if the two-sigma error is taken
(a sound statistical practice in radiocarbon dating), the chances are 95 percent that
the radiocarbon age is between A.D. 1650 and 1890.
On the basis of current evidence, then, a range of A.D. 1400 to 1700 is a
reasonable estimate for the time of the Cleaver site.
Among excavated sites, the Cleaver and Copperhead sites correlate most
closely in time and artifact assemblages with Zones 2 and 2A at the Dow-Cleaver
site (41BO35) south of Shy Pond (Aten 1971). The Dow-Cleaver site is the only
other excavated site in this area of the coast with radiocarbon dates. Aten believes
that theRangia radiocarbon samples had been affected by recent chemical contamination and, by some statistical juggling, arrived at a date of A.D. 1320£_80, which
falls within his expected calendar span of A.D. 1300 to 1600. This is believed to
be a realistic date range, but some reliable radiocarbon dates from this area are
desperately needed.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The prehistory of the Gulf Coast area between Galveston and Corpus Christi
bays is largely unknown. In an attempt to remedy this situation, excavations were
carried out in the summer of 1967 at the Copperhead and Cleaver sites, two Rangia
sites on Shy Pond. The sites are on two ridges that, because of their modest
elevation above the surrounding terrain and the protection they provided from high
water, were sought out for habitation.
The two excavated sites and the other sites visited in the area are thin
accumulations of Rangia shell and midden debris, rarely more than 30 cm thick.
A great many small shell midden accumulations in the area, such as the Cleaver site,
apparently are the result of repeated occupations over a period of time. Neither of
the excavated sites has clearly stratified shell zones or massive shell accumulations
that might indicate a long time span or a long, continuous occupation.
The artifact yield from the sites is meager; at the Cleaver site, only sherds were

138

Texas Archeological Society

found. At the Copperhead site, in addition to sherds, there are small utilized flakes,
small steeply beveled flake scrapers, three biface fragments, one Catahoula arrowpoint, one untyped expanding stem arrowpoint, one bifacially chipped expanding
base drill, four bone awls, and a fragment ofapossible bone point, awl, or compound
fishhook.
Not surprisingly, the cultural components represented by the two sites do not
fit nearly any of the Late Prehistoric stage foci or phases so far defined for the Texas
Gulf Coast (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks 1954:123-133). However, the sandy paste
ware of the sites is most closely related to the sandy paste ware of the Galveston Bay
area. Attributes held by the Copperhead and Cleaver wares in common with the
Galveston Bay area ware are the cylindrical jar and deep bowl vessel forms, rim
profiles, lip nicking, incised decorations, conchoidal or rounded bases, grog temper,
and bone temper. On the basis of the sherd attributes, it is most feasible to credit the
origin of the pottery tradition and technology to the Galveston Bay area. The six
sherds with traces of asphalt are not considered necessarily representative of
Rockport focus influence from the central Gulf Coast, since, as suggested by Shafer
(1966:30), the application of asphalt to pottery seems to be rather widespread on the
Gulf Coast.
Despite the similarity of the Shy Pond pottery to the pottery of the Galveston
Bay area, there appear to be some differences in the popularity/occurrence of
decorated pottery. At the Copperhead site, 22 grog-tempered San Jacinto Plain
sherds were found in addition to the sandy paste sherds, but the only obvious
examples of decoration were one incised rim sherd and one interior nicked lip. At
the Cleaver site, aside from the plain sandy paste sherds, were four bone-tempered
sherds, one of which is a rim with diagonal lip notching.
In the Galveston Bay area, incised decoration steadily increased in popularity
after it was introduced around A.D. 400, and was common by the time grog-and-bone
temper appeared in the Galveston Bay area at about A.D. 1100 and A.D. 1400. But
why is there almost no decorated pottery in the Brazos delta area? During this time
period, incised decorated pottery is common in the Matagorda and Corpus Christi
Bay areas, and it is obvious that the incised decorated ceramics spread from the
Galveston Bay area. There is some question about the applicability of the pottery
sequence in the Galveston Bay area to the Colorado/Brazos deltaic plain, but sandy
paste pottery and both grog-tempered and bone-tempered pottery certainly were
not any earlier, and probably were later, in the Colorado~razos deltaic plain than
in the Galveston Bay area. Using the Galveston Bay sequence, the grog tempering
at the Copperhead site suggests an occupation sometime after A.D. 1000, and the
bone tempering at the Cleaver site suggests an occupation sometime after A.D. 1400
(Aten 1970). However, it is possible, but not probable, that bone tempering spread
from the central coast or from Central Texas at an earlier date, since both the
Rockport ware of the central coast and the Leon Plain of Central Texas have bone
tempering (Suhm and Jelks 1962).
At the Copperhead site, sandy paste cooking ware with floated interior surfaces
predominated; at the Cleaver site the interior surfaces are only smoothed and/or
scraped. The grog tempering at the Copperhead site and bone tempering at the

Hamilton-- Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

139

Cleaver site support the possibility that floated interior surfaces are earlier and were
later replaced by the more durable smoothed and/or scraped surfaces. Also common
to both of these excavated sites and noted in collections from other sites in the area,
is the high incidence of lace holes used for repairing cracks. The holes apparently
were part of deliberate attempts to make vessels last as long as possible. The other
most obvious ceramic trait at the Copperhead site is the prevalence of the dense dark
gray to black interior surfaces that apparently were the result of smudging. This trait
is not prevalent at the Cleaver or Dow-Cleaver sites.
In the Colorado/Brazos deltaic plain, the Copperhead and Cleaver sites
correlate most closely in time and artifact assemblages with Zones 2A and 2B at the
Dow-Cleaver site, 8 km (5 miles) south of Shy Pond. The two zones, which date
to about A.D. 1300 to 1600, have plain sandy paste, bone-tempered, and
grog-tempered ceramics, but no decorated wares (Aten 1971:52). Additional
comparisons of the Shy Pond sites with the Dow-Cleaver site were made by Aten
(1971).
Lithic artifacts are scarce, probably because of the scarcity of siliceous material
in the area. The flakes that are found are characteristically very small and bladelike,
and a large percentage are utilized. The small, steeply retouched unifaces from the
Copperhead site are distinctive, but their significance and distribution on the Gulf
Coast is not known, since no similar unifaces have been reported elsewhere on the
coast. Small scrapers that differ in many respects from the Copperhead examples
are reported from the island sites in the Laguna Madre that belong to the Rockport
focus (Campbell 1956:28-29). The Catahoula arrowpoint and the small expanding
base, bifacially flaked drill, together with the pottery, suggest stronger affiliations
with the Galveston Bay area than with the central Gulf Coast.
The archeological record of the Shy Pond area indicates that there was no
significant change in the technology or subsistence pattem during the occupation of
the area. The artifact sample available for study from the two excavated sites and
other sites in the area comprises a narrow typological range. The scarcity of
decorated pottery may be shown by future work to be a significant characteristic of
the sandy paste pottery found to the west of the Galveston Bay area. The scarcity
of traits held in common by the Shy Pond and adjacent areas indicates that Shy Pond
may have been isolated from outside influences or that innovations were not
generally accepted. The lack of typological variations may be best interpreted as
representing a very short time period; cultural stability and/or cultural stagnation are
other possible explanations. The basic similarity of the Shy Pond sites to one
another makes it possible to consider them part of a single cultural late prehistoric
’hunting-and-gathering pattern. The archeological evidence in Newcomb (1961)
and data from Service (1962) indicate that the simplest form of social structure
above the family--the band (probably patrilocal)---was characteristic of the coastal
Indians of Texas. At the band level of sociocultural integration,
altofthe functions of the culture are organized, practiced, or partaken of by no more
than a few associated bands made up of related nuclear families. The economy...is
organized by and takes place entirely within these units; there are no special

economic groups of specialized productive units....no specialized occupation

140

Texas Areheological Society

group, no economical institutions....no special consuming group or classes. The
economy...remains merely an aspect of kinship organization. The widest level of
integration achieved was that established through affmal ties with other bands
[Service 1962:108].
At a given time of each year the band occupied a certain locality within a territory
or area to exploit a primary food resource. Some sort of seasonal round was made
through the rest of the territory during the remainder of the year. Favorable
campsites were revisited year after year, resulting in the accumulation of large shell
middens in the areas where mollusks were being gathered. Many of the smaller
middens represent the time needed to exploit the mollusks, plant resources, or game
in the area during one season, part of one season, or on a short visit.
The apparent absence of deer antler and bones of very young deer, the size
ranges of the Rangia being collected, and the width of the Rangia growth rings
indicate a late summer to early fall occupation of the Shy Pond area. Since the
groups are assumed to have been migratory, houses probably were very simple; the
small circular shell middens commonly found in the area probably are the remains
of living and/or house floors. Since the food resources being exploited probably
were not stored, the absence of storage facilities is to be expected. Generally,
features other than burials, hearths, pits, and shell house floors are seldom found in
these sites.
In the archeological record of this part of the Texas Gulf Coast there is little
evidence to indicate any major change in the technology of the subsistence pattern.
This stability can be attributed in part to the environmental potential of the coast,
where there were few alternatives to exploitation of the estuarine and littoral
environments for mollusks, fish, plants, and game. If the environmental potential
of the area was sufficiently great to support large groups living year-round in
sedentary villages, the aboriginal inhabitants do not seem to have taken advantage
of it. Evidently the quantity and distribution of food resources forced the inhabitants
to break for most of the year into small bands or individual family units that could
seasonally exploit the environment to their advantage. Only in favorable areas and/
or in certain seasons of the year could entire bands or multibands get together. Some
groups in the Southeast Texas Gulf Coast area may have had garden plots
(Newcomb 1961:323), but in the Shy Pond area, probably no forms of agriculture
were practiced.
It is reasonable to expect the Shy Pond and adjacent areas to have similar
cultural stages, social structures, and settlement and subsistence patterns. It is also
reasonable to expect that some traits appear at Shy Pond later than in the adjacent
areas. Similar artifacts, potter,/types, and sequential developments that correlate
with adjacent areas are to be expected. But although correlations are to be expected,
local variations and developments that represent the individuality and integrity of
the cultures in their adaptation to the particular environment of the Shy Pond area
must be sought and investigated. This was attempted in the analysis of the material
from the Copperhead and Cleaver sites, but in general, any individual or local
adaptations that may have occurred have been masked by cultural similarities with
the Galveston Bay area.

Hamilton-- Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

141

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The excavation of the Copperhead and Cleaver sites was made possible by the
work, interest, and cooperation of many individuals. The project was financed in
1967 under a contract with the Texas State Building Commission and then State
Archeologist Curtis Tunnell. The late Raymond Walley, who was active in the
archeology of Brazoria County, brought the Shy Pond sites to the attention of archeologists at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory of The University of
Texas at Austin and provided valuable assistance during the excavation of the sites.
Lloyd Morrison, president of the Texas Better Homes Building Corporation in Lake
Jackson, granted permission for the excavations to be carried out on the property.
Thomas R. Hester conducted the excavations under the general direction of
Dee Ann Story, then Director of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory.
Larry Thompson and James McMichael, both of Lake Jackson, and Daniel Fox, of
San Antonio, served as crew members. Robert Cole provided a sketch of the Shy
Pond area that was the basis for Figure 2 and a sample of Rangia shell for
radiocarbon dating. C.L. Cleaver, for whom the Cleaver site is named, excavated
the first 5 x 5-foot unit at that site and made available the material he excavated from
the site for analysis. The Brazosport Museum of Natural Science in Lake Jackson
made their facilities available, thereby enabling the crew to work in the evenings
while the excavations were in progress. Appreciation is extended also to all of the
individuals in Lake Jackson and members of the Brazosport Museum who volunteered their time.
During the writing of this report, Lawrence Aten, then of the Texas Archeological Survey, made a trip to the area and provided valuable information concerning
the geomorphology, provided additional data on the prehistory of the Galveston Bay
area, and made pertinent comments about the Shy Pond sites and this report. Billy
Davidson helped in identifying the vertebrate fauna, but the responsibility for the
accuracy of the faunal identifications and any interpretations expressed herein rests
with the author.
REFERENCES CITED
Ambler, J. Richard
1967 Three prehistoric sites near Cedar Bayou, Galveston Bay area. State Building
Commission Archeological Program Reports, 8. Austin.
1970

Additional archeological survey of the Wallisville Reservoir area, Southeast
Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project Survey Reports 6. The University
of Texas at Austin.

Aten, Lawrence E.
1967 Excavations at the Jamison site (41LB2), Liberty County, Texas.
Archeological Society Reports, 1. Houston.
1971

Houston

Archeological excavations at the Dow-Cleaver site, Brazoria County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project Technical Bulletin 1. The University of
Texas at Austin.

142

Texas Archeological Society

1979

Indians of the upper Texas coast: ethnohistoric and archeological framework.
Ph.D. Dissertation, Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.

Bernard, Hugh A., and Rufus J. Lebranc
1965 Resum~ of the Quaternary geology of the northwestern Gulf of Mexico. In:
Quaternary of the United States, edited by H. E. Wright, Jr. and David Frey, pp.
137-185.

Bernard, H.A., C. F. Majors, Jr., B. S. Parrot, and R. J. LeBlanc, Sr.
1970 Recent sediments of Southeast Texas. A field guide to the Brazos alluvial and
deltaic plains and the Galveston barrier island complex. Bureau of Economic
Geology Field Book No. 11. The University of Texas at Austin.
Blair, W. Frank
1950 The biotic provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 2(1):93-117. Texas
Academy of Science. San Marcos.
Butler, Phillip A.
1954 SummaryofourknowledgeoftbeoystersintheGulfofMexico. In: TheGulfof
Mexico, Its origin, waters, and marine life. Fishery Bulletin of the Fish and
Wildlife Service 55:479-489. U.S. Government Printing Office.
Campbell, T. N.
1956 Archeological materials from five islands in the Laguna Madre, Texas coast.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 27:7--46.
1960

Archeology of the central and southern sections of the Texas coast. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 29:145-175.

1962

Origins of pottery types from the Coastal Bend region of Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 32:331-336.

Corbin, J. E.
1974 A model for cultural succession for the CoastalBend area of Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 45:29-54.
Dering, Phil, and David Ayers
1972 Archeological investigations in the village of Oyster Creek, Brazoria County,
Texas. Anthropology Laboratory Report 42, Texas A&M University.
Dice, Lee R.
1943 The biotic provinces of North America. Ann Arbor.
Dillehay, T. D.
1974 Late Quaternary bison population changes on the Southern Plains. Plains Anthropologist 19(65)180-196.
1975

Prehistoric subsistence exploitation in the lower Trinity River delta, Texas. Texas
Archeological Survey Research Report 51. The University of Texas at Austin.

Hamilton--Archeological lnvestigations at Shy Pond

143

Epstein, Jeremiah F.
1963 Centipede and Damp caves: excavations in Val Verde County, Texas, 1958.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 33:1-129.
Fairbanks, Laurence D.
1963 Biodemographic studies of the clam Rangia cuneata Gray. Tulane Studies in
Zoology 10(1):3-47. Tulane University.
Garner, L. E.
1967 Sand resources of the Texas Gulf Coast. Bureau of Economic Geology Report of
Investigation 60. The University of Texas at Austin.
Gooch, Donald M.
1969 StudiesonbrackishwaterclamsofthegenusRangiainLouisiana. Paperpresented
at the annual meeting of the National Shellfisheries Association in New Orleans,
July 1969.
Hester, Thomas R., and Harry J. Shafer
1975 AninitialstudyofbladetechnologyonthecentralandsouthemTexascoast. Plains
Anthropologist 20(69): 175-185.
Hopkins, Sewell H.
1969 Studies on brackish water clams of the genus Rangia in Texas. Paper presented at
the annual meeting of the National Shellfisheries Association in New Orleans,
July 1969.
Hopkins, Sewell H., and Jay D. Andrews
1970 Rangia cuneata on the East Coast; thousand mile range extension or resurgence?
Science 161:5919.
LeBlanc, Rufus J., and W. D. Hodgson
1959 Origin and development of the Texas shoreline. Transactions of the Gulf Coast
Association of Geological Societies IX: 197-220.
McIntire, William G.
1958 Prehistoric Indian settlements of the changing Mississippi River Delta. Louisiana
State University Studies, Coastal Sdudies Series 1. University Press, Baton
Rouge.
Moore, Walter B., Editor
1970 Texas Almanac 1970-1971. H.A. Bello Corp., Dallas.
Munsell, A. H.
1942 Munsell book of color. Pocket ed., 2 vols. Baltimore.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961 The Indians of Texas from prehistoric to modem times. The University of Texas
Press, Austin.

144

Texas Archeological Society

Parker, Robert H.
1955 Changes in the invertebrate fauna, apparently attributable to salinity changes in the
bays of Central Texas. Journal of Paleontology 19(2): 193-211.
Patterson, Leland W.
1975 Some Texas blade technology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
44:89-111.
Service, Elman R.
1962 Primitive social organization, an evolutionary perspective. Random House, New
York.
Sharer, Harry J.
1966 An archeological survey of Wallisville Reservoir, Chambers County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project Survey Reports 2. The University of Texas
at Austin.
1968

Archeological investigations in the S an Jacinto River basin, Montgomery County,
Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project 13. The Univestiy of
Texas at Austin.

1969

Archeological Investigations in the Robert Lee Reservoir basin, west central
Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project Papers 17. The University of Texas
at Austin.

1973

Lithic technology at the George C. Davissite: apreliminaryreport. Ph.D. Dissertation, Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.

Shepard, Anna O.
1956 Ceramics for the archaeologist. Carnegie Institution of Washington, Publication
609.
Story, Dee Ann
1968 Archeologicalinvestigations at two CentralTexas GulfCoastsites. State Building
Commission Archeological Program Report 13. Austin.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954 AnintroductoryhandbookofTexasarcheology. BulletinoftheTexasArcheologicat Society.
Suhm, Dee Ann, and Edward B. Jelks
1962 Handbook of Texas archeology: type descriptions. Texas Archeological Society
Special Publication I and Texas Memorial~ Museum Bulletin 4.
Tenore, Kenneth R., Donald B. Horton, and Thomas W. Duke
1968 Effects of a bottom substrate on the bracksih water bivalve Rangia cuneata.
Chesapeaks Science 9:238-248.

Hamilton m Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond

145

Turmell, Curtis D., and J. Rickard Ambler
1967 Archeological excavations at Presidio San Agustin de Ahumada. State Building
Commission Archeological Program Report 6. Austin.
Valastro, S., Jr., E. Mott Davis, and Alejandra G. Varela
1975 University of Texas at Austin radiocarbon dates X. Radiocarbon 17:52-98.
Wheat, Joe Ben
1953

An archeological survey of the Addicks Dam basin, Southeast Texas. Bureau of
American Ethnology Bulletin 154:143-252.

Wolfe, Douglas A., and Ernest N. Petteway
1968 Growth of Rangia cuneata Gray. Chesapeake Science 9(2):99-102.

The Swan Lake Site (41AS16) On Copano Bay,
Aransas County, Texas: Settlement,
Subsistence, and Sea Level
Elton R. Prewitt and Jeffrey G. Paine

ABSTRACT
Archeological investigations at the Swan Lake site (41AS16) in Aransas County, Texas, yielded preliminary data regarding the cultural and
natural history of the Coastal Bend region. Cultural materials at the site
include substantial quantities of shellfish, fish, and terrestrial animal remains. These materials date from roughly 6000 B.P. to 300 or 400 B.P. and
are interpreted as residue left by prehistoric fishermen. A few black drum
(Pogonias cromis) otoliths, together with other evidence, indicate that the
Swan Lake Site was occupied seasonally, usually from late winter to early
summer. Oysters (Crassostreavirginica) and fish were the staplemeat. The
site illustrates one segment of a settlement/subsistence model that was
confined to the littoral.
Holocene eolian, storm, and tidal sediments at the site reveal much about
its natural history. Most of the cultural materials were found within two
inactive clay dunes adjacent to an abandoned wind-tidal flat. For the windtidal flat and clay dunes to have been active, relative sea level probably would
have been 0.9 to 1.2 meters higher than at present. Cultural materials in the
dunes indicate that this sea-level highstand may have begun by 4500 B.P.
After sea level fell to near its present level, the wind-tidal flat and clay dunes
became inactive, and a soil formed. Radiocarbon dates on the buried claydune soil indicate that dune growth stopped by about 2500 B.P. Since that
time, loessic sediments have blanketed the abandoned tidal flat and clay
dunes.
A preliminary version of this paper was presented at the 57th Annual
Meeting of the Texas Archeological Society at Laredo, Texas, October 31 to
November 2, 1986.

INTRODUCTION
Archeological testing of the Swan Lake site was performed in 1985 by
personnel from Prewitt and Associates, Inc. of Austin, Texas (Prewitt, Lisk, and
Howard 1987). Sponsored by the Galveston District, U. S. Army Corps of
Engineers, the testing assessed the eligibility of the site for inclusion on the National
Register. The Swan Lake site, designated 41AS 16 by the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, is in southwestern Aransas County on the Copano Ranch
owned by Dr. George Strickhausen III, of Corpus Christi. The work was supervised
by Susan V. Lisk, under the direction of Elton R. Prewitt.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 58 (1987)

148

Texas Archeological Society

The site is on two low knolls on the western shoreline of Swan Lake, an inlet
on the south side of Copano B ay near the mouth of the Aransas River (Figure 1). The

Boyside

Rockport

PROJECT
AREA

Aronsos
Pass

¯

012
I

0

F-’-d

MEXICO

4
I

kilometers
I
2

4

miles
PSAI/SZ/SLH

Figure 1. Regional location map, Swan Lake site, 41AS16, Aransas County, Texas.

two knolls differ in size and in the amounts of cultural material on the surface. Both
the smaller, eastern knoll and the larger, western knoll are surrounded by a low,
hummocky area, except for the area where the Swan Lake shoreline truncates the
eastern knoll. Five distinct areas comprise the Swan Lake site (Figure 2). Area 1

Prewitt and Paine ~ The Swan Lake Site

149

LEGEND
x

Backhoe Trench

o

Excavation Unit

13

+

Permanent Grid Marker

+

Grid Point

NIIO0

WIO00

6x

~::ii!~ Site Area

AREA I

/
NIO00
W/O00

N900
wl350+ /

N900

WII50

Ngo0

WlOOO.,p

14

AREA

4
52

AREA 2

/

N850/

/

GRIO

AREA 5

/////

0

25 50

f

I. . . I

I00

]

meters
Contour Interval=O.Sm
PBA//8 7/SL H

Elevations approximate mean sea level

Figure 2. Site map, Swan Lake site, 41AS16.

is on the eastern knoll; Area 2 is on the deflated shoreline, extending southwestward
from Area 1; Areas 3 and 4 are on the west-central and southern flanks of the western
knoll; Area 5 is on the shoreline just south of the larger knoll.
The Swan Lake site is contained within Holocene eolian deposits that rest on
the Pleistocene BeaumontFormation (Brown et al. 1976:16-21). Soils on the knolls
are sandy loams; clays occur in the surrounding low-lying areas (Guckian and
Garcia 1979:53-55). Vegetation is typical of the region, with thickets of mesquite
and other thorny shrubs on the knolls and a prickly pear-midlevel grass association
on the fiats (Guckian and Garcia 1979:33). The tidal marshes and shallow waters

150 Texas Archeological Society
of Swan Lake support communities of cordgrass and other salt-tolerant grasses
(White et al. 1983:70-81). The humid subtropical climate has two periods of peak
precipitation, April through June, and September through October. Persistent
southeasterly winds are interrupted during the winter by strong northerly winds
associated with the passage of cold fronts. Average temperatures vary from 92° F
in August to 45° F in January (Guckian and Garcia 1979:1-2, 82-83).
The fauna comprise both aquatic and terrestrial assemblages. A wide variety
of fish and shellfish inhabit the shallow bays and inlets. Oyster, scallop, sunray
venus, and whelk are some of the more important shellfish. Small fish such as
croaker, anchovy, and silversides are the most abundant vertebrate groups. Seatrout,
redfish, black drum, sea catfish, and porgy, which represent the economic groups
(Gunter 1944; Calnan 1980) are plentiful. Terrestrial fauna include a variety of
gastropods and vertebrates such as gopher, field mouse, skunk, deer, and other small
mammals. An array of reptiles, amphibians, and crustaceans live on and near the
site area, and there are also many species of waterfowl, including large numbers of
migratory birds.
The Swan Lake site was recorded by George C. Martin and Wendell Potter in
1929 during their extensive survey around Copano Bay and the Live Oak Peninsula
(Martin n.d.). In 1967, Edmund Page, of the Coastal Bend Archeological Society,
visited the site (Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, County Files). It was
surveyed for the first time by a professional archeologist (Warren 1984) when
subdivision of the Copano Ranch was anticipated. Corps of Engineers archeologists
and the S tate Historic Preservation Officer concurred with Warren that the site was
eligible for nomination to the National Register, and, in 1985, the Corps contracted
with Prewitt and Associates, Inc. to gather data at the site with which to obtain a
determination of eligibility from the Keeper of the Register in Washington, D. C.
The Swan Lake site was studied through a program of machine and hand testing
combined. Machine testing consisted of the excavation of 32 backhoe trenches
averaging about 3 meters long and 1 meter deep. Trenches were excavated on the
knolls to supplement surface observations, and around the flanks of the knolls to
define site boundaries. Other trenches, located off the knolls, determined the
integrity of site areas 2 and 5 and exposed areas lacking cultural deposits.
After trenching was completed, one wall of each trench was cleaned, studied,
and recorded. This information was used to select areas for hand-excavated test
pits. Five 1 x l-meter units were dug adjacent to trenches, largely in 5-cm arbitrary
levels corresponding to the stratigraphy observed in the trenches. There were three
test pits in Area 1, and one each in Areas 3 and Area 4. All hand-excavated fill was
water-screened through nested quarter- and sixteenth-inch sieves.
STRATIGRAPHY
Both Pleistocene and Holocene sediments occur at the Swan Lake site. The
strata are discussed from oldest to youngest.

Prewitt and Paine -- The Swan Lake Site

151

Beaumont Formation Fluvial-deltaic Deposits
The oldest unit at the site is the late Pleistocene Beaumont Formation (Figures
3, 4), which is a fluvial-deltaic deposit (Brown et al. 1976). The Beaumont is
recognized by its tan-to--orange color, abundant caliche, and sandy clay composition. It was probably deposited during the S angamonian Interglacial (Winker 1979)
at roughly 107,000 to 128,000 B.P. (Moore 1982; Imbrie et al. 1984), when sea level
was near its present level. The formation was weathered and eroded during the
Wisconsinen Glaciation, when sea level was as much as 150 meters below present
sea level (Frazier 1974).
Before dissection by streams, the Beaumont was relatively flat lying, rising
slightly near channels. Topographic relief on the Beaumont of at least 2.5 meters
at the site (Figures 3, 4) indicates that postdepositional erosion has taken place.
Modem topography mimics the Beaumont surface; the top of the Beaumont is
higher under the two knolls comprising the Swan Lake site. The top of the
Beaumont is higher on the western knoll (3.8 meters elevation) than on the eastern
knoll (2.8 meters elevation).
Holocene Sediments
Holocene sediments cover the Beaumont across most of the site (Figures 3, 4).
They are generally coarser than Beaumont deposits, are light to dark gray, and may
contain caliche and cultural material. These sediments range between 42 cm and
more than 1.1 meter in thickness. Clay dunes, wind-tidal flats, and loessic sheets
are the three major Holocene depositional units at the site. The Holocene sediments
also contain three significant shell horizons.
Clay Dunes
The knolls are formed by clay dunes that were deposited on the eroded surface
of the Beaumont (Figures 3, 4). These silty clay dunes contain cultural material and
have abrupt upper boundaries and some soil development. At the top of the dunes
is a blocky, dark, organic-rich soil zone a few centimeters thick, underlain by a
texturally similar but less organic zone. Sparse caliche has formed in the lower part
of the 15- to 60-cm-thick dune deposit.
Though not exposed at the surface, the clay dunes can be mapped on aerial
photographs. The western knoll has an oval outline, elongate from northeast to
southwest (Figure 2). The eastern knoll has a similar shape, but the oval is truncated
at the Swan Lake shoreline. Cultural debris found within the clay dunes included
burned clay nodules, bones, charcoal flecks, and scattered marine shells.
Wind-tidal Flats

A depositional unit not found on the knolls is found in the topographic low
between the knolls. This unit is stratigraphically equivalent to the clay dunes, but
has a coarser sediment, lighter color and is locally laminated. In addition, the
elevation of the top of the unit (about 1.8 meters) is consistent across the low. These
sediments probably were deposited in a wind-tidal flat similar to Egery Flats (Figure

152 Texas Archeological Society

,4
O

~E

<

O

o
[J

~4
~0

LE

D
X

~J
i
m

la^al OaS

aAoqo S~a~aLU

Prewitt and Paine -- The Swan Lake Site

153

,4
k:I:

t~

0
CO

0

&
0

0

]::j ° /

-4

~:L’~,"

"A ;",:"

F-

q
~’-

Lr)

.!

~
rO

0
rr)

~)
~i

0
,,4
];3A~I

O~S

~
~

eAoqo

0

S~;IIB*U.I

154

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

2). The Swan Lake tidal flat is southeast of the western clay dune and was the
probable source of sediment for the growing dune. The wind-tidal flat appears to
be devoid of cultural material despite its stratigraphic equivalence to the clay dunes.
Because the tidal flat would have been periodically inundated during growth and
human occupation of the clay dunes, the absence of cultural material is consistent
with a tidal flat interpretation.
Loessic Sediments
The most recent deposit in the area is also the most uniform (Figures 3,4). This
deposit is composed of well-sorted, silt-sized particles that are bound together
weakly and rest unconformably on inactive Holocene clay dunes and wind-tidal
flats. This unit is found at the surface, is 7 to 47 cm thick, and contains relatively
few shells and other cultural materials. Its areal extent, sorting, and lack of cohesion
suggest that it is an eolian loesslike deposit, laid down when silt-laden wind was
slowed by vegetation. Deposition probably has continued to the present.
Shell Horizons
There are three significant shell horizons within the Holocene section at the
Swan Lake Site. The oldest is a dense storm-winnowed shell lens that contains
pockets of shell hash; it is a few centimeters thick and lies directly on the Beaumont
underneath the eastern clay dune in Area 1 (Figure 3). Cultural debris representing
an early occupation at the site is scattered among the whole and fragmented marine
shells comprising this deposit. Thicker but less dense accumulations of shell occur
among clay dune sediments higher in the Holocene section (Figures 3, 4). These
shell deposits, one on each knoll (Areas 1 and 4), contain abundant cultural material
and are probably contemporaneous. Their presence in clay dune sediments
indicates that humans discarded shells while the clay dune was actively expanding.
The third shell horizon is more sparsely distributed in the loessic sediments in Areas
1, 3, and 4 which overlie the clay dunes. Intermixed with other cultural debris, the
shells indicate continued human use during deposition of the loessic sediments after
growth of the clay dune had ended.
MATERIAL CULTURE AND FAUNAL REMAINS
The artifacts recovered during the testing of the Swan Lake site are divided into
four major groups: lithics, ceramics, bones, and shells. The 56 lithic pieces consist
of two arrow points, seven dart points, one drill/perforator, two biface fragments,
two unifaces, three cores, 10 pieces of edge-modified debitage, and 29 pieces of
unmodified debitage. Both arrowpoints lack their stems but are probably Perdiz
(Suhm and Jelks 1962:283; Turner and Hester 1985:187). The dart points include
four Matamoros, one Catan, one Abasolo, and one Bell (Suhm and Jelks
1962:165,175,215; Turner and Hester 1985:61,72,78,122). One arrowpoint (Fig.
5, a) is from loessic sediments in Area 1; the other (Fig. 5, b) is from the surface in
Area 5. One Matamoros point (Figure 5, c) is from dredge spoil taken from Area
1, and the other three (Figure 5, d-f) are from the surface of Area 2. The Catan

Prewitt and Paine ~ The Swan Lake Site

155

(1

b

c

d

g

/7
0
i

I
i

2
i
centimeters

4
1

Figure 5. Lithic artifacts from 41AS16: a-b, Perdiz (?) arrowpoints; c-f, Matamoros dart
points; g, Catan dart point; h, Abasolo dart point; i, Bell dart point; j, drill/perforator; k-l,
biface fragments; m-n, unifaces; o, expended core.

156

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

e

d

G

b

C

o
I

I
I

2
l

4

I

centimeters

g
Figure 6. Ceramic, bone, and shell artifacts from 41AS 16: a. Rockport Black-on-Gray body
sherd; b, Rock.oft Ware rim sherd; c, antler billet; d, possible antler fine tool; e, asphaltumpaintedbone fragment; f, modifiedBusyconcontrarium, Group A; g, modifiedB, contrarium,
Group B

Prewitt and Paine ~ The Swan Lake Site

157

b

f

d

I
2
I
I
centimeters

4
I

h

Figure 7.41AS16 Shell artifacts; modified Busycon contrarium., from 41AS16: a, Group
C; b, Group D; c, Group E; d, Group F; e, Group G; f, Group H; g, Group I; h, Group J; i, Group
K.

158

Texas Archeological Society

(Figure 5, g) is from the upper shell horizon of the clay dune in Area 1, and the
Abasolo (Figure 5, h) is from the shell-poor zone of the clay dune. The Bell point
(Figure 5, i) is from the surface of Area 2. The drill (Figure 5, j) and both biface
fragments (Figure 5, k-l) were found within the upper shell horizon in the clay dune,
and the two unifaces (Figure 5, m-n) are from the winnowed shell and loessic
sediments in Area 1. One core is from the upper shell horizon of the clay dune in
Area 1, and the other two are from the surface, one in Area 1 and the other (Figure
5, o) in Area 2. One piece of edge-modified debitage is from the surface of Area 1
and one is from the surface of Area 5; the remainder are from excavations in Area
1: two in the winnowed shell, one in shell-poor clay dune deposits, three in the upper
shell horizon of the clay dune, and two in the loessic sediments. All of the
unmodified debitage is from excavated contexts: one in the winnowed shell, two
in the shell-poor clay dune deposits, thirteen in the upper shell horizon of the clay
dune, and thirteen in loessic sediments. One is from loessic sediments in Area 3,
and four are from loessic sediments in Area 4; the remainder are from Area 1.
Six small ceramic sherds, five from Area 3 and one from Area 4, were found
in loessic sediments. The sherds (Figure 6, a-b) have sandy paste, and one is bone
tempered. The interiors of four are coated with asphaltum. All of them can be
classified as Rockport ware sherds (Suhm and Jelks 1962:131-136).
Three bone artifacts consist of an antler butt billet (Figure 6, c), an antler tine
flaking tool (Figure 6, d), and an unidentified bone fragment (deer size) encircled
by a single painted black asphaltum stripe (Figure 6, e). The billet is from backhoe
excavations in Area 1 and is probably from either the upper shell zone of the clay
dune or from overlying loessic sediments. The other two are from loessic sediments
in Area 3.
The 310 modified or possibly modified marine shells comprise the largest
artifact category. Five species are represented--Busycon contrarium, B. spiratum,
Pleuroploca gigantea, Fasciolaria lilium, and Macrocallista nimbosa. The 177
lightning whelks are divided into 17 categories and the 119 sunray venus clams are
divided into 10 categories. The fourpear whelks, fiveFlorida horse conchs, and five
banded tulip conchs are similar to groups within the lightning whelk categories.
Seventy-six of the lightning whelks represent variations of what traditionally have
been called kill holes (Figures 6, f-g and 7, a-i), 82 represent various columella
modifications, and 16 are combinations of whorl and columella modifications. The
columella modifications generally consist of abrasion, snapping, or both, on the
anterior ends, but some are also abraded on the posterior ends to form small pointed
implements. Functionally, these categories may represent a suite of oyster exploitation tools such as shucking wedges and picks (single-tine oyster forks). In
contrast, those with kill holes only may represent net weights for use with various
fishing devices.
Seven of the sunray venus clams are chipped into what traditionally are
recognized as scrapers (Figure 8, a). The chipping is along lateral edges and is
similar to the chipping found on lithic items. Another 27 may have served similar
functions, but are not as clearly chipped (Figure 8, b). Seven are elongated and
pointed on one or both ends (Figure 8, c). These appear to be sharpened and are

Prewitt and Paine m The Swan Lake Site

~:f. >..

159

. . ,. ~

b

\
/

d

o

o
I,

I
I

2
I
centimeters

4
I

e

Figure 8: Shell artifacts; modified Macrocallista nimbosa from 41AS 16: a, Group A; b,
Group B; c, Group E; d, Group H; e, Group J.

160 Texas Archeologicat Society
tentatively interpreted as oyster knives (they were inserted between the oyster
valves after the valves were pried open with one of the whelk shuckers and were
used to detach the animal from one valve to extract the meat). The largest category
of sunray venus artifacts is 47 small triangular pieces. Some of these apparently are
the broken ends of the presumed oyster knives (Figure 8, d), whereas others may be
shell projectile points (Figure 8, e) and other tools.
One feature revealed in the excavations was a cluster of whelk shells in an area
of burned oyster shells near the bottom of the upper shell horizon of the clay dune
in Area 1. Associated with the feature were various other shells, bone fragments,
and burned clay lumps. The association of the unburned whelk shells is difficult to
interpret, but the burned oyster shells and burned clay lumps seem to indicate the
presence of a hearth. Two other pitlike features were investigated, one in Area 1 and
one in Area4. Both were thought at first to be possible burial or storage pits but were
found later to be animal burrows.
The unmodified faunal remains consist of shells and bones. Oysters account
for more than 75 percent of the more than 183 kg of shell. The 13 remaining species
are dominated by lightning whelks (about 3 percent) and Atlantic bay scallops
(about 2 percent). Other groups comprise no more than about 1 percent each of the
total. Except for apple murex, which is a continental shelf species, all the species
represented are common in bay environments (Table 1). Most of the species prefer
low-salinity bays, but some, such as the horse oyster, prefer high-salinity habitats.
The economic species are oyster, whelk, scallop, sunray venus clam, and conch.
The hooked mussels and cross-barred venus clams are common on oyster reefs, and
their introduction to the site probably was incidental to oyster exploitation.
The snail shells recovered represent common terrestrial and aquatic species
expected in the region. These are dominated by the S outh Texas tree snail,Rabdotus
alternatus (Tables 2, 3).
The nearly 5,000 bone fragments (Table 4) represent an array of aquatic,
terrestrial, and avian species whose habitats are consistent with the site’s location
Table

1.

Names and Habitats of Mollusc Shells at 41AS16

Latin Name1

Common Namet

Fasciolaria liliurn
Pleuroploca gigantea
Busycon spiratum
B. contrarium3
Murex pomurn

Banded tulip shell
Florida horse conch
Pear whelk
Lightning whelk
Apple murex

Anadara transverso
lschadium recurvum
Argopecten arnplicostatus
Crassostrea virginica
Ostrea equestris
Rangia cuneata
Macrocallista nimbosa
Chitone cancellata
Mercenaria campechiensis texana

Transverse ark
Hooked mussel
Atlantic bay scallop
Eastern oyster
Horse oyster
Common Rangia
Sunray venus
Cross-barred venus
Texas quahog

1 Andrews 1981
2 Parker 1960
3 Abbott 1968

Habitat2
Inlet-influenced1
Inlet-influenced1
Inlet-influenced1
Bay margins3
Intermediate continental shelf
(or shallow water)3
Inlet-influenced3
Low-salinity oyster reef
Open sound or lagoon margin
Low-salinity oyster reef
High-salinity oyster reef
River-influenced, low salinity
Inletinfluenced1
Open sound orlagoon margin
Open sound or lagoon margin

Prewitt and Paine ~ The Swan Lake Site
Table

2.

Snail

Species Recovered from Quarter-inch
Samples, Unit 1, Area 1

161

Screen

Zone
Species

5/6

Littorina irrorata
Helicina orbiculata
Truncatella pulchella1
Succinea sp.1
Helicodiscus singleyanus1
Rabdotus alternatus
Thysanophora horniI
Polygyra texasiana
Praticolella berlandieriana

4

3
3
11
8
0
7
6
8
....
....
....
0
213
69
16
....
0
0

7
56

11
5

8
5

1 Shells of this species are too small to be retained on the quarter-inch screen.

Table

3.

Snail

Species

Recovered

Samples,

Unit

from
1,

Sixteenth-inch

Area

Screen

1

Zone
Species

Littorina irrorata
ltelicina orbiculata
Truncatella pulchella
Succinea sp.
Helicodiscus singleyanus
Rabdotus alternatus
Thysanophora horni
Polygyra texasiana
Praticolella berlandieriana

4

5/6

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

3

Ad

Im

Ad

0
38
2
0
1
15
4
47
46

22
2
2
0
47
1
27
17

0
27
0
0
0
39
4
33
52

2
Im
7
1
5
0
8
5

Ad
0
37
1
0
2
48
0
20
58

Im

17
0
3
0
21
13
15

Ad-Adult
Im-Immature

on the coastal littoral (Table 5). Fish bones are the most numerous, including ray,
gar, and a variety of advanced rayfins such as sea catfish, porgy, croaker, and
burrfish. Notable among these are sheepshead, seatrout, redfish, and black drum.
With the exception of the sheepshead, which prefers a nearshore open gulf habitat,
all the species inhabit bays during some part of the year. Those useful for seasonlity
purposes include cownose ray, redfish, black drum, and striped burrfish, all of
which are most common during the spring and summer months.
An analysis of the 15 black drum otoliths recovered generally indicates late
spring-early summer harvest (Appendix), but some variation is suggested by the
vertical distribution of the otoliths. The two specimens from the winnowed shell
suggest late winter-early spring harvest, but the three from the shell-poor clay dune
deposits suggest late winter to early summer. The 10 from the upper shell horizon

162

Texas ArcheologicaI Society
Table 4.
from

Summary of Faunal Remains Recovered
Excavation Units (Raw Frequencies)
Areas 3 & 4 (Units 3, 5)
Zone

Area 1 (Units 1, 2, 6)
Zone

516

4

3

Total

513
1
12
141
39

93
4
65
4
14

12
10
4

2,951
8
16
1,101
11
132

Lizard

Snake
Alligator
Bird
Unidentified mammal
Shrew
Skunk
Javelina
Deer
Bison
Dolphin
Rat
Gopher
Rabbit

1
3
48
4
7
66
7
1
.....
10
1
34
3
5
3
g
43
7
15
148
6
1
....
1
....
1
6
4
3
16
1
.....

136
1
56
227
1
1

Common name
Unidentified
Ray
Gar/bowf’m
Rayfin
Frog/toad
Turtle

516

4

3

2

112

116

65

26

1,669
5
722
7
47

-

29
2

-

1

-

-

436
2
69

1
-

......
8
1
10
1
3
1
2
10

29
1
1
19
1
16

of the clay dune indicate a continuation of the late winter-early summer pattern, but
one specimen appears to have been harvested during the summer. The sizes of the
fish can be estimated from their age; only four of the otoliths are from fish more than
four years old. The fish probably weighed about 1 kg.
Turtles and snakes are the predominant reptiles, but one alligator bone and a
few lizard bones were found. Unfortunately, none of the bird bones are identifiable
to species, but a variety of sizes appears to be represented. Similarly, most of the
mammal bones are too fragmentary for species identification, but deer dominates
the identifiable bones. One specimen each of javelina, bison, and dolphin are
represented in the collection. Roughly equal amounts of bone were found in the
winnowed shell and shell-poor zone of the clay dune. The greatest quantity came
from the upper shell horizon of the clay dune; the second-greatest quantity came
from the loessic sediments.
NATURAL HISTORY

Sediments and soils at the Swan Lake site indicate that the depositional
environment has changed significantly during the late Pleistocene and Holocene.
At about 20,000 B.P., the Swan Lake site was an upland area 150 meters above sea
level and more than 100 km inland. Today, itis a coastal lowland essentially at sea
level. The following sequence of paleoenvironments is interpreted from the strata
exposed in trenches and soil cores.

Prewitt and Paine ~ The Swan Lake Site
Table 5.

163

Composite Faunal List and Preferred Texas Habitats

Scientific Name

Common Name

Preferred Habitats

Cbondrichthyes
Batoidea
Rhinoptera bonasus

Sharks, rays, skates
Rays, skates,
Cownose ray

Nearshore, estuarine (warm months)

Osteichthyes
Holostei

Bony fish
Gar, bowfin
Gar
Advanced myfin fish
Sea catfish
Sea catfish
Gafftopsail catfish
Porgies

Lepisosteus sp.
Teleostei
Ariidae
Arius felis
Bagre marim~
Sparidae
Archosargus
probatocephalus
Scianidae
Bairdiella chrysto’a

Freshwater, estuarine, nearshore

Estuarine, nearshore
Estuarine, nearshore

Sheepshead
Croakers
Silver perch
Seatrout
Redfish
Black drum
Porcupinefish, burrfish
Striped burrfish
Balloonfish

Estuarine, nearshore
Estuarine, inner shelf

Amphibia
Anura

Frog, salamander
Frog, toad

Freshwater, terrestrial, arboreal

Reptilia Reptiles
Chelonia

Turtles

Freshwater, eatuarine, marine,
terrestrial

Sauria
Ophidia

Lizards
Snakes

Crocodilia
Crocodylidae

Terrestrial, arborial
Freshwater, estuarine, terrestrial,
arboreal

Crocodiles, alligators

Freshwater, estuarine

Cynoscion sp.
Scianops ocellata
Pogonias cromis
Diodontidae
Chilomycterus schoepfi
Diodon sp.

Ayes

Birds

Mammalia

Mammals
Shrews, moles
Least shrew
Carnivores
Weasels, skunks
Striped skunk
Even-toed hoof animals
Collared peccary

Soricomorpha
Cryptotis parva
Carnivora
Mustelidae
Mephitis mephitus
Artiodactyla
Dicotyles tejacu
common
Odocoiletts virginianus
Bison bison
Cetacea
Tursiops truncattts
Rodentia
Neotoma floridana
N. Micropus
Sigmodon hispidus
Geomys sp.
Lagomorpha
Sylvilagus aquaticus
S. floridam~
Lept~ californicus

White-tailed deer
marshes
Bison
Whales
Atlantic bottlenose
dolphin
Rodents
Eastem woodrat
Southern Plains woodrat
Hispid cotton rat
Pocket gophers
Rabbits, hares
Swamp rabbit
Eastern cottontail
Black-tailed jackrabbit

Nearshore
Estuarine
Estuarine, inner shelf
Estuarine, inner shelf
Estuarine

Fields with dense ground cover

Brushy or wooded areas
Brushy semidesert with prickly pear
Woody or brushy areas and coastal
Prairie, woodlands

Nearshore, irmer shelf, estuaries
Woodlands
Semiarid brushy areas
Grasslands, brushy areas
Sandy soils
Swamps and coastal marshes
Brushy areas and grasslands
Prairie and scrublands

164

Texas Archeological Society
Late Pleistocene to Early Holocene

During a period of low sea level at the end of the Pleistocene and the beginning
of the Holocene, streams cut a drainage network into the exposed and weathered
Beaumont Formation. At the Swan Lake site, a minor valley opened southward
between the two Beaumont knolls (Figure 9, a). This valley joined a larger,
eastward-opening valley (now occupied by Swan Lake) south of the site. This
valley in turn entered the deeper ancestral Aransas River valley, which had been
incised from 10 to 20 meters below present sea level under Copano Bay (Wright
1980).
Hoiocene Highstand (Early)
Sea level rose rapidly during the early Holocene, bringing the coastline closer
to the site. Estimates of when marine waters entered present-day Copano Bay
depend on both the depth of stream incision and the sea level curve used for the
calculation. Taking 20 meters as the maximum depth of incision (Wright 1980) and
the sea level curve of Frazier (1974), marine waters would have first entered Copano
Bay about 9000 to 10,000 B.P. Because the valleys near the Swan Lake site were
not deeply incised, saline water reached these areas later. By about 5000 B.P., sea
level was so high that storm waters inundated the area (Figure 9, b). A lens
composed of cultural debris, storm-winnowed marine shells, and shell hash was
deflated onto the Beaumont Formation on the eastern knoll at about this time. The
storm-winnowed shell lens in Area 1 records the first extensive occupation at the
Swan Lake site, preceded only by brief occupation of Area 2 by one or more groups
of hunters before 5000 B.P.

Figure 9: Paleoenvironmental and cultural sequence at the Swan Lake site, 41AS16
a. Small streams drain the weathered and eroded Beaumont Formation during the late
Pleistocene and early Holocene; early Archaic camp in Area 2 ca. 6000 B.P.
b. When sea level nears its present level, middle Archaic occupation occurs in Area 1, leaving
a mass of oyster shells and other cultural debris at about 5000 to 4500 B.P.
c. At the beginning of the highstand, ca. 4500 B.P., wind-tidal fiats develop, storms winnow
and deflate shell/cultural materials in Area 1 onto Beaumont Formation surface, and a low
shell berm develops along shoreline on northeast edge of Area 1.
d. During the highstand, the wind-tidal flat provides sediment for clay dune growth;
occupations occur in Areas 1 and 4 at about 4000 to 3500 B.P.; shell berm on northeast edge
of Area 1 continues to develop.
e. After the highstand, sea level retreats to near modem levels; abandonment of wind-tidal
fiats causes deposition to cease on the clay dunes and allows soil formation to begin; clay dune
depostion begins at lower elevation at about 3000 B.P.
f. Wind blown loesslike sediments blanket Swan Lake Site; occupations continue in Areas
1 through 4, about 2500 to 1000 B.P.
g. Loesslike sediments continue to accumulate across Swan Lake site; later occupations in
Areas 1, 3, 4, and 5, at about 1000 to 300 B.P.
h. Loesslike sediments continue to accumulate across Swan Lake site; Areas 2 and 5 deflate
as modem shoreline develops, beginning about 300 B.P.

Prewitt and Paine ~ The Swan Lake Site

",qLW ->- .’;,
.-Q,’ C- ~
,~..\ \2\~ \)\-, I -.~

:>.,-,+’;,.,,,..--,,’;,_.,
, ;.- .,;, ,’~, L~, = ’_,’-

L.’~+.~ ~ ".. ,..

",-’7-,7",7:.’,’-’,"-’.?

.....,~.., ~.:~-.. : ,~ . ~.

165

166 Texas Archeologieal Society
At the end of this rise in sea level, a wind-tidal flat was established at about 1.8
meters elevation between the two knolls at the site (Figure 9, c). If the wind-tidal
flat was active, sea level probably was 0.9 to 1.2 meters higher than at present. This
highstand is also suggested by a possible beach ridge, composed of reworked shells
from the winnowed shell layer, on the northeast edge of the eastern knoll.
Holocene Highstand (Late)
After the tidal flat was established, altemate periods of wetting and drying
caused by frontal passage or other infrequent atmospheric events, produced the
sediment that formed two clay dunes at the Swan Lake site (Figure 9, d). (Clay dunes
form downwind of and adjacent to ephemeral water bodies price 1958], the dunes
receiving eolian sediment when the adjacent water body dries up.) At the Swan
Lake site, the western Beaumont knoll collected sediment from the tidal flat
between the knolls. The source of sediment for the eastern knoll probably was also
a tidal fiat; however, bay-margin erosion has removed it. Erosion of the eastern clay
dune has deflated cultural debris from the dunes onto the Swan Lake shore. The
presence of cultural material in the clay dunes implies that occupation occurred
during dune formation and, therefore, during the Holocene highstand. This
occupation probably began by 4500 B.P. and ended by 3000 B.P.
Post-Holocene Highstand
After sea level fell to near its present level, the tidal flats adjacent to the clay
dunes were abandoned, and no sediment was available to continue dune accretion.
A soil began to form on the abandoned dunes (Figure 9, e), and, although it is
difficult to estimate how long they were exposed to weathering, it was long enough
for a soil profile to develop and for calichification to begin. Radiocarbon dates on
soil fractions from the western clay dune (Tx-5594, 2270-!-_60 B.P., uncorrected) (S.
Valastro, Jr., personal communication, October 1986) indicate that dune growth
ceased by about 2500 B.P., so it appears that sea level must have fallen by that time.
The final Holocene event at the Swan Lake site is the ongoing deposition of a
loesslike sheet of silt over the inactive wind-tidal fiat and clay dunes (Figure 9, fh). Loessic deposition coincided with the most recent occupation of the site
sometime after 1500 B.P.
CULTURAL HISTORY
The data recovered from the Swan Lake site support modest conclusions on
three aspects of its history. These are site function, local settlement/subsistence
model, and regional implications. It seems clear that the site was primarily a fishing
camp. The masses of shells are evidence that shellfishing was especially important
to the inhabitants, and large quantities offish bones attest to the importance of this
food resource. The site afforded ready access to the food resources in Copano Bay
and Swan Lake and also provided limited access to terrestrial resources; the limited
availability of these resources is reflected in the site’s contents.
Primary activities on the site were food preparation and consumption. Other
activities, such as formal stone tool manufacture, were kept to a minimum, and

Prewitt and Paine -- The Swan Lake Site

167

greater emphasis was placed on tools of convenience. The size of the group
inhabiting the site at any one time probably was small, perhaps no more than 25 or
30 people. The range of activities was appropriate to small family groups and
apparently did not include a specialized endeavor such as an all male fishing station.
Based on the limited seasonality data, it is presumed that occupation occurred
primarily during the late winter to early summer or, roughly, from March through
June or July.
From these interpretations, it is possible to construct the beginnings of a local
settlement/subsistence model. The Swan Lake site represents one seasonallyspecific component of this model. Previous investigations along the south shore of
Copano Bay (summarized in Prewitt, Lisk, and Howard 1987:15-25) have revealed
several very large and dense shell midden sites and many more smaller sites on the
order of the Swan Lake site. Seasonality studies are scarce, but the apparent use of
this site as a spring-summer fishing camp indicates that seasonal transhumance,
[See Ricklis, herein, Ed.] with its attendant social implications, was an integral
aspect of the prehistoric use of the area.
It is suggested that the littoral zone around Copano Bay was inhabited by small
groups of fishermen that moved periodically on a seasonal basis or whenever the
resources at a given locality were depleted, or were perceived to be depleted. These
small groups probably joined to form maximum bands at some time between late
summer and early winter. Larger shell midden sites around Copano Bay, such as
Kent-Crane (Campbell 1952), are assumed to represent periods of the year when the
groups congregated into maximum bands--the time when goods were exchanged,
marriages were arranged, and myriad other social rites and activities were conducted.
Little is known of the early historic aboriginal groups in this area, but Campbell
and Campbell (1981:12-13) place the Quitoles in the region extending from Copano
Bay southward toward Nueces Bay. The Quitoles are thought to have stayed near
the bay all year, and they, together with three other nearby coastal groups,
apparently did not participate in the well-known summertime treks into the prickly
pear fields of southern Texas. These observations, although sketchy, tend to support
the archeological conclusions.
The regional implications of the Swan Lake site are not yet clear. Most striking
is the absence of tools such as shell adzes that are commonly associated with the
Aransas focus. The site simply does not conform well to current perceptions of the
local Archaic. The later use of the site seems to agree with extant data describing
the Rockport focus, although the materials at the Swan Lake site do not reflect the
full range of the currently defined archeological unit. The implications are that the
few excavations conducted in the Copano Bay-Live Oak Peninsula area have not
included the functional range of sites and that considerable work is needed before
a regional framework can be established with confidence.

168

Texas Archeological Society
CONCLUSIONS
Several major conclusions are drawn from the investigations at the S wan Lake

Site:
1) Temporal affiliations begin with the early Archaic period and extend into
the Late Prehistoric period. The material culture assemblage can be assigned to the
Aransas focus (Archaic) and Rockport focus (Late Prehistoric) but does not include
a great many items associated with either of the defined units. The site was occupied
intermittently from about 5000 to 6000 B. P. until about 300 or 400 B.P.
2) The site was used by small family groups. Limited seasonality data gathered
from black drum otoliths and the migratory patterns of cownose rays, red drums,
black drums, and striped burrfish indicate spring to early summer harvest. Other
terrestrial and aquatic species such as deer, bison,javelina(?), alligator, and dolphin
were harvested on an opportunistic basis;
3) Tools of convenience made from whelk shells and sunray venus clam shells
dominate the material culture assemblage. These represent a suite of simple but
effective tools for exploitation of fish and oysters.
4) Wind-tidal flats surrounding the knolls comprising the site provided a source
for eolian sediments that formed clay dunes on the knolls. To make these flats
active, sea level on the Texas Coastal Bend would have to have been 0.9 to 1.2
meters higher than at present. Stratified cultural materials within the dunes and
radiocarbon dates on dune soils indicate that this highstand occurred between about
4500 B.P. and 2500 B.P.;
5) During and after the highstand, the site functioned as a fishing camp that
provided the occupants access to fish and shellfish from the shallow waters of
Copano Bay and Swan Lake. The use of the site as a fishing camp reflects one aspect
of a local settlement/subsistence system oriented toward exploitation of littoral
resources;
6) Extensive excavations around Copano Bay are required to reexamine the
composition of the local chronological constructs and to explore the validity of the
settlement/subsistence model suggested by the data from the Swan Lake site.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Investigations at the Swan Lake site were conducted under Contract No.
DACW64-85-D-0008, Delivery Order No. 0002, with the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, Galveston District. Dr. George Slrickhausen III, of Corpus Christi,
graciously allowed access to his property. This article contains original research by
several persons in addition to the authors, including Susan V. Lisk, Margaret Ann
Howard, Raymond W. Neck, James Westgate, and Michael B. Collins. Any misuse
of this information is the responsibility of the authors. The maps were prepared by
Sandra L. Hannum, and the artifact illustrations were made by E. Ellen Atha. Ed
Mokry, Jr., Tom Calnan, Chris Caran, and Meredith Dreiss were especially helpful
during our research. We thank them and numerous others who have assisted us
during this project.

Prewitt and Paine m The Swan Lake Site

169

APPENDIX

Observations on Seasonality of Selected Fish Remains from 41AS16
Elton R. Prewitt

INTRODUCTION
Two aspects of seasonality can be determined from the fish remains recovered
from the Swan Lake site. The first relies on observation of the annuli of the otoliths
of certain species (Casteel 1976:31-35); the second relies on biological observations of the habits of certain species (Hoese and Moore 1977; Texas Parks and
Wildlife Department 1984). The present observations are limited to four species of
fsh: Rhinoptera bonasus (cownose ray), Scianops ocellata (red drum), Pogonias
cromis (black drum), and Chilomycterus schoepfi (striped burrfish).
OTOLITH ANALYSIS

Fifteen otoliths from 41AS 16 are identified as Pogonias cromis (black drum).
Previous research along the Texas Coastal Bend (Smith 1983) has demonstrated
that the otoliths of this species are appropriate for analysis of seasonality as
described by Casteel (1976). According to Casteel (1976:31), this technique has
been known and used since the late nineteenth century. Otoliths, or ear stones, are
thought to be part of the system that controls equilibrium and hearing and are
composed of calcium carbonate in the form of aragonite (Castee11976:18-20). The
calcuim carbonates are deposited as alternating light and dark bands surrounding a
nucleus, forming annuli. The age of the fish is determined by counting the annuli,
and the season of death is estimated from the termination width of the outer ring.
Errors in these estimates can, of course, be introduced through variations in water
temperature and other factors, but these have not been considered in this preliminary
study.
Procedures
The procedures described by Smith (1983:479) are cumbersome and risky. A
modified system using equipment adapted to working with whelk shells was used
in this study. The equipment consists of a bench-mounted motor with a flexible
shaft and a series of attachments, including cutoff wheels, sanding drums, and felt
polishing wheels. A focal exhaust system is required to control dust generated
during the procedure (a dust mask is a less effective alternative). Additional
preparation materials include 400-grit sandpaper, jewelers rouge, modeling clay,
toothbrush, liquid soap, and water.
The procedure for slicing an otolith along its long axis is simple. Place the
otolith on a small block of modeling clay, flat or concave face down, then set the clay

170

Texas Archeological Society

adjacent to the exhaust system. Attach an extra-fine cutoff wheel to the flexible
shaft and cut the otolith along the desired axis. The cutoff wheel is most effective
between 1,500 and 2,000 rpm and will slice the otolith quickly at these speeds. The
modeling clay minimizes incidental breakage and partially dissipates the intense
heat generated by the cutoff wheel. The dust generated is removed by the exhaust
system.
The larger D-shaped part of the otolith is used for the remainder of the
preparation and analysis; the smaller piece (which breaks frequently during slicing)
should be returned to a vial or other receptacle with proper catalog information.
Smooth the cut facet of the otolith with an extra-fine smoothing drum inserted into
the flexible shaft and operated at about 1,500 rpm. Again, intense heat and dust are
generated. For final smoothing, place the 400-grit sandpaper on a flat surface and
rub the cut facet across it a few times. The otolith is now ready for polishing.
Smear a small amount of jewelers rouge on the circumference of the felt
polishing wheel after inserting it in the flexible shaft. The exhaust system should
be turned off to keep its force from sucking the otolith out of the hands (jewelers
rouge becomes very slick when heated). At about 1,500 to 2,000 rpm, gently polish
the cut facet of the otolith. Intense heat again will be generated. After polishing,
remove excess rouge by scrubbing the otolith gently with a toothbrush, liquid soap,
and water. It is now prepared for examination under a microscope.
The sample described here was examined at 30x and 64x magnification under
a binocular microscope using reflected light. The procedures described by Smith
(1983) were used to identify the nucleus and the annuli. Dark (translucent) rings are
assumed to be rapid spring and summer growth, and white (opaque) rings are
assumed to be slower fall and winter growth. This appears to contradict Casteel’s
(1976:32) comments, but his discussion of the confusion surrounding translucent
and opaque is itself confusing.
Results
All of the specimens are from Area 1, and 14 are from the first two excavation
units. The fish are not overly large forP. cromis, which commonly weigh 11 to 13
kg (5 to 6 pounds), but can reach as much as 132 kg (60 pounds), in the bays and even
330 kg (150 pounds) (and as much as 91 cm in length) in the open sea. Rather, the
age range of between less than one and eight years indicates a normal bay
population. Only 4 of the 15 otoliths indicate that the fish were more than four years
old.
The results of the determination of the apparent season of death supplied by the
15 otoliths (Table 6) are dramatic. Thirteen of the otoliths are centered around the
spring season, with seven indicating late winter/early spring and six indicating late
spring/early summer. This suggests strongly that the fish were harvested more or
less during the spring. Summer and winter seasons are indicated by only one
specimen each.

Prewitt and Paine ~ The Swan Lake Site
Table

6.

Seasonality

Distributions

of Pagonius

cromis

Otoliths

Area 1
Zone

Winter

5/6
4
3
2
Total

....
5
4
1
1
2
1
1
1
7
6
1

Late Winter/
Early Spring

Late Spring/
Early Summer

171

Summer
Total
0
10
3
2
15

BIOLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS
Less precise indications are gained from observations of the seasonal habits of
some species of fish. From observation of habitat and seasonality of four species
found at the S wan Lake site (Table 7), the general inference is that these fish are most
common, or are most easily caught, during the period from late winter through the
spring and summer.
Table 7. Seasonality Data, Selected Fish Species~
Species

Habitat

Rhinoptera bonasus
(Cownose ray)

Silty bays; browse across
mud/sand flats in schools

Scianops ocellata
(Red drum or redf’tsh)

Shallow bays; adults solitary

Pogonius cromis
(Black drum)

Bays; adults feed in large
schools, often in very
shallow water

Chilomycterus schoepfi
(Striped burrfish)

Bays

Seasonality
Especially common in May and
during the summer; migrate out of
bays at onset of cold weather.
Especially common in summer,
migrate out in fall, return in
spring; smaller fish stay in bays
all year, spring run is popular
time for modem harvest.
Common all year but usually
spawn in Gulf during late winter
or early spring; easily caught in
channels during spawning runs.
Especially common in summer.

1 Sources: Hoese and Moore (1977); Texas Parks and Wildlife Dept. (1984)

CONCLUSIONS

The otolith analysis and the biological observations for four selected species of
fish at the Swan Lake site provide complementary data suggesting that at least these
species were harvested during a limited time of the year. It is reasonable to conclude
that fishing, by whatever means, was a routine activity during the late winter through
the early summer. Obviously, this could include the period from March through
July, but it was most likely the period from April through June.

172 Texas Archeological Society
REFERENCES CITED
Abbott, R. Tucker
1968 A guide to field identification: Sea shells of North America. Golden Press, New
York.
1981

Texas shells: a field guide. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Andrews, Jean
1977 Shells and shores of Texas. The Elma Dill Russell Spencer Foundation Series 5.
University of Texas Press, Austin.
Brown, L. F., J. L. Brewton, J. H. McGowen, T. J. Evans, W. L. Fisher, and C.G. Groat
1976 Environmental geological atlas of the Texas coastal zone--Corpus Christi area.
Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Calnan, Thomas R.
1980 Molluscan distribution in Copano Bay, Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 103.
Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Campbell, Thomas N.
1952 The Kent-Crane site: a shell midden on the Texas coast. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paelontological Society 23:39-77.
Campbell, Thomas N., and Tommie Jo Campbell
1981 Historic Indian groups of the Choke Canyon Reservoir and surrounding area,
southern Texas. Choke Canyon Series, Vol. 1. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Casteel, Richard W.
1976 Fish remains in archeology and paleo-environmental studies. Academic Press,
New York.
Frazier, D. E.
1974 Depositionat-episodes: their relationship to the Quaternary stratigraphic framework in the northwestern portion of the Gulf basin. Geological Circular 74-1,
Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Guckian, William J., and Ramon N. Garcia
1979 SoilsurveyofSanPatricioandAransascounties,Texas. United States Department
of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, in cooperation with Texas Agricultural
Experiment Station.
Gunter, Gordon Pennington
1944 Studies on marine fishes of Texas: relative abundance and cyclic behavior related
to salinity and temperature. Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Texas at Austin.
Hoese, H. Dickson, and Richard H. Moore
1977 Fishes of the Gulf of Mexico, Texas, Louisiana, and adjacent waters. Texas A&M
University Press, College Station.

Prewitt and Paine-- The Swan Lake Site

173

Imbrie, J., J. D. Hays, D. G. Martinson, A. McIntyre, A. C. Mix, J. J. Morley, N. G. Pisias,
W. L. Prell, and N. J. Shackleton
1984 The orbital theory of Pleistocene climate: support from a revised chronology of the
Marine O record. In: A. L. Berger and others (eds.), Milankovitch and Climate,
Part 1: 269-305. D. Reidel, Dordrecht.
Martin, George C
n.d.
Preliminary archaeological survey of a portion of the Texas Coast made by George
C. Martin and Wendell H. Potter in 1927-1929. Privately printed by the author.
Moore, W. S.
1982 Late Pleistocene sea-level history. In: M. Ivanovitch and R. S. Harmon (eds.),
Uranium series disequilibrium: applications to environmental problems: 481496. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Parker, Robert H.
1955 Changes in the invertebrate fauna, apparently attributable to salinity changes, in
the bays of Central Texas. Journal of Paleontology 29(2): 193-211.
1960

Ecology and distributional patterns of marine macro-invertebrates, northern Gulf
of Mexico, 1951-1958:302-337 American Association of Petroleum Geologists,
Tulsa.

Prewitt, Elton R., Susan V. Lisk, and Margaret Ann Howard
1987 National Register assessments of the Swan Lake site, 41AS16, on Copano Bay,
Aransas County, Texas. Reports ofinves tigations 56. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,
Austin.
Smith, Herman A.
1983 Determination of seasonality in archaeological sites through examination of fish
otoliths: a case study. Journal of Field Archaeology 10(4):498-500).
Suhm, Dee Ann, and Edward B. Jelks
1962 Handbook of Texas archeology: type descriptions. Texas Archeological Society
Special Publication No. 1 and Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin No. 4. The
University of Texas at Austin.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
County files for Aransas County, Texas.
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department
1984 Saltwater fishes of Texas. Bulletin 52. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department,
Austin.
Turner, Ellen Sue, and Thomas R. Hester
1985 A field guide to stone artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press, Austin.
Warren, James E.
1984

A cultural resources survey at Copano ranch, Aransas County, Texas. Report 117.
James E. Warren, George West, Texas.

174 Texas Archeological Society
White, W. A., T. R. Calnan, R. A. Morton, R. S. Kimble, T. G. Littleton, J. H. McGowen, H.
S. Nance, and K. E. Schmedes
1983 Submergedlands of Texas, Corpus Christi area: sediments, geochemistry, benthic
macroinvertebrates, and associated wetlands. Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Winker, C. D.
1979 Late Pleistocene fluvial-deltaic deposition, Texas Coastal Plain and shelf. M.A.
thesis, Department of Geological Sciences, The University of Texas at Austin.
Wright, S.S.
1980 Seismic stratigraphy and depositional history of Holocene sediments on the
CentralTexas Gulf coast. M.A. thesis, Geology, The University of Texas atAustin.

A Visual Key for the Identification of Otoliths

Laurie S. Zimmerman, D. Gentry Steele, and Joffre D. Meyer

ABSTRACT
Examination of fish remains from Texas Gulf Coastal sites can provide
valuable information concerning both subsistence patterns of aboriginal
populations and paleoenvironments. Although otoliths, or ear-stones, are
one of the most commonly preserved fish elements, they are uncommonly
recovered or analyzed. To encourage and facilitate future studies, this paper
provides a visual key for the identification of otoliths from common Texas
Gulf Coastal fish, and provides descriptions of each fish’s gross features,
ecology, characteristic otolith, and reported occurrence in the archeological
record. A method for estimating fish size is also presented.

INTRODUCTION
The study of fish remains from Texas Gulf Coastal sites can provide valuable
information regarding seasonality, subsistence, and paleoenvironmental inferences
(Casteel 1976). One of the most commonly preserved elements of fish useful for
specific identification is the otolith, or ear-stone. Although otoliths are a commonly
preserved element of fish found in the archeological sites, they are typically
underrepresented in the archeological literature for two reasons--their small size
and the limited literature available concerning their structure and classification.
Olsen (1968) also noted these problems in the analysis offish remains, stating
that
1. A review of the published literature documented the paucity of material.
2. Investigators report finding fish without indicating which element or
elements were recovered.
3. Many investigators are unfamiliar with the elements of a fish, so they
may overlook small elements such as otoliths during excavation.
4. A lack of reference material; the keys that do exist are complicated.
Several factors account for the fact that otoliths in particular are underrecorded
in archeological sites. They include inadequacies in research design and in
collecting, recovering, and reporting techniques. Research design can be a vital
factor in recovery of information from an archeological site. From 1870 to 1950,
when the field of zooarcheology was in its formative period (Robison 1978),
emphasis was not placed on recovery of faunal remains from archeological sites.
Instead, material culture was the focus of most investigations. This is reflected in
the literature published during the early period of zooarcheology. It may look as if
fish were not used as a resource by aboriginal populations in some Gulf Coastal
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 58 (1987)

176

Texas Archeological Society

areas, but that appearance only reflects the fact that the research designs of many
early excavations did not focus on the analysis of subsistence strategies.
A second factor influencing data on otoliths is recovery techniques. Otoliths
are not commonly recovered because of their small size; the usual screen size for
archeological excavations is quarter-inch (Hester 1980, Hester et al. 1975). Casteel
(1972) and DeMarcay and Steele (1986), however, point out that many small fish
remains as well as other faunal remains pass through a quarter-inch mesh. In one
study, Fitch (1969) has even documented a 100 percent loss of fish otoliths by
sieving through a quarter-inch mesh screen, so it is clearly essential to fine-screen
archeological sites in order to recover otoliths. A review of the literature shows that
a variety of recovery techniques have been used on the Texas Gulf Coast sites. The
methodology varied from making only surface collections to using a backhoe, to
actually fine-screening the site. With the first two techniques, the otoliths probably
would not be recovered, except fortuitously.
The last factor is the actual documentation of information in the literature.
Eight sites could not be fully integrated into this study because of ambiguity in the
reported data. In some cases, it was noted that fish bones, or just fish, were recovered
(Campbell 1956, Hole and Wilkinson 1973, Patterson and Ford 1974). In other
instances, the species was listed, but no other information was provided, such as
identification of the specific element of the fish (Aten 1983, Dillehay 1975, Gilmore
1974, Hester 1975). Although it is important that the occurrence of fish was noted
at these sites, the importance of implementing precise recording practices should be
stressed as well.
In spite of these difficulties, fish otoliths have been recovered and reported
from sites along the Texas Gulf Coast, and 11 common Texas Gulf Coastal fish were
included in this investigation (Table 1), but it is important to point out thatLutjanus
campechanus, Bairdiella chrysura, and Paralichthys lethostigma have not been
reported in any of the Gulf Coastal sites in this survey. More than 100 site reports
were examined, and 32 of these documented the presence of fish remains. Otoliths
were recovered at 24/32 sites (Table 2, Figure 1). Examination of the tables makes
it apparent that most of the archeological sites yielding otoliths are in Nueces and
Table

1.

Species of Texas Gulf Coastal Fish

Species
lctalurus furcatus
Lutjanus campechanus
Bairdiella chrysura
Cynoscion arenarius
Cynoscion nebulosus
Micropogonius undulatus
Pogonius cromis
Sciaenops ocellata
Archosargus probatocephalus
Paralichthys lethostigma
Arius felis

Common Name
Blue catfish
Red snapper
Silver perch
Sand seatrout
Spotted seatrout
Atlantic croaker
Black drum
Channel bass
Sheepshead
Southern flounder
Sea catfish

Zimmerman , Steele, and Meyer m Identification of Otoliths

177

Kleberg counties, but this is a reflection of the work of several scholars who are
interested specifically in the prehistoric use of marine resources (Breuer 1957,
Carlson, Steele, and Bruno 1982, Hester 1971, Smith 1984, Steele and Mokry
1983). For example, Carlson, Steele, and Bruno (1982), Hester (1971), Smith
(1984), and Steele and Mokry (1983) have completed extensive studies in which
seasonality determinations were based on examination of the otoliths recovered. In
addition, Breuer (1957) had determined that the black drum had been an important
food resource at the Loyola Beach site, based on the large number of otoliths
recovered. Therefore, these studies, which focused on the use of prehistoric
resources, were greatly enhanced by examination of the otoliths, documenting a
more accurate picture of the subsistence strategies of these aboriginal populations.
To encourage the type of studies that are being undertaken now, this paper

A

\
\

Gulf of Mexico

@
!~

Localities

0
0

50
50

100 miles

100 kilometers

Figure 1. Map of the Gulf Coast of Texas, showing the archeological sites sampled for
this study (see Table 2).

178

Texas Archeological Society

Table 2.

Texas Sites From Which Otoliths Have Been Recovered

Map
No.

County

1
2
3

Austin
Cameron
Chambers

41AU36, 37, 38
41CF29
41CHl101, 1721

4
5
6

Jackson
Kenedy
Kleberg

41JK41, 91, 147
41KN3
41KL13, 22, 30,
33, 37, 71, 74
41NU101, 102,
103, 185, 221

Site

Nueces

San Patricio

41SP271, 43

Source
Hall 1981
Prewitt 1974
Gilmore 1974
DiUehay 1975
McGuff 1978
Hester 1969
Hester 1971
Carlson et al. 1982
Steele & Mokry 1983
Ricklis 1986
Ricklis 1986
Story 1968

1 It was not stated whether otoliths were recovered from these sites.

provides a visual key for the identification of otoliths from common Texas Gulf
Coastal fish and documents their occurrence in the archeological record and the
relationship between fish length and otolith length. For each of the species included
(Table 1), ecological information and a brief description are provided.
MORPHOLOGY OF OTOLITHS
Otoliths are the ear-stones situated within the inner ears of higher bony fish and
cartilaginous fish; they float in a liquid called endolymph that fills a chamber behind
the cranium. The piezoelectric properties they possess enhance the fish’s equilibrium and hearing (Casteel 1976:18).
Carlstrom (1963:441) recognized two basic forms of otoliths--statoconia and
statoliths. Statoconia are the small particles composed of calcium phosphate found
in the Cyclostomata (cyclostomates), Chondrichthyes (cartilaginous fish), and the
Chondrostei (chondrosteans) (Casteel 1976:19). Statoliths are the large solitary
ear-stones found in all of the Teleostei, or higher bony fish, except for the sturgeon.
They are composed principally of aragonite and conchiolin and forms of calcium
carbonate (Casteel 1976:19, 20).
Most of the Actinoptergians (ray-finned fish) and nearly all Teleosteans
(teleosts) have three pairs of statoliths (Nolf 1985:6). There are three types of
statoliths--the sagitta (arrow), the lapillus (small stone), and the asteriscus (star)
(Casteel 1976:20). Although all three types are present in each fish, the sagitta
otolith is generally the largest of the three, particularly in the Sciaenidae family, fish
that are common to Texas coastal waters.
In general, the otolith has an inner and an outer face. The outer face can be either
concave or fiat and consists of a series of bumps and ridges. The edges of the outer
surface may be crenulated. Concentric growth rings are visible on the outer face,
surrounding the core area. The most distinctive patterns, which characterize the

Zimmerman , Steele, and Meyer ~ Identification of Otoliths

A

179

2

1

D

Figure 2. Diagrammafic representation of an irmer right sagitta otolith, Lutjanus campechanus: 1, sulcus; 2, ostium; 3, cauda; 4, rostrum; 5, antirostrum; 6, postrostrum; 7, pararostrum;
CO, colliculum; dr, dorsal rim; vr, ventral rim; A-D, orientation: A, anterior; B, posterior;
C, dorsal; D, ventral.

specific level (Figure 2), are on the inner face. The sulcus, a deep groove on the
inner face, occurs in each of the three types of otoliths. It is divided into two parts-the ostium, or wider anterior region, and the cauda, the narrow taillike posterior
section. The cauda bends toward the ventral margin (Ffizzel and Dante 1965). The
colliculum is the area within the sulcal groove. The rostrum and antirostrum are
present in otoliths with slanted anterior ends. The rostrum is the anteriormost point
on the otolith, and borders the ventral margin. The antirostrum is roughly 40°
behind the rostrum and is on the dorsal margin. In this sample, the Sparidae,
Bothidae, and Lutjanidae families have rostra and antirostra.
The postrostrum and pararostrum are present in otoliths with slanted posterior
ends. Thepostrostrum is the posteriormost projection and is near the ventral margin.
The pararostrum is about 20° dorsal to the postrostrum. An excisura, or notch, may
be present at either the anterior or posterior end, separating the postrostrum from the
pararostrum or the rostrum from the antirostrum (Messieh 1972, see Figure 2).
Four primary margins describe the orientation of a sagitta otolith, anterior,
posterior, ventral, and dorsal. The ostium is always anterior, and the cauda is in the
posterior part and bends toward the ventral margin, so the dorsal margin is the one
the cauda points away from. To side otoliths in the family Sciaenidae, the otolith
should be oriented with the rostrum at the bottom. The eauda of the sulcus will point
in the direction of the side from which the otolith comes (Simons 1981).
Of the three types of otoliths, lapillus otoliths are the least distinctive in shape;
only the sulcal and antisulcal ends are identified. The sulcus usually is not well
developed (Figure 3). The Ictaluridae and Ariidae catfish families are unique in that
they have large lapilli.

180

Texas Archeological Society

C

B

A

D
Figure 3. Diagrammatic representation of an outer right lapillus otohth: 1, sulcus; A,
sulcal end; B, antisulcal end; C, upper margin; D, lower margin.
IDENTIFICATION OF SPECIES
This section provides diagrammatic representations and descriptions of the
otoliths and fish found in archeological sites along the Gulf Coast of Texas.
Table 3 summarizes the dimensions and localities of the Gulf Coastal Fish that
were included in this study.
Order: Ostariophysi
Family: Ictaluridae
Genus: Ictalurus
Species: Ictalurusfurcatus (Lesueur)
Common name: Blue catfish
Note: Since there are very few differences between Ictalurusfurcatus and Arius
felis, only one set of drawings (Figure 4, Ariusfelis) is given for both species. The
differences are explained in the text.
Body: The body is light to slate blue, without scales. It has eight barbels on the
lower jaw and 30 to 50 anal rays. The blue catfish can be distinguished from the
channel catfish because the former has a greater number of anal rays and does not
have spots on the body. The blue catfish typically reaches 45.5 cm in length, and
weighs between 0.23 and 0.25 kg (I-Ioese and Moore 1977).
Habitat: The blue catfish is common in low salinity habitats, although in winter it
will head for open bay waters. Blue catfish breed when the water temperature
reaches 21.1° to 23.8°C. The diet of the blue catfish consists of insects, crayfish,
mussels, fish, plants, and carrion. Its distribution extends from the Mississippi
Valley to Mexico (Hoese and Moore 1977).
Otoliths: The lapillus, the most distinctive otolith in the Ictaluridae and the Ariidae,
is heart-shaped (Figure 4). The inner face is concave and the outer face is almost
flat. The upper margin has a protuberance projecting outward. The sulcus extends
in a half circle, 180°, along the sulcal end. It is a narrow groove in the inner surface
of the lapillus. There are no crenulations along the sulcal end. The flat outer surface
is fairly smooth, with no crenulations (Figure 3).

Zimmerman , Steele, and Meyer ~ Identification of Otoliths
Table 3.

Dimensions

Location

-Gulf of Mexico
Gulf of Mexico
Baffin Bay
Corpus Christi Bay
Port Aransas
Port Aransas
Port Aransas
Port Aransas
Port Aransas
Port Aransas
Port Aransas
Port Aransas
Port Aransas
Port Aransas
Port Aransas
Port Aransas
Port Aransas
Port Aransas
Port Aransas
Port Aransas
Port Aransas
Port Aransas
Baffin Bay
Aransas Bay
Aransas Bay
Aransas Bay
Corpus Christi
Corpus Christi Bay
Oso Creek
--Corpus Christi Bay
Texas Gulf
Corpus Christi Bay
Aransas Bay
Mustang Island
Corpus Christi Bay

and

Localities of Gulf Coastal Fish
in this Study

181

Included

Catalog

Otolith
Length

Otolith
Length

Fish
Length

No.

(cm)

(era)

(cm)

Ictalurus fureatus
TAMU 6-35
1.73
Lutjanus campechanus
TAMU 6-12
2.945
TAMU 6-43
1.175
TAMU 6-44
1.145
Bairdiella chrysura
TAMU 6-25
0.605
Cynoscion arenarius
TAMU 6-23
1.860
Cynoscion
nebulosus
TAMU 6-59
1.415
TAMU 6-69
1.565
TAMU 6-61
1.575
TAMU 6-71
1.580
TAMU 6-32
1.595
TAMU 6-58
1.605
TAMU 6-67
1.620
TAMU 6-571
1.630
TAMU 6-68
1.650
TAMU 6-60
1.660
TAMU 6-631
1.670
TAMU 6-561
1.675
TAMU 6-66
1.685
TAMU 6-62
1.795
TAMU 6-65
1.830
TAMU 6-70
1.845
TAMU 6-34
1.900
TAMU 6-64
1.955
TAMU 6-22
2.500
Micropogonias
undulatus
TAMU 6-15
1.125
TAMU 6-20
1.210
TAMU 6-21
1.285
TAMU 6-19
1.380
Pogonias
cromis
TAMU 6-27
t.335
Sciaenops
ocellata
TAMU 6-26
1.480
TAMU 6-6
2.015
TAMU 6--6
2.210
Archosargus probatocephalus
TAMU 6-281
1.090
Paralichthys sp.
TAMU 6-7
0.855
Paralichthys
lethostigma
TAMU 6-24
0.870
Arius felis
TAMU 6-29
0.725
TAMU 6-10
0.940
TAMU 6-18
1.08

1 Measurements were taken on left otolith.

1.530

-

1.670
0.690
0.740

-

0.830

-

0.770

-

0.610
0.620
0.620
0.645
0.695
0.620
0.646
0.675
0.650
0.677
0.640
0.655
0.710
0.673
0.730
0.655
0.725
0.730
0.735

30.5
30.5
35.2
35.5
36.8
36.8
36.8
36.8
39.0
39.0
37.0
35.0
30.0
43.2
41.0
40.5
40.7
42.2
41.8

0.910
0.950
0.930
1.145
1.650
0.830
0.950
1.150
0.650
0.490
0.575
0.605
0.805
0.925

182

Texas Archeological Society

Archeological Sites: The genus Ictalurus has been reported from sites 41CHl10
and 172; 41JK147 and 91; and 41AU36, 37, and 38 (Table 2). In sites 41CH 172
and 41CH110 it is not stated whether otoliths were collected but only that the genus
Ictolurus was present.
Order: Siluriformes
Family: Ariidae
Genus: Arius
Species: Ariusfelis (Linnaeus)
Common name: Sea catfish, Hardhead
Body: Ariusfelis, the hardhead, is a scaleless fish with large spines on the dorsal
and pectoral lines (Figure 4). The body is blue on the sides, with a white venter.

A

B

C

D

Figure 4. Outline sketch ofAriusfelis (A) and drawing of right lapillus otolith ~-D): B,
outer face; C, ventral view; D, inner face; length 1.15 cm; width .97 cm.
There are six barbels on the lower chin. Most hardheads weigh less than 0.45 kg,
and typically reach a length of 61.0 cm (Compton 1975, Hoese and Moore 1977).
Habitat: Adult hardheads eat almost anything. The young will eat mucus, scales,
or ectoparasites by scraping the sides of other fish; adults will eat rotten fish or
whatever is available. They are most abundant in bays and the shallow part of the
Gulf during the summer months when they spawn. The males carry the fertilized
eggs in their mouths until they hatch. The distribution of the hardhead extends from
Massachusetts to Mexico (Compton 1975, Gough 1979, Hoese and Moore 1977).

Zimmerman , Steele, and Meyer-- Identification of Otoliths

183

Otoliths: The lapillus is enlarged in both the Ariidae and the Ictaluridae (Figure 4;
Table 3). The lapillus is round and dome shaped with a flat bottom. The outer
surface is flat, fine grained, with no crenulations. There is a small cylindrical
protuberance at the upper margin of the lapillus with a tiny notch on the antisulcal
end. Ariusfelis is smaller than Ictalurusfurcatus and has a less distinctive sulcus.
Archeological Sites: The species Arius cf. felis has been reported from sites
41NU102 and 103 (Figure 1; Table 2).
Order: Perciformes
Family: Lutjanidae
Genus: Lutjanus
Species: Lutjanus campechanus (Poey)
Common name: Red snapper
Body: The red snapper is marked by a reddish hue, with alternating dark and light
vertical bands (Figure 5) and a dorsal area that is darker than the light-colored belly.
The dorsal and caudal fins are dark; there can be a diffused black spot above the
lateral line, near the caudal fin. The red snapper weighs between 0.45 kg and 1.8
kg, but can reach 13.6 to 15.9 kg. Red snappers are 25.4 cm long by the first year

B

¢
D

Figure 5. Outline sketch of Lutjanus campechanus (A) and drawing of right sagitta otolith
(B-D): B, outer face; C, ventral view; D, inner face; length 2.930 cm, width 730 cm.

184

Texas Archeological Society

and probably grow 7.62 cm per year until age four. They are found in the Gulf of
Mexico, on the coasts of Texas, Louisiana, and Yucatan (Bryan 1971, Compton
1973, Hoese and Moore 1977).
Habitat: The red snapper inhabits hard irregular limestone formations that rise
above the floor of the Gulf, far from shore. These snapper banks are scattered at
depths between 40 and 100 fathoms in the Gulf of Mexico. Very young fish have
been caught on muddy and sandy bottoms in the Gulf. Spawning on the Texas coast
lasts from early June through the middle of September (Bryan 1971, Compton 1973,
Klepper 1966, Stevens 1969).
Otoliths: The sagitta otolith, though very large, is similar in structure toArchosargusprobatocephalus, the sheepshead (Figure 5; Table 3). The thick anterior end
slants at a 40° angle forming a rostrum and an antirostrum. The ventral edge is
nearly straight. A notch on the dorsal margin, below the point where the ostium and
cauda join, has a pinhole structure unique to the red snapper in this sample of fish.
The posterior end is slanted, giving it a postrostmm and pararostrum. The ostium
is deepest on the dorsal margin and is less pronounced on the ventral margin,
extending to the anterior part. The cauda is very pronounced; it does not reach the
ventral margin. Small crenulations on the anterior and posterior parts are visible on
both the inner and outer faces. On the outer face, there is a pronounced rib formed
by the sulcal groove, and, in addition, small transverse ribs run perpendicular to the
central rib.
Areheological Sites: This genus has not been reported from the Texas Gulf Coast.
Order: Perciformes
Family: Sciaenidae
Genus: BairdieIla
Species: Bairdiella chrysura (Lacepede)
Common name: Silver perch
Body: The body is light silvery with yellow to silvery yellow fins. The lateral line
is clearly marked (Figure 6). The fish is rather small, reaching only 15.24 to 30.48
cm, and usually weighs less than 0.227 kg (Compton 1976, Hoese and Moore 1977).
Habitat: The silver perch lives in lagoons and bays and can withstand a wide range
of salinities. Adults move to the Gulf in the winter and return to the coast to spawn
in the spring. Silver perch eat crustaceans, worms, and small fish. The young are
usually found in the protective grass beds (Compton 1976, Hoese and Moore 1977).
Otoliths: The sagitta otolith has a unique irregularly triangular shape (Figure 6;
Table 3). There is a projection at the corner formed by the posterior and ventral
edges when viewed on the inner surface; another projection is visible on the dorsal
side. The sulcus is deep and well defined; the ostium is deep and straight. The cauda
is short, L-shaped, and curves almost to the ventral margin. There is a groove just
below the cauda on the posterior end. The outer surface is slightly irregular. The
anterior half has the greatest height (Chao 1978).
Archeological Sites: There are no recorded sites for this genus.

Zimmerman , Steele, and Meyer m Identification of Otoliths

185

A

B

C

D

Figure 6. Outline sketch of Bairdiella chrysura (A) and drawing of right sagitta otolith
(B-D): B, outer face; C, ventral view; D, inner face; length .877 cm, width .630 cm.

Order: Perciformes
Family: Sciaenidae
Genus: Cynoscion
Species: Cynoscion arenarius Ginsburg
Common names: Sand seatrout, sand trout, white trout
Body: The body of the adult is silvery to blue gray, with a yellow-green back
(Figure 7) on which are large irregular spots. The sand trout is usually less than 45.7
cm long and rarely weighs more than 0.45 kg. The young differ from adults in the
faint crossbands visible on their backs (Compton 1974, Hoese and Moore 1977,
Moffett and McEachron 1976).
Habitat: The sand trout lives in the coastal bays and shallow near-shore Gulf from
southern Florida to the Gulf of Campeche. The adults spawn in the deeper channels
near the tidal inlets of the bays and remain there until about March to early April,
when they are fully grown. Adults also can be found in the shallow bays and will
remain throughout the winter if the water temperature does not fall far below 20°C.
The young prefer back bays because of the lower salinity and the protection they
afford from larger fish. Older fish prefer the primary bays and shallow Gulf waters.
The sand seatrout can withstand the rapid temperature and salinity changes of the

186

Texas Archeological Society

A

C
Figure 7. Outline sketch of Cynoscion arenarius (A) and drawing of left sagitta otolith

(B-D): B, outer face; C, ventral view; D, inner face; length 1.86 cm, width .773 cm.
Texas bays (Compton 1974, Hoese and Moore 1977, Moffett and McEachron
1976).
Otoliths: Cynoscion arenarius has an elliptical sagitta otolith (Figure 7; Table 3).
The inner side is well developed. The oval-shaped ostium almost reaches the
anterior margin. The cauda is noticeable but faint, becoming less distinct toward the
ventral margin. There is a poorly developed marginal groove on the dorsal part. The
posterior half is slightly thicker than the anterior half. On the inner face, the
posterior part has a slightly scalloped appearance. Cynoscion arenarius, which
does not have well-developed cauda, can be differentiated by that characteristic
from Cynoscion nebulosus, which does have a well-developed cauda.
Archeological Sites: The genus Cynoscion and the species Cynoscion arenarius
have been reported from 41JK147 and 91; 41NU102 and 103; 41SP43, and
41CH172 (Figure 1; Table 2). The genus Cynoscion was reported from sites
41SP43 and 41CH172, but it is not known whether otoliths were recovered.
Order: Perciformes
Family: Sciaenidae
Genus: Cynoscion
Species: Cynoscion nebulosus (Cuvier)
Common names: Spotted seatrout, Speckled seatrout
Body: The body of the speckled seatrout is silvery with a greenish back (Figure 8;
Table 3); the back, dorsal, and caudal fins have many dark spots, and the inside of
the mouth is orange. Adult speckled seatrout spawn in the bays; typically, mature
fish range between 30.0 and 35.5 cm in lenth and weigh approximately 0.23 to 0.45

Zimmerman , Steele, and Meyer ~ Identification of Otoliths

187

A

°
Figure 8. Outline sketch of Cynoscion nebulosus (A) and drawing of left sagitta otolith
(B-D): B, outer face; C, ventral view; D, inner face; length 2.05 cm, width .71 cm.
kg. Older fish may reach 76 cm in length and 28.7 kg in weight. (Becker 1964;
Hoese and Moore 1977). The young have a similar spotted pattern (Hoese and
Moore 1977).
Habitat: During their first year, the young usually are found in grass flats. The
adults live in deeper areas and sometimes can be sighted over oyster reefs. Adult
speckled seal!out spawn in the bays, and reach about 1.22 meters in length (Becker
1964, Hoese and Moore 1977).
Otoliths: Cynoscion nebulosus has a narrow elliptical sagitta otolith that is very
similar in appearance to the otolith of Cynoscion arenarius (Figure 8; Table 3).
Distinctive features of Cynoscion nebulosus are (1) The cauda bends more but does
not reach the dorsal margin, (2) The anterior half is narrower than in Cynoscion
arenarius, (3) The ventral margin of Cynoscion nebulosus is straighter, but the edge
is more jagged, (4) There are more crenulations on the outer surface, (5) The dorsal
margin bends inward more at the midpoint in Cynoscion nebulosus, and (6) The
posterior half of the otolith in Cynoscion nebulosus is thicker than the anterior half,
pointed rather than rounded, and lacks the toothlike serrations of the posterior end
of Cynoscion arenarius.
Archeological Sites: The genus Cynoscion and the species Cynoscion nebulosus
have been reported from 41JKgl and 47, 41NU221, 102, and 103; 41KL13, and
41CH172 (Figure 1; Table 2). The genus Cynoscion was present at site 41CH172,
but it was not stated that otoliths were recovered.

Texas Archeological Society

188

Order: Perciformes
Family: Sciaenidae
Genus: Micropogonius
Species: Micropogonius undulatus ~innaeus)
Common name: Atlantic croaker

A

B

C

D

Figure 9. Outline sketch ofMicropogonius undulatus (A) and drawing of sagitta otolith

(B-D): B, outer face; C, ventral view; D, inner face; length 1.275 cm, width .86 crn.
Body: The Atlantic croaker, silvery when young, has a brassy yellow hue and
irregular brown streaks as an adult (Figure 9). Adults weigh from 0.11 to 0.23 kg,
and, occasionally, as much as 2.3 kg. The typical body length ranges between 24.0
cm and 30.5 cm (Compton 1974, Hoese and Moore 1977).
Habitat: The Atlantic croaker can be found in bays and on the Gulf margin. In the
summer, the young live in the deeper parts of the bays, but depart by fall. Atlantic
croakers are winter spawners. Their distribution extends from Cape Cod to Central
Mexico (Compton 1974, Hoese and Moore 1977).
Otoliths: The sagitta otolith of the Atlantic croaker has a unique shieldlike form
(Figure 9; Table 3). On the outer surface is a hooklike phalange on the dorsal
margin. The large ovoid ostium is faint and does not reach the anterior margin. The
cauda is more pronounced and slants towards the posterior end. The posterior end
is thickest, due to the many spurs, or humps, projecting from the outer surface close
to the dorsal margin (Chao 1978).
Archeological Sites: The species Micropogonius undulatus has been reported
from 4ling.J102, 103, and 221; and at 41SP43 (Figure 1; Table 2). At site 41SP43
only the occurrence of the genus Micropogonius was noted.

Zimmerman , Steele, and Meyer ~ Identification of Otoliths

189

Order: Perciformes
Family: Sciaenidae
Genus: Pogonius
Species: Pogonius cromis (Linnaeus)
Common name: Black drum
Body: The black drum is the largest sciaenid in the Gulf of Mexico, weighing as
much as 68.04 kg (Figure 10). The sides of the silvery body are covered with broad,

A

B

C

D

Figure 10. Outline sketch of Pogonius cromis (A) and drawing of left sagitta otolith
(B-D): B, outer face; C, ventral view; D, inner face; length 1.375 cm, width 1.70 cm.
dark bands. In larger fish the banding becomes obscured so the body appears darker.
The underside of the lower jaw is covered with large barbels. Typically, black drum
range in length from 40.6 to 50.8 cm and weigh from 6.6 kg to 8.8 kg. Large
specimens may weigh as much as 35.4 kg. The black drum is found from Massachusetts to Argentina, but it is more abundant off the South Texas coast (Breuer
1977, Cook 1974, Compton 1975, Hoese and Moore 1977).
Habitat: This species frequents shallow bays and lagoons, the large grinding
molars in its throat aid in chewing shells of mollusks. The black drum spawns in
both winter and spring; its annual spawning run into the bays is from late December
through April (Breuer 1977, Cook 1974, Compton 1975, Nuckles 1967, Simmons
1962).

190

Texas Archeological Society

Otoliths: The sagitta otolith of the black drum is semicircular, or D-shaped, thin,
and has a large sulcus (Figure 10; Table 3). The ventral margin is evenly curved and
convex; the dorsal margin is fairly straight. There is a projection on the dorsal
margin near the point where the ostium and cauda are joined. The large, roundish
ostium does not reach the anterior end. The J-shaped cauda has a pointed distal end
that does not reach the ventral margin. The outer surface has crenulations and a
distinct core area. The posterior half is slightly thicker. The highest part is in the
center, giving the sagitta a domelike yet concave appearance in lateral view. There
is a faint marginal groove between the dorsal margin and the sulcus (Chao 1978).
Archeological Sites: The genus Pogonias and the species Pogonias cromis have
been reported from 41CF29; 41 SP27 and 43; 41JK41; 41KL22, 33, 71, 74, 37, 30,
and 13; 41KN3; 41CHll0 and 29; and 41NU221, 185, 101,102, and 103 (Figure
1; Table 2). It was not stated that otoliths were recovered from sties 41SP27,
41CHll0, and 41NU185.
Order: Perciformes
Family: Sciaenidae
Genus: Sciaenops
Species: Sciaenops ocellata (Linnaeus)
Common names: Channel bass, Red drum, Redfish
Body: The body of the redfish is silvery when young, turning coppery brown or
reddish as it matures (Figure 11). There usually is a single large black spot above
the lateral line in front of the caudal fin, but some redfish have additional spots

D
C
Figure 11. Outline sketch of Sciaenops ocellata (A) and drawing of right sagitta otolith
(B-D): B, outer face; C, ventral view; D, inner face; length 2.25 cm, width 1.10 cm.

Zimmerman , Steele, and Meyer ~ Identification of Otoliths

191

(Hoese and Moore 1977). Red drum are among the fastest growing fish. By one
year, they reach 27.9 cm and 0.45 kg, by two years, 55.8 cm and 1.59 kg; by three
years, they may reach 61.0 cm and 3.6 kg. Mature fish may weigh in excess of 22.7
kg (Simmons 1962; Simmons 1965; Simmons 1976).
Habitat: The redfish is predominantly a bottom feeder, commonly engaging in an
activity called tailing, in which the fish, in a head-down position, searches the
substrate for small crabs, fish, and shrimp. The adults are largely solitary, living in
shallow water habitats such as bays, but they also move in schools. In fact, redfish
migrate in large numbers to the Gulf in the fall as temperatures decline and return
to the bays and inlets in the spring. During the fall and winter, the redfish spawn just
off the shore along the bay inlets before moving out to the Gulf (Simmons 1962,
Simmons 1965, Simmons 1976).
Otoliths: The sagitta of the redfish is thick and rectangular, with a distinct sulcus
(Figure 11; Table 3). The ostium of the sulcus is pear shaped and not well
pronounced; its expanded part reaches the anterior margin of the sagitta. The cauda
is J shaped, with a narrow distal end that approaches the ventral margin. The dorsal
margin of the otolith is slightly crenulate, whereas the ventral margin is curved and
convex. The outer surface has both ridges and crenulations. The cauda is slightly
deeper than the ostium. In lateral view it is convex. The posterior is the thickest part
of the sagitta otolith (Chao 1978).
Archeological Sites: The species Sciaenops ocellata has been reported from
41SP43; 41KL33 and 13; 41NU101, 102, and 103; and 41CH172 (Figure 1; Table
2). The species Sciaenops ocellata was reported from site 41CH172, but it was not
stated that otoliths were recovered.
Order: Perciformes
Family: Sparidae
Genus: Archosargus
Species: Archosargusprobatocephalus (Walbaum)
Common name: Sheepshead
Body: The body of the sheepshead is gray, greenish yellow, or bronze, with seven
dark vertical stripes (Figure 12); the belly is white. Coloration fades with age. The
body is flattened sideways, and there is along dorsal fin. The tail is not deeply forked
and has rounded edges that separate the sheepshead from other members of the
family Sparidae. The name sheepshead was derived from its buck-toothed
appearance. The front incisors are broad and flat, and adjacent to these are peglike
canines. Next to the canines are globular and molarlike cheek-teeth. The average
weight is 0.9072 to 1.814 kg. Typical length of sheepshead range between 35.6 cm
and 45.7 cm. Some fish, however, attain a maximum weight of 13.61 kg and 76.2
cm in length (Hoese and Moore 1977; Pearsall 1966; Simmons 1962).
Habitat: The sheepshead are bottom feeders that are attracted to substrates covered
with barnacles or inhabited by crustaceans. Their diets change in the hottest part of
the summer to algae. They are commonly found in bays over shell reefs. From late
winter to early spring the sheepshead move in schools back to the shallow water

192

Texas Archeological Society

A

B

C

D

Figure 12. Outline sketch of Archosargusprobatocephalus( A) and drawing of sagitta otolith

(B-D): B, outer face; C, ventral view; C, inner face; length 1.105 cm, width .653 cm.
bays to spawn (Hoese and Moore 1977, Pearsall 1966, Simmons 1962, Swann
1964).
Otoliths: The sagitta otolith is small but similar in basic structure to Lutjanus
campechanus, the red snapper (Figure 12; Table 3). The anterior margin slants at
a 40° angle, creating a rostrum and antirostrum. The anterior margin is thin and
highly serrated, unlike the red snapper. The dorsal margin has a very slight slant.
The ostium reaches the anterior margin, and the cauda is straight with a slight bend
toward the ventral margin. The outer face shows an axis formed by the sulcal
groove. The side view is concave. The posterior end also is slanted, giving that
margin a pararostrum and a postrostmm. Serrations are visible on both the dorsal
and ventral sides. There is a marginal groove on the dorsal side adjacent to the
sulcus.
Archeological Sites: The species Archosargusprobatocephalus has been reported
from 41CH172 and 41JK91 (Figure 1; Table 2). It was not stated whether otoliths
were recovered at 41CH172.

Zimmerman , Steele, and Meyer ~ Identification of Otoliths

193

Order: Pleuronectiformes
Family: Bothidae
Genus: Paralichthys
Species: Paralichthys lethostigma (Jordan and Gilbert)
Common name: Southern flounder
Body: The dorsal surface of the southern flounder is dark olive to light brown; the
ventral surface is white (Figure 13); the the dorsal surface is capable of changing
color upon stimulation. The eyes and coloration are on the left side; the blind side
is pale. There are light tan spots on the fins. Newly hatched fish are symmetrical,

A

B

C

D

Figure 13. Outline sketch of Paralichthys lethostigma (A) and drawing of sagitta otolith
(B-D): B, outer face; C, ventral view; D, inner face; length .826 cm, width .473 cm.
with one eye on each side of the head, but after the fish reaches a critical size, one
eye migrates, find the pigment disappears from the blind side. Typically, female
southern flounder range from 30.5 cm to 40.6 cm and weigh from 0.45 kg to 0.68
kg. Males rarely exceed 30.5 cm. Large specimens may reach 71.0 cm and weigh
5.9 kg (Compton 1976, Hoese and Moore 1977, Simmons 1962, Simmons 1964,
Stokes 1975).
Habitat: Southern flounders prefers loose substrate so they can bury themselves
in order to catch small fish, squid, shrimp, and other crustaceans. The young are
found in shallow bays. The usual season of abundance extends from early spring
into November or December. In the fall, the adults leave the bays to spawn; severe
cold will cause a mass migration for spawning from the shallow bays into the Gulf.

194

Texas Archeological Society

Warmer conditions tend to cause these large flounders to disperse over a greater
period of time. Southern flounder are commonly found from North Carolina to
Florida and from Florida to northern Mexico (Compton 1976, Hoese and Moore
1977, Simmons 1962, Simmons 1964, Stokes 1975).
Otoliths: The sagitta otolith is extremely small, flat, and almost symmetrical along
the Y axis (Figure 13; Table 3). The anterior margin forms a40° angle and is slightly
jagged. There is a rostrum and an antirostrum. A notch or excisura at the base of
the posterior margin separates the postrostrum and pararostrum. The posterior
margin is straight. The sulcus is narrow and not differentiated into an ostium and
cauda. The outer side has prominent growth rings.
Archeological Sites: This genus has not been reported from sites on the Texas Gulf
Coast.
ESTIMATING SIZE OF FISH
Estimation of fish size is important when dealing with archeological remains
for three reasons. First, the size of a fish can suggest its importance as a subsistence
item. Second, some inferences may be made about the techniques used in obtaining
fish, especially in the absence of cultural remains. For instance, small fish probably
were trapped, netted, or poisoned, whereas large fish probably were speared or
hooked. Finally, some ecological information can be gleaned from fish remains. By
associating skeletal elements with specific levels, it is possible to infer habitats
based on the ecology of modem fish. Reitz, Quitmeyer, Hale, Scudder, andWing
(1987:306) have noted that small individuals of a particular species may have been
caught in an estuarine nursery, whereas those of larger species may have been
caught offshore, so fish size can provide valuable insights.
In several investigations the relationship between otolith length and fish size
(Casteel 1976, Eziuzo 1963, Fitch and Brownell 1968, and Reitz et al. 1987) has
been examined, and it has been determined that an allometric relationship exists
between bone and body mass (Reitz et al. 1987). This is biologically more sound
than work of some previous investigators who suggest that there is a linear
relationship. Those who support a linear relationship assume that shell or bone
dimensions increase in a constant ratio with body mass ~eitz et al. 1987), but this
is not the case.
Fish grow continuously throughout their lives, but the growth rate is not
constant; after sexual maturity the rate decreases. Environmental changes, too, can
affect the growth rates of fish. Casteel (1974:572, 1976:65, 66) has shown that the
growth rate of fish is directly related to temperature variations, with increases in
temperature promoting increased growth. These visible increments in growth in the
otoliths are biological evidence supporting an allometric relationship between
otolith size and fish size.
A second important fact is that in many cases where a linear relationship is
considered, an average-size criterion must be established for each species of fish,
and factors such as age, sexual dimorphism, and temperature variations--which can
cause extreme discrepancies in size within species--are not taken into account.

Zimmerman , Steele, and Meyer ~ Identification of Otoliths

195

Casteel (1976) has summarized and compared five methods of estimating fish
size from skeletal elements. These methods are the single regression, double
regression, proportional, White’s Technique, and Cook and Treganza’s technique;
the two most accurate are the single and double regression (see Reitz et al. 1987).
In order to investigate this issue, nineteen otoliths from Cynoscion nebulosus
were measured from the postrostrum to the rostrum (Table 3). These measurements
were compared to the actual fish length, using a simple regression, and the following
equation was derived: log Y = log a + b(log X). Log Y is the length of the fish, b
is the slope of the line, a is the y-intercept, and log X is the length of the otolith. This
equation can predict total length for Cynoscion nebulosus for which the actual
length is unknown by substituting the otolith length into the equation. Similarly,
fish weight can be estimated from otolith length by deriving an equation from a
known population of fish. The results of this investigation indicate that a relationship, albeit not a strong one, does exist (Figure 14). The correlation coefficient was
.778. These findings are similar to those of Reitz, Quitmyer, Hale, Scudder, and
Wing (1987). The sample that was used for this study did not include any juvenile
fish, and, in addition, most of the adults were in the same size range, so the lack of
variation within the sample can explain why the correlation was not strong.
Regression techniques are adequate for estimating gross fish size (either fish length
or fish weight), but the technique produces only an estimate.
A study by Eziuzo (1963) and Fitch and Brownell (1968) uses a two-step
process. The length of the fish is estimated from the length of the otolith, using the

4.5

E

o

4.2

3.9

3.6
1====

!1

3.3

~t_,_L_l Lt__LLJ~_L_L~LI , , , , I I ,, , I , , , ,
1. 5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2.0

OTOLITH

LENGTH crn

Figure 14. Simple regression plot illustrating the relationship between otolith length and
fish length for nineteen specimens of Cynoscion nebulosus.

196

Texas Archeological Society

double regression method, and the weight of the fish is predicted from this estimated
length. In this study, however, the length of the fish is already known, so the second
step would be to examine the data in order to determine the fish weight based on the
fish length.
As a general guide, Table 3, which documents fish size and otolith length of the
specimens used in this study, can be consulted.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Several people have made valuable contributions to this project. We thank
John McEachron for providing fish and otoliths and for his constructive comments
on the manuscript. The drawings of the otoliths were made by Roger Coleman, and
Marianne Marek provided technical services.

REFERENCES CITED
Aten, L. E.
1983 Analysis of discrete habitation units in the Trinity River delta, upper Texas coast.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Paper No. 2.
Becker, A. C.
1964 About trout. Texas Game and Fish 22(5):11-30.
Breuer, J.
1957 An ecological survey of Baff’m and Alazon bays, Texas. Publications of the
Institute of Marine Science, The University of Texas 4(2): 134-135.
1977

Black drum. Texas Parks and Wildlife 35:19-21.

Bryan, C. E.
1971 Red snapper research. Texas Parks and Wildlife 29(12): 12-14.
Campbell, T. N.
1956 Archeological materials from five islands in the Laguna Madre Texas coast.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 27:7-46.
Carlson, D. L., D. G. Steele, and H. L. Bruno
1982 Archeological investigations at the Allison site (41NU 185). Texas A&M University, Archeological Research Laboratory Reports of Investigations 1.
Carlstrom, D.
1963 A crystallographic study of vertebrate otoliths. Biology Bulletin 125(3):441-463.
Casteel, R. W.
1972 Some biases in the recovery of archaeological faunal remains. Proceedings of the
Prehistoric Society 38:328--388.

Zimmerman , Steele, and Meyer m Identification of Otoliths

197

1974

On the remains of fish scales from archaeological sites. American Antiquity
39(4):557-581.

1976

Fish remains in archeology and paleo-environmental studies. Academic Press,
New York.

Chao, L. N.
1978 A basis for classifying western Atlantic sciaenidae (Teleostei Perciformes).
NOAA Circular 415.
Compton, H.
1973 Texas saltwater fishes. Texas Parks and Wildlife 31(12):33.
1974

Texas saltwater fishes. Texas Parks and Wildlife 32(5):33.

1975

Texas saltwater fishes. Texas Parks and Wildlife 33(10):33

1976

Texas saltwater fishes. Texas Parks and Wildlife 34(8):33.

Cook, N.
1974 Drag up a drum. Texas Parks and Wildlife 32(2):2-5.
DeMarcay, G. B., and D. G. Steele
1986 The value of fine-screening on inland based hunter-gatherer habitation sites.
Appendix to the Archeological investigations at 41LK201 Choke Canyon Reser
voir, southern Texas. Choke Canyon Series vol. 11. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Dillehay, T.
1975 Prehistoric subsistence exploitation in the lower Trinity River delta, Texas. Texas
Archeological Survey Research Report 51.
Ezuzio, E. N. C.
1963 The identification of otoliths from West African demersal fish. Bulletin de
L’I.F.A.N.T. ser. A(2):488-512.
Fitch, J. E.
1969 Appendix A: fish remains, primarily otoliths, from a Ventura, California, Chumash village site (Ven-3). Memoir, Southern California Academy of Science
8:56-71.
Fitch, J. E., and R. L. Brownell
1968 Fish otoliths in Cetacean stomachs and their importance in interpreting feeding
habits. Journal of the Fisheries Research Board of Canada 25(12):2561-2574.
Frizzel, D., and J. H. Dante
1965 Otoliths of some early Cenozoic fishes of the Gulf Coast. Journal of Paleontology
39(4):692-693.

198

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

Gilmore, K.
1974 Cultural variation on the Texas coast: analysis of an aboriginal shell midden,
Wallis Reservoir, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 44.
Gough, B.
1979 A mouthful of hardheads. Texas Parks and Wildlife 37(9):22-23.
Hall, G. D.
1981 Allens Creek: a study in the cultural prehistory of the lower Brazos River valley,
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 61.
Hester, T. R.
1969 Archeological investigations in Kleberg and Kenedy counties, Texas in August
1967. Texas State Building Commission, Archeological Program Report 15.
1971

Loyola Beach: an example of aboriginal adaptation to the maritime environment
of the lower Texas coast. The Florida Anthropologist 24(3):91-106.

1975

Late Prehistoric cultural patterns along the lower Rio Grande of Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 46:107-125.

1980

Digging into South Texas prehistory: a guide for amateur archaeologists. Corona,
San Antonio.

Hester, T. R., R. F. Heizer, and J. A. Graham
1975 Field methods in archeology, 6th ed. Mayfield, Palo Alto.
Hoese, D. H., and R. H. Moore
1977 Fishes of the Gulf of Mexico. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Hole, F. and R. G. Wilkinson
1973 Shell Point: a coastal camp and burial site in Brazoria County. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 44:5-30.
Klepper, D.
1966 Snapper snooper. Texas Parks and Wildlife 24:16-17.
Moffett, A. W., and L. W. McEachron
1976 Don’t overlook the sand seatrout. Texas Parks and Wildlife 34:10-11.
McGuff, P. R.
1978 Prehistoric archaeological investigations at Palmetto Bend Reservok: phase 1.
Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 58.
Messieh, S.H.
1972 Use of otoliths in identifying herring stocks in the southern Gulf of St. Lawrence
and adjacent waters. Journal of the Fisheries Research Board of Canada
29:1113-1118.

Zimmernmn , Steele, and Meyer ~ Identification of Otoliths

199

Nolf, D.
1985 Handbook of paleoichthyology: otolith piscium. Edited by Hans Peter Schultze.
Gustav Fischer Verlag, New York.
Nuckles, L. D.
1967 Black battler. Texas Parks and Wildlife 25:6-7.
Olsen, S. L
1968 Fish, amphibian, and reptile remains from archaeological sites. Papers of the
Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology 56(2). Harvard University.
Patterson, P. E., and M. M. Ford
1974 Oso Creek flood control project for Nueces County, Texas. A report on archeological and historical resources. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 35.
Pearsall, J.
1966 Bucktoothed battler. Texas Parks and Wildlife 24:12, 13.
Prewitt, E.
1974 Preliminary archeological investigations in the Rio Grande delta of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 45:55-66.
Ricklis, R. A.
1986 Archeological investigations at the McKinzie site (41NU221): description and
contextual interpretations. M.S. thesis, Anthropology. The University of Texas at
Austin.
Robison, N. D.
1978 Zooarcheology: its history and development. In: A history and selected bibliography of zooarcheology in eastern North America, edited by A. E. Bogan and N. D.
Robison. Tennessee Anthropological Association Miscellaneous Paper 2.
Reitz, E. L, I. R. Quitmyer, H. S. Hale, S. J. Scudder, and E. S. Wing
1987 Application of allometry to zooarcheology. American Antiquity 52(2):304-317.
Simmons, E.
1962 Fish facts. Texas Game and Fish 20(7):12, 13.
1964

Lantern light flounder. Texas Game and Fish 22(12)18, 19.

1965

Fish facts. Texas Game and Fish 23(3): 10, 11.

1976

Learn about redfish. Texas Parks and Wildlife 34:24-26.

Simmons, E. H.
1981 A comparative study of otoliths belonging to the drum family (Sciaenidae).
Unpublished manuscript.

200

Texas Archeological Society

Smitla, H. A.
1984 Prehistoric settlement and subsistence patterns of the Baffin B ay area of the lower
Texas coast. Ph.D. dissertation, Southern Methodist University. Dallas.
Steele, D. G., and E. R. Mokry
1983 Archeological investigations of seven prehistoric sties along Oso Creek, Nueces
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:287-308.
Stevens, J.
1969 Signs of good fishing. Texas Parks and Wildlife 27(1):26-28.
Story, D. A.
1968 Archeological investigations of two Central Texas Gulf Coast sites. Texas State
Building Commission Archeological Program Report 13.
Stokes, G. M.
1975 Flatfish. Texas Parks and Wildlife 33:26-29.
Swarm, R.
1964

Star in stripes. Texas Game and Fish 22:23.

Rangia Cuneata as a Seasonal Indicator for Coastal
Archeological Sites in Texas

David L. Carlson

ABSTRACT
Rangia cuneata, a brackish water clam, is commonly found in archeological
sites along the coast of Texas and Louisiana. Because of its abundance and because
of the obvious growth rings on the surface of its valves, Rangia has been a focus
of seasonality studies over the last ten years. Recently, Lawrence Aten (1981)
proposed a method of identifying site seasonality using Rangia valves.
Aten’s dated collections are used to develop a model of Rangia growth
patterns by using cubic splines to smooth and interpolate the known samples. A
FORTRAN program is used to fit archeological samples to the model and provide
a graphic display of the quality of the fit. Sixty-fourpublishedRangia seasonality
determinations are evaluated using this procedure. The analysis of archeological
samples using this technique confirms previous researchers’ conclusions that
Rangia were used along the Texas coast primarily as a spring resource.

INTRODUCTION

The brackish water clam, Rangia cuneata, is common on archeological sites
along the coast of Louisiana and Texas. Along the central Gulf Coast of Texas,
extensive shell middens of Rangia like the one at the Dow-Cleaver site (41BO35)
document the use of large quantities of these clams for food (Aten 1971). At
Dow-Cleaver, piles of circular"floors" of Rangia appear to have been deliberately
constructed for living areas. Although there is some disagreement about whether
Rangia cuneata was a staple (Dillehay 1975c) or a minor supplement (Byrd 1976),
its abundance at many sites suggests that the species was systematically collected
as a food resource.
Rangia cuneata occupy brackish water habitats in estuaries and bays along the
coast, surviving in environments ranging in salinity between 0 and 33 parts per
thousand (Bedford 1972). They are most abundant in the low diversity habitat zone
between freshwater and saltwater environments, where they reach their greatest
population densities (Bedford 1972:99). Ecological studies suggest that the
preference of the species for low salinity environments is a result of heavy predation
and competition in more saline habitats (O’Heeron 1966).
The success ofRangia in brackish habitats, where salinity can change suddenly
and dramatically, is primarily a result of its success at osmoregulation. At salinities
above 10 parts per thousand, Rangia are isosmotic. At lower salinities, however,
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 58 (1987)

202

Texas Archeological Society

Rangia rapidly begin to osmoregulate and control their internal salinity at a
significantly higher level than the surrounding medium (Bedford 1972:99). This
ability buffers the species against sudden salinity shocks and insures that shell
morphology is more likely to be a function of animal growth cycles than of transient
environmental effects.
Perhaps as a result of their ability to survive under adverse environmental
conditions, Rangia cuneata are reported from the Potomac River on the Atlantic
Coast to Avarado, Mexico on the Gulf (TarJer 1971). The species has been in
Louisiana for at least the last 9000 years, and some 5 million cubic yards of dead
shell are dredged in that state every year (Tarver 1971).
Rangia are relatively easy to gather since they reach their highest densities in
shallow water adjacent to sources of fresh- or saltwater (Tarver and Dugas 1973).
In Lakes Pontchartmin and Manrepas in Louisiana, densities can reach 820
individuals 16mm or larger in a single square meter. In the Neches River in Texas,
concentrations of 250 individuals per square meter have been reported ~arver and
Dugas 1973).
Because of their abundance and because of the obvious growth rings on the
surface of their valves,Rangia cuneata have been a focus of seasonality studies over
the last 10 years (Aten 1972,1981; Dillehay 1974, 1975a, 1975b; Skelton 1978). By
studying the indentations on the surface of Rangia shells, Aten devised a technique
for classifying samples of 50 or more shells by growth stages and then fitting the
resulting distribution to a series of modem samples (Aten 1981).
The use of growth increments in bivalve shells to determine environmental
conditions has been the subject of considerable study in recent years. Bivalve
growth patterns that reflect subdaily, daily, bidaily, fortnightly, lunar month, and
annual growth episodes have been identified (Kennish 1980).
Interruptions in growth can be related to freeze, heat, and thermal shock,
abrasion, spawning, neap tides, and storms (Kennish 1980). By microscopic
observation of shell microstructure, it is often possible to distinguish various
environmental shocks and other events in the life of an individual bivalve (Tevesz
and Carter 1980).
This report explores the use ofRangia cuneata for estimating seasonality on
archeologieal sites on the Texas coast. An extension of the techniques originally
proposed by Lawrence Aten (1981) is described and applied to a series of 64
archeologieal samples.

SEASONALITY IN RANGIA CUNEATA
In 1981, Aten published a method for determining seasonality from collections
of Rangia cuneata (Aten 1981). The technique involves examining the exterior
surfaces of the shells for annual rings. Once the annual rings are located, the degree
of growth beyond the last period of growth interruption is estimated. Application
of the procedure involves using estimates of age/size relationships in Rangia
cuneata so that interruptions caused by thermal shock or storm tides are not
mistakenly identified as annual rings. The width ofthering preceding the lastis used

Carlson m Rangia Cuneata as Seasonal Indicator

203

as a measure of the amount of growth expected in the last ring. If the growth in the
last ring is less than one-third of what is expected, the valve is classified as in the
Early stage. If it is more than one-third, but less than two-thirds, it is classified as
Middle, and if it is more than two-thirds, it is classified as Late. If the last growth
episode appears to be complete, and the valve is currently in an arrested period of
growth, it is classified as Interrupted; if the rings cannot be clearly identified, the
valve is classified as Indeterminate. Since the evaluation of any single valve is
subject to error, Aten recommends that samples of at least 50 valves of one side (i.e.
all left or all right valves) be used. Blind tests involving Aten and Dillehay and Aten
and the author indicate that independent assessments of single samples are comparable.
Once estimates have been made for a sample of valves (preferably at least 50),
the distribution of the sample is compared to empirical distributions made by Aten
from modem collections along the Texas coast.
The samples vary in size from 14 to 50 individuals. Aten combines these
samples into half-month periods. Dated samples are available for 18 of the 24
half-month periods in the year.
Seasonality estimates are made by picking the empirical distribution that most
closely matches the sample. The method has been criticized on various grounds;
one criticism is that the surface morphology of bivalves in general cannot be used
to identify annual cycles reliably (Monks 1981, Claassen 1982). Study of thin
sections or acetate peels of thick sections certainly are more reliable methods than
observation of surface morphology or estimating the age or season of a single
individual, but the cost and time involved in analyzing sections of each specimen
greatly limit the number of specimens that can be examined. Although study of
surface morphology is less precise, the errors in that method may average out if
sample sizes are large enough. Examination of surface annual rings has been used
in at least one ecological study to produce demographic life tables for Rangia
(Fairbanks 1963).
Another criticism has been that the determination of seasonality from surface
morphology overestimates the expected growth in the last year by comparing it to
the penultimate growth ring, since growth rates slow as the individuals become
older. This imprecision would be more important if the exact width of the ring were
involved in the estimate. Since only the nearest third is estimated and since the
reduction in growth rates is relatively small from one year to the next, the effect is
likely to be negligible. More importantly, the same inaccuracy occurs in the
empirical data. Since both the sample and the empirical data may underestimate the
"true" proportion of Late stage clams, there is no systematic bias in the prediction
as suggested by Monks (1981). To resolve this problem, steps have been taken to
systematize the fitting procedure and to provide a graphic display of the goodness
offit between the unknown sample and the dated samples.
The dated samples collected by Aten represent several localities along the
coast. For this reason, they are viewed best as an approximation of the average
trends of growth forRangia. Examining the plots for the different growth categories
emphasizes this fact. Each growth category should be characterized by a single

Texas Archeological Society

204

peak. Secondary, smaller peaks probably reflect sampling fluctuations or unique
conditions (see Aten 1981, Figure 4).
What is needed is a smooth cupJe that follows the rise, peak, and decline of each
growth category through the years but ignores the smaller fluctuations. Several
techniques are available for smoothing "noisy" data. These techniques also permit
estimates of the expected proportions in the six half-month periods for which there
are no samples. One technique would be to fit nonlinear curves to the data, for
example, polynomial functions by least squares or by iterative techniques designed
for nonlinear regression. Another would be to smooth the data using the exploratory
data techniques described by Hartwig and Dearing (1979) and others. The first
approach would have the possible disadvantage of smoothing the data too much.
The latter approach would make estimates for the gaps somewhat more difficult, and
the degree of smoothing could not be easily controlled.
A third approach, which overcomes these deficiencies, is to use cubic splines,
which are simply a series of separate cubic polynomials fitted to the intervals
0+8-

!

0.7¸

0.6

0.5
to
k~

o

0.4

o
0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

I

i

I

+

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

June

July

Aug

Sept

Oct

Nov

Dec

Month
Figure 1. Spline curve fit to Aten’s modem data on the proportion of Rangia values in the
Interrupted stage. Vertical lines show the observed proportions; the smooth curve is the cubic
spline approximation.

I

Carlson ~ Rangia Cuneata as Seasonal Indicator
Table 1.

Expected Proportions for each Rangia Growth

Half-Month

Interrupted

Mid-Jan
L~e Jan
Mid-Feb
Late Feb
Mid-March
Late March
Mid-April
Late April
Mid-May
L~eMay
Mid-June
Late June
Mid-July
Lam July
Mid-Aug
La~ Aug
Mid-Sept
Late Sept
Mid--Oct
Late Oct
Mid-Nov
Late Nov
Mid-Dec
La~ Dec

.6941
.7398
.7177
.6193
.5015
.3851
.2601
.1473
.0782
.0451
.0289
.0065
.0482
.0962
.1467
.1857
.2196
.2892
.3637
.3968
.4092
,4391
.5129
.6088

205
Stage

Early

Middle

Late

Uncertain

.0425
.0864
.1464
.2209
.3017
.3770
.4313
.4406
.3911
.3012
,2007
.!261
.0827
.0591
.0504
.0391
.0232
.0131
.0103
.0079
.0044
.0000
.0015
.0147

.0051
.0123
.0215
.0329
.0474
.0776
.1394
.2320
.3368
.4378
.5102
.4972
.3905
.2633
.1860
.1652
.1638
.1476
.1057
.0821
.0748
.0663
.0436
.0063

.1586
.1035
.0541
.0196
.0220
.0230
.0329
.0522
.0818
.1236
.1787
.2447
.3156
.3804
.4260
.4501
.4556
.4415
.4172
.3888
.3557
.3160
.2684
.2150

.0997
.0580
.0603
.1073
.1274
.1373
.1363
.1276
.1121
.0923
.0815
.1255
.1630
.2010
.1909
.1599
.1378
.1086
.1031
.1244
.1559
.1786
.1736
.1552

between dated samples. A cubic spline is continuous and has continuous first and
second derivatives. This latter condition assures that the curve will have a smooth
overall appearance. The spline function can be used to smooth noisy data values and
to interpolate between known points (Reinsch 1967, Wold 1974).
In order to smooth the dated samples published by Aten, a FORTRAN program
was written using a subroutine provided in the International Mathematics and
Statistics Library (1980) for smoothing by cubic splines. The subroutine requires
the user to provide a smoothing parameter, which is used to fit the curve. In fitting
the function, each sample was weighted by the number of valves in the sample so
the curve would fit large samples more closely than small ones. A large value was
selected for the smoothing parameter by examining the data, and this value was
progressively reduced to zero. At this point, the spline curve fits the data exactly
(i.e., no smoothing is done). The results were inspected at each increase of the
smoothing parameter, and the smallest value was selected that produced a curve that
rose monotonically to a single peak and then declined monotonically. Curves were
calculated independently for Interrupted ~igure 1), Early, Middle, and Late growth
stages. The expected proportions for each half-month period in the year were
calculated for each growth category (Table 1). The uncertain category was
computed by summing the four growth stages and subtracting the result from 1.0.
Table 1, then, represents a model of a full year’s expected Rangia growth that is

206

Texas Archeological Society

Mid-Jan
Late Jan
Mid-Feb
Late Feb
Mid-Mar
Late Mar
Mid-Apr
Late Apr
Mid-May
Late May
Mid-June
Late June
Mid-July
Late July
Mid-Aug
Late Aug
Mid-Sept
Late Sept
Mid-Oct
Late Oct
Mid-Nov
Late Nov
Mid-Dec
Late Dec

0.55090
0.61324
0.59308
0.48934
0.38325
0.30755
0.23551
0.16637
0.10081
0.05127
0.03022
0.01810
0.00654
0.03496
0.07935
0.10661
0.12192
0.15230
0.20436
0.23052
0.23604
0.25710
0.32828
0.44777

Rangia counts (N=32):
Proportions (% of total):
Expected:

2
0.0625
0.0482

4
0.1250
0.0827

12
0.3750
0.3905

8
0.2500
0.3156

6
0.1875
0.1630

Figure 2. Aten’s mid-July Rangia sample compared to the model. The length of the line of
astersks/stars shows how well (short) or poorly (long) the sample fits each period. The best
fit is mid-July. The error sum of square is 0.006537. The mean squared error is 0.239391 with
variance 0.033999.

based on the dated samples.
If the calibrated data really reflect the seasonal growth patterns of Rangia
cuneata, they should be correlated with environmental factors known to affect
Rangia growth. Data on air temperature (Aten 1981) and water temperature (Texas
Parks andWildlife Department 1963,1964,1965,1966,1967,1968,1969/70,1972,
1973) in the Galveston Bay area were examined and found to be highly correlated
(r=+.9912). Rangia in the Early, Middle, or Late stages can be considered to be
growing, so the sum of these categories should be correlated with temperature. The
correlation between air temperature and the proportion of Rangia in the Early,
Middle, or Late stage is +.9254. In addition, Aten (1981:195) notes that growth in
Table 2.

Summary of Goodness of Fit Between the Model and the
Dated Rangia Samples
Error Sums of Squares

Sample Size

No.

Minimum

Maximum

Mean

Standard
Deviation

X < 50
50< X < 100
X > 100

4
8
6

.0007
.0009
.0006

.0428
.0121
.0069

. 0157
.0061
.0027

.0187
.0038
.0028

Carlson ~ Rangia Cuneata as Seasonal Indicator

Mid-Jan
Late Jan
Mid-Feb
Late Feb
Mid-Mar
Late Mar
Mid-Apr
Late Apr
Mid-May
Late May
Mid-June
Late June
Mid-July
Late July
Mid-Aug
Late Aug
Mid-Sept
Late Sept
Mid-Oct
Late Oct
Mid-Nov
Late Nov
Mid-Dec
LateDec

0.28260
0.31775
0.29123
0.20582
0.12606
0.08438
0.06902
0.07801
0.09659
0.12818
0.17335
0.18637
0.12868
0.09433
0.09173
0.10022
0.10740
0.10827
0.11564
0.11943
0.11702
0.12342
0.15632
0.22003

Rangia counts (N=200):
Proportions (% of total):
Expected:

207

****************************
********************************
*****************************
*********************
*************
********
*******
********
**********
*************
*****************
*******************
************
*********
*********
**********
***********
***********
************
************
************
************
****************
**********************
48
0.2400
0.2601

52
0.2600
0.4313

32
0.1600
0.!394

46
0.2300
0.0329

22
0.1100
0.1363

Figure 3. Aten’s late April and mid-October samples combined to illustrate a poor fit to the
Rangia seasonality model. The best fit is mid-April. The error sum of squares is 0.069020.
The mean squared error is 0.146743 with variance 0.004675.

proportion of growing Rangia should come in June (mean temperature 81.5°). In
July and August, when the mean temperature increases to 83°F, the proportion of
growing Rangia declines. These data strongly suggest that the major growth cycles
of the species have been captured in the model.
In order to match undated samples to the model, a second FORTRAN computer
program was written. This program compares the sample proportions with each of
the model predictions. For each of the 24 comparisons a goodness--of-fit measure
is calculated that involves summing the differences between the observed and
expected proportions for the four growth periods (the unknown category is not used
in fitting the sample to model). The half-month period with smallest error sum of
squares is selected as the best fit. For each sample, the program displays the error
sum of squares for each half-month period and draws a histogram that reflects the
degree of fit or lack of fit over the whole year. A sample that fits the model will have
a valley in the histogram that indicates a close fit with that half-month or group of
half-months. A deep, narrow valley indicates a close fit with a single half-month,

208

Texas Archeological Society

whereas a broad, gradual valley indicates a poorer fit with any particular half-month
but a general fit with a particular season.
To judge the accuracy of the model and the fitting program, the 18 dated
samples were submitted for seasonality estimates. Thirteen of the samples were
estimated to the exact half-month of their collection. The remaining five samples
were placed in an adjacent half-month interval. All of the samples then, were
classified within a half-month of their true dates. All of the"errors" occurred in the
late summer and early fall months when growth is slowing and most of the valves
are in the Late or Interrupted stage. In addition, the valleys tend to be broader in the
late summer and fall, indicating that changes are taking place more gradually and
that, therefore, it is more difficult to distinguish between adjacent periods. Aten’s
mid-July collection is illustrated as an example of a close fit between the model data
and a modem collection (Figure 2). The results of the test also provide some data
on how well good samples can be expected to fit the model (Table 2). Archeological
samples cannot be expected to fit the model as closely as the data from which the
model was generated do, but very poor fits should be regarded with suspicion.

Mid-Jan
Late Jan
Mid-Feb
Late Feb
Mid-Mar
LateMar
Mid-Apr
Late Apr
Mid-May
Late May
Mid-Jun
Late Jun
Mid-July
Late July
Mid-Aug
Late Aug
Mid-Sept
Late Sept
Mid-Oct
Late Oct
Mid-Nov
Late Nov
Mid-Dec
Late Dec

0.47043
0.48667
0.42872
0.30102
0.18511
0.10368
0.04475
0.01420
0,.01013
0.03657
0.09310
0.13897
0.14652
0.17885
0.22114
0.15094
0.26838
0.28240
0.30648
0.31391
0.30606
0.30831
0.34467
0.41568

Rangia counts (N=295):
Proportions (% of total):
Expected:

47
0.1593
0.0782

102
0.3458
0.3911

88
0.2983
0.3368

23
0.0780
0.0818

35
0.1186
0.1121

Figure 4. A composite sample created by combining all of Aten’s spring samples, which
illustrates a close fit to theRangia seasonality model. The best fit is mid-May. The error sum
of squares is 0.010133. The mean squared error is 0.235696 with variance 0.019410.

Carlson m Rangia Cuneata as Seasonal Indicator
Table 3.

Seasonality Determinations for Published Rangia
Samples

Site

Level (L)
Zone (Z)
Surface (S)

Estimate

Date

41CH32

L1
L2
L3
L4
L5

Late April
Late May
Poor fit
Late May
Poor fit

A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.

41CH46

L1
L2
L3
L4

Late April
Late April
Poor fit
Late April

After A.D. 1100z
A.D. 600-11002
A.D. 500-1000z
A.D. 100-6002

41CH47

L1
L2
L3
L4
L5

Late April
Mid-May
Late May
Poor fit
Late May

A.D. 800?2
A.D. 700?2
A.D. 41X)-600?2
A.D. 100-5002
Late Archaic2

41CHl10

Z1

Late July
Mid-July
Mid-May
Late July
Mid-May
Late May
Mid-July
3-Poor fit

A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.
A.D.

Late April
Mid-May
Mid-May
Poor fit
Poor fit
Mid-July
Mid-June
Mid--July

A.D. 100-5002
A.D. 100-5002
A.D. 100-5002
Archaic2
Archai~
Archaidz
Archaic2
Archaic2

41MG19

Mid-May

Late Prehistoric3

41MG25

Mid-May

41MG29

Late May

41JK7

Mid-May
Late April
Poor fit
Late April
Mid-April
Late April

Late Prehistoric3
Late Prehistoric3
Late Prehistoric3
Late Prehistoric3
Late Prehistoric3
Late Prehistoric3

Z3
Z4

41CH172

L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
L6
L7
L8

1550?2
1400z
1000-14002
500-10002
100-500z

1160-17601
1160-17601
1160-17601
1 !60-17601
1160-17601
1160-17601
1160-17601
1160-17601

41JK41

"lest

Late April

Late Prehistoric3

41JK91

Upper
Cluster

Poor fit
Poor fit
Late April
Poor fit

Late Prehistoric3
Late Prehistoric3
Late Prehistoric3
Archaic/
Late Prehistoric3
Archaic/
Late Prehistoric3
ArctNc3
Arch~c3
continued

Middle
Cluster

Late Apri!
Lower

Cluster

Late April
Late April

209

210

Texas Areheological Society
Table 3, continued
41JKll0

S

Mid-May

?3

41JKl13

S

Mid-May

?3

41JKl14

S
S

Late April
Mid-July

Late Prehistoric3
Late Prehistoric3

41JKl18

S

Late June

Late Prehistoric3

41JK120

S

Late May

?3

41JK125

S
S

Late May
Mid--May

Late Prehistoric3
Late Prehistoric3

41JK128

S

Mid-May

Late Prehistoric3

41JK129

S

Late June

Late Prehistoric3

41JK147

Test

Late April

Late Prehistoric3

41CL35

S

Mid-July

?3

41CL37

S
S

Late June
Mid-July

Archaic3
Archaic3

1 DiUehay 1974
2 Ditlehay 1975b
3 Skelton 1978

Mid-Jan
Late Jan
Mid-Feb
Late Feb
Mid-Mar
Late Mar
Mid-Apr
Late Apr
Mid-May
Late May
Mid-Jun
Late Jun
Mid-July
Late July
Mid-Aug
Late Aug
Mid-Sept
Late Sept
Mid-Oct
Late Oct
Mid-Nov
Late Nov
Mid-Dec
Late Dec

0.56606
0.57683
0.50531
0.35587
0.21709
0.11454
0.03922
0.00282
0.00759
0.05307
0.13101
0.18969
0.20578
0.24258
0.28864
0.32355
0.34669
0.36693
0.39477
0.40316
0.39533
0.39891
0.43826
0.51117

Rangia counts (N=51):
Proportions (percent of total):
Expected:

6
0.1176
0.1473

22
0.4314
0.4406

14
0.2745
0.2320

3
0.0588
0.0522

6
0.1176
0.1279

Figure 5. A sample from archeological site 41JK7 illustrating a close fit to the Rangia
seasonality model. The best fit is late April. The error sum of squares is 0.002815. The mean
squared error is 0.2924785 with variance 0.029107.

Carlson u Rangia Cuneata as Seasonal Indicator

211

Next, a series of mixed samples was created by combining dated samples from
different seasons. The purpose of these experiments was to see if, for example, by
mixing spring and fall collections, the program would erroneously estimate a
summer or winter collection. The results (Figure 3) showed that a bimodal
distribution is created by mixing samples from disparate seasons, which is readily
identified as a poor fit to the model; no half-month period fits well. An added
advantage to the program, then, is that mixed or otherwise inappropriate samples
can be readily identified and eliminated.
A second series of experiments was run simulating collection over a single
season. In these tests, all of the dated samples from a single season were combined
(Figure 4). The best estimate is consistently within the range of the known sample
dates. The valleys appear to be somewhat broader than for single samples, however,
the difference is subtle. This suggests that samples representing a particular season
and samples representing a single collection episode cannot be distinguished from
one another. For example, combining all of the spring collections produces a
composite sample that fits the Late April and Mid-May model values (Figure 4).
This suggests too that the accuracy of this technique for seasonality estimates may
be as good as +1 1/2 months. Considering the simplicity of the technique and the
level of our current understanding of seasonal exploitation by prehistoric populations, this level of accuracy is impressive.
Next, a series of 64 published archeological samples ofRangia, from Chambers
County on the upper Texas coast to Calhoun County on the central Texas coast, was
analyzed (Table 3). Thirteen of the samples provided relatively poorfits to any of
the half-month periods; 51 samples fit one of the model periods. The sample from
the Anaqua site (41JK7) (Story 1968) is illustrated as an example of a good fit
(Figure 5). The analysis shows that the estimates range between mid-April and late
July, a four-month period spanning spring and early summer. Despite differences
in location along the coast and time period, it is clear that the the use of Rangia by
the prehistoric inhabitants of the coast was highly seasonal (Table 4). This confirms

Table

4.

Summary of Archeological
Determinations

Half-Month Period

No.

Seasonality
Percent

Mid-April
Late April
Mid-May
Late May
Mic-June
Late June
Mid-July
Late July

1
16
12
9
1
3
7
2

1.6
25.0
18.8
14.1
1.6
4.7
10.9
3.1

Poor fit

13

20.3

64

100.1

TOTAL

212

Texas Archeological Society

the results of Aten, (1979), Dillehay (1974, 1975b), and Skelton (1978). Some of
the sites listed in Table 3 probably were occupied only for a single season. Others,
however, are larger, multicomponent occupations of specific areas. The fight
clustering of Rangia seasonality determinations suggests a highly scheduled
subsistence pattern involving movements along the coast and, perhaps, inland as
well.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank Gentry Steele for encouraging me to work on theRangia
seasonality problem for a paper presented at the annual meeting of the Society for
American Archaeology in Pittsburgh. I also thank Lawrence Aten for initiating
Rangia seasonality studies by collecting the control samples and recognizing the
potential of the technique. Some of his comments on the original paper have been
incorporated here. Texas A&M University provided the computer facilities for
conducting the analyses. A program to fit Rangia samples to the model distributions, which will run on IBM or compatible microcomputers, is available from the
author.
REFERENCES CITED
Aten, Lawrence E.
1971 Archeological excavations at the Dow-Cleaver site, Brazoria County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project, Technical Bulletin 1.
1981

Determining seasonality of Rangia cuneata from Gulf Coast shell middens.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 52:179-200.

Bedford, W. B.
1972 The physiology of the estuarine clam Rangia cuneata (Gray). Ph.D. dissertation,
Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Byrd, K. M.
1976 The brackish water clam (Rangia cuneata) a prehistoric "staff of life" or a minor
food resource. Louisiana Archaeology 3:23-31.
Ctaassen, Cheryl
1982 Report of recent molluscan seasonality projects in the southeastern United States.
Paper presented at the October 1982 annual meeting of the Southeastern Archaeological Conference, Memphis.
Dillehay, Tom D.
1974 Appendix]II: SeasonalityassessmentofRangiacuneataclamfrom41CH110. In:
Cultural variation on the Texas coast, by Kathleen Gilmore. Texas Archeological
Survey Research Report 44:97-105.
1975a Appendix I: Seasonality ofRangia cuneata shellfish collection. In: Matagorda
Bay area, Texas: A survey of the archeological and historical resources, by G.
Fritz. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 45:159-165.

Carlson--Rangia Cuneata as Seasonal Indicator

213

1975b Appendix ]lI: Shell refuse analysis for the 1973 Wallisville archeologicalproject,
Chambers County, Texas. In: Prehistoric subsistence exploitation in the lower
Trinity River delta, Texas, by T. D. DiUehay. Texas Archeological Survey
Research Report 51:149-162.
1975c Prehistoric subsistence exploitation in the lower Trinity River delta, Texas. Texas
Archeological Survey Research Report 51.
Fairbanks, Lawrence D.
1963 Biodemographic studies of the clam Rangia cuneata gray. Tulane Studies in
Zoology 10(1):3-47.
Fritz, Gayle
1975 MatagordaBay area, Texas: a survey of the archeological and historicalresources.
Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 45.
Gilmore, Kathleen
1974 Cultural variation on the Texas coast: analysis of an aboriginal shell midden,
Wallisville Reservoir, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 44.
Hartwig, F., and B. Dearing
1979 Exploratory data analysis. Sage Quantitative Applications in the Social Sciences
16.
International Mathematics and Statistics Library
1980 IMSL: Library reference manual. Edition 8. Houston, IMSL, Inc.
Kennish, M. J.
1980 Shell microgrowth analysis: Mercenaria mercenaria as a type example for
research in population dynamics. In: Skeletal growth of aquatic organisms:
Biological records of environmental change, edited by D. Rhoades and R. Lutz.
New York. Plenum Press, pp. 255-294.
McGuff, Paul R.
1978 Prehistoric archeological investigations at Palmetto Bend Reservoir: phase I,
Jackson County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 58.
Monks, Gregory
1981 S easonality studies. Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory 4:177-240.
O’Heeron, M. K., Jr.
1966 Some aspects of the ecology ofRangia cuneata (gray). M.A. thesis, Texas A&M
University, College Station.
Reinsch, C. H.
1967 Smoothing by spline function. Numerische Mathematika 10:177-183.
Skelton, D.
1978 Appendix V: The seasonal factor ofR. cuneata clam collecting. In: Prehistoric

214

Texas Archeological Society
archeologicalinvestigations at Palmetto Bend Reservoir: phase i, Jackson County,
Texas, by Paul R. McGuff. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report
45:262-274.

Story, Dee Ann
1968 ArcheologicalinvestigationsattwoCentralTexasGulfCoastsites. StateBuilding
Commission Archeological Program Report 13.
Tarver, J. W., and R. S. Dugas
1973 A study of the clam, Rangia cuneata in Lake Pontchartrain and Lake Maurepas,
Louisiana. Louisiana Wild Life and Fisheries Commission, Oyster, Water
Bottoms, and Seafoods Division Technical Bulletin 5.
Tevesz, M. J. S., and J. G. Carter
1980 Environmental relationships of shell form and structure of unionacean bivalves.
In: Skeletal growth of aquatic organisms: Biological records of environmental
change, edited by D. Rhoades and R. Lutz. New York, Plenum Press, pp. 295-322.
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department
1963 Coastal fisheries project report, Austin.
1964

Coastal fisheries project report, Austin.

1965

Coastal fisheries project report, Austin.

1966

Coastal fisheries project report, Austin.

1967

Coastal fisheries project report, Austin.

1968

Coastal fisheries project report, Austin.

1969

Coastal fisheries project report, Austin.

1972

Coastal fisheries project report, Austin.

1973

Coastal fisheries project report, Austin.

Wold, Svante
1974 Spline functions in data analysis. Technometrics 16(1): 1-11.
Wolfe, D. A., and E. N. Petteway
1968 Growth of Rangia cuneata gray. Chesapeake Science 9(2):99-102.

Utilization of Marine Mollusks by Inhabitants
of the Texas Coast

D. Gentry Steele

ABSTRACT
Along the Texas Coast, marine mollusks were used by the aboriginal
populations both as a significant food resource and as a source of raw material
for the manufacture of tools and ornaments. The utilization of this resource
v aries along the co ast, and this variation is correlated with differences in marine
habitats and the availability of lithic resources. Along the upper Texas coast the
common rangia and the eastern oyster were the major mollusks used as food;
along the central and southern coast a greater variety of marine species were
utilized. More tools and ornaments were manufactured from mollusks along
the central and southern parts of the coast.
INTRODUCTION

Many Texas coastal archeological sites can be recognized by the shell refuse
littering the area, yet the aboriginal use of these marine resources was one of the last
questions seriously examined by archeologists working in the state. The early
period of archeological research concentrated on finding evidence of prehistoric
occupation, establishing the cultural sequences, tracing historic groups back through
time, and understanding Texas’s role in the origin of Mesoamerican cultures and
their diffusion into the Mississippi Valley. This phase of archeological research has
been well reviewed by Aten (1979, 1983), Campbell (1960), Dillehay (1975),
Hester(1980a), and Patterson (1979a, 1979b).
This early research did not focus on analyses of subsistence patterns, such as
utilization of marine resources, but it did establish the importance of marine
resources to dwellers of the Texas coast. The concentration of shell midden sites
along the upper Texas coast was first documented by Sayles (1935), whereas the
significance of the marine resources to peoples of the central and southern coast of
Texas was first documented by Martin (1929, 1930) and Sayles (1935). In a more
systematic fashion, Campbell’s research on the central coast of Texas emphasized
the importance of shell as a resource for production of tools (1947,1952,1956,
1958a, and 1958b), whereas MacNeish’s work emphasized the shell industry of the
south (1947).
Only in the last two decades have archeologists systematically pursued
questions concerning the use of marine resources by Indians of the Texas coast. For
the upper Texas coast, Ambler’s excavations in the Trinity River delta (1973) and
Dillehay’s report (1975) on prehistoric patterns of subsistence in the lower Trinity
Bay area are landmark research efforts. For the central coast of Texas the work of
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 58 (1987)

216

Texas Archeological Society

Story (1968) in the Corpus Christi Bay area is especially noteworthy for its
ecological orientation. Her work was followed shortly by research conducted by
Hester (1969a, 1971b) and Fritz (1975). In these studies, the first serious consideration of the faunal remains and human subsistence patterns was presented, as well
as traditional research on the artifacts made of bone and shell. Since these studies
appeared, Aten (1979,1983), Carlson, Steele, and Bruno (1982), Day, Laurens-Day,
and Prewitt (1981),Smith (1983a, 1983b), and Steele and Mokry (1985) have
continued to pursue environmentally oriented questions. Janota’s study of the shell
ornaments of the central and upper Texas coast (1980) and Mokry’s examination of
whelk shell adze technology (1980) are two studies that specifically examine one
aspect of aboriginal use of marine resources
What is lacking for the Texas coast is a review of the aboriginal use of marine
resources for the entire region focused on recognition of regional patterns and
explaining the reasons for these patterns. This paper is an initial review that
concentrates on aboriginal use of mollusks as food and for the production of tools
and ornaments. It is restricted to the mollusks because insufficient data is available
to warrant inclusion of other marine resources such as salt and fish. The emphasis
is on analysis of geographic variation in the use of species, since data are too limited
to support analysis of temporal and seasonal use of mollusks. However, the
literature on these topics will be discussed where it is pertinent.

SITES AND MATERIALS
This review of aboriginal use of marine mollusks is based on material recovered
from 111 sites and the Anderson Collection, the most extensive collection of
mollusks recovered from archeological sites in the Rio Grande delta region, made
by A. E. Anderson during the first half of the century. After Anderson’s death, the
collection was lent to The University of Texas at Austin (Prewitt 1974a). Tabulation
of the mollusks in the Anderson Collection is based on a brief paper of Anderson’s
(1932) and on the author’s examination of material from that collection that is
housed in the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin.
To facilitate regional comparisons, materials from the sites have been clustered
into 15 separate localities along the coast (Figure 1, Table 1).
Identifications made by the original analysts generally have been accepted, but
species identifications of shells originally identified as oyster or whelk are tentative.
Since all sites were not sampled originally in the same fashion, precautions
should be taken in evaluating the data (Table 2). No distinction is made on Table
1 between one or a thousand specimens since frequencies are not available for the
various species at all sites. Certain taxa, such as Rangia, Crassostrea, or Busycon,
are quite frequent, but species such as Diodra cayenensis or Cerithideapliculosa are
never very frequent. In these cases, subjective evaluations of species frequency are
presented, but in cases where specimens of species appear in apparent equal
frequency, no frequency comparisons are made. Too, absence of a species from a
locality may be significant, as is the absence of Rangia cuneata from southern
coastal sites, but the absence from a locality of species that show up only rarely in

Steele m Utilization of Marine Mollusks

re. 6 ~ a

217

_A

~

T

X

Bay
Y
sland

.Lavaca Bay
Matagorda Bay
’San Antonio Bay
-Aransas Bay
ous Christi Bay
"Nueces Bay

Gulf of Mexico
County Key

-Baffin Bay

A-Zavala
B- Dimmit
C - McMullen
D- Live Oak
E- Kleberg
F- Goliad
G - Victoria
H- Williamson
I - Matagorda

Island
una Madre

0
O

lOO mile
1oo kilometers

J - Brazoria
K - Harris
L - Galveston

Figure 1. Map of the Coastal Bend of Texas showing the 15 localities from which sites were
sampled.

all sites may simply be a result of sampling error.
Variation in mollusk use through time, and seasonal variation in the use of
mollusks are discussed only briefly because little data are available on them. One
exception concerns seasonal utilization of rangia, which is discussed by Carlson
(1988).
FACTORS AFFECTING DISTRIBUTION AND USE OF MOLLUSKS
Three major factors that affect the distribution of mollusks along the Texas
coast are (1) the structure of the coastline itself, (2) the amount of rainfall in the
region and the amount of runoff into the bays, and (3) the scarcity of lithic materials
along the Gulf Coast.
The most distinctive features of the Texas coastline are the many embayments
that flood the m outh s of the rivers, and the peninsulas and barrier islands that parallel

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

218
Table

1.

Sites from 15 Localities Along the Gulf Coast
Containing Material Examined or Cited

Map
No.

County

Coastal Area

1

Chambers

Trinity
Bay

2

Harris

3

Galveston

Galveston
Bay
Galveston
Bay and
Gulf of

Brazoria
4

Brazoria

Mexico
Gulf of
Mexico

5
6
7

Wharton
Matagorda
Jackson

Matagorda Bay
Matagorda Bay
Lavaca Bay

8
9

Victoria
Calhoun

Lavaca Bay
Lavaca Bay

10

Aransas

Aransas Bay

11

San Patricio

12

Nueces

Corpus
Christi Bay
Nueces Bay

13

Kleberg

Laguna
Madre
Baffin Bay

14

Cameron

Laguna
Madre and
Gulf of
Mexico

Hidalgo
Willacy
15

Cameron

Laguna
Madre and
Gulf of
Mexico

Sites

41CH1, 16, 20,
24, 31-33, 36, 40,
46, 47, 52, 80,
88, 98, 106, 110,
137, 169, 172
41HR50, 56, 61,
80, 81, 85
41GV1, 5,
41BO2

41BO4, 11-13,
35, 41, 50, 126

41WH8
41MG8-25, 29
41JK7, 41, 47,
91, 110-120,
122, 124-130,
132-142, 144,
41VT!
41CL8, 9, 2132, 35, 41, 42,
44
41AS1, 3
41SP43
41NUll, 35,
65, 101, 102104, 169, 184,
185, 221

41KL13, 71
41CF2, 18
19, 97-102

41HG89
41WY48, 51,
60, 74
Anderson
Collection

of Texas

Source

Ambler 1973,
Aten 1983,
Dillehay 1975,
Gilmore 1974,
Shafer 1966
Aten et al. 1976,
Aten 1983
Aten 1965,
Campbell 1957
Hole and
Wilkinson 1973
Aten 1971, 1983,
Dering & Ayers
1977, Hamilton
1988, Hollingsworth
1981, This study
Hudgins 1984
Fritz 1975
Fritz 1975,
McGuff 1978,
Story 1968
This study
Fritz 1975

Campbell 1947,
1952
Story 1968,
This study
Carlson et al.
1982, Steele &
Mokry 1985,
Riklis & Gunter
1986, Ricklis
1986, This study
Campbell 1956
Hester 1969a, 1971,
Smith 1983b
Collins et al. 1969,
Hall & Grombacher
1974, Prewitt,
1974a, This study
Day et al. 1981
Day et al. 1981
Anderson 1932,
This study

Steele ~ Utilization of Marine Mollusks

219

the coastline, protecting these bays (Figure 1). In the northeast comer of the state,
Galveston Bay and Trinity bays are almost completely separated from the Gulf of
Mexico by Bolivar Peninsula and Galveston Island (Figure 1, localities 1 to 3).
These bays, because of their isolation, together with high annual rainfall and
resultant discharge into them, are brackish water bays that support few mollusk
species. South of Galveston Bay (near locality 4, Figure 1), a short stretch of the
Texas coast directly fronts the Gulf; like the seaward rim of Galveston Island and
Bolivar Peninsula, it provided hunters and gatherers access to a marine environment
and to fauna more reminiscent of the southern bays than of the adjacent brackish
water bays.
The next embayment is Matagorda Bay, with the smaller arms Lavaca Bay,
Carancahua Bay, and Tres Palacios Bay flooding the lower reaches of the streams
that bear the same names (near localities 6 and 7, Figure 1). Matagorda Bay, like
Galveston Bay, is bounded seaward by barrier islands and peninsulas, but less
freshwater enters the bay, so Matagorda Bay’s mollusk fauna is more reminiscent
of the Gulf of Mexico than of Galveston Bay.
Directly south of Matagorda Bay are the narrow San Antonio Bay, the larger
sprawling Aransas Bay with smaller embayments Copano and St. Charles bays
(near locality 10), and Corpus Christi Bay with smaller Nueces Bay and Cayo del
Oso (near localities 11 and 12, Figure 1). All three of these bays, like Matagorda
Bay, are sufficiently saline to support a highly varied marine fauna reminiscent of
the Gulf of Mexico.
South of Corpus Christi Bay stretches Laguna Madre (localities 14 and 15,
Figure 1), separating the mainland from Padre Island, which opens to the Gulf only
at its southern and northern tips and has little freshwater entering from the mainland.
Consequently, of all Texas bays, the saline Laguna Madre supports a marine fauna
most like that of the Gulf of Mexico. Baffin Bay (locality 13) with its sister bays
Cayo del Grullo and Alazan Bay, is the only embayment that breaks the main
coastline fronting Laguna Madre, flooding one of the most arid stretches of the
Texas coast. It is one of the most saline bays along the Gulf, and it appears, in fact,
that this bay complex has grown more saline during the period of human occupation
(Hester 1971a, 1980a, Smith 1983a, 1983b).
The second factor affecting mollusk distributions and their value to aboriginal
populations is the amount of rainfall along the coast, together with the amount of
water entering the bays from the rivers. Today, a marked precipitation gradient
characterizes the Texas coast. The current annual precipitation means range
between 112 cm (44 inches) along the upper coast and 71 cm (28 inches) at the
mouth of the Rio Grande (Figure 2).
The upper Texas coast receives the major part of both precipitation and runoff
for the state. The Colorado, Brazos, Trinity, Neches, and Sabine Rivers, which enter
the upper half of the Texas coast, drain well over half of the entire landmass of
Texas. On the other hand, the Lavaca, Guadalupe, San Antonio, Aransas, and
Nueces Rivers, short rivers draining only the base of the Edwards Plateau and the
south Texas plains, cross the central part of the coast, with discharges far less than
those of the rivers of the upper Texas coast. Between the Nueces and the Rio Grande

220
Table

Texas Archeological Society
2.

Species of Marine Mollusks Recovered
Along the Gulf Coast of Texas1

Species
(Common name in parentheses)
Aequipecten irradians
amplicostatus (Atlantic
bay scallop)
Anadara sp. indet.
(Ark)
Anadara transversa
(Transverse ark)
Atrina serrata
(Saw-tooth pen shell)
Brachiodontes sp. indet.
(Scorched mussel)
Busycon sp. indet. (Whelk)
Callista nimbosa
(Sunray venus)
Cerithida pIicuIosa
(Plicate horn shell)
Chione cancellata
(Cross-barred venus)
Crossostrea virginica
(Eastern oyster)
Crepidula fornicata
(Common Atlantic slipper)
Cyrtopleura costata
(Angel wing)
Diodora cayenensis
(Keyhole limpet)
Dosinia discus (Disk dosinia)
Fisciolaria lilium
(Banded tulip)"
Geukensia demissa
(Ribbed mussel)
Ischadium recurvum
(Hooked mussel)
Laevicardium robustum
(Giant Atlantic cockle)
Littorina irrorata
(Marsh periwinkle)
Lucinia floridana
(Florida lucina)
Mercenaria campechiensis
(Southern quahog)
Murex pomum (Apple murex)
Noetia ponderosa
(Ponderous ark)
OIiva savana (Lettered olive)
OIivella dealbata
(Whitened dwarf olive)
Ostrea equestris

in

15

Localities

Locality
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

11 12 13 14 15

S-SB-- S S SS

S

S

S

SS-S
ABBBSSBABB

S

B

A A A

AAASB

-

B

B

S

A

S

S

S

.... SS

A A
A

S

S
SS

S

-

S

S-SS-ABASB

S

S

S

S

-

S-

S

S

S

S

A

S

s
--AS
S

S

S

S

S

-

S-SSS
S

S
S

S
S

S

-

S
A-A-A--A-S

S
S

A A A
S A A

S-SSB
S

SS
S

--ASSSB-SS

S

SS

S

--S

S

S
S

A

continued

Steele m Utilization of Marine Mollusks

221

Table 2, continued

(Horse oyster)
Phalium granulatum

(Scotch bonnet)"
Pleurophloca gigantea
(Florida horse conch)
Polinices duplicatus
(Shark’s eye)
Prunum apicina
(Common Atlantic
marginella)
Rangia cuneata
(Common rangia)
Rangia flexuosa
(Brown rangia)
Thais haemastoma floridana
(Florida rock shell)
Trachycardium sp. indet.
(Cockle)

-B

S

S

A-A

-

A

S-SSS

-

S

---A---A
B-SS SSBS S--S

S
S

A A
-

S
S

S

SS-S

t Based on the taxonomic list of Andrews, 1971
S (Shell) unmodified specimens
A (Artifact) modified specimen
B (Both) both unmodified and modified specimens

lies a fourth of the entire Texas coastline, but it is drained by no constantly flowing
river.
These conditions were probably less harsh in the past, but the precipitation
gradient apparently has existed at least since Cabeza de Vaca’s time. Krieger
(1956), in his review of the food habits of aboriginals along the Texas coast based
on the journals of Cabeza de Vaca, describes three regions: one near Galveston Bay,
one inland from Lavaca B ay, and the expanse between the Nueces River and the Rio
Grande. Although the relative amounts of rainfall are not given for these regions
by Cabeza de Vaca, his descriptions closely fit the conditions for the regions as they
are now.
We do not know how far into antiquity these conditions persisted. Hester
(1980b) and Smith (1983b) have reviewed changing salinity in Baffin Bay. Based
primarily upon the work of Behrens (1963, 1971, and 1972), they report that until
4,000 years ago Baffin Bay supported a varied marine fauna similar to what is found
in Aransas and Corpus Christi bays today. Then, with the development of the barrier
islands around 5,000 years ago and the gradual reduction in the amount of fresh
water discharging into the bay, the bay became too saline to support the varied
mollusk fauna.
Ricklis and Gunter (1986) reported recovering only brown rangia in Late
Archaic deposits at 41NU 184 and 41NU221, but by Late Prehistoric times, both the
brown and the common rangia were being harvested at 41NU221. They inferred that
this reflected increasingly brackish water conditions in the area of the site as the
developing barrier islands slowed the dispersion of the fresh water emptying into

222

Texas Archeological Society

2O

32

14

2G
2(
0

2OO

Miles

2O

Figure 2. Map of Texas showing the precipitation gradient along the coast. Numbers give
the mean annual precipitation recorded in inches along the representative lines.
Corpus Christi Bay from the Nueces River. This is the reverse of the trend
postulated for Baffin Bay, where the developing barrier islands, water evaporation,
and the lack of a constant fresh water discharge resulted in increasing rather than
decreasing salinities.
Aten, Chandler, Wesolowskyl and Malina (1976) reported sequential changes
in mollusk fauna recovered at the Harris County Boys’ School site similar to those
seen in Nueces Bay. Here the changes indicated a shift from an early brackish water
fauna dominated by common rangia to a more saline fauna with increasing numbers
of oysters, then a final return in the most recent times to a brackish fauna, again
dominated by the common rangia. Aten (1983) suggested that these changes
reflected the development of the Galveston Bay estuary.
From these three examples it is apparent that conditions along the coastline
have changed during the period of human occupation. The creation of the barrier
islands was a major change that could have affected conditions in all of the estuarine

Steele ~ Utilization of Marine Mollusks

223

bays, limiting the exchange of bay waters and those of the open Gulf. This would
have resulted in the gradual establishment of either brackish water estuaries such as
the upper reaches of Galveston and Nueces bays, or hypersaline estuaries such as
Baffin Bay, depending upon the degree of freshwater discharge into the bays.
Availability of marine fauna along the Texas coast could have been affected
not only by the establishment of the barrier island system, but also by the changing
environmental conditions during the late Quaternary. Aten, in summarizing the
climatological data available for the upper Texas coast (1983), points out that with
the last recession of the glaciers there was a gradual submergence of the Texas
coastline. Between 10,030 and 8490 B.P. river flow was reduced to about what it
is today, cloud cover dissipated, and seasonal temperatures became increasingly
divergent. Between 8490 and 5060 B.P. the area became markedly more arid and
warmer, conditions that supported the formation of caliche deposits; during this
period river discharge may have dropped. S ince 5060 B.P. there has been a gradual
change to present conditions. These broad changes were taking place along the
upper Texas coast together with analogous changes along the southern part of the
coast, but the exact nature of the changes and their effects upon the mollusk fauna
are unknown.
In summary, the Texas coastline today is a complex series of bays nestled
behind a protective screen of barrier islands and peninsulas. From the upper Texas
coast southward these bays form a graded series of saline environments from the
brackish Trinity and Galveston bays to the highly saline Baffin Bay complex.
Various aboriginal populations living along the Texas coast then, would not have
harvested from a homogeneous marine environment, but rather from a variety of
environmental zones with specific foraging opportunities and limitations that
probably required adaptation to changes through time.
The third factor to be considered when examining mollusk utilization is the
scarcity of locally available lithic material for tools and ornaments. The land
bordering the coast is a broad, gently rising plain of late Pleistocene sands and
aeolian deposits resting on Holocene clays. These deposits, which extended as far
as 145 km (90 miles) inland, are virtually barren of rock or gravel of suitable size
for the production of artifacts (Aten 1979,Hester 1980a), except for the upper Texas
coast where (Aten 1983) has postulated that gastroliths from crocodilians were
locally available lithic raw material (Figure 3). Except for this rather unusual
source, aborigines had to look inland for lithic materials.
The nearest chert- and silicified wood-bearing deposits are along a belt about
95 to 145 km (60 to 90 miles) inland that broadly parallels the coastline. Here,
silicified wood fragments and stream-worked chert pebbles and cobbles are found
on the surface of locally exposed Pliocene and early Pleistocene deposits. Further
inland, late Pleistocene stream gravels are exposed along stream beds and abandoned terraces. These gravels, washed down during the last phases of the Pleistocene, contain some large cobbles and appear to have been a useful source for chert.
In the eastern part of the state the Manning Formation (Brown 1976) is a more
localized source for fused glass, and one of the major sources for chert and
precipitated flint is the limestone exposures of the Edwards Plateau. In this region,

224

Texas Archeological Society

TEXAS

\
Sntclfled Woods
~, Manning Fused Glass
Uvalda Gravels
Plateau Charts

~eA Alligator Gastrolltha
Alibatas Flint

Big Band Cherts
o
MilII

Figure 3. Map of Texas showing sources of lithic raw material that were available to coastal
populations. Numbered localities are specific sources. Prepared in consultation with Harry
J. Shafer and with information from Aten (1983), Brown (1976), and Hester (1980a).
large chert nodules can be found eroding from some of the limestones; the region
undoubtedly was one of the ultimate sources for chert in stream gravels. In the Big
Bend region of West Texas are some other important sources for chert, and some
of this material has been found downstream along the Rio Grande. One of the most
widely recognized sources of lithic raw material, the Alibates Quarry, is in the
Panhandle region of Texas, but little or no Alibates flint has been recovered along
the coast.
Several authors, including Aten (1971, 1983) and Hester (1980a), have noted
these extensive inland lithic sources and the lack of lithic resources along the Texas
coast. They have pointed out that there must have been trading relations with inland
groups for acquisition of the raw materials needed for lithic tools. Cabeza de Vaca
referred to these trading relations when he noted his value to the Indians as a trader
carrying conchs and other things inland (Newcomb 1961:70). As a result of the
scarcity of lithic deposits along the Texas coast, mollusk shells were widely use(]
as raw material for the manufacture of tools and ornaments.
MOLLUSKS AS A SUBSISTENCE RESOURCE

Food for the hunters and gatherers who lived along the Texas coast may not
have been abundant throughout the year. Anyone who has read Cabeza de Vaca’s
experiences among the aborigines from 1528 to 1536 comes away with a strong

Steele u Utilization of Marine Mollusks

225

feeling that hunger was a common condition to contend with, and that little that lived
and could be collected was not eaten. Based primarily on Cabeza de Vaca,
Newcomb (1961:39) stated that the Coahuiltecans living in the central and south
coastal regions of Texas had available the fewest usable resources of any Texas
Indian group. For the coastally locatedKarankawa Indians Newcomb (1961:66-67)
stated that
it is difficult, in fact, not to think of Karankawas as harvesting a little here, then hastening
to another spot to reap another minuscule harvest, and on to a third place, and so on
continuously, seldom starving but never having a truly bountiful or fully dependable
subsistence either. They were no more able to overlook a potential food source than
were the Coahuiltecans.
Krieger’s summary of the food habits of Texas coastal Indians, gleaned from
his translation of the journals of Cabeza de Vaca (1956), also presents a grim picture
of the subsistence base for hunters and gatherers along the coast. For the central part
of the coast Krieger (1956:52) stated that there apparently were only two seasons
of comparative plenty, one in the fall when the pecans were ripe and available in the
river bottoms and one in the summer when the Indians journeyed inland to harvest
the fruit of the prickly-pears. For the southern part of the Texas coast starvation was
the year-round rule except for the season when the tunas and young stems
ripened(Krieger 1956:55).
Whether this rather harsh outlook for subsistence reflected conditions present
only for a short period of the sixteenth century or only the biased view of Cabeza
de Vaca, food hardly could have gone unclaimed and uneaten, and any mollusks,
either alive or with hermit crabs in the abandoned shells, found in sites could have
served as food. Therefore, most of the 34 species of mollusks recovered from the
15 locations probably served as food. Beyond this broad level of generalization are
some patterns of utilization.
Of the 34 species recovered and identified, 22 were recovered in more than one
locality and 13 were found in five or more localities. Comparison of the number
of species found in each locality indicates that fewer species were utilized along the
upper Texas coast, whereas a more varied mollusk fauna was utilized as food along
the central and southern parts of the coast ~igure 4). This variation from locality
to locality may be a result of sampling error rather than a reflection of reality, but
other lines of evidence suggest that fewer species were important in the subsistence
pattern of Indians of the upper Texas coast. Virtually all researchers working in this
area have found that most shell middens were composed predominantly of rangia,
with fewer middens composed predominantly of eastern oyster (Ambler 1973, Aten
1965, 1971, 1979, 1983, Campbell 1957, Dering and Ayers 1977, Dillehay 1975,
Gilmore 1974, Hole and Wilkinson 1973, Hollingsworth 1981, and Shafer 1966).
Ambler (1973) in particular has discussed how the rangia populations, because of
their abundance in the slow-moving brackish waters, could be easily harvested to
serve as a staple resource during most of the year. On the other hand, mollusk
samples recovered from sites along the central part of the coastline are far more
varied in species, and usually several species such as eastern oyster, southern
quahog, and specimens of the whelk are equally common. Exceptions to this
generalization on the upper coast of Texas may be sites with ready access to the Gulf

226

Texas Archeological Society

of Mexico’ s more varied mollusk fauna (Localities 3 and 4). Aten ( 1983), in listing
eight species of marine mollusks recovered from 41BO4 (Locality 4), noted the
large number of species recovered at this site compared to other upper Texas coast
sites he had sampled. He also noted that the site was within 5.5 km of the Gulf of
Mexico.
There may be regional differences in the numbers of species harvested, but five
species appear to have been utilized consistently along the entire coastline: the
Atlantic bay scallop, the whelk, the eastern oyster, the giant Atlantic cockle, and the
lettered olive. Of these, the scallop, whelk, and oyster are found frequently enough
in one or more sites to indicate that they were indeed eaten consistently and were
harvested frequently enough to be of significant value. The giant Atlantic cockle
and the lettered olive, on the other hand, may have been of more value as tools or
ornaments than as food. Neither of these species occurs with high enough frequency
in any sample examined by the author to suggest that they could have been a major
mollusk food resource. The fact that shells found in sites are usually modified casts
further suspicion of use of the lettered olive as food.
The value of the giant Atlantic cockle as a substantial food resource is even
more questionable. According to Andrews (1971), this species is found at the

PRECIPITATION
44"

20

32N

:15

tL
o
rr
W
X
Z

:10

I,

5

I
I
I

I
I
I
0

~

I

I

:t

2

3

4

5

~

~

I

I

6

7

8

9

I

I

I

I

I

I

:10 :1::1 :12 :13 :14 :15

LOCALITIES
Figure 4. Graph showing the number of species of mollusks reported at the 15 localities on
Figure 1.

Steele -- Utilization of Marine Mollusks

227

mouths of the bays,and offshore from the barrier islands, so it is probable that this
species was harvested at ocean front sites not yet discovered, or that the occasional
shells found in the sites were acquired through trade.
It is possible to document not only differences in the numbers of species
harvested from locality to locality, but also the relative importance of specific
species in different localities. One of the most dramatic regional variations is found
in the distribution and relative importance of the two species ofrangia. The common
rangia dominates the shell middens in Trinity and Galveston bays. Here, many of
the middens are composed almost exclusively of this species, and they are so
abundant and so large that they have been used as a shell resource for present day
construction proposes (Ambler 1973; Shafer 1966). In the central coastal bays of
Matagorda, San Antonio, and Aransas, the common rangia occurs much less
frequently, and in Corpus Christi Bay is found only at sites along the upper reaches
of Oso Creek and the lower reaches of the Nueces River. South of Corpus Christi
Bay the common rangia has not been documented. The brown rangia, on the other
hand, is recovered most frequently in the Corpus Christi Bay area, particularly in
Archaic horizons. These distributional differences for the rangia species reflect the
presence of more brackish bays suitable for the common rangia to the north along
the upper Texas coast and saline bays suitable for the brown rangia to the south
One note of interest concerning the possible method ofprocessing ofrangia can
also be made. At site 41BO35, Hollingsworth (1981) reported dwelling platforms
composed of uniformly small specimens of the common rangia, and Hollingsworth
and Polan (personal communication 1983) stated that many were still articulated,
unbroken, and unburned. He tentatively interpreted this as evidence that the Indians
were boiling the rangia before eating them, rather than shucking them alive and
using the shells as flooring.
The common rangia and the ubiquitous eastern oyster were the apparent main
mollusk fare along the upper Texas coast, but a different group of mollusks seems
to have been a more significant food resource along the central and southern parts
of the coast. From Matagorda Bay southward, the eastern oyster, Atlantic bay
scallop, southern quahog, sunray venus, and whelks dominate the shell middens. Of
these, the eastern oyster, Atlantic bay scallop, and southern quahog can be found in
the bays today, and they can be harvested by techniques similar to those used for the
common rangia. Of these three, the eastern oyster seems to be the most frequent in
these bays.
Evaluating the sunray venus as a food resource is more difficult. Today,
although this species is virtually absent from the bays (Andrews 1971; personal
experience), fossil specimens eroded out of submerged muds wash up frequently
along the bayshores. In some sites around Aransas and Corpus Christi bays, shell
fragments of the sunray venus have been recovered, so the bays may have supported
live colonies of this species in the recent past that may have been harvested for their
food value. However, shells of this species were commonly modified and used for
a variety of tools, so it is possible that only the shells of this species were collected.
It is the author’s opinion, however, that shells and fragments of shells in sites along
Oso Creek occur at sufficiently high frequencies to suggest that live colonies may

228

Texas Archeological Society

have been harvested (Steele and Mokry 1985). Hester (1971a) also reported the
sunray venus as one of the most abundant mollusks at sites around Baffin Bay,
further suggesting the possible use of the species as a food resource, but Smith
(1983b) proposed that only fossil shells were harvested around Baffin Bay.
The whelk also is a difficult species to evaluate. For the purposes of this paper,
all species of Busycon are lumped into the single taxonomic category since, in many
sites, the only parts of the shell found are modified fragments of the body whorl or
columella, and these cannot always be identified to species. But not all whelk shells
recovered from central and southern coastal sites have been modified into artifacts,
so they probably served as food as well (Steele and Mokry 1985). Additionally, at
sites along Oso Creek near Corpus Christi Bay, whelk shells of a wide variety of
sizes were recovered, indicating that the aborigines were not selecting specific sizes
for manufacturing material. Some shells have a hole punched through the body
whorl opposite the aperture, a common method used today to remove the body of
the gastropod. The whelk’s lower frequencies in sites along the upper Texas coast
suggests that it was either less important as a food resource there, or that the shells
were collected and utilized for artifact production only, serving little value as a food
resource. Hollingsworth and Polan (personal communication, 1983) reported only
five or six whelks from site 41BO35 in Brazoria County (Locality 2), two of these
had segments cut from the body whorl.
All species probably were harvested when possible for food; Busycon perversum is the species most commonly recovered in the shallow flats of the bays, and
it is this species that is most commonly recovered from the sites near Oso Bay
(Steele and Mokry 1985). Unlike the bivalves described above, whelks are carnivores that forage over the flats where they can be caught on bait (Andrews 1971).
Also, abandoned shells of whelks are taken over by hermit crabs, which can in turn
be harvested for food. So whelks and hermit crabs are scattered more sporadically
over the bays, and, although baited traps could have been used, they would have
required wider foraging by the aborigines.
The last species to be considered separately as a food resource is the horse
oyster, noted only for Baffin Bay, where it has proven to be of dietary significance.
However, this species has provided the only substantial data for a temporal change
in the use of mollusks along the Texas coast. Smith (1983a, 1983b) points out that
the horse oyster is most frequent in the late prehistoric sites along Baffin Bay, and
suggests that this frequency was the inadvertent result of the increasing salinity of
Baffin Bay. The increasing salinity of the bay destroyed the bay as a habitat for most
species, except for the horse oyster, which prefers these saline conditions. So the
change in the frequency of this species in archeological sites probably reflects a
change in availability of species, rather than a change in dietary preferences. Hester
(1980b) also has addressed the problem of changing salinity in Baffin Bay,
suggesting that as the bay became hypersaline, the aborigines ate fewer mollusks.
Although commonly harvested species appeared to have been consistently significant food resources, some species may have been collected opportunistically,
brought to the site unintentionally, or may have entered by other means. Species of
the genus Crepidula, for instance, could have been brought to the site attached to

Steele -- Utilization of Marine Mollusks

229

oysters, shark’s eyes, whelks, or other intentionally harvested mollusks, but
however acquired, they may have been eaten. Two other species, the marsh
periwinkle (Litorina irrorata) and plicate horn shell (Cerithidea pliculosa) feed
over the mud flats of the bays during low tide and could have been harvested
unintentionally with marsh grasses. They could have been brought to sites also by
birds, but their small size and low frequency in sites clearly indicate that they were
of only minor importance.
In summary, the Atlantic bay scallop and the eastern oyster undoubtedly were
used along the entire coastline. The whelks, the giant Atlantic cockle, and the
lettered olive also are found in sites along the entire coastline, but their value as food
is less well documented. It is also possible to see regional variations in the number
of species harvested; more species were harvested in the southern bays and fewer
species in the northern bays, and some species were of only regional subsistence
value. The common rangia proved to be of great significance along the upper Texas
coast and of less and less value southward. On the other hand, the southern quahog
and sunray venus proved to be of greater regional significance in the central and
southern parts of the coast. The whelk was shown to be eaten along the central and
southern coast, and possibly along the upper coast as well, and finally, the horse
oyster was documented as of local significance only in Baffin Bay.
Some questions about seasonal and temporal variations in harvest time cannot
be answered in a simple presence-or-absence distribution chart. Among the Texas
coastal species, only the common rangia has been the subject of seasonality studies.
By determining that shell growth is correlated with seasons, and thereby determining what growth phase the shellfish was in at death, Aten (1981,1983) has estimated
that the common rangia was harvested mainly in the early summer along the upper
Texas coast; common rangia recovered from sites along Corpus Christi Bay
apparently were harvested earlier, from late April to late May (Carlson 1988,Ricklis
1986).
One reason why there is so little data on temporal variation of subsistence
patterns is that the Texas coastline has undergone gradual flooding since the end of
the Pleistocene, which has inundated earlier shorelines and sites. As a result, most
sites that are known represent only Middle and Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric
times; no Paleo-Indian shell midden sites have been documented along the Texas
coast. This problem of identifying earlier coastal sites and analyzing temporal
variation in coastal adaptations is not unique to Texas. All reviewers of North
American coastal archeology have noted the flooding of the coastline, but they do
not agree on the effects this has had on adaptations of populations to coastal
environments (Clark and Workman 1983, DePratter 1983, Gagliano 1983, Sanger
1983, Stewart and Custer 1983). Stewart and Custer (1983) believe the flooding of
the coastline has resulted in increasing use of marine resources by coastal populations, whereas DePratter (1983) believes there has been little increase during the last
4,500 years in the utilization of marine resources along the southeastern Atlantic
coast. For theGulfCoast, Gagliano(1983) documentedtheuseofcoastalresources
back through the Late Archaic, but did not specifically address the issue of whether
increasing use of resources could be documented.

230

Texas Archeological Society

In addition to the flooding of the coastal margin, archeologists along the Texas
coast must also deal with the problem of the relatively slow rate of soil deposition,
particularly in the central and southern parts of the coast, which has resulted in
mixing of the faunal debris in what multicomponent sites there are. Both Corbin’s
(1974,1976) reviews of the Texas Archaic and cultural sequence of the central coast
and Patterson’s reviews of the upper Texas coast (1979a and 1979b, 1985) have
summarized the literature pertaining to cultural sequence, but neither found
evidence documenting changing subsistence patterns through time.
As already mentioned, exceptions to the lack of evidence for temporal variation
are found in the adaptation to shifting resources in Baffin Bay (Smith 1983a, 1983),
Nueces Bay ~icklis and Gunter 1986), and Galveston Bay (Aten et al. 1976). In
Baffin Bay the shift was to increased reliance on the horse oyster; in Nueces Bay the
shift was from brown rangia to a combination of brown and common rangia; in
Galveston Bay the shift was from the common rangia to the eastern oyster, followed
by a return to greater use of common rangia.
MOLLUSKS AS RAW MATERIAL FOR TOOLS AND ORNAMENTS

In addition to serving as food, mollusks, through their shells, served also as raw
material for the manufacture of artifacts. In discussing shell artifacts the topics
considered are (1) the species used and the types of artifacts produced, (2) methods
of preparing artifacts, (3) regional variations in the manufacture and use of shell
artifacts, and (4) evidence of the trade of these shells and artifacts inland. ReSearchers particularly interested in these topics should consult Anderson (1932), Campbell
(1947, 1952, 1956, 1958a and 1958b), Hall (1981), Hester (1969a, 1969b, 1971a,
1971b, 1980a), Janota (1980), Mokry (1980), Steele and Mokry (1985), and Story
(1968).
Both utilitarian and ornamental artifacts were made by Texas coastal Indians.
S hells used for tools and other utilitarian needs are the whelks, sunray venus, eastern
oyster, banded tulip, horse conch, and common rangia. Discarded shells have been
reported in house platforms; Aten (1971) and Hollingsworth (1981) reported
platforms composed of the common rangia at 41BO35 in the upper Texas coastal
area. There, many of the platforms appeared to be composed of uniformly small
shells of the common rangia, suggesting that small shells were the preferred
platform material (Hollingsworth 1981). To the south, along the coast, Campbell
(1947) has reported circular shell areas at the Archaic site 41AS1 that may have
served as floors of temporary shelters, but here the circular areas were composed of
a variety of shells. Common rangia shells that show signs of having been heated and
possibly were being used in cooking have also been reported by Gilmore (1974).
Shells such as the giant Atlantic cockle also can be used as containers with little
or no modification. This cockle is one of the largest bivalves found along the Texas
coast; other shells and objects have been found stored in valves of this species at
burial sites around Corpus Christi B ay (Hester and Corbin 1975). McGuff (1978:219)
reported one giant Atlantic cockle valve with red pigment on the interior recovered
from a site north of Lavacabay. In addition, broken but otherwise unmodified valves
of this species have been recovered from virtually every location along the coast,

Steele ~ Utilization of Marine Mollusks

231

but they never occur there in sufficient numbers to suggest that aborigines used this
species extensively as food, indicating that the valves were used as vessels or for
other purposes.
In the instances just described, the shells were used without modification, as
building material, convenient material for cooking, or as vessels. In most other
instances the shells were consciously modified. Whelk shells with the body whorl
removed have been recovered from the Corpus Christi Bay area; the shells are
battered, suggesting use as billets or hammers (Steele and Mokry 1985) (Figure 5,
A). Similar whelk shell hammers have been reported from sites along Aransas Bay
(Campbell 1947, 1952).
Other functional tools made from whelk shells are adzes (Figure 6, E) made
from prepared sections of the body whorl recovered from many sites along Aransas
Bay, Corpus Christi Bay, and Laguna Madre (e.g. Campbell 1947, 1952, 1956,
Hester 1969a, Steele and Mokry 1985, Story 1968). There are some specimens in
the Anderson collection, and one specimen has been recovered more than 100 km
inland at 41LK67 (Brown et al. 1982). The finding of whelk shell columellae with
the whorls removed at central Texas sites indicates that they were being made
locally, and Mokry (1980) has described probable techniques of manufacture of
adzes from the shells. It is worth noting that Eaton (1974) reported techniques for
making similar adzes from Strombus shells from sites along the Yucatan coast,
indicating that the techniques for manufacturing tools and ornaments from body
whorls of large marine gastropods were well known along the entire coastline of the
Gulf of Mexico
Hollingsworth and Polan (personal communication 1983) also reported recover/ of two whelk shells with sections of the body whorls cut away from site 41BO35
(Locality 2) on the upper Texas coast. The removed material could have been used
for tools such as the adzes described above or for ornaments; however, Hollingsworth
and Polan believe the segments were being used in the manufacture of ornaments.
No body whorl adzes were recovered at 41BO35.
Small ovoid shell discs made from body whorls of shells have also been
reported by Campbell (1956), Corbin (1963), and Story (1968) from the central
Texas coast. Story (1968) has also reported a similar shaped ceramic sherd from the
Ingleside Cove site. These discs are only about 1.5 cm in diameter, smoothed along
the margins, and unperforated. Their function has yet to be determined.
Awls made from the columella of the whelk are found frequently in sites along
the central and southern parts of the coast; they have been reported from the
Matagorda Bay area (Fritz 1975; this paper), Aransas Bay (Campbell 1947, 1952),
and Corpus Christi Bay (Steeleand Mokry 1985, Story 1968). All of these awls have
a ground point at the siphonal end of the columella; the spiral part of the shell may
or may not have been removed (Figure 5, A-E). Some of the smaller whelk
columella awls also may have been made from banded tulip shells. It should be kept
in mind, however, that beach-rolled fragments of columellae and the columellae
left after body whorls have been removed can resemble manufactured and used
columella awls, making it difficult to determine which, if any, of the columellae
were specifically prepared for this purpose and which are tools that had no

232

Texas Archeological Society

o

B Cm

B

A

\

G

\

H

Figure 5. Drawings of tools made from the columellae of whelks and conchs recovered from
sites near Cayo del Oso, off Corpus Christi Bay. A, a whelk used as a billet or hammer; B-E,
awls made from columellae of whelks; F-H, gouges made from columellae of the Florida
horse conch. From Steele and Mokry 1985.

Steele -- Utilization of Marine Mollusks

233

intentional modification.
Another gougelike tool made from the columella of the Florida horse conch has
been reported from Aransas and Corpus Christi bays (Campbell 1947, 1952, Corbin
1963, Steele and Mokry 1985) and the Anderson Collection (personal observation).
They differ from the columella awls made from the whelk in that the columella are
much stouter, and the siphonal ends are ground obliquely, rather than to a point
(Figure 5, F-H). No horse conch shells have been recovered from sites examined
by the author, but there is one of unknown provenance in the Anderson Collection.
James E. Corbin (personal communication), however, has seen horse conch shells
in site refuse along Ingleside Cove. This miniscule amount of material, added to the
fact that this species is more an inhabitant of the Gulf than of bays, may indicate that
the adzes were made only occasionally or were not made at the bay sites commonly
sampled.
Shells were also used as net weights. Campbell (1958b), basing his idea upon
a Florida analogy, suggested that perforated shells from sites along Aransas Bay
were net weights. Since publication of Campbell’s paper, perforated oyster shells
have been reported at sites along Trinity Bay (Aten 1979), along Matagorda Bay
(Fritz 1975), at Corpus Christi (Story 1968), and in the Anderson Collection.
Rangia shells punched from the inside outward seem to have been put to similar use,
and have been reported by Ambler (1973), Aten (1983), and Shafer (1966).
Shells from three species commonly have been used as raw material for making
cutting instruments. Aten (1979, 1983) reported cutting implements made from
valves of the eastern oyster recovered from Brazoria County (Locality 4) that
usually were made from the upper valve and were worn or battered along the
margins. The rough exterior of the shell was also commonly smoothed. McGuff
(1978) reported these tools farther south along the Lavaca River (Locality 7). Aten
(1983) noted this limited distribution of shell knives from Matagorda Bay to the
western margin of Galveston Bay and indicated that it may or may not reflect
prehistoric territorial boundaries.
Although rangia shells are common in middens on the upper Texas coast and
in some sites on the central Texas coast, their shaping into cutting tools is rarely
reported. Hamilton (1988) suggested that broken rangia shells at41BO13 may have
been used as cutting implements, and McGuff (1978) reported rangia shells with
ground and chipped margins from 41JK91.
The eastern oyster and possibly the rangia apparently were the preferred
material for the production of shell cutting implements along part of the central and
upper Texas coast, but aborigines from most of the central and southern parts of the
coast used sunray venus and disk Dosinia valves. The sunray venus has the
smoothest shell with the finest microstructure of the larger bivalves along the Texas
coast, making it possible to use the chipping and pressure flaking techniques used
for flint tools to produce chipped shell tools from the sunray venus shells (Figure
6, A-D). Tools of chipped shell also have been reported by McGuff (1978) from
the Lavaca Bay area, by Campbell (1952) from the Aransas Bay area, and by Hester
(1971a, 1971b,1980a) and Smith (1983b) from the Baffin Bay area, and there are
some in the Anderson Collection. Chipped shell arrowpoints have been reported

234

Texas Archeological Society

0

1

2

0

5

fn

Cra

C
A

[3

E

Figure 6. Drawings of tools made from sunray venus shells (A-D) and the body whorl of the
whelk (E) from sites near Corpus Christi Bay. A and B, valves with the unbo and unmodified hinge area attached (possibly to make the tool more comfortable to hold) and part of the
ventral edge of the shell intentionally flaked to pro-duce a cutting or scraping edge; C and D,
flakes from the valves of the sunray venus with more than one edge finely flaked; E, adze with
a ground bit made from the body whorl of a whelk. From Steele and Mokry 1985.

Steele -- Utilization of Marine Mollusks

235

from theRio Grande delta area (Anderson 1932), Baffin Bay (Highly 1980), and the
Corpus Christi Bay area (Steele and Mokry 1985). A disk Dosinia has been found
in the Rio Grande delta area with a chipped ventral margin (Anderson Collection,
Hester 1980a).
Cylindrical projectile points made from the columella of large gastropods,
probably whelks, have been reported by MacNeish (1947) from the Rio Grande
delta area, and are represented in the Anderson Collection (Hester 1980a), but the
type has not been reported elsewhere along the coast. The points are made from
short sections of columella that are rounded into a smooth cylindrical shape and
ground at one end to a rounded point.
The use of mollusk shells along the Texas coast as ornaments, worn on the body
or otherwise associated with burials has been documented in a series of burials
reported from the Rio Grande area (Collins 1969, Hester and Rogers 1971, Hester
and Ruecking 1969, Hudgeons and Hester 1977), from the Corpus Christi Bay area
(Hester and Corbin 1975), and the Galveston Bay area (Aten et al. 1976, Campbell
1957, Hall 1981, Hole and Wilkinson 1973). Similar ornaments also have been
found associated with archeological sites along the entire coastline.
The most commonly recovered ornaments are made from whole or slightly
modified plicate horn shells, lettered olive, whitened dwarf olive, and common
Atlantic marginella (Figure 7, A-D). These apparently were strung through the
aperture, with a second opening made through the body whorl (plicate horn shell and
common Atlantic marginella) or by removing the spire (lettered olive and whitened
dwarf olive).
Of these ornaments, the most commonly recovered are beads made from the
lettered olive, which are reported from the Galveston Bay area (Ambler 1973,
Campbell 1957, Hudgins 1984), the Aransas Bay area (Johnson 1979), and the Rio
Grande delta area (the Anderson Collection, Collins et al. 1969, Hester and Rogers
1971, Hester and Ruecking 1969). Olive shell tinklers have been made by
suspending a mammalian canine tooth inside the shell (Hester 1980a). Beads made
from the common Atlantic marginella have been reported from Galveston Bay and
the surrounding area (Hall 1981), and the Rio Grande Delta area (Anderson
Collection; Collins, Hester, and Weir 1969). Beads made from the whitened dwarf
olive have been reported from Galveston Bay and the surrounding area (Hall 1981)
and there are beads from the plicate horn shell in the Anderson Collection.
Only one bivalve shell is thought to be used as a bead--the ponderous ark found
in central and southern coast sites (Collins et al. 1969, Hester 1969b). The bead was
apparently strung through a hole in the umbo of the valve (the hole could have been
drilled by a predatory gastropod before the valve was collected); its identification
as a shell bead was based on its presence in a burial with other shell beads.
Disc-shaped beads also have been made from small parts of shells, round in
shape with holes drilled through the centers, they have been reported from the Rio
Grande area (Collins et al. 1969, Hester and Ruecking 1969), the Baffin Bay area
(Hester 1969a), the Aransas Bay area (Campbell 1952), and the Galveston Bay area
(Ambler 1973, Aten et al. 1976, Campbell 1957). These beads reportedly are made
from whelk shells, but they are usually modified to such an extent that positive

236

Texas Archeological Society

<

A

C

/

D

Figure 7. Drawings of shell ornaments from the Texas coast. A, marginella bead with a hole
ground tt~rough the body whorl (after Hall 1981); B, olivella bead with spire removed (after
Hall 1981); C, olive tinkler made by removing the entire spire, incising the margin, and
drilling a hole in the body whorl (after Janota 1980); D, olive bead with the apex of the spire
removed (after Janota 1980); E, perforated whelk columella (after Hudgeons and Hester
1977); F, whelk body whorl pendant with edges and surfaces ground and smoothed and two
perforations in the body (drawn from a slide of a pendant from 41VT1). Not drawn to scale.

Steele ~ Utilization of Marine Mollusks

237

identification of the original shell cannot be made.
Ornaments also have been made from the columellae of whelks by one of two
techniques. One technique, requiring less modification of the columella, involved
smoothing and grinding the piece, blunting the tips and perforating one or both ends
to allow for stringing (Hudgeons and Hester 1977) (Figure 7, E). The other more
involved technique required cutting or grinding the columella into short sections,
smoothing the exterior surfaces more completely, and drilling a hole longitudinally
through the center of the bead (Aten et al. 1976, Hall 1981, Janota 1980). These
beads are most commonly reported from the Galveston Bay area (Campbell 1957,
Hall 1981, Hole and Wilkinson 1973).
Another ornament often recovered in burial contexts is the whelk body whorl
pendant (Figure 7, F) reported by Ambler (1973), Aten et al. (1976), Hall (1981),
and Hole and Wilkinson (1973) from burials on the upper Texas coast. The author
has seen similar pendants from 41VT1 along the middle Texas coast in Victoria
County near Lavaca Bay, and they have been reported from burial sites in the Rio
Grande delta area (Hester and Rogers 1977, Hester and Ruecking 1969).
The most complete description of these ornaments has been provided by Hall
(1981), who recognized 12 different forms made from the body whorl of the whelk.
All forms share some features; they are made from the body whorl of the shell, they
have shaped and ground edges, and they have one or two perforations that have been
ground from both sides. They vary in size, however, from large subtriangular slabs
consisting of a large part of a body whorl to much smaller rectangular or round
pendants that may or may not be incised.
There is good evidence for regional variation in the extent to which mollusks
were used as raw material for tools along the Texas coast. In his report of
excavations of shell middens near Trinity Bay, Ambler (1973:102-103)noted the
surprisingly few kinds of shell tools and ornaments. He noted a relatively large
number of shells with large perforations in the middle of the shell, presumably used
as net weights. Except for these, he noted only two whelk columella beads, a whelk
body whorl pendant, and a bead made from an olive shell. This meager list of shell
artifacts from the upper Texas coast can be expanded to include occasional cutting
tools made from the eastern oyster (Aten 1983, McGuff 1978) and habitation
platforms consisting of beds of the common rangia (Hollingsworth 1981).
The limited number of utilitarian shell artifacts from the upper Texas coast is
in marked contrast to what is seen along the central and southern parts of the coast.
No tools made from columellae of gastropods or whelk hammers or chipped shell
artifacts been reported, which leaves the impression that these tools were not
considered necessary on the upper Texas coast, or equivalent tools were made from
stone or wood. It is interesting to note that whereas stone is generally scarce along
the Texas coast, the one local source for gastroliths (Aten 1983) is in the area where
the fewest shell artifacts are found. It is also of note that wood resources are more
extensive along the upper Texas coast. Another factor that may have limited the use
of shells for tools along the upper Texas coast was the possible lack of easy access
to the wide variety of shell types available farther south.
The highest concentration of shell ornaments was found inland along the upper

238

Texas Archeological Society

Texas coast among the material associated with burials at the Harris County Boys’
School cemetery (Aten et al. 1976) and the Aliens Creek site (Hall 1981). From
these sites were recovered a shell columella atlatl weight (Aliens Creek), numerous
whelk body whorl pendants, olive shell beads (Aliens Creek), marginella shell
beads (Aliens Creek), two styles of columella beads, disc-shaped shell beads, and
a modified bonnet shell (Harris County Boys’ School). Hall (1981:214-222) noted
little evidence of shell debitage from sites in the area and proposed that these shell
artifacts could have reached the upper Texas coast from the southeast Gulf Coast by
established trade networks.
Ample evidence for such trade networks was established with the finding of
boatstone and gorget material that originated in Arkansas. The author’s examination of nonutilitarian material from the Texas coast lends support to Hall’s
hypothesis for the origins of at least the pendant material and probably all the
material. The pendants found at Aliens Creek and the Harris County Boys School,
although made from body whorl of whelks as are pendants of the Rio Grande delta
area, seem to be distinct from southern material in workmanship, common shapes,
and placement of perforations.
The evidence for the origin of the other shell ornaments from Aliens Creek is
slightly more equivocal. With the exception of the columella beads drilled through
the center, all of these other shell ornaments have been recovered from elsewhere
along the coast. This raises the possibility that at least some of the material could
have reached the upper Texas coast through trade networks with peoples from the
southern part of the coast. The overall evidence, however, does support the view that
the nonutilitarian material, like that found at Allen’s Creek, did enter the upper
Texas coast through trade networks with the east.
For the central part of the coast, a variety of researchers (Campbell 1947, 1952,
1956, 1958a, 1960, Corbin 1963, Hester 1969a, 1971a,1980a, Martin 1930, Steele
and Mokry 1985, Story 1968) have provided ample evidence of the use and
manufacture of utilitarian tools from shell by the aborigines. The commonly
reported tools are hammers, shell net weights, cutting implements, columella awls,
columella gouges and whelk body whorl adzes, and Campbell (1947) reported
possible habitation platforms composed of shell at the Archaic Aransas site. Mokry
(1980) described the process used locally for manufacturing the whelk body whorl
adzes, and Steele and Mokry (1985) reported the high number of broken whelk
shells found at sites near Corpus Christi Bay. Steele and Mokry (1985) also reported
the high number of sunray venus shells with chipped ventral margins and shells
represented by chipped fragments alone. This evidence demonstrates that most of
the utilitarian artifacts were being made locally.
The one utilitarian tool for which minimal evidence of local manufacture has
been demonstrated is the Florida horse conch columella gouge. With the exception
of Corbin’s sighting of horse conch shells eroding from sites along Corpus Christi
Bay (personal communication), no shells or shell fragments from this species other
than the gouge itself have been reported in sites from the central coast. The only
shell specimen associated with archeological material seen by the author is a shell
in the Anderson Collection; this shell artifact could be of local manufacture, but it

Steele w Utilization of Marine Mollusks

239

has yet to be clearly documented.
Limited reports of nonutilitarian artifacts document the presence of olive shell
beads (Johnson 1979), shell disc beads (Campbell 1952, Hester 1969a), and
ponderous ark shell beads (Hester 1969b). In addition, Hester and Corbin (1975)
reported on a juvenile burial fortuitously recovered near Aransas Bay that had a
cluster of small white shells, possibly marginella beads, around the neck; similar
beads have been found along Baffin Bay (Hester 1969a).
The central coastal material, then, is characterized by a much larger inventory
of locally made utilitarian tools that are made from a wider variety of species of
mollusks, than is seen in upper Texas coastal sites. The ornaments recovered also
differ from those in the upper Texas coast inventory. For instance, ponderous ark
shell beads are seen centrally and in the south, and no whelk pendants have been
reported. This extensive use of shells for the manufacture of tools and ornaments
has been noted as characteristic of the central Texas coast, beginning with Martin
during the 1930s and continuing through Campbell’s research initiated in 1947 to
the work of other current researchers.
Although less research has been conducted along the Texas coast south of
Baffin Bay, this area is in many respects the most intriguing, particularly in the
extensive use of shell for tools and ornaments. MacNeish (1947), reporting on the
sites of the Rio Grande delta region, which he characterized as the Late Prehistoric
Brownsville complex, identified projectile points made from columellae of gastropods, chipped shell discs, whelk body whorl pendants, olive shell beads, and shell
fishhooks. In the Anderson Collection the author has seen utilitarian tools such as
eastern oyster shells with large perforations, whelk body whorl adzes and Florida
horse conch gouges similar similar to ones from the central coast, marginella beads,
columella tube beads, and beads made from the lettered olive shell.
For this southern part of the coast, researchers beginning with Anderson (1932)
have noted that shell tools and ornaments characterized archeological assemblages
from the region. Sayles (1935) first defined a Brownsville phase characteristic of
sites south of Baffin Bay on the basis of the shell industry; MacNeish (1947)
expanded Sayles’s concept, defining it as the Brownsville complex of the Late
Prehistoric period. More recent researchers such as Collins, Hester, and Weir
(1969), Hester and Ruecking (1969), Hester (1969b), and Prewitt (1974a) have
provided further evidence of the extensive use of shell for tools and ornaments by
aborigines in this region.
The most distinctive features separating the shell industry from that found in
the central part of the coast seems to be the columella arrowpoints, fishhooks, and
the far more extensive selection of shell ornaments. MacNeish (1947) believed that
the aborigines of the Rio Grande delta region were participating during the Late
Prehistoric in a large trade network that extended from the Huasteca to the south to
Texas groups inland, but did not extend to coastal groups beyond the Baffin Bay
region. Hester (1980a:122), more recently discussing the trade networks of the
peoples of the Rio Grande region, reconfirmed their ties with the Huasteca along the
Gulf of Mexico to the south. He also suggested that their trade network may have
included desert groups of northeastern Mexico.

240

Texas Archeological Society

In contrast to MacNeish, the author also suggests that the trade network of the
Rio Grande peoples extended up the Texas coastline at least as far as Matagorda
Bay. The utilitarian tool industries of the Brownsville, Aransas, and Rockport
complexes are remarkably similar since all of them include whelk body whorl adzes,
columella awls, and Florida horse conch gouges. Trade with the complex to the
south is also suggested by the presence of typical Brownsville complex lithics at
sites in Kleberg County (Highley 1980) and on north Padre Island (Gunter 1985).
Probably one of the most intriguing questions about aboriginal use of mollusks
along the Texas coast is the extent to which the locally made shell ornaments or
locally acquired shells were traded inland. Cabeza de Vaca reportedly traded shells
inland (Newcomb 1961:70), and Krieger (1956:52) believes that coastal groups
ranged as far as 145 to 190 km (90 to 120 miles) inland. But not all shells found in
archeological sites in Texas came from the Texas coast. Hall’s (1981) discussion
of the shell ornaments reaching the upper Texas coast from the southeastern Gulf
Coast has been discussed already, and there is evidence of shell artifacts from the
Jornada area in West Texas, whose origins were ultimately the West Coast
(Woolridge 1979). Because of this problem, the surest way to examine the question
is to consider only those shells and shell artifacts that can be assigned definitely to
the Texas coast.
From the southern part of Texas, Hester (197 lb) reported fragments of the giant
Atlantic cockle found at 41DM30 in Dimmit County and a sunray venus shell with
a chipped ventral margin recovered from 41ZV 14 in Zavala County. Both of these
sites were reported by Hester to be 250 to 320 km (160 to 200 miles) from the coast.
In the central part of the coast a giant Atlantic cockle was found at 41GD4, in Goliad
County (Hester and Parker 1970), a sunray venus shell was reported at 41GD30, in
Goliad County, about 80 km (50 miles) inland from the coast (Fox et al. 1979), and
a whelk columella awl similar to ones found along the central coast 96 km (60 miles)
south was recovered at 41LK67, in Live Oak County (Brown et al. 1982, Hall et al.
1982). Also recovered from Live Oak and McMullen counties were a battered
columella fragment from a Florida horse conch (41LK75), marginella beads
(41KL31/32, 41LK87, 41MC55), and a body whorl fragment from a whelk
(41 MC55) (Hall et al. 1982). Along the upper Texas coast, the historic site reported
by Hudgins (1984) and listed in this report as Locality 3, clearly contains material
¯ from the Texas coast, 80 km (50 miles) away. Further inland, in Central Texas,
Prewitt (1974b) records a conch pendant from the Loeve-Fox site in Williamson
County. Although other shell artifacts have been reported from inland sites, it is
difficult to identify them as coming from the Texas coast, especially in the case of
Caddoan sites, since the Caddos had well-established trade networks with populations of the Mississippi valley.
These sites, then, do document trade by coastal inhabitants with some inland
groups and the possible extension of this trade network as far as 250 to 320 km (160
to 200 miles) inland in the southern coastal region.

Steele ~ Utilization of Marine Mollusks

241

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
In summation, a series of patterns in the use of mollusks by Texas coastal
inhabitants can be recognized. Although there was extensive reliance on mollusks
for subsistence along the upper Texas coast, the emphasis was on harvesting the
common rangia and tile eastern oyster, primarily in the early summer. Along the
upper Texas coast, few utilitarian shell artifacts are recovered; those reported are
shell net weights and cutting implements made from eastern oyster shells. Shell
ornaments of some variety are reported from the upper Texas coast, but the evidence
strongly indicates that at least during the Archaic these ornaments reached the area
from the east. This pattern of use was the result of a series of factors. The great
amount of water reaching the upper Texas coast created an excellent and extensive
habitat for the common rangia, but it limited the availability in the inland bays of
the more saline-adapted marine mollusks. A possible factor contributing to the
minimal use of mollusks for utilitarian tools was the local availability of stone.
Along the central and southern parts of the coast, reliance on a greater variety
of mollusks for subsistence is evident. Here, the bays are more saline and support
the varied marine mollusks of the Gull On the other hand, the habitat for the
common rangia is limited to a narrow band of brackish water near the mouths of the
rivers that enter the bays. A far more varied shell industry is also typical of the
central and southern parts of the coast. From Matagorda Bay southward, utilitarian
tools of great variety are found in the sites, including whelk body whorl adzes, whelk
columella adzes and gouges, Florida horse conch adzes, sunray venus and disc
dosinia shell cutting implements, and oyster net weights. Columella arrowpoints
are limited to the south. From Baffin Bay southward an extensive shell ornamental
industry is found, and around the Rio Grande delta region there is strong evidence
that the Late Prehistoric Brownsville complex produced large amounts of shell
ornaments and tools for trade to the south, north, and possibly northward along the
coast. This greater shell industry was possible because of a rich and varied mollusk
fauna available in the shallow saline bays and possibly was necessitated by the fact
that the nearest lithic resources were 145 km (90 miles) inland.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author thanks Harry J. Sharer for generous help with reviewing lithic
resources and collaboration on the development of Figure 3, Ed Mokry for the
cooperative research conducted with him in the Corpus Christi Bay area, Ted
Hollingsworth and Johnney Polan for unpublished information on 41BO35, Roger
Coleman for providing the excellent maps and other illustrations, and Harry Sharer,
Thomas Hester, Ed Mokry, Raymond Neck, and anonymous reviewers for critiques
of the manuscript.

242

Texas Archeological Society
REFERENCES CITED

Ambler, J. Richard
1973 Excavation in the Trinity River delta." The lost River phase. Texas Archeological
Survey, Austin
Anderson, A.E.
1932 Artifacts of the Rio Grande delta region. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society. 4:29-31.
Andrews, Jean
1971 Shells and shoars of Texas. Dill Russell Spencer Foundation Series 5. University
of Texas Press, Austin.

Aten, Lawrence E.
1965 Five crania from the Jamaica Beach site (41GV5), Galveston County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 36:153-62.
1971

Archeological Excavations at the Dow-Cteaver site, Brazoria County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project, Technical Bulletin 1

1979

Indians of the Upper Texas Coast: ethnohistoric and archeological frameworks.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas at Austin

1981

Determining seasonality of Rangia cuneata from Gulf Coast shell middens.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 52:179-200

1983

Indians of the upper Texas coast. Academic Press, New York.

Aten, Lawrence E., Charles K. Chandler, A1 B. Wesolowsky, and Robert M. Malina
1976 Excavations at the Harris County Boys’ School cemetery: Analysis of Galveston
Bay area mortuary practices. The Texas Archeological Society Special Publication 3.
Behrens, E. W.
1963 Buried Pleistoceneriver valleys in Aransas and Baff’mbays, Texas. Publication of
the Institute of Marine Science, The University of Texas 9:7-17.
1971

The development of hypersalinity in Baffin Bay, Texas (abstract). The Texas
Journal of Science 22(2-3):279.

1972

Baffin Bay marl and shell samples, Texas. In S. Valastro, Jr., E. Mott Davis, and
Alejandra G. Varela, University of Texas at Austin Radiocar bon Dates IX.
Radiocarbon 14(2):466-468.

Brown, Kenneth M
1976 Fused volcanic glass from the Manning Formation. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 47:189-207.

Steele m Utilization of Marine Mollusks

243

Brown, Kenneth M., D. R. Potter, G. D. Hal!, and S. L. Black
1982 Excavations at 41LK67, a prehistoric site in the Choke Canyon Reservoir, South
Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio, Choke Canyon Series, 7.
Campbell, T. N.
1947 The Johnson site: TypesiteoftheAransasfocusoftheTexascoast.Bulletinofthe
Texas Archeological Society 18:40-75.
1952

The Kent-Crane site: A shell midden on the Texas coast. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 23:39-77.

1956

Archeological materials from five islands in the Laguna Madre, Texas coast.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 27:7-46.

1957

Archeological investigations at the Caplen site, Galveston County, Texas. Texas
Journal of Science 10:423-442.

1958a Archeological remains from the Live Oak Point site, Aransas County,
Texas Journal of Science 10(4):423-442.

Texas.

1958b Probable function of perforated oyster shells found in Aransas focus sites. Texas
Archeology 2(2):7.
1960

Archeology of the centxal and southern sections of the Texas coast. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 29:145-19.

Carlson, David L.
1988 Rangia cuneata as a seasonal indicator for coastal archaeological sites in Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 58.
Carlson, D. L., D. G. Steele, and H. L. Bruno
1982 Archeological investigations at the Allison site (41NU185). Archeological Research Laboratory Reports of Investigations 1, Texas A&M University, College
Station.
Clark, Donald W., and William B. Workman
1983 Maritime adaptations of northwestern North America. Presentation at the 48th
Annual Meeting of the Society for American Archaeology, Pittsburgh.
Collins, Michael B., Thomas R. Hester, and Frank Weir
1969 Two prehistoric cemetery sites in the lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas. Part 1:
The Floyd Morris site (41CF2) A prehistoric cemetery site in Cameron County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:119-146.
Corbin, James E.
1963 Archeotogical materials from the northern shore of Corpus Christi Bay, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 34:5-30.

244

Texas Archeological Society

1974

A model for cultural succession for the CoastalBend area of Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 45:29-54.

1976

The Archaic of the Texas coast. In: The Texas Archaic, a Symposium, edited by
Thomas R. Hester. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas
at San Antonio, Special Report 2:91-97.

Day, D. W., J. Laurens-Day, and E. R. Prewitt
1981 Cultural resources surveys and assessments in portions of Hidalgo and Willacy
counties, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Reports of Investigations 15 ,
Austin, Texas.
DePratter, Chester B.
1983 Primary swamp stomping or marsh/lagoon Efficiency on the southeastern U.S.
coast. Presentation at the 48th Annual Meeting of the Society for American
Archaeology, Pittsburgh.
Dering, Phil, and David Ayers
1977 Archeological investigations in the village of Oyster Creek, Brazoria County,
Texas. Anthropology Laboratory, Texas A&M University, Report 42.
Dillehay, Tom D
1975 Prehistoric subsistence exploitation in the lower Trinity River delta, Texas. Texas
Archeological Survey Research Report 51, Austin.
Eaton, Jack D
1974 Shell celts from coastal Yucatan, Mexico. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 45:199-208.
Fox, Anne A., S. L. Black, and S. R. James
1979 Intensive survey and testing of archaeological sites on Coleto Creek, Victoria and
Goliad counties, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report 67.
Fritz, Gayle
1975 Matagorda Bay area, Texas: a survey of the archeological resources and historic
resources. Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report 45, Austin.
Gagliano, Sherwood M
1983 Prehistoric maritime adaptations, northern Gulf of Mexico. Presentation at the
48th Annual Meeting of the Society for American Archaeology, Pittsburgh.
Gilmore, Kathleen
1974 Cultural variation on the Texas coast: Analysis of an aboriginal shell midden,
Wallis Reservoir, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report 44,
Austin.
Gunter, Rita R.
1985 The Ben Bickham Collection from north Padre Island, Texas. La Tierra 12:6-17.

Steele -- Utilization of Marine Mollusks

245

Hall, Grant D.
1981 Allens Creek: a study in the cultural prehistory of the lower Brazos River valley,
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report 61, Austin.
Hall, Grant D., Stephen L. Black, and Carol Graves
1982 Archaeological investigations at Choke Canyon Reservoir, South Texas: the Phase
I findings. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio, Choke Canyon Series: 5.
Hall, Grant D., and K. A. Grombacher
1974 An assessment of the archeological and historical resources to be affected by the
Brazos Island Harbor Waterway Project, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey,
Research Report 61, Austin.
Hamilton, D. L.
1988 Archeological investigations at Shy Pond, Brazoria County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 58.
Hester, Thomas R.
1969a Archeological investigations in Kleberg and Kenedy counties, Texas in August
1967. Texas State Building Commission, Archeological Program, Report 15.
1969b Two prehistoric sites inthelower Rio Grande ValleyofTexas. Partm: TheFloyd
Morris and Ayala sites: a discussion of burial practices in the Rio Grande Valley
and the lower Texas coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:157166
1971a Loyola Beach: an example of aboriginal adaptation to the maritime environment
of the lower Texas coast. Florida Anthropologist 24(3):91-106.
1971b Marine shells from archeological sites in southwestern Texas. Texas Journal of
Science 22:87-88.
1980a Digging into South Texas prehistory. Corona, San Antonio.
1980b Changing salinity in Baffm Bay, Texas, and its possible effects on prehistoric
occupation. In: Papers on the Archaeology of the Texas Coast, edited by Lynn
Highley and Thomas Hester, pp. 105-108. The University of Texas at San
Antonio, Special Report 11.
Hester, Thomas R., and J. E. Corbin
1975 Two burial sites on the central Texas coast. Texas Journal of Science
26:519-528.
Hester, Thomas R., and R. C. Parker
1970 The B erclair site: A Late Prehistoric component in Goliad County, southern Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 41:1-23.

246

Texas Archeological Society

Hester, Thomas R., and R. W. Rodgers
1971 Additional data on the burial practices of the Brownsville complex, southern
Texas. Texas Journal of Science 22(4):367-371.
Hester, Thomas R., and R. Ruecking, Jr.
1969 Two prehistoric cemetery sites in the lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas.Part II:
Additional materials from the Ayala site, a prehistoric cemetery site in Hidalgo
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:147-157.
Highley, Lyrm
1980 Archaeological materials from the Alazan Bay area, Kleberg County, Texas. In
Papers on the archeology of the Texas coast, edited by Lynn Highly and Thomas
Hester, pp. 51-60. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas
at San Antonio, Special Report 11.
Hole, Frank, and Richard G. Wilkinson
1973 Shell Point: a coastal camp and burial site in Brazoria County. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 44:5-30.
Hollingsworth, Ted D.
1981 Investigations at 41BO35, the Dow-Cleaver site, Brazoria County, Texas. Houston Archeological S ociety Newsletter 71:5-10.
Hudgeons, Mark D., and T. R. Hester
1977 An aboriginal burial at the Dunn site, De Witt County, southern Texas. La Tierra
4(3): 10-14.
Hudgins, Joe D.
1984 A Historic site in Wharton County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 55:29-52.
Janota, Beverly
1980 A preliminary study of the shell ornaments of the Texas coast between Galveston
B ay and the Nueces River. In Papers on the Archaeology of the Texas coast, edited
by Lynn Highley and Thomas Hester, 29-50. Center for Archaeological Research,
The University of Texas at San Antonio, Special Report 11.
Johnson, Malcom L.
1979 Oliva shell beads or dangles, San Patricio County, Texas. La Tierra 6(3):22-24.
Krieger, Alex D.
1956 Food habits of the Texas coastal Indians in the early sixteenth century. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 27:47-58.
MacNeish, Richard S.
1947 A preliminary report on coastal Tamaulipas, Mexico.
13(1):1-15.

American Antiquity

Steele ~ Utilization of Marine Mollusks

247

Martin, George C.
1929 Notes on some Texas coast campsites and other remains. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 1:50-57.
1930

Two sites on the Callo de10so, Nueces County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 2:7-17.

McGuff, Paul R.
1978 Prehistoric archeological investigations at Palmetto Bend Reservoir: phase 1.
Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report 58, Austin.
Mokry, E. R., Jr.
1980 Notes on conch shell adze technology, Texas coast. In Papers on the archeology
of the Texas coast, edited by Lynn Highley and Thomas Hester, pp. 51-60. Center
for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, Special
Report 11.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961 The Indians of Texas. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Patterson, L. W.
1979a Archeological summary of the upper Texas coast. La Tierra 6(4):30-35.
1979b A review of the prehistory of the upper Texas coast. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 50:103-124.
1985

Prehistoric settlement and technological patterns in southeast Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 54:253-270.

Prewitt, Elton
1974a Preliminary archeologicalinvestigations in the Rio Grande delta of Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 45:55-66.
1974b Archeological investigations at the Loeve-Fox site, Williamson County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 49, Austin.
Ricklis, Robert A.
1986 Archaeological investigations at the McKinzie site (41NU221): description and
contextual interpretations. Unpublished M.A. thesis, Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Ricklis, Robert A., and Rita R. Gunter
1986 Archaeological investigations at the Means site (41NU184), Nueces County,
Texas. La Tierra 13:15-31.
Sanger, David
1983 Recent research on maritime adaptations in northeastern North America. Presentation at the 48th Annual Meeting of the Society for American Archaeology,
Pittsburgh.

248

Texas Archeological Society

Sayles, E. B.
1935 An archeo!ogical survey of Texas. Medallion Papers 17.
Shafer, Harry J.
1966 An archeological survey of Wallisville Reservoir, Chambers County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project Survey Report 2. Austin.
Smith, Herman A.
1983a An archeological assessment of the Baffin Bay area of the lower Texas Coast.
Paper presented at the 48th Annual Meeting of the Society for American Archaeology.
1983b Prehistoric settlement and subsistence patterns of the B affin B ay area of the lower
Texas coast. Ph.D. dissertation, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Steele, D. Gentry, and E. R. Mokry
1985 Archeological investigations of seven prehistoric sites along Oso Creek, Nueces
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:287-308.
Stewart, R. Michael, and Jay F. Custer
1983 Maritime adaptations in the Middle Atlantic America. Presentation at the 48th
Annual Meeting of the Society for American Archaeology, Pittsburgh.
Story, Dee Ann
1968 ArcheologicalinvestigationsattwoCentralTexasGulfCoastsites. StateBuilding
Commission Archeological Program Report 13.
Woolridge, Harold G.
1979 The Bald Eagle Cache: Implications of an early exchange system in the Jornada
region of south-central New Mexico. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, The
University of Texas.

Stress and Survival: Models of Adaptive Success in
the Texas Late Prehistoric
Joseph F. PoweH

ABSTRACT
This paper reports investigations of the adaptive success of Late Prehistoric
hunter-gatherer groups in the central and coastal areas of Texas. A spacially
stratified skeletal series was drawn from 12 Late Prehistoric sites from the
Texas coast, coastal plain, and Edwards Plateau border areas. Individuals were
examined for pathologies associated with various types of stress such as
infectious disease, metabolic disruption of growth, and nutritional deficiencies. These pathologies were used in the creation of indices that gauge the level
of biocultural stress and relative health of the populations. Models of adaptive
success inbuffering these stressors are presented and statistically tested against
these data, and an overview of adaptive success is presented in regional
perspective.

INTRODUCTION
Although myriad subsistence and behavioral adaptation models for
hunter-gatherer societies are described in the archeological literature (Winterhatder
1981, Cohen 1977a, 1977b, Bettinger 1982, Jochim 1976, Keene 1979), only a few
attempt to determine the biological success of such adaptive behaviors (Cook and
Buikstra 1979, Rose 1983). In this study, an attempt is made to test the success of
environmental adaptation in central and coastal Texas during the Late Prehistoric
period, from A.D. 600 to 1750 (Prewitt 1985:223) Skeletal pathologies from
hunter-gatherer populations are used to test a set of explanatory models of adaptive
success. These pathologies are general indicators of the reaction of the population
to a variety of environmental and cultural pressures known as stress.
For the purposes of this paper, stress is defined as "the physiological disruption
of an organism resulting from an environmental perturbation" (Huss-Ashmore et
a!. 1982:396). The perturbation may be caused by nutritional, climatic, cultural,
epidemiological, parasitic, or demographic factors, or a combination of these. All
of these variables decrease the individual’s ability to cope with the stressor.
Bone abnormalities can be seen as a general function of the impact of
environmental stress (Huss-Ashmore et al. 1982:398, Martin et al. 1985:231, Stini
t985:192). The stress factors that lead to particular pathologies are difficult to sort
out because they act synergistically and cumulatively in the production of lesions
(Huss-Ashmore et al. 1982:399, Stini 1985: 215, Steinbock 1976:237-238, Ortner
and Puschar 1981:270). For this reason, stress pathologies, or those skeletal
abnormalities caused by environmental perturbation, will be used only as general
indices of populations’ reactions to stress.
Bulletin of tire Texas Archeological Society 58 (]987)

250

Texas Archeologieal Society
Response to Stress

Skeletal tissue is one of the last tissues to be sacrificed in the maintenance of
homeostasis during stress. (McLean and Urist 1968, Hancox 1972); it is most
susceptible to stress during growth and development. Only those pathologies that
are severe, but not so severe as to kill the host immediately, are manifested in
skeletal material. Therefore, most stress pathologies indicate long-term exposure
to the stressor.
The Armelegos, Goodman, and Bickerton (1980) ecological model of stress
is useful for illustrating how stress pathologies are acquired. In this model the
resistance of the host, together with cultural buffers, plays an important role in
reducing or augmenting the degree of lesionous expression. When such factors
favor the stressor rather than the host, a downward spiral of stress resistance begins,
contributing to the death of the individual. These kinds of maladaptive biocultural
responses are seen in skeletal series as active stress lesions at death. On the other
hand, a positive biocultural adaptation will be evidenced by healed lesions or no
lesions at all (Leiban 1977:13).
METHODOLOGY
Sampling Methods
The data for this study come from a set of Late Prehistoric skeletal populations
housed at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory at The University of Texas
at Austin. Although sites 41BL3 and 41CV14 do have earlier components, an
attempt was made to use individuals from upper excavation levels, most of whom
were buried in semiflexed or flexed positions. A stratified sample was selected from
12 sites (containing 348 individuals) in the Brazos and Colorado drainages, using
three physiographic strata: the Inner Coastal Plain, the Outer Coastal Plain, and the
margin of the Edwards Plateau (Figure 1).
The stratified sample size necessary for a population of 348 with a 7 percent
bound of error was 86 individuals. The sample was allocated to each strata using
a weighted Neiman Allocation method. A set of four sites per strata was used to
obtain the base population size (Table 1); the use of different sites in each region
was an attempt to control for between-group cultural variation in each stratum. The
most complete individuals from each regional stratum were then sampled. Age and
sex variation was controlled by using an equal number of males and females and a
nearly equal number of adults and subadults from each stratum.
Three of the sites included in the sample have questionable Late Prehistoric
affiliations. The Crestmont site,41WH39, has some artifactual material indicative
of a Late Archaic population, but an exact temporal affiliation for this population
is as yet uncertain. Additionally, Ranney Creek Shelter (41CV14) and Owl Creek
Shelter (41BL3) have diagnostic artifacts that span several time periods, including
the Late Prehistoric. Because the site notes do not describe the association of
specific artifact types with individual burials, only the burials from the upper site
strata were included in the sample. As a precaution, the sites in question were
removed from the sample and the models were tested again. Examination of the

Power ~ Stress and Survival

251

@

Figure 1. Map of the upper coast of Texas showing site locations and Productivity Zones,
based on Rodin, B azilevitch, and Rozov (1975). The heavy stipple (Inner Coastal) has a Net
Primary Productivity (NPP) greater than 50 t/ha; the light stipple (Outer Coastal) has an NPP
of 15-30 t/ha; the unstippled area (Plateau) has an NPP of 10-15 t/ha. Circles represent sites
mentioned in the text.

results both with and without these sites revealed that the inclusion of possible Late
Archaic sites did not significantly alter the test conclusions, so these sites have been
incorporated in the analysis results presented below.
Pathologies
Individuals were examined for gross pathologies using a low-powered (10x)
microscope. Pathologies were recorded on score sheets by location, degree of
involvement, and remodeling of each lesion type. The use of active and remodeled
classes of lesions is useful for determining the recovery rate from stress (Martin et
al. 1985:267-269). All of this information was then used in a differential diagnosis
to determine the probable cause of the lesion. Differential diagnosis is a method by
which the etiology of pathological agents is compared. The combination and distribution of pathologies in individuals and populations and age distributions of the
possible causes are compared and eliminated until the most likely cause is found.

252

Texas Archeological Society
Table

Site No.

41HR80
41CH1
41GV1
41GV66

41AU36
41AU37
41FY42
41WJ39

41BL3
41CV14
41ML46
41WM230

1.

Sites

Used

in

Sample

Site Name

Coastal Stratum
Harris County Boys’ School
Lawrence Island
Caplen Mound
Mitchell Ridge
Total
Coastal Plain Stratum
Witte, Groups 3 and 4
Leonard K
Frisch Auf!
Crestmont Cemetery
Total
Plateau Stratum
Owl Creek Shelter
Ranney Creek
Asa Warner
Loeve-Fox
Total

N

Subadult
to Adult
Ratio

11
3
6
.7_
27

6/5
1/2
2/4
fi!2
14/13

8
4
4
15
31

6/2
0/4
1/3
7/8
14/17

6
5
9
8
28

3/3
2/3
5/4
4/4
14/14

Several pathologies that indicate environmental stress were recorded. For ease
of description, the stress pathologies can be classified as either deficiency or
infectious pathologies.
Porotic Hyperostosis is a pathology often associated with a nutrient deficiency
(Steinbock 1976:236-237, Ortner and Putschar 1981:257), although other stressors
such as parasites have been known to cause it. This lesion is generally confined to
the cranium and is evidenced by expanded cranial diploe, a thin and eroded outer
vault, and exposed trabecular bone (Steinbock 1976:231). This pathology can
appear in several forms, from finely pitted (seen in most of the cases below) to
porous and sievelike. Lesions were recorded as either active or remodeled at death.
Cribra Orbitalia is a similar erosional lesion, also associated with a deficiency
of some kind (Steinbock 1976:244-248). It takes the form of porous, eroded,
spongy lesions on the roofs of the orbits (Martin et al. 1985: 266, Steinbock 1976:
239-240, Ortner and Putschar 1981: 258). This lesion was also recorded as active
or remodeled.
EnamelHypoplasia is a dental pathology that can be used to measure responses
to stress during growth and development. The pathology develops when the host
is exposed to a short-term period of high stress, such as inadequate diet or disease.
With the reestablishment of homeostasis comes an overproduction of tooth enamel
that produces a visible transverse line in the tooth. Multiple lines sometimes have
been associated with recurrent, or seasonal, stress (Martin et al. 1985), but this
relationship is not a conclusive one.
For the populations studied, overall health status was gauged by the prevalence
of osteomyelitis (Leiban 1977:15, Rose 1983:240-241). Acute osteomyelitis is "a

Powell J Stress and Survival

253

destructive invasion of bone caused by pyogenic bacteria" (Steinbock 1976:61).
Evidence includes cortical thickening, subperiosteal bone apposition, woven (primitive) bone, cloaccae for suppuration, and in severe cases, complete necrosis of the
bone and formation of an involucrum (Steinbock 1976:62). Acute osteomyelitis is
associated with individuals who have reduced resistance to infection or have had
bacteria directly introduced to the bone by trauma.
Chronic osteomyelitis is associated with long-term, recurring infection that
may flare only when resistance is reduced (Steinbock 1976:74). Symptoms include
minor periostitis, striated bone apposition, partially or totally filled cloaccae, and
localized cortical thickening.
From these pathologies, two indices of stress response were created. First, the
sum of all deficiency pathologies (porotic hyperostosis, cribra orbitalia, and enamel
hypoplasia) was calculated for each individual. This index was called STRESS. A
second index, GENERAL STRESS, combined the sums of deficiency pathologies
with the sum of osteomyelitis for each individual.
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
The environmental analysis presented below is only a general overview rather
than an in-depth discussion. Generalizing the biotic zones in the region tends to
overlook the diversity of the areas, but it is useful for constructing a basic framework
for analyzing human adaptations in a varied environment.
The study area has been divided into physiographic regions with widely varied
resources. These have been analyzed by Net Primary Productivity (NPP) (Figure
1) as well as by biotic zones (Figure 2). However, data on the NPP available for
human consumption in each region was unavailable.
Net Primary Productivity is "the material actually available for decomposition
by the soil flora and fauna or their aquatic equivalent" (Simmons 1979:85). It is
measured in tons of dry matter per hectare (t/ha) cycled through aH ecosystems.
Each sampling stratum was analyzed for environmental sources of variability.
Inner Coastal Plain
This region is composed of Coastal Plain Prairie (Figure 2) with a large number
ofestuarine and riverine areas (Blair 1950:102). Forests include mixed oak-hickory
in small isolates, with other shrubs and grasses intermingled. Shellfish, freshwater
fish, and marine fish are noted in the archeological record at 41GV66, together with
opossum, raccoon, cottontail, mouse, rat, skunk, deer, and alligator (Yates 1979:76).
This area has been characterized as having fewer habitats and a lower biomass
than other parts of the state (Kotter et al. 1987:14). However, the coastal region has
an NPP of more than 50 t/ha, the highest productivity value possible (Rodin et al.
1977, Whittaker and Likens 1975). For archeological populations, this should be
a highly productive environment even though the exploitable microhabitats appear
to be fewer than in other regions.

254

Texas Archeological Society

Blackland Prairie
Post Oak

Piney Woods

\

T E X A

Outer
Coastal Plain
Rio Grande

Coastal Plain

Figure 2. Map showing the environmental zones of Texas (from Kotter et al. 1988).

Outer Coastal Plain
This region contains parts of the Coast~ Plain and Post Oak zones (Figure 2)
with gently rolling terrain (Chambers 1948). Vegetation includes post oak savannah (Gould 1975:3) which is composed of post oak, blackjack oak, and hickory,
together with little bluestem, Indian grass, and other grasses. Common mammals
include opossum, badger, fox, skunk, raccoon, ringtail, gopher, rat, mouse, squirrel,
and deer (Blair 1950:101, Davis 1978). Prehistoric resources also included a wide
variety ofriverine products such as shellfish, fish, reptiles, deer, and small mammals
(Lord 1981:421-432).
The Outer Coastal Plain region has an NPP of 15 to 30 t/ha (Figure 1). Although
this is lower than the coastal NPP, the region still has an abundance of resources and
is comparable in productivity to the subtropical forests of Southeast Asia and
Central Africa (Rodin et al. 1977). The potential for adequate resources is very high;
Aten (1983:66) believes that if they consumed 100 percent of the NPP available for
humans, dense native populations could be supported.
Plateau
This area is a mix of grasslands of the High and Low Plains (Figure 2), including
the Blackland Prairie (Chamber 1948, Blair 1950:101). Juniper/oak woodlands are

Powell ~ Stress and Survival

255

scattered among the grasslands. A wide variety of fauna are available, including
opossum, skunk, raccoon, squirrel, shellfish, fox, and deer. Most of the resources
are concentrated along river drainages (Kotter et al. 1987:16).
The NPP for the Plateau region is 10 to 15 t/ha Figure 1), which is low
compared to the coast; however, the NPP of the plateau is similar to other
environments known to be very productive, such as the woodlands of eastern
Europe (Rodin et al. 1977). Prehistoric hunter-gatherers would have had quite
adequate resources for exploitation even if only a part of the NPP was available for
human consumption.
ADAPTIVE MODELS

From the data presented above, it is apparent that there is an abundance of
resources in all physiographic regions in the study area, although the productivity
of the coast differs from that in other areas. Ethnographic research among
hunter-gatherer groups shows that the positive adaptations of these groups to their
environments results in minimal stress to individuals (Lee 1968:45), even in
marginal environments, as long as the necessary .05 to 5 percent consumption of the
NPP is provided (Casteel 1972:21-22).
So far we have assumed that Late Prehistoric hunter-gatherers stayed within the
physiographic borders of the study area. It is much more probable that most of the
populations in this study had wide territorial ranges that crosscut the physiographic
areas. Evidence has been found for the existence of trade or direct contact between
the plateau and coastal groups in the Late Archaic period (Prewitt 1982:218, Hall
1981:291-296). Ethnohistoric accounts from the Madames of South Texas describe
80-mile trips to and from seasonal resources (Campbell 1983:349), with an
estimated territory of 1000 square miles (Campbell 1983:353,356). Such information certainly suggests that the Late Prehistoric populations in this study exploited
resources outside of their cemetery areas. But even assuming that there was no
movement outside of their physiographic area, the resources there should have been
more than adequate to provide a relatively nonstressful environment.
Model Definitions
Assuming that the areas of lowest NPP contain enough available resources to
prevent environmental stress, it is possible to define a set of explanatory models of
subsistence success.
Model 1
Adaptive strategies suited to the environment and cultural interactions will
have succeeded in providing adequate buffers against stress. Successful adaptations will result in good health and high resistance to stress.
Expectations. Low rates of STRESS and other stress pathologies, with a high
degree of healing. Low rates of bone infection indicate high resistance; most bony
infections are chronic.
STRESS Rate. 0 to 5 percent involvement.

256

Texas Archeologieal Society
Model 2

Strategies adapted to seasonal exploitation of abundant resources will be
moderately successful in providing buffers against stress. However, occasional
deficiencies could occur, depending on the fluctuation of seasonal resources. Seasonal stress would then result, causing yearly variations in resistance.
Expectations. A moderate rate of STRESS; enamel hypoplasia will be higher than
in Models 1 and 3. Other lesions will evidence remodeling. Infection rates will be
moderate; most or all infections will be chronic.
STRESS Rate. At or near 20 percent involvement
Model 3
Adaptive strategies poorly suited to the environmental and cultural factors will
be unsuccessful in providing buffers against stress. Such adaptation will result in
profound stress and little or no resistance to infection.
Expectations. High rates of all stress pathologies, especially STRESS and GENERAL STRESS. Most stress lesions will be active, as will bony infections, due to
low resistance.
STRESS Rate. At or above 50 percent involvement
The estimated rates of STRESS involvement are derived from modern data on
nutritional deficiency and infection from nonindustrial countries (Schaefer
1966:1091, Lowenberg et al. 1968:295), and from prehistoric incidence rates of
similar lesions (Steinbock 1976:242, Carlson et al. 1974:408). Using these values,
it will be possible to test the proportions of stress lesions in the three geographic
samples.

ANALYSIS OF DATA
The data were analyzed using a variety of nonparametric tests for discrete
variables. Nonparametrics were favored because the underlying population distribution is unknown. Tests included contingency table analysis, Kendall’s Tau-b
correlation coefficient, and binomial probability tests (Large Sample Approximations). The results of these analyses are presented below.
Overall, the percentages of both STRESS and GENERAL STRESS
(STRESS+infection) are very high (Table 2); thepercentages increase with distance
from the coast ~igure 3). Along the coast, infection appears to contribute nearly
equally with other lesions. Levels of STRESS and GENERAL STRESS increase
dramatically away from the coast.
Correlation coefficients show a positive correlation between STRESS and
distance from the coast (Table 3). These values are significant at p<.02. In addition,
chi-square values for GENERAL STRESS indicate that the level of environmental
stress depends on the geographic location of the population (p<.05). There does not
appear to be any relationship between stress and sex or stress and age in any of the
populations studied.
Rates of osteomyelitis have a similar pattern of distribution. Chronic infection

Powell ~ Stress and Survival
Table

2.

Percentage

of Involvement of Stress

257

Lesions

Percentage
Variable

Overall

Co ast

Plain

GENERAL STRESS
STRESS

67.4
38.4

56.5
14.8

61.3
35.5

85.7
57.1

PH, active
PH, remodeled
Enamel hypoplasia

5.8
17.4
31.0

3.7
14.8
23.5

3.2
16.1
30.0

10.7
21.4
88.9

Infection, active
Infection, chronic

3.5
13.9

0.0
11.1

0.0
16.1

10.7
14.3

Kendall’s

Correlation

Table

3.

Plateau

Coefficients
Variable

Pathology
Region

p

GENERAL, STRESS
STRESS

.2776
.2758

.002
.003

Enamel hypoplasia
Cribra orbitalia

.1986
.3200

.022
.002

Infection, active

.2223

.032

Age

p

Sex

*

*

*

P

p-The significance level, P, is the probability that the correlation of variables
would occur by chance alone.
¯ no significant correlations

peaks in the Outer Coastal Plain sample (Table 2), whereas acute infection is found
only in the Plateau groups (Figure 4). There is a positive correlation between
infection and distance from the coast, with the highest rates farther inland (Table 3).
TRENDS
Several trends are present in the data.
1) There is a significant difference among regions in STRESS-associated
pathologies, which is unexpected, since all of the environments were assumed to
have sufficient resources to support hunter-gatherer populations.
2) There tends to be less STRESS along the coast, with a linear increase in the
inland areas. Infection accounts for fewer of the lesions in the Outer Coastal Plain
and Plateau groups (Figure 3)
3) STRESS pathologies affect all age and sex groups equally in all of the
populations studied.
4) Resistance to disease, as reflected in the ratio of chronic to acute infection,

258

Texas Archeological Society

iO0 -

Stress
90-

General
Stress

8O
70
c~60
el3
,

,

,

i
i

50

!!

C_9

I

c_

!

C13

ca__ 40-

!

I

i

!
....

30-

,

,

i
!
i
|
!
a
|
|
!
1
!
i

20-

!
I
I
i
!

Coastal

Coastal Plain

Region
Figure 3. Graph showing percent of region affected by STRESS.

Plateau

Powell-- Stress and Survival

259

40--

Remode]ed PH
35-

Act.i.ve PH

30-

i5-

10

f//////I
I//fj///
#1111fl/
#////1/1

@

5~

¢IIIG/I¢
If111111

~///////,

~//////~

O_

!1111111

Coastal

Coastal Plain

Begion
Figure 4. Graph showing porotic hyperostosis types by region.

Plateau

260

Texas Archeological Society

decreases dramatically in thePlateau sample. The proportion of active-to-remodeled
porotic hyperostosis also increases ~igure 4)
If stress had been adequately buffered in all populations, trends such as these
would not have occurred. Since all of the regions have resource bases adequate to
support hunter-gatherers, and all were exposed to similar STRESS, the occurrence
of STRESS in some groups indicates that in the affected ones an ineffective cultural
buffering mechanism was at work.
TESTING THE MODELS
To test the models of adaptive success, nonparametric binomial probability
tests were employed. (The Large Sample Approximation is abinomial approximation of a normal distribution. The statistic,
Bi - Ni (p^)
B* =

q i(p^) (1 - p^))

has an approximate standard normal distribution, where Bi is the number of
stress-affected individuals in stratum i, p^ is the hypothesized value of STRES S rate
from the model, and Ni is the size of stratum i.) The binomial test compares the
proportion of STRESS found in each region to the various hypothesized stress rates
presented in the models. One-tailed tests at alpha=.01 were used.
In the coastal groups, stress was found in 4 of 27 individuals (14.8 percent).
This was then tested against Model 1 (STRESS= 5 percent) and Model 2 (STRESS=
20 percent). Similar tests were conducted for the Outer Coastal Plain and Plateau
sample, using Models 2 and 3 (STRESS= 50 percent) (Table 4).

Table

4.

Results

of

Binomial

Probability

Null
Hypothesis

B*

Ha:P^<.05
Ha:P^<.20

2.34
.518

Reject
Accept

.50> B* >.20

Coastal
Plain

Ha:P^<.20
Ha:P^<.50

2.16
.759

Reject
Accept

.20> B* >.05

Plateau

Ha: P^<.20
Ha:P^<.50

3.19
2.35

Reject
Reject

B* >.50

Region
Coastal

Null
Hypothesis

Tests
Range

The adaptive success of the coastal sample shows that this population was
moderately successfulin adapting to environmental stress. Model 1 does not appear
to fit the coastal data exactly; however, Model 2 appears to be too severe (Table 4).
The coastal groups show an adaptive behavior to stress that might be attributable to seasonality. Stress pathologies are present but most are healed (Table 2;
Figure 4). Enamel hypoplasia is, however, low, indicating that periodic or seasonal

Powell ~ Stress and Survival

261

stress may have occurred less often among coastal groups than in other regions.
Chronic infection is found in subadults and young adults, which is another expectation of Model 2. Overall, the coastal data appear to resemble more closely the
expectations of the seasonal stress model.
The Outer Coastal Plain groups have a STRESS value that places them somewhere between Models 2 and 3 (Table 4). This sample has a moderate rate of stress,
with very high rates of chronic infection (Table 2). As noted previously, chronic
infections can be activated by periods of reduced resistance; these periods can be,
but are not necessarily, seasonal in nature. There is a higher percentage ofnonhealed
lesions in the Outer Coastal Plain groups than on the coast. These data indicate that
the Outer Coastal Plain populations may have had much more severe periods of
stress or that they may have had a greater number of stressors in their environment,
combined with periods of"punctated" deficiency.
The test of the Plateau STRESS rate shows that the data fit Model 3. An
apparently unsuccessful adaptation to stress resulted in the high number of stress
lesions, high infection rate, reduced resistance, and unhealed lesions. These results
were expected under the Model 3 assumptions.
Interestingly, when sites of doubtful Late Prehistoric affiliation were removed
from the sample, the statistical tests did not significantly differ from the results
presented above. This suggests that the pattern of adaptation to stress is fairly consistent, not only for the Late Prehistoric period, but for earlier time periods as well.
INTERPRETATIONS
The exact types and origins of the stressors experienced by these populations
is unknown. Causes can only be inferred from the available biological and archeological data. Completely different stressors, i.e., nutritional stress, demographic
stress, etc., could be experienced by the three regions, and, too, relative population
densities may enhance or diminish the effects of stress factors. Understanding the
cause of the stress is not as important as understanding whether the biocultural
adaptation is effective in protecting the population from it. The main purpose of this
report has been to assess, from biological evidence, the adaptive success of populations.
POSSIBLE CAUSES OF STRESS
Hypothesizing the causes of stress in the Late Prehistoric groups in Texas can
be somewhat helpful in understanding some of the suggested changes in the Late
Prehistoric period.
In the coastal groups we have noted that the adaptations to stress were moderately successful, although not totally so. One possible explanation for the low levels
of stress in these populations is competition for resources with neighboring groups
or encroachment into the population’s home range by migrating groups, Aten
(1983:42) has suggested that the displacement of indigenous groups on the Texas
coast occurred during the Historic period. This displacement certainly created
stress for native groups at that time (Aten 1983: 60-64); prehistoric displacements
may have been a factor in the adaptations of earlier populations in this area. The

262

Texas Archeological Society

resulting migratory stress might have been responsible for the low levels of stress
pathologies seen in the inner coastal populations.
The Inner Coastal pathologies also may be the result of a cultural activity
associated with seasonality--aggregation of smaller hunter-gatherer groups.
Jackson, Boone, and Hennenberg (1986), noting that some coastal hunter-gatherers
have treponemal lesions, have hypothesized that this contagious disease was
transmitted during seasonal aggregation of hunter-gatherers. If seasonal transhumance (See Ricklis, Hamilton, and Prewitt and Paine, herein) was an adaptation of
the coastal groups sampled in this study, the resultant pathologies might include
elevated infection rates (from contagious diseases affecting all tissues) as compared
to populations with no intergroup contact. Although very tentative, this coastal
stress data might fit the aggregational model proposed by Jackson, Boone, and
Henneberg (1986).
For the populations farther north there is evidence of less successful adaptation
to stress, as presented above. Encroachment by Plains groups is evident during the
Historic period (Campbell 1986:9), an event that could account for the higher stress
rates in the Outer Coastal Plain and Plateau groups. Evidence of intergroup conflict
has been noted in the Late Archaic (Hall 1981:303) and Late Prehistoric ~ewitt
1981:176) in these regions. Cultural systems not adapted to intergroup competition
can be seen as unsuccessful ones; in them, inadequate stress buffering would be
manifested in the skeletal populations.
Inefficient subsistence strategies could be another stress factor. Since human
populations usually need only between .05 and 5 percent of the NPP of an area for
survival (Castee11972:21-22), any stress from inadequate diet would be a factor of
a cultural adaptation (rather than lack of resources) that prohibited optimal exploitation of the environment (Winterhalder 1981:86-88). This stressor could, in turn,
be the result of competition for resources.
Whatever the cause, this study has shown that the groups studied have to some
degree been unsuccessful in preventing stress from impacting the biological
systems of these populations.
CONCLUSIONS
In this study, a case was made for the interrelationship of biology and culture.
An analysis of stress pathologies provided data to be tested against a set of models
describing a group’s success in preventing environmental stress from affecting its
members. From the tests, it appears that the Inner and Outer Coastal Plain groups
have moderate success in buffering stress, although they may experience it during
seasonal or random intervals. The Plateau groups apparently were unsuccessful in
nullifying the effects of stress in their populations.
The models of adaptive success presented here are only a rudimentary effort to
connect the biological and cultural systems at work in hunter-gather cultures.
Several of the limitations that have become apparent probably can be overcome by
further research. Detailed investigations concerning the interactive roles of
prehistoric diet, demography, and material culture will be necessary for models
such as this to be fully useful for research.

Powell-- Stress and Survival

263

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author thanks Dee Ann Story, James L. Boone, Claude A.
Bramblett, and Thomas R. Hester for their comments and suggestions on early
versions of this manuscript, and Ren PoweU for her faithful support and
encouragement.
REFERENCES CITED
Aten, L. E.
1983 Indians of the upper Texas coast. Academic Press, New York.
Armelegos, G. J., A. Goodman, and S. Bickerton
1980 Dietary, nutritional, and infectious disease stress in prehistoric populations
(Abstract). American Journal of Physical Anthropology 52:201.
Bettinger, R. L.
1982 Explanatory/predictive models of hunter-gatherer adaptation. In: Advances in
archaeological method and theory (Vol. 2), edited by M.B. Schiffer. Academic
Press, New York.
Blair, W.
1950 The biotic provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Campbell, T. N.
1983 Coahuiltecans and their neighbors. In: Handbook of North American Indians,
edited by William C. Sturtevant. Volume 10: Southwest, edited by Alfonso Ortiz.
pp. 343-360.
1986

Name aUoftheIndians oftheBastrop area. Sayersville HistoricalBulletin7:7-16.

Carlson, D. S., D. P. VanGervan, and (3. J. Armelegos
1974 Factors influencing the etiology of Cribra Orbitalia in prehistoric Nubia. Journal
of Human Evolution 3:405-410.
Caste,el, R. W.
1972 Two static maximum population density models for hunter-gatherers: An approximation. World Archaeology: 4(1):19--40.
Chambers, W. T.
1948 Geographic regions of Texas. Texas Geographic Magazine. Spring 1948.
Cohen, M. N.
1977a The food crisis in prehistory: Overpopulation and the origin of agriculture. Yale
University Press, New Haven.
Cohen. M. N.
1977b Population pressure and the origins of agriculture: An archaeological example
from Peru. In: origins of agriculture, edited by C. Reed. Mouton Press, The Hague.
pp. 135-177.

264

Texas Archeological Society

Cook, D. C. and J. E. Buikstra
1979 Health and differential survival in prehistoric populations:
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 51:649-664.

prenatal defects.

Davis, W. B.
1978 The mammals of Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department Bulletin 41.
Gould, F. W.
1975 The grasses of Texas. Texas A&M University, College Station.
Hall, G. D.
1981 Allens Creek: the cultural prehistory of the lower Brazos River valley, Texas.
Research Report 61, Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Hancox, M. C.
1972 Biology of bone. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Huss-Ashmore, R., A. H. Goodman, and G. J. Armelegos
1982

Nutritional inferences from paleopathology. In: Advances in archaeological
method and theory (Vol. 4), edited by M.B. Schiffer. Academic Press, New York.
pp. 395-474.

Jackson, B. E., J. L. Boone, and M. Henneberg
1986 Possible cases of endemic treponematosis in a prehistoric hunter-gatherer population on the Texas coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 55.
Jochim, M. A.
1976 Hunter-gatherer subsistence and settlement: A predictive model. Academic
Press, New York
Keene, A.

1979

Economic optimization models and the study of hunter-gatherer subsistence
systems. In: Transformations: mathematical approaches to culture change, edited
by C. Renfrew and R. Cooke. Academic Press, New York. pp. 369-404.

Kotter, S. M., B. A. Nightengale, and W. M. Davis
1987 Environmental and cultural setting. In: Cummins Creek IV: cultural resources in
the Cummins Creek Historic District, Fayette County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin. (In Press)
Lee, R.B.
1968 What hunters do for a living, or, how to make out on scarce resources. In: Man the
hunter, edited by R.B. Lee and I. DeVote. Aldine, New York. pp. 30-48.
Leiban, R. W.
1977 The field of medical anthropology. In: Culture, disease, and healing: studies in
medical anthropology, edited by D. Lang. Macmillan, New York. pp. 13-31.

Powell-- Stress and Survival

265

Lord, K.J.
1981 Identification of faunal remains. In Allens Creek: the cultural prehistory of the
lower Brazos River valley, Texas. Edited by Grant Hall. Research Report 61,
Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Lowenberg, M. E., E. N. Todhunter, E. D. Wilson, M. C. Feeney, J. R. Savage
1968

Food and man. Willey and Sons: New York.

Martin, D. L., A. H. Goodman, and G. J Armelegos
1985 Skeletal pathologies as indicators of the quality and quantity of diet. In: The
analysis of prehistoric diets edited by R.I. Gilbert and J.H. Mielke. Academic
Press, New York. pp. 227-280.
McLean, F. C. and M. R. Urist
1968 Bone: Fundamentals of the physiology of skeletal tissue. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago.
Ortner, D. J. and W. G. Putschar
1981 Identification of pathological conditions in human skeletal remains. Smithsonian
Contributions to Anthropology 28. Washington.
Prewitt, E. R.
1981 Cultural chronology in Central Texas. BulletinoftheTexasArcheologicalSociety
52:65-89.
1982

Archaeologicalinvestigations at the SanGabriel Reservoir District, CentralTexas,
(Vol. 4). Institute of Applied Science, North Texas State University, Denton.

1985

From Circleville to Toyah: comments on Central Texas chronology. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 54:202-229.

Rose, J. Rodin, L. E., N. I. Bazilevich, and N. N. Rozov
1975 Productivity of world ecosystems. National Academy of Science, Washington.
1983

Bioarcheology of the Cedar Grove site. In: Cedar Grove: an interdisciplinary
investigation of a Late Caddo farmstead in the Red River valley. Arkansas
Archeological Survey. Report for the United States Army Corps of Engineers No.
PD-RC-83-03.

Schaefer, A.
1966 Observations from exploring needs in national nutrition. American Journal of
Public Health 56:1089-1093.
Simmons, I. G.
1979 Biogeography: natural and cultural. Edward Arnold, London.
Steinbock, R. T.
1976 Paleopathological diagnosis and interpretation: bone disease in ancient human
populations. C.C. Thomas, New York.

266

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

Stini, W. A.
1985 Growth rates and sexual dimorphism in evolutionary perspective. In: The analysis
of prehistoric diets edited by R. I. Gilbert and J. H. Mielke. Academic Press, New
York. pp. 191-226.
Whittaker, R. H., and G. E. Likens
1975 The biosphere and man. In: Primary productivity of the biosphere, edited by R.
H. Whittaker. Ecological Study 14. Springer-Verlag: Berlin.
Winterhalder, B.
1981 Foraging strategies in the boreal forest: An analysis of Cree hunting and gathering.
In: Hunter-gatherer foraging strategies. Edited by B. Winterhalder and A. E.
Smith. University of Chicago Press, Chicago. pp. 66-98.
Yates, B. C.
1979 Appendix I: Identified vertebrates from Mitchell Ridge, 41GV66. Unpublished
manuscript. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory files, The University of
Texas atAustin, pp. 63-81.

Recommendations for the Conservation of Shell
Materials
Paul S. Storch
ABSTRACT

Recovery of mollusk shell from excavations can be difficult for the
archeologist because of poor preservation. A search of the archeological literature on field conservation reveals a lack of concern and
knowledge of techniques applicable to the treatment of shell in the field.
After summarizing the structure of shell, factors affecting preservation,
and the categories of information inherent in shell deposits, this paper
reports the results of a laboratory experiment performed on archeologically recoveredRangia cuneata (Gray) specimens in order to determine
which consolidants are best at preventing further deterioration and loss
of information on both wet and dry shell. Recommendations on which
consolidants to use and how to apply them in the field are based on the
experimental data.
INTRODUCTION
Mollusk shell, when found in large concentrations such as are found in littoral
shell middens may be in excellent condition (Aten 1981:179, Meighan 1970:415,
Sparks 1970:395-396). On the other hand, individual specimens that have been
deposited in organically rich acidic soils in terrestrial sites may be weak and friable.
Inquiries by several Texas archeologists as to the best methods for recovering shell
specimens from excavations made the author aware of a lack of recognition of this
problem in archeological field manuals. The field techniques that can be found
consist of dousing the finds with a proprietary formulation such as Elmer’s
Glue-All, which rarely, if ever, gives satisfactory results.
The goal of this paper is not to promulgate a panacea for all problems
concerning shell specimens and artifacts, but rather to provide usable data and to
make practical recommendations that can be used until something better is developed. The proper conservation of any material requires an understanding of the
physical and chemical nature of that material and procedures acceptable for testing
the field consolidants. The advice given here is not intended to replace the
assistance of a trained archeological conservator and should not be taken as such.
THE PROPERTIES OF SHELL

Shells are the calcareous outer protective covering of invertebrate animals
belonging to the phylum Mollusca. This phylum is divided into six classes; the two
most important in archeology are Gastropods (snails) and Bivalvia (Pelecypoda, or
clams, oysters, and mussels).
The shell itself consists of a matrix of calcium carbonate covered with a
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 58 (1987)

268

Texas Archeological Society

noncalcareous membrane called the periostracum, which is analogous to the
periosteum on the outer surfaces of bones (Morris 1973:xviii). As the periostmcum
dries and flakes from the shell, it breaks the delicate growing distal edge of the valve
(Aten 1981:186-187). The shells of bivalves are excreted by tissue layers called the
mantle, which cover the visceral mass (Weisz 1963:274). The shells of most
bivalves are laid down in visible layers that are useful in seasonality studies, since
the thickness and spacing of the layers correlate with the seasonal growth of the
animal.
PRESERVATION
The primary parameters in the preservation of shell remains in the ground are
the pH level of the soil matrix, the amount of shell in the deposit, and aeration.
Secondary factors affecting preservation are human and animal disturbances and
erosion, which allow increased weathering and leaching to occur. For example,
burning or calcination of shell leads to poor preservation. The habitat of the mollusc
may also be important to preservation after death. The shells of some terrestrial
gastropods that live on calcium-depleted soils may be thin and easily broken, and
pelecypods that live in brackish or marine environments rich in calcium ions will
be preserved very well. Although there are technical distinctions among different
types of shell midden deposits, the term is used here to refer to deposits consisting
almost entirely of shell remains (Meighan 1970:415). Water percolating downward
through such a concentration of shell may become charged with carbonic acid,
causing a leaching and redeposition effect on the shells, serving to encrust or even
cement some of them together with a caliche coating (Sparks 1970:395). The pH
levels of shell middens that are deposited in initially acidic soils such as sandy loams
can be raised to alkaline ranges that encourage the preservation of bone and other
organic materials such as wood, cordage, and seeds, especially if the site is
waterlogged or wet as well.
THE ARCHEOLOGICAL IMPORTANCE OF SHELL REMAINS
Shell has been used as a material for ornaments in the New World at least since
the Archaic stage, perhaps reaching an artistic apex during the Mississippian period
in midwestern and southeastern North America, so the need for preserving shell
artifacts is obvious. Shell refuse, on the other hand, can provide invaluable
information about the economy of the site occupants, population, climate and
habitat, radiocarbon age, and, from the season of death of the mollusks, the
seasonality of the site’s occupation (Aten 1981:179, Shakelton 1970:407).
In order to determine seasonality from bivalve remains, a sample of at least 50
to 100 fairly complete specimens is needed. Aten (1981) describes in detail the
morphological approach to the determination of seasonality in the Gulf Coast
brackish water speciesRangia cuneata (Gray). This approach requires that the outer
edges of the bivalve be as well preserved as possible to allow measurement of the
most recent growth tings. The exterior surface of the valve should also be stable,
since powdering and flaking will obscure the earlier growth rings, making accurate
measurement difficult.

Storch m Conservation of Shell

269

FIELD TREATMENTS
The few archeological manuals that deal with field conservation pay little or no
attention to the problems attendant on the excavation of shell. Dowman (1970), in
her book that is still the only work devoted entirely to archeological field conservation, does not mention shell at all. Joukowsky (1980:258) discusses the treatment
of shell together with bone and ivory. For dry shell requiting in situ stabilization,
she advocates the use of a polyvinyl acetate (PVAc) resin in acetone.
Lamb and Newsom (in Fairbanks 1983:30), in a misguided and dangerous
attempt to standardize archeological field conservation, state that "shell artifacts
generally do not present a problem with preservation." They go on to say that in
archeological deposits, shell can become very fragile and advocate the use of
ethulose and PEG (polyethylene glycol, Carbowax). Conceding that these materials may not provide adequate consolidation, they describe the use of cellulose (sic)
in either ethanol or acetone. They advocated Duco cement, an unstable and
unsuitable material, which should not be used on any artifactual material whatsoever, for use on shell in a "2% solution in alcohol." Duco is composed of
nitrocellulose and is soluble only in ether-alcohol mixtures and acetone.
Cease (1985, personal communication) also states that shell usually is found in
good condition, but that if it is extremely friable, it can be consolidated by brushing
on a 2 percent solution of acrylic resin (Acryloid B-72) in acetone or toluene. If the
specimen is damp, Cease states that a PVAc emulsion can be used. However, PVAc
emulsions are irreversible once they dry completely, unstable, acidic (pH less than
7), can attract moisture, and should not be used on artifacts.
Hester, Heizer, and Graham (1975:214), using outdated references, describe
the use of celluloid (nitrocellulose) on dry shells and gelatin/formaldehyde for damp
shells. The latter treatment is unstable and harmful to the specimens, since
formaldehyde will form formates with the calcium in the shell over time (Tennant
and Baird 1985:77).
TREATMENT EXPERIMENTS
As can be seen from the sources described above, there is no consensus as to
the best treatment for shell, either wet or dry. An experiment was undertaken using
several consolidant formulations in order to determine which type gives satisfactory
results and to develop techniques that can be applied to treatment in the field.
A sample of 50 valves ofRangia cuneata (Gray) recovered from archeological sites in the Gulf coastal brackish water environment along the San Jacinto River
in Harris County were obtained from Prewitt and Associates, Inc., of Austin. After
excavation, the shells had been air-dried slowly on screens. The condition of the
surfaces could be described best as moderately deteriorated, a rating of 2 to 3 (Table
1). Some of the outer edge rings were already broken, and the exterior surfaces
powdered under light pressure, but none were brittle or exfoliating.
aded to "corrode" the shells artificially using hydrochloric acid, m order to reproduce a natural weak and unstable condition, but the acid
treatment only served to dissolve the shells without causing friability and exfolia-

Texas Archeological Society

270

Table 1.

Qualitative Ratings of Shell Deterioration Conditions

Surface

Rating

Pitting

Striations

Layers
& Edges

Excellent (1)

Not powdery

None

All visible

Good (2)

Exterior

Some

Most are visible

slightly

Stability

Most outer

Both wet
& dry
Both wet

edges extant

& dry

---

powdery
Fair (3)

Mostly ob ....

Unstable

surfaces

literated

when dry;

powdery

on exterior

Exterior

Yes

flakes or

crumbles to
touch
Poor (4)

Flaking,

Heavy on

Minimal,

crumbling,

exterior

soft, ,un-

soft

surface

stable

dry

or wet

tion. The results of the control sample group and the group that was soaked in a 1.75
percent g/1 sodium chloride salt solution are reported here (Table 2). The salinity of

Table 2. Weights of the Shell Specimens Before Treatment
Test Group

Control Group (A)

(B)1

Dry, No

Before

After Drying 6 hrs

No.

Preparation

Soaking

in Lab Oven at 40~C

1

15.64

21.27

21.22

Specimen

2

10.30

11.54

11.50

3

14.16

13.36

13.25

4

13.44

19.90

19.84

5

6.53

14.61

6

13,51

6.60

7

15.95

7.90

8

22.21

7.64

9

16.20

10.62

10

14.25

4.45

After Soaking;
Treated Wet

14.58
6.63

8.61
8.30
11.18
5.00

t Specimens 1-6 were soaked for 4 weeks in the 1.75% saline solution.

seawater is about 3.5 percent, so a concentration of 1.75 percent would approximate
the salinity of brackish water. The pH of the salt solution was measured at 5.0.
Weight (Tables 2, 4) was the parameter used to measure the efficacy of the treatment
and to indicate the reversibility of the consolidant. It was assumed in this
experiment that the influence of density, porosity, and age of the shell would be negligible. There are, of course, other considerations in the choice ofa consolidant than
weight gain and reversibility; they are chemical compatibility with the artifact
material, stability over time, surface appearance, and toxicity to the operator. All
of the consolidants that were chosen for this experiment have satisfactory characteristics and have been used in other applications by conservators (Table 2).
The specimens were divided into two groups. Group B specimens 1-6 were
treated with solvented resins; the last four were treated with water-based and

Storch ~ Conservation of Shell

271

emulsion consolidants. The resins, which included PVAc-AYAA, PVAc-AYAF,
and polyvinyl butyral ~VB) B-98, were applied in 5 and t0 percent gB solutions
in acetone and ethanol. The wet consolidants were Rhoplex acrylic emulsion
AC-33, polyethylene glycol ~EG) 400, a mixture of PEG 400 and methylcellulose
(25 percent 1/1) and CM Bond (a PVAc emulsion) used at 25 percent strength.
The solvented resins are clear, dry by evaporation of the solvent, and are stable.
PVB may yellow over time if exposed to UV radiation. The AC-33 is an acrylic
emulsion that is stable, neutral in pH, and more easily reversed than the PVAc
emulsions. PEG 400 is a low-molecular-weight glycol ether commonly used in the
preservation of wet and waterlogged wood and leather. It acts as a bulking agent
by forming hydrogen bonds between hydrogen and hydroxyl groups and by
replacing water in the material. The mixture of PEG and methylcellulose was
proposed by Brown in 1974 as a 4:1 PEG/ethulose solution in water. This mixture
never dries completely and is hygroscopic. CM Bond is a PVAc emulsion
formulation with a high molecular weight of about 30,000. It has the drawbacks
discussed above that are inherent to most emulsion products.
Consolidant solutions were brushed onto the specimens and allowed to air dry.
The specimens were then weighed and placed in a Hotpack environmental chamber
for 14 days at 80 percent R.H. and 90°F (33°C), which simulates storage conditions
in an environmentally uncontrolled building.
RESULTS
After treatments of the shell surfaces (Table 3), the specimens were soaked for
12 hours in a solvent specific for the consolidant solution that was applied. They

Table 3.
Specimen
No.
i
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Visible Effects of Treatment on Shell Surfaces
Observation1

Slight sheen; stopped surface abrasion
Sheen slightly heavier than 5%; stopped surface abrasion
Slight sheen; stopped surface loss
Slight sheen; stopped surface abrasion
No sheen noted on Group A specimens; stopped surface loss
No sheen; stopped surface loss
Marked sheen; shallow penetration; no abrasion noted
Stayed wet in areas; no abrasion resistance
Group A stayed wet; Croup B dried; no abrasion resistance
Slight sheen; abrasion resistance

Consolidant
Used
PVA-AYAA 5%
PVA-AYAA 10%
PVA-AYAF 5%
PVA-AYAF 10%
PVB 5%
PVG 10%
Rhoplex AC-33
PEG 400
PEG/MC
CM Bond

1 Observations are for both groups unless otherwise noted.

were removed from the solutions, light--dried with a paper towel, and weighed. A
weight lower than the initial weight indicated removal of the consolidant (Table 4).
It can be seen (Table 4) that the most successful reversibility occurred with the
PVAc resins. PVB was not easily removed by soaking in ethanol and tended to
absorb solvent instead, slightly increasing the weight. The water soluble consolidants also were removed after soaking. This was most likely due to the fact that poor

272

Texas Archeological Society
Table 4. Results of Reversibility Tests:
Comparison of Treated Weights With Weights After Consolidation
Treatment (B)

Control (A)
Specimen

Soaking

No.

Agent

Treated
Weight

1
2
3
4

Acetone
Acetone
Acetone
Acetone

15.72
10.41
14.24
13.58

15.69
10.35
14.21
13.51

21.40
11.74
13.38
20.05

21.34
11.65
13.34
19.95

5
6

Ethanol
Ethanol

6.60
13.58

6.64
13.76

14.69
6.77

14.73
6.84

7

Acetone

16.28

16.03

8.10

8.00

8

Ethanol

22.93

22.58

8.07

8.00

9

Ethanol & water,
50%, 1/1
Acetone

16.53
14.44

16.31
14.33

10.96
4.58

10.97
4.54

10

WeightAfter
Removal

Treated
Weight

Weight After
Removal

penetration had occurred, especially with the PEG and PEG/methylcellulose
mixture.
Treatment Recommendations and Techniques
Based on the results of the experiment, the following materials and techniques
are recommended for shell materials requiring treatment in the field. For dry
conditions, one of the grades of PVAc in either acetone or ethanol should be used.
If the ambient temperature is over 80°F, use ethanol, since it will evaporate more
slowly, eliminating the risk of shallow penetration of the consolidant. The
lowest-molecular-weight grade ofPVAc, AYAA, should be used if the shell is very
porous and fragile in order to afford the best penetration. The AYAF grade may be
used if the condition is moderate, but fragile. It is best to apply a light spray of pure
solvent onto the object being treated before the consolidant is applied. This helps
to drive off residual moisture and to introduce the solvent into the material, aiding
the penetration of the consolidant. In a midden site, the individual pelecypod valves
may be tightly packed together. It is best to excavate a pedestal, consolidate the
shells with the surrounding matrix, and remove the sample in a block, either with
or without jacketing. This is the standard method for removing fragile bone and
other objects and has been described in detail elsewhere ~xon 1976, Storch 1983).
When wet or damp shell is encountered, an aqueous-based consolidant is
required because it would be impossible to allow the material to dry enough to use
a solvented system. Use of a solvented resin on material that is too damp will result
in the formation of a white skin on the surface and lack of penetration. The
recommended wet consolidant is Rhoplex AC-33 acrylic emulsion. It can be used
as supplied, which is 45 percent solids, or diluted with distilled or deionized water.
It is the most stable of the emulsion formulations and is of neutral pH. The sheen
can be toned down by swabbing with acetone once the material is stable and dry.

Storch m Conservation of Shell

273

Koob (1984) describes the use of this consolidant on archeological bone in the field.
The same excavation method can be used with the emulsion as the one described for
the solvented PVAc system.
Once the specimens have been returned to the laboratory, they should be
carefully removed from the jackets and placed in an environmentally stable area
(without major fluctuations in temperature and relative humidity). Cleaning of
consolidated specimens can be done by dissolving the adhered matrix with the
appropriate solvent, and, once it is cleaned, reconsolidating the actual surface of the
object. Objects requiring more than simple mending and cleaning treatment should
be treated by a qualified archeological conservator.
CONCLUSIONS

It is difficult to describe every possible object, condition, or problem that might
be encountered in the field, but it is hoped that this article can help to solve some
of the problems posed by fragile shell materials. Several consolidants have been
tested in controlled experiments and, based on the results, the stable, conservation
quality consolidants polyvinyl acetates and acrylics have been recommended for
most stabilization procedures. Although it was not tested in this experiment, the
author agrees with Cease’s recommendation of using a dilute solution of Acryloid
B-72 as a consolidant on dry shell. A recommended dilution is 1:2 B-72/acetone;
acetone is less toxic to the operator than toluene. The resin is known to be stable,
has been well tested on several artifactual materials, and is compatible with shell.
Its main advantage over the PVAc resins is that B-72 has a higher Tg than the
PVAc’s, meaning that it will not cold-flow once it has set up.
Proprietary compounds such as Duco Cement and Elmer’s GlueAll must be
avoided. These materials were not formulated to meet the standards of conservation
practice, are not stable, and actually may be harmful to the specimen. It also must
be remembered that the consolidation with a carbon-containing solvent or resin
should be avoided on any samples that might be subjected to radiocarbon dating.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author thanks Prewitt and Associates, Inc., consulting archeologists,
for supplying the Rangia cuneata (Gray) specimens used in the experiment.
REFERENCES CITED
Aten, L. E.
1981

Determining seasonality of Rangia cuneata from Gulf Coast shell middens. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 42:179-200.

Dowman, E. A.
1970

Conservation in field archaeology. Methuen, London.

Hester, T. R., Heizer, R. F., and Graham, J. A.
1975 Field methods in archaeology (sixth edition). Mayfield. California.

274

Texas Archeological Society

Joukowsky, Martha
1980 A complete manual of field archaeology. Prentice-Hall, New Jersey.
Koob, S. P.
1984 The consohdation of archaeological bone. In: Adhesives and consohdants,
Preprints. HC, London.

HC

Lamb, T. R., and Newsom, Lee
1983 Preservation and conservation of organic materials. In: The conservation of
archaeological materials, edited by Charles H. Fairbanks. Special Publication 1,
Florida Journal of Anthropology, University of Florida.
Meighan, C.W,
1970 Molluscs as food remains in archaeological sites. In: Science in archaeology
(second edition), edited by Don Brothwell and Eric Higgs, pp. 415--422. Praeger,
London.
Morris, P. A.
1975 A field guide to shells of the Atlantic and Gulf coasts and file West Indies (third
edition). The Peterson Field Guide Series, 3. Houghton Mifflin, Boston.
Rixon, A. E.
1976 Fossil animal remains:
London.

their preparation and conservation.

Athlone Press,

Shackelton, N. J.
1970 Marine mollusca in archaeology. In: Science in archaeology (second edition),
edited by Don Brothwell and Eric Higgs. Praeger, London.
Sparks, B. W.
1970 Non-marine mollusca and archaeology. In: Science and archaeology (second
edition), edited by Don Brothwell and Eric Higgs, pp. 395-406. Praeger, London.
Storch, P. S.
1983 Fietdandlaboratorymethodsforhandlingosseousmaterials. ConservationNotes
No. 6, November. Texas Memorial Museum, The University of Texas at Austin.
Tennant, N. H., and Baird, Thomas
1985 The deterioration of mollusca collections: identification of shell efflorescence.
IIC Studies in Conservation 30:73-85.
Weisz, Paul B.
1963 The science of biology (second edition). Mcgraw-Hill, New York.

Photograph courtesy of Corpus Christi Geological Society
W. ARMSTRONG PRICE, 1889-1987
In this issue of the Bulletin, which features archeology of the Texas coastal
zone, it seems appropriate to call attention to the recent death, at the age of 98, of
W. Armstrong Price, geologist and oceanographer, whose studies of shoreline
dynamics have made it easier for archeologists to correlate human occupations with
environmental changes that occurred during the late Pleistocene and Recent epochs.
These changes, all in some way connected with fluctuations in global sea level,
controlled the distribution of archeological sites along the shallow bays, deltas, and
offshore barrier islands that characterize the Texas coast.
Price (Ph.D., Johns Hopkins University, 1913) was a versatile man who had
several careers in his very long and productive life. For many years he was a
consulting petroleum geologist in Corpus Christi, and he is credited with the
discovery of five oil and gas fields in southern Texas. During that time he steadily
published the results of basic geologicalresearch (his name is now linked with some
150 publications). At the age of 61 he entered academic life at Texas A&M
University and was one of the three professors who organized its very successful
Department of Oceanography. After retiring from his position at Texas A&M, Price
returned to Corpus Christi, resumed his consulting work, continued his research,
and lectured at the University of Corpus Christi. His mind was clear to the very end
of his life, and shortly before death he was preparing another manuscript for
publication.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 58 (1987)

276

Texas Archeological Society

Although Price carefully recorded any archeological evidence he encountered
while doing geological field work, he was content to leave artifact description and
interpretation to archeologists. What interested him most were the environmental
changes that affected successive human occupations along the Texas coast. Of
special interest to archeologists are his studies of sedimentation in coastal bays and
lagoons, of factors involved in the formation and maintenance of offshore barrier
islands, of the distributary channel sequences found on the Braz0s and Rio Grande
deltas, and of conditions leading to the formation of clay and sand dunes.
My most treasured memory of Armstrong Price is connected with a three-day
trip I once made with him to examine shoreline features in northern Tamaulipas. We
traveled southward from Corpus Christi in a chartered twin-engine amphibian
plane, so landings could be made on either ground or water. This trip turned out to
be exciting because of two near disasters while trying to take off from landing areas
that were too small. In one instance the plane did not become airborne but came to
rest atop a dense thicket of thorny brush. Price complimented the pilot on his skill
in making such an unusual landing, crawled down from the plane, surveyed the
situation, and suggested that we get men with machetes from a nearby village to
come and clear a runway for the perched plane.
Later, while flying northward from Matamoros to Corpus Christi, one of the
plane’s engines died, and we slowly but steadily lost altitude. Price entertained us
by pointing out and explaining various topographic features along the Laguna
Madre and Padre Island. You would have thought he was lecturing in a quiet
classroom. When the Corpus Christi airport came into view, the plane’s altitude had
fallen to about 500 feet. After landing I asked Price what he thought of the trip. He
replied: "Wonderful! We found that clay dunes occur as far south as the Rio Soto
la Marina."
T. N. Campbell
Austin

Book Reviews
ElPaso’s Prehistoric Past. By Mark T. Bentley. Published by Mark
T. Bentley, Austin. First edition 1981, second edition 1985. xi+100
pages, 21 figures, 5 figures. Softbound, $5.95.
Bentley’s small volume fills an important need in Texas archeology. It is a
regional synthesis written primarily for the layman, but it also appeals to the
vocational and professional audience. It is clear, without knowing the author or
anything of his background, that Mark Bentley has had some professional training,
but he still understands the needs of nonprofessionals.
El Paso’s Prehistoric Past is divided into three chapters, each dealing with an
archeological area of concern--physical environmental, socio-technological, and
socio-ideological. The first chapter is a straightforward discussion of the geography of the E1 Paso and Hueco Bolson area. Parts of this chapter reflect some
indecision about which audience is being addressed, and, like other parts of the
book, have some literary fence-straddling. From the professional archeologist’s
point of view, Bentley impresses one as knowing what he talks about, but whether
neophytes will be equally impressed or just lose interest is not certain.
The second chapter, on the socio-technological concern, is a clean and precise
cultural-historical discussion covering time periods, projectile points, house types,
etc. Its rifle, "Socio-Technological Parameter," is more than an example of "old
wines in new skins," as Walter Taylor has put it. The title and the presentation reflect
a way of thinking about prehistory that is different from the time-worn culture
history. However, this concept comes from a school of thought that grew out of the
New Archeology of the Southwest, particularly at the University of Arizona. Inthe
1970s, it was innovative, but in 1988 it seems overly simplified and pass5.
However, this criticism may be too harsh here, for Bentley’s volume was first
published in 1981 and has not been updated.
The third chapter focuses on the socio-ideological concerns of prehistory.
Rock art and pottery designs are discussed in an interesting and informative manner.
This may be Bentley’s best chapter. The first-rime reader suddenly finds here that
the people of the past still have interesting things to say to the people of the present,
and this chapter probably has brought more than one new member to the E1 Paso
Archaeological Society.
Bentley ends the volume with a useful appendix covering ceramic types of the
E1 Paso area. This may not be useful for the novice, but it is a handy reference for
those who are familiar, but not intimately so, with the area.
It is unfortunate that his book is already becoming outdated. Scarborough’s
discoveries of prehistoric irrigation canals in the E1 Paso area and recent work by

278 Texas Areheologica[ Society
Tom O’Laughlin, of the Centennial Museum at The University of Texas at E1 Paso,
for example, have forced a great deaI of restructuring of our understanding of the
prehistory of Southwest Texas, but these developments are not reflected in Bentley’s
volume. This reviewer is concerned too that Bentley lacks a clear understanding of
what is palatable to his audience--that is, if this reviewer understands correctly
what that audience is. Finally, Bentley presents no discussions of interaction of the
prehistoric E1Pasoans with other people, such as those at Casas Grandes in Mexico.
This is in accordance with the wholesale abandonment of diffusion as a valid
concept by the Arizona new archeologists of the 1970s.
Despite these problems, E1Paso’s Prehistoric Past is recommended to everyone interested in Texas archeology. This will be as welcome an addition to their
bookshelves as it has been to this reviewer’s. It is hoped, too, that Bentley’s lead
will be followed by others. CanEastTexas’sPrehistoricPastorTheFirstResidents
of the Panhandle be seen coming over the horizon?
Thomas H. Guderjan
San Antonio

The Rock Art of Seminole Canyon State ttistorical Park: Deterioration andProspectsfor Conservation. By Constance S. Silver. Texas
Parks and Wildlife Department Report 4000-430, February 1985.43
pp., 6 figures, appendix.
Rock art, including both petroglyphs and pictographs, executed by vanished
and vanishing aboriginal peoples, is one of the world’s most precious cultural
resources. Conservators, and archeological conservators in particular, recently
have become interested in developing methods and techniques for conserving and
preserving this art. The difficulties involved in this endeavor stem from the fact that
rock art is often found in remote areas, is exposed to both the elements and human
caprice, and is executed on and in rock substrates that are subject to progressive
natural deterioration.
The published work that has been done on pictographs--paintings with
pigments on rock surfaces-has consisted of compilations of data describing in
detail the problems connected with the the preservation of the paintings and the
rocks themselves and the straightforward documentation of these problems. These
data presumably will be used to design intelligent preservation programs that will
slow, if not arrest, further deterioration of the paintings (Dragovich 1981:143-149).
It is therefore disappointing to find that this publication-concerned with the
endangered rock art sites in Val Verde County, Texas--is merely an exercise,
reviewing the problems of rock art in a general way, as has been done already in
other publications. In addition, the author postulates that the prehistoric pictographs
were executed in the fresco technique, a misleading assertion (to be discussed
below) that clearly betrays a lack of understanding of the local geology and rock
deterioration processes. Publication of assertions such as this are particularly
disturbing to conservators in this area, where specialists are few and not well known.

Book Reviews

279

These few individuals spend much of their time trying to educate archeologists and
the general public in the scientific study of archeological materials. Unfortunately,
since this report will be accessible to the general public, its contents undoubtedly
will be incorporated into the archeological folldore that causes professional archeological conservators so much trouble and that results in well-meaning but incorrect
and harmful treatments.
Silver’s report is based on only nine days’ work in the field, although she calls
repeatedly for long-term data collection, and no definite data are presented in
support of the recommendations. Instead, she proposes that an international
conference be held in the Seminole Canyon area in order to assess further the
problems associated with the rock art. It is this reviewer’s opinion that such a
conference would accomplish nothing except the generation of one more publication stating the need for more work on the problem.
In the "Methodology" section, the manner in which the condition of the shelters
was assessed is not defined, nor is there any description of how the "possible agents
of deterioration" were studied. Such a lack of specific information about methodology in a scientific report is inappropriate.
Under the "Component Materials" section, a "white stratum" that overlies the
limestone "support" and apparently the basis for a mistaken inference that the
pictographs were executed in the fresco technique (i.e. painted on a prepared base
layer) was identified as gypsum by an analyst who did not visit the site but who
stated that"it does not seem likely that a gypsum stratum could develop naturally."
According to S olveig Turpin, who has written an extensive archeological report on
the Seminole Canyon sites (Turpin 1982), deposits of gypsum efflorescence--a
naturally hydrated calcium sulfate (CaSO4-2I-IzO)--develop naturally on limestone outcrops in the area. As in the rest of this report, the words possibly, likely,
and probably abound in descriptions of the "white preparation stratum." As
evidence for this "intentional preparation layer" at Seminole Canyon, Silver cites
a layer of similar appearance in the Courthouse Wash Pictograph in Utah, identified
as a"white clay," that may have been used for making preparatory sketches on the
wall. However, later on in the report she states that a dull red clay layer does
precipitate out onto the pigments (p. 19), producing a surface accretion that is
"typical of normal surface weathering of limestone caves due to condensation."
Because these observations are without documentation and data to back them up,
they lack credibility. There are no documented occurrences of true fresco technique
in the Southwest before the coming of the Spaniards in the sixteenth century.
Furthermore, neither Turpin nor Zolensky (Tin,in 1982), in presenting clear cross
section photographs and complete x-ray diffraction data, mentions any frescolike
preparation layers.
Under "The Deterioration of Stone in Deserts and Semi-arid Regions," three
pages are devoted to restating standard references on stone deterioration and
environmental factors. This is a useful review, but the purpose would have been
served more effectively if these references had been cited in conjunction with actual
data from the rockshelters as they were in Turpin’s archeological report (1982:197,
200-201). Silver has overlooked an important rock art reference that looks at the

280 Texas Areheological Society

same problems she was attempting to address: Conservation ofRockArt, edited by
Colin Pearson and punished in 1977, the result of a conference in Australia on the
agents of deteriorarion that affect sites. It is surprising that the author has not used
more Australian references, since researchers there have done considerable research on arid and semiarid sites during the past two decades.
The subsection rifled"Exfoliation of Stone" is the most critical to the credibility
of this study. A functional explanation given for the exfoliation and obfuscation of
the pictographs relates the two phenomena to each other, but no data are presented
to show how these factors operate at the Seminole Canyon sites. One type of
exfoliation, called granular by Turpin (1982:200), was not mentioned by Silver
because she did not examine any of the shelters where it occurred. She is correct
but not helpful in noting that"stone exfoliation and obf)ascation of the pictographs
are complex phenomena whose mechanisms change from shelter to shelter and
within discrete areas of each individual shelter."
The data presented under"Exfoliation of S tone" consist of three x-ray powder
diffraction spectrograms that are not adequateIy explained. In addition, there is
confusion between the singular and plural of the word stratum. It is unclear from
the text and the illustrations whether the author is referring to a single stratum or to
multiple strata in the explanations of the cross sections on pages 17 and I9. "S trata
2" is not explained at all in the text, nor is there any explanation ~br giving different
samples to two different analysts. The work of a third analyst, a geoIogist, is not
explained, except ~br a statement that exfoliation is caused by the leaching of clays
and salts to the surface of the rock.
The major theoretical probIem with the re~rt comes in the"Recommendations
for Conservation" section, where the rockshelters in the canyon are compared to a
hypothetical Byzantine crb~t. The reviewer wonders why Silver reached for an
exotic model to back up her findings instead of using more-comparable data from
similar environmental situations. Comparison of a hv.sco done in lime plaster to
paintings on rock, supposedly done on a gypsum ground, is bound to cause
confusion, since the comparison is not based on any dam presented in the text. Mora,
Mora, and Phittipot (1984) state that the making of gypsum plaster requhes the
knowledge of calcination; them is no evidence that this technology existed on the
Lower Pecos at the time the pictogmphs were ex~uted.
The chemical EDTA is mentioned (p. 28) as a strong chelating agent for the
removal of obfuscation crust, but it is not clear whether the author is referring to the
acid of EDTA or to one of its sodium salts; the salts are the proper chemicals to use
in chelation treatments. The pH level of the EDTA solutions can be adjusted with
EDTA acid or other chemicals such as ammonium acetate.
~[n the discussion of the reatmchment of loose plates of limestone (p. 31), there
is a major contradiction. Silver states that "in the case of Seminole Canyon there
are many considerations in regard to reatuachment of ioose areas .... there are no
preceAents in the literature on r~k art conservation." However, on page 26 she
quotes the conservator Barbara Kennedy as saying that the reattachment of large
plates of limestone at the Deer Corral Pictograph in British Columbia was successful after six years. Furthermore, Silver goes on to say that"similar rock suthilization

Book Reviews

281

has been carried out for decades in the White Mountain[s}, New Hampshire," and
"studies are now underway to stabilize Mt. Fuji (sic), Japan," but she does not
describe the methods of stabilization used at these sites. Again Silver calls for pilot
tests of adhesives before further work is done, something that should have been
carded out before this report was written.
The appendix is indeed the most useful and coherent part of the report, since
it deals objectively with the condition of the pictographs at the time they were
examined (1980). The recommendations for treatment give readers a general idea
of what treatment is required at each shelter.
In summary, this report would have served its intended purpose better if it had
been published in a conservation journal in abbreviated form after the study was
complete. A report of field work such as this should be more comprehensive and
should include a fully developed plan of research.
REFERENCES CITED
Dragovich, Diedre
1981 Cavern microclimates in relation to preservation of rock art. In:
conservation 26:143-149.

Studies in

Mora, P., Mora L., and Phillipot, P.
1984 Conservation of wall paintings. Butterworths, London. Pearson, Colin
1977

Conservation of rock art. Proceedings of the International Workshop on the
Conservation of Rock Art. Perth, ICCM, Australia.

Turpin, Solveig
1982 Seminole Canyon: the art and the archeology, Vat Verde County, Texas. Texas
Archeological Survey Research Report 83, The University of Texas at Austin.
Zolensky, Michael
1982 Analysis of pigments from prehistoric pictographs, Seminole Canyon State Historical Park. In: Turpin, Solveig, Seminole Canyon: the art and archeology, Val
Verde County, Texas. Texas Archeologieal Survey Research Report 83. The
University of Texas at Austin.

Paul S. Storch
Columbia, South Carolina

Commentary
San Patrice and the Early Archaic: Comments on H. Blaine Ensor’s "San
Patrice and Dalton Affinities on the Central and Western Gulf Coastal Plain."
Blaine Ensor’s recent article on the relationships between the San Patrice and
Dalton complexes is a long overdue and welcome addition to the published
literature (Ensor 1987). He has deftly combined material from across the upland
south in a manner that could be done only by one with experience with both San
Patrice and Dalton materials.
In the article, Ensor notes that San Patrice and Dalton complexes have been
argued to be Late (or terminal) Palex)-Indian or Early Archaic by various previous
investigators. He states that "the general consensus.., has been that data for
distinguishing San Patrice from earlier, later, or contemporaneous manifestations
are not available" ~nsor 1987:70). Interestingly, he has overlooked archeological
efforts of the University of Southwestern Louisiana’s program at Fort Polk, Louisiana from 1977 to 1979 (Servello 1983, Guderjan and Morehead 1981), which
included intensive surveys, testing, and excavations on the Fort Polk Military
Reservation and have given us some insights into this problem. Because of the size
of the sites encountered and the number of artifacts recovered, techniques of
numerical taxonomy were applied to lithic debitage to gain insight into the
relationships among site components that were otherwise difficult to identify. The
reasoning was straightforward--if an artifact assemblage of known date, e.g., San
Patrice, can be characterized numerically, then it should be possible to characterize
and compare assemblages of unknown date numerically and, by so doing, to date
the unknown assemblages. In carrying out this process, several artifact assemblages
of known dates and cultural affiliations were compared.
The procedure required examining lithic debitage for a series of attributes such
as platform facetting, platform profile, presence of cortex, dorsal-ventral profile,
dorsal ridge pattern, dorsal scar pattern, lateral profile, and axial cross section. In
the context of this commentary, it is not possible to describe fully these attributes
and the system of analysis. However, more detailed information is available
elsewhere (Guderjan and Morehead 1981, Servello 1983:329-378). The results of
these analyses were then subjected to a factor analysis that effectively filtered out
undesirable variability in the information, after which a cluster analysis was
performed on the resulting factors. This procedure resulted in a dendrogram that
described the relative similarities and differences in the original data. The basis for
this procedure was developed originally by Parks (1970) for use on geologic
samples.
At the Big Brushy site (16VN24), four components were identified--San
Patrice, one that was termed "Middle Archaic" (in deference to the possibility that
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 58 (1987)

284

Texas A rcheological Society

San Patrice might be considered Early Archaic), Late Archaic, and a later Ceramic
component. Cluster analysis was performed on a variety of attribute sets for each
of the components; Guderjan and Moorehead published an article (Guderjan and
Moorehead 1981) summarizing the results, and also a more detailed report (Guderjan and Moorehead 1983). Since the results are detailed in these publications, it
is important here only to highlight particular information. When about 80 percent
of the variability was accounted for, and using sets of four, six, and all of the
attributes examined, the similarity between the San Patrice and "Middle Archaic"
samples was remarkable. In all cases the two samples were virtually indistinguishable.
In the Peason Ridge area of Fort Polk, several Paleo-Indian and more recent
sites were clustered around Eagle Hill (Servello 1983). These sites--Eagle Hill I
through IV were marked by the tabular chert that was used as raw material
throughout the Paleo-Indian sequence. This chert, which appears to be similar to
Edwards Plateau chert, was obtained from a now-lost or depleted source near Eagle
Hill. Following the Paleo-Indian pattern discussed by Goodyear (1979), the Eagle
Hill source was used intensively. Eagle Hill materials are found in sites for many
miles around the source but generally only in Paleo-Indian contexts. Interestingly,
only one of the seven San Patrice points found on Peason Ridge by the University
of Southern Louisiana survey teams was made of Eagle Hill chert (Brassieur 1983).
Furthermore, a survey of collections from Eagle Hill and Peason Ridge confirms
this pattern (John Guy, Anacoca, Louisiana, personal communication; Guderjan,
field notes).
Servello compared the San Patrice artifact assemblages from Big Brushy and
elsewhere with the Paleo-Indian assemblages of the Eagle Hill sites (1983:156) and
found that the San Patrice assemblages clustered closely to, but quite separately
from, the Eagle Hill Paleo-Indian materials. This may be due in part to the use of
differing raw materials. However, a major part of the distinction is clearly due to
differing lithic technologies. The attribute sets selected for the computer runs that
were analyzed were intentionally chosen to avoid variability due to differences in
raw material. The technological similarity between the San Patrice complex and
later Archaic materials at Big Brushy, then, coincides with the distinction between
San Patrice and Eagle Hill Paleo-Indian materials.
In addition, the shift in resource utilization at the end of the Paleo-Indian period
is widespread (cf. Ensor 1987, Goodyear 1979) and is not seen only at Fort Polk.
With this information in hand, it is difficult to perceive the San Patrice complex as
anything but an Early Archaic pattem.
As a final point, the relationship between S an Patrice and Dalton complexes has
been noted in the past by investigators other than Ensor (cf. Morehead and Guderjan
1983:27). Some investigators have seen the typological distinctions between even
San Patrice and Hardaway points as being only a function of the historical
development of local typologies (Robert Thorne, personal communication). Limited
information was gathered by the Fort Polk project on San Patfce settlement patterns
in an effort to determine whether they follow the Dalton model proposed by Dan
Morse and his associates in various publications (Morehead and Guderjan 1983).

Commentary

285

Interestingly, a Dalton point was found in association with San Patrice points at the
Big Brushy site (Guderjan and Morehead 1981, 1983).
REFERENCES CITED
Brassieur, C. Ray
1983

Analysis of cultural material recovered by Peason Ridge surveys. In Fort Polk
Archaeological Survey and Cultural Resources Management Program, edited by
A. Frank Servello, pp. 237-327. University of Southwestern Louisiana, Lafayette.

Ensor, Blaine
1987 San Patrice and Dalton affinities on the central and western Gulf Coastal Plain.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57:67-81.
Goodyear, Albert C.
1979 A hypothesis for the use of crypto--crystalline materials among Paleo-Indian
groups of North America. Research Manuscript Series 156. University of South
Carolina, Institute of Archaeology and Anthropology, Columbia.
Guderjan, Thomas H., and James R. Morehead
1981 Big Brushy: a stratified multiple component site at Fort Polk, Louisiana. Louisiana Archaeology 7:1-31.
1983

A stratified multiple component site on Big Brushy Creek. In Fort Polk Archaeological Survey and Cultura! Resources Management Program, edited by A. Frank
Servello, pp. 859-937. University of Southwestern Louisiana, Lafayette.

Morehead, James R., and Thomas H. Guderjan
1983 An overview of the prehistory and history of the Fort Polk region. Fort Polk
Archaeological Survey and Cultural Resources Management Project, edited by A.
Frank Servello, pp. 19-51. University of Southwestern Louisiana, Lafayette.
Parks, James M.
1970 FortranIVprogramforQ-Modeclusteranalysis. KansasStateGeologicalSurvey,
Computer Contributions 46.
Servello, A. Frank (editor)
1983 Fort Polk Archaeological Survey and Cultural Resources Management Program.
University of Southwestern Louisiana, Lafayette.

Thomas H. Guderjan
San Antonio

Authors
ThomasN. Campbell is Professor Emeritus of Anthropology at The University of
Texas at Austin. He received graduate degrees from The University of
Texas and Harvard, and thereafter served on the faculty of The University
of Texas at Austin for 40 years, teaching, holding various administrative
positions, editing, and publishing the results of research. His publications
are varied and relatable to such academic disciplines as anthropology,
archeology, botany, folldore, ethnohistory, and history. He has edited
several research series and three journals, including American Antiquity
and this Bulletin. During the past 15 years he has been particularly
interested in developing better ethnic identities for the many Indian
groups, mainly hunters and gatherers, who ranged over northeastern
Mexico and southern Texas during the historic period. Address: Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
78712.
David L. Carlson, Associate Professor of Anthropology at Texas A&M University, joined the faculty in 1981. He is also the Head of the Archeological
Research Laboratory at Texas A&M University. He received his Ph.D.
from Northwestern University in 1979. His research interests include the
archeology of hunter-gatherers, the application of quantitative methods to
archeology, and cultural resources management. Address: Anthropology
Dept., Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843.
Thomas H. Guderjan is a Research Associate IV and Director of Collections at The
University of Texas at San Antonio, Institute of Texan Cultures. He
received his Ph.D. from Southern Methodist University and codirects the
Ambergris Cay Archaeological Project, which focuses on Maya maritime
trade and settlementin northern Belize. In 1986 and 1987 he was Chairman
of the Southern Texas Archaeological Association. With Carol Canty he
has recently completed The Indian Texans, to be published by The Institute
of Texan Cultures. Address: The Institute of Texan Cultures, 801 S. Bowie
St., San Antonio, TX 78205.
D. L. Hamilton graduated from Texas Tech University in 1967 in anthropology.
He started his graduate studies at the University of Arizona and completed
his Ph.D. in anthropology at The University of Texas at Austin in 1975.
From 1969 to 1978 he was employedby the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory (TARL), rising during that time from shovel hand to the head
of the TARL Antiquities Conservation Facility. In that position he
directed the treatment and preservation of the artifacts recovered from two
sixteenth century Gulf Coast Spanish shipwrecks. He left TARL in August
1978 to teach at Texas A&MUniversity. Address: Dept. of Anthropology,
Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 58 (1987)

288

Texas Archeological Society

JoffreD. Meyer received both his B.A. in anthropology and his M.S. in educational
psychology from Texas A&M University. He is currently following his
career in educational psychology.
Jeffrey G. Paine is a geologist with interests in Quaternary geology, geomorphology, and the geological context of archeological sites. He holds a
bachelor’s degree in geology from the University of Texas and an M.A.,
also in geology, from the University of Washington. He may be contacted
at the Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas, University
Station, Box X, Austin, TX 78713. Phone: 512/471-1534
Joseph Powell is a staff archeologist at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory at The University of Texas at Austin, where he is completing
work for his M.A. degree in anthropology. His research interests include
paleopathology, paleodemography, and statistical methodology. He has
conducted archeological fieldwork in Kentucky, Utah, and Texas, has
served at Columbia University as a research archeologist for the Adena
Project, and at Eastern Kentucky University as an instructor in physical
anthropology. Address: Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
10100 Burnet Rd., Austin, TX 78758.
Elton R. Prewitt received his B.A. and M.A. degrees from The University of Texas
at Austin. During 18 years of work in the state he has published many
reports and articles dealing with different areas of Texas archeology. His
research interests include the prehistoric cultures of Texas, applications of
remote sensing techniques to archeological problems, prehistoric cemeteries, projectile point morphologies, and regional chronologies. His work
during at the Loeve-Fox site in Central Texas has yielded significant
information about intrasite camping patterns, the structuring of prehistoric
cemeteries, and regional chronology. He is president of a private archeological consulting firm. Address: Prewitt and Associates, Inc., 7100 N.
Lamar Blvd., Austin, TX 78752.
Robert A. Ricklis received his M.A. in anthropology at The University of Texas at
Austin and is pursuing his Ph.D. at that institution. He has conducted
archeological fieldwork at several prehistoric and historic sites in the
Northeast and in the Coastal Bend area of Texas. His current interests are
focused on the study of the cultural ecology of hunter-gatherer and early
food-producing societies. Address: Dept. of Geography, The University
of Texas at Austin.
D. Gentry Steele is a professor of anthropology at Texas A&M University. His
research interests include human skeletal biology and zooarcheology. He
is coauthor with Claud Bramblett of Anatomy and Biology of the Human
Skeleton, Texas A&M University Press, June 1988.

Authors

289

Paul S. Storch received his B.A. in Anthropology and Archaeology in 1978 from
Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland, Ohio. After working for
two years as Laboratory Supervisor in the Department of Archaeology in
the Cleveland Museum of Natural History, he went to The George
Washington University in Washington, D.C. for graduate training. There,
he received his M.A. in Anthropology and a Certificate of Training in
Museum Studies Conservation of Archaeological and Ethnographic Objects in 1982 after five internships in the Smithsonian Museum of Natural
History, the National Park Service, and the Texas Memorial Museum. In
the fall of 1982, he became Conservator of Historic, Archaeological, and
Ethnographic Objects in the Materials Conservation Laboratory of the
Texas Memorial Museum, The University of Texas at Austin. In addition
to his regular responsibilities for the treatment of myriad Texas Memorial
Museum objects, he pursued archeological field conservation work,
serving as field conservator at three Field School excavations of the Texas
Archeological Society, two major expeditions sponsored by The University of Texas at Austin, and several smaller, short-term projects. Teaching
and research in order to disseminate the principle that a basic understanding of modern conservation methods and theories is absolutely essential to
the progress of archeology has been a major priority of his career activities.
In October 1987 he assumed the position of Chief Conservator at the new
South Carolina State Museum in Columbia, South Carolina. Address: 719
Huntington Ave., Columbia, SC 29205-3826.
Laurie S. Zimmerman is a Ph.D. student in anthropology at Texas A&M University.
She received her M.S. in geology at Penn State University, analyzing
bryozoan patch reefs in the Glass Mountains of the Big Bend region of
Texas. Her present interests include paleonutrition, palynological analysis, paleoenvironmental reconstruction, and zooarcheology. Address:
Dept. of Anthropology, Texas A & M, College Station, TX 77843.

