BULLETIN
OFTHE

o4 Ig
(Formerly Texas Archeo!ogioal and Pa,leontologioM Society)

VOLUME TWENTY-FOUR
!953

Published by
ihe Socieiy ai
Austin, Texas

THE TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(FORMERLY THE TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL AND
PALEONTOLOGICAL SOCIETY)

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
BY
ABILENE PRINTING & STATIONERY COMPANY
ABILENE, TEXAS

BULLETIN
OFTHE

&rd+e ttogimt
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. Speleothem Age Dating
By Phil C. Orr .......................................................................

7

2. The Bellevue Mound: A Pre-Caddoan Site in Bossier,
Parish, Louisiana
By Robert L. Fulton and Clarence H. Webb
18
3. The Sam Kaufman Site, Red River County, Texas
By R. K. Harris ................................................................... 43
4. The Morris Site, Ck-39, Cherokee County, Oklahoma
By Robert E. Bell and Charlene Dale ........................... 69
5. The Brown Site, Gd-l, Grady County, Oklahoma
By Karl Schmitt and Raymond Toldan, Jr .... 141
6. Two Early Historic Sites on the Southern Plains
By Charlie R. Steen .............................................................. 177
7. Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter
By Edward B. Jelks .............................................................. 189
8. A Preliminary Report on The Mortuary Cave of
Candelaria, Coahuila, Mexico
By Pablo Martinez Del Rio .........: ...................................... 208
9. News Notes ............................................................................ 257
I0. Book Notices ..........................................................................259
11. Report of the Secretary-Treasurer .................................. 261
12. Membership List .................................................................. 262

Volume 24, 1953 -- Price $5.00
Address orders for publications and membership applications to the
Secretary-Treasurer, Edward B. Jelks, Department of
Anthropology, University of Texas, Austin.

OFFICERS
ROBERT E. BELL,

President (Norman, Oklahoma)

CYRUS N. RAY,

President Emeritus (Abilene)

W. C. HOLDEN,

Active Vice-President (Lubbock)

Secretary-Treasurer (Austin)
(replacing Ernest Wallace as of August 1, 1953)

EDWARD B. JELKS,

ALEX D.

KRIEGER,

Editor oS Publications (Austin)

DIRECTORS
In Addition to the Above
Floyd V. Studer, Amarillo, Col. M. L. Crimmins, San Antonio
O. L. Sims, San Angelo

REGIONAL VICE-PRESIDENTS
L. E. Rawalt, Corpus Christi
Erik K. Reed, Santa Fe, N. ICl.
Mrs. Iva Schmitt, Norman, Okla.
Harry E. Weaver, San Angelo

T. N. Campbell, Austin
R. K. Harris, Dallas
Jack T. Hughes, Canyon
Edward B. Jelks, Austin

TRUSTEES
Joe F. Cason, Round Rock
Wilson W. Crook, Jr., Dallas
Victor J. Smith, Alpine
J. Henry Ray, Vernon

Mrs. Forrest Kirkland, Dallas
C. R. Steen, Santa Fe, N. lVi.
C. H. Webb, Shreveport, La.
R. B. Worthington, Houston

FELLOWS
Cyrus N. Ray

Col. M. L. Crimmins

nvewor
The society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific undertaking; for the study of the
history, pre-history and the major artifacts of man and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas;
for the encouragement of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils in museums and their
study and classification and the publication of the results of the researches
incident thereto.
The BULLETIN is published annually
for distribution to members of the society.

Opinions expressed herein are

those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent views of the society or
the editorial staff.

The Society Acknowledges With Thanks the
Contributions of the Following Toward
the Cost of Printing this Volume

SUHM COIL SPRING WORKS
2710 McKinney
Houston, Texas

FIRST FEDERAL SAVINGS & LOAN
ASSOCIATION
917 Congress Avenue
Austin, Texas

MRS. TUCKER’S FOODS, Inc.
Sherman, Texas

SPELEOTHEM AGE DATING
PHIL C. ORR

In the constant hunt for methods of determining the age
of archeological or paleontological material, little attention
has been paid to the growth of speleothem--"cave formation" including stalactites, stalagmites and dripstone, etc. A
few short papers have appeared on the rapid growth of these
forms, usually in mine tunnels, dams or concrete works, but
of these most are of material other than crystallized travertine, which is usually associated with old human bones or
those of prehistoric animals in natural caves.
Epsom salts, for instance, grows very rapidly. In the construction of a simulated mine---a life size replica in the
Nevada State Museum, we utilized epsom salts to make
crystal growth, but these later had to be removed, for their
growth could not be controlled. CaIcanthite, a copper sulphate, occurring as a secondary mineral, forms rapidly under
artificial conditions, but does not appear to occur in nature,
except in Chile. Other salts, including calcium carbonate,
form rapidly under ideal conditions, particularly in hot
springs.
The growth of fast forming minerals is little understood
and for the purpose of this paper will not be gone into, as
the present study is concerned with the growth of crystallized calcium carbonate upon human bone and is limited to
an effort to determine the relative age of archeological cave
deposits in Moaning Cave, Calaveras County, California.
The Truman Expeditions of the Western Speleologica!
Institute, excavating for the Santa BaPbara Museum of
Natural History in Moaning Cave, unearthed hundreds of
human, dog and small mammal and bird bones in the floor
of the large room, which posed a problem of determining
their age.

Bones were found to depths of eleven feet under speleothem capping interlaid with broken rocks, cave earth and
other speleothem layers. A total of 420 ram. of speleothem
lay over the oldest of the bones which are chalky white in
color inside and stained a light red on the surface (Plate I).

Texas Archeological Society

The mineralization is such that had they been the bones of
extinct mammals, there would be no hesitation in placing
them in the Pleistocene Age; but being Homo sapiens, the
ghosts of Hrdlicka and Holmes would rise up and point out
a dozen reasons why and how these human bones became
imbedded in solid rock in a matter of a few thousands of
years.
Moaning Cave was first discovered by white men some
time in the ’49er era. One of the first white visitors to the
cave left a miner’s pick and a whiskey bottle. It is believed
by some that the cave was visited by Trask, State Geologist
in 1851, but it was not entered again until 1922, when Addison Carley, the present owner, descended the 210 feet from
the surface and found a "coyote skull," the whiskey bottle
and the miner’s pick.
It seems probable in the light of the recent excavations
that the "coyote skull" may have been that of a dog, for
many bones of Indian dogs were uncovered, but no coyotes.
However, the skull has disappeared along with the whisky
bottle and only the miner’s pick has been recovered and has
been presented to the Western Speleological Institute’s collections at the Santa Barbara Museum of Natural History.
Moaning Cave is a large trap cave, with relatively small
opening of some four by ten feet, dropping down a straight
fissure about thirty feet to a small shelf and beneath this is
a huge room of 165 feet sheer drop and roughly 90 by 30 feet
at the bottom, which originally was in the form of a cone of
debris coated with speleothem.
Excavations by Mr. Carley in this cone, in an effort to find
hidden passages, led to the original discovery of human bone
beneath the cone.
In prehistoric times a second entrance to the cave existed
through another fissure and this has been reopened and is
utilized today as the main entrance to the cave. Therefore,
the prehistoric cone has been supplied from two different
entrances.

PLATE !
Cross section of human femur from Moaning Cave, Calaveras
showing growth of speleothem.

County,

White ring in center is the original bone.

California,

Speleothem Age Dating

11

Wallace (1951, p. 38), working on the side of the cone
supplied by the present artificial entrance, estimated the
age of human bone by the artifacts at 3500 years. Orr (1952,
p. 11) made a fortunate discovery of some common nails,
which it was determined entered the cave in 1922 during
the construction of the stairway and were removed in 1951,
making 29 years during which they received their coating
of speleothem in the cave. On the basis of the accumulated
speleothem on five of these nails, he postulated a minimum
age for the oldest of the human bone as 12,180 years (Orr,
1952, p. 14) and a maximum age, disregarding the several
feet of red clay deposits, as about 50,400 years.
With the discovery of the miner’s pick, which appears to
have been left in the cave between about 1850 and 1922, or
roughly seventy years, we secure an additional check against
the evidence of the nails for a period of twenty-nine years.
The iron pick (Plate 2, B) at one time was in part heavily
encrusted with speleothem. Other portions received a lighter coating. Measurements made by Mr. O. H. Truman,
President of the Institute, show a maximum deposition of
2.5146 mm. accumulated in 70 years. The minimum deposition measured was 1.016 ram., and the average of nine measurements was 1.8034 mm.
The question of which measurements are of importance
arises. The minimum deposit of speleothem will give the
maximum age in years, while the maximum deposit will
give the minimum number of years. Inasmuch as the maximum deposit and the minimum number of years is somewhat older than any Carbon-14 date for early man, we may
assume that the maximum deposit or minimum number of
years is of value as an indication of the age of the deposits.
The minimum time period for the oldest of the deposits
is indicated as being in the vicinity of 12,000 years. Depending on the method used to determine this mathematically and the number of decimal places the rate of growth
in millimeters per year is carried out, there is a variation
in the answer of a few hundred years in 12,000. For ex-

12

.

Texas Archeological Society

ample, calculating the rate of growth per year from the
accumulation of speleothem in 29 years gives us .0345 ram.
divided into the total deposition of speleothem of420 ram.
gives 12,174 years to accumulate this amount.

Yet, if we

figure as Orr did (1952, p. 14) on the number of years to
accumulate one millimeter, we get the figure 12,180 years, a
variation of six years due to the number of decimal places
the calculations are carried out. In the case of the minimum
deposits, but maximum years, there is a slight increase to a
maximum of 50,755 as against 50,400 years.
From the measurements made of the miner’s pick, which
lay in the cave some 70 years prior to the accumulated
speleothem on the nails, we secure the minimum deposition
of 1.0160 ram. or an accumulation of .0145 ram. per year for
the 70 years, which gives us a maximum age of the 420 ram.
of speleothem deposit as 28,965 years as against 50,755 years
derived from the nails.
However, the 2.5146 mm. maximum deposition on the pick
in 70 years results in a rate of growth of 0.359 ram. per year,
or 11,699 years to make the total deposition of 420 mm. This
figure agrees fairly well with the minimum age, secured
from the nails alone, of 12,174 years.
If we were to average the two sums

11,699 and 12,174

years, we get 11,961 years as represented from the data of
the past I00 years, instead of merely the last 29 years, as
reported by Orr. This is a minor difference from his estimate of 12,180 tending, on the basis of the data available, to
substantiate his original estimate of a minimum age.
On the matter of the maximum age of 50,000 years derived
from the nails, and of only about 29,000 years secured from
the pick, the difference can be explained only in the habit
of speleothem to grow on different surfaces at different
times.

One consideration must be made, and that is the condition
of the surface of the object to be deposited on. Greasy, dense,
or highly polished surfaces wi!l not hold the mineral-carry-

PLATE 2
A, stalactite growth in Cave of Skulls, Calaveras County, California.
Note new
stalactite growing from stump of one broken off in 1853, thus representing 98 years
g~’owth.
B, two views of miner’s pick from Moaning Cave, Calaveras County, California, showing amount of speleothem coating from 1850 to 1922.

Speleothera Age Dating

15

ing water long enough to make its depositions of salts. Consequently, the 1953 investigations found other nails, dropped
at the same time, but which had accumulated virtually no
speleothem in that period.
The point of the pick shows no deposition, while the region
near the eye has the heaviest deposits. This is doubtless
due in part to the condition of the pick when left in the cave.
It is usual with such tools to find that the used point is inclined to be smoother, and to have rust and other porous
conditions removed, and hence speleothem deposition could
not be started until after a coating of rust had developed.
Porous bone also accumulates more speleothem than that
found on the more dense portions, and likewise, green bone
containing grease would resist the action of the crystallization longer than dry bone subject to the same condition.
During the construction of the stairway, electric lights
were strung and the waste of the rubber insulation fell to
the floor of the cave with the discarded nails and were subject to the same conditions of humidity and mineral loaded
waters, yet the pieces of rubber insulation after 29 years
show virtually no accumulation of speleothem.
Efforts were made to compare the record of speleothem
growth to rainfall records from the area. It was hoped that,
like tree rings, a wide and narrow band might indicate
climatic changes, but so far this has not produced fruit.
Unlike tree ring growth in which climatic conditions are
reflected in the next season, there is a considerable lag in
the results in speleothem growth due to the necessity of restoring the water table after dry years, and during wet
years there is an excess of solution, not deposition, of already
existing speleothem.
It is possible, however, from a study of cross sections of
banded, crystallized speleothem, to select periods of time of
excessive rainfall as against arid conditions. Contrary to
general belief, there is a greater growth of fine rings during
the arid conditions than during the humid.

Texas Archeological Society

16

There is much to be desired about the above study of
speleothem growth as a method of dating archeological deposits.

At this time it appears reasonable to suppose that

the human remains in Moaning Cave date back at least
12,000 years, with the possibility that they may be as much
as 50,000 years. There will be many eyebrows raised at both
figures, but let us point out that from Carbon-14 determinations we know that man had already reached various parts
of America by 12,000 years ago, that man in Nevada was
trading with the Pacific Coast for sea shells as long as 9,000
years ago, and that hundreds of different cultures had developed throughout America to the southern tip of South
America before the time of Columbus.
No Carbon-14 dates have been secured from this material.
It is decidedly questionable as to whether its value would
be great for the reason that for the most part only small
specks of water-soaked charcoal are available and these, if
collected in sufficient amounts for a test, might well come
from points several thousand years apart. Furthermore, the
question arises as to what effect, if any, the carbonated
waters carrying modern Carbon-14 might have on carbon
deposited a thousand years before. This is a wonderful
opportunity for contamination, tending to give a lesser age
than the true age.
Nevertheless, it would be exceedingly interesting to secure a Carbon-14 date on any of these deposits.
That speleothem growth in the mother lode caves of California is slow is shown by a stalactite which the Western
Speleological Institute and the Stanford Grotto determined
was broken off in 1853. From it a very small stalactite has
grown about three quarters of an inch in 98 years (Plate
2, A). Another similar new stalactite occurs at the top of
the stairway in Moaning Cave, which has been growing
since 1922. Yet in this same cave we have 420 ram. of speleothem over human bone plus several feet of earth deposits.

Speleothem Age Dating

17

Bibliography
Wallace, Wm. J.
1951. Archeological Deposits in Moaning Cave, Calaveras County. Reports of the University of California
Archeological Survey, No. 12.
Orr, Phil C.
1952.

Excavation in Moaning Cave. Bulletin No. i, De-

partment of Anthropology, Santa Barbara Museum of
Natural History.
Western Speleological Institute
Santa Barbara Museum of Natural History
Santa Barbara, California

THE BELLEVUE MOUND: A PRE-CADDOAN
SITE IN BOSSIER PARISH, LOUISIANA

ROBERT L. FULTON AND CLARENCE H. WE~
Little is known of the pre-Caddoan pottery cultures of the
northern part of Louisiana. Attention has been called
(Webb, 1948 b) to certain evidences of pre- or non-pottery
cultures of the area and mention has been made of the
Fredericks site in Natchitoches Parish, from which surface
collections demonstrate Marksville or Troyvi!le to be the
major culture period (Ford, 1951; Webb, 1948 a). Occasional
sherds of these periods have been reported from sites which
represented later horizons (Webb, 1948 a). The major emphasis has been on the numerous sites of the Caddoan time
levels and there has been no previous report of excavations
in this part of the state which demonstrated an early pottery
horizon.
Description of the Site
The Bellevue mound site is located approximately two
miles west of Bellevue, in the central part of Bossier Parish
and about 20 miles northeast of Shreveport (Fig. 1, B). It
is situated on a hill overlooking the western bank of Bodcau
Bayou, the solitary mound capping the hill about 150 yards
from the stream and some 60 feet above its present normal
water level (Fig. 1, A). A secondary highway, State Route
181, cuts through the village site immediately south of the
mound. A house is situated on the stream bank a few feet
east of the mound; a small amount of surface material was
collected from the clearing around the house and from the
access road which impinges on the northern and southern
edges of the mound. (Fig. 1, C).
The extent of the village site is difficult to determine because the area is densely wooded except for the clearing
around the house; some evidences of a thin midden cover
several acres along the stream. No burials, post molds or
other village features were found apart from the excavated
portion of the mound. The banks of the bayou are almost
completely engulfed in a heavy growth of cypress and un-

The Bellevue Mound

19

derbrush; the surrounding flora consists of oak, ash, elm,
pine, willow, cedar, sycamore, locust, sassafras, hickory, cottonwood, persimmon and many other tree varieties, in addition to thick underbrush and vines which give a jungle-like
appearance along the water edge. The native fauna includes
opossums, raccoons, squirrels, rabbits, armadillos and even
some deer, while larger animals such as bears, cougars and
wolves must have been common in former years.
The original size and contour of the mound were uncertain because of the road cuts on the slopes and the several
pits which had been dug into the crest. It appeared to be
oval in outline, approximately 80 feet in diameter and about
10 feet in height, with a flat top 20 to 30 feet in diameter.
Lifetime residents of the area have stated that prior to the
digging of intrusive pits the mound was not flat-topped but
had a rounded contour. Excavation was hampered considerably by the presence of eight large trees, three of them
near the crest, and four stumps, two of which were old and
evidently represented very large trees.
The Bellevue site was chosen for excavation because of
its accessibility, its comparatively small size which permitted exploration in one summer’s work, and because it represented a type of mound in this area which had not been
reported upon.* A small number of solitary hilltop mounds
overlooking valleys and small streams contrast strikingly
with larger mounds and mound groups in the valleys of
nearby Red River and its tributaries. Heretofore none of
these solitary hill-capping mounds has been carefully excavated and their place in the archaeology of the region has
been uncertain.
Methodology
Permission to remove the mound was not obtained, hence
a trenching technique was used. A five-foot trench was cut
on a north-south line from the margin of the north road
through the mound crest and well onto the southern slope
*Excavation of this mound was carried on largely by R. L. F. in preparation for his
thesis in Anthropology at the University of New Mexico. The second author acted in
advisory capacity, with limited assistance in excavation and study of artifacts.

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

20

(Fig. 1, C), for a total length of 70 feet. This trench was
placed with the idea of revealing whether the site warranted
a summer’s work and whether stratigraphic levels could be
recognized; in the event structure outlines were demonstrated, a modified stripping technic was planned. In the
absence of these, vertical slicing was utilized throughout,
shaving thin slices of the fill with a shovel and trowelling
through midden deposits. Parallel to the original trench, an
additional 5-foot cut was removed on the west side and two

°"n

FIGURE 1
A, Map of Bellevue mound locality.
C, Outline of excavations.

B, Location of related sites mentioned in "~ext.

The Bellew~e Mound

such cuts on the east, producing a total width of 20 feet
completely excavated beneath the crest of the mound.
Each trench was subdivided into sections, five feet square,
marked by stakes.

These sections were numbered from

north to south, 14 in the original trench, and corresponding
sections of the later trenches were similarly numbered.
Trenches were designated A, B, C, D from west to east
(Fig. 3, C).

A field catalog was kept in which each speci-

men was numbered and a card was filed for each, recording
the depth from mound surface, height above pre-mound clay
level and placement within the corresponding section. If
the specimens were not found in situ or came from one of
the interruption pits, such information was recorded. Profiles were taken at five-foot intervals; features were recorded, diagrammed and photographed.
Stratigraphy
The mound was constructed upon a hard red clay subsurface, which was covered by a layer of fine sand beneath
most of the mound, although in some places beneath the
center the lowermost midden deposit extended to the clay
subsoil and several features lay on this clay. The contact
zone between the clay and over-lying sand was not sharp,
but was a gradual mixture as is found over the village site
away from the mound. Hence it is likely that at least the
peripheral portions of the mound were built upon village
sand, although the finding of several projectile points in the
contact zone immediately above the clay leaves in question
whether the sand layer was the first construction layer of
the mound or was village sand subject to habitation disturbances which left these artifacts in its lower zone.
The first of three midden deposits was superimposed upon
the light sand layer (Fig. 2, A, B) beneath most of the mound
area. It was first detected as a thin layer in trench B about
12 feet from the northern perimeter and became progressively darker and thicker beneath the mound center. It
attained a maximum thickness of 31/2 feet, had 3 firebeds in

h.

Z

FIGURE 2
Profiles of Bellevue mound.
"C", oriented north-south.

A,

Profile

"B",

oriented

north-south.

B,

Profile

The Bellevue Mound

23

association, and yielded about half of all artifacts found in
the excavation.
This initial midden layer was covered, beneath the center
of the mound, by a clay cap which varied in thickness from
one inch to two feet (Fig. 2, A, B). The thinner portions
represented pure dark red clay similar to the clay subsoil;
the thicker portions had some admixture of sand. The cap
was oval in outline, 20 to 25 feet in diameter, with its
thickest portions over the center of the mound and fraying
out around the periphery. When Burial I was found lying

on it, it was presumed to be a burial platform. However,
no other burials were found on it and firebed D was also
in association with it (Fig. 3, C).
A second midden deposit, 4 inches or less in thickness, lay
immediately above a portion of this cap, detectable over a
diameter of approximately 15 feet. The remainder of the
mound above this level was composed largely of sand or
mixed sand and clay fill, with one rather dense clay layer,
1 to 2 feet in thickness, its lower levels about one foot above
the second midden deposit (Fig. 2, A, B). This layer was
quite irregular and was interpreted as an incidental construction deposit of no significance. Above it, however, was
a third midden layer, rather irregular and thin, visible more
clearly along the west wall of the excavation and containing
very few artifacts. If a final occupation midden existed
atop the mound, it had been removed by-erosion and the
digging of several pits as mentioned below.
Features

Intrusive pits. Evidences were found of six intrusive pits
sunk from the top of the mound, all apparently in recent
times. Three of these, a barbecue pit and two narrow adjacent pits (Fig. 2, A) found by trenches A and B, did little
damage to mound stratigraphy or feature’s. Two others,
found in trenches B and C, did little damage but a larger
pit (Intrusive pit C) sunk from the center of the mound and
detectable in trenches B and C, was more disturbing in that
it was carried to the clay subsoil, interrupting all layers and

Texas Archeological Society

24

disturbing Burials II and III and their associations (Fig.
2, B).
Firebed A.

This was a small firebed, 1~’2 by 2 feet in

diameter and 2 to 3 inches in thickness, lying directly on
the sub-mound clay at the adjoining corners of Sections
B9 and 10 and C9 and 10 (Fig. 3, B).

The ashes were de-

posited on the slope of a shallow depression or basin in the
clay, which was approximately 5 by 6 feet in diameter.
Immediately to the east of the firebed were some of the
bones of Burial II, which also lay within the shallow depression. Intrusive Pit C, mentioned above, cut across the
edges of the firebed and the burial, extended down to the
clay of the depression, and interfered with interpretation of
the aboriginal features.
Firebed B. This firebed, slightly larger than A but of
similar thickness, also was placed on the submound clay in
Section B8, in what appeared to be a prepared bed. Beneath
its ashes was the beginning of a trench, extending eastward
for about 7 feet, slightly sinuous in outline, 11/2 to 2 feet
wide and 5 to 6 inches deep, filled with white sand (Fig.
3, B). No artifacts were in association with the firebed or
the trench.
Firebed C. This was the largest of the firebeds, about 5
feet in length, 2 feet in maximal width and 2 to 3 inches in
thickness. It surmounted the lowermost midden deposit and
was covered directl:~ by the red clay cap in Sections C and
D 8 (Fig. 3, C). A few broken animal bones and sherds
were found in and around this ashbed.
Firebed D. This bed was placed immediately atop the red
clay cap, 3 feet south of Burial I. It was irregular in outline
and could have represented one large bed, 3 to 31/2 feet in
diameter, or an aggregation of several small beds (Fig. 3,
C). The second habitation midden surrounded and overlay
this bed; only a few bone fragments and sherds were in
association. There was no indication of a prepared clay
basin.

A
¢
FIGURE 3
Bellevue mound burial and excavation plots.
C, Level of elay platform.

A,

Burial

1,

B,

Sub-mound

level.

The Bellevue Mound

27

Structure 1. It has been mentioned that Firebed A and
Burial II were found in a shallow oval depression or scooped
out basin in the clay subsoil almost directly beneath the
center of the mound (Fig. 3, B). This depression was 5 by
6 feet in diameter and 6 to 8 inches in depth at the center.
A thin layer of white sand had been placed on the clay
before the fire was built and the burial deposited. Although
Intrusive Pit C had cut into these features so that only the
right humerus and portions of the corresponding radius and
ulna were intact and in situ, there was a suggestion of cremation because several human bones were found among the
ashes and others of the bones were hard, brittle and discolored as though partially charred.
Surrounding the depression was a larger oval of post
molds detected at the sand-clay contact zone and extending
into the clay for a depth of 12 to 18 inches. There were 14
molds, 4 to 8 inches in diameter, placed irregularly at intervals of 1 to 3 feet to form an oval outline 11 feet in N-S
diameter and 9 feet in E-W diameter (Fig. 3, B). One 3
inch mold was inset at the south end. A square mold, 16
inches in diameter and 2 feet deep, was found within the
oval and at the bottom of Intrusive Pit C. It was uncertain
whether this was aborigina! or dug at the bottom of the intrusive pit.
Since this outline seems small for a habitation and since
it was directly associated with the basin containing Firebed
A and Burial II, it is reasonable to infer that Structure 1
was a small crude arbor or ceremonial structure enclosing a
crematory basin.
Burials
Burial 1 was found intact, lying on the clay cap or platform
in Section B7 (Fig. 3, C) with no artifact association, and no
evidence of a burial pit. The axis of the body was east-west,
with the head directed east. The position was flexed and
rotated to the right side. The spine was strongly flexed, the
legs flexed to 90 degrees at the hips, with lower legs fully
flexed to place the heels against the pelvis. The right arm

Texas Archeological Society

28

was flexed at the elbow, placing the hand under the mandible; the left arm extended with the left hand between the
femora. The skull indicated an elderly female.
Burial 2 was badly disturbed, as mentioned above, by Intrusive Pit C.

Only the right humerous and six inches of

the right radius and ulna were found undisturbed and articulated, lying alongside Firebed A (Fig. 3, B). In the bottom of the intrusive pit, near the firebed, there was a pile
of bones, consisting of ribs, vertebrae, left humerus, part of
the maxilla and upper dentures, parts of the pelvis and
skull. Several ribs or portions of ribs lay among the ashes
and the hardened, discolored condition of some of the bones,
which indicated partial cremation, has already been described. No artifacts were in association. A preliminary examination of the skull fragments and teeth indicated a young
adult female.
Burial 3, even more fragmentary, was found about 2 feet
from Burial 2 (Fig. 3, B), apparently placed on the clay at
the bottom of Intrusive Pit C. It was not certain to ’the
excavator whether the fragments lay in the fil! of this interruption or immediately beneath it. The former seemed
more probable and this burial may have been closely associated with Burial 2. The skeleton was represented only
by the mandible, upper teeth and several other bone fragments crushed into one mass and showing evidence of considerable burning. The teeth indicated a child of 2 to 3
years.
Food Sources
A large number of animal bones found in the midden
layers and fill suggested that hunting was significant in the
subsistence pattern of these people. Deer bones predominated. Mussel and snail shells were frequent. No fish bones
were identified, but this may have been a matter of preservation, since many of the larger bones were badly absorbed.
No evidence of agriculture was found except the implication
afforded by the manos to be discussed later.

The Bellevue Mound

29

Pottery

A total of 752 sherds was available for study, 695 found by
Fulton in the original excavation, 57 found by Webb in a
subsequent trench on the east side. There were 31 (4.1 per
cent) rim sherds and only 6 (0.8 per cent) decorated sherds
in the entire series; in two instances the decoration was confined to the lip. This preponderance of plain ware and the
lack of any stratigraphic evidence of differentiation on the
basis of temper or surface finish preclude any attempt to
set up typology.
One group of 14 sherds was of interest because of tempering with a white material which we interpreted as crushed
bone and identified as bone by subsequent microscopic examination. In some instances this material had leached out
from the surfaces, leaving a porous or "hole-tempered" appearance (Fig. 4, A, B). Since bone tempering has not been
reported from the earlier horizons in Louisiana, typica!
specimens, in addition to a representative selection of other
sherds from this site, were submitted to the Ceramics Repository, Ann Arbor, Michigan. We quote from a report by
Dr. James B. Griffin:
Sherds 10D-3 and M-56 were submitted to our Minerology
Department for identification of the tempering material. Their
reply was that the white temper is "apatite (calcium phosphate), could be either shell or bone." The sherds from the
site which have this whitish temper and those from which the
tempering material has been leached very closely resemble
the appearance of pottery which has inclusions of limestone
or fossil shell. When the temper did not react to dilute hydrochloric acid it was indicated that the material was not limestone.
Two of these sherds are rims with narrowed and rounded
lips. They are too small to determine accurately the vessel
shape. Three of the sherds are fragments from the lower side
wall where it joins the base. They are quite thick (1 cm.),
while the rim sections are 6 to 7 ram. in thickness. Sherd 202
is from a side wall 7 mm. thick and has clay inclusions as well
as the angular holes from leached temper. The exterior surfaces are smoothed but not burnished or polished. They are
somewhat uneven. The texture is medium coarse to coarse
with large angular temper inclusions and the clay has a con-

Texas Archeological Society

torted and twisted appearance in cross-section. Some of the
breakage lines suggest that the vessel was coiled, and the contorted appearance of the clay is also suggestive of this method
of construction. The surface hardness is 2-2.5. Except for the
temper this group of sherds conforms rather well to the majority, which is clay tempered.
Most of the sherds sent in by Fulton are tempered with clay
particles which I believe are crushed sherd particles, since
some of the inclusions also seem to have tempering in them.
Most are from the side walls of large bowls Or deep, rather
cylindrical jars with flat circular bases. The bases were shaped
and the first and succeeding additions to the sides were added
coils of clay. The paste is contorted and medium coarse to
coarse on most of these body and basal sections. The bases are
1 to 1.3 cm. thick; most of the walls are .7 to 1 cm. in thickness.
Both inner and outer surfaces are smoothed but are uneven.
The exterior surfaces have a hardness of 2-2.5. Sherd 266 is
somewhat unusual in that it is thinner, 6 mm., has a well-com,
pacted burnished to polished exterior and is noticeably harder
(2.5) than the majority of the specimens. The exterior colors
are various shades of tan or buff, with grayish tones either
from firing or from use over a fire. A minority of the sherds
have reddish to pink exteriors, also produced by firing.
Most of the rim sherds are small but suggest a wide bowl
form with either a vertical rim area or a slight inward curve.
The rim areas are thinner (5 to 7 mm.) than the side walls
and base, and the lips are narrowed and rounded. One rim has
a markedly constricted mouth so that the rim is almost horizontal. Two of the rim sherds have lip decorations. The first
(Fig. 4, D) has medium wide (2 mm.) and deep oblique grooves
across the rounded surface of the lip. The second (Fig. 4, E)
has very narrow, closely spaced oblique cuts on the rounded
lip. (The authors call attention to the similarity of these decorations to lip decorations on steatite vessels from Poverty
Point.)

(Webb, 1944).

An unusual rim (Fig. 4, F) is quite thin, 4 to 5 mm.

It has

a very narrow lip (1.5 mm.) and a thickened rim area 1 cm.
high with a slight channel on the exterior below the thickened
rim. It is suggestive of rim forms in Adena and Hopewell
pottery. Both surfaces of this vesse! were smoothed and burnished with horizontal strokes. This sherd is clay tempered,
presumably with crushed pottery; the texture is medium and
the exterior surface hardness is 3~

Two sherds have a sandy feel not present in the others. One
of these is a basal piece and has clay temper. The other may

The Bellevue Mound

31

be a rim and is also clay tempered, so that the different tactile
quality of these sherds is likely due to a slightly different clay
source rather than to any markedly different cultural source
from most of the specimens at the site.
The majority of the sherds sent by Webb are not significantly different from the Fulton group, having the same general temper, paste, color, surface and shape qualities. There
are some exceptions. One is a rather large rim sherd with a
slightly narrowed and flattened lip. The rim is vertical and is
from either a wide cylindrical jar or a vertical-walled deep
bowl. One body sherd (Fig. 4, H) with a zoned punctate design has a smoothed exterior surface and a surface hardness of
4. Typologically this sherd reminds me more of the Troyville
type Churupa Punctated than any other. The punctates are
more like those of Rhinehart Punctated, but the bordering incised lines are Churupa. !k small rim sherd with a single
horizontal incised line 1.3 Cm. below the lip is not readily assignable. The body sherd (Fig. 4, G) with curvilinear incised
lines is probably Marksville Incised. I can do very little with
the fourth decorated sherd which has a few scratches or incised lines.
Summary. The sherds from the Bellevue mound are, on the
whole, I think, closest to the Marksville level. They are not
much like Tchefuncte, nor are they much like the TroyvilleColes Creek paste. It is perhaps unfair to make this comparison since these specimens should be contrasted with the
ceramic sequence in northwestern Louisiana, which is still in
the process of construction. In paste quality, the Bellevue
material would conform most closely with Early Baytown,
particularly period E-D (Lower Mississippi Valley sequence).
The burnished to polished sherds and the rim placed on a
horizontal plane, with a markedly constricted orifice, are characteristics which are somewhat later than the Marksville period.

Baked Clay Object
One fragment of baked clay object was found in the
mound fill (Fig. 4, M). It is tan-colored, smoothed on all
except the broken surface. Although not typical in shape,
this fragment is suggestive of the Poverty Point proble:
matical objects of clay balls (Webb, 1944). No clay pipe
or figurine fragments were found.
Stone Artifacts
Projectiles. Twenty-two whole projectiles were found by

32

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

excavation, in addition to one from the village surface.
There were 12 portions of broken projectiles, of which 5
could be typed. All are of the larger, or "dart-point" size.
Sixteen have contracting stems, corresponding to type Gary
Stemmed (Newell and Krieger, 1949) of East Texas, but
also found in Central Louisiana and throughout the Southeast (Fig. 5, B-D). The specimens from this site range from
3.2 to 5 cm. in length and from short and stubby to longer
and slender in proportions. Ten of these are rather well
made, the remainder crude---possibly due to inferior quality
of material.
Seven projectile points (Fig. 5, E-F) are of the expanding
stem type designated Ellis Stemmed by Newell and Krieger
(1949). They range from 2.6 to 4.3 cm. in length and most
are well chipped. Two projectiles (Fig. 5, G-H) are possibly
of the type Yarbrough Stemmed (Newell and Krieger, 1949),
not unusual in pre-pottery cultures of East Texas and found
with pottery in the Davis mound. They are well made, ~t
and 4.6 cm. in length and quite slender.
Two projectiles (Fig. 5, I-J) are of the type San Patrice
Concave Base. They have been described from surface collections in the area (Webb, 1946) and were assumed to be
late Archaic in origin. None had been found heretofore in
excavations where cultural associations could be assumed.
One (Fig. 5, I), a surface find, is 2.6 cm. in length, and 2 cm.
in greatest width. It is of petrified wood, smoothly worked
to extreme thinness, with secondary chipping along the
edges and the concave base thinned by removal of a single
wide longitudinal flake from one face. The second, found
immediately below the clay platform in the mound proper,
is more typical in shape (Fig. 5, J) and demonstrates a similar flaking technique. It is 3.2 cm. long, 2.4 cm. wide, very
thin with basal thinning achieved by bifacial removal of
wide longitudinal flakes.
Scrapers or Knives. Twenty flaked stone objects were
found which are thought to be scrapers or knives, although
some are so rough that it is questionable whether they are
artifacts. Four were simply made by flaking along one

The Bellevue Mound

33

d

~.0".~" .: " ":<~ :." ." ~’.

/

Ge n ~’, ~cT. ers "
I~IGURE 4
Potsherds and clay artifacts from Bellevue mound. A, B, Bone tempered.
C, J-L,
Plain rims.
D, E, Decorated on lip. F, Sherd with exterior rim channel.
G, Marksville Incised.
H, Churupa Punctated (?).
I, Incised sherd.
M, Baked-Clay ball
fragment.

34

Texas Archeological Society

edge, leaving the remainder of the stone unworked (Fig.
5, L). Another was made from a flat rectangular pebble of
chert by flaking one end and the two adjoining edges (Fig.
5, M). A third is a long oval, 6.3 cm. long by 1.2 cm. wide,
worked on all edges (Fig. 5, O). There were several smaller
side scrapers.
Spokeshave. One beveled spokeshave or scraper (Fig. 5,
N) is of the Albany type, with squared haft and angulated
beveled blade. It apparently was made from a reworked
projectile. Spokeshaves of this type have been described
(Webb, 1946) as surface finds in this area, generally in association with San Patrice Concave Base proj ectiles.
Manos. Three hand-sized stones from the mound showed
evidence of smoothing on one face, presumably from use as
manos (Fig. 5, Q). They range from 10 to 12 cm. in length,
8 to 9.8 cm. in width, and 3 to 4.5 cm. in thickness. No
pitted or nut-stones were found.
Quartz Crystals. Two small unworked quartz crystals,
about 2.5 cm. in length, were found. One (Fig. 5, P) is clear
quartz, the other opaque.
No beads, ornaments, celts, banner stones, bar stones, or
other polished stone artifacts were found in or around the
mound.
Discussion and Conclusions
The evidence indicates that the Bellevue mound was constructed for burial purposes by a comparatively small group
of individuals who lived in a fairly early pottery-making
period and were comparatively retarded in cultural development. The smallness of the group is indicated by the thinness of habitation evidence on the village site and the limited
amount of materials in the mound fill and layers. The absence of ceremonial objects, ornaments and copper, in contrast with more highly developed centers of this general time
period, further attest to the cultural paucity of the group.
A carry-over of Archaic-like existence, primarily dependent
on hunting and gathering, is indicated by the food remains;

The Bellevue Mound

35

evidence of agriculture is inferred only from the general
Southeastern association of mound-building and agriculture.
The persistence of Archaic traits at this site is especially
strong in the stonework. The chief projectile types, Gary
Stemmed and Ellis Stemmed, are widespread in the late
Archaic. They have been carried over into pottery-making
horizons of the Gibson Aspect in Texas (Newell and Krieger,
1949), Fourche-Maline and Early Spiro in Oklahoma (Bell,
1953; Orr, 1952), the Tchefuncte-Marksville-Troyville sequence in Central Louisiana (Ford and Quimby, 1945; Ford
and Willey, 1940; Ford, 1951), Arkansas and Mississippi
(Jennings, 1952) and elsewhere in the Southeast (Newell
and Krieger, 1949). In Northwestern Louisiana, Webb
(1948) has noted their presence, as well as the San Patrice
point and Albany scraper, on non-pottery and pottery sites.
The scraper types and the baked clay ball fragment at the
Bellevue site also represent carry-overs from Archaic times.
The baked clay objects, originating in the Poverty Point
period, have been found with pottery association in Tchefuncte, Marksville and Troyville sites (Ford and Quimby,
1945; Ford and Willey, 1940; Ford, 1951). They occasionally
occur in sites of later periods such as Coles Creek and Alto
(Ford, 1951; Newell and Krieger, 1949).
The construction of the mound on this site and the presence of several habitation debris layers in the mound show
that the village, however small and primitive, was a fixed
settlement for some time. There was no evidence that the
mound served as a substructure for buildings. The added
information that the original shape was a rounded cone, with
the evidence of cremated burials and a flexed burial placed
on a prepared clay platform, place it in the burial mound
category of Early and Middle Woodland (Jennings, 1952)
or Ford and Willey’s (1941) Burial Mound I and II of the
Southeast. Jennings (1952) states that small conical mounds
on ridges or low terraces along streams of varying sizes
occur in both Early and Middle Woodland levels of the
lower valley, although multiple conical mounds placed on
river flood plains are more characteristic of Middle Wood-

36

land.

Texas Archeological Society

In the Early period burials were placed on prepared

floors or in pits beneath the original surface and the conical
mounds heaped over them. Burials were flexed and placements were rare. In the Middle period, typically the top
soil was removed and a flat-topped platform of earth, about
30 to 40 feet square and not over 3 to 4 feet in height, was
constructed. A mass or group burial was placed on this or
log tombs were let down into the platform, the platform and
burials were covered by a conical heap of dirt, then a secondary mantle of earth covered the entire original structure
or structures to a height up to 20 feet and a total diameter
up to 100 feet. Full flexion still predominated; partially
flexed, bundle, and skull burials were not unusual but fully
extended burials were rare. Cremation was practiced in
certain instances during both periods, generally in prepared
clay-lined basins in the original surface. Placement of objects with burials continued to be infrequent; 84 per cent
of burials at Crooks site had no artifacts.

Although the position of the Bellevue mound on a ridge
overlooking the stream and its small size are like mounds of
the Early Woodland period, the construction of the claycovered platform upon which the flexed burial was placed
suggests Middle Woodland times, consistent with the pottery evidence. The placement of the platform over a habitation layer differs from the custom in central Louisiana
Marksville sites, also in Miller II sites in Mississippi (Jennings, 1952), where sterile soil was used. Regardless of
whether Burials 2 and 3 were cremated in a submound
basin or in a pit dug into the platform, these burial customs
are consistent with Burial Mound II features elsewhere, as
is the absence of artifact placement with burials.
The above mentioned structural features, burial arrangements, and stone artifact types correspond quite well with
the conclusions reached by Griffin from a study of the pottery. He has indicated that the sherds are on the whole
closest to the Marksville time level and in paste quality
conform most closely with early Baytown. The various
evidences therefore indicate that the Bellevue site and

The Bellevue Mound

37

e

b

q

h

5

Con t ~ r~ete r5

o

FIGURE

Stone artifacts from Bellevue mound,
Quartz crystal

Q, ~Iano.

5

h.J, Projectile points.

K-O, Scrapers.

P,

38

Texas Archeological Society

mound belong to the general Burial Mound II or Middle
Woodland Horizon, in which are included Marksville of
Central Louisiana, Early Baytown in the Lower Mississippi
Valley, Miller II in Mississippi, Copena in Alabama, Santa
Rosa in West Florida, and Cooper Focus in Oklahoma (Bell
and Baerreis, 1951).
Several questions are raised by the pottery study. The
preponderance of undecorated pottery is unusual, even in
this period. At the Crooks site, 80 per cent of total sherds
and 90 per cent of the Marksville period sherds were plain,
in comparison with 99.2 per cent at Bellevue. In Miller II,
96 per cent of the pottery was plain or cordmarked. Orr
(1952) reports a low percentage of decorated sherds in
Fourche-Maline pottery of eastern Oklahoma, only 90 out
of 6,000 sherds showing decoration, most of this being incised straight-line designs. The absence of any technique
of body roughening by cordmarking or paddle stamping on
the Bellevue sherds is consistent with the general absence
of these techniques in the "Caddoan" area. Indeed, as Ford
(1952) has pointed out, the lower Mississippi valley and the
"Caddoan" area have a consistent technique of body smoothing and of plain wares in all early potteries. Fabric impressing, cordmarking, and check stamping never penetrated
the "Caddoan" area, and generalized body roughening by
brushing did not appear until Haley Focus times and the subsequent period of the Fulton Aspect, in which it is common.
Bone tempering, present in 14 (1.8 per cent) of the Bellevue sherds, seems to be indigenous to the four-state "Caddoan" area and westward into Texas. In northwestern
Louisiana bone tempering was found in a large cache of
pottery in the margin of a borrow pit near the big mound
at Mound Plantation, chiefly in plain or straight-line decorated sherds, preponderantly thick-walled, with which were
associated several sherds of the marker types of Coles Creek
pottery (Coles Creek Incised, French Fork Incised), and
several others of a plain black, polished ware.
A minor percentage of bone tempering extends into the
Fulton Aspect wares of the Bossier Focus (Webb, 1948 a)

39

The Bellevue Mound

and the Belcher Focus in this area. In Texas, Krieger (1946)
reports bone tempering to a minor degree in all loci of the
Gibson and Fulton Aspects; also that it occurs outside of
the "Caddoan area" in cord-marked pottery of the Antelope
Creek and nearby cultures in the Panhandle and in the Aus~
tin Focus of Central Texas, wherein the chief pottery type,
Leon Plain, is predominantly bone tempered.

In Oklahoma,

Orr (1952) states that somewhat less than 5 per cent of
Fourche-Maline pottery sherds have bone tempering.
The suggestion by Griffin that the burnished sherds and
strongly incurving rim are characteristics which are somewhat later than the Marksville period, and the presence of
the decorated sherd of Churupa Punctated (placed by Ford
in the Troyville potteries), pose the question whether the
Bellevue mound should be equated with Troyville rather
than Marksville.

Although this question seems to be com-

paratively academic outside of the central Louisiana homeland, since elsewhere it has been difficult or impossible to
differentiate Marksville Stamped and Marksville Incised
from Troyville Stamped and Yokena Incised, it might be
pointed out that barrel-shaped pots and bowls with incurving rims are present--even though infrequent--in Marksville wares and Churupa Punctated sherds were present in
small numbers at the Crooks site (Ford and Willey, 1940).
At the Kirkham site in Arkansas (Dickinson and Lemley,
1939) and the Fredericks site in Northwestern La., the two
nearest Marksville (or Troyville) sites to Bellevue (Fig. 1,
B), Churupa Punctated sherds occurred with sherds which
have characteristic Marksville features (deeply incised concentric circles or ovals, conventionalized bird design, dentate rocker stamping and cross-hatched Marksville rims).
Moreover, sherds secured by Webb from the deeper levels
of one of the Larto mounds showed a similar association of

Texas Archeo!ogical Society

4O

Churupa Punctated with Marksville Incised and Marksville
Stamped pottery.

The Bellevue mound furthermore shows

none of the traits which first appear during the Troyville
transition as distinguished f r o m Marksville: rectangular
temple mounds, plaza arrangement of mounds, extended
burials, head deformation, small (arrow) projectile points,
the replacement of monitor or platform pipes by elbow and
effigy pipes, French Fork Incised and Mazique Incised pottery, cordmarked surface, and so on.
We conclude, therefore, that the Bellevue mound site represents a simple Burial Mound culture, on the Burial Mound
II or Middle Woodland horizon, which developed out of the
late Archaic horizon in this area.
Bibliography
Bell, Robert E.
1953.

The Scott Site, Le Flore County, OMahoma.

American Antiquity, Vol. 18, No. 4, pp. 314-331.
Bell, Robert E. and David Baerreis ....
1951. A Survey of Oklahoma Archeology. Bull T. A. P.
S.

Vol. 22, pp, 7-100.

Dickinson, S. D. and Harry J. Lemley
1939. Evidences of the Marksville and Coles Creek Complexes at the Kirkham Place, Clark County, Arkansas.
Bull. T. A. P. S] Vol. 11, pp. 139-189.
Ford, James A.
1951.

Greenhouse: A Troyville-Coles Creek Period Site

in Avoyelles Parish, La.

Anthropological Papers of the

American Museum of Natural History, N. Y. Vol. 44,
Part I.

The Bellevue Mound

1952.

41

Measurements of Some Prehistoric Design De-

velopments in the Southeastern States. Anthropological
Papers of the American Museum of Natural History,
Vol. 44, Part 3.
Ford, James A. and George I. Quimby, Jr.
1945.

The Tchefuncte Culture, an Early Occupation of

the Lower Mississippi Valley.

Mem. Soc. Amer. Arch.,

No. 2.
Ford, James A. and Gordon Willey
1940. Crooks Site, a Marksville Period Burial Mound in
La Salle Parish, La. Anthropological Study No. 3, Department of Conservation, La. Geological Survey.
1941. An Interpretation of the Prehistory of the Eastern
United States.

American Anthropologist, Vol. 43, pp.

325-363.
Jennings, Jesse D.
1952.

Prehistory of the Lower Mississippi Valley. In:

Archeology of Eastern United States, Univ. of Chicago
Press, pp. 256-271.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946.

Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern

Texas with Extension of Puebloan Datings to the Mississippi Valley.

Univ. of Texas Pub. No. 4640, Austin.

Newell, H. Perry and Alex D. Krieger
1949. The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoir 5, Society for American Archeology.
Orr, Kenneth G.
1952. Survey of Caddoan Area Archeology. In: Archeol-

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

42

ogy of Eastern United States.

Univ. of Chicago Press,

pp. 246-247.
Webb, Clarence H.
1944.

Stone Vessels from a Northeast Louisiana Site.

American Antiquity, Vol. 9, No. 4, pp. 386’394.
1946.

Two Unusual Types of Chipped Stone Artifacts

from Northwest Louisiana.
pp. 9-17.
1948a.

Bull. T. A. P. S., Vol. 17.

Caddoan Prehistory: The Bossier Focus.

Bull.

T. A. P. S., Vol. 19, pp. 100-147.
1948b.

Evidences of Pre-Pottery Cultures in Louisiana.

American Antiquity, Vol. 13, pp. 227-232.
3346 Youree Drive
Shreveport, La.
The Children’s Clinic
1560 Line Ave.
Shreveport, La.

THE SAM KAUFMAN SITE, RED RIVER
COUNTY, TEXAS
R. K. HARRIS
The site described in this paper is located on the farm of
Mr. Sam Kaufman in the north central part of Red River
County, Texas, about two miles northwest of the small community of Blakeney.

The village area is located on a low

terrace about one mile long and about 1/4 mile wide.

Near

the middle, the terrace is cut through by a small slough
which flows into Red River just north of the site. It is called
Salt Well Slough.
Many small rises are to be found over the village area on
both sides of the slough. Several of these rises seem to have
the remains of house sites located on them. Mound building
seems to have about ceased at the time the site was occupied,
but on the west side of the slough what appear to be ~wo
small mounds are to be found. The east mound, the smaller
of the two, is probably only a natural rise with about two
feet of accumulated midden material. This small mound has
the remains of a house site located in it. Cultivation has
torn into the remains of the burned house, as many large
pieces of burned clay daub are found over the surface.
Around this house site, some small evidences of white contact
have been found, namely, four or five glass trade beads and
three or four copper cones made from rolled-up sheet copper.
They were probably ornaments or tinklers attached to clothing. However, one was rolled with a very sharp point on
one end, and was probably an awl or a projectile point.
The larger or west mound is probably the only real mound
of the two. Today, after years of cultivation, it is still about
five feet high above the surrounding field. The soil on top
of it is very black and shows evidence of much fire. Plows
have no doubt destroyed several large burials in this mound
as over the top may be found large conch shell beads and
many sherds of Avery Engraved, Simms Engraved, and
other types of pottery found in the Texarkana and McCurtain Foci.

44

Texas Archeological Society

Two cemetery areas are located near the site. One is just
to the northeast of the village area and is in the bank of Red
River. The other, also located in the bank of the river is
about ~ mile downstream from the village area. Both cemetery areas are now being destroyed by Red River, and many
burials are being lost to the river. In fact, the whole Kaufman Site is in danger of being destroyed as Red River is
shifting south at a rapid pace. During 1952, Mr. Kaufman
lost over 200 acres to the River. The two mounds are only
about 300 yards from the river at present. If the river continues to shift south, at the rate of the last two years, the
whole site will be gone in about three or four years. Before
this happens, some institution should excavate some of the
house sites and burials.
The writer and some of his fellow students of archeology
have tried to gather as much information about the site as
possible before it is lost forever. At this point the writer
wishes to thank Mr. C. R. Allen, Mrs. Mamie Allen, Mr. Jack
Hughes, and Mr. Lester Wilson for their help in making
this report possible.
Surface Artifacts
Over the surface of the village, after a heavy rain, may
be found many artifacts of the Indians who occupied the
Kaufman Site.
Several house sites have been destroyed by the plow.
Around these house sites may be found many artifacts. The
following paragraphs will describe artifacts found over the
surface.
Lithic Artifacts
Lithic artifacts at the Kaufman Site can be divided into
projectile points, scrapers, knives, drills, and chipped axes.
Projectile Points: Projectile points can be divided into
spear points, dart points, and small arrow points, The spear
points shown on Plate 3, Nos. 13, 14, 16, and 18 are of the
types found. The dart points are mostly of the type Gary
Stemmed. Plate 3, No. 12, bottom row, shows dart points

PLATE 3
Kaufman site artifacts of shell, bone, turquoise, gl,ass, and flint.

Size ~.

The Sam Kau]man Site

47

from this site. The small arrow points are mostly triangular,
but several of the Alba Barbed and side-notched triangle are
also found. Plate 3, No. 12, middle row, shows small arrow
point types.
Scrapers:

Scrapers are mostly small end or duckbill

scrapers, but the side scraper is also present.

Plate 3, No.

12, upper two left, shows types of scrapers found.
Knives: These are leaf-shaped.

Some are double-pointed

and some rounded on one end. Plate 3, No. 15 shows a knife
from a burial.
Drills: Plate 3, Nos. 12, upper right, and No. 17 shows the
types of drills found. Only one drill of the type shown on
Plate 3, No. 17 has been found. This is the first of this type
seen by the writer from the Red River area.
Double-bit Axes: Plate 4, No. 13 shows a double-bit axe
chipped from ferruginous sandstone.
Lithic artifacts are made mostly from quartzite or cherts,
but some evidence of trade is seen in artifacts made from
novaculite from Arkansas.
Polished Stone Artifacts
Many celts are found at this site. They are made mostly
from a black stone with white specks, but a few are made
of a green stone. Plate 4, Nos. 12, 14, 15, and 16 are celts from
this site.
Plate 4, No. 11 shows an arrow-shaft abrader from the
Kaufman Site. It has two grooves in one face. Both of the
grooves are smooth and rounded.
Plate 4, No. 4 shows a beautiful quail effigy pipe. It is
made from red siltstone and has the features of a quail engraved on it. It was found in a disturbed house site.
Plate 4, No. 6 shows a stone ear plug or spool. It is made
from a soft white stone and is of the same type as shown by
Bell and Baerreis (1951, Plate 10, No. 13).

Texas ArcheologicaL Society

48

White Trade Artifacts
A few white and blue glass trade beads and three or four
artifacts made of sheet copper have been found around house
sites and in graves.

On the whole, white trade artifacts are

very scarce.
Shell Artifacts
Plate 3, No. 2 shows an insect effigy pendant of mussel
shell. It has the features engraved with small lines or dots
and probably represents a grasshopper or locust. Plate 3,
No. 7 shows a piece of conch shell probably once used as
inlay in some sort of wooden object. Plate 3, Nos. 4, 5, and
8 show conch-shell beads from the surface and from burials.
A local farmer has a gorget made of conch shell, plain, about
three inches in diameter, with two drilled holes near one
edge.
Bone Artifacts
A few crude bone beads and one bone awl have been
found. Plate 3, No. 6 shows one of the crude beads. The
bone awl was in Burial 5 (see below). Most of the bone
artifacts seem to have decayed due to soil conditions and
time.
Pottery Artifacts Not Associated With Graves
Plate 4, No. 8 shows a shell-tempered pipe found in a disturbed house site.

Fragments of long, thin-stemmed pipes

have been found around house sites.
Plate 4, No. 7 shows an engraved and perforated sherd in
broken condition. Fragments of several artifacts of this type
have been found:
Plate 7, Nos, 4, 5, and 6 show three shell-tempered vessels
of the type Nash Neck Banded. These were on the floor of
a disturbed house, on a bed of ashes, with a small mano
nearby. Plate 7, No. 3, and Plate 8, No. 7, show small shelltempered vessels found on other disturbed house floors.

PLATE 4
Kaufman site artifacts of shell, stone, and clay.

Size ~g.

The Sam KauSman Site

51

Houses and House Floors
Very little is known about house types at this site, but
from small amounts of excavation done by the writer in disturbed houses, it seems that round houses of wattle-daub
construction are probably the major house types. However,
one disturbed area seems to have a square or rectangular
house present. This problem needs the attention of an institution which would have a crew large enough to handle it.
Burials
Many burials have been found at the Kaufman Site. Some
are in the village area about the two small mounds, others in
the two cemetery areas being destroyed by the river, and
still others all over the remaining village area. All of the
burials probably belong to a single culture as will be seen
in the burial descriptions to follow.
Burial I
This burial was located in the village area. It had been
somewhat disturbed by the plow but was mostly in position
as buried. The skeleton was in a bad state of preservation
but appeared to be an adult. It was impossible to determine
the sex. Burial was extended with head to northeast. Burial
offerings were three shell-tempered vessels and one conch
shell dipper or ornament. This was made by removing the
central core of the conch shell and smoothing the outer
edges. A hole was drilled at each end (Plate 4, No. 10).
There was no decoration on it.
The small spool-necked bottle (Plate 5, No. 2) was near
the head. The body of this bottle is engraved all over with
interlocking hook-shaped elements with small engraved
circles between. The design is repeated four times around
the bottle, which is brown in color. A bottle of somewhat
the same shape and design has been assigned to the McCurrain Focus in Oklahoma by Bell and Baerreis (1951, Plate
10, No. 20). However, they state it may be a trade piece.
The second vessel from Burial 1 (Plate 8, No. 1) has a design engraved through a red slip and belongs to the type

52

Texas Archeological Society

Avery Engraved which Krieger (1946, Fig. 18) assigned to
the Texarkana Focus. This type is also common in the McCurtain Focus which was defined in southeastern Oklahoma
shortly after Krieger described the Texarkana Focus (compare the present vessel with that shown by Bell and Baerreis, 1951, Plate 10, No. 14). The third vessel (not shown)
from Burial ! is of the type Simms Engraved which was
assigned to Texarkana Focus by Krieger (1946, Fig. 18), and,
like Avery Engraved, is now considered common also in the
McCurtain Focus (Bell and Baerreis, 1951, Plate 10, No. 19).
In the Kaufman site the type Simms Engraved usually has
red pigment rubbed into the lines.
Burial 2
Burial 2 was located in the cemetery area just to the northeast of the village area. It was buried at a depth of 14 feet
below the present surface and was exposed by the present
river cutting. The skeleton was extended with head to the
east, and was in a bad state of preservation. Determination
of sex was impossible, but the teeth were those of an adult.
Offerings consisted of two shell-tempered vessels, a doublepointed knife (Plate 3, No. 15), and two small arrow points
of the type Alba Barbed. There was no water bottle in this
grave, but it is possible that there was one and it had already
become a victim of the river.

The first vessel found (Plate 7, No. 7) is of the type Nash
Neck Banded, assigned to Texarkana Focus by Krieger (1946,
Fig. 18). Like Avery Engraved and Simms Engraved (see
above) this type is now also considered to be common in
both Texarkana Focus and IVIcCurtain Focus (Bell and Baerrels, 1951, Plate I0; No. 17). The second vessel from Burial
2 (Plate 8, No. 5) has three rows of impressed fingernail
lines (nail punctations placed end to end) around the vessel just under the rim, and a chevron design repeated four
times around the body. These designs were applied while
the vessel paste was still soft. This vessel has the crimping
of neck coils and is probably a variation of Nash Neck Banded, which sometimes includes such body designs in addition
to crimped rim coils.

PLATE 5
Kaufman site pottery vessels.

Nos. 3, 4 are %~ size, others ~.

The Sam Kaulman Site

55

Burial 3
This was located in the village area and was extended
with head north. The skeleton was in a bad state of preservation but was that of an adult. Sex could not be determined. The burial offerings were three shell-tempered vessels and 20 small triangular arrow points. Of the 20 small
points, two are side-notched triangles, and 18 are indentedbase triangles without notches. Two of the 20 are novaculite, a material obtained from southwest Arkansas. Of
the three pottery vessels in this burial, one is Simms Engraved with red pigment in the design, one is Avery Engraved (Plate 6, No. 2) with design engraved through a red
slip, and one is a bottle (Plate 5, No. 3). This bottle is very
much like one pictured from Oklahoma by Bell and Baerreis
(1951, Plate 10, No. 18). The water bottle and the red Avery
Engraved vessel had both been broken around the rim, and
showed evidence of having been chipped evenly around the
break, then re-used.
Burial 4
Burial 4 was located in the middle of a county road which
passes through the village area. The skeleton, which was
in a bad state of preservation, was extended with head to
the northeast. Determination of sex was impossible, but
the burial was that of a child about 12 years old. Burial
offerings included three shell- tempered vessels, a shelltempered pottery pipe and eight long conch-shell beads. The
shell beads (four of which are shown on Plate 3, No. 4) were
around the neck. The pipe (shown on Plate 4, No. 9) is interesting as it is the stem of a pipe, which after the bowl was
broken off, the break was smoothed down around the hole
and the stem end smoked by placing a cane stem in the hole
on the side. Two vessels (not shown) are Simms Engraved,
with red pigment in one vessel design. The bottle (Plate 5,
No. 5) is plain with a red slip covering it.

Burial 5 was located in the County road and was extended
with head to north. The sex could not be determined and

56

Texas Archeological Society

skeleton was in bad state of preservation, but appeared to
be a young adulh Burial offerings included two shell-tempered vessels and one bone awl. The bone awl (Plate 3,
No. 1) is made from ulna of deer. Plate 8, No. 4, shows a
vessel of Simms Engraved from this burial. Plate 5, No. 6,
shows a bottle.
Burial 6
This burial was located in the cemetery area being washed
by the river just northeast of the village area. It was in the
bank of the river about 12 feet below the present surface.
The skeleton was that of a middle-aged male and in a good
state of preservation. It was extended with head to the east.
Burial offerings included four clay-tempered vessels, one
shell-tempered vessel, one conch-shell pendant with nineteen conch-shell beads, 16 small triangular arrow points, and
three mussel-shell spoons.
Of the 16 small arrow points, five show evidence of being
ground or smoothed on the edges near the point. One of the
five is ground smooth on edges near the point and also
smoothed on each side of the point about half way toward
the base. The 16 points are shown on Plate 3, No. II. The
conch-shell beads and pendant are shown on Plate 3, Nos. 3
and 5. The pendant is made from the center core of conch
and is probably some sort of insect effigy.

The water bottle shown on Plate 5, No. 4 has three sets
of three strips of applied clay marked with fingernail as a
design. The vessel shown on Plate 6, No. 1 has a design of
punctates and straight lines, which is similar to Canton
Incised at Sanders Site (Krieger, 1946, Plate 28, Figs. F & G).
However, this vessel does not have the polish or shape of the
vessel from Sanders. The vessel shown on Plate 6, No. 3,
has 4 lugs on the rim and four incised lines under and around
the rim and is well polished. The writer has seen vessels
similar to it from the Sanders and Titus Foci Sites. The
vessel shown on Plate 6, No. 6 has a thickened lip and four
lines of punctates around the vessel just below the lip. The
surface of the vessel is well polished. The above four yes-

4

3

PLATE 6
Kaufman site pottery vessels.

No. 4 is % size, others 1,4.

The Sam Kau]man Site

59

sels are probably trade pieces to the Kaufman Site. All
four are clay-tempered. The last vessel from this grave is
shown on Plate 6, No. 5, is shell-tempered Avery Engraved
with design engraved through the red slip. Burial 6 in some
ways seems to be a stranger to the Kaufman Site with its
four clay-tempered vessels, some of which could be Sanders
or Titus vessels, and yet, they were in the same grave with
a shell-tempered vessel of Avery Engraved and 16 small triangular arrow points.

Burial 7 was located in the County road in the village
area. It was the burial of a small child in bad state of preservation. Sex was impossible to determine, but burial was
extended with head to east. Burial offerings included three
small shell-tempered vessels and a shell-tempered pipe. The
pipe is shown on Plate 4, No. 5. It shows no evidence of being
used in smoking. Plate 6, No. 4 shows a small vessel of
Avery Engraved with design engraved through the red slip.
Plate 7, No. 2 shows a small vessel of Simms Engraved with
red pigment r ubb ed into the design. Plate 5, No. 7,
shows a small spool-necked water bottle with interlocking
design repeated four times around the body.
Burial 8
This burial was located just east of County road in village
area. The burial was extended, but somewhat disturbed by
the plow. The skeleton was in a bad state of preservation
and determination of sex was impossible. Burial offerings
included two shell-tempered vessels, two small turquoise
pendants, and five turquoise beads. Plate 3, No, 9 shows
the turquoise artifacts. These turquoise artifacts are of the
same type as found by Rex Housewright in a burial on the
Goss Farm in Fannin County (Housewright, 1946) and must
be the result of trade from New Mexico with Pueblo tribes.
The Goss Site is located across Bois d’Arc Creek from Sanders Mound. As early as 1542, Caddo tribes were engaged
in the trade of bow wood of Osage Orange to the Puebloans
in exchange for turquoise and cotton blankets (Krieger,

6O

Texas Archeological Society

1946, p, 207), A small turquoise bead was found in the
Hatchel Mound near Texarkana by the University of TexasW, P. A: in a midden stratum assigned to Texarkana Focus
(Krieger, 1946, p. 207).
Of the two vessels from burial 8, one is Simms Engraved
(not shown) and the other Avery Engraved with design cut
through the red slip (Plate 8, No. 6).
Burial 9
This burial was located in the village area and was extended with head to north. The burial was that of an adult,
but skeleton was in a bad state of preservation and sex could
not be determined. The offerings consisted of three shelltempered vessels and 28 blue glass trade beads. The two
vessels (Plate 8, Nos. 2 and 8) are of the same type and are
plain except for a row of crimping around the top just below
the rim. This crimping of the neck coils is done in the same
manner as on the Nash Neck Banded vessels. The water
bottle shown on Plate 5, No. 1 is from this burial. The
blue glass trade beads are of the same type as found on the
Womack Site some 30 miles up Red River.
Burial 10
This burial was located in the cemetery area northeast
of the village area and was partially cremated with remains
of skull to the east. It was not possible to determine the
sex, but it was an adult. Offerings consisted of three pottery vessels, all shell-tempered. Plate 7, No. 1 shows a very
fine vessel of the type Nash Neck Banded. The design
was filled with red pigment and body highly polished. The
other two were a red-slipped vessel of Simms Engraved and
a plain vase-shaped vessel.
Burial 11
This burial was located in the County road in the village
area and was extended with head to the northeast. The
skeleton was in a very bad state of preservation, but seemed
to be that of an adult female about middle age. A small
shell-tempered spool-necked water bottle was to left side of

2

PLATE 7
Kaufman site 9ottery vessels.

All .’~.

The Sam Kau]man Site

63

head, but was so badly crushed by road grader that it could
not be repaired. Two shell-tempered vessels were to right
of head. One of these is Simms Engraved with red pigment
in design. The other is shown on Plate 8, No. 3 and is plain
except for a crimped design below the rim. This crimped
design was done in the same manner as the two vessels in
Burial 9. Near the right hand of burial 11 was a large mussel shell with a small flint scraper and three colors of paint
inside. The colors were red, white, and yellow. Plate 4,
Nos. 1, 2, and 3 show the yellow and white paint, and scraper.
The mussel shell and red paint were too soft to move. This
mussel shell was probably a paint kit and scraper used to
work the colors.
Pit Burial o5 Skulls
Just east of Salt Well Slough, and about the middle of the
village area, a pit was found. This pit contained about 20
skulls, but no other bones of the bodies. There were male,
female, and small children’s skulls in the pit. As the Osages
were the bitter enemies of the Caddo in historic times, these
may represent the remains of a group of Osages captured by
the Caddo. If they were Caddo themselves, it is probable
they would have been given the typical burial with offerings.
Many burials at the Kaufman site have been destroyed by
road graders, plow, and the river, but many more remain
to be excavated and recorded.
Summary of Burials
The burial of people who occupied the Kaufman site was
typically in an extended position with the head usually to
north or northeast, with a single skeleton in each grave. An
exception is the partially cremated burial described above.
Probably due to soil conditions, the bones are usually in a
very bad state of preservation.
Offerings included pottery vessels of types commonly
found in burials of the Texarkana and McCurtain Foci elsewhere, shell beads, shell dippers (one burial), shell gorgets
and pendants, glass beads (one burial), turquoise artifacts
(one burial), pottery pipes, and (very rarely) bone imple-

64

ments.

Texas Archeological Society

In most cases the pottery vessels were placed about

the head and shoulders.
Historical Notes
In 1797, while Andrew Ellicott was at Natchez, a body of
Choctaw Indians crossed the Mississippi to make war on
the Caddo. They were very successful and returned with
a number of poles filled with scalps (Foreman, 1930, p. 32).
In the early 19th century, the Caddos’ greatest enemies were
the Osage, William Dunbar reporting in 1804 that they were
unable to defend themselves against this tribe (Foreman,
1930, p. 25).
A few Caddo were still living in the area of northern
Red River County in 1815. Foreman (1930, p. 160) states
that in 1815 a number of white traders made a settlement
at Nanatscho, or Pecan Point, on the south bank of Red
River south of the present Kullituke in McCurtain County,
Oklahoma. The Caddo chief immediately complained of
this intrusion to the Caddo agent, Jamieson, at Natchitoches,
because this was the only crossing place for buffalo hunting
for miles along the Red River. In April, 1816, Jamieson
removed a dozen white families from this settlement to the
north side of Red River, arrested several unlicensed traders,
and confiscated their merchandise. The Caddo, however,
had become greatly reduced in numbers by this time.
We have seen that some Caucasian trade material has been
found on the surface of the Kaufman site and in Burial 9.
However, the amount of this trade material is so small
when compared with that from the Womack site, some 30
miles up Red River from the Kaufman place, that one wonders whether Kaufman is not mainly protohistoric rather
than historic. Krieger (1946, p. 210) states that the Texarkana Focus sites in the northeast corner of Texas and adjacent Arkansas and Louisiana have not revealed the slightest hint of historic contact. Bell (personal communication)
has said that the McCurtain Focus sites in southeastern
Oklahoma are without historic contact. In Burial 9 at the
Kaufman site, we nevertheless have found blue grass trade

PLATE 8
Kaufman site pottery vessels.

All 9§.

The Sam Kau]man Site

67

beads together with pottery vessels which closely resemble
those of other graves described above from this site. The
complex as a whole provides a close connection with both
the Texarkana and the McCurtain Foci through such pottery types as Avery Engraved, Simms Engraved, and Nash
Neck Banded. The water bottle from Burial 9 may border
on the type of bottle associated with the Glendora Focus,
which is generally regarded as representing the historic
period in the heart of the Caddoan area (Krieger, 1946).
On the whole, however, there is no positive Glendora Focus
ware at the Kaufman site so far as known, and Glendora
Focus bottles are often difficult to distinguish from those
of late prehistoric loci (Krieger, personal communication)’.
The Kaufman site would therefore seem to belong very
near the beginnings of white contact in this area, perhaps
early in the 18th century, when the first French traders were
extending their activities up Red River from Louisiana. It
has been the writer’s observation that evidence of white
trade increases as one comes up Red River. Thus, Kaufman
might be slightly later in time than the sites of Texarkana
and McCurtain Foci farther east, as from the notes above
it is suggested that the Osage and Choctaw drove the Caddo
west and south, or out of eastern Oklahoma and up Red
River.
At the Womack site to the west in Lamar County, there
is not only much more white trade material, but Glendora
Focus pottery types become the major ones.
Although the pottery types Avery Engraved, Simms Engraved, and Nash Neck Banded occur commonly in both
Texarkana and McCurtain Foci, there are a number of
differences between these loci in other pottery types, housefloor patterns, projectile points, and other traits. Because
of its proximity across Red River from the known McCurtain
Focus sites in Oklahoma, the absence of some of the key
pottery types of the Texarkana Focus, and the high frequency of red slips and shell temper, Krieger (personal
communication) suggests that the Kaufman site probably
should be considered a component of the McCurtain Focus

68

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

rather than Texarkana. If so, it extends this focus into the
time of early white contact although the date cannot be
accurately determined as yet.
Conclusions
1. The Kaufman site burials, so far as they have been
studied, contain pottery types of both the Texarkana and
McCurtain Foci, with preference for the latter, and perhaps
some tendency toward Glendora Focus through the shape
and decoration of certain bottles.
2. Trade relations with southwestern Arkansas are seen
in the presence of projectile points made of novaculite.
3. Trade relations with the Puebloan Indians of New
Mexico are seen in the turquoise artifacts in Burial 8.
4. A small amount (perhaps the beginning) of trade with
white men, probably French, is seen in the presence of blue
glass beads in Burial 9, and cone-shaped tinklers or projectile points of rolled sheet copper on the surface.
5. The McCurtain Focus, previously believed to be prehistoric, is seen to extend slightly into historic times, and
the Caddo Indians living at Kaufman may have been forced
westward up Red River by their enemies.
Bibliography
Bell, Robert E. and Baerreis, David A.
1951. A Survey of Oklahoma Archeology. Bulletin of
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society. Lubbock.
Foreman, Grant
1930. Indians and Pioneers, The Story of the American
Southwest before 1830. Yale University Press.
Housewright, Rex
1946. A Turquoise Bead Necklace. The Record, Vol. 5,
No. 2. Dallas Archeologicat Society.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. University of Texas Publication No. 4640,
Austin.
9024 San Fernando Way
Dallas 18, Texas

THE MORRIS SITE, CK-39, CHEROKEE

COUNTY, OKLAHOMA

ROBERT E. BELL AND CHARLENE DALE
Foreword
Archaeological excavations at the Morris site were sponsored by the Department of Anthropology at the University
of Oklahoma. The project was under the direction of Robert
E. Bell who also supervised most of the field activities.

Co-

operating agencies participating in the project included the
University of Oklahoma Museum, the United States Army
Engineers, the Smithsonian Institution River Basin Survey
and the National Park Service.

The University Museum

furnished a vehicle and transportation.

The U. S. Army

Engineers supplied maps, minor supplies and easy access to
lands under their jurisdiction.

The Smithsonian Institution

River Basin Survey furnished funds for the initial testing
by Donald J. Lehmer in May, 1951, and the National Park
Service supplied financial aid for labor in June and July
of 1952.
Actual excavations were undertaken on three different
occasions. In May, 1951, Donald J. Lehmer of the River
Basin Survey dug a test trench across the site, His work
revealed a series of burials and indicated that additional
work should be done. During the months of June and July,
1951, Robert E. Bell expanded this exploratory work to learn
more about the site. A preliminary report on the excavations of 1951 has been published in The Chronicles of Oklahoma (Bell and Fraser, 1952). During June and July, 1952,
additional excavations explored the village area. The following report represents the results of all work accomplished
including that reported on for the 1951 season. Although a
large portion of the Morris site remains unexcavated, no
additional work is contemplated. The reservoir for this area
is completed, and the Morris site is already under several
feet of water. Although additional work at the site would
undoubtedly have produced new data and perhaps solved

7O

Texas Archeological Society

some problems which remain, it is believed that a reasonably good sample of material and features has been secured.
1

The following students participated in the excavations:
Ralf Andrews, Charles Bareis, Marian Berman, Harold
Brighton, George Butts, Ann Chowning, Charlene Dale,
Lathel Duffield, Joanne Johnson, Archie Lindsey, Alice
Schroyer Proctor, Charles Proctor, Raymond Toldan, and
Bobby Williams. Innumerable other persons have helped
in various ways to make this report possible. Gratitude
and appreciation are therefore extended to everyone who
through contributing services or ideas has helped in making
the following information available.
Introduction
The Morris site is one of 43 known archaeological sites
located within the limits of the Tenkiller Reservoir in eastern Oklahoma. The reservoir will inundate approximately
20 miles of the Illinois River valley in Sequoia and Cherokee
Counties between Gore and Tahlequah. Although some
previous archaeological work had been done in the area,
relatively little was known about the prehistory of the region,. During 1939 and 1940 the University of Oklahoma
excavated at three sites, Brackett, Smullens I and Smullens
II, The field work was under the immediate direction of
Lynn Howard, and a brief report on the excavations has
appeared (Howard, 1940). The Brackett site represents a
mound and associated village situated at the northern end
of the reservoir; it will be outside the permanent lake pool
but will be subject to flooding. The Brackett site represents
the Gibson Aspect and has been assigned to the Spiro Focus
(Bell and Baerreis, 1951; Orr, 1952). Smullens I and Smullens II represent two bluff shelters just outside the northern
limits of the reservoir area. Excavations there were in
progress at the time of Howard’s preliminary report, and
no definitive study of these materials has appeared. An
examination of the specimens, however, suggests that a
Considerable span of cultural materials is present, ranging
from Archaic to late prehistoric pottery :bearing horizons.

o

.o 0.0

I,
FIGURE 6
Grid ])]an of Area "A". Morrls stY, showing Zocatlon of ~osthol¢~, bur~o ~its,

72

Texas ArcheoZogical Society

In the summer of 1948, stimulated by construction activities in the reservoir, the Smithsonian Institution River
Basin Survey financed an archaeological survey of the area.
David J. Wenner, Jr., and two assistants, William MayerOakes and Robert Shalkop, reported the locations of 38
archaeological sites (Bell, 1949). This survey suggested that
at least three types of occupation were represented; sites
lacking pottery and probably to be considered as Archaic,
and sites with pottery, probably belonging to either the
Gibson or Fulton Aspects.
The Tenkiller Archaic resembles the Grove Focus materials of northeastern Oklahoma. The Grove Focus represents a pre-pottery hunting and gathering people who are
best known from excavations in Delaware County (Baerreis, 1951). This complex lasted over a long period of time
and has been subdivided into three phases labeled A, B, and
C.
These subdivisions reflect minor cultural changes
through time within a single complex rather than geographical or major cultural groupings. In general, the Grove
Focus can be characterized by a mobile population following
a hunting and gathering economy. The sites are small and
were apparently occupied intermittently as hunting stations
by small family bands. The Grove Focus is represented by
a variety of large sized projectile points and various other
artifacts. Distinctive features of the projectile points are
a proportionately broad blade, occasional coarse serrations
and beveling of the blade. Other chipped flint artifacts
include points with a blunt tip, large drills, knives, a variety
of heavy crude scrapers, crude choppers, double-bitted axes
and digging tools. Ground stone tools include full grooved
axes, grooved atlatl weights, concave faced abraiding stones,
anvils, grinding stones, manos and mortars. Bone and shell
objects are rare but include bone awls, flaking tools and shel!
scrapers.
The Gibson Aspect has been outlined and described by
Krieger (1946). It contains several loci and is well represented by sites in eastern Oklahoma and the Tenkiller
Reservoir. The Gibson Aspect marks the appearance of an

The Morris Site

73

advanced cultural development which reflects homogeneity
within the Caddoan area for the first time. The Gibson
sites are normally marked by both burial mounds and substructure or flat-topped temple mounds which were important religious centers supported by a surrounding but
relatively dispersed population. The following list of traits
are representative of the period. The houses are variable
but in Oklahoma are normally square or rectangular with
four central roof supports. The burials are commonly multiple graves with relatively abundant grave offerings. The
pottery is represented by highly polished bowls, carinated
bowls, and bottles decorated with carefully engraved, incised or punctated design and having a granular clay tempering material. Other important traits are effigy pipes of
stone or clay, long stemmed pottery pipes, large T-shaped
stone pipes, stone pulley-shaped ear spools, shell and wooden
ear spools, use of copper veneer on ear spools, spindle shaped
wooden beads coated with copper, conch shell containers,
engraved conch shell dippers or gorgets, repousse copper
plaques, pearl beads, a wide variety of shell beads, quartz
crystals, spatulate celts, large flint blades, stone celts, sandstone hones, and small arrowheads in a variety of forms
(Krieger, 1946, p. 215).

The Fulton Aspect contains a number of loci within the
Caddoan area, and although largely prehistoric, two loci
have produced evidence of European trade materials. The
Oklahoma representatives of the Fulton period lack European trade goods although they must be considered as late
prehistoric occupations. Krieger (1946, pp. 211-212) has
outlined the characteristics of the Fulton Aspect as follows: a general absence of mounds; single extended burials
concentrated in a cemetery area with grave associations
close to the head; rectangular houses with two central roof
supports; a variety of pottery vessel forms including simple
bowls, bottles, jars with everted rims and globular ollas;
pottery decoration includes engraving, crude incising and
fingernail gouging. The Oklahoma wares are largely shell
tempered. Other artifacts include elbow pipes of pottery
or stone, cylindrical conch shell beads, sandstone hones,

74

Texas Archeological Society

small stemmed or triangular arrowheads; snub-nosed scrapers, side scrapers; flint drills, bone scapula hoes, bone awls
and village cache pits.
This sequence of events, Archaic, Gibson and Fulton, as
suggested by the 1948 survey did not adequately reflect the
known phases of development for adjoining areas, To the
northeast the Grove Archaic is followed by a Woodland
complex, including Middle Woodland or Hopewellian, a
Gibson thrust into the area and a late Neosho Focus which
is a northern counterpart of the more southerly Fulton
Aspect. The Woodland and Neosho materials seem to represent cultural traditions which have moved into Oklahoma
from the north or northeast and which apparently did not
push far enough south to be represented in the Tenkiller
region. On the other hand, the sequence of events to the
south and southeast is represented by the underlying Fourche Maline materials including pre-pottery and early pottery bearing levels followed by the Gibson and Fulton
Aspects.. As with the Woodland and Neosho, the Fourche
Maline materials appeared to be missing in the Tenkiller
region survey. Thus the Tenkiller area was situated geographically and culturally on the peripheries of two spheres
of influence; the Caddoan area to the south and southeast,
and the northeastern sector of the state, characterized by
influences from the north and northeast. Both areas had
apparently contributed to the cultural development of the
Tenkiller area, and it was hoped that excavations in the
region would not only clarify the prehistory of the local
Illinois Valley, but aid in correlating cultural relationships
between the two adjacent areas.
Following the survey, Donald J. Lehmer of the River
Basin Survey conducted some excavations during the period
from April to May, 1951. After testing two sites which were
unproductive, extensive work at the more promising Cookson site (Ck-12) was undertaken. This site has two components represented, one early and one late. Lehmer (1952)
has reported on the late occupation which he assigns to the
Turkey Bluff Focus of the Fulton Aspect. The early occupa-

The Morris Site

75

tion has not been described but appears to represent a preFulton horizon. Characteristics of the Turkey Bluff Focus
at the Cookson site include the absence of mounds, rectangular houses with two center posts and a central fire
pit, cache pits, shell tempered pottery normally without
decoration, stone celts, metates, manos, pitted hammerstones, stone pipes, arrowshaft smoothers, awl sharpeners,
small triangular arrowpoints, flint knives, drills, scrapers,
hammerstones, bone awls, bone punches, scapula hoes, bone
picks, rasps, tubes and pendants, shell hoes and shell scrapers. No burials were represented. Although the Turkey
Bluff materials were in part similar to those attributed to
the Fort Coffee Focus (Orr, t946), differences between the
two suggested that separate recognition should be given to
the Tenkiller materials.
During June and July, 1951, Robert E. Bell of the University of Oklahoma conducted excavations at the Vanderpool
site (Ck-32). This site is represented by scattered occupational debris extending along the Illinois River bank for
a considerable distance; test excavations were made at four
localities of the site. A preliminary study of the materials
suggested that three components are represented: a prepottery occupation represented chiefly by large projectile
points and chipped flint objects, an early pottery bearing
occupation which suggests a pre-Gibson period, and a late
shell tempered pottery bearing occupation affiliated with
the Fulton Aspect. The middle occupation is best represented at the site and includes the following characteristics:
circular pit burials without grave offerings, round refuse or
cache pits, square houses with a short trench entrance way
and multiple roof supports, projectile points of various kinds
including contracting stemmed, rectangular stemmed, flaring stemmed and some barbed forms, leaf shaped knives,
crude scrapers and flint cores, flint hoes, double-bitted axes,
boatstones, stone ornaments, manos, metates, flint pecking
hammers, cup stones, stone celts, flint celts, drills and clay
tempered pottery. The pottery is rarely decorated but a few
crude incised lines have been found on rim sherds. The
base is a thick flat-disc like bottom, sometimes with basketry

76

Texas Archeologica~ Society

impressions. No vessel forms have been determined. All
of the pottery is a thick crude ware resembling the Fourche
Maline pottery (Williams Plain), the Spiro utility ware, and
Harlan Plain ware. This complex lacks most of the features
of Gibson Aspect times, but the presence of pottery suggests
a post-Archaic period. Possible affiliations with Fourche
Maline are indicated. Further identification can not be attempted until a complete analysis of the materials has been
made.
With this additional information the chronology suggested
by the survey was supplemented as follows:
Fulton Aspect--Turkey Bluff Focus (late occupation at
the Cookson site)
Gibson Aspect--Brackett site.
Pre-Gibson--Vanderpool site (areas B and C)
Archaic (pre-pottery--Grove Focus ?)
The Morris site was then selected for excavation in order
to amplify the above sequence and to broaden our knowledge
of the newly recognized Turkey Bluff Focus. Preliminary
testing by Lehmer and his findings of several burials, shell
tempered pottery and small triangular arrow points suggested that another Turkey Bluff site might be represented.
In view of the fact that the burial complex was unknown
further clarification seemed desirable.
Location and Description
The Morris site is located on the eastern bank of the
Illinois River about 15 miles south of Tahlequah in Cherokee
County, Oklahoma. This county lies in eastern Oklahoma
to the north of the Arkansas River and includes a large
portion of the Cookson Hill country. The site is about onehalf mile due east of the former Standing Rock bridge which
crossed the Illinois River at this local landmark. This area
is about 25 miles east of Muskogee, Oklahoma, or 40 miles
northwest of Fort Smith, Arkansas. More specifically the
site is located in the SW1/4, NWY4, Section 30, Township !5
North, Range 22 East.

The Morris Site

77

The occupational area is situated on the second terrace of
the Illinois River and was not normally subjected to overflow. At the time of excavation, the Illinois River was
several hundred feet west of the site, although an old cutoff channel was still evident adjacent to the terrace slope.
Elk Creek flowed into the Illinois River immediately to the
south so that the site occupied an L-shaped promontory
formed by the junction of these two streams. Stream erosion, in cutting into the terrace at flood stage, had destroyed
portions of the site along the southern and western edges.
Surface debris and exposed midden materials were especially
abundant on these weathered slopes where erosion had exposed the underlying materials.
Although the actual extent of the site was not verified
by test pits, village debris such as artifacts, flint chips,
broken stones, and fragments of bone and mussel shells was
found over a fairly large area. This debris was most abundant along the top of the terrace toward the river, extending
parallel to the stream for a distance of at least 1,000 ft.
Surface materials extended inland from the terrace edge for
perhaps 300 ft. or more for the entire length of the site, but
the greater abundance of materials close to the river suggested that the main occupation extended along the stream bank,
remaining as close to the water supply as convenient.
The nearby Illinois River was a clear water stream furnishing not only a dependable water supply but good fishing. A large spring was also present near the mouth of Elk
Creek and was equally close to the site. The valley provided
ample areas of fertile land for gardening, and the surrounding Cookson Hills must have been plentiful with wild game
and plant products. The location was well chosen for the
hunting-gathering and agricultural economy which is suggested for the Morris site inhabitants.
The site had been under cultivation for a number of years
and was planted in corn at the time of excavation.
Excavations
The excavations were limited to three areas herein desig-

78

Texas Archeological Society

nated A, B, and C. These were placed in what was believed
to represent the richest and deepest portion of the site.
A horizonal grid system of 5 ft. squares was superimposed
upon the site, and the areas excavated were carefully marked
by wooden stakes placed at each 5 ft. interval.

Each 5 ft.

square was then numbered with reference to its position
from two zero coordinates (Figs. 6, 7).

For vertical control

and measurements of depth, a point of reference or datum
was established at the southwest corner of the site.
Each grid block was excavated by arbitrary 6 in. levels
measured from the ground surface. Long handled shovels
and small hand picks or trowels were used in the work, and
most of the dirt was screened to avoid loss of any unnoticed
specimens. The objects recovered were placed in paper
sacks, which were marked with the square and level in
which the materials had been found. All artifacts, flint
chips, pieces of bone, shell and other bits of occupational
debris were saved during the excavations. This was later
carefully sorted to remove artifacts or significant specimens
and the balance was discarded. The locations of the artifacts within the site were later made a permanent record
when they were numbered and catalogued. As the excavation progressed, the walls and floors of each level were carefully troweled and examined for any disturbances or features that might appear. Whenever a burial or some feature
such as a hearth or refuse pit was found, the excavation
procedure was altered to deal with the situation at hand.
Excavation revealed that artifacts and occupational debris
were concentrated in a dark colored soil which had an average depth of 2 ft. This dark colored sandy loam rested on
top of a yellow-tan clay sub-soil. The underlying clay contained a small number of flint artifacts and flint chips to
clearly mark an earlier occupation at the site. Differences
in the color and texture of the soil made it relatively easy to
distinguish between the two deposits although the yellow
clay surface was irregular and marked by rodent disturbances.

N

LII

LIO

S16

’ ¯

SI7
o

£

LI3

LI2

;19

¯ S20

Is~,

@

,o

, S22

@
@
o
Q

’ S23

0

.

$24

i

$25

$26

$27

$28
i

S29

FIGURE 7

Grid plan

of Area

"’B",

Morris site.

8O

Texas Archeological Society

The upper mantle of dark colored soil was found in all
areas excavated and could be observed extending over most
of the site. In some localities, particularly slopes or eroded
areas, this surface deposit had been washed away to expose
the underlying yellow clay. The upper stratum contained
considerable debris such as bits of charcoal, flint chips,
broken animal bones, occasional pieces of mussel shell,
cracked rocks and various artifacts, either whole or broken.
Artifacts were found in all parts of this deposit although
they appeared most frequently in the first or top level, presumably a result of continued plowing and surface erosion.
No evidence of natural stratigraphy or occupational surfaces
could be observed within the upper brown mantle. Because
of the dark soil color, the actual outlines of grave pits or
similar features were not always visible except where they
penetrated into the underlying yellow clays. Intrusions into
the yellow clay were clearly evident by differences in color
and the nature of the soil.
The underlying yellow clay sub-soil was believed to be
sterile at the end of the first season’s work (Bell and Fraser,
1952), but the subsequent work proved this supposition invalid. In removing some areas of the yellow clay during
the second season, some flint artifacts and flint chips were
found within this deposit. Aside from the occasional flint
object the yellow clay does not appear to represent an occupational deposit; charcoal, ash, bones, shell or debris other
than flint appears to be entirely absent. Because of limitations in personnel and time, no special effort was made to
collect materials from the yellow clay. Most of the specimens found came from leveling floors or removing a single
6 in. layer for the rare specimen it might produce.
The excavated areas A, B, and C were located in the
southern portion of the site where surface debris appeared
most abundant.
Area A (Figure 6) included a total area involving 97
blocks of the grid system which was excavated to a varying
depth from 24 in. to 30 in. The initial trench by Lehmer
and the first season’s work by Bell are contained in area A.

The Morris Site

81

This section produced a large number of burials, several
refuse or cache pits, one complete house pattern and perhaps three-fourths of another. This latter house pattern was
discovered late in the season and it was not possible to completely uncover the structure.
Area B (Figure 7) is represented by a long north-south
trench with adjoining areas on both the east and west sides
of the main trench. It was dug primarily to aid in determining the extent of the burial area and to locate additional
house structures. Several post holes, a rock hearth, two
burials and some refuse pits were found in this area.
Area C is represented by a long trench extending in an
east-west direction across the southern edge of the site. A
single refuse pit and one probable rock hearth were found
in this trench. The identification of the rock hearth, however, remains uncertain since most of the stones were removed by the Indian workmen before their possible significance was realized. With the abundance of. scattered
stones throughout the village deposit, it was not until the
subsequent discovery of a stone hearth in Area B (Fig. 7)
that this error became apparent.
Village Features
Houses: One complete house pattern was found in Area
A (Figure 6). In outline the post hole pattern forms a crude
square with rounded corners, the interior distance from wall
to wall being about 15 ft. (Figure 8). The house pattern
is somewhat confused by the presence of many extra post
holes within the interior, at the corners and along the walls.
It is suggested that the clustering of extra posts at the house
corners may reflect features of construction at that point
rather than repairs or interior furnishings. Although the
post holes varied in size, most of them were between 5 and
7 in. in diameter and penetrated into the yellow clay for a
depth of 8 to 12 in. No conspicuous evidence of roof supports is present on the interior of the house although some
of the post holes found may indicate supports. In general,
the post holes around the periphery ~¢ere deeper than those

82

Texas Archeological Society

inside the house, suggesting that the interior posts demanded
less strain or were of less support in the house construction.
A circular basin shaped fire place about 20 in. in diameter
was found in the center of the house floor. The surrounding
clay was baked quite hard from the fire place, and the basin
contained a large quantity of ash and charcoal when discovered. Three post holes surrounded the fire place and
appeared to have been associated with the fire basin ~n
some way.
Extending from the fire basin and marking off the western
section of the house was a dark colored disturbance which
was clearly marked on the troweled floor. It is not known
whether this represents some feature associated with the
house, possibly a fire screen, or if it is merely a rodent
burrow. The feature was fairly straight and much longer
than any other burrow found during the excavations; however, it also appeared as a unique house feature and consequently remains of uncertain origin. Its position, shape
and size suggest that it is probably to be correctly attributed
to the house construction itself.
The house floor could not be determined except immediately adjacent to the fire basin where it was clearly marked
by baked clay. Certainly the house was not characterized
by a prepared clay floor: No special artifacts were found
within the house except a stone metate which rested upon
what must have been the floor surface to the northwest of
the fire basin.
The house has no obvious entrance way although gaps in
the post hole pattern on both the north and south walls
could have served as doorways.
The incomplete pattern of a second house was also found
in Area A (Figure 6). This house pattern was found at the
end of the digging season and the time was not available to
uncover the complete unit. The house was apparently rectangular in outline, fairly small in size, and was lacking
interior features such as a fire place, central roof supports
or a prepared clay floor. A circular basin shaped cache pit,

The Morris Site

83

17 in. in diameter, was found within the western part of the
house. The only artifact in the pit was a projectile point.
The cache pit was apparently associated with the house
rather than intrusive into the house area since the pit could
not be seen in profiles above the assumed house floor.
The post holes ranged from 4 to 8 in. in diameter with most
of them being about 6 in.

Their average depth was 8 in.

There were no burials overlying this house area which suggests that it was somewhat later in time than the square
house which did have burials overlying it.
Several post holes arranged in a line were found in Area
B. Although it is very likely that these represent parts of
another house, excavation failed to reveal additional post
holes in the area examined. Other occasional post holes
were found as isolated features in various parts of the excavations (Figures 6 and 7).
Refuse or cache pits: A total of nine pits was found during
the excavations. The pits represent two general shapes: a
hemispherical or basin shaped pit, and a straight sided, flat
bottomed pit. All of them contained refuse or debris from
the village occupation and occasional artifacts.

Five examples were found in Area A; four were basin
shaped pits and one was a flat bottomed pit. One large
basin shaped pit was found in the N6 trench (Figure 6).
It was roughly circular in outline and was 7 ft. 3 in. in maximum diameter. The cross section is hemispherical in outline presenting sloping walls and a rounded floor. The pit
extended to a depth of 36 in. under the present surface. The
contents included bits of charcoal, broken animal bones,
some charred nut shells, small rocks, flint chips and a few
artifacts. Worked specimens found in the pit include 4
projectile points, 5 crude pieces of worked flint and 2 pieces
of worked bone. Three other pits in Area A (including one
within the rectangular house) were similar in shape and
content but were somewhat smaller in dimensions.

84

Texas Archeological Society

One flat bottomed pit was found in Area A. It had straightsided walls and a flat floor.

In shape, this pit was roughly

circular; it was 5 by 51/2 ft. across the top and 46 in. deep.
Although the pit contained various fragments of animal
bones, flint chips and charcoal, artifacts were few.

Speci-

mens recovered include one bone awl, a short antler tip,
a worked penis bone of the racoon, three projectile points,
two crude scrapers and two flint cores.

An incomplete

burial, number 15, was found within the limits of the pit
area at a depth of 28 in.

Although the pit extended under-

neath the burial, it could not be determined whether the
partially filled pit had been used as a convenient burial
place or whether the burial had been intruded into the
abandoned pit at a later date.
Three pits were found in Area B (Figure 7). One was a
circular, straight-walled and flat-bottomed pit about 37 in.
in diameter and 38 in. deep. In addition to refuse it contained 11 pottery sherds, two mussel shells, one projectile
point and one crude flint core.
A second pit was represented by an irregular shaped area
in square S18-L10 which, since it is irregular in outline and
has uneven walls and floor, may possibly not be aboriginal
in origin. This feature may represent a disturbance by
treasure hunters or possibly may be the area where a tree
stump has been burned out or rotted away.
In the south end of the Area B excavation indications of a
very large pit were discovered. It appeared to be a large
pit having a relatively flat bottom and penetrating into the
yellow clay for a depth ranging from 8 to 17 in. Since the
pit area was about 25 ft. long it was thought that possibly
a pit house structure had been discovered. However, a cross
trench and careful search for interior features failed to produce any such evidence. The width of this feature reached
a maximum measurement of 10 ft. 9 in., thus producing a
large oval shaped pit 10 ft. 9 in. in width and 25 ft. long and
averaging around 30 in. in depth. In some areas the outline

The Morris Site

85

of the pit was not clearly defined; in others, it was exceptionally clear. The contents did not vary from the surrounding village midden area.

Because of the unusual size, the

possibility of this representing some natural feature of the
occupational area is certainly to be considered. Perhaps a
gully or eroded area became a convenient place for the disposal of village refuse.
A single basin shaped pit was found in Area C.

It was 70

in. in diameter, 36 in. deep and was circular. Artifacts found
in the pit include three projectile points, one flint blade, and
one crude piece of worked flint.
Rock hearths: One rock hearth was found in Area B. It
was composed of many cracked stones concentrated in an
area approximately 36 in. in diameter. Charcoal and ashes
mixed among the stones suggest the use as a hearth. A
second rock fireplace was apparently found in Area C, but
it was largely destroyed by the removal of the stones before
its significance was realized.
Burials: A total of 55 burials was found during excavations at the Morris site. From the apparent distribution of
the graves, they were concentrated within a cemetery area;
however, since much of the site remains unexcavated, there
is the possibility that this represents an accidental situation.
The great majority of graves was found in Area A; Area B
contained only two graves and Area C contained none at al!.
In general the bones are in fairly good condition and are
suitable for further study except in cases where they had
been damaged by rodent, human or plowing activity. The
great majority of the burials found had been disturbed in
some way, either by plowing or cultivation, post humus
shifting of the bones, rodent activities or, more likely, by
pot hunting activities. It is known that considerable digging for treasure and pot hunting activity has been carried
on at the site in past years, and it is quite likely that some
of the disturbed burials are a result of this activity. Since
many of the graves were shallow in depth, continued culti-

Texas ArcheoIogicaI Society

86

vation has also scattered and disturbed some of the graves.
Over one-half of the total number of graves were less than
12 in. under the ground surface; many were within the top
6 in: where they would be especially subject to plowing activities.

A number of burials, although apparently not ob-

viously disturbed as indicated by displaced bones out:of
articulation, were represented by incomplete skeletons. A
few of the specimens exhibit various pathological conditions
or bone injuries.

.......

....

The graves were apparently dug from the SUrface tO Vary,
ing depths within the village deposit; most of them were
quite shallow.

The grave pits were either circular or oval

in outline and normally were just large enough to accom’
modate the enclosed skeleton: The grave area was Usually
marked by a darker col6red soil, and the pit outlines could
often be clearly traced around the grave. : Whenever the
grave penetrated the underlying yellow sub-soil the area
was clearly marked, but even in cases where it did not, the
grave outline was often evident. In Some cases the grave
outline was clear almost to the: surface and was easily
marked on the floor of level 1.

Consequently, it appeared

that the graves had been dug from what was the ground
surface and that they did not originate at a lower depth
which was later covered with additional sediments.
Most of the graves contained single interments although
some multiple burials were found. The body was commonly
placed in a flexed position, and the orientation apparently
had no significance.

Some skeletons were in a semi-flexed

position but no examples of an extended burial were found,
The body position of several burials could not be determined.
Two graves could possibly represent bundle burials; however, they may also represent disturbed graves which were
opened by treasure hunters since many of the bones were

The Morris Site

87

0

0

Ooo

O

0o

O

Ct

©
0

0

O0

o
O

O

o%

0

0

Q

0

O

0

0

0

o %
©

O
0

0©

0

0

oo

O
O

o

0

I

5 feet
FIGURE 8
Floor plan of House 1, Area "A", Morris site.

O

Texas Archeological Society

88

broken and splintered rather than merely disarticulated.
The bones were of multiple burials, disarticulated and damaged as though they had been thrown into the grave in a
heap.

Certainly the typical grave was a single interment

with the body in a flexed position and without apparent
orientation.
More than one-half of the graves had some artifacts in
association with the skeleton.

Since many of the artifacts,

however, are minor items or broken objects, it is quite likely
that many of them were not intentional grave offerings.
Since the village midden was rich in artifact material, specimens could easily have become associated with the skeleton in the process of refilling the grave.

Where the occas-

ional projectile point or pottery sherd was found close to the
skeleton and within the grave pit it is very likely an accidental grave association.
Articles which were certainly intentional offerings include pottery vessels, turtle shells, shell ornaments, shell
beads, bone awls and flint knives. Such objects were usually
found close to the head of the skeleton. Grave associations
were modest and usually were limited to one or two objects.

In spite of the proximity of burials to one another, only
one example was discovered in which one grave obviously
cut into another one. The grave pit of burial 40 was intrusive into burial 44. In digging the grave for burial 40,
the skull and shoulder region of burial 44 had been removed.
It should also be noted that many of the graves were
located in the area containing House 1 (Area A). These
graves were obviously later than the house in time, and the
house must have been abandoned for a considerable amount
of time prior to the digging of the graves.
The burial area of the Morris site was certainly not exhausted, and additional graves could be found with further
excavation in the area.

I

I
O.H

~ ,-t

suoT~ToossV

~o o)

~ ~.~i

,%

,r-} g rd (Ddo
~*r
p,.~ ~m o.~
,o) co our-o

~

o o

ix

o.i~~ ~. ,~
ao~3.ms

mo=~

I’eT..t~o, $o

o,

~do~

ocT~

BI~rapTATpuT $O’OM

..

,-’t r.-t

~-t

~

N

r-t ,-1

o~V

xeg

~

eou~q~a~sTg

~

(sa~ouT)ozTs

oa~O

~oqumu I~TauE

~~_~

o) a)
h~

-.

r-t

~ ~0

I

,
~0

.~’o:
O~

o~

o

N.~ ~

m
mOO
0 . 0

m
C

:0

O~r_t

g~

.4

o4

i,

o~
II~e

1o

o

o

~OT~Oe~TcI

~
=

e
I

°"

~

r~
gi~*~pTA TpuT

to’o~
m

e~v

-4

~°

xgg

eou*eq~’~s TC[

seqo~zT)ezTs

e~e~
c~

I

i

:
-I

~

g

-rl

m4:

oo

:.r4 ¢

o

¯ r4

o

m
,cl r-I

~
~

r"!
a)

m

a~.c
.o

8aOT%~TOOsSy
o

c~

o

.~C~

%-r4

~) o 0)

~

m
m c

¢t-~ ,1o ,-t

II’~e $o UOT%Oe~ZT(I

co

¢-t
e.,

o’o.~
o

.-t ¢

,-t o

~ c

u’~

UOT~’e%ueT,zO

_~

z

~-~

~.

c-,

c-,

N
i

eo~.m8 mo.z$ K~de(I

sI~PT~Tp=T

~o’o~

,o

o~

,"4

e4

,-t

e~

xe~

e eo crecb~-o.%’~ TC[

~zRU I~T~nK

o
rd~

c-.

The Morris Site

93

Artifacts
Projectile points:

Of the 1,886 projectile points found,

1,571 are relatively complete specimens while 315 of them
are in too fragmentary a condition to be useful.

The former

were classified into 32 groups of which nine are represented
by only one example and thus are considered unique. This~
classification of projectile points was made primarily on
the basis of base and stem form and in some cases on size.
With respect to size, there are generally two large categories.
The first includes types 1 through 12, and, except for a number of large projectile points in type 3, is characterized by
small-sized arrowheads.

Type 3 includes both small arrow-

heads and dart points.

These represent one of the three

stemless forms and are characterized by having convex
sides or both convex sides and convex bases.

Some are

basically triangular in shape while others are more ovoid in
outline. The second general group includes types 13 through
32 which are of either representative dart point dimensions
or of a large spear point size. On a stratigraphic basis the
smaller arrowheads were al! found in the top levels of the
site. Only very rarely were they found in level 3, and only
one specimen (with the exception of some in type 3) was
found in level 4. The distribution of the larger points is not
so limited.
Types 1 to 17 are shown on Figure 9, types 18 to 27 on
Fig. 10, and types 28 to 32 on Figure 11.
Types 1 and 2 are the other two stemless forms. Type 1
is a triangular shaped point which differs from type 2 only
in that type 2 is characterized by a concave base.
Type 4 includes a side-notched projectile point with a base
always wider or at least as wide as the rest of the point.
Type 5 is a corner-notched point with the base in all cases
less wide than the widest part of the blade. These points
have barbs to some degree in almost every case. Type 6
differs from type 5 in that the shoulders are straight with

Texas ArcheologicaL Society

94

no barbs and the stem is parallel-sided. The three specimens
of this type are all serrated.
Type 7 has an unusually long stem which flares at the
base.

The base may be straight or concave.

All examples

have been serrated.
Type 8 includes those points which have been termed the
Morris point (Bell and Hall, 1953). It has two wide side
notches and one notch in the center of the base. Out of the
ten points of this type, three have serrated edges.
Type 9 is another side-notched form and differs from
type 4 only in that the two specimens found are much
longer and have concave bases. Types 10, 11 and 12 are all
unique points.
Type I3 includes points that are generally larger than
the average dart point dimension. These projectile points
in most cases are unusually thin in cross-section. The characteristic feature, however, is the apparently basic ovoid
shape. The widest point is always above the stem in the
middle of the blade.
Types 14 and 22 are characterized merely by corner
notches. The bases are both straight and convex. In all
cases they have barbs although the prominence of this feature varies widely. Type 22 differs from type 14 in that it
is a much shorter, wider point. The ratio of length to width
on type 14 is around 2V2: 1V2, on type 22 it is around 13/~: 11/2.
Types 15, 16 and 19 are basically square stemmed types.
Type 15 has a large square stem and contains both specimens
that have barbs and specimens with straight shoulders. Type
16 has a very thin square stem. There are no barbs on the
two specimens of this type and the blade is characteristically
a very long one. Type 19 has a narrower stem than type 15
and is, in general, a smaller sized point.
Type 17 is represented by only three specimens all of
which are side notched with the base as the widest part of
the projectile point.

The Morris Site

95

Type 18 is a contracting stem form with either a squared
base or a slightly concave base.

The typical specimen tends

to be rather narrow with only slight or no shoulders.
Type 20 is characterized by a stem which expands toward
the base.

The base is straight in all cases.

This type is

mostly found in levels 3 and 4.
Type 21 is characterized by long very shallow side notches.
In some cases the notches are so slight as to make them
almost negligible.
Type 23 has a rounded base form with side notches and
is represented by four specimens.
Type 26 is a tapered stem form and was separated from
the other tapered stem forms because of its unique point.
The only two specimens found, both in level 4, have a very
characteristic drill-like point.
Type 27 includes all of the tapered stem points other than
those of type 18 and type 26.

Although there is a huge

range of form in this type, the problem appears to be one of
acknowledging different modes of the same type rather than
separating out different types of the tapered stem projectile
point. Every character that could have been a possible basis
for differentiating sub-types proved to be useless.

Each

character graded so slightly that it seemed unsound and
impossible to separate out the sub-types.

Type 27 is by far

the most popular projectile point at the site.

It represents

64.93% of all points found.
Type 32 is characterized by a notch in the base in addition
to side notches.
unique points.

Types 24, 25, 28, 29, 30 and 31 all represent

Texas Archeological Society

96

SITE DISTRIBUTION OF NUMBERED PROJECTILE
POINT TYPES

(D

1~i
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
Total

2
2
21
4
5
.....
1
1

9
29
7

15
2
1
7
4

7
6
60
17
32
1
2
6
1
1
1
1
4
29
t0

2
4
1
8
6
2

2

..................

11
8

19
3
13

10
1
4

2
2
2

1
1

11
13
5

3
21
4
2

4
1
1
1
2

4
1
4
1
6
1

1
1
I

12
1

1

2
12
3
2
1
1
5

2
5
2

3

3
2
2

2

!

2

1
1

2
1

1

1

15

17
1

2

1
1

1

3

1
1

1
2
239

376

154

128

1

1
1

2

48

19

15

8

I

1

I

349

579

236

194

90

32

Untyped
fragments
83

110

43

29

20

4

Grand
Total 432

689

279

223

110

36

2

2

26

12

2

1

28

13

1

1

123
26
56
3
6
I0
2
I
1
1
34
116
36
2
3
30
12
12
18
24
4
1
I
2
1020
1
1
1
1
4

26

24

1571

4

19

315

30

43

1886

The Morris Site

97

Drills: There are actually five different types of drills,
which probably differ only in shape and not in purpose or
use (Fig. 11, A).
The first type, of which there are four examples, all have
triangular stems which have been purposely shaped.

The

shafts in all cases are fairly uniform in size from stem to
point. Only one of these specimens is unbroken, and it
has a length of almost 2 in. This seems to represent the
average length for this type of drill. Possibly one other
specimen could be included in this group, but it is too broken
to be identified positively.

Three drills were made from crude flakes. The only work
displayed on these specimens is the chipping necessary to
make the point. These shafts taper more from the base to
the tip than do the shafts of the first group. In size these
drills are slightly larger than the first group.
Five of the specimens possess a more cylindrical shape
which tapers to a point at one or both ends. A!l of these
specimens were worked uniformly the entire length of the
drill. The longest specimen of this group is 21/2 in. long, but
it is a fragment and therefore represents only a fraction of
the total length. Two of the complete drills are 2~/4 in. long.
In addition to these five specimens, two smaller drills are of
this type but possess a small flaring base.
The two remaining specimens may well have been eccentricities and not represent two kinds of drills at all. One
looks as if it had been fashioned from a former projectile
point. It has side notches and the blade has been narrowed
considerably to form the shaft and point of the drill. The
other drill was made from a small flake, 11/4 in. long, and
exhibits crude workmanship.
There is no significant correlation of type of drill to the
various levels within the site.
Flint knives: In the total of 138 knives found, there are
three general shapes represented (Fig. 11, F, G). These
three types are not mutually exclusive but rather grade

98

Texas Archeological Society

from one shape to the other. The typical specimen of one
group is an oval shaped knife with a length to width ratio
of 3V2:2V2 or 4:3. A few of the oval shaped knives have a
more circular outline. The second type of specimen is a
longer elliptical shaped knife with one pointed end. The
ratio of length to width in these specimens is on the average
about 41/2: lY2. The third type of specimen is characterized
by a square base, giving the knife a more triangular appearance. Only two whole specimens of this type were found,
both of which have dimensions similar to the oval form. The
square base fragments, however, seem to indicate that the
square base is more typical of a longer knife. Of those in
which the shape could be determined there are 22 elliptical,
35 oval, and 9 square base specimens. Of the remainder, at
least 12 of the base fragments represent long knives.
The long elliptical knife has some variant characteristics.
In one variety the knife is widest at the base and tapers
very gently toward the point. Three of the specimens, however, are widest at 1/3 to V2 of the way up from the base.
Two of the burial knives, one of which had evidently been
resharpened and beveled, are of this latter variety.

In addition to the typical way of producing a knife by
flaking a piece of flint to the desired thinness and then secondarily chipping the edges, two specimens have been beveled on opposite edges of the blade. One broken example may
represent an incomplete diamond-shaped alternate beveled
knife (Fig. II, E).
Two uniquely shaped specimens are present and probably
only reflect eccentrieity. One of these probably was basically the long elliptical type, but it has a large notch on each
side at one end, The other atypical example is a rectangular
knife except for the point end. Here the specimen was
angularly chipped to an off-center point. This specimen is
3 in. in length by 1 V2 in. in width.
Practically all of the knives are fairly thin except in a few
cases where a large node of flint could not be detached from
the face of the blade.

Most of the knife fragments found

The Morris Site

I

2

5

12
II
9

I0

\

/

15

16

I

, INCHd
FIGURE 9

Examples of projectile-point t~pe~ 1 to 17, Morris site:

IO0

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

are bases; consequently not much could be determined about
their total size or shape. The same is true of the few point
fragments found.
The longest specimen found is 61/4 in. long and 2 in. wide
at the base. The smallest specimen is 2 in. long. The majority of the knives range from 3 to 4 in. in length.
All except one of the knives were chipped from flint; the
exception was made of basalt. There appears to be no significant differences in the stratigraphic distribution of the
knives.
Flake scrapers: The majority of the 28 flake scrapers was
found in level 1. Practically all of these specimens are just
crude irregularly shaped flakes with secondary chipping
along one side. The overall workmanship was also comparatively crude in most specimens. Five of the specimens,
however, were secondarily chipped on both sides of the
flake (Fig. 11, C). Four of the 28 specimens are end scrapers, the rest all being typical side scrapers.
Two unbroken halted scrapers were found, one in the
initial trench and one in level 2. They both show the beveled scraping edge (Fig. 11, B) and are the only~scrapers
in this group that are not typical flake scrapers.
The scrapers range in size from about 1½ in. to almost 4 in.
in length.
Core scrapers: A wide range of workmanship is apparent
in the specimens of this category (Fig. 11, D). Some of the
specimens have just a little more work on them than some
of the crude cores, and some of the specimens are only too
crude and a little too thick to be included with the knives.
Typically, all specimens are ovoid in outline, but this characteristic does not always apply. There are a few circular
specimens as well as a few elliptical shaped ones. The perimeter of all specimens has been roughly worked to provide
a fairly straight though crude scraping edge.
The specimens range in size from small core scrapers 1½
in. in length to larger 4 in. ones, the majority being about 3

The Morris Site

101

in. in length. It is probable that many of these specimens
have been made from discarded pieces of flint which for
some reason were not suitable for an implement of any other
kind.
Crude cores: Included in the crude cores are specimens
that show some, but in most cases very little, evidence of
having been worked. For the most part they are large
nodules of flint or rough thick flakes. Several flakes have
been removed from the larger chunks of material, but in no
definite pattern. Most of the specimens were probably
rejects or by-products from the working of flint.
Double-bitted axes: Of the 43 double-bitted axes found,
most are whole specimens. The evidence of use polish on
the mid-section and bits varies considerably. A few roughly
made specimens were found which display none of the characteristics that would mark them as having been used. One
specimen is made from an irregular flint nodule with only
one end crudely fashioned into a bit.
The typical implement appears to have been made by
chipping both faces to a relatively thin core with an edge
at each end and along the sides. The sides were indented
at the mid-section to facilitate halting (Plate 9, H, K). Quite
often the mid-section is much thicker than the rest of the
axe, even to the point of appearing almost round in crosssection. This is particularly true of the larger axes. Most
of the specimens are at least l Y2 to 2 in. longer than they
are wide. A very few specimens, however, are less rectangular, the differences between the length and breadth
measurements in these specimens is 1 in, or less. The length
of the axes varies from about 3 to 5 in. with the majority
having lengths in excess of 4 in.
All except two of the implements were made from a white
colored flint. These two specimens were made from a dark
colored stone, probably a basalt, from which hoes were commonly fashioned.
Chipped hoes: The 61 hoes found can be roughly divided
into two groups, those made of flint and those made of a

102

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

non-flinty material. Fourteen of them are made from white
flint, and all have been made by chipping the core on both
sides to the desired shape (Plate 9, A). These specimens
were limited to the upper three levels of the site, and one
was associated with a burial. About half of the flint hoes
are triangular in shape; the remainder are more rectangular
with rounded corners. All of these tools have been sharpened on at least one end, and many are sharpened on all
sides. Two of the more oval shaped ones and one triangular
one exhibit a glossy use polish on the blade. The average
size of the flint hoes is 4 to 5 in. long and 2 to 3 in. wide.
The second group consists of hoes made from sandstone,
limestone, basalt, or some other non-flinty rock; the majority are made of basalt. Eight of these specimens have
been ground and smoothed to some degree. Two, which
have been pecked and then ground all over on both surfaces, are rather large in comparison to the typical specimens. Although broken, they both measure about 6 by 3V2
in. and are an inch thick. Two of the smaller broken specimens were also ground and smoothed on all surfaces. The
four remaining examples were ground only at the cutting
end, but all were ground in such a way that a good cutting
edge was produced. These partially ground specimens are
all roughly rectangular with rounded corners.
All other specimens have been chipped only (Plate 9, A).
In some cases, particularly in the utilization of sandstone
and limestone, the natural stone was largely unmodified
with the only work having been some sharpening at one end.
The shape of these specimens is the same as that already
described for the other partially ground specimens although
a few tend to be more ovoid. Most of the specimens were
sharpened only on one end but have been definitely shaped
along the sides. Four specimens are mid-sections with the
ends missing. Four specimens from level 1 are such small
fragments that they were included with the hoes primarily
by virtue of the material from which they were made.
Three of the specimens show signs of wear and abrasion,
indicating considerable use.

The Morris Site

103

The sizes vary from a broken specimen 6 by 4 in. to the
very small fragments already mentioned. An average specimen is about 3 in. in width at the digging end. The thickness of the hoes is rarely more than 1 in. Practically all of
the specimens are fairly flat and thin but are crude in workmanship.
Flint hammerstones: A total of 61 hammerstones was
found throughout the excavations. These were more abundant in the upper levels of the site, decreasing in frequency
from 22 in level i to only one in level 5. They are al! roughly
globular in shape (Plate 9, C) and vary from almost perfect
spheres to quite irregularly shaped ones. The degree of
symmetry in most cases depends upon how much the stone
had been used with the rounder ones showing the most use.
All of the hammerstones were made of a light colored, ahnost
white, flint. The sizes vary from 2 in. in diameter to 31/2
in. in diameter; the majority are between 2Y2 and 3 in. There
seems to be no correlation between the size of the specimen
and the depth at which it was found although levels 3, 4 and
5 seemed to contain consistently the size which is 23/4 in. in
diameter. The top levels yielded the total range of sizes.
Miscellaneous Ilint objects: There are a few miscellaneous
artifacts that deserve mention. There were three cone
shaped flint cores found, one each from levels 1, 2 and 3.
These cores are distinctive because of the flake scars on
them which run the full length of the height measurement.
They all have flat bases. One of the bases has been secondarily chipped around the edges indicating that this specimen has been used as a scraper.
Four irregular flint flakes were found, one from level 1
and three from level 2. The distinctive feature of these four
flakes is that all possess one edge which has been either
wholly or partially ground smooth. This is the only evidence of any special preparation of the specimen. The
purpose of these flakes is not evident.
One piece of chipped flint found in level 1 has two points
which have been considerably worked down. The points

104

Texas Archeological Society

appear to have been continually rubbed by something; possibly these specimens were used as a drill or reamer.
A piece of flint having a worn down notch on one side
was found on the surface. It is possible that other tools were
straightened or rubbed down in this notch.
Although most flint was derived from local sources, one
piece of flint from quarries in Kay County, Oklahoma, was
found in level 4.
Unidentified ]Iint pieces: Included in the category of unidentified specimens are fragments of well finished artifacts. It was impossible to identify what each of these fragments formerly represented. Certainly many of them are
pieces of projectile points, knives, blades, and possibly drills
or scrapers. In addition, parts of axes and hoes are probably included. Other specimens included among the unidentified are those which could not be attributed to any of
the other categories of well finished artifacts but which show
considerably more primary and secondary chipping than
either the crude cores or core scrapers. Some of these are
probably unfinshed artifacts, unused blocks of raw material
or rejects from the manufacturing process.
Celts: The majority of the 12 celts found have been fashioned from quartzite. The one exception to this is a broken
celt fragment which has been made from a white chalky
sandstone. All of the specimens display ground and smoothed surfaces with one exception, which has been pecked but
not smoothed.
Only four specimens found are whole or relatively complete (Plate 9, D, E). These include one which is typical of
the group as a whole in size, shape and material. It is 5 in.
long and 2 in. wide, quite thick and circular in cross-section.
The butt is rounded, and the sides expand gently toward the
bit, which has been ground down to a sharp cutting edge.
The whole specimens also include one almost rectangular
celt found in association with a burial. It is 5 in. long and
2V2 in. wide, and is only slightly broader at the cutting end.

The Morris Site

105

It maintains a uniform thickness of little more than ½ in.
throughout its length.
The two remaining whole specimens are almost identical
in appearance. They are oval in outline with a cutting edge
at one end. The dimensions are 3 by 2 in. with a 3/4 in.
thickness (Plate 9, D).
All of the other specimens were apparently shaped like
the first celt described. The cross-section varies, however,
from circular to elliptical with most of them being more
elliptical. In addition, the size of the celts, when it can
possibly be determined, is fairly uniform. The specimens
are between 4 and 5 in. long and have a width at the cutting
edge which is between 2 and 2½ in.
Stone beads: The stone beads found were made from
three kinds of material. Six of the beads are of shale, two
are made from a much harder dark-colored stone, and two
are made of a light colored sandstone (Plate 10, R). The
shale specimens are flat discs and tend to be laminated
showing the bedding planes of the shale. The beads often
split along these laminations. Three of this type were found
in level 1, two in level 2, and one in level 3. The representative specimen of this type is about 1 in. in diameter. Two
of the specimens are in such fragmentary condition, however, that the shape could not be determined. Moreover,
one specimen found in level 3, although damaged, displays
a diameter of almost 1½ in. Although the ends of the beads
are usually flat, one specimen was found in which the end
is more convex.
The two beads of the harder stone are both whole specimens, One was found on the ~urface, and the other was
found in level 1. The larger bead, found on the surface, has
the shape of a flattened spheroid with a diameter of 1 3/16
in. and a thickness of 13/16 in. It is perforated through the
center. The smaller bead, found in level 1, is of the same
general shape; it has a diameter Of 9/16 in. and a thickness
of % in. Both specimens are quite wel! formed and are
carefully made.

106

Texas Archeological Society

Of the two beads made of white sandstone, one was found
in level 1; the level of the other is unknown. One is broken
from a large tubular bead and is 1 in. in diameter. The
perforation is large and off center at the end but it tapers
toward the center of the tube where the specimen has been
broken. The other bead of this material is quite flat but is
rounded on the edges. It is 7/s in. in diameter and only J/4
in. thick.
Boatstones: Of the four boatstones found three are made
of limonite and one is made from sandstone. The three
limonite specimens (Plate 10, U, V, W) are complete, whereas the one made from sandstone (Plate 10, T) is just a small
fragment. The typical specimen is boat shaped with a flattened area around what would be the keel. Only the broken
specimen has been hollowed out. One specimen, which was
found in Area C, is a slightly different shape. Instead of
being elliptical on the top face, it is much thinner in width
and possesses a groove around the keel rather than being
flat.
The largest specimen found (Plate 10, V) is 3V2 in. long
and is 11/4 in. wide at the center. It is 1V2 in. high with the
flattened keel area being 1/4 in. across. There are scratches
across the top surface which may be the beginnings of a
hollowed out area, This specimen is quite well formed and
smoothed. A second specimen of this type (Plate 10, W) is
only 21/4 in. across the top and 1V2 in. high. The surface is
cracked and in a poor state of preservation, The specimen
from Area C (Plate 10, U) is also of this same general size.
The hollowed out broken specimen (Plate !0, T) is of approximately the same size as the largest boatstone found;
it is made of sandstone anti is well ground and smoothed.
Stone pendant: One disc shaped stone pendant (Plate 10,
M) was found in level !.

It is not a whole specimen but has

a few chips broken off from the edges. The pendant is 21/2
in. in diameter and has one perforation for suspension.
Pipe: Several pieces of a broken elbow shaped stone pipe
(Plate 10, L) were found in level 1. The length of the bowl

The Morris Site

107

19
18
2O

21

25

I INCH
!
FIGURE 10
Examples of projectile-polnt types 18 to 27, Morris site.

108

Texas Archeological Society

is 21/4 in. and that of the stem is 13/4 in. The bowl is not of
uniform diameter but is slightly spindle shaped with the
mid-section larger than the ends. The walls of both the
stem and the bowl are relatively thin, and the exterior surfaces are fairly well polished.
Ear spool: One broken stone ear spool (Plate 10, S) was
found in level 1. It represents the pulley type ear spool
and consists of one flange and a part of the inter-connecting
mid-section. The flange, which is circular in outline, has a
depressed central area. The rim, which is about 11/4 in. in
diameter, is rounded inward to the central depression and
outward to the perimeter. The diameter of the connecting
mid-section is % in.
Unidentified stone piece: One fragment of a tubular piece
of stone was found. The fragment is 1 in. long, but it has a
thickness between the outer edge and what was the perforation of over 1/4 in. This fragment could be a piece of a
stone pipe or even of a large stone bead.
Sharpening stones: A grooved sandstone awl sharpener
(Plate 10, Q) and a sandstone sharpening stone or hone were
found in level 1.
Manos: Of the 57 manos found, 14 are unbroken. Except
for three, these unbroken specimens are elliptical in shape.
One of the exceptions is more bun-like in appearance; the
other two are more rectangular with rounded corners (Plate
9, B). The average size of the elliptical manos is 31/4 by 41/4
in. with a thickness of around 1½ in. Two specimens, however, are larger; one is 41/4 by 51/4 in., and the other is 4 by 6
in. Thirty-one of the remaining stones, although broken,
appear to be of the above mentioned type. Nine of these are
so broken that it is impossible to ascertain their size. Some
of the others are of the average size mentioned above, but
most generally they seem to have been larger.

Three mano fragments are of a completely different shape.
Two are perfectly circular in cross-section; one is square
with rounded corners. These three have diameters of 23/4
in., 31/4 in., and 23~ in. respectively, and, in so far as it could

The Morris Site

109

be determined from the fragments, they seem to retain these
same diameters throughout the length of the stones. It is
interesting to note that all three of these specimens were
made of exactly the same kind of sandstone.
Five specimens appear to be transitional between the
above types. Their cross-section dimensions are 3 by 2 in.,
3½ by 21/~. in., 33A by 2 in., 33/4 by 21/4 in., and one is indeterminable.
Two unfinished manos were found, both of which are quite
large in size and roughly rectangular in shape. Three of the
stones, including the bun-shaped specimen discussed among
the first group, seem to have been more polished, possibly
from use as tanning stones. It should be noted that all of
these polished specimens were found in the deeper levels,
two having been found in level 4 and one in level 5.
Of the total number of manos 47 have been used on both
surfaces. This number includes the polishing stones as well
as the two unfinished specimens which are pecked on both
sides. Five specimens have been used on only one surface.
Eight stones have very faint cups on one side, but they are
included among the manos because they were used in the
same manner as the others on at least one surface. All of
the manos were made of sandstone. Except for the already
noted distribution of the polishing stones, there seems to be
no further correlation of size or shape to the various levels.
It should be mentioned, however, that the three manos of
circular cross-section were from levels 2 and 3.
Milling stones: Seven various sized fragments and four
relatively whole milling stones were found. With the exception of two, these were found on the surface. One of the
exceptions was found at the top of level 2 in Area A, the
other on the floor level and inside of House 1. The milling
stones have dimensions of about 12 to 14 in. in both length
and breadth. The basin area ranges from 9 to 10 in. in
diameter and is of medium depth. All are hard sandstone.
Cupstones: Twenty-two sandstone cupstones (or nutstones), ranging in size from 4 by 4 in. to 2½ by 2½ in., were

110

found.

Texas Archeological Society

The smaller sizes are most typical.

There are three

general shapes, the most popular one being a rectangular
shaped specimen (Plate 9, I).

In addition, there are five

slightly spherical shaped cupstones and three broken ones
that appear to have been elliptical in outline.

These latter

ones are quite similar in shape to the manos (Plate 9, F).
The cups generally are merely bowl-shaped depressions in
the stone; however, five of the specimens exhibit cups of a
more conical form. The majority of the stones have cups
on both sides although in some cases the cup is a very shallow depression. Only three specimens exhibit just one cup.
There is no correlation between the sizes of the specimen,
the number of cups or the particular level.
Sandstone hammerstones: There are ten sandstone hammerstones which were apparently used for the same purpose
as the flint hammerstone. However, these vary much more
in size and shape than the flint hammerstones. The largest
one found is an elliptical shaped specimen measuring 6 by
3 by 11/2 in. Four of them are roughly bal! shaped and they
average 3 in. in diameter. Except for one smoothly rounded
pecking stone which has a diameter of 2 in., the remaining
specimens are quite irregularly shaped.
Smooth stones: Two rounded and smoothed stones were
found, one in level 1 and the other in level 4. The smallest
one is perfectly round and wel! smoothed. It is a little more
than 1 in. in diameter. The larger specimen, which is a little
more than IV2 in. in diameter, is not as round in shape nor
so well smoothed as the smaller one. The use or purpose of
these stones is unknown.

Galena: Seven worked chunks of galena, varying in size
and shape, were found. While the specimens are far from
being spherical, the surfaces on six of them have been
ground and rubbed to produce a fairly well rounded object
(Plate 9, J). The remaining specimen shows much less
grinding and has the appearance of a cube (Plate 9, G). The
sizes range from 11/2 to 3 in in diameter. The powdered
galena may have been used as a pigment.

The Morris Site

Hematite:

Five miscellaneous pieces of hematite were

found at the site.
1 in.

111

The largest piece is a chunk 21/2 by 2 by

The other specimens are smaller pieces; three of these

have rounded edges, and the fourth specimen is merely a
flat broken fragment.

The hematite was probably used to

supply a red pigment.
Limonite: One very small irregularly shaped chunk of
limonite was found in level 4. It was probably used to
supply pigment.
Bone awls: Seventy pieces of worked bone awls were
found, and they were in consistently decreasing order from
level 1 to level 5. In general, the awls can be placed into
two groups; one consists of a slender, pencil-shaped awl,
and the other consists of awls made from splintered animal
long bones (Plate 10, P). The pencil-shaped awls were generally the better made ones. They are rarely more than 1/4
in. in diameter and retain this same diameter throughout the
length of the awl. Most of them are perfectly circular in
cross-section, although some of them do exhibit a flattened,
more oval appearance. One of the most perfect examples
of this type was found with a burial. It is 41/2 in. long. Of
31 specimens of this type, almost half have been fire hardened.
The other type consists of awls made from deer cannon
bones or from fragments of bones which have been sharpened to a point. These fragments vary in size, but the
cannon bone awls are the largest. These are from 4 to 4Y2
in. in length.

All of the other specimens of this type vary

in shape and the amount of workmanship expended on them.

One specimen found differs from all others; it has a spatula-shaped end instead of a pointed tip. All examples exhibit some use polish at the tip. There is no apparent correlation between the various levels and the types of bone awls.
Bone ]lakers: Of the nine deer ulna flaking tools, seven
have tips present and show wear and roughness due to chipping flint. Three relatively complete specimens are made

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

112

from deer ulnae (Plate 10, X), and the remainder apparently represent parts of the same bone. The specimens were
identified as flakers by their flat spatula-shaped tips and
abraded surfaces.
Antler:

A total of 38 pieces of antler was found during

the digging; of these, 18 are represented by horn tips.

Only

two of the tips show signs of having been extensively used
although seven of the specimens are either fire-blackened
or charred.

The sizes of the specimens range from small

tips to sections of antler as long as 6 inches.

A majority of

the specimens show evidence of rodent gnawing.
Bone hoe: One worn, small bone hoe measuring 5 by 2 in.
was found in association with burial 12. It was made from
a buffalo scapula (Plate 10, Y).
Bone ornament: One tubular bone ornament was found
in level 2. It is 2 in. long and has a diameter of a little more
than 1/2 inch. A single perforation has been drilled through
the bone tube at one end (Plate 10, N).
Bone beads: Six fragments of tubular bone beads found
all represent the complete length of the bead. They range
from 7/s to 2~ in. in length and from 1/4 to 1/2 in. in diameter.
All but two of the specimens have been broken or split, but
they exhibit some polish (Plate 10, Q).
Miscellaneous bone items: A small worked fragment of
buffalo skull and a split deer cannon bone were found in
association with burial 12. A raccoon penis bone was found
in a refuse pit located in squares $3-L4 and $3-L5. The deer
cannon bone, although not shaped (Plate 10, Z), may have
been split for an awl. Neither of the other specimens displays evidence of having been made into a specific implement.
Shell beads: Of the 137 shell beads found, almost all of
them are badly weathered and chalky. However, a few,
found in levels 1, 2 and 3 are in a better state of preservation
and retain their former hardness. The typical bead is a

113

The Morris Site

,~
\28

29

31

G

I INCH

=

FIGURE 11
Examples of projectile~polnt types 28 to 82 and other chipped stone artifacts, Morris
site¯ A, Flint dri!]s~ B, Hatted scraper. C, Side scrapers. D, Core scrapers. ]~,
Beveled knife fragment. F, G, Knives.

114

Texas Archeological Society

small flat disc bead with a thickness of about % in.

A very

few specimens represent tubular beads as much as Y2 in. in
length. The typicaI tubular bead is about 1/4 in. in diameter
although a few are as much as V2 in. in diameter.

The ma-

jority of the beads were found in association with burials.
Shell ornaments: Of the four conch-shell ornaments found
with burials, three are whole circular specimens, and one is
merely a fragment of a former pendant or gorget. The fragment suggests a circular outline, but it is broken along a
perforation.

One almost flat circular gorget, which is 31/4

in. in diameter, has three perforations, one in the center and
two at the top (Plate 10, A).

It was decorated on one side

with pairs of parallel curved lines evidently forming some
design which is no longer complete.
Another of the circular burial specimens is 2V2 in. in diameter. At the top, it has two perforations for suspension
(Plate 10, G). The other grave specimen is perfectly circular and is 11/4 in. in diameter. It is flat and has only one
hole at the top (Plate 10, D).
Five more pendants were found in level i.

One is a broken

elliptical shaped gorget with two perforations at the narrow
end (Plate I0, H). Another is a circular gorget 13~ in. in
diameter with two holes on one edge (Plate I0, K). An
unperforated disc-shaped ornament is a little more than 1 V2
in. in diameter; possibly this object was unfinished (Plate
I0, B). One specimen is a small broken ornament with at
least one perforation in the center.

It appears to have been

broken along another perforation.

It is less than 1 in. in

diameter. The last of the ornaments found in level 1 is a
small rectangular-shaped pendant with a large perforation
at one end (Plate I0, F). It has been broken on both sides,
so its true shape is indeterminable.

Only two pendants were found in level 2, One is a slightly
concave circular pendant, 13/4 in. in diameter, with a tiny
perforation through the center (Plate 10, C). The other is a

o

o
H
;D
H
03

o

ooq TToqS
-~uo~treuao ITeqs
~p~eq TIeqS !

c~

~ro~T euoq "o~]:H
sp~oq ouo~
o~uo~uao

,-I

C~

,-J

¢-~

L’--

u’~

u’x

r-J

,--i

C~!

,-4

euo~

eoq ouo~

o~

~aO~TJ

euo~

~ T.~’e

ouo~

C~

~0
o~

0’-

o

e~.zuourVI

,-j

u’x

~UOT~O
s ouoq,~ q"+ooms

~

,-J

,--I

c~

0

The Morris Site

117

cone-shaped pendant made from the columella of a conch
shell. It was grooved around the tip leaving a knob for suspension (Plate 10, E). Near the bottom there is a small perforation extending from the back to the bottom of the ornament. This pendant is only 1 in. long.
Shell hoe: One mussel shell hoe was found. It has a large
perforation through the center of the shell and measures
41/2 by 31/4 in. (Plate 10, I). It was associated with a burial.
Miscellaneous shell specimens: Four other whole shells
were found. One large shell may represent an unfinished
hoe, and one of the smaller ones has been used as a shell
scraper (Plate 10, J). The others are unworked.
Nine pieces of shell show evidence of having been worked
and are probably fragments of ornaments. They are all
broken and therefore have irregular shapes; four are well
shaped elongated pieces and possibly were broken from
former pendants.
Pottery: Two major wares were found at the site. One
of these is a shell-tempered ware and the other is a granular
clay-tempered ware. In addition there are a few decorated
sherds with Shell temper (Plate 11, J-P) and with clay
temper (Plate 11, I, Q, R). Decoration is rare and is not a
typical characteristic of either the shell-tempered or the
granular clay-tempered wares. Also found was a dark
polished ware tempered with a more finely pulverized clay;
this is represented by only a few sherds and may represent
one or two vessels. A group of red-slipped sherds was found
which was further sub-grouped because of differences in the
tempering material. These red-slipped wares include shelltempered, limestone-tempered, bone-tempered and grit-or
sand-tempered sherds. All of the whole vessels found were
with burials, and, except for the one red-slipped grit-tempered bottle (Plate 11. F) all the whole vessels are shelltempered (Plate 11, A-E, G, H, N).
The only significant feature in the stratigraphic distribution of the pottery sherds is the fact that, from bottom to
top levels, the shell-tempered ware increased in popularity

118

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

whereas the granular clay tempered ware decreased. This
same distribution is also true in comparing the decorated
shell-tempered ware and the decorated granular clay-tempered ware.
Shell tempered ware:
Type material: 734 sherds or 51.1% of the total sample of sherds
are of this ware. In addition seven whole or restorable shelltempered vessels were found associated with burials.
Paste:
Method of manufacture--The coiling technique was probably
used on the majority, and possibly all, of the specimens
as far as could be determined from the appearance of some
of the fractured edges.
Tempering--The tempering consists of tiny particles of crushed
shell. These particles, in densely tempered sherds, are sometimes as large as 2 to 3 mm. in diameter; occasionally a
4 mm. particle is present. The tempering makes up a possible fourth of the paste in some sherds, but more often it
falls considerably short of this until in some sherds the
tempering is just perceptible. There is some surface leaching on less than half of the sherds.
Hardness--Between 2.5 and 3.5.
Color--Black, dark brown, red and buff. Frequently a dark
brown or mud colored core has been oxidized to a buff or
reddish-brown on one surface and reduced to a grey-black
or black on the other surface. In some other cases the
mud-colored core has been oxidized to a light buff or reddish-buff on both surfaces. In cases of uneven firing, the
surface is mottled reddish-brown or light buff and greyblack or black.
Surface finish:
Modifications--In the majority of cases both the exterior and
interior surfaces have been smoothed, although in almost
all such cases the exterior smoothing exceeds that of the
interior. In some sherds the exterior surface looks as if it
had been polished, In the cases where there is little exterior smoothing the interior has not been smoothed at all.
The tempering is usually visible on both surfaces, although
it is usually more evident on the interior than the exterior.
Form:
Rim--There are three different kinds of rims.
1) Rims that curve inward. Some of these have a definite
shoulder; others are just a gentle curve.

The Morris Site

119

2) Rims that flare outward. This includes the range from
those which have a short rim and curve outward to varying degrees, to those which are longer necked, straight
and flare outward only slightly.
3) Rims which are straight.
Lips--The lips are rounded, flat, thickened and flat, and narrowed.
Body--Bowls, jars, globular pots and bottles.
Base--The bases are all flat and disc shaped.

They range from

61~ to 11 cm. in diameter.
Thickness--The average thickness is around 8 to 10 mm. although there is a range of thickness from 6 to 12 mm. The
thickest part of the ware is the junction between the body
and the base, and this never exceeds 13 ram.
Vessel diameters--The bowls range from 15 to 21.5 cm. in
diameter (measured at the rim). The jars range from 12
to 21 cm. in diameter (measured at the shoulder region).
Appendages--Strap handles are present; they are attached to
the lip and to the upper part of the body. In two cases
there is a small lip tab on each side adjacent to the handle.
Loop handles are also present.
Chronological position:
This ware is the same as Woodward Plain (Hall, 1951).
Decorated shell-tempered ware:
Type material: There are 22 sherds or 1.5% and one bottle
made of this ware. It has basically the same description
as the shell-tempered ware except that it appears to be a
slightly thinner ware averaging a thickness of only 5 to 7
mm. It has been separated out principally because of the
decoration.

Decoration:
1) Incising. Seven of the sherds are incised, most often
with deep wide incisions. All of the incised lines are
straight and parallel and from 3 to 9 ram. apart. It could
not be determined on which part of the vessel the decoration occurred.
2) Four of the sherds and the bottle exhibit nodes which
have been stuck on to the vessel. These nodes are generally about 7 ram. high. On the bottle twelve of them
are evenly spaced around ~he base of the neck.
3) Six of the sherds have been decorated with a small
attached ridge which, in most cases, has been further
decorated by a punctate design. Two of the sherds,
however, exhibit only the simple ridge. The punctate
marks are about 4 mm. apart.

Texas Archeologica~ Society

120

4) Four of the sherds are engraved with either straight
cross-cutting lines, faint curvilinear lines or faint straight
parallel lines.
Granular clay-tempered ware:
Type material: This ware is represented by 548 sherds or 38.2%
of the total sample and includes rim and base sherds. There
are no whole vessels.
Paste:
Method of manufacture--On the thicker sherds it is impossible
to determine the method of manufacture.
Some of the
thinner sherds suggest a coil method although examples of
coil fracturing are quite rare. Two sherds indicate that
the coil was from 1.7 to 2 cm. thick. The maleated surface
on some of the sherds suggests a paddle and anvil technique.
Tempering--The tempering consists of granules of clay and in
some cases extraneous material such as small pieces of rock
or coarse sand. In the very thick sherds the granules of
clay are quite large and unpulverized; sometimes they are
as much as 4 or 5 mm. in diameter. The average size of
the clay granules, however, is between 2 and 3 ram. in
diameter. The tempering has been only moderately well
mixed into the rest of the paste, particularly on the thick
sherds, and therefore the pottery in some cases has a
crumbly appearance.
Hardness--For the thick sherds the hardness ranges from 2.5
to 3.5 with an average of around 3.0. For the thinner pottery the average is closer to 3.5.
Color--Black, dark brown, reddish-brown and grey. In most
instances the pottery has been poorly fired and has been
oxidized to a reddish-brown on the outer surface and reduced to a dark brown or black on the interior. In these
cases about half of the core is also reddish-brown and half
is black. In some of the pottery the exterior surface is
reddish-brown whereas the interior has not been as reduced and is therefore a brown or brownish grey color. In
other pieces of the pottery there is a consistent grey black
on both surfaces and throughout the core.
Evidence of
uneven firing is seen by the fire clouds on some sherds.
The grey pottery is medium in width in almost all cases
and is consistently grey on both surfaces and the core,
Surface finish:
Modifications--Both the interior and exterior surfaces have
been smoothed. Only a very few sherds show striations

PLATE

9

Stone artifacts from Morris site.
A, Hoes.
]3, Mano.
C, Flint hammerstone.
D,
E, Celts.
:F, I, Cupstones or nutstones.
G, J, Galena.
H, K, Chipped double-bitted
axes.

The Morris Site

123

due to tool markings. Several sherds exhibit a very smooth
maleated outer surface which is probably due to a paddle
and anvil manufacturing technique,
Form:
Rim--All of the rim fragments suggest an incurving rim form.
Some of the rim fragments are so small that their true form
cannot be determined.
Lip--The lips have in a few instances been narrowed. They
are sometimes flattened but are more commonly rounded.
Body--No whole vessels of this ware were found, and the
sherds are generally too small to determine the body form.
One large sherd, however, and the base fragments suggest
a deep bowl form with sides which flare outward from the
base. Some of the thinner sherds may be fragments of a
bottle form.
Base--The bases are flat, disc like forms. They are often much
thicker than the body of the vessel: Where the body joins
the base is the thickest region of all. On the majority of
the base sherds there is a very slight heel.
Two base
sherds are marked with a basketry impression.
Thickness Most of the sherds average between 10 to !4 mm.
although there is a range from 6 to 20 mm.
Vessel diameters--Some of the sherds, and especially the thickness of the sherds, suggest medium to ,large vessels.
Appendages--None~
Chronological position:
This ware is similar to Williams Plain.

:;

Decorated granular clay-tempered ware:
Type material: There are 21 sherds or 1.5% of the total sample of
this decorated clay tempered ware. This is essentially the same
kind of ware that has been described for the granular clay
tempered pottery except that this ware never exceeds a thickness of 9 mm. It averages a thickness of from 6 to 7 mm. It
has been separated out principally because of its decoration.
Decoration:
1) Eighteen of the sherds are incised with parallel lines which
are sometimes in a straight line design, sometimes in a curvilinear and/or concentric circle design, sometimes in an inclosed triangle or chevron design, and sometimes in a simple
series of small lines only 6 mm. long. One of the straight
parallel lined sherds is a rim fragment.
2) Four of the sherds are engraved with parallel lines or a
chevron pattern.
3) One sherd is decorated with a small node in the middle of
the incised decoration.

Texas ArcheoZogical Society

124

Polished granula~ clay-tempered ware:
Type material: This ware is represented by 17 sherds or 1.2% of
the total sample. The number of vessels represented could not
be determined.
Paste:
Method of manufacture--This could not be certainly determined because of the paucity of material. The maleated
surface suggests the probable use of the paddle and anvil.
Tempering--This ware is tempered with pulverized granules
of clay which are 1 mm. or less in diameter. Only occasionally are the granules as large as 2 mm. It is impossible
to tell the percent of tempering because of the smallness
of the particles.
Hardness--Between 3.5 and 4.0.
Color--Black or grey black.

One sherd is red on the outer

surface with a black interior. Usually the color is fairly
uniform on both surfaces and throughout the core although
occasional fire clouds are evident.
Decoration: None.
Surface finish:
Modifications--The interior and exterior surfaces have both
been very highly smoothed and even polished to a degree.
The exterior surface in all cases shows a maleated appearance.
Form:
Rim--Simple rim.
Lip--Of the four rim sherds only one lip shows a perceptible
narrowing. It is also the only lip which is rounded; the
other three are flattened.
Body--It is impossible to determine body form from the small
sherds found.
The sherds probably represent a bowl,
flower-pot form or bottle.
Base--None found.
Thickness--The range of thickness is from 4 to 6 mm. with the
great majority being between 4 and 5 mm.
Vessel diameter--Indeterminable.
Appendages--None.

Red-slipped wares:
A) Type material: A shell-tempered red-slipped ware represented
by six sherds. All red slipped wares together constitute 1.5%
of the total.

D

G

J

M
0

O

S

T

j

¥

PLATE 10
Stone, bone, and shell artifacts, Morris Site.
A-K are shell, as follows:
A, G, K,
Gorgers.
B, C, Discs.
D, E, F, Pendants.
H, Ornament.
I, Hoe blade, perforated.
J, Scraper.
The bone artifacts are:
N, Tubular pendant.
O, Tubular beads.
P,
Y, Hoe blade of bison scapula.
Z. Split cannon
Awls. X, Flaking tool of deer ulna.
L, pipe.
M, Pendant.
Q, Grooved awl sharpener or
bone. The stone artifacts are:
hone. R, Beads.
S, EarspOOl, broken. T-W, Boatstones (T broken).

127

The Morris Site

Paste:
Method of manufacture--Indeterminable.
Tempering--This ware has been tempered with shell which in
most cases has been crushed to less than 1 mm. in diameter.
In some sherds, however, pieces as large as 3 mm. in diameter were found.
Hardness--Between 2.5 and 3.0, the average being closer to 3.0.
Color--All are red because of the red slip. Two of the sherds,
however, have a buff colored interior. The core in all
cases is either black or red.
Decoration: One sherd is decorated with two wide incised parallel
lines about Y4 in. apart.
Surface finish: All of the sherds have been smoothed on both surfaces. On some of the surfaces striations from the working
tools can be seen.
Form:
Rim--Both rim sherds found curve outward from the body.
One of these flares quite sharply and stands out from the
body surface at a 90 degree angle.
Lip--Only one lip was found; it is rounded and has a small tab
sticking up from the lip.
Body--Indeterminable.
Base--None found.
Thickness--From 4 to 6 ram. thick.
5 mm.
Vessel diameterswUnknown.
AppendageswNone found.

The average is around

B) Type material: A limestone-tempered red-slipped ware represented by six sherds.
Paste:
Method of manufacture--ProbablF coiling.
TemperingmThis ware is tempered with crushed limestone
with the particles having a diameter of 1 mm. or less.
There is only an occasional piece of limestone that is as
large as 2 ram. in diameter. In most cases the tempering
makes up at least I/3 of the paste.
Hardness--Ranging from 3.0 to 3.5.
ColormRed on both surfaces due to the red slip.

The core is

dark brown.

Decoration: None.
Surface finish:
Modifications--These sherds show smoothing on both surfaces.

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

128

Form:
Rim--Only two rims are in this group.

One is a simple rim;

the other is incurved with a definite shoulder break exactly 1 in. down from the lip.
Lip--The simple rim has a rounded lip while the other rim
has a flattened lip.
Body--Indeterminable. Probably medium sized bowls.
Base---None found.
Thickness--The average thickness is 5 mm.
Vessel diameter--Indeterminable.
Appendages--None found.
C) One red-slipped bone-tempered sherd was found. The bone
tempering is in very tiny particles of 1 mm. or less and constitutes a very small fraction of the total paste. This particular
sherd is a rim sherd that has been decorated by diagonal parallel incised lines 1/4 in. apart around the rim. The rim has an
incurved form with a definite shoulder break ~ in. down from
the lip. The lip is rounded. The core color is dark brown. The
sherd is 8 mm. in thickness, and both surfaces have been
smoothed.
D) Eight red-slipped sherds were found in which the tempering is
either non-perceptible or could not be identified. Five of these
sherds have a red slip on the exterior surface only. The interior surface in these cases is sometimes smoothed; however,
in two cases the interior has not been touched. Only one rim
sherd was found; it indicates a simple rim form. The lip is
somewhat thickened and rounded. The thickness of these
sherds ranges from 5 to 9 ram. Hardness ranges from 2.5 to 3.5.
E) One bottle which has a red-slipped exterior was found with a
burial. The red slip differs from that of all specimens mentioned:previously in that it contains a great amount of sand and
grit in it; therefore it gives the surface a rough and gritty appearance. The interior surface has not been smoothed to any
extent. The vessel has been tempered with bits of sand and
occasional rock fragments. The sherd has a thickness of 5 ram.
and a hardness of between 4.0 and 4.5. The bottle itself has
a flat circular base 10~/2 cm. in diameter. The body is globular
in form with a maximum diameter of 13.2 cm. The neck region
is tubular and is 7.7 cm. long. The mouth of the bottle is 4
cm. across. The entire vessel stands 81/4 in. high. The lip is
somewhat flattened. The core and inner surface are greyish
black in color.

The Morris Site

129

Decorated wares, temper unidentified:
Type material: There are six sherds or .4% of the total sample in
which the temper is either unidentifiable or is so scarce as to
be imperceptible. The ware is from 5 to 6 ram. thick and is a
buff, greyish black or reddish brown color.
Decoration:
1) Three of the sherds are incised with straight parallel lines.
One of these is a rim sherd and exhibits not only parallel
lines but also straight cross-cutting lines.
2)

Two sherds are engraved.

One has been engraved in a

zoned region with a small cross-hatched design. The other
one exhibits a larger cross hatched design in an unzoned area.
3) One sherd is decorated with a small node and with finger
nail designs.
Unidentifie d sherds :

In the 65 sherds of this group, the tempering is either bone or
limestone, or there is too little of it to identify the tempering
material. The hardness ranges from 2.5 to 4.5.
DISTRIBUTION OF MORRIS SITE POTTERY SHERDS
r~
>

>

>

>

Shell-tempered ............ 427 155 46
Decorated,
shell-tempered ........ II
5
Granular claytempered .................... 213 133 73
Decorated, granular
clay-tempered .......... 6
8
4
Polished, granular
clay-tempered .......... 11
1
Red slipped, shelltempered .................... 5
Red slipped, limestone
tempered
5
Red slipped, bonetempered
1
Red slipped, sandand grit-tempered ....
Red slipped, unidentified
temper ................
3
1
Decorated, unidentified
temper
2
2
1
4
32 11
Unclassified
TOTALS ........................ 716 316 128

ii

>

,~
10

17

5

1

1
30

17

9

1

16

11

3

1

46

734

4

22

59

548

2

21
17

5
1

6

1

6
1
1
I

!
44

9

11

1
40

2
33

3

8

6
15
65
9 129 1435

130

Texas Archeological Society

Discussion

At the end of the first season’s work at the Morris site, the
exact number of occupations represented was not clear (Bell
and Fraser, 1952).

With the additional work of the second

season, some points were clarified, but others still remain
questionable.

The finding o2 various artifacts within the

yellow clay underlying the upper dark-colored sandy loam
indicates that at least two components are present at the
site. The difference between them is well marked by the
deposit in which they are found and also by the artifact
content. Unfortunately, however, the artifact yield of the
yellow clay deposit was so small that few traits are available to represent the complex.
occupation at the site.

This is certainly the oldest

The occupation represented by materials in the yellow
clay is certainly non-pottery and probably pre-pottery or
Archaic in content. Artifacts found include several projectile point types including types 13, 14, 15, 18, 22, 24 and
27. Other flint objects recovered from this deposit are crude
oval-shaped knives, thick oval-shaped core scrapers, crude
cores or worked blocks of flint, and miscellaneous fragments
of broken flint artifacts too damaged to be identified. No
pottery, ground stone objects, shell or bone artifacts were
found within the yellow clay. In general, the few artifacts
recovered resemble some of those ascribed to the Grove
Focus of northeastern Oklahoma (Baerreis, 1951). It is suggested that the early occupation of the Morris site represents
the Archaic pattern and that it is most closely related to the
Grove Focus of northeastern Oklahoma. The limited number of traits makes impractical an assignment to the Grove
Focus subdivisions A, B or C.

Whether the materials from the upper levels of the site
mark one or two occupations is not especially clear. The
complete complex of traits represented by the upper darkcolored sandy loam includes characteristics of both the Gibson Aspect and the Fulton Aspect. Although the majority
of traits suggests an occupation to be aligned with the Fulton

The Morris Site

131

Aspect, a number of traits are typical of the earlier Gibson
Aspect. Such traits include the granular clay-tempered pottery, large sized projectile points Of various types, pieces of
galena, black stone beads, conch shell ornaments and stone
ear spools. At the close of the first season, it was suggested
that possibly two occupations were present in the upper
levels, a Gibson occupation overlain by a Fulton occupation.
An alternative possibility was that the upper levels might
represent a single occupation which was transitional between the two periods and hence contained some features
of each. It was hoped that the excavations of the second
season would clarify this situation.
After careful study of the stratigraphic position of the
various artifacts recovered, however, the results of the second season indicate that it is impossible to segregate the
Gibson and Fulton traits on the basis of the Morris site
alone. The only stratigraphic differences to be noted are
changes in pottery and certain projectile point types. The
granular clay-tempered pottery becomes less popular in the
upper levels whereas the shell-tempered wares are of increasing popularity. Certain projectile point types also
appear to be limited to or are more common in the lower
levels. Otherwise, there appears to be no significant differences in the distributions of the various artifacts. Since
this is the case, it seems most reasonable to consider the
upper dark-colored soils as representing a single occupation,
with slight internal change, which is transitional in time
and characteristics between the Gibson and Fulton Aspects.
The majority of the traits are Fulton Aspect in character.
Of the sites excavated in the reservoir, the upper levels
of the Morris site most closely resemble the late component
at the Cookson site which has been assigned to the Turkey
Bluff Focus by Lehmer (1952). Although the relationship
is quite close, it is not identical. Aside from some Gibson
Aspect traits which are lacking in the Turkey Bluff Focus,
there are differences in architecture and in various minor
artifacts. The role of bison as food and bison bones as raw
material for artifacts is decidedly different for the two corn-

Texas Archeological Society

132

ponents; also, the Turkey Bluff Focus has a greater number
of features which suggest influences derived from the Plains
cultures. Although these differences are not great, it is suggested that they are the result of time rather than space and
that the late horizon at the Morris site represents a somewhat earlier occupation.
A suggested chronological framework for the Tenkiller
Reservoir area is as follows:
Fulton Aspect
Late occupation at Cookson site
Late occupation at Morris site.

Turkey Bluff Focus.

Gibson Aspect
Brackett site--Spiro Focus.
Pre-Gibson
Vanderpool site (Areas B and C).
Archaic
Early horizon at Morris site (yellow clay)
Focus.

Grove

In terms of a broader comparison with the state as a whole,
the late component of the Morris site appears to be most
closely related to the Fort Coffee Focus (Bell and Baerreis,
1951) of eastern Oklahoma. It does not appear to be related
to the Neosho Focus (Bell and Baerrias, 1951), which is
identified largely by pottery types which are not present at
the Morris site. The Searcy component (Bel! and Baerreis,
1951) has features which are duplicated at fne Morris site,
but limitations in comparative data make the Searcy materials of less value.
Summary
The Morris site appears to have been occupied by two
different peoples in prehistoric times. The earliest occupation probably existed sometime between 2,000 and 5,000
years ago. It represents a relatively small population of
nomadic or semi-nomadic hunting and gathering people
who utilized the site for a temporary or intermittent camp-

¯

H

S
PLATE 11
Pottery from Morris site. A-H, N, Whole vessels.
Base sherd with basketry impression.

I-M, O-R, Decorated sherds.

S,

The Morris Site

135

ing locality. Among the few artifacts found that can be
attributed to these people are large projectile points which
were probably used in conjunction with the atlatl and dart.
The most typical projectile points are characterized by their
large size, relatively broad blades and prominent corner
notches. Additional artifacts include crude oval-shaped
flint knives, heavy core scrapers and a few unidentified
flint implements. No houses, burials, ground-stone tools
or pottery representing remains from these people were
found. Apparently they represent one example of a fairly
widespread Archaic people who formerly lived throughout
many parts of northeastern Oklahoma.
The Morris site was again occupied in late prehistoric
times by a sedentary, agricultural people. At this time a
village, undoubtedly small in size, was present on the site
and several houses were arranged along the river terrace.
The economy was one concerned largely with maintaining a
subsistence level, and it is doubtful if much of a surplus or
many luxuries existed. Subsistence was evidently based
largely upon hunting, gathering and fishing, with agriculture being somewhat limited and probably restricted to
small family gardening activities.
Some knowledge of the surrounding country is indicated
by the raw materials used in their technology. Some trade
and exchange with nearby groups must also have taken
place. The presence of conch shell, galena, and flint from
distant quarries in north-central Oklahoma indicates some
contact with surrounding areas or peoples. On the other
hand, the absence of many features such as novaculite from
Arkansas and trade pottery wares from the northeast and
the rarity of alien exchange materials suggest a somewhat
provincial and isolated people. This is noticeable in contrast to earlier times when outside contacts were probably
more numerous and effective. It appears as though the
Morris site occupants had lost their stimulating contacts

with cultural centers to the south and east and that they
had become, more or less, a peripheral survival which continued to persist in the Cookson Hill country. They certainly

136

Texas Archeological Society

received some ideas from peoples in surrounding areas but,
at the same time, many older cultural features continued to
persist.

One is tempted to view the late occupants of the

Morris site as surviving representatives of an earlier Gibson
Aspect expansion into the Tenkiller area.
The village is characterized by scattered house sites, a
limited cemetery burial area, cache or refuse pits, outdoor
fire places, and an absence of mounds. The houses were of
a wattle and daub construction, square or rectangular in
outline, lacking passage type entrances and large interior
roof supports but containing some interior features such as
fire places, cache pits and minor construction features. The
rectangular type house is probably more recent than the
square style.
There was no special midden area, but debris from daily
living was scattered over the village area or in abandoned
cache pits. Burial of the dead was within a restricted cemetery area, and grave offerings were present but were limited to simple utilitarian or ornamental objects ......
Household furnishings included pottery bowls, globular
jars and bottles, primarily without decoration or appendages.
Other articles utilized were flint knives, manos and milling
stones, sharpening stones, cupstones and shell scrapers.
Tools and implements included a variety of projectile
points, suggesting the use of both the bow and arrow and
the atlatl and dart; also manufactured were flint drills,
scrapers of various types, chipped double-bitted axes, stone
hoes or digging tools, celts, boatstones, bone flakers and bone
awls.
Included as ornaments by these people were stone beads,
pendants, ear spools, shell beads, shell pendants and gorgers,
bone beads and bone pendants. Pigments were made from
galena, limonite and hematite.
It remains difficult to determine when these later people
occupied the Morris site. There is no evidence of contact
with Europeans, and, since trade materials are abundant on

The Morris Site

137

sites occupied between 1700 and 1750 (Bell and Baerreis,
1951), a date considerably prior to 1700 is indicated. A
reasonable guess would be that the last occupation took place
sometime between 400 and 600 years ago. Any identity
with known historic Indian tribes is impossible at the
present time.
Bibliography
Baerreis, David A.
1951. The Preceramic Horizons of Northeastern Oklahoma. University of Michigan, Museum of Anthropology, Anthropological Papers No. 6. Ann Arbor.
Bell, Robert E.
1949. Recent Archaeologica! Research in Oklahoma. The
Chronicles of Oklahoma, Vol. XXVII, No. 3, pp. 303-312.
Bell, Robert E. and David A. Baerreis
1951. A Survey of Oklahoma Archaeology. Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society Bulletin, Vol.
22, pp. 7-100. Lubbock.
Bell, Robert E. and Richard H. Fraser.
1952. Archaeological Discoveries at the Morris Site,
Cherokee County, Oklahoma. The Chronicles of Oklahoma, Vol. XXX, No. 2, pp. 215-235.
Bell, Robert E. and Roland Scott Hall
1953. Selected Projectile Point Types of the United
States. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. !, pp. 1-16.
Hall, Robert L.
1951. The Late Prehistoric Occupation of Northeastern
Oklahoma as Seen from the Smith Site. M. A. thesis,
University of Wisconsin.
Howard, Lynn
1940. Preliminary Report of Cherokee County, Oklahoma Archaeology. Oklahoma Prehistorian, Vol. 3, No.
I, pp. 2-9.

138

Texas Archeological Society

Krieger, Alex
1946. Cultural Complexes and Chronology in Northern
Texas. University of Texas Publication No. 4640, Austin.
Lehmer, Donald J.
1952. The Turkey Bluff Focus of the Fulton Aspect.
American Antiquity, Vol. 17, No. 4, pp. 313-318.
Orr, Kenneth G.
1946. The Archaeological Situation at Spiro, Oklahoma:
A Preliminary Report. American Antiquity, Vol. 11, No.
4, pp. 228-256.
1952. Survey of Caddoan Area Archaeology. In: Archaeology of Eastern United States (edited by James B.
Griffin), pp. 239-255. University of Chicago Press.
Department

of Anthropology

University of Oklahoma, Norman
Appendix A
Site locations for various artifacts illustrated in the plates.
Figure 9
No. 1 a) Area A, Level 1
b) Area A, Level 1
c) Surface
2 a) Area B, Level 1
b) Surface
c) Area C, Level 1
3 a) Area A, Level 2
b) Surface
c) Area A, Level 4
d) Area C, Level 1
4 a) Burial 15
b) Area A, Level 1
c) Area A, Level 1
5 a) Area A, Level 2
b) Area A, Level 2
c) Area A, Level 1
d) Burial 40

e) Area A, Level 1
6 a) Area A, Level 1
b) Area A, Level 2
c) Area A, Level 2
7 a) Area A, Level 3
b) Area A, Level 2
c) Area A, Level 1
8 a) Area A, Level 2
b) Test Trench
c) Area A, Level 1
9 a) Surface
b) Area A, Level 1
10
Area A, Level 1
11
Area A, Level 1
12
Area A, Level 1
13 a) Surface
b) Area C, Level 5
c) Area C, Level 3

139

The Morris Site

14 a) Area A, Level 3
b) Area A, Level 1
c) Area C, Level 1
d) Area A, Level 3
e) Area A, Level 2
f) Area C, Level 2
15 a) Area A, Level 6
b) Area A, Level 4
c) Unknown
16 a) Area C, Level 3
b) Area A, Level 3
17 a) Area C, Level 4
b) Area A, Level 3
c) Area C, Level 4
Figure 10
No. 18 a)
b)
c)
19 a)
b)
20 a)
b)
c)
21
22 a)
b)
c)
23 a)
b)
24
25
26 a)
b)
27 a)
b)
c)
d)
e)

Surface
Area C, Level 3
Surface
Area A, Level 2
Surface
Area A, Level 4
Area A, Level 3
Area A, Level 4
Surface
Surface
Surface
Surface
Burial 10
Area A, Level 1
Area A, Level 5
Area A, Level 1
Area A, Level 4
Area A, Level 4
Surface
Area C, Level 5
Surface
Area A, Level 1
Area A, Level 2

f) Surface
g) Area A, Level 2
h) Area C, Level 5
i) Surface
j) Area B, Level 3
k) Area A, Level 3
1) Surface
Figure 11

Test Trench
No. 28
29
Area B, Level 1
3O
Area C, Level 1
31
Area C, Level 3
32 a) Area A, Level 5
b) Area B, Level 3
c) Area C, Level 2
A a) Area A, Level 2
b) Surface
c) Area A, Level 1
d) Area B, Level 2
e) Area A, Level 3
B
Area A, Level 2
C a) Area C, Level 1
b) Area B, Level 1
c) Area C, Level 1
D a) Surface
b) Area B, Level 4
c) Area A, Level 1
E
Area A, Level 2
F
Area B, Level 3
G a) Burial 12
b) Burial 12
c) Area C, Level 1
d) Area A, Level 4
e) Area A, Level 2
f) Area B, Level 3
Plate 9
A a) Surface

Texas Archeological Society

1140

b) Surface .......
B
Area B, Level 3
C
Surface
D
Area A, Level 1
E a) Surface
b) Burial 12
F
Area C, Level 1
G
Area A, Level 1
H
Test Trench
I
Surface

J
K

Surface
Surface

’R a) Area C, Level i
b) Area A, Leyel 1
c) Area B, Level 1
d) Surface ........
S
Area A, Level 1
T
Surface
U
Area C, Level 1
V
Surface
W Area A, Level 3
X
Area A, Level 2
Y
Burial 12
Z
Burial 12

Plate 10
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O a)
b)
P a)
b)
c)
Q

Burial 40
Area A, Level 1
Area A, Level 2
Burial 6
Area A, Level 2
Area A, Level 1
Burial 36
Area A, Level 1
Burial 12
Area B, cache pit
Area A, Level 1
Area A, Level 1
Area A, Level 1
Area A, Level 2
Area B, Level 2
Area B, Level 3
Area A, Level 3
Burial 34
Area A, refuse pit
Area A, Level 1

Plate 11
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M

Burial 21
Burial 11
Burial 19
Burial 12
Burial 10
Burial 36
Burial 40
Burial 51
Area A, Level 1
Area A, Level 1
Surface
Area B, Level 4
Area A, Level 4

N

Burial 54

O

Test Trench

P

Unknown

Q

Area A, Level 1

R

Area A, Level 2
Burial 34

S

THE BROWN SITE, Gd-1, GRADY
COUNTY, OKLAHOMA*
KARL SCHMITT AND RAYMOND TOLDAN, JR.

Introduction
The Brown Site is situated on the left bank of Winters
Creek just above its junction with the Washita River. The
site was first reported to the Department of Anthropology
of the University of Oklahoma by Mr. George McClure, then
of Norman, Oklahoma. The major portion of the site lies
on the property of Mr. Roger Brown, who has been most hospitable and cooperative even to the extent of allowing
excavations to remain open for extended periods. We are
most grateful for this and his permission to excavate. We
also wish to thank the following personnel of the University
of Oklahoma for assistance: Professor Willis Stovall for
identifying bones and stone; Professor O. F. Evans for examining the terrace situation of the site; Professor A. O.
Weese for identifying shells; Professors George Goodman and
Elroy Rice for aid with vegetable remains; and Professor
Robert E. Bell for aid in excavation and interpretation.
Approximately 300 yards from the junction of the creek
and river, a bank exposure exhibits five to six feet of a dark
refuse-bearing stratum overlying the sandy, reddish subsoil. In the nearby field, potsherds, broken bones, shells,
and other indications of former occupation are plentiful.
From these surface materials it appears that the site extends
some 100 yards both to the north and south of the bank
exposures, and 50 yards back from the bank.
At present, the courses of Winters Creek and the Washita
are marked with trees, including elm, various oaks, and
walnut. Both the streams carry heavy silt burdens and
older residents say that fish are few in number compared
with those of a period forty years ago. Fresh water mussels
seem to have disappeared, as have the larger land animals
such as deer and buffalo.
*Submitted by Mrs. Iva Schmitt. Manuscript was being prepared for 1952 Bulletin
by Karl Schmitt at time of his death, August, 1952. Manuscript and illustrations completed by Toldan.

142

Texas Archeological Society

The geological situation of the site is not yet clear. The
site is on the first terrace above the present flood plain.
There is some possibility that this terrace is not the true first
terrace of the Washita, but is a "half terrace" at a slightly
lower elevation. In present floods, river water does not rise
over the site although the run-off from hills will cover the
area.
Excavations have been carried on intermittently from
1948 to 1952 under the direction of R. E. Bell and the senior
author. These have been in the nature of week-end field
trips for anthropology students and friends. The initial excavation consisted of a trench 5 feet by 20 feet paralleling
the bank exposure. Subsequently, another trench at right
angles to the first was started toward the east. Two squares
of this latter trench were completely excavated while only
the top levels of two others were removed. A third trench,
5 by 15 feet, was in the field east of the bank. Thus, a total
of nine five-foot squares were completely excavated. Material from horizontal six-inch levels in each square was
kept separate. Material from pits, as they were recognized,
was also separated. All dirt was passed through a 1/4 in.
screen.
Traits of the Brown Site
A summary treatment of functionally related traits, as
used by Krieger (1946), will be followed in the presentation.
Subsistence
A dual economy of agriculture and hunting was followed.
Ch,xrred kernels and cobs of corn and also beans were found.
The large number of bone digging implements and storage
pits also indicate the importance of agriculture. The refuse included bones of many species of animals, of which
the most important for food were bison, deer, and rabbit.
Turtles, tortoises, fresh water mussels, and catfish also were
important food items. Wild plants were utilized: a charred
mass of seeds, either of wild sunflower or perhaps of a wild
carrot, was found in the pit.

The Brown Site

143

Architecture
No houses were excavated. There are numerous concentrations of "wattle", or baked mud containing many grass
impressions, in the field east of the bank exposure. One
fifteen-foot trench was oriented so that it cut through a
portion of this area in the hope of delimiting a house pattern.
Although the first shovelsful of dirt revealed a much used
hearth, no post-hole pattern could be found. The hearth was
basin-shaped, two feet in diameter, and eighteen inches deep;
hard, red, fired earth lined the pit, except for the bottom.
This may not have been intentional but may have been
accidentally produced by the intense heat of the fire. White
ashes completely filled the pit.
No prepared floor was found; it is possible that such a
floor could have been removed by plowing. No post holes
could be observed at, or near, the expected floor level since
the building had been on a rich midden which here was
over 30 inches in depth. Near the base of the midden two
post holes were discovered and may have been those of
center posts for the house. No wall trenches were found.
It appears that the depth of the midden was so great that
most of the post holes did not penetrate subsoil. One cache
pit with contents intact most probably was associated with
the house; since it was only seven feet from the fire place,
it would have been inside the structure.
Houses, in general, were plastered with a mixture of mud
and grass. From accidentally fired pieces it appears that
the mixture was applied two to four inches thick and roughly
smoothed. No matting impressions were noted, though several of sticks a half inch in diameter were seen. One wood
impression indicated a log eight inches in diameter and
suggested that the mud was applied directly over wall posts.
Agricultural Complex
Bison Scapula Hoes: These were of two minor types: one
with a groove which cut away a portion of the posterior
side (Plate !3, E), and the other with a medial groove (Plate
13, B). There were ten specimens of the former, nine made

144

Texas Archeological Society

from left scapulae and one from a right; and five specimens
of the latter, four made from left scapulae and one from the
right. The medial groove was on the outside surface in four
of the specimens and on the inside in the fifth. There were
twenty-eight miscellaneous fragments of scapula hoes of
which four could be identified as from left and two from
right scapulae. Six scapulae blanks, all with dorsal spines
removed and one with a side groove, were found in the
cache in the house area; of these, five were from left scapulae
and the other from a right. Two scapula hoes, reworked
for use as knives, were both from left scapulae. Three reworked pieces of scapula hoes appear to have been parts
of scraper or chisel-like implements, though two may have
been fragments from the manufacture of hoes.
The process of manufacture of hoes is revealed by the
above specimens and some fragments from the bone refuse.
A strong preference for left scapulae is indicated, twentyfour out of twenty-nine identifiable specimens were such.
First the dorsal spine was knocked off; this is indicated by
six blanks from the cache and by five such spines from the
general refuse, all of which exhibit battering near the juncture of the spine and the main blade of the scapula. Then
the groove for attachment was made; this is indicated by
one specimen from the cache (Plate 13, A). The rough
areas of the spine were honed as is indicated by striations
left by sandstone abraders on the smoothed hoes. Often the
entire proximal end of the scapula was carefully smoothed
with abraders. The blade portion was also honed to a
sharp edge. Hoes were damaged in use and resharpened
many times as shown by the presence of short, stubby
specimens. Details of halting are not known.
Bison Skull Hoes: Six whole and six large fragments were
found (Plate 13, D). These were made by breaking out a
portion of the frontal bone so that the horn core was still
attached. Then the tip and ventral half, or more, of the
core was removed, and a cutting edge ground on the frontal
bone. The method of halting is not known. It is possible
that they were used as hand trowels. It is also possible that

B

D

PLATE 12
Bone artifacts from the Brown site.

A, Squash knife made from bison skull.

Digging stick tip made from bison tibia.

C, Flaking tool of bison tibia.

deer antler, possibly part of headdress.

E,

bison rib.

G, Dorsal spine of bison scapula.

Deer

mandible.

Slightly under ~

F,

Rasp

B0

D, Worked
(?)

made of

(G, 81/,_, inches long).

The Brown Site

147

they were used as ladles, though the intensive wear at the
blade and the cutting edge suggests more strongly a digging
function.
Bison Tibiae Digging Tools: Eight complete (Plate 13, G)
or large fragments and thirty-one smaller fragments were
found.

Three partially finished specimens (Plate 12, B)

were found in the house area cache; these had the proximal

end broken off and a portion of the posterior side of the
shaft broken out to the marrow core. The other specimens
show that holes between 1 I/2 and 2 inches in diameter were
pierced through the distal end to meet the natural cavity
of the bone. Blade-edges were honed at the distal end of
the tool and often the whole distal end was extensively
smoothed by sandstone abraders. High use polish indicates
a dirt digging function. They would have served as excellent digging stick tips, but on some, a sharp demarcation
between the area of use polish and remainder of the bone
shows that the hole-end was covered in hafting. A few
specimens have flattened, worn areas on the posterior side
indicating they may have been hafted like hoes or adzes.
Storage Pits: One pit was completely excavated as were
portions of four others which lay in the test areas dug. These
were straight-walled pits, some with flat bottoms and some
with gently concave bottoms. The largest, from the arcs
noted, would be oval with diameters of 8 and 5 feet and a
depth of 5V2 feet. The smallest would be under 3 feet in
diameter and 5 feet and 2 inches in depth. All, with one
partial exception, were filled with refuse. Several had reddish sterile layers extending from wall to wall, indicating
that dirt had been thrown in to form a new, clean bottom
after some trash deposition. Although no agricultural produce, intentionally placed, was found in the pits, it is most
probable that they were initially dug as cache pits for such
material and that they were subsequently used as refuse
pits.
One completely excavated pit had a cache of artifacts
still in place. This pit was 34 inches in diameter and 48

148

Texas ArCheological Society

inches deep with straight sides and a flat bottom. It had
been used as a refuse pit for a while and then a false bottom
or layer of sterile soil had been put down so that the bottom
was 24 inches from the present surface. On this new base
several partially completed and completed artifacts were
placed. First, six bison scapulae blanks, for later use as hoes,
and three bison tibiae blanks, for later use as digging tools,
were laid down. On these were placed a small, complete,~
greenstone celt, a complete deer-jaw tool of unknown use,
the mandible of a deer with the angles and ascending rami
removed, three shell scrapers, three shells with roughly
serrated edges, and fifty-five unworked fresh water mussel
shells. This pit and its contents were most probably associated with the house of the near-by fire basin.
Food Preparation
Hearths: One deep, basin-shaped, unlined fire pit was
found in the house area. Other small concentrations of ash
turned up by the plow indicate other probable hearth areas.
Grinding Stones and Manos: Three large fragments of
grinding stones were found on the surface: these were irregular sandstone slabs, two to three feet long with shallow
depressions worn by back and forth motions of manos, and
thus properly called metates. There had been very little
shaping of the stones. Two had been used on one side only,
the other on both sides. From the surface and excavations,
thirty-one miscellaneous grinding stone fragments were recovered. Some of these indicate intentionally shaped sides
and deep depressions with almost vertical walls. A back
and forth grinding motion is indicated by the depressions
and striations on the stones: only two possibly had been
used for rotary grinding.
Twenty,two .complete, or nearly completel and twenty
small fragments of manos were recovered from the surface
....
and the excavations. All were of the one-hand variety.
Of the large specimens, nine are thin, flattish, and rectangular with rounded Corners, used mainly On one side;
ten are thick, loaf, shaped, and were used for grinding on

The Brown Site

149

the one flat side; one is wedge-shaped and was used on
both sides; and two are thick oval, rounded, and have no
flat sides. All except the latter two indicate grinding by
a back and forth motion; the two exceptions indicate grinding by rotary or possibly rolling motions. Material of all
the manos was sandstone. Pecking was evident on many;
worn surfaces appear often to have been repecked to increase grinding efficiency.
Hammerstones: Twenty-one nodular hammerstones of
dense quartzite and chert were found, and almost all came
from the excavations. These were rounded pebbles which
exhibited battered surfaces and ranged between 3½ and 13~
inches in diameter. Such stones could have served as meat
and vegetable pounders and as bone crushers.
Squash knives: Two blade portions of bison scapula hoes
had been reworked into another class of implement. One
had the proximal end trimmed and smoothed so that there
was a hand grip (Plate 13, C). The other had the broken
edges smoothed so that there were no jagged protrusions.
Both had ground cutting edges. Another specimen was
made from a portion of a bison skull (Plate 12, A). This
artifact had been greatly thinned by scraping and had
ground cutting edges.l
Bone Refuse: Such refuse was common and many ribs,
vertebrae, and scapulae of bison and deer and two deer foot
bones exhibit scraping, cuts, and grooves evidently made by
flint knives during butchering. It would appear that an
attempt was made to remove a maximum amount of meat.
Pottery: 318 body, 20 basal, 5 handle, and 147 rim sherds
were collected from the surface; 926 body, 12 basal, 3 handle,
and 81 rim sherds were obtained by excavation. The great
majority of the pottery (Plate 15) was made locally and
would be classified as Lindsay Plain (Schmitt, 1950, p. 75),
Nocona Plain (Krieger, 1946, pp. 109-110), or Woodward
Plain (Baerreis, unpublished manuscript). On the basis of
1.
Professor Alfred Bowers of the University of Idaho commented that these specimens were similar to tools used by the historic Mandan and Hidatsa to cut and peel
pumpkins and squashes.

Texas Archeological Society

150

the present evidence, the preliminary description of the
former will have to be partially altered, and the fact emphasized that the other types grade gradually into one another.

Temper is the most variable attribute of the pottery

at the Brown Site. Sherds were tempered with shell, limestone, sandstone, sand, bone, sherd fragments, possibly caliche, and numerous combinations of the foregoing. Within
this range the smoothed sherds with shell temper fall within
Krieger’s definition of Nocona Plain and Baerreis’s description of Woodward Plain while the smoothed sherds with
other temper are Lindsay Plain. Table I presents a less detailed breakdown of surface treatment, decoration, and temper for the excavated sherds than was actually made. The
sherds are classified by their predominant temper: a heavily
shell-tempered sherd might exhibit a small, occasional fragment of sandstone but be classed as shell tempered.

Briefly described, Lindsay Plain is a thick, carelessly
smoothed ware. The exterior surfaces show many striations
left by scraping and occasionally by brushing. Temper is
used in large amounts and is highly variable, though sandstone or limestone, or either mixed with shell, are the preTABLE I
SHERDS FROM EXCAVATION

Surface Finish-Temper

~9

;aN

.~
O

Shell ...................................... 223
Shell-limestone
17
369
Shell-sandstone
Shell-bone ............................ 2
Shell-sand ............................ 118
Limestone .............................. 12
Sandstone .............................. 115
Sand ...................................... 64
Bone ....................................... 32
Sand-caliche (?) ............. 23
Fine sand ..............................
Unclassified ......................... 13
988

4

1

2

1
6
4
!

1

2

2
2
17

1

2

2

1

1

l0

3

229
17
374
2
118
12
118
73
36
24
4
15
1022

The Brown Site

dominant materials.

151

At the Lee Site, a sandy limestone is

the usual material; at the Brown Site, a reddish sandstone
is found most often. It is now realized that the limestones
and sandstones used grade one into the other, and that the
choice of one is almost certainly not indicative of a cultural
preference. The paste tends to be compact: it does not
flake easily, but does occasionally have many small cracks.
This is particularly true for interior surfaces. Color ranges
from reddish browns through light greys to dark grey or
black; greys predominate. Hardness is 2.5 to 3.0. Decorations are rare: three sherds from the surface and one from
the dig have small nodes (Plate 15, A-D, H, I; A, D from same
vessel). No restorable pots were found, but vessel form
seems almost limited to flat-based jars of varying sizes.
Twelve such bases are among the excavated material; they
range between three and one-half and six inches in diameter;
five have thickened and five have thinned basal discs; one
protrudes to the side; all, but one with an indented base, are
flat. The surface collections have fifteen such bases; they
are similar in size range and other characteristics to those
excavated, except that one is cord-roughened and partially
smoothed over. Rims flare, some drastically so. Lips are
thinned and rounded; no fully flattened rims occur. Large
strap handles (Plate 15, A, E, G) are an occasional feature
of Lindsay Plain at the Brown Site; one such handle from
the surface and three from the excavation were noted. They
were attached below the lip from the flaring rim to the
body of the vessel.
The problem of shell-tempered wares of the Plains and
Southeastern areas was discussed at a gathering of archaeologists held at Oklahoma University in April, 1952. It was
pointed out that body sherds of the types Nocona Plain,
Woodward Plain, Neeley’s Ferry Plain, and Bell Plain, appear to be indistinguishable. This is probably true of body
sherds of Cowley Plain, also. To distinguish these types rim
sherds appear necessary. Nocona Plain lacks handles and
appendages; Woodward Plain has strap handles attached to
the lip and rim protrusions. Neeley’s Ferry Plain and Bell

152

Texas Archeological Society

Plain appear similar to Woodward Plain.

Cowley Plain

has strap handles attached below the lip.
Both shell-tempered vessels and Lindsay Plain vessels
were made at the Brown Site. Only the arbitrary distinction
of temper enables one to place the sherds in different categories. Because of this, and the lack of stratigraphy, we
seriously doubt that the former inhabitants of the Brown
Site considered them distinct styles. Here, the classification
into Lindsay Plain, Nocona Plain, and/or Woodward Plain
probably does not reflect native distinctions of importance.
However, this breakdown into types may have utility in
establishing chronology and determining cultural relationship when many sites are considered.
Some shell-tempered sherds at the Brown Site do deviate
from the others and perhaps with further data another
type may be usefully described. These sherds are relatively
thin, have a well-worked paste, are well smoothed, and
seem to have a higher incidence of decoration. From the
surface are three sherds with small nodes (not arranged in
lines) made by sticking clay pellets to the exterior surface,
and five well-made strap handles. From the excavations
are three such sherds with nodes, and one pinched applique strip. This variation may be the predominant ware
of the Grant Site2 on the Washita River in nearby Garvin
County; some of the sherds in question could be trade pieces
from this or a similar site.
In addition to sherds discussed above a few obviously
deviant specimens were noted. These are most probably
trade pieces from other areas. From Level 6 in the deepest
portion of the midden, came a highly polished, fine sandtempered, red sherd. The interior is poorly smoothed, suggesting that it came from a bottle. This sherd is well within
the range of plain polished sherds associated with the Sanders Focus (Krieger, 1946) and Spiro, and is undoubtedly
a trade piece from the Caddo area to the east. Another
2. Material from this site was excavated by the University of Oklahoma and is
now being analyzed by the junior author.

E

PLATE 13
Bone artifacts from the Brown site.
of bison scapula with medial groove.
of bison skull.

E, Hoe blade of bison scapula with posterior groove.

of deer olecranon.
bone.

A, Hoe blade of bison scapula.

B, Hoe blade

C, Squash knife of bison scapula.

G, Digging-stick tip of bison tibia.

I-L. Awls (L made from bison rib).

H,

D, ~Ioe blade

F, Flaking tool

Ball carved from bison

A-E, GI~, others 1~.

The Brown Site

155

polished, fine sand-tempered, blue-gray sherd from Level 4,
and a highly polished, fine sand-tempered, black sherd, also
from a bottle, from the surface are referable to the same
area and time period.
Two unpolished sherds with red slip and a fine sand
temper, containing quartz, came from levels 4 and 9 in
the same midden area. They, too, appear to be trade sherds
from the east but are not identifiable as to type.
Seventeen roughened sherds were recovered from the excavations. One was a base with markings of a small-corded
textile. Two sherds are thick, sand tempered, and seem to
come from small cylindrical vessels some three or four
inches in total diameter: the interior vessel cavity would
be approximately two inches in diameter (Plate 14, J). The
others are cord-roughened and have the temper range shown
in Table I. These cord-roughened sherds are not all similar;
two of those tempered with sand are relatively thin, hard,
and very similar, if not identica!, to sherds from the Antelope Creek Focus of the Texas Panhandle, or to sherds of
the Upper Republican Culture. The others are thicker and
probably trade sherds from an as yet undefined archaeological manifestation--perhaps in west central Oklahoma. Thirteen such sherds were found on the surface.
Also from the excavation were three incised sherds which,
although they deviate somewhat in temper, probably are
within the Lindsay and Nocona Plain series. One wellmade, shell-tempered sherd with a portion of a loop handle
(Plate 14, I) was found on the surface: a design in broadline incising was partially on the handle and the adjacent
portion of the vessel. This latter piece definitely appears
exotic and is within the range of pottery associated with the
Neosho Focus of northeast Oklahoma. This identification.
was confirmed by Professor David Baerreis of the University of Wisconsin.
Cutting, Scraping, Skin Preparation
Stone Knife: Only one such specimen was identifiable
and was from the collection of a nearby resident. The ma-

156

Texas Archeological Society

terial is agatized dolomite or "Alibates Flint" and is 5V2
inches in length and almost 2 inches in width. It is roughly
diamond-shaped with two long and two short sides; the short
sides are opposingly beveled.
Stone Scrapers: Thirty-six complete and fragmentary
snub-nosed scrapers were recovered from both the surface
and undisturbed levels. These were made from flakes struck
from a core so that in each instance a concave flake scar
formed one side; at one end fine flakes were removed to
form a steep bit; workmanship varied from excellent to
poor. Five of the specimens were made from small and very
narrow flakes (Plate 14, Q).
Thirteen side scrapers were made by retouching large
flakes (Plate 14, S). Over 150 worked flakes which also
had been used as scrapers were recovered. One disc-shaped
specimen was found on the surface; this has flake scars
forming two concentric sides and fine retouching all around
the circumference.
Stone Celts: One complete and four fragments of celts
made from a greenish-black (when polished) rock were
found. The complete specimen (Plate 14, B) came from
the cache in the house area, and the others from the surface or p!ow zone. Four are circular or oval in cross section
and have a tapered poll. One has a flattened oval cross
section. Three specimens had been re-used, after breaking,
as hammerstones. The presence of the celt in the cache,
which otherwise contained objects connected with women’s
work, suggests that the celts may have been used in skin
working.
Shell Scrapers: Three complete and seven fragmentary
specimens were recovered from the excavations; the three
complete specimens came from the cache. They are made
of fresh water mussel shells with flattened edges worn by
smoothing or grinding.
One specimen from the cache
(Plate 14, A) is modified in the most extreme manner and
so ground down that one end is almost pointed. These
artifacts could have served a variety of scraping purposes:

The Brown Site

157

they could have been useful as pottery working tools, for
skin working, as corn scrapers,3 or as shellers.
Rib Beamers: Portions of three specimens were recovered
in the excavations. Half of a large deer rib has the edges
well worn and rounded and has a high use polish. Two other
fragments, probably bison ribs, also exhibit some wear and
a high use polish. Such tools could have been used as dehairers, or as skin-softeners.
Bone Beamer: One fragment of a possible deer metapodia!
bone beamer was recovered. This is a distal end with an
indication of a concave cutting edge. The same bone also
had great popularity at the Brown Site for making bone
awls; it is possible that the specimen in question may be
part of a large awl. But, since beamers are known for
nearby sites, the present identification is thought more
probable.
Bone Chisels: Three fragments of scapula hoes which
had been re-used as scrapers were recovered. One in particular had been re-worked on all sides; the irregular surfaces of the broken edges are well-smoothed. One edge is
chisel-like; and one jagged, but smoothed, edge has been
used for scraping.

Four implements from fragments of bison tibiae were
similar in appearance to the preceding specimens. They
were probably made from pieces knocked from the shafts
in the process of making bison-tibiae digging tools. The
edges are jagged and irregular but well-smoothed, and the
wear suggests a scraping function.
Bone Scrapers: Three irregularly oval bone discs were recovered. In size they are 15 by 25 mm., 13 by 30 mm., and
10 by 15 ram. The latter two had flaked edges and presumably had been worked by the same technique that was
used on flint.
3.
An elderly Pawnee woman, who recently visited the senior author’s home, commented on a mussel shell used as an ash tray.
She said that one never saw these
shells anymore, but that they used to use them to scrape green corn in the preparation
of "green corn bread."
Shells could be used unaltered, but were sometimes ground
down on the edge.

158

Texas Archeological Society

Sewing, Punching, and Drilling Implements
Stone Drill: One specimen was found on the surface
(Plate 14, K). This tends to a T-shape, but with a wide
base. Two bone fragments with drilled holes, one bi-conical,
were recovered from the excavation. The sherd-discs also
had bi-conical perforations.
Bone Awls: Specimens of several different types were
found. Eight bison rib awls were noted (Plate 13, L) : these
were made from ribs split longitudinally so that the maximum cancellous bone was exposed and with a point worked
on one end. Some specimens were extremely well-finished,
while others had jagged and only partially smoothed edges.
Five awls were made from split metapodial bones of deer
(Plate 13, I). In addition to the finished awls, there were
14 miscellaneous fragments indicating the manufacturing
process. They were split the length of the bone: a cut
through the bone by scraping in the natural groove on the
anterior surface was matched by a similar cut on the posterior surface. This resulted in two long slender blanks
which could be pointed as desired. Some awls of this type
were resharpened until they were quite short.
Two awls were made from the long bone of some small
unidentified animal (possibly a jack rabbit). The joint is
partially preserved but greatly modified by smoothing.
One specimen is made from a bison scapula fragment and
is over an inch at the maximum width. Two other pieces
of awls are probably made from bison scapulae: these were
round to oval in cross section, approximately 1/4 inch in
diameter, and long and curved (Plate 14, P). Among the
bone refuse was found the dorsal spine of a bison scapula
from which the topmost edge had been broken off by scraping two long grooves on opposing sides (Plate 12, G). Such
a process would produce long, curved blanks, easily workable into awls similar to the two in question.
One awl was made from a small animal rib; the bone was
broken and a splinter-like projection ground to a point.

C
D

[_

P

O

N

s

R

Q

PLATE 14
Various artifacts from the Brown site.
of clay figurines.
handle.

G,

Shell bead.

~’, Cordmarked potsherd.

M, Bone fish-hook.
Q, Flint end-scraper.

N, Bone bead.

I,

A, Shell scraper.

Potsherd with

B, Celt.

incised lines

K, Flint drill fragment.

L, Bone fish-hook blank.

O, Fragment of stone-pipe bowl.

R, Sandstone shaft abrader¯

C-F, H, :parts

and part of loop

S, Flint side scraper.

P, Bone awl.
Size 1/~.

161

The Brown Site

There were eleven awls made from splinters and twentytwo miscellaneous fragments (Plate 13, J, K).

Five of the

latter were the tops of awls and had been abraded to a
flattened end.
Weapons and Associated Tools
Arrowpoints: A large number of arrowpoints were found,
almost all of relatively small size.

Basically triangular

points, with or without side and basal notches, greatly predominate.

Figure 12 shows the outline forms of the points

and the number underneath each outline gives the frequency of that variety. Three specimens (not illustrated)
are of a type known as Alba Barbed (Krieger, 1946); one
was found on the surface, the others were from undisturbed
levels of the dig.
Arrowpoints were manufactured from flakes struck from
flinty pebbles. Many points show the original flake scar.
Small cores from which:~such flakes were taken are common in the refuse. In addition, four points were made of
Kay County flint from quarries in northern Oklahoma.
Deer OIecranon Flaker: Four specimens were recovered
(Plate 13, F). The proximal joint served as a handle and
the shaft was ground to a rounded flat tip. Two other specimens exhibiting polish on the joint probably were similar
tools broken in use.
Antler Drifts: Four fragments of antler approximately
cylindrical and about % inch in diameter were found. Blunt,
somewhat rounded ends are indicated. Nine miscellaneous
pieces of antler were also found; two exhibit circular cuts
and breaking. A portion of a deer skull shows that the horns
were broken off by cutting and battering.
Bison Tibia Flaker: One specimen originally was a bison
tibia digging toot but had been reworked to produce a narrow cylindrical tip (Plate 12, C). On this tool the larger
end is shaped to a convenient handle, and the flaking point
has a blunt and much scarred end.

162

Texas Archeological Society

Bison Rib Flaker: The rib had been broken directly across
so that a minimum of cancellous bone is visible; the broken
surface is smoothed and rounded. A portion of the rib
formed a natural handle. One side, below the handle, had
been broken off at an angle so that a long blade was formed.
The very tip is smoothed to a rounded point. It could have
served as a flaking implement, or less probably as an awl
or punch.
Arrowshaft Wrenches: Five fragments attributable to
this class of implement occur. They were made from deer
radii with the distal ends removed and two opposing, offset, holes cut into the shaft. Two of the fragments show
the cut and smoothed proxima! end. One specimen exhibits wear in the form of a groove from drawing an arrowshaft through the holes.
One highly polished fragment from the shaft has incising
in the form of five triangular figures and 13 fine nicks in a
line. While this specimen is so fragmentary.that its identification is partially in doubt, attention is called to the fact
that two shaft smoothers from other sites exhibit similar
decorations. One specimen was recently found on the surface of the Lee site, GV-3, in Garvin County. Another was
excavated from site D-l, in Delaware County.
Abrading Tools
This category overlaps the previous one in that some
of the artifacts were used in shaping arrowshafts.
Arrowshaft and Awl Abraders: Six fragments of large
well-made shaft abraders are present in the collections.
They are of a type which often occurs in pairs in the Plains
area: one side is flat with a central longitudinal groove, and
the general appearance is loaf-shaped. One specimen which
is nearly complete is 51/2 inches long (Plate 14, R). All
are made of non-local sandstones. One specimen indicated part of the technique of manufacture: it had been
sawed lengthwise, probably by scraping with flint flakes,
until two opposing cuts almost met. Then it was broken

The Brown Site

163

14

!

s£A
I

I

3

i

£££

S

3

I

2

!

!

I

I

FIGURE 12
Projectile point types from the Brown site.
sents the number of specimens found.

The number under each outline repre~

164

Texas Archeological Society

along the cuts, with the resulting rough surface only partially smoothed.
Three irregularly shaped pieces of local sandstone have
rounded grooves indicating they had been used as shaftabraders. These grooves, as well as those on the more completely finished specimens, indicate that arrowshafts were
between 1/4 and % inch in diameter, Several of the specimens had also been used to sharpen awls since the original
grooves had been partially altered to more angular shapes.
Five irregularly shaped pieces of local sandstone had only
awl-sharpening grooves in them.
Another type of abrader is rectangular in cross section
and has three or four grooves, one to a face; four such specimens were noted. They had been used both as arrowshaft
smoothers and awl sharpeners and were made of non-local
sandstone.
Whetstones: Seventeen flattish pieces of sandstone, usually of local origin, had been used in honing operations.
They exhibited worn surfaces, with small grooves and striations such as would result from sharpening and shaping
bone hoes and other bone artifacts.
Fishing Tools
Bone Fish Hook: One fragment (Plate 14, M) was found
in the excavations. The point probably was broken in the
process of manufacture. There is no knob or groove for
attachment to a line.
Fish Hook Blanks: One thin, flat bone slab (Plate 14, L)
is broken but originally it was rectangular with rounded
corners; in such blanks the center portion could be cut out
and:two hooks made from one blank. Another irregularly
oval bone slab has been smoothed on all sides and the center
area has been scraped extensively from both sides in an
effort to cut it away.
Weaving
One basal sherd of a shell-tempered vessel has an im-

The Brown Site

165

pression of a loosely woven material with relatively fine
threads. Some form of over-and-under plaiting is indicated.
Ornaments
Bone Beads: Ten tubular specimens cut from bird or small
mammalian bones were found (Plate 14, N). Several had
been well smoothed at the ends and polished. One bead of
small diameter was found within a larger one. Two bird
leg bones had circular cuts and breaks indicating the main
part of the shaft had been removed to make beads.
Snail Shell Bead: One such specimen was excavated
(Plate 14, G). It is made :from a shell of the genus Io and
has been extensively ground on the tip, one side, and the
base. A string could be passed through the original aperture
and out through the ones produced on the side or tip by
grinding.
Bone Inlay: A small, thin disc, flat on one side and convex on the other, was found in the deepest part of the midden. It is Y2 inch in diameter and about 1/16 inch thick.
Possibly this was used as an inlay in the manner shel! discs
were used to inlay stone and wood at the Spiro Site.
Ceremonial Objects
Stone Pipes: One small bowl fragment was obtained by
the excavation, and three other fragments from the surface.
The bowl fragment is made of a fine-grained sandstone, it
has a collar-like projection, delineated by a groove, and
one incised line on the collar (Plate 14, O). Two of the
surface fragments are made of similar material; one has a
fine incised line. Another surface fragment is of finegrained, reddish clay or silt stone. It is of an e!bow-shape
with almost equal arms lY2 inch long. The bowl is larger
than the stem and has a co!lar-like projection delineated
by a groove. The stem end is swollen into a less definite
collar.
Deer Antler Headdresses: Four fragments of antler show
extensive modification (Plate 12, D). Half of the antlers
had been cut away and smoothed longitudinally. If these

166

Texas Archeological Society

were parts of headdresses, the effect, if the unworked portion of the antler were worn to the front, would be that
of a full set of antlers, but of much less weight.4
Pigment Stones: Three pieces of hematitic sandstone with
facets produced by grinding were found. These were tested
and readily gave pigments of reddish shades. One small
piece of hematite with one flat facet, a small piece of yellow
limonite, and a piece of banded hematite-limonite also had
been used to obtain pigments.
Burials
Information concerning disposal of the dead is scanty.
One burial, that of an elderly female, was recovered. Leg
bones and parts of the pelvis were found where they had
fallen with a portion of the bank along Winters Creek; the
skull, arm bones, and most of the vertebrae were still in
situ.
No pit outlines were discernible.
Apparently the
body had been placed in a shallow excavation which did
not penetrate the base of the midden. The head was to the
east and the position was extended or very slightly flexed.
One stone scraper was found while excavating the burial
but almost certainly was accidentally included in the fill.
Mr. Reynolds, lessee of a portion of the site, reported that
he had plowed out several burials and had found two or
three more in eroded gullies.
southern margin of the site.

All these were at or near the
It is possible that a burial area

would be found here.
A human molar and a small scrap of skull were discovered
in the plowed field near the excavated area. A child’s tibia
was found in the exposed refuse of the bank; this was mixed
in with other bone refuse and did not appear to have been
the remnant of an intentional burial.

Games
Pottery Figurines:

A large number of these specimens

were recovered--so many that they must have been ex4.

Elderly Wichita informants have told the senior author that deer antler head-

dresses were worn by some members of the Deer Lodge in their ceremonies.

However.

Wichita headdresses included part of the frontal bone shaped to fit the contour of the
head:" No such specimens were recovered from the Brown Site.

The Brown Site

167

tremely common among the former inhabitants of the Brown
Site.

It seems more probable that they served an amuse,

ment function rather than a ceremonial one.5
One specimen (Plate 14, C) is almost complete: it has a
long, tapering, cylindrical body, rudimentary shoulders ann
arms, and a keel-shaped head.
off.

The basal portion is broken

Two fragments of another figurine exhibit a flattened,

ova! body, two legs, finger nail incisions on the shoulder
area, and a groove on the shoulder (Plate 14, D). The sex
of this latter specimen is not indicated. Another body section has the rudimentary shoulders and arms and two legs;
again the sex is not indicated. There are four other fragments from the shoulder area of figurines; these indicate
the rudimentary shoulders and arms by slight projections.
Five miscellaneous fragments are from torsos. One of
these was from a feminine figurine; one complete breast is
present and a portion of the other remains. An incised arc
with fringed lines on and over the breast may have been
intended to represent tattooing or painting.
Six specimens seem to be sections of bodies of the long
tapering cylindrical type.

There are also five basal sections,

tapering down to a rounded point, which are referable to the
same type of figurine. Several specimens are heads; one
with portions of the shoulders remaining has a rounded hole
possibly intended for a mouth (Plate 14, E); two indicate
rounded heads; and another is a keel-shaped head. One foot
is present (Plate 14, F); it shows no distinctive features.

Over fifty other small fragments of figurines were recovered. One of these had an intentional hole made by molding
the clay about a cylindrical object. A larger fragment may
have come from an outsize figurine, or it may have been
part of an artifact of unknown use (Plate 14, H). It is barrel-shaped, broken at top and bottom, nearly 2 inches long
5. Elderly Wichita informanks tell of a boys game played with baked clay figurines
of horses and men. Two sides of boys setup their figures ten or more feet apart.
¯ Then they hurled small mud balls with pliant sticks until one side won the game bF
knocking down all the opponent’s figures.

168

Texas Archeological Society

and 11/4 inch in diameter, and has cord impressions about
one end.
The great majority of figurines are relatively poorly made.
Most are untempered.

A few contain some sand temper.

The paste is not well worked and the figurines tend to
split along old convolution lines.

Some specimens flake ex-

tensively on the surface.
Miscellaneous Traits
Sherd Discs:

Portions of ten such discs and two other

artifacts of a related nature were found; two were from the
surface and the remainder from the excavations.

Four are

made from Nocona Plain, seven from Lindsay Plain sherds,
and one from a roughened sherd.

The discs are round, or

almost so, and have a single central, bi-conical perforation
(Plate 15, L). This feature is present on six specimens, and
two others have pits drilled from two sides, but not meeting. The other two specimens of discs are less than half
complete and the expected central hole is thus not present.
The only evidence for possibly multi-perforated discs is one
of the incompletely drilled specimens mentioned above: this
has a drilled pit on one side and three on the other, but, they
are all very close together and complete drilling might have
obliterated the extra pits. Diameter of the discs ranges
from slightly over 1 inch to approximately 23~ inches. Five
specimens are between 1 2/3 to 2 inches; one is larger than
this and four range between 1 and 11/2 inches. Two specimens exhibit decorations. One has two broad gouged areas
extending from the circumference toward the center; this
suggests that the complete design on the disc would have
been a rayed flower or a star-like design with perhaps seven
or eight points. The other specimen, the fragment of the
largest disc, has parts of an engraved design near the circumference; this consists of three lines meeting at acute
angles giving the appearance of connected triangles. A
similar design occurred on the fragment of a bone arrowshaft wrench.

PLATE 15
Pottery from the Brown site.
cordmarking.

Examples of noded decoration, strap handles, and

L, disc made from potsherd.

Size 1~.

The Brown Site

171

Two sherds showing smoothing of old breaks were probably discs in the process of manufacture.

One is a basal

sherd which was round to begin with; apparently it broke
again during the abrading process and was discarded.
Angular Worked Sherd: This fragmentary specimen is
definitely not part of a sherd disc since it has a sharply
angular corner, somewhat greater than a right angle. It was
found in the excavations and is made from a Lindsay Plain

sherd. In shape and appearance it is very similar to specimens found on many Pueblo sites of the Southwest.
Deer Mandible Tools: Two complete specimens, one large
fragment, and three smaller fragments were found. As a
class these share removal of the diastema almost to the first
premolar, smoothing over of the broken bone, and some
form of grooved wear of the teeth. A complete specimen
(Plate 12, E) has the diastema removed and the break completely rounded and smoothed; one groove was worn so that
it removed a part of the roots of the first and second premolars; another groove was worn between the last premolar
and first molars; there are also para!lel cuts across the
ramus which may be butchering scars.
Another complete specimen was recovered from the cache.
It has the diastema smoothed and rounded, though the old
break is visible. A small groove is worn into and between
the first and second premolars. As in the first specimen
there are parallel cuts across the ramus.
A large fragment which has the ramus missing also has
the diastema removed and rounded. The first premolar and
the first molar are missing, but the edges of alveoli show
wear. In addition there is a groove worn behind and into
the last molar.
Of the smaller fragments: two have the teeth missing but
the edges of the root cavities exhibit wear; the other specimen has the diastema removed, is well rounded and smoothed, and has a groove worn so deep that it has removed all
but the roots of the first premolar. Three other deer man-

172

Texas Archeological Society

dibles have parallel cuts across the ramus but no other signs
Of Use; this similarity to the two complete tools may have
resulted from the butchering process and not from use as

tools.
At present the use of these specimens is conjectural; they
have been called "corn shellers" and "sinew stretchers," and
a somewhat similar hafted specimen was collected from the
Caddo and identified as a sickle (Swanton, 1942, Plate 16,
Figure 1).
PerSorated Bison Scapula: A scapula complete with acromial spine had a hole approximately 3 by 2 inches battered
into the central part of the blade. Some of the rough edges
of the break had been partially smoothed. Its use is not
known.
Bone Balls: One almost spherical specimen (Plate 13, H)
1 ½ inch in diameter was excavated. This is all of cancellous
bone and probably was made from the head of a bison
femur. Another specimen is hemispherical, 3~ inch in diameter, and ½ inch high. The use of these obj ects is not known
though they could have served as painting tools, or in a game.
Stone Balls: Two ovoid sandstone-barite balls were recovered. One is 15 by 19 mm. in diameter and the other
is 17 by 19 mm. The last was obviously made from a small
"rose rock," or sand cemented by barite crystals, since some
of the original depressions remain. An unmodified "rose
rock" of similar dimensions was also found in the refuse.
It is possible that these objects were pigment stones or game
objects.
Miscellaneous Worked Bone: Twenty-eight such pieces
were noted. One has a bi-conical drilled perforation, another has a perforation drilled from one side only. A small
fragment exhibits a decoration of four small parallel cuts
or notches along an edge. Another, from a large implement, has a well-worked spatulate tip 1 inch across. A
portion of a bison rib (Plate 12, F) has rudely made notches
and may be a musical rasp.

The Brown Site

173

Evidence os Trade ...................
The material from which the celts are made is a finegrained greenish rock of non-local origin. A source farther
to the east, perhaps Arkansas, is suspected. The materials
of many of the sandstone abraders and of the stone pipes
are also of non-local origin, but the sources are unknown.
Implements and flakes of banded, Kay County, Oklahoma,
flint containing fusilinid fossils are fairly common: a total
of 37 such specimens were noted. Only one sample of
"Alibates flint," a red-banded, agatized dolomite, was encountered: this is the large stone knife from the surface of
the site. The bead made from a shell of the genus Io most
probably is indicative of eastern trade connections: this
genus is now limited to the Tennessee River Valley.
A great majority of the pottery was locally made, even
most of the shell-tempered ware. However, some of the
latter type with a more carefully smoothed surface finish
and/or noded decorations may be trade sherds from sites
such as the Grant site near Pauls Valley, Oklahoma. The
few polished sherds are trade pieces from the Sanders Focus
of East Texas or the Spiro area of eastern Oklahoma (Krieger, personal communication). Two other unpolished red
sherds are also from the east but cannot be delimited more
accurately. A shell-tempered, incised loop handle from the
surface appears to have originated in the Neosho Focus of
northeastern Oklahoma. Of the cord-roughened pottery,
two sherds could easily have come from sites of the Antelope Creek Focus of the Texas Panhandle or perhaps Upper
Republican sites of Kansas. The origin of the other cord-~
roughened pottery is not known though central and western
Oklahoma seem to be the most likely sources.
Stratigraphy
The relative great depth of midden at the Brown Site
gave hopes that stratigraphy associated with distinctive
artifact types would be encountered. This has not been
found yet. Excavation was carried out by five-foot squares
and six-inch levels. Pot sherds were typed by surface finish

174

Texas Archeological Society

and temper; all major types occurred in all levels and the
variations in frequencies do not have statistical significance.
Small-scale stratigraphy, that of ash lenses and bands of
refuse, is evident in the profiles. The various pits encountered could have originated at almost any level of the
refuse. The original excavations of such pits may partially
account for the lack of stratigraphy as they would tend to
mix the refuse. Pieces of several pottery vessels and other
artifacts which fitted together were found in widely separated levels. It is still to be hoped, and perhaps expected,
that significant stratigraphy will be found with extensive
excavation. Comparison of pit contents and material from
over and under house floors would appear to have the best
chance of yielding such results.
General Relationships and Chronology

The closest relationship of the material from the Brown
site is with that of the Lee Site (Schmitt, 1950), and both
sites would be within the same focal grouping, These two
sites, along with the Grant, Braden, Lacy, and Frankenburg Sites, are placed by Bell and Baerreis (1951, p. 75) in
the Washita River Focus. Cursory examination of the
material from all these sites indicates that they are indeed
very closely related. However, the pottery complex at the
Grant and Braden Sites may differ enough from that of the
others so that the focus might be subdivided. General, and
many detailed, similarities are also evident between the
Brown and Lee Sites and those of the Henrietta Focus
(Krieger, 1946 pp. 87-159), Custer Focus (Bell and Baerreis,
1951; Brighton, 1951; Gallaher, 1951), Optima Focus (Bell and
Baerreis, 1951; Watson, 1950), and the Paint Creek or Great
Bend Aspect (Wedel, 1942). Somewhat more distant relationships are with those of the Antelope Creek Focus (Krieger, 1946); and the Fort Coffee, Nelson, Bryan, and Neosho
Foci (Bell and Baerreis, 1951). All these manifestations are
generally accorded to be of a late prehistoric time horizon.
The presence at both the Brown and Lee Sites of trade
sherds similar to types associated with the Sanders and Spiro
Foci indicates that the two sites in question may have a time

The Brown Site

span of several hundred years.

175

Certainly they all pre-date

the earliest European contact.
Conclusion
The material from the Brown Site shows that the former
inhabitants followed a dual economy of hunting and agriculture of the type found in the late prehistoric archaeological horizons of the Low Plains and adjoining portions of
the High Plains from Northern Texas to North Dakota. As
might be expected, closest relationships are to other manifestations of geographic proximity, such as the nearby Lee
and Grant sites, the Henrietta Focus of North Texas, and
the Custer Focus of Western Oklahoma. A terminal date
of not later than 1600 A. D. is indicated. More precise
dating will depend on local dendrochronological and Carbon14 dates or perhaps cross-dating with Spiro and Sanders
Foci. Correlation with any historic tribe is not possible at
this time.
Bibliography
Baerreis, David A.
MS. Notes on the Smith Site in Northeastern Oklahoma.
Bell, Robert E. and David A. Baerreis
1951. A Survey of Oklahoma Archaeology. Bulletin of
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol.
22, pp. 7-i00.
Brighton, Harold D.
1951. Archaeological Sites in Custer County, Oklahoma.
Bulletin of Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 22, pp. 164-187.
Gallaher, Art
1951. The Goodman I Site, Custer County, Oklahoma.
Bulletin of Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 22, pp. !88-216.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern
Texas. The University of Texas Publication No. 4640.
Austin.

176

Texas Archeological Society

Schmitt, Karl
1950. The Lee Site, Gv-3, of Garvin County, Oklahoma.
Bulletin of Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 21, pp. 69-89.
Swanton, John R.
1942. Source Material on the History and Ethnology of
the Caddo Indians. Bureau of American Ethnology,
Bulletin 132.
Watson, Virginia Drew
1950. The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect: Description and Analysis. Bulletin of Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 21, pp. 7-68.
Wedel, Waldo
1942. Archeological Remains in Central Kansas and
Their Possible Bearing on the Location of Quivira.
Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. 101, No. 7.
Department of Anthropology
University of Oklahoma,
Norman

TWO EARLY HISTORIC SITES ON THE
SOUTHERN PLAINS
CHARLIE R. STEEN

This is an appraisal of two large, early historic sites on
the southern plains: the Deer Creek site in Kay County,
Oklahoma; and the Spanish Fort site in Montague County,
Texas, and Jefferson County, Oklahoma.

Other sites, sim-

ilar in aspect, and probably contemporaneous, have been
recorded but not enough is yet known of them to warrant
comparison with the two described here.

At each of these

sites there has been found a large quantity of early 18thcentury material of French origin, but of the several sites
only Spanish Fort is mentioned in known accounts of
French or Spanish travelers and explorers. Spanish Fort
figured, as the principal Taovayas village, in both French
and Spanish accounts of the Red River country throughout
the 18th century and it persisted as a settlement into the
19th century (Krieger, 1946, p. 161 et seq.). For Deer Creek
there is no positive identification by Europeans but the
Indians at that site were probably Wichita proper.
The Deer Creek Site
The Deer Creek site lies in an excellent position at the
confluence of the creek of that name with the Arkansas
River, northeast of Newkirk, Oklahoma (Plate 16, A). Approximately two miles north is a smaller contemporaneous
site and there are rumors of at least one other similar site
in the vicinity. In order to distinguish between the two
known sites I shall refer to the smaller site, north of Deer
Creek, as the Bryson site; it was partially excavated in 1926,
by the late Joseph Thoburn of the Oklahoma Historical
Society.
The principal site, at Deer Creek, covers an area of perhaps two hundred acres of high ground which is well above
the flood plain of the river. At the present time most of
the site is under cultivation but a portion of the vi!lage
area lies under sod which has never been plowed.

178

Texas Archeological Society

Apparently about the middle of the 19th century finds of
European relics at Deer Creek gave rise to a belief that a
Spanish fort had once existed there and the name Ferdinandino, or Fernandino, appeared on several maps to indicate such a post. Just how this name originated cannot now
be determined.
In 1925 Joseph Thoburn obtained excavation funds for
work at Deer Creek and, during parts of that summer and
of the summer of 1926, dug a portion of the Bryson site. No
report of the work was ever published, and the material
recovered lies unstudied at the Museum of the Oklahoma
Historical Society in Oklahoma City. A few newspaper accounts, dictated by Thoburn during the work, gave little
archeological information; two of these accounts were republished in an obituary for Thoburn (Wright, 1947). The
only item of any importance which appeared in the newspaper articles was that definite evidences of a stockade were
found. In none of the stories is there any account of artifacts, house types, or any other features which would help us
place the site with a cultural group.
The best collection of Deer Creek material available for
study is in the private collection of Mr. Burt Moore, of
Winfield, Kansas. Mr. Moore has collected from the surface
of the site for many years.
At the Deer Creek site no evidence of a stockade can be
detected On the ground, nor, for that matter, is there a trace
of any other structure. The only surface features of the site
are half a dozen large middens, apparently composed entirely of bison bones among which hundreds of large scrapers
areto be found. Most of the middens are well plowed down
but still stand a foot or more above the surrounding ground
and are thirty feet or more in diameter (Plate 16, A).
The Spanish Fort Site
Archeological accounts of Spanish Fort have been published by Krieger (1946) who discussed the site at some
length, especially its relationship to the Henrietta Focus,
and Witte (1938) who gave a brief account of the site. In

B
4¸¸

C
PLATE 16
A, Air view of Deer Creek Site, Oklahoma, looking west across Arkansas River with
Deer Creek entering it from the right.
In the plowed field in center, one large bisonbone midden shows as a white scar, and other middens, closer to the river, as dark
spots.
B, Parts of mechanisms of flint-lock muskets from Spanish Fort Site on Red
River, Joe Benton Collection, Nocona, Texas (about 1/3 actual size).
C, Indian-made
gun flints and steel projectile point, from Deer Creek Site (about actual size).

Two EarZy Historic Sites

181

addition, Mr. Joe Benton, of Nocona, Texas, has collected
artifacts from Spanish Fort for years and has gathered a
large collection of Indian and European artifacts from the
vicinity.
Two locations, and an unknown number of sites, make
any analysis of Spanish Fort material exceptionally difficult. Fluted points have been found here; and other
point types from the Spanish Fort vicinity which are much
older than the historic period are the Gary and Martindale
types described by Bell and Hall (1953). The Spanish Fort
bend of Red River was apparently a favored homesite for
primitive man for many centuries and an intensive survey
of this stretch of the river would undoubtedly locate a number of sites with a considerable time span. The historic
material is concentrated in two comparatively small areas.
One of these lies in the triangle of land between Red River
and Farmers Creek, on the Texas side of the river; and directly east, on the Oklahoma side, there is a site fully as
large, on higher ground.
No controlled excavations have been made at either of
the historic Spanish Fort sites, and we have no evidence of
the Taovayas Indian culture other than artifacts recovered
from the surface of the sites. There is indirect evidence that
the village on the Texas side, at least, was surrounded by a
stockade, for Parrilla reported that during his attack on the
site in 1759 the Indians fought from behind such defense
works. The only visible features of the villages are large
middens of bison bones, identical with those at the Deer
Creek site, and from which many scraping tools have been
recovered.
French Goods at the Sites
The similarity of metal goods found at the two sites is
astonishing, as is the quantity in which the items have been
found. It is easy to understand how tales of trading posts
located at these sites could get started, for a large amount
of material has been recovered from each location.

The

collections of European materials from each site are so

182

Texas :ArcheologiCaI Society

similar that, except for the possibilit~ that some perishable
goods such as blankets formed part of the trading stock, it
would appear that we have a rather complete list of trade
items of the time. These are:
1. Flint lock muskets--numerous parts of many muskets
have been found at each of the sites (Plates 16, B; 17) ; butt
plates, trigger guards, hammers, frizzles, and short lengths
of barrels which have been altered to serve as tools. Some
European gun-flints are found at Deer Creek but they are
fewer in number than Indian-made flints (Plates 16, C; 17) ;
at Spanish Fort the proportion of European to native-made
flints seems greater.
2. Lead Bullets (Plate 17).
3. Cutting tools--Knives (probably "sheath" knives), scissors, pole axes, and cleaver-like chopping knives.
4. Cooking pots--of iron and copper.
5. Ornaments--Glass beads of several types, rolled "tinklers" of thin metal sheets, brass buttons and hat ornaments.
6. Projectile points--of iron and copper (Plate 16, C).
Mr. Burt Moore sent a representative collection of this
material to Mr. Arthur Woodward, then of the Los Angeles
County Museum, for identification. Mr. Woodward wrote
to Mr. Moore that all of the material was of French origin,
that it could be dated as of the first half of the 18th century,
and that he would place the time 1725-1750 as the most likely
period in which the items were traded to the Indians.
Now we have, at two widely separated sites, European
materials of the type which can safely be termed "trade
goods", materials which have been dated as of the second
quarter of the 18th century. The question remains as to
what sort of trading establishments were maintained at
these villages, A definite clue can be found in a letter
written in 1727 by Father du Poisson, a Jesuit stationed
for a short time at the Arkansas Post, Du Poisson wrote a
rather lengthy letter to a fellow priest in France in which
he described Louisiana and its inhabitants. It reads, in part:

Two Early Historic Sites

183

"Besides these grantees and planters, there are also in this
country, people who have no other business than that of
vagabondizing. 1st, Women and girls taken from the hospitals of Paris, from Salpetriere, or other places of equally
good reputation, who find the laws of marriage too strict,
and the care of a single household too troublesome. Voyages
of four hundred leagues present nothing to terrify these
heroines; I have met with two of them, whose adventures
would furnish material for a romance. 2d, The voyagers;
these are for the most part young people sent for some
reason to Mississippi by their parents or by justice, and who
finding it too low to dig the earth, prefer engaging themselves as rowers, and wandering about from one shore to
the other. 3d, The hunters; these at the end of the summer
ascend the Mississippi to the distance of two or three hundred leagues to the buffalo country; they dry in the sun
the flesh on the ribs of the buffaloes, salt the rest, and also
make bear’s oil. Toward spring they descend, and thus furnish provisions to the Colony. The country which extends
from New Orleans even to this place [Arkansas Post], renders this business necessary, because it is not sufficiently
inhabited, or enough cleared to raise cattle there. At the
distance of only thirty leagues from here they begin to find
the buffaloes, and they are in herds on the prairies or by
the rivers. During the past year a Canadian came down to
New Orleans with four hundred and eighty tongues of buffaloes he had killed during the winter campaign with only
one associate." (Kip, 1846).
One has a great desire to deviate from the announced
subject of this paper and speculate on the lives and adventures of the women and girls who roved the Mississippi
valley because they could not be bothered by the cares of a
single household, but with only that single tantalizing statement du Poisson dropped the subject of women and went
on to more prosaic matters. It is with the hunters, the
third group listed by du Poisson, that we are here concerned. The description given of these men, and their activities, furnishes the clue to the sort of establishments
maintained by the French at the Indian villages on the

184

Texas ArcheoIogicaI Society

southern plains.

It is doubtful that we can ever be certain

that Deer Creek, Spanish Fort, and other similar sites were
winter headquarters for French hunters.
If we assume however that such hunters returned to a
certain village, or village group, year after year and paid
for carcasses, or for help in the hunt, with trade items, it
would easily explain the large amount of trade goods to be
found at sites at which there is no record of a permanent
trading post or factory. Such activities are also in keeping
with the general nature of the vanguard of Frenchmen on
the American frontier.
Summary
At present there are many more questions to ask than
statements to make concerning the material culture of the
Indian population of the villages under discussion. On the
map which accompanies his article on the archeology of the
Central Great Plains, Wedel (1940, p. 293) indicates a site
on the Arkansas River (at the approximate location of Deer
Creek) with the symbol for the Paint Creek manifestation
of Plains culture. I believe that if his viewpoint had been
from the Southern plains that he would with just as much
certainty, have stamped the site with a Henrietta Focus
label. In a subsequent paper I hope to show that, based on
artifacts alone, there is remarkably little change in material
culture between districts in the central and southern plains
in late prehistoric and early historic times. The differences
which do exist seem based partly on materials available to
the different groups, partly on regional proximity to other
cultural areas, but mostly differences are apparent merely
because we lack the information which intensive excavations would give us concerning the economy of the plains
Indians.
With the evidence available at present it appears that the
great middens of bison bones are products of the decades
after 1700. This probably indicates a change in the hunting
methods of the Plains Indians which followed the introduction into Plains economy of the horse, which Haines (1938)

PLATE 17
Artifacts from the Deer Creek Site.

Flint lock mechanisms, Indian-made gun flints,

and lead balls in the Butt Moore Collection, Winfield, Kansas.

187

Two Early Historic Sites

places on the central Arkansas River by 1719.

It may not

be stretching a point to say that, with the coincident use of
the horse for hunting, and for carrying or dragging carcasses, and with the arrival of professional hunters from the
Louisiana colonies, hunting habits did change.

The neces-

sity to produce meat far in excess of the needs of the village,
with a sudden ability to transport major portions of bison
carcass, could well mean that much of the meat cutting and
skin dressing, which formerly seems to have taken place at
the site of the hunt, was transferred to the village.
In general, early 18th-century villages of the Wichita, and
their affiliates, appear frequently to have been located on
major streams at, or near, the mouth of a small stream which
probably furnished the water supply. The villages often
appeared in clusters; this may have been dictated by the
location and distribution of arable land. Some evidence
exists that a stockade was a common feature of the village,
but practically nothing else is known of the village structure. It is also probable that these villages served as winter
quarters for small bands of professional hunters whose business it was to supply the Louisiana colony with meat. Since
there are no surface indications of permanent structures for
trading posts it seems likely that, with the evidence now
available, the hunters were responsible for all of the trade
material found at the sites. Excavation at these sites probably would furnish data on the acculturation process which
was then (1700-1750) beginning to change the lives of the
Plains Indians.
Bibliography
Bell, Robert E. and Baerreis, David A.
1951. A Survey of Oklahoma Archaeology. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
22: 7-100.
Bell, Robert E. and Hall, Roland Scott
1953. Selected Projectile Point Types of the United

188

Texas Archeo!ogical Society

States, Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, ,1:1-16 ......
Hainesi Francis
1938. The Northward Spread of Horses Among the
Plains Indians. American Anthropologist, 40:429-437.
Kip, Revi William Ingraham (Translator and Editor)
1846. The Early Jesuit Missions in North America.
Wiley and Putnam, New York, 2 Vols. See: Letter
VIII, from Father du Poisson, Missionary to the Akensas, to Father * * * (Vol. 2: 231-263).
Krieger, Alex D,
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern
Texas. University of Texas Publication 4640. Austin.
Wedel, Waldo R.
1940. Culture Sequence in the Central Great Plains.
Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, 100: 291-352.
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D. C.
Witte, Adolph Henry
1938. Spanish Fort, An Historic Wichita Site. Bulletin,
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, 10:
234-244.
Wright, Muriel H.
1947. Pioneer Historian and Archeologist of the State
of Oklahoma. Chronicals of Oklahoma, 24: 396-413.
National Park Service
Region Three
Santa Fe, New Mexico

EXCAVATIONS AT THE BLUM
ROCKSHELTER
EDWARD B.

JELKS

INTRODUCTION
The Blum rockshelter is situated on the west bank of the
Nolands River near the town of Blum in Hill County, Texas.
It was discovered by Mr. George Benson, Hill County rancher and amateur archeologist, in the summer of 1951. Recognizing the potentialities of the site, Benson informed the
writer of his discovery.
In January, 1952, Edward H. Moorman and I spent two
days in company with Benson digging a test pit in the
shelter. Results of the test indicated that the site held
promise of producing significant data on the Central Texas
Aspect, and since it will be within the embrace of Lake
Whitney’s flood control pool, plans were immediately made
for its excavation. These plans were brought to fruition
in September, 1952, when a crew consisting of Benson, E. O.
Miller, Thomas L. Williamson, Steve Boyd, James H. Duke,
Glen E. Rodda, and the writer excavated an area of 250
square feet to a mean depth of approximately six feet.
I am grateful to all the above for their enthusiasm and
industry on the dig. Special acknowledgment is due Mr.
Benson for his discovery and initial appraisa! of the site, and
for his wholehearted cooperation during all phases of the
River Basin Surveys’ investigations at Whitney. I am also
indebted to Glen L. Evans of the Texas Memorial Museum
for his geological analysis of the site, one of the key ingredients used in formulating the conclusions in this paper.
Excavation of the Blum Rockshelter was part of the nationwide archeological salvage program of the River Basin
Surveys, a program designed to recover, before it is inundated or otherwise destroyed, archeol0gical material endangered by the construction of dams and reservoirs. Formerly administered by the Smithsonian Institution, the
River Basin Surveys office in Austin is now operated by
the National Park Service, Department of the Interior, and

190

Texas Archeological Society

conducts salvage operations in Texas and adjoining states.
Grateful acknowledgment is due the following institutions
and agencies, all of which contributed complete cooperation
to the Whitney archeological project: the U. S. Army Corps
of Engineers, the University of Texas, Texas Memorial Museum, and Baylor University.
Physiographic Setting
Across the extreme northwestern corner of Hill County,
Texas, flows the Nolands River. From its headwaters in
northern Johnson County to its point of entrance into Hill
County it flows in a southeasterly direction, roughly parallel
to the Brazos a few miles to the west; but immediately after
entering Hill County it changes its direction of flow and
curves toward the west in a broad arc to converge with
the Brazos at a point some eight miles southwest of Blum.
Its channel has cut deeply into the Cretaceous limestone
bedrock, thereby exposing vertical limestone cliffs at the
edges of the valley. The cliffs have been long exposed to
the elements, and rockshelters have been formed in them
at favorable spots by the erosional effects of stream action,
weathering and temperature fluctuations. One of these is
the Blum Rockshelter.
Present day mammalian fauna of the area includes the
white-tailed deer, fox squirrel, cottontail, jack rabbit, gray
fox, red fox, opossum, raccoon, bobcat, timber wolf, coyote,
and armadillo. Of these the red fox was introduced in
recent years and the armadillo has migrated into the area
within the last fifty years. Mammals present historically,
but not found in the area now, include javelina, bison, and
beaver.
The uplands are rolling prairie which once sustained large
herds of bison, but along the margins of the stream valleys
erosion has produced a series of rocky hills and valleys. The
prairies support a fairly heavy cover of native grasses, scattered mesquites, and motts of elm and oak. The stream
valleys are heavily forested with pecan, hackberry, elm,
juniper, and other trees, dense tangles of underbrush oc-

PLATE 18
View of Nolands River terrace with Blum Rockshelter in center background°
end of low-water dam in center, where river has cut around it.

Note

Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter

curring in many spots.

193

The hilly zones adjoining the val-

leys are covered with juniper and small oaks.
The resources appear adequate to support a hunting, gathering population of considerable size: small game was abundant a century ago; the streams still teem with fish, turtles,
and mussels; edible nuts, fruits, seeds, and berries are plentiful. Terraces along the streams would have been suitable for
primitive agriculture without irrigation.
Geological Background
The Blum Rockshelter faces almost due east toward Nolands River. A low terrace (T-l), 18 to 20 feet thick and
60 to 100 feet wide, stretches across the interval between
shelter and river (Plate 18). On the east side of the stream
T-1 is absent, but T-2 is well developed. The surface of
T-2 is about 25 feet above the bed of the stream, some seven
feet higher than T-l, and T-2 is undoubtedly of considerably
greater age than T-1 (Figure 13, A).
On a line with the northern end of the shelter, a low dam
was constructed across the Nolands by the PWA in 1936.
Shortly afterward the river burst around the west end of
the dam (Plate 18) cutting a new channel through the
terrace (T-l) to which the dam had been anchored. This
dissection of T-1 left a clean, vertical face revealing clearly
its composition, which is as follows (Figure 13, B) :
Stratum
4.

Thickness
in ~eet

Top stratum of T-1. Weak soil, sterile
of cultural material ........................................

1.2

3. Middle stratum of T-1. Brown silt, weakly
stratified. Sterile of cultural material ......

2.8

2. Bottom stratum of T-1. Gray silt, humus
stained in the top three feet, containing
lenses of small gravels and sand. Flint
chips, charcoal, hearthstones, and bone
scraps occur throughout this stratum ........ 15.0

194

Texas Archeological Society

Disconformity
1. Weakly consolidated gravel lenses resting
on limestone bedrock, evidently remnants of an older terrace than T-1 (T-2?)

2.5

Four stages in the development of the present geological
situation have been reconstructed, all based on a study
made by Glen L. Evans.
Stage 1. The Blum shelter lies in a limestone bluff on the
convex side of a long meander of the Nolands River. The
erosional processes which formed the shelter can be seen at
work today several hundred feet upstream at a point where
the river impinges on the vertical face of the same limestone
bluff. A cavity is developing there in the bluff where the
erosional action of the stream is slowly removing a layer
of relatively soft stone sandwiched between more resistant
strata.
Formation of Blum shelter took place during Stage 1 when
the Nolands flowed against the cliff at the point where the
shelter is situated, and removed a soft stratum of limestone,
leaving an inhabitable indentation in its stead. The original
cavity has continued to enlarge through the years due to
spalling of weathered fragments of stone from the ceiling
and back wall. Erosion has also imparted a slight inclination to the floor, so that it slants downward from the rear
wall toward the mouth.
Stage 2. After having hollowed out the shelter the stream
gradually migrated laterally to the east, depositing gravels-and presumably silts--where its former channel had been.
Remnants of this deposit (T-2?), resting on bedrock and
discomformably underlying T-l, are yet visible where the
river has dissected and exposed a vertical face in T-1 in
front of the shelter.
Another remnant of what is apparently the same older terrace lies about fifty feet south of
the shelter along the face of the same limestone cliff. (There
are indications, incidentally, that another shelter, still filled
with the terrace remnant and masked by a sizeable talus
accumulation, may exist at that spot.)

Excavations aS the Blum Rockshelter

195

Stage 3. At some unknown time after the formation of the
terrace in Stage 2, the N01ands moved in toward the shelter
again, erasing the old terrace except for remnants such as
those described above. Although there may be small remnants of the old terrace remaining within the shelter proper,
none were recognized as such in the excavated area, and it
is probable that the shelter was swept completely, or very
nearly, clean during Stage 3.
Stage 4. Again the river retreated from the cliff, leaving
another deposit (T-l) in its wake, mostly silt rather than
gravel (Figure 13, B). That the formation of T-1 took place
in relatively recent times is indicated by an unbroken
sequence of cultural material, all a result of the Central
Texas Aspect occupation in the shelter, extending to the
bottom of T-1. All the cultural material excavated was
apparently deposited on the site during Stage 4.
Excavation
Prior to excavating, an area fifty feet long and twenty
feet wide, running east and west on its long axis from the
rear wall of the shelter out into the open terrace, was
blocked off in a grid system of five-foot squares with a
stake at each corner of each square (Figure 14). The eastwest lines of the grid were labeled J, K, L, M, and N, in
sequence from south to north; the north-south lines were
numbered in sequence from 6 through 15 from west to east.
The coordinate designation for each square was taken from
the intersecting lines at its southeast corner.
Specimens were sacked by six-inch levels and, after the
strata inside the shelter had been recognized, were labelled
by strata. All excavated fill was run through a screen.
of I/4 inch mesh.

Squares excavated were J-6, J-7, K-6, K-7, L-6, L-7, L-8,
and L-9. It was soon discovered that the rear wall, instead
of being perpendicular, sloped back to form a recess, so that
the deposits lying in the back part of the recess felt into.
Squares J-5, K-5, and L-5. This material was also exca-~
vated.

Texas Archeological Society

196

All squares inside the shelter were carried down to bedrock except L-7, L-8, and L-9. L-8 and L-9, lying at the
mouth of the shelter, were excavated to respective depths
of 96 and 114 inches, well below all evidence of occupation.
Tests with a post-hole digger in the floors of those two
squares went some 20 inches deeper in both cases without
producing any sign of habitation. For the purpose of correlating the geological sequence inside the shelter with that
revealed in the face of the terrace, Square L-15, about half
way between the shelter and the edge of the terrace, was
excavated to a depth of 84 inches.
Four distinct strata were recognized in the shelter deposits. They are:
Stratum

Thickness
in feet

4. Reddish brown, oxidized soil, in the upper
part of the stratum. Small gravels and
numerous small limestone spalls in the
lower 7 to 8 inches. Sterile

0 -2.3

3. Silt, grading from dark gray to brown,
heavily interspersed with limestone
spalts. A few bone splinters and flint
chips and a large fire hearth were in
the lower six inches

.1.2 -2.8

2. Midden material intermixed with silt and
tiny to very large limestone spalls. Several ash lenses were present. Most of
the artifacts were found in this stratum ....... 0.5 -5.3
1. Dark gray silt containing small gravels,
artifacts, and cultural debris. Not discernible in Squares L-5, L-6, L-7, L-8,
and L-9 .................................................................... 0 -1.5
The three higher strata (4, 3, and 2) in the shelter evidently correspond to the three higher strata in the vertical
terrace exposure at the river’s edge (Figure 13, B). Stratum
1 in the shelter, however, contains Central Texas Aspect

197

Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter

A
t,J

__~.__’:X_.___:_..4~
OmZON~

$ AL iHr

EA~;"r

~,.

B
FIGURE 13
Cross

section

of Blum

Rockshelter and adjacent terraces

of

Nolands

River.

Composition of terraces T-1 and T-2 with position of rockshelter indicated.
scale exaggerated 5 times).

A,

(Vertical

B, Stratigraphy of excavations, related to strata exposed

in edge of terrace at river (vertical scale exaggerated 2 times).

198

Texas Archeological Society

artifacts and is probably equivalent to the lower portion of
Stratum 2, rather than Stratum 1, in the terrace outside.
Inside the shelter, artifacts were found from the lowest
part of Stratum 3 throughout Strata 2 and 1 down to bed’
rock. Features encountered include numerous ash lenses,
piles of fire-cracked limestone chunks, masses of charcoal,
and concentrations of snail and mussel shells.
Square L-15, in the terrace between the shelter and the
river, was carried down to a depth of 84 inches. The three
upper strata seen in the section at the terrace’s edge were
easily identified in L-15, Strata 4 and 3 being sterile, Stratum
2 containing artifacts and cultural debris.
No line of demarcation between Strata 1 and 2 was discernible in Squares L-5, L-6, L-7, L-8, and L-9 but it is
thought that the difficulty in separating the two strata is
due to soil characteristics. Consequently, when the artifacts are assigned to their respective strata in the following, those found in the bottommost levels of the L squares
are designated as occurring in Stratum 1-2. All other specimens were found definitely in the strata to which they are
assigned.
Artifacts
Since most of the recognized artifact types found at Blum
have been described elsewhere, no descriptions of them will
be given here. The others will be briefly described. Projectile-point types having binomial designations will be
referred to only by the identifying word in the name, as
follows:
Present Name
Perdiz
Cliffton
Alba
Scallorn
Fresno
Yarbrough

Binomial Designation
Perdiz Pointed Stem
Cliffton Contracting Stem
Alba Barbed
Scallorn Stemmed
Fresno Triangular Blade
Yarbrough Stemmed

Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter

199

Arrow Points
A total of 148 chipped stone arrow points was found, 36
of them too fragmentary for typological identification and
six that do not have the requisite characteristics to be
assigned to any recognized type. Of the remaining 106
specimens, 50 are of the Perdiz type (Kelley, 1947, Plate 13,
a; Miller and Jelks, 1952, p. 177 and Plate 24, 2); 28 are
Scallorn (Kelley, 1947, Plate 13, f; Miller and Jelks, 1952,
pp. 176-7 and Plate 24, 1) ; 19 are CliJfton (Kelley, 1947, Plate
13, b; Krieger, 1946, p. 115 and Fig. 7, p-s; Miller and Jelks,
1952, p. 177 and Plate 24, 3); six are Alba (Newell and
Krieger, 1949, pp. 161-2 and Fig. 56, A-H; Miller and Jelks,
1952, p. 178 and Plate 25, 2); and three are Fresno (Kelley,
1947, Plate 13, g; Miller and Jelks, 1952, Plate 25, 3). Examples of these types appear on Plate 19.
Of the two most numerous arrow point types, Perdiz and
ScaIlorn, it was readily apparent--both in the field and in
the laboratory--that Perdiz occurred principally in the upper levels of occupation while Scallorn was found, for the
most part, at greater depths. Thirty-three Perdiz points
were recovered from Stratum 2 where only one specimen
of Scallorn was found; six of the Scallorn points occurred in
Stratum 1, which yielded no Perdiz.
Fourteen of the 19 CIiffton points were in Stratum 2 in
association with Perdiz; none were found in Stratum 1. One
specimen each of types Alba and Fresno was recovered
within Stratum 2, the other points of those two types occurring in the Stratum 1-2 zone (bottom levels of the "L"
squares).
The average depth below the surface for Perdiz was 52.6
inches, for Cliffton 52.1 inches, and for Scallorn 67.1 inches.
Dart Points
Sixteen dart points were found at Blum, all made of chipped stone. Three are probably of the type Yarbrough (Newell and Krieger, p. 168 and Fig. 57), four are of unknown
type, and nine are too fragmentary to be classified. One

200

Texas Archeological Society

Yarbrough and two indeterminate fragments occurred in
Stratum 2; all the other dart points were in Stratum 1-2.
DriZls
The nine flint drills and drill fragments were classified
on a basis of size.

There are three small drills with light,

delicate blades chipped on both faces.

One was rechipped

from a dart point with the dart point stem retained as a base
(Plate 19, N); the other two have unworked bases (Plate
19, L, M). Four drills were classified as medium-sized, all
having worked bases. Two fragments were not classifiable.
While the "medium" drills are larger than those commonly
occurring in Central Texas Aspect components, they are not
so large as those typical of the Edwards Plateau Aspect.
Blades
A total of 28 flint blades and blade fragments was found.
Eight are thin triangular specimens which were probably
used as knives. One of them was found in the lower part
of Stratum 3, three in Stratum 2, and four in Stratum 1-2.
Another knife-like blade, asymmetrical in shape, was recovered from Stratum 1-2. Three crude blades which might
equally well have been classified as blanks or cores were
found, one in Stratum 2 and two in Stratum 1-2. The sixteen fragments, too small for identification, were distributed

in this manner: eight in Stratum 2, five in Stratum 1-2, and
three in Stratum I.
Scrapers
Of the 66 flint scrapers, 56 are flake scrapers, six end
scrapers, and four heavy side scrapers. The flake scrapers
are smal!, irregularly shaped spalls which have been retouched unifacially along one or more edges. Twenty-three
occurred in Stratum 2, 25 in Stratum 1-2, and eight in
Stratum 1.
The heavy side scrapers are larger chunks of flint with
one smooth unworked face. The opposite face is worked

Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter

201

along one or both lateral edges. Strata 2 and 1-2 yielded
respectively one and three examples.
Two small and four medium-sized end scrapers were
found. Of the medium ones, two were in Stratum 3, one in
Stratum 2, and one in Stratum 1. One small end scraper
came from Stratum 2, the other from Stratum 1-2.
Gravers
The six gravers are irregular-shaped flint chips retouched
along one edge in the manner of the flake scrapers, but with
a sharp, short, beak-like projection which would be suitable
for scratching grooves in materials such as wood, bone, and
soft stone. They were equally distributed between Strata
2, 1-2, and 1, two specimens occurring in each of those strata.
Grinding Implements
Five fragments of grinding slabs and ten mano fragments

¯

d

K LN~

/
Ground plan of Blum site, showing position of rockshelter in relation to eroded
edge of terrace to east:
Stakes in excavation area shown by dots.
Squares outlined
are those excavated to date.

2O2

Texas Archeological SocieSy

were found as follows: in Stratum 2, three slab and five
mano fragments; in Stratum 1-2, two slab and five mano
fragments. As nearly as could be determined from the
pieces, the grinding slabs had been subjected to rotary,
rather than back-and-forth, motions during the grinding
process.
Hammerstones
Three hammerstones were found in Stratum 2, four in
Stratum 1-2. All are waterworn pebbles which show evidence of battering around the edges.
Pigments
Small pieces of hematite, probably used for body paint,
were found in all occupation levels.
Bone Awls
Fourteen sharply pointed bone awls with highly polished
blades were recovered from Strata 1, 2, and 1-2. All are
evidently of deer .bone, two of them retaining a portion of
the articular surface of a joint at the base. One, fashioned
from a bone splinter, has a rough unworked base. The other
eleven are too fragmentary for complete description.
Deer Ulna Flakers
Eleven flaking implements made from deer ulna were
found. Five were in Stratum 1,2, six in Stratum 2. The
blunt design of the tip and the scratches toward the distal
end of the blade indicate that this type of implement was
probably used for flint chipping by the pressure method.
Bone Bead
One undecorated, cylindrical bone bead was cut from a
long bone of a small mammal. It came from Stratum 2, and
is 1 cm. long with a diameter of 7 ram.
Artifacts of Antler
There are thirteen pieces of worked antler, all probably
representing implements used for chipping flint by either

B

A

I

0

p

Q

R

H

6

F

M

L

K

J

,

E

D

C

T

S

X
PLATE 19
Representative artifacts from
points.

I-K, Cliffton points.

O-S, Scallorn points.

Blum Roekshelter.

A-E,

Perdiz points.

L, M, Drills with unworked bases.

T, Fresno point.

U, Engraved sherd from

F-H, Alba

N, Stemmed drill.
vessel No.

1.

V,

Rim sherd from vessel No. 3.
W, Rim sherd from vessel No. 2.
X, Rim sherd from
vessel No. 4.
Y, Sherd with faintly engraved pendant triangles from vessel No. 5.
Size 1~, except X, 1/~.

Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter

pressure or indirect percussion.

205

The distal tips are blunt

and have been smoothed and polished.

Three specimens are

between 11 and 12 cm. long and may be almost complete;
the rest are small fragments.
the others from Stratum 2.

Four are from Stratum 1-2,

Ceramics
Eighty-eight potsherds, representing at least five and
perhaps six or seven vessels, were found. All are from the
upper portion of Stratum 2 in association with Perdiz and
Clif]ton arrow points. No pottery was encountered below
the Perdiz-Cliffton zone.
Only a single sherd (Plate 19, U) of Vessel 1, a bottle,
was found. It is a thin, hard, dark gray, polished ware with
clay temper. An engraved design of panels composed of
concentric curved lines is somewhat reminiscent of the Titus
Focus type RipIey Engraved. The lines contain traces of red
pigment.
Vessel 2, represented by 15 sherds, was a simple undecorated bowl, dark gray in color (Plate 19, W). It is clay-grit
tempered, with a sandy texture, and the paste is relatively
hard. A heavy coating of burned grease suggests use as a
cooking vessel.
The four sherds of Vessel 3 are light tan in color, tempered
with clay lumps and small particles of bone (Plate 19, V).
Like Vessel 2, it was evidently a small, simple bowl, The
exterior is smoothed, and an incised design consisting of inclined parallel lines and light, thin punctates appears below
the rim.
Most complete of the vessels is Vessel 4, of which 55 sherds
were found. The paste is black and has a decided tendency
to crumble. The tempering agent is bone. This was a large
vessel with a slightly outcurving rim and a bulging body
which is decorated with parallel, horizontal bands of deep
fingernail impressions, the uppermost band 9 to 10 cm. below the rim (Plate 19, X). The shape of the base cannot
be determined.

206

Texas Archeological Society

There is only one sherd of Vessel 5, a bottle with a crudely
executed design of pendant triangles engraved around the
shoulder (Plate 19, Y).

It is dark gray in color, with a

slightly smoothed exterior, and the principal tempering
agent is small clay lumps.

There are also a few tiny white

particles which appear to be bone.
None of the five vessels has been definitely identified as
to type, but most or all of them seem to be Caddoan ware.
It is safe to assume that all are trade items from the east.
Summary and Conclusions
The entire occupation at the Blum Rockshelter can be
attributed to the Central Texas Aspect. A complete absence of European trade material indicates that the shelter
was abandoned prior to the time that intensive trade between white men and central Texas Indians began. The
fact that a terrace of the Nolands River, 18 feet in thickness, has been deposited over the earliest signs of habitation
suggests that the occupation extended over a period of several centuries. That conclusion is strengthened by the
quantity of spall material, fallen from the shelter’s roof,
encountered throughout the excavated deposits. The dozens
of carbon samples which were collected should provide accurate dates for the occupation when they are subjected to
analysis by the radiocarbon method of age determination.
Absolute dating of the material will also contribute to geological knowledge concerning the rate of terrace accretion
along small streams in the area.
The presence of Caddoan style pottery in the higher levels
is indicative of trade relations between the Central Texas
Aspect and peoples to the east. While no pottery was found
in the deeper levels, the presence there of arrow point type
Alba and dart point type Yarbrough suggests contacts with
peoples in the same direction.
Arrow points with expanding stems, notably types ScaIlorn and Alba, in general lay deeper than those with contracting stems (Perdiz and Cliffton). It will be of interest,

Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter

207

and perhaps of considerable chronological significance, to
discover whether or not similar typologica! stratigraphy
obtains at other Central Texas Aspect sites.
References Cited
Kelley, J. Charles
1947. The Lehmann Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of
the Toyah, Uvalde, and Round Rock Foci. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeologica! and Paleontological Society, V.
18, pp. 115-128. Abilene.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chrono!ogy in Northern
Texas. University of Texas Publications No. 4640. Austin.
Miller, E. O. and Edward B. Jelks
1952. Archeological Excavations at the Belton Reservoir, Coryell County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, V. 23, pp.
168-217. Lubbock.
Newell, H. Perry and Alex D. Krieger
1949. The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Society for American Archeology, Memoir No. 5.
National Park Service
River Basin Surveys
601 East !9th St.
Austin, Texas

~
~z~

A PRELIMINARY REPORT ON THE
MORTUARY CAVE OF CANDELARIA,
COAHUILA, MEXICO
PABLO MARTINEZ DEL t~IO

Introduction
The Cueva de la Candelaria lies about 55 miles northeast
of Torre6n and 30 miles north-northeast of San Pedro de las
Co!onias, in southwestern Coahuila. It is reached after a
four-hour drive across the dry bed of Laguna de Mayran
and then along the rocky bottom of Canyon de Ventanas;
a very sturdy type of vehicle is essential. This canyon connects the prosperous, agricultural Laguna bols6n (or basin),
with a smaller one, the Bols6n del Sobaco or Bols6n de las
Delicias. But whereas the Laguna is nourished by the large
Rio Nazas, Mexico’s counterpart to the Nile, which rises far
to the west in the Sierra Madre, the Bols6n de las Delicias is
nourished only with the very meager local precipitation.
The practically waterless bols6n, in consequence, is unfit
for agriculture, which today d e p e n d s u p o n irrigation
throughout the Laguna region. The bols6n contains a single
small settlement, Las Delicias, which owes its name to a
tiny permanent stream which springs from the flanks of the
adjoining sierra. The bols6n is roughly oval in shape and,
according to Maldonado-Koerdell, it is an area of subsidence
surrounded by Mesozoic sierras of moderate elevation. The
floor of the bols6n is about 3,300 feet above sea level (Plate
20, B).
The cave itself is located about 100 feet above the flat
floor of the bols6n (Plate 20, A), on a small hill which forms
part of a cluster of similar hills c!osely attached to the Sierra
de la Candelaria, in the southern section of the bols6n. These
hills, which are particularly rich in lime, abound in caves,
crevices and cracks of all sorts and have not proved too
friendly to vegetation, although the surrounding country is
clothed with yuccas, oeotillo, scrub mesquite, cactus, lechuguilla and the other members of a typical desert flora (Plate
20, B). Animal life is impressively scarce. A well, pro-

Mortuary Cave o] Candelaria, Coahuila, Mexico

209

ducing more mud than water, has been dug some two miles
away, and there is also a "poza’,, or basin, about 1,000 feet
long and full of a most untempting coffee-colored liquid, at
a slightly greater distance. This rimless "poza", with its
steep sides slanting down to about 100 feet below the level
of the plain, is the largest of several equally puzzling depressions, although the rest are now quite dry. In other
days it seems to have provided the Candelaria people with
much of their drinking-water, as attested by the large number of small flint artifacts lying within a restricted area
(no doubt a work-shop or camp-site) close to the edge of
the basin. These are mostly arrowheads and scrapers, a few
of them remarkable on account of their strange shape, as if
it had been inspired by the thumb-nail. Nowhere did we
find traces of dwellings.
The cave was originally reported by Sr. Jos~ S~nchez to
his employer, Sr. Luis Talamantes, who has proved most
helpful throughout, Sr, Talamantes promptly conveyed the
information to Lic. Federico Elizondo, the very efficient
Director of the Escuela Secundaria y Preparatoria del
Estado, at TorreSn. Soon some preliminary visits to the
cave were conducted by Lic. Elizondo himself, by Prof.
Wenceslao Rodr~guez, who is the organizer of the School
museum, a model in its way, and by other associates. They
were able to collect a great amount of material, including
many of the objects illustrated in the following pages.
Some time later news of the discovery was sent to the Departamento de Prehistoria of the Instituto Nacional de Antropologla e Historia, in Mexico City, together with a generous invitation to cooperate with the School in further
work on the cave.
In view of the above, two visits to the cave, each lasting
several days, were made by joint parties from the School
and the Department. The first visit (March-Apri! 1953) was
financed and handsomely assisted by the State and local
authorities (Sr. Roman Cepeda, Governor of Coahuila; Lic.
Rodolfo Gonz~lez Trevi~o, Mayor of TorreSn; Lic. Lucas
IIaces Gil, Chairman of the Junta de Mejoras Materiales).

210

Texas Archeo~ogical Society

The second expedition (September 1953), although largely
financed by the Department, also received a substantial
grant from the same sources. During the expeditions, the
School was represented by Sres. Elizondo and Rodriguez,
the Department by Sres. Maldonado-Koerdel!, Bernal, Aveleyra, Romano, Gonz~lez Rul and the writer. Aveleyra and
Bernal~ did not take part in the first campaign; MaldonadoKoerdell was absent from the second. The writer wishes
to express his indebtedness to several friends and confreres
from both sides of the frontier who gave him the benefit of
their personal experiences in that part of the world (notably
Dr. J. Alden Mason and Dr. Walter W. Taylor), or else
helped him in other ways. Dr. J. O. Brew, for instance,
kindly provided him with a copy of the field notes of Dr.
Palmer, who visited some other caves in this region around
1880 (Report of the Peabody Trustees, 1881) and provided
the Peabody Museum of Harvard University with a collection which, to judge from description, is almost exactly a
duplicate for our own. Further acknowledgments were all
duly set down in a previous publication (Martlnez del Rio,
1953). Special thanks, however, are due to Alex D. Krieger.
It must be stressed that it has as yet proved impossible
fully to study the material in all its aspects, including its
implications and possible correlations. A great amount of
work remains to be done with the material itself and the
early historical sources before the final Report is available.
This paper, however, is offered chiefly as an accompaniment
to the illustrations, which are reproduced through the kindness of Dr. J. Silva Herzog, Director of "Cuadernos Americanos," hoping that they may prove of interest to fellowworkers in the great Aridamerican field. The larger illustrations are from photographs by Arturo Romano: each of the
black blocks represents one centimeter. For the smaller photographs I am indebted to Lic. Elizondo and Prof. Rodriguez.
The Cave
Camp was set up close to the cave, and thanks to a small
generating plant we had the best possible lighting, both in

PLATE 20
A, Candelaria Cave mouth on hill slope where men are standing at far right, and
camp in center foreground. B, View, of bols6n and vegetation from near the camp.

PLATE

21

Interior of cave with entrance opening at top.

Mortuary Cave oi CandeZaria, Coahuila, Mexico

215

camp and also inside the cave itself. The Candelaria cave
was exclusively a burial cave: it could never have been
used for human occupation. The entrance is roughly circular
and very small, some 4 ft. across: it opens horizontally on to
a vertical shaft some 30 feet deep, so that ropes or, better
still, a rope ladder, are absolutely essential (Plate 21). At
the bottom of this shaft the floor of the cave slants in accordance with the dip of the strata. Some important rock
falls have taken place, crushing a certain amount of material; and work inside the cave is fraught with considerable danger. All the same, an almost incredible number of
bones and objects of all kinds was collected, some of them
in remarkably "fresh" condition in the archaeological sense,
though it would hardly meet with the approval of the average housewife. In fact the work inside the ill-ventilated
cave was only rendered possible by the lavish use of respirators and deodorizers as the atmosphere, owing to the
guano and the effects of human decomposition, was truly
nauseating.
The material was in a state of great disorder (Plate 22,
A, B). The dead had been placed with knees bent toward the chest and wrapped in fibre-blankets (Plate 22, D),
but as the result of decay and other ravages the bundles had
been largely torn open and the bones and other contents
scattered. Originally many of the bundles had been placed
overlying each other, with a layer of cactus leaves, sticks
and other bedding between the bundles, but owing to the
rock falls and the general confusion stratigraphic work was
clearly impossible. A few remains, in fact, had slipped down
and hung like stalactites in a sort of secondary chamber
underneath. There are other crevices, as yet unexplored.
Skeletal Material
Human remains were found, as already explained, in great
quantity, and a large proportion of these, secured during
the first expedition, has already been measured and studied
by Sra. Faulhaber, of the Department of Physical Anthropology of the 1Viuseo Nacional de Antropologla in Mexico

216

Texas Archeological Society

City. It would be impossible to reproduce her report and
tabulations but a few data, and some of her general impressions, will be of interest. It must be pointed out that
work of this nature had been carried out many years ago
(Studley, 1884, pp. 233-260) on the osteological remains taken
to the Peabody Museum by Palmer and secured, as already
pointed out, from caves in this same Laguna region (although quite far from Candelaria) in association with some
strikingly similar cultural material.
Most of the Candelaria individuals were !ong-headed: the
average breadth-length index for 11 male crania is 74.38.
The index for nine of these lies under 74.9; the remaining
two were mesocephalic. The average index for 10 female
crania was 73.29; five of them were dolicocephalic, the other
five mesocephalic.
As regards the height-length index, six males turned out
to be orthocephalic, with indices between 70.00 and 74.9.
Five proved to be hypsicephalic. The average height-length
index for all the male skulls is 74.54. Six of the females
were orthocephalic, four hypsicephalic; the average index
for the ten is 73.75. Average height-breadth index for the
males is 100.14; for the females 100.67. Average nasal index
is 49.36 and 51.29, respectively.
Sra. Faulhaber has worked out the probable average
stature of the individuals at 166.80 cm. for the males and
156.81 cm. for the females. Thus, in accordance with Martin’s classification, the Candelaria people were rather higher
than the average, although not actually tall.
The majority of the bones, according to Sra. Faulhaber,
suggest healthy individuals, although a certain proportion
reveal pathological injuries. She points out that there are
no intentionally deformed skulls. The teeth are considerably
worn, apparently due to a predominance of hard foodstuffs. There are abscesses in 13 of the crania studied.
Sra. Faulhaber remarks, in short, that the Candelaria folk
seem to have been well-developed, and that the individuals
were physically strong. Their stature was similar to that of

PLATE 22
A, B, Views of masses of artifacts and skeletal remains on
and arrow shafts. D, Wrapped infant bundle.

cave floor.

C, Bows

PLATE 23
A, Three skulls showing’ advanced syphilitic lesions on frontal and facial bones.
B, Digging sticks. C, Miscellaneous shafts, including arrowshaft (?) at bottom. D,
Grooved "rabbit clubs" or "fending stic]~s",

Mortuary Cave of Candelaria, Coahuila, Mexico

221

the Indians of northern Mexico today, although these, unlike the Candelaria folk, are on the whole mesocephalic:
They had narrow foreheads and a large face in proportion
~o the skull. For the rest, after careful comparison with
the data relating to the Peabody material, Sra. Faulhaber
thinks that she is able to affirm "that both series represent
the same Indian people, since the variations observed in the~
few crania do not appear to be in excess of normal limits;
although it is impossible to state to which particular trib~
individuals under study belonged."
More material was secured during the second campaign~
but this had not as yet been considered by Sra. Faulhaber~
For the rest, Dr. D6valos Hurtado, Professor of Palaeo~-pathology at the Escuela Nacional de Antropologia e Hi~-toria, points out that several of the skulls show impressive"
and undeniable symptoms of syphilis in the frontal region.
(Plate 23, A).
Cultural Material
It must be stressed that the cultural material is still u~dergoing study: we only returned from the second expedi-.
tion to the cave some three weeks ago, but it is hoped that the~
illustrations will afford a good genera! conspectus. The best:
collection is in the museum of the Escuela Secundaria y
Preparatoria at TorreSn, but there is an excellent duplicate’
series in the Museo Nacional de Antropo!ogia, Mexico City..
Some of the wooden artifacts are illustrated in Plates 2224. The digging-sticks in Plate 23, B of course do not attest
that the Candelaria people practiced cultivation since, as
pointed out by Mera (1938, p. 58) and others, they would
have proved useful for uprooting various plants, notably the
small agaves which, as all anthropologists are aware, were
such an essential part of the diet of the hunting and gathering peoples of Aridamerica (see Castetter, et al., 1938). It
is important to note that no traces of edibles of any sort
were found inside the cave, nor of grinding equipment of any
description.
The number of bows secured (Plate 22, C) was surpris-

222

Texas Archeological Society

ingly small, relatively speaking, and the same holds true of
arrowshafts (Plate 23, C). During the second expedition we
secured part of a fine bow with a large part of the fiber
string and a strip of leather still attached to it. The grooved
"rabbit clubs" or "fending sticks" (Plate 23, D) are like
those found widely in western Texas and the Southwest.
There was no trace cf the atlatl or dart-thrower; one is reported (wrongly, I suspect) in the Palmer collection at Peabody Museum, but we have not been able to go into the matter. Our associates had discovered a cradle frame (Plate 24,
A), and we found fragments of others.
The knives (Plates 24, B; 25, A-C) might be described as
spectacular; they are not only things of beauty in their way
but reveal excellent workmanship. A few of the wooden
handles are round; others are wide, thin, and flat. Many
are attached to the flint blades with asphaltum which may
have come from the Gulf of Mexico shores. Krieger has
suggested another and much closer source in northeastern
Chihuahua, where tar pits are known near Ojinaga. In three
cases the knife handle bears round black pits due to its being
used as a fire-drill hearth. Steward (!937, p. 75) cites this
practice for the Great Basin, where various wooden artifacts were often used as emergency material for fire-drilling. Some of the knife handles are, moreover, decorated
with incised designs. One would expect frequent use to
blacken the handles and obliterate the designs, hence one
wonders whether these knives were of ceremonial nature.
That shown in Plate 25, B, for instance, is remarkably frail,
and some of the blades are decidedly thin. The flint, of local
origin, is at times translucent.
Cotton textile was quite exceptional, a single piece being
found. Great masses of other fine textiles (Plate 26) were
found, woven with agave fibers.
The designs are often
polychrome and in assymetrical but pleasing designs, as in
Plate 26, B. The number of these "mortuary blankets" is
almost overwhelming. Sra. Johnson of the Museo Naciona!
is going carefully into the question of techniques, and has
already called our attention to two fragments (Plate 26, A,

PLATE 24
~, C~’.a.dl.e frame; note sharpened ends of cross-pieces,

B, Knives~

PLATE 25
Three of the halted knives shown in preceding plate, enlarged to about 2/3 actual
size. Length of A, about 9 inches, Note incised decoration on A and two fir~-be~r~h
pits in handle of C0

Mortuary Cave of Candelaria, Coahuila, Mexico

227

second from left and lower right corner) which are strongly
reminiscent of Peruvian weaving methods. A sash-like strip
was also found, no doubt resembling those mentioned by
Palmer from other Coahuila caves.
Cordage was found in quantity, apparently all of agave
fiber. It was present in various degrees of thickness although none of it might be described as "rope" (this point
is of importance since the question arose of how the Indians
got in or out of the cave without stout ropes), i bundle,
largely undamaged, which we opened in Mexico City, proved
that the corpse had been provided with a sort of turban.
There are also breech clouts (Plate 31, A), a trait found
throughout Aridamerica (cf. Haury, 1950, PI. 40) and some
curious tassels (Plate 31, B). Nets were found (Plate 28,
B), probably both for fishing and for carrying, although
one wonders where the Candelaria people would have fished
unless it was in the Laguna basin. Reference must also be
made to the round bags of net-like weaving (Plate 28, D).
Prof. Rodrlguez states that one of these is of a type still in use
for catching birds in that part of Mexico.

incidentally, the

turban referred to a moment ago must not be mistaken for
the grass rings (Plate 28, C) which were placed on the head
for carrying loads; a cruder type was made of cedar bark
in the Basket-Maker culture in the "Four Corners" area of
the Southwest United States (Kidder and Guernsey, 1919,
p. 175).
There were many pieces of reed matting, called "petates"
and used as sleeping mats even by the more sophisticated
tribes of Mesoamerica (Plate 28, A). The twilling is at times
diagonal, and many of the fragments are either painted red
or decorated with red and green designs. Some of these
mats, together with a different type consisting of a large
number of thin sticks closely bound together, might almost
duplicate a couple of the illustrations in Cosgrove’s work
(1947, Figs. 106-107) in caves of the Upper Gila and Hueco
areas. Similar specimens were likewise present in Tularosa
Cave (Martin, et al., 1952, p. 323) and in Murrah Cave on the
lower Pecos River in Texas (Holden, 1937, Pl. I0). In so far

228 ....

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

as the "petate" mats are concerned, these, of course, may be
found over most of Aridamerica and Mesoamerica wherever
rushes were or are available (for example, see Cressman,
1942, Figs. 89, 99 for northern Great Basin).
There are many fragments of basketry but only a few
complete ones (Plate 27). The coiling technique is clearly
shown, and a couple of the baskets had been patched, as,
for instance, in the case of Ventana Cave, Arizona (Haury,
1950, P1. 32). There were plenty of sandals, made in severa! different techniques (Plates 29, 30). They are mostly
of lechugilla fiber and merit an extensive study in view of
comparisons with other areas (in western Texas, for example, see Setzler, 1935, p. 107; Smith, 1933, pp. 57-65).
Ornaments were found in great profusion although in
many cases the kinds of material used awaits identification.
Some of the necklaces and bracelets are still threaded (Plate
33, A, B); they contain beads made of seeds, shell, bone,
and stone. The magnificent necklace made of rattlesnake
vertebrae tied tightly in place with cords (Plate 34, B),
deserves special mention; in this case as in so many others,
there are duplicates in the Palmer collection. The curious
flower-like objects (or rattles?) reproduced in Plate 32, A,
are fashioned out of tiny ringlets of bone tied into bunches
with fine cords. Bone also figures in the sharply pointed
object at the top of Plate 32, B, and in the two objects in the
center of the same photograph, which Prof. Rodr~guez ascertained are thorn cases. Some of the she!l ornaments are
shovcn in Plate 34, A; the object at bottom center of th~s
photograph is of green s_]ate. We were very fortunate as
regards shell ornaments during the second expedition, but
they resemble those in the illustrations.
The antlers in Plate 35, A, were no doubt used for ceremonial purposes, presumably dances, as occurred throughout
most of the Greater Southwestern area. The small Tart!y
mummified dog (Plate 35, B) naturally reminds one of Kidder and Guernsey’s discoveries in a Basket-Maker cave in
Arizona (Guernsey and Kidder, 1921, Pl. 15).

PLATE 26
Textiles woven with fine threads of dyed agave fibers,

PLATE 27
Coiled baskets.

Mortuary Cave O] Candelaria, Coahuila, Mexico

233

Bone tools were strangely absent, although there was an
awl. A number of pieces of deer-skin were found, of different sizes, and there was evidence that the head of a corpse
had been wrapped in one of these before being finally enclosed in the usual fiber blanket. Another piece was provided with a simple decorative motif. We found no traces
of fur, and the most remarkable piece of human hair was a
long wisp which had been coiled around a small reed splint.
There was another remarkable find: a human skull with a
fragment of fiber cloth rammed into the foramen magnum,
strongly suggestive of decapitation.
Our associates had already secured a bundle, intact, containing an infant (Plate 22, D); and during the succeeding
expeditions two more were secured, both in the same excellent condition. The bundle of an adult, which had been
well preserved down to the waist, revealed that the body
had been enclosed in two fiber-blankets, sewn together
lengthwise, then wrapped around the corpse and finally
sewn, although the part around the head had only been
fastened by means of strings. The dead man, as already
said, had been provided with a kind of fiber turban, originally dyed red. In this case there were no traces of deerskin.
As regards stone artifacts, our associates were able to
gather well over three dozen inside the cave, mostly small
arrow-heads and scrapers, during their earlier visits. During
the later expeditions only four were secured, two of them
broken. It has been impossible to illustrate these points but
Aveleyra, who has studied them closely, reports that this
deficiency can be compensated by turning to Krieger’s wellknown paper (1950, Fig. 8), since they almost always conform to his outlines D, E, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, in section V,
at the top of the illustration. Krieger considers that these
small points begin to appear from about 500 A. D.
A very large number of similar artifacts were found by
Aveleyra and other members of the party close to the
"poza" to which reference has already been made, which

234

Texas Archeological Society

also produced two large fragments of blades. These types
are reported associated with pottery (presUmably indicative
of European activity) at Finisterre, Cerro de Santiago and
other sites in this same Laguna region. There is, accordingly,
a strong suggestion that they were in use at the time of the
first contacts with the Spaniards late in the 16th or early
in the 17th centuries.
Sr. Jos~ S~nchez is said to have reported finding a piece
of pottery during his first descent into the cave, but further
information is unavailable at this moment. Aveleyra and
Gonz~lez Rul discovered a single blackened, primitive-looking potsherd under one of the bundles; they feel sure that
it was in situ, but this closes the list as far as the cave is
concerned and, for that matter, all the adjoining country.
That, however, need not surprise us, since such is the situation throughout the vast north-central Mexican area of
which the Laguna region is only a small part. Many crude,
coarse, sherds are indeed found in the Laguna itself, such
as at Cerro de Santiago, but they are apparently limited to
the early mission sites of communities that came into being
under European influence, when the missionaries attempted
to set the Laguneros on new ways of living. The single
sherd in the cave, amongst hundreds of other objects, is still
somewhat of a mystery, as is all this question in general, but
it does seem suggestive when trying to establish a date for
the Candelaria people.
Discussion
Given the evidence provided by the finds, and their relative freshness, it is tempting to consider that the Candelaria
people were flourishing at the time of the first contacts with
the Europeans, late in the sixteenth and early in the seventeenth centuries. A good deal of ethnological information
as to the tribes of al! this part of the world at that time is
to be found in the writings of the ecclesiastics who either
established missions in the region, or else embodied data,
based on earlier sources, when writing many years later
(Alegre, Arlegui, Mota y Escobar, P~rez de Ribas, etc.).
The early "Litterae Annuae" of the Jesuit missionaries,

PLATE 28
A, Twilled sleeping mat with painted designs.
B, Fine net. C, Three rings of thick
grass bundles bound with eordag’e.
D, Two round baskets of loose weave with stick:

rims.

PLATE 29
Examples of different sandal techniques.

Mortuary Cave of CandeIaria, Coahuila, Mexico

239

in other words the annual reports sent by the Jesuit missionaries to their superiors (some are transcribed in "Documentos", 1857) are of special interest, and were it not for
these devoted men, who may almost be counted on the
fingers but shirked no difficulty in their work of conversion
of the natives, our information would be of the vaguest,
although even thus it is far from complete.
Curiously enough, it can be said in brief that, generally
speaking, the written sources neither contradict nor confirm the evidence afforded by the finds. According to the
sources, the Laguna tribes (to use the term as also embracing the Delicias basin) were hunters, fishers and gatherers who, at least in part, lived in "rancher~as", mostly on
the islands in the great lagoon, although no information is
given as to the nature of their dwellings, which must have
been made of the flimsiest materials. In fact, the term
"rancherlas" might even be construed simply to imply either
a tribe or a community, although the first seems to be the
right interpretation.
Did the tribes of the Laguna region practice agriculture?
Beals (1932) favors the idea; Kirchhoff (1943, pp. 137 and
144) questions it; and the present writer, frankly, is even
more skeptical, although I would by no means refuse to
admit a certain possibility. But it seems most unlikely. As
already pointed out, the sources tell us specifically that the
Laguneros hunted different kinds of game, fished and caught
water-fowl in the great lagoon, which also supplied them
with certain edible roots which they beat into circular longlasting cakes; and that they likewise subsisted on the usual
desert products: agaves, prickly pears, "mezquitamal", and
the rest of them. In point of fact, the documents give us
quite a lot of information on this subject of diet, but I have
hitherto failed to find a single mention of maize, or for that
matter, a single unequivocal reference to agriculture in general. The few references that one encounters merely prove,
to the writer’s way of thinking, that, thanks to the missionaries, the natives took to cultivation very rapidly. Nor,
must one insist, did the cave, with the extremely doubtful

240

Texas Archeological Society

exception of the digging-sticks, provide any evidence on this
very important matter. Moreover, cultivation could never
have been practiced anywhere near the cavern.
The sources speak a good deal about the use of deer
antlers by the natives in their ceremonies, and as already
said, we found such antlers, adapted to ceremonial purposes, in the cave, but this is such a common trait that it
can hardly be classified as diagnostic. What is more significant is that the sources should make no mention of mortuary bundles or, for that matter, of mortuary caves of the
Candelaria type, an ommission that would seem almost inexplicable in the missionaries, who wrote their accounts on
the spot and give us all kinds of details regarding the life
of the natives and their different practices. This might lead
one to suspect that the people of the mortuary caves may
have antedated the period of Spanish penetration by a considerable period; in other words, that they may have flourished much earlier; and their cultural status would seem
to be in agreement.
As against this evidence, there are, however, the suggested correlations between the pottery and the artifacts,
rightly stressed by Aveleyra, and favoring a date roughly
coincident with the early contacts with the Europeans, not
so many years before !600 A. D. and a little afterwards.
There is also the relative freshness of the remains. What
is~certain is that the tribes in question cannot have flourished much later, as there would certainly have been some
clear evidence to that effect in the mortuary caverns. It
is to be hoped that C14 and further research will shed more
light on this question.
It is undeniable that in other days a great cultural continuum stretched all the way down from Oregon to Guanajuato anti even as far as Quer~taro, in Mexico. It has been
termed the "Greater Southwestern Area" by American archaeologists such as Martin and his associates (1947, map
on end papers) although, to my mind, the area spread much
further south into central Mexico than the aforesaid au-

PLAI ~ 30
Examples of different ~land~l techniques.

PLATE 31
A, Breech clout of agave-fiber cords and pelvic bone.
cords,

B,

"Tassels" of agave-flber

Mortuary Cave o] Candelaria, CoahuiIa, Mexico

245

thorities suggest. The cultures that flourished within the
continuum were strongly differentiated in accordance with
local ecological conditions, but they are basically related:
in fact, they stand to each other much as the fingers of a
single hand. They all have the same "air de famille".
A general resemblance, for instance, could easily be made
out between the Candelaria people and the Basket-Makers
in spite of what is in all probability a considerable timelag on the part of the first. Basket-Makers II were, of
course, incipient agriculturists so that one would prefer to
speak of Basket-Makers I, although these are practically
hypothetical. A Basket-Maker "mummy", apparently at the
Peabody Museum and illustrated by Miss Wormington
(!947, p. 30) might, at first sight, be taken for one from
the Candelaria cave, and the same holds true of some of the
objects shown by Kidder and Guernsey in their well known
reports.
But these first impressions have to be qualified immediately. The Candelaria blankets, unlike the Basket-Maker,
were not made of fur: in fact, I repeat that no traces at all
of fur (or of bark) were found inside our cave. The similarities, in other words, lose in sharpness of definition the
closer one studies them, and turn out to be generic rather
than specific, whereas divergences a r e o f t e n clear and
straightforward. For example, one may refer to the fundamental differences in the type of burial between the Candelaria folk and the peoples of Southwestern Texas or of
the Sierra Madre, although they did not lie so far away
geographically. In brief, notwithstanding the basic relationships to which we have referred, the culture of the
Candelaria people has a character all its own which sets
it distinctly apart:
attention.

it most certainly merits the greatest

Bibliography
Alegre, Francisco Javier
1841. Historia de la Compafiia de Jesds en Nueva Espafia. 3 Vols. Mexico, D. F. (written about !767).

246

Texas Archeological Society

Arlegui, Jose de
1851. CrSnica de la Provincia de N. S. P. S. Francisco
de Zacatecas. Mexico, D. F. (first edition 1737).
Beals, Ralph L.
1932. The Comparative Ethnology of Northern Mexico
before 1750. Ibero-Americana, No. 2. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Castetter, Edward F., Willis H. Bell, and Alvin R. Grove.
1938. The Early Utilization and the Distribution of
Agave in the American Southwest. University of New
Mexico Bulletin. Albuquerque, N. M.
Cosgrove, C. B.
1947. Caves of the Upper Gila and Hueco Areas in New
Mexico and Texas. Papers of the Peabody Museum of
American Archaeology and Ethnology, Vol. XXIV, No.
2. Cambridge, Mass.
Cressman, L. S.
1942. Archaeological Researches in the Northern Great
Basin.

Carnegie Institution of Washington, Publ. 538.

Washington, D. C.

"Documentos"
1857. Documentos para la Historia de Mexico. Cuarta
serie, vol. III. Mexico, D. F.
Guernsey, Samuel James, and Alfred Vincent Kidder.
1921. Basket-Maker Caves of Northeastern Arizona. Papers of the Peabody Museum of American Archaeology
and Ethnology, Vol. VIII, No. 2, Cambridge, Mass.
Guernsey, Samue! James
1931. Explorations in Northeastern Arizona. Ibid., Vol.
XII, No. 1.
Haury, Emil W.
1950.

The Stratigraphy and Archaeology of Ventana

°

o

PLATE 32
A, Ornamental objects and rattles (?) of tiny bone ringlets bound ~,vith cords.
B,
:MiscellaneQ~s objects of wood, bone, and shell ; note beads at bottom set in asphaltum,

PLATE 33
A, Necklaces and bracelets of stone and bone, including snake vertebrae.
lace of bone and stone beads,

B, Neck-

Mortuary Cave o~ Candelaria, Coahuila, Mexico

251

Cave, Arizona, University of New Mexico Press. Albuquer.que, N. M.
Holden, W. C.
1937. Excavation of Murrah Cave. Bulletin’ Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 9, pp. 4873. Abilene, Texas.
Kidder, Alfred Vincent, and Samuel James Guernsey
1919. Archaeological Explorations in Northeastern Arizona. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 65. Washington, D. C.
Kirchhoff, Paul
1943. Los Recolectores--Cazadores del Norte de Mexico.
In: E! Norte de Mexico y el Sur de los Estados Unidos,
Sociedad Mexicana de Antropo!og~a, pp. 133-!44. Mexico, D. F.
Krieger, Alex D.
1950. A Suggested General Sequence in North American Projectile Points. Proceedings of the Sixth Plains
Archeological Conference, pp. 117-124. University of
Utah Press. Salt Lake City.
Martin, Paul S., George I. Quimby, and Donald Collier
1947. Indians Before Columbus. University of Chicago
Press. Chicago, Illinois.
Martin, Paul S., et al
1952. Mogollon Cultural Continuity and Change. Fieldiana: Anthropology Papers, Vol. 40. Chicago Museum of
Natural History. Chicago, Illinois.
Martinez Del Rio, Pablo
1953. La Cueva Mortuoria de la Candelaria, Coahuila.
Cuadernos Americanos, Vol. LXX (July-August), pp.
177-204. Mexico, D. F.
Mera, H. P.
1938. Reconnaissance and Excavation in Southeastern

252

~,

Texas Arcl~eo!og~cal Society ~

.... ,,~

NewMexico. Memoirs of the American Anthropological
Association, No. 5i. Menasha, Wisconsin.
Mota y Escobar, Alonso
1940. DescripciSn Geogr~fica de los Reinos de la Nueva
Galicia, Nueva Vizcaya, y Nuevo Leon. (Written about
1605?). Mexico, D. F.
Perez de Ribas, Andres
1944. Triunfos de nuestra Santa Fe entre las genres mas
b~rbaras y fieras del Nuevo Orbe. Mexico, D. F. (First
edition, Madrid, 1645).
Setzler, Frank M.
1935. A Prehistoric Cave Culture in Southwestern Texas. American Anthropologist, Vol. 37, pp. 104-1!0. Menasha, Wisconsin.
Smith, Victor J.
1933. Sandals of the Big Bend Culture with Additional
Notes Concerning Basket- Maker Evidence. Bulletin,
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 5,
pp..57-65. Abilene, Texas.
Steward, Julian H.
1937. Ancient Caves of the Great Salt Lake Region.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 116. Washington, D. C.
Studley, Cordelie A.
1884. Notes upon Human Remains from Caves in Coahuila. Sixteenth and Seventeenth Reports of the Trustees of the Peabody Museum, Vol. III, Nos. 3 and 4, pp.
233-260. Cambridge, Mass.
Wormington, H. M.
1947. Prehistoric Indians of the Southwest. Denver Museum of Natural History. Denver, Colorado.
Departamento de Prehistoria
Museo Nacional
Moneda 13
Mexico, D. F.

PLATE 34
A, Shell ornaments; note use of asphaltum.
Object at center bottom is green slate.
B, Necklace of rattlesnake ¥ertebrae held in place with fiber cords.

PLATE 35
A, Deer antlers of ceremonial use.

B, Dried body of skinn~ed clog.

NEWS NOTES
THE 1952 ANNUAL MEETING
The twenty-fifth annual meeting of the Society was held in Room
119 Fondren Science Building, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, on November I, 1959.. On the preceding evening a get-together
at the home of Mr. and Mrs; R. K. Harris was much enjoyed. The
following papers were presented in the morning, while the afternoon was given over to discussion topics suggested by members
previously.
"Excavations at the Morris Site, Cherokee County, Oklahoma,"
Dr. Robert E. Bell, University of Oklahoma.
"Excavations at the Bonnell Site and on the Gallo River, New
Mexico," Dr. W. C. Holden, Texas Tech College.
"Some Material Culture Elements Common to the Southwest,
Northern Mexico, and the Southern Plains," Charlie R. Steen, National Park Service, Region Three, Santa Fe, New Mexico.
"The Carbon-14 Dating Laboratory at the University of Texas,"
Alex D, Krieger, University of Texas.
"Excavations in the Falcon Reservoir Basin, Rio Grande Valley,"
Joe F. Cason, Round Rock.
"Resume of Culture Chronology in the Dallas Area since Glacial
Times," Wilson W. Crook, Jr., and R. K. Harris.
Extended discussions were held on the following subjects:
Geological-archaeological
Texas.

correlations

and

culture

dating

in

Projectile-point typology in Texas, E. B. Jelks and Alex D.
Krieger, illustrated with Kodachrome slides of about 30 of the best,
known types.
Procedures in defining artifact types.
The following day a field trip was made by members and their
guests to the Wheeler Site near Carrollton and the East Fork Site,
both of which have produced pre-ceramic cultural material serving
to link the late Pleistocene cultures with those of the much later
agricultural and pottery-making Indians.
At the business meeting, the following events took place:
Report of the Editor, Dr. W. C. Holden.
Report of the Resolutions Committee, Dr. T. N. Campbell, chairman.

Report of the Auditing Committee, A. D. Krieger, chairman.
Vote of thanks to R. K. Harris and Wilson W. Crook, Jr., for
making local arrangements and conducting the field trip, and to
Southern Methodist University.
Appointment of Floyd V. Studer as chairman of Arrangements
Committee for 1953 annual meeting.

258

Texas Archeological Society

Report of the Nominating Committee, Ed B. Jelks, chairman.
The slate of new officers offered by the Committee was adopted
by voice vote and appears at the front of this Bulletin,
Several ideas for increasing membership were discussed. It was
agreed that dues should not be raised, and that, instead, every member should make real efforts to obtain new members for the
Society. (The Editor is glad to report that we did obtain many
new members in 1952-1953).
CHANGE OF NAME
By unanimous vote, it was decided to change the name of our
Society from THE TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL AND PALEONTOLOGICAL SOCIETY to THE TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY. Please notify your Sriends and local libraries.
THE OKLAHOMA ANTHROPOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The newly-established Oklahoma Anthropological Society announces the following types of memberships and annual dues:
Active .............................................................................. $ 3.00
Contributing .................................................................... !0.00
Sustaining ....................................................................... 25.00
Institutional ................................................................... 3.00
Associate (under age 16) ........................................... 2.00
Life ................................................................................. 75.00
Send applications for membership to Roland Scott Hall, Secretary-Treasurer, Oklahoma Anthropological Society, University of
Oklahoma, Norman.
The Society has begun the publication of an attractive Bulletin
free to all members or obtainable for $3.00. Volume 1 appeared
in March, 1953, and contains the following articles on archaeology
and ethnology:
"Selected Projectile Point Types of the United States," Robert
E. Bell and Roland Scott Hall. (Illustrated, with descriptive notes
and general distributions of types).
"The Lacy Site,
Oakes.

Garvin County,

Oklahoma,"

John Underhill

"Pottery Vessels from the Spiro Mound, Cr-1, Le Flore County,
Oklahoma," Robert E. Bell.
"The Oashuns or Dances of the Caddo," Eugene Heflin.
"Report of Excavations in the Eufaula Reservoir," Charles Proctor:
"The Brewer Site: A Preliminary Report," Lathel Duffield.
We need hardly add that members of the TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY have always enjoyed close cooperation with both
professional and amateur archaeologists in Oklahoma, that many
of them belong to our Society and have contributed excellent papers
to our Bulletin, and that we can all derive a great deal of mutual
benefit by becoming members of THE OKLAHOMA ANTHROPOLOGICAL SOCIETY.

BOOK NOTICES
The following recent publications will be of interest to members:
EARLY MAN IN AMERICA: A STUDY IN PREHISTORY. By E.
H. Sellards. Order from University of Texas Press, Austin. $4.50.
Contains early man sites listed by states and countries, numerous
drawings of artifacts, and sketches of Pleistocene animals as they
looked "in the flesh", by Hal Story.
LA VENTA, TABASCO. A STUDY OF OLMEC CERAMICS AND
ART. By Philip Drucker. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin No. 153.
Order from U. S. Government Printing Office,
Washington, D. C. $1.25. The article by Robert Greengo in our
last Bulletin discussed the Olmec problem at length but contained no illustrations. Drucker’s publication contains 66 plates
illustrating the very important sites and artifacts from La Venta,
detailed descriptions of the artifacts and great stone heads, and
further important discussions.
MOGOLLON CULTURAL CONTINUITY AND CHANGE: THE
STRATIGRAPHIC ANALYSIS OF TULAROSA AND CORDOVA
CAVES. By Paul S. Martin and others
Fieldiana Papers in
Anthropology, Volume 40, Chicago Museum of Natural History,
Chicago, Ill. This large volume of 528 pages brings together the
detailed data on Mogollon Culture in western New IViexico and
eastern Arizona, has many charts, graphs, and photographs. The
perishable artifacts found in excellent preservation in the New
Mexico caves are of special interest, as is the discovery of over
30,000 corn cobs from Tularosa Cave.
AN ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE ADDICKS DAM BASIN,
SOUTHEAST TEXAS, by Joe Ben Wheat, and INDIAN SKELETAL REMAINS FROM THE DOERING AND KOBS SITES, ADDICKS RESERVOIR, TEXAS, by Marshall T. Newman. These
articles appear in RIVER BASIN SURVEYS PAPERS, Bureau
of American Ethnology, Bulletin 154. Order from IT. S. Govern=
ment Printing Office, Washington, D. C. $1.75. These reports
give the excavation details and illustrate the artifacts and skeletal material from the Addicks Reservoir Basin west of Houston
in Harris County, the field work having been done in 1947. The
same Bulletin contains two important papers by Waldo R. Wedel
on the whole Missouri Valley archeological salvage program, another by Herbert W. Dick on the excavation of two rock shelters
near Tucumcari, New Mexico, and another on the geology of
these sites by Sheldon Judson.
THE SPIRO MOUND. By Henry W. Hamilton, with a Preface and
an interpretation of the place of Spiro in Southeastern Archaeology by James B. Griffin. The Missouri Archaeologist, Volume
14. Order from the Missouri Archaeological Society, Switzler
Hall, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri. $3.00. This is
a compilation of the vast amount of archaeological material taken
from the Spiro Mound in eastern Oklahoma by commercial excavators in the 1930’s and now located in many places. Heretofore it has been almost impossible for archaeologists to get any

idea of the riches of the central tomb in this mound.

There

are 152 photographic plates of artifacts and drawings of the in-

260

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

cised designs on conch shells. No archaeologist should be without
this striking volume.
THE MISSOURI ARCHAEOLOGIST, Volume 15, Nos. 1-2, 1953.
Order from Missouri Archaeological Society as above. This
publication is of great value to amateurs who wish to know how
to record different kinds of archaeological sites, describe them,
catalog the specimens, etc. There are four sections: THE MISSOURI ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY, by Carl H. Chapman;
ARCHAEOLOGICAL PHOTOGRAPHY, by T. M. Hamilton; HOW
TO DRAW ARTIFACTS, by Eleanor F. Chapman; and EXTINCT
RIVER CHANNELS AS A METHOD OF DATING ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES IN SOUTHEAST MISSOURI, by Edward G.
Scully.
THE KARANKAWA OF THE TEXAS GULF COAST. By Richard
P. Schaedel. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, Volume 5,
No. 2, 1949. $1.00. Order from University of New Mexico Press,
Albuquerque. This is a convenient and easily obtained summary
of knowledge on the history and ethnology of the Karankawa
tribes, the only previous study being that by Gatschet in 1894.
THE BIDAI INDIANS OF SOUTHEASTERN TEXAS. Andree F.
Sjoberg. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, Volume 7, No.
4, 1951. $1.00. Order as above. Information on this tribe has
always been very scarce and the present paper summarizes what
is known.
LIPAN APACHE CULTURE IN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE. By
Andree F. Sjoberg. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, Volume 9, No. 1, 1953. $1.00. Order as above. The best summary
available of this well known tribe that roamed over western
Texas and northeastern Mexico, their hunting habits, weapons,
implements, social customs, etc.
THE CULTURE OF THE TONKAWA, A TEXAS INDIAN TRIBE.
By Andree F. Sjoberg. The Texas Journal of Science, Volume 5,
No. 3, 1953. $1.25. Order from T. N. Campbell, Editor, Department of Anthropology, University of Texas, Austin. An extensive study of the several tribes grouped as "Tonkawa" in southcentral Texas, their early history and location at several 18th
century missions, economy, material culture, and social customs.
THE RIVER BASIN SURVEYS: RECENT ARCHAEOLOGICAL
INVESTIGATIONS IN TEXAS, ARKANSAS, AND KANSAS.
By Edward B. Jelks. In same issue of Texas Journal of Science
mentioned above.

REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-TREASURER
OF THE
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Report for the twenty-fifth year from September i, 1952,
to August 31, 1953.
RECEIPTS
Balance on August 31, 1952 ............................................. $1,781.16
1952 Dues, 193 @ $5.00 ........................................................ 965.00
1953 Dues, 18 @ $5.00 ........................................................
90.00
Sale of Bulletins, 70 @ $5.00 ............................................ 350.00
Sale of Indexes, 76 @ $2.00 .............................................. 152.00
Reimbursement for reprints for articles in Vol. 23 .... 238.00
TOTAL RECEIPTS ........................................................... $3,576.16
DISBURSEMENTS
Abilene Printing & Stationery Co., printing 300
copies of Vol. 23 ........................................................... $1,156.50
Abilene Printing & Stationery Co., printing 300
copies of Index ............................................................

366.5~

Southwestern Engraving Co., engraving plates
for Vol. 23 ......................................................................

347.23’

Merchants Fast Motor Line, for delivery of Indexes__

1.55

Clerical work for Index ....................................................

175.00’

Postage ....................................................................................

49.00’

TOTAL DISBURSEMENTS ............................................ $2,095.78
Balance on deposit, First National Bank, Lubbock,
Texas, on August 31, 1953 .......................................... 1,480.38’
$3,576.16;
EDWARD B. JELKS,
Secretary-Treasurer.

MEMBERSHIP LIST AS OF SEPTEMBER 1, 1953
FELLOWS
Col. M. L. Crimmins, 312 Geneseo Road ................ San Antonio, Texas
Dr. Cyrus N. Ray, Box 62 ................................................... Abilene, Texas
HONORARY MEMBERSHIP
J. S. Bridwell, Bridwell Oil Company ..................Wichita Falls, Texas
Albert G. Inga!ls, Editor, ScientiSic American Magazine
...................................................................................... New York, N. Y.
MEMBERS
A. & H. Society, Box 791 .................................................... Roswell, N. M.
Abilene Printing & Stationery Co ................................. Abilene, Texas
Adams, E. T ...................................................................... Glen Rose, Texas
Allred, A. M., Box 2529 ................................................... Amarillo, Texas
American Museum of Natural History. ...................... New York, N. Y.
American Philosophical Society .......................... Philadelphia 6, Penn.
Armstrong, John R., Box 225 ............................................ Farwell, Texas
Ashlock, Ben D., Box 14 .................................................... Stanton, Texas
Atwood, W. L., 501 Ruth Street .................................... Baytown, Texas
Austin, Cart, 913 Tate Street ................................... Brownfield, Texas
Baerreis, David, Department of Sociology and Anthropology,
University of Wisconsin ........................................ Madison 6, Wisc.
Baylor University Library .................................................... Waco, Texas
Bell, Robert E., University of Oklahoma ....................... Norman, Okla.
Ben~e~, I~enC~eB~.~8111 Overman Drive ................... .DWha~n:~:TexasTexas
Benton, Joe ........................................................................... Nocona, Texas
Boldt, Kyrle, Rt. 1, Box 593 ............................................. Clayton 24, Mo.
Brennan, W. P ............................................................. Crystal City, Texas
Brighton, Harold D., 941 Nebraska .................................. Norman, Okla.
Bronaugh, Richmond L., Baylor University .................... Waco, Texas
Brown, Lowell, Amarillo Globe-News ........................ Amarillo, Texas
Butchee, D. E., Route C .................................................... Lamesa, Texas
Butts, George T., Box 2367 ............................................... Norman, Okla.
Caldwell, C. M ...................................................................... Abilene, Texas
Campbell, Elizabeth W. Crozier, 2820 East 6th,
Apt. 37 ............................................................................. Tucson, Ariz.
Campbell, Tom N., University of Texas ........................ Austin, Texas
Carter, Robert H., 1215 Monroe ................................... Abilene, Texas
Cason, Joe F., Rt. 2 ........................................................ Round Rock, Texas
Chamberlain, Sam ............................................................... Refugio, Texas
Chicago Natural History Museum, Roosevelt Road and
Lake Shore Drive ............................................................ Chicago 5, Ill.
Chitwood, F. H., Box 354 ...................................................... Lefors, Texas
Cleveland Public Library ............................................ Cleveland 14, Ohio
Columbia University Libraries .............................. New York 27, N. Y.
Compton, Carl Benton, Box 5133, North Texas State
College ............................................................................. Denton, Texas
Corbett, John M., 1023 Potomac Ave ............................. Alexandria, Va.
Corley, John A., 309 North Houston .................................. Hobbs, N. M.
Corpus Christi City Public Library .................... Corpus Christi, Texas

Membership

263

Cotten, Fred R .......................................... Weatherford, Texas

Cox, Ben M .......................................................Eden, Texas
Cramer, J. L., 2488 Poly Drive ..............................Billings, Montana
Cranz, Gus E., 612 Meacham Bldg., Box 705 ........Fort Worth, Texas
Credille, Jim, Box 900 .................................................Dallas i, Texas
Crook, Wilson W., Jr., 4130Y2 Hyer Street ...................Dallas 5, Texas
Dallas Public Library .......................................................Dallas, Texas
De Montel, E. C., I000 City National Bldg .........Wichita Falls, Texas
Douglas, Frederick H., Denver Art Museum, 1300 Logan
Street .......................................................................Denver 3, Colo.
Drennan, C. O., 1504 Garner Street ...............................Lamesa, Texas
Duffield, Lathel, University of Oklahoma ....................Norman, Okla.
Duke, Alan R., 1706 Oaks Drive ................................... Pasadena, Texas
Durham, James H., Box 1262 ......................................... Roswell, N. M.
Dyer, Lloyd N., Box 351 ..................................................... Boerne, Texas
Early, Brooke, Box 948 .............................................. Stamford, Texas
Eaves, C. D., Texas Technological College .................. Lubbock, Texas
E1 Paso Public Library ........................................................ E1 Paso, Texas
Evans, Oren F., University of Oklahoma ........................ Norman, Okla.
Everhart, Merrill W., 2704 Douglas Drive ............. San Angelo, Texas
Field, Albert, Box 323 .................................................. Lampasas, Texas
Fitzpatrick, W. S., Fitzpatrick Drilling Co ....... Corpus Christi, Texas
Foote, M. F., 6110 Mimosa Lane ........................................ Dallas, Texas
Forrester, R. E., Jr., 6229 Malvery Ave .................Fort Worth 7, Texas
Fort Worth Children’s Museum ............................ Fort Worth, Texas
Fulton, Robert L., 3346 Youree Drive ........................... Shreveport, La.
Fulton, W. S ........................................................................ Dragoon, Ariz.
Gallaher, Art, 440 Park Drive ....................................... Norman, Okla.
Gillespie, John W., 314 W. Main St ...............................Norman, Okla.
Gladwin, Harold S., 534 Valley Road .............. Santa Barbara, Calif.
Gray, C. A., R. R. 5 .................................................._Burkburnett, Texas

Green, Earl F............................................................... Slaton, Texas
Greengo, Robert E., Peabody Museum ..................... Cambridge, Mass.

Grimes, Frank .......................................................................Abilene, Texas
Guleke, James S., 302 West 15th Street ........................ Austin, Texas
Hall, Roland Scott, Box 523, W. W. C ........................... Norman, Okla.
Hanks, Billie, 727 Rust Street .................................. San Angelo, Texas
Hardin-Simmons University Library ......................... Abilene, Texas
Harral, Carolyn H., Cactus Hotel ............................. San Angelo, Texas
Harris, R. K., 9024 San Fernando Way ..................... Dallas 18, Texas
Harris, Ted, 1901 Rosemont Drive .......................... San Angelo, Texas
Hatzenbuehler, Robert C., 8803 Cherrybrook Dr .......Dallas 17, Texas
Hawkins, J. E., Baylor University ...................................Waco, Texas
Hayner, E. W., Box 152 ............................................ Karnack, Texas
Heroy, William B., 6441 Llano Street ................................Dallas, Texas
Hibben, Frank C., 3000 Campus Blvd ..................Albuquerque, N. M.
Hodges, T. L ..................................................................... Bismarck, Ark.
Holden, W. C., Texas Technological College ............ Lubbock, Texas
Housewright, Rex A ...........................................................Wylie, Texas
Houston Public Library ................................................. Houston, Texas
Huff, John Arleigh, Box 13 ............................................... Boerne, Texas
Huggins, N. R., 109 Penrose Street ............................ San Angelo, Texas
Hughes, Jack, Panhandle Plains Historical Museum__ Canyon, Texas
Hunt, Mrs. Charles B., 635 Vine Street ......................... Denver 6, Colo.
Illinois State Museum .................................................... Springfield, Ill.
Jackson, A. T., 508 E. 46th St., Box 370 ..................... Austin, Texas

264

Texas Archeological Society

....

Jelinek, Arthur, 3636 16th Street, NW ................ Washington 10, D. C.
Jelks, Edward B., 1402 Kirkwood Road ......................... Austin, Texas
Johns Hopkins University Library ........................... Baltimore 18, Md.
JOint University Libraries ............................................ Nashville 4, Tenn.
Joyner, Joy, Oilfield Route .......................................... Big Lake, Texas
Kayser, J. Merrill, Box 823 ............................................... Snyder, Texas
Kirkland, Mrs. Forrest, 121 W. Montana ................... Dallas 16, Texas
Krieger, Alex D., University of Texas ........................ Austin 12, Texas
Laboratory of Anthropology ......................................... Santa Fe, N. M.
Lacy, C. E., 402 West Creek ................................................ Lindsay, Okla.
Lee, John P .................................................................. Tankersley, Texas
Lemley, Harry J ......................................................................... Hope, Ark.
Lilly, Eli, 5807 Sunset Lane ......................................... Indianapolis, Ind.
Louisiana State University General Library ........ Baton Rouge 3, La.
Lucas, Robert P., Baylor University .................................... Waco, Texas
MacGowan, Kenneth, 10737 LeConte Ave ......... Los Angeles 24, Calif.
Maier, N. A., Jr., 416 Gay Street ............................... San Angelo, Texas
McDaniel, Allen J., Jr., 642 E. N. 16th St.
Abilene, Texas
McDannald, A. T., Box 2972 ........................................... Houston, Texas
McLean, M. T., Jr., 1010 W. 24th ....................................... Austin, Texas
Metropolitan Museum of Arts Library, Fifth Ave. at
82nd Street ..................................................... New York 28, N. Y.
Mewhinney, H., Houston Post ....................................... Houston, Texas
Miller, E. O., Box 417 ................................................. Moody, Texas
Million, Lloyd E., Jr., 601 E. McLendon St ................. Stamford, Texas
Miroir, M. P., 2009 Olive St .....................................Texarkana, Texas
Moates, C. E., Box 174 ........................................................ Cisco, Texas
Moore, Mrs. Glen E., 3610 Ft. Blvd ................................ E1 Paso, Texas
Moore, John I., Box 551 ................................................. Midland, Texas
Moore, Russell R., Box 264 ............................................ Childress, Texas
Moorman, Edward, 205 E. 14th .......................................... Austin, Texas
Morgan, Betty Joyce .......................................................... Norman, Okla.
Morgan, Louis S., 3002 Sennett St.
.Wichita, Kansas
Museum of American Indian, Heye Foundation, Huntington
Free Library .......................................................... New York, N. Y.
Museum of New Mexico .................................................. Santa Fe, N. M.
Newberry Library, 60 W. Walton Place ............................ Chicago, Ill.
New York Public Library, Fifth Ave. and 42nd St.
................................................................................. New York 18, N. Y.
Nichols, Archie ................................................................... Baird, Texas
Northwestern University Library ...................................... Evanston, Ill.
Ochsner, Eugene E., R. F. D. No. 1, Box 854 ................ La Porte, Texas
Ohio University Library ................................................. Athens, Ohio
Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard

University ................................................................. Cambridge, Mass.
Pearce, W. M., Texas Technological College ............... Lubbock, Texas
Pearson, Frank, Lost Valley Resort Ranch ................ Bandera, Texas
Pearson, Reuel E., 1138 W. Hildebrand ............ San Antonio, Texas
Phillips Academy, Dept. of Archaeology ................ Andover, Mass.
Phillips, Gertrude S., 314 W. Main St ........................ Norman, Okla.
Pickard, Eddleman ............................................... Weatherford, Texas
Poynor, Benton C., Star Route South ............................ Saint Jo, Texas
Pritchard, V. L., Route 2 .......................Weatherford, Texas

"

"

Membership

: :

265

Ragsdale, H. C., 315.Beauregard St ...................... San Angelo, Texas
Rawalt, L. E., 725 Post St .............................. Corpus Christi, Texas
Ray, J. Henry, 2130 Fannin St .................................... Vernon,
Reading, R. S., 320 West Collin
........... Corsicana,
Reed, Erik K., 238 Griffin St ...................................... Santa Fe,
Rice Institute Library ..................................................... Houston,
Rice, P. M ....................................................................... Hamilton,
Richardson, R. N., Hardin-Simmons University ....... Abilene,
Roberts, Thomas E ........................................................... Abilene,
Rodgers, Rex, 101 1st Street ............................................. Tulia,
Roe, James C., 3720 Harley Ave ............................... Fort Worth,
Rosenberg Library .......................................................... Galveston,
Rouse, Irving, Yale University .......................... New Haven,
Ruhland, E. J., 6260 McComas .................................... Dallas 14,

Texas
Texas
N. M.
Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas
Conn.
Texas

San Antonio Public Library .................................. San Antonio, Texas
Sanders, Malcolm, 607 Harold St ............................. Houston 6, Texas
San Diego Scientific Library, Balboa Park ............. San Diego, Calif.
San Jacinto Museum of History .......... San Jacinto Monument, Texas
Sayles, E. B., Arizona State Museum ................................ Tucson, Ariz.
Sayles, Henry, Jr ............................................................ Abilene, Texas
Schmitt, Mrs. Ira, University of Oklahoma ................ Norman, Okla.
Sellards, E. H., Texas Memorial Museum ................ Austin, Texas
SewelL John B. Box 432 ................................................... Phillips, Texas
Shuler: Ellis W., Southern Methodist Univ ................... Dallas, Texas
Sims, O. L ...................................................................... Paint Rock, Texas
Smallwood, R. E., 502 Holly St .................................. Fayetteville, Ark.
Smith, Arthur George, 65 North Foster St ................... Norwalk, Ohio
Alpine, Texas
Smith, Victor J., 906 E. Ave. D .......................................
Soday, F. J., Chemstrand Corporation ................... Decatur, Alabama
Sollberger, J. B., 8515 Forest Hills Blvd ........................ Dallas, Texas
Southern Illinois University Library ............................ Carhondale, Ill.
Southern Methodisl University Library .......................... Dallas. Texas
Southwest Museum Library, Highland Park.__.Los Angeles 42, Calif.
Steen, Charlie R., 1013 Don Cubero .............................. Santa Fe, N. M.
Stephen F. Austin State Teachers College Library
.................................................................................. Nacogdoches, Texas
Stephenson, Robert L., River Basin Surveys, University
of Nebraska ...................................................................... Lincoln, Neb.
San Angelo, Texas
Stubblefield, Jack, 104 E. Riverside ........................
Studer, Floyd V., 636 Amarillo Building .................... Amarillo, Texas
Austin, Texas
Suhm, Dee Ann, 1100 W. 22nd St .......................................
Swiss Society of Prehistoric Research, Haus Ratia,
Speicherstrasse 39 ........................................... Frauenfeld, Switzerland
Taylor, Walter W., Jr., 711 Camino del Monte Sol ...... Santa Fe, N. M.
Texas A. & M. College Library .......................... College Station, Texas
Texas State Library, Capitol Bldg ................................... Austin, Texas
Texas Technological College Library .......................... Lubbock, Texas
Texas Western College Library ..................................... E1 Paso, Texas
Tulsa, Okla.
Thomas Gilcrease Foundation ................................................
Springfield, Mo.
Tong, Marvin E., 1935 E. Elm St ...................................
Baytown, Texas
Tuck, Darrel!, 205 W. Gulf Street .................................Pittsburg, Texas
Turner, Robert L., Jr., 102 Pecan Blvd ......................
Tyrell Public Library ................................................... Beaumont, Texas

266

Texas Archeologica~ Society

United States Bureau of American Ethnology, Smithsonian
Institution .............................. -- ...... Washington 25, D. C.
United States Bureau of Indian Affairs, Anadarko Area
Office .........................................................._Anadarko, Okla.
United States Dept. of the Interior, National Park Service,
Box 1728 .............................................. Santa Fe, N. M.
United States Library of Congress ..................Washington 25, D. C.
United States Smithsonian Institution .............Washington 25, D. C.
University of Arizona Library ......................
Tucson, Ariz.
University of Arkansas Library ...........................Fayetteville, Ark.
University of California Library ............................. Berkeley 4, Calif.
University of California at Los Angeles Library
...........................................................................Los Angeles 24, Calif.
University of Chicago Library ...................................... Chicago 37, Ill.
University of Colorado Libraries ..................................... Boulder, Colo.
University of Denver, Mary Reed Library ...................... Denver, Colo.
University of Houston .................................................. Houston, Texas
University of Illinois Library ................................................Urbana, Ill.
University of Kansas Library .................................... Lawrence, Kansas
University of Michigan Library ................................. Ann Arbor, Mich.
University of Nebraska Library ..................................... Lincoln, Nebr.
University of New Mexico Library .......................Albuquerque, N. M.
University of Oklahoma Library ............................... Norman, Okla.
University of Pennsylvania Library
Philadelphia 4, Pa.
University of Texas Library .................................Austin, Texas
University of Utah Library .................................... Salt Lake City, Utah
Villines, Bill
Rosedale, Okla.
Waco Public Library ...........................................................Waco, Texas
Wallace, Ernest, Texas Technological College ........Lubbock, Texas
_Temple, Texas
Walser, P. H., 1102 N. 1st, Street
Ward, Bernard H., Jr., 1202 Annapolis Dr ........ Corpus Christ, Texas
Ward, Hortense Warner, 1900 Stillman Ave ..... Corpus Christi, Texas
Washington State College Library
.......... Pullman, Wash.
Watson, J. Wendell ............................................................. Morton, Texas
Watt, Frank H., Box 1176 .................................................... Waco, Texas
Watts, Wm. C., 2111 23rd St ............................................. Lubbock, Texas
Weaver, Harry E., Rural Route, Robert Lee ....... San Angelo, Texas
Webb, C. H., Children’s Clinic, 1560 Line Ave ............ Shreveport, La.
Weir, Frank A1, c/o Postmaster
........... McAllen, Texas
Wheat, Joe Ben, University of Colorado .................. Boulder, Colo.
White, James N., 206 East Harris ............................. San Angelo, Texas
Williamson, T. L., 633 Atlantic ......................... Corpus Christi, Texas
Wilson, Lester L., Box 362 .....................................................Wylie, Texas
Winkler County Free Library ......................................... Kermit, Texas
Wisconsin State Historical Society, 816 State Street
............................................................................... Madison 6, Wisc.
Witte, A. H., Route B ...................................................... Henrietta, Texas
Witte Museum, Brackenridge Park ................... San Antonio 9, Texas
Worthington, R. B., 4216 Walker Ave ..................... Houston 3, Texas
Wright, William P., 1226 Sylvan Drive .......................Abilene, Texas
Yale University Library ............................................ New Haven, Conn.

ORDER THE NEW INDEX!
For the ridiculously small sum of ~2.00 anyone with
an interest in the archaeology and Indians of Texas and
surrounding states can obtain the Index to Volumes 1
through 22 of this Bulletin (1929 through 1951).
Prepared by Mrs. Billie Rusk, this Index lists every
author and article in all these years, the names of artifacts and all cultural names, tribes, sites, etc., and is
thoroughly cross-indexed for areas, river valleys, and
counties.

Order from the Secretary-Treasurer, Ed B.

Jelks. Ask your local library to order it too.
A mimeographed list of the authors and articles of
all volumes through i952 can be obtained free from
the Secretary-Treasurer. We feel that members should
obtain as many of the back copies as they can while
they are still available. It is amazing how many worthwhile articles have appeared since the Society was
founded by Dr. Cyrus N. Ray in 1929.

