ARCHEOLOGICAL

Votumc 56
Published
the Society s.t
Austin, Texas-1985

SOC IETY

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
The Society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific undertaking: the study of man’s past in Texas and contiguous areas. The Bulletin offers an outlet for the publication of serious research on history, prehistory,
and archeological theory. In line with the goals of the Society, it encourages scientific collection, study, and publication of archeological data.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to the members of the
Society. Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers and do not necessarily
represent the views of the Society or editorial staff.

Officers of the Society 1984-1985
President: C. K. Chandler (San Antonio)
President-Elect: Elton Prewitt (Austin)
Treasurer: Jack Eaton (San Antonio)
Secretary: Anne A. Fox (San Antonio)
Editors (appointed August 1985): Thomas R. Hester (San Antonio), Harry J.
Shafer (College Station), Ellen Sue Turner (San Antonio)
Bulletin Editor-Elect: James E. Corbin (Nacogdoches)
Newsletter Editor: Beth O. Davis (Austin)
Immediate Past President: Roy Dickinson (Wichita Falls)
Directors 1984-1985 (in addition to the above): Richard L. Gregg (Houston),
James C. Everett (Arlington), Samuel McCullough (Austin), Laurie Moseley
(Springtown), Robert L. Smith (Stinnett), Norman G. Flaigg (Austin).
Regional Vice Presidents 1984-1985: Meeks Etchieson (Canyon), Brownie
Roberts (Lamesa), Jimmy Smith (Cleburne), Bonnie McKee (Dallas), Sheldon Kindall (Seabrook), Jimmy Mitchell (Converse), John Rex Wayland
(George West), John H. Stockley, Jr. (Quemado), Jim Carpetas (Austin),
James D. Hall (San Angelo), Elizabeth Ayer (Mesilla, NM).

Memberships and Publications
Membership in the Society is for the calendar year. Dues (current 1985) are
as follows: Individual (regular), $15.00; Family, $20; Student, $10; Contributing, $30; Chartered Societies and Institutional, $15; Life, $300. All members of
the Society receive the Bulletin, published annually, and Texas Archeology, a
newsletter issued about four times a year. A monograph series, Special Publications, also is published by the Society. Back issues of the Bulletin are available,
and price lists can be obtained from the Secretary.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary,
Texas Archeological Society, Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78285.
© Copyright 1985 by the Texas Archeological Society.

i!i!i i i i i i4i i i !i! ~i!~i~i i!i i i i i i i i ! BU L L E T I N

OF

THE

Edited by
Thomas R. Hester,
Harry J. Shafer, and
Ellen Sue Turner

Cover illustration by
Kenneth M. Brown

Published by the Society at
Austin, Texas
1985

Dedication

This volume of the Bulletin is dedicated to Thomas N. Campbell in appreciation of
his many contributions to the Society, Texas archeology, and the ethnohistory of southern
Texas. From valedictorian of the graduating class of the Munday, Texas High School in
1925 to Professor Emeritus at The University of Texas at Austin since 1978, Tom Campbell has distinguished himself as a student, teacher, scholar, and individual.
He has three advanced degrees in Anthropology: from The University of Texas, a
M.A. (1936), and from Harvard University, a second M.A. (1940) and, after interruption
for military duty, a Ph.D. from Harvard (1947). A member of TAS since 1938 and a Fellow since 1962, Tom Campbell has served the Society as a Regional Vice President
(t947-48, 1952-56), Editor (1958-61), Vice-President (1963), and President (t964).
He also has edited American Antiquity, the journal of the Society for American Archaeology (1962-66), the Texas Journal of Science (1953-56), and, in his always helpful manner, innumerable student papers.
A popular and much respected teacher at UT Austin, Tom Campbell taught his first
class as a graduate student teaching assistant in 1934 and continues active today as a special advisor. He also continues his long and productive career in research. Among his
many notable contributions are co-authorship (with J. Charles Kelley and Donald J.
Lehmer) of the first truly scientific archeological study in Texas, The Association of Archaeological Materials with Geological Deposits in the Big Bend Region of Texas, published by Sul Ross in 1940. His reports of sites on the Texas coast, written in the characteristically clear Campbell style, stand as major sources of information for the archeology
of the Western Gulf coast. They include four published in the Society’s Bulletin: the
Johnson site in Volume 18, the Kent-Crane site in Volume 23, sites on five islands in
Laguna Madre in Volume 27, and (with Jack Q. Frizzell) the Ayala site in Volume 20.
Since retiring from full-time teaching in 1978, he has been devoting his attention to a
long-time interest, ethnohistory. The results are impressive, for he has unraveled much of
the confusion surrounding the numerous, but little known, Indian groups in south Texas,
as well as provided researchers with models of how important tidbits of information can
be wrestled from early documentary sources. Being a modest man, Tom Campbell might
deny this and would probably make some humorous, but relevant remark, about how
much remains to be done.
Dee Ann Store

Contents
Papers
The Atlatl Assessed: A Review of Recent Anthropological Approaches
to Prehistoric North American Weaponry
D. Bruce Dickson .............................................. 1
Winnie’s Mound (41BU17): A Study in the Prehistory of Burleson
County, Texas
Bradley F. Bowman ............................................ 39

Three Caches of Guadalupe Tools from South Texas
Kenneth M. Brown ............................................ 75
Episodes in the History of Texas Archeology: Excavations at Shumla
and Eagle Caves, Witte Memorial Museum
Roberta McGregor ............................................ 127
Trace Element Analysis of an Obsidian Paleo-Indian Projectile Point
from Kincaid Rockshelter, Texas
Thomas R. Hester, Glen L. Evans, Frank Asaro,
Fred Stross, T. N. Campbell and Helen Michel ..................... 143
Paleo-Indian Occupations in Wharton County, Texas
L. W. Patterson and J. D. Hudgins ................................ 155
A Burial from the Sour Mash Site (41HI34)
C. K. Chandler ............................................... 171
A Mimbres Potter’s Grave: An Example of Mimbres CraftSpecialization
Harry J. Shafer ............................................... 185

Review
An Archeological Reconnaissance of the Upper Little River Basin in
Cleveland County, Oklahoma, Terry L. Steinacher.
Jimmy L. Mitchell ............................................ 201
Authors ...................................................... 207

The Aflatl Assessed: A Review of Recent
Anthropological Approaches to Prehistoric North
American Weaponry
D. Bruce Dickson

ABSTRACT
This paper reviews recent anthropological analyses of a basic tool in the
technical inventory of the prehistoric peoples of North America: the atlatl or
spearthrower. The atlatl is described, its major variant forms defined and the
areal distribution of these forms discussed. Experimenta! studies of atlatl
performance are reviewed with special attention paid to the contribution of
weights or "bannerstones" to that performance. Ethnographic examples of
atlatl use are noted. The general replacement of the atlatl by the bow-andarrow in North America is considered with particular reference to the reasons for that replacement and for the retention of the atlatl as a special purpose tool in some areas. The change in projectile point size occasioned by
that replacement is examined. Evidence of the ritual and symbolic retention
of the form of the atlatl subsequent to its functional supercession by the
bow-and-arrow is noted.

INTRODUCTION
Traditionally, anthropologists have approached technology and material culture in formalistic ways; they have undertaken taxonomic or classificatory studies, plotted spatial and temporal distribution patterns or focused on changes in
form and distribution over time (cf., Lane Fox 1858, 1875; Krause 1902, 1905;
Cressman and Krieger 1940; Kellar 1955; Oswalt 1973, 1976). The emerging
interest in "cultural ecology" in recent years, however, has led anthropologists
generally to turn their attention from mere formal studies and to focus instead on
the cultural strategies developed by human groups to accommodate or adapt
themselves to their environments. As a consequence, anthropologists concerned
with tools and technology have attempted to broaden their understanding of the
role of these phenomena in human adaptive strategies. To effect this broadening,
some scholars have attempted to assess tool function, performance or patterns of
wear through the experimental replication of prehistoric tools or techniques (e.g.

Bulletin of the Texas Areheological Society 56 (1985)

2

Texas Archeological Society

Semenov 1964; Ahler and McMillan 1976; Hayden 1979), or by close observation of living practitioners of ancient arts (e.g. Clark 1952; Gould 1969, 1978;
Yellen 1977; Binford 1978). Far less commonly, scholars have examined the image or role of tools and technology in the symbolic system or mental universe of
their users. The "anthropocentric perspective" taken by Hall (1977) is a prime
example of this last approach.
This paper reviews some recent applications of these various approaches to
the analysis of a basic tool in the technological inventory of prehistoric North
American aboriginal peoples: the atlatl or spearthrower. In doing so I hope to
present an overview of the anthropological study of an important aspect of North
American material culture.

The Atlatl Described: The Formal Definition of the Tool and Its Major
Variant Types
Although generally known to Americanists as the atlatl, that rudimentary
tool for increasing the propulsion of aboriginal spears or darts has been variously
referred to in the literature by a host of other names. A list of alternative terms
for the weapon would have to include throwing board, throwing stick, dart
thrower, spear-sling, hand board, spear-thrower (Howard 1974: 102); the Australian aborigine name, wommera (Coon 1976: 97); the French propulseur or
propulseur a crochet (de Mortillet 1891); the German Wurfbrett (Seler 1890,
1892), Wurfstock (Uhle 1888), Wurfholz (yon Luschan 1896), Speerschleuder
(Spratz 1956) and the most Teutonically scholastic expression schleudervorrichtungenfiir Wurfwaffen (Krause 1902), which translates literally to "sling contrivances for projectile weapons." Equally exotic are the 16th and 17th century
Spanish labels such as tiradera (Noguera 1945), bohordo y amiento (Swanton
1938: 357), lanzadardo and estolica (Massey 1961: 82). According to Massey,
the last term is an hispanicization of a South American Indian name for the
weapon. Of course, the most widely accepted word, atlatl, is derived from the
Indian language Nahua, and refers to the military weapon responsible for what
Brundage (1972) aptly calls "the rain of darts" encountered by the Spanish conquistadors in their assault on the Aztec empire.
Whatever one choses to call it, the tool consists of two basic parts: (1) a
stick or board generally less than two feet in length equipped with a notch or
hook to engage a projectile shaft and (2) a "dart" or spearshaft generally 50 to
70 percent longer than the board which engages and cradles it (Peets 1960:
108-110). For consistency, we shall refer to both parts of the tool collectively
as the atlatl and its two constituent parts as the throwing board and dart or
dartshaft, respectively. The atlatl is used as follows:
These two elements are held in the thrower’s hand with the projectile in a superior
position, the long axis of both being approximately parallel. The spear is steadied
with the aid of the fingers and sometimes rests on the knuckles. Motion is imparted

Dickson-- The Atlatl Assessed

3

by an overhand throwing movement. A sharp snap of the wrist at the moment of
release initiates the independent flight of the dart. The spearthrower remains in the
hand of the user (Kellar 1955: 283).

The throwing board is generally made of a single, solid piece of wood which
ranges in cross-section from round to oval or rectangular in shape. The proxima!
end of the throwing board is generally fashioned into a hand grip of some kind
while the distal end is modified to accommodate the butt of the spear or dart.
Thus, as Cressman and Krieger (1940: 22) note:
¯ . . atlatls may be described according to three main criteria: (1) the general shape
and proportions of the body shaft, (2) the mechanism for engaging the projectile,
and (3) the provision for gripping.
These authors go on to state that, throughout the world, a "great variety of means
(are) employed to satisfy these three requirements." However, from the standpoint of classification, variation in their second criteria, "the mechanism for
engaging the projectile," has been considered most important. For example,
Krause (1902), following von Luschan (1896), states that throwing boards can be
sorted into three basic classes worldwide based on the shape of the distal end: the
male, the female, and the "hybrid" (Zwitterhaften) (see Figure 1). This latter
term has generally been translated as "mixed" (cf., Cressman and Krieger 1940;
Kellar 1955: 282; Mildner 1974: 7) or "compound" (Baker and Kidder 1937: 52)
in English.
A "male" throwing board is characterized by a projecting hook or spur at its
distal end. The butt of the dartshaft, which is often grooved or indented to receive
the spur, is placed against this projection when the dart is cradled on the throwing
board prior to being thrown. Such hooks are often carved from a separate piece
of material and then fastened to the throwing board (see Hester 1974a, b). Wood,
bone, stone, horn and antler were commonly used but Metraux (1949: 245) notes
that such hooks were also made of shell and copper. Alternatively, both hook and
throwing board may be fashioned from a single piece of wood. Mildner (1974:
19) refers to separate hooks as forming the "attached" type and to those carved
directly on the throwing board as "integral" hooks. Based on existing archeological evidence, Mildner (1974: 19) gives temporal primacy to the attached
form, at least in the Great Basin, but he notes that:
Webb (1950: 347) has suggested that the integral (wooden) spur was later replaced
by attached spurs. This development would allow for the continued use of an atlatl
that had a wooden integral hook broken off or given too much wear; or that it would
be ultimately easier to mend an atlatl with a broken or loose attached spur. Strong
(1969), however, has pointed out that an attached hook may have been difficult to
keep immobilized after throwing several large darts (Mildner 1974: 19).

In contrast to the male type, the "female" throwing board lacks a hook or

4

Texas Archeological Society

spur. In its simplest form, the female type is characterized merely by a deep
groove or channel on its dorsal surface into which the dartshaft is placed. The
tapered butt of the dartshaft is engaged to the throwing board by the terminus of
the groove. More elaborate versions of the female type occur, however. Accordin~} to Cressman and Krieger (1940: 26, 28):
¯ . . in Melanesian and Micronesian weapons, the spear itself is equipped with a
hook which engages the hollow at the back of the groove in the thrower. On the other
hand, some Greenland specimens show a hollow cup at the back of the groove into
which the spear butt fits.

As its names implies, the "hybrid," or "mixed," throwing board possesses
features of both the male and female types. This variety has both groove and spur
or hook (Krause 1902, 1905). However, the hooks are relatively small and generally set flush with the top of the groove on the dorsal surface of the throwing
board (see Baker and Kidder 1937: 52). Often such hooks are made of a separate
piece of bone that has been attached at the rear of the groove and extended forward "horizontally or at a slight upward angle to facilitate disengagement at
some point in the throwing arc" (Cressman and Krieger 1940: 28).

Cl

b

I!

c

Figure 1. Three basic classes of mechanisms for engaging the dartshaft at the distal end of
the throwing board. According to Krause (1902, 1905), atlatls worldwide may be sorted
into these three classes: (a) hybrid or mixed (Zwitterhaften) (b) female; full perforation
represented here may or may not be present (c) male with "attached" rather than "integral" spur.

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

5

The proximal end of the throwing board, which is gripped by the user, shows
a great deal of variation as well (see Figure 2). Most commonly the proximal end
of the implement is left smooth and unshaped but this is by no means always the
case. According to Krause (1905: 624), to facilitate gripping, the proximal ends
of Australian throwing boards are often roughened with indentations or notches
or are covered with resin or gum or wrapped with cords of human hair. A similar
effect was achieved through the use of wrist or hand loops made of cordage
which Massey (1961: 81) reports were attached to several throwing boards recovered from archeological sites in Baja California.
A slightly more elaborate means of improving the grip of the throwing
board is illustrated in Figure 2, b. On this specimen the proximal end has been
shaped to fit the user’s hand by carving palm-sized indentations on one or both
sides of it a few inches above the butt (also cf., Krause 1905: Plate I, 16; Kellar
1955: 294, Figure 4, b-c). Often such palm-sized indentations were accompanied
by a single hole drilled just above them to accommodate the index finger. Such
carving and shaping of the proximal ends of the throwing boards seems to have
become particularly well developed among the Eskimos of the North American
arctic. A number of boards collected from the arctic in historical times are so
carefully shaped and worked that, for all the world, they seem intended as tiny,
surrealistic bass violas or fiddles. It was also common in the North American
arctic to insert one, two or even three pegs perpendicular to the throwing board’s
shaft (see Figure 2, c-d). These pegs were then gripped with the fore and middle
fingers (cf., Kellar 1955: 295,303). Small shells or stones, attached to the throwing boards with resin or gum, apparently served the same purpose in Australia
(Krause 1905: 621), and Ekholm (1962) has identified the U-shaped shell or
stone objects found throughout northern Mexico and the southwestern United
States as "fingerloops" which were formerly lashed to the proximal ends of
throwing boards there. Cord or sinew was also used to provide southwestern
throwing boards with handles (Kellar 1955: 303; see Figure 2, f). The tighter
hold on the throwing board, which such pegs, shell or stone objects, or cords or
sinew provided, was also obtained by widening the proximal end of the board,
drilling finger holes directly through it and then narrowing the stick below the
holes to fit the palm of the hand (see Figure 2, e). This latter form of atlatl grip
occurred widely in the New World (Nuttall 1891: 203, Plate II, 1-20; Krause
1905: Plate IV; Metraux 1949: 246, Peets 1906: 109, Figure 1, c).
In addition to the wide variation in the treatment of the proximal end or
grip, throwing boards vary in the degree to which they exhibit nonfunctional decoration. Certainly the most elaborate decorations are found on the throwing
boards of the Aztecs. A particularly impressive example of such decoration is
located in the Museum of Anthropology and Ethnology of Florence (Defuentes
1963: Illustration 17). The proximal end of this specimen is smooth and exhibits
no modifications for gripping but the medial portion of the throwing board all the
way to its distal end is covered with intricate carved and gilded representations of
what appear to be warriors and/or deities set within complicated fret work. It is

6

Texas Archeological Society

intricate decoration of this nature that no doubt led Cressman and Krieger (1940:
32) to the conclusion that many Aztec and Maya atlatls were too elaborate for
practical use and served instead as emblems of rank. Perhaps a singular lack or
"practical purpose" also led to the crafting of the Ecuadorian atlatl described by
Metraux (1948: 245) as "covered with artistically-wrought gold plate."
Less spectacularly decorated atlatls are found in North America¯ Read
(1891, cited in Kellar 1955: 300) illustrated a throwing board collected from the
Northwest Coast of North America. Typical Tlingit animal motifs had been
carved on this specimen and then inlaid with Haliotis shells. Carved atlatl throwing boards are also known from southeastern North America. Cushing recovered
two such specimens at the Key Marco site in Florida where,
¯ . . the remarkable preservation of normally perishable artifacts has given us one
atlatl with its spur carved as a rabbit and another with the handle grip in the outline
of the head and neck of a roseate spoonbill’s eyes (Cushing 1896: Plate XXXII-4,
cited in Kehoe, Foster and Hall, n.d.: 17-18).

Less sophisticated decorations are known from western North America. Southwestern Basketmaker throwing boards recovered from dry caves are often adorned
with what appear to be stone and feather amulets (Guernsey and Kidder 1921:
80; Palter 1976: 505; McGregor 1965: 182), while an atlatl throwing board from
Roaring Springs cave in Oregon had been painted with red ochre (Cressman and
Krieger 1940: 38).

The Atlatl Apportioned: A Brief Overview of the Spatial and Temporal
Distribution of the Weapon
No attempt will be made here to exhaustively survey the historic and prehistoric distribution of the atlatl. Readers interested in such surveys are urged
to consult the works of Krause (1905), Cressman and Krieger (1940), Kellar
(1955), Spratz (1956) and Driver and Massey (1957). For our purpose it will be
sufficient to note that the atlatl appears to be an exceedingly old weapon which
was present in Europe by at least the end of the Upper Paleolithic period. According to Campbell (1976: 398), the oldest definite evidence of the atlatl comes
from La Placard cave where the Magdalenian levels produced fragments of a
"male" type throwing board hook dated to around 14,000 B.C. However, other
scholars are willing to attribute far greater antiquity to the weapon and conclude
that it was present in Europe at a much earlier time in the Upper Paleolithic period (Krause 1905: 124; Cressman and Krieger 1940: 36; Massey 1961: 81). Actually, if the tanged points made on Levaillois flakes in Mousterian tool inventories were meant to be hafted on atlatl darts, the tool may have appeared as early
as 80,000 or more years ago.
Of course the place (or places) of origin of the atlatl are unknown¯ However, based on the widely-scattered locations of the peoples who have retained the

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

7

tool into historical times, we are probably safe in concluding that the use of the
atlatl spread broadly until, by the end of the Pleistocene or beginning of the
Holocene, it had become an important element in the technological inventory of
peoples over much of the Old World.
The recovery of atlatI parts in association with extinct ground sloth bones
and feces at Gypsum Cave, Nevada, led to the conclusion that the weapon was

a

d

o
1

to
I

e

20
1

3o
I

40
I

50
I

scale in centimeters

Figure 2. Some variations in the grip or proximal ends of atlatl throwing boards: (a) single
bark loop attached with sinew wrapping set at right angles to the plane of the "attached"
type male atlatl spur or hook and to one side of the shaft, Las Palmas culture, Baja (after
Massey 1961: 86); (b) Eskimo throwing board in which the proximal end has been slightly
shaped and narrowed to accommodate the palm of the user and a hole has been drilled for
his forefinger (after Kellar 1955: 294, Figure 4c); (c) front view of another Eskimo throwing board showing the shaft groove for aligning the dart and the carefully carved grip with
a notch for the thumb and a hole for the forefinger (after Cushing 1895: 339, Figure 29);
(d) somewhat less elaborately carved Eskimo throwing board with pegs inserted in the
proximal end for the forefinger and little finger and a carved indention for the thumb (after
Krause 1904: Plate II, 27); (e) modern Yucatecan throwing board with two carved winglike extensions which have been perforated to accommodate the user’s first two fingers
(Peets 1960: 109, Figure lc); (f) southwestern throwing board from Grand Gulch, Utah,
with rawhide cord or thong grip. A single piece of rawhide was folded and a hole drilled
through it. The throwing board was then forced into the hole until the rawhide came to rest
in a shallow groove carved on the shaft to receive it. The ends of the rawhide were then
pressed forward against the edges of the shaft and fastened with sinew to tbrm the loops
(after Pepper 1905:110-111).

8

Texas Archeological Society

also present in the New World during the Late Pleistocene (Harrington 1933;
Kellar 1955: 305). However, recent radiocarbon determinations have placed the
age of these specimens at 900 and 400 B.C. (Heizer and Berger 1970; Aikens
1978: 146). Nonetheless, the Late Pleistocene points of the Paleo-Indian tradition, such as Sandia, Clovis and Folsom, could surely have served as effective
atlatl dart tips.
According to Cressman (1977: 105), the earliest definite archeological
record of the atlatl in the New World comes from Fort Rock Cave in Oregon. At
this site, an "attached" type atlatl spur was recovered and dated to approximately 8,500 years ago. Evidence for the prehistoric use of the atlatl in North
America is best in the Southwest and Great Basin where the special conditions
found in dry caves there have resulted in the preservation and recovery of numerous complete (or nearly complete) specimens of the weapon (Mildner 1974). In
addition, the presence of the atlatl at least during the Archaic period in eastern
North America is well documented from a variety of grave lot contexts (e.g. see
Tuck 1970; Webb and Haag 1939; Webb 1946). In the absence of actual atlatl
remains, the presence of the weapon in other parts of North America is generally
inferred on the basis of projectile points present at Ventana Cave in southern Arizona by about A.D. 1. Among peoples of the Anasazi tradition on the Colorado
Plateau, the atlatl appears to have remained the primary weapon until near the
end of the Basketmaker III or Modified Basketmaker period between about
A.D. 500 and A.D. 700 (Lipe 1978: 369). In the Trans-Pecos region on the eastern margins of the Southwest, Kelley (1950: 72) reports that the bow-and-arrow
did not appear until around A.D. 900.
In the midwestern United States, this technological transition seems to have
taken place sometime after A.D. 400 (Ford 1974: 402) but may have occurred
later in the Northwest, where according to Griffin (1978: 254), the atlatl did not
give way to the bow-and-arrow until sometime between A.D. 700 and 900. Ford
(1974: 402) goes so far as to suggest that the replacement of the atlatl by
the bow-and-arrow may have been an important factor in the breakdown of the
Hopewell Interaction Sphere in the eastern United States. He proposes that the
greater efficiency of the bow as a military weapon may have heightened conflict
and reduced peaceful interaction and in turn led to the Hopewell decline. Alternatively, he suggests that the presumably greater hunting effectiveness of the bow
may have allowed loca! groups to exploit sufficient wild resources on their own
without reliance on the regional exchange of foodstuffs presumed to have been an
important function of the Hopewell Interaction Sphere. Muller (1978: 302),
however, feels both these theses to be too simplistic.
Despite the widespread acceptance of the bow-and-arrow in place of the
atlatl, the replacement was not absolute in either the New World or the Old. Perhaps due to their relative isolation, the peoples of Australia, New Guinea, Micronesia and Melanesia retained the atlatl into historical times (Krause 1905; Ketlar
1955; Cressman and Krieger 1940). Likewise, certain Arctic and Subarctic
peoples, including the Aleuts and some Eskimo groups, continued to use the
atlatl. However, northern peoples generally either possessed the bow-and-arrow
as well, or at least were familiar with it. They seem to have retained the atlatl

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

9

primarily for use in sea-mammal hunting and water fowling since, in these contexts, the atlatl has a number of advantages over the bow-and-arrow, which we
discuss below.
The atlatl was also retained by peoples at the opposite end of the scale of
social complexity from the Eskimo: the civilized societies of southern and central Mesoamerica such as the Aztecs and the Toltec-Maya. Among the former
peoples, the atlatl seems to have served as a kind of artillery weapon used to
launch heavy spears in close support of phalanxes of massed infantry (Nuttall
1891; Driver 1961: 380). On the margins of Mesoamerica, simpler peoples are
also reported to have been using the atlatl at the time of the Spanish conquest.
Massey (1961) found reference to the weapon in use in Baja California during
the 17th century, Heizer (1938) reports its historic use in the Santa Barbara channel area of southern California and throwing boards dating to the 15th century
have been recovered at the Key Marco site in coastal Florida (Gilliland 1975: 38).
In addition, Swanton (1938) reports that the DeSoto expedition was attacked by
Indians using atlatls on the Gulf Coast near the mouth of the Mississippi River. It
is uncertain whether or not the presence of the atlatl in these four coastal settings
indicates that the weapon was retained there for specialized use in marine hunting, as it was in the arctic, or whether it was abandoned in those localities also
with the coming of the bow-and-arrow and only later reintroduced by diffusion
from the high cultures of nearby Mesoamerica (cf., Sturtevant 1960: 31; Kellar
1955: 335). In this context it is interesting to note that both the atlatl darts used
against DeSoto’s men on the Gulf Coast and those used against Cortez’s army in
Mexico were reported to have been mounted with three-pronged dart points
(Swanton 1938: 358; DeFuentes 1963: 169).
Perhaps an analogous situation existed in South America. There also the
atlatl was reportedly used by the Inca and other civilized peoples as a military
weapon as well as by surrounding societies of markedly lower levels of social and
technical complexity in Ecuador and northwest Brazil as far south as the Rio de
la Plata (Metraux 1948: 244-245,247; also cf., Cressman and Krieger 1940: 28;
Uhle 1909). Despite these survivals or specialized retentions, the bow-and-arrow
had largely supplanted the atlatl in North America by historic times. By then, as
Driver (1961: 58) notes: "... the bow-and-arrow was almost everywhere the
chief weapon used .... The spearthrower is reported by European observers
only in the far north and extreme south with a huge gap in the middle."

The Atlaa Observed: Experimental Assessments of Atlaa Performance.

Although most scholars would agree that the purpose of the atlatl is to increase the amount of "thrust" or propulsive force, which a user can put behind a
spear or dart, they have disagreed as to precisely how this increase was effected.
According to Howard (1974: 102),
... archaeological literature commonly attributes increased leverage and centrifugal force as the primary factors in the thrust provided by the atlatl. Actual ex-

10

Texas Archeological Society

perimenters have enforced this consensus by implying that the atlatl raises the dart,
or spear, in a high arc above the thrower and flips, whips, or otherwise performs in a
catapulting fashion.

Howard’s own experimental work led him to a different conclusion. According to him (Howard 1974: 102), the function of the throwing board is merely to
prolong the contact between the spearman and his missile and thus allow him to
concentrate a greater percentage of the total force of his throw behind the dart. In
using the throwing board, a spearman is in effect lengthening his reach and therefore applying force to the dart for a moment longer than he would be able to do
with his arm alone.
Howard’s interpretation receives some support from Brues (1959: 465) who
notes in her classic paper, "The Spearman and the Archer," that different body
morphologies are suited to different forms of weaponry. She suggests that since
"the determining factor in the efficiency of the spear is the velocity with which
the weapon leaves the hand," individuals with long, linear, "ectomorphic" body
builds would tend to be the most effective spearmen. She too interprets the
throwing board as an artifical extension or lengthening of the human arm designed to increase that velocity. Thus, according to Brues (1959: 464-465), the
throwing board
¯ . . affords a means of compensating for the disadvantage of a short arm in the use
of the spear. Possibly it was devised as a means of adapting the spear to the use of
peoples of more lateral build, who would not have been apt to have developed the
spear themselves but might have received it from others. The possibility that the
throwing stick represents a compromise with body build finds confirmation in
the fact that the very linear spear-users of Africa generally throw the spear with the
bare hands; apparently the throwing-stick has little to offer to a physique with maximum built-in speed leverages.

However, the physics of the atlatl are of less interest to anthropologists than
the practical performance characteristics and capabilities of the weapon. Assessing the performance of the atlatl has been approached primarily in three ways.
First, by field testing actual atlatl specimens (or workshop prototypes) in what
has come to be called "experimental archeology." Second, by observing the rapidly diminishing ranks of living peoples who still make and use the atlatl. And
finally, by examining historic and ethnographic accounts of aboriginal atlatl use.
Published accounts of performance tests with the atlatl begin with the work
of Browne (1940), Davenport (1943), Hill (1948), Evans (1959), Peets (1960),
Mau (1963), Hobbs (1963) and continue into the present with the more recent
works of Spencer (1974), Howard (1974) and Palter (1976). Many of the earlier
experiments were notably unsuccessful. For example, Browne (1940:211) states
bluntly that "any close degree of accuracy is impossible with the atlatl and the
spear." Hill (1948) and Hobbs (1963) are nearly as skeptical about the accuracy
and overall utility of the weapon. Since the atlatl has been an important part of

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

11

the human technical inventory for thousands of years, we are forced by the evidence of its very persistence and ubiquitousness to conclude that it offered some
advantage to its users. However, the fact that these modern scholars appear to
have been unable to master the atlatl certainly points up the dangers and limitations inherent in any such tests. Lacking living mentors, the experimenter is
forced in a matter of weeks or months to teach himself a skill, the mastery of
which may have taken the people who actually used the weapon years of constant
and closely-supervised training and practice. Given such a limitation, can we
ever hope to simulate the actual performance capabilities of such a prehistoric
tool? Probably not, but the tests of those scholars who have managed to obtain
more positive results than Browne and company give us at least some indication
of the atlatl’s ancient capacities.
Such capacities can be measured along three lines: maximum distance, accuracy and penetration. Comparing the results of his own experiments with
those of some of his predecessors, Spencer (1974: 52) states,
¯ . . my viable dart throws averaged about 50-60 yards (46-55 meters) in distance.
I feel better distances are possible. Browne (1940) mentions distances of 81 yards
(74 meters). Hobbs (1963) reports average distances of 38.6 yards (35 meters)¯ Hill
(1948) records 46.6 yard (43 meters) average distances for what he calls "medium
weight" darts. All these distances are different and doubtless different types of
atlatls and darts were used.
In addition, Peets (1960: 109) reports distances averaging slightly more than
57 meters (62 yards) for an unweighted throwing board and Palter (1976: Figure 1,
105), who would seem to hold the World Cup for the atlatl, achieved tosses of
around 108 meters (118 yards) with a similarly unweighted board. Howard
(1974: 104) and Hobbs (1963: 6) achieved distances only about half those reported by Palter; their tosses averaged around 59 meters (64 yards) and 37 meters
(40 yards) respectively. However, their experiments are perhaps more useful
since they compare their atlatl results with the average distances they achieved
with the hand-thrown spear. Howard’s figures indicate that the use of the throwing
board resulted in a 42 percent increase in the average distance he was able to
obtain. These percentage increases are no doubt more significant indicators of
the effectiveness of the throwing board than the gross distances reported by the
other experimenters.
Krause (! 905:621-622) states that using the throwing board, one should be
able to cast a spear three or four times further than with the bare hands. He confirms this through reference to the ethnographic literature of his time noting:
. . . an Englishman saw a native of Port Jackson (Sidney) aiming the spear sling at
a mark 276 feet (84 meters) away. While spears can be thrown 50 to 75 feet (15 to
23 meters) with the bare hands, from the spear sling they easily reach 200 to 300 feet
(61 to 91 meters). Indeed, according to Clutterbuck, the Australians are said to have
made even 150 yards (137 meters) with the spear sling. Whether these last state-

12

Texas Archeological Society

ments are entirely accurate we can not decide, but one constantly sees references to
great distances attained by aid of the spear sling.
Assessing the atlatl along the second dimension, accuracy, is a still harder
task to undertake experimentally. As noted above, Browne (1940), Hiil (1948)
and Hobbs (1963) all find the atlatl to be a basically inaccurate weapon. On this
point Browne (1940: 212) is most emphatic:
I consider myself an average individual, have an expert rating with both large and
small bore rifles, a few trophies from archery tournaments, but after six months of
intensive practice with atlatl and spear I wouldn’t be sure of hitting a buffalo at thirty
yards once out of ten shots. With a bow, anyone can register eight hits out of ten
shots at this distance and on this size target after a week’s practice.

On the other hand, Evans (1959: 160) states that after a few minutes prac=
tice, "a target a foot in diameter could be pierced at 20 to 30 feet (6 to 9 meters)
about four out of five times." Davenport (1943: 33) does Evans one better when
he states that "in a short time I was hitting within a three-foot circle at a distance
of about 80 paces." And Spencer (1974: 52) states that his "subjective opinion is
that the atlatl and dart is a very accurate hunting weapon .... Accuracy with
my dart and atlatl combination seemed best at distances of 20-30 yards (18-27
meters)." Once again, the problem of learning ancient skills by oneself (combined no doubt with the varying quality of the atlatls used in the experiments),
makes the results of these tests difficult to assess.
At this point we are better served by turning briefly and selectively to the
ethnographic record. Coon (1976: 97), for example, notes that the Aleuts of the
Northern Pacific Bering Straits region used the atlatl in hunting from their skin
boats or bidarkas. According to him, "... the early Russian accounts state that
the Aleuts cast (atlatl darts) with deadly accuracy and killed men, animals, and
birds as efficiently as the Russians could with firearms." An eyewitness account
of the accuracy of the atlatl may be found in Foster’s (1948: 107) ethnography of
the central Mexican people of Tzintzuntzan. The atlatl was retained among these
people for use in a single activity--duck hunting. According to Foster (1948:
107), large numbers of villagers gather with their canoes to take part in an annual
communal duck hunt on a major lake near Janitizio. Describing the use of the
atIatl during the hunt, Foster says that "the aim of skillful men is deadly, and
literally thousands of ducks are killed on this day." The weapon is also used in the
smaller-scale hunts that precede and follow this annual event. The Aleut and
Mexican examples indicate rather clearly that, in the hands of an experienced
hunter, the atlatI can be an exceedingly accurate weapon, which is probably superior to the hand-thrown spear. At least in part, this accuracy may result from
the "superior grip and control of his spear" which, according to Howard (1974:
t04), the atlatl affords its user.
Finally, penetration, the third dimension of atlatl performance to be discussed, is surely the crucial one for any projectile weapon. After all, whatever its

Diekson--The Atlatl Assessed

13

range or accuracy, the extent to which the missile it projects is able to penetrate
and damage the target is the final measure of the utility of such a device. Recognizing the importance of this dimension, gun and archery equipment manufacturers have developed a number of techniques for measuring relative projectile
penetration. Although some of these techniques have been used by Pope (1923)
in appraising aboriginal arrow penetration, none of the experimental studies of
atlatl performance have made use of them. In fact, of all the atlatl experimental
studies cited above, only Hill (1948) and Cole (1972) are at all concerned with
this aspect of dart effectiveness. Hopefully, future performance studies will remedy this deficiency. Meanwhile, lacking empirical data, we are forced to approach the problem of atlatl dart penetration, first through the ethnographic
record, and second on theoretical grounds.
An ethnographic example of just exactly how forcefully and successfully an
atlatl dart can sometimes puncture its target is provided by Garcilaso de la Vega,
a chronicler of the DeSoto expedition in the southeastern United States during
the 16th century. Describing the effect of an atlatl dart wound on a member of
the expedition, Garcilaso relates that,
¯ . . the dart of long arrow with which they wounded our Spaniard . . . had three
barbs in the place of one, similar to the three largest fingers of the hand. The barb in
the center was a hand-breadth longer than the two on the sides, and thus it went
through the thigh from one side to the other. The two side barbs were lodged in the
middle of the thigh and in the poor Spaniard’s leg, because they were harpoons and
not smooth points. The butchery was such that he expired before they got his wound
dressed, the poor fellow not knowing whether to complain more of the enemy who
had wounded him or of the friends who had hastened his death (Swanton 1938: 358).
In the same context Garcilaso notes that the atlatl was used against the
Spanish in Peru. There, according to him, "they shoot darts with it with extreme
force, so that it has been known to pass through a man armed with a coat of
mail" (Swanton 1938: 358).
How is such penetration achieved? From basic physics we learn that the
force with which any projectile strikes its target is a product of its mass times its
velocity (Arons 1965:127-128). Cole (1972: 1) refers to this force as the "impact pressure" of the projectile. In large measure, it is the impact pressure of the
dart which determines the extent or degree of its penetration. However, as Cole
(1972: 1) notes, the contact area of the projectile point and the resistance of the
target material enter into this determination as well. Atlatl users seeking to
increase the penetration and/or range of their weapon would thus have three
options:
!. Increase the velocity of the dart without changing its mass.
2. Increase the mass of the dart without changing its velocity.
3. Increase both the velocity and mass of the dart.

It would appear that the velocity achieved by the dart is largely a function of

14

Texas Archeological Society

the human force that can be concentrated behind it when it is thrown. If Howard
(1974) is correct in asserting that the purpose of the throwing board is to prolong
contact between the dartshaft and the thrower’s arm, then one should be able to
increase the velocity of the dart by increasing the length of the throwing board.
However, there are natural constraints on such increases. Most obviously, the
overall body size, reach and strength of the individual atIatl user would place a
limit on the extent to which the throwing board would be lengthened (Davenport
1943: 34). Further, Peets (1960:110) and Evans (1959: 160) state that the size of
both the throwing board and the dart must be in proportion to one another if the
weapon is to be effective. These scholars suggest a dartshaft-to-board length
ratio of no less than about 3 to 1 is necessary if the balance of the weapon is to be
maintained (Palter [1976: 503] denies that such a limit exists).
Increasing the mass of the dart and/or the dartshaft without changing the
velocity at which it is thrown is perhaps a simpler way to increase penetration
and range, but here too, physical limitations are encountered. First, one can always increase the mass of the dart by enlarging the projectile point attached to its
tip. However, siliceous rock, of which most projectile points are made, tends to
be relatively fragile. Although larger points may weigh more, they also are more
likely to break on impact. The inconvenience of such breakage eventually would
offset performance benefits. Secondly, any enlargement of the dart’s mass heightens the friction and wind resistance encountered by the missile in its flight. At
some point the performance benefits conferred by increased mass are negated by
the decline in velocity resulting from greater friction.
The existence of these physical limitations on the expansion of the length
of the throwing board and the mass of the dart were probably discovered experimentally by atIatl users over the course of millennia. No doubt such long-term
experience also resulted in the recognition of something approximating an optimal balance between board length and dart mass. With the development and
application of this balance, the maximum range and penetration capabilities of
the simple atlatl would have been reached. Deviation from this length:mass ratio
could only have resulted in a decline in performance.
At this point the matter of the tool’s technological evolution may have come
to rest among many atlatl-using peoples. I would suggest, however, that experimental efforts at improving atlatl range and penetration did not everywhere stop
with the recognition of the optimal length:mass ratio. Instead, a new avenue of
investigation seems to have begun, at least in North America. That avenue apparently involved aboriginal experiments with the use of weights or "bannerstones"
to enhance the effectiveness of the atlatl.

The Problem of Atlaa Weights or "Bannerstones"
Bannerstones, or what Willey.(1966: Figure 5-5, 254) prefers to call
"problematical ground-and-polished stone objects," have been recovered in

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

15

North American contexts, especially in the eastern United States, virtually since
the beginnings of scientific archeology there (e.g. Fowke 1896; Jones 1873;
Holmes 1897). Such objects were made from a wide range of raw materials including slate, limestone, greenstone, quartzite, marble, jasper, galena, hematite
and steatite. According to Palter (1976: 503), they range in weight from as little
as 30 to as great as 800 grams. Bannerstones are equally variable in shape (see
Figure 3). Although many are fairly flat in cross-section, they range from rectangular, oval, sub-oval, lunate, triangular, circular, to "reel-shaped" (sic) in
plan. More bizarre cylindrical, loaf- or boat-shaped, irregular and winged forms
are also commonly reported. Grooves on or holes through the objects suggest
that they were hafted. Generally the flat bannerstone forms exhibit one or more
holes drilled or perforated through them from front to back, while the cylindrical
and winged varieties often have had holes drilled through them longitudinally.
Considering the formal variety of these "problematical" objects, it is not surprising that they have been known by a great number of terms. Alternative labels
include gorget, birdstone, boatstone, butterfly stone, forearm bow guard, charmstone, pendant, fishing weight as well as many others.
As these names imply, the objects have been variously interpreted as items
of personal adornment or luck, bow guards, fishing gear as well as atlatl weights.

a

b

c

d

f
0
I

I

I

I

r

5
I

I

I

t

I

I0
]

scele in centimeters

Figure 3. Six different examples of "problematic stone implements" often classed as
atlatl weights in the eastern United States: (a) "boatstone" from Alabama (after Willey
1966: 254, Figure 5-5, d); (b) specimen from Indiana (after Jennings 1974: 144, Figure 4.7; (c-d) perforated, bannerstones from Laurentian culture, New York (after Willey
1966: 263, Figure 5-15, 11 and kk); (e) "winged bannerstone" from Archaic context in
Indiana (after Willey 1966: 254, Figure 5-5 c); (f) "birdstone" from Archaic context in
Indiana (after Willey 1966: 254, Figure 5-5, a).

16

Texas Archeological Society

And, Curren (1977: 97) notes, evidence for all of these interpretations have been
recovered from time to time. For example, in the Southwest and Great Basin, a
limited number of atlatls have been recovered intact from dry caves with weights
still attached to their throwing boards (Mildner 1974; Hester 1974b; Guernsey
1931, Plate 50; Fenenga and Wheat 1940). However, the boat-shaped or grooved
pebbles found to have been mounted on these throwing boards represent only a
few of the types or classes of "problematical stone objects", which have been
interpreted as atlatl weights. As far as the large, winged and cylindrical bannerstones of eastern North America are concerned, the evidence for their use as
atlatl weights is much more indirect. The acceptance of the idea that they were
formerly mounted on throwing boards seems to be based on two lines of evidence. First, the longitudinal and transverse holes drilled through them would
appear to allow them to be so mounted. Second, as Palter (1976: 505) notes,
graves excavated by Webb and Haag (1939) at the Mclean 11 site and by Webb
(1946) at Indian Knoll, both in Kentucky, contained winged bannerstones apparently in linear alignment with socketed "attached type" male atlatl hooks and
atlatl handles. Although the wood of the throwing boards had long since decayed, the excavators interpreted these alignments to mean that the weights were
formerly mounted on them. Other alignments were also noted at the sites and
alternative interpretations of the mounting of the bannerstones are possible, so
more will be said of these data below.
Since the correct functional interpretation of these "problematical objects"
is crucial to the remainder of our discussion, we must digress for a moment and
consider the disagreement that currently surrounds the subject. This discord is
perhaps well illustrated by three papers: an early work by Butler and Osborne
(1959), a provocative recent paper by Curran (1977), and a spirited rejoinder to
that paper by Starna (1979). Butler and Osborne (1959) define and illustrate
three types of "atlatl weights", or bannerstones, from the northwestern United
States. The three types are reproduced in our Figure 4. Note that the classes differ so widely in form that only an archeologist steeped in the literature of his
profession would conlcude that such disparate objects as these were really made
to serve the same purpose. In fact, even members of the archeological tribe do
not entirely share Butler and Osborne’s views. For example, in eastern North
America, the perforated oval, circular and rectangular ground-and-polished
stone objects which Butler and Osborne would surely class as "Type I atlatl
weights" are more often interpreted as "stone gorgets" or even as "forearm
bowguards" (Curren 1977: 97). In his interesting and imaginative paper, Curren
(1977) adds a new interpretation by suggesting that, at least in the East, such
artifacts were used as ceramic manufacturing tools. He adduces this idea largely
by juxtaposing illustrations of classic Early Woodland period Adena "stone
gorgets" with drawings of wooden implements commonly used by modern ceramists in decorating and shaping pottery. The formal correspondence between
these two classes is striking indeed and Curren (1977: 97-99) attempts to
strengthen this identification by suggesting that the appearance of stone gorgets

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

17

is generally correlated with the rise of ceramic manufacture in the eastern North
American archeological record.
However, in a still more recent paper, Starna (1979) strongly demurs. According to him, the fornlal parallel between the ancient stone gorgets and the
modern ceramic shaping tools are spurious. To support his counterargument he
notes that, while ancient stone plummets and modern brass plumb bobs share a
formal similarity, no one is willing to conclude that the ancient tool was part of
an aboriginal land-surveying complex. He further disputes Curren’s suggestion of
a temporal correlation between the appearance of gorgets and ceramics in the
East. While conceding that data bearing on this point is not entirely clear,
he notes that gorgets have been recovered in contexts, which both pre- and
post-date the appearance of ceramics (Starna 1979: 337-338). Starna (1979:
338-340) prefers instead to interpret these stone objects as items of personal
adornment possessing both social and religious connotations, that is, as gorgers
in sensu stricto. He [’eels such an interpretation more satisfactorily accounts for
the obvious effort lavished on their manufacture, their common appearance in
mortuary contexts with individuals of both sexes and the fact that they are often
made of lightweight material, such as copper and shell, as well as stone.
No attempt is made at resolving Curren and Starna’s interpretational dispute
here. Suffice to say, both their papers strongly indicate that Butler and Osborne’s
"Type I atlatl weights" may have served very different tasks. The likelihood of
that being the case is further strengthened by the fact that, according to Mildner
(1974: 15, 21), only Butler and Osborne’s Type II and Type III atlatl weights
have actually been recovered mounted on atlatl throwing boards in archeological
contexts in the Great Basin and the Southwest.
Thus, clear archeological evidence exists to demonstrate that stone weights
were sometimes attached to atlatl throwing boards in North America. This evidence comes from the western United States where a limited number of atlatls
with such stones still attached have been recovered from dry caves. Somewhat
more ambiguous evidence from graves in the eastern United States indicates at
least an association between certain classes of bannerstones and atlatls. However, a broad range of other "problematical stone implements" have been moreor-less arbitrarily included in the functional category "atlatl weight" despite the
fact that association between many of these forms and actual atlatls has been
inferential, tenuous or nonexistent. Further, alternative functions for many of
these stone objects are highly plausible. In other words, archeologists are unable to precisely agree on what was and what was not an "atlatl weight."
With that rather unencouraging Caveat in mind, let us turn to an examination of
some recent experimental attempts at gauging the effects of weights on atlatl
performance.
The most common approach to the problem is to assume that the weights
were mounted on the atlatl throwing board. Palter (1976: 502) summarizes as
follows the results of experiments with weighted throwing boards done by a number of scholars:

18

Texas Archeological Society

Clayton Mau, as a result of his experimentation with a weighted spear thrower,
claims that he was able to increase the range of his projectiles by between 15% and
25% (Mau 1963:11). Orville Peets, on the other hand, concluded from similar experiments that the attachment of spear thrower weights made no appreciable difference in the average range of his tosses (Peets 1960: !09). Calvin Howard has
concluded that spear thrower adjuncts are disadvantageous based upon recent experiments which revealed an 18% decrease in the range of a projectile thrown with the
aid of a weighted spear thrower (Howard 1974: 104). Still another experimenter,
Malcomb Hill, concluded that the addition of weights to the shaft of a spear thrower
might be functional when employing light-weight darts, but he doubted their utility
in the case where heavier projectiles are in use (Hill 1948: 41-42).
Hobbs (1963: 6) was able to achieve an average increase in distance of about
3.2 per cent with his radically modified, weighted "super." Unfortunately, there
is not a shred of archeological evidence to suggest that an atlatl of Hobbs’ design
was ever used in prehistoric North America. Palter’s experiments revealed inverse
correlation existed between the weight of the various bannerstones, which he attached to the throwing board, and the distance he was able to hurl the dartshaft.
The greater the weight, the shorter the toss. According to him, "the minimum
weight tested which still permitted maximum efficiency comparable to the nonweighted spear thrower was 75 grams" (Palter 1976: 502). This latter conclusion
corroborates the results of Spencer (1974: 52). Spencer made an exact replica of
an atlatl, which had been recovered archeologically, with a boat-shaped weight
of approximately 60 grams attached to its throwing board. In his experiments
with this replica, Spencer found that the presence or absence of this 60 gram
bannerstone had virtually no effect on the distances he was able to toss the
dartshaft. Despite his test results, Palter (1976: 505-509) is not entirely willing
to reject the notion that throwing boards were weighted in order to improve atlatl
performance and suggests that although rigid boards do not benefit from the
weights, perhaps flexible ones might, like the type recorded in Australia (Krause
1905: 623-624). This hypothesis seems plausible and should prove easily testable. However, it fails to account for the fact that most of the atlatl weights recovered in situ in the Great Basin and elsewhere are mounted on rigid throwing
boards (cf., Hester 1974; Mildner 1974).
Thus, most experiments appear to indicate that the attachment of a bannerstone weight to a throwing board has at best a negligible, and at worst a distinctly
adverse, impact on atlatl performance. Results such as these have led some
scholars to suggest that throwing-board weights were designed to enhance performance by indirect means. Peets (1960), for example, suggests that it is necessary
to maintain a balance between the throwing board and the dartshaft on the
fulcrum of the thrower’s hand. Thus, if one were to use a heavy dartpoint or a
harpoon, it would be necessary to place a bannerstone on the end of the throwing
board to counterpoise the weight on the opposite end of the dartshaft. The notion
that bannerstones served to counterbalance the throwing board is also shared by
Lewis and Kneberg (1958) and Hobbs (1963: 6). Palter (1976: 503), however,
rejects Peets’ argument on the grounds that the exceedingly large dartshafts and

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

19

small throwing boards of the Australian aborigines do not conform to the latter’s
"balance formula" and thus suggest that is not necessary to maintain an equilibrium between throwing board and dartshaft. In fairness to Peets, however, it
must be noted that he suggests that such counterbalancing would be useful primarily where the hunter himself was precariously situated, such as in a kayak or
on slippery footing (Peets 1960:110). This suggestion is, of course, especially
difficult to test.
McGregor (1965: 182), on the other hand, concludes that atlatl weights, at
least in the Southwest, served merely as charms or good luck pieces. Both he and
Palter (1976: 505) muster evidence to demonstrate that at least some of the supposed "weights" mounted on atlatls recovered from southwestern dry caves were
too light to have served as anything but symbols or charms. Kellar (1955: 304)
considers it possible that weights mounted near the distal end of the throwing
board might aid performance but notes that, on some southwestern specimens,
such weights were "attached too near the handle for any practical benefit." Finally, Johnson (1971: 190-193) nmsters evidence to suggest that southwestern
and Mexican atlatls were sometimes decorated with clearly nonfunctional items
such as "cruciform" stones. However, these authors have yet to prove that all
bannerstones were merely talismans or embellishments. The weights recovered
in association with atlatls in eastern North America tend to be larger than those
referred to by McGregor. Therefore, instead of being intended to enhance the
performance of the atlatl, Hudson (1976: 47) suggests that such weights made
the throwing board "suitable for secondary use as a war club." Here too, the actual placement on the throwing board of those bannerstones recovered in situ argues against the interpretation.
Taking a different tack, Cole (I 972) refers to basic physics to explain why
weighted throwing boards would fail to enhance atlat! performance. He notes
that the range and penetration of the dart is largely the product of its mass times
its velocity, and that the velocity of the dart is in turn a function of the force with
which it is thrown. The force of the throw is determined by the strength of the
thrower; augmented by the lengthened contact between his arm and the dartshaft
provided by the throwing board. Increasing the weight of the throwing board by
attaching a bannerstone to it does nothing to enhance either the force of the throw
or the period of contact between arm and dart. Conversely, excessively heavy
weights can, as Palter (1976) demonstrates, reduce the force of the throw by
making the throwing board more awkward and difficult to handle.
However, since range and penetration can be increased by maintaining the
velocity and increasing the mass of the dartshaft, Cole (1972: 3-4) suggests that
bannerstones, especially the winged and cylindrical varieties known from eastern North America and the arctic, may actually have been placed on the darts’h@
rather than the throwing board. He further hypothesizes that the purpose of the
bannerstone "wings" on these specimens was to provide a real (or perhaps an
imagined) stabilizing effect on the dart’s flight. Cole strengthens his case by referring to the classic alignments of bannerstones and throwing board hooks re-

20

Texas Archeological Society

ported by Webb and Haag (1939) and Webb (1946). Although Cole concedes that
the bannerstones and hooks do occur in linear patterns in the graves at these
sites, he notes that Webb’s Indian Knoll photographs:
¯ . . are all the more impressive for the number of weights and hooks shown side-byside (Webb 1946: Figs. 17a, d, 20c, f). Webb believed that the side-by-side placement of a weight and a hook was an example of... an atlatl having been intentionally broken, with the broken parts being placed next to each other in the burial
(Webb 1946: 326-327). The same placement, however, could have resulted from a
spear, with an attached weight, having been placed in the burial with the atlatl, assuming that the weight was attached to something in the first place (Cole 1972: 4).

Cole (1972: 4) also cites the early experiments done by Parker (1917: 193)
who found that "a spear can be thrown at least 25 percent farther when assisted
by a winged weight placed on the tail end of the spearshaft." Thus the notion that
bannerstones were shaft- rather than board-mounted has the potential for resolving some of the anomalies in our current understanding and should be systematically tested through field experimentation.
In summary, North American atlatl throwing boards do in some instances
appear to have been weighted. However, only a limited number of throwing
boards have actually been recovered with the weights or bannerstones still in
place. Weights recovered in situ have generally been light and fairly limited in
formal variation. Thus, although a wide range of types of "problematical stone
objects" have been called atlatl weights, it seems probable that many of these
objects actually served very different purposes. This is especially likely to have
been true of the larger, heavier stone objects.
Experimental studies of the contribution of throwing board weights to atlatl
performance indicate, for the most part, that such weights offer little benefit and,
depending on their size and weight, may actually decrease dart range. Since
throwing board weights seem to have a largely negative effect on atlatl performance, at least five alternative hypotheses have been advanced to explain their
use in North America:
1. Although bannerstones do not seem to contribute to the performance of either
heavy darts or rigid throwing boards, perhaps the range of light-weight darts (Hill
1948) or flexible throwing boards (Palter 1976), neither of which have been sufficiently tested experimentally, may have benefited from the use of such weights.
2. Bannerstones might have been attached to the throwing board to counterbalance
an especially heavy point or harpoon head mounted on the dartshaft (Peets 1960).
3. Bannerstones, as well as other objects or materials found attached to throwing
boards and dartshafts, were really magical charms or goodluck pieces designed
to enhance the performance of the atlatl exclusively by supernatural means
(McGregor 1965: 182).
4. Bannerstones, at least in eastern North America, did not contribute to atlatl performance but allowed the throwing board to be used secondarily as a war club
(Hudson 1976: 47).
5. at least some bannerstones, notably the large, winged and cylindrical varieties of

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

21

eastern North America, were not mounted on the throwing board at all. Instead,
these weights were used on the dartshaft in order to increase the "impact pressure" of the missile and perhaps to stabilize it in its flight (Cole 1972).
Like the hypothesis which they are designed to replace, none of these five
theses provide an entirely satisfactory explanation of the bannerstone phenomenon. It would appear that "theoretical closure" in this area is impossible at
present and the rejection of any of these alternative hypotheses must await
systematic field experimentation and the recovery of additional archeological
evidence.

b
~,i -~.~

Figure 4. Three basic classes of "problematic stone implements" from the northwestern
United States interpreted as atlatl weights by Butler and Osborne (1959): (a) Type I
(b) Type II (c) Type III.

The Atlaa Abandoned: A Brief Discussion of the Reasons for Technical
Supercession of That Weapon by the Bow-and-Arrow with Some Notes on
Its Limited Retention.
As noted above, the bow-and-arrow seems to have entered the North American technical inventory sometime during the last millennium before Christ. Over
time the bow-and-arrow replaced the atlatl as the primary military and hunting
weapon on the continent. The reasons for this replacement are perhaps obvious
and will be but briefly attended to here. Less obvious are the reasons for the
retention of the atlatl by certain aboriginal peoples in the face of the widespread
acceptance of the bow-and-arrow by most. Several hypotheses regarding this retention will be advanced.
The first and most obvious advantage of the bow-and-arrow over the atlatl
would appear to be the greater "casting power" or range of the former weapon.
In an interesting study, Pope (1923, 1962) tested a large number of aboriginal
bows from various museum and private collections to determine their casting
power and penetration under controlled conditions. The thirteen bows from the
New world tested by Pope (1962: 2-21) cast arrows between 101 and 230 meters

22

Texas Archeological Society

(92 and 210 yards) with a mean distance of 167 meters (153 yards), and a standard deviation of 37 meters (34 yards). Using the distance figures presented by
the atlatl experimenters summarized earlier, the atlatl was reportedly capable of
distances ranging from about 42 to 70 meters (39 to 64 yards) for a mean distance
of 62 meters (57 yards) and a standard deviation of 16 meters (15 yards) under
controlled conditions. The mean of Pope’s arrow-cast distances is thus about 164
percent greater than the mean dart casts. However, Krause (1905: 621-622) reports atlatl casts observed by travelers and ethnographers ranging between 61
and 137 meters for a mean distance of 93 meters and a standard deviation of 31
meters. Pope’s reported mean casts are thus only about 79 percent farther than
those reported by Krause. Nonetheless, the range of the bow-and-arrow seems to
be clearly greater than that of the atlatl.
Less obvious advantages of the bow have also been noted by various authors. First, the bow-and-arrow is perhaps an easier tool to use from the cover of
an ambush or game blind. Hill (1948: 38) states that although it is not impossible
to do so, the atlatl is a difficult weapon to use in thick woods with little elbow
room. This difficulty stems, according to Mau (1963: 12), from the body movements one must utilize to launch the dartshaft. Such launching requires:
¯ . . a vigorous, and perhaps conspicuous, swing of the arm. This, one can imagine,
often was sufficiently evident to an agile animal or other game to enable it to make
good its escape from the missile. By contrast, when using the bow, the arrow can be
launched, with a minimum of movement on the part of the archer and from almost
any position (Mau 1963: 12).

Thus the bow can probably be used with less effort under such conditions and can
be done so with less body exposure. This latter advantage would be especially
important in warfare. A third major advantage of the bow-and-arrow stems from
its use of lighter, shorter shafts. As Evans (1959: 161) puts it: "... while it is
possible to carry only two or three short spears, 20 to 30 arrows can easily be
carried in a quiver." The shorter length of the arrow over the spear would also
make travel through heavily wooded terrain much easier. However, the disadvantage presented by the bulky nature of the atlatl dartshafts may have been overcome in another way. Lahren and Bonnichsen (1974) present archeological evidence to suggest that Clovis fluted points were mounted on short, cylindrical
foreshafts made of bone. The authors hypothesize that such foreshafts were in
turn stuck into socketed spearshafts. In this way, a hunter would need to carry
only one or two socketed spearshafts for use with a whole quiver full of foreshaftmounted dart points. As Lahren and Bonnichsen (1974: 149) note: "Retrieving
the lance and inserting another foreshaft and point composite could have been
done in seconds. This method would be far more efficient than carrying a number
of lances .... " If such foreshaft mountings were used with atlatl darts by Paleo:
Indian (and later) peoples, it would h.ave enabled them to overcome some of the
inconvenience of large dart shafts. Frison and Zeimens (1980: 234) however, feel
these supposed foreshafts are really bone projectile points.

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

23

In any case, if one considers the greater range, weaponry and convenience
of the bow-and-arrow compared to the atlatl, it is easy to understand why the
former replaced the latter. Less obvious perhaps, are the reasons for the retention
of the atlatl by some peoples in the New World after the introduction of the bowand-arrow. For instance, the ethnographic record indicates that many peoples
who used boats to hunt marine or aquatic animals preferred the atlatl over the
bow-and-arrow. As Kellar (1955: 337) reminds us, bow strings of animal or plant
fibers tend to dampen and stretch when exposed to moisture for prolonged periods. Further, the larger size of the atlatl dartshaft would not be a particular disadvantage where extra spears could be carried in a boat rather than on the
hunter’s back. Of course, at medium range, such large shafts and projectile points
would strike the quarry with equal or greater force and penetration than the arrow. As Cressman and Krieger (1940: 30) point out, size, force and penetration
would be especially desirable in the hunting of large sea mammals such as walrus. Further, the bow-and-arrow must be used with two hands while an atlatl
dartshaft can be loaded and cast with only one hand by an experienced user. This
means that a lone hunter could hold his paddle and steady his boat with one hand
and launch a dart with the other (Cressman and Krieger 1940: 30; Mau 1963:
12). Finally, marine and aquatic hunters and fishermen commonly attach lines to
their projectiles so they will be able to recover their quarry after killing or wounding it on the water. As Peets (1960:110) notes:
¯ . . the arrow is unsuited to carrying a line such as were even the best Indian ones¯
The modern bow-fisher uses a very thin waterproof line on an efficient reel, but
some experiments I made several years ago with Indian-type equipment were spectacular failures, though at the time I had the Delaware Championship in archery and
the distance record. The arrow, though heavy and having a steel broadhead could not
handle the wet, sandy line. The first jump of the arrow was far too rapid, and the
inertia of the line seemed to be increased by it. And when there was enough line in
the air to have the wind catch it, all accuracy was lost.

The atlatl, on the other hand, apparently suffers no such disadvantage and
the ethnographic record contains numerous accounts of that tool being used to
cast shafts with lines attached to them. The Angmagsalik Eskimo used the atlatl
to launch toggle-head harpoons from their kayaks when seal hunting. The combination of the atlatl with the Angmagsalik harpoon resulted in a composite tool
consisting of 33 separate parts including the line and seal-skin floats (Oswalt
1976: 99). This composite tool brought together two of the most effective devices
in the technical inventory of early man. The harpoon is present in Europe at least
by 7,000 B.C. (Bordes 1968: 165-166) and may have been known in North
America by this time as well (Cressman 1977:115). We may perhaps surmise
from this that the combination of the atlatl and the harpoon is a very ancient
innovation indeed. With all these advantages in mind it is easy to understand
why, despite its replacement elsewhere by the bow-and-arrow, the atlatl was retained by peoples as diverse as the Aleuts of the Arctic, who used it for marine
hunting and waterfowting (Coon 1976: 97), and the Brazilian forest peoples,

24

Texas Archeological Society

who used it in hunting turtles and spearing fish from their canoes (Cressman and
Krieger 1940: 35).
Finally, as noted earlier, the atlatl was retained by peoples such as the
Aztecs and the Inca for use primarily as a military weapon. Unlike the warfare of
simpler peoples, the military operations of the civilized peoples of the Americas
depended more upon set battles between masses of troops than on ambush or
stealth. It would appear that the weight and penetration of the atlatl dart provided the damaging close support for the Aztec and Inca infantry much as artillery does for modern armies. Among the Inca levies, the bow-and-arrow had a
distinctly lower status. According to Metraux (1949: 229), it was a weapon used
primarily by auxiliary or irregular troops drawn to the Inca armies from the forested regions on the edge of the empire. Metraux surmises that the chief reason
for the Inca’s neglect of the bow was the absence of suitable wood for their manufacture in the highlands. In any event, Garcilaso de la Vega reports that the Spanish feared the atlatl far more than the bow-and-arrow in their encounters with the
Incas during the Conquest (Swanton 1938: 358).

Dart Points and Arrow Points: Are They Really Different?
As is the case with the style or form of many elements of culture, the size
and shape of stone projectile points have altered through time. As a consequence, projectile points can be sorted into types and these types arranged in
order of their appearance. This placement of projectile points into presumed
Chronological order on the basis of their formal variation is termed "seriation;" it
is the ease with which projectile points can be "seriated" that lends them their
particular charm for the archeologist. However, most scholars would agree that
projectile point morphology reflects more than mere stylistic convention and
change; variation in size and shape is also presumed to relate to variation in the
specific tasks for which points were intended.
For example, over most of North America, small projectile point types tend
to date to sometime after 500 B.C. or later (cf., Cambron and Hulse 1960; Bell
1960; Perino 1968; Ritchie 1961; Kehoe 1966; Suhm, Krieger and Jelks 1954;
Heizer and Hester 1979; Turner and Hester 1985). Of course this size change is
useful in seriational dating but it is generally interpreted as more than mere stylistic alteration; it is seen instead as indicating the replacement of the atlatl by
the bow-and-arrow. This interpretation is in turn based on the assumption that
atlatl dart points in general must have been larger than arrow heads due either to:
(1) technical limitations: that is, large points and shafts were simply too heavy to
be propelled by the bow-and-arrow, or (2) technical evolution: that is, "it has
been a general trend in the development of projectile weapons, from spear to
bullet, that the size of the projectile has decreased and the velocity increased"
(Brues 1959: 463).
The assumption that atlatl points were generally larger than arrow points

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

25

has become so deeply embedded in the literature that archeologists routinely assign projectile points to the atlatl dart or arrowhead category on the basis of size
or weight alone (Fenenga 1953: 309-310). Such assignment is not without empirical, or at least inferential, basis. Kidder (1938) states the evidence for the
assumption as it appeared to the last generation of archeologists:
(1) that all prehistoric stone-headed arrows so far found in the Southwest bear points
weighing less than 35 grains [2.27 grams, F.F.]; (2) that at Pecos and other former
settlements of the arrow-using Pueblo peoples there occur hundreds of points of
comparable weight for every one of large size; (3) that in Pueblo sites such large
points as have been found halted have usually been set in short handles for use as
knives, but never in arrows; (4) that small points, which can hardly have been other
than arrowheads, appear in great quantities among the bones of slaughtered buffalo
in the trap-ravines of the Great Plains, while on the other hand, the heads of all
Basketmaker spear-thrower darts that have come to light are much larger and heavier
than those which we can be sure were arrowheads. I had, of course, considered the
possibility that the ancient heavy points, from Folsom, Signal Butte and elsewhere,
were arrowheads, but I was unable to see why, if they were serviceable for that purpose, they should have been replaced by the small points apparently exclusively employed by tribes of the same region in later times (Kidder 1938: 156-157).

Fenenga (1953) attempted to test this assumption by weighing 884 chipped
stone projectile points from various sites in the western United States. His analysis revealed that the collection showed a distinctly bimodal distribution based on
weight: "the overwhelming majority of the points (92.3%) weighed less than
3.49 grams; in the other, virtually all of the points (99.6%) weighed more than
4.5 grams" (Fenenga 1953: 313). All the same, as Thomas (1978: 461) notes,
demonstrating that North American projectile point populations tend to cluster
bimodally by weight is not the same as proving that one cluster consists exclusively of atlatl darts, the other of arrowheads.
Thomas (1978) approached the problem from a different direction. He measured 142 complete stone-tipped arrows and atlatl darts drawn primarily from
the ethnographic and archeological collections of the American Museum of
Natural History. These measurements provided him with a population against
which he could quantitatively test various hypotheses about darts and arrows.
Initially he found that, while there is general correlation between the size of the
arrowshaft and the size and weight of the arrow point, this correlation is by no
means perfect. Further, there seems to be no particular relation between the size
of the atlatl dartshaft and the size of the dart point, although dartshafts as a
group are demonstrably larger than arrowshafts (Thomas 1978: 469).
To answer the most important question, "Are arrowheads smaller than dart
points?", Thomas computed the means for 5 variables (length, width, thickness,
neck width and weight) and then calculated a t-test for each. His results indicated
that all five variables differed between the dart points and the arrowheads in his
population. However, to answer the question fully, he had to turn from univariate

26

Texas Archeological Society

to multivariate statistical tests. Thomas (1978: 469) chose to use discriminant
analysis, which is a technique designed "to form linear combinations of the variables, weighted in such a way as to distinguish between preexisting groups (in
this case darts and arrows)."
This multivariate analysis led to the following conclusions: (1) dart points
are demonstrably larger than arrow points but the most important dimension in
determining this is overall width rather than weight, length, neck width or thickness; (2) a set of equations could be generated, which would classify other
projectile points of uncertain function into one or the other with about 86 percent
certainty (Thomas 1978: 470-471). Thomas’ work is both comforting and
useful. It is comforting to receive formal confirmation of the widely held assumption that dart points and arrowheads differ from one another in discernible,
measurable ways. It is useful to possess a set of equations which will allow
projectile points of unknown function to be labeled with some confidence as either dart or arrow points. Still, one question remains: when the bow-and-arrow
replaced the atlatl in North America, was the resulting change in projectile point
size merely a stylistic alteration or was it the result of technical limitations or
technical evolution?
It is possible, according to experiments by Fenenga (1953:319) and Browne
(1940: 213), to use small projectile points (or no points at all) on the tips of atlatl
darts. Further, as Ahler and McMillan (1976: 166) have pointed out, the archeological and ethnographic documentation of the use of small projectile points
against animals like bison are sufficiently abundant to demonstrate that large
projectile points are not necessary to bring down large game. Conversely, Browne
(1940: 213), an experienced archer, demonstrated experimentally that large
points, well within the size range of atlatl dart tips defined by Thomas (1978),
can be shot effectively with a bow-and-arrow. Pope (1962: 56) notes the deep
penetration of large arrow points such as the "English Broadhead" used with the
longbow in the late Middle Ages.
Atlatl performance experiments conducted by Spencer (1974: 5) suggest
that the use of large points to tip atlatl darts does have a practical advantage
since, according to him, "a point which is too light gives the dart a characteristic
uplift in its flight pattern one-third of the way into its flight." Davenport (1943:
33) also concludes that a heavy point enhances "the shaft’s ability to hold a true
flight." Further, according to Brues (1959: 463): "the amount of kinetic energy
embodied in the projectile, and consequently the amount of destruction that it
can produce in the object which brings it to a stop, is... a product of the mass
of the projectile and its velocity. Hence the size of the weapon can profitably be
decreased if its velocity increases." Or, as Browne (1940: 213) put it, "the arrow
gets its penetration by speed, the spear by weight." Assuming the bow can propel a shaft at greater velocity than the atlatl, the arrival of that tool in North
America would have meant that smaller points could have been used with the
same effect as the older, larger ones. These small points might also have traveled
farther due to their lighter weight and lower wind resistance (Brues 1959: 5) and

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

27

although Davenport’s (1943: 33) experiments indicate that large points stabilize
the flight of atlatl darts, there is no evidence to suggest that such stabilization is
necessary with arrows.
But why was the replacement of the large projectile point by the small one
so complete? Would we not expect that natural conservation of stylistic considerations might still have favored the continued use of the older forms? Perhaps so
but, given the brittle nature of most siliceous stone, larger stone points would
tend to break on impact more readily than smaller points. Thus, although the
replacement of large projectile points by smaller ones might have been stimulated initially by technological advantage, the final transformation would have
had an economic cause: when larger points ceased to confer much advantage in
performance, the greater material and labor "costs" involved in their manufacture and replacement would lead to their abandonment.
On a slightly different front, Ahler and McMillan’s (1976: 166-167) study
of wear and damage patterns on a large population of projectile points led them
to conclude that a significant percentage of the artifacts in this class actually were
sometimes used as stemmed scrapers, knives, or multipurpose tools. They further conclude: "... that extremely small (points) would not function as efficiently for hafted cutting, scraping or prying activities as would large specimens,
due to limitations in structural strength and length of usable cutting edge (of) the
smaller tools."
Thus, the blades needed for these scrapers, knives and multipurpose tools
would presumably not have been affected by the shift away from the atlatl to the
bow-and-arrow and would not have declined in size. The continued manufacture
and use of such stemmed tools after the adoption of the bow perhaps masks the
real abruptness with which the shift from large to smaller sizes took place among
points actually used as projectiles. In summary, although small points can be
used as atIatl dart tips or as hafted, multipurpose tools, the performance of such
tools declines when one does so. Likewise, although large points can be used
with the bow-and-arrow, there is no reason to do so since the increased shaft velocity, which can be achieved with the bow, allows small points to travel as far or
farther than large points and yet do the same damage on impact. Additionally,
such small points are not as fragile and need less raw material in their manufacture. It would thus appear that the bimodality in projectile point size and weight
observed by Kidder (1938), Fenenga (1953), Thomas (1978) and numerous other
scholars results from the balance struck between the demands of tool performance and efficiency on the one hand, and raw material and labor "costs" on the
other.
As we have noted, it has often been assumed that the projectile points were
reduced in size over time due to some inherent technical limitation (e.g. "bows
cannot shoot larger projectile points") or simply as a result of stylistic change or
drift. I suspect we are better served by regarding the change to have been the
result of an infinite number of informal experiments done by generations of observant, practical people. Like ourselves, these ancient Americans could learn

28

Texas Archeological Society

from their experience and make rational decisions about both the costs and the
benefits of their actions.

Hall’s Anthropocentrism: The Ritual and Symbolic Retention of the Atlatl
After Its Technical Replacement
The replacement of the atlat! by the bow-and-arrow in eastern North America was an important event, which seems to have occurred in an almost universal
fashion in the technical sphere during the first millennium after Christ (cf. Ford
1974: 402; Griffin 1964: 247, 1978: 254). However, in the ideological and religious spheres, this transformation was not nearly so complete. Robert L. Hall
(1977:514) argues, in a provocative recent paper entitled "An anthropocentric
perspective for eastern United States prehistory," that despite its technological
supercession by the bow-and-arrow, the form or image of the atlatl persisted as a
powerful element in the moral and symbolic life of eastern aboriginal peoples as
fiat-stemmed pipes, ceremonial staffs, fetishes, society emblems, and symbols of
command long after its actual technical function was forgotten. Hall explains this
symbolic retention by reference to a general notion that weapons have an ideational and symbolic value as well as a material function. Function and symbol are
to some degree separate phenomena which, it would seem, can survive and
diffuse independent of one another. Although he does not cite it, a modern example of such symbolic independence can be found on modern U.S. Army uniform insignia. One still finds the engineers represented by medieval castles, the
infantry by crossed muskets and, until quite recently, the artillery by crossed
muzzle-loading cannons. Obviously none of the aforementioned weapons are
still in our military inventory, yet they live on symbolically in our military insignia. So, it would appear, did the atlatl in the time of the bow.
One of the clearest formal survivals of the atlatl, according to Hall (1977:
504), are the long, fiat-stemmed stone pipes known historically in the eastern
United States. At least some forms of these historical pipes are traceable "stepby-step back to the Hopewell platform pipes as much as two millennia older."
The odd flat shape of the stems of these pipes provides no particular advantage to
the smoker. Since it extends in front of the tobacco bowl, it would appear to be
merely a decorative convention. However, referring both to the historic and prehistoric versions of the flat-stemmed pipe, Hall (1977: 504) notes:
¯ . . a Hopewell effigy platform pipe with an attached fiat stem looks like a flat atlatl
with effigy spur. The animal form on the bowl is almost invariably positioned to
present a nose or beak where an atlatl spur is needed. The usual curvature of the
pipe platform places this spur closer to the main axis of the atlatl. The flat stem in
ethnographic collections is almost invariably covered with a wrapping of porcupine
quill braid over the half near the mouth end, a practice I see related to the wrapping
needed to attach atlatl finger loops or possibly the fetishes sometimes found on
atlatls.

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

29

In other words, Hall sees the form of the atlatl to have been conjoined with,
or transformed into, the flat-stemmed pipe in Late Woodland times or earlier.
One of the three atlatls recovered at the Key Marco site in Florida is an excellent
example of the kind of throwing boards which apparently served as the prototype
for the platform pipe (Kehoe, Foster, Hall n.d.: 18). The male spur or hook on
the distal end of specimen 40609 from the site "is carved in the form of a thumping rabbit, the handle end turned down in a graceful volute" (Gilliland 1975:
133, Plate 83). The similarity between this atlatl spur and a platform pipe is
striking indeed.
Hall (1977: 502- 515) also musters evidence to suggest that a complex symbolic and ideological association existed between smoking, tobacco, weapons,
life and water symbolism and peaceful interaction. According to him, this association of ideas and symbols centered in historic times on the smoking of the
Calumet pipe, the famous "peace pipe" so prominent in the popular image of
the American Indian. Hall suggests that the atlatl-shape of the flat-stemmed pipe
symbolically conveys the message that a weapon of war has been transformed
into an emissary of peace, a concept as evocative as the Old Testament injunction
to "beat swords into plowshares." Hall elaborates on his interpretation by suggesting that since the symbolism of the Calumet was widely shared and undertaken in eastern North America, the ceremonialism surrounding the pipe was an
effective means of fostering peaceful interaction between different peoples. As
he notes: "... one cannot ignore the economic and political values of interaction of this kind, for late prehistoric and historic Indians as well as for prehistoric
Hopewellians 2,000 years before" (Hall 1977:515).
The platform pipe, in Hall’s view (1977: 505), greased the very workings of
the Hopewell Interaction Sphere: it "may not have been merely an item exchanged; it may have been part of the very mechanism of exchange." While this
is an attractive notion, it is not without its critics. Turnbaugh (1979: 686-687),
for example, musters evidence to suggest that at least over portions of the East,
the spread of Calumet ceremonialism was a post-contact rather than an ancient
phenomenon. Yet, even if Hall is correct in identifying the origins of the Calumet
complex in the Hopewell tradition, we must still proceed with caution. Surely
religious and symbolic systems are often conservative. Witness the American
penchant for building modern versions of Gothic and Romanesque cathedrals.
Yet, how far can we extrapolate backwards from the social forms which operate
inside these modern cathedrals to the interpretations of the societies that built the
originals at Chartres, Rheims or Salisbury? Further, although symbolic systems
are often conservative, they are also designed to communicate complex ideas in a
simple fashion. When their conservatism begins to impede this communication,
the symbolism presumably will change. Hall suggests that since the atlatl eventually disappeared altogether from the weapons inventory in eastern North
America, the association between the shape of the flat-stemmed pipe and the
military weapon began to dim as well. Eventually, the atlatl-shaped pipe gave
way to the new "Hako" type pipe. This later variety was long, thin and very

30

Texas Archeological Society

much in the shape of an arrow. In adopting the form of the current military
weapon, the arrow, pipe makers sharpened the image conjoining warfare and the
sacred peace ceremony of the Calumet (cf., Turnbaugh 1975, 1977, 1979).
A parting in this regard would be to remind the reader that such "symbolic updating" occurs in our culture as well. Witness the recent transformation of uniform insignia in the air defense branch of the U.S. Army artillery: the two
crossed cannon have given way to one cannon and one guided missile.

REFERENCES CITED
Ahler, S. A., and R. B. McMillan
1976
Material Culture at Rodgers Shelter: A Reflection of Past Human Activities. In
Prehistoric Man and His" Enrivronments: A Case Study in the Ozark Highlands,
edited by W. R. Wood, and R. B. McMillian, pp. 163-199. Academic Press,
New York.
Aikens, C. Melvin
The Far West. In Ancient Native Americans, edited by Jesse Jennings, pp. 1311978
181. W. H. Freeman and Co., San Francisco.
Arons, Arnold B.
1965

Development of Concepts in Physics, From the Rationalization of Mechanics
to the First Theory of Atomic Structure. Addison-Wesley Incorporated, Reading, Mass.

Baker, W. E., and A. V. Kidder
1937

A Spearthrower from Oklahoma. American Antiquity 3:51-52.

Bell, Robert E.
Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points. Okla1960
homa Anthropological Society, Special Bulletin 2.
Binford, Lewis R.
1978
Dimensional Analysis of Behavior and Site Structure: Learning from an Eskimo
Hunting Stand. American Antiquity 43 : 330-361.
Bordes, Francois
1968
The Old Stone Age. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Browne, Jim
1940
Projectile Points. American Antiquity 5: 209-213.

Brues, Alice M.
1959
The Spearman and the Archer. American Anthropologist 61:457-469.

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

31

Brundage, Burr Cartwright
1972
A Rain of Darts. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Butler, B. Robert, and Douglas Osborne
1959

Archaeological Evidence for the Use of Atlatl Weights in the Northwest. American Antiquity 25 : 215-224.

Caldwell, Joseph R.
1958

Trend and Tradition in the Prehistory of the Eastern United States. American
Anthropological Association, Memoir 88.

Cambron, James, W., and D. C. Hulse
1960

Handbook of Alabama Archaeology, Part 1: Point Types. Moundville: The Archaeological Research Association of Alabama, Inc.

Clark, J. G. D.
1952
Prehistoric" Europe: The Economic Basis. Methuen, Inc., London.
Cole, G. S.
1972
The Bannerstone as a Spear Weight. Michigan Archaeologist 18(1): 1-18.
Coon, Carleton S.
1976
The Hunting People. Penguin Books, Inc., New York.
Cressman, L. S.
1977
Preshistory of the Far West. University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.
Cressman, L. S. and A. D. Krieger
1940
Atlatls and Associated Artifacts from Southcentral Oregon. In Early Man in
Oregon: Archaeological Studies in the Northern Great Basin, edited by L. S.
Cressman et al., University of Oregon Monographs, Studies in Anthropology
3 : 16-52.
Curren, Cailup B.
1977
Potential Interpretations of "Stone Gorget" Function. American Antiquity
42:97-101.
Cushing, Frank H.
1897
Exploration of Ancient Key Dwellers’ Remains on the Gulf Coast of Florida.
Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 25(153).
Davenport, J. W.
1943
Some Experiments in the Use of the Atlatl. Bullethz of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society 15 : 30-37.
DeFuentes, Patricia
1963
The Conquistadors: First-Person Accounts" of the Conquest of Mexico. The
Orion Press, New York.

Texas Archeological Society

32

Driver, Harold E.
1961

bldians of North America. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Driver, Harold E. and William C. Massey
1957

Comparative Studies of North American Indians. Transactions of the American
Philosophical Society, n. s. 47(2) : 165-456.

Ekholm, Gordon F.
U-shaped "Ornaments" Identified as Fingerloops from Atlatls. American An1962
tiquity 28 : 181 - 185.
Evans, O. F.
1959
The Development of the Atlatl and the Bow. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 30 : 159-162.
Fenenga, Franklin
1953
The Weights of Chipped Stone Points: a Clue to Their Functions. Southwestern
Journal of Anthropology 9 : 309- 323.
Fenenga, Franklin and Joe Ben Wheat
An Atlatl from the Baylor Rock Shelter, Culberson County, Texas. American
1940
Antiquity 5 : 221-223~
Ford, Richard I.
Northeastern Archaeology: Past and Future Directions. Annual Review of An1974
thropology 3:385-413.
Foster, George M.
Empire’s Children: The People of Tzintzuntzan. Smithsonian Institution, Insti1948
tute of Social Anthropology, Publication 6.
Fowke, Gerard
Stone Art.
1896

13th Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology,

Pp. 47-178.
Frison, G. C. and G. M. Zeimens
Bone Projectile Points: An Addition to the Folsom Cultural Complex. American
1980
Antiquity 45 : 231-237.
Gilliland, Marion Spjut
The Material Culture of Key Marco, Florida. The University Presses of Florida,
1975
Gainesville.
Gould, Richard A.
1969

Subsistence Behavior Among the Western Desert Aborigines of Australia.

1978

Explorations in Ethnoarchaeology. University of New Mexico Press, Albu-

Oceania 39 : 251-274.
querque.

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

33

Griffin, James
1964

The Northeast Woodlands Area. In Prehistoric Man in the New World. Edited
by J. D. Jennings and E. Norbeck, pp. 223-258. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.

1978

The Midlands and Northeastern United States. In Ancient Native Americans,
edited by Jesse Jennings, pp. 221-279. W. H. Freeman and Co., San Francisco.

Guernsey, S. J.
1931

Explorations in Northeastern Arizona. Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, Papers 12( 1 ).

Guernsey, S. J., and A. V. Kidder
1921

Basketmaker Caves of Northeastern Arizona. Peabody Museum of American
Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, Papers 8(2).

Hall, Robert L.
1977

An Anthropocentric Perspective for Eastern United States Prehistory. American
Antiquity 42 : 499-518.

Harrington, M. R.
1933

Gypsum Cave, Nevada. Southwestern Museum Papers 8.

Hayden, Brian
1979

Lithic Use-WearAnalysis. Academic Press, New York.

Heizer, Robert F.
1938

An Inquiry into the Status of the Santa Barbara Spearthrower. American Antiquity 3: 137-141.

Heizer, Robert F. and Rainer Berger
1970

Radiocarbon Age of the Gypsum Culture. Contributions of the University of
California Research Facility 7 : 13-18.

Heizer, Robert F. and Thomas R. Hester
1979

Great Basin Projectile Points: Forms and Chronology. Ballena Press Publications in Archaeology, Ethnology and History 10.

Hester, Thomas R.
1974a

Archaeological Remains from Site NV-Wa-197. Western Nevada: Atlatl and
Animal Skin Pouches. Contributions, University of California Research Facility
21.

1974b

Supplementary Notes on a Great Basin Atlatl. In Great Basin Atlatl Studies.
T. R. Hester, M. P. Mildner, and L. Spencer. Ballena Press Publications in Archaeology, Ethnology and History 2: 29- 31.

Hill, M. W.
1948

The Atlatl or Throwing Stick: A Recent Study of Atlatls in Use with Darts of
Various Sizes. Tennessee Archaeologist 4(4) : 37-44.

Texas Archeological Society

34

Hobbs, H. E, Jr.
The Mystery of Bannerstones and a Possible Solution. Quarterly Bulletin, Ar1963
chaeological Society of Virginia 18 : 2- 7.
Holmes, William H.
Stone Implements of the Potomac-Chesapeake-Tidewater Province. 15th An1897
nual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology, pp. 3-152.

Howard, Calvin D.
1974
The Atl-atl: Function and Performance. American Antiquity 39 : 102-104.
Hudson, Charles
1976

The Southeastern Indians. University of Tennessee Press, Knoxville.

Jennings, Jesse D.
1974

Prehistory of North America. McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.

Johnson, Ann S.
1971

Finger-loops and Cruciform Objects. American Antiquity 36: 188-194.

Jones, Charles C.
Antiquities of the Southern Indians, Particularly of the Georgia Tribes.
1873
D. Appleton and Co., New York.
Kehoe, T. E.
The Small Side Notched Point System of the Northern Great Plains. American
1966
Antiquity 31 : 827- 841.
Kehoe, Alice B., Mary Le Cron Foster and R. L. Hall
n.d.

Paradigmatic Archaeology. Unpublished manuscript, files of the author.

Kellar, James H.
The Atlatl in North America. hzdiana Historical Society, Prehistory Research
1955
Series 3(3) :281-352.
Kelley, J. C.
Atlatl, Bows and Arrows, Pictographs and the Pecos River Focus. American An1950
tiquity 26 : 71- 74.

Kidder, A. V.
1938
Arrow-heads or Dart Points. American Antiquity 4:156-157.
Krause,

1902

F,

Schleudervorrichtungen for Wurfwaffen. lnternationale Archiv far Ethnographie 4(4) : 121 - 151.

1905

Sling Contrivances for Projectile Weapons. Smithsonian Institution, Annual
Report for 1904: 619-638.

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

35

Lahren, Larry and Robson Bonnichsen
1974

Bone Foreshafts from a Clovis Burial in Southwestern Montana. Science 186:
147-149.

Lane Fox, Augustus H.
1858

On the Improvement of the Rifle, as a Weapon for General Use. Journal "of the
Royal United Service Institution 2 : 453-493.

1875

On the Principles of Classification Adopted in the Arrangement of his Anthropological Collection. Journal of the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain
and Ireland 4: 293-308.

Lewis, T. M. N. and M. Kneberg
1958

Tribes that Slumber. University of Tennessee Press, Knoxville.

Lipe, William D.
1978

The Southwest. In Ancient Native Americans, edited by Jesse Jennings, pp. 327401. W. H. Freeman and Co., San Francisco.

von Luschan, F.
1896

Das Wurflmlz in Neu-Holland und in Oceanien Festschrift zum 70. Geburtstag
von Adolf Bastian. S. t31-135.

McGregor, John C.
1965
Southwestern Archaeology. Second ed. University of Illinois Press, Urbana.
Massey, William C.
1961

The Survival of the Dart-Thrower on the Peninsula of Baja California. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 17 : 81 -93.

Mau, Clayton
1963

Experiments with the Spear Thrower. The Bulletin of the New York State Archaeological Association 29:2-13.

Metraux, A.
1949
Weapons. In Handbook of South American bMians, edited by J. H. Steward.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 143(5):229-263.
Mildner, M. R
1974
Descriptive and Distributional Notes on Atlatls and Atlatl Weights in the Great
Basin. In Great Basin Atlatl Studies. T. R. Hester, M. R Mildner, and L. Spencer. Ballena Press Publications in Archaeology, Ethnology and History 2:7-27.
de Mortillet, A.
1891

Les propulseurs a crochet modernes et prehistoriques. Revue de l’ecole anthropologie 1891:241 ft.

Muller, Jon D.
1978

The Southeast. In Ancient Native Americans, edited by Jesse Jennings, pp. 281 325. W. H. Freeman and Co., San Francisco.

36

Texas Archeological Society

Noguera, E.
1945

E1 atlatl o tirandera. Anales del Museo Nacional de Arqueologfa, Historia y
Ethnografia III.

Nuttall, Zelia
1891

The Atlatl or Spear-Thrower of the Ancient Mexicans. Archaeological and Ethnological Papers of the Peabody Museum, Harvard University 1 (3): 171-205.

Oswalt, Wendell H.
1973
Habitat and Technology. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York.
1976

An Anthropological Analysis of Food-Getting Technology. Willey-Interscience,
New York.

Palter, John L.
1976
A New Approach to the Significance of the "Weighted" Spear Thrower. American Antiquity 41 : 500-5 t0.
Parker, Arthur C.
1917

Problematic Polished Slate Implements and Allied Forms from New York. In
Stone Ornaments, edited by Warren K. Moorehead, pp. 179-195. The Andover
Press, Andover.

Peets, O. H.
t960
Experiments in the Use of Atlatl Weights. American Antiquity 26 : 108-110.
Pepper, George
1905
The Throwing-Stick of a Prehistoric People of the Southwest. International
Congress of Americanists, 13th Annual Session (1905) 107-130.
Perino, Gregory
Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points. Okla1968
homa Anthropological Society, Special Bulletin 3.
Pope, Saxton T.
1923

A Study of Bows and Arrows. University of California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology 13(9) : 329-414.

1962
Read, C.
1891

Bows and Arrows. University of California Press, Berkeley.

H.

An Account of a Collection of Ethnographical Specimens Formed during Vancouver’s Voyage in the Pacific Ocean, 1790-1795. Journal of the RoyalAnthropological Institute XXI : 99-108.

Ritchie, William A.
A Typology and Nomenclature for New York Projectile Points. New York State
1961
Museum and Science Service Bulletin 364(21 ):99-108.

Dickson--The Atlatl Assessed

37

Seler, E.
1890
Altmexikanische Wurfbretter. InternationaIes Archiv fiir Ethnographie 39(S) :
137-148.
1892

Das Altmexikanische Wurfbrett in Modernem Gebrauch. Globus LXI(7,S): 97.

Semenov, S. A.
1964
Preh~toricTechnology. Barnes and Noble, Inc., New York.
Spencer, L.
1974
Replicative Experiments in the Manufacture and Use of a Great Basin Atlatl. In
Great Basin Atlatl Studies. T. R. Hester, M. P. Mildner, and L. Spencer. Ballena
Press Publications in Archaeology, Ethnology and History 2:37-60.
Spratz, Bodo
1956
Die Speerschleuder in Amerika. VerSffentlichungen aus dem 10bersee-Museum
in Bremen, Museum fiir Natur-, Vdlker- und Handelskunde, Reihe B 1(2):
148-162.
Starna, William A.
1979
A Comment on Curren’s "Potential Interpretations of ’Stone Gorget’ Function."
American Antiquity 44: 337-341.
Strong, E.
1969

Stone Age in the Great Basin. Binford and Mort, Portland.

Sturtevant, William C.
1960

The Significance of Ethnological Parallels and Similarities between Southeastern North America and the Antilles. Yale University Publications in Anthropology 64.

Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward Jelks
1954
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25.
Swanton, John R.
1938
A Historic Use of the Spear-thrower in Southeastern North America. American
Antiquity 3 : 356-358.
Thomas, David Hurst
1978
Arrowheads and Atl-atl Darts: How the Stone Got the Shaft. American Antiquity 43(3):461-472.
Tuck, J. A.
1970

An Archaic Indian Cemetery in Newfoundland. Scientific American 222( 12):
112-121.

38

Texas Archeological Society

Turnbaugh, William A.
1975

Tobacco, Pipes, Smoking and Rituals Among the Indians of the Northeast.
Quarterly Bulletin of the Archaeological Society of Virginia 30(2)59-71.

1977

Elements of Nativistic Pipe Ceremonialism in the Post-Contact Northeast.
Pennsylvania Archaeologist 47(4): 1-7.

1979

Calumet Ceremonialism as a Nativistic Response. American Antiquity 44:
685-691.

Turner, Ellen Sue and Thomas R. Hester
1985
A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas b2dians. Texas Monthly Press, Austin.
Uhle, Max
1888

Wurfstock yon Australien. Internationales Archivfiir Ethnographie I(S): 196.

1909

Peruvian Throwing Sticks. American Anthropologist 11 : 624-627.

Webb, William S.
1946

Indian Knoll. University of Kentucky, Reports in Anthropology 4(3, pt. 1).

1950

The Carlson Annis Mound. The University of Kentucky, Reports in Anthropology 7(4).

Webb, William S. and William G. Haag
1939
The Chiggerville Shell Heap in Ohio county. Department of Anthropology and
Archaeology, University of Kentucky, Publication 4(1).
Willey, Gordon R.
An Introduction to American Archaeology, Volume 1: North America. Prentice1966
Hall, Englewood Cliffs.

Yellen, John E.
1977
Archaeological Approaches to the Present. Academic Press, New York.

Wh e’s Mound (41BU17):
A Study in the Pretfistory of Burleson County, Texas
Bradley F. Bowman

ABSTRACT
Winnie’s Mound (41BU17) is a relict levee of the Brazos River constituting a slightly raised landform in the broad flood plain. Test excavations
conducted in 1983 combined with extensive surface collecting indicate a
long period of prehistoric use for this locality, from Paleo-Indian to Late
Prehistoric times. The excavations revealed the existence of a small, spatiallyconfined, prehistoric cemetery containing burials from two different time
periods. Evidence for prehistoric structures was also found. Diagnostic
lithic artifacts in the sample show a mixing of central and eastern Texas
styles suggesting that the Brazos River may have been a traditional boundary
between two geographically-distinct populations.

INTRODUCTION
The Winnie’s Mound Site (41BU17) has been heavily surface hunted by
local collectors for many years. Its archeological importance was evident by the
diverse point types and human remains collected on the surface over a very large
area showing signs of cultural debris. The possibility of site destruction dictated
a need to excavate a test unit to see if any cultural material could be found intact.
At a depth of 40 cm, a flexed burial (6, Figure 7), was located. At that time, the
author contacted Dr. Harry Shafer of Texas A&M University who offered his assistance and encouragement to continue excavations during the summer and fall
of 1983.
A small, prehistoric cemetery containing flexed and secondary interments
in a deep midden deposit was discovered in the following months. The excavated
portion of the site was disturbed by many years of cultivation and by a road construction project during World War II when a large amount of earth was removed
from the cemetery for use as fill (David Wilson, personal communication). The
destruction of the uppermost layers of the cemetery would explain the complete
lack of Toyah Phase and historic materials found in most other areas of the site.
Winnie’s Mound is located on an ancient river terrace in the river flood plain

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 56 (1985)

40

Texas Archeological Society

approximately two km west of the present day Brazos River in Burleson County,
Texas, and is the highest point for three km in any direction. The site appears to
have been occupied at least seasonally from Paleo-Indian through Late Prehistoric times. At present it is a corn field with an elevation of 73 meters
(240 feet) above mean sea level.

NATURAL SETTING
The site is situated on an elevated ancient river terrace in close proximity to
a relict river channel of the Brazos River. Cultural debris is scattered over an area
of approximately 120,000 square meters. A broad flood plain extends southwest
from the site for 5.3 km to a high valley wall, which rises rapidly up to an elevation of over 91 meters (300 feet), and to the northeast two km to the present day
Brazos River, which is the easternmost border of Burleson County. Sloughs and
bayous still exist in the general area, evidence of the ancient river’s course. The
majority of the flood plain is under cultivation and the uplands are heavily
wooded. Thirty-six inches of rain fall on the area annually. Major fauna includes
whitetail deer (Odocoileus virginianus), bobcat (Lynx rufus), jackrabbit (Lepus
californicus), opossum ( Didelphis marsupialis), and raccoon ( Procyon lotor).
Flora in the uplands consists of a post oak (Quercus stellata) canopy with an
understory of yaupon (flex vomitoria), hawthorn (Crataegus sp.), willow (Salix
nigra), sycamore (Platanus occidentalis), and green ash (Fraxinus pennsylvanica), which are the dominant species along the creeks and rivers.

EXCAVATION PROCEDURE
The numerous human remains scattered on the surface were a positive factor in locating the cemetery. At the onset, it appeared to be a large, dark, sandy
circle surrounded by red clay but this later proved to be an ancient slough or
depression, which had filled in by an accumulating midden deposit.
Once a datum point had been established, units were laid out in 2 by 2 meter
squares. The total excavated area encompassed 13 units or 46 square meters (Figure 7). Work proceeded in arbitrary 10 cm levels until sterile clay was encountered. Due to limited time and labor force, all soil was troweled, locating all artifacts and features in situ, then discarded, with the exception of three units.
These three units were troweled and screened through I/4 inch hardware cloth. All
cultural materials were collected and stored in individual bags which correlated
to each level.
Stratigraphy was not visually apparent as the deposits appeared to be a homogeneous mass. Due to the large amount of rodent activity which had taken

Bowman-- Winnie’s Mound

41

place, erosional episodes that occurred between occupational periods further
confused the issue. Stratigraphy was later detected during analysis and a simple
mathematical formula was applied to each unit. This proved to be successful in
relating all units to each other regardless of their nonconforming depths and irregular predepositional surfaces, thus producing four distinct cultural levels with
nearly sterile strata between occupied levels.
Each unit’s actual depth was divided by 15. The resulting figure was then
divided into an artifact’s elevation above sterile clay, producing any one of 15
mathematical levels. Example: Unit C-4 has an actual depth of 170 cm from surface to sterile clay; V~sth of 170 cm = 11.33 cm. Each 11.33 cm for the purpose
of discussion will be considered as one level. An artifact encountered at 140 cm
above sterile clay would be treated as 140 cm + 11.33 cm = 12.36 cm, placing it
in the 12th of 15 mathematical levels.
Unit C-3 has an actual depth of 110 cm; %sth of 110 cm = 7.33 cm. An
artifact encountered 90 cm above sterile clay would be treated as 90 cm + 7.33
cm = 12.28 cm, placing it in the 12th of 15 mathematical levels. When this procedure was applied to each artifact or feature encountered, they consistently lined
up on four levels with sterile zones in between. In two cases, there were two
mathematical levels which contained the same cultural debris and were consolidated to become one stratum, thus producing 11 recognized strata (See Table 5).

LITHIC TECHNOLOGY
Debitage from three units was analyzed by 10 cm levels with the hope of
producing information on the kind and quantity of artifacts produced at the site.
Comparison of raw materials to finished artifacts should determine if the artifacts described in this paper were manufactured at the site or elsewhere and also
the methodology of manufacture emp!oyed. Strategies from Shafer (1973) were
used exclusively as a guideline for all analysis of debitage.
A search for chert procurement sites was conducted and was successful in
locating deposits of chert in the form of nodules, which were deposited by the
Brazos River in the present day channel and in other areas of the valley. These
nodules generally exhibit a rich brown cortex with interiors ranging in color from
light tan to gray with an occasional occurrence of mottled olive and black. Local
chert is defined as any material readily obtained in the general area and is based
on the knowledge gained from inspection of the procurement sites. Nonlocal
cherts included material known to be obtained in the San Gabriel River basin and
types totally unknown to the author. The distinction of local versus nonlocal is
purely subjective on the author’s part and is based on the aforementioned research. While it is possible for some small amounts of nonlocal chert to be transported to the local area by rivers, my research shows that a size and quantity
large enough to produce finished lithics is highly improbable.

42

Texas Archeological Society
Terminology

The following terms are used in this paper:
Cobbles - are defined as water-tumbled nodules of chert.
Cores - Cobble that has been partly reduced by flake removals.
Primary Flakes - Retains all of the cortex on dorsal side; these were flakes removed from the outside of a cobble.
Secondary Flakes - Retains only a small amount of cortex, usually on only one
facet.
Tertiary Flakes - Retains none of the original cortex.
Hard Hammer Percussion - A method of flake removal using materials as hard or
harder than the material being reduced, producing thick flakes with fractured or beveled points of impact. (Shafer 1973: 67-69)
Soft Hammer Percussion - A method of reduction using a material softer than the
material being worked to remove flakes and usually producing thin, curved
flakes exhibiting a lip at the point of impact. (ibid.: 116-118)

Discussion
Due to the scarcity of river cobbles located at the site, it is assumed that
cores were produced elsewhere and transported to the site. Nonlocal cherts show
up only late in the manufacturing process, which could imply reworking of artifacts already in the possession of the aborigines. One very large blue chert blank
identical to chert observed west of Georgetown, Texas, was discovered as a surface find at the site. This find suggests the possibility of a trade network with
other areas. However, at present, there is not enough information available to
support this theory, due to the very small percentage of nonlocal cherts to local
cherts and the lack of nonlocal cores.
Methodology of chert reduction changes with each stage of manufacture
(see Tables 1, 2, and 3.) Primary flakes in the sample were removed far more
frequently by hard hammer techniques than by soft hammer percussion and the
existence of nonlocal material in this category is rare; none were encountered in
Unit C-5 (Table 2), with the largest percentage (1.59%) discovered in Unit E-6
(Table 3).
Secondary flakes were produced mainly by hard hammer reduction methods
but the use of the soft hammer technique begins to increase while the local to
nonlocal chert ratio remains about the same.
The last stage of production studied was tertiary flakes. The use of hard
hammer drops dramatically and the use of soft hammer becomes the most consistently used method of reduction. This category also provided the largest percentage of nonlocal cherts ranging from (2.01%), Unit C-3 (Table 1), to a (4.74%),
Unit E-6 (Table 3).

Bowman-- Winnie’s Mound

43

THE ARTIFACTS
A total of 189 lithic artifacts was recovered from the site. Table 4 records all
information regarding measurements and chert types, while Table 5 records
provenience for each artifact. In most cases, typo!ogy was dictated by Turner
and Hester (1985). Any deviation from this text will be stated in the following
descriptions.
By comparing material types found in the artifact assemblage (Table 4) to
debitage recovered (Tables 1-3), it becomes apparent that the nonlocal artifacts
were not produced at the site, but were probably reworked; nonlocal debitage is
most prevalent in the form of tertiary flakes, the last stage in chert reduction.
Crude tool forms are made almost exclusively of local chert while the projectile
point assemblage includes (15%) nonlocal cherts.
The disturbed nature of the strata produces a possibility that at least some
artifacts were displaced, although it appears that diagnostic point types occur in
their expected sequence (see Table 5).

Artifact Descriptions
Arrow Points
Scallorn (N=3; Figure 1,A,B) Triangular serrated blades with straight to
convex bases. All examples show strongly barbed shoulders, nice workmanship,
and are made of local tan and brown chert.
Dart Points
Bell (N= 1; Figure 1 ,C) One example was recovered. It is extremely well
made of a nonlocal blue chert. This specimen has been reworked as one barb is
missing, but retouched, and has a short concave blade, due to reworking.
Darl (N=I; Figure 1,D) The long, serrated blade with a slightly ground,
concave base is a typical example of this dart point form. It exhibits average
workmanship and is of a local gray chert.
Edgewood (N=3; Figure I,E, F) Three examples of this type were recovered. All are made of local cherts. They have concave bases, showing signs of
grinding, with short triangular blades. Two of the three have broken distal ends.
Ensor (N=2; Figure 1 ,G) No complete examples were recovered. Both have
broken distal ends. One example appears to have been aborted in manufacture.
Both are made of local tan chert having straight to slightly convex bases with
deep notches and prominent shoulders. Both have slightly convex, long, triangular blades.
Frio (N=2; Figure 1 ,H) These have almost straight triangular blades, wide
notches, and prominent shoulders. Bases are straight with a deep U-shaped notch
exhibiting some grinding. One is rather crude with a beveled blade made of local
tan chert. The other is of nonlocal banded chert of good workmanship.

44

Texas Archeological Society
Gary-Kent (N=6; Figure 1,I,

J)

These two types have been combined for

the purpose of this paper, as the points recovered do not fit either definition exactly, but fall nicely between the two. Of the six examples, four are contracting
stemmed with two having nearly parallel stems. Bases are mixed, from straight
to convex, with one example having a slightly concave base. All have triangular
straight blades, one being finely serrated. All are made from !ocal gray and tan
chert.
Hoxie (N= 1; Figure 1 ,K) This basal-ground, nearly parallel-stemmed point
exhibits a deeply concave base with a nearly straight, beveled, serrated blade and
is manufactured of local gray chert.
Lange (N=2; Figure 1 ,L,M) Large, triangular blades with prominent shoulders and expanding stems are the dominant features of this type. Bases on both
are nearly straight. All examples are of local gray chert of fair workmanship.
One example is lacking its distal end.
Marcos (N=5; Figure 2,A,B) All five specimens are made of local chert.
Two seem to have been broken in manufacture, while two lack distal ends. All
exhibit wide, convex, triangular blades and broad, convex bases with deep corner notches producing long barbs. Two show excellent workmanship, while one
is quite crude.
Plainview-like(N = 1 ; Figure 2-C) This projectile point, made of local tan
chert, is lanceolate in shape with a concave base. It is basal-ground and exhibits
edge grinding on approximately 40 percent of its total length.
San Patrice (N= 1; Figure 2,D) One example of this type was recovered. It
is of local chert and of exceptional workmanship. The fluted base is deeply concave with basal grinding. The blade is leaf-shaped and constitutes over 80 percent of the total length.
Yarbrough (N=3; Figure 2,F) All are produced from local chert, one having
a triangular-shaped blade, the others having leaf-shaped blades. All three have
slightly concave bases--two having expanding ground stems and one a nearly
parallel stem. Workmanship could be considered crude.
Unclassified Dart Points
Form 1 (N= 1; Figure 2,E) This example exhibits a triangular blade with
asymmetrical barbs; one long and curved and the other very short. The stem has
nearly parallel edges and a straight base. This artifact is made of local gray chert
of average workmanship.
Form 2 (N=5; Figure 2,G, H) This form like Forms 4 and 9 is common to
the lower strata; Dr. Thomas Hester (personal communication) suggests they are
all variations of the same type. He terms them "Early Corner Notched." This
loosely-defined group could be classified as Gower or Uvalde. The wide variation
of typological traits in the sample, and the wish to avoid controversy, has
prompted the author to describe them as three separate forms. Form 2 has a
strongly expanding stem with a deep, U-shaped notch. Only one example lacks
heavy basal grinding. Blade shape varies greatly, some are very broad and triangular with long barbs, others are beveled and convex with sharp prominent

Bowman-- Winnie’s Mound

45

shoulders. Three examples are of local tan chert, while two are of nonlocal blue
and black. Workmanship is good.
Form 3 (N=4; Figure 2, I, J) This side-notched type exhibits a leaf-shaped
blade, slight angular shoulders, and a slightly concave, almost straight base. Two
examples are of local tan chert, one is of nonlocal blue, and the other is of an
orange translucent material of unknown origin. Workmanship is good.
Form 4 (N=2; Figure 2, K, L) These small points are more Gower-like than
Form 2 or 9 and may be a variation of that type. Both examples exhibit a short

e

h

J

I
o
[

i

i

5
I

Figure 1. Arrow and Dart Points from Site 41BU17. Scallorn, A, B; Bell, C; Darl, D;
Edgewood, E, F; Ensor, G; Frio, H; Gary-Kent, I, J; Hoxie, K; Lange, L, M.

46

Texas Archeological Society

thick triangular blade, beveled in one example, and nearly absent shoulders.
Ground stems are almost rectangular with pronounced U-shaped notches in the
base. Both examples are of local tan and gray chert.
Form 5 (N=2; Figure 3,A,B,) Long, narrow leaf-shaped blades with weak
shoulders and a thinned, flared base, concave in one example and slightly convex
in the other, describes these examples. Both are of local chert, one tan and one
gray, with crude workmanship.
Form 6 (N = 1 ; Figure 3,C) This basal-ground example appears to have been
abandoned in manufacture, then exposed to extreme heat. It is diamond-shaped
in cross section with very weak shoulders and a slightly expanding stem. It is
made of a !ocal gray chert.

rt

8
a

e

i

b

f

d

c

g

1

k
0
I

5
i

I

cm

Figure 2. Dart Points from Site 41BU17. Marcos, A, B; Plainview-Like, C; San Patrice,
D; Form 1, E; Yarbrough, F; Form 2, G, H; Form 3, 1, J; Form 4, K, L.

Bowman-- Winnie’s Mound

47

Form 7 (N= 1; Figure 3,D) This specimen is of crude workmanship and of
loca! gray chert, tt has a leaf-shaped blade and side notches located about onefifth of the way from this point’s concave base.
Form 8 (N = 1; Figure 3,E) One example having a heavy, serrated, triangular
blade and a strongly expanding stem culminating in a straight base was recovered
at the site. It is made of a light-gray local chert and is poorly made.
Form 9 (N=5; Figure 3, F, G) This type is the last described variant of
Hester’s "Early Corner Notched" series, showing traits of Hoxie, Uvalde, and
Gower. Of the five examples recovered, three are missing distal ends. The two
complete examples have triangular blades with nearly straight to slightly convex
edges. Shoulders vary from slight to prominent. Stems are strongly expanding
and flare outward in all examples. Thinned bases have deep U-shaped notches.
Stems and bases are smoothed in four of the five examples. Three are of local
chert and show fair craftsmanship but are thick in appearance, while two are nonlocal--one blue chert and one unknown material, showing better workmanship.
Bifaee Failures (N=72)
A total of 72 bifaces broken in manufacture were found representing all occupied strata. Without exception, these are of local tan and gray chert.
Awl (N = 1; Figure 3,H)
This specimen is of local tan chert with a thinned, flaring base and a long,
needle-like blade culminating in a sharp tip. It exhibits good craftsmanship.
Corner Tanged Biface (N = 1; Figure 3,I)
This knife was manufactured from local tan chert. It is beveled from right to
left on the ventral surface and shows considerable wear. A small amount of cortex
is visible on the "tang" portion of this artifact. It is of excellent workmanship.
Drills (N=2; Figure 3, J,K)
One incomplete specimen is triangular in cross section with nearly parallel
edges. It is of local tan chert. The other, unifacial in design, was produced from a
secondary local tan chert flake. The thin, short bit was formed by pressure
flaking.
Ovate Bifaces (N=8; Figure 4, A)
Eight specimens were recovered which vary in quality of workmanship,
size, and material. Seven examples are made of local tan, gray, and brown chert.
One, the largest showing the best workmanship, is of a chocolate brown material
of unknown origin.
Bifaces, Group I
Group I represents seven tools which are conducive to woodworking and
were probably hafted. To demonstrate this, the author produced reproductions of
these tools and, with little difficulty, used these to carve a wood atlatl. Each example’s bit is angled at about 45° from the center plane of the tool.
IA (N=4; Figure 4, B) Included in this group are three specimens of local
tan chert and one a black chert of unknown origin. They show a striking resemblance in bit design to tools termed Guadalupe bifaces described by Turner and
Hester (1985: 216-218). They are nearly triangular in cross section and have

48

Texas Archeological Society

a radically concave bit produced by the removal of many short flakes from the
dorsal side.
IB (N=2; Figure 4, C) Two examples of this tool were recovered and are
similar in design to IA except that the bit was formed by the removal of long,
straight flakes from the ventral surface and a number of shorter flakes from the
dorsal, producing a thinner, slightly concave cutting edge. This could be interpreted as a chisel version of IA.
IC (N= 1; Figure 4, D) A small, thin biface with a concave bit retaining

Ix
/

\
\
\\
\

J

d

e

f

,,,

g

h

J

k

o

5
cr’n

Figure 3. Dart Points, Awl, Corner Tanged Biface and Drills from Site 41BU17. Form 5,
A, B; Form 6, C; Form 7, D; Form 8, E; Form 9, F, G; Awl H; Corner Tanged Biface, I;
Drills, J, K.

BowmanmWinnie’s Mound

49

much of the original cortex on its ventral surface. This example was produced
from a local chert cortical flake that was bifacially worked only around the
bit area.
Bifaces, Group H
Six hand-held carving or chopping tools are represented in this group. These
possibly could serve the same function as Group I bifaces.
IIA (N=2; Figure 5, A) These two crude examples were manufactured from
medium-sized local tan river cobbles. They retain most of the original cortex and

i¸t ,~ "

Figure 4. Ovate and Group I Bifaces fi’om Site 41BU17. Ovate Biface, A; Biface IA, B;
Biface IB, C; Biface IC, D.

50

Texas Archeological Society

are bifacially worked to produce a concave bit in one instance and a nearly
straight bit in the other.
liB (N=4; Figure 5, B) All specimens are manufactured from local river
cobbles by hard hammer reduction. One end has been bifacially reduced at approximately 30° to produce a sharp edge. Bit design varies from nearly straight
to convex and angular.
Unifacial Artifacts
Unifacial Group I Six distinct types of artifacts, which could be classed as
scrapers, are present in this collection. All are manufactured from local tan and
gray chert with one exception of silicified wood.
IA (N= 11; Figure 5, C) Each example of this class exhibits one worked
convex side. Seven examples are thick and retain much of the original cortex
while four are secondary hard hammer flakes showing no cortex.
IB (N=6; Figure 5, D) Six implements have one worked end. Four are large
hard hammer flakes retaining much of the cortex while two are secondary flakes
showing no cortex.
IC (N= 1 ; Figure 5, E) This tool consists of a hard hammer primary flake
with two worked parallel convex edges. It is of a local gray chert.
ID (N=2; Figure 6, A) Both examples exhibit three worked edges; one is a
small secondary flake showing good workmanship, the other a primary flake
crudely formed.
IE (N=3; Figure 6, B) A concave scraping edge is the distinguishing feature
of this group. Two examples are of local chert and retain much of the original
cortex while one is of poor quality silicified wood.
IF (N=2; Figure 6, C) Two tools are included in this group. One example
retains some cortex while the other is completely void of this trait.
Battered Stone
Hammerstone (N=2; Figure 6, D) These small cobbles of local river chert
are heavily battered on one side showing multiple step fractures on approximately 40 percent of total surface area. Each retains much of the original cortex.
Smoothed Stone
Mano (N=2; Figure 6, E,F) One example is of soft sandstone exhibiting a
convex, smoothed ventral surface and an altered dorsal surface which shows
signs of pecking. The other is a small quartzite cobble showing signs of wear on
both ventral and dorsal surfaces and a battered lateral edge.
Ceramics
Potsherds (N=5) All specimens are classed as "sandy paste" with very fine
grain sand as a temper. Colors range from almost black to dark gray with brown
mottled exteriors. By measuring the curvature of one large rim sherd, an estimated outside diameter of 36 cm was obtained for this vessel.
Fired Clay
A total of 1,958 pieces of fired clay was recovered from the three screened
units. These vary in size and shape from almost marblelike to irregular with
eroded exteriors. Colors range from black to mottled reds and tans. A small sam-

Bowman--Winnie’s Mound

51

pling was sliced and the interiors examined. There were no tempers in use and, in
most cases, they were thoroughly fired. There appeared to be three distinctly different explanations for the many clay fragments. They shall be treated as such in
the following text.
Type I (N=38; Figure 6, G,H) These irregularly-shaped burned clay pieces
have one concave surface and a convex opposite side. The diameter of the concave surface varies from 1 mm to 5 cm (See Table 6.) These are accidentally fired
daub coating used in the wattle and daub construction. Due to the nature of the

d

e
0

5
]

cm

Figure 5. Group II Bifaces and Group 1 Unifaces from Site 41BU17. Biface 11A, A; Biface IIB, B; Uniface IA, C; Uniface IB, D; Uniface IC, E.

52

Texas Archeologieal Society

soil, no post hole molds or other evidence of a permanent structure was revealed
during excavation. Fired daub was noted throughout the occupations at Winnie’s
Mound (see Table 6).
Type H (N=42, Figure 6, I,J) These were used to transfer thermal energy in
food preparation by being heated and then placed in a container of food. The use
of fired clay seems to be an East Texas and Louisiana custom, especially in areas
devoid of natural rock that could be used in cooking (Patterson 1975). In Late
Prehistoric times, fired clay nodules have been documented at Poverty Point,

b

i

i,~:7.

h

.;~

f

e

g

’

i
o

J
5

,

r

cm

Figure 6. Group I Unifaces, Smoothed Stone, and Fired Clay from Site 41BU17. Uniface
ID, A; Uniface IE, B; Uniface IF, C; Hammerstone, D; Mano, E, F; Type I Fired Clay, G,
H; Type II Fired Clay, I, J.

Bowman-- Winnie’s Mound

53

Louisiana (Webb 1968) and in southeast Texas (Shafer 1968; Aten 1967). At
Winnie’s Mound, where an undisturbed hearth was located, it contained large
quantities of these fired clay balls. They vary in size and distribution (see Table 6).
Type III (N=42) These large burned clay balls were without exception
found in association with hearths. They appear to have been heaped around the
fire as mud balls, then fired as the hearth was used. On close examination, they
are fired on the side closest to the fire and almost unfired on their opposite surface. They range in size from 5 cm to 10 cm in diameter (see Table 6).
Faunal Remains
Large amounts of poorly preserved or fragmented bone were recovered from
the excavation and, in most cases, it was impossible to separate erosionally displaced human bone fragments from animal bone. Of the 15 identifiable specimens recovered, 11 were whitetail deer (Odocoileus virginianus), three were redeared turtle (Chrysemys scripta elegans), and one example of a beaver tooth
(Castor canadensis) was recovered in Stratum 7. Fresh water bivalve shell and
bird bone fragments were recovered from all occupied strata, but identification of
species was impossible due to poor condition.
Burials
The cemetery contained 12 identifiable burials and many displaced human
teeth and bone fragments that could not be assigned to any known burials. Although charred human molars and other bone were encountered, there is not
enough evidence to prove or disprove the existence of cremations at this site. The
homogeneous character of the soil made it impossible to discern burial pits and
no artifacts discovered could be interpreted as grave goods. When burials were
complete enough to warrant the effort, they were removed in blocks of matrix,
wrapped in plaster casts, then transported. In instances when only a few fragments of bone were encountered, this procedure was not employed. They were
individually collected, marked, and bagged.
Figure 7 shows the horizontal distribution of burials and the excavated area.
Figures 8 and 9 demonstrate the vertical distribution of burials in tour units. Due
to the fact that an unknown quantity of soil was removed for construction purposes from the surface of the midden, al! measurements will be given from sterile clay up.
Burial 1 (Figure 10) This young adult was interred in a bundle fashion. The
skul! was facing 255° W-SW and lying on its right side. There was an elevation of
45 cm fi’om sterile clay to the underside of this burial and 65 cm to the uppermost
point placing this individual in Stratum 3. Skeletal material recovered was only
partially complete and composed of skull, long bone shafts, rib fragments, and a
pelvic fragment. Teeth are well worn but lack dental caries or evidence of abscess. Sex is undeterminable.
Burial 2 (Figure 1 I) This individual is an adult of undeterminable sex in a
tightly flexed supine position. Alignment of this burial is only slightly off a N-S
plane, with the skull in the southernmost direction. From sterile clay to the
uppermost portion of this individual is a distance of 140 cm, the lowest 130 cm,

54

Texas Archeological Society

placing it in Stratum 8. The skull has been severely damaged by a chisel plow.
Mandibles and maxilla were never recovered but enough skull fragments were
recovered to re-assemble a nearly complete, elongated cranium exhibiting a
gracile brow. All skeletal material was normal and showed no signs of osteological abnormality except the right ulna, which had a well-healed fracture approximately 8 cm from the olecranon. A small, tan chert ovate biface and two
biface fragments were recovered from the fill soil.

Figure 7. Cemetery Plan. Site 41BU17.

Bowman--Winnie’s Mound

55

O9

~

©

×
×

×
×
×
×

×
×

2.
E~

.~ ~ ~
~ ~ =
×

f

56

Texas Archeological Society

1

....

i’¯ ¯

."

."

¯

¯

×
×

a~
~9

×

CQ

x

O
,.a
×

¢~

×

¯

¯

¯

/
.~

Bowman--Winnie’s Mound

57

Burial 3 Ten cm directly beneath the cranium of Burial 2 was a robust adult
male skull in an inverted position facing 30° N-NE. The mandible was partially
articulated and a small amount of foreign bone was located in the vicinity of the
foramen magnum. Although the material could not be positively identified, the
author suggests it is the remaining fragments of the first cervical vertebra. All
third molars had erupted and were fully developed. Dental caries were absent but
teeth are heavily worn. There is no evidence present to suggest that Burial 2 intruded upon a complete burial. In this case, it seems this skull was interred
alone.
Burial 4 (Figure 12) This loosely-flexed adult was lying on its right side

MN

I

5
I
cm

Figure t0. Burial #1. Site 41BUl7.

10
I

58

Texas Archeological Society

facing 330° N-NW and is located in Stratum 3. Recovered bone consists of a
crushed skull, a mandible, long bone shafts, and a few pelvic fragments. Facial
features are gracile in appearance. Teeth seem to be free of dental caries and are
heavily worn. All third molars have erupted.
Burial 5 This individual was located in Stratum 3 with an elevation of 40 cm
above sterile clay. Due to poor preservation and its disarticulated condition, very
little could be ascertained from this burial. Recovered bone consists of a few long
bone shafts, three skull fragments, and one well-worn molar.

MN

0

I

10

20

I

I

cm
Figure 11. Burial #2. Site 41BU17.

Bowman-- Winnie’s Mound

\

59

Om

c:

Z
c~

60

Texas Archeological Society

Burial 6 Stratum 8 yielded the least preserved individual encountered. The
only skeletal material recovered was five molars and one premolar in occlusion
lacking all mandible and maxillary material. A light discoloration in the soil
marked the outline of the cranium, ulnas, radii, and femur. It appeared to be
flexed, lying on its left side facing approximately 30° N-NE.
Burial 7 (Figure 13) This secondary interment or bundle was the second and
last encountered. This adult consists of a crushed skull, disarticulated mandible,
and teeth showing a few small dental caries. Other skeletal material includes long
bone shafts and a few rib fragments.
Burial 8 Stratum 8 provides an individual lying 60 cm - 75 cm above sterile
clay which has been devastated by the chisel plow. Establishing orientation, sex,
or interment style is impossible due to condition, but the examination of surviving teeth suggests the probability of adult status.
Burial 9 A hearth intruded upon Buria! 9 producing burned skull fragments
and a generally disturbed interment. It appears to be flexed but original orientation and age could not be established. This individual rests in Stratum 3 and has

\

10

L
cm

Figure 13. Burial #7. Site 41BU17.

Bowman-- Winnie’s Mound

61

an elevation of 30 cm at its lowest point and 40 cm. at its highest point above
sterile clay.
Burial 10 An erosionally displaced burial was encountered in Stratum 4.
This severely disarticulated individual was strewn over a four square meter area
with only long bone shafts and a few skull fragments recovered. Original orientation and statistical information was impossible to determine.
Burial 11 A small child approximately four or five years of age was recovered associated with Burial 12. In this instance, bone preservation was very
poor, but a partially complete crushed skull and a few long bone shafts were recovered. Orientation of this individual was on a NW-SE plane with the head
being placed to the southeast.
Burial 12 This flexed adult was positioned on its left side facing 90° east
and was buried in Stratum 3 with child burial 11. No teeth, mandible, pelvis, or
maxillary bones were recovered, so age and sex could not be determined. This
interment seems to have been disturbed either by aboriginal excavations at the
site or erosion, as only a few skull fragments and an incomplete count of long
bone shafts were encountered.

DISCUSSION
Twelve burials were recorded at 41BU17 in 1983 and at first it was assumed
that all were from the same time period. However, during analysis, while charting artifacts and burials on a vertical graph (Figures 8 and 9), it became evident
that there were two groups of burials from different time periods. Group One,
consisting of Burials 1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, and 12 were interred during a much
earlier occupation than the Group Two burials (2, 3, and 8).
Since the original surfaces from which the burials were introduced was not
evident by visual inspection, it was necessary to conduct an experiment to try
and estimate which strata would have been the most likely level from which each
group of burials was introduced.
A pit was dug using only a bovine scapula and a sharp stick--tools that
were available to the aboriginal groups. It soon became apparent that to excavate
a hole of great depth in this manner was impractical. This experience seemed to
suggest that the graves were rather shallow. Most interments were flexed and on
their sides and since the human body in this position would require a minimum
depth of 50 cm from the surface to the bottom of the pit, an estimated average
figure of 70 cm was adopted for the purpose at hand. Hall (1981: 78) noted that at
Allen’s Creek burials were interred in a deposit only after an accumulation of
40-90 cm of sand. This observation reinforces the hypothesized figure of 70 cm.
When this figure is applied vertically to the deposits, which Group One burials
were enveloped in, it places a possible original surface at Stratum 7, which

62

Texas Archeological Society

yielded Lange dart points, or in the Late Archaic context 2250-2600 BP (Prewitt
1981: 13).
When the same theory is applied to Group Two, they would be placed in an
unknown zone that was destroyed by the removal of earth for fill; possibly the
missing Toyah Phase noted in other parts of the site (see my comments in the
Introduction).
At present, this time frame is purely speculative and the hope exists that a
similar cemetery in the general area with better soil conditions will be excavated to
either prove or disprove this estimated chronology for the interments at 41BU17.
In four cases out of the 12 burials, little or no information was gained to
shed light on Winnie’s Mound mortuary practices due to three major disruptive
forces.
Burial 10 was severely scattered by an apparent erosional episode that obliterated any traces of this individual’s original resting place. Interments 5 and 9
were displaced by aboriginal excavations with Burial 9 being further disturbed
by an intrusive hearth in the vicinity of this individual’s skull, producing charred
cranial fragments and other burned bone. The third and most disruptive force
occurred in historic times when the cultivator’s chisel plow virtually destroyed
Burial 8 and removed all traces of mandibular and maxillary materials from
Burial 2.
Group One burials were reduced in number from nine to six by the aforementioned disruptive forces. Of the remaining six, two are secondary interments
or bundle burials. This mortuary practice to date has not been documented in
Burleson County or, in fact, in any of the surrounding counties, with the nearest
examples coming from Austin County to the south at Allen’s Creek (Hall 1982).
There appear to be three logical explanations for the existence of bundle
burials at the site. One, an individual would die at the site and the remains would
be consigned to a scaffold or tree until decomposition freed the bones of flesh. At
that time the bones would be collected and interred in the cemetery. The second
possibility is that an individual would die elsewhere. After decomposition had
taken place, the remains would be collected and transported to the cemetery for
interment. Either case would require more effort expended for the deceased than
the use of a simple interment. Thirdly, a burial could have been accidentally disturbed by aboriginal excavations, the remains collected and reinterred in the
cemetery. Any of these possibilities seem to imply that this particular parcel
of land held meaning, either religious or territorial, to the populations being
discussed.
The remaining individuals of this group were all buried in a flexed position.
Numbers 6 and 12 were interred on their left sides, 6 facing north and 12 facing
east. Burial 4 was on its right side, facing N-NW.
It is interesting to note that at 41BU17 there is almost no consistency in
grave orientation while at 41BU16 (Roemer 1985), a few km to the north, some
consistency is evident in the five burials discovered. Orientation in one case is
impossible to discern because of its disturbed nature, but all the others recovered

Bowman-- Winnie’s Mound

63

face in either a northern or. a southern direction. 41BU16 also includes a single
group interment consisting of an adult female and a five-year-old child nestled
between her stomach and flexed legs (Steele 1985).
At 41BU17 a flexed adult lying on its left side (12), was located with a small
child (11), approximately the same age as the one at 41BU16. In this instance,
the child’s orientation appears to be on a NW-SE plane or aligned with the spine
of the flexed adult. Steele (1985) notes, "the possibility of a catastrophic situation taking the lives of two individuals within a few days of each other." Unfortunately, at Winnie’s Mound, as well as 41BU16, there is no evidence to suggest the
cause of death.
The Group Two burials consist of three individuals, one of which was destroyed by a plow. The surviving burials are those of a flexed individual in a
supine position (2), and an inverted skull (3), lying directly below the skull of
Burial 2. The association between these two burials is unclear. While the possibility of Burial 2 intruding on the remains of Burial 3 exists, there is no evidence
to suggest that this was the case. With the exception of the skull and articulated
mandible, there was no skeletal material in or around those burials that could be
assigned to individual 3.
The author is unaware of any documented case in Central Texas where an
individual was interred in an inverted position or, for that matter, a severed head
being interred with another individual as a trophy.
The people of Winnie’s Mound made use of a geographically-confined area
for a cemetery. This practice has been documented in other areas of Texas. The
Loeve-Fox site (Prewitt 1981: 62) has a large number of burials within a three
meter diameter circular area and at Allen’s Creek, Hall (1981: 76) notes, "The
earliest occupation took place within and about an irregularly-shaped basin or
depression at the edge of a bluff." Hall (ibid.) further states that occupying such
a place would provide "a well-protected pocket" for aborigina! occupation.
The first group of interments at Allen’s Creek, as well as at Winnie’s Mound,
was not introduced until this depression had filled up with sand to a level great
enough for this purpose -- 40 - 90 cm (Hall 1981:78). This scenario seems to fit
perfectly with the series of events at Winnie’s Mound and the parallels between
the two sites should not be underestimated.

SUMMARY

Winnie’s Mound was occupied by small bands of hunter gatherers, perhaps
in some instances semipermanently, as suggested by the wattle and daub structures (see Figure 6). The occupation extended from Late Paleo-Indian times,
documented by San Patrice and Plainview-like dart points in Stratum 1, to a Late
Prehistoric Austin Phase in Strata 10 and 11, as characterized by Scallorn arrow
points and sandy paste pottery.

64

Texas Archeological Society

By comparing debitage to finished artifacts, it seems the artifacts made of
nonlocal material were not produced at the site but were manufactured elsewhere. This suggests that these people traveled or traded far into Central Texas
during certain times of the year, bringing back points made of nonlocal materials
and would explain the complete lack of crude tools made of those materials.
There is little evidence to support the theory that a structured trade network
existed, but the possibility exists and should in the future be researched.
The area of aboriginal occupation at Winnie’s Mound encompasses many
acres of a high ancient river terrace. The cemetery is located in a slight depression on the side of the terrace. Debris from the occupations began to fill in the
depression creating a sandy midden deposit, which in time allowed the easy interment of the first group of burials. Although no material suitable for radiocarbon dating was recovered, and all inference to time is based on diagnostic
point type associations, this group seems to be derived of individuals of Late
Archaic times or a date approximating 2400-2600 B.R
A period of time elapsed during which the cemetery area was used for other
purposes, probably by other groups. Eventually the second group of burials was
introduced in the still-accumulating deposits, probably associated with Toyah
Phase people or a possible date of A.D. 1200. After examining the existing
skeletal material, it appears that these people were free of bone disease and dental problems, with the exception of heavy tooth wear, and were gracile in facial
appearance.
The artifact assemblage represents a blend of eastern and Central Texas
types. The many untyped points are probably loca! variations of these artifacts
and suggest to the author that the Brazos River could be a boundary used by both
groups throughout the site’s occupation.
In the author’s opinion, this project has created questions that when answered will fill in many gaps in Texas prehistory and demonstrates the need
for more controlled excavations in the area between the Little River and the
Navasota’s respective confluences with the Brazos River.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author wishes to thank Dr. Harry Shafer of Texas A&M University for his continued advice and support during the course of this project. His deep concern for local
archeology and willingness to share of himself has made this report possible. The author
is also indebted to the following people: Phil Scamardo, the landowner, for his permission
to work at the site; Dr. Gentry Steele of Texas A&M University for his advice in the analysis of human and faunal remains; Michael Sweatt of Bryan for his help in the field; and my
wife, Deborah, for the many hours spent in the field and typing my manuscripts.

Bo wman-- Winnie ’s Mound

~

o

r%

u~

r,l

r-i

e,i

6

~c~o

o

r"--

r~

~L

2~

d~
._~

6

.~
~~

65

Texas Archeological Society

66

tl

LI

I
I L

p-I

~q

I L
cq

t’q

c~
~9

I
o

I L

I I
rn~r~

L]
cm~q

I
o

~L

~L

l i

©
o

o

~z

~’~

*g

:r:m~

6

~:~

rm~

~rm~

Bowman-- Winnie ’s Mound

o (D
o

~°

o

cr~

c~

cr~

0o

~J
~D

¢,q

~E

-II

o

©
MZ

o
MZ

.~g

~2
C~

o

o
~9

67

Texas Archeological Society

68

-III-LIII!II

I~ I I I I I~t~

Ct3

~i-. oo

a’,¢~o

0

~t"

©

¢D

ff

I...I

F"-

t¢3
I
tD

¯~’~

e¢3

09

~O~

~’Uo

¯

.

ii

~’~.

I

I

’.oa’,

]

"’~

o~o~

O~

~

o

~

©
tD
~OO
~v

~

~o

~

o~~o-~
~

,-2

o

0
"6
.<

.<

.1

~

~.~ ~~~

Bowman-- Winnie ’s Mound

III-

-!1

69

II

1~ ~q cq

c~

-

1/

¯

I

I

I

I

0
0

i I-..i

I

I

(9

~<m
(9

o~

I

70

Texas Archeological Society

©

I

I

I

I

-

!--IIII
II

I

~

I!111

II

-]1

II
I

t.,

1
I

(’4

II

I
I

II

09

,<

I

II

Bowman--Winnie’s Mound

71

I!
II
I

II

I
-I

0

t

I

f

I

II

I-

JI

I

I

I,

Iltl

(~.

II

-II1~

I-I
III

Illll

I-

o
o

onoo

o

.~.o

¯

==,=

go

~:~

0

o

LP

72

Texas Archeological Society

o

I-]

t l-II

II

0
0

II

I

0

I

II]ll

I

!llll

I

I~LII

I

]1
II

[I

~D
cq

II

~9

¢,,1

,..~ ~..~~

~.

~ ~(:) ~::~

~

c~

It

c,4

!l

0

I

IIII

!1

] I-I

L-II ~=-4~11 Ill II

I

IIII

H

II

] ! I ]

I]11 ~ ]E~-I] ILl

II

I

IIII

H

II

I ! ] I II Itl-~~l-=tl Ill

I

I]1!

0

0

0
,..3

,.0

II

-~

uj~

0

Bowman--Winnie’s Mound

I!

II

I

II

II

I

II

II I

!

Itl

II

73

t., 3

I

-I

II1-11

I I

-I1-1t

III

-li-tl

III

III II1

II1

!11 I!1

-~, Ilott

~9

tt’~ ’~1- ’.0

O

r/)

o

,,D

©

©
.1

©
*’~

©

tD

09

z~

74

Texas Archeological Society

REFERENCES CITED
Aten, L. E.
Excavations at the Jamison Site (41LB2), Liberty County, Texas. Houston Ar1967
cheological Society Report 1. Houston, Texas.
Brothwell, D. R.
1981
Digging Up Bones. Third Edition. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, New York.

Gray, H.
1901
Gray’s Anatomy. 33rd Printing. Running Press, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Hall, Grant D.
Allen’s Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower Brazos Valley,
1981
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report 6 l.
Patterson, L. W.
The Poverty Point Culture, As Seen From Southeastern Texas. Louisiana Ar1975
chaeology, 2 : 153-162.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1981

Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox, Loeve and Tombstone Bluff Sites
in the Granger Lake District of Central Texas, Volume 4. Texas Archeological
Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.

Roemer, Erwin
1985
Unpublished Report on 41BU 16 submitted to the State Department of Highways
and Public Transportation. Ms. on file at Texas A&M University Archeological
Research Laboratory, College Station, Texas.
Shafer, Harry J.
1968
Archeological Investigations in the San Jacinto River Basin, Montgomery
County, Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project 13. The University of Texas at Austin.
1973
Lithic Technology at the George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Ph. D.
dissertation, The University of Texas at Austin.
Steele, D. Gentry
1985

Human Skeletal Remains Recovered From 41BU 16. Manuscript on file, Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas.

Turner, Ellen Sue and Thomas R. Hester
1985

A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press, Austin.

Webb, Clarence H.
1968

The Extent and Content of Poverty Point Culture. American Antiquity 33:
297-321.

Three Caches of Guadalupe TooRs From South Texas
Kenneth M. Brown

ABSTRACT
Three caches of Guadalupe tools from south Texas are described and
compared metrically and microscopically. The Lindner cache of nine tools,
from Medina County, is an isolated find from the flood plain of Hondo
Creek, and all nine specimens appear unused (or at least freshly resharpened). The Granberg cache was found in a Bexar County occupation site,
and at least three of the four tools show some use wear in the form of edge
attrition. The Peterson cache of six tools from Atascosa County was also
apparently an isolated find, and all six show an identical configuration of
abrasive (?) polish on surfaces adjacent to the working edge. Other topics
such as recognition of caches, method of manufacture, experimental use
wear, and the problem of distinguishing percussor damage from traumatic
use wear are discussed. While the shape, size, and method of manufacture of
all three caches are quite similar, microscopic examination shows each cache
has its own microwear signature that distinguishes it from the others, suggesting these are tool sets, not simply random collections of tools, and the
differences may be due to differing stages in the use life of tool sets, or to
different hardnesses of the material being worked.

INTRODUCTION
This study began when Mr. O. R. Lindner of San Antonio visited the lab at
the Center for Archaeological Research and brought for identification a collection of nine Guadalupe tools found on his Medina County property (Figure 1).
I borrowed the tools for study and later visited the location of the find. After
studying the tools, I became curious to see what characteristics other Guadalupe
tool caches might have, and was able to examine a small cache from the Granberg II site. The study became a comparison of two caches, and there the matter
rested until Bobbie McGregor and Fred Valdez brought to my attention a third
cache at the Witte Museum, this one donated long ago in 1942. These are the
only Guadalupe tool caches I have been able to locate and study. Reportedly another cache may have been found at the Morhiss site, but I have not tried to locate
or document it. Yet another cache has been reported at the J-2 Ranch site, but on

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 56 (1985)

76

Texas Archeological Society

L indner

f-

/
/
0

50 km

Figure 1. Location of Guadalupe tool caches.

examination it has proven to consist of Clear Fork tools or protoforms (see appendix). Since this study has grown in such unplanned fashion, maintaining continuity of the text and observational consistency has been a persistent problem,
especially since the Lindner tools were returned to their owner before I obtained
the Peterson cache on loan from the Witte Museum. Any inconsistencies in the
tool descriptions must be laid to this cause, and I plead nolo contendere.
I have tried to accomplish several things in this paper: 1) to explain how
Guadalupe tools were made, something that has been poorly understood for some
time; 2) to provide detailed individual descriptions of the tools, because existing
descriptions in the literature are too uncommon or inadequate; 3) to discuss some
of the realities and limitations of microwear observation, such as distinguishing
between manufacturing damage and use damage; and 4) to see what characteristics these cached tools might have in common and whether these can tell us anything about why the tools were cached.
A cache is an accumulation of useful material that is hidden away for future recovery
and utilization. Such things as food, clothing, tools, and raw materials may be
placed in a cache. Similar types of association between cultural objects are found in

-Guadalupe Tool Caches

77

human burials and trash pits, but these are not caches according to the definition above because recovery and utilization are not normally anticipated (Tunnell
1978: 1).

Caches are for the most part the product of logistically organ&ed behavior.
That is, procurement of resources in relatively large quantities, too large to be
transported at once, by special task groups at a specific, preplanned location.
Caches are an important feature of hunter-gatherers employing collector (rather
than forager) economies (Binford 1980: 10, 12; 1982) and are organized with
regard to some anticipated route or routine of behavior. The material is left behind because it is too heavy to carry, or will not be needed until some future
predictable date (see, for example, Shutler 1956), or because multiple stashes of
supplies must be provided for contingency use. A metate, for example, may be
left at a site both because it is too heavy to carry and because ptanned travel
might lead away from concentrations of the seeds that were being ground on the
metate. A cache of eight introduced chert cobbles (three of which had been
tested; Calhoun 1965) found on Hog Bayou in Calhoun County and another
cache of about 50 tested cobbles found in the Cypress Creek watershed in Harris
County (Hale and Freeman 1978: 90-98) are possible archeological examples
from Texas. Thomas (1983: 81-82) provides a useful discussion of caches and
distinguishes between resource caches and tool caches in the Great Basin, where
ethnographic sources record rabbit nets, bird nets, deadfall parts, fishing equipment, digging sticks, snares, and milling stones having been cached (see Osborne
and Riddell 1978 and Wallace 1978 for some California examples). Many of
these were put in field storage because they were needed only in certain locations
at certain times of the year. Tool caches may consist of sets of similar tools, like
the Kelly Field projectile point cache (Hester 1972) or like the caches reported in
this paper, or they may sometimes consist of tool kits, like the Hawkins cache of
Dalton points, bifacial preforms, "adzes," edge damaged flakes, end scraper,
sandstone abraders, and other items (Morse 1971). Another example, this one
from Missouri, is a cache of ten agricultural hoes and two "spades", all with
silica polish, plus a cobble hammerstone that was probably provided for retouching them. These were found in a pit about 30 cm deep with otherwise sterile fill,
associated with a Mississippian structure (Southard 1976). Occasionally caches
are found that seem to represent a series of artifacts whose manufacture was in
progress; an example is a slab-lined cache of obsidian and quartzite preforms, a
flake, a projectile point, a bone flaking tool and a lump of yellow ocher found in
the Warner Valley in Oregon (Weide and Weide 1969). In other cases, caches may
have little to do with logistically organized behavior and may in fact be special
offerings with supernatural meaning, or were ritual items stored away from
camps to shield them from contact with society members who were not privy to
their use or. meaning. The famous Mount Livermore cache of hundreds of arrow
points, both complete and fragmentary, a "large point, and a few flat beads"
(Janes !930: 8) found under a cairn on the summit of Mount Livermore, may

78

Texas Archeological Society

well be an example. The Hutton cache (Hutton 1976), an E1 Paso Polychrome
olla with an incised slate tablet, pecked pebble, and quartz crystals, found at the
edge of a playa, might be another. Other caches with diverse arrays of rare
goods, such as the Tobin Ranch cache (Moore and Wheat 195!), are sometimes
interpreted as traders’ caches, although this has never actually been demonstrated.
Caches may be left 1) marked but without a storage facility; 2) in a natural,
unprepared storage facility; or 3) in a prepared storage facility. Some kind of
marker is usually necessary to allow the material to be relocated, and some kind
of facility is usually necessary to prevent the material from being dispersed.
Cached food, for example, must be sealed from predators.
How, then, are archeologists to recognize caches: how, for example, can
cached material be distinguished from discarded material, especially since discards may also occur in a facility, such as a trash pit? This might be termed the
cache-trash problem. Some evidence of a prepared facility or a marker perhaps
ought to be expected as evidence of logistically organized behavior, if an accumulation of artifacts is to be identified as a cache. Paradoxically, though, since
caches are frequently isolated, they are rarely recovered by archeologists, who
concentrate on sites. Perhaps this very isolation should be regarded as evidence
of caching. Most caches reported to archeologists have already been removed
from the ground, and it is not clear whether a facility of some sort was present.
Finds such as the Millsap cache (Millsap and Dickson 1968), the Johnson, Palo
Duro, and Potter County caches (Witte 1942), McWilliams cache (Tunnell
1978), Brush Creek cache (Hammatt 1970b), Anadarko cache (Hammatt !970a),
and a cache at 41 FY 314 (Nightengale, Jackson, and Moncure 1985: 33 - 34) all
seem to be ambiguous with respect to the presence of a facility. Others, such as
the Whitzitt cache found under a flat rock (Witte 1942), the High Lonesome bead
cache found in a pot marked with a cairn (Kelly 1977), the Indian Mesa cache
found under a pile of rocks inside a rockshelter (Eagleton 1955); the Gibson,
Weaver-Ramage (Tunnell 1978), LeVick (LeVick 1975), Heerwald (Lintz 1978),
and Brookeen Creek (Mallouf 1981) caches, all in small, shallow pits; and Feature 8 near the Road Cut site (Hughes and Willey 1978), in a large, charcoalstained, possibly baked pit, seem to indicate a facility. The last example, like
many other finds of biface preforms or blades in north Texas and Oklahoma,
might represent material buried for heat treating, in an environment where it is
easier to transport the lithic material to a source of firewood than to carry the
extra firewood for heat treatment to an archeological site. Other caches of biface
preforms, however, seem to comprise material that would not require heattreating, such as a cache of welded tuff preforms found near Sterling, Idaho
(Pavesic 1966). Other problems of interpretation arise in areas with acidic soils
which degrade bone, introducing the possibility that "caches" may actually be
burial offerings. In such cases, definition of a facility is critical: does it have the
properties of a grave, or of a cache pit? Other "caches", such as the small tightly
packed concentrations of chert flakes sometimes found in occupation sites, may
be heat-treating loads, true caches, or simply the result of prehistoric clean-up

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

79

activities. Helm and Turner (1975) give an example from Missouri. A very similar feature was found at Skillet Mountain Four (41 MC 222) in Choke Canyon
Reservoir.
In practice, recognition of a facility such as a pit is often difficult or impossible. Most of the shallow cache pits reported in Texas and adjacent areas seem
not to have contrasting fills, so that the only way to judge whether a facility is
present at all is from the configuration of the objects themselves. The Road Cut
cache seems to be an exception. Another exception are the various-sized bellshaped, often elaborately floored pits found in excavated 18th century Wichitaspeaking villages such as the Stansbury site (Stephenson 1970: 71) and the
Vinson site. These have been termed "cache pits" in the literature, but might be
better regarded as storage pits’, since they presumably functioned to protect crops
from rodents and the like during the occupation of a sedentary village and perhaps had nothing to do with logistically organized movement.
Markers, belonging to the class of things that stick up in the air, are almost
never found (the Mount Livermore cairn and the possible cairn at the High Lonesome site serving as all too rare exceptions). Pragmatically, then, archeologists
are usually forced to turn to other circumstances of recovery for identification of
caches. In practice, single items are almost never identified as caches, while
clustered multiple items, especially multiple occurrences of the same item, may
be identified as caches. Accordingly, while there are many known instances of
Guadalupe tools found buried in sites or exposed on the surface, these are not
ordinarily regarded as being deliberately cached, but rather as discards, since
there is no prima facie evidence of intended future use. Operationally, then,
single items even if associated with a facility are not likely to be identified as
cache items, while tightly clustered arrays of identical items are most likely to be
regarded as a cache even if no facility is recognized. The condition of the item
may or may not be decisive; the Gibson and Brookeen Creek finds, for example,
were regarded as caches rather than trash even though unmodified flakes constituted the bulk of the material recovered. Here, the isolation of these finds seems
to indicate the operation of logistically organized behavior. In a few cases, the
carefully patterned or layered arrangement of items in a cache seems to indicate
they are not discarded, even when there is no evidence of a formal facility (see
Slesick 1978).
With the foregoing in mind, let us consider the three caches reviewed in this
paper. The Lindrier cache was found buried in flood plain sediment of Hondo
Creek; no pit was visible when I visited the site in 1984, although the artifacts
had already been removed from the cutbank. Nothing that could be considered an
occupation site was visible near the cache. The Peterson cache was apparently an
isolated find also, occurring about 150 meters away from the nearest occupation
site, although the information on location is not firsthand, and we have no information at all on the depth of the find or the presence of a pit. The Granberg cache
was found in an occupation site; again, a cache pit was not found, although conceivably a small one might have been overlooked in the midden fill.

80

Texas Archeological Society

MANUFACTURING SEQUENCE FOR GUADALUPE TOOLS
The manufacturing sequence given below was written as a description of the
Lindner cache, but it applies equally to all three caches insofar as can be determined, except for the details of edge angle, length, and platform width. Evidently all of the tools were made from elongate chert cobbles. In the Lindner
cache all except specimens 3, 5, and 7 have some cobble cortex remaining. In
some cases it can be seen that the craftsman took advantage of the natural shape
of the cobble, using a naturally occurring ridge on the cobble as the dorsal keel
on the finished tool. In several cases, dorsal decortification flakes have been removed from both lateral edges, stopping short of the dorsal ridge so as to leave a
narrow strip of cortex running down the spine of the tool and extending onto the
butt. Apparently the manufacturing sequence was as follows:
!] a cobble was selected and truncated by a heavy percussion blow from a
large hammerstone. In effect, the cobble was "quartered" although only the
end was removed. This left a somewhat hollow striking platform on the end
of the cobble, generally without any discernable ripple marks. The truncation surface was not produced exactly at right angles to the long axis of the
cobble, but rather at an angle of about 50-60° to the edge of the cobble
which was destined to become the dorsal ridge (Figure 2);
2] using the truncation facet as a platform, the bit was trimmed into a rounded
shape by removing a series of decortification flakes from what was to be the
dorsal surface of the tool;
3] again using a heavy hammerstone, a severe blow was struck on the truncation facet about 4 cm back from the trimmed arcuate edge, removing a long
(about 10-11 cm), narrow but thick cortex flake from the core;
4] the ventral side of this flake was used as a platform from which to remove
part or all of the cortex from the dorsal side. The aim here seems to have
been to regularize the lateral edges, and perhaps more importantly, to make
the lateral edges less acute;
5] if the ventral facet was straight when it came off the core, little further modification was done; if irregular, flakes were detached as needed from the
ventral facet so as to straighten the ventral face of the tool;
6] the bulb of percussion was removed from the ventral face by a percussion
blow delivered at one of the distal corners using the dorsally flaked surface
as a platform. Sometimes more than one flake removal was necessary to
produce a straight juncture between the bit facet and the ventral surface,
and sometimes a removal from the opposite corner was necessary to restore
the symmetry of the ventral face;
7] final trimming of the rounded bit facet was done using a light blow delivered with a small hammerstone. In many of the specimens, considerable
care was obviously taken to produce an even, carefully trimmed edge that
was symmetrically arcuate. Because of the edge angle, these final trimming

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

81

scars frequently hinged out abruptly a centimeter or two from the edge. In
some cases these trimming scars truncate dorsal flake scars.
One important observation concerning step number 1 is in order. The remnant of
the quartering facet preserved on the tool generally lacks the typical ripple marks
left by direct percussion, as noted above. The reason for this is that the fracture
type associated with cobble quartering is not a typical "cone fracture," according
to Tsirk (1979: 84), and lacks the characteristic distally-directed ripples.

@ V.nt..!

@ R.~ov.g of ~.ih

flattening

~anu#acturi~g Sequence
fop Cache Specitnens

®

Final hit tpimn~iny

Figure 2. Manufacturing sequence for cache specimens. Arrows indicate direction of percussion blows, which in stages 5 and 6 are directed toward the viewer. Abrasion of lateral
edges also occurs, but is not indicated here.

82

Texas Archeological Society

TERMINOLOGY

The truncation facet or original flake platform mentioned in steps 1 and 2
above is here termed the bit facet. The ridge- or keel-like surface is termed the
dorsal surface, and the opposite flatter face is termed the ventral face; these correspond to the dorsal and ventral surfaces of the original flake as well.
A series of standard measurements was taken on each tool in all three
caches, as follows (Figure 3):
1] dorsal length: the maximum length of the tool, from the butt (proximal)
end to the tip of the bit;
2] ventral length: distance from the butt end to the proximal edge of the bit
facet;
3] maximum bit width;
4] maximum tool width;
5] maximum tool thickness;

Figure 3. Landmarks and measurements on a Guadalupe tool. Numbered measurements
correspond to those defined in the text: 1) dorsal length; 2) ventral length; 3) maximum bit
width; 4) maximum tool width; 5) maximum tool thickness; 6) bit thickness (e.g. distance
from bit apex to intersection with ventral face); 7) maximum depth of bit concavity (the
maximum amount of "dishing" of the bit facet, usually just a millimeter or two); 8) bit
facet/ventral angle; 9) bit spine-plane angle (working edge angle).

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

83

6] bit thickness: measured parallel to the bit facet, from the tip of the bit to
the proximal edge of the bit facet (Figure 3, variable 6). Corresponds
approximately to the platform depth of the original flake, except that the
bulb of percussion has been removed;
7] maximum depth of bit facet concavity;
8] bit facet/ventral angle: the obtuse angle between the bit facet and the ventral face of the tool;
9] bit spine-plane angle: the working edge angle, between the bit facet and
the dorsal face;
10] weight.

MICROSCOPIC EXAMINATION
All of the tools were examined at low power (7x and above, usually not
above 40× but where necessary up to 80x) with a stereozoom microscope.
Edges were not opaqued but were carefully washed before examination. The
methods and goals of this study were essentially the same as an earlier examination of a stone tool assemblage from Choke Canyon (Brown et al. 1982). The bit
edge, both lateral edges, and both faces were examined microscopically. Microscopic features were measured with a microscope scale accurate to 0.1 mm;
larger features were measured with a standard set of sliding vernier calipers accurate to 0.02 mm. Edge angles were measured with a goniometer, and only one
measurement near the center of the tool was taken, rather than taking several and
averaging the results, because the working edge angle changes radically as measurement moves away from the center of the bit. Several Guadalupe tool replicas
were also made and examined microscopically for comparative purposes.

THE LINDNER CACHE
In 1982, Mr. O. R. Lindner found five Guadalupe tools lying exposed on
freshly slumped dirt at the base of a newly made bulldozer cut into the high cutbank along Hondo Creek, on property he owns ten kilometers southeast of
Hondo in Medina County (Figure 4, 5, a). Investigation of the cutbank immediately above revealed a matched pair of tools (specimens 1A and 1B, Figure 6,
a, a’, b, b’) in place, and further probing revealed a second pair (specimens 2A
and 2B, Figure 6, c, c’, d, d’), this one separated by a few centimeters. Nine
tools are present, all complete and evidently all members of a single cache that
apparently lay buried by about five meters of Hondo Creek alluvium. Mr. Lindner
marked the spot and in March, 1984, I visited the site and estimated the depth
below the terrace surface at 5.0 meters with a K+E hand level. A tenth tool has

84

Texas Archeological Society

since been found about 200-300 meters downstream, but we have no idea
whether it is related. The Lindner cache is of particular interest because there is
considerable uniformity in size, shape, and methods of manufacture, possibly
enough to justify proposing that all were made by a single craftsman. Two of the
paired tools, 1A and 1B, are almost exactly the same size and shape and are
made of very similar chert. The other pair differs in shape but both specimens are
made of similar material contrasting with that of the first pair. I thought at first
that each pair of specimens had been made from one parent cobble. Closer inspection shows that each specimen was made from a separate cobble, but that the
pairs comprise specimens that were probably deliberately selected so as to match
the color and texture of the chert as closely as possible.

Geologic Context of the Lindner Cache
While the Lindner cache was found an estimated 5 meters below the Hondo
Creek terrace surface (actually the eroded surface lies only about a meter above,
but the depth estimate was run from an uneroded area), the entire exposed terrace
section is estimated at 9.8 meters. The total thickness is unknown; the present channel is gravel choked, but Mr. Lindner reports that in the past a channel
2-3 meters deep has existed here, indicating that the alluvium may be as much
as 13 meters deep here (water is now present only in discontinuous pools, but
according to Mr. Lindner the water level in the creek is greatly depressed by excessive irrigation drawdown). All of the exposed portion is presumed to be of
Holocene age. A moderately well-developed soil is present at the top of the section, but no obvious paleosols were seen in the cutbank. The terrace surface is
covered with large hackberry and mesquite trees along with some persimmons
and sumacs. While the age of this surface is unknown, a Late Prehistoric date
would be quite consistent with analogous geomorphic settings elsewhere in South
Texas. A sample of sediment from the cache findspot consists of yellow (8YR
6.5/5), mostly medium and fine sand (1.0 to 3.0 phi) with small amounts of very
fine sand, silt, and clay, and it appears to be very representative of the section as
a whole, which is quite homogeneous except for the appearance of gravel bars
which will be discussed in more detail below. The sediment is extremely cohesive and the cutbank is resistant to slumping. The sediment reacts strongly to
dilute HC1 and is probably weakly cemented by carbonate derived from Cretaceous formations upstream, since there appears to be too little clay present to
account for its cohesiveness. In the vicinity of the cache and elsewhere in the
section are scattered, occasionally somewhat clustered snail shells. Most prominent are Rabdotus sp. snails, including both adults and juveniles; these nearly
always occurred in the cutbank with the long axis of the shell horizontal, but with
the spire oriented in various directions. Present in smaller frequencies are Helicina orbiculata tropica and Polygyra sp. shells. This is a typical semiarid south
Texas Holocene land snail assemblage. Only one aquatic snail (tentatively identi-

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

85

fled as Gyraulus parvus) was observed. None of the snails show obvious abrasion from transport.
The Hondo Creek valley is constricted at the Lindner site (from about
4.3 km wide to about 1.5 km wide) by a sandstone bedrock ridge that projects
westward into the valley from its eastern margin, following an ENE-WSW fault

/

/
Qt

~
~

0

500 M

CONTOUR INTERVAL
I0 FEE T

QUATERNARY ALLUVIUM, PROBABLY ALl
HOLOCENE
oooooeooo FAULT TREND

\
Figure 4. Topographic map of Lindner cache environs.

86

Texas Archeological Society

h
Figure 5. Lindner cache environs, a, looking east-southeast at Lindner cache findspot in
bulldozer cut through Hondo Creek alluvium. Tools were found where 50 cm scale is resting. b, looking southwest at cutbank with thick gravel deposit about 40 meters upstream
from bulldozer cut.

trend. The San Antonio sheet of the Geologic Atlas of Texas indicates the ridge is
a downthrown block and it is mapped as part of the Midway Group (Figure 4).
The ridge rises to a peak 150 meters above the terrace surface about 750 meters
back from the creek, and is covered with a thin, stony, gravelly soil supporting a
dense growth of chaparral, with occasional outcrops of brown ferruginous sandstone bedrock. Chipping debris and stone tool manufacturing failures, many of
them patinated in varying extent, occur wherever these scattered gravels occur. A
small collection by the Lindners includes few readily identifiable artifact types,
but possible examples of La Jita(?), Early Corner Notched(?), Early Triangular,
Nolan (?), Marcos (?), and Ensor (?) points and small bifacial piano-convex and
biconvex Clear Fork tools are present. Apparently most of the ridge is covered
with a thin sheet deposit of quarrying debris. The gravels are relatively small
in size and occur as lag deposits as high as the peak of the ridge 252 meters
(827 feet MSL). These gravels seem somewhat smaller in caliber than the Uvalde
Gravels mapped at the western valley margin at 265 meters (870 feet) and below
(see the San Antonio sheet), but like the Uvalde Gravels, are mostly chert. North
of this ridge a small nameless intermittent tributary of Hondo Creek flows paral-

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

87

lel to the main creek, then turns westward where it is confined by the ridge, flowing along its base to join Hondo Creek a short distance upstream from where the
cache was found.
The bedload in Hondo Creek is chert and limestone gravel, probably representing a mixture of reworked Uvalde chert gravels and limestone clasts from the
Edwards Plateau upstream. The chert ranges from rather massive cobbles (the
largest collected was 23 cm in diameter and weighed 6.35 kg) to small pebbles.
Large cobbles are fairly common. Limestone clasts were not examined but
seemed to be smaller.
About 30 to 40 meters upstream from the cache site the cutbank forms a
sheer vertical wall, and exposed here is a thick, multistoried sequence of channel
gravels filling almost the entire terrace section to within 30 cm of the surface
(Figure 5, b). Evidently Hondo Creek made a bend here, perhaps deflected by
the sandstone ridge or by enchannel boulders and flowed (speculatively) southwest into the area now masked by terrace deposits. Evidently this channel was
stable and aggrading for thousands of years, for the sequence of channel gravels
is over nine meters thick. There seems to be almost no evidence of lateral migration, except for a small bar about 40 cm thick, three meters below the surface,
which extends to the south and is exposed in the bulldozer cut. This bar is about
two meters above the level of the cache and pinches out west of it. The indicated
channel width seems to be roughly the same as the present channel, although it is
hard to be sure without knowing the orientation of the paleochannel. While the
channel stability suggested by this exposure seems quite remarkable, equally
remarkable is the relative homogeneity in caliber of the gravel. Most are about
2-3 cm in diameter, smaller than the maximum size of the modern channel load;
the largest cobble noted in the cutbank was about eight cm long. In general, the
average caliber seems to be significantly smaller than in the modern channel, and
there seemed to be no conspicuous trends in caliber and little well-defined stratification in this paleochannel sequence. Evidently a channel shift did occur near
the top of the section, however, for anywhere from about 30 cm to a meter of
overbank sands cap the channel sequence, indicating the channel had moved but
was still depositing overbank sediment. The next event in the sequence was the
beginning of the present incisive phase.
It should be noted that the presence of abundant channel gravels throughout
the aggradational history of Hondo Creek probably has less to do with the velocity or volume of stream flow than it does the relatively high gradient of the
creek and the relative nearness of the Edwards Plateau. The Balcones Escarpment lies only about 25 km upstream.
We can summarize the geologic context of the Lindner cache by noting that
it was left on the sandy flood plain of Hondo Creek, some 30 or 40 meters southeast (?) of the contemporary creek, which was gravel-floored like its modern
counterpart, although not so coarsely. At the same time or perhaps slightly later a
fire was evidently built on the flood plain nearby, for a small deposit of wood
charcoal was found in the south wall of the bulldozer cut, about a meter west of

88

Texas Archeological Society

and an estimated 20 cm or so above the level of the cache. Some time afterward~
the creek extended a marginal gravel bar near this area, but by then the cache
had been capped by a couple of meters of overbank sands. It is possible the
Guadalupe tools in the cache may have been made of chert cobbles collected
from the creek, but the average length of the tools (about 10-11 cm) seems
somewhat longer than would be afforded by most of the small chert cobbles seen
in the cutbank. Most of the gravels capping the sandstone ridge also seem too
small. Possibly the tools were made from Uvalde Gravels collected along the valley margin to the west, where Highway 173 now lies.

Description of the Lindner Specimens
In essence, microscopic examination seems to show that all nine specimens
are in nearly pristine condition. No significant edge rounding or polish was seen
on the bit edges, in fact no damage at all that can be attributed to use except for
occasional small nicks and occasional small invasive scars or short, broad step
fractures infrequently occurring on the bit facet. There is frequently extensive
percussive crushing of the edge and heavy step fracturing, at various scales, on
the dorsal face of the tool, but this is attributed to hammerstone damage left by
manufacture of the tool and is not considered use wear. It is identical to hammerstone damage on the replicas. While it seems possible that heavy use, for example in adzing hardwoods, might produce the same kind of edge crushing and
step fracturing here attributed to manufacturing damage, it is doubtful that the
two sources of modification could be distinguished microscopically. Edge crushing and battering is frequently more pronounced near the corners of the working
edge, because the bit spine-plane angle increases progressively away from the
center of the bit (it should be pointed out also that the single measurement taken
at the center of the bit does not adequately record the range of edge angles displayed by the bit) and toward the sides becomes so steep that hammerstone retouch of the edge was difficult to achieve.
A few specimens show small areas tentatively regarded as having use polish
on ventral flake scar ridges. Most likely this is some kind of hafting polish. It
was seen only on a few specimens, was never well developed, and generally occurred toward the proximal end. No polish was seen on the dorsal face.
Most specimens have at least some rounding and smoothing of lateral edges;
this does not represent platform preparation related to bifacial "thinning", since
in many cases substantial smoothing and rounding was done after final bifacing,
and in some cases rounding and smoothing are very heavy, exceeding what would
be required to prepare the edge for flake removal. This is perhaps a better argument for halting than the tentative presence of haft polish noted earlier. The term
"thinning" as used above is somewhat misleading, since it appears the craftsman
avoided actually thinning the biface and tried instead simply to increase the lateral edge angles so as to produce a thick, durable edge. In fact, most of the lat-

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

89

eral edges on these tools are fairly heavily battered, not from failed attempts to
thin the edge but from an apparent intent to produce a massive, dulled edge that
would withstand hard use.
Specimen 1A (Figure 6, a, a’)
Specimens 1A and 1 B, according to Mr. Lindner, were found paired with
the ventral surfaces in contact and with the same proximal-distal orientation.
Specimen 1A is made of light brownish-gray chert with a small patch of
yellow-brown cobble cortex at the butt end. It is the most carefully made and
symmetrical of the nine specimens, and a very close match to 1B in size and
form. The ventral face is gently concave from front to back, with flake removals
originating from both lateral edges. The dorsal side has a sharp, prominent ridge
running down the center. The small bit trimming flakes hinge out about 24 mm
from the edge of the bit.
At 7 × to 28 × the bit edge appears essentially pristine; the dorsal side has a
columnar fluted appearance from the narrow percussion flake removals that form
the bit. A few of these have hinged out at about 2-4 mm from the edge. Along
the bit edge are many microscopic flake scars on the dorsal surface, mostly short
and step fractured. One section of the edge at the left corner (oriented with the
bit away from the viewer, and with the dorsal side up) shows moderate crushing.
All this damage could have been produced by percussor scrubbing. The bit facet
has a few small nicks and some shallow step-fractured scars.
Lateral edges: major projections on both edges show heavy rounding; smaller
projections frequently show moderate rounding. Some rounding extends into reentrants somewhat. The lateral edges show more modification than the bit.
Surface polish: the only visible surface polish is on the ventral face near the
extreme proximal end, with light polishing on flake scar ridges on the last 12 mm
of the tool.
Specimen 1B (Figure 6, b, b’)
This specimen is made of light gray-brown chert, slightly lighter in color
than 1A. It has a small patch of light gray cortex at the butt end. The chert is
similar to that used for specimen 1A, but the difference in color and texture
seems adequate to indicate both did not come from the same cobble. This specimen is almost exactly the same size as specimen 1A, but less well made. The
ventral side is uneven but otherwise essentially straight from one end to the other.
The dorsal side is irregular, with a central knot. The bit is less dished than on
specimen 1A.
At 7 x and above the bit edge appears essentially pristine except for slight
rounding and polish on a very small section near the center, and another one mm
back from the edge on the right side. The bit facet has one medium-sized hinge
fracture (nine mm wide, four mm long) and a few small nicks.
Lateral edges: light to heavy smoothing is present on a few projections; on
the whole, rounding and smoothing is less well developed than on specimen 1A.
The edges are mostly just percussor-battered.
Surface polish: this sample lacks the ventral/proximal polish seen on speci-

90

Texas Archeological Society

men 1A; the dorsal ridge shows no haft wear.
Specimen 2A (Figure 6, c, c’)
Specimens 2A and 2B were also paired, reportedly with the ventral faces in
contact, but with the proximal and distal ends reversed. These two tools are made
of similar chert, possibly but not definitely from the same core. Specimen 2A is
made of light brownish-gray chert. Yellow-brown cortex is present on a small
patch on the ventral side, at the right distal corner on the bit facet, and covering
most of the dorsal ridge and extending onto the butt. The dorsal ridge is a natura!
one formed by the original shape of the cobble. The ventral face is gently
concave.
At 7x to 28 x the working edge appears essentially pristine; a couple of
small projections near the center of the edge have light rounding and polishing,
conceivably from platform preparation. The bit facet has three small nicks and a
small step fracture.
Lateral edges: show light to heavy smoothing, but with little polishing,
mostly on prominent projections but also on straight portions of one edge, beginning a short distance from the bit. The right edge has less noticeable smoothing
than the left.
Surface polish: light polishing is visible on a few ridges near the butt end
(beginning about 23 mm from the end).
Specimen 2B (Figure 6, d, d’)
This specimen is unrepresentative of the group because of its pointed bit and
acute spine-plane angle, and perhaps would not be regarded as a Guadalupe tool
had it not been associated with the others. It is made of light brownish-gray chert
similar to specimen 2A, but slightly darker. Both cherts are grainy textured. The
dorsal ridge is covered with cobble cortex just as in specimen 2A, and the cortex
also extends onto the butt end. No cortex is present on the ventral surface. The
cortex is a light yellowish tan, lighter and less brown than on specimen 2A.
At 7 x to 10x the bit edge appears pristine; the graininess of the chert has
resulted in considerable percussor crushing of the edge, but no noticeable edge
rounding was seen.
Lateral edges: show light to heavy smoothing on projections, but no real
polish developed. The right edge has somewhat less rounding. Major projections
are severely percussor-battered.
Surface polish: slight polish is visible near the butt end on ridges and facets,
and possibly near the bit, on flake scar ridges. The dorsal cortex-covered ridge
shows no polishing.
Specimen 3 (Figure 7, a, a’)
Specimen 3 is made of light gray homogeneous, relatively fine-grained
chert with no visible cortex; the ventral surface is quite flat, much of it formed by
the original ventral flake facet. This specimen is short and thick.
At 7 x to 9 x, the bit edge appears pristine except for slight rounding at the
center and in a small area on the right side. Both areas are in front of resistant

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

a

a"

h

91

h"

10 c~
I

I

I

I

I

I

~

i

~

t

I

Figure 6. Guadalupe tools from the Lindner cache. Left photo of each pair is dorsal view,
right photo is ventral view. a, a’, specimen 1A; b, b’, specimen 1B; c, c’, specimen 2A; d,
d’ specimen 2B. All specimens oriented with distal (bit) end at top.

92

Texas Archeological Society

step fractures and might represent platform modification left from attempts to
remove step fractured areas.
Lateral edges: the right edge has heavy rounding toward the.distal end with
scattered examples of light to moderate rounding toward the proximal end. The
right edge has no noticeable rounding.
Surface polish: none visible on either ventral or dorsal surface.
Specimen 4 (Figure 7, b, b’)
This tool is made of light grayish-tan fine-grained chert. The dorsal ridge is
covered with cobble cortex, extending onto the butt; the cortex is yellow-brown
subsurface, with a chalky white surface layer. Concentric lighter colored zones
of cortex parallel the bit edge, indicating that the distal end of the tool conforms
closely to the original cobble shape. The ventral face is irregular but fairly flat.
Unlike the other specimens reported here, the bit facet seems to have been
formed by a blow struck from the left bit edge.
Under magnification the bit facet can be seen to have one or two small nicks,
a few small invasive scars, and one short, broad hinged scar about 7 mm wide
and 3.5 mm long. The bit edge seems somewhat more battered and irregular (at
12x) than on the other specimens, but no significant edge rounding was seen
except at the right-hand corner.
Lateral edges: are heavily battered, with fairly heavy edge rounding in some
places, although not continuous.
Surface polish: none visible.
Specimen 5 (Figure 7, c, c’)
This example is made of light gray and gray-brown chert of variable texture;
the light gray areas are grainy, but the bit portion of the tool is formed entirely of
the more vitreous gray-brown chert. No cortex is present.
At 16x, the edge appears somewhat crushed. There is no visible edge
rounding except for a couple of minor occurrences. The bit facet has some small
nicks and invasive scars. The edge seems more irregular and crushed than most
of the specimens, but not extensively step fractured.
Lateral edges: show light to heavy rounding, especially on the grainy light
gray portion of the tool.
Surface polish: none visible.
Specimen 6 (Figure 7, d, d’)
This specimen is long and narrow, with a narrow bit. It is made of finegrained grayish-brown chert with a narrow strip of brown cobble cortex remaining on the dorsal ridge, plus another small patch on the butt. The bit is carefully
shaped. A couple of the flake scars on the ventral face reach completely across
the body of the artifact. In tranverse cross-section the specimen is triangular.
Under magnification the bit edge appears pristine except for several very
small invasive scars on the bit facet. No edge rounding is visible.
Lateral edges: are battered, but show no rounding except for light rounding
in a couple of places.
Surface polish: possible light polish is visible on several ridges central to
the ventral face.

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

93

a

c

c"

d

d"

/0 cm
Figure 7. More Guadalupe tools from the Lindner cache. Left photo of each pair is dorsal
view, right photo is ventral view. a, a’, specimen 3; b, b’ specimen 4; c, c’, specimen 5; d,
d’, specimen 6. All specimens oriented with distal (bit) end at top.
Specimen 7 (Figure 8, a, a’)
This specimen is made of light tan-gray chert. No cortex is present. The bit
facet is very acute as in specimen 4. The distal half of the dorsal ridge has been
removed by a large flake scar originating from the bit facet and hinging out at the
midpoint of the tool. One area of the remaining dorsal ridge is battered as if the

94

Texas Archeological Society

craftsman had tried to remove part of the remaining ridge by striking it from
the right side.
At 7 ×, the lefthand portion of the bit edge has a series of small, deep nicks
invading the dorsal face, perhaps from an attempt to remove an intersecting
facet. The edge as a whole appears relatively pristine and sharp. The bit facet has
a couple of small hinged scars near the center, plus one short, wide step fracture
10 mm wide and 1.5 mm long. There is no noticeable edge rounding except for
very slight rounding visible at 14× on a relatively straight section of edge on the
left side of the bit.
Lateral edges: heavy rounding is present on major projections, none or at
most light rounding visible elsewhere.

I

{
{

J

a

a"

loom

8
Figure 8. More Guadalupe tools from the Lindner cache and Guadalupe tool failures from
various other sites, a, Lindner specimen 7, dorsal view; a’, Lindner specimen 7, ventral
view; b, Guadalupe tool failure from 41 BX 228 (specimen DB2:l-2, N974 E988, level
4b; see Black and McGraw 1985: figure 32, c); c, Guadalupe tool failure from 41 BX 228
(specimen DB2:I-13, same provenience as "b," Black and McGraw 1985: figure 32, d);
d, Guadalupe tool failure from 41 ZV 183; e, Guadalupe tool failure from 41 BX 274. All
specimens oriented with distal (bit) end at top. b-e were broken, perhaps during use, by
fractures originating at the working edge and plunging into the body of the tool to emerge
on the ventral face.

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

95

Surface polish: slight polish on flake scar ridges near the proximal third of
the ventral face.

Summary Observations on the Lindner Cache
All of the tools in the Lindner cache appear to be essentially in mint condition, suggesting either that they had been prepared and never used, or else used
but resharpened shortly before being cached. The only evidence which might
suggest use consists of occasional small edge nicks and small invasive, stepped,
or hinged scars appearing in low frequency on the bit facet of most specimens,
since damage to the bit facet would not be expected as a result of manufacture.
Damage like this might result if the tool were used as an adze and, becoming
caught in the wood, had to be rocked back and forth to free it. But the frequency
of these scars is too low to make this seem likely. Other damage to the bit edge,
such as crushing, step fracturing of the dorsal face, and occasional edge rounding, especially near the corners, is attributed to percussor damage during manufacture. If any of this damage is due to use of the tool, it cannot reliably be distinguished from manufacturing damage. Possible light polishing was tentatively
identified on several of the tools, usually on the ventral side near the proximal
end. If valid, this may represent haft wear, but is only tentatively identified.
The uniformity of the specimens in the cache is substantial, at least in comparison with other known examples of Guadatupe tools (Table 1), and might justify the hypothesis that all were made by a single craftsman. At least four of the
tools were paired when found, although since the other five had already slumped
from the wall of the bulldozer cut, we do not know whether they, too, were
grouped in some way. The two known pairs seem to have been matched on the
basis of size, shape, and/or the nature of the raw material.
The evidence from the Lindner cache would seem to suggest perhaps that all
of the tools were prepared by a single craftsman and laid aside, either for hafting,
for trade, or in anticipation of some future task for which the tools were intended. Perhaps the relatively large number of tools indicates the magnitude of
the task or the severity of wear expected. That Guadalupe tools were hafted in
use seems fairly certain, judging by the consistent presence of lateral edge
smoothing. Whether these particular tools were halted when cached is unknown,
although the fact that specimens 1A and 1B were found with the ventral surfaces
in contact probably argues against it.

THE GRANBERG CACHE
Hester (1980: 147-149) and Hester and Kohnitz (1975) briefly review the
stratigraphic context of a cache of four Guadalupe tools found at the Granberg II
site (4t BX 271). During 1974 excavations by the Southern Texas Archaeologi-

96

°~

Texas Archeological Society

~g

E

N~

~.~ ~
q;,

r~
%

%

%

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

97

cal Association these were removed from the east wall of excavation unit 3S at a
depth of 2.29 meters (90 inches) below the existing ground surface (the original
depth apparently was about 1.8 meters, but a deposit of recent backfill was
present over the excavated area) in stratum 8, which is described as a compact,
charcoal-stained zone about 10 cm thick occurring near the midpoint of a thick
sequence of channel gravels. Since these tools (specimens 15, 16, 17, and 18)
were found in the profile wall rather than the excavation unit, no information on
the arrangement or spacing of the artifacts is available. Another specimen (number 12) was found in ttie 84 to 90 inch level in the excavation unit, and a sixth
Guadalupe tool (specimen 19) was found at the same level near the northwest
corner of the excavation unit, but outside it in an area cleared of overburden with
a backhoe.

Description of the Granberg Specimens
The four specimens in the Granberg cache differ in several ways from the
Lindner specimens:
1] all are smaller (the average weight of the Granberg tools is only about 60%
of that of the Lindner specimens; Table 2);
2] all have bit facets canted to left or right to some extent;
3] the average working edge angle is about 11 degrees less acute;
4] all have somewhat less cortex remaining;
5] in general the Granberg tools appear somewhat less well made and less uniform than the Lindner tools;
6] at least three of the four tools have some damage to the bit edge that is
tentatively interpreted as use wear rather than percussor damage.
The smaller size of the Granberg tools is perhaps due to the smaller caliber
of the gravels available as source material. The average weight of the four Granberg specimens (80 gm) is intermediate between that of the Lindner tools (131
gm) and that of specimens from the Panther Springs Creek site (66 gm), reported
by Black and McGraw (1985: Table 15, form 1 specimens). For the most part the
technique of manufacture appears to be the same, except perhaps in the method
of initially quartering the cobble. For the Granberg specimens a method of quartering was evidently used that resulted in the tool blank being struck off at an
angle other than 90° to the plane of the striking platform. As a result, bit facets
on the Granberg tools are canted either to left or right when viewed from the
ventral side. Somewhat less cortex is present on the Granberg tools, but when
present, usually appears as a small patch covering the proximal end. I suspect
this remnant cortex was a deliberate feature of the tool, perhaps intended as a
cushion of less brittle, shock-absorbent material left covering the point of contact
between the butt end of the tool and the haft [?]. This feature is found on tools
from both caches.

98

Texas Archeological Society

6

’~
m

%~
%
%%
%
0000

%%
%%
O0

do
%

oo

d~

.==
°~

24

%

©
©

©

~o
~Z

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

99

Although none are heavily worn, at least three of the Granberg cache specimens have some damage to the bit edge that is tentatively interpreted as use wear.
The assessment is uncertain because most of the damage to a completed edge
originates as percussor damage during the manufacture or rejuvenation of the
tool. Both hard hammer percussion and use of the tool (assuming some kind of
adzing use) can be expected to produce crushing of the edge and severe fracturing
with stepped or hinged terminations. Percussor crushing or fracturing is perhaps
more likely to create damage that is localized at restricted impact points, unless
the edge is also raked with the percussor to even it, in which case the distinction
between use wear and manufacturing damage is likely to be difficult or impossible to make. Edge rounding is probably more likely due to use wear than to
manufacture, although again if the edge is scrubbed with the percussor it may
simulate attrition through use. A certain amount of localized edge rounding also
originates through crushing of the edge. In assessing the condition of the bit
edges from all three caches, the degree of rounding, its location, and the degree
of localization of edge fracturing have been used as critical tests, but evaluation
is frankly a matter of judgment (see Vaughan 1985: 23). Another attribute which
may have some bearing is the presence of small flake scars on the bit facet. These
would probably not be expected as a result of manufacture, but might occur in
storage (either before or after excavation) or use; they seem to appear in about
equal frequency in both caches.
Another way to try discriminating between different sources of edge damage is to look at known examples of rejuvenation failures. Figure 8 (b, c) shows
two specimens from the Panther Springs Creek site (41 BX 228) and two from 41
ZV 183 and 41 BX 274 (Figure 8, d, e). All four are overshot rejuvenation fragments (or possibly tools that failed during use). Apparently in each case a resharpening flake has been struck off from the distal face using the bit facet as a platform, but the flake has overshot, passing through the body of the tool and
expanding as it emerges on the ventral side, breaking the tool in two. In these
fragments the central part of the working edge can. be expected to have only percussion damage, while the lateral remnants of edge presumably have accumulated use wear sufficient to prompt resharpening (regardless of whether the specimens broke during use or failed during attempted resharpening). In all four cases
the section of edge adjacent to the rejuvenation flake scar is sharp and undamaged; the other portions of the working edge have no diagnostic wear visible,
but show a substantial number of minute, stacked step fractures. The specimen
from Zavala County, made from a very grainy chert, has a working edge that
appears rounded and somewhat crumbled at 40 x.
Another approach is to make and use Guadalupe tool replicas in the same
way that the archeological specimens are thought to have been used (replicas pictured in Figure 14 have not been used). Severe adzing of seasoned mesquite wood
with a replica showed that the tool was more durable than expected. Heavy blows
were required to drive off flakes from the working edge. Initial use damage consisted of percussion rings of large radius (similar to Figure 14, e, a cache speci-

100

Texas Archeological Society

men), some microscale crumbling of the edge, small scale step fracturing, and
occasional small irregular flakes removed from the bit facet. Continued use resuited in more flakes being driven off the dorsal facet unti! the working edge assumed an irregular, scalloped shape. Thirteen of these tiny flakes were collected,
ranging in length from 1.5-6.0 mm and in width from 3-11 ram; seven had
feathered terminations, three were step-fractured or broken, one was hinge fractured, and two were indeterminate. The deep reentrants formed by these flake
removals generally had sharp edges, while the intervening edge projections were
either crushed and rounded or relatively sharp. Target material of different hardness, and especially different work habits would probably have produced different results. I would expect that a softer wood and less violent but more prolonged
use might produce less flaking of the edge and more generalized edge rounding.
In large part, though, the condition of the edge on the replica and on the Granberg specimens agrees fairly well.
Specimen 15 (Figure 9, a, a’)
This specimen is made of gray chert and is unusual because the truncation
facet (or bit facet) has rolled over toward the ventral face and there is no ridge
between the bit facet and ventral face; instead a small patch of brown cobble
cortex is present. The bit is rounded in plan view but narrow, almost pointed.
Viewed from the ventral face, it slants slightly to the left. Several heavy percussion blows have been delivered to the dorsal ridge of this tool from both sides in
an apparent attempt to reduce the height or acuteness of the ridge (see also specimen 18).
Under magnification most of the bit edge shows little rounding; at 40x only
light edge rounding is visible in a few places (Figure 14, c). One short segment to
the left (when viewed from the dorsal side) of the center of the bit is heavily
battered, probably from hard hammer percussion. The ends of the working edge
show somewhat more rounding; some sections of edge are minutely step fractured. The bit facet shows considerable damage from several small, deep invasive scars (note also the unresolved fracture shown in Figure 14, e).
Lateral edges: show light to heavy rounding.
Ventral face: no substantial evidence of smoothing or polish, although possible light smoothing of flake scar ridges near one lateral edge may be a byproduct or intentional edge dulling.
Dorsal ridge: in addition to the percussor damage noted above, there is
rounding and smoothing on several of the high spots on the ridge and in one location, possible incipient faceting is visible. This may be evidence of haft wear.
Specimen 16 (Figure 9, b, b’)
This specimen is made of light gray chert with a patch of cortex at the butt
end and a very small strip on the proximal part of the dorsal ridge. The ventral
surface is slightly concave from the proximal to distal ends. Viewed from the
ventral side, the bit facet slants to the left.
The bit edge of this tool is irregular because of the removal of several short,
heavy percussion flakes with step or hinge terminations from around the periph-

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

101

ery. These may be rejuvenation flake scars or use damage. At 40-60×, light to
moderate rounding and crushing of the edge can be seen. Moderate rounding of
the edge was seen where a couple of the possible rejuvenation flakes had been
removed, possibly indicating some use after resharpening.
Lateral edges: light to heavy smoothing is visible at 40×.
Ventral surface: a peak formed by intersection of flake scar facets near the
distal end shows possible rounding and smoothing visible at 14× and above.
Other flake scar ridges at the extreme proximal end and near the midpoint of the
ventral surface show definite polishing. A longitudinal scar ridge near the proximal end has a series of microscopic flakes removed from it.
Specimen 17 (Figure 9, c, c’)
This is a relatively short tool made of fine-grained tan chert with small
white inclusions, with a patch of cortex on the butt end. The bit is evenly
rounded but is asymmetrical, projecting to the left when viewed from the ventral
side, with the bit slanting downward to the right. The ventral face is essentially
straight in profile.
Under magnification, light to moderate rounding of edge projections (especially near the center of the bit) and some straight edge segments is visible, but
even more distinctive is rather continuous minute step fracturing extending onto
the dorsal surface immediately back from the edge. The lack of clustering of this
step fracturing at impact points and its small scale perhaps suggest it represents
use wear rather than percussor damage. One edge projection shows rounding and
light polish extending slightly onto the dorsal surface.
Lateral edges: have light to moderate smoothing, more pronounced than on
the bit edge, but not heavy.
Ventral surface: one very small area near the proximal end, slightly offcenter from the midline of the tool, is burnished to a mirrorlike finish. This resembles burnishing seen on Clear Fork tools from Choke Canyon (Brown et al.
1982: 68) and interpreted as haft wear, although no striations were seen at magnifications up to 80x.
Specimen 18 (Figure 9 d, d’)
This tool is made of grainy, matte-textured grayish tan chert with no cortex
present. The bit is rather acutely pointed. The tool is narrow but thick with the
dorsal ridge peaking about two-thirds of the way toward the distal end; it has been
struck both from the left and right sides on the proximal side of the peak in an
attempt to remove the high spot, but the blows produced only small hinge flakes.
The bit facet appears undamaged except for obvious, recent excavation
damage. At 40 x light to heavy edge rounding is visible, mainly on projections
and mainly at or near the corners of the working edge, but light rounding is
present on some straight edge sections and in reentrants. Moderate rounding is
present on a projection at the center of the edge, and extending back onto the
dorsal face on the corresponding flake scar ridge, suggesting that on this tool, at
least the first few millimeters of the dorsal side came into contact with the material being worked. Microscale step fracturing is present along the edge on the

102

Texas Archeological Society

dorsal face.
Lateral edges: show light to heavy rounding, with possible abrasive faceting
on one projection.
Ventral face: possible light polish is visible on one flake scar ridge in the
medial section, and on another one in the proximal third of the tool.

Figure 9. Guadalupe tools from the Granberg cache. Left photo of each pair is dorsal view,
right photo is ventral view. a, a’, specimen 15; b, b’, specimen 16; c, c’, specimen 17; d,
d’, specimen 18. All specimens oriented with distal (bit) end at top.

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

103

Isolated Specimens
The other two Guadalupe tools found at the same level in or near excavation
unit 3S are described below, for comparative purposes.
Specimen 12
This tool is made of light gray chert, with no cortex present. The ventral
face is irregular but fairly straight. Viewed from the ventral side, the bit facet
slants to the right. The bit appears to have been rounded in shape, but subsequent
damage has left it pointed at the center. The dorsal ridge has been struck from
both sides to reduce its height, as in specimens 15, 18, and 19. The bulb of percussion for the tool blank has been removed by a transverse flake scar.
This tool looks as if it has suffered severe, very percussive use. Under magnification, the bit facet shows only a couple of small invasive scars. Viewed dorsally, the bit edge left of the centerline is heavily battered, step and hinge fractured, probably representing use damage. One large hinge fracture 7 mm long
and 11 mm wide may be use damage. Another area 9 mm wide and 4 mm back
from the edge is heavily step fractured. At 40x, a few slightly rounded projections are present, but most of the edge has large scale hinge fractures present,
leaving relatively acute edges. The proximal end of the tool also has a few small
step fractures which might indicate stress against a haft.
Dorsal face: at 40×, polish can be seen on flake scar ridges near the center
of the bit, up to 7 mm back from the edge; the polish is not extensive but is well
developed, almost burnished.
Lateral edges: mostly light rounding or no rounding; moderate to heavy
rounding on just a few edge projections.
Ventral face: no evidence for abrasive modification except immediately
along one lateral edge, where a couple of smoothed flake scar ridges intersect the
edge; possibly a byproduct of intentional edge dulling.
Specimen 19
The largest by far of the six tools from the Granberg site that were examined, this is the only one comparable in size to the Lindner tools. It is narrow,
thick, and crudely made of grainy light-gray chert with no cortex remaining.
Viewed from the ventral face, the bit facet slants to the left. The dorsal ridge has
been heavily battered in an attempt to reduce its height. The bulb of percussion
for the tool blank has been removed by a transverse flake scar. The ventral face is
concave from the proximal to distal end.
The bit facet of this tool shows considerable modification. Part of the facet
at the apex of the bit has been removed by four flake scars originating from the
right side (viewed from the ventral face) and extending transversely across the
facet. These are presumably rejuvenation scars, and the rejuvenated edge appears to have experienced some battering afterward. Two of the scars appear to
overlap the other two. Other damage to the bit facet consists of a large, .deep
hinge fracture and several smaller invasive, step, or hinge fractures.
The bit edge at both corners (especially the left corner, when viewed ven-

104

Texas Archeological Society

trally) is severely crushed and step fractured, probably from percussor damage.
Elsewhere some minor step fracturing extends onto the bit facet. Edge rounding
is infrequent: one remnant projection with rounding and smoothing over small
scale step fracturing is present (the smoothing almost obliterates the fracturing),
and another projection shows moderate rounding. This tool seems to have had
fairly heavy use, although evidence of edge attrition has mostly been removed by
the postulated rejuvenation and by spalling off of short, wide, step-terminated
flakes during use. A couple of remnant projections suggest less percussive use
producing some edge rounding at some previous stage in the history of the tool.
Lateral edges: have either no rounding or light to moderate rounding.
Ventral face: light polish is present on flake-scar ridges near the proximal end.

THE PETERSON CACHE
These specimens (accession number 42-4-69-G) were donated to the Witte
Museum in 1942 by Mr. J. C. ("Poss") Peterson, now deceased, who found them
(evidently in !938) on his property north of Kyote in northwestern Atascosa
County (Figure 10). In November, 1985, Kay Hindes and I interviewed J. W.
Kenney, the present landowner, and Tobey Tomblin, who had driven Mr. Peterson
to San Antonio in a Model A Ford in 1942 to donate the specimens to the Witte
Museum. While Mr. Tomblin was not present when the tools were originally
found and did not remember the artifacts themselves, he did remember where
Peterson said he found the artifacts, and pointed out the findspot to us (Figure
t 1). Apparently one artifact, not part of the cache, was found south of Siestedero
Creek while digging a well that is still present on the property; just north of the
well, in the creek channel, some mammoth bones and teeth were found, and a
short distance upstream, a few meters from the creek, "the others were found,"
according to Mr. Tomblin. Evidently this was the findspot for the Guadalupe tool
cache, near some large live oaks pointed out by Mr. Tomblin. The location is in a
bend of the creek, with the terrain sloping gradually to the south, but with a more
abrupt cutbank about three meters or higher to the west, exposing the Reklaw
Formation sandy clay substrate. The topsoil here is similar in texture to sediment
at the Lindner site, and consists mostly of fine and medium sand (1.0 to 3.0 phi),
with some very fine sand and little silt or clay; it is mapped as part of the Sinton
series (Dittmar and Stevens 1980). The dominant vegetation consists of mesquite, an occasional retama, and large live oaks along with introduced grasses
away from the creek channel, and willows and pecans along the creek. The nearest known occupation site is farther up Siestedero Creek, about 150 meters away,
where a site now designated 41 AT 90 has produced Gower (?), La Jita (?), Langtry, Ensor, Perdiz, and a variety of other chipped stone artifacts. No occupation
debris was visible in the immediate vicinity of the reported cache findspot when

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

105

0

Figure 10. Topographic map of Peterson cache environs. Number 1 indicates location
where mammoth bones were found in creek bed; number 2 indicates location of another
unspecified artifact said to have been found during excavation of a well.

we visited the site, despite the fact that the pasture has been root plowed since
Mr. Kenney acquired it. Nothing is known about the stratigraphic context of the
cache.

106

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 11. Kay Hindes standing near the spot where the Peterson cache is believed to have
been found. Looking southwest, with Siestedero Creek in the background.

Description of the Peterson Specimens
Of the three caches studied, this one seems to show the greatest consistency
in manufacture (Table 3). The Peterson cache has the lowest coefficients of variation for seven out of nine attributes measured; only maximum thickness and bit
thickness are less variable in the other caches. The average coefficient of variation (.0939) is smaller than that for the Lindner (. 1495) and Granberg (. 1414)
caches, introducing the possibility that, as in the Lindner case, all of the components of the cache might have been made by a single craftsman. Aside from this,
the Peterson tools seem to be intermediate in most respects between the other two
caches (Table 4). We may also observe that:

1 ] all except specimen 6 are comparable to the Lindner cache in the degree to
which the bit is carefully trimmed;
2] most do not have bits markedly canted to left or right;
3] like the Granberg tools, most have little cortex remaining;
4] these tools have the most acute spine-plane angle of any of the three groups.
The most remarkable aspect of the Peterson cache is the rather uniform pattern of wear on the bit, but unlike the Granberg tools there is not much evidence

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

107

of attrition of the edge itself. Instead, abrasive (?) polish appears (usually only
weakly or moderately developed, but in the case of specimen 6, quite pronounced) chiefly on the dorsal face adjacent to the working edge and to a lesser
degree on the bit facet adjacent to the working edge. On both faces the polish is
concentrated at the center of the bit. The dorsal polish is best developed in a zone
about four to five millimeters back from the edge, but continues to diminish gradually further back. From microscopic examination it is clear that this polish favors
high spots on the tool surface, such as flake scar ridges and other small projections, but in the more pronounced examples extends into the flake scars themselves, indicating that the material being worked was a semi-yielding substance,
neither as pliable as animal tissue nor as hard and unyielding as hardwood. Some
kind of soft wood may be indicated. In a few cases poorly developed striations
were seen, usually on the dorsal face and usually parallel to the long axis of the
tool. These might have resulted from the abrasion of microflakes generated by
edge attrition, but they are generally quite shallow and poorly defned, and always occur in association with surface polish. Isolated burnished spots were
found, usually on the ventral surface, and these are perhaps infrequent indicators
of ventral haft wear.
This type of use wear seems to correspond to the "wood polish" reported by
Keeley (1980: 35-42), although Keeley describes surfaces viewed at much
greater magnifications (up to 500 x) than were used here. Keeley describes wood
polish as very bright, smooth, additive in nature, with broad, shallow striations.
Vaughan (1985: 33-34; Plates 17-18, 43-52) confirms and amplifies Keeley’s
findings, also at high magnifications. The principal development of polish on the
Peterson specimens in a zone four or five millimeters from the working edge
probably indicates the average depth of penetration of the bit. The asymmetrical
development of the polish, favoring the dorsal surface over the bit facet, probably
indicates an adzing rather than a chopping motion (see Keeley 1980: 38). Although I have interpreted the polish described here as abrasive in nature, Anderson (1980) supports Keeley in maintaining that wood may produce cumulative
silica polish in the same way that grasses produce "sickle gloss." She notes that
wood cells may contain deposits of silica, calcium carbonate, and calcium oxalate, and her scanning electron microscope studies suggest some of this material
may adhere to the working edge; another cause is localized dissolution and redeposition of silica from the tool itself, perhaps aided by friction-generated heat.
In other recent studies, Meeks et al. (1982), studying sickle gloss, maintain that
polish is not additive, while Unger-Hamilton (1984) maintains that it is both
abrasive and additive. However, neither of these studies deals with wood as a
target material.
Although the Witte Museum has not assigned individual specimen numbers, I have assigned temporary numbers for reference purposes.
Specimen 1 (Figure 12, a, a’)
This tool is made of variegated light-gray chert with no remaining cortex.
The ventral face is quite flat, and the bit is canted slightly to the left when viewed

108

Texas Archeological Society

t¢’3(’ ’~

~rZ~5

6

~

"~ ~
.~

~:~ ~

tc3r~

~

m

r~

~9

~°~.~
t._.

r’-lt"-It’~

e.l,-.~e.l

e.lt’-.le.I

=_

¯~

~,~
r.io~

~’~ ~

~’~’~’~"*~
~.lec3e¢3

e4~t-.i
L
~,~t"’~t"-~",~t’’~

~00

N

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

109

ventral side up; it is fairly evenly rounded, and is formed on the dorsal face by
shallow, parallel flake scars, many of them fairly narrow. The dorsal ridge has
been removed by a long, narrow flake scar possibly originating at the butt end
(the direction of travel is difficult to determine). On the ventral side, about three
fourths of the intersection of the bit facet and the ventral face has been removed
by a long, narrow flake scar originating from one lateral edge. Iron oxide stains
are present but not conspicuous; tool marks like these frequently indicate contact
with a plow, but there is so little recent chipping of the cache that contact with a
hand tool or some metal object during curation might be indicated.
At 40x the bit appears heavily worn, for the most part, with light to moderate edge rounding and smoothing, and moderate rounding over short, stacked
step fractures. A prominent edge projection to the right of the bit center is heavily rounded and battered. A few areas also show only light rounding, probably
where use percussion has carried away worn sections of the edge. The bit facet
has very poorly developed, weak polish visible only near the working edge, especially on one side where the texture of the chert is grainer. Similar polish is
visible in some places on the dorsal surface immediately adjacent to the working edge.
Lateral edges: battered, light to moderate rounding; the left edge (viewed
ventrally) appears more heavily battered and rounded.
Ventral face: an irregular, discontinuous, patchy area of mirrorlike burnishing was noted on the ventral face over an area 14 x 4.5 mm across, near the
midpoint of the tool on the right side (held with the distal end away from the
viewer). The polish is hard to see, and no striations were visible at magnifications up to 60x. Smaller isolated patches of the same polish were also seen on
the left side. This polish is confined to minute high spots on the grainy surface of
the chert and was evidently created by friction with a hard, unyielding substance;
it perhaps represents haft polish, although the ventral flake scar ridges do not
appear polished.
Specimen 2 (Figure 12, b, b’)
This tool is made of light gray, homogeneous chert with light brown cobble
cortex on the dorsal ridge (only on the proximal third), extending to the proximal
end. The dorsal ridge has been flattened by a long, narrow flake scar originating
from the bit facet and ending abruptly at the cortex on the proximal end. About
half of the intersection of the bit facet and the ventral face has been removed by a
flake scar originating from one lateral edge. The most interesting aspect of this
tool is the presence of pronounced polish on the dorsal face of the bit and on a
small area of the ventral side near the proximal end (see below).
The bit is somewhat narrow and arched; the bit edge is even and shows little
evidence of traumatic percussion, but does show fairly consistent light to heavy
rounding and smoothing, with some moderate rounding over short step fractures;
some edge projections show heavy rounding. The central part of the bit edge
shows less rounding and smoothing, with more battering and more damage to the

110

Texas Archeological Society

bit facet. This is also the part of the edge where use polish is most heavily developed on the dorsal face. The nature of this relationship is unclear.
A few shallow, broad flake scars with step terminations have been removed
from the bit facet. These vary in size, with the largest (4.42 mm long by 6.78
mm wide) located near the center of the bit. A few deeper, more irregular nicks
are also present.
Surface polish: this specimen has well-developed polish on the dorsal face,
originating at the bit and extending back from it up to 8.5 mm (Figure 14, d).
The polish is clearly abrasive or attritional in nature, not accretional, and covers
both the ridges and hollows formed by flake scars. It is best developed near the
center of the bit but is asymmetrical, with another well-polished area on the right
half of the bit (viewed dorsally). Faint, parallel striations can be seen originating
at the bit edge and oriented parallel to the long axis of the tool. These are by no
means well developed and can be seen only at magnifications of 40 x and above
with low-angle grazing light (Figure 15, b). One small area of the bit facet adjacent to the right edge (viewed ventrally) has a small irregular burnished area with
parallel striations running at an angle of perhaps 30° (estimated) to the trend of
the edge. A third area of polish covers a flake scar ridge on the ventral face, 17
mm from the proximal end; no striations are visible here.
Specimen 3 (Figure 12, c, c’)
This specimen is made of light gray-brown chert with a very small patch of
cream-colored cortex remaining at the proximal end and a rust stain on the bit
facet, tt has a strongly arched, very symmetrical bit, carefully trimmed with
long, narrow, parallel flake scars giving a columnar fluted appearance on the dorsal face. The ventral face is flat.
The lateral parts of the working edge appear relatively pristine, for the most
part showing only light edge rounding and shallow step fractures from percussor
trimming; the central part of the working edge, however, shows some concentrated wear consisting of heavy rounding over step fracturing and edge crushing.
Edge wear is concentrated at the apex of the working edge and is directly adjacent to polishing on the bit facet’.
Lateral edges: show heavy percussor crushing and step fracturing, for the
most part, but little evidence of edge rounding, though a few edge projections are
heavily rounded.
Surface polish: light polishing is evident on the bit facet adjacent to and as
much as 3.5 mm back from the working edge. The polish is best developed near
the edge, becoming less pronounced away from it, resembling that seen on the bit
facet of specimen 1. The dorsal surface has fairly pronounced polishing present
as much as 32 mm back from the working edge, but again concentrated chiefly
near the edge and at the apex of the bit. The polish is present both in flake scars
and on flake scar ridges but is somewhat better developed on the ridges.
Specimen 4 (Figure 12, d, d’)
This specimen is made of dark grayish-brown chert, somewhat mottled,
with a strip of brown cobble cortex covering part of the dorsal surface along the

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

a"

a

111

h"

b

10 c~
;,

i

~

i

t

;

t

;

r

~

I

Figure 12. Guadalupe tools from the Peterson cache. Left photo of each pair is dorsal
view, right photo is ventral view. a, a’, specimen 1; b, b’, specimen 2; c, c’, specimen 3;
d, d’, specimen 4. All specimens oriented with distal (bit) end at top.

112

Texas Archeological Society

midpoint of the tool. There is no dorsal ridge, the cortex providing a somewhat
rounded dorsal face. The ventral face is flat, but twists slightly from one end to
the other. The bit is symmetrical and strongly arched, slightly canted to the right.
At 20× and above, the lateral parts of the working edge show heavy crushing and step fracturing produced by percussor battering; the apex or central part
shows light to heavy rounding over crushing of the edge. Rounding occurs both in
reentrants and on edge projections but is more pronounced on the latter. Several
small flake scars are present on the bit facet; these range from rows of small nicks
0.2 mm wide and 0.2 mm long to abruptly terminated oval or D-shaped scars up
to 3.0 mm across and 1.3 mm long.
Lateral edges: light to heavy rounding, mostly on edge projections, over frequently heavy percussor crushing and step fracturing of the edge.
Ventral face: the distal third of the tool has a couple of small, irregular,
highly burnished patches in a flake scar. The proximal third has a couple of
small, highly burnished areas on flake scar ridges (Figure 15, d). All of these
probably represent haft wear.
Surface polish: like specimen 3, this tool has light to moderate surface polish on the bit facet, chiefly near the working edge, and especially near the central
part of the edge (Figure 15, a). The polish also covers most of the small nicks and
scars on the bit facet, suggesting they were also created as a byproduct of use.
Polish is best developed in a zone about 3.5 mm wide next to the edge. Some
poorly developed striations are present on this polish and are most easily seen at
about 30x with high angle lighting; these trend approximately parallel to the
long axis of the tool but there is some variety in orientation. A few of these may
originate at the working edge but the better defined examples begin about 3.5 mm
from it.
Again, as in the case of specimen 3, the dorsal surface has moderately welldeveloped polish, both in flake scars and on flake scar ridges, although it is better
developed on the latter; a few small high spots on ridges are highly burnished.
Most of the polish lies in a band about 4.5 mm wide along the edge, with the
polish heaviest near the working edge and along its center. A few weakly developed striations are present, some of them oriented at about 30° to the working
edge, others roughly at right angles to it. These are faint and quite difficult
to observe.
Specimen 5 (Figures 13, a, a’)
This tool is made of very light gray, homogeneous chert that has a very
grainy appearance under magnification. Small impurities and fissures are stained
red from contact with iron oxide in the soil. No cortex remains. The bit is symmetrical, somewhat less arched than the other examples, and is slightly canted to
the right. A dorsal ridge is present only on the proximal third of the tool, having
been removed by bit-trimming scars on the distal part. Like most of the other
tools in the cache, this one has a carefully trimmed bit, with a columnar fluted
dorsal face.
Small-scale step fracturing and crushing of the working edge extends onto

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

113

the dorsal face for about half a millimeter along most of the edge, giving it a
somewhat minutely beveled appearance under magnification; parts of this edge
are lightly rounded, with heavy rounding of only a few edge projections. Edge
attrition is less than expected, since coarse-textured cherts like this generally develop edge wear prematurely. On the dorsal face are a few flake scars about 6 mm
long with step terminations, and a couple of larger stepped or hinged scars about
3 cm long, but all of these are regarded as trimming scars, not use wear.
Lateral edges: pronounced percussor crushing and battering, a few small
lateral snap facets; as would be expected with this grainy textured chert, edge
rounding is rather pronounced, especially toward the proximal end.
Ventral face: no use wear was noted.
Surface polish: poorly developed polish is present on the bit facet, at the
same location as in the other specimens, e.g. near the edge (most of it within 4.5
mm) and concentrated at the apex of the bit (along a segment about 1 cm long).
Moderate rounding of flake scar ridges and light to moderate surface polish (predominantly on ridges) is evident on the dorsal surface, mostly within about
3.5 mm of the working edge, chiefly at its center. A few very small wellburnished high spots are visible in the same area. Also noted were a few very
small weakly polished or burnished flake scar ridges near the proximal end.
Specimen 6 (Figure 13, b, b’)
This specimen is atypical in shape, size, and in extent of use wear. It is the
smallest specimen in the cache and has the least carefully trimmed bit. It is made
of light gray variegated chert with a remnant of light brown cobble cortex on the
proximal third. The ventral face is slightly arched from front to back. The bit is
small, moderately arched, and slightly canted to the left. The facet-ventral angle
is rather pronounced. A large flake scar on the bit facet, together with a corresponding scar on the dorsal face, carrying away part of the work edge, apparently
represent damage occurring since the tool was found.
At 30 to 40× the surviving lateral part of the working edge can be seen to
have nearly continuous small-scale crushing, interspersed with small step fractures about 7-12 mm long. The center of the working edge, however, has been
modified by the removal of a series of overlapping flake scars taken off the bit
facet; these are deep, usually short and broad, with step or hinge terminations.
The largest is about 1.5 mm long and 6.7 mm wide. The surviving lateral part of
the bit edge also has a series of smaller flakes taken off the bit facet. All of the
damage probably represents traumatic percussive use wear, concentrated especially at the apex of the bit. Doubtless this tool has more damage to the bit facet
than its companions because of the angle of the working edge to the body of the
tool (as indicated by the exceptionally high facet-ventral angle). Interspersed between these crushed edge segments are other areas showing moderate rounding
and smoothing of the edge. The central part of the edge shows light rounding of
the edge where it has been modified by flake removals on the bit facet.
The most distinctive aspect of this tool is the unmistakable polish on both
the bit facet and the dorsal face. The bit facet polish is not very conspicuous

114

Texas Archeological Society

,

o

o~
0

°~

o.~ ~ -~

OG OG

o

©

o

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

115

without magnification, but at low magnification can be seen over essentially the
entire facet except where removed by recent damage. As in the other specimens
in this cache, polish is most pronounced near the working edge and especially
near the center or apex of the bit. Some of the small flake scars penetrating the
bit facet have polish developed on them, while others are free of polish.
Surface polish on the dorsal face is much more pronounced and is visible
even without magnification; it is more highly developed on this specimen than on
any of the others in the cache. Conspicuous rounding, in some places bordering
on faceting, of flake scar ridges is present on the dorsal face (Figure 15, c, e). It
is most pronounced near the working edge and especially near the center of the
bit. This abrasion of flake scar ridges is simply the result of prolonged and severe
polishing. Heavy polish is present on the dorsal face near the central working
edge both on ridges and in flake scars, but toward the sides of the dorsal face and
well back from the edge it diminishes markedly, occurring chiefly on ridges and
only faintly in flake scars. Some detectable polish occurs over the entire distal
half of the tool; only the most proximal 33 mm of the tool is free from polish. On
two or three dorsal trimming scars at the center of the bit, closely packed parallel
striations can be seen, oriented at right angles to the edge and precisely parallel
to the long axes of the trimming scars; these extend up to 6.3 mm from the edge
(Figure 15, e).
Lateral edges: severe percussor crushing and battering, with light to heavy
edge rounding. Some areas have light polishing over edge battering.
Ventral face: a few small burnished spots such as have been found on the
other tools are visible on the ventral face. Also present is light surface polish
similar to that on the rest of the tool, occurring mostly along the lateral edges
(both on flake scar ridges and in the scars themselves) and at the proximal end
(mostly on ridges). This polish is poorly developed and is noticeable only at 20 ×
and above. Nothing comparable in extent has been seen on the other tools in the
cache, where small burnished spots are generally the only ventral wear visible.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
All of the Guadalupe tool collections reported here presumably represent
caches, despite the fact that there is no evidence for a pit or other facility associated with any of the finds. The best evidence for regarding these as caches is the
fact that each group was tightly clustered when found (except for the Peterson
collection, for which we have only the notation "found in one cache" on the accession card). Moreover, the internal homogeneity of the Lindner and Peterson
groups is sufficient to suggest that, conceivably, in each case a single craftsman
might have been responsible for the knapping and deposition of the group.
All of the tools considered here are rather similar in shape and size, and
insofar as can be determined conform to the manufacturing sequence defined for

116

Texas Archeological Society

the Lindner cache. As a rough measure of the variability of each cache, we may
average all the coefficients of variation for the nine different variables measured
(omitting maximum depth of bit concavity) to obtain an average coefficient of
variation (bearing in mind also that the different variables are by no means independent). These are: Lindner, . 1495; Granberg, . 1414; and Peterson, .0939. To
get some impression of what this means in terms of absolute variability, if we
compare these to a completely unrelated tool class, we find for example an average coefficient of variation of. 1759 for Late Prehistoric two-beveled knives at
Choke Canyon (Brown et al. 1982, Table 8). All of the Guadalupe tools, then,
are less variable than the beveled knives, which are more susceptible to breakage
and resharpening.
If we may characterize all three caches as essentially the same in manufacture, then, the difference in use wear is all the more remarkable. Even more so is
the fact that for the most part each cache is coherent in terms of its microwear
characteristics. The Lindner tools appear to be essentially unused (or if not mint
specimens, then freshly resharpened ones). The Peterson tools are characterized
by a very consistent pattern of matching dorsal and bit facet polish concentrated
at the center of the bit. The target material indicated is clearly semi-yielding in
texture, possibly a substance like soft wood. The Granberg tools, on the other
hand, seem to have some traumatic, percussive bit damage, damage which is
thought to be more extensive than would be expected to be inflicted by a percussor during manufacture. The target material may be hard wood. Adzing of
mesquite with a replica did not exactly duplicate the bit weal" on the Granberg
tools, but the analogy seems close enough.
With the exception of the use-polished Peterson cache, trying to recognize
use wear on such roughly made artifacts as the Guadalupe tools reported here is a
difficult task. Hard hammer percussion, when applied to a steep platform angle
(54° for the Lindner specimens, 65° for the Granberg tools), results in severe
percussor damage to the stone being worked, leaving percussion rings, crushed
and step fractured or hinge fractured edges, and possibly even rounded, crumbled,
or nibbled edges if scrubbing or raking of the edge was done to prepare the striking platform (Figure 14, a, b). The difficulty lies in the fact that if Guadalupe
tools were used as some sort of adzelike woodworking tool (which seems to be
the best explanation advanced yet) their customary use was probably rather percussive as well. It seems very likely that a hafted tool struck forcibly against a
fairly hard wood might suffer damage which is hard to distinguish from percussor
damage (in the case of the Peterson cache, a softer wood is postulated as the
contact material, resulting in much less edge trauma). Many of the Guadalupe
tools examined microscopically show heavy step fracturing at the center of the
bit edge. Is this because it is the center of the working edge that receives the
heaviest use, or is it because particularly forceful trimming blows were delivered
here in an attempt to strike off the distal part of the dorsal ridge? Much of the
heavy step fracturing seen on some of the Granberg specimens looks just like the
sort of wear that might be produced by heavy percussive use on dense wood, but

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

117

it also tends to intergrade with the kind of edge damage seen on unused, freshly
made experimental specimens. Many of the tools show stairstepped flake scars
with hinged or stepped terminations on the dorsal face; are these manufacturing
scars, successive macroscars driven off during percussive use, or successive rejuvenation scars?
As the discussion above indicates, microwear examination for this kind of
tool class--percussive cutting tools--is weighted with uncertainty. The intersection of (presumed) stressful use and stressful manufacture means that a good deal
of overlap between use and manufacturing traces can be expected. Only where
less abusive target material was worked, as with the Peterson cache, can we have
more confidence in our ability to distinguish use wear from manufacturing traces.
In summary, then, while all the Guadalupe tools reviewed here can be considered equivalent in manufacture, each cache seems to have its own microwear
signature that distinguishes it from the others, suggesting these are tool sets, not
simply random collections of tools. It seems likely, perhaps, that each set was
made and disposed of by a single craftsman (at least in the case of the Lindner
and Peterson caches) and disposal was probably a single event, there being no
evidence that tools were added to the group over a span of time. In the case of the
Lindner cache, the original number of tools in the cache (unknown, but at least
nine) may indicate something of the scope or severity of the anticipated task. It
may be, as well, that all of the tools in a cache were intended for use with just one
haft or helve, each tool being unhafted and set aside as it became worn. This
might account for the striking uniformity of the tools. In the Peterson cache, all
the tools were worn, perhaps indicating the task was completed and the exhausted tools were set aside for future resharpening. Here, six tools were involved. Likewise, the four Granberg tools may have also been set aside for
rehabilitation.
The condition of a particular tool is probably contingent on several different
variables, such as:
1] type of target material, whether hardwood (mesquite, juniper, guayacan,
oak, walnut, pecan), soft wood (willow, sycamore, cottonwood) or some
material other than wood;
2] condition of target material (green or seasoned);
3] length of use episode;
4] force employed in use, or other relevant work habits;
5] frequency and nature of resharpening.
The observations reported here am based on a sample of only three caches. Ab
more caches of Guadalupe tools are found in the future it will be interesting to
see whether the patterns perceived here will be borne out in later studies. Will
newly discovered caches form coherent microwear groups, or will there be variability in wear that crosscuts caches?

118

Texas Archeological Society

I .... , .... L

d

I .... , .... I

Figure 14. Photomicrographs of Guadalupe tools and replicas. Scale is 1 mm long, with
small divisions tenths of a millimeter, a, unused working edge of chert replica, viewed
from dorsal face, showing percussor crushing and trimming scars; b, more oblique view
of replica edge; note percussor crushing; c, Granberg specimen 15, showing relatively
pristine section of working edge (orientation similar to "b"); d, Peterson specimen 2,
showing polish on working edge and dorsal flake scars (orientation is similar to "a’); e,
Granberg specimen 15, unresolved fracture (incipient use failure?) on bit facet.

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

119

I~,,1t,~,,I

d

Figure 15. Photomicrographs of Guadalupe tool cache specimens. Scale is 1 mm long,
with small divisions in tenths of a millimeter, a, Peterson specimen 4, polish on bit facet
truncated by D-shaped scar to right; b, Peterson specimen 2, polish and longitudinal
striations originating from working edge at apex of bit on dorsal face; c, Peterson specimen 6, polish on dorsal face near working edge; d, Peterson specimen 4, polish on flake
scar ridges, proximal end, ventral face; e, enlargement of prominent flake scar seen at
right side of "c," showing polish and weak striations, a-c, e are oriented with working
edge at top of frame.

120

Texas Archeological Society

tME, IC;HT
grim

100 -

50I

0.6

I

I

I

0.8

I

I

1.0

I

!.2

BIT THICKNESS
BI T ~iD TH

Figure 16. Scattergram showing relationship between weight and amount of bit "amh"
(expressed as the ratio of bit thickness to bit width) for all 19 tools in the study. Weight is a
variable related both to use and to availability of raw material. The amount of arching of
the bit is probably largely stylistic, a matter of craft habits of the individual knapper. The
scattergram shows that the Peterson cache is intermediate between the Lindner and Granberg caches, that there is limited overlap between caches, and that weight varies more than
bit arch. The spread of points for each cache indicates how heterogeneous or homogeneous each cache is. Weight is measured in grams; bit arch is a dimensionless ratio.

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

121

APPENDIX: DESCRIPTION OF A CACHE OF CLEAR FORK TOOLS
FROM THE J-2 RANCH SITE, VICTORIA COUNTY
It should be noted that a cache found at the J-2 Ranch site in Victoria County (Fox,
Schmiedlin, and Mitchell 1978: 9) is erroneously reported as consisting of Guadalupe
tools, but the specimens are more appropriately regarded as Clear Fork tools or protoforms. This classification has been perpetuated in subsequent literature. With the help
of Shirley Van der Veer I have been able to examine both the specimens in question (lot
82A) and the relevant field notes. Three specimens were found clustered together near the
east wall in the northeast quadrant of unit N 100/E30 (= unit K) at depths of 62.5, 61.75,
and 62.75 inches, respectively, below ground surface at the northwest corner datum.
Judging from the level plan all were grouped within a diameter of about 25 cm. A fourth
specimen was found in the northwest quadrant in the same level (60 to 66 inches) but
evidently was not found in place since it does not appear on the level plan (field notes,
October 17, 1976). Of the cached tools, one is an elongate-oval biface of yellow-brown
chert 12.8 cm long, with a slightly ridged dorsal face, and the beginnings of a recognizable bit formed on the ventral side by a few heavy percussion scars at the distal end; in
plan view the bit end is somewhat arched. This specimen is perhaps best regarded as a
Clear Fork protoform. Another is a thick, markedly piano-convex biface of light brown
chert 13.1 cm long, with a well developed bit formed on the ventral side by detachment of
several heavy percussion flakes; in plan view the bit is roughly straight with rounded corners. This specimen seems to be a representative Clear Fork tool. The third specimen in
the cache is a small elongate-oval biface of light chert with patches of cortex on the dorsal
side. In section it is piano-convex only toward the proximal end. The presumed distal end
has a slightly beveled effect created by the removal of many, fairly well-controlled flakes
from the ventral face, driven off from around the periphery of the bit. In plan view the bit
end is rounded. This specimen appears to be a small counterpart to the first one, and like it
is presumed to be a protoform. The fourth specimen, found isolated from the others, is a
short thick biface 5.9 cm long of yellow-brown chert, biconvex to piano-convex in section, with a steep, well-defined bit (rounded in plan view) formed on the ventral side. It
may be a Clear Fork tool that has been shortened by repeated resharpening.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank Mr. O. R. Lindner for reporting his artifacts, for loaning them
for study, and for allowing me to visit the site. Tom Hester and Shirley Van der Veer provided crucial information on the Granberg and J-2 Ranch sites and arranged for me to
have access to the tools from both sites. Steve Black and A1 McGraw let me borrow two
specimens from the Panther Springs Creek site for study. Bobbie McGregor and Fred Valdez brought the Peterson cache to my attention and arranged for the Witte Museum to loan
them for study. Kay Hindes assisted in tracking down the original find spot of the Peterson
Cache, and Mr. Tobey Tomblin and Mr. J.W. Kenney provided access and answered
questions about the find. Harry Shafer and Rick Holloway provided access to photomicrographic equipment.

122

Texas Archeological Society
REFERENCES CITED

Anderson, Patricia C.
t980

A Testimony of Prehistoric Tasks: Diagnostic Residues on Stone Tool Working
Edges. World Archaeology 12(2): 181 - 194.

Binford, Lewis R.
1980

Willow Smoke and Dogs’ Tails: Hunter-Gatherer Settlement Systems and Ar-

1982

The Archaeology of Place. JournalofAnthropologicalArchaeology 1(1):5-31.

chaeological Site Formation. American Antiquity 45(1) : 4- 20.

Black, Stephen L. and A. Joachim McGraw
1985

The Panther Springs Creek Site: Cultural Change and Continuity Within the Upper Salado Drainage, South Central Texas. CenterJbrArchaeologicaIResearch,
University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report 100.

Brown, Kenneth M., Daniel R. Potter, Grant D. Hall, and Stephen L. Black
1982

Excavations at 41 LK 67: A Prehistoric Site in the Choke Canyon Reservoir,
South Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, University of Texas at San
Antonio, Choke Canyon Series 7.

Calhoun, Cecil A.
A Possible Cache of Flint From the Mouth of the Guadalupe River. Newsletter
1965
of the Houston Archeological Society 14:2-4.

Dittmar, Glenn W. and Jack W. Stevens
1980
Soil Survey of Atascosa County, Texas. United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
Eagleton, N. Ethie
An Historic Indian Cache in Pecos County. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
1955
Society 26 : 200-2t7.
Fox, Anne A., E. H. Schmiedlin, and Jimmy L. Mitchell
Preliminary Report on the J-2 Ranch Site (41 VT 6), Victoria County, Texas. La
1978
Tierra 5(3) : 2-14.
Hale, Thomas H. Jr. and Martha Doty Freeman
1978

A Reconnaissance Survey and Assessment of Prehistoric and Historic Resources, Cypress Creek Watershed in Harris and Waller Counties, Texas. Texas
Archeological Survey, Research Report 68.

Hammatt, Hallett H.
1970a
1970b

A Paleo-Indian Butchering Kit. American Antiquity 35(2): 141-152.
A Cache of Flint Tools from Tillman County. Oklahoma Anthropological Society Newsletter 18(8-9) : 15-19.

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

123

Helm, Jeep and Betty J. Turner
1975

The Chips Feature. The Missouri Archaeological Society Newsletter 289: 1-3.

Hester, Thomas R.
1972
A Projectile Point Cache From Bexar County, Texas. Texas Archeology (Newsletter (~" the Texas Archeological Society) 16(4) : 6-7.
1980
Digging hzto South Texas Prehistory. Corona Publishing Company, San Antonio.
Hester, Thomas R. and Harvey Kohnitz
1975

Chronological Placement of "Guadalupe" Tools. La Tierra 2(2) : 22-25.

Hughes, Jack T. and Patrick S. Willey
1978

Archeology at Mackenzie Reservoir. Texas Historical Commission, Office of the
State Archeologist, Archeological Survey Report 24.

Hutton, James D.
1976

A Cache From the Edge of a Dry Lake at McGregor Range. The Artifact
14(3):21-27.

Janes, Susan M.
1930

Seven Trips to Mount Livermore. West Texas Historical and Scientific Society
Publications 3:8-9. Sul Ross State Teachers College, Alpine.

Keeley, Lawrence
1980

Experimental Determination_ of Stone Tool Uses. A Microwear Analysis. The
University of Chicago Press, Chicago and London.

Kelly, Thomas C.
1977

The High Lonesome Bead Cache. Appendix II in An Archaeological Survey of
the Radium Springs Area, Southern New Mexico, edited by T. R. Hester. Center for Archaeological Research, University of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report 26:141-171.

LeVick, Lawrence E.
1975

A Cache of Preforms From Southwestern Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society 23:177-183.

Lintz, Christopher
1978

Flake Blank Production Strategy of the Heerwald Site Cache. Bulletin of the
Oklahoma Anthropological Society 27 : 179-206.

Mallouf, Robert J.
1981

A Case Study of Plow Damage to Chert Artifacts. The Brookeen Creek Cache,
Hill County, Texas. Texas Historical Commission, Office of the State A rcheologist
Report 33.

124

Texas Archeological Society

Meeks, N.D., G. de G. Sieveking, M. S. Tite, and J, Cook
1982
Gloss and Use-Wear Traces on Flint Sickles and Similar Phenomena. Journal of
Archaeological Science 9(4):317-340.
Millsap, Mike and Don R. Dickson
1968

The Millsap Cache. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society 16:
159-160.

Moore, Mrs. Glen E. and Mrs. Joe Ben Wheat
An Archaeological Cache From the Hueco Basin. Bulletin of the Texas Archeo1951
logical Society 22: t44-163.

Morse, Dan F.
The Hawkins Cache: A Significant Dalton Find in Northwest Arkansas. The
1971
Arkansas Archeologist 12( 1 ) : 9-20.
Nightengale, Bruce A., Jack M. Jackson, and Henry B. Moncure
1985

Additional Intensive Survey of Cultural Resources in the Cummins Creek Prospect, Fayette County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report 89.

Osborne, Carolyn M. and Harry S. Riddell, Jr.
1978

A Cache of Deer Snares From Owens Valley, California. Journal of California
Anthropology 5(1) : 101 - 109.

Pavesic, Max G.
A Projectile Point "Blank" Cache From Southeastern Idaho. Tebiwa (The Jour1966
nal of the Idaho State University Museum) 9(1):52-57.
Shutler, Richard
!956

A Pinon Nut Cache Near Tonopah, Nevada. Plateau 28(3) : 70-72.

Slesick, Leonard M.
A Lithic Tool Cache in the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
1978
Society 49 : 3 t9-330.
Southard, Michael D.
1976

A Cache of Agricultural Implements From Towosahgy State Archaeological
Site. The Missouri Archaeological Society Newsletter 300 : 1-4.

Stephenson, Robert L.
1970

Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir Area, Central Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 41 : 37-277.

Thomas, David H.
The Archaeology of Monitor Valley. 1, Epistemology. Anthropological Papers
1983
of the American Museum of Natural History 58(1).

Brown--Guadalupe Tool Caches

125

Tsirk, Are
Regarding Fracture Initiations. In Lithic Use-Wear Analysis, edited by Brian
1979
Hayden, pp. 83-96. Academic Press, New York, San Francisco and London.
Tunnell, Curtis D.
1978
The Gibson Lithic Cache From West Texas. Texas Historical Commission,
Office of the State Archeologist Report 30.
Unger-Hamilton, Romana
1984

The Formation of Use-Wear Polish on Flint: Beyond the "Deposit Versus Abrasion" Controversy. Journal of Archaeological Science 11 (1) : 91 - 98.

Vaughan, Patrick C.
1985

Use-Wear Analysis of Flaked Stone Tools. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.

Wallace, William J.
1978
The Chuckwalla: a Death Valley Indian Food. Journal of California Anthropology 5(1): 109-113.
Weide, Margaret L. and David L. Weide
1969

A Cache From Warner Valley, Oregon. Tebiwa (The Journal of the hluho State
University Museum) 12(2) :28-34.

Witte, Adolph H.
1942

Certain Caches of Flints From the North Texas Area. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 14:72-76.

Episodes in the History of Texas Archeology:
Excavations at Shumla and Eagle Caves,
Witte Memorial Museum
Roberta McGregor

ABSTRACT
The Witte Museum of San Antonio was involved, during the 1930s, in
early archeological research in the Lower Pecos region of Texas. These activities are summarized here and have been supplemented by interviews with
Harding Black, a participant in the field work.

INTRODUCTION
This narrative is intended to give historical insight into the Witte Museum’s
expeditions into the Lower Pecos River area of Texas in the 1930s. These explorations provided important foundations toward our understanding of the archeology of that region. The objectives, methods, and techniques, although imprecise
at best by our modern standards, were in keeping with their time and serve to
illustrate how far we have come. In this paper, one member of the early expeditions, Harding Black, furnishes a personal glimpse of those historic moments in
Texas archeology.
The involvement of San Antonio’s Witte Museum in the archeology of the
Lower Pecos River area began more than 50 years ago. In 1931 the Witte sent a
small scouting expedition to investigate a number of prehistoric sites in West
Texas including 10 rock-shelters near Langtry. A member of that early group,
Mary Virginia Carson, sketched a series of pictographs painted on the walls of
several shelters. The Witte now houses those first attempts to document the
Lower Pecos area rock art. Later, in 1933, a museum expedition excavated the
Shumla Caves (Martin 1934). The 1936 excavation of Eagle Cave (Davenport
1938) followed two testings of the shelter in 1935.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 56 (1985)

128

Texas Archeological Society

THE 1933 EXCAVATION
Concern about scouting expeditions in the Lower Pecos from other institutions-particularly from the north and east--expedited the decision to excavate
the nine Shumla Caves. The San Antonio Light in 1933 quoted Mrs. Ellen
Schultz Quillin, Witte Museum Director: "Material brought from this section to
San Antonio will be invaluable, as all of the major outside institutions have their
expeditions in the same field, and soon there will be nothing left for Texas unless
the work of excavation is done now."
To finance the expedition, Mrs. Qui!lin solicited food and money from the
citizens of San Antonio who responded with donations of beans and coffee and
other food items and $90.00 in cash. The crew, all members of the newly-formed
Southwest Texas Archaeological Society, consisted of George Martin, President
of the Society and head of the expedition; Major Fletcher Gardener, Ret.; John S.
Eross, crew chief; Jack W. Davenport, "expedition artist"; and Harding Black,
now a well-known San Antonio potter. Other Society members who spent a varying amount of time at the site included Jack Specht, George C. Martin, Jr., Albert Maverick III, Everett Lehman, John Davis, George Nalle, Jr., John Ray,
Gustave Bentrup, and Burton Waters. All of the crew members volunteered their
services.
Harding Black’s association with the Witte Museum dates back to the Depression years of the 1930s when Quillin hired him to conduct children’s pottery
classes. He recalls (personal communication 1985) the early days of Texas
archeology:
Sam Woolford decided to start an archeological society at the Witte Museum. He
was editor of the San Antonio Light. The University of Texas was doing some digging out in the Big Bend area. Woolford was a good friend of George Martin--he
was sort of an amateur archeologist and so they decided to have an expedition out to
West Texas. I was selected to be one of the pick and shovel men. For some reason we
started out at midnight and ended up at Shumla, Texas; it was just a railroad siding.
We arrived there in the middle of the day--hot as blazes. We set up camp [May 28,
1933]. There was a little cave just down from the camp site where we set up the
kitchen. It was a bare cave--no ash or anything in it. We had a spring right down
below. To get to the spring we stretched a rope from the top and tied it to a bush and
let ourselves down that steep slope. (Figure 1)

Black reminisces about some of his Shumla co-workers:
Eross was a semi-professional. He worked in New Mexico and Arizona with some
archeo!ogists there. He knew where to dig so he came up usually with the best finds.
We had George Nalle--the governor’s (Ma Ferguson’s) grandson at that time. Of
course us guys were mostly poor people and they were very rich. So when we heard
he was coming, think of the consternation it caused in the camp. During the first day
of digging, someone threw a whole shovelful of ash right on top of his head. It’s a

McGregor--Shumla and Eagle Caves

Figure 1. Descent to the Shumla Caves: The 1933 Excavation

129

130

Texas Archeological Society

good thing he came up smiling or I’m afraid he would have been ostracized. Albert
Maverick III was in training for football at school so whenever they found a heavy
mortar he got to carry it out of the canyon, which was quite a job. Some of these
things weighed 30-40 pounds .... Jack Davenport was an artist--that wasn’t
enough to keep him busy so Quillin hired him here at the museum because he was a
good handyman, a good plumber, and electrician.

Davenport drew the illustrations in the Witte’s Big Bend Basket Maker Papers’.
Major Gardener returned to San Antonio before the actual digging began.
George Martin followed in a little over three weeks. Ellen Quillin (in a letter to
"Uncle Tom" dated July 12, 1933) writes: "Mr. Martin came in from the field
about three weeks ago, both to get the material in and mounted for exhibition,
and to rest. He was quite ill when he got back." John Eross remained as crew
chief and kept a log of the daily activities from June 20th to his arrival back in
San Antonio on August 25, 1933. During that time Martin, who returned to
Shumla for one day in July and three days in August, received weekly progress
reports from Eross. The crew spent long hours working in the shelters, usually
excavating from 7:30 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., six days a week.
This early exploration in the dry shelters yielded an unsurpassed collection
of perishable materials dating mainly to the Middle and Late Archaic. Eross and
his crew recovered hundreds of mat fragments and such rare items as hafted
knives and points, several complete baskets, woven headbands, a threaded bone
awl and a skin pouch. In addition, the crew uncovered a number of burials including one of the most elaborate burials yet found in the Lower Pecos.

1935 SURVEYS
Elated by the Shumla excavations, Ellen Quillin sent two of the museum’s
employees back to the Lower Pecos River area. On March 8, 1935, Harding
Black and J. Walker Davenport "left for the Big Bend region in a survey of caves
located around the Langtry district" (Davenport 1935a: 1). They remained at
Eagle Cave for four days "sinking test holes and trenches as cave far too big to
work without additional help" (ibid. :3). Davenport also wrote: "The eastern
museums have been sending scouts through here [Langtry area] offering cash for
information and artifacts."
In September, Black and Davenport returned to Eagle Cave for several days
of excavation. Davenport noted two artifacts in particular. The first (Figure 2,a)
was a painted slate pendant drilled with five holes. Davenport noticed traces of
painting on the face of the pendant although he could not make out the design.
When Mock (1984) examined the artifact she found red ochre patches visible on
the edges. The second object (Figure 2,b) was "the largest painted stone I have
ever seen," (Davenport 1935b :4). The same artist may have painted two other
pebbles recovered at this time since they share a strong similarity in design and
technique (Figure 3).

McGregor--Shumla and Eagle Caves

131

b

Figure 2. Artifacts from Eagle Cave, 1935. a, painted slate pendant drilled with five
holes; b, fragment of a large painted pebble.

1936 EXCAVATION
As a result of the 1935 trips, Quillin successfully solicited money and food
from the citizens of San Antonio to finance the excavation of Eagle Cave. Davenport and Black, accompanied by Edward Ritchey and Joe Bentz (Figure 4), returned "to work this rock-shelter to the bottom" in 1936 (Davenport 1936: 1).
In 1922, Sam Woolford had exp!ored Eagle Cave with Herbert Dodd, the
postmaster at Langtry. Woolford (Woolford and Quillin 1966: 198) describes the
shelter: "There it was--a great yawning opening in the canyon wall. I do not
think it had been disturbed at that time by ’pot-hunters.’ The typical large, black
arrowheads lay in clear view on the packed-down surface of the cave. When you
stamped your boots on the floor of the cave it made a thumping sound." Unfortu-

132

Texas Archeological Society

b

Figure 3. Artifacts from Eagle Cave, 1935. Two painted pebbles.

nately, by 1935 the landowner was using the cave to shelter freshly-sheared sheep
from inclement weather--as many as 5,000 at a time (ibid.). Later, in 1963,
Ross (1965: 15) found "the uppermost stratum was a light gray soil composed of
backdirt from potholes, burned rocks, sheep and goat dung and straw."

McGregor--Shumla and Eagle Caves

133

Access to Eagle Cave is possible through a cleft in the canyon walls near the
site, or by coming upstream from the mouth of Mile Canyon. However, the Witte
crew found a third way in 1936. They built a wooden ladder and braced it halfway
down the slope by wooden scaffolding (Figure 5). Davenport (1936: 3) wrote:
"Ritchey had the doubtful honor of making the first trip down." They set up the
screen and shaker--a motorized contraption built by Davenport "that shot that
ash down a shoot to the canyon to get rid of it" (Black, personal communication 1985).
Davenport drew a floor plan of the shelter. He mentioned in his field notes
that two boys named Lassiter were "doing some work in the cave--know of no
way to stop them. However, don’t think they will interfere with us" (Davenport
1936:2). In fact, Davenport (1938:4 ;’Figure 6) mapped in the local boys’
trench in his drawing. Black (personal communication) remembers: "Every day
after school, three little boys of the neighbors there would come down to where
we were digging. They were looking for painted stones because you could get
about $10.00 for these painted stones."
Davenport began excavating Eagle Cave by digging a trench 106 feet from
the south edge and about 18 feet in from the line of the two edges. The trench
measured eight-feet wide and extended to the rear wall (Davenport 1938). In
later excavations, the east-west trench was visible as an elongated depression
(Ross 1965). Davenport (1936:3) described the top layer as consisting of "limestone dust, ashes and some burnt rock. Snail shells are thickly scattered through
this layer. Bones of birds and animals are also in the layer which are being saved
for future reference." Davenport (ibid.) wrote that Layer A was about two-feet
deep towards the outside of the shelter and increased in depth to five feet at approximately 15 feet from the rear.
Davenport usually listed the daily finds in the margin of his notebook. In the
first stratum he mentioned, in addition to the chipped stone artifacts, eight
painted pebbles, miscellaneous bone and broken awls, a tubular stone pipe fragment (Schuetz 1961) and one gray stone bead.
Work began on Stratum B, which dates to the Middle Archaic, on February
24. On March 5, Davenport (1936:12) wrote: "Ritchey noticed a finger and fingernail mark on one of the cigar-shaped objects of which we have several. Several other objects, which we had collected today, upon examination prove to be
clay. Believe this to be important as every piece that we can remember came out
of B level." The crew uncovered two more clay figurines the following day.
Davenport (1938:10) later noted: "Scattered through layers A, B, and C
were 12 objects of cigar-like shapes--these appear to have been moulded (sic)
from clay." Later excavations at Eagle Cave (Ross 1965: Table 15) produced 22
additional clay objects including six clearly identified as clay figurines (Sharer
1975 : 150).
In addition to the figurines, Davenport (1936:t3) described a painted
pebble uncovered in stratum B: "Design on stone unusual--it is of spider web-have seen one other like it. It was in possession of Comstock mercantile store

134

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 4. Excavations at Eagle Cave, 1936.

Figure 5. Excavations at Eagle Cave, 1936. View of
ladder built for descent to the site.

McGregor--Shumla and Eagle Caves

135

:::::-::::::::::

Figure 6. Plan of Eagle Cave. Drawn by J. Walker Davenport, the plan shows areas of
the Witte excavations and earlier relic-collector trenches.

136

Texas Archeological Society

owner." Davenport completed recording section 4B by taking photographs and
movie footage of the cross section.
Perishables recovered from Stratum B included three matting fragments, 13
knots, nine strings, 11 sandal fragments, two fiber rings and three basket centers.
In addition, the crew excavated bone awl fragments, two perforated shells,
17 painted pebbles and eight clay figurines. Fifteen of the pebbles were found in
the T-cut along the back wall.
The Witte crew excavated Strata C and D to a depth of 12 feet (Figures 7,
8). Before leaving Eagle Cave, Davenport (1936: 12) wrote: "Dismantled ladder
and after supper took lumber and wheelbarrow to Skiles. We had quite a little talk
with them, shortly before we started to leave Guy said he sure would like to have
the lumber from the ladder and when we told him it was outside on the truck and
that we had brought it up to give him he was pleased and as a result he gave us a
(prehistoric) Lower Pecos gee string. We feel that we got the better of that bargain." Thanks to Davenport and Black the leather "g-string" is now in the museum’s collection.
While reminiscing about the lower Pecos, Black discussed his ideas as to
how the prehistoric people cooked one of their staple foods:
I can’t remember which cave this was I found a fireless cooker. Most people didn’t
realize they didn’t have pots to cook in--even to carry water. There was no clay out
there--they didn’t make any pots--and I found this fireless cooker. I was digging
one day and I came to some rocks and I took the rocks off and I found some grass
and I removed the grass and in that was a bunch of yucca hearts. Then below that I
found some more grass and below that some more rocks. So they heated up the bottom rocks, put the wet grass on top of the hot rocks, put the hearts in, some more wet
grass and some more hot rocks and covered the whole thing up and that’s the way
they cooked the yucca hearts to eat.

Hough gives an ethnographic example for a similar cooking technique in the
American Southwest (1959:846): "Mescal pits are usually circular depressions
in the ground, a foot to three feet in depth, and lined with coarse gravel. A fire
was built in the pit, raked out after the stones became hot, and the mescal plants
put in and covered with grass. After two days steaming the pile was opened and
the mescal was ready for consumption."
Black (personal communication) also discovered how the Lower Pecos
peoples improved their sleeping quarters: "Most of the fiber was found in the top
levels where it hadn’t been burned. They used grass for bedding. We’d find this
bedding material because this ash wasn’t very good to sleep on so they’d pull this
grass and make beddings." Baker Cave (Brown 1984) and Hinds Cave (Shafer
and Bryant 1977) yielded similar grass-like features.

iVIcGregor~Shumla and Eagle Caves

Figure 7. Excavations at Eagle Cave, 1936.

137

Figure 8. Excavations at Eagle Cave, 1936.
View of stratigraphy in trench.

FINAL COMMENTS
The main reason the Witte explored the Lower Pecos area was to collect objects for the museum. Mrs. Quillin chose two of her full-time museum employees
for key positions in the excavations: Jack Davenport, an artist, carpenter and mechanic; and Harding Black, a potter. Both observant and hard working, they returned with more information than once thought. The Witte published Davenport’s report in 1938. Davenport and Black brought back soil and charcoal
samples, took photographs and filmed a portion of the excavation. The film, now
restored, resides in the collection of the Witte Museum. Harding Black looks
back to the early excavations:
We used shovels. We had to move a lot of ash in order to find anything. We screened
all the ash to make sure. Of course, at that time we weren’t too professional. Now 1
realize we should have saved seeds, leaves--because they were just as important as
some of the hard stone. We probably didn’t do too good a professional job but I guess
we got the stuff before the potholers got it, which is a good thing. At least we got it in
the museum.

In September, 1963, a Texas Archeological Salvage Project crew left Austin
to begin a three-month season in the Amistad Reservoir testing three sites: Bon-

138

Texas Archeological Society

fire Shelter; Fate Bell; and Eagle Cave. The cultural fill within Eagle Cave varied
considerably, from 2-3 feet thick approximately 50 feet from the rear wall to
9-10 feet thick at 20-25 feet from the rear (Ross 1965).
Ross began the excavation by cleaning out and profiling the old Witte Museum trench (ibid.: E-W Profile along N90, p. 18) (Figure 9). He also excavated
a 20 x 10 foot block of undisturbed soil adjacent to the north side of the trench, a
pothole in the north end of the shelter, and a deep pit to the floor of the shelter.
Table II compares the stratigraphic distribution of selected dart points from
the 1936 and 1963 excavations. If one disregards the unknown stratum and the
disturbed stratum A, we find that Ross (1965) uncovered the majority of the Pandale points from levels IIc and IId, and Davenport from level B. Ross found Langtry and Val Verde points well represented in IIa and Davenport again in B. Most
Shumla points came from the top level.
The Witte Museum’s interest in Lower Pecos prehistory continues today.
Funded by the Witte, the Center for Archaeological Research at The University of
Texas at San Antonio conducted excavations at Baker Cave in 1984 and 1985. In
January of 1987, the Witte opens a major exhibit that explores the lifeways of the
people of the Lower Pecos. In addition, the Witte has supported the production of
a book amply illustrated by color photographs Of the rock art taken by Jim Zintgraft of San Antonio over the last 20 years. The author of the book, Dr. Harry
Shafer of Texas A&M University details the ways of life of the ancient people
who produced the art and lived in the shelters.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank Dr. Thomas R. Hester for his advice and for reading several
versions of this paper. My thanks also to my friends and co-workers at the Witte Museum-Roger Fry for the excellent quality of the photography and Karen Branson for her fine
typing. My special thanks to Harding Black for spending a morning with me reminiscing
about the early days at the Witte.

McGregor--Shumla and Eagle Caves

139

Texas Archeological Society

140

Table 1. Artifacts Recovered During Surveys of Eagle Cave

Artifacts
Stone, chipped
Points, perfect or good
broken or bad
Scrapers
Knives
Drills
Fist axe
Stone, ground, pecked, smooth
Manos
Metates
Stone
Painted
Smooth
Miscellaneous
Pendant, slate
Bone
Awl, whole
Awl, broken
Flakers
Miscellaneous
Bead
Wood
Point
Miscellaneous
Basketry
Burnt
Sandal
Fiber ball
Shell
Clam

March
15-18, 1935

September
17-22, 1935

53
11
57
2
1

185
432
238
30
4
1

26
6

33
9

41
17
17
1

1
31
2
3

1
23

6
1

2

McGregor--Shumla and Eagle Caves

©

<Ca

C~

O

O

;>

("4

M

t2
O

e.,

Ca
!

141

142

Texas Archeological Society

REFERENCES CITED
Brown, Ken
1984
The 1984 Season at Baker Cave. Ms. on file at Witte Museum.
Davenport, J. Walker
1935a Field Notes of March 1935 Survey of Eagle Cave. Ms. on file at Witte Museum.
1935b Field Notes of September 1935 Survey of Eagle Cave. Ms. on file at Witte
Museum.
1936
Field Notes of 1936 Excavation of Eagle Cave. Ms. on file at Witte Museum.
Archaeological Exploration of Eagle Cave, Langtry, Texas. Witte Memorial
1938
Museum, Bulletin 4, San Antonio.
Hough, Walter
Mescal. In Handbook of American Indians North of Mexico, Part I, ed. by F. W.
1959
Hodge. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 30.
Martin, George C.
1934

Archaeological Exploration of the Shumla Caves. In Big Bend Basket Maker
Papers 3, Southwest Texas Archaeological Society, Witte Museum, San
Antonio.

Mock, Shirley
1984
Analysis of Bone and Shell Artifacts from the Lower Pecos, Witte Museum Collection. Ms. on file at Witte Museum.
Moore, William E.
Archeological Investigations at Musk Hog Canyon, Crockett County, Texas.
1982
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Socieo, 53: 13-81.
Ross, Richard E.
1965
The Archeology of Eagle Cave. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, Papers 7.
Schuetz, Mardith K.
An Analysis of Val Verde County Cave Material: Part II. Bulletin of the Texas
1961
Archeolagical Society 31 : 167-205.
Sharer, Harry J.
1975

Clay Figurines from the Lower Pecos Region, Texas. American Antiquity
40(2): 148-158.

Shafer, Harry J. and Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr.
1977
Archaeological and Botanical Studies at Hinds Cave Val Verde County, Texas.
Texas A&M University Anthropology Laboratory, Special Series 1.
Woolford, Bess and E. Quillin
1966
The Story of the Witte Memorial Museum. San Antonio Museum Association.

Trace Element Analysis of an Obsidian Paleo-Indian
Projectile Point From KAncaid Rockshelter, Texas
Thomas R. Hester, Glen L. Evans, Frank Asaro, Fred Stross,
T. N. Campbell, and Helen Michel

ABSTRACT
Excavations in 1948 and 1953 exposed the basal cultural deposits at
Kincaid Rockshelter, southcentral Texas, and led to the recovery of an obsidian projectile point fragment. The specimen is attributed to the Paleo-lndian
period on the basis of stratigraphy (the basal deposits contained the remains
of late Pleistocene fauna) and typological attributes. Problems with PaleoIndian radiocarbon dates from the site are noted. Trace element analyses have
shown that the obsidian is derived from a geologic source near Queretaro,
Mexico, more than 1000 km from the Kincaid site.

INTRODUCTION

Kincaid Rockshelter is a rockshelter-river terrace occupation site on the
Sabinal River on the edge of the Edwards Plateau in southcentral Texas (Figure t). Excavations were conducted at the site by the Texas Memorial Museum
and a University of Texas (Austin) field school in 1948 and 1953, after attention
was drawn to the site by the discovery, by amateurs, of three Folsom points. The
investigations failed to locate any additional Folsom materials, but they did reveal 2.5 meters of stratified deposits at the base of which were zones containing
Pleistocene fauna and artifactual evidence of human occupation. The site has not
yet been fully published; brief summaries can be found in Suhm (1960:98-99)
and in Hester and Story (ms).
According to Glen L. Evans, then director of the excavations for the Texas
Memorial Museum, the lowest stratigraphic units at Kincaid, Zones 1 and 2,
were comprised of sterile alluvium. Zone 3 contained Pleistocene fauna, including juvenile horse, elephant, bison and large cat. At the top of this zone, at its
contact with Zone 4, there was a cobble pavement formed by large stones
brought into the shelter by the earliest human inhabitants. The paving apparently
served to provide better footing around a travertine spring at the rear of the shelter. Atop the pavement, in Zone 4, were the earliest artifacts, along with late

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 56 (1985)

144

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Location of Kincaid Rockshelter, Uvalde County, Texas.

Pleistocene vertebrate fossils, especially bison. Evans believes Zone 4 to have
been the stratum from which the Folsom points were derived. However, no additional Folsom points were found and the other artifacts that came from the excavations within Zone 4 were generally undistinguished. The assemblage included four lanceolate bifaces, six flakes with single-edge retouch, one graver,
several cores, and 52 pieces of debitage. Another artifact from Zone 4, the only
specimen that apparently served as a projectile point, was the basal fragment of a
thinned obsidian biface. Since the specimen was broken, Evans recalls wondering if it had been broken in manufacture, and he carefully searched for obsidian
debitage, but found none.
In the overlying Zone 5, late Paleo-Indian artifacts were found although the
cultural stratigraphy within the zone is unclear, as artifacts of the Edwards
Plateau Archaic are also present. Hester’s review of 19 Paleo-indian projectile

Hester and others--Kincaid Obsidian

145

points from the zone reveal the following types: Plainview or Plainview-like (3),
Golondrina (4), Angostura and Angostura-like (11) and a small reworked PaleoIndian point.
Eighteen radiocarbon dates have been published for Kincaid Rockshelter
(Stipp et al. 1962; Tamers et al. 1964). All are from Zone 5, primarily from deposits in the terrace fill in front of the shelter. Haynes (1967:270) published five
dates from the site and attributed them, without any comment, to Zone 5. The
dates cited by Haynes were TX-63, and TX-17 through TX-20, ranging from
7900 to 10,365 B.P. However, only one of these dates (TX-63; wood charcoal)
can be accepted as accurate. The other four, TX-17 through TX-20, were all run
on snail shells, materials that produced dates which Stipp et al. (1962:48) described as "older than expected." Moreover, they are from miscellaneous contexts in Zone 5, with no associated diagnostic artifacts. Indeed, TX-17 (on snail
shells) yielded an age of 10,025 -+ 185 B.R Yet a date from a charcoal sample,
TX-67, which was stratigraphically below TX-t7 has an age of 1150 -+ or ca.
A.D. 800.
Only one of the dates listed by Haynes (and published originally by Tamers
et al. 1964) from Kincaid is of interpretative value. As noted above, this is
TX-63 at 7900 -+ 800 B.R or 5950 B.C. It came from the "lower levels of Zone
5", associated with a fragment of a point of "Angostura outline" (Tamers et al.
1964: 147). This date fits with what we presently suspect in Central Texas in
terms of the terminal part of the Pateo-lndian era. Two other dates on charcoal
reported by Tamers et al. (1964: 147-148) are of relevance. TX-59 (5890 -+ 200
B.R; 3940 B.C.) is linked to the "Early Archaic" on stratigraphic grounds.
TX-58 (6020 + 170; 4070 B.C.) comes from the "base of Zone 5."
Though the radiocarbon chronology for Zone 5 begins at ca. 6000 B.C.,
there are diagnostics within this zone which we know, from other sites in southern and southwestern Texas, date 1000-2000 years earlier. Golondrina points
can be dated at ca. 7000 B.C. (Hester 1983), and Plainview, to ca. 8200 B.C.
(Dibble 1970). On the basis of the Kincaid stratigraphy, we must assume that
Zone 4, with its obsidian point and late Pleistocene fauna, dates sometime prior
to 10,000 years ago.

DESCRIPTION OF THE OBSIDIAN ARTIFACT
The obsidian projectile point fragment from Kincaid Rockshelter has a lanceolate outline, with a slightly constricted base. The lateral edges near the base
are heavily dulled, indicating that this is a finished point. Parallel flaking is
present on both faces. The base is thinned by longitudinal scars on one side and
short arc-shaped flakes on the other (see Figures 2, 3). The dimensions of this
basal fragment are: length, 26 mm; maximum width, 25.5 mm; basal width, 20
mm, thickness (at the break), 9 mm; and weight, 8 grams.

146

Texas Archeological Society

Typologically, it is difficult to place the specimen into any specific niche.
Illustrations of the artifact were sent to several experts in Paleo-Indian projectile
point typology. Dennis Stanford (personal communication) does not think it fits
the Clovis type, to which it was once assigned in a Texas Memorial Museum
exhibit. Computer-assisted attribute analyses by T. C. Kelly (1983; personal
communication) definitely exclude the specimen from the Plainview type, as
well as from Angostura. In regard to the latter type, the broad morphological
range of contracting-base lanceolate points called Angostura in Texas might include the Kincaid specimen (as M. B. Collins, personal communication, has observed: "It looks like Angostura more than anything else."). But, the same general statement might also be made for the Agate Basin type of the Plains (George
Agogino, personal communication; cf., Shelley and Agogino 1983).
Such typological considerations from a North American perspective may be
meaningless when we view the Kincaid specimen in terms of its temporal context
and geographic derivation. For the present, then, we share Ruthann Knudson’s
view (personal communication) that no specific typological label should be applied to the Kincaid obsidian point.

TRACE ELEMENT ANALYSIS
Over the past two decades, geologic source analysis of obsidian has become
a standard analytical technique. Mesoamerican obsidian sources have been particularly wel! defined (cf., Stross et aI. t976; Zeitlin and Heimbuch 1978, Stross
et al. 1983), and studies have also taken place in volcanic areas of the western
United States (e.g. California, Arizona, New Mexico; see Jack 1971; Hughes
1984; Baugh and Terrell 1982). While there are gaps in the data base in terms of
the geochemical characterizations of some obsidian types, the universe of geologic sources has been very extensively sampled and analyzed.
The Kincaid specimen (Texas Memorial Museum No. 908-1698) was submitted for trace element analysis, to the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory (LBL),
University of California, Berkeley, where it was studied by Asaro and Stross in
1978 (LBL No. TEX-11). Initially, X-ray fluorescence (XRF) techniques were
utilized; the material was identified as a comendite (a peratkaline rhyolite), and it
exhibited a number of trace elements similar to E1 Paraiso, Queretaro, type obsidian. Following consultation among the authors, it was decided that a small
piece of the specimen would be detached (after the specimen had first been
photographed in color and black and white) and a pill prepared for neutron activation analysis (NAA).
As indicated in Table !, comparisons of the Kincaid specimen were made
with obsidian deposits at E1 Paraiso, Cadereyta, and San Martin, all in the state
of Queretaro. These deposits lie within 20-50 km east-northeast of the city of
Queretaro. A concordance of the analytical techniques used in these studies and
the sample designations is provided in Table 2.

Hester and others--Kincaid Obsidian

a

147

b

Gm

Figure 2. Obsidian Projectile Point Fragment from Kincaid Rockshelter. Both sides are
shown; drawing by Hal Story.

5

0

l

cm

l

Figure 3. Obsidian Projectile Point Fragment from Kincaid Rockshelter. Both sides are
shown. Photographs provided by the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory (negative numbers
BBC789-12547, BBC789-12549).

148

Texas Archeological Society

Hester and others--Kincaid Obsidian

149

The obsidian specimens attributed to E1 Paraiso, Cadereyta, and San Martin
were kindly made available to us by Dr. J. E. Ericson. The samples were collected along roadsides at the locations indicated. The three composition patterns,
analyzed by Ericson and Kimberlin (t977) were similar to each other and collectively called by them the "El Paraiso Source". The average composition pattern
is similar to that of E1 Paraiso obsidian found by Zeitlin and Heimbuch (1978),
but different from that of the E1 Paraiso source described by Cobean (1971),
which presumably represents a different flow deposited close to the outcrops
sampled by the other authors (Ericson and Kimberlin 1977; Zeitlin and Heimbuch 1978).
While the NAA and XRF studies cannot precisely attribute the Kincaid
specimen to any of the three Queretaran locations where obsidian was found by
Ericson and Kimberlin (El Paraiso, Cadareyta, and San Martin), they established
that the chemical composition of obsidian from these areas does indeed bracket
the trace element composition of the Kincaid artifact. The three Queretaran locations are situated roughly 165 km northeast of Mexico City, and some 1000 km
(635 miles) south of the Kincaid Rockshelter in southcentral Texas.
If one compares the abundances of the Kincaid artifact with those of the
obsidian sources for all elements measured with precision of better than 3% (14
elements), then the composition patterns of the artifact differ by 2.2, 2.8 and
4.8% from the San Martin, Cadereyta and E1 Paraiso obsidian. This caliber
agreement strongly suggests the artifact came from Queretaro, although it is not
possible to distinguish conclusively the three source areas.

IMPLICATIONS OF THE DATA FROM KINCAID ROCKSHELTER
Obsidian artifacts are rare in Texas sites and no identified geologic sources
for archeological obsidian are documented within the state (Hester et al. 1980).
Over the past 15 years, the senior author has worked first with Robert N. Jack
(then of the Department of Geosciences at the University of California, Berkeley) and subsequently with Asaro, Stross and Michel in conducting studies of

Table 2. Concordance of Obsidian Samples from Kincaid Rockshelter and
Queretaro, Mexico
Sample designation

NAA run #

TEX 11
ELPAR 5
CAD 1
SAN 1
ELPAR 1, 1’, 2, 3, 4
SAN 2, 3, 4, 5

1062 O
t062 P
1061F
1061J

XRF run #

8084 G
8064 H, 8085 Q-T
8085 U,V,W,X

150

Texas Archeological Society

more than 100 archeological obsidians from various spatial and temporal contexts throughout Texas (cf., Hester et al. 1975; Hester et al. 1980, 1982;
Mitchell et al. 1981). Most of the specimens studied so far are of Late Archaic
and Late Prehistoric date.
The Kincaid specimen represents the southernmost Paleo-Indian obsidian
artifact from a known stratigraphic context. Indeed, obsidian projectile points
are rarely found in Texas Paleo-Indian archeological assemblages. Two lanceolate specimens from surface sites in Vat Verde County have been published by
Carroll (1978; see Figure 4). Trace element analysis has failed to reveal their
geologic source. At the Lubbock Lake site, an obsidian point perhaps attributable to the Plainview type has been analyzed as to geologic source and linked to
the Valles Caldera obsidian outcrops in New Mexico (Johnson et al. 1985). It was
associated with a bison kill/butchering locale nearly 10,000 years old. Johnson
et al. (1985:51-52) also report that an obsidian Clovis point from Blackwater
Draw Locality No. 1 has also proved to be from the Valles Caldera source. An
obsidian biface from this site has also been analyzed, but the source could not be
determined. The authors (ibid.: 52) suggest that the presence of these "exotic"
obsidian points at Lubbock lake and Blackwater Draw "... indicates long distance trade, travel, or both and may be the beginnings of later well-established
trade routes and relationships between the Southern Plains and the Puebloan
Southwest."
However, with the Lubbock Lake and Blackwater Draw specimens, we are
seeing obsidian material some 350 to 500 km from its geological source. As
noted above, the distance from Kincaid to the Queretaro obsidian source is about
1000 km. Clearly, these cases provide specific instances of the long-distance
movement, by whatever means, of Paleo-Indian artifacts. There have been a
number of studies of Paleo-Indian settlement patterns, group mobility and exchange systems (Wheat 1971; J. Hester 1975:254-255). Additionally, the wide
distribution of another raw material, Alibates dolomite, used for Paleo-Indian
points and tools, has been documented for the Plains as far north as Wyoming
(Wheat 1971; J. Hester 1975). These and other studies have focused on Plains
Paleo-Indian cultures and comparatively little is known about coeval archeological
complexes in central and northern Mexico. Given the geologic source of the Kincaid specimen, it is quite likely that we are dealing with a non-Plains, southern or
Mexico-based Paleo-Indian pattern.
The Kincaid fragment is morphologically similar to the lanceolate projectile
point found with the second mammoth of Santa Isabel Itzapan (Wormington
1957:95; Fig. 34, left). That specimen is, however, made of a dark red igneous
material though other artifacts in the assemblage associated with the first mammoth are made of obsidian (the sources of which are, as far as we know, undetermined). One possibility is, then, that the Kincaid specimen reflects a southern
cultural pattern that included within its boundaries part of what is now Mexico
and southcentral Texas. One example of such a Mexico-oriented, non-Plains
Paleo-Indian pattern has been published by Epstein (1980). His "Small Projectile

Hester and others--Kincaid Obsidian

151

Point Tradition" is characterized by small bipointed bifaces as early as ca. 8600
B.C. Although we do not believe the Kincaid specimen to be linked to that construct, it may be indicative of another such complex, as yet undefined.
An alternative hypothesis is that the specimen is related to Plains PaleoIndian traditions, but that its morphology is slightly aberrant and makes typological placement uncertain. If this is the case, long-range trade, exchange
networks or trade contacts that involved groups over a considerable distance
would be implied in the procurement of the Queretaro obsidian. With such meager data at present, it would be futile to speculate further on either of these alternatives. It is hoped that they can be tested by a variety of future investigations.
One such test, obviously, would be the trace element analysis of other PaleoIndian obsidian points from the region, perhaps extant in present collections.

REFERENCES CITED
Baugh, T. G. and C. W. Terrell
1982

An Analysis of Obsidian Debitage and Protohistoric Exchange Systems in the
Southern Plains as Viewed from the Edwards I Site (34 BK 2). Plains Anthropologist 27(95) : 1 - 18.

Carroll, W. B.
1978
Notes on Two Obsidian Paleo-Indian Points from Val Verde County, Texas. La
Tierra 5(3): 15-16.
Cobean, R. H., M. D. Coe, E. A. Perry, Jr., K. H. Turekian and D. R Karkar
1971
Obsidian Trade at San Lorenzo Tenochtitlan, Mexico. Science 174:666-671.
Dibble, D. S.
On the Significance of Additional Radiocarbon Dates from Bonfire Shelter,
1970
Texas. Plains Anthropologist 15(50)251 : 254.

Epstein, J. F.
1980
Some Reflections on the Nature of the Northeast Mexico Lithic Tradition and
the Problem of its Origin. In Papers on the Prehistory of Northeastern Mexico
and Adjacent Texas, edited by J. F. Epstein, T. R. Hester and C. Graves,
pp. 81 -92. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio, Special Report 9.
Ericson, J. E. and J. Kimberlin
1977

Obsidian Sources, Chemical Characterization and Hydration Rates in West
Mexico. Archaeometry 19(2) : 157-166.

Haynes, C. V., Jr.
1967

Carbon-14 Dates and Early Man in the New World. In Pleistocene Extinctions,
The Search for a Cause, edited by R S. Martin and H. E. Wright, Jr., pp. 267286. Yale University Press, New Haven.

152

Texas Archeological Society

Hester, J. J.
Paleoarchaeology of the Llano Estacado. In Late Pleistocene Environments of
1975
the Southern High Plains, edited by F. Wendorf and J. J. Hester, pp. 247-256.
New Mexico, Fort Burgwin Research Center.
Hester, T. R.
Late Paleo-lndian Occupations at Baker Cave, Southwestern Texas. Bulletin of
1983
the Texas Archeological Society 53 : 101 - 119.
Hester, T. R. and D. A. Story, editors
ms.

Archaeology of Texas. Book manuscript, in preparation.

Hester, T. R., F. Asaro, and F. Stross
1980

Source Analysis of Obsidian Artifacts in Texas: New Results. Houston Archeological Society Newsletter 68 : 12-16.

1982

Results of Some Recent Studies by the Texas Obsidian Project. Journal of the
Houston Archeological Society 73:8-10.

Hester, T. R., J. W. House, R. N. Jack, and F. H. Stross
X-Ray Fluorescence of Obsidian Artifacts from the Rio Grande Plain, Southern
1975
Texas. Texas Journal of Science 26(1-2) :286-289.
Hughes, R. E., ed.
Obsidian Studies in the Great Basin. Contributions of the University of Califor1984
nia Archaeological Research Facility 45.
Jack, R. N.
1971

The Source of Obsidian Artifacts in Northern Arizona. Plateau 43:103-114.

Johnson, E., V. T. Ho!liday, F. Asaro, F. Stross, and H. Michel
Trace Element Analysis of Paleoindian Obsidian Artifacts from the Southern
1985
High Plains. Current Research in the Pleistocene 2:51-53. Center for the
Study of Early Man, Orono, Maine.
Kelly, T. C.
1983

Criteria for Classification of Plainview and Golondrina Points. La Tierra
9(3) :2-25.

Mitchell, J. L., T. R. Hester, F. Asaro, and F. Stross
Note’s on Trace Element Analysis of Obsidian from Hutchinson and Roberts
1980
Counties in the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of the Texas ArcheologicaI Society
51 : 302- 308.

Shelley, R H. and G. Agogino
1983
Agate Basin Technology: An Insight. Plains Anthropologist 28 : 115-1 ! 8.

Hester and others--Kincaid Obsidian

153

Stipp, J. E., E. M. Davis, J. E. Noakes, and T. E. Hoover
1962

University of Texas Radiocarbon Dates I. Radiocarbon 4:43-50.

Stross, F. H., T. R. Hester, R. F. Heizer, and R. N. Jack
1978

Chemical and Archaeological Studies of Mesoamerican Obsidian. In Advances
in Obsidian Glass Studies, edited by R. E. Taylor, pp. 240-258. Noyes Press,
Park Ridge, N.J.

Stross, F. H., R Sheets, F. Asaro, and H. V. Michel
1983

Precise Characterization of Guatemalan Obsidian Sources and Source Determination of Artifacts from Quirigua. American Antiquity 48:323-346.

Suhm, D. A.
A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological So1960
ciety 29 (for 1958): 63-107.
Tamers, M. A., F. J. Pearson, and E. M. Davis
1964

University of Texas Radiocarbon Dates II. Radiocarbon 6: 138-159.

Wheat, J. B.
1971

Lifeways of Early Man in North America. Arctic Anthropology. 8(2):22-31.

Wormington, H. M.
1957
Ancient Man in North America. Fourth Edition. Denver Museum of Natural
History, Popular Series 4. Denver, Colorado.
Zeitlin, R. N. and R. C. Heimbuch
1978

Trace Element Analysis and the Archaeological Study of Obsidian Procurement
in Precolumbian Mesoamerica. In Lithics and Subsistence, edited by D. Davis,
pp. 117-159. Vanderbilt University Publications in Anthropology 20.

Paleo-Indian Occupations in Wharton County, Texas
L. W. Patterson and J. D. Hudgins

ABSTRACT
Several sites have been recorded in Wharton County, Texas with evidence of PaleoIndian occupations. Much of the data is in the form of surface collections. However, excavations at site 41WH19 have demonstrated a well-stratified site with an occupation sequence from the Paleo-Indian period through the Late Prehistoric. Ongoing research by
members of the Houston Archeological Society is contributing to a more detailed picture
of early occupation sequences and technologies in southeastern Texas.

INTRODUCTION

This paper discusses evidence for Paleo-Indian occupations in Wharton
County. This has become an important geographic area for Paleo-Indian research
by the Houston Archeological Society. A number of surface collections from this
area contain Paleo-Indian components and the first site in southeastern Texas
with well-stratified Paleo-Indian occupations has been found here.
The Paleo-Indian period is of great interest in archeology, especially in relation to origins and early adaptations of early man in the New World. This time
period is generally recognized as being a span of approximately 4,000 years in
Texas (Story 1981:142), from 10,000 to 6,000 B.C. It is viewed here as a
chronological period rather than a term given to a specific prehistoric lifestyle.
There appear to be regional differences in lifestyles throughout North America
during this time period, perhaps due to adaptations to local resources. Data on
this prehistoric period in southeastern Texas has been slow to accumulate (Hester
1980). However, in recent years a significant amount of new data (Patterson
1983) has become available on Paleo-Indian occupations in this region, mainly
due to the efforts of serious amateur archeologists. The extent of the data base
for each local area of this region seems to be directly proportional to the amount
of survey work done. Harris County has the largest number (14) of reported sites
in this region with Paleo-Indian components due to the large amount of survey
work completed there.
Only one radiocarbon date is available for Paleo-indian occupations in
southeastern Texas. Most Paleo-Indian manifestations here have been identified
by projectile point types. These include Clovis, Plainview, Dalton, San Patrice,

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 56 (1985)

156

Texas Archeological Society

Scottsbluff, Early Stemmed (Turner and Hester 1985 : 87), and Angostura types.
Recent excavations at site 41WH19 in Wharton County have yielded Folsom,
Plainview, San Patrice and Angostura-tike points and some new types of notched
and stemmed points from the Paleo-Indian period.

THE SETTING IN WHARTON COUNTY
Wharton County is located in a relatively flat section of the inland coastal
plain (Figure 1), and contains a mixture of woodlands and prairie grasslands.
This county is bisected by the Colorado River drainage system, and has other
stream systems such as the West Bernard River. A large variety of natural floral
and faunal resources occur here that could have provided a subsistence base for
prehistoric foragers. The Holocene period geology here consists mainly of redeposited Pleistocene sands and clays overlying the Pleistocene age Beaumont
formation. Indian occupations here span the Paleo-Indian to the Historic period
with sites found mostly on high points along stream banks.

COUNTY

÷

Figure 1.

Location of Wharton County, Texas

Patterson and Hudgins--Wharton County

157

SURFACE COLLECTIONS

Most survey work in Wharton County has been done east of the Colorado
River. Surface collections from several sites in this area have revealed PaleoIndian projectile points, usually together with point types covering a much longer
time period. It is important to note that most finds of Paleo-indian points in this
area are not isolated finds, but come from surface collections of deflated sites
that usually have evidence of very long occupation sequences, from the PaleoIndian through the Late Prehistoric time periods.
Site 41WH2 (Patterson and Hudgins 1980a) has a collection with Plainview
and San Patrice points. Two points from this site previously identified as Williams and Darl have recently been reclassified as Paleo-Indian side-notched types
similar to ones excavated at site 41WH19. (Patterson and Hudgins 1980a: Figures 2,G and 4,G) It is common for early notched points to have ground basal
edges.
Two Plainview points have been found at site 41WH7 (Patterson and
Hudgins 1980a). Two Plainview points and one San Patrice point were found on
site 41WH26 (Patterson and Hudgins 1982). A Scottsbluff point was found on
site 41WH69 (J. D. Hudgin’s field notes).
Several Paleo-Indian points have been found on the surface of site 41WIll0
(Patterson and Hudgins 1980b, 1984a, 1985b). These specimens include Plainview, San Patrice, Early Stemmed (Turner and Hester 1985 : 87) and miscellaneous lanceolate types. Site 41WH10 is a stratified site but test excavations to date
have not located any Paleo-Indian points in situ.
A large surface collection has been obtained from site 41WH19 location
"A" (Patterson and Hudgins 1981, 1983a, 1984b, 1985a; Hudgins and Patterson
1983). Paleo-Indian points in this collection include Plainview, Scottsbluff, San
Patrice, Early Side Notched, Early Corner Notched, Meserve, and several forms
of early straight-stemmed points. The Early Side Notched, Early Corner Notched
and early straight-stemmed points are of the same types as described here from
excavations at Location "B" of this site.
A total of six sites in Wharton County has now been reported with surface
collections containing Paleo-lndian projectile points, mainly from the Late
Paleo-Indian period of about 8,000 to 6,000 B.C. With the exception of site
41WH69, all of these sites have yielded data indicating very long occupation
sequences, similar to a number of sites found about 50 miles east in Harris
County (Patterson 1983). Also, Wharton County (Patterson and Hudgins 1983b)
and Harris County (Patterson 1980) each have one excavated site with Paleoindian points found in situ.
An important point should be made here regarding surface collections,
which represent significant archeological data that some investigators tend to ignore. Only when data from both surface collections and excavations are used can
the maximum interpretive potential be realized. Syntheses derived without use of

158

Texas Archeological Society

0

1

5

I

I

I

1

cm

Figure 2.

Early Side-Notched points, Stratum 3 upper half

the large number of published surface surveys in southeastern Texas cannot represent the full extent of this region.

SITE 41WH19 LOCATION "B"
Site 41WH19 Location "A" is a large eroded area on a steep river bank.
Details on the location of this site have been recorded in the files of the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin. This area was thoroughly tested
without finding any remaining intact cultural deposits. In the fall of 1982, tests
were made downstream on a less eroded section of this river bank and intact cultural deposits were found. This was designated as site 41WH19 Location "B". A
six-month excavation season was completed by the Houston Archeological Society in May 1983 and a preliminary summary has been published (Patterson and
Hudgins 1983b). A second six-month excavation season was completed in May
1984. A detailed final report of this work is now being prepared. This project has
required many hundreds of hours of labor. It is a good example of the type of
contribution that can be made by serious amateur archeologists.
Site 41WH19 is the first site found in southeastern Texas with well-stratified

Patterson and Hudgins--Wharton County

159

Paleo-Indian components. This site has an occupation sequence for the Early
Paleo-Indian period through the Late Prehistoric. Stratified cultural deposits here
have a total depth of 2.5 meters. The depth of stratified Paleo-Indian components
appears to be slightly over 80 cm.
Stratum 1B is the top level of excavation, totally in the Late Prehistoric period. It consists of 35 to 40 cm of a uniform brown silty sand that is immediately
above the uppermost "A" horizon buried paleosol that was encountered. Arrow
points and ceramics were found in this stratum that are typical of the Late Prehistoric in this region. Stratum 1B, below 1A, consists of 35 to 40 cm of silty
sand that includes three separate buried paleosols. The depth of this stratum was
originally selected to include all visible "A" horizons, but later another "A" horizon was found in the top of Stratum 2. Stratum 1A is the transition between the
Late Prehistoric and the Early Ceramic periods, with arrow points found only
in the top half, but ceramics found throughout this stratum. A summary of
projectile points from Strata 1A, B is given in Table 1.
Stratum 2, below 1A, consists of 80 to 100 cm of alternate light and dark
brown layers. Variations in depths of the individual strata for various test pits are
due to the fact that excavations were made according to natural stratigraphic levels, according to soil types. The top 20 cm of Stratum 2 represents the earliest
portion of the Early Ceramic period. Below this level, Stratum 2 appears to be
entirely in the preceramic Archaic period. A summary of projectile points from
Stratum 2 is given in Table 2.
The bottom of stratum 2 appears to be the transitional point between the
Late Paleo-lndian and Early Archaic periods, at a depth of about 1.7 meters. An
Angostura-like point was found at this level. Based on estimates by other investigators (Prewitt 1981 :Figure 3), Angostura and Angostura-like points occur in
the period of 6,000 to 5,000 B.C.
Below stratum 2, in stratum 3, an abrupt soil change occurs, going from a
clay-sand matrix to a completely sandy matrix with a depth of approximately 40
centimeters. Stratum 3 appears to represent the Late Paleo-lndian period. A surprising variety of side-notched and corner-notched points were found at this level
(Figures 2, 3), all with ground basal edges. Except for San Patrice (Figure 3
upper left), these point styles were not previously known as being from the Late
Paleo-lndian period in southeastern Texas. Some of these point types probably
would be identified as Late Archaic types if found in surface collections. Some
of these point types also occur at Location "A". In the Early Archaic period,
notched points were displaced by straight stem point forms. Following the identification of these new kinds of notched points, more surface collections having
Late Paleo-Indian components may now be classified in this region. Stratum 3 is
judged as representing the Late Paleo-Indian period because it is bracketed by a
Plainview point below and an Angostura-like point above, as well as having a
San Patrice point in this stratum. A summary of projectile points from Stratum 3
is given in Table 3.
Below stratum 3, there is again a marked soil change in stratum 4 with a

160

Texas Archeological Society
Table 1. Site 41WH19 Projectile Points, Strata 1A, B
Location

Dimensions, mm
L

W

T

51.5
43.0
51.3
-39.0
31.8
---23.5
---52.3
17.5

21.6
26.5
28.9
22.9
18.2
18.4
17.5
23.6
15.2
11.6
12.1
18.1
16.4
27.3
11.4

10.9
7.0
8.0
8.9
3.3
4.3
8.1
8.2
4.4
2.7
2.2
4.2
6.6
7.0
3.0

Type
Kent
Ellis-like
Yarbrough
Kent
Perdiz
Edwards
Travis-like
Gary
Scallorn
Perdiz
Perdiz
Unifacial Arrow Point
Gary(?) Preform
Ensor
Scallorn-like

Stratum Depth, cm
30
Btm
39
0- 20
20
15
15-30
0-15
0-20
20-40
0-20
0-20
20-40
!5
10

1A
1A
1A
1A
1A
1A
IA
1A
1B
1B
1B
1B
1B
1B
1B

Table 2. Site 41WH19 Projectile Points, Stratum 2
Location

Dimensions, mm
Type

L

W

T

Bulverde-like
Angostura-like
Bulverde-like
Unclassified
Unclassified
Unclassified
Unclassified
Gary
Unclassified Stem
Unclassified Stem
Unclassified Stem
Misc. Lanceolate
Travis-like
Travis-like
Travis-like
Bulverde-like
Bulverde-like
Yarbrough
Gary

92.6
-98.3
--49.9
27.0
34.0
---38.7
----44.7
53.6
--

34.2
29.4
36.5
-46.1
27.0
16.5
21.0
---18.6
22.4
21.5
22.1
36.2
29.3
24.6
30.1

8.0
8.8
8.3
8.5
8.5
6.9
5.3
7.7
5.5
6.9
5.3
8.2
9.8
10.2
7.4
8.6
8.1
11.1
6.7

Stratum Depth, cm
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

57
71
50
Btm
70
61
50
5
Btm
40
50-75
0-25
41
30
25-50
80
45
34
12

Patterson and Hudgins--Wharton County

161

depth of about 40 centimeters overlying sterile Beaumont clay. A Plainview
point, reworked as a scraper, and two side-notched points (Figure 4 lower right)
were found just below the top of stratum 4. This level probably represents the
earliest Late Paleo-Indian component at approximately 8,000 B.C. (Johnson and
Holliday 1980:Table 3). Below this, at depths of 10 to 15 cm in stratum 4, other
side-notched and unclassified points were found (Figure 4 upper row and lower
left). At a depth of 20 cm, a Folsom point was found (Figure 5 second from left).
This point is a manufacturing failure, apparently broken during removal of the
second flute. Since this Folsom point is a manufacturing failure, it is not likely to
be an item that was curated by later Indians. This split point type of manufacturing failure is common for Folsom points (Wilmsen and Roberts 1984:Figure
102). Because of the presence of a Folsom point, the lower portion of stratum 4
is judged to be in the earlier portion of the Paleo-Indian period that is usually
represented by fluted points. This is now supported by a radiocarbon date of
9920+530 B.R (AA-298) from a small piece of charcoal found during screening
of soil from the lower half of Stratum 4. More radiocarbon dates from several
excavation levels of this site are now being run. Many more small charcoal
samples are available that could be dated by the atomic accelerator method if
funds were available.

Figure 3.

Late Paleo-Indian points, Stratum 3 lower half

162

Texas Archeological Society

Surprisingly, a large side-notched point (Figure 5 left) was found at a depth
of 25 cm in stratum 4, somewhat below the Folsom point. The presence of a sidenotched point this early may be very significant. This may explain why Folsom
points have not been found previously on the upper Texas coast, because other
point types were perhaps being made here, instead of Folsom, during this time
period. A summary of projectile points from Stratum 4 is given in Table 4.
Some general comments on the lithic technology of this site can be made.
The full range of typical Paleo-Indian lithic technology is not present here, as can
be found elsewhere in Texas (Patterson 1977, 1981). Other than projectile point
types, only large scrapers and a few combination scraper/gravers are similar to
typical Plains-type Paleo-Indian tool kits. The absence of an industry for the
manufacture of large prismatic blades should especially be noted. This may be
explained by adaptation to use of local chert raw materials that are generally in
the form of small cobbles that are not suitable for the manufacture of large
blades. Paleo-Indian unifacial tool types seem to be discontinued altogether
above stratum 3 in the Early Archaic. The simple utilized flake dominates the
tool kit of the Archaic period, apparently casually taken from bifacial thinning
debitage.
Preservation of faunal remains in the lower levels of site 41WH19, Location
"B", is not good but some remains of deer and turtle have been identified. There
is no data from this site to associate Paleo-Indians with the hunting of extinct
megafauna, except for an unplaced elephant bone from Location "A". Based on
limited data for faunal remains (McClure 1983), the Paleo-Indian subsistence
pattern here does not appear to differ from that of the later Archaic period. Fired
clay balls found here may be associated with cooking functions (Patterson 1976:
183). This is the first site in southeastern Texas where fired clay balls have been
well identified at Paleo-Indian as well as Archaic levels. The use of fired clay
balls would appear to be a very long technological tradition.

EXTERNAL RELATIONSHIPS
Wharton County, Texas appears to be in a geographic zone that may be an
interface between Plains and eastern Paleo-Indian projectile-point traditions. At
site 41WH19 and other sites in this county, the Plains tradition is represented by
Folsom, Plainview, Scottsbluff, and Angostura-like points. The eastern tradition
is represented by San Patrice, Big Sandy, and a variety of other side-notched and
corner-notched points, all with ground basal edges. There seems to be a very
early and widespread eastern notched-point tradition. For example, some of the
side-notched points from site 41WH 19 are similar to points found with San Patrice at a site in Louisiana (Webb, et al. !971). Early notched points can be
found throughout the southeastern U.S. (Goodyear 1982; Coe t964; Gardner
1974) and on the eastern side of the Great Plains (Agogino and Frankforter

Patterson and Hudgins-- Wharton County

163

Table 3. Site 41WH19 Projectile Points, Stratum 3
Dimensions, mm
Location
L
Type
W
T
Stratum Depth, cm
Early Corner Notched 1
Early Corner Notched 2
Early Corner Notched 3
Early Side Notched 5
Early Side Notched 5
Big Sandy
Early Side Notched 1
Early Side Notched 4
San Patrice
Early Triangular
Early Side Notched 5
Early Side Notched 5
Early Straight Stem
Early Straight Stem
Early Straight Stem
Early Corner Notched 4
Bullet Shaped
Early Straight Stem
Early Side Notched 5’
Early Side Notched 5

48.4
39.0
43.7
53.3
59.2
75.0
61.5
49.0
-32.5
--46.0
-48.2
-33.5
----

27.2
24.4
22.5
21.2
25.5
29.7
27.0
26.8
23.6
---18.2
20.4
22.0
-12.2
----

7.1
6.9
6.6
9.3
11.9
10.4
7.0
6.8
8.3
7.7
9.5
8.4
9.3
7.6
8.1
7.5
9.5
5.5
6.6
--

3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3

38
25
30
37
5
30
0-20
0-20
25
25
25
0-20
30-60
Btm.-40
20-40
20-40
0-20
10
20-40
0-25

Table 4. Site 41WH19 Projectile Points, Stratum 4
Location

Dimensions, mm

Type
Early Side Notched 1
Plainview
Early Side Notched 5
Early Side Notched 4
Folsom
Unclassified Type 1
Unclassified Type 1
Early Side Notched 2
Unclassified Stem
Early Side Notched 3
Early Side Notched 3
Early Straight Stem
Early Straight Stem
Early Contracting Stem (A)
Unclassified Type 2
Dart Point Blade
Early Side Notched 3 Stem

A--or Lanceolate Base

L

W

T

73.4
-69.7
49.9
--------------

24.3
26.4
31.4
23.7
-14.8
15.7
15.0
-17.9
----29.8
21.8
--

7.4
7.0
11.0
7.0
4.0
9.1
5.8
6.9
6.5
8.8
5.1
7.0
5.8
6.1
5.5
6.0
--

Stratum Depth, cm
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4

25
1
1
2
20
10
15
15
20-40
7
0-20
0-20
0- 20
15-30
10
0-20
0-20

164

Figure 4.

Texas Archeological Society

Paleo-Indian points, Stratum 4 upper half

o
cm

Figure 5.

Paleo-Indian points, Stratum 4 lower half

Patterson and Hudgins-- Wharton County

165

River Bottom Clay Dredge Soil
1.5 mto 1.8 mthick

+0.8

m

Stratum 1 b, Medium Dark Brown
dark lines are "A" Horizons)
+0.4 m

Stratum la, Dark Brown

datum

Stratum 2, Medium Brown

(light lines are
darker materials)

/

Stratum 3, Whitish

t
t

-1.4 m

Stratum 4, Reddish Brown

-1.8 m

Red Beaumont Formation
(sterile)

scale

I
0

I
0.4m

I
O.8m

Figure 6. Typical stratigraphy at 41WH19.

166

Texas Archeological Society

1960), some dating as early as Folsom points in the period of 10,000 to 11,000
years ago.
It would appear that the development of a wide variety of projectile point
styles may have been well underway during the Paleo-Indian time period, instead
of starting in the Archaic period, as is so often cited. Some differences in
projectile-point styles may be explained as adaptations to different regional environments. It should be noted, however, that technological innovation is not always related to environmental adaptations, as technological change can occur for
a variety of reasons. The very early stemmed points at Site 41WH19 do seem to
be related to a broad-based Archaic hunting and gathering lifestyle. This fits well
with Shafer’s (1977 : 187) hypothesis "that the early lithic adaptations of the area
between the southern High Plains and the eastern woodlands was one of hunting
and gathering and not which could be described as big game hunting." This
should not be surprising. As Johnson (1977:65) notes, Paleo-Indians probably
always did operate from a broad economic base. Also, it should be noted that
hunting and gathering peoples must adapt readily to local resources in a new occupation area or perish.
A major question is how early did this nonfluted-point technological pattern begin in southeast Texas? Does this represent a technologica! tradition
completely parallel to the fluted-point tradition, or is it a development from
the Clovis early fluted-point tradition? Bryan (1977) notes the possibility of
other projectile point traditions parallel to the fluted-point tradition. Very early
stemmed points have been found in both western (Bryan 1980) and eastern
(Fowler 1971; Peck and Painter 1984) portions of the United States.
Shafer (1977:Figure 3) has described an Early Lithic technological tradition without fluted points that is found throughout eastern Texas. This fits well
into the concept of an eastern Paleo-Indian tradition that is distinct from the
Plains Paleo-Indian tradition. The Obshner site (Crook and Harris 1955) near
Dallas is a good example of this Early Lithic tradition in eastern Texas, where
side-notched points were found together with Scottsbluff Paleo-Indian points.
Severa! side-notched points from the Obshner Site are similar to Late PaleoIndian specimens from site 41WH19.
Some of the early-notched points found in the central Mississippi Valley
from a time period of 9,500 to 9,000 B.P. (Morse and Morse 1983 :Figure 5.2)
are similar to Late Paleo-Indian period points from site 41WH19. Morse and
Morse (1983:71) place Dalton points earlier, however. They also seem to imply
that the Dalton point may be a technological evolution from the Clovis point
(Morse and Morse 1983 : 72). Not all of the early-notched points in this region are
well dated. Unless the central Misssissippi Valley has a unique technological tradition, future research may find that some of the early-notched point types are as
early as Dalton. In any event, the central Mississippi Valley is another example of
the early start of an Archaic hunting and gathering lifeway (Morse and Morse
1983 : 71).
Aside from site 41WH19, there are now several sites in Texas with side-

Patterson and Hudgins--Wharton County

167

notched points earlier than Plainview. Watt (1978 :Figure 7) has shown a San
Patrice-like point earlier than Plainview in the central Brazos River Valley. The
Wilson-Leonard site (Weir 1985), north of Austin, has a number of side-notched
points earlier than Plainview (Frank Weir, personal communication). The Rex
Rodgers site in the Texas Panhandle (Hughes and Willey 1978 :Figure 12) has
San Patrice-like points at least as old as Plainview, similar to Watt’s specimen
from central Texas. It should also be noted that there are some sites in Harris
County, such as 41HR206 (Patterson 1976:Figure 1A, B, C), that have earlynotched point types similar to those from site 4 l WH 19 in Wharton County.
The presence of side-notched and straight and contracting-stem points as
early or earlier than a Folsom fluted point gives more credence to the findings of
Sellards (1940: 1641) from a site in Bee County that is 100 miles west of site
41WH19. The side-notched point found by Sellards (1940:Plate 1-6) is very
similar to the specimen from 41WH19 (Figure 5 left) that was found in a similar
stratigraphic position. This type of point is well made and has an expanding stem
with concave lateral edges. The straight and contracting stem point specimens
from site 41WH19 and from the Bee County site are all fragments. It should also
be noted that the coastal plain of southeast Texas is probably a poor place to
search for pre-Ctovis remains. It seems to be common for sites in this region to
have Paleo-Indian remains of 11,000 years age or less directly overlying the
Beaumont formation. Since the Beaumont formation has an estimated minimum
age of at least 30,000 years (Aten 1983: 108), there seems to be a gap in the
geological stratigraphy of this region of roughly 20,000 years. This may represent a severe erosional episode at the end of the Pleistocene period.

SUMMARY

It has now become apparent that there are a significant number of sites in
southeastern Texas with very long occupation sequences, indicating a longtime
stable settlement pattern for the inland portion of the coastal plain (Patterson
1983). Excavations at site 41WH19 (Patterson and Hudgins 1983b), site 41HR315
(Patterson 1980), and site 41HR5 (Wheat 1953) have given details on this subject. Numerous surface surveys have also aided in establishing this widespread
regional pattern. The long period of over 10,000 years for a foraging lifestyle in
southeastern Texas might be compared to a similar longtime pattern for the Desert Culture of the eastern Great Basin (Jennings 1974: 154-182).
Until recently, most of the data on the prehistory of southeastern Texas related to the Late Archaic and later time periods after 2,000 B.C. The earlier
Paleo-indian, Early Archaic, and Middle Archaic periods are now better known.
Ongoing research by members of the Houston Archeological Society is continuing to contribute to a more detailed picture of the early time periods in southeastern Texas.

168

Texas Archeological Society

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Appreciation is expressed to A. J. T. Jull and C. Vance Haynes for assistance in radiocarbon dating given by the University of Arizona.

REFERENCES
Agogino, G. A. and W. D. Frankforter
1960

A Paleo-Indian Bison-Kill in Northwestern Iowa. American Antiquity 25(3):
414-415.

Aten, L. E.
1983
Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press, New York.
Bryan, A. L.
1977

Development Stages and Technological Traditions. New York Academy of Sci-

1980

The Stemmed Point Tradition: An Early Technological Tradition in Western

ences, Annals 228 : 355-368.
North America. tn Anthropological Papers in Memory of Earl H. Swanson, Jr.,
edited by C. N. Warren and D. R. Tuohy. Special Publication of Idaho State
Museum of Natural History, Pocatello.
Coe, J. L.
1964

The Formative Cultures of the Caroline Piedmont. American Philosophical Society, Transactions 54(5).

Crook, W. W. Jr. and R. K. Harris
1955

Scottsbluff Points in the Obshner Site Near Dallas, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 26 : 75- t00.

Fowler, M. L.
1971
Summary Report of Modoc Rock Shelter. Illinois State Museum, Report of
Investigations 8.
Gardner, W. M. (ed.)
1974
The Flint Run Paleo-Indian Complex: A Preliminary Report 1971-1973 Seasons. Occasional Papers 1, Archeology Laboratory, Catholic University of
America.
Goodyear, A. C.
1982

The Chronological Position of the Dalton Horizon in the Southeastern United
States. American Antiquity 47(2):382-395.

Hester, T. R.
1980
A Survey of Paleo-Indian Archaeological Remains Along the Texas Coast. In
Papers on the Archaeology of the Texas Coast, edited by L. Highly and T. R.
Hester, pp. 1 - 12. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas
at San Antonio, Special Report 11.
Hudgins, J. D. and L. W. Patterson
Scottsbluff Point, Site 41WH!9. Journal of the Houston ArcheologicaI Society
1983
75: 1.

Patterson and Hudgins--Wharton County

169

Hughes, J. T. and P. S. Willey
1978

Archeology at MacKenzie Reservoir. Office of the State Archeologist, Archeological Survey Report 24.

Jennings, J, D,
Prehistoty of North America. McGraw-Hill, New York.
1974
Johnson, E.
1977

Animal Food Resources of Paleoindians. The Museum Journal 17:65-77.
Lubbock, Texas.

Johnson, E. and V. T. Holliday
A Plainview Kill/Butchery Locale on the Llano Estacado--The Lubbock Lake
1980
Site. Plains Anthropologist 25(88) : 89-111.
McClure, W. L.
1983

Faunal Material from Area "B" of 41WH19. Journal of the Houston Archeological Society 77:19-22.

Morse, D. F. and P. A. Morse
1983

Archeology of the Central Mississippi Valley. Academic Press, New York.

Patterson, L. W.
1976

Technological Changes in Harris County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 47 : 171 - 188.

1977

A Discussion of Possible Asiatic Influences on Texas Pleistocene Lithic Technology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 48:27-45.

1980

The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County,
Texas. Houston Archeological Society, Report 3.

1981

Paleoindian Lithic Technology and New Associated Dates for Site 41ME3, Medina County, Texas. La Tierra 8(1):23-26.

1983

Prehistoric Settlement and Technological Patterns in Southeast Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 54 : 253- 259.

Patterson, L. W. and J. D. Hudgins
1980a

Preceramic Sites 41WH2 and 41WH7, Wharton County, Texas. Houston Archeological Society Newsletter 66 : 34-39.

1980b

Multi-Component Site 41WH 10, Wharton Co., Texas. Houston Archeological
Society Newsletter 68:28-35.

1981

Site 41WH19, A Long Occupation Period in Wharton Co., Texas. Houston
Archeological Society Newsletter 70: 4-13.

1982

Site 41WH26, Another Long Occupation in Wharton Co., Texas. Journal of the
Houston Archeological Society 72:10-15.

1983a

Additional Artifacts from 41WH19, Wharton Co., Texas. Journal of the Houston Archeological Society 76 : 7-11.

1983b

A Preliminary Summary of Excavations at Site 41WHt9, Wharton County,
Texas. Journal of the Houston Archeological Society 77 : 10-18.

1984a

Test Excavations at Site 41WH 10, Wharton County, Texas. Journal of the Houston Archeological Society 80: 23- 26.

1984b

Additional Artifacts from 4tWH19 Location A, Wharton Co., Texas. Journal
of Houston Archeological Society 79 : 20- 23.

170

Texas Archeological Society

1985a

Additional Projectile Points from Site 41WH19. Journal of Houston Arch-

1985b

eological Society 82 : 22-24.
Additional Test Excavations at Site 41WH 10, Wharton County, Texas submitted
to Journal of the Houston Archeological Society.

Peck, R. M. and F. Painter
1984

The Baucom Hardaway Site: A Stratified Deposit in Union Country, North
Carolina. The Chesopiean 22(2):1-41.

Prewitt, E. R.
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological So1981
ciety 52 : 65- 89.
Sellards, E. H.
Pleistocene Artifacts and Associated Fossils from Bee County, Texas. Bulletin
1940
of the Geological Society of America 51:1628-1657.
Shafer, H. J.
Early Lithic Assemblages in Eastern Texas. The Museunz Journal 17 : 187-197.
1977
Lubbock, Texas.
Story, D. A.
An Overview of the Archaeology of East Texas. Plains Anthropologist 26(92) :
1981
139-156.

Turner, E. S. and T. R. Hester
1985
A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press, Austin.
Watt, E. H.
Radiocarbon Chronology of Sites in the Central Brazos Valley. Bulletin of the
1978
Texas Archeological Society 49 : 111 - 138.
Webb, C. H., J. L. Shiner and E. W. Roberts
1981
The John Pearce Site (16CD56): A San Patrice Site in Caddo Parish, Louisiana.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 41 : 1-49.
Weir, F. A.
An Early Holocene Burial at the Wilson-Leonard Site in Central Texas. Mam1985
moth Trumpet 2(1):1,3.
Wheat, J. B.
An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin, Bureau of American Eth1953
nology, Bulletin 154.
Wilmsen, E. N. and F. H. H. Roberts
Lindenmeier, 1934-1974: Concluding Report on Investigations. Smithsonian
1984
Contributions to Anthropology 24.

A Burial From the Sour Mash Site (41HI34), Hill
County, Texas
C. K. Chandler

ABSTRACT
A prehistoric human buria! was recovered from the eroding bank of
White Rock Creek in Hill County, Texas. A single dart point with broken
stem was directly associated with the burial. It was embedded in the right
tibia just below the knee. Two other dart points were recovered from the
grave fill at the same level as the top of the burial and about 15 cm from the
knees. Radiocarbon analysis of the human bones provided a radiocarbon
date of 2060 - 210 B.P.

INTRODUCTION
In November, 1964 a single human burial was found when the back of the
skull was exposed by erosion of the vertical bank of White Rock Creek in northcentral Texas near Milford (Figure 1). In addition to the natural erosional processes of creek bank collapse, the burial site area had evidence of extensive reliccollecting activity. The skull was covered with loose soil to mask and protect it
until proper excavation could take place. The burial was subsequently excavated
by C. K. Chandler, Bob Brannon and Henry Nichols on November 7, 1964.

BURIAL DESCRIPTION
The burial lay on its right side in a loosely-flexed position with both hands
before the face. The head was oriented to the west facing south. The knees were
drawn up almost to the elbows (Figure 2). The skull and most all of the remaining
bones were fragmented. Most of the vertebrae and scapula were missing, apparently decomposed. Much of the ends of the ribs and tong bones were decomposed. A dart point was embedded in the right tibia; it had a broken stem and is
unclassifiable, but it has the appearance of a Gary. The other two dart points

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 56 (1985)

172

Texas Archeological Society

x._

Hill County

Figure 1. Location of Hill County, Texas and Site 41H134.

found in the grave fill near the knees were Gary. Research of the literature reveals
projectile points associated with burials are not uncommon but the vast majority
of those reported have been arrow points. For more on projectile point wounds
see Watt (1936) and Prewitt (1974).

STRATIGRAPHY
The top of the skull was 121 cm below the surface. An excavation area 210
cm x 120 cm was started from the surface. All material was passed through a 1¼_
inch screen. Four identifiable soil zones were encountered in the excavation.
Zone I, from surface to 30 cm, was black clayey loam interlaced with tree roots,
small particles of marl, a few flint flakes, one smal! pottery sherd, two flint artifacts, some animal bone refuse, and a deer ulna tool. Of the two flint artifacts,
one was an Alba arrow point and one a bifacially-worked cutting tool on a
medium-sized flake.
Zone II, 30 cm to 95 cm, was dark grayish-black clayey loam containing
numerous pieces of marl, flint flakes, broken animal bone, charcoal flecks, large
tree roots, one Gary dart point and one broken pointed biface.
Zone III, 95 cm to 125 cm, was a grayish-black clay interlaced with white

Chandler--Sour Mash Site

173

streaks that appeared to be decomposed limestone that had leached into the soil.
This zone was almost sterile of cultural debris in that there were no animal
bones, no flint flakes, and only an occasional charcoal fleck. However, three artifacts were recovered from the bottom of this zone. Two were large Gary dart
points and one a pointed biface made of petrified wood.
Zone IV began at 125 cm. It was a yellowish clay of an undetermined depth.
The burial pit had been dug into this zone approximately 15 cm. This would
place the lowest part of the burial at 140 cm below the existing surface.
The burial pit was not identified in Zone III, but the upper surface of three
large limestone slabs was encountered at 105 cm to 112 cm below surface. The
thickest of these slabs (12 cm) was placed over the upper torso and skull while
the two thinner slabs (5 to 8 cm) were over the hips and legs (Figure 3).
Forty-five centimeters of the yellowish clay (Zone IV) was excavated below
and immediately north of the burial and it was sterile of cultural debris. It appears the burial pit originated in Zone III and was dug into Zone IV.

PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
An osteological analysis of the skeleton from the Sour Mash site was carried
out by Lawrence E. Aten in April 1967. The comments that follow are derived
from his notes.

Sex Determination
The skeleton is almost certainly that of a female, based on small to medium
features of the skull, a smooth occipital region, and a delicate mandible. This set
of features is in contrast to the more rugged characteristics of the male cranium.
(cf., Brothwell 1965:51, 53).

Age at Death
Aten’s notes indicate a "rough guess" as the age of death of this individual.
His estimate is 40-45 years of age, based on several factors. He notes excessive
tooth wear, but was impressed by the "great abundance of sutures still evident."
The cranial sutures were generally obliterated on the interior, however, and this
condition had apparently not progressed very far towards the exterior cranial surface by the time of death. Brothwell (1965:38) notes that suture closure is not
very useful for age determination although sutures begin to close at about 20
years of age.

174

Texas Archeological Society

Chandler--Sour Mash Site

175

176

Texas Archeological Society

Skeletal Elements Present
Much of the skull and a complete mandible are in the collection. Postcranial
bones include: the center of two cervical vertebrae, showing marked lipping;
fragments of the sacrum; rib fragments (6 right; 13 left; 8 indeterminate fragments); four fragments of the right and left innominates; the right humerus from
just below the head to the distal end and the lower third of the left humerus to just
below the coronoid fossa; a right ulna that is complete except for the distal extremity (the left ulna is present and in a similar condition); the right and left radii,
both of which are fragmentary, extending from just below the head to near the
distal end of the shaft.
Lower limbs from this skeleton include: the right femur (fragmentary and
extending from just below the lesser trochanter to just above the patellar area);
the left femur (fragmentary, in a similar condition as the right femur); five tibia
shaft fragments, one of which exhibits a jagged osseous growth along the anterior border; the right fibula and the left fibula, both fragmentary and extending
from just below the proximal end to near the lateral malleolus); outer extremities,
including three metatarsals, four phalanges, and a fragmentary left (?) calcaneum. Finally, there were 20 unidentifiable fragments of the skeleton.
A series of cranial measurements were made by Aten. These detailed observations are on file at the Center for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio, and are available to interested colleagues.

Pathology
A couple of observations can be made here. First, the cervical vertebrae
with marked lipping may be indicative of osteoarthritis (Brothwell 1965:144;
Ubelaker 1980: 10).
The jagged projections noted on the anterior surface of a tibia fragment may
result from some type of osteitis, or inflammation of the bone. This fragment
should probably be examined by a specialist for a more accurate assessment. The
affected area is 28 mm long and the three bony projections range in length from
2-3 mm. There appears to be postmortem or postexcavation breakage of two of
these projections.

Radiocarbon Dating of the Burial
The long bones from this burial were submitted to the Radiocarbon Laboratory, University of Texas, Austin. This radiocarbon assay yielded a date of
2060+210 B.P. This date was corrected through dendrochronology (see Klein et
al. 1982), to 520 B.C. to A.D. 245 (Sam Valastro, personal communication).

Chandler--Sour Mash Site

177

TRACE ELEMENT AND GEOLOGIC SOURCE STUDY OF OBSIDIAN
The one small obsidian flake from 41 HI 34 was subjected to X-ray fluorescence analysis at Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, University of California,
Berkeley. This XRF analysis reveals a probable source of Malad, southeastern
Idaho. Fred Stross (letter to T. R. Hester, June 20, 1985) notes that the specimen
from 41 HI 34 actually "... fits the Malad profile quite well, but the thinness of
the sample has tended to increase the values for the abundances of diagnostic
elements." Hester et al. (1986) have noted the presence of Malad, Idaho obsidian
at a number of Late Prehistoric and Late Archaic sites in Texas, primarily along
the eastern and southern edges of the Edwards Plateau.
For future reference to interested scholars, the raw data provided through
the XRF analysis is found in Table I.

DISCUSSION

A review of two local collections from this site reveals Perdiz, Cliffton,
Alba, Cuney, Scallorn and Young arrow points, Gary, Palmillas, Ensor, Wells,
Marshall, Elam, Ellis, Yarbrough, Godley and Neches River dart points. Perdiz is
the most common arrow point type constituting 50 percent of the identifiable arrow points and Gary the most common dart point type for 37 percent of the identifiable dart points. Classification of these artifacts is derived from Suhm and
Jelks (1962) and Turner and Hester (1985). In addition to these identified types
there were 20 unidentified dart points with rectangular to slightly expanding
stems that have the general appearance of Darl or Godley. Seven of these have
strongly beveled blades with stem edge smoothing, seven others have stem edge
smoothing without beveled blades and the remaining six are somewhat smaller
without beveling or smoothing. Some have lightly serrated blade edges and some
have slightly flared shoulders. These appear to fit well within the Eliasville type
proposed by Flinn and Flinn for similar points from the High Bluff site in northern Stephens County (Flinn and Flinn 1968:98, 99, 100).
Among the unidentified dart points is a corner-notched, expanding-stem
point that is unusually long and made of a very light-gray grainy flint that is unlike any other material from this site. Dimensions are: L-9.7 cm; W-2.7 cm; T-.8
cm. This point greatly resembles an Ellis but is unusually long for this type.
Also included in the local collections from this site are several Erath Bifaces
(Story 1965), serrated flakes, flake end and side scrapers, bifacial knife forms,
scored hematite, bifacial drills, one canine tooth, one obsidian flake, one hammerstone, and one thin butterfly-shaped gorget made of Taylor shale (Prewitt,
personal communication), deer-ulna bone tools and 99 potsherds. Sixty of these

178

Texas Archeological Society
Table 1. XRF Analysis of 41 HI 34 and Malad, Idaho Obsidians

Designation

LBL Run

Ba*

Zr

Rb/Zr

Sr/Zr

41 HI 34

8141-0

1493

117

1.21±.03

.74±.02

Malad,
Idaho
reference

8136-E (XRF)
8136-F
Neutron
activiation
analysis

101

1.28±.04

.71±.03

1499

Analysis performed by Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory (LBL) and data provided
by F. Stross to T. Hester, June 20, 1985.
*The XRF Ba values have been calculated by a new approach and should be close to the
tree value (--+2%).

sherds are decorated with various incised, punctate, stamped, brushed or impressed designs of various unidentified Caddoan types. One sherd is Weches Fingernail Impressed. The one stamped sherd appears to be Pontchartrain Stamped
(H. Shafer, personal communication). There appear to be at least twenty different vessels represented. Several of the sherds are shell-tempered. All of these
materials reportedly came from the upper levels of the site and cannot be directly
related to the burial, but it is of interest to note that the predominate dart point
style of Gary is the same type as found in the grave-fill at the same level as the
upper part of the skeleton beneath the covering limestone slabs.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Of the 13 sites listed in Table 2, eight report burials including cremations at
two of these sites. The Stansbury site burials were historic and stone slabs were
associated with only one of these. However, it is not stated that the burial was
covered with stone slabs, but: "... Burial No. 2 was located in the midst of
eight stone slabs..." (Stephenson 1970:64) One of the Strawn Creek burials
had limestone slabs in association but was not defined as being covered with
these slabs. None of the burials from the other sites listed in this table are reported to have had limestone slabs covering.
Earlier reports (Watt t936: 10, 11) reflect a number of burials covered over
with limestone rocks and describe this as a usual feature of the 32 burials recovered from Aycock Shelter. Hughes (1942) also states Central Texas burials
"... are ordinarily flexed and stone covered." Burials covered with limestone
slabs are also reported from Horn Shelter No. 2 (Redder 1985:43) and from

Chandler--Sour Mash Site

179

Lehman Rock Shelter (Kelley 1947: 123).
An analysis of artifacts in private collections recovered from this site indicates it was intermittently occupied over a considerable span of time and that
cultural changes occurred over this time period. The earliest occupation of the
site, though intermittent, appears attributable to the Middle Archaic time period
with increased use of the site toward Late and Transitional Archaic times. The
predominant dart point styles of Gary, Yarbrough, and Palmillas indicate a strong
bond with the Archaic LaHarpe Aspect in the eastern part of the state. There is
evidence in the form of Elam points for ties with the Elam Focus of the Trinity
Aspect to the north, and the Godley points indicate either Late Archaic occupation or other contact with early Austin Focus people from Central Texas. The
presence of Scatlorn points supports the continued presence of the Austin Focus
people.
The predominant arrow point type of Perdiz with the minor occurrence of
Cliffton are diagnostic of the Toyah Focus. These point types occur over most of
the state and are well documented from the northcentral area to the Gulf Coast.
Perdiz occurred in 10 of the 13 sites researched.
The occurrence of a wide variety of Caddoan style pottery, two sherds of
Leon Plain and one sherd of Pontchartrain Stamped indicates an extensive trade
network over much of the Caddoan areas of East Texas and possibly into Oklahoma and Louisiana. The Leon Plain ware may have been locally made but
probably came from contact with Central Texas people.
Trace element analysis of the one obsidian flake from this site indicating a
tentative source of Malad, Idaho and the identification of several other obsidian
flakes and artifacts along the eastern edge of the Edwards Plateau as having their
source as Malad, Idaho indicates a far-reaching trade network to the north
and west.
The complete absence of European trade material indicates occupation of
the site terminated prior to intensive trade between white men and Central Texas
Indians.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to express my sincere appreciation to Lawrence Aten, Tom Hester,
Harry Shafer and Elton Prewitt for their help and guidance in the analysis of materials
from this site and to Richard McReynolds for the drawings of the burial.
Aten did the osteological analysis and Hester later prepared the physical anthropology summary from those notes. Hester also arranged for the XRF analysis of the obsidian
flake and provided additional information regarding previous work in this area. Shafer was
helpful in the classification of the pottery sherds. Prewitt was very helpful in providing
information on reference material and in the identification of the lithics. The radiocarbon
analysis of the human bone was funded by the Friends of Archaeology program, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

180

Texas Archeological Society

.£2

’,D

cq

vD
(’ 5

e-I

c-I

cq

u’~

cq

t/5

eq

c-I
¢%

O

t"-

~

1".1

(-4

(’.1

e¢5

c~

t, -)

("4

Chandler--Sour Mash Site

~ ~o~~
oJ}¢~

C’4

~2N

oo

oo

0"~

oo

~,0

c’q

=
oo

~1-

o~

_.~’~

~-,

,,0

0

m

181

182

Texas Archeological Society

REFERENCES CITED
Brothwell, D. R.
1965

Digging Up Bones. British Museum of Natural History, London.

Duffield, Lathel F.
The Strawn Creek Site: A Mixed Archaic and Neoamerican Site at Navarro
Mills Reservoir, Navarro County, Texas. Mimeographed report, Texas Archeological Salvage Project, University of Texas at Austin.
Flinn, Richard and Judy Flinn
1968

The High Bluff Site on the Clear Fork of the Brazos River. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 38:93-125.

Hester, T. R., Frank Asaro, Helen Michel, Fred Stross and Fred W. Nelson
1986
Trace Element and Geologic Sources Studies. Choke Canyon Series 10:5t0522. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.

Hughes, Jack T.
1942
An Archeological Report on the Harrell Site of North Central Texas. MA thesis,
University of Texas at Austin.
Jelks, Edward B.
1953
Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 24 : 189- 207.
1962

The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County, Texas.
Archaeology Series 5. Department of Anthropology, University of Texas at
Austin.

Kelley, J. Charles
1947

The Lehmann Rock Shelter. Bulletin of" the Texas Archeological Society 18:
125-128.

Klein, Jeffrey, J. C. Lerman, R E. Damon and E. K. Ralph
t982

Calibration of Radiocarbon Dates: Tables Based on the Consensus Data of
the Workshop on Calibrating the Radiocarbon Time Scale. Radiocarbon 24(2) :
103-150.

Long, Joseph K.
1961

Three Central Texas Aspect Sites in Hill County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 30 (for 1959):223-252.

Prewitt, Elton R.
1982

Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site, Williamson County, Texas.
Reprints in Archeology No. 1. Prewitt and Associates, Austin. (Reprinted from
Research Report 49, Texas Archeological Survey, University of Texas at Austin, 1974.)

Chandler--Sour Mash Site

183

Redder, Albert J.
1985

Horn Shelter Number 2: The South End; A Preliminary Report. The Central
Texas Archeologist 10: 37-65.

Sorrow, William M.
1966

The Pecan Springs Site, Bardwell Reservoir, Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project 10.

Stephenson, Robert W.
1970

Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir Area, Central Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 41:37-286.

Story, Dee Ann
1965

The Archeology of Cedar Creek Reservoir, Henderson and Kaufman Counties,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 36: 163-257.

Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks
1962

Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Archeological Society Special Publication 1 and Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin 4.

Turner, Ellen Sue and Thomas R. Hester
1985

A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press, Austin.

Ubelaker, D. H.
1980

Human Bones and Archaeology. Interagency Archeological Service, U.S. Department of the Interior, Washington.

Watt, Frank H.
1936

A Prehistoric Shelter Burial in Bell County, Texas. Bulletin of the Central Texas
Archeological Society 2 : 5-27.

A Mimbres Potter’s Grave:
An Example of Mimbres Craft-Specialization?
Harry J. Sharer

ABSTRACT
Archeological excavations beneath the floor of a Late Pithouse period
Three-Circle Phase Mimbres structure at LA 15049 in Grant County, New
Mexico, led to the discovery of a burial accompanied by an assortment of
artifacts suggesting that the female adult buried in the grave was a potter.
Among the grave items was at least one and possibly two baskets, a Boldface
Black-on-White bowl containing a red paint pigment, seven worked potsherds, two polished pebbles, and at least three unfired, red painted, Mimbres Boldface Black-on-White ollas. The archeological and cultural contexts
of the burial and artifact assemblage are described. The find is significant
because the potter was recognized for her craft skills by her own people suggesting that a level of craft specialization had been achieved in the Mimbres
culture by the Late Pithouse Period.

INTRODUCTION
The Mimbres Mogollon of southwestern New Mexico are recognized mostly
for their exquisitely painted Black-on-White pottery (Brody 1977). In fact, the
commercial collecting of the Mimbres painted pottery, which is recovered mostly
in mortuary context, has led to the total destruction of most Mimbres pueblo
villages in the Mimbres heartland. This regrettable loss in archeological sites has
promoted a fear among archeologists that we may never know the specifics about
the people who painted the pottery. In an effort to expand our knowledge about
this little known ancient Mogol!on culture, the Department of Anthropology at
Texas A&M University has been engaged in intensive, long-term archeological
investigations in the middle Mimbres River Valley in Grant County, New Mexico. Among the objectives of this research are to gain information about the evolution of the Mimbres culture, and to study the human ecology and adaptive technology by examining all aspects of their material culture such as subsistence
remains, architecture, mortuary data and skeletal remains, lithic and ceramic

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 56 (1985)

186

Texas Archeological Society

technology, and agricultural technology. In short, we are seeking to find out
about them as a people, by looking beyond the pottery, in an effort to understand
why they expressed their unique symbolism so vividly in the ceramic arts; and
perhaps more importantly, we are seeking to determine what happened to their
cultural adaptation and to the people who disappeared from the archeological
record ca. A.D. 1130.
MIMBRES MOGOLLON SEQUENCE

The Mimbres Mogollon culture was an indigenous, agriculturally-oriented
tradition that began ca. A.D. 200 (Cosgrove and Cosgrove 1932; LeBlanc 1983;
Shafer and Taylor 1986). Geographically the Mimbres area is concentrated in,
but not totally confined to, the landlocked Mimbres River drainage in southwestern New Mexico (LeBlanc 1983: Figures 1 and 2). The Mogollon sequence

SITE LOCATIONS
MIMBRES VALLEY
NEW MEXICO

Figure 1. Map of the Mimbres Valley in southwestern New Mexico showing relative location of LA 15049.

Shafer--Mimbres Potter’s Grave

187

began with the appearance of shallow, oval pithouses with extended entranceways
that were usually constructed on high points of land overlooking the predominant
streams. These early pithouses are associated with plain brownware pottery. This
Early Pithouse period is referred to as the Cumbre phase (Anyon et al. 1981).
About A.D. 550, oval pithouses began to be constructed in the lower elevations
of the valleys. This shift, presumably tied to an increasing commitment to agriculture is marked by other changes as well, and signals the beginning of the Late
Pithouse period (Anyon et al. 1981).
A general shift from oval to rectangular pithouse form can be traced throughout the Late Pithouse period. The appearance of decorated pottery, first the redslipped San Francisco Red, followed sequentially by Mogollon Red-on-Brown,
Three-Circle Red-on-White, Mimbres Boldface Black-on-White and the finer
transitional style, which occurred between Boldface and Classic Black-onWhite, provides the hallmarks of the Late Pithouse Period.
The ceramics and the general evolution in pithouse form and characteristics
have been used to define three cultural phases within the Late Pithouse period
(Anyon et al. 1981). These are Georgetown, San Francisco, and Three Circle.
Surface rooms began to be constructed about A.D. 950 to 1000. These may have
been surface storage rooms associated with the pithouses at first, but eventually
contiguous-room pueblos replaced pithouses altogether and marked the onset of
the Classic Mimbres period. Other changes occurred also; most notable are the
appearance of Mimbres Classic Black-on-White and polychrome pottery and the
mortuary patterns, which include numerous subfloor burials and the placement of "killed" bowls over or about the head of around half of the interments
(Gilman 1980).
SITE LA 15049
Site LA 15049, known as the NAN Ruin (Cosgrove and Cosgrove 1932;
Shafer 1982; Shafer and Taylor 1986), is located in the middle portion of the
Mimbres River valley in Grant County, New Mexico (Figure 1). The site has
been under investigation by Texas A&M University since 1978, It consists of a
pithouse village of undetermined size overlain by a large Classic Mimbres pueblo
ruin (Shafer 1982; Shafer and Taylor 1986). The Classic Mimbres ruin was first
tested by the Cosgroves in 1926 (Shafer et al. 1979) and was extensively disturbed by pothunters prior to the Texas A&M University investigations.
The occupation at LA 15049 began sometime in the Late Pithouse period,
probably about A.D. 700, based on the presence of Mogolton Red-on-Brown and
Three Circle Red-on-White pottery found in the fill of some of the older pithouses. The settlement was occupied continuously throughout the remainder of
the Late Pithouse period, through the Classic Mimbres phase, ending sometime
between A.D. 1125 and 1150, at a time when the entire Mimbres Valley was
abandoned and the Classic Mimbres period came to an end.
The emphasis of this report is on the Late Pithouse period village at LA

188,

Texas Archeological Society

15049 represented by 10 pithouse structures, eight of which have been partly or
wholly excavated. These include the floor remnant of Room 1, Rooms 14, 15,
17, 43, 52, 83, 86, 91, and 93. The "potter’s grave" was located in Room 14.

Room 14
This east-facing Three-Circle Phase pithouse was discovered beneath the
northern section of Room 12 (surface pueblo room of the Classic Mimbres
Phase) in the 1981 season. The pit was dug 1.13 meters into the Pleistocene clay
and gravel terrace underlying the cultural deposit at the site. Room 14 was not
completely excavated, but was sufficiently investigated to accurately measure the
interior size (Figure 2). The subsquare pitroom measured 3.2 meters east-west by
3.0 meters north-south, giving an overall floor space of about 9.5 square meters.
The walls were once plastered with adobe and the floor was surfaced twice, once
when the room was originally constructed and again later. Although not exposed
by excavation, the entrance faced east as indicated by the firepit placement in the
eastcentral portion of the room.
Floor features included a circular firepit in the eastcentral portion, a mano
adjacent to the firepit, portions of a Three-Circle Neck Corrugated olla in the
northwest corner and a post set into the floor along the south wall at a point
where the wall expanded outward (Figure 2). A similar outer expansion occurred
along the north wall as well.
Subfloor features included three burials; Burial 86 is the subject of this report and is described in more detail below. Burial 90 was a pit placed in the center of the north wall that contained two smashed vessels (an early Mimbres Transitional Black-on-White [Figure 6, a]), a brownware plate, a pot polishing stone,
and two worked potsherds. No skeletal material was found in this pit, but its
depth near the water table and composition (very loose large cobbles) may have
contributed to total destruction of the skeletal material. Buria! 93 was a child
placed near the entranceway close to the east wall. It was accompanied by shell
beads, turquoise and lead crystal inlays (part of an inlaid object), a smashed pallette, and three smashed pottery vessels, including a red-slipped seed jar (Figure 6, b), a small punctated jar, and a plain brownware boat-shaped bowl with tab
handles (Figure 6, c).
Burial 86
Burial 86 was placed in an oval pit 52 cm deep beneath the second or uppermost floor in the northwest corner of the room. The poorly preserved skeleton
was in a tightly flexed position with the head to the east (Figure 3, a; 3, b). The
sex of the individual in the grave, determined by Suzanne W. Patrick (personal
communication, 1986), a graduate student in human osteology at Texas A&M
University, on the basis of sexually distinctive features on the skeleton, was a
gracile female. The grave contained an assortment of artifacts associated with

Shafer--Mimbres Potter’s Grave

189

!

I

[

!

I
I

I
I
!

Room 14 Pithouse
Burials 86, 90 and 93
~) Posthole

0 Burials

~Olla

~

[] Firepit

[] Unexcavated

Sherd
concentration

--- Probable Room Outline
...... Excavation Limit

0

meter

1

Figure 2. Schematic plan of Room 14, LA 15049.

pottery making; it is on the basis of these associated artifacts that the grave is
interpreted to be that of a potter.
Associated A rtifacts
Included in the grave was a coiled basket; it is possible that a twilled basket
(Figure 5) was also included, but since the body was wrapped in a twilled mat, the
fragments of which were scattered throughout the area of the corpse, it was not
possible to conclusively determine if there were two separate twilled objects in
the grave. The textiles, along with traces of other organic residue, were preserved by the damp condition due to the depth of the grave into the gravels. Also

190

Texas Archeological Society

8
,,.

tt

Pro{ile - t3urmt

8G

[~]Skull Froqm~ls

[] Left Femur -Proxpmal En~

~Tl]sl~ero

[~RiSht Potelte

[] Left Foot

[] Worxee S~erd

[’31Rieht T,bio

[] See~ Jar

[] 13one

[]Left Femur

[] Red Ochre V,~ssel
0

cm

~Text,lc

I0

b
Figure 3. A, horizontal plan of Burial 86; B, profile of Burial 86.

Shafer--Mimbres Potter’s Grave

191

....

a

b
Figure 4. Views of Burial 86 during excavation; A, upper portion of pit with seed jar and
sherd of Boldface Black-on-White bowl; B, sherds of Boldface Black-on-White at middle
level of pit.

192

Texas Archeological Society

ocm2

Figure 5. Selvage fragment of twilled mat or basket from chest area of Burial 86.

in the grave was a small Boldface Black-on-White seed jar (Figure 4,a 6,d), a
smashed Boldface Black-on-White bowl (Figure 6, e), a small Boldface Blackon-White bowl containing red pigment (Figure 6, f), at least three unfired, white
slipped, red painted Boldface Black-on-White ollas (Figures 7, 8), seven worked
potsherds (Figures 9, a-d, g)’, and two polished pebbles which probably served
as pot-polishing stones (Figure 9, f). Some of the pottery making tools may have
been contained within a twilled basket. The worked sherds were presumably used
in tooling the clay while shaping the pottery. The unfired ollas were severely
crushed and because of their soft state, were extremely difficult to recover.
Nevertheless, with the delicate conservation by Elaine Hughes, enough was restored to determine the vessel forms and general design layout for three (Figures
8, a-c). All artifacts are illustrated to scale.

Shafer--Mimbres Potter’s Grave

193

Smashing of the Boldface bowl and scattering the sherds in the burial pit fill
is a method of vessel-killing, characteristic of Three-Circle Phase burials. The
smashing of vessels albeit ceases in the Classic Mimbres period when the characteristic method of killing is by knocking a hole in the bottom of a bowl.
The placement of the artifacts in the grave occurred at intervals. The unfired
ollas were placed on either side of the body; the pebbles and worked sherds were
placed over the body along with the bowl containing the pigment. The baskets,
one of which may have contained the pottery-making tools, were placed over the
head and chest. The coiled basket was over part of the face but it was not possible
to determine if the basket had been inverted. Sherds of the smashed bowl were
scattered in the fill after the body and other artifacts had been covered (Figure 4,
b). The seed jar was the last item included. It was placed intact just beneath the
floor (Figure 4, a).

DISCUSSION
In a recent study of status differentiation in Mimbres burials, Anyon and
LeBlanc (1984: 183-186) concluded that there was no marked status differentiation evident in the burials from the Galaz and Swarts Ruins, both large Late
Pithouse period-Classic Mimbres sites. They compared the Mimbres data to the
Chaco Canyon and Casas Grandes areas where some indication of status differentiation and social ranking, which would be in the form of ascribed status,
existed. In a ranked society, a person is born into a particular social class and
retains that ranking throughout his or her life. Somewhat simpler tribal societies
usually do not exhibit social ranking, but often do display some differentiation in
the form of achieved status. Anyon and LeBlanc (ibid.) felt that the Mimbres fit
the expectations of a tribal society although cited no specific examples of acquired status. A study of the social implications of the mortuary remains of the
LA 15049 burials was conducted by Spreen (1983). She concluded that there was
evidence for both ascribed and achieved status among the Mimbres and postulated a social structure somewhere between the tribal and chiefdom level.
The significance of the LA 15049 find may not be obvious at first glance.
The importance lies in four things. One is that this is the first assemblage of
pottery-making tools reported with a burial in the Mimbres area, an area which is
known both archeologically and in the art world for its ancient painted pottery.
(Note that Burial 90 also included artifacts associated with potmaking.)
Secondly, the individual in the grave was a female. Most archeologists have
assumed that the Mimbres potters were women based on the early historic pattern among the southwestern Pueblo people where women were the potters.
However, LeBlanc (1983: 138) has suggested that perhaps it was the men who
painted the more exquisite Mimbres pottery. If the mortuary furniture in Burial
86 symbolized that this woman was indeed associated with ceramic production,

Texas Archeological Society

194

?

?

b

cm

10
J

0
I

a

cm

5
[__J
cm

lO
]
cm

10
I

e

o
I

5
cm

I

cm

Figure 6. Mortuary vessels from Room 14. A, Mimbres transitional Black-on-White from
Burial 90; B, red-slipped seed jar (San Francisco Red?) from Burial 93; C, boat-shaped
brownware vessel with tabs fi’om Burial 93; D-F, Mimbres Boldface Black-on-White vessels from Burial 86.

Shafer--Mimbres Potter’s Grave

195

Figure 7. Sherds of unfired ollas from Burial 86.

then the burial provides the first instance of what might be interpreted as archeological proof of female potters among the Mimbres.
Thirdly, this is the first reported unmistakable evidence of baskets being included as mortuary vessels in a Mimbres grave. Traces of textiles had been found
in other graves at LA 15049 (Shafer et al. 1979) including impressions of what
may have been a basket over the head of a child. Bradfield (1931 Plates IV, 2)
illustrates traces of a textile in a Cameron Creek grave which may have been a
shroud. Poor preservation of textiles may have given a very biased impression of
vessel inclusions with Mimbres burials. Many of those lacking pottery could
have included baskets instead.
The fourth important aspect about this find is that if we can assume that
status in life is preserved in death (Binford 1971), then this woman’s status as a
potter was recognized by others in her society. This would be an example of
achieved status much like that of a shaman.
What processes can we look for in the Mimbres society that may have led to
low-level craft specialization? For one thing, craft specialization does not necessarily indicate high levels of social complexity. Good craftsmen are often sought
out for their skills, not only in primitive societies but in complex societies as

196

Texas Archeological Society

5CM

o

C

s

I
I
I

t

I

I

Figure 8. Reconstructed designs on three partially restorable unfired Mimbres Boldface
Black-on-White ollas from Burial 86.

well. Presumably every woman in the Mimbres village could make pottery to suit
their needs, but some were undoubtedly more skilled than others. Because of
their recognized skill, some craftsmen may have been called upon to produce
more of an item than they or their family would ordinarily need. When this happens in simple societies, the development of low-level craft specialization occurs. It usually begins as a cottage industry (Prentice 1983); that is, the crafts are

Shafer--Mimbres Potter’s Grave

197

C

b

a

d

9

Figure 9. Worked sherds and pot polishing stone from Burial 86; A-E, G, worked sherds;
F, pot polishing stone. Worked sherds A-C were from a Boldface Black-on-White bowl;
Sherds D, E, and G, were from Boldface Black-on-White ollas.

made at the household level (Clark 1983), and, if the economic networks within
the society continue to become more complex, then more intensive levels of craft
specialization emerge (Shafer and Hester 1986).
Levels of intensity--that is, production output--among craft specialists
may be associated with another process, that involving a "second class" citizen
status. This scenario can be associated with land use and land tenure. For example, let’s assume that the Three-Circle Phase represents the zenith of Mimbres
Mogollon development (painted pottery aside). If the population had expanded
to the point that all prime land was claimed and appropriately partitioned to
those having jural access to it, what happened to those families who were late
comers and had no legitimate claim to good farm land? Presumably they attempted to work less desirable land; one alternative was for them to produce a
needed commodity, which they could exchange for products that they could not
produce themselves. Low-level craft specialization can emerge in this fashion
among second-class families. The burials in Room 14, however, do not suggest a
second-class status when compared to other Three-Circle Phase burials (e.g.
Anyon and LeBlanc 1984: 173-186), but since pottery-making artifacts were associated with Burial 90 as well, perhaps this particular household was engaging
in pottery production above that of the normal households of this period.

198

Texas Archeological Society

During the Three-Circle Phase, the Mimbres people began to make more
black-on-white pottery than they used locally. Much of this excess pottery was
traded to people, whom we identify as the Jornada Mogollon, who occupied the
desert region to the south and east of the Mimbres. The Jornada people did not
make a Black-on-White pottery although Mimbres Boldface and Classic Blackon-White are common in Jornada sites that date before A.D. 1150 as far east as
the Guadalupe Mountains in Texas (Phelps 1974; Smiley 1979). After the disappearance of the Mimbres about A.D. 1130, the desert area was supplied with
Black-on-White pottery from the Salinas area in the form of Chupadero Blackon-White and later Tabira Black-on-White.
Another item, which may have been produced by incipient craft specialists
in the Mimbres area, was the corrugated ware. LeBlanc (1983: 144-146) has
reported the use of a distinctive temper in the production of some corrugated
vessels distributed throughout the Mimbres Valley. The temper materials have a
very localized distribution in the area. One of the scenarios that LeBlanc suggests to explain the pottery distribution is localized craft production.
Craft production beyond the household needs was by no means limited to
ceramics. Cosgrove and Cosgrove (1932: Plate 69) illustrate a workshop assemblage of bead-making items including raw material, blanks, and finished
products, recovered from Burial 904 at the Swarts Ruin. Anyon and LeBlanc
(1984: 276-278) suggest that three-quarter grooved axes found throughout the
Mimbres area were made at the Galaz and Mattocks sites of a green igneous rock
that outcrops nearby. They noted that no workshops were found and that such
specialization could not be demonstrated. This is not surprising since no debitage analysis was done to define workshop activity or workshop production. I
have personally observed a noticeable amount of debitage of this distinctive
green stone at both the Galaz and Mattocks ruins. Axes of the green igneous rock
occur at LA 15049 in Classic Mimbres context but no debitage or production
failures have been found to indicate localized manufacture. In a more dramatic
example of Mimbres craft production, McCluney (1968) describes what seems to
be a Classic Mimbres turquoise workshop at the West Baker site (although interpreted by him as a shrine). These examples of craft production, together with the
recognized status of a potter by her own people as proposed for Burial 86, would
suggest that some degree of low-level craft specialization--probably at the cottage industry level--indeed existed in the Mimbres culture beginning sometime
during the Late Pithouse period. How these industries developed and how they
were structured among kinship networks and villages is not known; pursuit of
these questions will undoubtedly yield much new information about the structures of the ancient Mimbres society.

Shafer--Mimbres Potter’s Grave

199

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Numerous people have contributed in various ways to the project which led to this
study. The generous cooperation and assistance of Mr. and Mrs. C. A. Hinton of Mr.
Pleasant, Texas, made this project possible. Specifically, Suzanne W. Patrick supervised
the excavation of Burial 86, established the sexual identity of the individual, and assisted
in the material conservation in the field. Elaine Hughes spent many hours meticulously
piecing together tiny sherds of the unfired ollas and assisted in conserving the textiles.
Additional assistance was provided by Marianne Marek, who aided both in the field work
and laboratory photography, Karen Gardner, Diane Young, Anna J. Taylor, and students of
the 1982 Texas A&M University field school. Support for the 1982 field season was provided by Earthwatch.

REFERENCES CITED
Anyon, R., and S. LeBlanc
1984

The Galaz Ruin: A Prehistoric Mimbres Village in Southwestern New Mexico.
University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

Anyon, R., R Gilman, and S. A. LeBlanc
1981
A Reevaluation of the Mogollon-Mimbres Archaeological Sequence. The.Kiva
46(4) :209-25.
Binford,
197!

g. R.

Mortuary Practices: Their Study and Their Potential. In Approaches to the Social Dimensions of Mortuary Practices, edited by J. A. Brown. Memoirs of the
Socieo, for American Archaeology 25:6-29.

Bradfield, W.
Cameron Creek Village: A Site in the Mimbres Area in Grant County, New Mex1931
ico. Monographs of the School of American Research 1. Santa Fe.
Brody, J. J.
1977

Mimbres Painted Pottery. University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

Clark, J. E.
1983
Mesoamerican Blade Workshop and Craft Specialization. Paper presented at the
48th Annual Meeting of the Society for American Archaeology.
Cosgrove, H. S., and C. B. Cosgrove
1932

The Swarts Ruin. A Typical Mimbres Site in Southwestern New Mexico.
Papers of the Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University 15(1).

Texas Archeological Society

200

Gilman, R A.
1980
The Early Pueblo Period: Mimbres Classic. In An Archaeological Synthesis of
Southcentral and Southwestern New Mexico, edited by S.A. LeBlanc and
M.E. Whalen, pp. 256-343. Office of Contract Archaeology, University of
New Mexico.
LeBlanc, S. A.
1983

The Mimbres People: Ancient Painters of the American Southwest. Thames and
Hudson, London.

McCluney, E. B.
1968
A Mimbres Shrine at the West Baker Site. Archaeology 21(3): 196-205.
Phelps, A. L.
1974

An Analysis of the Ceramics of the Guadalupe Mountains National Park. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 45 : 121 - 150.

Prentice, Guy
1983

Cottage Industries: Concepts and Implications. Mideontinental Journal of Archaeology 8( 1 ) : 17-48.

Shafer, H. J.
1982

Classic Mimbres Phase Households and Room Use Patterns,

The Kiva

48(l -2): 17-37.
Shafer, H.
1986

J.,

and T. R. Hester

Maya Stone-Tool Craft Specialization and Production at Colha, Belize: Reply to
Mallory. American AntiquiO, 51 ( 1 ) : 158 - 166.

Shafer, H. J., and A. J. Taylor
Mimbres Pueblo Dynamics and Ceramic Style Change. Journal of Field Ar1986
chaeology 13 ( 1 ) : 43-68.
Shafer, H. J., A. J. Taylor, and S. J. Usrey
Archaeological Investigations at the NAN (Hinton) Ranch Ruin, Grant County,
1979
New Mexico: A Preliminary Report, Texas A&M University, Anthropology Special Series 3.
Smiley, N. K.
1979
Evidence for Ceramic Trade Specialization in the Southern Jornada Branch. In
Jornada MogoIlon Archaeology, edited by R H. Beckett and R. N. Wiseman,
pp. 53-60. New Mexico State University, Las Cruces.
Spreen, M. R. K.
1983
The Social Implications of Mortuary Remains at Two Mimbres Mogollon Sites
in Grant County, New Mexico. MA Thesis, Texas A&M University.

Book Review
An Archeological Reconnaissance of the Upper Little River Basin in Cleveland
County, Oklahoma, 1984. By Terry L. Steinacher.
The University of Oklahoma, Oklahoma Archeological Survey, Archeological
Resource Survey Report Number 25. January 1986. xii + 150 pp., 28 figs.,
14 tables, and appendices.
The Oklahoma Archeological Survey has just published Terry Steinacher’s
archeological assessment of the Upper Little River Basin of central Oklahoma
(just southeast of Oklahoma City, just north of Norman). With a bright red
cover, bold printing, and perfect binding, it is available for $6.00 postpaid from
the OAS (1808 Newton Drive, Norman, OK 73019). The project itself was
funded in part by the Oklahoma Office of Historic Preservation and the Nationa!
Historic Preservation Fund Grant-In-Aid Program.
It is an extremely interesting study in that it samples the archeology of the
headwaters of a "small" river basin (some 70,000 acres or 109 square miles)
through systematic sampling. The archeological resources of the area are seriously threatened by the continued urban growth of cities and highways, as well as
two major reservoirs.
This volume reports an innovative approach to the project in the sense of
using modern sampling techniques to check a mosaic of patches which total six
square miles (5% of the area). Crews examined representative units throughout
the river basin (by "pedestrian survey"), and the report interprets the results of
these tests in terms of Oklahoma’s cultural resources plan. The study succeeded
in its major objectives, and identified 49 new sites plus additional isolated finds,
which are representative of the archeological potential of the region. The study
more than doubled the number of recorded sites in the river basin, and recommended full National Register evaluation for six sites, content testing for 21, and
resurvey of eight.
As with other Oklahoma Archeological Survey reports, this is a very professional volume, with comprehensive overviews of the geomorphology, climatology,
flora, and fauna of the region. One finishes the introduction and background sections with a very good understanding of the study area and how it relates to the
rest of the state and entire Southern Plains region.
A minor problem is the number of previously recorded sites in the study
area; the Introduction (p. 1) notes there were 41 but the Survey Results section
talks of revisiting "30 of the 39 previously recorded sites" (p. 39) and Figure 11
shows only 39 previous sites (p. 42). This is not a particularly significant discrepancy, but an irritating one.
Specific sites which were located or revisited were evaluated with a variety
of information. For example, the slope orientation ("general direction of the

Bulletin o f the Texas Archeological Society 56 (1985)

202

Texas Archeological Society

slope") of each site was recorded and analyzed. Figure 27 presents the results in
a graphic display, and the text notes that there is a predominance of a southerly
orientation. Yet, the longest single line in Figure 27 appears to be that to the east.
The schematic is unscaled but the length of the lines presumably represent proportions of occurrence. In any case, the author concludes, "it does not appear to
be a significant variable" (p. 70). A more complete explanation of this graphic
would have been helpful (or its elimination from the report).
The number of lithic, bone, and ceramic artifacts recovered during field
work was very small (except for 1504 flakes). Thirty-four bifaces (including five
projectile points) were documented. This sample was augmented by examination
of local collections by avocational archeologists (variously called amateur collectors, local co!lectors, and finally in Appendix D, avocational archeologists).
The use of such collections makes possible an extended number of analyses, including estimation of the chronological and cultural affiliation of the sites. Unfortunately, it is not always made clear when such surface collections are the data
being reported; most titles of the tables and photos in the main body of the report
include the phrase "in the Upper Little River Survey 1984" which erroneously
infers (for Table 8 and Figure 23 at least) recovery during the survey.
Upon closer reading of the findings, a number of other errors become evident. The chronological assessment relies heavily on "diagnostic point types" for
dating, yet there are some major problems with the chronological ranges given in
Figure 22. The San Patrice is shown as 3000 B.C. to 0; Yarbrough is given as
500 B.C. to A.D. 1200; and Morhiss as 200 B.C. to A.D. 1200. In the Texas
archeological literature, San Patrice is firmly accepted as a Paleo-Indian type
dating about 8000 to 6000 B.C.; Yarbrough is thought to date in the Early Archaic; and Morhiss (a very southern Texas type) is Late Archaic (ca. 800 B.C.;
see Turner and Hester 1985). This kind of error undermines one’s confidence in
Steinacher’s analysis. It also makes it necessary to examine his references to
evaluate his exposure to recent archeological progress in Texas. This is an important issue, since Steinacher reports many Texas types as occurring in the Upper Little River Basin, and bases much of his chronological analysis on their
presence.
The reference list contains only two Texas publications in eight pages of
references: the Suhm and Jelks Handbook (1962), and Lynott’s Bulletin article
on Bison in northcentral Texas (1979). One might conclude from the paucity of
Texas typology references that the author is not familiar with the more recent
Texas literature. Otherwise, he might have hesitated to classify (or report) the
Little River specimens as Desmuke, Frio, Morhiss, and Uvalde since these are
defined as localized types having distributions limited to South and southwestern Texas.
In fact, part of the reference list appears missing; perhaps a whole page of
authors. Everyone between Gray and Keith is unlisted, yet Hall (1977a, 1977b,
1977c, 1978, !982), Hall and Lintz (1984), and Hemish (1980) are all cited in

Book Review

203

Figure 6 (page 17). Since the pages of the bibliography are all numbered serially,
this appears to be an author and reviewer problem rather than a printer’s mistake.
Page 123 includes a printed pencil mark note, "9 in", which may be a printer’s error.
Most of the information on local collections is in Appendices D and E, except for Table 8 and Figure 23 in the main report. Figure 23 includes photos of
named points from three collections, yet photos from the same collections included as Figures D-3 through D-11 are not classified as to type. Many of these
specimens must have been classified in order to build Table 8. In the Cox collection (Appendix E), the points are classified in the photos (Figures E-1 through
E-6) and summarized in Table E-1. The author explains (p. 135) that the Cox
collection was examined after the analysis was completed. This difference in
treatment and lack of inclusion of the Cox collection in the analysis is regrettable, since it disguises some interesting and potentially significant data.
For example, if the data on Site 34CL76 are summarized across Tables 8
and E-1, the site appears to be highly significant. It included points ranging from
a reworked Plainview (not noted in the main body of the report) through many
Archaic types and even Late Prehistoric arrowpoints (Scallorn, Washita, Reed)-a total of at least 148 projectile points. This is a large enough sample to start to
see some possible cultural contact (or trade) trends. Types with the highest frequencies are: Gary (20), Calf Creek (15), Ellis (14), and Darl (10).
Gary points are frequently found in East Texas and Louisiana (Turner and
Hester 1985). They are also occasionally found in western Oklahoma (i.e., The
Edwards I site, 34BK2; see Baugh 1982) where they may represent some type of
contact from the Caddo of eastern Texas and Oklahoma (Lintz 1979).
Calf Creek are Pre- or Early Archaic points which are probably related to
Texas Andice and Bell types (see Parker and Mitchell 1979; McKinney 1981;
Prewitt 1983; Chandler 1983; Turner and Hester 1985). Indeed, the three forms
intergrade and probably represent one technological series rather than distinct
types (see Weber and Patterson 1985). The relatively large number of such points
recovered from 34CL76 represent an important sample which needs further
study, in terms of technology, attributes, and source of lithic materials. Examination of the photos of Little River Calf Creek specimens suggests that they vary to
both the Andice and Bell ends of the series.
It is difficult to evaluate the lithic raw material data in the Little River report; it is tabulated by site but not by point type (see Tables E-1 and E-2). Thus,
the data can not be used directly to test for possible relationships with other areas
(such as Texas) at specific time periods. The lithic source data for flakes is so
tabulated (Tables C-1 through C-5); however, flakes are more evidence of local
workmanship and thus are a biased indicator of long range trade sources.
Steinacher concludes his report with recommendations for future research
in the Upper Little River Basin. He includes site 34CL76 among the six sites
recommended for "more extensive testing" (p. 83) and full National Register

Texas Archeological Society

204

evaluation. Thus, he recognizes its rich potential for what he calls morphological,
historical, and behavioral research.
This is an important report. It represents a substantial effort toward evaluating a threatened river basin, and the project was an excellent investment in the
future archeology of central Oklahoma. While there are problems with the presentation and report, the project itself should stand as a model for professional
and avocationa! cooperation. By analyzing both local collections and field data,
it was possible to develop a fairly comprehensive picture of the threatened archeological resources of the area. Hopefully, this kind of cooperation can go forward to
a more complete study of these important sites.
Jimmy L. Mitchell
Editor, La Tierra
Converse, Texas

REFERENCES CITED
Baugh, Timothy G.
1982

Edwards I (34BK2): Southern Plains Adaptations in the Protohistoric Period.
Oklahoma Archaeological Survey, Studies in Oklahoma’s Past 8.

Chandler, Charles K.
Notes on some Bell Points from San Patricio County, Texas. La Tierra
1983
10(3) :7-10.
Lintz, Christopher
1979

The Southwestern Periphery of the Plains Caddoan Area. Nebraska History
60(2): 161-182.

Lynott, Mark J.
Prehistoric Bison Populations of Northcentra! Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Ar1979
cheological Society 50 : 89-101.

McKinney, Wilson W.
1981
Early Holocene Adaptations in Central and Southwestern Texas: The Problem of
the PaleoIndian-Archaic Transition. Bulletin of the Texas ArcheoIogical Society
52:91-120.
Parker, Wayne, and J. L. Mitchell
Notes on Some Bell Points from a Site in Crosby, County, Texas. La Tierra
1979
6(2) :26-27.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1983

Andice: An Early Archaic Dart Point Type. La Tierra 10(3): 1-6.

Book Review

205

Suhm, Dee Ann, and Edward B. Jelks
1962
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Memorial Museum
Bulletin Number 4 and Texas Archeological Society Special Bulletin Number 1.
Austin, Texas.
Turner, Ellen Sue, and Thomas R. Hester
1985
A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press, Austin.
Weber, C. D. and L. W. Patterson
1985

A Quantitative Analysis of Andice and Bell Points. La Tierra 12(2) : 21-27.

Authors

Frank Asaro received the Ph.D. degree from the University of California, Berkeley. He is
Group Leader, Energy and Environment Division, at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory. He conducts research in applied nuclear chemistry and is the author of more
than 100 publications. Since the 1960s, he has written extensively on the uses of
nuclear chemistry in the study of archeological problems. Trace element studies
have figured prominently in his publications, dealing with ceramics and obsidian
from various parts of the world. Most recently, he has worked with L. and L. W.
Alvarez and H. Michel on studies of the end of the Cretaceous period. National attention has been focused on their theories of the mass extinctions that occurred
at that time. Address: Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Road, Berkeley,
CA 94720.
Bradley F. Bowman operates a violin shop in Bryan, Texas. He received his formal education in Denver, Colorado where he trained as a violin maker; a trade that he practices
at the present time. His interest in archeology began during a family outing to Mesa
Verde National Park in his early childhood. He pursued this interest through selfmotivated research until his move to Texas in 1980 when he was able to get actively
involved. Address: Bradley F. Bowman, 300A South Haswell, Bryan, TX 77803.
Kenneth M. Brown is a Research Associate on the staff of the Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio. He has been a member of
the Texas Archeological Society since 1963 and participated in the Society’s field
schools at the Vinson and Gaulding sites and at Kerrville and Choke Canyon. He is
the current editor of the South Texas Bluegrass Music Association Newsletter and
plays dobro and lead guitar with Timbre Line, a San Antonio bluegrass band.
Address: Star Route Box 9A, Helotes, TX 78023.

T. N. Campbell is Professor Emeritus of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.
He received graduate degrees from the University of Texas and Harvard, and thereafter served on the faculty of The University of Texas at Austin for 40 years, teaching, holding various administrative positions, editing, and publishing the results of
research that interested him. His publications are varied and relatable to such academic disciplines as anthropology, archeology, botany, folklore, ethnohistory, and
history. He edited several research series and three journals, including American Antiquity and this Bulletin. During the past 15 years he has been particularly interested
in developing better ethnic identities for the numerous Indian groups, mainly hunters
and gatherers, who ranged over northeastern Mexico and southern Texas during the
historic period. Address: Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, TX 78712.
Chat’les K. Chandler, president of the Texas Archeological Society, 1984-1985, is a retired railroad management official who has been an active member, officer and board
member of the Society for 25 years. C. K. has authored a number of significant reports and articles in the Bulletin, La Tierra and other journals in Texas. C. K. was a
founding member of the Southern Texas Archaeological Association. Address: 13719
Brook Hollow, San Antonio, TX 78232.

208

Texas Archeological Society

D. Bruce Dickson received his Ph.D. from the University of Arizona and is currently Associate Professor of Anthropology at Texas A&M University. Dr. Dickson has conducted archeological fieldwork in Central America as well as the American Southwest and Southeast. His major research has been centered on archeological theory,
paleogeography, and North and Middle American prehistory. His most recent work
has been in "cognitive archeology" and he has just completed a book manuscript
on the archeological reconstruction of religion and ideology in the European Upper
Paleolithic. His publications include the monograph Prehistoric Pueblo Settlement
Patterns: The Arroyo Hondo Pueblo, New Mexico Site Survey (School of American
Research) and "Ancient Agriculture and Population at Tikal, Guatemala: an Application of Linear Programming to the Simulation of an Archeological Problem."
American Antiquity 46(4):909-916. Address: Department of Anthropology, Texas
A & M University, College Station, TX 77843.
Glen L. Evans has done archeological and geological work at many localities in Texas.
Much of the pioneering research on Texas Paleo-Indian sites was conducted under
Evans’ direction. Published reports deal with such sites as Berclair Terrace (1940),
Plainview (1947), and Freisenhahn Cave (1961). He has served on the staff of the
Bureau of Economic Geology at The University of Texas at Austin, and as Assistant,
then later Associate, Director of the Texas Memorial Museum. After more than 20
years with the Louisiana Land and Exploration Company, Evans retired to Austin in
1975. He is a Fellow of the Geological Society of America, a charter member of the
Society of Vertebrate Paleontology, and past president and honorary life member of
the West Texas Geological Society. Address: 9011 Fairway Drive, Austin, TX 78750.
Thomas R. Hester is Professor of Anthropology and Director, Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio. He received the Ph.D. degree at
the University of California, Berkeley. Hester has done field work in Texas, Belize,
the western United States, and Egypt, and is the author of numerous books and
papers on archeology. Books written for popular audiences have included Digging
into South Texas Prehistory (1980) and A Field Guide to the Stone Artifacts of Texas
Indians (with Ellen Sue Turner, 1985). He has edited earlier volumes of the Bulletin
and is a Fellow of the Texas Archeological Society. Address: Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78285.
Joe D. Hudgins is a graduate of Texas A&M University and a rancher in Wharton County,
where his family has ranched since 1839. He has been an active avocational archeologist since the 1960s and has recorded more than 100 sites--from Paleo-Indian to
Historic--in Wharton and Fort Bend Counties. Hudgins is the author of a number of
published papers, most appearing in the Journal of the Houston Archeological Society. He has served as a director of that organization and is also a member of the
Texas Archeological Society and the Southern Texas Archeological Association. Address: Box 225, Hungerford, TX 77448.

Roberta McGregor is assistant curator of anthropology at the Witte Museum, San Antonio, and is currently working on her MA in Anthropology degree at The University
of Texas at San Antonio. She holds a BS degree from the University of Connecticut
and a BA in Native American Studies from Incarnate Word College, San Antonio.
Her present interests are focused on the archeology of the Lower Pecos and she is
engaged in a study of textiles from the rock shelters of that region. Bobbie is directing the installation of a major permanent exhibit, "Ancient Texans: Rock Art and
Lifeways Along the Pecos’, scheduled to open at the Witte in January, 1987. In-

Authors

209

cluded in the exhibit will be artifacts from the early Witte excavations at Eagle and
Shumla Caves. Address: 329 Irvington, San Antonio, TX 78209.
Helen V. Michel is a chemist in the Applied Science Division of the Lawrence Berkeley
Laboratory. She is involved with the applications of nuclear chemistry in archeological research and is the author of more than 30 publications. These include
papers on the chemical composition of ceramics from Egypt and Iran, chemical
analyses of Medieval brasses, trace element studies of obsidian from Texas, Mesoamerica and South America. She has also been involved with recent research by
Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory personnel on the extinctions that took place at the
end of the Cretaceous period. Address: Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron
Road, Berkeley, CA 94720.

Jhnmy L. Mitchell is a behavioral scientist with McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company. He holds a Ph.D. in I/O Psychology from Purdue University and is a retired
U.S. Air Force Lt. Colonel. He is the author of a number of publications, including
many papers on the archeology of South Texas and the Texas Panhandle. He serves
as Vice-President for Region 6 of the Texas Archeological Society and is a steward
for Bexar County with the Office of the State Archeologist. Mitchell is the editor of
La Tierra, the quarterly journal of the Southern Texas Archaeological Association.
Address: 921 Toepperwein Road, Converse, TX 78109.
Leland W. Patterson is Manager of Environmental Affairs/Engineering for Tenneco, Inc.
He is an active avocational archeologist, with research interests in lithic technology
and the prehistory of southeastern and southcentral Texas. Resulting from his research are more than 190 papers and reports and the documentation of more than
150 prehistoric sites in Texas, Louisiana and Ohio. In addition to his work at
41WH 19, he has also conducted excavations at 41HR315. Patterson is past chairman of the Houston Archeological Society and is a member of a number of other
state, regional and national archeological associations. Address: 4t8 Wycliffe,
Houston, TX 77079.
Harry J. Shafer is Professor of Anthropology at Texas A&M University. He received his
Ph.D. degree from The University of Texas at Austin. Shafer has conducted archeological research in many parts of Texas and is involved in a long-term research
program in the Mimbres Mogollon area of New Mexico. He has also been involved
in the Colha Project, Belize, since 1979. Shafer has numerous publications resulting
from these research activities and is the author of a book on the ancient peoples of
the Lower Pecos region of Texas, to be published by the Witte Museum, San Antonio, in Fall 1986. He is co-editor of a revised version of Field Methods in Archaeology, now nearing completion. Address: Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M
University, College Station, TX 77843.
Fred H. Stross received his Ph.D. degree in Chemistry from the University of California,

Berkeley. After more than 30 years with Shell Development Company, Dr. Stross is
presently a researcher at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory and a Research Associate of the Archaeological Research Facility, University of California, Berkeley. He
has been extremely active in the application of the physical sciences in archeology
and is the author of papers, columns, and book chapters dealing with archeometric
studies. Many of his publications deal with trace element analysis of obsidian
throughout the Western Hemisphere. His fieldwork has also taken him to Egypt
where he was involved in the Colossi of Memnon project. Address: Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Road, Berkeley, CA 94720.

INFORMATION FOR CONTRIBUTORS
The Bulletin of Texas ArcheoIogical Society publishes original papers in the
field of American archeology. Emphasis in placed on Texas and adjoining areas
in the United States and Mexico; papers on other areas also are considered. Articles concerning archeological technique, method, or theory are encouraged.
Manuscripts must be typed, double spaced throughout, on 872 × 11 in.
white paper. Footnotes should be avoided. References to published literature (by
author, date, and page or figure numbers) should be placed within parentheses in
the body of the text, with full bibliographic citations at the end. See this issue of
the Bulletin for examples. Authors also should consult "Style Guide for Authors"
in Texas Archeology 26(2) :9-14 (April 1982) or write the Editor for a copy.
The proportions of full-page illustrations (picture or drawing plus captions)
should be suitable for reduction to effective Bulletin page size of 4Y4 × 7 inches.
Plates may be printed either horizontally or vertically; allowance for the caption
to be printed in the same direction must be made. Captions for illustrations
should be listed in numerical order and placed in the manuscript behind the list of
references cited.
A complete manuscript is one with: a title, abstract, main body with subdivisions, acknowledgments, references cited, appendices (if necessary), figure
captions, completed (camera-ready) photographic and drafted plates, and author’s biographical note. Submit three copies of the typed manuscript. Manuscripts are subject to peer review; final decision rests with the Editor.
Papers published in the Bulletin are abstracted and indexed in Abstracts in
Anthropology.
Manuscripts should be addressed to: Dr. James E. Corbin, Department of
Sociology, Stephen F. Austin State University, P.O. Box 13047, SFA Station,
Nacogdoches, TX 75962-3047.

