TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
The Society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and
scientific undertaking: the study of man’s past in Texas and contiguous areas.
The Bulletin offers an outlet for the publication of serious research on history,
prehistory and archeological theory. In line with the goals of the society, it
encourages scientific collection, study and publication of archeological data.
The Bulletin is published annually for the distribution to the members of
the Society. Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers and do not
necessarily represent the views of the Society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society 1972-1973
President: DESSAMAE LORRAIN (Ava, Mo.)
President-elect: FRANCIS STICKNEY (Midland)
Secretary-Treasurer: PAUL KOEPPE (Ft. Worth)
Newsletter Editor: ANNE FOX (San Antonio)
Directors (in addition to the above): R. MILTON BELL (Austin), RICHARD M.
BOWEN (Corpus Christi), C. K. CHANDLER (Houston), R. K. HARRISON
(Texarkana), S. ALAN SKINNER (Dallas), FRANK AL WEIR (Austin).
Regional Vice-Presidents: CLAUDE BROWN (Lubbock), LESLIE DAVIS (El Paso),
JON L. GIBSON (Lafayette, La.), TOMMY HICKS (Dublin), EUGENE O’BRIEN (San
Antonio), W. L. RICHMOND (Austin), JAY SHARP (La Porte), TEDDY LOU STICKNEY
(Midland), RAY THOMPSON (Amarillo), ROBERT D. VERNON, Jr. (Sherman), JAMES
E. WARREN (George West), JOHN R. WAYLAND (Corpus Christi).

Membership and Publications
Membership in the Society is for the calendar year. Dues are as follows:
Regular--S7.50; Chartered Societies and Institutional--S10.00;
Contributing--S25.00; Life--S150.00. All members of the Society receive the
Bulletin, which is published annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter
that is mailed out about four times a year. Back issues of the Bulletin, up to and
including Volume No. 39, that are still in print may be obtained for $5.00 per
volume. Subsequent volumes are available at a cost of $7.50.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to SecretaryTreasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Southern Methodist University, Box
165, Dallas, Texas 75275.

Bulletin of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Volume 44/1973

David S. Dibble, Editor
Marsha F. Jackson, Assistant Editor

Marvin L. Jeffreys, Cover Design

PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY AT AUSTIN, TEXAS
1975

Phototypography and Camera-Ready Composition by Photocomp, Inc., Austin, Texas.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
A. T. Jackson--1895-1974 .............................

1

Shell Point: A Coastal Complex and Burial Site
in Brazoria County
Frank Hole and Richard G. Wilkinson ............................

5

A Study of the Clear Fork Gouge
Calvin D. Howard ............................................... 51
An Infant Burial in the Texas Panhandle
Billy R. Harrison and Bob T. Griffin .............................. 61

The Finis Frost Site: A Toyal Phase Occupation
in San Saba County, Central Texas
L. M. Green and Thomas Roy Hester .............................. 69

Some Lithic Blade Technology in Texas
Leland W. Patterson ............................................. 89

Benard de la Harpe and the Nassonite Post
M. P. Miroir, R. King Harris, Jay C. Blaine,
Janson McVay, Donald C. Book, Floyd Cigainero,
Roger McVay, Joe B. Raffaelli, Jr., and Paul E. Schoen .............. 113

Small Site Investigations for Interpretation
of Site Activities
Tom D. Dillehay ................................................ 169

BOOK REVIEWS
Rock Art in New Mexico by Polly Schaffsma
w. w. Newcomb, Jr .............................................. 179

Dating Methods in Archaeology by Joseph W. Michels
E. Mott Davis ................................................... 181

ALVIN THOMAS JACKSON, 1895-1974
Alvin Thomas Jackson; better known as A. T. Jackson, died in
Austin on January 27, 1974 at the age of 79 years. He was very close to
being a charter member of the Texas Archeological Society, held
various offices in the society, and recently was made a Fellow in
recognition of his contributions to Texas archeology, particularly his
pioneering volume entitled Picture-Writing of Texas Indians. He is
survived by his second wife, Sue Settle Jackson; two children, Craig
and Celestine, by his first wife, Kathleen Cowan Jackson, who died in
the 1950’s; and five grandchildren.

2

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Jackson was born at Bagdad, a now extinct community near Leander in Williamson County, Texas. His father, Thomas Jackson, died a
few weeks before A. T. was born, and his mother, Lucretia Jackson,
took the family westward to live with her father, William L. Lewis, a
physician and pharmacist who had migrated from England to
Alabama and had later moved to Llano County, Texas, because of
severe economic losses connected with the Civil War. It seems that
Grandfather Lewis, who was also serving as a Methodist minister, had
considerable influence on the fatherless boy.
In due time A. T. went to the nearest school, a one-room structure,
in which he shared a desk with a 200-pound, 18-year-old boy who was
in the third grade. Later Jackson went to larger rural schools and
eventually to the high school in Llano. Biographical sources indicate
that in school he was very good in mathematics and English literature
and that he particularly enjoyed writing. This seems to be borne out
by his later varied career as accountant, free-lance journalist, and
self-made archeologist.
After high school Jackson worked for Wells Fargo, the well-known
express company, at offices in Corpus Christi and Robstown. He saved
his money and subsequently left for two years of study in a business
college at Tyler. From there he went to work for the Bryan Eagle as
both bookkeeper and reporter. At this time the Texas Agricultural
Experiment Station at nearby College Station was expanding and he
was offered a position as statistician. When World War I came, he
volunteered for military service, entering the U.S. Army as a buck
private and emerging as a first lieutenant. The war over, he became an
accountant for Texaco in Houston, but after five years developed
tuberculosis and was advised by physicians to work outdoors in a
drier climate.
Jackson returned to Llano and used it as a base for travel and
free-lance writing. His feature stories on Texas history and archeology
were regularly bought by the Dallas News, the Fort Worth
Star-Telegram, and the Houston Chronicle. He also sold feature articles to various magazines. His health regained, he married, and then
came another sharp turn in his career. This developed through J. E.
Pearce, who in the late 1920’s was trying to establish a department of
anthropology at the University of Texas and was actively promoting
the idea of a state museum through emphasis on Texas archeology
and history. Pearce had read Jackson’s newspaper stories and noted
his objectivity and evident skill in collecting information. He offered
Jackson a job as field archeologist.
The period of 1930-1940 was Jackson’s decade in archeology. He
supervised most of Pearce’s archeotogical field parties and produced

A. T. JACKSON
most of the articles, reports, and books cited below. Jackson turned
out to be just the person Pearce needed-- a practical man who could
get things done and knew the state of Texas first-hand, and who also
had the necessary self-discipline to finish any manuscript he began.
But late in the 1930’s Pearce died, and Jackson faced a new regime that
emphasized college degrees. At the beginning of World War II Jackson tried to get himself reinstated in the U.S. Army, but his age was
against him. Since the war brought an end to all archeological field
work, Jackson returned to his former profession, accounting. From
that time until his retirement he was connected with various finance
divisions of the Austin municipal government. However, through the
years he continued his writing, and shortly before death his book on
the flour mills of pioneer Texas, Miils of Yesteryear, was published by
the Texas Western Press at the University of Texas at E1 Paso.
Members of this society who knew Jackson personally will probably remember him as a quiet, courteous man who wasted little time
talking when he had nothing worthwhile to say. He had a strong sense
of personal integrity, and he was uncommonly tenacious in the pursuit of objective fact. In his archeo!ogical writing he was cautious in
generalizing and was obviously impatient with theorists, since he
ignored them, but he was very successful in accumulating substantive
data at a time when such data were badly needed. His writing was
clear and effective, but tended to be in a style favored by journalists -short but varied sentences, no long paragraphs, and frequent topical
subheadings. Since so much of his life was concerned with records of
one kind or another, it is perhaps not surprising to learn that Jackson
kept copies of nearly everything he wrote. His family has deposited
these papers in The University of Texas Archives at Austin. The
collection contains many of his original, hand-written field
notebooks, including those on rock art sites. These will undoubtedly
be helpful to future archeologists who have need to check the primary
written records.

Principal Archeological Publications

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
1933 Indian Pipes of East Texas. Vol. 5: 69-86.
1934 Types of East Texas Pottery. Vol. 6: 38-57.
1935 Ornaments of East Texas Indians. Vol. 7: 11-28.
1936 A "Perpetual Fire" Site. Vol. 8: 134-173.
1937 Exploration of Certain Sites in Culberson County, Texas. Vol.
9: 146-192.

4

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
1938 Fire in East Texas Burial Rites. Vol. 10: 77-113.
1939 A Deep Archaeological Site in Travis County, Texas. Vol. 11:
203-225.
1940 Tubular Pipes and Other Tubes in Texas. Vol. 12: 99-137.
1941 Pendants and Their Uses. Vol. 13: 9-45.
1943 Indian Arrow and Lance Wounds. Vol. 15: 38-65.

The University of Texas Publications
1933 (with J. E. Pearce) A Prehistoric Rock Shelter in Val Verde
County, Texas. No. 3327.
1938 Picture-Writing of Texas Indians. No. 3809.
1938 The Fall Creek Sites. No. 3802: 11-118.

T. N. Campbell
The University of Texas at Austin

SHELL POINT: A COASTAL CAMP
AND BURIAL SITE IN BRAZORIA COUNTY
FRANK HOLE AND RICHARD G. WILKINSON

Abstract
Salvage archeology at an eroding shell midden on Chocolate Bayou,
Brazoria County, was carried out as a class project by students at Rice
University. Analysis of the contents of the site suggests that it was a
fishing camp. The chief interest in this site is a burial of five persons,
probably a simultaneous interment. An analysis of these skeletons, along
with portions of four others which had eroded out of the site shows a very
homogeneous population with a great amount of sexual dimorphism.
Comparison of the skeletons with others from the area shows similarities
as far south as Corpus Christi Bay. Morphologically the skeletons correspond with historic accounts of Karankawa Indians.

The Archeology of Shell Point (41 BZ 2)
FRANK HOLE

DESCRIPTION OF THE SITE
The Shell Point Site (41 BZ 2) is near the junction of Chocolate
Bayou and Galveston’s West Bay at a point marked Shell Point on
USGS Quadrangle Hoskins Mound, Texas, 1963 (Fig. 1). The site is
presently on land owned by General Crude Oil Company and is not
accessible by public road.
Very little of the site remains today. Formerly it was a midden
situated on the landward end of an oyster reef that still runs out into
the bayou, although we could find no evidence that oysters are still
growing on the reef. According to local informants the site was once
much more extensive than it is today. In the 10 years that the site has
been under regular observation by Frank Mebane, Jr., it has eroded
back some 5-7 meters and its original size can only be a matter of
speculation. The present dimensions along a north-south axis are 20
meters, and east-west it is 12 meters (Fig. 2). The maximum thickness
of the shell layers which comprise the midden is 40 cm. The entire
remaining midden is covered to varying depths by sandy loam that
was deposited subsequent to Indian occupation, and the entire site is
covered with a mat of vegetation.
When we first saw the site, it was actively eroding and a burial had
been exposed only a few weeks earlier. This erosion had cut deeply
into portions of the site, leaving a peninsula of midden which appeared suitable for salvage work. Small pits placed at intervals over

6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

FIGURE 1. Map of a portion of the Texas Gulf Coast showing the
location of sites mentioned in the text.

the surface revealed that the topography of the midden was irregular.
In places it lay just below the grass while in others it was as much as 40
cm. below the sandy loam, although the present surface is relatively
flat. The irregularity of the surface of the midden resulted from nonuniform dumping of shell and some excavation by both the Indians
and by Frank Mebane, Jr. Mr. Mebane dug a shallow pit into the site in
about 1961 and removed about a "washtub" of shell and dirt after
three hours of work. He could not reca!l having filled the pit; consequently its refilling must have been due to erosion and deposition
during flooding.
Some years before Mebane dug his pit, an oil exploration crew had
used the site for landing heavy equipment. The tight compaction of
some of the layers and the fragmentary condition of the burials can be
explained by the driving of vehicles directly over them. Nevertheless,
the essential damage was relatively slight.

SHELL POINT

GEOGRAPHY OF THE AREA
The land in the immediate vicinity of the site lies near sea level.
Tides of more than 3.5 meters completely innundate the land around
the site and up the bayou to Frank Mebane’s camp which is at an
elevation of about 1 meter. As might be expected the land itself is
sandy and carries salt grass vegetation.
The terrain of most of this area is described as Coastal Prairie by
physiographers. Although there are many swamps and marshes, it is
essentially a fiat grassland with an elevation slightly above sea-level.
Cord grasses, bluestem, and salt grasses (Spartina) are the dominant
vegetation, but there are wooded areas along the bayous and streams
that cross the prairie on their way to the Gulf (Newcomb 1961:60). The
following resumd of the local geology was kindly provided by Margie
Lohse who studied the area with her husband Dr. Alan Lohse of the
Department of Geology of the University of Houston.
The Shell Point Site is located upon a remnant of the natural levee
bordering the eastern edge o~ Chocolate Bayou which is an entrenched valley of Late Pleistocene age. The soils beneath the midden
and the slightly elevated land form upon which it is located, along
with the processes which formed them are Late Pleistocene age,
although the formation of Shell Point as a topographic feature extending into the middle portion of Chocolate Bay, and the deposition of
marshy soils to the east, are Recent in age.
Evidence for the Pleistocene age of the subsoil is twofold: (a) the
characteristic tan to reddish-brown, stiff, oxidized clay of the Beaumont Formation, here modified by an admixture of fine-grained sand,
and (b) the presence of pimple mounds on the land surface to the
north. Pimple mounds are low (10 cm. to about 3.5 m. in height),
circular mounds varying from 1 to 75 meters in diameter. They are
common in southeast and central southwest Texas, on silty or sandy
terrain of Pleistocene age and older. Mounds are also known on soils
of Recent age but are distinguishable from those on the older surfaces.
By contrast, sediments of Recent age forming the marsh and swamp
terrain now bordering the bay are not oxidized, contain an abundance
of black to gray organic detritus, and support a marsh flora.
After the creation of Galveston Island and the development of West
Bay as a low-energy, shallow-water body separated from waves and
currents of the open Gulf, the mainland shore began to advance
slowly as a result of the deposition of modern sediment within the
bay. This is the normal process of accretion. It has continued for at
least 2000 years to form the Big Marsh area east of Chocolate Bay and
other mainland marsh areas more than one mile in width that contain

8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

\

\\\

\
\
/
/

9

SHELL POINT

Carancahua Lake and Greens Lake to the northeast.
Simultaneously, a second modifying process commenced, and continues into the present time. The lower reaches of each bayou, in
reality a small estuary, is subjected to erosion and scour by internal
wave action. This wave action, which results in a rounding of shape to
create a new bay, is generated by prevailing onshore winds blowing
from the southeast for six months of the year and the 15 to 20 winter
"northers" that reach the coast annually with winds in excess of 40
knots.
Approximately 2000 years ago, after the formation of the barrier
island and before the "rounding" effect of Chocolate Bay, the Shell
Point promontory extended more or less southeastward to a distance
that is unknown from present data but may have been as much as 1.25
statute miles. This estimate is based upon the general bathymetry of
the bay and the line of oyster reefs which extends southeastward from
Shell Point. Middens located upon the east-bank of the natural levee
system would have been lost by erosion. If the midden was situated
where the river and the bay met, the present Shell Point Site is
possibly as recent as 200 years, and any older remains would have
been lost through erosion.
A further modification of the terrain and destruction of the site is
taking place as a result of regional subsidence in the HoustonGalveston area. Undoubtedly the Shell Point Site has also subsided a
meter or more, affecting the adjacent marsh of Recent age and increasing the rate of erosion of the shore.
GOALS OF THE PROJECT
The principal objectives were to salvage a potentially interesting
site that was in imminent danger of destruction through erosion, and
to teach archeological field techniques in the context of a real project.
Additionally, we viewed this project as one of a series of excavations
that would enable us to build up a systematic picture of aboriginal
occupation along the coast. Speaking in general, our knowledge of
local archeology is based on miscellaneous surface collections and a
few small and unevenly reported excavations. At best we have a
general idea of the distribution of sites and some knowledge of the
overall duration of occupation in the area, but very little information
about sizes of populations, activities represented in the sites, and of
the relations among sites in different parts of the area.
Shell Point was reported to us as a burial site and in view of its
eroded condition it seemed most likely that its major contribution
would be in ellucidating certain burial practices and in helping to

10

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

establish the physical characteristics of the local population. Finally,
insofar as possible, we wished to determine the nature of the site itself
(as an area of activity used by the Indians) as it exists independently of
the burials that are contained within.
At the time we began work, Aten (1971) had just completed a report
on his work at the Harris County Boys School burial site and this
report suggested a number of things concerning the burials that might
be investigated at Shell Point.
Some of the specific things we were looking for in relation to the
burials follow.
1. Are the burials contemporary with the midden, or were they
placed either before or after it had accumulated? This question concerns whether sites were selected specially for cemeteries, or whether
people were buried in sites that continued to be occupied. The facts
that many sites do not seem to have burials and that some have an
extraordinary number of them suggested this question.
2. Is there a consistent method of orientation? Aten (1971) suggested that there was a consistent orientation at the Jamaica Beach
Site and also at the Boys School Site.
3. Is there a consistent method of interment? Are there single,
multiple, primary and secondary burials ? Are sites used for long or for
short periods? These questions can be only partially answered by
previous work because there are so few good records of the actual
circumstances.
4. Can one find evidence for differences in the morphology of the
Indians that correspond with ethnohistorical accounts of distinct
groups of Indians along the coast at the time of European contact?
5. Is there differential treatment of individual burials that can be
seen in relation to status, sex or ethnic affiliation?
There were also problems of a more strictly archeological nature.
1. What is the age of this site?
2. What is the nature of the site? Was it a temporary camp, a burial
ground, a habitation site, a special activity site?
3. Was the site occupied during certain seasons?
4. What geographic area was exploited by people using the site?
5. What is the relation of this site to others up the bayou?
6. What is the variability within the site? Most middens are treated
as if they are homogenous yet this is an untested assumption.
7. What is the nature of deposition of the midden itself? How did it
accumulate?
In view of the great amount of the site that had been eroded it
seemed that we might get information on any of these topics but there
are many other problems that one could hardly hope to solve. To

SHELL POINT

11

accomplish further goals it is necessary, as we have already begun, to
excavate sites which are entirely intact.
PRINCIPAL RESULTS
Clearly the most interesting aspect of the excavation was the finding of five burials which probably represent a single interment. To
these we may add four skeletons which had been recovered by Frank
Mebane, Jr., from the eroding bank of the site, and which are described
in Wilkinson’s study of the physical anthropology.

,excavated

1960 shorelinef\

/
FIGURE 3. Location and orientation of the investigated burials.

12

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

We had questioned whether some sites were reserved for burials or
whether they remained habitation or camping sites as well as burial
grounds. Our findings were similar to those of Aten (1971) in that we
could determine that the burials had been placed into a pit that was
dug after the bulk of the midden has accumulated, but we are uncertain whether the site remained in use for other purposes thereafter.
What is evident at both sites is that little if any midden accumulated
after the burials were placed in position.
It appears that both multiple and single burials occur in the site.
Ordinarily one would expect to find single burials and the finding of a
multiple burial is cause for comment. As described later, it seems
likely that members of a fishing party were caught in a natural disaster, possibly a norther which caused their untimely death when they
were exposed to the full force of the weather and were unable to regain
their base camp. The burials which were found eroding out of the site,
however, were apparently placed singly, if Mebane’s recollections as
to their locations are correct.
Aten (1971:45-46) feels that burials at the Boys School Site were
oriented with the heads toward the rising sun. Perhaps this is true,
although the high degree of variability in the orientation of heads at
that site leaves considerable room for doubt. We did not measure the
orientation of the Shell Point burials because of the post-mortem
dislocation of the skeletons. Nevertheless, as Figure 3 shows, the
bodies were usually placed in a flexed position along an east-west
axis with the heads facing the northeast quadrant. Still there is some
deviation from this pattern in that one of those excavated by our group
faced south and one of those removed by Mebane faced the same
direction. From the plans of the burial groups it looks as if there is
somewhat less variation in the axis of the body at Shell Point than
there is at the Boys School Site. Nevertheless, the pattern of interment
at the two sites appears to be very similar.
More interesting than matters of orientation are the physical
characteristics of the Indians themselves. As Wilkinson describes in
his report, they conform closely to other populations described from
sites west and south of Houston and with the historical descriptions of
Karankawa Indians. The question of the areas occupied by various
historically-known Indian groups has been raised many times but
there has been little useful evidence to answer it. It can now be stated
that a population which is physically different from those found in
sites south of Houston existed on Bolivar Peninsula, as evidenced by
the Caplen Site.
The artifacts found with the skeletons are few; they consist of beads
and other personal ornaments. Most unusual is the fact that the child

SHELL POINT

13

had a necklace of shell beads whereas most of the adults were without
ornamentation.
Also of interest are conclusions with respect to the nature of the site.
Its age has not been determined through radiocarbon methods, but the
artifacts and the geology of the area both suggest a recent date, probably around the time of European contact. This supposition is supported by our work at the Three-Oaks Site up the bayou which has
contact material along with Indian artifacts.
The site itself is most likely a fishing camp, like those presently
dotting the landscape in the immediate vicinity. Virtually all of the
faunal remains were derived from the water and there is little pottery.
These facts suggest that the site was used as a temporary camp and not
as a living site.
It has not been possible with the present analyses to determine the
seasons during which the site was used, but ethnohistoric reports
indicate that Indians lived in coastal areas during the winter. It seems
likely that the principal camp of these people was up the bayou at the
Three-Oaks Site where dry land and abundant fuel were both available.
The deposits in the site were badly disturbed through the digging of
burial pits and the areas of intact midden that we dug were relatively
small and discontinuous. We could not, therefore, do a useful analysis
of intrasite variability. It was readily apparent, however, on visual
examination that the artifacts were not evely scattered, especially
toward the edges of the midden where they were very rare indeed. By
far the largest concentrations of artifacts were in the area of the
burials.
The midden itself was apparently built through a series of dumpings of shells. On the edges a number of discrete piles of shells were
found, suggesting that this waste was scattered inland, thus extending the useable surface into the surrounding marsh.
The excavation enabled us to accomplish most of our goals and has
added significant new information, especially on types of settlements
and on the burial practices, morphology and pathology of the local
populations.

THE EXCAVATION
Prior to digging, the site was laid out in a 2-meter grid with a stake at
each corner (Fig. 2). Stake 12NIW was set as the permanent datum
and all other stakes marked on the same level to facilitate plotting the
depths of features and strata. Then we dug a series of shove!-sized pits
around the periphery of the site to determine the limits of the shell.

14

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

We found in so doing that the remaining midden is not very extensive
and that it slopes off rapidly on its outer margins.
The initial work on the main area consisted of first stripping the
grass off the portion of the site we wished to investigate (Fig. 4a,b) and
then stripping the sandy loam down to the top of the shell in squares
10NaW, 12N3W, 12N5W. The sandy loam overlying the shell was
designated Layer 1. The loam was excavated with shovels until shell
appeared, at which time the remaining loam immediately above the
shell layer was removed with trowels and screwdrivers so that the top
of the shell layer would remain in place (Fig. 5). All dirt from Layer 1
was put through a 1/4" screen to recover any artifacts. Artifacts in Layer
1 were bagged by the 2 meter square in which they were found; no
other recording was deemed necessary.
This procedure was used for the following reasons: The surface of
the site appeared visually, and in plotting the depth of the surface soil,
to be relatively smooth and the product of a combination of deposition
and erosion. Therefore it was reasoned that it did not contain artifacts
in primary association but might have material derived from the
midden directly below. It was further reasoned that the midden might
have a contour different from the overlying soil and that if there were
only scattered artifacts in the soil, the case for post-occupation deposition of the sand would be secure. The initial results indicated that
this was the case and suggested that when additional squares were
dug the upper soil should be simply discarded without screening.
Our experience in digging 41 HR 82 had demonstrated the advantages of removing artifacts by natural layers through the tedious
process of removing shells individually and leaving the artifacts in
place. We decided to follow this procedure at Shell Point but were
prevented from carrying out this systembecause of the presence of the
burial pits which occupied nearly all the area that we excavated. For
this reason we had basically two collection levels: 1, which consisted
of the few artifacts found in the loam overlying the midden; and 2,
which contained artifacts found in the fill of the burial pits. Aside
from the quantity of recovered material, there was no essential difference between the two "strata".
Upon clearing the grass layer in Square 10N5W we noticed a
number of roughly circular dark areas which had a high proportion of
finely broken shell in them (Fig. 5a). These were clearly pits and were
dug as such. Several proved to be of no particular interest as they were
simply holes (probably from rotted bushes or trees) into which broken
up shells had washed at times of high tide or storms. This conclusion
was obvious upon comparison of the contents of the pits with the
beach alongside the eroding bank of the site.

SHELL POINT

15

a

FIGURE 4. Viea~s ~/ Shell Poi~zt Site. a, Stripping grass off site prior to
excavation. On spoil banks in the background across Chocolate
Bayou are modern fishing camps. Note eroded bank of site; b, After
removal of the grass, excavation proceeded within a grid of 2-meter
squares. In the background is the shell beach.

A similar, but somewhat less obvious darkened area, in Square
10N3W proved to contain the group of skeletons (Fig. 5b). A major

16

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

FIGURE 5. Excavation in Progress at Shell Point. a, Sandy loam and salt
grass covered the midden to varying depths. When this was cleared
down to the shell midden, pits into the midden were recognized as
dark areas which were filled with finely broken shell; b, The edge of
the burial pit is outlined by plastic markers. Arm bones from Burial
No. 1 are seen protruding into the grass root zone.

SHELL POINT

17

concern was whether the burials were placed during or after the
accumulation of the midden. We were not able to solve this problem,
however, because the burials lay directly under the grass in the top of
the midden. All we can say for certain is that the burial pit was dug
after the bulk of the midden had accumulated and that there is very
little material on top of the burials. There is nothing above them, in
fact, that could not have been derived from the backfilling of shells
over the bodies. In view of the apparent recentness of the site -- very
close to the period of European contact-- it is doubtful that very much
midden would have accumulated even if the site had continued in
use.

Aside from digging in the burial area, we sought through test pits to
determine the limits of the site and something of the nature of the
midden with respect to the land around it. This work consisted
basically of a series of trenches to probe the edges of the midden (Fig.
2). The objective in probing the edges was to see whether shells had
been used to help fill in marshy land, thus providing more dry living
or work space for the inhabitants. Essentially what this showed was
that the midden rests directly upon marsh soils but does not interdigitate with them. Thus, the shells did extend the useful land surface, but there is no suggestion that the land was subsiding while the
site was in use. Heaps of shells lying at the midden’s edge illustrate
the fact that individual baskets (?) of them were heaved around the
periphery, a practice that had been suspected from the distribution of
shells in 41 HR 82 and also at the Three-Oaks Site up Chocolate
Bayou.
Although Figure 2 shows that considerable area was excavated,
most of the trenches simply cut down to the top of the shell layer or
exposed its edges, thus providing us with relatively few artifacts. The
bulk of the artifacts in the analysis came from the following squares:
6NIE, 8N3W, 10N3W and 10N5W. In other squares e.g., 16N8W,
which were completely excavated, there were few, if any artifacts.
Other material that proved useful came from the beach just below the
eroding bank of the midden where concentrations of pottery were
found lying in shallow water. In all there were relatively few artifacts
from the site as compared with 41 HR 82 or the Three-Oaks Site.

THE BURIALS
The upper portions of the first burials encountered were very fragmentary as a result of their having been crushed by vehicles driving
over the site. It was immediately apparent that human bones were
present, but at first it was exceptionally difficult to determine how

18

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

they lay in the earth because a) they were broken, b) they were tightly
packed in with oyster shells and c) several individuals were represented (Fig. 6). My first thought was that we were dealing with a
secondary interment of miscellaneous bones. We were unable to leave
the bones in the ground as we encountered them because the oyster
shells prevented cleaning and exposing adjacent bones simultaneously. Therefore, we sketched the position of each bone along with its
orientation and removed it. It was not until we had removed a dozen
or more bones in this fashion that we were able to see that we were
dealing with several closely packed, but articulated skeletons. Once
we discovered this every effort was made to leave the bones in place.

FIGURE 6. A vertical photograph of the upper level of bones lying
directly under the surface, showing them to be tightly packed in with
oyster shell.

SHELL POINT

19

This was somewhat easier as we proceeded downward because the
shells were less dense and the soil less compacted. The tight packing
of the shells in the upper layer apparently helped to preserve the
skeletons below through dispersing the pressure of the vehicles that
crossed the site.
In digging the burials our attention was continually on the limits
and nature of the pit that contained them (Fig. 6). A rough indication
of the pit had been clear from the start but the finding of its limits as
we worked downward proved difficult, as one might expect in a hole
dug into loosely packed shell. Nevertheless, we could determine that
the hole was dug from the surface down into the underlying sand. The
bodies were then placed in, the lowermost being placed directly on
the sand and the remainder as close to this level as the space in the pit
permitted.
Once the burials were exposed, it was apparent that they must have
been a simultaneous interment. In other words, five bodies, fully
described in Wilkinson’s report, were buried together (Fig. 7, 8). The
reason for deciding that they represent a single burial episode is
basically that they are placed closely together without clear evidence
of the dislocation of bones that would have occurred had a pit been
dug into a previous burial. The sketch of the burial group (Fig. 8)
shows the relations of the burials to one another and from the placing
we can deduce the following order of burial. First, body No. 4, an
adult female was placed in the ground. Then bodies I and 2, those of
an adult male and a child were put into the pit with the head of No. 1
placed on the hip of No. 4. Then bodies 3 and 5 were placed back to
back with the legs of No. 3 resting against the bodies of I and 2. Some
cramming was necessary to get all the bodies into the shallow pit. The
left leg of No. I had been bent back so that it lay alongside the left arm
and No. 3 had been placed completely on his side rather than partly on
his back as was the usual custom.
The difference between this group of articulated skeletons and the
fragmentary condition of disturbed burials is readily seen by comparing Figure 7 with Figure 19 in Aten’s (1971) report. The other four
burials at Shell Point were evidently single interments spaced some
distance from one another so that there was no disturbance.
The circumstance of finding a group burial seemed unusual as we
had no evidence of foul play, and it demanded an explanation. Hostile
action which left no traces either in projectile points or in cut marks
on the bones cannot be excluded. Neither can some unfortunate
natural disaster or disease. However, in view of the location of the site
and of the presumed activities that took place there, I suggest that a
reasonable explanation is death through freezing.

20

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

FIGURE 7. Vertical photograph of the five burials which lay on the
sandy soi! directly under the midden.

The site is in an exposed location, several kilometers from the
wooded portion of Chocolate Bayou and from the site that we have
tentatively considered to be the base camp of the group. Assuming
that a small party went down the bayou for fishing and collecting, if
one of the unusually extreme northers had suddenly blown up, the
Indians could easily have perished. In fact, local fishermen have told
us that they have come close to freezing themselves when they have
found themselves in their camps during a norther. Even with power
boats, getting back up the bayou may be impossible because of the
force of the wind and the outgoing tide. To suggest the kinds of
conditions that occasionally befall the area, Melissa Crowfoot has
compiled the following information.

SHELL POINT

21

FIGURE 8. A sketch traced from Figure 7 which shows the essential
relationships of the bodies more clearly than the photographs. Many
bones were omitted for clarity.

A perusal of the Weather Bureau records coupled with an examination of the area newspapers makes it obvious that it does get sufficiently cold in the Gulf Coast area of Texas for humans to freeze to
death. These extremely cold winters seem to occur on an average of
about every six to ten years, with measurable snowfall every six years
(snowfall of over one inch is recorded about every ten years). Severe
ice storms occur less often, but do occur irregularly in a rough pattern
of about fifteen years. As another general rule, these storms blow in
from the north (known as "northers"), and tend to cover the entire
area of southeast Texas, if not the whole state. That is they are not local
flurries, but are part of an entire weather system that brings bad
weather to a wide area.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

22

The coldest winter over all the state was 1898-1899, when Houston
recorded a minimum temperature of 6°, while Galveston recorded 8°
(February 12-13). The greatest snowfall by far was recorded in the
winter of 1895: officially, 15.4 inches were on the ground in Galveston, while the unofficial figures went as high as 20 inches in Houston
and 28 inches in the Beaumont area. The worst ice storm was in 1951,
when Houston was crippled for three days with 123 consecutive
hours of temperatures below freezing.
Table 1. Extended Freezing Temperatures
(number of consecutive hours with temperatures below freezing)
Galveston
# of hours

lowest temp reached

January 12-13, 1912

33

20

January 11-12, 1918

33

16

January

1 -2, 1928

34

20

January 22-23, 1930

36

20

22

13

11

24

15

19

15

21

20

15

19-20

15

21

22-23

15

26

13

19
25

30

15

26

30-31

16

24

12

27

Date

(also 17-18
18-19)
February 7 -8, 1933
8 -9
January 18-29, 1949

January 30-31, 1951

(the record in Houston was set during this time period, 123 hours)
January 3117
44
February 2, 1951
18
63
January 9-12, 1962

Table 2. Mean Number of Days
with Minimum Temperature Less Than 32°

Downtown Houston

Galveston

December- 1 day
January - 3 days
February- 1 day
March - 1 day

December- .5 (less than)
January - 1 day
February - 1 day
March - 0 day

SHELL POINT

23

Newspaper articles give a better understanding of what these figures mean when applied to the human situation:
Galveston Daily News, January 8-10, 1886:3 and 10:
"the cold wave acted fiercely last night freezing pumps, water pipes, the
ground, and water in pitchers and vessels... 5° above at some places...
clear sky, strong north wind."... "Yesterday can be described as decidely
winterish. While the water in the street gutters was frozen hard, the water
in the bay, except along the extreme edges, was not frozen; but as the high
wind would dash the spray upon the sides of the vessels in port, it would
rapidly freeze over and cover their sides, rudders and chains with ice,
reminding the seafarers of the scenes of a more northern latitude."

These figures can also mean death, for the frozen body of Captain
Thomas Jefferson was found the afternoon of the tenth on the deck of
his sloop Annie that had been stranded on the flats the night before.
The rescue party themselves were nearly frozen, as "the wind was
blowing a gale at the time and the thermometer about 35o.’’ Also, by
the tenth, the bay had frozen over for miles and resembled "an arctic
scene." Old-timers grumbled that it was worse than the "dreadful
winters of ’38, ’45, and ’64." Reference to the storm of ’64 was made in
another article which told of the deaths of 22 Confederate soldiers
stranded in Matagorda Bay, who died from exposure and freezing.
Table 3. Snowfall
(This table records only those years in which the snowfall
exceeds or is close to one inch.)
Downtown Houston
Galveston
(records kept since 1909
(records kept since 1871)
Feb. 14-15, 1895
Dec. 21-22, 1929
March. 10-11, 1932
Jan. 22, 1940
Jan. 30, 1949
Feb. 12, 1960

20.0 inches
(unofficial)
2.5 inches
0.8 inches
3.0 inches
2.6 inches
3.0 inches

Feb. 14-15, 1895

15.4 inches

Jan. 22, 1940
Jan. 30, 1949
Feb. 12-13, 1960

0.9 inches
0.8 inches
2.2 inches

Table 4. Severe Ice Storms
Downtown Houston
(records kept since 1909)
January
December

2,

1919

19-22,

1924

January

22,

1940

January

29-3,

1951

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

24

The snows of the winter of 1895 were also covered in the Galveston
Daily News (p. 6), with reports of snowfall from all around the area: 28
inches in Beaumont, an average of 16 inches in Orange, 8 inches in
Columbus, and 20 inches reported for both Houston and Lake Charles,
Louisiana. The temperature climbed to above 32° for only an hour
during February 15-16. Cattle losses were estimated at a minimum of
10% and a maximum of 75% (the latter was by a man in Orange). Three
people suffered death by freezing, one in Beaumont, one in Round
Rock and one in Clear Creek. No mention was made of the condition of
Galveston Bay, but Matagorda Bay was frozen over so that people
were ice-skating on it.
"Nothing like it ever in America" was the headline of the Daily
News on February 13, 1899, as the "range of the blizzard" covered the
whole South, with the exception of southern Florida, south Texas,
Mississippi and Alabama. "Loss to fruit and garden truck is great,
cattle have suffered, hundreds have died." Ten degrees below zero
was reported, and several anonymous frozen corpses were discussed.
That was the winter that recorded the lowest temperatures in both
Houston and Galveston (6° and 8°, respectively).
Table 5. Hurricanes
Texas Gulf Coast Area
Land Station

Deaths

Dates of

with Highest

Hurricanes

Wind Speed

(U.S,
only)

Aug. 27 -

Galveston,

Sep 15, 1900

77 mph,

6,000

Damages
(in dollars)
5,0OO,00050,000,000

Galveston,
92 mph,

flooded Galveston
5-6 feet

120 mph

1915

12-foot tide
to a deptb of

gusts to

Aug 5-25,

Description

275

5,000,00050,000,000

gusts to

again, a storm
tide inundated
Galveston

120 mph
Sep 16-25,

Texas City,

1941

gusts to

5,00O,0OO50,000,000

heavy crop
damage-most low
places evacuated

83 mph

in time
Sep 27 -

Freeport

Oct 6, 1949

est. 135 mph

Jun 25-28,

Sabine Pass,

1957

85 mph, gusts

AUDREY

to 100 mph

2

390

5,000,000-

most of damage

50,000,060

was to crops

50,000,000-

storm surge over 12

500,000,000

feet caused flooding
as far as 25 miles
inland; many homes
destroyed and offshore oil rigs
damaged

Sep 3-15,

Port Lavaca and

1961

Matagorda, est.

CARLA

145 mpb, gusts
est to 175 mph

46

50,000~000500,000,000

largest and most
intense in years;
damage from high
winds and tides,
flooding

SHELL POINT

25

On January 23, 1940, theHouston Post reported that three inches of
snow fell on that city, the worst storm since the one of 1899, and again
it covered the entire area. Three hundred forty nine deaths across the
South were blamed directly and indirectly on the snow and ice, with
23 of those in the Gulf Coast area.
The worst ice storm was that of late January and early February,
1951. For three days, schools were let out, telephone service, bus and
taxi service, and garbage service were suspended, the airport was
closed, and at times, even the radio stations weren’t functioning.
In summary, it does get cold enough for human beings to die from
exposure to the low temperatures, wind, snow and ice. Tables 1, 2, 3
and 4 present the extreme weather patterns in the Houston-Galveston
area.
Hurricanes would be another natural hazard for local Indians, although it is doubtful that bodies would be recovered after these
disasters. Table 5 records these storms which seem to affect the local
area on the average about every 10-15 years.

THE ARTIFACTS
There were relatively few artifacts of any kind from the excavated
portion of the site. Surprisingly, no lithics were recovered, although
Frank Mebane told us that he had picked up points on the eroded shell
beach. Despite our continual search, we were unable to find any
evidence at all for artifacts of chipped stone. The following brief
descriptions of the artifacts are divided by the material out of which
they were made. Most of the artifacts were found either in the burial
pit, some in definite association with the burials, or in the adjacent
square.

Shell
Beads, pendants and worked shell are included in this group.
Beads. A string of five beads (Fig. 9 a-e) made from the inside whorl of a conch shell was
found around the neck of the child (Burial No. 2}. These beads are polished and drilled
biconically (Fig. 10 a) and the ends have been ground down flat. Their dimensions (in
cm.) are given in the table.

Maximum
Diameter

Fig. No.

Example

Length

A

4.12

1.6

9a

B

2.94

1.15

9b

C

2.47

1.12

9c

D

2.36

1.19

9d

E

2.11

1.15

9e

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

26

d

b

e

O

9

,~ Cm

k
FIGURE 9. Shell and Bone Artifacts. a-e, five tubular conch shell beads
associated with Burial No. 2; f, conch shell pendant associated with
Burial No. 4; g, bone awl found in the burial pit; h, broken deer radius
awl; i, tubular bone bead; j, incised bone awl; k, tip of bone aw!.

SHELL POINT

27

A discarded end of the inside whorl of a conch which had been cut into beads was
found in the deposit adjacent to the burials. This segment had been cut and partly
ground. It looks as if the first step in manufacturing beads was to grind the entire whorl
to the diameter desired and then to cut it into sections whose ends were subsequently
ground flat.
Pendant. Associated with Burial 4, the female, was a pendant made from the outer
whorl of a conch. One end had been pierced for suspension and a series of five holes had
been partly drilled into its inner surface (Fig. 9f}. The edges of the piece are ground and
slightly beveled.

Bone
There are two bone awls and a probable section of an awl which had been incised.
One specimen (burial pit) is complete (Figs. 9g; 10d) and was made from a longitudinal
section of a deer long bone. This example is 10.8 cm. long. The second example (burial
pit) is the tip of an awl, also made of a section of deer long bone (Fig. 9k).
The incised example (burial pit) is also a section of long bone which has been
polished like an awl but which has four incisions or cut marks at the small end where it
is broken, and a single cut mark at the larger end where it is also broken (Figs. 9j; 10b).

®o

b

I

I

C

d
FIGURE 10. Shell and Bone Artifacts. a, Conch shell bead showing
method of drilling hole; b, incised fragment of bone awl; c, tubular
bone bead; d, polished bone awl.

28

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Also in the burial pit was the proximal end of the radius of a small deer which was
broken and then polished, probably to make an awl. The end of the piece has been
broken and worn down, partly by gnawing to judge from the tooth marks (Fig. 9h).
A possible bone bead is a tapered section cut from a long bone which was smoothed
on the outside and partly hollowed out on the inside. The narrow end is intact, but the
remainder has been broken (Figs. 9i; 10c).

Discussion of Non-Ceramic Artifacts
The beads and pendant are clearly personal ornaments associated
with burials and they correspond closely with artifacts found at the
Boys School Site. Similar beads are described by Aten (1971:Fig.
14c,d) as Type B, eight of which were found in association with his
Burial 3. All of these beads were shaped from conch shell whorls and
all retain the spiral groove. The beads found at the Boys School Site
have an average length of 2.76 cm. and an average diameter of 1.27
cm. This compares with the smaller four of the five beads from Shell
Point whose length average 2.47 cm. and whose diameters average
1.15 cm.
The shell pendant is of the same style as the one found at the Boys
School Site (80-62) although the latter is slightly larger and has more
elaborate decoration in the form of evenly spaced drilled holes (Aten:
1971:Fig. 15A-A’).
Bone awls which are usually found in archeological sites of this
region have basic similarities which can be attributed to function and
the material out of which they were made.
Ceramics
One hundred thirty-seven sherds were recorded from various pits
in our excavation. Considering the area we dug, pottery is scarce, a
situation which is not surprising if we accept the view that the site
was a fishing camp and not a residence area. Although a sample of this
size enables us to relate the sherds to other sites, we can do so with far
less precision than we would like because of two factors: 1) the sherds
tend to be extremely small, and 2) we have no way of determining on
present evidence whether they should all be considered contemporary. Attempts to refine a ceramic chronology for the area have been
difficult because of the same factors at most sites and because of our
poor understanding of regional variation. The Three-Oaks Site which
is currently under investigation has a large collection of pottery
which is accurately controlled stratigraphically. A complete analysis
of this will be necessary before it is useful to reach firm conclusions
about the Shell Point material. What we can say now is that there is
nothing in the ceramics to suggest that the site is not late. For this

SHELL POINT

29

j..,
/

b
5cm
i

FIGURE 11. Potter), fron~ Shell Point. a-c, sherds with notched rims; d-e,
plain rims.

30

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

reason I have not assigned the sherds to the usual series of types
which are found in the region.
The salient characteristic of all our sherds is that they are sand
tempered; only three had bits of grog temper along with the sand.
Eleven of the 18 rims have notching (Fig. 11a-c) and three sherds have
parallel horizontal incisions (Fig. 11a). One sherd has a trace of
asphalt decoration, a trait which is more common in sites well to the
south of Houston than to the Clear Lake area, for example. The range
of variation in rim sherds is illustrated in Figure 11.

FAUNA
Bones
A zoological analysis of the bones has not been carried out but Charles Stedman
grouped the bones according to major categories and calculated the percentages by
weight. Most of the bones were tiny chips recovered in the screen and could not be
further identified. By weight these comprised 49.3 percent of the total. Of the remainder, 25.1 percent are fish bones. Bones of rodents, turtles, and birds made up another
13.3 percent. A few fragments of deer bone and a cow tooth (possibly a recent addition
to the site) added up to 5.7 percent of the total weight. The remainder were miscellaneous burned bones. Crude though this breakdown may be, it does indicate that the
principal activity was fishing, along with collecting of oysters. The lack of deer bones
accords well with the absence of projectile points and of Ethics themselves.

Shell
The bulk of the midden is composed of oyster shells but scallops and Busycan shells,
also derived from saline water, were found, the former only as small fragments.
Additionally, there were half a dozen fragments of Rangia and more than 100 examples
of at least three kinds of terrestrial snails. There is nothing in the shells themselves to
suggest environmental conditions different from those prevailing in the area today.
Indeed, all the species found occur in the vicinity today, either living or washed up on
beaches.

The Physical Anthropology of Shell Point
RICHARD G. WILKINSON

INTRODUCTION
The eight burials from the Shell Point Site, representing a
minimum of nine individuals, can provide students of American
Indian osteology with additional data for overall syntheses and
specific information concerning the physical anthropology of a restricted geographical/ecological area. To this end, the skeletal material from the site will be described metrically, morphologically and
pathologically; additional skeletal series will be considered for comparative purposes.

BURIAL DESCRIPTIONS
Burial 1
Burial 1 is an adult mate, of approximately 25 to 30 years of age. Like the other adult
males from the site, Burial 1 is robust, with well-defined muscle markings, and the
browridge, mastoid processes, supra-mastoid crest and nuchal ridge are all prominent.
The mandible (Fig. 12) is very robust, with a bilateral chin, marked gonial eversion and
a large, nearly vertical (103°) ramus.
The post-cranial skeleton reaffirms the impression of muscularity evident from the
skull and mandible. The humerus has a massive deltoid crest and a deep groove for the
biceps tendon. The femur is likewise massive, with equally marked areas of muscle
attachment.
The dentition is sound, with no pre-mortem tooth loss, and a single, small apical
carie. Burial 1 is the only individual from the site with caries. The wear on the teeth is
moderately heavy and the posterior dentition is characterized by flat wear which is
greater on the buccal aspect of the mandibular dentition and on the lingual aspect of the
maxillary dentition. This form of wear is typical of the other burials as well and the
older individuals demonstrate it to a greater degree.
The skeleton is relatively free of pathology; only the lumbar vertebrae and the left
femur are pathological. The vertebrae have porotic superior and inferior articulating
facets, and the femur shows a slight amount of lipping around the patellar surface of the
femoral condyle.

Burial 2
This individual is a child of 5 to 6 years of age at death. The post-cranial remains are
fairly complete but badly fragmented and give no indication of trauma or pathology.
Due to the fragmentary nature of the skeleton the dentition provides the only consistently observable part of the skeleton. The mandibular first molars are erupted but not
yet in the occlusal plane. The deciduous teeth show very little wear, considering the
fact that the permanent teeth are coming in. The wear is confined to tiny facets on the
molars and small patches of dentine on the mandibular and maxillary incisors. Considering the amount of wear seen on the adults, and even young adults such as Burial 1, the
tooth wear on this child may indicate that children were eating food of different
consistency than that of the adults, if not different food altogether.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

32

b

c

d

FIGURE 12. Ma~dibles. a, Burial 7; b, Burial 8; c, Burial 1; d, Burial 3;
Burials 1, 3 and 7 are males,

Burial 3
Burial 3 is a male of approximately 50 years of age. As is the case with the other adult
burials, the age estimate must be based on a combination of endocranial suture closure
and dental attrition, as no pubic symphyses were preserved. The usual caveats
concerning these methods of age estimation are understood and the reader must keep
them in mind. This individual is another example of a markedly rugged male, as
indicated by the large size of the browridge, mastoids and other such characteristics
traditionally used to determine sex. In addition, the skull shows the typical form for this
series, being characterized by a high, narrow vault, marked parietal bossing and
constrictions immediately superior to the supramastoid crests (Fig. 13). As was true of
Burial 1, the mandible has a bilateral chin, marked gonial eversion and generally
marked rugosity (Fig. 12). The muscularity so obviously evident in the skull is equally
obvious post-cranially, as was the case with Burial 1.

SHELL POINT

33

b

(1

¢
FIGURE 13. Crania, occipital view. a, Burial 4; b, Burial 7; c, Burial 3.
Burials 3 and 7 are males.
Dental attrition is very marked with relatively more wear on the anterior dentition
and the first premolars. Despite the wear, the teeth were sound, with no evidence of
dental pathology. Bone pathology on this skeleton is restricted to the right tibia and the
lumbar and cervical vertebrae. The right tibia is grossly pathological, with marked

34

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

swelling of the anterior aspect of the shaft and severe porosis. The pathology is most
marked on the lateral shaft, but encompasses the entire shaft to a lesser extent. The
epiphyses are not affected.
Vertebral pathology consists of marked exostoses on the centrum of L4 (Fig. 15) and
less marked lipping of L5, C5 and C6. In addition, L4 has bony growths surrounding the
margins of the superior articulating facets and the inferior facets are missing, presumably as a result of disease.

Burial 4
This is the only female skeleton in the group of five individuals. From dental attrition
and suture closure, it is quite clear that the individual is old, but 40 + years is as accurate
an estimate as is possible at this point. Like the majority of the males Burial 4 has a skull
characterized by its height and narrow width, with the constrictions above the supramastoid crests when viewed from the rear. The mandible is much less rugged than
those of the males although gonial eversion is quite marked.
In the area of pathology, only the mandible and frontal bone are involved. There is an
alveolar abcess around the roots of the left mandibular third molar and the roof of the
left orbit is porotic, a condition usually referred to as cribra orbitalia. As in the males,
the dental wear is flat with a lingual-to-buccal direction in the mandible and the reverse
in the maxilla. The anterior dentition exhibits relatively more wear than the posterior.

b
FIGURE 14. Sexual Dimorphism. a, left humeri of Burials 1 and 4; b,
mandibles of Burials 1 and 4. Burial 1 is a male, 4 a female.

SHELL POINT

35

Cl

b

C

FIGURE 15. Patholo~,. a, cross-section of adult humerus; b, fourth
lumbar vertebra of Burial 3; c, lateral view of adult tibia.

Burial 5
This individual was still imbedded in earth at the time I examined the skeletal
material, as the skeleton is intended for display. As a result only a superficial examination could be made. Burial 5 is a male of at least 40 years of age at death. Like the other
males, he is extremely robust, although shorter than the others. Based on the length of

36

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the right femur (435mm.) which was measured in situ, the estimated stature is 166.1
cm., or 65.4 inches. Observable pathology was restricted to the right tibia and the
lumbar vertebrae. As in Burial 3, the shaft of the tibia is swollen and porotic and the
lumbars have lipping of the centra. The pathological involvement of the tibia in Burial 5
is much less severe than that observed in Burial 3, and would appear to be an earlier
manifestation of the same disease.

Burial 6
This burial consists of the skull and mandible of an adolescent, 10 to 11 years of age.
The mandible shows a strong, bilateral chin and marked swelling of the body in the
region of the second molars. The mandible would, therefore, indicate that this individual is a male. Accurate sex determination at such a young age is quite improbable in
most cases, but the extreme amount of sexual dimorphism in this series (especially
evident in the mandibles) makes such determination likely in this case. The postcranial remains associated with the cranium are of another individual, probably an
adult female. No abnormalities nor pathologies were observed.

Burial 7
The most complete individual in this burial is an adult male over 40 at death. The
skull is typically high and narrow, the mandible typically robust although lacking
gonial eversion. Post-cranially, the skeleton again suggests ruggedness, and this individual was also the tallest, the stature estimated as 180.7 cm., or 71.1 inches. The tibiae
have smooth bumps along the anterior edge, and some porosis. It would appear that this
individual was in the early stages of the disease that affected burials 3 and 5. Unlike the
other two burials the vertebrae of Burial 7 are free of pathology.
Additionally, Burial 7 contains a second mandible and skull fragments, also of an
adult male. The second mandible appears to be that of an individual older than the mate
described above. The second mandible and skull fragments continue the morphological traits observed in the more complete males. Thus the mandible is characterized by a
bilaterial chin and overall rugosity. The maxillary dentition has extreme wear, flat as in
the other individuals, and in a buccal-to-lingual direction.
A partial post-cranial skeleton of a child is also included in Burial 7. The long bones
have no epiphyses and the size indicates a child of approximately 10 years of age. These
bones may belong to the skull described as Burial 6. No pathologies nor anomalies were
observed.

Burial 8
This burial consists of the badly broken skull of an old adult female. Although
distorted in breakage and reconstruction, the skull is high and narrow, like the other
individuals. The frontal bone is pathological, as there is a series of irregular bumps and
a shallow depression just above the orbits; no endocranial involvement is observable.
Like Burial 4, this female is very small, and similarly points to the marked degree of a
sexual dimorphism present in this group.

MORPHOLOGY
Selected measurements of the skull, mandible and long bones are
presented in Tables 6 and 7. The lack of facial measurements is due to
the poor condition of the crania, as none has a complete facial skele-

SHELL POINT

37

ton. As can be seen from the measurements, the skulls are quite long,
¯ and the cranial indices derived from the length and breadth measurement show all of the measurable adult skulls to be dolichocranial.
Basion-bregma height could be taken on only one skull, and the value
for this measurement, 146 mm., is relatively high. The marked height
of all of the skulls was also evident. The measurements thus reinforce
the visual impression one has of the skulls, that is, long, narrow and
high.
The mandibular measurements are notable mainly in the area of the
ascending ramus, as the measurements show the rami to be very high
and quite broad. The differences between the one measurable female
and the males is very obvious in these measurements; Plate III reaffirms this dimorphism. The post-cranial measurements are the most
dimorphic, especially those expressing shaft diameter. Unfortunately, it is impossible to assess the significance of this sexua! dimorphism because of the small sample size, as there are only two
adult females in the sample. The fact remains, however, that these two
females are small and very gracile, whereas all of the males are
large-boned and rugged. It was even possible to determine the sex of a
pre-adolescent boy, Burial 6, with a fair degree of confidence. Comparing Burials I and 4 the amount of sexual dimorphism, as measured
by dividing the male value by the female, ranges from 2.7% to 31.7%
in the skull and mandible, and from 207% to 47.1% in the post-cranial
skeleton.
With the exception of the 2.7% value for cranial length, all of the
other values were greater than those calculated by de Villiers (1968)
for South African Negroes, even though the same measurements were
significantly different among the two sexes of the Negro population.
Some of the measurements show even more dimorphism than that
observable among gorillas, which are usually assumed to be among
the most dimorphic of the primates. The meaning of such a finding is
unclear, especially since the small sample size prohibits the determination of statistical significance. All that can be said at this point is
that all of the males were larger than both of the females. To accept
such a difference as representative of the entire population is obviously premature, as is the interpretation of the difference. If such a
difference did exist within the population then it would remain for us
to demonstrate an equally diverse diet and/or division of labor to
explain the differences. The rather scarce comparative literature is of
little help here, as sexual dimorphism is never referred to. Several of
the reports on Texas Coast skeletal series mention the marked robusticity of the males, but a corresponding lack of robusticity among the
females is not mentioned.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

38

Table 6. Cranial Measurements
Males
Measurement
Length
Breadth
Basion-Bregma
Minimum Frontal
Basion-Nasion
Palate Length
Palate Width
Symphysis Height
Bigonial Width
Bicondylar Width
Ramus Height
Ramus Width
Body Length

3

7

191
140
146
103
118
57
70
40
119
129
83
38
105

191
138

186
134

184

96

99

92

58
70
40
91
121
80
40

70
38
116
122
73
39
105

7a

Female
4

1

128

36

35

106
121
74
39

63
35
93

Table 7. Post-cranial Measurements

Males

Measurement

Female
4

7

3
Humerus
339

336

346

280

Head Diameter

45

46

45

36

Ant.-Post. Mid-shaft Diameter

24

25

20

16

’ Med.-Lat. Mid-shaft Diameter

25

25

23

Radius Length

273

276

Ulna Length

302

293

286

Length

472

470

490

Bicondylar Length

470

468

483

Ant.-Post. Mid-shaft Diameter

35

34

29

Med.-Lat. Mid-shaft Diameter

30

30

29

LengthI

18
226

Femur

Tibia
406

397

414

336

Ant.-Post. Mid-shaft Diameter2

41

37

41

29

Med.-Lat. Mid-shaft Diameter

28

28

26

21

Length

1. All lengths are maximum. The measurements are for the left bone when both bones
of a pair were present.
2. The diameter of the tibia was taken at the level of the distal aspect of the nutrient
forament.

SHELL POINT

39

STATURE
Table 8 lists the estimated stature for the four adult males from the
Shell Point Site and some comparative series from the Texas Gulf
Coast. As is evident, there is a considerable difference in stature
depending on the formulae used for the estimation. The tables supplied by Genoves (1967) yield estimates consistently less than those
derived from the formulae of Trotter and Gleser (1958) for Mongoloids. Since Genoves’ tables are based on cadaveral stature of
Mesoamerican Indians who are of short stature, estimates for North
American Indians based on these tables are most likely too short
(Bass, Evans and Jantz 1971; Wilkinson 1971:51). All estimates are
based on femora! and/or tibial measurements, as suggested by Trotter
and Gleser (1958:120).

Table 8. Stature Estimates of Texas Coast Males
Site
and
Burial

Femur

Genoves

and

Femur

Tibia

Shell Point 1

170.5

171.0

177.2

3

170.0

169.0

176.1

5

162.5

7

174.5

172.5

180.7

169.4

170.8

178.0

Mean
Oso*

Tibia

Trotter and Gleser
Femur

176.9
166.1
177.4

167.0

170.4

"b"

171.0

174.5

"c"

173.5

176.6

"d"

175.5

178.8
180.9

174.0
171.8

175.1

"1"

161.0

165.0

"2"

167.0

170.4

"3"

173.0

176.2

167.0

170.5

Mean

H-U
178.9

"a"

3 males

Tibia

Doering and
Kob**

Mean

*Woodbury and Woodbury, 1935
**Newman, 1953

The stature estimates indicate that the Texas Coast males were
relatively tall and that all three series used here were quite similar in
stature. The Shell point males have stature estimates which range
from approximately 5’5" to 5’11" with a mean of 5’9", using the

40

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Trotter and Gleser formulae. The Oso series (Woodbury and Woodbury 1935) ranged from 5’7" to 5’11" with a mean of 69.4 inches; This
is nearly identical to the Shell Point estimate. The three skeletons
from the Doering and Kob sites (Newman 1953b) are somewhat shorter than those from the other series, as the mean stature is 5’7". Stature
estimates made on five males from the Harris County Boys School
Cemetery (Aten et al., 1971) indicate a mean stature of 67.1 inches.
This is identical to the Doering and Kob estimate but is based on
"either the femur, tibia or both" and is calculated from a different
formula in the present study.
The males from these Texas Coast series are taller than a Middle
Woodland series from Kansas (Phenice 1969) and six Middle to Late
Woodland series from Illinois and Michigan (Wilkinson 1971). Additionally, the Shell Point male stature is greater than that estimated for
Arikara males, using the same formulae (Bass, Evans and Jantz
1971:167). Stature estimates using the humerus and ulna are in one
case greater, in one case less and in the third case the same as the
estimates based on the bones of the leg. Thus it would not appear that
the tall stature estimates are an artifact of unusually long legs among
the Shell Point group.
It is quite clear that the Shell Point males were very tall for precontact American Indians. It is also clear that they were not unusual in
this regard in that the existing data indicate that relatively tall stature
was the rule among late prehistoric Indians of the east Texas Coast.
Newman (1953) has demonstrated a south to north gradient of increasing stature for American Indians, and also has presented evidence for increasing stature through time among American Indians of
the southeastern United States (Newman 1962). The skeletal series
discussed in this report have statures which are considerably too tall
to be explained in terms of the "rules" of Bergmann and Allen;
further, it is unlikely that a secular trend can explain the high values,
due to lack of evidence for shorter ancestral populations. While secular changes in stature are well documented they are accompanied by
similar changes in levels of nutrition. No such nutritive change of the
appropriate magnitude can be demonstrated for the populations of
tile Texas Coast.

DEMOGRAPHY
The sex and age distributions are not what might be expected in a
representative sample of a small population. Of the minimum of nine
individuals, only two are subadults, and of the seven adults only one,
Burial 1, is of reproductive age. Burials 1 through 5 were found

SHELL POINT

41

together, and on this basis may be thought to represent members of a
common social group such as a family. This group contains two old
(40+) males and one old female, a young adult male and a 5 year-old
child.
While we might expect a reasonably large proportion of the burials
to be individuals older than 40, the proportion among the Shell Point
series, 67%, would seem too high. We would also expect more subadults (especially infants) to be represented. Obviously the small
number of individuals in the sample prevents drawing sound conclusions concerning the age distribution, but it should be noted that it is
not as expected under "normal" prehistoric conditions. It is, of
course, quite possible that the burials do indeed represent a real social
group. The low number of subadults is apparently not unusual for
Karankawa:
The family unit was apparently quite small. Usually two parents and one
child, and never more than two children, were observed. In addition to
this nuclear family the couple lived with one set of relatives by marriage
and possibly one or two other relatives (Schaedel 1949:124).

There may well have been unusual circumstances leading to the
death of these individuals, considering that at least Burials i through
5 were apparently interred simultaneously. There is no evidence of
trauma and the pathology present was not responsible for the presumed sudden death. There are many references to cannibalism
among the Karankawa, Atakapa and Tonkawa, but no evidence of this
in the form of cutting marks on the bones was observed.
The most obvious and common pathology is a progressive bone
disease seen in three of the nine individuals. Burials 3, 5 and 7 have
tibiae exhibiting varying stages of this disease. The affected tibiae are
swollen along the anterior shaft and the shaft is marked by longitudinal striations. In the more severely affected bones the swelling progresses to the entire shaft, the cortical bone is very porotic and the
entire medullary canal is infested with spongy bone. The epiphyses,
and thus the joints, are not affected. The most severely affected tibia is
one which could not be associated with any individual. This bone was
one of a number of bones recovered from the site without exact
provenience. That the disease is restricted to males may be of significance but the fact that five of the seven adults are males is most likely
the reason for the association.
The disease would seem most likely to be a form of periostitis. Like
most infectious diseases which affect bone tissue, the most probable
cause is an infection somewhere else in the body. Infectious diseases
are also another possible cause. The evidence from the bones only

42

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

indicates that some sort of infection was present; it could have been
syphi!lis, which would be interesting considering three of the males
exhibited the disease, or it could just as well have been tonsilitis, at
least originally.
Dental pathology is very limited in the Shell Point series. One of six
observable adult dentitions contains caries, and three have premortem tooth loss. Such a low frequency of caries accords well with
data from larger series from the Texas coast. Among shellfish gatherers of the Texas coast Goldstein (1948) found caries in 34.5% of the
dentitions whereas east Texas agriculturalists had a frequency of
46.8%. The frequencies of pre-mortem tooth loss were equally disparate and suggest differences attributable to dietary patterns. The
Shell Point population was most certainly non-agricultural and the
low incidence of dental pathology, if not due to sampling error, may
be explained on the basis of inferred dietary practices.
COMPARATIVE MATERIAL
There are a few skeletal series from the east Texas Coast area and
they can provide some data with which to compare the Shell Point
material. Because of the small size of most of the samples (including
the Shell Point series) only the most simple comparisons can be made.
The location of these sites is indicated in Figure 1.
The skeletal material most frequently encountered in the literature
from the Texas Coast area is that from the Oso Site on Corpus Christi
Bay in Nueces County. Burials from the Oso Site are apparently first
described by the Woodburys (Woodbury and Woodbury 1935) along
with skeletons from at least one other site. Woodbury (1937) later uses
the Oso remains in a comparative paper and notes that "This series is
too small (less than 10 individuals) for statistical reliability but as
there are no more in existence nothing can be done about it (p. 9)."
The tables show a maximum of 11 individuals from the site and by
1957 the Oso population grew to 22 individuals (Goldstein 1957:305).
The Oso skeletons also served as part of the original sample upon
which Neumann’s Otamid physical variety was based (Neumann,
1952). Although few artifacts were found at the Oso site Woodbury
(1937) felt that the probable late date and geographical location of the
site would argue for the site being identifiable as Karankawa. This
identification is repeated by Neumann (1952).
The descriptions provided by the Woodburys and Neumann could
easily fit most of the Shell Point skulls. For example, "When observed
from the rear, the skull appear to have perpendicular sides" (Woodbury and Woodbury 1935) and the well-developed chins are also

SHELL POINT

43

noted. Neumann’s description of the Otamid type is even closer to the
Shell Point series as he mentions the dolichocranial, high skulls, with
medium to pronounced muscle relief, large browridges and large
mastoids. The mandibles are "medium to large, rather massive, with a
wide bilaterial type of chin... (Neumann 1952:16)."
The Caplen Mound (Woodbury 1937; Campbell 1957) is located
near Galveston.From the date and the artifacts Woodbury identifies
the site as Atakapan and notes that the cultural material "differs
radically" from that found at the Oso site (Woodbury 1937:9).
Woodbury’s tables indicate that the Caplen series was considerably
more brachycephalic than the Oso series; the cranial index being 70.1
for the Oso males, and 77.3 for the males from the Caplen Site. There
are also some differences in mandibular measurements but the two
series are very similar in 17 of 22 measurements. Woodbury emphasized the differences and concluded that the two series were
remotely related, at best; the opposite conclusion, that they were
closely related, is also consistent with the data if the similarities are
stressed. The broader skulls of the Caplen Mound series do represent a
distinct difference from other Texas Coast series and an explanation
based on different gene pools would seem to be the only logical one.
The Jamaica Beach Site (Aten 1965; Aten et al. 1971) is located on
Galveston Island. The site yielded 17 burials, and was radiocarbon
dated at 490+ 100 B.P. (Aten 1965:154). In Aten’s original report five
skulls were discussed briefly and the long, narrow and high vaults,
similar to those at Shell Point, were noted. The skeletal material is
also discussed as a comparative series for yet another Texas Coast
series from the Harris County Boys School Site (Aten et al. 1971). In
this later report 19 burials from the Jamaica Beach site are mentioned.
The different body counts are at least partially understandable when
we learn that some of the burials were carefully exhumed, only to be
crushed under the wheels of a passing truck. According to this recent
paper only two of the 19 individuals from the Jamaica Beach site were
subadults, and one of these was an infant (Aten et al. 1971).
I was able to examine a few of the extant skulls from the Jamaica
Beach site through the courtesy of Dr. Pulley of the Houston Museum
of Natural Science. With one exception the male skulls were very
similar in overall morphology to those from Shell Point -- being
characterized by long, narrow and high vaults. The depressions noted
just above the supramastoid crests on the Shell Point skulls are also
evident on most of the Jamaica Beach skulls examined. The one major
exception is a skeleton referred to as "Burial D" which is said to be a
40 to 50 year old male (Aten et al. 1971). This was the only burial with
the cranium positioned toward the east (Aten 1965) and the only

44

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

brachycranial skull at either the Jamaica Beach or Shell Point sites.
This skull is obviously different from all of the other skulls in these
series and although variability could account for this difference it is
much more probable that this skull is of an individual from another
population. The peculiar burial orientation is also evidence that the
person was seen as somehow different by the rest of the population.
Upon examining the skeletal material it was immediately obvious
that Burial D was not a male and it could thus well be that the skeleton
represents a female brought into the group from another population.
The only brachycrania! skeletal series of which I am aware in this
area is that from the Caplen Mound, discussed above. It may well have
been that the female known as "Burial D" originally came from the
population represented by the Caplen Mound skeletal material.
Whether this burial represents an exchanged mate, a captive woman
or any number of other possibilities is naturally unknown. All that
can be said with any certainty is that she was perceived as being
different by the Jamaica Beach population, as witnessed by the peculiar burial position.
The skeletal remains from the Harris County Boys School Cemetery
(Aten et al. 1971) would be an ideal population with which to compare the Shell Point material but the requisite information is not
available. There is no description of the skulls, and "traditional osteometric techniques were not used in this study since there is a
growing realization in physical anthropology that understanding of
the significance of such techniques is markedly deficient (Aten et al.
1971:48)." That the authors later complain of the lack of comparative
data (ibid. p. 53) is astonishing.
Some of the Harris County Boys School Cemetery Burials are affected with bone infections which appear to be identical to those
observed on three of the Shell Point burials. Thus Burial 13 is described as an adult male with "mild inflammation affecting the cortical bone of the femur and tibia that was diagnosed as periostitis (Aten
et al. 1971). Burial 29 is an adult female with vertebral lipping and
tibial inflammation, affecting the cancellous bone as well as the
cortical bone. This is exactly the type of pathology observed in the
Shell Point skeletons.
As was the case at the Shell Point and Jamaica Beach sites there
were fewer subadults than expected at the Harris County Boys School
Site. Seven of the 32 burials were less than 11 years at death, and this
ratio is seen as evidence of "easy living" (Aten et al. 1971). A late
summer occupancy is thus assumed. Presumably a site occupied
during the winter would be evident from the larger proportion of
subadult deaths. Such an assumption is not warranted. The Jamaica

SHELL POINT

45

Beach Site contained 19 burials, only two of which were subadults,
yet the same authors consider this to be a winter occupation. While
these two sites may well be summer and winter occupations the
proportions of subadults should not be the determining factor in
judging seasonality.
The Doering and Kobs sites are located about 16 miles west of
Houston. They yielded a total of seven skeletons (Newman 1953b).
The Doering Site yielded four individuals, including a male and two
females described as long-headed and a second adult male with a
cranial index of 81.5. The Kobs Site contained three individuals, two
females and a male, and they are all described as long-headed. The
Doering Burials are felt by Newman to be most similar to those from
the Caplen Mound, and the Kobs are associated with the Oso material,
which means that the Doering group is Atakapan, while the Dobs
series is Karankawan (Newman 1953b:265). The two males from the
Doering Site are considerably shorter than the males from Shell Point
and Oso (see Table 8). Atakapans have been described as having a
short stature (Dyer 1917) whereas there are several references to the
tall stature of the Karankawa.
Most of the skeletal series from Texas Coast sites relatable to either
the Karankawa or Atakapa are very small, incomplete and/or poorly
described. The information that is available, however, makes it quite
clear that there was a predominant physical similarity among many of
the series. The most notable morphological features are the head
shapes and stature. With the exception of the Caplen Mound skulls
the "typical" skull from the area is strongly dolichocranial, with
marked muscle relief, and exhibits a large mandible with a strongly
bilateral chin. The dolichocranial features of the skulls from the Texas
Coast area have been noted by many and have been seen as evidence
for the existence of marginal remnants of early American Indians. The
skulls described in this report are dolichocranial but are also characterized by having high vaults and variably marked depressions just
superior to the supra-mastoid crests.
The skeletal material from Caplen Mound and the Doering and
Kobs sites (Woodbury 1937; Newman 1953b) is identified as Atakapan in both areas, but the morphology exhibits large differences. The
skulls from the Doering and Kobs sites are described as long and
narrow whereas those from the Caplen Mound are considerably more
brachycranial. Thus, either the Atakapans varied greatly in morphology or the identification of these three sites as Atakapan is erroneous.
Descriptions of living Atakapans are extremely rare, and the only
reference I could locate was very brief:" ’... their bodies stout, stature
short, and heads of large size placed between their shoulders... (Dyer

46

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1917, cited by Newcomb 1961).’ "The meaning of"large heads" is, of
course, debatable but the reference to short stature would separate the
Atakapans from the Karankawa.
The third major group in the East Texas area were the Tonkawa, a
19th century confederation of small, obscure groups with histories
connected to the Southern Plains. There are no adequate descriptions
of the morphology of the Tonkawa but Newcomb (1961:Plate II and
III) illustrates some 19th Century Tonkawas. The few individuals
pictured are meso- to brachycephalic but this is hardly sufficient data
upon which to base ethnographic identification.
There is little doubt that the majority of the skeletal series mentioned in this study are identifiable as Karankawa. The tall stature and
general ruggedness evident in the skeletal material from the Shell
Point, Jamaica Beach, (9so and Harris County Boys School sites are
alluded to in various early accounts of Karankawans. When visited
around 1830, the males were described as being nearly 6 feet tall
(Berlandier 1969:32), and in general, "The Carancahueses are a big
people, with robust, well formed, athletic bodies (ibid. p. 149)." Their
strength impressed others as well: " ’... every warrior’s bow when
strung, was precisely as long as his person and as useless in the hands
of a man of ordinary strength as was the bow of Ulysses in the hands of
the suitors (Kuykendall 1903, cited in Newcomb 1961:61).’ " The
Karankawa made a less poetic but equally strong impression on
others: " ’They were the most savage looking human beings I ever
saw. Many of the bucks were six feet in height with bows and arrows
in proportion (Smithwick 1900, cited in Newcomb 1961:64).’ "
SUMMARY
The analysis of the skeletal material from the Shell Point Site allows
a number of conclusions, although each should be tempered with the
implications of small sample size. In terms of overall morphology it is
evident that the Shell Point material is similar to a number of precontact or early contact skeletal series from the Texas Coast area. The
similarities are most marked in the areas of head shape and stature.
Yet the Shell Point series also had distinctiveness notably in the
homogeneity of head shape and in the high degree of sexual dimorphism.
In terms of demography the Shell Point series would not seem to be
representative of a "real" social group, due to the age and sex of the
nine individuals. Of the nine, two were adult females beyond reproductive age, two were subadults and the rest were adult males. Only
one of the males was less than 40 at the time of death. The skeletal

SHELL POINT

47

material showed no signs of trauma and the marked robusticity of the
males would suggest that the group was adequately nourished.
Skeletal pathology was noted on several of the males. A progressive
periostitis is indicated, affecting primarily the tibiae of four individuals. Dental pathology is slight, with only one observable carie and
three individuals with pre-mortem tooth loss.
The Shell Point skeletal series can be compared with several Texas
Coast skeletal series and such a comparison points to a basic similarity among skeletons from sites identified as Karankawa and some
differences when compared to putative Atakapan skeletal material.
From various descriptions of living Karankawa Indians made in the
19th century, all of which note the tall stature and ruggedness of the
males, there is little doubt that the She!l Point series can be identified
as Karankawa. While differing from the Karankawa series in head
shape and stature the skeletal material from the Caplen Mound and
the Doering Site also shows a number of similarities to the material
from Oso, Shell Point and Jamaica Beach. If these two sites are in fact
Atakapan then we could expect that Atakapa and Karankawa shared a
gene pool at one time.
Biological evidence for the origin of these two groups is scanty, due
mainly to the small sample sizes and lack of published data from
Texas Coast populations. Ethnographic and archaeological evidence
seems to point toward Louisiana as a possible homeland; biological
evidence does not contradict this view. Snow’s description of the
Tchefuncte skeletal material, emphasizing as it does the high, narrow
heads and marked muscularity {Snow 1945) could provide a basis for
establishing a population ancestral to those of the Texas Coast.

Acknowledgments
Without the help and cooperation of many persons the excavation of the Shell Point
Site could not have been carried out. Special appreciation is due to the Mebane family
who own a fishing camp a short distance up the bayou from the site and who alerted
officials of General Crude Oil Company, the present owners of the land, to the danger of
the site’s being eroded into the bayou. To Frank Mebane, Jr., we owe special thanks for
his care in recovering skeletons that had eroded out of the banks of the site over the two
years preceding our excavation. We would not have been able to work at the site,
however, except for the foresight of Mr. K. E. Montague, President of General Crude Oil
who informed Dr. Thomas Pulley of the Houston Museum of Natural Science in August,
1971 that a skull was at that time eroding out of the bank. We were informed immediately and after visiting the site decided it was worth excavating as a class project at
Rice. General Crude Oil, through the good offices of G. E. Gotschall and James Montague, gave us permission to enter the prdperty and to conduct the excavation. Frank

48

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Mebane, Sr., has been extremely helpful in guiding us over the difficult marsh terrain,
welcoming us into his camp and in providing a rich lore about the area based on his
lifelong experiences.
The work itself was carried out by students in Anthropology 323a (Archeological
Techniques). The following students participated: Susan Bielstein, Bruce Byland,
Melissa Crowfoot, Margie Lohse, Anntoinette Moore, Michael O’Brien, Elsa Redmond,
Charles Spencer, Charles Stedman, Oscar loost, Mary Williamson, John Thorne. Much
of the information in this report was compiled and in some cases written by these
students. In addition Mrs. Barbara Burger and Mrs. Nancy Jircik, although not students
in the class, volunteered their services in excavation, and Bob Cartier, a graduate
student in Anthropology at Rice, helped build equipment and was in charge of photographic processing.
Finally special appreciation must be extended to General Crude Oil Company for
providing funds which enabled Richard Wilkinson to travel to Houston to study the
skeletons and which facilitated the preparation of the manuscript.

REFERENCES CITED
Aten, L. E.
1965 Five Crania from the Jamaica Beach Site (41 GV 5), Galveston County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 36:153-162.
Aten, L. E., C. K. Chandler, A. B. Wesolowsky and R. M. Malina
1971 Archaeological Investigations at the Harris County Boys School
Cemetery. Manuscript submitted to the Texas Antiquities Committee,
Austin.
Bass, W. M., R. D. Evans and R. L. Jantz
1971 The Leavenworth Site Cemetery: Archaeology and Physical Anthropology. University of Kansas Publications in Anthropology, No.
2.
Berlandier, J. L.
1969 The Indians of Texas in 1830. John C. Ewers, editor and annotator.
Smithsonian Institution Press. Washington, D.C.
Campbell, T. N.
1957 Archeotogical Investigations at the Caplen Site, Galveston County,
Texas. Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 9, No. 4:448-471.
Dyer, J. O.
!917 The Lake Charles Atakapas Cannibals. Period of 1817 - 1820.
Genoves, S.
1967 Proportionality of the Long Bones and their Relation to Stature among
Mesoamericans.American Journal of Physical Anthropology, Vol. 26,
No. 1:67-78.
Goldstein, M. S.
1948 Dentition of Indian Crania from Texas. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology, Vol 6, No. 1:63-84.
1957 Skeletal Pathology of Early Indians in Texas. American Journal of
Physical Anthropology, Vol. 15, No. 3:299-311.

SHELL POINT

49

Kuykendall, J. H.
1903 Reminiscences of Early Texas. Quarterly of the Texas Historical
Association, Vol. 6:236-253;311-330.
Neumann, G. K.
1952 Archeology and Race in the American Indian. In: Archeology of Eastern United States, James B. Griffin, editor. University of Chicago
Press. Chicago.
Newcomb, W. W. Jr.
1961 The Indians of Texas, from Prehistoric to Modern Times. University of
Texas Press. Austin.
Newman, M. T.
1953a The Application of Ecological Rules to the Racial Anthropology of the
Aboriginal New World. American Anthropologist, Vol. 55, No.
3:311-327.
1953b Indian Skeletal Remains from the Doering and Kobs Sites, Addicks
Reservoir, Texas. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin
154:253-266.
1962 Evolutionary Changes in Body Size and Head Form in American
Indians. American Anthropologist, Vol. 64, No. 2:237-257.
Phenice, T. W.
1969 An Analysis of the Human Skeletal Material from Burial Mounds in
North Central Kansas. University of Kansas Publications in
Anthropology, No. 1.
Schaedel, R. P.
1949 The Karankawa of the Texas Gulf Coast. Southwestern Journal of
Anthroplogy, Vol. 5, No. 2:117-137.
Smithwick, Noah
1900 The Evolution of a State, or Recollections of Old Texas Days. Compiled by Nanna Smithwick Donaldson, Austin, Texas.
Snow, C. E.
1945 Tchefuncte Skeletal Remains. In: The Tchefuncte Culture, an Early
Occupation of the Lower Mississippi Valley by James A. Ford and G. I.
Quimby, Jr. Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, Vol.
10, No. 3, Part 2:99-110.
Trotter, M. and G. C. Gleser
1958 A re-evaluation of Estimation of Stature Based on Measurements of
Stature Taken during Life and of Long Bones after Death. American
Journal of Physical Anthropology, Vol. 16, No. 1:79-123.
United States Department of Commerce
1962 Climatic Guide for Houston-Galveston, Texas Area. Climatography of
the United States. Department of Commerce Publication No. 40-41,
June.
n.d. Some Devastating North Atlantic Hurricanes of the Twentieth
Century. Department of Commerce, Environmental Sciences Administration.
deVillers, H.
1968 Sexual Dimorphism of the Skull of the South African Bantu-speaking
Negro. South African Journal of Science, Vol. 64:118-124.

50

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Wilkinson, R. G.
1971 Prehistoric Biological Relationships in the Great Lakes Region.
Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan Anthropological
Papers, No. 43.
Woodbury, G.
1937 Notes on Some Skeletal Remains of Texas. University of Texas
Publication, No. 3734. Anthropological Papers, Vol. 1, No. 5:5-16.
Woodbury, G. and E. Woodbury
1935 Prehistoric Skeletal Remains from the Texas Coast. The Medallion
Papers, No. 18.
Rice University
Houston

A STUDY OF THE CLEAR FORK GOUGE*
CALVIN D. HOWARD

Abstract
A study was conducted in an effort to determine the probable hafting
methods, functional efficiency, and possible application of the Clear Fork
gouge. Wear patterns strongly suggest a socket hafting method. In experimental use the hafted gouge proved to be an efficient wood planing
tool. Demonstration of functional efficiency includes the felling of both
soft and hardwood trees.

INTRODUCTION
The Clear Fork gouge was first described by Cyrus Ray (1929; 1930)
from specimens found along the Clear Fork of the Brazos River near
Centerline, Texas. This artifact is included in the tool assemblage of
the Clear Fork Culture Complex (Ray 1934;1938).
Although Clear Fork gouges vary considerably in size, they most
commonly range from 5 to 10 centimeters in length and 3 to 5 centimeters in width. One surface of the implement has a concave area
which gives it a scoop-like design. Because of this feature it is commonly considered to have been a wood-working tool. A study was
conducted to determine probable halting methods which would suggest the manner in which the gouges were used. The suggested use
was then tested by actual woodworking experiments to determine
gouge functional efficiency and to identify its possible application.
Twenty-five specimens, five of which were fragmentary, were
available for the study. This collection included both biracial and
unifacia! specimens conforming to Cyrus Ray’s Types 1 and 2 (Ray
1941). All of the gouges were specimens representing surface finds
from the southeastern Texas counties of Austin, Waller, and Colorado, and the southcentral county, Bexar.

ARTIFACT EXAMINATION
The first phase of the study involved the detailed visual examination of each gouge in an effort to discern wear patterns which might
indicate the halting methods that were used. These examinations
were performed using a large rectangular magnifying glass and various magnifiers up to and including 10X.
Extreme care was exercised to prevent erroneous consideration of
wear caused by natural agencies subsequent to abandonment of the
*EDITOR’S NOTE: This manuscript submittedJbr publication in April, 1972.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

52

artifact. General polish caused by wind or water-borne grit was readily recognized and eliminated from consideration. Wear indications
located on high spots of the tools’ surfaces could have been caused by
friction between the gouge and the soil. Therefore, these areas were
not included in the wear pattern data unless they were supported by
additional evidence such as directional wear patterns or wear on
adjacent low areas. All "questionable" polish or wear was excluded
from the data considered relevant. The wear pattern data are reflected
in Figure 1.
bit
0
@
@

<
<
@

0

@

O0

o

0

~
DORSAL

@

butt
VENTRAL

FACE

CENTER

WEAR

OF

AREA

WEAR

ON

AREA

ON

FACE

FACE

EDGE

FIGURE 1. Wt’ar Pattern Data. Data are derived from a sample of 25
Clear Fork gouges. Five gouges were fragmentary, with the butt 2/3
missing. Nine (45%) of the 20 complete gouges had evidence of wear
on the butt 1/3 of the gouge.
The data indicates that use wear was concentrated in two general
areas. One area was on the bit (concave) end of the gouge and was
located on the face opposite the concavity. This was obviously caused
by direct contact with the surface being worked and does not directly
contribute to evidence of halting. The other area of wear concentration includes both faces of the opposite or butt end of the gouge. This
area involves approximately 1/3 of the total gouge length. This wear
location correlates with the location of the breaks resulting from

CLEAR FORK GOUGE

53

aboriginal use of the fragmentary gouges in the study. These breaks
indicate that considerable force was applied during aboriginal use.
The wear data and break locations suggest that hafting involved
only 1/3 of the gouge at the butt end. This is also suggested by the
frequency of unremoved high spots located forward of this area and
the contour of both faces which would make hafting at these locations
very difficult.

GOUGE HAFTING

Many hafting methods used by Indians and Eskimos (Miles 1963)
for adze type devices were considered but rejected because they did
not appear compatible with the wear data and the above noted conditions, including the force which preliminary cutting attempts indicated was required for effective gouge use.
Preliminary cutting attempts indicated that good control of the
cutting angle was required. To provide such control and apply the
necessary force to a haft that grips only the butt of the gouge strongly
suggested that socket hafting was the ancient method used. A socket
hafting method is also suggested by the tapering design of the butt
end of most gouges. This design serves to force the gouge firmly into
the socket during use. Another factor which supports socket hafting is
its simplicity which is certainly compatible with ancient technologies. All that was required was a hole of the proper size in a
handle of wood or bone.
The tip of the butt end of some gouges is flaked to a sharp edge, but
on most gouges it is unflaked with the original cobble cortex remaining. Both of these conditions are compatible with socket hafting. In
fact, with one method tested (T-Mount) the tip of the butt end may
even protrude from the aft end of the socket and serve no purpose
whatever.
Gouges may have sometimes beefi socketed in the natural hollow of
various bones or horns, but gouge designs do not necessarily support
this possibility. Most bones and horns of suitable shape and strength
have interior contours which are incompatible with the lenticular
shape of most gouges. Also, a bone of sufficient size to accept large
gouges would probably be rather awkward to handle efficiently, and
the narrow or pointed end of a horn would be impractical for the
application of force by hand.
WOODWORKING EXPERIMENTS
The efficiency of the Clear Fork gouge as a wood planing device was
apparent very early in the experiments. Hafted and unhafted gouges

54

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

were used. The most efficient results were obtained with the gouge
maintained at approximately 15 degrees relative to the surface being
worked. This position transferred the force to a very thin layer of the
wood. Such shallow "bites" applied with rapid strokes provided the
best results, especially on very hard woods. A deeper cutting angle
with slower, more forceful strokes was effective only on very soft
wood (willow).
When cutting hard woods such as dried oak, the gouge produced
very small shavings and powdered wood similar to those produced by
a wood rasp. The powder produced when cutting thick, hard bark
would make excellent tinder for starting fires; thus, this residue may
have been a by-product from use of the gouge. Long, narrow shavings
are produced when shaving soft woods.
A gouge which is unhafted, or poorly hafted, is more effective on
hard, dry oak than it is on soft, fresh willow. Dry wood resists the bit
and therefore shaves well, but the spongy effect of fresh, soft wood,
and the lubricating effect of its sap make shaving difficult. These
effects are overcome by the great force which can be applied by an
efficiently hafted gouge; then, of course, shaving progress is greatest
on soft wood.
Very little evidence of wear can be discerned on the gouge bit even
after considerable and severe use. No wear can be discerned on the
gouges used in the various cutting experiments. Artifacts showing
considerable wear when found must have seen lengthy use unless
they were used on materials contaminated with abrasive grits.
Several methods of socket mounting were tested to determine the
most effective. These methods are illustrated in Figure 3 and are
described below:

T-Mount
This was the first hafting method tested. This method (Fig. 3a),
which proved to be the most efficient, is similar in general design to a
carpenter’s spokeshave or cabinet plane. A wooden handle 1.8 inches
in diameter and 14.5 inches long was used. A socket was drilled
midway along the length of the handle and at right angles to the long
axis. The gouge was mounted with its cutting edge parallel to the long
axis.
Various cutting attempts were made on log surfaces. The rather
large diameter of the handle provided the leverage necessary to maintain the blade at its most effective cutting angle.
Effective removal of wood would be accomplished by either a push
or pull action; however, the push mode was significantly superior.

CLEAR FORK GOUGE

55

This was primarily because it provided better control of cutting angle
and additional force could be applied by the leg muscles and weight
of the shoulders. The pull mode was much more fatiguing, and the
lack of cutting angle control resulted in a "chattering" effect.

Wood Plane Mount
This method involved mounting the gouge in a socket which had
been drilled midway along the length of a wood handle 2 inches in
diameter and 14.5 inches long (Fig. 3b). The gouge was positioned
similar to the cutting blade of a modern carpenter’s wood plane. The
long axis of the gouge was approximately 28 degrees in relation to the
long axis of the handle. This angle is necessary to position the gouge
in the most effective cutting angle.
Although this mounting method was somewhat effective, it did not
appear to be practical. The handle had a tendency to "rock" with the
gouge serving as fulcrum. The fingers cannot grip the lower surface of
the handle because of insufficient clearance between the handle and
the surface being worked. Because the cutting edge of the gouge is
mounted at right angles, an undesirably large diameter handle is
required. These factors, and the difficulty of cutting the socket at such
an acute angle, eliminated this method as a probable aboriginal hafting method.

Knife Mount
The gouge was inserted into a socket drilled in the center of the end
of a wooden handle 1.8 inches in diameter and 4.3 inches long (Fig.
3c). This method was proved effective in both pushing and pulling
modes. The greatest control and cutting efficiency, however, was
obtained with a pushing action.
To apply the force required for cutting, it was necessary to use the
butt end of the handle. In the push mode this was accomplished by
using the heel of the hand. In the pull mode one hand must be cupped
over the handle butt, and this resulted in a clearance problem between
the small finger and the working surface. In both modes the second
hand rested on the first and provided some additional force and
control.
This mounting method appears to be feasible, especially for light
woodworking.

Adze Mount
The gouge was insta!led in a socket drilled near the end of a
cylindrical handle with the cutting edge positioned at right angles to

56

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the long axis of the handle (Fig. 3d). With the gouge mounted in this
manner it was impractical to use it as a wood shaving device, so it was
used in the true adze "chopping" fashion. Since the swing stroke is
curved, it is difficult to control the angle at which the gouge strikes the
wood surface. The cutting edge usually hit at too great an angle and
merely produced a "chewing" effect with very little removal of wood.
The results were less effective than any other mounting method used
in the experiments.

Hand-Held
Because some gouges are not tapered and are wide and thick at the
butt end, it appears they were designed to[3e hand-held. When held as
shown in Figure 2, they are surprisingly effective on dry woods. The
best results are obtained by light rapid strokes with the gouge
positioned very nearly horizontal to the surface being worked. The
cuttings produced are very small and similar to those produced by a
wood rasp. The cutting stroke is a pulling stroke; therefore, full
advantage of the arms strength is obtained. These experiments indicate that gouges could have been hand-held for light woodworking
tasks.
\

\

\\
\

FIGURE 2. Hand-held Use of Gouge. Left, gouge positioned on open
palm with ventral face (concavity) next to hand. Right, gouge
positioned for use.
TREE FELLING
Because many of the houses used by certain Texas Indians were
assumed to have been built using small trees and saplings, an experiment in felling trees was conducted. The most efficient mounting

CLEAR FORK GOUGE

57

b

C

f

d
FIGURE 3. Methods of Halting Clear Fork Go~ge. a, T-mount; b, wood
plane mount; c, knife mount; d, adze mount.

58

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

method, the T-Mount, was used. The cutting of small trees was accomplished by leaning forward with one shoulder near the tree and
the arms encircling the tree. When cutting trees 3 inches or more in
diameter, the shoulders and arms were located on the far side of the
tree (Fig. 4a-c). The shavings were removed on the side opposite the
individual performing the test and at a convenient distance from the
ground. This method allowed full use of the shoulders’ weight and
the strength of both arms. As the shaving progresses the individual
slowly rotates around the tree until its entire periphery is cut to the
point that it can easily be pushed down.
Felling small trees in this manner proved very successful. Willows
and water oaks of approximately 2 inches in diameter can be cut down
in less than four minutes. Several trees were felled during the experiment, the largest an oak 41/2 inches in diameter (Fig. 4a-d).
Because it is difficult to maintain the gouge on trees of less than 13/4
inches in diameter, a chopping technique was employed by using a
T-mounted gouge in the manner of a hatchet. The weight of the excess
handle added force to the swing. The swings were slow and short;
therefore, it was more of a hacking than a true chopping process. It
was necessary to take very shallow "bites" which generally produced
shavings rather than chips.
This technique usually required more time, but was less fatiguing
than the shaving technique. It proved effective on small, living water
oak trees, but was ineffective on dry, dead ones. It was also ineffective
on larger diameter trees, including soft willows. These results correlate with gouge design which suggests a shaving rather than a chopping device.
One might speculate that the ancient inventor of the Clear Fork
gouge was attempting to simulate the tooth of a gnawing animal, such
as the beaver. In fact, except for the lack of curvature, gouge design is
quite similar to such teeth.
CONCLUSION
The study strongly suggests that the Clear Fork gouge was the
cutting "bit" of an efficient woodworking tool. The experiments
demonstrated that the tool was most probably a shaving or planing
device. This indicates that the gouge is more closely related in function to the modern wood plane and drawing knife than it is to the
adze. Because of its demonstrated efficiency it was probably used for
numerous woodworking tasks.
The construction of many types of prehistoric structures may be
assumed to have included the use of trees and saplings. Since the

CLEAR FORK GOUGE

59

experiments demonstrated the efficiency of the gouge for felling trees,
it appears reasonable to suspect that this was one of its applications.
This possibility is supported by the absence of the stone axe from
many of the prehistoric tool assemblages which do include the Clear
Fork gouge.

b

d
FIGURE 4. Technique qf Felling Trec,s with T-Moupzted Gouge.

60

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
REFERENCES CITED

Miles, Charles
1963 Indian and Eskimo Artifacts of North America. Henry Regnery Company, Chicago.
Ray, Cyrus N.
1929 A Differentiation of the Prehistoric Cultures of the Abilene Section.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society. Vol.
1: 7-22.
1930 Report on Some Recent Archaeological Researches in the Abilene
Section. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society. Vol. 2: 45-58.
1934 Flint Cultures of Ancient Man in Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society. Vol. 6: 107-111.
1938 The Clear Fork Culture Complex. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society. Vol. 10: 193-207.
1941 Various Types of Clear Fork Gouges. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society. Vol. 13: 152-162.
Houston, Texas

AN INFANT BURIAL IN THE TEXAS PANHANDLE
BILLY R. HARRISON AND BOB T. GRIFFIN

Abstract
An infant burial with some unusual artifacts was found on West
Amarillo Creek in Potter County in 1968. The associated materials included prairie dog palates and hackberry seed beads. A Scallorn-like
arrow point indicates a late lithic or early ceramic age for the burial.

INTRODUCTION
In August of 1968 Mr. Terry Gerhardt of Amarillo, then a student at
West Texas State University in Canyon, found an infant burial eroding out of a creek bank on the farm of Mr. A. E. Wesley near Amarillo.
Associated with the burial were numerous bone beads and several
other kinds of artifacts. Gerhardt encased what was left of the burial in
a plaster-of-Paris jacket and brought it to the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum in Canyon to be cleaned and studied.
The junior author of this report, then a Curatorial Assistant at the
Museum, cleaned the burial, described the skeletal remains, and
prepared the accompanying illustrations. The senior author, who is
Curator of Anthropology at the Museum, visited the site with
Gerhardt on June 19, 1971, described the cultural remains, and prepared the rest of this report.

THE SITE

The spot where the burial was found has been designated Site A769
in the records of the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum. It is in the
central part of Potter County, northeast of the community of Cliffside
and northwest of the city of Amarillo.
The burial was eroding out of a steep cutbank in a terrace on the
west side of West Amarillo Creek. It was about 4 feet below the top of
the cutbank which is about 12 to 15 feet above the creek bed. The
upper part of the terrace is a light brown silt. The grave fill immediately around the bones was darker. The grave could not be traced
upward to the surface from which it was dug.
The skeleton Was flexed and lying on its right side with head to the
east. No occupational materials were found near the burial.
West Amarillo Creek flows generally northeastward out of the
Staked Plains into the south Canadian River. It is one of many such
creeks which have produced the moderately rugged terrain along the
southern edge of the Canadian breaks, which form the northern border of the Staked Plains. In the vicinity of the burial, the creek is an

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

62

intermittent stream that is cutting a deep narrow channel in large
meanders along a wide shallow valley. Broad terraces of Quaternary
alluvium occupy the valley floor. Underlying the valley floor and
extending up the valley slopes are colorful siltstones and sandstones
of the Dockum Group of upper Triassic age. Crowning the slopes are
light-colored sediments of the Ogallala Formation of Pliocene age.
In many places cottonwoods are clustered along the channel, mesquites are spread across the terraces, and junipers are scattered up the
slopes. Several different Indian sites in the area have produced artifacts ranging in age from Folsom points to glass beads. The natural
condition of the area has been considerably altered in modern times
by such things as farm buildings and plowed fields.

/

\

/ J/~

/

\1

\\

\

......-.fill>

~<~
\

\

c J/

i
\
x
\

\

\
0

j

/

12 inches

I

FIGURE 1. Infant burial as viewed from inverted position in plaster
jacket. Broken line shows contact of dark brown grave fill with
lighter-colored terrace deposit. A, left and right ilium. B, proximal
end of femur. C, right hand. D, ribs. E, obsidian pendant. F, prairie dog
palate. G, bone beads.

INFANT BURIAL

63

The Staked Plains has been classified by Fenneman (1946) as part of
the High Plains section of the Great Plains province of the Interior
Plains major division, and characterized as "broad intervalley remnants of smooth fluviatile plains." The U.S. Department of Commerce
(1970) has described Staked Plains climate as "semiarid", "cool
temperate", and "a dry steppe type of climate with mild winters".
Blair (1950:110) has assigned the Staked Plains to the Short-grass
Plains biotic district of the Kansan biotic province.
THE SKELETON
Skeletal parts recovered include the following axial elements: skull
(frontal, premaxillary, right malar, both mastoid regions, right
pterygoid area, occipital condylar area, and mandible); teeth (see
dental analysis below); fragments of 20 vertebrae and 41 rib fragments. Appendicular elements recovered include right and left
humerus, radius, ulna, ilium, pubis, femur, tibia, and fibula; 17 hand
elements; 13 foot elements; and 29 hand or foot elements.
SKULL Only the supra-nasal portion of the medio-facial suture is
yet unobliterated, which places the skull at less than six years old but
well after the second year. The mandible has united at the symphysis
and the mastoid process has begun to appear. The formation of the
frontal sinuses is not yet evident. All of these traits usually occur
during the second year. Other traits cannot be reported due to weathering or missing parts.
DENTITION Only the premaxilla and mandible are present. The
maxilla was eroded away with lower portions of the skull. The teeth
recovered are as follows: 1) complete mandibular deciduous dentition; 2) all mandibular permanent tooth buds except second and third
molars; 3) left and right maxillary deciduous first molars, left maxillary deciduous central incisors, right maxillary deciduous cuspids,
and left maxillary deciduous first molar; 4} left and right maxillary
permanent incisor and cuspid tooth buds and left maxillary permanent first molar tooth bud.
The age of the child as indicated by the dentition would fall between two and three years.
The mandibular permanent first molars are dryopithecus, or
Dahlberg’s Y5 type (the metaconid adjoins the hypoconid). This trait
has been reported in 68.7% of Texas Indians (Dahlberg 1951:156}. The
maxillary permanent incisors are shovel-shaped, as in nearly 100% of
these people.
The only attrition and abrasion is on the mandibular deciduous
incisors with possible wear facets on the cuspids and lingual cusps of
the mandibular deciduous first molars. There is no indication of

64

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

caries or other anomalies. Except for the abrasion, the dentition appears to be more perfect than that of the typical North American child.
POST-CRANIAL SKELETON The neural arches of the cervical vertebrae are not fused, placing the child at less than three years old. The
proximal ends of both radius and fibula have not formed, which
indicates an age of less than four years. The epiphyses of the
phalanges, metacarpals, and metatarsals have not developed, also
indicating an age of less than four years.
GENERAL No cranial deformation can be recognized, nor is any
pathology noted. The child’s sex cannot be determined. The cause of
death is not indicated.

THE ARTIFACTS
The skeleton was accompanied by an unusual number and variety
of artifacts of stone, bone, shell, and plant material. These include a
flint arrow point, an obsidian pendant, 275 tubular bone beads, 11
prairie dog palates, two mussel shell beads, and 38 hackberry seed
beads.
The arrow point (Fig. 2A) was found by Gerhardt when he first
started digging into the burial. It is a small corner-notched specimen,
made from a flake of red Alibates agate with good bifacial chipping.
Edges of the blade are straight, as is the base of the stem. Maximum
length is 25 mm., maximum width 15 mm., maximum thickness 2.7
mm., neck width 7.6 mm., and stem length 4.4 mm. It resembles arrow
points of the Scallorn type, which are common in Oklahoma and
down the middle of Texas, with an estimated age of A.D. 500 to A.D.
1200 (Suhm and Jelks 1962:285, pl. 143). In the Texas Panhandle
Scallorn-like arrow points have been reported with the Lake Creek
Focus (a complex of the Plains Woodland stage) dating around A.D.
1000 (Hughes 1961), and with the Canyon City Focus (a complex of
the late Plains Archaic stage) dating around A.D. 500 (Hughes n.d.).
The obsidian pendant (Figs. 1E and 2B) is bifacially chipped into a
broad oval outline with a small tang at one end. Both faces show some
grinding. It is 25 mm. long, 18 mm. wide, and 4 mm. thick.
The 275 tubular bone beads (Figs. 1G and 3A-E) may have formed a
long necklace that was doubled around the infant’s neck. Thirty-five
smaller beads were found partly inside larger beads (Fig. 3A) and
were not removed for measuring. The remaining 240 beads are readily
classifiable into three different sizes (Fig. 3B, D, and E): 76 large
(averaging 24 mm. long by 8 mm. in diameter); 122 medium (averaging 16 mm. long by 4 mm. in diameter); and 42 small (averaging 10
mm. long by 2.5 mm. in diameter). Three of the large and two of the
medium beads measured were encircled with a groove (Fig. 3C).

INFANT BURIAL

65

B
0
1

I

20ram
J

C

FIGURE 2. A, Scallorn-like arrow point B, obsidian pendant, C, prairie
dog palate.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

66

’it

A

C

B

0

0

I0

g

E

20mm

10ram

FIGURE 3. A, large bone bead with smaller bead inside. B, large bone
bead. C, medium-size grooved bone bead. D, medium-size bone bead.
E, small bone bead. All side and end views, F and G, shell beads, H,
hackberry seed bead.

INFANT BURIAL

67

The 11 prairie dog (Cynomys ludovicans) palates (Figs. 1F and 2C)
have been grooved, snapped, and worn at both ends. Perhaps they had
some religious significance, since they do not look very ornamental.
The two large flat mussel shell beads (Figs. 2F and G) are perforated
near the center and have ground edges but unmodified faces. The
holes are 3 ram. in diameter and drilled from both faces. The specimen
with sub-trapezoidal outline is 22 ram. long, 15 mm. wide, and 1.7
ram. thick. The circular specimen is 17 mm. in diameter, and 1.5 ram.
thick.
The 38 hackberry (Celtius occidentalis) seed beads (Fig. 3H) were
found during laboratory work on the burial remnant in the plaster
jacket. Twenty-three are complete and 15 are fragmentary. They were
made from the hard, hollow, spherical seeds of the hackberry tree by
grinding away opposite portions of the sphere. Average diameter is
about 4.5 ram. Such beads could easily be overlooked in the field and
may have been more common than the archeological literature would
indicate.
CONCLUSIONS
Since Indian graves in the Texas Panhandle seldom exceed a depth
of 21/2 to 3 feet, the position of the skeleton at a depth of 4 feet below
the present surface of the stream terrace suggests that the grave site
has received a foot or more of alluvium since the burial was made,
although the grave could not be traced up to the level from which it
was dug. This depositional stage at the grave site was succeeded by
the present erosional stage which is actively cutting the terrace, and
revealed the burial. This amount of deposition and erosion supports
an inference of some antiquity for the burial.
If this burial was typical of the people who made it, then it can be
inferred that their custom was to bury a dead infant on a stream terrace
in a shallow oval pit barely large enough to accommodate the body in
a flexed position, on its right side with head to the east, and accompanied by a quanity of ornaments and other objects, including, in this
instance, numerous tubular bone beads of three different sizes, some
hackberry seed beads, some prairie dog palates, a couple of mussel
shell beads, an obsidian pendant,and a Scallorn-like arrow point.

Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank Mr. Gerhardt for allowing us to analyze and publish his
discovery; Mr. Wesley for permission to enter his property; and Dr. Jack T. Hughes,
Professor of Anthropology at West Texas State University, for advice in preparing this
report.

68

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
REFERENCES CITED

Blair, W. Frank
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 2, No. 1:
93-117.
Dahlberg, A. A.
1951 The Dentition of the American Indian. In: The Physical Anthropology
of the American Indian, William S. Laughlin, editor: 138-176. Viking
Fund, Inc., No. 5. New York.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1946 Physical Divisions of the United States. Map, United States Geological Survey. Washington, D.C.
Hughes, Jack T.
1961 Lake Creek: A Woodland Site in the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 32: 65-84.
n.d. The Canyon City Club Cave in the Panhandle of Texas. Texas Historical Commission Archeological Report (in press).
Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks, Editors
1962 Handbook of’Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Archeological Society Special Publication No. 1, Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin No. 4.
United States Department of Commerce
1970 Climatological Summary for Canyon, Texas. Department of Commerce, Washington, D.C.
Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum
Canyon

THE FINIS FROST SITE: A TOYAH PHASE
OCCUPATION IN SAN SABA COUNTY,
CENTRAL TEXAS
L. M. GREEN AND THOMAS R. I-IESTER
Abstract
The Finis Frost Site (41 SS 20) is situated near Richland Springs Creek
(also known as Richland Creek) in western San Saba County, Texas.
Artifactual materials from the site are attributable to the Toyah phase of
the late prehistoric times in Central Texas. These artifacts include Perdiz
arrow points, bipointed and four-beveled bifaces, end and side scrapers,
perforators, modified flakes (including gravers), manos and metates, and
Leon Plain pottery. Evidence of a core-blade technology is also present.
Judging from the faunal remains, bison bunting appears to have been a
major economic pursuit of the site occupants. The high percentage of
scraping tools in the lithic tool kit may be related to the process of working
bison hides.

INTRODUCTION
This paper reports archeological materials from a discrete Toyah
phase occupation site in San Saba County, centra! Texas (Fig. 1). The
site is situated in the northwest portion of the county, on the north
edge of the town of Richland Springs. It was discovered following the
clearing of a small pasture for agricultural purposes. The landowner
at that time, L. M. Matlock, found a number of chipped and ground
stone artifacts. The property has since been acquired by Mr. Finis
Frost (after whom the site is named) and he and the senior author
investigated the site during 1970 and 1971. A large number of artifacts
have been obtained and samples of exposed faunal remains have been
collected.
There has been little in the way of scientifically-oriented archeological research in the San Saba County area. Some sites in the Lake
Buchanan reservoir area in the southeastern corner of the county were
investigated by Jackson (1938), and in subsequent years, L. P. McElroy
(1940) and Albert Field (1956) examined cave, rockshelter and open
occupation sites in the county. More recently, L. M. Green has published a survey of archeological sites along Richland Springs Creek
(Green 1970) and has investigated midden accumulations on the
Colorado River in northern San Saba County (Green 1971).
ENVIRONMENTAL DATA
A rather detailed account of the local environment has been previously given in papers by Green (1970, 1971); therefore, we will restrict

70

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

our comments here to a description of the ecological conditions in the
site vicinity. Three basic ecological zones can be discerned (each
undoubtedly contains several discrete microenvironments which
would be evidenced through comprehensive mapping of the zones):
1) aquatic; 2)flood plain-low terrace; 3) uplands. Each of these zones
is described below.
Major components of the aquatic zone are the channel of Richland
Springs Creek (an intermittent tributary of the middle Colorado River
watershed) and a narrow band of vegetation paralleling the stream
course. The waters of the creek support a variety of fishes, including
catfish, sunfish and carp; also present are turtles, water snakes, frogs,
freshwater mussels, and occasionally, beavers. In the winter, the
aquatic habitat attracts migratory waterfowl. Vegetation on the
fringes of the stream include pecan, willow and wild plum trees.
The flood plain-low terrace zone extends both to the north and
south of the stream (Fig. 1). The dark alluvial soils of the flood plain
grade to sandy loams and stony soils on the terraces (Thompson
1893). Much of this zone is currently used for agriculture. Vegetation
includes oak, mesquite, cedar and blackjack; fruit-bearing species are
mulberry, dewberry, agarita, wild grape and wild persimmon. Common cacti include prickly pear and turkey pear (or tasajillo), and there
are a variety of native and introduced grasses.
The uplands to the north of the site are characteristic of the Western Cross Timbers physiographic province. It is a geologicallycomplex region, with exposures of clays, shales, sandstones and
conglomerates, mostly of Pennsylvanian and Mississippian ages
(Drake 893; Oetking 1959). The region isknown locally as the "sandy"
or "postoak" country. The upland zone to the south of the site is
typical of the Edwards Plateau, with eroded limestone hills and thin
soils. It is referred to colloquially as the "limestone" or "liveoak"
country. Vegetation on the uplands, both north and south of the site,
include bee brush, blue brush, catclaw, cedar, oaks, mesquite and
scattered wild persimmon. The contemporary fauna are characteristic
of Blair’s (1950) Balconian Biotic Province, and include whitetail
deer, jackrabbit, cottontail rabbit, raccoon, opossum, skunk, and red
and gray fox. Reptilian species include lizards and snakes, and important avifauna are turkey, quail, dove, hawk, owl and a variety of
songbirds. Most of these fauna are shared with the flood plain-low
terrace zone, and the vegetated fringes of the aquatic zone.
At present we have no data on pre-European environmental conditions in the area and we cannot be sure to what extent recent agricultural and ranching practices have altered those conditions (cf. Gibson
1969). Reconnaissance along Richard Springs Creek by Green (1970)

FINIS FROST SITE

A

71

FINIS FROST SITE
and vicinity
41 SS 20

S

f
"/SAN SABA COUNTY

\
concentration

u

p

I

a

n

d

s

ROUGH CROSS SECTION (downstream)

1

aquatic

2

flood plain - terrace

3

uplands

FIGURE 1. Sketch maps of 77ze Finis" Frost Site and Vicinity (not to scale).
Upper, location of site; note concentration of debris in east-southeast
corner, lower left, rough cross-section, looking downstream; major
ecologic divisions are indicated; lower right, index map showing
location of San Saba County within state.

72

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

has revealed that most prehistoric occupation was confined to the
flood plain-low terrace zone. We can safely assume that the ecological
zones described above served as resource areas for the prehistoric
inhabitants of the area, but we do not yet know (and it would indeed
be difficult to determine) to what extent the potential of each zone was
exploited.
THE SITE
The Finis Frost Site is an open occupation site lying on flood
plain/eroded low terrace deposits immediately to the south of Richland Springs Creek. Limestone uplands, represented by a row of low
hills on the east, approach to within 75 to 100 yards of the site (Fig. 1).
A small tributary of Richland Springs Creek forms the southern and
western boundaries of the site. A "spring branch" joins the tributary
near the southwestern corner of the site; this stream flows from an
intermittent spring which still provides water for the modern-day
inhabitants of Richland Springs. Another spring, which ceased flowing several decades ago, is situated at the western edge of the site near
the east bank of the tributary.
Occupational debris is scattered over approximately 4 acres. A
dense concentration of artifacts and other detritus is located in the
east-southeast part of the site covering an area 250 feet in length and
70 feet in width (Fig. 1). Though mussel shell is found in fragmentary
form over much of the site, there are no discernible concentrations
such as those reported from other San Saba County sites on the
Colorado River 10 to 12 miles to the north (Green 1971). Anima! bones
are found over the entire site area although again no clusters were
observed.
THE ARTIFACTS
All of the artifacts reported here are surface finds, unearthed by
chiseling, plowing and other agricultural practices in recent years. As
we shall discuss in more detail later, the artifactual materials appear
to be exclusively Late Prehistoric in age, since not a fragment of a dart
point or other diagnostic Archaic artifact forms have been collected
(for an overview of the Archaic artifact assemblages of the Richland
Springs Creek area, see Green 1970).
The artifact descriptions which follow vary in their completeness,
since collections from the site are scattered among several persons
and were available to the authors for only brief inspection. While we
were able to examine most of the materials, it was not possible to
study all of them in detail. Therefore, emphasis has been placed on
outlining the range of artifact types present at the site, and providing
full descriptive data where possible.

FINIS FROST SITE

73

i

c

d
e

g

t

k

I

m

n

r

P

0

s

t

q
0

50
I

mm.

FIGURE 2. Arrow Pointsfrom Finis Frost Site. a-r, contracted stem (Perdiz)
arrow points; s,t, triangular arrow points.

74

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Artifacts of Chipped Stone

Projectile Points
Contracted Stem Arrow Points (Fig. 2a-r).
Twenty-seven relatively complete specimens have been studied. In general, they
conform to thePerdiz type as defined by Suhm, Krieger and Jelks (1954:504). Most are
made on thin flakes. Unifacial flaking (on the dorsal face of the flake) is present on the
bodies, with trimming along the lateral edges; stems are bifacially flaked. Manufacturing techniques appear to closely parallel those described for Berclair Site Perdiz points
(Hester and Parker 1970:17). Bodies are triangular with straight to slightly-convex
edges; three specimens have one lateral edge which is slightly recurved (Fig. 2h) and
several have serrated edges. Stems are pointed to slightly rounded.
Two of the specimens are made on flake blades (Fig. 2q,r). Each retains a portion of
the median ridge on the dorsal surface. One (Fig. 2r) shows no modification other than
the shaping of the stem and barbs, and the other (Fig. 2q) is flaked over some of the
dorsal face and trimmed along one edge of the ventral face.
Length ranges from 29 mm. to an estimated 51 mm. (mean: 36.3 mm.) maximum
width is from 15 mm. to an estimated 25 mm. (mean: 19.6 mm.); and maximum
thickness varies from 2 mm. to 5 mm. (mean: 3.1 mm.).

Triangular Arrow Points (Fig. 2s,t).
Three triangular arrow points have been found at the Finis Frost Site. One (Fig. 2s)
resembles the Fresno type (Suhm, Krieger and Jelks 1954:498) and the others, (Fig. 2t),
possible variants of the type. They are made on thin flakes and exhibit delicate chipping. All have mildly concave bases, thinned in two instances by the removal of a
broad, arc-shaped flake. One specimen is serrated (Fig. 2t.)
Lengths are 33,32 (estimated) and 19 mm., maximum widths, 21, 17 and 6 mm. and
maximum thicknesses, 2 mm. on each.

Side-notched Arrow Point (Fig. 8a).
The specimen is triangular in outline with a mildly convex basal edge and two
shallow si de notches 10 mm. above the base. It fits within the Harrell type, as defined by
Suhm, Krieger and Jelks (1954:500), although greater similarities are noted with the
Washita type of Bell (1958: Pl. 49). Length of the specimen is 30 mm., maximum width
is 16 mm., and maximum thickness, 3 ram.

Bifacial Tools
Bipointed Bifaces (Fig. 3a-f.)
The site has yielded nine relatively complete specimens and a number of fragments.
Four of these are diamond-shaped with four beveled edges, a characteristic form in Late
Prehistoric times in central Texas (@ Poteet 1938:245; Krieger 1946:166; Suhm 1955,
Pl. 5 A; Schuetz 1957: Fig. 39 A,B). The beveling results from the resharpening of a
dulled cutting edge (Sollberger 1971). The four beveled bifaces have lengths of 99, 115,
127 (estimated) and 148 mm., maximum widths of 27, 31,41 and 39 mm., and thicknesses of 7, 7, 7, and 8 mm., respectively. Two other bifaces are double-pointed but not
beveled (cy. Suhm 1957:40; Jelks 1962:45-46; Hester 1971). They have lengths of 76 ram.
and 112.5 mm., maximum widths of 33 mm. and 31 mm., and thicknesses of 7 mm. and
9 ram.
Three additional specimens (Fig. 2e,f) are present. Two are broad with markedly
convex lateral edges. One has been roughly shaped by percussion and the other shows
fine flaking with trimming notching along one lateral edge (Fig. 20. The third specimen, which is narrow and has convex lateral edges, seems to have been made on a flake

FINIS FROST SITE

75

’!i

"!

FIGURE 3. Bipointed B![hces /~om Finis Frost Site. a-c, diamond-shaped,
four-beveled bifaces; d-f, double-pointed bifaces.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

76

blade. Lengths are 100, 133, and 76 mm., maximum widths, 27, 55, and 26 mm., and
maximum thicknesses, 12, 8 and 6 mm., respectively.
Large Asymmetrical Bifaces (Fig. 4a,b).
Two large, complete asymmetrical bifaces and several fragments are in the collection. The two complete specimens (Fig. 4) exhibit broad flake scars and are made of dark
gray flint which occurs in ledge form in the area. One (Fig. 4a) has been roughly
trimmed along the lateral edges, while the other shows no such trimming. Lengths are
131 mm. and 155 mm., maximum widths, 53 mm. and 59 ram., and maximum thicknesses on both, 11..

b
c

F

d

o

,

so

mm.

FIGURE 4. Bifaces from Finis Frost Site. a,b, asymmetrical bifaces; c,d,
large thick bifaces; e,f, choppers.

FINIS FROST SITE

77

e

h

0
t

mm.

50
j

FIGURE 5. Unifaces from Finis Frost Site. a-h, end scrapers; i, large
bipointed uniface.
Large Thick Bifaces (Fig. 4c,d).
A few large, crudely chipped bifaces occur at the site. All appear to be entirely
percussion flaked; some may represent cores while others may be preforms. One
specimen is rectanguloid in outline (Fig. 4c) and roughly serrated at one end. It is 135

78

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

mm. long, 92 mm. in maximum width and 26 mm. thick. Another is triangular (Fig. 4d),
with a convex base and cortex remnants on one face. Length is 101 ram., maximum
width, 63 mm., and maximum thickness, 24 ram.
Choppers (Fig. 4e,f)
Choppers recovered from the site are all made on cobbles with one end flaked to form
a working edge and the other retaining the cortical surface. In outline, they vary from
ovate to rectanguloid. Some may be cores, but most show battering and other forms of
use-wear resulting from chopping activities.
Perforators (Fig. 6a-d).
Of the six small perforators or drills recovered frmn the site, three are made on flakes
and three on flake blades. These tools show only minimal modification on the proximal
end or base, but have carefully bifaced bits or drill shafts. The original flake striking
platform is visible on five of the tools.

Unifacial Tools
Large Bipointed Uniface (Fig. 5i)
This specimen is made on a large cortex flake. It has been trimmed to a point at both
ends and steeply beveled along one lateral edge. It may have functioned either as a
scraper or as a knife. Length is 129 mm., maximum width, 45 mm. and maximum
thickness 9 mm.
Scrapers (Fig. 5a-h; Fig. 6m,n)
This group with 90 specimens, represents the most abundant artifact category at the
Finis Frost Site. Sixty-seven are classified as end-scrapers. Of these, 25 are trimmed at
the distal end only, 17 are trimmed on the end and along the right side, and 24 are
trimmed on the end and along the left side. Outlines vary from rectangular to ovate.
Most are made on flakes, but several specimens have been made on flake blades; over
half retain some cortex on the dorsal surface.
Side-scrapers in the collection are usually retouched along one lateral edge. They
are made on flakes of various forms, but long, narrow flakes seem to have been
preferred.
We are able to provide only these broad measurement ranges for both classes of
scrapers: length, 43 mm. to 101 mm.; maximum width, 29 mm. to 59 mm.; and
maximum thickness, 7 mm. to 23 mm. Due to the dispersed nature of the scraper
collections, we have been unable to study them more carefully. It is our impression that
they are representative of Late Prehistoric scraper forms in Central Texas (cf. Suhm
1957; Shafer 1969; Sorrow 1970).

Cores and Flakes
Polyhedral Core (Fig. 7).
The only core collected from the site, aside from possible cores included in some of
the previously described biface categories, is the polyhedral core described here. The
conical specimen is made of a variegated tan-gray fine grained flint and has a flat cortex
striking platform. Small trimming flakes have been detached around the platform
circumference; their purpose was to remove the overhang caused by negative bulbs of
percussion from prior flake detachments. The platform angle varies from 60° to 80°.
The purpose of the core was the removal of long, narrow flake blades. There are scars
on the body of the core representing the detachment of at least four such flake blades.
They have the following length-width measurements: 70 x 24 ram., 73 x 23 ram., 70 x 13
ram. and 93 x 20 mm. All had been struck from the cortex-covered platform. However,

FINIS FROST SITE

79

b

a

c

d

e

S

0

h

m

k

0
I

50
,

i
rn~n,1,

FIGURE 6. Perforators, Flakes and Unifaces from Finis Frost Site. a-d,
perforators; e,f, modified flakes (note graver point on f); g-l, flake
blades; m,n, side scrapers.

80

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

one blade (71 ram. long and 22 mm. wide) has been struck from the wedge-shaped distal
end of the core. A hinge fracture is also present on the core (struck from the cortex
surface) and the distal end shows crushing.
Height of the core is 84 ram., maximum platform diameter is 82 ram., and minimum
platform diameter is 73 ram. Polyhedral cores designed for the removalof flake blades
are rare in central Texas, and usually occur in uncertain archaeological contexts (cf.
Green 1963: Fig. 8; Epstein 1969:86; Honea 1966:263-264).

Flake Blades (Fig. 6g-l).
In his research in the Robert Lee Reservoir of west central Texas, Shafer (1969:4) has
defined a flake blade as".., an elongated flake (usually twice as long as it is wide), with
parallel sides and one or more parallel ridges or scars running nearly the length of the
dorsal surface." A number of these have been collected at the Finis Frost Site and seven
examples are illustrated in Figure 6. All have one or more dorsal ridges and each retains
all or part of the striking platform and bulb of percussion. Four of the illustrated pieces
retain cortex on the dorsal face and three others were apparently removed from the
interior of a core. One blade (not shown) has a graver beak at both ends. As we have
noted previously, flake blades were often used as blanks in the manufacture of scrapers
and arrow points.

FIGURE 7. Polyhedral Blade Core from Finis Frost Site (shown natural
size).

FINIS FROST SITE

81

Modified Flakes (Fig. 6e,f; Fig. 8b).
Irregular waste flakes which have seen some utilization, usually of a casual nature,
are scattered over much of the site, with a definite clustering in the east-southeast
portion. Some are ovate and trimmed around the edges (Fig. 6e); some others are
irregular, with graver beaks (cf. Jelks 1962: Fig. 20 F,G). One specimen (Fig. 8b) is a
rectangular flake of black flint. Along the distal end of the flake is a series of three long,
vertical flakes. A few other flakes have been detached from both sides of the specimen,
and a series of neat trimming scars are found along one edge. This edge may have been
used for cutting or scraping; microscopic examination revealed a single striation
oblique to the edge. Length of the piece is 46 mm., maximum width is 23 mm., and
maximum thickness, 4 mm.

Artifacts of Pecked, Ground and Polished Stone
Hammerstones (not illustrated).
Several specimens were found at the site. In general they are ovate to rounded chert
and quartzite pebbles, some of which appear to have been shaped by pecking. All have
edges battered from use.

Manos and Metates (not illustrated).
Four complete grinding slabs (or metates) and four manos, all made of sandstone,
were found at the site by a former landowner and are not available for study.

Polishing or Rubbing Stones (not illustrated).
Occasional quartzite cobbles at the site exhibit highly polished facets, perhaps
resulting from use in smoothing or rubbing activities (for instance, as "pot-polishers").

Artifacts of Clay
Potsherds
Seventeen plain body sherds have been collected; three specimens are not now
available for analysis. At first glance, most appear to conform to the bone-tempered
Leon Plain type found in central and southern Texas (Suhm, Krieger and Jelks 1954;
Greene ms.; Hester 1971; Hester and Hill 1971). However, one specimen is grogtempered an two others seem to be tempered with calcareous materials.
The bone-tempered sherds have hard surfaces (3-4 on Mohs’ scale), flecked with
tempering agents, and gray or pink pastes. Exterior surfaces are either well-smoothed
(although sometimes uneven) or burnished. The interiors are similarly treated, while
one interior shows an unsmoothed coil juncture and another is roughly-smoothed, with
three short gouges. Size of tempering agents varies from less than 1 mm. in length on
one sherd, to a maximum of 2.0-2.5 mm. on most of the others. In the core of one sherd, a
bone fragment 4 mm. long is preserved. On one specimen there is a remnant of a
perforation in which a handle was once attached (cf. Hester and Hill 1971: Fig. 2t,u).
The grog-tempered sherd has a dark brown crumbly paste; with multicolored
tempering agents, up to 2.5 mm. long. The surfaces have a distinct sandy feel and are
unevenly smoothed (2-3 Mohs’ scale). Shafer (1971:71) notes grog-tempered sherds
from the nearby Robert Lee Reservoir basin.
Two of the sherds are tempered with what appears to be bits of highly-crushed, and
slightly rounded, white rock (perhaps fossilized bone); size of the particles ranges up to
2.5 mm. in length. Pastes are light brown in color and are highly compact. Surfaces are
burnished, with hardnesses of 4-5 on Mohs’ scale. Further analyses of these sherds are
required.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

82

a

b

50

0

J

I

mm.
s

12
FIGURE 8. Additional Artifacts from Finis Frost Site. Specimens recorded
by Green in late 1971. a, triangular arrow point; b, modified flake
(cross section shown); c, possible tool of bison bone; rounded and
beveled end indicated by heavy stippling.

FINIS FROST SITE

83

Color and other attributes of the sherds are listed below. The varied surface colors no
doubt results from the vessels having been fired in an oxidizing atmosphere. Surface
and paste characteristics suggest to us that at least seven vessels are represented. Colors
given below are based on the Munsell color charts.

Color

Temper

Exterior

Interior

Thickness in mm.
Max.
Min.

reddish-yellow
(5YR:7/6)

pink (5YR:8/4)

bone

4.5

4.0

It. reddishbrown (5YR:6/4)

same as
exterior

bone

4.5

3.0

light brown

pink

stone

6.0

5.0

(5YR:6/4)

(5YR: 7/4)

lt. reddish-

same as
exterior

bone

4.0

3.0

brown (5YR:6/4)
smudged

light brown

grog

7.0

4.0

(5YR: 6/4)
pink (5YR: 7/4)

pink (5YR: 8/4)

bone

4.5

4.0

gray-brown

light gray
(1OYR: 7/2)

stone

4.0

3.0

burned
bone and
stone(?)

4.0

3.0

bone

9.0

7.0

(10YR: 5/2)
brown (10YR: 513)

same as
exterior

pale brown

reddish-yellow

(10YR: 6/3)

(5YR: 6/6)

pink (7.5YR:

very pale brown
(10YR: 7/4)

bone

5.8

5.5

7/4)
It. brown to
pink (7.5YR: 6/4-7/4)

very pate brown
(10YR: 7/4)

bone

8.0

7.0

same as above

gray (10YR: 5/1)

bone

8.0

7.0

pink (7.5YR:7/4)

same as exterior

bone

9.5

5.0

very pale brown
(10YR: 7/4)

same as exterior
(with gray streaks)

bone

7.0

6.0

pink (7.5YR: 7/4)

same as exterior

bone

4.0

3.5

FAUNAL REMAINS
Fauna! remains are scattered over the site and no distinct clusters
were found. Samples have been collected and identified by personnel
at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin. Identified
remains include bison, deer, turtle, and bobcat (the latter represented

84

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

by a single mandible). While no quantitative measurements are possible, we should like to emphasize that bones of the bison are by far the
dominant faunal remains at the site. Comminuted long bone fragments of bison are widely distributed and at least 20 teeth and tooth
fragments have been collected.
A splinter of bison bone from the site may have been intentionally
modified (Fig. 8c). One end has been rounded off, and appears to be
slightly beveled, with more prominent beveling on the opposite face.
Length is 67 mm., maximum width, 24 mm., and maximum thickness,
6 mm.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
In reviewing the cultural materials at the Finis Frost Site, it is
immediately apparent that these manifestations are characteristic of
the late prehistoric Toyah Phase (Shafer 1971; the Toyah Focus of
Jelks 1962) of central Texas. Chronometric evaluations have placed
the age of this phase at between A.D. 1250 and A.D. 1560 (Jelks 1962;
Sharer 1971; Hester 1971).
The lithic tool kit at Finis Frost includes many contracted stem
arrow points (Perdiz), three triangular arrow points (possiblyFresno),
and a side-notched point (possibly Washita), numerous unifacial
scraping tools, diamond-shaped beveled bifaces and bipointed
bifaces (both forms may have functioned as knives), choppers, crude
bifaces of various sorts, perforators and gravers made on flakes, and
manos and metates. Pottery vessels are represented by sherds of Leon
Plain ware. In general, this assemblage resembles those of other
Toyah phase sites in central Texas (Sharer 1971; Hester and Parker
1970; Jelks 1962; Stephenson 1970). Triangular arrow points occur in
Toyah phase contexts in the Whitney Reservoir of central Texas
(Stephenson 1970). Somewhat similar triangular points are known
from the earlier Austin phase (these are the Granbury points of Jelks
1962:35).
Bison dominates the faunal remains at the Finis Frost Site, a fact
consistent with data from other Toyah phase sites noted by Sharer
(1971). It is most likely that the large number of scrapers (and possibly
the beveled and bipointed bifaces) reflect a hide-working technology
which accompanied the heavy economic emphasis on bison. In addition to the exploitation of bison the inhabitants of the site gathered
freshwater mussels and box turtles and hunted whitetail deer. The
bobcat represented at the site may not have been a food item (cf. Jelks
1962: 93). Both Jelks(1962:93) and Stephenson (1970:247) note the
heavy reliance of Toyah phase peoples in the Whitney Reservoir area

FINIS FROST SITE

85

on the gathering of mussels and land snails; such emphasis appears to
be absent at the Finis Frost Site. Jelks (1962:93) also notes the importance of fishing, but again we have no data for this activity.
If climatic conditions of today are similar to those which existed at
the site in late prehistoric times, there would have been an abundance
of plant foods in the three ecological zones or resource areas available
to the site inhabitants. The manos and metates found at the site were
probably used in the processing of such plant foods. However, Shafer
(1971) has suggested that Toyah phase peoples might have been
engaged in maize horticulture in favorable locales, such as the one in
which the Finis Frost Site is situated. In such an instance, these
grinding tools might have been used on maize or other foodstuffs
which may have been produced.
It is difficult to estimate the length or nature of the occupation at the
site. While the occupational debris is scattered over 4 acres, it is
concentrated in a rather small area in the east-southeast part of the
site; we believe this may have been the locus in which much of the
activity at the site was confined. Given the large amount of bison bone
and accompanying processing tools, we can speculate that the site
represents a seasonal bison-hunting encampment. However, the site
is situated in an ideal location, with easily accessible permanent
water sources and in close proximity to the productive aquatic and
upland resource areas, and may have seen semi-sedentary occupations (cf. Shafer 1971).
We have inadequate data for detailed inferences on lithic technology at the site. Samples of waste flakes have not been collected or
studied. It is apparent, however, that a core-blade technology was
known. The carefully-worked polyhedral blade core has few counterparts in dated contexts in central Texas. Flake blades have been
previously recognized in central and west-central Texas by Honea
(1966), Shafer (1969), Hester (1971) and Hester and Shafer (1974), and
it is becoming rather clear that most of these materials can be attributed to the Late Prehistoric era. At this site, the flake blades were
used in the manufacture of arrow points, end scrapers, side scrapers
and other tools.
Although Green (1970) has reported several other sites along the
Richland Springs Creek drainage system, the Finis Frost Site represents the only known major Toyah phase occupation. Perdiz points are
known from two other sites (41 SS 11 and 41 SS 13), both of which
date mainly from Late Archaic times. Triangular arrow points, flake
blades, end and side scrapers, bipointed knives and other similar
materials also occur, but also in mixed, predominantly Archaic contexts.

86

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

In conclusion, we can state that the Finis Frost Site represents a
discrete Toyah phase occupation site, the inhabitants of which appear
to have emphasized the hunting of bison in their subsistence regime.
Investigations are continuing at the site and further data will be
forthcoming.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to several people who helped us when we were gathering data for this
report: Finis Frost, owner of the land where the site is located; Mr. L. M. Matlock, former
owner; and Frank Green and Ronald Moore. We sincerely thank all of these people.

REFERENCES CITED
Bell, Robert E.
1958 Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile
Points. Special Bulletin, Oklahoma Anthropological Society, No. 1.
Blair, W. Frank
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 2, No.
1:93-117.
Drake, N. F.
1893 Report on the Colorado Coal Field of Texas. Fourth Annual Report,
Geological Survey of Texas: 357-446.
Epstein, Jeremiah F.
1969 The San Isidro Site, An Early Man Campsite in Nuevo Leon, Mexico.
University of Texas Anthropological Series, No. 7.
Field, Albert
1956 Archeological Investigations in Lampasas, Burnet, Llano, and San
Saba Counties, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
Vol. 27:161-184.
Gibson, Jan L. and Blake L. Benham
1969 Archaeological Survey of Parts of the Denton Creek Watershed.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 40:199-230.
Green, F. E.
1963 The Clovis Blades: An Important Addition to the Llano Complex.
American Antiquity, Vol. 29, No. 2:145-165.
Green, L. M.
1970 An Introduction to the Archeology of the Richland Springs Creek
Area, Western San Saba County, Texas (with the collaboration ofT. R.
Hester). Lower Plains Archeological Society, Bulletin No. 1:1-38.
1971 Notes on the Archeology of the Happy Patch Site, San Saba County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 42:319-333.
Greene, Lorraine H.
ms. An Analysis of Leon Plain Typology. Unpublished manuscript.
Hester, Thomas Roy
1971 Archeological Investigationsat the La Jita Site, Uvalde County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 42:51-148.
Hester, Thomas Roy and T. C. Hill, Jr.
1971 An Initial Study of a Prehistoric Ceramic Tradition in Southern Texas.
Plains Anthropologist Vol. 16, No. 53:195-203.

FINIS FROST SITE

87

Hester, Thomas Roy and Robert C. Parker
1970 The Berclair Site: A Late Prehistoric Component in Goliad County,
Southern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol.
41:1-24.
Hester, Thomas R. and Harry J. Shafer
1974 An Initial Study of Blade Technology on the Central and Southern
Texas Coast. Texas Journal of Science manuscript submitted for publication.
Honea, Kenneth M.
1966 Prehistoric Flaking Technologies in Texas. Atti del VI Congresso
Internazionale delle Scienze Prehistoriche e Protostoriche, Vol.
3:260-267.
Jackson, A. T.
1938 The Fall Creek Sites. University of Texas Publication, No. 3802.
Anthropological Papers, Vol. 3, No. 1:11-118.
Jelks, Edward B.
1962 The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County,
Texas. University of Texas Archaeology Series, No. 5.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946 Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. University of
Texas Publication, No. 4640.
McElroy, L. P.
1940 A Study of Indian Mortar Hole Sites in Mills and San Saba Counties.
The Record, Vol. 1, No. 10:40-42, 43-44.
Munsell Soil Color Charts
1954 Munsell Color Company, Baltimore.
Oetking, Phillip F.
1959 Geological Highway Map of Texas. Dallas Geological Society.
Poteet, Sybil
1938 The Occurrence and Distribution of Beveled Knives. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 10:245-262.
Schuetz, Mardith K.
1957 A Report on Williamson County Mound Material. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 28:135-168.
Sharer, Harry J.
1969 Archeological Investigations in the Robert Lee Reservoir Basin, West
Central Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No.
17.
1971 Late Prehistory of Central Texas: 500 B.C. to A.D. 1700. Paper given at
annual meeting, Texas Academy of Science, Nacogdoches.
Sollberger, J. B.
1971 A Technological Study of Beveled Knives. Plains Anthrop ol ogist, Vol.
16, No. 53:209-218.
Sorrow, William M.
1970 Archeological Investigations at the Barker Site. Texas Archeological
Salvage Project Research Report, No. 1.
Stephenson, Robert L.
1970 Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir Area, Central
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 41:37-286.

88

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Suhm, Dee Ann
1955 Excavations at the Collins Site, Travis County. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 26:7-54.
1957 Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis County, Texas. Texas
Journal of Science, Vol. 9, No. 1:26-58.
Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Thompson, R. A.
1893 Reports on the Soils, Water Supply and Irrigation of the Colorado Coal
Field. Fourth Annual Report, Geological Survey of Texas: 449-481.
Richland Springs
University of Texas at San Antonio

SOME TEXAS BLADE TECHNOLOGY
LELAND W. PATTERSON

Abstract
Some previously unreported technology of prismatic blades and prepared cores found on the Upper Texas Gulf Coast and adjacent regions is
discussed, including a detailed review of microblade and other blade
technology represented in collections from Harris County, Texas. Comments are also made on possible external relationships indicated by
similarities in blade core types and related artifacts.
The presence of a complete prismatic blade industry is demonstrated
for several Harris County sites. Use of unifacial arrow points, including
the Mesolithic compound type, before conventional biracial arrow points
is proposed, based on the typology of microliths from these sites, and
related chronology of associated artifacts.

INTRODUCTION
The importance of blade technology with prismatic blades and
prepared cores has long been recognized for the Upper Paleolithic
and Mesolithic periods of Europe and Asia. There are a number of
recent summaries such as Bordes (1968), Bordaz (1970), and Coles
and Higgs (1969). Blade technology studies as related to questions on
peopling of the New World has received increasing attention in recent
years, particularly in the Arctic and Pacific Northwest. The general
reader is referred to a report by MacNeish (1964) and the symposium
published inArctic Anthropology, Vo!. 7, No. 2, 1970, for background
on this literature.
There is no complete summary available on North American midcontinent blade technology, as discoveries have not been made uniformly in all regions. Aside from scattered finds in Paleo-Indian
contexts, the Poverty Point and Hopewell assemblages are the main
ones mentioned in the literature concerned with areas north of Mexico and southeast of the Pacific Northwest.
This paper is primarily concerned with small prismatic blades
found in Archaic contexts. It appears to the writer that small blade
technology of the New World late Archaic may be more closely
related to the Old World Mesolithic, with smaller blades and a variety
of prepared core techniques.
Developments in blade technology discoveries are not easy to research. There appears to be a consistent lag in publication and reports
in a wide variety of journals. The writer has the impression, however,

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

90

that new blade sites are being found continuously, and may eventually lead to a recognition of a wide distribution over North America.
Aside from demonstrating cultural traits of given groups, specific
blade technologies offer the possibility of providing evidence of external relationships between broad areas and being of value in providing more information on the peopling of the New World at various
times. In addition to presenting some current information this paper
is intended as a plea for more field workers to be alert for these types of
artifacts, as they are often overlooked, or at least not reported in detail.

Table I: SUMMARY OF NEW BLADE TECHNOLOGY FINDS

Site
41HR5
41HR6
41HR82
41HR98
41HR180
41HR181
41HR182
41HR183
41HR184
41HR185
41HR188
41HR206
41HR208
41HR209
41HR210
41HR211
41HR213
41HR215
41HR217
41RE7
41JW4
41KY14
41SP68
41SP76
41SP77
41SP81
41FY51

Texas
(County)
Harris
Harris
Harris
Harris
Harris
Harris
Harris
Harris
Harris
Harris
Harris
Harris
Harris
Harris
Harris
Hams
Harris
Harris
Harris
Real
Jim Wells
Kinney
San Patricio
San Patricio
San Patricio
San Patricio
Fayette

A -- Blade-like flakes not counted.

Prismatic
Blades
(A)

Blade
Cores

Possibl e
Blade
Cores

12
9
Several
1
1

1
3

3
2

2
49
13
242

11

19

1

102

7

104

1

4
12

1

16

2

2

1

1
1
1
4
8
14

2

Several

1

Several

1

Several

1

Several

1

8

1

12
37

BLADE TECHNOLOGY

91

TEXAS SITES
While blades and polyhedral cores have been known for some time
on the Central Texas Gulf Coast, most of the information has remained
unpublished. Texas blade sites found to date by this survey are summarized in Table I.
In recent years some information on the occurrence of blade technology has been published. Green (1971, 1972) has described blades
and cores from San Saba County. Hester (1971a, 1971b) has published
some information on blades from south Texas.
Alton Briggs (personal communication) has furnished information
that three blades were recovered from a site in Calhoun County, 41 CL
20, on Matagorda Bay.
Several sites in Coke County have been reported to contain blades,
in the Robert Lee Reservoir report by Shafer (1969).
The writer has found a few blade-like objects and a good sample of a
tabular blade core (see Figure l-D) on the surface of site 41 RE 7 in Real
County. The writer has also found a few blades on the surface of Site
41 JW 4 in Jim Wells County.
Evidence for significant new blade technology has been found in
Harris County. There are 19 sites to date with crude prismatic blades,
several with large enough samples for statistical analysis. All of the
sites in Harris County represent surface collections made by the writer
except for the Fullen Site (41 HR 82), with information on this site
coming from Michael O’Brien, as late information after his paper
(1971) was published.
Since most of the sites in Harris County represent material found on
the surface, precise chronology is lacking. It appears however, that
blades were in use from the Archaic to more recent times. Prismatic
blades have been found in context with a large number of dart point
and arrow point types, suggesting a probable time range of 2000 B.C.
to A.D. 1500. Dart points found on sites which have yielded blades
include: Almagre, Gary, Carrollton, Refugio, Ellis, etc. Arrow points
include Perdiz, Bassett and Fresno types. Both pre-ceramic and
ceramic phases are probably represented; most of the sites have some
pottery. Lawrence Aten (personal communication) dates Galveston
Bay shell middens as early as 2000 B.C. and there is stamped pottery
on some of the blade sites which Aten dates as 200 A.D.
The persistence of blades over long periods of time, equal to or
longer than the time estimate for Harris County occurrences, has been
noted at a number of sites, such as the Tehuacan Valley (MacNeish
1969), Magic Mountain (Irwin-Williams and Irwin 1966), and Sierra
de Tamaulipas (MacNeish, 1958).

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

92

a

d

g

C

e

h

FIGURE 1. Cores. a,b, blade core fragments; c, boat-shaped possible
core; d, tabular core; e,f, Poverty Point type cores; g, casual core; h,
cylindrical core; i, tapered polyhedral core.

BLADE TECHNOLOGY

93

Site 41 HR 188, which does not have ceramics has a distribution of
blade sizes similar to sites exhibiting ceramic components.
Charles K. Chandler (personal communication) has reported several sites in San Patricio County with blades and cores. Site 41 SP 68
yielded a true polyhedral conical blade core and Site 41 SP 76 a
partially completed conical core. Site 41 SP 77 yielded a block-like
core with two striking platforms at right angles’on separate faces. The
collection from Site 41 SP 81 includes a cylindrical blade core with
striking platforms on both ends. Approximately five blades were
found on these sites. All cores have been personally examined by the
author.
Harris County Blade Technology
Most of the blades, all of flint, are of the "crude" type, with lateral
edges and dorsal ridges not exactly parallel to each other. Blades from
other locations made from obsidian, such as the Mexican examples,
show far more uniformity and symmetry. The majority of blades in
Harris County have a triangular cross section with only one dorsal
ridge. There are a number with two dorsal ridges. Ridge flakes also
occur with the larger blade technology.
Some statistics have been developed for Harris County blade sites
with prismatic blades divided into three classes as follows:
1. microblades -- under 9 mm. wide
2. small blades -- 9 to 12 mm. wide
3. large blades -- over 12 mm. wide
Table V shows the distribution of blade widths for site 41 HR 184.
The distribution is bimodal with peaks at the 9 mm. and 11-12 mm.
ranges. If the smaller number of blades of 10 mm. width is fortuitous,
then the microblade and small blade groups should be combined, to
give microblades to 12 mm. width and larger blades above 12 mm.
MacNeish (1964) uses 10 mm. as a maximum width for microblades,
and Taylor (1962) uses 11 mm. as a maximum width for Arctic microblades. Large blades, as used in this paper, is a relative term. By
Anderson’s (1970) definition of the Akmak assemblage, all of the large
blades in this paper would be called small, narrow blades.
In addition, blade-like objects with dorsal ridges are shown, including cortex flakes from possible core preparation. Table II is a summary
of blade size distribution. This distribution is similar for all of the
sites. Table III shows average dimensions for blades from two of these
sites.
As may be seen in Table III the average length of truncated blades is
not much shorter than for whole blades. The blades probably served
as cutting edges or hafted sideblades without much retouch. Most

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

94

;>

,--1

£

o~

Z

..

©

~o
o~

:>
¢/)

t’q

C/?

Z

,--]

0

~o
co

S

Z

2:
©

3S
o)

o~

Z

¯°~.s
©

BLADE TECHNOLOGY

95

retouch is on the ends of the blades, for use as scrapers and gravers.
Whole blade examples are shown as Figures 2A to 2I, ranging from
microblades to larger sizes. In addition, microliths made from blades
(including crescent, rectangular, and trapazoidal forms) also occur.
A possible aim of prismatic blade manufacture is to obtain long,
thin flakes, with higher structural strength due to the prismatic
cross-section. Thin flakes have sharp edges and are easier to retouch,
but flat, thin flakes lack strength. Occasionally, cortex flakes from
possible core manufacture were also retouched, shown as Figure 21
from site 41 HR 208.
Table III: AVERAGE BLADE DIMENSIONS
(Millimeters)
Site 41HR 206

Type

L

W

Site 41HR 184

T

L

W

Whole Micro

18

8

2

Tr. Micro

20

8

2

17

8

2

16

8

2

Whole Small

21

11

2

Tr. Small

25

11

3

19

11

Whole Large

3

19

11

34

16

4

Tr. Large

30

15

3
4

25

15

3

30

16

3

The most common form of truncated blade has a straight oblique
truncation on one end and is rounded on the other end, illustrated as
Figures 2-0 to 2-R. This form is common in other North American
blade industries. Other common forms for end retouch are pointed
(for gravers and possibly projectile points) and blunt (for scrapers). A
number of types of retouched blades are shown in Figures 2 and 3.
Figures 2K, L and M are examples of perforators. Figures 2K and 2M
are from Site 41 HR 184, and Figure 2L is from Site 41 HR 210. Striking
platforms (bulbar end) are up in all cases in Figures 2 and 3. Figure 2N
shows a burin formed on a prismatic blade from Site 41 HR 184.
Figures 3 A, B and C are examples of end scrapers on blades with
retouch on the bottom end. Figures 3B and 3C are from Site 41 HR 206
and Figure 3A is from Site 41 HR 184.
Figures 3 E, F and G show blades with side retouch, with 3E from
HR 206, and 3F and G from HR 184. Figure 3H is a retouched bladelike flake from HR 184 which might have been used as a side-blade.
Figure 3I is a blade retouched to leaf-shape, as a possible small
projectile point, from HR 188.
Figures 3 D, J, K, L, M, N and T are blades with some retouch to form

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

96

b

a

c

e

d

i

\

k

o

I

p

m

q

n

r

FIGURE 2. Blr~des. a-c, microblades; d-f, small blades; g-i, large blades;
j, retouched cortex flake; k-m, perforators; n, burin-on-blade; o-r,
truncated blades.

BLADE TECHNOLOGY

97

a point, from several of the sites in Harris County. Figures 3-0, P and
Q, from HR 188, HR 5 and HR 184 respectively, are examples of blades
with extensive minute retouch on the pointed end.
Figures 3 R and S from Site HR 184 have notches on the bulbar end.
The notch in Figure 2S has been formed by a distinct burin blow.
Giddings (1964) reports this type of retouch to microblades in Alaska,
and they are also known in the Siberian Mesolithic (Okladnikov
1969).
Some blades may not have been used at all, and represent debris
from core preparation. This could especially apply to some of the
smaller microblades. In Harris County sites, where samples are large
enough to be statistically meaningful, prismatic blades comprise
about five to ten percent of the total flakes collected, excluding fine
chipping debris.
Blade cores and possible cores from Harris County are shown in
Figures 1, 4, 5 and 7. These include the following types:
1. Wedge-shaped
The striking platform is on the edge opposite to a wedge-shaped
keel and is approximately 70 to 90 degrees from the blade surface.
These cores are similar to the Arctic and Asiatic types, but lack
retouch on the keel. An example from 41 HR 98 is shown in Figure 4
and one from 41 HR 188 is shown in Figure 5. This type has also been
found on sites 41 HR 184 and 41 KY 14.
The writer feels that the keel could have served as a method for
holding the core in a slotted device during blade making, rather than
the later combination use as a scraper, as stated by some authors. This
opinion has also been given by Irving (1962:59). These cores may be
related to the post-American Paleo-Arctic Tradition of Alaska, shown
by Anderson (1972) in his Figure 9, in that the shapes are similar,
especially in keel type geometry.
2. Poverty Point/Hopewell Type
These cores are semi-cylindrical or semi-conical in shape, a form
seemingly dependent on the conformity of the original pebble material used. The striking platform is at an acute angle of about 50 degrees.
In the Jaketown report, Ford, Phillips and Haag (1955) gave an opinion that Poverty Point and Hopewell cores were very similar. The
writer has four undated specimens from Ohio Flint Ridge that also
conform to this type description. Two examples are shown as Figures
1E and 1F from sites HR 188 and HR 184 respectively.
Ford (1969) has also noted the presence of conical blade cores in the
Ohio Hopewell. Aside from discussion in the Jaketown report, however, the relation of Poverty Point and Hopewell cores has received
little attention. Sanger’s (1970) survey of mid-latitude core and blade

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

98

traditions presented an analysis of Illinois and Ohio Hopewell blades
but without any actual specimens of cores. Based on the limited
information available, however, the writer is in agreement with the
Jaketown report that acute angle cores of the Poverty Point and
Hopewell cultures are technologically related.
Needles and perforators occur at Harris County sites, similar to
items from Jaketown. No other Poverty Point type artifacts are known
to occur at Harris County sites, however, such as are found farther east
at Avery Island.
Table IV: PROJECTILE POINT’DISTRIBUTION

Point Type
Catan
Gary
Kent
Palmillas
Ensor
Matamoros
Fresno
Carrollton
Lerma
Almagre
Tortugas
Pogo
Morhiss
Abasalo
Alba
Yarbrough
Ellis
Plainview
Scallorn
Shumla
Williams
Wells
Bassett
Bulverde

A
B
C
D
P

- Gagliano 1967
- Wheat 1953
- Patterson 1972
- MacNeish 1958
~ Possible

Avery
Island,
La. (A)

Houston,
Texas
(B,C)

Desmuke
X
X
X
X

X
XX
X
X
X
X
X
Refugio,P
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
P
X
X
X
X
P

P
P
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

Sierra
De
Tamaulipas,
Mexico (D)
X
x
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
x
X
X
X

X

BLADE TECHNOLOGY

99

Table V: BLADE WIDTH DISTRIBUTION
Site 41 HR 184

Width, mm
5

Distribution,
%
(A)
0.4

6

5.5

7

6.8

8

7.2

9

15.2

10

8.8

11

15.9

12

16.4

13

3.6

14

3.6

15

7.2

16

3.6

17

1.6

18

2.8

19

0.8

20

0.8
100.0

(A) Does not include "blade-like" objects

3. Straight Polyhedral
These are straight-sided cylindrical or block shaped with striking
platforms at 90 degrees. Either end can be used as the striking platform. An example from Site 41 HR 188 is shown as Figure 1H. A
pencil-shaped microblade core of this type was found on HR 209.
4. Tapered Polyhedral
These cores are similar to conical cores, except that the blade flutes
do not curve to the end. Striking platforms are generally at an angle of
about 70 degrees. An example is shown as Figure 1-I, from HR 188.
Some of these cores resemble MacNeish’s "tongue-shaped" cores
(MacNeish 1964, Figure 89) from the Southwest Yukon. There is a
relatively flat surface on each face of a wedge, with blade facets on
both lateral edges.
5. Tabular Cores
Tabular cores from Harris County are probably simple fragments
from cores of other types. An example from 41 HR 213 is illustrated as
Figure 1A, and one from HR 184 is shown as Figure 2B.
As mentioned previously, a true tabular core was found on Site
41RE 7. It is noted that this core was found where tabular flint was
available. Blade core shapes are probably a function of lithic material
available, as well as specific core preparation techniques.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

100

f

e

i

k

o

p

1

I

I

i

h

g
.... I

OI

d

c

b

a

I

. . . . 15

m

cm

n

q

FIGURE 3. Examples of Blade Tools. a-c, end scrapers; e-g, side retouched blades; d, j-n, t, pointed retouch; h, possible side-blade; i,
possible projectile point; r,s, base notched; o-q, extensive minute
retouch.

BLADE TECHNOLOGY

101

!

FIGURE 4. (Left) Wedge-shaped Blade Gore, 41 HR 98. FIGURE 5. (Right)
Wedge-shaped Blade Core, 41 HR 188.

6. Casual types
A formalized method of core preparation need not be used to obtain
blades. Blades can be struck from random shaped pieces of flint
although not at a high yield of blades. These are the most difficult to
recognize as blade cores but the method was probably widely used. A
number of writers, including Tolstoy (1971) for Mexico and Gagliano
(1967) for Avery Island, Louisiana mention use of this core type. An
example from 41 HR 188 is shown as Figure 1-G.
None of the cores fouhd in Harris County exhibit elaborate preparation of the striking platform; there is some use of unprepared platforms evident. In most cases the platform was formed by a single blow
although several blows were required on Poverty Point type cores.
There is some evidence of pecking and grinding at the platform edges
such as described by Sanger (1968) for Northwest types.
Blade sites in the New World are noted for a low frequency of core
specimens when compared to the number of blades found. As far as
Harris County is concerned, this might be explained as follows:
a. Blade core fragments show that cores were reduced further to
obtain additional flakes. This is consistent with maximum use of flint
in an area where lithic material importation was required.
b. "Casual" cores are difficult to recognize.
c. Previous workers have tended to overlook blade technology.

102

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ARCHAIC
BLADE
DIFFUSION

FIGURE 6. Hypothesized route of blade d~fusion to the Gu~ Coast. (1) Avery
Island, La.; (2) Houston, Tx.; (3) Matagorda Bay, Tx.; (4) Corpus Christi,
Tx.; (5) Happy Patch Site; (6) Robert Lee Reservoir, Tx; (7) Lodaiska and
Magic Mountain, Colo.; (8) Cleveland, Utah; (9)Harney County, Ore.; (10)
Ryegrass Coulee, Wash.; (11) Sierra de Taumalipa~, Mex.; (12) La Jita Site,
Tx.

d. Some of the blades may have been made at locations other than at
reported sites.
A boat-shaped possible blade core is shown as Figure 1-C. Figure 7
shows sketches of typical Harris County blade cores.
A major use of microblades from Harris County sites was for the
production of microliths that resemble Eurasian and Alaskan unifacial forms used for side and end blades with the compound arrow
point. Figures 8, 9, and 10 illustrate this material for Site 41 HR 184,
with all items made from prismatic blade fragments. Side blades have
one straight lateral edge, presumably used for halting, with trimming

BLADE TECHNOLOGY

103

retouch on the opposite lateral edge. Trimming is of the steep retouch
variety, common to Eurasian microliths. Several microliths are firepopped, as occurs with dart points in the area which might indicate
damage during meat cooking.

EXTERNAL RELATIONSHIPS
Sites yielding evidence of blade technology seem to have a relatively wide distribution on the Texas Gulf Coast during late Archaic
and post-archaic times (Figure 6). Geographically bracketing these
Texas sites are blade producing sites in Mexico (MacNeish, 1958) and
Avery Island, Louisiana (Gagliano 1967) as well as the Poverty Point
type sites. Other evidence of cultural traffic over long periods of time
on the Gulf Coast is shown by correspondences in projectile point
styles over this area as suggested in Table IV. With blade producing
sites in northern Mexico, the entire Gulf Coast, Louisiana, Mississippi
and Florida, there may be some basis for referring to a Gulf Coast small
prismatic blade tradition in late Archaic times -- perhaps lasting
longer in some locations.
While the Houston area is the westernmost occurrence on the Gulf
Coast of Poverty Point type blade cores known to the writer this
general semi-cylindrical core type with acute angle striking platform
occurs in an earlier context at Magic Mountain, Colorado (IrwinWilliams and Irwin 1966). Along with the general distribution of
small blades on the Gulf Coast, Magic Mountain provides additional
suggestion that small blade technology did not originate at Poverty
Point but may have arrived from the Northwest. This core type is also
found in Siberia.
While the writer proposes a relationship between Poverty Point and
Magic Mountain blade cores, Cynthia Irwin-Williams (personal
communication) is of the opinion that the Magic Mountain microblade industry is in turn related to the Northwest. Griffin (1966) sees a
relationship between the Poverty Point core and blade industry and
the Arctic Denbigh complex. In the same article, he notes that the
burin did not penetrate to Poverty Point. This is not true for the South
in general, however, as the writer has found burins in Harris County;
others have reported burins in Texas (Epstein 1960, 1963) and MacNeish (1967) found burins as far south as the Tehuacan Valley in
Mexico. Blades and burins occur together on sites in Harris County, in
the Tehuacan Valley and the Catahoula Lake Archaic in central
Louisiana (Webb 1968).
Houston, Avery Island, Poverty Point sites and Illinois Hopewell
(MacNeish 1948) all share the Gary and Yarbrough point types, as
well as one of the same types of blade cores.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

104

TEXAS COAST BLADE CORES

WEDGE-SHAPED
SINGLE EDGE FACETED
70-90° PLATFORM ANGLE
SINGLE FACET PLATFORM

SIDE

TONGUE-SHAPED
2 EDGES FACETED
70-90° PLATFORM ANGLE
SINGLE FACET OR UNPREPARED
PLATFORM

FRONT

SEMI-CONICAL
POVERTY POINT TYPE
50-70° PLATFORM ANGLE
MULTI FACET PLATFORM

CUBOID
90° PLATFORM ANGLE
SINGLE FACET OR
ROUGHENED PLATFORM

TABU LAR

CRUDE CONICAL

90° PLATFORM ANGLE
SINGLE FACET OR
UNPREPARED PLATFORM

70-90° PLATFORM ANGLE
SINGLE FACET PLATFORM

FIGURE 7. Texas Coast Blade Cores.

BLADE TECHNOLOGY

01-----4

105

I

I

I

15cm

FIGURE 8. Possible Side Blades’, 41 HR 184

Figure 6 illustrates a possible, highly generalized route for the
diffusion of small blade technology to the Gulf Coast from the Northwest. This model is, of course, subject to further verification. There is
a distribution of blade sites from the assumed Bering Straits entry
point to the New World through Oregon, as summarized by MacNeish
(1964) and Sanger (1968). Blade sites between Oregon and Texas are
less well documented but are not complIetely absent. In Texas, there
are sites on the Colorado River in the Edwards Plateau, which may
relate to diffusion of blade technology from the Northwest to the Gulf
Coast.
Wedge-shaped blade cores found in Harris County are suggested as
an indication of possible northwest influence on Gulf Coast lithic
technology. Tolstoy (1971) reported one of these artifacts from the
Valley of Mexico and attributed it to indicating far northern influence.
David Sanger (personal communication) has suggested to the writer that comparison of core manufacturing systems, such as shown by
Morlan (1970) are of importance in making inter-regional comparisons of cores. It is judged that the Harris County wedge-shaped cores
employed a simple preparation process. First, a minimum number of
blows was used to obtain a wedge-shaped object. Then a single blow
was employed to form a striking patform. Little or no retouch was
used to sharpen the wedge keel. It is not surprising that some wedgeshaped blade cores do not have extensive retouch on the keel. Even a
rather blunt keel can be cradled in a slotted wood vise. In the more
common case where only one lateral edge of a wedge-shaped core is
faceted, the other sharp latera! edge could be inserted into a wood slot

106

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

instead of, or also with, the bottom keel. The points of comparison of
Harris County cores with Northwest types is the use of a wedgeshaped core with striking platform on the edge opposite the keel and a
single striking platform at approximately right angles to the fluted
surface. This general pattern can be found in Japan, Siberia, Alaska
and the Pacific Northwest, both with and without extensive retouch of
the keel. In the writer’s opinion, retouch of the keel simply indicates
that a bifacial technique was used to form the keel wedge shape.
It is felt that the wedge-shaped cores from the Harris County sites
conform more closely to the Northwest blade tradition as described by
Sanger (1968) than to the Paleo Arctic tradition. Side-notched, leaf
shaped and tapered stem points shown in connection with microblades at Ryegrass Coulee, Washington are also present with microblades at the Harris County sites. Irving (1972:58) states that stemmed
and notched points are connected with the Northwest microblade
tradition.
Ford presented a model for small blade technology evolving from
crude Paleo-Indian blades in Mexico and then diffusing to sites such
as Poverty Point. As the reader may note, the blade diffusion model
suggested in this paper is entirely different and implies Archaic
Period influence from the Northwest, separate from Paleo-Indian
technology.
It is recognized that much work remains before external relationships of prehistoric blade technology in Texas can be firmly established. However, a start must be made in providing models for further
testing. It is hoped that this paper will serve to stimulate further
interest in the subject.
Judging by the number of blade core types on the Gulf Coast,
probably not all blade technology can be explained as coming from a
common source. In addition to the model presented there remains the
possibility of some Mesoamerican influence and local adaptations in
technique to types of lithic materials available.
Although different blade core types may indicate varied cultural
influences, this need not be so in all cases at a given time, even though
there may be ultimate separate sources. Asiatic sites reported by
Derevianko (1969) and Medvedev (1969), for example, contain both
keeled wedge-shaped and Poverty Point type cores. The keeled cores
are called "Gobi" type. The Amur River cores reported by Derevianko,
assumed here as of the "Poverty Point" type, have a striking platform
angle of 50 degrees as in the North American occurrences and are
semi-conical. These are labeled "wedge-shaped" by Russian writers
because of the acute angle of the striking platform, as opposed to the
American usage of the same term to refer to the keeled type.

BLADE TECHNOLOGY

0

I

01". . .

I

107

I

I

I

I

I

15 c m

12cm

FIGURE 9. (Top) Possible End Blades, 41 HR 184. FIGURE 10. Side Blade
Detail, 41 HR 184.

108

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Another possible indication of Pacific Northwest influence is the
heat treatment of flint. A significant number of flint artifacts in Harris
County sites show the coloring and luster of heat treatment. IrwinWilliams and Irwin (1966) cite heat treatment as a possible Northwest
trait.
A still further possible indication of northern influence is burin
spall and spall-like artifacts with end retouch, similar to those described by Giddings (1964) for the Denbigh Flint Complex and mentioned also for the later Dorset Culture (Taylor 1962). A number of like
specimens have been found on Site 41 HR 184; the first possible
example was noticed on Site 41 HR 6. Both 10 and 25 power magnifiers were required for proper examination. Most flint spalls having
a wedge-shaped end exhibited at least some use retouch, with a few
spalls having possible purposeful retouch. Epstein (1960, Figure 1,
94) has noted this type of artifact in the Lower Pecos River Archaic.
Micro-flaking is also a possible indication of Northwest influence.
Harris County microblades and perforators show very fine retouch.
Demonstration of this has required use of 10 power magnification.
Two flakes were found on Site 41 HR 184 with graver points formed
by extremely minute pressure flaking. This kind of fine flaking is well
known from the Cape Denbigh complex in Alaska described by Giddings (1964) and encountered at the Magic Mountain site in Colorado
by Irwin-Williams and Irwin (1966).
The presence of microblades in possibly pre-ceramic context in
Harris County raises the question as to whether the bow and arrow
arrived earlier than now generally acknowledged, and whether arrows were possibly used with compound points of the Eurasian
Mesolithic variety rather than with the conventional single piece
arrow tip. A number of trimmed microblades suggest hafting as sideblades, and others as points.

COMMENTS ON ASIATIC INFLUENCES
Harris County sites surveyed by the writer show no evidence of
agriculture. A hunting and gathering way of life may have extended
here until near historic time. It appears that these sites may have
retained a number of traits that reflect an original Asian Mesolithic
origin as well as displaying the usual more local Archaic traits. Aside
from small blades, other "typical" Mesolithic traits present are: use of
the spear thrower, burins and microliths.
The persistence of Mesolithic traits into more recent periods is
paralleled in Russian Asiatic Neolithic sites, as has been noted by
Formozov (1961) and others. Griffin (1966) has cited evidence of

BLADE TECHNOLOGY

109

Asiatic influences on North America during the late Archaic as being
of possible Siberian Neolithic origin. It is the writer’s opinion that
Harris County sites furnish additional supporting evidence on such
influence. Giddings (1964) feels that microblade technology should
be termed "Mesolithic Asiatic" influence rather than Neolithic. Although somewhat outdated in certain respectsl the Jaketown report by
Ford, Phillips and Haag (1955) still seems to be viable in its discussion
of the relationship of southern US microblade sites with the Eurasian
Mesolithic. The writer (Patterson 1973) has separately presented
more detailed comments for a number of possible Asiatic and arctic
influences on southern North America.
Acknowledgments
The writer would like to express appreciation for reviews of this paper by Douglas D.
Anderson and Jeremiah F. Epstein, while stating that conclusions are the responsibility
of the writer.

REFERENCES CITED
Anderson, Douglas D.
1970 Akmak: An Early Archeological Assemblage from Onion Portage,
Northwest Alaska. Acta Arctica, Fasc. 16.
1972 An Archaeological Survey of the Noatak Drainage, Alaska. Arctic
Anthropology, Vol. 9, No. 1:66-117.
Bordaz, Jacques
1970 Tools of the Old and New Stone Age. Natural History Press. Garden
City, New York.
Bordes, Francois
1968 The Old Stone Age. McGraw-Hill. New York.
Coles, John M. and Eric S. Higgs
1969 The Archaeology of Early Man. Praeger. New York.
Derevianko, Anatolii P.
1969 The Novopetrovka Blade Culture on the Middle Amur. Arctic Anthropology, Vol. 6, No. 1:119-127.
Epstein, Jeremiah F.
1960 Burins from Texas. American Antiquity, Vol. 26, No. 1:93-97.
1963 The Burin-Faceted Projectile Point. American Antiquity, Vol. 29, No.
2:187-201.
Ford, James A.
1969 A Comparison of Formative Cultures in the Americas: Diffusion or the
Psychic Unity of Man. Smithsonian Institution Contributions To Anthropology, Vol. II.
Ford, James A., Philip Phillips, and William G. Haag
1955 The Jaketown Site in West-Central Mississippi.Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of Natural History, Vol. 45, Part 1:1-164,
Plates 1-8.

110

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Formozov, A. A.
1961 Microlithic Sites in the Asiatic USSR. American Antiquity, Vol. 27,
No. 1:82-92.
Gagliano, Sherwood M.
1967 Occupation Sequence at Avery Island. Coastal Studies Series, No. 22.
Louisiana State University Press. Baton Rouge.
Giddings, James L.
1964 The Archaeology of Cape Denbigh. Brown University Press. Providance.
Green, L. M.
1971 Notes on the Archeology of the Happy Patch Site, San Saba County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 42:319-333.
1972 Flake Blades from Western San Saba County, Central Texas: An Initial
Study. Lower Plains Archeological Society Bulletin, No. 2:5-22.
Griffin, James B.
1966 Some Prehistoric Connections between Siberia and America. In: New
Roads to Yesterday, Joseph R. Caldwell, editor: 277-301. Basic Books.
New York.
Hester, Thomas R.
1971a Archeological Investigations at the La Jita Site, Uvalde County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 42:51-148.
1971b Loyola Beach, An Example of Aboriginal Adaptation to the Maritime
Environment of the Lower Texas Coast. Florida Anthropologist, Vol.
24, No. 3:91-106.
Irving, William N.
1962 A Provisional Comparison of Some Alaskan and Asian Stone Industries. Technical Papers of the Arctic Institute of North America, No.
11:55-68.
Irwin-Williams, Cynthia and Henry Irwin
1966 Excavations at Magic Mountain. Denver Museum of Natural History
Proceedings, No. 12.
Irwin, Henry and Cynthia Irwin
1959 Excavations at the LoDaiska Site. Denver Museum of Natural History
Proceedings, No. 8
MacNeish, Richard S.
1948 The Pre-Pottery Faulkner Site of Southern Illinois. American Antiquity, Vol. 13, No. 3:232-243.
1958 Preliminary Archaeological Investigations in the Sierra de
Tamaulipas. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society,
Vol. 48, Part 6.
1964 Investigations in Southwest Yukon: Archaeological Excavation,
Comparisons, and Speculations. Papers of the Robert S. Peabody
Foundation for Archaeology, Vol. 6, No. 2.
MacNeish, Richard S., Antoinette Nelken-Terner and Irmgard Weitlaner de
Johnson
1967 The Prehistory of the Tehuacan Valley. Vol. 2. University of Texas
Press. Austin.
Medvedev, G. I.
1969 Archaeological Investigations of the Stratified Palaeolithic Site of
Krasnyi IAr on the Angara in 1965-1965. Arctic Anthropology, Vol. 6,
No. 1:30-44.

BLADE TECHNOLOGY

111

Mortan, Richard E.
1970 Wedge-Shaped Core Technology in North America. Arctic
Anthropology, Vol. 7, No. 2:17-37.
Okladmikov, A. P.
1969 An Ancient Settlement on the Tadusha River at Ustinovka and the
Problem of the Far Eastern Mesolithic (In Light of the 1964 Excavations). Arctic Anthropology, Vol. 6, No. 1:134-149.
Patterson, L. W.
1973 Far Northern Influences on the Upper Coast. Paper presented at Annual Meeting, Texas Archeological Society, Lubbock.
Sanger, David
1968 Prepared Core and Blade Traditions in the Pacific Northwest. Arctic
Anthropology, Vol. 5, No. 1:92-120.
1970 Mid-Latitude Core and Blade Traditions.ArcticAnthropology, Vol. 7,
No. 2:106-114.
Shafer, Harry J.
1969 Archeological Investigations in the Robert Lee Reservoir Basin, West
Central Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No.
17.
Shafer, Harry J. and Thomas R. Hester
ms. An Initial Study of Blade Technology on the Central and Southern
Texas Coast. Manuscript in press..
Taylor, William E.
1962 A Distinction Between Blades and Microblades in the American Arctic. American Antiquity, Vol. 27, No. 3:425-426.
1968 The Arnapik and Tyara Sites, An Archaeological Study of Dorset
Culture Origins. Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology,
No. 22.
Tolstoy, Paul
1971 Utilitarian Artifacts of Central Mexico. In: Handbook of Middle
American Indians, Vol. 10, Gordon F. Ekholm and Ignacio Bernal,
editors: 270-296. University of Texas Press. Austin.
Webb, Clarence H.
1968 The Extent and Content of Poverty Point Culture.American Antiquity,
Vol. 33, No. 3:297-321.
Wheat, Joe Ben
1953 An Archaeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin. Bureau of
American Ethnology Bulletin 154; River Basin Surveys Papers, No. 4,
Pt. I:143-252.
Houston, Texas

BI~NARD DE LA HARPE
AND THE NASSONITE POST
M.P. MIROIR, R. KING HARRIS, JAY C. BLAINE AND JANSON MCVAY
WITH THE COLLABORATION OF DONALD C. BOOK, FLOYD CIGAINERO,
ROGER MCVAY, JOE B. RAFFAELLI, JR. AND PAUL E. SCHOEN

Abstract
Data are presented on an Historic Period site (41 BW 5) in northeast
Texas near Texarkana which suggests that it may be the site of the Nassonite Post established by the French trader, Benard de la Harpe in 1719.

INTRODUCTION
During the past 15 years, a group of nine amateur archeologists has
been collecting artifacts, doing limited testing and researching
documentary sources relevant to an Historic site located near Texarkana, Bowie County, Texas. Information gathered as a result of these
efforts is in the possession of R. King Harris. Artifacts are dispersed
among the authors. Because of the mutual effort on the part of all the
participants in the recovery of the data from the site, all are listed as
authors. The main burden of the writing, however, fell to Miroir,
Harris, Blaine and McVay. Before the project was completed, Miroir
and Janson McVay both died. Since their contributions were many,
they are retained among the senior authors. The section on gun parts,
gun flints, ball and shot was written by Jay C. Blaine.
THE ROSEBROUGH LAKE SITE
The Rosebrough Lake Site (41 BW 5) has had several names applied
to it -- both popularly and in print. Among other names which have
been applied are the Rochelle Place, Pearson Site and Fort St. Louis.
Because the name Rosebrough Lake has appeared in published form a
number of times, it is retained here.
The site is located on a natural levee which rises about 3 feet above
the flood plain of the Red River (Figs. 1,2). Unti! the dam forming Lake
Texoma was built several years ago, the site was subject to periodic
flooding. The last flood known to have affected the site occurred in
1936. The site has undergone some sheet erosion. Generally, it is
associated with a sandy silt matrix.
The site is herein separated into two contiguous areas, A and B, a
division based on differences in the kinds of artifacts recovered and

114

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

O

K

L

A

H

O

M

A

~.

!,

"

TEXAS

.I"

÷

,EXARKANAI"
I

’,

PORTAGE
OF
,THE
NASSONI
BELLE

oln
~’¢h

p!p
1

i

o

5

M t

L

E

s

ADAPTED FROM "USO $1AMS
TEXARKANA, TEX,;ARK ,; OKLA.;
LA ,1953

,
I
I

FIGURE 1. Map showing La Harpe’ s route up the Sulphur River (Bear
River) and overland to the site of his Nassonite Post (41 BW 5).
the occurrence of visible cultural features. Area A, at the south end of
the site had been exposed to more erosion. Ten occupational features
were recognized here (Fig. 2) and artifacts of both native and European origin recovered. On the other hand, Area B (at the north end of
the site) yielded only native-made artifacts and no discrete cultural
features were noted. Limited stratigraphic testing in the area also
resulted in the exclusive recovery of native-made materials. As much
care as possible was exercised by the investigators to preserve the

Bt~NARD DE LA HARPE

115

integrity of the site. Burials which were excavated were those which
had been struck by plowing or exposed by erosion in the fields and
hence vulnerable to destruction. Stratigraphic tests (generally 5-foot
square units) were dug only to determine extent of midden in a given
area or feature.
Occupational Features
Two general kinds of occupational features, artifact concentrations
and burials, were recognized at the site (all of them in Area A). Eight
apparently separate and distinct circular to oval concentrations of
various cultural materials including sherds, flint flakes, bone and
burned daub were identified (Fig. 2). Artifacts recovered from the
surface of these features are given the provenience of that feature.
Although stratigraphic tests were made in several of these features,
none was investigated thoroughly enough to allow further description or interpretation.
Figure 2 indicates general locations and spatial relationships
among these features. In addition to the eight concentrations, two
burials of historic age were excavated at the site. Both are described
below:
BURIAL 1
The remains of a 30-year-old female interred in an extended position, back down, with the head to the east was excavated by M.P.
Miroir before World War II. The burial had been tipped by a plow and
although some of the vessels were broken, the basic original arrangement of burial goods could be recorded (Fig. 3). As this burial lay in
dark midden soil, no pit outline could be discerned.
Burial goods included pottery vessels and trade beads. A small,
fine-grit-tempered Natchitoches Engraved (Suhm and Jelks
1962:113-114) bottle was located between the knees (Fig. 3E). Red
pigment had been rubbed into the engraved lines.
A second vessel (Fig. 3C), probably Canton Incised (Suhm and Jelks
1962:21), was placed near the right hand. It is shell tempered.
A Simms Engraved bowl (Suhm and Jelks 1962:141) which has a
fine grit temper was present at the left shoulder (Fig. 3B). Another
Simms Engraved bowl (Fig. 3D), shell tempered, was located at the
left forearm.
Five vessels were located at the feet of the burial. A shell-tempered
Natchitoches Engraved bowl (Fig. 3J) had been placed near the left
foot. Adjacent to it was a grog-tempered vessel which can be classified
as Womack Engraved (Duffield and Jelks 1961:36-39). A fine grit-

116

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

SITE MAP
41 BW 5
/,,

B2

&

F5

&

&

B1

F6

&
F4

&

SCALE
{approx.)

1/2

0
MILE

FIGURE 2. Sketch Map oJ’Site 41 BW 5. "B" indicates the location of a
burial; "F" indicates the location of a feature.

BI~NARD DE LA HARPE

117

B
A

,/o

FIGURE 3. Burial 1, Site 41 BW 5. Diagram at the lower left indicates
the relationship of the burial goods to the burial. A, glass trade beads;
B, Simms Engraved vessel; C, Canton Incised vessel; D, Simms Engraved
vessel; E, Natchitoches Engraved bottle; F, unidentified vessel (not illustrated); G, Natchitoches ngraved vessel; H, Simms Engraved vessel; I,
Womack Engraved sherd (not illustrated); J, Natchitoches Engraved vessel.

118

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tempered Simms Engraved bowl (Fig. 3H) had been placed at the feet.
A fine grit-tempered carinated bowl classified as Natchitoches Engraved (Fig. 3G) and the fragments of another pottery vessel were
located at the right foot.
In the area of the neck and extending down the left side were 1028
glass trade beads (Fig. 3A). They have been classified as follows
(Harris and Harris 1967:156-158): 34 Type 10, 7 Type 9, 2 Type 11, 4
Type 44,973 Type 46, 3 Type 48, 1 Type 63 and 4 Type 80. The basis of
these bead classifications as well as the basic descriptions are given
on each type in a subsequent section "Glass and Shell Trade Beads."
Examples are illustrated in Figure 9. All of the beads from this group
are estimated to fall within the time period of La t-Iarpe (that is the first
decades of the eighteenth century) except for one specimen, Type 63.
BURIAL 2
A second burial was located by Roger McVay and excavated by him
in 1963. It was possible to discern a burial pit 53 inches long by 27
inches wide and 12 inches deep. The skeleton lay extended on its back
with the head to the east-southeast (Fig. 4). The remains appeared to
be those of a female but age could not be determined. Plowing had
destroyed the skull and broken some of the burial goods. Seven grave
offerings were identified and their placement noted (Fig. 4).
Two items were located at the neck area. The first (Fig. 4D) consisted of 18 large conch shell beads around the neck. In the same area
were 48 blue glass trade beads (Type 46) (Fig. 4B).
A shell-tempered vessel, probably Simms Engraved, was located at
the right knee. Most of this vessel had been carried off in the plowing.
A bracelet consisting of 12 conch shell beads (Fib. 4C) was found
around the left wrist.
Four items had been placed along the lower left leg. Two very small
shell-tempered vessels, probably McKinney Plain (Suhm and Jelks
1962:97) have strap handles. One (Fig. 4F) has two handles, the other
(Fig. 4E) four. Located with these vessels was a pear-shaped pendant
of fired clay (Fig. 4A). It had been perforated at the narrow end. An
additional burial association, six mussel shell spoons, was located at
the left foot. These items were too fragile to recover in an intact
condition.

Native-Made Artifacts
Items listed here include stone and ceramic artifacts presumably
made by the Indian inhabitants of the site. Goods of European manufacture which show aboriginal modification are included under
European Trade Goods.

B!~NARD DE LA HARPE

119

Pottery
Pottery descriptions conform to previously described types found in Suhm and Jelks
1962 unless otherwise noted. Recurring types will be referenced only once as to source
of original description. Breakdown is by type and temper, vessel provenience is marked
"B" for burial or "F" for feature.

A

\

;

///

FIGURE 4. Burial2, Site 41 BW 5. Diagram at lower left indicates the
relationship of the burial goods to the burial. A, ceramic pendant; B,
glass trade beads; C, conch shell bracelet; D, conch shell necklace;
E,F, McKinney Plain ? vessels; G, Simms Engraved vessel (not illustrated); H, mussel shell spoons (not illustrated).

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

120

SHERDS--AREA
Plain rim
shell
clay-grit-grog
bone

A

Emory rim
shell
clay-grit-grog
bone

66
17
5

41

88
Plain body
shell
clay-grit-grog
bone

Emory body
shell
clay-grit-grog
bone

591
82
25

Keno Trailed body
shell

3
1
4

Red slipped
clay-grit-grog

Simms Engraved rim
shell
fine grit
red slipped-shell

18
7
3
28

Engraved rim
clay-grit-grog

Natchitoches Engraved rim
shell
fine grit

Engraved body
clay-grit-grog
Punctate body
clay-grit-grog

87
16
7
110

690

Brushed body
shell
clay-grit-grog

31
7
3

7
3
10

11

Natchitoches Engraved body
shell
fine grit

Avery Engraved
shell

68
49
117

TOTAL SHERDS, AREA A

1129

VESSELS--AREA A
Pinched-noded (F. 1)
clay-grit-grog
Canton Incised ? (B. 1)
shell
Emory (olla, F. 5)
fine grit
Keno Trailed (F. 1)
shell
McKinney Plain ? (B. 2)

1

1

1

Simms Engraved
fine grit (B. 1,2;
F. 3,1)
shell

clay-grit-grog

1

3
1
4

Womack Engraved (B. 1) (Duffield and Jelks
1961:36-39)

1
1
1
3

1

2

shell

Natchitoches Engraved (B. 1)
fine grit (red
pigment in lines)
fine grit
shell

TOTAL VESSELS, AREA A

14

Bt~NARD DE LA HARPE

121

SHERDS -- AREA B
Plain rim
shell
clay-grit-grog
bone

Emory body
shell
clay-grit-grog
bone

5
3
2

48
16
5

10
Plain body
shell
clay-grit-grog
bone
shell and bone

69

Keno Trailed
shell
clay-grit-grog

387
207
48

12

34

Natchitoches Engraved
shell
clay-grit-grog

676

Plain body, red slipped
clay-grit-grog

6
4
10

Brushed body
bone

Simms Engraved rims
shell
clay-grit-grog

Plain strap handle
shell
Emory rim
shell
clay-grit-grog

9
3

7
3
10

TOTAL SHERDS, AREA B

802

2
2
4

VESSEL -- AREA B
Simms Plain
fine grit

1

TOTAL VESSELS, AREA B

1

All the decorated pottery examples recovered fall within the Historic time frame.
Examples of similar wares in Historic contexts can be seen at such sites as Gilbert (Jelks
1967) and Womack (Harris et al. 1965). Examples of the ceramics recovered from this
site are shown in Figure 5.

Figurines
Total: 2
A fired clay horse figurine (Fig. 6E) similar to types found in large numbers in the
Spanish Fort sites in Montague County, Texas, and Jefferson County, Oklahoma, on
upper Red River may have come from one of these up-river sites. Bell et al. (1967: Fig.
57Q) illustrate a very similar specimen.
A second figurine fragment (Fig. 6G), boot-like in appearance, was associated with
Feature 6. Small punctates cover the surface of the specimen.

122

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

0

I

2.

3 4

5

FIGURE 5. Native-made Ceramics. A, Vessel, Area B; B,E, Natchitoches
Engraved, shell tempered (F.1); C,D, Natchitoches Engraved, fine grit
tempered (F.3); F, noded-pinched, clay grit-grog (F.1); G, Simms
Engraved, fine grit tempered (F.3 ); H, Emory (F.5 ); I, Keno Trailed, shell
temper (F. 1).

BENARD DE LA HARPE

123

Pipes
Total: 11
Although most of the specimens are fragments, they do give some idea of the kinds of
pipes at the site. Of the 11 specimens, two are stone and nine are ceramic.
One specimen {Fig. 6B} is a light tan limestone pipe with the top of the bowl broken
off. Apparently this break was smoothed and the pipe continued in use. The bowl sits
on a rectangular block of stone. The pipe was recovered from Feature 7.
A fragment ofa catlinite pipe stem was found in Feature 3. The stem was hexagonal in
cross section (Fig. 6F}.
Elbow pipes which sit on ring-shaped bases constitute the most common pipe style
found (five out of the eleven}. Each pipe has perforations on each side of the base {Fig.
6C,D). It is possible that these small holes were made so that decorations (such as
feathers) could be attached. Decoration on this type of "ring base elbow pipe" usually
consists of engraved straight lines (some of which are ticked}, occasional punctates and
occasional hatchured engraved triangles. Color ranges from dark brown to almost
black; most examples are well polished on the surface.
An example of this same basic pipe but without the ring base and with the single
perforation through the foot of the pipe was found in Feature 6. The pipe has the same
decoration as the ring-shaped pedestal base examples.

Arrow Points
Total: 71
Specimens include Fresno (66 examples, Fig. 6K-M) (Suhm and Jelks 1962:273},
Harrell (1 example) (Suhm and Jelks 1962:275) and Maud (4 examples, Fig. 6J) (Suhm
and Jelks 1962:28). It is interesting that no stemmed points occur; however, this may be
due to sampling error. These artifacts are made from flint, red and yellow jasper and
novaculite.

Dart Points
Total: 4
A probable Edgewood dart point (Suhm, Krieger and Jelks 1954:418) and three Gary
points (Suhm, Krieger and Jelks 1954:430) were found on the general surface of the site.
They may not relate to the Historic occupation due to the low frequency of occurrence.

Drills
Total: 4
All examples are chipped base types with finely chipped drill stems (Fig. 6N). The
small number of stone drills may indicate the use of iron awls; however, no iron awls
have yet been found here.
Knives
Total: 3
from a light cream-colored flint and shows wear
wear may have resulted from cutting action.
leaf-shaped.

One specimen (Fig. 6H) is made

along

the entire long curved edge. This

Two other

specimens

are

Scrapers
Total: 47 (34 end; 13 side)
End scrapers (Fig. 60,P ,S,T) occurred in association with nearly all features. Thirteen
side scrapers were recovered from the general surface.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

124

B

G

F

Q

0

I

2

5

4

5

cm

FIGURE 6. Native-Made Artifacts. A, Norteno pipe; B, limestone pipe;
C,D, ring base elbow pipes; E, horse figurine; F, catlinite pipe stem; G,
boot-like figurine; H, knife,; I, Edgewood dart point; J, Maud arrow
point; K-M, Fresno arrow point; N, drill; O,P,S,T, scrapers; Q, conch
shell pendant; R, stone pendant; U, celt.

B]~NARD DE LA HARPE

125

Miscellaneous Flint
Total: 30
This sample includes 17 small, rough bifaces, eight secondary flakes and five chips.

Pendants
Total: 2
A stone pendant (recovered from Feature 4) is unmodified except for the drilled hole
(Fig. 6R). A second specimen, a pendant is made from conch shell (Fig. 6Q) and was
probably intended to represent a bear claw. The single perforation is drilled from both
sides. The specimen was associated with Feature 1.

Celts
Total: 1
One well polished celt (from Feature 1) is made of fine spotted diorite, probably
originating from eastern Oklahoma. The poll end is rounded and the cutting edge is
well shaped and sharp (Fig. 6U). A cross section about midpoint is oval.

Beads
Total: 5
Three specimens are thin sections of crinoid stems; two are Olivella shells. It would
appear from the small numbers of native-made beads, that with the availability of glass
and wampum shell beads, this craft was nearly discontinued.

European Trade Goods
Axes or Tomahawks
Total: 5
Three complete and two fragmentary iron axe heads were cleaned of rust to see if any
maker’s marks or names could be found, and, although no such markings are visible,
some use scars are evident.
Two fragmentary axe blades (Fig. 7D), broken off at the eye, are from the general
surface of the site. Both specimens are large and heavy.
A complete specimen from Feature 8 has a slightly damaged cutting edge (Fig. 7B). A
large, heavy specimen from Feature 3 has interesting use marks {Fig. 7E). Both faces of
the blade are covered by numerous fine cut marks possibly produced by using the face
of the blade as an anvil. The eye is tear-drop-shaped.
A specimen found in Feature 1 has a tear-drop-shaped eye (Fig. 7C).
All of the complete specimens have tear-drop eyes and none of the blades appear to
have steeled cutting edges.

Pipe Tomahawk
Total: 1
An iron pipe tomahawk (Fig. 7A) has a pipe blade forged from a single piece of iron
with two straps forged to form the eye and pipe bowl. The eye is almost round.

Bottle Fragments
Total: 14
All specimens are fragmentary and come from light green glass bottles. All exhibit
heavy patination perhaps the result of the soil conditions over the years. Of the sample,
four are "high kick up" bottoms, probably from wine bottles. One sherd has a pontil

126

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

mark. Provenience of the specimens is: Feature 1 (10), Feature 2 (1), Feature 3 (1),
Feature 4 (1) and Feature 7 (1).

Mirror Fragments
Total: 6
All specimens appear to be crown glass. One specimen has a straight edge suggesting
that some of the mirrors were either square or rectangular. One fragment has a chipped
edge about 25 mm long on one edge and may have been used as a scraper. Provenience
of the fragments is: Feature 1 (4), Feature 2 (2).

European Ceramics
Total: 8
The inventory of European ceramics from the site includes: one example of French
faience (Fig. 8A), one delft sherd, a fragment of Puebla blue-on-white majolica (Fig. 8b)
and three pieces of salt glazed stoneware from Feature 1. A second sherd of French
faience (Fig. 8C) and a piece of majolica were found in association with Feature 7.

Ring or Crucifix Set
Total: 1
A clear glass set mounted in a brass frame is similar to examples recovered from the
Spanish Fort sites on upper Red River.

Button
Total: 1
One white metal button with a floral pattern on the front and a border of small
triangular designs around the edge was found in association with Feature 1. The word
"DEPOSE" and a double "T" are on the back (Fig. 8D).

Rivet
Total: 1
A small, handwrought rivet (Feature 1) is made from sheet brass. Numerous rivets of
this type are in collections from the Norteno sites (Harris and Tunnell 1967: Fig. 48).
These items were used to make kettle repairs, horse trappings or other repair jobs.

Horse Trappings
Total: 5
Iron fragments of Spanish bridle bits include: a bridle cannon (Fig. 8I) from Feature 1,
two chain links (Fig. 8J,K) -- Feature 1 and Feature 7, a fragmentary cheek plate with
engraved lines (Fig. 8N) associated with Feature 1, and another fragmentary cheek plate
from Feature 8.

Knives
Total: 10
For several years collections of metal knives have been studied from historic sites,
and, as a result, it is now possible to recognize several types. Some of the types can be
identified as to country of origin by blade shape (Harris et al. 1966:7-8).
A complete French case knife (Fig. 8F) has the name "COOBON" stamped near the
butt. Directly above this name is stamped an oval emblem with a cross on top. The
provenience of the knife is Feature 7. A knife of this same maker was recovered from the
Gilbert Site (Harris, Harris and Woodall 1967:23).

Bt~NARD DE LA HARPE

127

A

©

D

FIGURE 7. European Trade Axes. A, pipe tomahawk; B-E, trade axes.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

128

I

0

I

2

3

4

5

FIGURE 8. European Trade Good.s’. A,C, faience sherd; B, Puebla blueon-white majolica; D, metal button; E, French clasp knife, Type 1 ; F,
French case knife; G, knife blade fragment; H, case knife; I, bridle
cannon; J,K, chain links from bits; L, strike-a-light; M, possible
strike-a-light-; N, bridle cheek plate; O, carpenter’s knife?; P, briefcase lock; Q, lead pendant; R, brass pendant; S-U, tinklers.

B!~NARD DE LA HARPE

129

A new type of case knife (Fig. 8H) from Feature 5 is too oxidized for any names to be
visible, even after cleaning. The shape of the blade resembles French clasp knife Type 1
(Harris et el. 1965:350). This type of knife was mounted in a wooden handle probably
through a ferule similar to one recovered from Feature 4.
Another French clasp knife, Type 1 (Fig. 8E) is too oxidized for cleaning but a single
letter "E" was raised by x-ray. Provenience of the item is Feature 6.
The mid-section of a knife blade (Fig. 8G) is probably from a case knife. The name
"CLAUDE POLIVET" stamped in two rows was raised by cleaning. A mid-section of a
case knife blade found near the stockage (Yscani area) of the Longest Site in Jefferson
County, Oklahoma, also had this name on it (Bell et el. 1967). A similar specimen from
the Gilbert Site bears the same name (Jelks 1967).
Six other fragmentary specimens from the site are too small to warrant further
description.

Scissors
Total: 1
A fragment of a pair of scissors (from Feature 8) is in too poor condition to warrant
cleaning or measurement.

Pendants
Total: 2
A triangular brass pendant (Fig. 8R) has cut marks along portions of the edges,
perhaps a result of cutting the piece from sheet brass. A small punched hole is located in
one corner. The specimen is made from 21 gauge brass. Its provenience is Feature 1.
A lobe-shaped pendant made from 20 gauge sheet lead has two holes punched
through it (Fig. 8Q). The specimen is from Feature 2.

Tinklers
Total: 16
In order to make tinklers, a piece of sheet brass was cut into a blank and then rolled to
finish. A blank from Feature 6 is made from 25 gauge brass. Complete tinklers from the
site are made from the following gauges: 4 of 25 gauge, 9 of 23 gauge, i of 21 gauge and 2
of 19 gauge. Provenience of these items is: Feature I (4), Feature 6 (7), Surface (5). Three
specimens are shown in Figure 8S-U.

Carpenter Tool
Total: 1
A wrought iron tool fragment with what appears to be an engraved design on both
sides of the blade may be a part of a knife (Fig. 80). Part of the blade and all of the handle
are missing. If the specimen were complete, one might be able to judge whether this
artifact was a draw knife, froe or block knife. The edge of the blade opposite the cutting
edge has been flattened. This type of use is seen many times on the back edges of draw
knives and froes as they were used to cut or split boards or shingles. Many early settlers
used draw knives, block or froes for all wood work (Sloane 1964:9, 31, 39). The
engraved design is very much like some present on Spanish horse trappings.

Metal Scraper
Total: 1
An iron scraper recovered from Feature 4 measures 45 mm. long by 25 mm. wide and
varies in thickness from 1 to 2 ram. This type of scraper which was inserted into a

130

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

wooden handle is of a type also present from the Spanish Fort sites (Bell et al. 1967) and
the Gilbert Site (Jelks 1967). They appear to be made from the flattened thin parts of gun
barrels and lock plates from guns or any other available piece of flat iron.

Bells
Total: 2
A small fragment of a brass sleigh bell is decorated with a floral decoration. The
provenience of the specimen which is too fragmentary to determine size is from Feature
1.
A small fragment of a hawk bell was found on the general surface.

Strike-a-lights
Total: 5
A complete strike-a-light (Fig. 8L) is oval and somewhat like a flattened chain link in
appearance. It measures 68 mm. long by 31 ram. wide and about 3 ram. in thickness.
Fragments of the same type of strike-a-light have been recovered from the Spanish Fort
sites (Bell et al. 1967). A complete specimen of this type was found in Grave 17 in the
Old Birch Island Cemetery on Georgian Bay, Ontario (Greenman 1951: Plate XIX,D).
Items found at Old Birch Island appear to be the result of French trade. The additional
fragments of this same type of strike-a-light were found on the general surface of the
site.
An iron ring (Fig. 8M) recovered from Feature I may have been used as a strike-a-light
as a similar item identified as a round strike-a-light was associated with Grave 18 at Old
Birch Island Cemetery (Greenman 1951: Plate XIX, A).

Briefcase Lock
Total: 1
Part of a brass or bronze briefcase lock (Fig. 8P) from Feature 1 is of a type made in
France near the end of the 18th Century (Allemagne 1967: Plate 61).

Kettle Fragments
Total: 6
One fragment of a rim of an iron kettle was found in Feature 6. It is from a round,
shallow kettle with three legs. In its rusted condition, the thickness of the kettle wall is 4
ram. Three other fragments of this type are among the inventory from the site.
A fragment of the rolled rim of a kettle is made of 22 gauge brass, It is from the general
surface.
The fragment of a brass kettle rim (Found on the general surface) has two handwrought rivets in place. The kettle fragment is 22 gauge.
A small piece of 26 gauge decorated brass was associated with Feature 1. The design
was made by pressing two straight ribs in the sheet brass.

Metal Scrap
Total: 118
These fragments, all from Area A, are considered to be the scrap cut away and residue
of metal discarded in the process of making various artifacts. They can be broken down
as follows:

BI~NARD DE LA HARPE

131

Iron: 68 fragments
Brass: 44 fragments of six gauges
gauge

no.

25

15

22

8

19

18

17

1

16

1

15

1

Lead: 5 fragments of 20 gauge
The gauge of the iron scrap was not determined because of the extremely rusty
condition of the items. The brass scrap of all gauges appears to represent kettle brass.
The lead scrap probably is the result of making patches to cushion flints in the vise jaws
of guns. Although the sample is small, the inhabitants of the site appear to be obtaining
sheet lead of one thickness (20 gauge) for this purpose.

Glass and Shell Trade Beads
The use of European trade beads (i.e. glass and shell beads of non-Indian origin) as
time markers has been under study for a number of years. A description of the manufacture of these items and their occurrence in Texas and Oklahoma sites relevant to this
study can be found in Harris and Harris 1967. The relative positions and utility of these
items as time markers is based at present on inter-site comparisons and documentary
correlation (Harris and ~Iarris 1967:156-158). The bead types as expressed here result
from this study.
In the following descriptions, a standard color chart (Bustanoby 1947:28-29, Plate 8)
has been used to indicate the hues of the beads. It should be noted that bead surfaces are
frequently altered by age and weathering and it is sometimes difficult to determine the
original color. However, the color can often be restored by immersing the beads in a
weak solution of muriatic acid for about two hours and then washing in water. It is
surprising how many beads that would have otherwise been classified as "dirty white"
turn out to be red, green, yellow, or blue when cleaned.
General terms are used to describe the bead shapes: barrel-shaped, donut-shaped,
round, and tube-shaped (bugle). Some of the larger (necklace) beads are described as
being olive-shaped. This term was taken from an early 18th century document
(Thwaites 1959:143) and was apparently widely used by the French to describe certain
of the trade beads.
There is documentary evidence that Indians used the larger beads mainly for necklaces and the small and medium-sized ones principally on skins, garters, and the like.
The large beads will here be referred to as necklace beads, the medium and small ones
as garter beads. The beads were sorted into size groups as follows:
0-2 mm. -- extra small
2-4 mm. -- small
4-6 mm. -- medium
over 6 mm.- large

(The measurements are for bead
diameter measured perpendicular
to the hole axis. Length
is disregarded in this

classification.)
At the end of each type description, it will be indicated whether the bead is tumbled
(ends smoothed by placing in hot drum with sand and ashes), untumbled (with ends
left sharp) and/or twisted (while the hot canes were being stretched lengthwise). The

132

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

abbreviations T, UT, and TW wilt be used to indicate these respective manufacturing
processes.
The glass beads are classified into three categories on the basis of structure: simple,
compound and complex.
Simple beads are those composed of a monolithic, structurally undifferentiated mass
of glass. Both hollow-cane and mandrel-wound forms are common. Mandrel-wound
beads were made by winding a hot thread of glass around a wire or mandrel.
Compound beads are those consisting of two or more layers of glass. These are
normally hollow-cane beads.
Complex beads are those having decorative designs made of tiny glass elements that
are pressed into the bead.
Examples of some of these types are shown in Figure 9. An asterisk (*) next to a
number indicates that it is illustrated.

Glass Bead Types
No. 1.* Large, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of simple construction. The
glass is porcelain-like in texture. T. 10 specimens.
No. 2.* Large, white, opaque, elongated, olive-shaped necklace bead of simple
construction. The glass is porcelain-like in texture. T. 8 specimens.
No. 3.*Large, white, opaque, round necklace bead of simple construction. The glass
is porcelain-like in texture. T. 5 specimens.
No. 4.*Large, white, opaque, barrel-shaped garter bead, of compound construction.
The inner layer of glass has a porcelain-like texture, while the outer layer is clear glass
but has a slightly frosted appearance, probably due to age. T. 6 specimens.
No. 5.* Medium, white, opaque, barrel-shaped garter bead, of compound construction. The inner layer of glass has a porcelain-like texture, while the outer layer is clear
glass but has a slightly frosted appearance, probably due to age. T. 94 specimens.
No. 6* Medium, white, opaque, olive-shaped garter bead of simple construction. The
glass is porcelain-like in texture. T. 3 specimens.
No. 8.* Large, light grayish-white, semi-translucent, donut-shaped necklace bead of
simple construction. The glass has a frosted-like appearance similar to No. 7. T. 6
specimens.
No. 9.* Large, Peacock Blue, opaque, elongated, olive-shaped necklace bead of
simple construction. The glass has fine lines running lengthwise with the bead, giving
it a texture reminiscent of stripped sugarcane. T. 11 specimens.
No. 10.* Large, Peacock Blue, opaque, barrel-shaped necklace bead of simple construction. The glass has fine lines running lengthwise with the bead, giving it a texture
reminiscent of stripped sugarcane. T. 44 specimens.
No. 11.* Medium, Peacock Blue, opaque, barrel-shaped garter bead of simple construction. The glass has fine lines running lengthwise with the bead, giving it a texture
reminiscent of stripped sugar cane. T. 40 specimens.
No. 12.*Large, Turquoise Blue, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of simple construction. The glass is porcelain-like in texture. T. 1 specimen.
No. 13.* Large, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent, olive-shaped necklace bead of
simple construction. The glass is often cane-like in appearance. T. 1 specimen.
No. 14.* Medium, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent, olive-shaped garter bead of
simple construction. T. 1 specimen.
No. 15.* Medium, Gobelin Blue, opaque, barrel-shaped garter bead of simple construction. The glass is porcelain-like in texture. T. 8 specimens.
No. 20.* Large, white, opaque, elongated, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex
construction. The bead surface is covered with four dark blue stripes which are evenly

BI~NARD DE LA HARPE

2

133

14

41

56

15

44

57

20

45

60

21

47

61

48

68

23

76

6

49
24
77
5O

86

26
51

lO

28

29

12

103

53

g~: :>~

30

54
ii

13

31

55

FIGURE 9. Glass Trade Beads. Sample of trade bea ds from Site 41 B W 5.

134

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

spaced and parallel the long axis. The white glass is porcelain-like in texture. T. 1
specimen.
No. 21.* Large, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex construction.
The bead surface is covered with three blue stripes which are evenly spaced and
parallel to the long axis. The white glass is porcelain-like in texture. T. 1 specimen.
No. 23.* Large, bluish-white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex construction. The bead surface is covered with three longitudinal sets of three blue stripes
spaced evenly around the bead. The bluish-white glass is porcelain-like in texture. T. 6
specimens.
No. 24.* Large, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex construction.
Extending longitudinally across the surface of the bead are three sets of stripes, each of
which is composed of two red stripes, and between these, a blue stripe. The white glass
is porcelain-like in texture. T. 2 specimens.
No. 26.* Large, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex construction.
The bead surface is covered with three sets of three blue stripes which are twisted in an
S-shape around the bead. The white glass is porcelain-like in texture. The inner layer of
glass is bluish-white. TW. T. 3 specimens.
No. 28.* Large, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex construction.
The bead surface is covered with six rather evenly distributed red stripes which are
twisted around the bead in an S-shape. The white glass is porcelain-like in texture. TW.
T. 2 specimens.
No. 29.* Large, Emerald Green, translucent, barrel-shaped necklace bead of complex
construction. The bead surface is covered with eight white stripes, rather evenly spaced
and parallel to the long axis. T. 4 specimens.
No. 30.* Large, Brittany Blue, opaque, elongated, olive-shaped necklace bead of
complex construction. The surface of the bead is covered with three evenly spaced sets
of stripes, each of which is composed of two white stripes, and between these, a red
stripe. T. 2 specimens.
No. 31.* Large, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent, olive-shaped necklace bead of
complex construction. The surface of the bead is covered with five white stripes twisted
S-like around the bead. TW. 1 specimen.
No. 41.* Large, milk-glass, eight-faceted necklace bead of mandrel-wound, pressed
facet, simple construction. The surface sometimes appears frosted, probably due to age.
2 specimens.
No. 44.* Small, white, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of simple construction. The
glass has a porcelan-like texture. T. 108 specimens.
No. 45.* Small, white, opaque donut-shaped garter bead of compound construction.
The inner layer has a porcelain-like texture, and the outer layer is clear but has a slightly
frosted appearance, probably due to age. T. 901 specimens.
No. 46. Small, Peacock Blue, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of simple construction. The glass of this bead has a sugarcane-like texture. T. 1030 specimens.
No. 47.* Small, Gobelin Blue, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of simple construction. The glass has a porcelain-like texture. T. 36 specimens.
No. 48. Small, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent, donut-shaped garterbead of simple
construction. T. 20 specimens.
No. 49.* Small, clear, donut-shaped garter bead of simple construction. T. 6 specimens.
No. 50.* Small, black, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of simple construction. The
glass is porcelain-like in texture. T. 35 specimens.
No. 51.* Small, red, opaque {outer layer), donut-shaped garter bead of compound
construction. The outer layer of opaque glass is brick red, and the inner layer is a

B]~NARD DE LA HARPE

135

translucent light green. This bead is generally referred to as "Cornaline d’Aleppo" T. 38
specimens.
No. 53.* Large, milk-glass, translucent, round necklace bead of mandrel-wound
construction. 2 specimens.
No. 54.* Large, milk-glass, translucent, olive-shaped necklace bead of mandrelwound simple construction. 1 specimen.
No. 55.* Large, red, opaque (outer layer), tube-shaped (bugle) necklace bead of
compound construction. The outer layer of opaque glass is brick red and the inner layer
is a translucent light green. This bead is generally referred to as "Cornaline d’Aleppo,"
but in this case the bead stock was broken into tube-shaped beads. T. 4 specimens.
No. 56. * Small, Brittany Blue, opaque, tube-shaped (bugle) garter or necklace bead, of
simple construction. The glass is porcelain-like in texture. T. 6 specimens.
No. 57.* Small, red, opaque (outer layer), tube-shaped (bugle) garter or necklace bead
of compound construction. The outer layer of opaque glass is brick red and the inner
layer is translucent light green. This bead is the same as No. 55 except the diameter
equals that of a small size bead. T. 35 specimens.
No. 60.* Small, Gobelin Blue, opaque tube-shaped (bugle) garter or necklace bead of
simple construction. The glass is porcelain-like in texture. T. 3 specimens.
No. 61.* Small, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent, tube-shaped (bugle) garter or necklace bead of simple construction. T. 13 specimens.
No. 63. Small, Colonial Yellow, translucent, tube-shaped (bugle) garter or necklace
bead of simple construction. T. 2 specimens.
No. 64. Small, white, opaque, tube-shaped (bugle) garter or necklace bead of simple
construction. T. 15 specimens.
No. 65. Small, white, opaque, tube-shaped (short bugle) garter or necklace bead of
compound construction. The inner layer has a porcelain-like texture while the outer
layer has a slightly frosted appearance. UT. 62 specimens.
No. 66. Small, black, opaque, tube-shaped (bugle) garter or necklace bead of simple
construction. The glass of this bead is porcelain-like in texture. UT. 2 specimens.
No. 67. Small, red, opaque (outer layer), tube-shaped (bugle) garter or necklace bead
of complex construction. The surface of the bead is covered with three evenly spaced
sets of stripes, each of which is composed of two white stripes, and between these, a red
stripe. The inner layer is translucent light green. This appears to be a variety of
"Cornaline d’Aleppo" with addition of stripes. T. 34 specimens.
No. 68.* Small, red, opaque (outer layer), tube-shaped (bugle) garter or necklace bead
of complex construction. The surface of the bead is covered with three evenly spaced
sets of stripes, each of which is composed of two white stripes and, between these, a
chocolate brown stripe. The inner layer is translucent light green. This appears to be a
variety of "Cornaline d’Aleppo" with the addition of stripes. T. 18 specimens.
No. 69. Small, dark amber, opaque, tube-shaped (bugle) garter or necklace bead of
complex construction. The surface is covered with nine alternating red and white
stripes which run parallel to the long axis of the bead. T. 1 specimen.
No. 70. Small, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent, tube-shaped (bugle) garter or necklace bead of complex construction. The surface of the bead is covered with three evenly
spaced sets of stripes, each of which is composed of two white stripes, and between
these, a red stripe. T. 1 specimen.
No. 76.* Large, black, opaque, donut-shaped necklace bead of simple construction.
The glass is porcelain-like in texture. T. 1 specimen.
No. 77.* Large, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent, donut-shaped necklace bead of
simple construction. T. 3 specimens.

136

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

No. 78. Medium, pearly white, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of simple construction. T. 1 specimen.
No. 79. Small Sky Blue, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of simple construction. T.
30 specimens.
No. 80. Small, Peacock Blue, translucent donut- to barrel-shaped garter bead of
simple construction. T. 21 specimens.
No. 81 Small, Colonial Yellow to Brass colored, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of
simple construction. The glass often has a cane-like texture. T. 3 specimens.
No. 82. Small, Colonial Yellow to Brass colored, translucent donut-shaped garter
bead of simple construction. T. 2 specimens.
No. 83. Small, Emerald Green, translucent, donut-shaped garter bead of simple
construction. T. 11 specimens.
No. 86.* Large, brick red, opaque, donut-shaped necklace bead of compound construction. The outer layer of glass is brick red, and the inner layer is translucent light
green. This bead is generally referred to as "Cornaline d’Aleppo." T. 3 specimens.
No. 96. Medium, black, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of simple construction.
The glass is porcelain-like in texture. T. 4 specimens.
No. 97. Large, Colonial Yellow, semi-translucent, barrel-shaped necklace bead of
simple construction. T, 3 specimens.
No. 98. Medium, Colonial Yellow, semi-translucent, donut-shaped, garter bead of
simple construction. T. 3 specimens.
No. 99. Medium, Brick Red, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of compound construction. The inner layer is translucent green. This type is generally referred to as
"Cornaline d’Aleppo." T. 3 specimens.
No. 101. Medium, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace or garter bead of mandrelwound simple construction. 15 specimens.
No. 102. Medium, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace or garter bead of mandrelwound simple construction. The surface has four pressed facets. 3 specimens.
No. 103.* Medium, Harvard Crimson, translucent, olive-shaped garter or necklace
bead of mandrel-wound simple construction. 2 specimens.
No. 104. Medium, Harvard Crimson, translucent, olive-shaped necklace or garter
bead of mandrel-wound simple construction. The surface of the bead has four pressed
facets. 1 specimen.
No. 105. Medium, pink and white, opaque necklace or garter bead of mandrel-wound
construction. The surface of the bead has three pressed facets. It appears that two colors
of hot glass threads (one pink and the other white) were wound on to the mandrel at the
same time, giving the bead a marbled appearance, i specimen.
No. 106. Medium, turquoise, opaque, olive-shaped necklace or garter bead of
mandrel-wound compound construction. The outer layer of glass is turquoise and the
inner layer is white. The surface of this type is nearly always badly pitted, i specimen.
No. 107. Medium, dark Bluebird Blue, semi-translucent, olive-shaped necklace or
garter bead of mandrel-wound simple construction. 2 specimens.
No. 108. Medium, black, olive-shaped, opaque necklace or garter bead of mandrelwound simple construction. 2 specimens.
No. 115. Medium, Bluebird Blue, donut-shaped, translucent necklace or garter bead
of complex construction. On the surface are four rather evenly spaced white stripes
which run parallel with the axis of the bead core. T. 1 specimen.
No. 118. Small, white, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of complex construction.
Two red stripes and two blue stripes alternate around the bead, the stripes running
parallel with the bead axis. T. 4 specimens.

Bi~NARD DE LA HARPE

137

No. 128. Extra small, white, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of simple construction. T. 177 specimens.
No. 137. Medium, white, opaque, barrel-shaped garter bead of simple construction.
T. 6 specimens.
No. 138. Medium, Peacock Blue, translucent, barrel-shaped garter bead of simple
construction. T. 2 specimens.
No. 155. Extra small, Peacock Blue, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of simple
construction. The glass has fine lines running lengthwise with the bead, giving it a
texture reminiscent of stripped sugarcane. T. 18 specimens.
No. 169. Medium, dark Bluebird Blue, semi-translucent, "somewhat" olive-shaped
necklace or garter bead of mandrel-wound, pressed facet, simple construction. There
are eight pressed facets. 1 specimen.

DISCUSSION OF GLASS BEAD TYPES
Total:2958
La Harpe’s Nassonite Post was occupied over a relatively long time period; the total
span being from 1719 to 1778. Glass trade beads were found in association with all of
the features at the site and some over the general surface. Based on the kinds of beads
collected from the individual features, some appear to have earlier types than others.
Features 7 and 8 have beads associated with them which date to the period of establishment of the post in 1719. The bead types are: 1-6, 8-15, 20, 21,23, 24,26,28-31,41, 53
and 54. These types occur in large numbers at other Historic Period sites dating from
1700 to 1740 in their spans of known occupancy (e.g., Harris and Harris 1967:156).
Features 1-6 have bead types of a later period associated with them and therefore are
assumed to be younger than the above mentioned feature. New bead types that appear
in the trade after 1740 are: 57, 60, 61, 66-69, 76-83, 86, 87, 96, 97 and 99 (Harris and
Harris 1967:156).
An unusually large number of beads are associated with Feature 1. The numbers and
estimated age of the bead types present suggest that this may be the site of Alex
Grappe’s little fort and trading house built shortly after he settled at the site in 1737.

Shell Bead Types
No. 1. Small, white or purple banded, tube-shaped bead. The drilled hole is very
uniform in size through the bead and probably was made with a metal drill as it does not
appear hour-glass-shaped like typical Indian drilling. The bead is about 12 ram. long.
No. 2. Small, white or purple banded, tube~shaped bead. The hole is of uniform
diameter throughout. Length is about 6 mm.

DISCUSSION OF SHELL TRADE BEADS

Total: 18
Shell wampum (identification by Arthur Woodward, personal communication) at
the site is of two colors. Twelve specimens are made of dark purple shell and six are
made from white shell.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

138

Gun Parts, Gunflints, Ball and Shot*
BA CKGROUND
The process of reliably identifying the components of guns used in
the French trade continues to be in a formative stage. Hamilton
(1960a:1-15; 1960c:126; 1960e:208) pioneered this effort and proposed that certain breech and bore dimensions were indicative of guns
used in the 18th century French or English trade. Hamilton’s proposal
was substantiated and enlarged by other research involving historic
sites by Harris et al. (1965:316-341), Blaine and Harris (1966:33-81),
and Blaine (1967:163-177) wherein these and additional components
of such guns were discussed and proposed. Hamilton (1964) has now
brought together and interpreted the results of such research and
offered provisional types, affording a valuable overview of chronology and trade relationships.
These data can be most useful to the archeologist working with
historic sites but a word of caution about comparative work is necessary. Any comparison with gun parts described here, and in other
reports, should be done with discretion. An accurate interpretation of
some parts, such as a cock, can depend upon the entire historic
assemblage from the site, as well as the particular gun parts assemblage. For example, a "cock" of given appearance could represent
either French, English, or other manufacture, depending upon the
determination of its quality or age.
It is presumed that all parts described herein are from flintlocks.
Wherever the distinction can be made between flintlock and percussion, or other parts, the type invariably is flintlock in this assemblage.
The general terminology and loci of measurements follows that used
by the Harris et al. (1965), Blaine and Harris (1967) and Blaine (1967)
in discussing guns used in the 18th century trade.
Gunlock Parts
All gun parts are from Area A of the site. Provenience, unless otherwise noted, is
random surface.

Flintlock Cock
No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 3
This cock (Fig. 10A) has a wide comb with a groove in the face. The base of the cock is
flat faced with beveled edges. It is goosenecked (s-shaped) with medium general
curvature and not reinforced, The upper cock jaw and jaw screw are missing.

*The following section on gun parts, gunflints, ball and shot was authored by Jay C.
Blaine.

Bt~NARD DE LA HARPE

139

Measurements: (no major cleaning) Distance from center of tumbler hole to upper
surface of jaw, 39.0 ram.; total length, 75.0 ram.; jaw width (once edge gone),
19.0+ram.; jaw thickness (maximum at jaw screw hole), 4.3 ram.; comb width (maximum) 10.2 ram.
Frizzen
No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 3
The steel of this frizzen (Fig. 10D,D’) is curved with a beveled front face and rounded
top.
Measurements: (no major cleaning) length of steel, 41.0 mm.; width of steel, 23.0
ram.; thickness at pivot arm 8.0 mm.

Tumbler
No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 3
This tumbler (Fig. 10B) is an unbridled type with half and full cock notches and
would be used with a vertical action sear. There is no provision for stirrup or swivel.
The axle shaft has a square end and a threaded hole for the tumbler screw.
Measurements: (after major cleaning) tumbler axle shaft, 9.0 mm. diameter; body, 6.5
mm. thickness.
Sear
No. of Specimens: 1
This sear (Fig. 10C) is a vertical action type. The sear arm is at right angle to sear body;
no back rake.
Measurements: (no major cleaning) sear arm length (including ’body’ thickness),
21.8 ram.; sear body thickness, 6.2 mm.

Sear Spring
No. of Specimens:l
This fragmentary specimen is the upper leaf of a sear spring. It is broken through the
screw loop and in the bend of the spring. It would be used with a vertical action sear.
Measurements: (after major cleaning) width, 9.1 ram.; length 22.0 ram.

Mainspring
No. of Specimens: 1
This mainspring (Fig. 10E) is an internal type and is not designed for use with a
tumbler stirrup or swivel. It is broken across the screw loop.
Measurements: (no cleaning) length of upper leaf to break through screw loop, 45.0
ram.; length of lower leaf, 83.2 ram.; maximum width, 13.0 ram.

Frizzen Springs
No. of Specimens: 2
Provenience: Feature 3 (No. 1)
Frizzen spring No. 1 (Fig. 10G) was not notched for a pan strap and has no antifriction roller. It was designed for attaching to the lockplate with a hidden frizzen
spring screw.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

140

Measurements: (after cleaning) length of lower leaf to center of screw hole, 30.6 nrm.;
length of upper leaf, 43.4 ram.; maximum width (lower leaf), 9.3 ram.
Frizzen spring No. 2 (Fig. 10H) is the same in description as that above.
Measurements: (after cleaning) length of lower leaf to center of screw hole, 32.2 mm.;
length of upper leaf, 41.8 mm. Width not determined because the edges are rusted
away.

A

012545
cm

FIG URE 10. Gun Parts. A ,A ’, trigger gu ard No. 4; B,B ’, trigger gu ard No.
3; C, ramrod guide; D-I, side plates (D, No. 1;E, No. 2; F, No. 4 probable front; G, No. 4 -probable rear; H, No. 3; I, No. 5); J-M, butt
plates (J, No. 2; K, No. 3; L, No. 1. - modified into arrow point); N,
possible side plate fragment (modified into arrow point); O, Be~ton,
Type A, metal arrow point.

Bt~NARD DE LA HARPE

141

Remarks: The cock, tumbler, sear, sear spring and frizzen springs are suitable in size
and form for use on the ca. 1750 fusil as used in the French trade (Blaine and Harris
1966:35-53, Fig. 10). The frizzen is approximately 4 ram. longer in the pan cover-pivot
arm dimension than those of the 1750 French trade gun and would be suitable for an
earlier or larger (possibly military) gunlock. The mainspring also belongs in the latter
category. I cannot establish that any of these parts came from the same gunlock. The
cock and tumbler are the only parts here that would be required to fit together; these do
not.

Gun Barrel Parts

Breech Plugs
No. of Specimens: 2
Provenience: Feature 3 (No. 1)
Breech plug No. 1 (Fig. 10I) is iron and has a lateral hole through the rear body behind
the screw portion. There is a countersunk screw hole in the tang, and tang screw would
pass downward. A groove on the right face of the cylindrical portion indicates use with
a right hand lock. The tang end is pointed and has straight sides.
Measurements: (no major cleaning) plug screw length, 19 mm. (3/4"); plug screw outer
diameter, 18.7 mm.; height of rear body, 32. ram. (1 1/4").
Breech plug No. 2 (Fig. lOJ) is the rear portion of an iron breech plug. The screw
portion (barrel plug) is broken away and most of the tang is also missing.
Measurements: (no major cleaning) height, 30 mm. (about 1 3/16").
Remarks: Breech plug No. 1 is probably from the 18th century military musket. The
estimated bore size, (.65-.68), length of threaded plug and the tang end shape argue
against such presently accepted attributes of French or English 18th century trade guns
(Hamilton 1960e:208; Blaine and Harris 1966:61). The bore size and breech diameter
proposed could agree with that for Hamilton’s "Type A" French trade gun, 1680-1730
(Hamilton 1968:p. 3) but on the basis of personal observation, the "Type A" tang end is
shaped differently. Breech plug No. 2 can only be said to match the outer breech
diameter of late 17th century and 18th century French trade fusils or 18th century
military muskets.

Breech Sections
No. of Specimens: 2
Provenience: Feature 3 (No. 1)
Breech section No. 1 (Fig. 10F) is a portion of an iron gun barrel breech, octagonal,
and with breech plug in place. The breech plug tang has been hammered down against
the body of the breech plug. The touch hole is on the right side and is brass lined (a
repair, drilled off-center). The front of the breech is broken evenly and shows two layers
of metal about the bore at this point (lap forging?).
Measurements: (after cleaning) bore, slightly oval from pounding, estimated at 14.8
mm. to 15 mm.; maximum diameter of breech across flats, 28.5 mm.; total length, 67.0
mm.

Breech section No. 2 (Fig. 10K) is iron, octagonal and in two sections. The breech
plug has been removed and the breech is mushroomed at this end. The breech has been
partially collapsed by lateral pounding and the bore is not measurable. A touch hole is
present.
Measurements: (no major cleaning) breech diameter across flats, (below "mushroom"), 28.5 mm.; breech length (combined), 16.2 mm.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

142

Remarks: Breech section No. 1 is probably from an 18th century French trade gun.
The dimensions are in agreement both in caliber and breech diameter. Breech No. 2 is in
two sections. The bore is not measurable; judging by the outer breech form and
diameter it can only be said to be suitable for a 17th-18th century French trade fusil or
18th century military musket.

Barrel Section
This specimen is a flattened section of gun barrel with a longitudinal split.
Measurements: (no major cleaning) length, 10.5 mm.
Remarks: No bore size or particular affiliation can be estimated for the gun barrel
section. It was a seemingly common Indian practice to collapse discarded gun barrels
by pounding, and by bending their thin sections, separating these from the breeches. By
further pounding the barrel, or its segments, were split into halves. These flat halves
were apparently fashioned into useful articles such as awls, scrapers, and projectile
points. The smooth bore barrels used on guns in the French trade were octagonal and
thick in the breech, or chamber, area; round and thin forward of the breech. The breech
area is tapered and merges smoothly with the round forward barrel area.

Gun Mountings
Side Plates
No. of Specimens: 6
Provenience: Feature 1: No. 2, No. 4C, No. 6; Feature 3: No. 1
Side plate No. 1 (Fig. 11D) is made of cast brass, flat, with slightly beveled face edges.
It is a center portion, being broken at each end. It is engraved with single line borders
and a scalloped design with floral arrangement. There is a single side, or lock, screw
hole in the uppermost portion. It has oxidized to a black finish. The edges are slightly
undercut for inlaying.
Measurements: thickness, 1.85 mm. to 1.95 mm.; length, 73.0 mm.
Side plate No. 2 (Fig. 11E), of cast brass, is flat with edges beveled toward the interior.
It has been partially cut and then broken across the upper lock plate screw hole, and is
broken at the other end. It is engraved with scrolls and a scalloped design. The portion
of lower border remaining is contoured (fancy outline). This is a mid-section.
Measurements: thickness 1.9 mm. to 2.0 ram.; length 22.0 ram.
Side plate No. 3 (Fig. 11H) is made of flat cast brass. The plate is beveled on the
exterior face along the top and bottom. The edges bevel toward the interior for inlaying.
This is a front section, broken across the widest portion ahead of the location of the
upper lock plate screw. The front end is broken across the front lock plate screw hole. It
is engraved with a simple abstract design containing three ellipses, one large and two
small.
Measurements: thickness, 1.5 mm. to 1.7 mm.; length, 57.0 mm.
Side plate No. 4 (Fig. 11F,G) includes two sections, probably fragments of the same
side plate, and is made from flat cast brass. The edges bevel toward the interior. The
shorter piece is part of the front section; the longer piece is part of the rear section. It is
engraved along the borders with double parallel lines and with a foliate design in the
rear section. This side plate is for a two side screw lockplate.
Measurements: thickness (shorter piece) 1 mm.; length 22.0 ram; thickness (longer
piece) 1 mm.-1.4 mm.; length 44.0 mm.
Side plate No. 5 (Fig. 11I) is made of flat, cast brass. The face edges are beveled. This is
a rear part of the side plate and is broken across both ends. It is poorly engraved; the
design was apparently a bow and quiver motif.

B!~NARD DE LA HARPE

143

Measurements: thickness, 0.7 mrn. to 1.0 ram.; length 23.0 rnm.
Specimen No. 6 (Fig. 11N) is a possible side plate fragment and was made into a
point. It is made of cast, flat brass, and was engraved. Basal edges are chisel or knife cut
and lightly roughened. It is broken above the widest portion (across the blade). The
engraving motif is not identified.
Measurements: thickness 0.9 ram. to 1.0 ram.; length 20.0 ram.
Remarks: Side plate No. 1 matches well in size, form and general decorative technique to examples believed typical of the ca. 1750 French trade guns (Harris et al.
1965:327-332; Blaine and Harris 1966:68-71). The engraved design features what I
believe is a conventionalized sea shell from which floral elements extend. This cockelshell or scallop motif appears to be one of importance in French trade gun decoration. I
have seen eleven side plate examples from Texas and Oklahoma sites alone. The
"conventionalized" sea shell detail on these side plates has proven difficult to identify.
Elsewhere the author referred to such as a "design which, solely for descriptive
purposes, may be said to resemble an inverted wicker basket" (Blaine 1967:172, Fig.
55,g), and "what appears to be a basket containing a plant" (Blaine and Harris 1966:69,
Fig. 38h). When used on French trade side plates the sea shell element is roughly
"centered" on the upper screw hole; the Gilbert specimen (ibid.) is an exception to the
rule. In addition, there frequently are two floral (sometimes floral-foliate) elements
extending from the shell border, lending design balance to the front and rear areas of the
side plate. Customarily the engraver has rendered the shells’ narrowly spaced radial
ridges, and/or a simplistic version of the scale-like processes that often cover the ridges
on some shells. Invariably the scalloped or crimped shell edge is emphasized. Sometimes compounding the identification problems are such general gun decoration motifs
as "sun ray" or "sun burst." However, these usually exhibit a spiked or multi-pointed
appearance and are sometimes contained within areas with a smooth circular (not
scalloped) border. Thus far I have not encountered the latter motifs on French trade gun
parts.
I believe this particular side plate decoration, as a frequent motif on guns associated
with the French trade, probably dates from ca. 1750. To date only one atypical side plate
decoration of this nature has been found at the Gilbert site. This French trade oriented
site demonstrably had some occupation at least as late as 1749, according to the date on
a coin (Harper et al. 1966: Fig. 44, g; 94). The earliest dated side plate I am aware of
which suggests this motif is on a Spanish gun dated 1724 (Neal 1955: Fig. 11). This
particular firearm follows French styling in general form and decoration. Some details
of the side plate decoration strongly suggest to me that this gun, or yet unpublished
French guns or gun decoration pattern sheets, could have been a direct inspiration for
sundry details on the patterns of De Marteau dating 1743 and 1749 (Lenk 1965:P1.
130,1-2). In any case, rococo decoration showing the strong use of crimped sea shell
and/or sea shell-scroll details on fine guns generally dates after the publication of De
Marteau’s patterns. Examples occur through and beyond the rest of the 18th century; for
instances of these see Lenk 1965 (P1.93,3); Neal 1965 (P1.20; P1.24; P1.30; P1.56). The
general availability and use of this motif for decoration of common grade guns probably
dates from De Marteau’s 1749 sheet, which also appears to be the most suitable for
copying by the less skilled engravers. The use of such pattern sheets to help identify the
sources and starting times for major use of particular firearm decoration has been
discussed by Harris et al. (1965:318-320), Blaine and Harris (1966:71) and Hamilton
(1968:13). Boudriot illustrates a gunlock from the French model 1754-59 infantry
officers "Fusil" which is engraved in this fashion (Boudriot 1963: P1.6, P1.7).
The decorative motif of crimped shell work, often combined with ’C’ scrolls, is a
rococo style ornamentation. The use of "rococo" style ornamentation on quality French
firearms began in the 1730’s (Hayward 1963:48). In describing some rococo ornaments
executed on fine weapons with this particular type of detail the term "rocaille" has

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

144

A

¢

D

G

\\

lI

N

o

cm

FIGURE 11. Gun Parts. A, flintlock cock; B, unbridled tumbler; C, sear;
D,D’, steel frizzen; E, mainspring (internal); F,K, breech sections; G,H,
frizzen springs; I3, breech plugs.

Bt~NARD DE LA HARPE

145

been selectively used by Hayward (1963:112,238, P1.67 a,b; PI.75 a; P1.80). The general
category is rococo but, according to the McGraw-Hill Dictionary of Art (1969:529-530),
the French reserve the term "style rocaille" for their own creations. For these, and other
reasons, it would be unsuitable to use the term rocaille when describing the simplified
decoration of the less than fine firearms and of unknown actual origin reported here.
Authoratively described "rocaille style" work shows that usual kev elements are ’C’
and/or ’S’ scrolls fringed with sea shell edges or texturi~ng (Allemagne
1968:122,203,204). Such compositions also may contain the representation of a sea
shell itself. However, the rendition of a sea shell (i.e. the scallop or cockle), without
shell fringed ’C’ or ’S’ scrolls, does not qualify the design as basically rocaille.
Side plate No. 2 also has a sea shell design centering on the upper lock plate screw
hole. No floral or foliate design elements show on this fragment. The decorative
contouring of the lower edge of the plate is slight in degree and uncommon in most
unfretted flat side plates (Hamilton 1968: Fig. 6). This particular feature could reflect an
earlier fashion, that is, that of the fretted and well-contoured side plates as used on
French trade guns ca. 1720 (Harris et al., 1965:327-332, Fig. 13). Nonetheless, I believe
the cockleshell motif dates it in the second half of the 18th century as used on guns
associated with the French trade. Furthermore, it could occur with diminishing frequency to as late as the 1790’s, at which time the Spanish forbade trade between the
Texas Indians and the Louisiana traders.
Side plate No. 3 shows decoration simplified to the degree it could be called abstract.
The ’V’ shaped element at the forward end of the under portion occupies the same
position as a similarly oriented ribbon on Gilbert Site specimens (Blaine and Harris
1966: Fig. 38,g,i). Small, isolated eliptical elements such as the three present here are
often seen on side plate, butt plate tangs, finial necks, and other areas on French trade
gun mounts. The small "v" adjacent to the front lock screw hole occupies a side plate
area commonly decorated with a foliate element which also is essentially v-shaped,
wide at the base and tapering toward the rear. Because of these features I suspect it to be
one of the imitative but greatly stylized decorations that sometimes occur on these
guns.
Side plate No. 4, as noted, is represented by two sections. The plate between these is
missing; however, the double parallel lines along the upper and lower borders of the
recovered sections match precisely in engraving technique (one deep and heavy, the
other light) and both fragments are unbeveled (an uncommon characteristic) on the face
edges. Since the rear portion is intact, we know the conformation of this plate and we
may infer use with a two side screw lock, one in the front and one on the upper center.
This is common in French trade guns (Blaine and Harris 1966:36-51). The use of a
foliate element in the rear of the plate is a common form of decoration.
Side plate No. 5, like the above, was part of a flat and unfretted side plate. Design
elements featuring combinations of bow, quiver, club and arrows are frequent on, but
not restructed to, French trade guns in use by ca. 1750 (Blaine and Harris 1966:65-66,
Figs. 36,38).
Specimen No. 6 is, as noted, possibly the remains of a side plate which has been made
into a projectile point.
There is physical evidence that the gunlocks and the brass side plates used on French
trade guns were not manufactured in close collaboration. It frequently appears that
there was difficulty in adapting the side plate to the gunlock side screws. For example.
often placement for the front screw hole in the side plate was forced partially off the
plate, resulting in a semicircular notch instead of a proper hole (Fig. 11H). That this was
an unplanned or expedient procedure is verified by its evident violation of visual
balance originally present in form and decoration of the side plate. Moreover, in such
cases the side screw head then bears on a partial or badly off-center "washer".

146

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Admittedly, it was a common 18th century practice to bring together gun components from various sources and assemble them. However, the mismatching cited here,
plus other evidence, strongly suggests many of these brass components were in a sense
mass produced. As such they would form an economical source for gun assemblers
dealing in military and common grade French trade firearms.
Butt Plates
No. of Specimens: 4
Provenience: Feature 1: No. 1, No. 2, No. 3
Butt plate No. 1 (Fig. 11L) is a butt plate heel-tang fragment. It is made of brass, with a
portion of engraved design showing an unstrung bow and "quiver" (base of club?). The
fragment has been formed into an arrow head. The stem edges were formed by chisel
cuts and the blade edges bifacially tapered to sharpness by hammering and grinding.
There are hammer marks present over the entire surface and the tip is broken.
Measurements: thickness, 1.2 ram. to 1.8 mm.; length, 39.0 ram.
Butt plate No. 2 (Fig. J} also is a butt plate heel-tang fragment. It is of cast brass and
broken at both ends across the butt plate tang and heel. It is engraved with a crimped
shell scroll design and has been hammered flat.
Measurements: thickness, maximum, 1.9 ram.; width, maximum, 49.0 ram.
Butt plate No. 3 (Fig. 11K) is a brass butt plate section which has been formed into a
large projectile point or a "knife". It has a bifacially sharpened blade. The stem is
roughly chiseled to edge sharp, with hack marks across the edges, making the edges
rough. The surfaces have been hammered or pounded.
Measurements: length, 84.0 mm.; width, maximum, 21.0 mm.; thickness, maximum,
1.9 mm.
Butt plate No. 4 (Fig. 11M) is another butt plate tang-finial fragment. It is flat, cast
brass, with a portion of engraved design featuring what appears to be an idealized tulip
blossom and portions of scrolls. The base of the fastening tongue is present. The
fragment has been made into a projectile point with the sides of the stem formed by
chisel cuts. Small additional cuts were made at right angles to the edge, probably to aid
in hafting. The blade edges and rounded tip are bifacially sharpened.
Measurements: thickness, 1.2 mm. to 2.4 ram.; length 30.0 ram.
Remarks: Butt plate No. 1 is decorated with an unstrung bow, quiver and what
probably is the base of a club. As noted above, this motif was frequently used in
decoration of the ca. 1750 French trade guns.
Butt plate No. 2 (Fig. 11J) is especially noteworthy in its decoration. This is essentially a crimped shell with scroll which almost certainly was copied directly from the
pattern sheet by de Marteau dated 1749 (Hayward 1962:P1.94). It is also possible, but not
as likely, that De Marteau’s pattern sheet of 1743 (Lenk 1965:1~1.130-1) was the direct
inspiration. Other possibilities are discussed above under the remarks on side plates
concerning the French style Spanish gun of 1724. However, the obvious availability,
wide usage and nature of De Marteau’s patterns for gun decoration argue for their
position as the likeliest source.
It is believed that this butt plate belongs with the post ca. 1750 guns associated with
the French trade. I am presently aware of eight other butt plate specimens with this
scroll-shell motif on their tangs. Five are from the Spanish Fort sites in Texas and
Oklahoma. The projected design (Fig. 11J) is based on one of the Spanish Fort exampies. Hamilton (1968: Fig. 7,D) and Good (1971:P1.8,c) each illustrate additional speci-

Bt~NARD DE LA HARPE

147

mens. Significantly, only one example has been found to date at theca. 1750 Gilbert site
(personal observation). Doubtless many more can be identified in other collections.
Minor variations in this motif are in its placement and orientation; usually shell
down when placed at the junction with the finial neck. and shell up when based below.
In the latter position the shell usually perches atop an enigmatic partial or full engraved
circle. It seems likely this circle is relict to the position and decoration of a butt plate
screw in use during an earlier fashion (Lenk 1965:P1.124-2). The shell-scroll may be
used by itself, with another, and with varied military-trophy like combinations of
banners, spears, bugle and club. Floral or foliate elements sometimes extend from the
scalloped edge. It seems likely the crimped shell decorated side plate and crimped
shell-scroll butt plate saw contemporaneous use; possibly often on the same gun.
Butt plate No. 3 (Fig. 11K) does not offer any special data beyond demonstrating one
secondary utilization of a butt plate body.
Butt plate No. 4 (Fig. 11 H), as noted, shows what resembles an idealized tulip. The
"tulip", as rendered here, is not an uncommon minor detail in gun decoration of the
18th century, including French trade guns.

Ramrod Guide
No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 6
This guide (Fig. 11C,), of sheet brass, is either an intermediate or upper ramrod guide.
It is tubular with longitudinal facets and was split or cut evenly lengthwise and
reformed into a cylinder of smaller diameter. There are two parallel grooves filed
around, and adjacent to, each end. A remnant of one flange remains with the bottom
half of a hole for pin fastener present. Immediately below the partial hole another
complete hole has been made.
Measurements: length, 22.8 mm.
Remarks: This ramrod guide is the same as those believed typical of the ca. 1750
French trade guns (Blaine and Harris 1966:56-58; Fig. 35, h,i).

Trigger Guards
No. of Specimens: 6
Provenience: Feature 1: No. 3; Feature 2: No. 4; Feature 6: No. 3; Feature 7: No. 5.
Trigger guard No. 1 is a probable tang fragment. It is of cast brass, broken at both ends
and piano-convex in cross section. The convex surface has been hammered.
Measurements: width, maximum, 13.5 mm.; thickness, maximum, 2.4 mm.; length
23.0 mm.
Trigger guard No. 2 is the rear tang of a cast brass trigger guard. It is piano-convex in
section and has been bent into a "U" shape, with the convex surface inside. It is broken
across one end, the other end smoothed (as for a bracelet,) and has been heavily
hammered.
Measurements: width, maximum, 11.8 ram.; thickness, 2.2 ram.; length, 10 cm.
Trigger guard No. 3 (Fig. 11, B,B’)is a cast brass front tang, broken across the neck of
the finial and across the lower end of the bow. The fastening tongue on the underside is
broken across the pin hole. One edge is evenly nicked (saw?). The bow remnant shows a
single line engraved along and parallel to the right border. There are wide bevels on the
tang.
Measurements: width, maximum (front), 15.6 ram.; thickness at this point, 2.2 ram.

148

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Trigger guard No. 4 (Fig. 11A,A’) is a fragmentary specimen of cast brass. It is broken
across the bow and across the front tang near the bow. A front fastening tongue is on the
under surface. The bow is engraved with a scalloped line and with a ticked line along
each side. A central design existed but only one foliate scroll portion can be seen. There
is an uncommon boss or protrusion at the front base of the bow.
Measurements: maximum width of bow present, 19.2 mm.; thickness, same location,
1.6 mm.
Trigger guard No. 5 is a badly oxidized iron trigger guard finial.
Measurements: length, 26.0 ram.; width, 11.0 ram.
Trigger guard No. 5 is a badly oxidized iron finial.
Measurements: length, 51.0 mm.; width, 10.0 mm.
Remarks: Trigger guard No. 1, being piano-convex in section, does not appear to be
typical of those believed commonly employed on French trade guns in the period ca.
1720-1750 (Harris et al. 1965:327; Blaine and Harris 1966:80-81). It is noteworthy in
that two pieces of this particular tang have been found. The other fragment is from the
Womack Site (Harris et al., 1965:326, Fig. 12,L).
Trigger guard No. 2 also is a form (piano-convex in section) not held to be typical of
late 17th or 18th century French trade guns.
Trigger guard No. 3, in the portion here, is typical in form of those used on the ca.
1720-1750 French trade gun.
Trigger guard No. 4 is unusual in two respects. The combination of engraved scalloped line and inner ticked line bordering each beveled side of the bow form a
decoration I have not seen before. The boss, or protrusion, at the front base of the bow is
worth special note. A similar attribute occurs on one trigger guard from the Pearson Site
(Duffield and Jelks 1961:Fig. 13, U,V). I believe these guards were cast in molds
originally designed for light military type trigger guards. Originally this protrusion
was functional and, drilled through laterally, served as the base for a sling swivel. This
particular form is found on 18th century military shoulder arms. Some models of the
latter, described as "German-Dutch" in origin (Neuman 1967:M.40, M.41), have trigger
guards which share some similarities with those of various French 18th century light
military models and guns commonly in the French trade (Blaine and Harris 1966:81).
The importance of the Dutch as actual manufacturers of common or military firearms in
the 17th and 18th centuries is difficult to establish, but their major position as traders in
the export of arms is certain (Hayward 1963:158). I believe a major brass founding
center such as Liege (Hayward 1963:165) may well have produced quantities of the
brass furniture used in assembling the "German-Dutch" and other firearms cited above,
possibly including some of the French trade guns.
Trigger guard No. 5 is a front finial for a trigger guard. Iron trigger guards apparently
saw minor use on French trade guns throughout the period of French trade. They are
often quite similar in general form to the typical cast brass specimens (Blaine and Harris
1966:79, Fig. 40,F).
Trigger guard No. 6 may be either a rear finial from an iron trigger guard, or possibly
the tang of a large terminal rampipe. The former is the more likely identification.

Metal Arrow Points
The site yielded four metal points that are presumed to be "arrow" points, and one
large specimen that cannot be classed in the same category. Three of the specimens are
made from brass gun furniture (Fig. 11L-N) and the large specimen (Fig. 11K) also
comes from that source. The fourth "arrow" point (Fig. 110) is made of iron. All of these

Bt~NARD DE LA HARPE

149

smaller points can be classified as the "Benton Type A". This type of metal point is
estimated to date between the mid-18th and mid-19th centuries and is found associated
with Norteno Focus sites of the southern plains (Harris et al. 1965:30-31,32).

Gun Flints

Spall Gunflints
Gunflints of this form have been referred to as "wedge-shaped spalts" (Witthoft in
Hamilton 1960b:74), "gunspalls" (Hamilton 1960b:76; 1964:52-57), and "spalt gunflints" (Maxwell and Binford 1961:100; Harris et el. 1965:341-343; Blaine and Harris
1966:81-84; Blaine 1967:177-179; Stone 1970:9). Witthofi (1966:25-28) now designates
such gunflints as "Dutch" and Hamilton (personal communication) agrees with this
choice.
Witthoft (1966:25-26) has found the range of colors and materials common to the
"Dutch" gunflints matches uniquely with those found in the Riss glacial outwash and
believes the Low Countries are the origin of all these particular wedge-shaped gunflints. Minor exceptions are described by Hamilton (1964:53) and Witthoft (1966:
30,37).
Such gunflints were first described as struck individually from rounded cobbles
(Hamilton 1960b:73-79). The Harrises and Blaines (Harris et al. 1965:341-343) described examples struck frmn prepared cores, and the technology is discussed by Blaine
and Harris (1966:82-83) and Witthoft (1966:26-28).
Witthoft has also furnished statistical data on the technology of the wedge-shaped
gunflints (1966:26-27). In the sample from this site, thirty-six have intact striking
platforms. Thirty of these (83%) have one facet (plane) platforms and six (17%) have two
facet platforms.
The concave (relatively flat) face of a "Dutch" gunflint is produced on the core by the
prior removal of other gunflints (ibid.) and dressing flakes (Harris et el. 1965:341-343;
Blaine and Harris 1966:81-83). In the sample from this site twenty-eight specimens
have intact concave faces. Of these, seventeen (61%) show one scar and eleven (39%)
have two or more such scars.
These figures do not closely match those given by Witthoft, but all of the majorityminority relationships are in agreement. Witthoft’s percentages are based on large
samples and this sample, from one site, is probably too small for reliable statistical
comparison. The major significance of all such evidence is pointed out by Witthoft
(1966:26); each core reduced by the "Clactonian" technique produces relatively few
gunflints. Waste is high in proportion to finished product. The production of gunflints
of uniformity and desired various sizes must be accomplished in a relatively random
fashion.
There are seventy "Dutch" gunflints from this site. Sixty (Group A) show no signs of
thermal altering, and ten (Group B) do display significant exposure to heating fire, i.e.
are badly pocked or checked with cracks.
In Group A, 52% are light, medium and dark shades of tan in color. Forty percent are
gray to gray-black. Most of the remaining eight percent range from light gray to whitish
in color. The range of colors in Group A correspond with those of specimens whose
source is identified by Witthoft (1966:25-26) as the Riss glacial outwash of the Low
Countries.
Most of Group B has probably undergone color change through the evident thermal
action. The colors are whitish, gray and light pink.
Five of the "Dutch" gunflints have been reshaped in typical native Indian fashion.
Their primary origin is established on the basis of material, color, and some evidence of
the original technology.

150

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Eleven specimens are notched in a fashion similar to those flints used with a
fire-steel.
Measurements of the nineteen reasonably intact examples shows width clustering
between 28.6 ram. and 30.2 mm. (64%), and length clustering between 20.6 ram. and
22.2 ram. (64%). Width range is 25.4 mm. to 38.1 mm. Length range is 17.5 mm. to 28.6
nlm.

The width of gunflints, as used herein, refers to measurements taken across the
striking edge, and the length refers to measurement from the striking edge to the back or
heel.
The width measurements show a common but perplexing fact. These wedge-shaped
gunflints usually appear too wide (over 25.4 ram.) for a "proper fit" in the gunlocks of
the 18th century French trade. Frizzens on such gunlocks usually measure less than
25.4 mm. in width. The same observation applies to the 18th century French "blade"
gunflints. Witthoft (1966:37) in comparing the British and French gunflint industries,
suggests a paramount position for the French shops in production of military flints. It
seems likely to me that both wide "Dutch" gunflints, as well as "wide French"
gunflints found in Indian sites were produced originally for military needs, hence
"sized" for large gunlocks. It is important to distinguish between the French gunflints
and the flints they produced for use with fire steel. Witthoft (1966:30) states that most
French blade flints produced before 1760 were designed for the fire steel, double edge,
and usually wider than gunflints. Most of the "Dutch" gunflint groups I have examined
from 18th century Indian sites in Texas contain some smaller specimens suitable for the
French trade gunlocks, but the larger specimens usually predominate.

Blade Gunflints
There are eleven French blade gunflints made of the typical yellowish or "blond"
French flint of waxy lustre in varying shades. Two are relatively intact and seven,
although battered, exhibit the basic prismatic blade technique fundamental to their
manufacture. The remaining two specimens are bifacialty re-worked in good native
Indian style.
French (and English) blade gunflints were made by cross-sectioning prismatic
blades of flint which had been struck from carefully prepared cores. Previously I have
referred to such as the "conventional" form of gunflint (Harris et al. 1965:341-343;
Blaine and Harris 1966:81-84; Blaine 1967:178-179) as made in France and England.
However, the use of national designations for gunflints has become intrenched in the
literature. It remains important to note that such use of terms as "Nordic", "Dutch",
"French", and "English" indicates the probable manufacturing source but not necessarily direct trade from that source. Hamilton (1960b:74-75) and Witthoft (1966:24) give
discussion pertinent to such labeling problems.
One of the two intact French gunflints shows reaction bulbs at the bed (face opposite
to the convex face) and, although retouched, clearly recognizable undercut fractures on
both sloping sides as a result of blade segmenting, or trimming of the gunflint; the other
shows this attribute on one side only. These particular technological attributes are
recognizable on nine other French gunflint specimens I have examined from Texas and
Oklahoma site collections of R. K. Harris and myself alone. Eight are from sites whose
contents at present cannot be dated exclusively within the 18th century, although the
major occupation did take place within that period. The ninth, however, is from the
Gilbert Site (Blaine and Harris 1966:33-86) where I believe there is no reason to suspect
occupation after the 1760’s. Woodward (1960:31) quotes Knowles concerning such
technological features. In substance Knowles states the French knappers did not produce side trimming based on single blow undercut fractures and (between 1838-48)

B!~NARD DE LA HARPE

151

sent their gunflints to Brandon for such trimming. Witthoft (1966:36) in discussing
British technology, describes the demi-cone (reaction bulb) "on the scar of the micro
burin blow" as a major attribute in identifying the British gunflint manufacturing
technique. Witthoft (1966:32) in recognizing evidence of this technique on some
"French flints" used in 1812, designates them as hybrid, i.e. "made in France and
finished in England".
Both the British and the French knappers placed their blades over a chisel edged
"stake" or "cutter" when segmenting them into gunflints (Woodward, quoting
Knowles, 1951:30-31; Smith 1960:59). According to Knowles (Woodward 1960:31)
when the blade is struck from above in the segmenting operation the "stake" beneath
produces a reaction bulb (demi-cone, knot, mark of percussion). It would appear that
the blade segmenting operation by either British or French knappers can produce the
reaction bulb. Clearly, reaction bulbs and undercut fractures could result with frequency. The British knappers ultimately sought to produce a single undercut (sloping
side) fracture which would require little or no retouch. Successful attempts are shown
on the finest quality British gunflints and, presumably, the "micro burin" technique
described by Witthoft (1966:30) was employed here. These are comparatively rare
among British gunflints I have examined from Indian sites. More common are examples
showing the basic technique with reaction bulb but with frequent secondary trimming
(sometimes extensive) to straighten the sides and back.
The French knappers product does appear relatively indifferent to any attempt to
produce the "classic" single blow side fracture. The shaping of their typical rounded
back gunflint normally would call for a more extensive degree of secondary trimming
than that required by the British knapper for the square back gunflint. It appears this
would frequently, but not always, remove any reaction bulb and tend to obscure any
primary undercut fracture. However, these two attributes do occur on what I believe are
totally French-made 18th century gunflints and, therefore, should not automatically
cause specimens with such attributes to be assigned among those sent from France to
Brandon in the 19th or 18th centuries. The two French gunflint specimens from this
site, showing the above critical attributes, are not to be classed as fine grade or specially
select in any other sense. They are ordinary French blade gunflints of military musket
size, with the typical rounded back and single striking edge. Both measure 28.6 ram. in
width. One is 24.9 ram. long and the other is 26.1 ram.

Possible Gunflints - Native Indian
There are three possible gunflints in this group. Two are sub-rectangular, roughly
bifaced, and one is a flake or "spall" which has been thinned at the heel and has lateral
edge trimming.
The lithic material is varied but none appears to match European sources. One
specimen has apparently been in a fire, one is quartzite-like, and one (the "spall") is a
black jasper. Both of the latter materials can be found in the adjacent Red River gravels.
Remarks: Eighty-one gunflints are of European origin. There are no British specimens. The absence of British gunflints is probably significant. It is the opinion of
Witthoft (1966:36) that the archeological evidence to date indicates British gunflints do
not appear prior to the 1770’s.
Seventy gunflints are classified as "Dutch". Witthoft (1966:25,29) believes the production of this wedge-shaped gunflint starts about 1650 and that they dominated until
the 1770’s when the blade gunflint came into prominence.
The eleven "blade" gunflints are all French in origin. According to Witthoft
(1966:28) some French blade gunflints were being produced by 1675 but exportation in
significant quantity would not occur before 1740. Witthoft (1960:74; 1966:28-29) and

152

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Hamilton (1960:74-79; 1964:53-55) have indicated the proportion of one European type
gunflint to another in a site may offer a valuable index for estimating occupation dates.
Witthoft (1960:74) noted the proportion of "wedge-shaped spalls" (Dutch) to French
gunf!ints was about equal for sites of the French and Indian war period (1755-63). His
later findings (1966:28-29) indicate the Dutch gunflints remain in the majority through
and beyond that period. Stone’s data from Fort Michilimakinac (1970:20) indicates the
Dutch gunflint remained "in common usage" during the period 1761-81 when that
Michigan post was under British control. The results of Hamilton’s research with dated
sites (personal communication) continued to support the approximately equal ratio for
the 1755-63 period. In 1758, according to data given in Peterson (1956:331), a supply
request from French Canada would indicate gunflints for fowling pieces".., to arm the
Indians" were considered a separate class from "clear and transparent flints" for
muskets. The former probably were the smaller size of "Dutch" gunflints and, in this
instance, ordered in a twenty to one ratio over the, presumably, French blade gunflints.
In view of the above data and opinions concerning ratios it appears that variables
such as military vs. non-military and trade orientation of the sample cannot yet be
adequately evaluated toward use in general applications. In our area the present lack of
sufficient comparative data from discretely stratified historic sites of the 18th century
prevents direct comparison with the above hypothesis. The Gilbert Site (occupied
about 1750) does offer a useful sample in quantity; the ratio of Dutch to French gunflints
is slightly over two to one (32 to 13). At the Vinson Site which should date later in the
18th century, according to the firearms sample (personal observation), the ratio of
Dutch to French gunflints is about three to one (11 to 3).
Based upon such results from these and other 18th century historic Indian sites it is
suspected that our western part of the French trade oriented area will show the "Dutch"
gunflint predominating until after about 1770. Further, I suspect it could subsequently
have continued to appear in the trade after being supplanted in military and civilian
use. This was a nondeteriorating commodity produced in vast quantities; it seems
reasonable to anticipate a terminal distribution in numbers (military surplus?) may
occur in the trade periphery after approximately 1770. For these reasons the seven to
one ratio of Dutch to French gunflints from the sample from the Nassonite Post area
cannot in itself, I believe, be a reliable indication of 17th or major early 18th century
occupation. The number of French gunflints does seem to indicate some substantial
post-1740 activity, and the complete lack of English gunflints (within a major artery of
travel) suggests a cessation of major occupation by the 1770’s.
The European gunflint count is unusually large in proportion to the number of native
Indian gunflints and to the firearms sample. In addition, the majority of the European
gunflints have not been utilized, re-worked, or worn out to the discard stage usually
encountered in our Indian sites. Approximately 10% of both the Dutch and French
gunflints are virtually unused. We may speculate that a source of European gunflints
was immediately available to this site, however, more extensive controlled excavation
is necessary for a reliable evaluation. This is also true for the firearms sample.

Shot
Provenience: All area A, random surface
No. of Specimens: 56
In this report all spherical bullets below 90 grains in weight and .40 inches in
diameter are assigned to the shot category. For comparison, these spherical pellets are
categorized according to named sizes and weights given in an early table by Ezekiel
Baker (1780-1832) as given in J. N. George (1947:211).
Shot of the same weight and size can have several different designations according to

BI~NARD DE LA HARPE

153

the manufacturer, time period, and country of origin. In fact, according to Greener
(1910:614), in one period shot tables for the cities of Paris, Lyons, and Marseilles had
widely varying numbers of pellets (hence individual pellet weights) assigned to the
same "size". Compounding the issue was the individual manufacturers own range of
different weight pellets allowable within a given size (Greener 1910:610-611). The
foregoing comments concern "dropped" shot in later times, rather than those we are
probably dealing with in this site, but I suspect an equal lack of uniform standards
among all kinds of shot prevailed from the beginning.
According to George (1947:209), dropped shot rapidly replaced milled shot upon the
market after 1769. Before that time large shot were cast in molds and the smaller sizes
were produced by cutting sheet lead into cubes which then were tumbled ("milled") in
iron drums to round off the corners. The minimum practical size for cast shot is
uncertain but early specimens assigned to "swan" size are illustrated by Hamilton
(1960:Fig. 27).
As Greener explains (1910:610-611}, "dropped" pellets whose shape and uniformity
varied from the ideal were still being placed upon the market at the turn of this century.
I have no reason to doubt this was the case from the time of invention in 1769. One
cannot be certain if many smaller shot from a site have been fired or not. The soft lead
normally distorts when fired, but, as noted above, shape can vary even among unfired
pellets. Identifying any dropped shot that belongs with the early site occupation can be
important for it will indicate post 1769 activity. I am not yet familiar with any reliable
visual criteria for identifying commercially manufactured drop shot. Chemical analysis
may offer promise as it was necessary to mix antimony or arsenic with the lead used in
this process (George 1947:209).
The early practice was to grade shot in size with separation done by passing shot
through a series of different size "screens". Thus separated, they were labeled a given
shot "size" according to the number of pellets per ounce or other weight. Obviously,
this too resulted in varying individual pellet weights in a given size. Close matches
between site specimens and listed "sizes" will expectedty be rare and the range
between listed sizes allowed by screen grading can only be estimated.
One possible indication of Indian preference for certain shot sizes is shown by "shot
sieves" being reported from a late historic Indian site (containing flintlock gun parts) by
Howard (1972:296).
By their physical appearance, all shot listed in the table seem not to be modern. Some
five specimens did appear modern and have been eliminated from the study. One
specimen, No. 50, is still definitely recognizable as one of the early "cubes" and was
tumbled just enough to remove the corners.

SHOT TABLE

All Area A,
SPECIMEN
NO.
33
34

MEASUREMENT

WEIGHT

(INCHES)

(GRAINS)
69.85
65.85+

Random Surface
COMMENT

ADAPTION
E.BAKER TABLE
small buck
small buck+

Fired
Underweight. Fired
Underfilled mold
Conical with 6 longitudinal facets on sides?

35

62.35

36

46.33

swan drops

37

44.21+

swan drops+

Fired
Fired. Weight loss obvious

38

39.74

swan drops

Fired

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

154

SHOT TABLE (Continued)
All Area A,

Random Surface

SPECIMEN

MEASUREMENT

WEIGHT

ADAPTION

NO.

(INCHES)

(GRAINS)
28.64+

E.BAKER TABLE
swan drops+

39

26.76
15.84
14.46
12.09
11.97
11.97
8.62
8.62
8.50
8.13

4O
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49

5O
51

,166

52
53
54
55

.160

56
57
58
59
6O
61
62

.156

.155

63
64
65
66
67
68
69
7O
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
8O
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88

.147

.138

.130

6.75
6.38
6.13
5.63
5.50
5.25

goose drops
duck shot
duck shot
BB
BB
BB
B
B
B
B+
B
B
B
No. 1
No. 1
No. 1

COMMENT
Air cavity in shot
Underweight. Cast
Fired
Fired
Fired
Fired
Fired
Fired
Fired
Fired
Fired
Fired. Rodent gnawed.
Weight loss obvious
Cuboid
Fired. Ovoid. Possibly cast
Ovoid. Possibly cast
"Tear" shape. Dropped shot?
Ovoid. Possible sprue
scar. Cast?

5.25

No. 1

5.13

No, 1

5.00

No. 1

Ovoid. Possibly cast
Ovoid. Possibly cast

5.00

No. 1

Fired

5.00

No, 1

5.00

No. 1

4.63

No. 2

4.50

No. 2

Ovoid

4.25

No. 2

4.13

No. 2

Fired
Fired

4.00

No. 2

Fired

3.88

No. 2

3.75

No. 2

3.38

No. 3

3.38

No. 3

3.25

No. 3

3.25

No. 3

3.25

No. 3

3.13

No. 3

3.13

No. 3

3.00

No. 4

3.00

No. 4

2.88

No, 4

2.75

No. 4

2.63

No. 4

2.38

No. 5

2.38

No. 5

2.25

No. 5

2.13

No. 5

2.13

No. 5

1.88

No. 5

1.75

No. 6

1.63

No. 7

Fired
Fired
Fired

Fired
Fired
Fired

Fired
Fired
Fired

Bt~NARD DE LA HARPE

155

Balls
One intermediate goal in analyzing the spherical bullets from a site is an attempt to
determine the probable bore sizes of the guns they were used with. This in turn may
help identify and date the trade, military, or other sources of such weapons. Ultimately
it can be hoped that such data will be matched with the translations of contemporary
documents dealing with trade or other contact with the site area and help shed light on
its inhabitants and their activities.
There are numerous pitfalls in analysis of these bullets. The following procedure was
followed for this report:
1. All specimens were weighed, despite examples of mutilation and sometimes very
obvious weight loss. By comparison with the median known weights of unfired lead
balls, at least the minimum size of a fired ball can be estimated. This cannot be
precise. Even today molds cast balls which will deviate from true spheres, hence vary
in weight. The quality of lead and alloys varies, also varying the weight. Sprue
cutting also contributes to weight variation.
2. Specimens were measured where it appeared no obvious distortion had occurred
through firing or other agencies. Careful measurement offers the best chance to
identify the original size intended. The best diameter for measurement, I believe, is
along the seam or mold line left on the ball by the mold halves. Care was taken to
avoid the unplanned oversizing in diameter caused by laterally off-center mold
halves (common on balls from 18th century sites). In such cases the weight can still be
correct. Undersizing may be detected by examination of the largest true circle (taken
along the mold seam) and comparing this with the section or diameter taken at right
angle to the mold seam. Unplanned undersizing in this dimension could result from
reduction of the mold faces around the cavity by cleaning, repairs, and by insufficient
cavity depth in one or both mold halves. Many balls suffering from this cause are
noticeably ovoid (Hamilton 1960c:128). I have yet to identify lead balls oversized in
this dimension, but this could occur.
Despite care, most of the measurements and assignments that follow are estimates,
hence subjective. The sizes assigned are based upon an adaption of tables for round ball
weights and diameters (Barnes 1972:300; Dixie Gun Works, Inc. 1972:329). I have found
the best (truly cast with little or no ovoid shape) unfired balls which range from .52 in.
to .60 in. in diameter usually weight approximately 7 to 11 grains under their theoretical weights. An estimate of a fired specimens size, based on weight alone, can only be
considered as the minimum size suggested; each may originally have been any of the
larger sizes.
In this study it is assumed the guns are all smooth bore. Only one ball shows rifling
evidence and it will be considered intrusive to the site. Balls were commonly wrapped
with a "patch" of cloth or thin deer skin. Hamilton (1960c:132) has hypothesized that
approximately .02 inches patch clearance between the ball and the bore could be
suitable for trade or other non-military guns. He also gives data (ibid.:129-132) indicating 30 gauge (approximately .54 inches) balls were loaded with patches in 24 gauge
(approximately .58 inches) bores in the 19th century Northwest (English) trade guns.
The tolerances here would be approximately .04 inches. Belgian 19th century proof
testing called for 6 mm. (approximately .236 in.) clearance or tolerance between ball
and bore (Dixie Gun Works, Inc. 1972:330). Among supplies needed for French Canada
in 1758 (Peterson 1956:331) were bullets "28 or 30 to the pound" (diameters approximately .56 in. or approximately .55 inches). These, I believe, were for the fowling
pieces, included with other arms on the same list, intended for Indian use and inferred
is a common use of balls of approximately .55 in. and approximately .56 in. in diameter
in the same fowling pieces. This also gives a valuable lead toward at least one bore size

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

156

Z
~a

o~

x

©

u

:~

+

I1++++~

5

+++++11

++

+

+++++tl

++

+

++

+

z

©

~

I

I

++++

I

I

I

+

.........

a:

~~

<

CD

++++

o

Z

+

+++++

.........

<

Z

g~

Z

O9

BI~NARD DE LA HARPE

I1+++tl

+

++

II+++1+

+

++

+++

+

++

g

o~
~

g

gg

+

.....

~ggggggg
........

ta’3
tr3

tO

’v~

g~ggg~

157

158

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

preference (.58?) in French trade guns used at that time. After working with balls and
bores from the 18th century French trade sites, and in view of the above, I now believe
Hamilton’s original guess of .02 inches for patching clearance was excellent but a bit
conservative, and that .02 to .04 inches (approximately 0.5 mm. to 1.0 mm.) clearance
would be nearer the actual situation for this period. British military small arms ammunition called for clearances ranging from .05 in. to .10 in. in the immediate post Revolutionary War period, according to Neumann (1967:52). In the accompanying tables
on balls, the hypothetical bore size ranges are based upon the .02 in. to .04 in. clearance
between these balls and the bores of the probably associated 18th century French trade
gun. As further archeological evidence accumulates we are approaching an identification of reasonably standard bore preferences by trade affiliation and time periods. For
some of the pertinent investigations see Hamilton (1960e:207-209; 1968:3-30), Harris et
al. (1965:334), Blaine and Harris (1966:61-85), Baird (1965:), Good (1972:148-151),
Hanson (1960:176).
The provenience of all ball and shot is area A, random surface.
By my figures* the "28 or 30 to the pound" balls requested for French Canada in 1758
(Peterson 1956:331) would be approximately .56 inches to approximately .55 inches in
diameter. If the patch clearance of .02 to .04 inches I have proposed is correct, a bore of
approximately .58 inches (14.7 mm. to 14.8 mm.) should have been suitable for use with
this range of 250,000 bullets ordered (ibid .). According to the table on bails given inthis
report, approximately 25% (8) of the balls from this site could suit a hypothetical .58
inch bore.
The same requisition also called for bullets "20 or 22 to the pound". These should
range from approximately .63 inches (16.0 mm.) to approximately .61 inches (15.5 ram.)
in diameter. A hypothetical bore of approximately .65 inches (16.5 mm.) could be
indicated but here we are approaching the range of some 18th century military bores
with their larger tolerances.
Our table of balls from the site also indicates 25% {8 balls) appear suitable for a
hypothetical bore of approximately .55 inches (13.9 mm. to 14.0 mm.).
The bore estimates of approximately .58 inches and approximately .55 inches appear
to be the two major patterns to emerge. One additional but lesser pattern would indicate
a hypothetical bore range of .58 to .60 inches (4 balls). Two of the remaining balls (cut
away) do not offer any reasonable basis for an estimate. The final six specimens suggest
a bore of .40 to .42 inches (2 balls); a rifled bore of .43 to .45 inches (1 ball); a bore of .46 to
.48 inches (1 ball); and a bore of .50 to .52 inches (1 ball).

BENARD DE LA HARPE AND THE ESTABLISHMENT
OF THE NASSONITE POST
Benard de la Harpe arrived from France in 1718 with the express
goals of exploring the Kadohadacho territory and establishing a trading post among these Indians. The post represented another French
attempt at reinforcement of their relations with the Indians and dominance over this territory in their continuing rivalry with the Spanish.
During his journey La Harpe kept a journal ("Account of the Journey
of Benard de la Harpe Discovery Made by Him of Several Nations
*Based upon the old French 490 gram livre (pound).

Bt~NARD DE LA HARPE

159

Situated in the West," Ralph A. Smith, translator and annotator,
Southwestern Historical Quarterly, Vol. LXII, Nos. 1-4) and it has
been the main basis for correlation of the archeological manifestations
with the documentary sources. For examples, see discussions of the
Angola Farm Site (Swanton 1911:311-313) and the Fish Hatchery Site
(Gregory 1962).
Because the present paper is concerned with that period of La
Harpe’s journey after he reached the mouth of the Red River, a brief
resume of events leading up to that time is presented.
The La Harpe Expedition left New Orleans on December 18. 1718,
and reached the mouth of the Red River on January 10, 1719. At this
point, La Harpe left his boats and journeyed by pirogue to the village
of the Tunicas where he arrived on-the 12th of January. After this side
trip, La Harpe continued his trip, entering the mouth of the Red River
January 15, 1719. By February 21 he had reached Natchitoches. On
March 6, 1719, La Harpe and six companions left Natchitoches, entering the Bear River (Sulphur River) April 1. It is at this point that the
present narrative begins.
No attempt has been made to reconcile La Harpe’s estimates of the
leagues travelled; rather discussion is in terms of the land forms
mentioned by La Harpe in his journal and their relationship to presently observable topography.
On April 1, 1719, La Harpe and his companions reached the juncture of the Bear and Red rivers where they spent the night. La Harpe
had resolved to go through the Bear River with one of his pirogues and
a party of Indians to the portage of the Nassonites and then overland to
his destination to establish a trading post. The rest of his men were to
travel the Red River and meet him at the site of the post. La Harpe
estimated that his segment of the trip would be 5 leagues by water and
10 leagues by land. On the other hand, his men would have to travel
52 leagues on the Red River (Smith 1958:249-250).
After he had entered the Bear River on April 2, La Harpe found
many log jams and bushes which made travel difficult. This same
stretch of the river from the mouth of the Sulphur River to the Texarkana dam is still plagued by logs and brush. As recently as World War
II cypress logs were removed by lumber companies for commercial
use.

Three leagues to the northwest, the La Harpe party camped on a
little island (Smith 1958:250). This island may have been old Belle
Island, a land feature noted for many years by local residents and now
partially inundated by the Texarkana Reservoir.
On April 1, La Harpe said "We found high lands on the left [south
side] as we sailed along Bear River..." (Smith 1958:249). These high

160

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

lands would place him between the mouth of Bear River and present
Texarkana Dam.
On April 3, La Harpe mentions "... very great high grounds which
we sailed along, leaving them to our left..." [south side of Bear River]
(Smith 1958:250). These very great high grounds would place him
between present Texarkana Dam and Knight’s Bluff.
La Harpe arrived at the portage at 2 o’clock in the afternoon on April
3, 1719 (Smith 1958:250). Before the dam which joined Lake Texarkana, there was an old county road crossing of the Sulphur River (Fig.
1). The crossing was built there because of the break in the hills on the
south side of the river. On April 4, 1719, La Harpe beached his
pirogues and started overland to the village of the Nassonites. One of
the Indians in his party was sent ahead to inform the Nassonite chief
of his coming.
La Harpe mentioned a "fine stream" and may have camped by it on
that night. It is possible that this is Barkman Creek, a spring-fed creek
in the vicinity of present-day Leary, Texas.
On April 5 La Harpe continued his trip and mid-morning the war
chief of the Nassonites and six tribal notables arrived to meet him.
They continued their trip and at three in the afternoon arrived at the
dwelling of the chief. La Harpe was entertained with a great feast of
bread, boiled corn, bear meat, buffalo meat and fish (Smith
1958:250-251).
La Harpe spent several days talking to the Nassonites and looking
for a location to establish a post. He resolved to locate it on the left
(south) side of the Red River at a distance of a "musket shot" (Smith
1958:253).
On April 21 the boats which La Harpe had sent around by the Red
River arrived at the Nassonite village. The next day the Caddo nations
celebrated the Calumet for the party and La Harpe gave the Indians
2,000 livres of merchandise which consisted of European trade goods.
At this time La Harpe proposed to the Nassonite chief to cede to him
the deserted village of the chief. The chief consented to this and was
given 30 pistoles in merchandise (Smith 1958:255).
La Harpe described the site of his post thusly:
"The terrain of the Nassonites is a little elevated, the soil is sandy; but at
half a quarter of a league from the river, the country is fine, the earth black,
and the prairies most beautiful and most fertile. Near the place that I have
chosen for my establishment, there is an expanse (lake) two leagues long
covered with ducks, swans, and bustards. Although the land there may be
sandy, it does not fail to be very fertile for cultivation ..." (Smith
1958:254).

Bt~NARD DE LA HARPE

161

The Rosebrough Lake Site closely fits the description of the area
given by La Harpe for the location of his Nassonite Post. The site is
located on an old natural levee of Red River and thus a little elevated.
The black land to the south is present and the lake (cut offbend of Red
River) is present. Today the lake is somewhat like a fishhook in shape.
In 1806 when the site was visited by the Freeman-Custis Expedition,
the lake had somewhat the shape of a reversed "S" (Freeman and
Custis 1806:Nicholas King map). Today the remnant scar of the old
lake as seen by Freeman and Custis is visible on the Minor Davis Farm.
Another feature located north of the site is a "double hook" in the
Red River which has been indicated on maps of the area since 1720. It
is first shown on two maps attributed to La Harpe -- one dated 1720
and the other 1722 (Lowery Catalog of Maps, Library of Congress, Nos.
301 and 302). The map of the Freeman-Custis Expedition of 1806
discussed above shows this double hook in the river just north of the
site. A map of Texas printed in Morphis’s History of Texas in 1874
also shows this feature as does a map of Texas printed in 1879 in
Hanford’s Texas State Register. Too, modern maps of appropriate
scale indicate this characteristic of the channe!. As of March 10, 1973,
this hook was still present. Although the river banks are fairly stable,
the stream has been eroding the north bank. The south bank does not
appear to have been subjected to much erosion. Although some have
said that the Rosebrough Lake Site has been reworked by the river

since the site was abandoned, we feel that this is impossible as the
burials and other features of the site are still intact and undisturbed
(except by plowing).
Next we will go the Freeman-Custis Expedition of 1806 for additional evidence that thePoste aux Nassonites (Post of the Nassonites)
and the Rosebrough Lake Site are one and the same. On July 27, 1806,
towards evening, the party was on the north side of the Red River
opposite a lake on the south around which Caddoes had planted corn
fields when they occupied their principal village. This lake was about
2 miles in length and parallel to the river. Astronomical readings
taken that evening determined their latitude to be 33° 34" 42’ north
(Freeman and Custis 1806:37). The latitude of the Rosebrough Lake
Site (41 BW 5) in a field road about the center of the site is 33° 34" 15’
-- a difference of 27’. Freeman’s reading was taken on the north bank
of the river and this difference is about 540 yards.
The day following this reading, one of the Indian guides accompanying the expedition, Frangois Grappe, guided the expedition to
the south side of the river opposite the point where the French had
established a military outpost. Grappe had been born there in 1748

162

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

(Freeman and Custis 1806:37). The establishment of this post, erected
many years before Louisiana was ceded to Spain, was to guard a
factory that was there for the Indian trade (American State Papers
1832, Vol. IV:729).

CHRONOLOGY OF THE NASSONITE POST
When La Harpe purchased the site for the post, the Indians offered
him 30 men to bring cypress wood for the construction of the house
that he wished to build. By the end of July 1719 a building 110 feet
long by 20 feet wide had been erected (Smith 1958:255-256). After La
Harpe left in 1719 little is known about the occupation of the post
until 1726.
In a letter dated March 26, 1726, to the Compagnie des Indies from
De Pauger, a complaint is made about having only six soldiers (Margry 1876-1886, Vol. VI:226-227).
The history of the post after 1735 depends largely on depositions
made before John Sibley in 1805 in Natchitoches by former residents
of the French post.
In 1737 Alex Grappe settled at the post and built and fortified a
small post and trading house (American State Papers 1832:692-694).
The post was maintained until 1763 when Louisiana was ceded to
Spain and the garrison withdrawn. The trading house remained in
operation until 1765 when Grappe moved with all his family to
Compti. By 1778 the French settlement had been totally abandoned
(American State Papers 1832:693-694).
In 1770 the post was visited by Athanase de Mezieres. Alex Grappe
came from Compti as an interpreter. At this time there was still a small
population present (Bolton 1914, Vol. II.:71-74).
By 1778 mention of the post drops out of the frontier correspondence (American State Papers 1832:693). Therefore, it is assumed that
the dates of occupation at the post can be placed from 1719 to 1778. At
no time during this occupation does it appear that the population was
large -- generally a few soldiers, settlers and traders. The number of
soldiers was set at 15 (a sergeant’s command) by the French government, but it is doubtful that this number was ever present at the site. A
few French families lived there at various times during the period of
occupation. Depositions to this effect were given to Dr. John Sibley in
1805 by Mary Pulogia Grappe Fontinueau, Julien Bessen, Mary Senes
Brevell, John Baptiste Grappe and Francois Grappe (American State
Papers 1832, Vol. II:692-694).

B!~NARD DE LA HARPE

163

CONCLUSIONS
The journals left by Benard de la Harpe in 1719 and the FreemanCustis Expedition of 1806 have made possible the tentative identification of the Rosebrough Lake Site (41 BW 5) in Bowie County, Texas, as
the site where La Harpe established the Nassonite Post (Ft. St. Louis
de Kadohadacho) in 1719.
All of the European goods found in Area A of the site seem to
substantiate this hypothesis as all fit the period of occupation -1719-1778. It is presumed that if Area A of the Rosebrough Lake Site is
investigated in the future such structural features as French, Indian
and trading houses and military buildings could be found and identified specifically.
Acknowledgments
This project would not have been possible during the years except for the fine spirit of
cooperation and the kindness of Mr. and Mrs. George Pearson and Mr. and Mrs. Minor
Davis.
We also wish to thank all of our wives for the coffee and snacks furnished during the
many meetings of the authors. We are most thankful to Jerrylee Blaine and Inus Marie
Harris for their kindness in helping with the documentary research and the typing of
the final manuscript.
Dr. Charles R. McGimsey of the University of Arkansas was very helpful in furnishing
photographs and notes on Burial 1 from the Rosebrough Lake Site and giving us
permission to use them in this paper.
William A. Westbury of Southern Methodist University very kindly identified the
French and Spanish ceramics.

REFERENCES CITED
Allemagne, Henry Rend d’ and Vera K. Ostoia
1967 Decorative Antique Ironwork: A Pictorial Treasury. Dover Publications. New York.
American State Papers
1832 Class I: Foreign Relations, Vol. II and Class II: Indian Affairs, Vol. I.
Gales and Seaton. Washington D.C.
Baird, Donald
1965 S ome Eighteenth Century Gun Barrels From Osage Village Sites. Great
Plains Journal, Vol. 4, No. 2:49-62.
Barnes, Frank C.
1972 Cartridges of the World. Third Edition. Digest Books, Inc. Northfield,
Illinois
Bell, Robert E., E. B. Jelks and W. W. Newcomb (Assemblers)
1967 A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory. Final
Report for Grant GS-964, National Science Foundation.

164

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Blaine, Jay C.
1967 Guns. In: A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and
Ethnohistory, Robert E. Bell, Edward B. Jelks and W. W. Newcomb,
assemblers. Final Report for Grant GS-964, National Science
Foundation:163-179.
Blaine, Jay C. and R. K. Harris
1967 Guns. In: The Gilbert Site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 37 (for 1966):33-86.
Bolton, Herbert Eugene
1914 Athanase de Mezieres and the Louisiana-Texas Frontier, 1768-1780,
Vols. 1 and 2. The Arthur H. Clark Company. Cleveland.
Boudriot, Jean
1963 Armes a feu Francaises, modeles reglementaries, 1717-1836. Second
Series. Lucien Petitot. Paris.
Bustanoby, J. H.
1947 Principles of Color and Color Mixing. McGraw-Hill Book Company.
New York.
Dixie Gun Works, Inc.
1972 Catalog No. 122. Union City, Tennessee.
Duffield, Lathel F. and Edward B. Jelks
1961 The Pearson Site: A Historic Indian Site in Iron Bridge Reservoir,
Rains County, Texas. Department of Anthropology, Archaeology
Series, No. 4. The University of Texas. Austin.
Freeman, Thomas and Peter Custis
1806 An Account of the Red River in Louisiana. Report to the War Office.
George, J. N.
1947 English Guns and Rifles. The Stackpole Company. Harrisburg, Pa.
Good, Mary Elizabeth
1972 Guebert Site: An 18th Century Historic Kaskaskia Indian Village in
Randolph County, Illinois. Central States Archeological Societies
Memoir, No. 2.
Greener, W. W.
1910 The Gun and Its Development. Ninth Edition. Bonanza Books. New
York.
Greenman, Emerson F.
1951 Old Birch Island Cemetery and the Early Historic Trade Route, Georgian Bay, Ontario. Occasional Contributions from the Museum of
Anthropology of the University of Michigan, No. 11. University of
Michigan Press. Ann Arbor.
Gregory, H. L.
1962 Louisiana Studies, Vol. 1, No. 2. Northwestern State College.
Hamilton, T. M.
1960a The Determination of Date and Origin of Archaeological Gun Parts. In:
Indian Trade Guns, T. M. Hamilton, editor. Missouri Archaeologist,
Vol. 22:5-15.
1960b Additional Comments on Gunflints. In: Indian Trade Guns, T. M.
Hamilton, editor. Missouri Archaeologist, Vol. 22:73-79.
1960c Some Gun Parts from 18th Century Osage Sites. In: Indian Trade Guns,
T. M. Hamilton, editor. Missouri Archaeologist, Vol. 22:120-149.

Bt~NARD DE LA HARPE

165

1960d The Gunsmith’s Cache Discovered at Malta Bend, Missouri. In: Indian
Trade Guns, T. M. Hamilton, editor. Missouri Archaeologist, Vol.
22:150-171.
1960e Concluding Comments and Observations. In: Indian Trade Guns, T.
M. Hamilton, editor. Missouri Archaeologist, Vol. 22:207-209.
1960f Some Gun Parts from 17th Century Seneca Sites. In: Indian Trade
Guns, T. M. Hamilton, editor. Missouri Archaeologist, Vol. 22:99-119.
1964 Recent Developments in the Use of Gunflints for Dating and Identification. In: Diving Into tile Past: Theories, Techniques, and Applications of Underwater Archaeology, Proceedings of a Conference on
Underwater Archaeology, June Drenning Holmquist and Ardis Hillman Wheeler, editors. The Minnesota Historical Society and the
Council of Underwater Archaeology.
Hamilton, T. M.
1968 Early Indian Trade Guns: 1625-1773. Contributions of the Museum of
the Great Plains. No. 3, Lawton, Okla.
Hanson, Charles E., Jr.
1960 Locks From Indian Trade Guns of the 19th Century. In: Indian Trade
Guns, T. M. Hamilton, editor. Missouri Archaeologist, Vol.
22:172-177.
Harper, Loyd, Ruby Harper, R. K. Harris, Inus M. Harris, Edward B. Jelks and J.
Ned Woodall
1967 Ornaments. In: The Gilbert Site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 37 (for 1966):87-104.
Harris, R. K. and Inus Marie Harris
1967 Trade Beads, Projectile Points and Knives. In:A Pilot Study of Wichita
Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory, Robert E. Bell, Edward B. Jelks
and W. W. Newcomb, assemblers. Final Report for Grant GS-964,
National Science Foundation:129-162.
Harris, R. K., Inus Marie Harris, Jay C. Blaine and Jerrylee Blaine
1965 A Preliminary Archeological and Documentary Study of the Womack
Site, Lamar County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 36:287-363.
1966 French Clasp Knives: Types D and E. The Record, Vol. 22, No. 1:7-8.
Dallas Archeological Society.
ms. The Spanish Fort Site in Texas and Oklahoma. Unpublished manuscript.
Harris, R. K., Inus M. Harris and J. Ned Woodall
1967 Tools. In: The Gilbert Site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 37 (for 1966):18-32.
Harris, R. K. and Curtis D. Tunnell
1967 Miscellaneous European Goods. In: The Gilbert Site. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 37 (for 1966):105-111.
Hayward, J. F.
1962 The Art of the Gunmaker, Vol. 2. St. Martin’s Press. New York.
Howard, James H.
1972 Notes on the Ethnogeography of the Yankton Dakota. Plains
Anthropologist, Vol. 17, No. 58, Part 1:281-307.

166

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Jelks, Edward B., editor
1967 The Gilbert Site, Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 37
(for 1966).
Lavin, James D.
1965 A History of Spanish Firearms. Arco Publishing Company. New York.
Lenk, Torsten
1965 The Flintlock: Its Origin and Development. G. A. Urquart, translator.
Bramhall House. New York.
Margry, Pierre, editor
18791888 Decouvertes et etablissements des Francais dans l’ ouest et dans le sud
de l’Amerique Septentrionale, 1614-1754,Vol. 6. Paris.
Maxwell, Moreau S. and Lewis H. Binford
1961 Excavations at Fort Michilimackinac, Mackinac City, Michigan, 1959
Season. Publications of the Museum, Michigan State University, Vol.
1, No. 1.
Myers, Bernard S., editor
1969 McGraw-Hill Dictionary of Art, Vol. 4. McGraw-Hill Book Company.
New York.
Neal, W. Keith
1955 Spanish Guns and Pistols. G. Bell and Sons. London
Neumann, George C.
1967 The History of Weapons of the A merican Revolution. Harper and Row.
New York.
Peterson, Harold L.
1956 Arms and Armor in Colonial America. Stackpole Company. Harrisburg, Pa.
1965 American Indian Tomahawks. Contributions from the Museum of the
American Indian, Heye Foundation, Vol. 19.
Sloane, Eric
1964 A Museum of Early American Tools. Funk and Wagnalls. New York.
Smith, Carlyle S.
1960 Two 18th Century Reports on the Manufacture of Gunflints in France.
In: Indian Trade Guns, T. M. Hamilton, editor. Missouri
Archaeologist, Vol. 22:40-49.
Smith, Ralph A.
1958 Account of the Journey of Benard de la Harpe: Discovery Made by Him
of Several Nations Situated in the West. Southwestern Historical
Quarterly, Vol. 62, No. 2:246-259.
Stone, Lyle M.
1970 Gunflints from Eighteenth Century Fort Michilimackinac, Michigan:
A Formal Analysis and Description. Paper Presented at the Eleventh
Annual Conference on Historic Site Archaeology, Columbia, South
Carolina.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger and Edward B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of th e Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Swanton, John R.
1911 Indian Tribes of the Lower Mississippi Valley and Adjacent Coast of
the Gulf of Mexico. Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American
Ethnology, Bulletin No. 43.

BIJNARD DE LA HARPE

167

Thwaites, Reuben Gold, editor
1959 The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents: Travels and Explorations
of the Jesuit Missionaries in New France, 1610-1791, Vol. 66. The
Burrows Brothers Company. Cleveland.
Witthoft, John
1966 A History of Gunflints. Pennsylvania Archaeologist, Bulletin of the
Society for Pennsylvania Archaeology, Vol. 36, Nos. 1 and 2:12-49.
Woodward, Arthur
1960 Some Notes on Gunflints. In: Indian Trade Guns, T. M. Hamilton,
editor. Missouri Archaeologist, Vol. 22:29-39.

SMALL ARCHEOLOGICAL SITE INVESTIGATIONS
FOR INTERPRETATION OF SITE ACTIVITIES*
TOM D. DILLEHAY

Abstract
Small archeological site investigations are discussed as one approach to
aid in the interpretation of various activities housed at large, intensively
occupied complex sites. Analysis of less complex, small, short-term sites
is suggested to be more sensitive for isolating activity components. Once
these activities have been identified with the associated spatial patterning
of tool assemblages and structures at various small sites, then they may be
useful in extrapolating the range of activities at larger, more complex
sites.

INTRODUCTION
In recent years the field of archeology has adopted a stronger scientific framework for investigating material remains and contextual
relationships of past cultures. Along with increasing emphasis upon
scientific methods as a means of formulating and testing hypothetical
laws and explanations about past human behavior and cultural processes, the archeologist is confronted with an increasing complexity
of data necessary for interpretive frameworks applying systemic and
ecological approaches. This emphasis also requires the archeologist
to design more explicitly the definition of his problem, types of data
needed to solve it, and techniques necessary to collect the data. Since
not all available data can be dealt with, the problem-oriented investigator must make sampling decisions.
In general terms, this paper concerns the potential utilization of one
type of sampling procedure, "small site methodology", and its relation to certain objectives and requirements of archeological research.
It is a review of the major tasks of this methodology with additional
comments about basic aspects of its general procedure, and a reexamination of some techniques that may be applied to methodological
orientations in archeology. This essay is not an attempt to reevaluate
treatment of the archeological record in terms of explicit models,
theories, and laws of cultural systems operations, but rather, it is only
an attempt to suggest the treatment of data in terms of small site
investigations, and some ways in which we may attempt to answer the
questions raised so far.
*This is a revised version of a paper read at the 1973 Convention of The Texas
Archeological Society, Lubbock, Texas.

170

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

METHODOLOGICAL FRAMEWORK AND PROCEDURES
In recent archeological research, there has been growing interest in
spatial and chronological relationships of pattern variables (such as
location and site type, tool assemblages, general characteristics of the
cultural deposit) in determining site functions, or particular activity
components housed within a site, within a settlement system. To
date, several approaches have been applied in attempting to discern
the various activities within a settlement system, but with relatively
little success. In some instances, no significant associations have been
found between site type, function, and archeological context on
which to base a working method of extrapolating isolated activities.
One approach which may be applied in attempting to isolate these
activity components in the field is the concept of small site methodology as described and utilized recently with reference to Peruvian
settlement pattern studies by M. Edward Moseley and Carol J. Mackey
(1972). Here the methodological emphasis is on less complex small,
short-term sites rather than large, tong-term sites, as small sites are
much more sensitive for isolating activity components. Moseley and
Mackey (1972:75) signify that larger sites complicate the identification of "specific modes of behavior or activity components" because
thick cultural deposits indicative of lengthy occupations at sizable
sites represent a number of different activities which has resulted in
problems relating to connecting distinct patterns of archeological
remains with specific types of past activities. In referring to A. L.
Kroeber’s methodological assumptions regarding settlement pattern
studies (cf. Kroeber 1963), Moseley and Mackey also add that
¯.. small populations have rather circumscribed and focused patterns of
activity. The focus of activity derives from the fact that small settlements
are not generally full microcosmic reflections of the greater society;
rather, they tend to be specialized adaptations geared to particular circumstances. Granting this, it should be and frequently is easier to work
out correlations between specific configurations of archeological remains
and the behavior that produced them at small settlements than it is at
complex sites. It is here that the remains particular to separate enterprises
and distinct patterns of conduct can be sought in relatively pure form
(1972:76).

It is Kroeber’s contention that societies are indicative of a complex
system, the most characteristic feature of which is its capacity to adapt
to "particular circumstances" by detailing its structure. Often it is the
small archeological site that reflects this adaptation to specifically
changing variables.
For our purposes, Moseley and Mackey’s concept will be modified

SMALL SITE INVESTIGATION

171

somewhat so that the following terms will be used interchangeably. A
reference to limited activity site is analogous to their "small, shortterm site", and the usage of range of activities site is equivalent to
their "large, long-term site."
Numerous investigators (all of whom generally agree about the
subject matter) have utilized general archeological site categories
composed of respective member sites. These common member sites
are considered to yield contextual characteristics and spatial patterning of archeological remains thought to be reflective of distinct site
categories which house either "limited activity" or a "range of activities." For example, limited activity sites are considered to be
represented by such site categories as kill and butchering locations,
quarry/workshop locations, burial locations (not associated with an
occupational area), short-term hunting and/or gathering camps (or
single component sites), fishing !ocations, and even pictograph locations. Those site categories considered to have a range of activities are
commonly referred to as long-term intensively occupied sites, base
camps, and ceremonial sites with associated occupational areas.
Traditionally, archeological investigations have focused primarily
upon such aspects as the larger, thicker, and more spectacular sites in
hopes of finding a rich cultural deposit with the potential to solve
problems relating to a number of activities, broad chronological
framework, general patterns of artifact associations, patterns of subsistence economics. In the past few years, another type of archeological research has been carried out in settlement pattern studies. These
studies have been related directly or indirectly to the establishment of
settlement pattern models. (Apparently, the significance of these
models is that they indicate an attempt to explain the underlying
factors for different settlement pattern arrangements by describing
changes in site distributions and associated tool assemblages.) Here
the attempt is to examine the spatial configuration of communities
within a given set of environmental zones in hope of ascertaining
inferences relevant to various topics such as procurement activities,
socio-political systems, trade, warfare, anti population size. Yet unless the full range of site types within a particular settlement system
study is sufficiently sampled, the understanding of site function may
be obscured. With reference to such an orientation, K. C. Chang states
that
in order to determine the historical relationship, at a certain time level and
for a certain time depth, between two or more communities, the archeologists generally must compare their respective remains -- or, more
accurately, the respective types of their remains, inasmuch as the vast

172

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
number of actual variations usually preclude comparison on a piece-bypiece basis. The purpose of comparing types of different communities is
in most cases to determine whether (1) type A of community X derived
from type A, of Community Y, or vice versa; (2) the two types derived from
a common origin; or (3) the two came about independently (Chang
1968:5).

For our purposes, Chang’s types of communities are analogous to
our usage of "site categories." However, when examining settlement
patterns, the tasks of archeological methods seem to be related directly or indirectly to the study of similarities of various kinds of
objects or events. Three such interrelated tasks for the objectives in
"small site methodology" are: (1) description of physical and cultural
similarities common to all members of a site category, (2) formulation
and testing of generalizations about repetitive relationships among
variable features as related to members, and (3) interpretation of
single objects or events by use of generalizations. Therefore, the
discovery of definable variables, formulation, and testing of generalizations concerning the relations among selected variables (or attributes) as related to site categories of objects or events constitutes our
central task.
The classification of activity components in terms of pattern variables (that is housed within each member site of a site category) is the
first step toward construction of a working "small site methodology."
For a better understanding of the interrelations between all sites in a
settlement pattern, these classifications will have to be well-defined
and related to the functional problems of activity components within
different site types.
In clarifying our usage of the concept of small site methodology or
even studies of "types of communities," inferences of other investigators concerned with problems relating to the complexity of material remains in the archeological record should be offered. Kent V.
Ftannery presents the view that we examine the complexity of systems such as settlement systems by attempting to isolate and examine
each of the constituent subsystems as a separate variable and then
recombining (1967:120). Lewis R. Binford points out that "... culture
is multivariate, and its operation is to be understood in terms of many
casually relevant variables which may function independently or in
varying combinations. It is our task to isolate these causative factors
and to seek regular, statable, and predictable relationships between
them (Binford 1965:205)." By combining these viewpoints, we arrive
at the basic concept that a complexity is organized in such a way that
we can attempt to understand it by examining, in the physical and
cultural environment, a combination of (a) the numbers and charac-

SMALL SITE INVESTIGATION

173

teristics of individual component units, and then (b) the relations
between the component parts within a larger, more complex unit.
From these points one may conclude that there should be a continu:
ous analytical interplay between large site and small site investigations -- if one is to understand more thoroughly the cultural processes. However, it seems that unless one has command of both approaches, the chances of progressing toward an understanding of the
cultural processes contained in large, long-term sites will be few.
Thus, such an interplay cannot be achieved unless one has first
developed a strong foundation of basic information, which in our case
would be not only the examination of those site categories indicative
of large sites housing a range of activities, but also the definition and
explanation of all the site categories representing small, limited activity sites. Suffice it to say, this approach is viewed not as much a parts
to whole relationship as it is a simplex to complex relationship.
If one reviewed the emphasis of most archeological investigations,
he would realize that past work has misrepresented the full spectrum
of the abovementioned site categories, in that the main concern has
been "range of activities" sites. Selecting larger sites simply on the
basis of their potential for producing more useful information can
often produce a distorted view of the archeological record, particularly when one is examining settlement patterns. Larger, more spectacular sites do not necessarily house greater potential for producing
data that would lead to a better understanding of a full range of past
human behavioral activities, but they do offer a wider range of problems. The larger site is also viewed as having a greater potential for
yielding a more complex set of human behavior patterns. Another
problem is that long-term occupation sites tend to be more difficult to
work with when investigating a full range of activities because the.
internal structure of the site is often more complex due to superimposed levels of sequential activities (Shiner 1970:26).
Today in archeology, as in the past, there continues to be a basic
prevailing concern with tool assemblages or clusters of tool types.
Since this is our basic analytic unit for understanding prehistoric
human behavior, then we shall use it as our primary variable in small
site investigations.
Let us assume that a tool assemblage at a limited activity site, such
as a quarry or kill site, offers a simpler insight into the patterning of a
specific cluster of tool types as opposed to a number of tool types as
seen in a more complex framework, such as the larger, thicker site. If
so, then it should be easier to work out correlations between tool
assemblages and the behavior that produced them at small sites than
it would be at more complex sites. Presumably once a given set of tool

174

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

assemblages is isolated at member sites, the more complex settlement
types could then be established on the basis of aggregations of specific
activity components.
It should be stressed that it would be necessary to ascertain all
activities within member sites of categories, because different activities may have been carried out at a given site simultaneously. This
procedure contrasts with the traditional one in which sites were
placed hastily into a few site categories, then relevant behavorial
characteristics thought to be associated with each broad type were
assigned. By applying the concept of small site methodology we can
more accurately define activity components (and their associated
spatial patterning of tool assemblages and structures) within the
member sites, then build up a working system of site categories as
aggregations of these activities. Such a framework would also allow
for inference of generalized behavioral characteristics not founded on
previously arranged categories. Once these activity components and
associated tool assemblages have been defined for the spectrum of
limited activity site categories, we could then attempt to clarify the
larger, more complex site by extrapolating from previously defined
activity categories. Such an approach would allow us to focus more
accurately on relations between activity components in the larger
sites.
However, it should be pointed out that the author does not advocate
the neglect of larger sites and a total shift to the smaller sites within all
site categories, but a greater emphasis toward the examination of two
types of sites: (1) sites that represent short-term occupations by a
small group of people and are therefore shallow in depositional
thickness and small in horizontal extent, and (2) sites that are indicative of less complex economic, social and contextual relations. Examples of the first type might include small sites that are representative
of "limited activity" components or possibly even large, long-term
locations having a series of well separated, thin cultural lenses (such
as the middle and lower deposits of Arenosa Shelter in Val Verde
County; Dibble 1967). The second type could be represented by sites
such as coastal shell middens and burned rock middens, which,
though representative of long-term occupations, are relatively simple
and therefore within the margins of our usage of small site methodology.

EXAMPLE OF THE METHOD
This section cannot deal with the application of specific measures
of small site investigations to a particular archeological context be-

SMALL SITE INVESTIGATION

175

cause the method has not been widely applied in light of the above
discussion. Yet to illustrate the use of one type of small site investigation, let us examine an archeological situation that reveals the potential of this method.
This example from the lower Trinity River delta on the Gulf Coastal
Plains of Texas, specifically concerns data dealing with dense shell
middens often found along rivers and bayous in the region. To date
several archeological investigators have concentrated their efforts
upon a detailed analysis of the larger, thicker middens in hope of
ascertaining functional activities, subsistence strategies, and explaining settlement pattern configurations.
Excavation of thicker shell middens has presented many problems,
the foremost of which is a lack of visible occupational stratification. In
addition, these sites often yield vast quantities of different artifactual

FIGURE 1. Site 41 CH 170 midden exposed. Note the thinness of the
relatively concentrates shell pile in the center portion of the grid; and
the adjacent small shell scatter in the excavation extension in the left
background. The main shell accumulation is about 3 square meters.

176

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and faunal remains which cannot be distinguished with the associated activity.
From the investigation of a small, unstratified, thin lens shell midden (Fig. 1), 41 CH 170, we may begin to isolate specific activities and
associated refuse which would be masked in a thicker, more complex
site. The following data on Site 41 CH 170 was provided by Lawrence
E. Aten (personal communication). Aten’s excavations at the site
produced two shell accumulations, one of which contained a small
hearth area. All recovered artifacts and bones were confined to the
spatial limits of the shell concentration. Artifacts and bone consisted
of ten Goose Creek Plain sherds, one broad barbed, straight-stem
projectile point, 680 Rangia cuneata shells, one unidentified small
fish, one unidentified turtle, one alligator gar, and one white-tailed
deer. Based on detailed analysis of usuable meat from each animal
and the small spatial limits and compactness of the total cultural
evidence, Aten estimates that no more than one or two meal preparations for a maximum of four to six adults is represented.
Obviously the examination of the small, thin concentration of residue at 41 CH 170 resulted in the production of more readable data
for specific activity patterning and variability, the settlement pattern,
general site function, and population systems analysis. Thus, it is also
quite possible that examination of more confined human activity may
help us to determine the continuous accumulations of refuse in large
complex shell middens.
Consideration of the members of each small site type in terms of the
micro-environmental zones from which they come, and the type of
human activity which they reflect could develop into a working
typology of aggregations of small site technological and economic
adaptations. This could then be articulated with members of large site
types in the total environment through a set of relationships.
CONCLUSION
In considering small site investigations for solving problems of
large complex sites, it must be realized that the present study is by no
means an attempt to present the one method for discerning various
types of past activities housed at archeological sites, yet this discussion should at least stimulate some thought aimed at improving
manipulation and interpretation of certain archeological data.
In conclusion, it is only necessary to remark that there are two
primary restrictions to this methodology. Moseley and Mackey
(1972:78-79) point out that (1) both small and large sites can house
similar "archeological forms or configurations" which may be rep-

SMALL SITE INVESTIGATION

177

resentative of different behaviors in each context, and (2) explanations and interrelationships of certain archeological phenomena can
only be solved in large, complex sites. With regard to the first limitation, it should be said that the distinction between context and associated activity is an analytical problem in all methodological approaches; yet whatever the limitations, by applying small site
methodology it should be possible to make generalizations explaining the spatial and chronological distributions, changes and continuities of certain activity components. The importance of such an
approach lies in the idea that workable activity components from
small sites have the potential to make large complex sites much more
manageable analytically when interpreting processual trends and
understanding cultural changes.
Acknowledgments
Special acknowledgment is extended to Glen Fredlund, the junior author of the
earlier version of this paper, and to Lawrence E. Aten, archeologist for the National Park
Service, for providing me with unpublished data. The author would also like to express
thanks to David S. Dibble of the Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin, and to Alton K. Briggs and William M. Sorrow of the Texas Historical Commission, Austin, Texas, for their helpful comments and criticisms.

REFERENCES CITED
Binford, Lewis R.
1965 Archaeological Systemati~s and the Study of Cultural Process.
American Antiquity. Vol. 31:203-10.
Chang, K. C.
1968 Toward A Science of Prehistoric Society. In: Settlement Archaeology,
K. C. Chang, editor. National Press Books, Palo Alto, California.
Dibble, David S.
1967 Excavations at Arenosa Shelter, 1965-66. Report submitted to the
National Park Service by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Flannery, Kent V.
1967 Culture History v. Culture Process: A Debate in American Archaeology. Scientific American. Vol. 217, No. 2:119-22.
Kroeber, Alfred L.
1963 The Methods of Peruvian Archaeology. Nawpa Pacha. Vol. 1:61-71.
Moseley, M. Edward and Carol J. Mackey
1972 Peruvian Settlement Pattern Studies and Small Site Methodology.
American Antiquity. Vol. 37, No. 1:67-81.
Shiner, Joel L.
1970 Activity Analysis of a Prehistoric Site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society. Vol. 41:25-36.
The University of Texas at Austin

BOOK REVIEWS

Rock Art in New Mexico. Polly Schaafsma. Photographs by Karl
Kernberger and Curtis Schaafsma. XII + 209 pages, 176 illustrations, 2 tables. State Planning Office.
A handsome soft-cover book profusely illustrated with superb
photographs including three in color, Rock Art in New Mexico is the
result of a brief, six-month survey of rock art sites in New Mexico.
Funded by the state of New Mexico and the National Park Service, the
author and the photographers must have worked at a breakneck pace
to complete the survey and to write up the results in such a short time.
The study has modest goals; it does not pretend "to be an in-depth
analysis" of New Mexican rock art, and in the author’s words, it is
"primarily a simple description and preliminary integration of the
data into stylistic categories which will serve as a taxonomic flamework for future investigations." New Mexico is divided into four
geographic regions, and within each of these the stylistic categories
are established, often closely associated with known prehistoric or
historic peoples. Thus, for northwestern New Mexico the rock art of
the Plateau Anasazi is discussed from a scattering of sites, as well as
one of its distinctive petroglyphic styles, the Rosa Style, defined by
Schaafsma in an earlier work. Navajo rock art of the Gobernador Phase
is also discussed in this chapter.
The varied rock art of southern New Mexico (Chapter III) is divided
into "Polychrome Abstractions," defined as "unformalized abstract
designs" probably painted by Desert Culture peoples, the "Mountain
Mogollon," the "Desert Mogollon," and "Historic Rock Art." The
Upper Rio Grande (Chapter IV) is set apart to accommodate the "Rio
Grande Style," a largely petroglyphic style that flourished among the
Rio Grande pueblos after A.D. 1300. Chapter V deals with the scattered rock art of eastern New Mexico, an area the survey investigated
even less thoroughly than any other. The petroglyphs of the upper
Canadian River drainage are divided into older "abstract" and
younger "representative" styles; to the south the petroglyphs of Olive
Buttes, some of which are "peripheral manifestations of the Jornada
Style of the Jornada Mogollon culture" are mentioned. A short final
chapter confusingly titled the "Historic Rock Art in New Mexico"
deals with the graffiti left by Spanish and American explorers and
missionaries.
As with most quickie surveys this one tantalizes and frustrates the
reader with its incompleteness. At Chaco Canyon, for example, where

180

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

there was a long Anasazi occupation, and where "one would expect to
find.., a corresponding lengthy tradition of rock drawings exhibiting change through time," Schaafsma perceives three, apparently
sequential stylistic divisions. But only one of these is illustrated, and
the reader is left dangling, to wonder how substantial this tripartite
division is. Perhaps the danger is not so much that the divisions are
inadequately defined, but that other potential investigators of Chaco
Canyon rock art may be deflected from making the intensive study
that is needed by what has been done already so sketchily.
The most appropriate way or ways to record rock art has long been a
matter of dispute. No doubt it is partly a matter of purpose. The
illustrations in this book are a persuasive argument for the point of
view that skilled photographers can transform dusty, vague scratches
on obscure rock surfaces into esthetically appealing works of art. That
this approach is satisfactory for comparative and analytical purposes
is, however, another matter. One cannot help but wonder whether the
author and her photographers were often at cross-purposes, the
photographers opting for pretty pictures, unblemished by markers to
indicate scale, unworried by camera angle distortions, the anthropologist doing her best to relate this fetching photographic image
to that design, this appealing close-up to that dramatic composition.
Both goals are equally valid, and if they can be combined happily
under the covers of one book, it is in such a preliminary and suggestive work as this. It is to be hoped that more intensive, local studies
will be fostered by this study, even, improbably, that this mismatched
team will do as well in depth for one region or for some rock art style
as they have done here so broadly.

W. W. Newcomb, Jr.
Texas Memorial Museum
The University of Texas at Austin

BOOK REVIEWS

181

Dating Methods in Archaeology. Joseph W. Michels. xiv + 230 pages,
including index, figures, tables, plates. Seminar Press, Studies in
Archaeology. New York, 1973.
An odd feature of the archeological literature today is that general
textbooks mention a fascinating variety of exotic dating methods -thermoluminescence, dendrochronology, radiocarbon, archeomagnetism, and so on-- but, with the exception of dendrochronology
and radiocarbon dating, and occasionally of obsidian hydration, these
techniques hardly ever appear in archeological research reports. In
point of fact, most of them are still under development. In the present
book Joseph W. Michels, an archeologist at Pennsylvania State University who has done a good deal of work with obsidian hydration
dating, sets out to clear up the fog around these techniques and to
incorporate them in a general work about the over-all problem of
dating.
In the first part of the book Michels relates the problem of dating to
the general aims of archeology, and specifically to the study of cultural process that is the concern of much current archeologica] research. He sees the objectives of dating as threefold: (1) periodization,
which is the determination of time segments -- clusters of events-- in
the history of a region; (2) relative dating, which is the sequential
arrangement of those segments; and (3) chronometric dating, which is
the determination of the relation of the segments to one another and to
the present in terms of measured time. The book is organized roughly
around this threefold set of objectives.
Using the classic definitions of Willey and Phillips in Method and
Theory in American Archaeology, Michels defines the basic units of
archeological analysis -- component, site, phase, locality, and so on.
All archeologica! dating, he points out, is the dating of components,
which are (roughly speaking) archeological manifestations of communities. To establish components we must first distinguish them
from other components (primarily through stratigraphy, the basic
principles of which are discussed, but not very clearly), and must then
demonstrate the contemporaneity and cultural interconnectedness of
the materials within the components. This intra-component contemporaneity can be demonstrated or refuted by such techniques as
trace-element analysis of bones, studies of bone mineralization, and
studies of patination of stone. These techniques (which other authors
usually class under "relative dating," but Michels’ arrangement is
better) are explained simply and competently. The second and third
parts of the book, making up three-fourths of the volume, are devoted
to descriptions of dating methods. Part Two is concerned with the

182

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

major methods of relative dating, which Michels aptly calls "sequence dating": stratigraphy, seriation, and cross-dating. Techniques of
stratigraphy are presented through the description of the stratigraphic analysis of a rock-shelter site in Pennsylvania. The excavation and recording techniques, and the laboratory analysis, are described in great detail. This is a most useful exposition, but not
entirely enlightening for someone involved in a different kind of site,
say one with masonry structures.
Seriation is discussed mainly in terms of the Brainerd-Robinson
technique of comparison of assemblages through quantitative measures of difference and similarity. The presentation is discursive and
probably would be confusing to the uninitiated (the clearest explanation I know of is Troike’s in the 1957 Bulletin of the T.A.S. -- Vol.
28:269-284). Ford’s bar-graph seriation technique ("battleship
curves") is given only cursory mention, but Meighan’s three-pole
graph technique, surely one of the most useful seriation methods, is
adequately explained.
Cross-dating is discussed with reference both to environmental
events through geomorphology and paleontology and to stylistic
similarities. Here the explanation is primarily through extensive presentation of examples from the literature, not always with clarifying
effect.
The third and last part of the book, making up almost half the
volume, is devoted to methods of chronometric dating. One suspects
that this is the reason the book was written in the first place. The
techniques covered are dendrochronology, archeomagnetism, radiocarbon dating, potassium-argon dating, fission-track dating, thermoluminescence, and obsidian hydration. As already noted, except
for radiocarbon and dendrochronology these methods are more significant for their potential than for their contributions to date, and it is
striking that archeological textbooks spend so much time on them.
Nevertheless, despite many technical difficulties many of them hold
exciting promise and it is helpful to have the details of each technique
explained here.
Much of the explanation requires at least an elementary knowledge
of chemistry and physics for understanding and appreciation, and in
a number of cases the pitfalls and problems associated with archeological application are stated either obliquely or ponderously so
that it is difficult to assess just what the potential significance of a
technique is. Since Michels has gone out of his way to make all of the
details available, I think the difficulty is mainly one of unimaginative
presentation.
I am bothered to note that in the discussion of radiocarbon dating,

BOOK REVIEWS

183

the one technique in which I have some expertise, there is a significant omission. Michels says that radiocarbon dating is done by proportional counting of gas, and he lists benzene as one of the gases used.
But when benzene is counted it is counted as a liquid, not a gas, and
the technique used is not proportional counting but liquid scintillation counting, which has become an important method of radiocarbon
dating in the course of the past ten years. I trust that there are not
similar technical errors in those areas with which I am less familiar.
Fortunately, Michel’s discussion of the physical basis and archeological uses of radiocarbon dating is good; and, as throughout the book,
his bibliography is extensive; in fact, it includes basic references on
the liquid scintillation counting of benzene.
As already noted, these presentations are often too technical for
someone without much knowledge of physics or chemistry, but they
are still useful for the student. The principal defects of the book are
that Michels is neither an insightful nor always a clear writer (although his style is not turgid), and that the function of the book is not
entirely clear. It is not a beginning text, being too technical and
sometimes too detailed for that; nor, on the other hand, is it a technical
treatise, being often a summary of more technical works. (There are, as
a matter of fact, a number of more technical works on the present
subject, for instance Dating Techniques for the Archaeologist, edited
by H. N. Michael and E. K. Ralph
[MIT Press, 1971 ], not to be
confused with the present volume.) It can best be considered a very
useful reference, with excellent bibliographies; a reference that will
serve to clear up questions about the dating techniques that are tantalizingly mentioned so often in more general works. With this book,
one need no longer wonder just whatis going on in the field of dating.

E. Mott Davis
Radiocarbon Laboratory
The University of Texas at Austin

Information for Contributors
The Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society publishes original papers in the field
of American archeology. Emphasis is placed on Texas and adjoining areas in the United
States and Mexico, but papers on other areas will also be considered. Articles concerning archeological technique, method, or theory are encouraged.
Manuscripts must be typed, double-spaced, on 81/2 x 11 white paper. Footnotes
should be avoided or kept to a minimum. Reference to published literature, by author,
date, and page or figure number should be placed within parentheses in the body of the
text, with full bibliographic citations at the end. See this issue of the Bulletin for
examples.
The proportions of full-page illustrations (picture or drawing plus caption) should be
suitable for reduction to the effective page size of the Bulletin of 41/4 x 7 inches. Plates
may be printed either horizontally or vertically, but allowance for the caption to be
printed the same direction must be made. Captions for illustrations should be listed in
numerical order and placed behind the list of references cited.
A complete manuscript is one with: a title page, an abstract, main body, references
cited, appendices (if necessary), figure captions, and completed photographic and
drafted plates. Only complete manuscripts will be considered.
Papers published in the Bulletin are abstracted and indexed in ABSTRACTS IN
ANTHROPOLOGY.
Contributions should be addressed to: Harry J. Sharer, Editor, Texas Archeotogical
Society, Department of Sociology and Anthropology, Texas A & M University, College
Station, Texas 77843.

