TEXAS
~RC HEOLOGICAL
~OCIETY Volume 64/1993

Timothy K. Perttula, Editor
Nancy Reese, Associate Editor

Published by the Society at Austin
1993

CONTENTS
Foreword ....................................................... v
Historic Indians of Central Texas
William W. Newcomb, Jr ........................................ 1

The Vinson Site (41LT1): A Norteiao Focus Indian Village in Limestone
County, Texas
James E. Smith H, with contributions by Jay C. Blaine,
Kathleen Gilmore, R. King Harris, and Inus M. Harris .............. 65
Firearms and Related Artifacts from the Vinson Site
Jay C. Blaine .............................................. 163
Faunas from House 5 at the Vinson Site
Bonnie C. Yates ............................................ 187
Archeobotanical Evidence from the Cobb-Pool Site, A Late Prehistoric
Farmstead in Dallas County, Texas
Gayle C. Fritz .............................................. 227

Pisgah Ridge Chert Distributions: Evidence for Changing Territorial Size
in North Central Texas
Daniel E. McGregor ......................................... 247
The Trinque Site (41ER27), Erath County, Texas
William A. Cloud and James E. Smith H,
with a contribution by Patti Landau and Gail Colby ............... 269
Renews
Rock Art in New Mexico, by Polly Schaafsma
Douglas K. Boyd ........................................... 329
Near-Surface, High Resolution Geophysical Methods for Cultural Resource
Management and Archaeological Investigations, by Don H. Heimmer
David O. Brown ............................................ 331
The Spanish Frontier in North America, by David J. Weber, and
Spanish Texas 1519-1821, by Donald E. Chipman
Maynard B. Cliff ............................................ 332
Journal Notes
Colonial Latin American Historical Review, The Cache: Collected
Papers on Texas Archeology, and Journal of Archaeological Research
Timothy K. Perttula ......................................... 339
AUTHORS

................................................... 343

FOREWORD
With this Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society (BTAS), we continue in
the recent tradition of the BTAS by publishing a number of articles that focus on
the archeology of one of the regions of Texas--in this case the archeology of North
Central Texas. Regional papers synthesizing the archeology of the Texas Panhandle and Southern Plains (BTAS Volume 60, for 1989), the Lower Pecos and
Eastern Trans-Pecos (BTAS Volume 59, for 1988), and the southern Texas Coast
(BTAS Volume 58, for 1987) were completed in the 1980s, and four areas (East
Texas, Central Texas, Trans-Pecos Texas, and the central and southern parts of the
Gulf Coas0 were discussed in BTAS Volume 29 (for 1958), but North Central
Texas has never received this treatment in the BTAS.
It is unfortunate that the prehistoric and historic archeology of North Central
Texas has received less attention than many other regions of Texas (see Prikryl
1993). Large numbers of sites in the region have been damaged or destroyed in the
twentieth century, principally through population growth and associated residential and urban development in the Dallas-Fort Worth and Waco metropolitan areas,
reservoir construction, and site looting.
Population projections for North Central Texas suggest that the population will
grow between 65 and 90 percent from 1990 to 2040; the region already has one of
the highest population densities in the state of Texas. This accelerated growth, and
its associated developments, constitutes one of the most serious threats to the
protection and preservation of the region’s archeological resources (Perttula
1993). Consequently, it is critical that we now take stock of our understanding of
the archeology of North Central Texas, focus on various key aspects of the
archeological record, and lay the foundation for a renewed interest in this part of
the state. This these papers admirably do.
Here, then, are seven papers on various aspects of North Central Texas
archeology.

Timothy K. Perttula, Editor
October 1993

REFERENCES CITED
Perttula, T. K.
1993
Threats to Archeological Resources in the Eastern Planning Region. In: Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document, edited by
N. A. Kenmotsu and T. K. Perttula, pp. 15-25. Department of Antiquities
Protection, Cultural Resource Management Report 3, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Prikryl, D. J.
1993
Introduction to Regional Preservation Plan for Archeological Resources, Praifie-Savanna Archeological Region. In: Archeology in the Eastern Planning
Region, Texas: A Planning Document, edited by N. A. Kenmotsu and T. K.
Pertmla, pp. 191-204. Department of Antiquities Protection, Cultural Resource
Management Report 3, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

vi

Historic Indians of Central Texas

William W. Newcomb, Jr.

ABSTRACT
This paper summarizes the history and ethnohistory of the Native Americans
who lived in the central part of Texas between approximately the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries until the 1850s.

INTRODUCTION
The intent of this paper is to summarize what is currently known about the
Indians of the central part of Texas, from its indigenous people of the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries to the last decimated tribes who were forced out of the
area while Texas was a republic. During those centuries, a succession of varied
Indian peoples inhabited or dominated the region. Some of them, such as the
Lipan Apaches and the groups who coalesced into the Wichita tribe, are relatively
well known. Knowledge of many others is scant, sometimes limited to a single
mention of their names. However, in most cases, some evidence can be marshaled
to suggest at least the outlines of their cultures.
Very little new or unpublished data have been utilized in these pages, but for
several reasons this is not merely an exercise in paraphrasing and reshuffling wellknown information. Focusing on a relatively small area to identify and summarily
discuss the cultures of the Indians who inhabited it over a span of about 300 years
gives the discussion a special perspective. In a general, more wide-ranging study,
poorly known peoples can or must be neglected in the interests of the larger
picture. In a localized study such as this one, no such license is desirable or
possible; the ignored and the poorly known must be considered. Many studies that
deal with the natives of Central Texas also have appeared in rather obscure and
scattered publications so that they are unknown or not easily located by any but
persistent seekers. This information, so far as it has been discovered, has been
incorporated into these pages.
These varied factors lead to the creation of a different and presumably more
accurate portrayal of the Indians of Central Texas. But this study should not be
regarded as the final, definitive word about its natives. It is, rather, a progress
statement designed to encourage others to seek additional information that will
amplify and correct the imperfect tale related here, just as this study has modified
or rejected some old, widely held notions about Central Texas Indians.
Remote from areas of North America first conquered and settled by Europeans, lacking great native cities, and without gold and silver, Central Texas long

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64 (1993)

2

Texas ArcheologicalSociety

remained unknown to Europeans. In the early years of the eighteenth century,
almost two centuries after Europeans had begun to explore portions of what is
now Texas, they finally became familiar with what we term Central Texas.
Although its native peoples had not directly experienced these alien invaders, the
presence and approach of Europeans had affected them in a number of ways.
First, during the northward advance of the colonial Spanish empire in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, Indians of northern Mexico and southern Texas
were forced to labor in mines and on ranches; many were gathered into missions,
and large numbers succumbed to introduced diseases. Others escaped their oppressors by moving northward away from their homelands into central and other
parts of Texas.
Second, by the beginning of the seventeenth century, Spaniards were establishing ranches and settlements in the Santa Fe vicinity far to the west of
Central Texas. Indians were employed or forced to labor for the Spaniards at
various menial tasks, including caring for horses and other livestock. Soon such
Indians were escaping their servitude on the backs of the Spanish horses they
had come to know and value. Horses spread rapidly, particularly among nomadic
bison hunters of the High Plains, and inevitably many aspects of native cultures
were dramatically altered. Of particular significance to Central Texas, newly
mounted warriors enjoyed a tremendous advantage over pedestrian enemies, and
by the mid-seventeenth century mounted Apaches were terrorizing native groups
to the east and southeast of their High Plains homeland, causing them to flee,
some into Central Texas. Before the century was over, Apache raiders themselves became familiar with Central Texas and for many years were its most
feared and powerful people.
Third, the arrival of French explorers and traders in the Mississippi River
valley in the closing years of the seventeenth century also affected Central Texas.
Indians equipped with firearms supplied by the French soon were able to expand
into the Southern Plains. Its native peoples, including various Caddoan-speaking
peoples whose descendants were to become known as Wichitas, began a southern
migration that carried some of them into the Central Texas region.
Central Texas was, then, a refuge by the time its peoples became known to
Europeans. However, it probably was not a refuge dictated solely by the vicissitudes
and consequences of European exploration and settlement, for the region was
peculiarly suited to serve as a haven for the dispossessed. It was (and is) one of
environmental diversity and rich potential, so much so that peoples moving into it
from surrounding areas almost certainly could continue to follow their traditional
techniques for wresting a living from the land. No doubt, some found it an even
more bountiful land than the one they had known. To the hunter and gatherer
recently fled from the arid and semiarid reaches of northeastern Mexico and
southern Texas, Central Texas must have seemed a verdant oasis, well watered
and blessed with abundant game and other wild foods, known previously, if at all,
for their scarcity. For the bison hunter evicted from the Edwards Plateau to the
southwest or the plains country to the west and northwest, Central Texas also

Newcomb M Historic Indians of Central Texas

3

supported large numbers of bison, particularly in the winter, as well as deer, bear,
and other game. The western Cross Timbers flanking the region on its northwestern
borders and the eastern Cross Timbers extending into its heart may have afforded
such refugee’s safety not available from mounted raiders farther west. Similarly,
the Post Oak Belt (El Monte Grande of the Spaniards), extending from south of
San Antonio northeastward to the Red River, and bordering the southeastern third
of the area, also provided a haven from attack. For the Wichita-speaking Caddoans,
Central Texas was hardly different or less attractive than their homelands farther
north. Wood for fuel, housing, and defensive work was abundant; water was
plentiful; easily cultivated soil was available along many of the river valleys; and
there was good pasturage for the horses and mules the Indians had acquired.
As is true of many rich, transitional, crossroads communities, the Central
Texas area may have always experienced the comings and goings of diverse
cultural groups. Lacking geographic barriers, it was also open to influences from
the varying cultural groups surrounding it. The most influential of these peoples in
early historic times lived to the east of the Trinity River in the Neches and
Angelina River valleys. They were the populous, settled, gardening, southern
Caddoan-speaking tribes of the loosely organized Hasinai "confederacy." Somewhat more distant in the great bend of the Red River was another group of
Caddoan-speaking tribes, generally known as the Caddo proper or Kadohadacho
(Swanton 1942:7-14; Newcomb 1961:279-313). Some of the Hasinai tribes placed
considerable reliance on bison, and their hunts carried them into the prairies of
Central Texas and into direct contact with its natives. What other contacts and
relationships existed between the people of the two areas is unknown, but like
other technologically more productive, politically better organized, and more
numerous people, it may be surmised that the Caddoan tribes of East Texas
exerted considerable influence and perhaps dominance over the natives of Central
Texas.
By the mid-eighteenth century, the thrust of Apache expansion was waning. Attrition brought about by years of conflict with Spanish and Indian enemies had taken its toll, and powerful new foes from the north and west had
entered the area. Comanches rode out of their Rocky Mountain homeland by the
early years of the eighteenth century to elbow their way into the Southern Plains.
By mid-century, an enduring alliance had been forged between the Comanches
and southward-moving Wichita-speaking plainsmen. The combined forces scattered the Lipan and other Apache bands who for half a century and more had
ridden roughshod through Central Texas, and the region soon came to be settled
by Wichita speakers.
Nor did the end of the century mark the culmination of the tumultuous story
of the Central Texas Indians. Fragments of a number of tribes, uprooted from their
homes east of the Mississippi--Shawnees, Delawares, Kickapoos, Cherokees,
and others--were forced westward by the advance of American settlement even
before the opening of the nineteenth century, to pass through and sometimes linger
in Central Texas.

4

Texas ArcheologicalSociety
EARLY EUROPEAN EXPLORATIONS

In the fall of 1528, some members of the P~inf’do de NSa-v~iez expedition were
cast ashore in the vicinity of Galveston Island on the Texas Gulf Coast. Only a
handful of these shipwrecked victims survived the winter, and one of them, Alvar
Nti~ez Cabeza de Vaca, ultimately became a trader between hostile native groups.
He claimed to have traveled along the coast 40-50 leagues (approximately 105132 miles) and as far into the interior as he wanted to go (Hodge and Lewis
1907:56; Newcomb 1983). But if he wandered as far inland as Central Texas, he
said nothing about its people. Ultimately Cabeza de Vaca was able to join three
other survivors, and they escaped their captors. After a remarkable trek across the
continent, they rejoined their own people in Mexico in 1536. There has been
disagreement among scholars about the route Cabeza de Vaca and his companions
followed across Texas and Mexico, but it is now clear that from the lower
Guadalupe River region of Texas, they traveled south into northeastern Mexico
before turning westward, never coming near Central Texas (Krieger 1955, 1961;
Campbell and Campbell 1981; Newcomb 1983).
Hemando de Soto, made wealthy by the plunder he had accumulated in
Central America and Peru, was authorized by the Spanish crown in 1537 to
conquer, pacify, and settle what is now the southeastern United States. He landed
his army in the vicinity of Florida’s Tampa Bay in the spring of 1539, and over a
period of three years the expedition pillaged its way through the southeastern
United States. In the spring of 1542, apparently near St. Joseph, Louisiana, de Soto
died of a fever and his weighted body was cast into the Mississippi River. He had
named Luis de Moscoso his successor, and it was decided that the expedition
should return to Mexico by land, thus being forced to cross Texas on its way to the
outpost settlement of P~inuco (near modern Tampico) on the Gulf Coast (Swanton
1985:xliii-xliv).
Several weeks after de Soto’s death, the westward march was begun, and by
the middle of July the army was near the Red River, probably above present-day
Shreveport, Louisiana, where the first of the sedentary Caddoan-speaking gardeners, the Amaye, were encountered. After crossing the river, the army veered
abruptly toward the southwest, probably more to the south than west. In the
following weeks, the Spaniards wandered around in Hasinai territory, often being
led astray by native guides. Consequently, the precise route cannot be traced,
although many of the peoples encountered Nasoni, Nacanish, Anadarko, Hais-can be associated with known Hasinai tribes (Swanton 1942:32). There is no
reason to believe these or other Caddoan speakers the army encountered had
abandoned their homelands in the middle reaches of the Angelina and Neches
valleys by the time they became better known to the Spaniards and French in the
last decades of the seventeenth century.
The identity of other groups met by Moscoso’s men is unknown or speculative. The army was led, for example, to a place (or people) called Soacatino. It is
possible that this group was known to the French in the late seventeenth and early

Newcomb -- Historic Indians of Central Texas

5

eighteenth centuries as Kanohatino and to the Spanish as Cantona (see below).
These natives reported they had heard of Christians to the south. The army
continued on in this direction for an unknown distance, ultimately reaching a
province called Guasco. The term was mentioned in the seventeenth century by
Casafias, but not in other documents. From Guasco, the army traveled to a
settlement of Naquiscoca, whose inhabitants at first denied any knowledge of
Christians, but after some natives were tortured the army was directed to
Nacacahoz, which they then said had been visited by Christians. Two days’ travel
took the army to Nacacahoz where a woman said she had been a captive of
Christians. She later admitted this was a lie and the army returned to Guasco.
Neither Naquiscoca or Nacacahoz can be associated with any later Hasinai tribes,
although they were undoubtedly Caddoans (Swanton 1942:8).
The Indians of Guasco now told the Spaniards that ten days’ journey to the
west (or six days to the south and southwest according to another chronicler) there
was a river called Daycao "where they sometimes went to hunt in the mountains
and to kill deer; and that on the other side of it they had seen people, but did not
know what village it was" (Swanton 1985:263). Swanton (1942:32) identified the
river as the Trinity, but this appears to be doubtful for two reasons. Six or ten days’
travel west or southwest from known Hasinai territory would have taken the army
well beyond the Trinity, and the mountains mentioned by Elvas and Garcilaso
must refer to the Balcones Escarpment and the Edwards Plateau southwest of the
Brazos River.
The sources are contradictory about what the army did after reaching the
Daycao River. One account indicates horsemen only crossed the river and climbed
its bank; another says that horsemen were given good horses with instructions to
travel eight or nine days in search of some place that had corn (Swanton 1985:263).
According to Garcilaso de la Vega (said to be the least reliable of the expedition’s
chroniclers), three groups of horsemen were sent westward to scout the land. All
groups returned in 15 days to give similar reports: they had ridden more than 30
leagues (78 miles), finding lands "very sterile and sparsely populated, and moreover even worse the farther they advanced" (Varner and Vamer 1951:520). It is
probable, then, that Moscoso’s horsemen were the first Europeans to reach southcentral Texas.
The Indians encountered west of the Daycao River lived in small huts, raised
no crops, and the captives Moscoso’s men took spoke a language that none of his
Indian hostages understood. Swanton speculated (1942:32, 1985:280) that they
were Tonkawas, Bidais, or Aranamas. As will be shown, at that time the Tonkawas
were probably in Oklahoma, the Bidai homeland was well to the east or northeast
of this area, and the range of the Aranamas was near the coast along the lower
Guadalupe and San Antonio rivers (Newcomb 1961:316; Campbell 1976a:33-34).
The Spanish description of the land beyond the Daycao River is apt to be
misjudged since the horsemen were searching for populous settlements whose
people could be exploited, and their corn and other provisions appropriated.
People were scarce and agricultural produce wanting to the west and southwest;

6

Texas ArcheologicalSociety

hence to Moscoso’s horsemen the land was unattractive. Realizing that the
expedition could not be victualed by such peoples and that they would likely
starve before they reached P~inuco, the Spaniards retraced their steps, ultimately
reaching the Mississippi River. There, boats were constructed and the survivors
were able to descend the Mississippi and journey along the Gulf shore to PS_quco.
While the de Soto expedition was rampaging through what is now the
southeastem United States, far to the west Don Francisco V~isquez de Coronado
led an army of more than 1,000 men northward out of Mexico in search of the
seven golden cities of Cibola. The cities turned out to be the adobe villages in New
Mexico of the Pueblo Indians known today as Zunis. Thwarted by the absence of
the expected wealth at Zuni and elsewhere in the Pueblo country, Coronado and
his army spent the winter of 1540-41 in the vicinity of modem Albuquerque and
Bemalillo (Coronado’s ’"Figuex").
The Spaniards found three captives among the Pueblos, Xabe, Isopete, and a
man they called el Turco (the Turk), because to them he looked like one. The
captives were plainsmen, and Isopete and probably the other two as well were
natives of a land called Quivira. Coronado’s men learned from el Turco that it was
a wealthy kingdom where there were great cities built of stone, and its people used
gold vessels and possessed other fiches (M. Wedel 1982:119-123; W. Wedel
1959:585-587). Whether el Turco consciously deceived them or was misunderstood is not clear. In any case, Xabe half-heartedly agreed with his countryman’s
description, but Isopete did not. The Spaniards had been fooled or perhaps their
greed led them to hear what they most wanted to hear, for Coronado’s army rode
eastward into the Southern Plains that summer in quest of Quivira and gold. They
were guided by el Turco, but Isopete was brought along as well.
The first natives they encountered, on the Llano Estacado in the Canadian
River valley, was a camp of Querechos. It is generally agreed they were Apaches,
although it is impossible to determine which of the later Apache tribes were their
descendants. They were friendly, the Spaniards found them intelligent, and they
conversed readily with the Spaniards through el Turco by means of a sign language. The Querechos were bison hunters who followed after the herds, using
dogs to haul their meager possessions. Bison flesh was eaten raw or to Spanish
tastes "only half cooked." They also ate fruit, but did not grow corn or "eat
bread." Their tipis were made of tanned bison skins, and surplus hides were taken
to the Pueblo country, toward Quivira, or to the east to trade. The Spaniards
also noted that the Querechos made rope from bison skins and from their "wool"
(Winship 1896:506, 527, 570). Their culture may be thought of as the ancestral
type from which developed the flamboyant, hard-riding, warlike Plains Indians
of later history.
Heeding the advice of el Turco, Coronado swung to the east and southeast,
then skirted and apparently entered Palo Duro Canyon in the Texas Panhandle.
Here, five days after leaving the Querechos, some men who were out hunting fell
in with a painted and tattooed people called Teyas. As they traveled down the
canyon and its river, the Prairie Dog Town Fork of the Red River, the army

Newcomb n Historic Indians of Central Texas

7

encountered other Teyas settlements. The Teyas were enemies of the Querechos
and also bison hunters who lived in tipis while hunting. But the Teyas were also a
horticultural people. They traded with the Puebloan villages to the west but they
had also made devastating raids on them (Winship 1896:506-507, 527, 570, 581;
Hammond and Rey 1940:237-239, 263). It is probable that the Teyas were a
Wichita-speaking plains people or speakers of some other Caddoan language
(Hughes 1968:247-255; Harrington 1940:512; Swanton 1942:35).
Coronado learned from the Teyas that el Turco was not guiding the army
toward Quivira. He had the Indian put in chains, most of the army was sent back to
the Pueblo country, and with a picked group of about 30 horsemen, Coronado
turned northward, now guided by Isopete. More than a month later the party struck
the Quivira River, the modern Arkansas, in the vicinity of Ford, Kansas, and after
rounding its northerly bend they encountered the first settlements of Quivira,
located along the Little Arkansas River (W. Wedel 1942, 1959:20).
Coronado spent more than a month in Quivira, visiting a number of scattered
settlements between the great bend of the Arkansas and the Smoky Hill rivers. The
names of two of the settlements located in the most remote and distant part of
Quivira were recorded by expedition members. The most populous was Teucarea
and the other was called Tabas, where incidentally the Spaniards garroted el
Turco. Teuearea is synonymous with the Tawakoni and Tabas with the Taovaya,
both subdivisions of the later Wichita tribe (M. Wedel 1982:121). Coronado and
his men did not find the wealth they sought, and with winter approaching they
rode back to the Southwest guided by six natives of Quivira.
Other explorations of southwestern Texas and the Southern Plains were
made by Spaniards in the last two decades of the sixteenth century: ChamuscadoRodrfguez in 1581-82; Espejo in 1582-83; Castano de Sosa in 1590-91; and Leyba
and Humafia in 1593 or 1594 (Bolton 1908:135-158, 163-195; Hammond and Rey
1953:416-419). While these explorations provide no information about the native
peoples of Central Texas, they served to excite Spanish interest in more distant
lands and led to the beginning of settlement in the Santa Fe area in 1598. In that
year, Don Juan de Ofiate led some 400 soldiers, priests, and families into the
region. They brought with them 7,000 animals, including 300 mares and colts.
Within a few years, the local Pueblo Indians had been defeated and temporarily
cowed, the capital established at Santa Fe, and the surrounding country was
beginning to be dotted with settlements and ranches.
In June 1601, Ofiate set out to explore the little known plains to the east. The
expedition was composed of more than 80 hand-picked men, two friars, more than
700 horses and mules, as well as carts pulled by mules and oxen, four cannons, and
an undisclosed number of servants (Hammond and Rey 1953; Newcomb and
Campbell 1982:30). On reaching the Canadian River friendly bison-hunting
Apaches were encountered. The term Querecho had been dropped in favor of
Apaches, Vaqueros, or Vaquero Apaches. Following the Canadian eastward the
expedition continued to meet Apaches for 100 leagues, or about half-way across
the Texas Panhandle. Their scattered bands were composed of no more than about

8

Texas ArcheologicalSociety

100 persons, usually less. On their frequent moves a woman led the way, followed
in single file by small dogs laden with tipis and other camp gear. The other women
and children brought up the rear. The men traveled "at a distance to one side,
within sight in battle array, scouting for the enemy, or for game such as buffalo or
deer." The bow and arrow was the principal weapon; men also carried leather
shields and war clubs "with a stone at the end like a hatchet and a strap for the
wrist." Women wore deerskin skirts, men apparently little or nothing in warm
weather, although "a sort of buckskin jacket which reached to the knees" is
mentioned. In cold weather, both sexes wrapped themselves in dressed bison-skin
robes. Surplus bison hides, meat, and fat were traded to the Pueblo Indians for
corn, cotton blankets, and tobacco (Hammond and Rey 1953:839, 852-853,864).
After encountering sand dunes, apparently those just east of the Texas
Panhandle, the expedition veered toward the northeast leaving the Canadian
River. Continuing in this direction, in late August or early September, some 200
leagues (520 miles) to the northeast of Pueblo San Gabriel, a large encampment of
Indians was encountered, probably about 25 miles northeast of present-day Ponca
City, Oklahoma. Members of the expedition termed the Indians Escanjaques after
the word they uttered when greeting the Spaniards. But their collective name for
themselves was Aguacane, and they were composed of eight "pueblos" whose
home territory likely lay along the North Canadian River in the vicinity of
Watonga, Oklahoma. The farthest downstream subdivision was termed
Yahuicache; upstream from it on the same side of the river were Ahaccache,
Yuhuanica, and Ahaccapan. On the other side of the river were Cochizca,
Cochpane, Aguacane, and Eguacapac (Newcomb and Campbell 1982:32).
These people are pertinent to the story of the Indians of Central Texas in
several ways. These names are in a Wichita dialect, and two of them, Yuhuanica
and Aguacane, can be associated with peoples who later frequented Central Texas.
Yuhuanica is most probably a variant spelling of Yojuane, an ethnic group that has
been heretofore identified as a Tonkawa subgroup. Aguacane is phonetically
similar to Tawakoni and Iscani, both of which became components of the later
Wichita tribe. Other evidence indicates that the Tawakonis and Aguacanes were
distinct peoples, and that by the middle of the eighteenth century the Aguacanes
had begun to merge with the Iscanis, a Wichita subdivision (Newcomb and
Campbell 1982:37).
Six members of the expedition estimated that the Aguacane camp numbered
between 5,000 and 6,000 people; one eyewitness estimated its population at only
4,000. There were other Aguacane divisions but expedition members did not
learn where they were (Hammond and Rey 1953:751,785, 807, 841, 883-884,
889). A manuscript map of the camp bears a note stating that the settlement
contained 650 dwellings, suggesting that each of them accommodated about eight
persons (Bolton 1908:facing page 212). The Aguacanes were bison hunters who
also consumed venison, wild fruit, and roots. Whether or not they grew corn in
some or all of their "pueblos" is open to question (Newcomb and Campbell
1982:34). Apparently, they erected two kinds of movable dwellings; one was

Newcomb ~ Historic Indians of Central Texas

9

circular, dome-shaped, and covered with bison skins or grass; the other was
similar or identical to the hide-covered conical tipis the Spaniards had seen in
use among Apaches. Discounting one improbable estimate of house size, the
largest structure was estimated at slightly less than 29 feet in diameter.
Three members of the expedition described Aguacane men as being tall and
well proportioned while another described them as being more robust than the
Indians of Mexico, and also "dark" with "ugly features." Two Spaniards thought
the physical features of the Aguacanes were like those of the Apaches they had
met earlier, and three men had a low regard for their cleanliness, terming them
"dirty." Apparently, Aguacanes of both sexes tattooed their bodies, and warriors
painted themselves before going into battle. In the warmth of late summer, the
men wore little or no clothing. Women covered their "privy parts" with soft skins
and some also "wore a sort of cloak" (which anatomical parts seventeenth century
Spaniards considered privy is unclear). In cold weather, men and women wrapped
deerskins and bison hides about their bodies.
Aguacane warriors were skillful archers, and they also employed short
hardwood clubs with large pieces of flint affixed to one end and a looped strap at
the other to prevent loss during battle. For defense they used large bison hide
shields. The initial encounter with the Aguacanes was peaceable, and the
Aguacanes volunteered to join in a campaign against an enemy people of a "Great
Settlement." Not only were these two peoples old enemies, but they "killed and ate
each other" (Hammond and Rey 1953:843). Ofiate did not accept the offer, but the
Aguacanes followed the Spaniards to the Great Settlement anyway. When the
Spaniards prevented them from looting and burning it, the Aguacanes became
hostile. The Spaniards, restricted by their carts, had to pass through or close to the
Aguacane camp on their return journey. As they approached the camp their
advance guard was attacked and some of their horses wounded by Aguacane
warriors. Thus, forewarned, the Spaniards prepared for battle and were attacked
by 1,500 warriors, whose numbers were augmented throughout the affray. The
battle raged somewhere between two and four hours, and during it the Aguacanes
retreated to some rocks near the river from which they dashed out from time to
time to shoot arrows at the Spaniards; one participant said the Indians set fire to
the prairie grass. The Spanish finally broke off the contest and were able to retreat
to their former camp. During the battle they captured some warriors, including one
they called Miguel. Between 30 and most of Ofiate’s men had been wounded, but
they were not subsequently harassed or attacked by the Aguacanes. The old
assumption that Plains Indians engaged only in hit and run raids with few participants is obviously wide of the mark.
The Great Settlement was eight leagues (about 21 miles) beyond the Aguacane
encampment and was probably located on the Walnut River, just above its
junction with the Arkansas River near present-day Arkansas City in southern
Kansas (W. Wede11942:18-20, 1959:223; Newcomb and Campbell 1982:30). It is
evident that it was a scattered settlement of one of the Wichita-speaking tribes,
possibly the Tawakonis.

10

Texas Archeological Society

The settlement extended along both sides of the fiver for three or four days’
travel, perhaps a distance of 30 miles (Hammond and Rey 1953:844, 857). One
member of the expedition counted 1,700 grass-covered houses over a span of two
leagues (5.2 miles) as they traveled alongside the settlement, and many more
houses could be seen in the distance. Another testified that four soldiers had
"counted the houses and found there were close to two thousand" (Hammond and
Rey 1953:846). One member of the expedition guessed that the population of the
settlement was 20,000, a figure that does not seem excessive. The Spaniards were
also told that this settlement was small compared to others located to the north,
and the Aguacanes indicated that there were other dispersed settlements farther
down the Arkansas River.
The houses of the settlement were 30-40 paces apart and clustered in groups
of 30-40. The clusters were separated from one another by 200-300 paces, with
gardens of corn, beans, and squash between them, and extending beyond them
but within sight of the houses (Hammond and Rey 1953:844, 846). Evidently
this settlement pattern was a reflection of their social groupings; the house clusters probably represented a number of nuclear families related to each other
through the maternal line (Schmitt and Schmitt n.d.; Newcomb 1961:264-267).
The houses were the distinctive "grass" or "straw-covered" lodges that
Wichitas continued to construct and live in until the late nineteenth century. As
described by members of the expedition, they were round structures, about 25 feet
in diameter, "two spears high" that accommodated eight to ten persons (Hammond
and Rey 1953:844-845).
Adjacent to the houses were wooden structures that intrigued Ofiate’s soldiers. O~ate related that

all had a flat roof or terrace, about six feet high, with room for three or
four persons, which they must have used in the summer, and which
they entered through a suitable small straw door. To enjoy the fresh air
they climbed to the top by means of a portable wooden ladder, and
there was no house which did not have a terrace [Hammond and Rey
1953:754].
One of the soldiers added that "on the outside there were wooden ladders to
climb to small wooden terraces that they had for storing corn, and we saw corn in
many of them. Inside we saw grinding stones resembling the metates used by the
Indian women in Mexico, but we did not see any pestles. We saw some ollas and
jugs of brownish clay" (Hammond and Rey 1953:857).
When the natives of the settlement discovered the Spaniards approaching
accompanied by Aguacanes, a number of their warriors on a hilltop challenged
them to battle by throwing dirt in the air, a "universal sign of war" in that land
(Hammond and Rey 1953:753). But Oilate was able to meet them peacefully,
apparently by employing the sign for peace---arms stretched toward the sun, then
touched to the chest (Hammond and Rey 1953:855). Presents were exchanged;
the Indians gave the Spaniards the small beads they wore around their necks,

Newcomb ~ Historic Indians of Central Texas

11

ears of corn, and "some round loaves of corn bread as big as shields and two or
three inches thick" (Hammond and Rey 1953:753, 857).
The Aguacanes had informed Ofiate that these enemy people still held a
Spaniard with burned feet from the Leyba-Humafia expedition. Ofiate decided
to take hostages ostensibly to gain the freedom of his countryman. Six or eight
men of the settlement were seized and placed in chains. Included was the principal chief of the settlement, and Ofiate employed the Wichita word for chief,
catarax, for him, a term, incidentally, that members of the Coronado expedition
also had picked up (Hammond and Rey 1953:754). The chief had ordered his
people to desert their settlement and they promptly did so, with the result that
the Spaniards saw few or none of its women and only some of the men. The
chief responded to questions through an aide, and the Spaniards were impressed
with the way the people obeyed him. Miguel, the captive, later told the Spaniards that their settlement had two chiefs, a "main one and a lesser one"
(Hammond and Rey 1953:874).
Various members of the expedition described the people of the settlement,
presumably men, as dark, well built, mostly naked, although "some wore buckskin hanging to the knee" (Hammond and Rey 1953:857). They painted their
bodies and "stripes extended from eye to ear" (Hammond and Rey 1953:842),
apparently referring to tattooing; footgear was also noted. Warriors were armed,
like Apaches and Aguacanes, with bows and arrows, clubs, and shields, although
they used "very short arrows, with good flint heads" (Hammond and Rey
1953:867). One of the soldiers thought the accuracy of such arrows at a distance
would be poor.
Realizing they were tremendously ou~umbered and believing that these
natives were gathering their forces to overwhelm them, O~ate agreed to return to
New Mexico. Apart from the battle with the Aguacanes the return journey of 59
days was uneventful. Although the expedition only had brief and superficial
contact with the Aguacanes and the Wichita-speaking people of the Great Settlement, several important facts emerge: First, Wichita-speakers, as illustrated by
these two groups, were not culturally homogeneous or politically united. Some
were enemies of one another. Second, Caddoan-speaking plainsmen were more
widely distributed in the Southern Plains than was formerly believed. Third, these
plainsmen were far more numerous than traditional wisdom has assumed. If, for
example, there were half a dozen grass-house settlements of Wichita-speakers
larger than the one the Ofiate expedition visited, the original population of settled
or semi-sedentary Wichita peoples considerably exceeded 120,000. Similarly, if
there were eight Aguacane divisions as large as the camp Ofiate visited, they
numbered somewhere between 40-48,000 people. It is clear, then, that Wichitaspeakers suffered a tremendous decline in the next two centuries, probably as
much as 90 percent.
Spanish interest in the Southern Plains did not ebb with the return of Ofiate’s
expedition. At least four rather poorly known expeditions probed eastward from
New Mexico in the first 60 years of the century, but none of them reached Central

12

Texas Archeological Society

Texas (Bolton 1908, 1911, 1912; Tyler and Taylor 1958; Williams 1962). But the
riches that might exist in these unexplored lands excited the Spaniards, particularly
their imaginative missionaries. Hoping to gain support for expanding their
activities, the missionaries wrote glowing accounts of the wealth of the native
kingdoms of the plains. In their zeal they created a mythical kingdom of Ahijados
and a nation of Cuitoas, both of which lay in a hazily defined area south of Quivira
and bordered on the east by the ’~I’¢xas" (i. ., the Hasinai Caddos). There was no
kingdom or people called Ahijado and a Cuitoa nation does not appear to have any
reality either (Newcomb and Campbell 1982:38-41).
While Spanish missionaries and soldiers were fitfully exploring eastward
and southeastward from the Santa F¢ area, the Spanish frontier was approaching
the lower Rio Grande from the south. The impact of this advance on the natives
of northeastern Mexico fomented hostilities and small scale raids on frontier
settlements north of Monterrey and Saltillo. They "were fairly common" by the
middle of the seventeenth century and the first major expedition sent to "punish" the northern raiders was led by Juan de la Garza in 1663 (Campbell 1984:6).
The force of more than 100 men marched northward to the vicinity of modern
Guerrero near the Rio Grand¢ and attacked a camp of Cacaxtle Indians, killing
100 and capturing 125 persons. In 1665, an even larger expedition was dispatched
from Saltillo, this time under the command of Fernande de Azcue, and an attack
again was made on the now entrenched Cacaxtles, probably in the southern part
of Kinney County, some 60 miles north of the Rio Grand¢. It took an entire day
for the Spaniards and their Indian allies to breach the Cacaxtle defenses and
defeat the natives, killing 100 and capturing 70 (Campbell 1984:8). Ten years
later, in 1675, Fernando del Bosqu¢ accompanied by Fathers Juan Larios and
San Buenaventura, soldiers, and Indian allies, crossed the Rio Grande, apparently near modern Eagle Pass, and continued northward into the southern
Edwards Plateau (Bolton 1908:297). While Bosqu¢ listed the names of a number of native groups he encountered south and north of the river, only one group,
Yurbipam¢ (i. ., Ervipiame) can be identified as playing a part in later events in
the Central Texas area. But Bosque’s diary is significant in several ways: it
reveals that turmoil and conflict were rampant in the region he visited, created
by the northerly advance of the frontier and possibly by the appearance of raiders from the north or northwest, although neither Apaches nor horse-using Indians are mentioned. Smallpox, introduced by Europeans, already had crossed the
Rio Grande and had decimated at least one group of natives.
Within a few years, in 1680, the Pueblo Indians of New Mexico managed to
unite and revolt against their Spanish oppressors. The rebellion was a temporary
success, with the missionaries, soldiers, and settlers being forced to retreat to the
safety of E1 Paso. The event was significant to Central Texas in that it accelerated
the spread of horses. No doubt many horses fell into Indian hands during and just
after the revolt, and many or most of them probably were acquired by plains
people to whom they were far more useful than to settled Puebloan farmers. But
after this initial windfall, horse-using Indians were forced to seek lsewhere for

Newcomb ~ Historic Indians of Central Texas

13

their mounts. That elsewhere lay to the south and southeast in Texas and northern
Mexico ~orbes 1959).
Partially in response to native requests for a return of missionaries, revival of
trade, and protection from Apaches, in 1683 the governor of New Mexico appointed Juan Domfnguez de Mendoza to lead an expedition into the Edwards
Plateau. Mendoza’s route took him from El Paso down the Rio Grande valley to
La Junta (the junction of the Rio Conchos and Rio Grande). Leaving the river
there the expedition rode northeastward, crossing the Pecos at or near Horsehead
Crossing, then turning eastward. Mendoza continued on to the vicinity of modem
San Angelo where he apparently veered to the southeast, and on the upper San
Saba or Llano River at a place he called San Clemente, a "bastion" was built. He
remained there from March 16 to May 1, 1684, hunting bison and receiving
delegations of Indians (Bolton 1908:314-343; Williams 1962).
During the journey Mendoza heard about and experienced marauding
Apaches. The Suma Indians, scattered out along the Rio Grande below El Paso,
requested help in defending themselves against Apache attacks. After crossing the
Pecos River, the Jediondos, who possessed horses, and the other local groups who
came to see Mendoza, asked him to make war on the Apaches. A few miles east of
the Pecos the Indian scouts followed the tracks of a herd of horses Apaches had
driven off, and while in the vicinity of modem San Angelo Apaches managed to
steal nine of the expedition’s horses and mules. After six weeks at San Clemente,
Mendoza decided to return to E1 Paso because of continuing Apache attacks
(Bolton 1908:337-338).
While at San Clemente Mendoza listed 37 native groups he expected to visit
him, but who did not do so before the expedition turned homeward. A number of
these groups can be identified in later years as inhabitants of northeastern Coahuila
and adjoining parts of Texas. But also included on the list were the Hasinai Caddo
("People of the Rio de los Tejas") of East Texas, and the "Isconis," referring to the
Iscanis, a Wichita-speaking people, some of whose descendants eventually settled
in Central Texas.
In 1685, two years after the Mendoza-Lopez expedition into the west-central
Edward Plateau, the French established a colony on the Texas coast. The noted
French explorer, Ren6 Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle, after having descended
the Mississippi River, had returned to France in triumph. There he organized an
expedition to establish from the sea a colony at the mouth of the Mississippi. But
ignorant of its longitude and at odds with the captain of his remaining three-ship
fleet, La Salle had his colonists put ashore late in the winter of 1685 on the shores
of Matagorda Bay. Fort St. Louis was built on Garcitas Creek at the head of
Lavaca Bay, and from there La Salle led two exploring parties to locate the river
he had so badly overshot (Weddle 1973).
These expeditions gave the French some acquaintance with the natives of the
coastal prairies and the Hasinai Caddos of East Texas, but the French did not
penetrate Cenlral Texas and had no direct contact with its peoples. On the second
expedition in 1687, however, Henri Joutel compiled two lists of natives; the first

14

Texas Archeological Society

was made at a camp or village of Teao Indians, probably 10-15 miles west of
present Lake Conroe, bordering Grimes and Montgomery counties on a western
tributary of the San Jacinto River (Cole 1946:488-489). The Teaos had horses,
some of them had visited Spanish settlements, and their hillside dwellings counted
"... about forty huts, standing together, besides several others straggling" (Cox
1905, Volume 11:113). Joutel divided the natives into those the French had
encountered between the fort and "La Maligne" River (the lower Brazos), and
those natives who lived west and northwest of the fiver. Later, in concluding this
section of his journal, Joutel again listed the two groups, but they are not identical,
perhaps because of copyist errors. The second group, some of whom may have
been native to Central Texas, follow (when different in the second list they are
indicated in parentheses): Kannehonan (Kannehouan), Tohaka (Tohaha), Pehir
(Pirir), Coyabegux (Cagabegux), Onapien, Pichar ~ickar), Tohan (Kohau),
Kiaffess (Kuasses), Chanzes (Chancres), Tsera, Bocrettes (Teserabocretes),
Tsepehoen (Tsepehouen), Fercouteha, Panego, Petao, Petzare (Petzares), Peisacho,
Peihoum (Peihoun), and Orcampion (Orcan, Piou) (Cox 1905, Volume II: 114115; 145-146; Margry 1879-1888:288-289; see also Stiles 1906:126-127, 147).
To meet the French challenge the Spaniards dispatched six land and five sea
expeditions to locate and destroy the French fort and settlement. But by the time
Alonso de Leon found the fort in 1689, disease and the local Karankawa Indians
had destroyed the colony, and La Salle had been murdered by his own men. Father
Damian Massanet accompanied Alonso de Leon’s expedition, and at a rancheria
of Tohaha Indians on the Colorado River in the Smithville-La Grange area, met
the chief of the Nabedache, a Tejas (Hasinai Caddo) tribe. Eager to establish
missions among these powerful, settled Indians, Massanet attempted to impress
the chief with the importance of becoming Christian and in the process, having no
other presents to bestow, gave the chief two horses and his own blanket. The chief
offered to lead Massanet to his country, and the priest promised to return the
following year (Massanet 1691).
Massanet returned with De Leon in 1690; they burned the French fort and
then rode on to establish a mission, San Francisco de los Tejas, among the
Nabedaches on San Pedro Creek, a few miles west of the Neches River near
modem Weches. The Santfsimo Nombre de Maria Mission was established about
five miles to the east by Fray Francisco Casafias de Jesus Maria. Thus was
launched the first attempt to convert the Caddos and to establish Spanish control of East Texas. Early in 1691, Domingo Terfin de los Rios was authorized to
establish four missions among the Kadohadachos, two additional missions among
the Hasinais, and one on the Guadalupe River. But the natives at San Francisco
de los Tejas were already becoming hostile to the missionaries when he visited
it, and the other missions could not be established for the lack of supplies. By
1693, when Captain Gregorio de Salinas Varona arrived with supplies for the
missions, Santfsimo Nombre de Maria had been abandoned because of a flood,
and the missionaries were about to desert San Francisco de los Tejas because of
the growing animosity of the Indians.

Newcomb ~ Historic Indians of Central Texas

15

These efforts to settle and control East Texas provide considerable data about
its natives but next to nothing about people living to the west. The only clue is a
confusing list of enemies apparently provided Father Casafias by the Hasinais.
Most of the enemies were reported to live toward the west, but an unspecified
three or four lived toward the southeast (Swanton 1942:251). Four of the tribes on
the list, Ayx, Nauydix, Nabiti, and Nondacau can be identified as non-Hasinai
Caddo tribes of East Texas. The Anao and Quibaga are not mentioned in other
documents (Campbell 1976b, 1976c); the Zauanito (as Souanetto) and Quiguaya
(as Quiouaha) were also mentioned in documents pertaining to the La Salle
expedition as enemies of the Kadohadacho, but not in later documents (Campbell
1976c, 1976d). The Tanico appear to be a non-Caddoan people Moscoso encountered in the vicinity of Hot Springs, Arkansas, far to the north of Hasinai territory
(Swanton 1985:254-255). The Sadammo nation was singled out as being very
large; they lived in bison hide houses (tipis) and had many horses and mules as
well as iron tools. Members of the La Salle expedition knew them (Caitsodammo)
as enemies of the Kadohadacho (Campbell 1976e:826-827), as did the French
castaway, Simars de Bellisle, who in 1719 mentioned them (Sadamon) (Folmer
1940:223). They were undoubtedly one of the Apache divisions or bands then
expanding eastward. Casafias also listed Canze (an alternate term for Apache) as
well as Apache. Other names on the list are Quitxix (Kichai), Tanquaay (Tonkawa),
Diujuan (Yojuane), and Canabatinu (Kanohatino, Cantona), all of whom are
discussed below. Appended to the list are two other peoples: Ca-au-cozi (a coastal
group), and Mani, who are otherwise unknown (Swanton 1942:251).
EUROPEAN AR~VAL
In 1713, Louis Juchereau de St. Denis was appointed by the French governor
of Louisiana to open an overland trade route with the Spaniards of Mexico. From
Natchitoches he traveled southwest across Texas to the mission and presidio of
San Juan Bautista on the Rio Grande, arriving there in July 1714. The surprised
commandant of the presidio, Captain Diego Ram6n, was unsure what the current
relationship was between France and Spain, and specifically if trade in these
distant lands was now authorized.
Meanwhile in Mexico City, it was decided to reoccupy East Texas. Four
missions were to be established under Fray Hidalgo with a garrison of 25 soldiers, commanded by Alferez Domingo Ram6n, son of the commandant of San
Juan Bautista, and St. Denis was hired as commissary officer of the expedition.
There were about 75 people on the expedition, and its progress was slowed
considerably by the number of livestock brought along--64 oxen, 1,000 sheep
and goats, and 4,000 horses and mules. It was the first Spanish expedition to
definitely reach Central Texas, pausing for three days in June 1716 at the
Rancherfa Grande, before continuing on to the Hasinai villages. Rancherfa
Grande then consisted of an encampment of about 2,000 remnant and displaced
Indians who had joined together as a defense against Apaches (see discussion of

16

Texas Archeological Society

the Ervipiame below). According to Bolton (1915:143-144), the rancherfa was
"north of Little River and two or three leagues west of the Brazos, apparently
near modern Cameron."
A few years later, in response to the activities of the French in East Texas,
Marques de San Miguel de Aguayo, Governor of Coahuila, volunteered to lead
another expedition into the region. On May 13, 1721, the expedition, comprised of
500 mounted men and 4,000 horses and mules loaded with supplies, left the
Presidio of San Antonio and proceeded to the Colorado River below Austin.
Heavy rains and high water, and apparently the prospect of difficult passage
through the brush and forest of El Monte Grande (biotically known as the Post
Oak Belt, not the more northerly Cross Timbers as some have suggested) northeast of present Rockdale, prompted the expedition to follow the advice of Juan
Rodrfguez, Chief of the Rancherfa Grande Indians. Guided by the Indians, the
expedition rode north from the Austin area, crossed Little River east of Belton and
the Brazos near Waco. The expedition then turned to the southeast, again joining
El Camino Real at the Navasota River crossing (Buckley 1911; Gonzalez 1983;
Forrestal 1935; Webb 1952, Volume 1:17).
Fray Mariano Francisco de los Dolores y Viana, a missionary at San Antonio
de Valero, also visited the region a number of times in the 1730s while attempting
to persuade Indians who had fled the mission to return and also seeking new
recruits (Bolton 1915:149ff). The Indians he encountered, the Deadose, Yojuane,
Mayeye, and the Indians of Rancherfa Grande, were unwilling to leave their
camps or to disrupt the trading ties they had established with the Hasinai Caddos
through whom they acquired French firearms. But the Apache threat was a very
real one, which probably accounted for their friendliness, and in June 1745 the
chiefs of the four groups visited San Antonio to request that a mission be
established in their country.
Mafiano believed two or three missions would be needed for the 1,228
people of these four groups (the precise number suggesting that a census was
taken), and through his perseverance three missions were ultimately established
on the San Xavier River (now the San Gabriel), near present-day Rockdale. The
four groups were not living in the immediate vicinity, however, but to the east in
El Monte Grande, where there was no suitable site for irrigating mission fields.
The Indians agreed to the San Gabriel location even though it was perilously close
to the trail Apaches used to come down into the prairies to hunt bison.
In January 1746, Fray Mafiano selected the site for the first mission, San
Francisco Xavier, on the south side of the San Gabriel just above its junction with
Brushy Creek. Crops were planted and construction of mission buildings was
begun, but it was not until February 1747 that the missions were officially
authorized. Subsequently a second mission, San Ildefonso, was established near
the mouth of Brushy Creek, and a third, Nuestra Senora de la Candelaria, a short
distance above Mission San Francisco Xavier.
The Mayeyes, Ervipiames (Rancherfa Grande), and Yojuanes were assigned
to San Francisco Xavier;, the Atakapan-speaking Deadoses and Orcoquizas, whose

Newcomb ~ Historic Indians of Central Texas

17

homelands were southeast of Central Texas, and the Bidais whose linguistic
relationships are moot, were congregated at Ildefonso; the Cocos and related
Karankawa peoples of the coast were assigned to Candelaria (Sjoberg 1951:393;
Newcomb 1961:315-329). Bolton (1915:198) asserted that the Indians were apportioned on the basis of their cultural and linguistic relationships, and that the
groups assigned to San Francisco Xavier were "all related to and allied with the
Tancahue (Tonkawa), a few of whom were there also." This particular allegation
was erroneous as will become evident.
The missions on the San Gabriel survived only a few years as they were
plagued by Apache raids, epidemics, difficulties with the soldiers stationed there,
and other problems. For its Indians and others in Central Texas it was a time of
tumult and change, strife, new alliances, migration of new groups into the region,
and consolidation and disappearance of smaller and weaker ones. In order to more
readily comprehend these Central Texas Indians and what became of them after
the mid-eighteenth century, they will be taken up individually.
Yojuane
When the Yojuanes were first mentioned in 1601, as previously noted, they
were one of eight divisions of a Wichita-speaking Plains Caddoan group whose
collective name was Aguacane. Ninety years later Casafias listed the Yojuanes
(Dijuan) as one of a number of Hasinai Caddo enemies (Swanton 1942:251). The
Yojuanes had apparently migrated south and east in the intervening years to
Central and North Central Texas, and they were to become one of its prominent
groups until after the middle of the eighteenth century.
Additional information about the Yojuanes is supplied by the EspinosaOlivares-Aguirre expedition which visited a short stretch of the Colorado River
between present-day Austin and Bastrop in 1709 (Tous 1930; Gonzalez 1982;
Campbell 1983). Missionaries had heard that the Tejas (Hasinai Caddos) had
moved southwestward to the Colorado River, and wanting to reestablish a mission
among them, a small party of soldiers and missionaries hurried northward. Their
information was faulty and they found no Hasinais on the Colorado; instead they
encountered four bands of Indians whose names they recorded as Simaomo,
Cantona, Tusonibe, and Yojuane. The Yojuanes were evidently newcomers to the
vicinity since no earlier documents mention them on or south of the Colorado
(Campbell 1983:2-3). Their former hostile relationship with the Hasinais had
apparently altered as Espinosa said that "the Indian captain of the Yojuanes, called
Cantona comes and goes to the Texas with his people," and he agreed to take a
message to the Hasinais (Gonzalez 1982:6). But the friendly relationship of the
Yojuanes with the Hasinais was short-lived, since they were said to have destroyed the principal temple of the Hasinais near the Angelina River in about 1714
(Bolton 1915:146).
The Simaomos and possibly the Tusonibes had migrated to Central Texas
from northeastern Mexico, but the Cantonas appear to have been native to the

18

Texas Archeological Society

Colorado River region (Campbell 1983:3-5; see under Canohatino-Cantona below).
In subsequent decades all three of these groups declined in numbers and were
absorbed by other groups, possibly including the Yojuanes; in fact, the encampment
visited by this expedition may represent an instance of this process of
amalgamation. That the Yojuane leader’s name was that of the allied group makes
sense in this context.
Espinosa included a sketchy description of these four groups in his diary,
but it is impossible to know whether it applied to one or all of them. His account
is consistent with what is known about the Yojuanes from the Ofiate documents.
The camp the Spaniards visited numbered about 2,~ people who lived in huts,
otherwise not described. They wore little or no clothing, and if they painted,
tattooed, or ornamented their bodies in other ways, Espinosa neglected to mention it. They were hunters, who at least at this season depended on bison for
their livelihood. Campbell (1983:6) suggests that they were probably following
the herds as they slowly moved northward. The number of people in a single
camp may have been "made possible by an abundance of bison in the open
grassland areas of Bastrop and Travis counties." The size of the camp also may
have been a defensive measure taken against Apache marauders, particularly
since the expedition was not able to make contact with these Colorado River
Indians until their "spies" had assured themselves they were not Apaches
(Gonzalez 1982:6). Espinosa was particularly impressed by the novel manner in
which the Indians greeted his party, remarking that:
as soon as we dismounted, they surrounded us with such insistence and
determination that we knew not where to turn. They were giving shouts
of joy, they were embracing us, they were reaching up to our faces and
arms, and then doing the same in their faces as if softly rubbing
[untando, the word for anointing] them or incorporating [embodying]
themselves with us. This is their custom when they want to make
others their friends or family members. As a matter of fact, there was
not an Indian man, woman or youth left who did not touch us to their
heart’s content. They would even bring breast-feeding babies so that
we could caress their faces-with less than that they would not be happy
[Gonzales 1982:7].
Less than a decade later St. Denis was told by the Hasinais that the Yojuanes
were among the nations north, northwest, and west of the Asinais. The others
mentioned were
the Tancahoe [Tonkawa proper], the Quihuugan, [Quiguaya, Quiouaha,
Quichuan?] Guanetjaa, the Nodacao [Anadarko], the Quitzais [Kichais],
Saccahe, Nauittij, Canohatinoo [Kanohatino], Conux, Tahoangaraa
[Tohaha], (and) Cahineo, and there are others whose names he does
not remember. He knows of them from what he has heard the Tejas say
and by reports which they themselves have heard. These nations do not

Newcomb ~ Historic Indians of Central Texas

19

have villages nor fixed abodes because of fear of the Apaches [Shelby
1923: 177-178].
St. Denis also included a brief, collective ethnography of these peoples:
All these nations which he has named used bow and arrows .... Each
nation is governed by its cacique, or captain, alike when they are settled
and when they are not, because they always have a chief who governs
them in peace and in war, but he has subaltern captains, some for the
government of the nation in war, and others in time of peace and for the
management of the villages. The declarant has observed these things
among the Tejas, and the same is true regarding the others, for that which
one nation observes the others with little difference, observe also.
Regarding meat and other supplies, the property of these nations is
communal, because that which anyone obtains by fishing is for the
nation, and likewise that which he gets by hunting. With regard to the
wives, these are not communal, since they are married in their style to
the Indian men; but the spinsters are. The husband has charge of the
wife and children, but if she has no children, it is customary to (temporarily) abandon her, she being blamed meanwhile. Some (husbands)
repudiate them for good. They support their wives and children by
hunting, fishing, and with roots, tubers, and other fruits of the trees.
All these nations have horses and ride them, but do not eat them,
having them to utilize among themselves. They do not cultivate the
fields, which are fertile [Shelby 1923:178-179].
In the fall of 1718, Jean-Baptiste Brnard, Sieur de La Harpe, secured from
French authorities in Louisiana permission to settle on the Red River among the
Kadohadachos above the settlement of Natchitoches. The following spring La
Harpe established a post just above a Nasoni village on the south side of the river,
about 12 miles northwest of modern Texarkana, in the vicinity of the Hatchel
archeological site (M. Wedel 1978). During the spring and summer, La Harpe
dispatched several expeditions. One of these, under Sieur Du Rivage, was sent up
the Red River to make alliances with any natives who might be encountered, and
to gain information about the Spanish settlements to the west. The small force rode
up the north side of the river 70 leagues (about 182 miles) where it encountered a
joint war party of Quidehais [Kichai], Naouydiches [Nabedache], Jojuan
[Yojuane], Huanchane, Huane, and Fancaoye ~onkawa] (M. Wedel 1971:64, fn
31; Bell, Jelks, and Newcomb 1967:251). The identities of the Huanchane and
Huane are unknown; Bolton (1910a:888) speculated that both were Wacos. Since
the Wacos (a Wichita subdivision) did not emerge as an ethnic entity until the
nineteenth century, this suggestion should be dismissed.
La Harpe described these groups as nomadic bison hunters, who together
counted 2,500 warriors. They were normally scattered so that they could more
easily secure food, but this war party had joined forces to make an attack on the

20

Texas Archeological Society

Cancy (Apaches) 60 leagues (156 miles) farther up the river. La Harpe also
mentioned that these tribes were allied with the Quichuans, a people who lived
two leagues south of the Red River somewhere between where he met the allied
war party and his post on the Red River. Mooney (1907, Volume 1:701) identifies
them as Kiowas, an improbable speculation since the migration of Kiowas into the
Southern Plains did not occur until almost a century later.
In the next several decades, the Yojuanes continued to roam over parts of
North Central Texas between the Trinity and Brazos rivers. In 1727, they were
reported to be on the Trinity River northwest of the Hasinais (Wheat 1957,
Volume I: Map no. 115), and as noted they were one of the tribes that petitioned
the Spaniards for a mission in 1745. A substantial number of Yojuanes were at
the mission for a time, but before it was abandoned most of them had left (Bolton
1915:190, 231). In 1754 some Yojuanes were reported to be living in a generally northerly direction from the Spanish settlement of Nacogdoches (Anonymous 1754:2).
It is apparent that Yojuane numbers had dwindled drastically, no doubt as a
result of warfare with Apaches and other enemies, and probably through introduced diseases. Their decline was accelerated in 1759 when they were surprised
by a Spanish army led by Don Diego Ortiz Parrilla. Some background is necessary
to understand the Yojuane involvement in this and other events then taking place
in Texas. For many years the Spaniards had been in conflict with Apaches, but
they were unable to subdue them. But by the middle of the eighteenth century,
Apaches--primarily Lipans--were beinghard-pressed by the Comanches, their
Wichita allies, and other Indian enemies, and there were signs that they might be
willing to settle down in missions. Consequently a mission and presidio were built
by the Spaniards in 1757 on the San Saba River, near present Menard, for the
Lipan Apaches. Virtually no Apaches could be persuaded to remain at the mission
for any length of time; nonetheless this new alliance enraged the Apache’s
enemies. Central Texas Indians, including those who had been in the three
missions on the San Gabriel, made common cause with the powerful allies of the
north, the Wichitas and Comanches, to make war on their old Apache enemies and
their newly found Spanish supporters (Dunn 1911, 1912, 1914; Tunnell and
Newcomb 1969; Weddle 1964).
In the winter of 1757-1758, the Spaniards at San Saba heard rumors of an
impending attack, and during the last days of February, 59 horses were stolen on a
night raid despite a guard over their pasture. The soldiers sent out to recover the
horses could reclaim only one, and they reported ominously that the country was
crawling with Indians. Six men were dispatched to warn a detail which had been
sent to escort a supply train coming from San Antonio. While camped on the
Pedernales River they were attacked. Four men were wounded, but they managed
to get through to the supply train. A message sent to the San Saba presidio said
their attackers were Tonkawas, Bidais, and Yojuanes. Their identity was known
because a corporal in the party had been at the presidio of San Xavier and was
acquainted with them (Weddle 1964:68-69; Tunnell and Newcomb 1969:146ff;

Newcomb ~ Historic Indians of Central Texas

21

for descriptions of Lipan culture see Opler 1936, 1940, 1945; Sjoberg 1953b,
Newcomb 1961:103-131).
The attack was a harbinger of things to come, and in March 1758 a combined
force of Wichita, Comanche, Hasinai, and other Indians, including Yojuanes and
Tonkawas, attacked the mission. Fathers Terreros and Santiesteban plus eight
other persons were killed, and the mission was pillaged and burned. The presidio,
located several miles away, was not attacked, but its soldiers were unable or
unwilling to come to the aid of the missionaries.
Ortiz Parrilla, commander of the presidio, proposed and was placed in
command of a retaliatory campaign. He gathered together about 380 militiamen
and presidial soldiers, 90 mission Indians, 30 Tlascaltecos from Saltillo, and 134
Lipan Apaches, numbering over 600 men. In August 1759, the army rode from
San Antonio to the San Saba presidio, and thence northward into the lands of the
"Nortefios." On October 2, on the "Rio del Fierro" (the Brazos or perhaps its
Clear Fork) (Cabello 1786), Ortiz Parrilla surprised an Indian rancherfa. He
attacked it and in an hour "fifty-five Indians were killed and one hundred and
forty-nine were taken prisoner;" none of his force was killed (Orfiz Parrilla
1759). The Indians attacked were not identified, but it is clear from other documents referring to the expedition that they were Yojuanes (Cabello 1786; Bell,
Jelks, and Newcomb 1967:262-263). Not satisfied with the destruction of the
Yojuane camp, Ortiz Parrilla continued on to the Red River guided by Yojuane
captives, to be drawn into a battle which had a very different outcome (to be
discussed below).
How serious this blow---or massacre--was to the Yojuanes is difficult to
judge. But if the four groups that petitioned Father Mariano for a mission in
1745 were numerically balanced, and they totaled 1228 people, then it is likely
that upwards of two-thirds of the Yojuanes were lost, or conversely that about
100 were neither captured nor killed (Bolton 1915:148). Even assuming that some
of the captives escaped and that some Yojuanes were elsewhere when the camp
was assaulted, it is apparent that this episode was a catastrophe for this once
numerous people.
In 1767, the Yojuanes were reported to be between the upper Sabine and the
Red River (Kinnaird 1958, end paper map), but in the following year Gaspar Jos6
de Solis found the Cocos, Mayeyes, Yojuanes, Tonkawas, and other unspecified
peoples in an area near the junction of the Little and Brazos rivers of present-day
Milam and Robertson counties. De Solis remarked that the:
nations are distinguished from one another by the stripes that they
paint on themselves in one manner or another, also in the cut of the
hair. Some of them have a tonsure like the Fathers or monks, others
keep the forehead shaved and let the hair grow on the back of the neck,
leaving a lock or motote on the crown of the head, the length of the
natural hair of which they take great care, others cut it off; some bore
holes in the muscles of the nose, others in the ears, but all nations have

22

Texas Archeological Society

one thing in common, that is the sign-language, with which they talk
not only for hours but entire days [Kress and Hatcher 1932:58].
Athanase de M6zi~res, a Frenchman who entered Spanish service after the
transfer of Louisiana to Spain and served as Commandant and Lieutenant Governor of the Natchitoches district, encountered Yojuanes in the same area in 1772,
still associated with Mayeyes and Tonkawas. It has long been assumed that
subsequently the Yojuanes were absorbed by the Tonkawa tribe, and at least in
one case their amalgamation with the Tonkawas can be documented. One of the
Yojuanes captured by Orfiz Parrilla was an eight-year-old boy named Miguel
Peres, after the Spaniard who raised him. His oldest brother and father had
escaped the Yojuane massacre and joined the Tonkawas, with whom they remained. But they frequently visited Miguel in San Antonio. After El Mocho, the
Tonkawa chief, was killed, Miguel’s brother succeeded him. That other refugee
Yojuanes joined the Tonkawas after the massacre, or after Miguel’s brother
became the Tonkawa leader, seems highly likely (Cabello 1786).

Canohatino-Cantona
The Canohatino (appearing as Ayano, Canatino, Coannotino, Kanoutinoa,
Konatine, and Quanoatinno in French documents) are one of the most enigmatic
ethnic groups associated with Central Texas in the last years of the seventeenth
and the first decades of the eighteenth century (Campbell 1976f:463). The name
first appears in documents of the La SaUe expedition. During that period the
Caddos of East Texas, as well as non-Caddoan peoples of East and Southeast
Texas, were acquiring horses. Some groups seem to have had an ample supply, but
others few or none (Cox 1905, Volume 1I:147). Some horses were probably
acquired through trade, but others were taken by raiding better supplied peoples to
the west, among whom were the Canohatinos. When La Salle and his party were
among the "Teao," for example, the Indians talked ofa"great nation called Ayona
and Canohatino" (Cox 1905, Volume II: 115). The ’~eaos" stole horses from the
"Canohatinos" and also mentioned that the "Canohatinos" were at war with the
Spanish. Douay adds that the Hasinais were also enemies of the "Kanoatinos," a
people said to be "cruel to their enemies, whom they boil alive" (Cox 1905,
Volume 1I:248). Some of La Salle’s men accompanied a Hasinai war party that
attacked the "Kanohatinos," and the usage of French firearms resulted in a highly
successful raid, but none of its details were recorded (Cox 1905, Volume II: 162165). Le Clercq (La Salle’s biographer), contrary to Joutel who stated that they
heard of but did not see the Canohatinos, remarked that
we crossed great prairies to the Maligne [probably the Brazos River since
there were no extensive prairies east of the Trinity or Navasota, but
Blackland Prairies are extensive northeast of the middle reaches of the
Brazos from northeast Fails County northward]. This deep river, where
one of our men had been devoured by a crocodile [i.e., alligator], comes

Newcomb ~ Historic Indians of Central Texas

23

from a great distance, and is inhabited by forty populous villages, which
compose a nation called the Quanoatinno; they make war upon the
Spaniards and lord it over the neighboring tribes. We visited some of
these villages. They are a good people, but always savage, the cruelty of
the Spaniards rendering them still more fierce. As they found us of a
more tractable nature they were charmed with our nation; but after these
mutual presents we had to part. They gave us horses cheap and carried us
over their river in hide canoes [bull boats] [Cox 1905, Volume I:240].
The most informative account of the Canohatinos was written by Cavelier,
La Salle’s brother, who may have been referring to the encounter mentioned by Le
Clercq:
In the morning, when about to march, we perceived one hundred and fifty
Indians, all on horseback, armed with lances tipped with sharpened bone,
well tied and encased, each of whom attacked a bull. No sooner had they
perceived us when some of them left the party and came to welcome us,
after dismounting. They at first regarded us with astonishment, and, after
having examined us, they uttered extraordinary exclamations. They then
made us mount, the more conveniently to witness the close of the bullfight, which seemed to us the most diverting thing imaginable, and I am
convinced that there is no chase as curious in Europe. When the combat
was ended by the death of several animals the combatants came galloping to us and, giving many tokens of surprise and joy at meeting us, they
led us away to their village. Their frank and cordial manners made us
follow them without repugnance. They often uttered the word Kanoutinoa,
pointing to themselves; this made us suppose that it was the name of the
nation. They took us straight to the cabin of their great chief, or captain,
where they first washed our heads, hands and feet with warm water, after
which they presented us boiled and roast meat to eat and an unknown
fish, cooked whole, that was six feet long, laid in a dish of its length
[alligator gar or catfish?]. It was of a wonderful taste and we preferred it
to meat. They told us by signs that they were abundant and came from a
distance, ascending the river.
We bought at this place thirty horses, which mounted us all and
carried our baggage. They cost us thirty knives, ten hatchets and six
dozen needles. On the 19th we crossed the river on their boats and our
horses swam over [Cox 1905, Volume I:290-291].
Campbell (1976g:248) has raised the possibility that the Canohatino of the
French were the Cantona of the Spanish, variously transcribed as Canabatinu,
Cantanual, Cantujuana, Cantahuhaone, and Cantuna. He states that "both groups
occupied the same general area at the same time, and their cultures as known seem
to have been similar. This question can be answered only by further archival
research." That the Spanish and French would hear and transcribe a native name,

24

Texas Archeological Society

very probably composed of unfamiliar sounds and combinations of sounds, in
different ways is highly likely, and it seems probable that the Canohatino and
Cantona were a single ethnic group. French allusions to Canohatino warfare with
the Spanish suggests that they were in conflict with New Mexican Spaniards since
nothing similar to Kanohatino appears in Spanish documents relating to southern
Texas or northern Mexico. But no documentation supporting this speculation has
been discovered, so that the earlier homeland of this group is in doubt.
In the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, the range of the
Canohatino-Cantona was on the Blackland Prairies between the Guadalupe and
Trinity rivers to the east of present-day San Antonio, Austin, and Waco. Europeans usually encountered them in encampments with other tribal groups, as was the
case of the Espinosa-Olivares-Aguirre expedition of 1709. This has led to their
being given a variety of linguistic and cultural classifications, but as Campbell has
noted (1976g: 143): "It is clear that linguistic identification on the basis of association leads nowhere in the case of the Cantona." But if their identity as latter-day
Soacatinos is correct as suggested earlier, they were in all probability Caddoan
speakers.
The Canohatino-Cantona were ultimately absorbed during the last half of the
eighteenth century by the Tawakoni and Iscani subdivisions of what became the
Wichita tribe, then inhabiting northerly parts of the old Canohatino-Cantona
range. That they would choose to unite with a people with whom they were
linguistically and culturally related, rather than with a more alien group, supports
the Caddoan-speaking thesis.
Mayeye

Henri Joutel of La Salle’s expedition was the first European to mention the
Mayeyes as "Maghai" and "Meghty" in 1687, listing them as one of the groups
encountered between Fort St. Louis and the Maligne River, southeast of the Waco
area (Cox 1905, Volume 1I:114; Stiles 1906:127, 147; Margry 1879-1888, Volume III:288). They do not appear, then, to have been native to Central Texas. In
1718-19, the Alarc6n expedition encountered Mayeyes, as well as the Sana, Emet,
Toho, and perhaps the Yojuane west of the Brazos River (Hoffman 1935:69). In
1727, these groups were mentioned as being 15 leagues (39 miles) west of the
junction of Little River with the Brazos at a spring called Las Puentezitas, perhaps
on Little River or one of its tributaries between Bartlett and Temple (Bolton
1915:145). In 1732, Bustillo y Zevallos, in a campaign against Apaches, led a
force northward across the San Gabriel River, becoming acquainted with the
Indians of that region (Bolton 1915:141; Dunn 1911). As quoted by Bolton
(1915:146): "the Mayeye customarily came down from the Brazos de Dios to the
Nabasoto (Navasota), and ranged from there to the Trinity." Bustillo last had
contact with them in 1734 when he noted that this small tribe (as well as the
Deadoses) had not increased in size because of measles and smallpox epidemics
"which are their sole destroyers" (Bolton 1915:148). An anonymous document

Newcomb ~ Historic Indians of Central Texas

25

written in 1748 asserted that"the country of the Mayeye was on the east side of the
Brazos, eighty leagues [208 miles] from San Antonio and twenty [52 miles] from
the place of San Xavier" (Bolton 1915:146).
Fray Mariano also became acquainted with the Mayeyes in the 1730s, and as
has been noted, they were among the petitioners for a mission in 1745. In 1749,
there were 86 Mayeyes at San Xavier mission, and the small number of women
and children represented in this group was attributed to Apache attacks (Bolton
1915:190). When the mission effort was abandoned, 41 of the Mayeyes who had
been at San Xavier moved to the springs on the Guadalupe, near present-day San
Marcos. They acknowledged that this location was outside their territory, but they
were agreeable to a mission being established there for them. The poorly known
mission was not successful, probably because of Apache attacks, and it was
abandoned before 1758 (Bolton 1915:276-278). Some Mayeyes were at Mission
San Antonio de Valero in the 1750s and 1760s (Hodge 1907-1910), and in 1768,
as De Solis noted, at least some of the Mayeyes had returned to the San Gabriel
area where they were found associated with Yojuanes, Tonkawas, and Cocos.
Some moved to the Gulf Coast with the Cocos and were assimilated by this
Karankawa band. Others remained with the Yojuanes and Tonkawas. Sjoberg
(1953a:281-282) has suggested that the Tonkawa tradition which held that some of
their tribe became separated from the main body and were known as the "Drifted
People," refers to that portion of the Mayeyes who joined the Cocos. It tends to
confirm the Mayeye assimilation by the Tonkawa tribe, as does the fact that one of
the tribe’s clans was named Mayeye.
Next to nothing is known about the Mayeyes culturally and linguistically; it
can be inferred, however, that they were a nonagricultural hunting and gathering
group who relied heavily on bison, at least while they occupied the San GabrielLittle River watershed, which was said to be "superb buffalo country" (Bolton
1915:44, 142). They may never have been a numerous people, and as early as the
1730s Apache assaults and introduced diseases had reduced them to no more than
a few hundred people.

Ervipiame
Ervipiame, Chivipane, Cibipane, Hierbipiane, Huvipane, Hyerbipiame,
Yerbipiame, and Yrbipia are considered synonymous (Campbell 1976h:283). The
Ervipiame were first known in northeastern Coahuila and adjacent parts of Texas
between 1670-1688, and were one of the groups encountered by the BosqueLarios expedition of 1675 in the southwestern part of the Edwards Plateau (Bolton
1908:297; Campbell 1979:13). They were usually associated with groups of
Coahuilteco-speaking Indians, and it is assumed that they were members of this
speech family. During this period the Ervipiames were generally hostile toward
Spaniards and Indian groups of the area, but by 1698 some had entered missions in
northeastern Coahuila. Displaced with other groups by the Spanish and Apaches,
they migrated to east-central Texas after 1707, and were usually found between

26

Texas Archeological Society

the Colorado and Brazos rivers. They became the dominant members of an
assortment of Indian groups that had fled the Spanish and their missions (Bolton
1914, Volume I:329-331, 1915:143-145; Hodge 1907-1910, Volume II:354). This
consolidated group of remnant and refugee Indians became known as Rancherfa
Grande, or Rancherla Grande de los Ervipiames. A map of this period by Alvarez
y Barrero notes that "Rancherfa Grande [was] composed of the remnants of 22
nations broken up by the Apaches" (Wheat 1957, Volume I, no. 115).
Several years later, in 1716, Diego Ram6n’s expedition stopped at their
encampment near present-day Cameron. It then numbered 2,000 persons, as has
been noted (Bolton 1915:143-144). In 1721 Marques de Aguayo met Juan
Rodrfguez, a chief of the Rancherfa Grande Indians, at San Antonio, where the
Indian had come to request a mission for his people. Aguayo employed Roddguez
to guide his expedition to East Texas, and at the Trinity River they found the
Rancherfa Grande Indians in association with Bidais and Agdocas (Deadose).
Aguayo asked Juan Rodrfguez and his people to move back across the Brazos
River, promising that he would establish a mission for them near San Antonio.
Their eastward movement and request for a mission was undoubtedly a response
to Apache attacks. Aguayo did establish a mission, San Xavier de Naxera where
Mission Concepcion is now located. It was not successful, and in 1726 it was
merged with San Antonio de Valero (Bolton 1915:144).
When Bustillo y Zevallos was governor of Texas in 1732-1734, Rancheria
Grande had dwindled in size; its people continued to live between the Trinity and
the Brazos. They were, as has been mentioned, one of the groups that petitioned
for a mission in their territory, and in March 1749 there were between 63-70
Ervipiames at the San Xavier mission (Bolton 1915:190, 198). By the summer of
1750, their number at the mission had shrunk to 41 (Bolton 1915:230), and when
the mission was abandoned in 1755 some Ervipiames entered San Antonio missions. But others and perhaps a majority, along with Tonkawas, Mayeyes, and
Yojuanes, moved closer to the Taovaya village on Red River in the next few years,
associating themselves with the Comanches and Wichita speakers, now joint
enemies of Spaniards and their new Apache allies (Francisco Delgado et al. 1759).
In the last decades of the century, it appears that the remaining Ervipiames were
absorbed into the Tonkawa tribe.
Tonkawa
It has been long assumed that the Tonkawa tribe was indigenous to Central
Texas (Bolton 1910b:998-999; Sjoberg 1953a; Newcomb 1961:133-153). But
considerable doubt has been cast on the literal accuracy of this assumption by
information revealed by Miguel, an Indian captured by Ofiate in 1601 during his
battle with the Aguacanes (Newcomb and Campbell 1982; Campbell 1983:3).
Miguel was later taken to Mexico City where he testified that he had been
captured as a boy of about 12 by the Aguacanes in the "pueblo of Tancoa"
(Hammond and Rey 1953:874). The word is almost certainly an orthographic

Newcomb ~ Historic Indians of Central Texas

27

variant of Tonkawa. Tonkawa is the Wichita (Waco) name for these people, not
their own term for themselves (Gatschet 1891:36-37), and it is reasonable that
Miguel used the Wichita term for his own people since he had lived with the
Aguacanes for a considerable number of years. Miguel was questioned about
various native settlements, and the map that was prepared under his direction
suggests that Tancoa probably was located between the Salt Fork and the Medicine Lodge rivers in North Central Oklahoma (Newcomb and Campbell 1982:31
and Figure 2).
Apparently, the Tonkawas (or Tancoas) were forced out of their homeland
by the rapid expansion of mounted Apaches in the seventeenth century, and they
drifted into Central and North Central Texas. Their first mention in Texas was
by Fray Francisco Casafias de Jesus Mafia in 1691, who listed them (Tanquaay)
as one of the enemies of the Hasinai Caddos (Swanton 1942:251). By 1717, when
mentioned by St. Denis as the Tancahoe with other tribes of Central Texas, they
were no longer at war with the Hasinais (Shelby 1923:178). In the following
year, as noted, a war party that included Tonkawas, was encountered on the Red
River by Du Rivage, returning from a raid on Apaches, and during the next
several decades the Tonkawas continued to range over part or parts of North
Central Texas.
Tonkawas were never represented in the San Xavier missions in any appreciable numbers. In fact, part of the opposition to the establishment of missions on
the San Gabriel was that the Tonkawas, as well as the Tawakonis, Kichais, and
Yojuanes were too far to the north to be drawn to them (Bolton 1915:183). A few
years after the disintegration of the missions on the San Gabriel, the Tonkawas
were among the natives who attacked the mission on the San Saba (Nathan and
Simpson 1959). In the following decades they were reported to be located between
the Trinity and Brazos rivers, generally in or close to El Monte Grande. In 1772,
De Mrzi~res included the Yojuanes (as Yocouanes) and Mayeyes (as Maheyes)
among the Tonkawas (Tancagues), and was told that they numbered in all 150
warriors "or something more" (Bolton 1914, Volume 1:289-290). They were then
allied with Tawakonis and Kichais in the common struggle against the Osages and
Apaches. He asserted that:
they have never been stable except while they were gathered in the
mission of San Xavier, whence in a short time they fled, since they care
less for instruction and civilization than for their unbridled liberty and
forays. The district in which they are ordinarily found lies between the
Trinity and Brazos Rivers. They devote themselves to hunting buffalo
and deer, from which they secure, besides their food, an incredible
number of skins, which they are accustomed to take to the village of the
Tuacanas [Tawakonis] [Bolton 1914, Volume I:290].

On his return from San Antonio, De Mrzi~res again mentioned the three groups,
who he said usually camped in El Monte Grande near the spring called Las

28

Texas Archeological Society

Puentecitas. In the spring of 1778, De Mrzi~res encountered Tonkawas in the
vicinity ofLa Tortuga, a hill near modern Tehuacana in northwestern Limestone
County. He found them
not in permanent houses and in a village, but underneath [tents] of
skins, and in various bands, which are directed, maintained, and moved
by the caprice of their petty chiefs and leaders. They number about
three hundred warriors, including not a few apostates. They are all
given to stealing, are daring, and are the ones who have taken the
greater part in the hostilities which the presidios of San Sabas, Espiritu
Santo, and Bexar have suffered [Bolton 1914, Volume II: 192].
De Mrzi~res’ eyewitness estimate of Tonkawa population in 1778 was more
accurate than the hearsay estimate he had learned about six years earlier as was
shown by subsequent events. An epidemic in 1777 had devastated Bejar,
Bucareli, and Natchitoches, as well as nearby Indian communities, and it then
spread to more remote natives including those of Central Texas. In the late summer of 1779, De Mrzi~res again visited the Tonkawas, then west of the Trinity
River. Their chief and many prominent men had died from the disease; there
remained but 150 warriors in a population probably numbering 500-600 people.
The chieftainship had fallen to an Apache who had been captured many years
earlier. Known as E1 Mocho ~he Maimed), for an ear lost in battle, he had
participated in the attack on the San Saba mission. He was anathema to the
Spaniards, and De Mrzi~res conspired w~th some members of the tribe to have
him murdered. But they succumbed to the epidemic before action could be taken.
It was not until 1784 that the Spaniards finally succeeded in killing E1 Mocho
(Bolton 1914, Volume 1I:231,265-274).
During the last decades of the century, the Tonkawas continued to roam
Central Texas, their wanderings dictated by the availability of game and plant
foods and by their shifting relationships with various Indian peoples, as well as
with the Spaniards. The more numerous Wichitas and Comanches to their north
and west seem to have gradually forced them to move southward out of Central
Texas, and in the early decades of the nineteenth century they were usually to be
found between the Trinity and San Antonio rivers (Abel 1922; Gatschet 1891;
Sjoberg 1953a:283). They were generally more of a nuisance than a threat to
Anglo-American settlers in the 1820s, and during this period they became more
amicably associated with the Lipan Apaches with whom they shared common
enemies and other problems. During the ten-year life of the Republic of Texas,
Robert Neighbors, their agent for a time, furthered this association (For their
subsequent history, near extermination, and language see Sjoberg 1953a; Newcomb
1961; Hoijer 1933).
Five poorly known native groups, the Sana, Cava, Emet, Tohaha, and Toho,
have been linked linguistically with the Tonkawas and were assumed to have
been absorbed by them. In view of the probable geographic homeland of the
Tonkawas, the presumed linguistic connection with these groups is unlikely. The

Newcomb ~ Historic Indians of Central Texas

29

Sanas, whose homeland appears to have been between the Guadalupe and Brazos
rivers, east and northeast of San Antonio, were probably at least in part absorbed
by the Tonkawa tribe, becoming its "Sanux" clan. Documentary evidence suggesting or demonstrating amalgamation of the other four groups with the
Tonkawas is lacking. These groups disappeared--joined other groups, entered
missions, succumbed to disease--before Tonkawas frequented the area southeast of San Antonio and Austin, their apparent homelands (Branda 1976, Volume III:153, 279, 852, 1016).
Vocabularies gathered from Tonkawa informants in the late 1820s, 1870s,
and 1928 contain many words that are similar or the same, but others, referring to
the same object or thing, are completely different. This replacement of words has
been credited to the Tonkawa custom of no longer using words that resembled or
were the same as names of persons who had died (Gatschet 1884: 159, 160, 209;
Goddard 1979:361). In light of the varied languages spoken by the peoples who
became "Tonkawas," it seems likely that the differing linguistic heritage of
informants played a significant if not preponderant role in such differing
vocabularies.
The Tonkawa tribe as it emerged in the last decades of the eighteenth century
was, then, a composite of disparate cultural and linguistic groups drawn from
different environmental regions. It seems to have become a relatively wellintegrated and self-consistent entity by the nineteenth century, although its cultural landscape can be understood only with reference to its complex origins. The
nature of Tonkawa culture, for example, has seemed anomalous in that it was a
non-horticultural, not very productive hunting and gathering society, particularly
after access to the rich hunting grounds of Central Texas was denied to the tribe.
Nonetheless, the Tonkawas were organized into about a dozen matrilineal clans,
perhaps grouped into two complementary but not exogamous divisions (moieties).
It is clear that some and very probably all of their clans were remnants of once
autonomous groups (Mayeye, Yojuane, Ervipiame, Sana, Tonkawa proper, and
others). That clans (and possibly moieties as well) originate from autonomous,
linguistically and culturally distinct fragments, has seldom if ever been noted in
the development and evolution of human societies.
That the varied components of the Tonkawa tribe should not only develop
the characteristics of clans, but continue to function like them was probably the
result of a number of factors. Some and perhaps all of the groups that were
absorbed by the tribe were demonstrably small. The Yojuanes, for example,
apparently numbered less than 100 persons and perhaps fewer at the time of
their consolidation. They were not numerous enough to maintain their independence, and it is likely that there were few or no marriageable persons to be found
within such a population. At the same time their sense of common identity or
ethnicity must have been strong and even enhanced as they were forced to interact with other groups with different cultural and linguistic characteristics. Thus,
their sense of "brotherhood" --their clannishness--was strong at the very time
their sons and daughters were marrying Tonkawas, Mayeyes, and others.

30

Texas Archeological Society
Kichai

The Kichais are speakers of a Caddoan language that is unintelligible to
speakers of Wichita and other dialects and languages of the Caddoan family. In
some respects Kichai (or Kitsai) is closer to Pawnee than to Wichita (Lesser and
Weltfish 1932; Chafe 1979:213-214; Parks 1979:203). The Kichais became affiliated with and absorbed by the Wichita tribe in the nineteenth century, although
some individuals as late as the 1960s were still fully aware of their Kichai ancestry
(Frank Miller, former Wichita tribal chairman and a Kichai, personal communication). The linguistic distinctiveness of the Kichais indicates a different past than
other components of the modern Wichita tribe, raising the possibility that the
Kichais also may have varied from Wichitas in other cultural respects. The
Kichais were seldom mentioned in Spanish and French documents of the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, and if they differed in fundamental ways
from Wichita speakers, such differences were not recorded. When first known to
Europeans they inhabited an area adjacent to the Red River valley in North Central
Texas. Hughes (1968:247-255) has suggested their association with the prehistoric archeological materials known as the Henrietta Focus, but Rohrbaugh (1982)
has persuasively argued that the prehistoric origins of the Kichais lie to the north
in the Arkansas River basin. Their linguistic affiliation supports this contention.
The historic remains of the Kichais appear to be part of the complex known as the
Nortefio Focus (Duffield and Jelks 1961; Harris et al. 1965).
The first mention of the Kichais (as Quitxix) appears to have been by Father
Casafias in 1691 (Swanton 1942:125). The next notice of them was in 1714 when
St. Denis was detained at San Juan Bautista and ordered his men to return to
Natchitoches. On their return journey, while at a Hasinai village, the men learned
that 150 of its men had ridden off to carry on war with the Kichais, and while still
there the warriors returned. They had two Kichai prisoners; four others had been
eaten during the return journey, and the Frenchmen witnessed the torture and
ritual consumption of the remaining two 0~enigault 1953:153-156; John 1975:204).
It is highly probable Kichais accorded Hasinai prisoners the same kind of treatment these prisoners received. Andr6 Penigault, one of St. Denis’ men, referring to
both the Hasinais and Kichais, also noted that:
These savages make war quite differently from those along the bank of
the Missicipy, for they all go on horseback, armed with a quiver made of
buffalo hide, filled with arrows, which hangs slung over the shoulder
behind their backs. They have a bow and in their left arm a small shield of
buffalo hide with which they ward off arrows. On their bridles they use
no other bit than a horsehair rope which passed through the horse’s
mouth. Their stirrups are held up by a horsehair rope that is tied to four
folds of doeskin, which serve them for a saddle. Their stirrups are merely
small boards, three inches wide and five inches long, upon which they
put their feet to mount the horse and to hold themselves upon his back
~enigault 1953:154].

Newcomb m Historic Indians of Central Texas

31

St. Denis, in the interest of furthering French trade, managed to arrange
peace between the Hasinai Caddos and the Kichais, and in 1718 Bienville
mentioned the Kichais (Quitchaiiches) as inhabiting a village with three
Kadohadacho tribes (Nassonites, Natchitoches, and Natsohos) 80 leagues (over
200 miles) above Natchitoches on the Red River, apparently in the neighborhood
of Lamar and Red River counties in northeast Texas. Bienville said of the four:
they make war on the Cannecy [Apache] allies of the Spaniards. They
travel on horses and are still able to put 200 men into the field. They are
respected by their enemies although they have few firearms. They formerly numbered 500-600 men [Swanton 1942:55-56].
After B6nard de La Harpe established a trading post near modem Texarkana,
in the summer of 1719 a small party under Du Rivage was dispatched to explore
the Red River. The mixed war party the Frenchman encountered included Kichais
(Guidehais), and it was learned that the natives to the north were their allies and
that the principal nation was called Touacara (Tawakoni). Du Rivage suggested
that La Harpe would like to visit these powerful people in order to form an alliance
with them, but that he would need guides to lead him there. After conferring with
one another, the leaders of the war party indicated that they would go to the
Tawakoni village to inform them the Frenchmen were coming, and they sent two
Kichai warriors back to the post on the Red River with Du Rivage to serve as
guides (M. Wedel 1971, 1982).
The Kichais moved southward away from the Red River valley, apparently
to escape Osage raiders, probably in the 1750s. They lived too far to the north to
be attracted to the missions on the San Gabriel in the 1740s, but according to De
M6zi~res they were involved in the attack on the San Saba Mission but "participated through accidentally being with the others" (Bolton 1914, Volume I:218).
In 1768, they were mentioned by De Solis (as Quchixes) and were then living
between the Trinity and Navasota rivers, along with a number of other native
groups. In 1770, they were present at a council on the Red River at the old
Nassonite post near Texarkana in which the Wichita subtribes and various Caddo
leaders conferred with Athanase De M6zi~res. In the spring of 1772, he journeyed into Central Texas to cement the alliance he had made with its people. One
hundred leagues from Natchitoches and 20 from San Pedro, apparently south of
present Palestine in Anderson County, he visited a Kichai village and wrote the
earliest and apparently the only general description of their culture. Situated in a
"fertile little meadow crossed by a permanent arroyo," there were 30 lodges in
the village, with a warrior population of 80, "most of whom are young:"
The Quitseys women, as well as those of the villages which follow, are
industrious, devoting themselves to the cultivation of the soil; and,
considering the fact that their number is not much greater than that of the
men, they have a prodigious multitude of children. The women make the
houses, prepare the food, plant the fields, tan the skins, gather the crops,

32

Texas Archeological Society
and work unceasingly, while their husbands are never employed except
in war or in hunting. Their crops are limited to maize, beans, cantaloupes,
watermelons, and pumpkins. They likewise provide themselves with
various wild products, especially nuts and medlars [probably hawthorns
or persimmons], from the latter of which they make a kind of bread that is
very palatable; and they do not despise even acorns. The trade of this
village consists in bartering with the inhabitants of Natchitoches the
skins of buffalo and deer in exchange for guns, powder, balls, and other
merchandise useful for their support and defense .... It is closely allied
with the Iscanis, Tuacanas, Taouaiazes, and Ouedsitas. The people are
cannibals just like these others, and they have the same custom of
absenting themselves from their village during the cold season for the
purpose of getting a full supply of dried meat, which is kept for the other
seasons of the year. Their superstitions are excessive. They dedicate their
chief cult and veneration to an evil spirit whom they fear and try to
propitiate [Bolton 1914, Volume II:285-286].

The Kichais continued to occupy their old range in the vicinity of present-day
Anderson, Houston, and Leon counties well into the nineteenth century. Sibley,
American Indian agent at Natchitoches, called them Keyes or Keychies, and
reported that in 1805 they lived on the east bank of the Trinity River not far from
the Camino Real (Sibley 1832:722).
The Kichais did not come into conflict with Anglo-American settlers as
quickly as did the Wacos and Tawakonis, but in 1833, after being accused of
"depredations" along Cummin’s Creek in eastern Fayette County, they were
pursued and attacked by militia, losing eight to ten men. In May 1835, Kichais
again were accused of attacking these settlements, and as a result 30 Texans
marched to the Kichai village on Boggy Creek in Leon County to chastise them.
The Kichai chiefs denied guilt, but it was alleged that stolen horses and other
plunder were in the village. A fight resulted, and the Indians fled (De Shields
1912:133).
They apparently did not return to their village or the area, but moved well
beyond the white settlements to the upper reaches of the Trinity and Brazos rivers.
Although maintaining their own villages for many years, they became more
closely associated with the Wichita-speaking tribes, and ultimately were absorbed
by the modem Wichita tribe (Newcomb 1976:73ff).
Wichita-Speaking Tribes

Wichita-speaking tribes include the Taovaya, Iscani, Tawakoni, Wichita
proper, and the Waco. After their unpleasant confrontation with Ofiate and his
soldiers in 1601, Wichita-speaking peoples apparently had no further visits from
Europeans for more than a century. Their next contact was with Frenchmen
probing westward from Louisiana and the Illinois country. In the intervening
years, however, the impact of European civilization affected these remote natives

Newcomb-- Historic Indians of Central Texas

33

in a number of ways. They had acquired horses, for example, and learned the art
of horsemanship. Possession of horses might seem to have been less essential to
them than to pedestrian hunters inasmuch as their women raised an abundance of
corn, beans, and squash. But Wichitas were as eager to obtain these wonderful,
serviceable animals as were other plains natives. It was essential that they do so;
mounted hunters were also mounted warriors. To hunt afoot one might only go
hungry; to fight cavalry afoot was to court certain disaster (Newcomb 1976:21).
Wichita-speaking tribes, or at least the more northerly settlements, also
began a southerly movement late in the seventeenth century that was to carry
some of them into the Waco region. Their migration appears to have been
prompted by tribes to their north and east who had acquired French and British
firearms (M. Wedel 1982:124-125). Made militarily powerful by these new
weapons and in quest of a more adequate supply of horses, the scattered settlements of the Wichita tribes must have become fat targets for horse-hungry
raiders. On their western flank the Wichita tribes were also now confronted by
mounted Comanche raiders, new invaders of the plains. Contacts appear to have
been sporadic, but these newcomers constituted a new and growing threat. The
southern migration was not without its dangers, since old Apache enemies ranged
in that direction. But Apaches had few if any firearms; they were wealthy in
horses, as were Spanish settlements and ranches off to the south and southwest.
In short, several factors apparently were involved in the southward movement of
the Wichita tribes.
In the late summer of 1719, Wichita-speaking tribes were visited by two
separate Frenchmen, B6nard de la Harpe and Claude-Charles Dutisn6. France and
Spain had gone to war again, so it was useless for La Harpe from his post near
Texarkana to attempt to inaugurate trade with the Spanish in New Mexico.
Exploration of the unknown country to the northwest and developing trade with its
people was an attractive alternative. So, in August with the two Kichai guides and
eight other men, La Harpe struck out on horseback for the Tawakoni settlement.
The journey took more than three weeks and during it they barely avoided a
skirmish with a party of Osages and just managed to stay out of the way of an
Apache war party. For many years there was disagreement among scholars about
the location of the dispersed Tawakoni settlement, but it is now firmly established
that it was situated on a terrace (Wealaka ridge) on the south bank of the Arkansas
River below Tulsa, Oklahoma, near the town of Leonard (M. Wedel 1981:28,
1982:124; Newcomb 1979:36-38).
La Harpe and his party were ceremoniously met some distance from the
village by the principal Tawakoni chief and six chiefs of other "nations," all
mounted on beautiful horses. Following mutual assurances of friendship, members of the French party were presented with cornmeal bread and dried meat; La
Harpe was provided with a fine horse, and the group proceeded to the settlement.
The Indians had La Harpe dismount, and he was seated on a buffalo robe placed
over a plank a musket-shot away from the Tawakoni chief. The leading men
encircled him, and one after another put a hand in his as a token of goodwill. La

34

Texas Archeological Society

Harpe presented the young Tawakoni chief with muskets, powder, balls, and
cloth, and the chief gave La Harpe an eagle feather headdress, adorned with many
colored feathers and two feathers from the calumet, one for peace and one for war.
It was the most prestigious gift they could bestow.
The peoples who had gathered, in addition to the Tawakonis (Touaearo),
were the Toayas (Tawehash or Taovaya), Ousita (Wichita proper, the subdivision
whose name later came to be employed for the consolidated tribe), and Ascani
(Iscanis). Two other groups, the Adeco and Honecho, are not mentioned in other
documents; presumably they were small groups subsequently absorbed by other
Wichita-speaking tribes. Other groups mentioned were the Quiraquirit, which La
Harpe did not realize was a collective term Wichita-speaking Indians used for
themselves, and Caunuche, which was the natives’ term for Frenchmen (M.
Wedel 1981:28).
About 7,000 persons had been attracted to the Tawakoni settlement to see
the Frenchmen, and during the next several days long, drawn out calumet ceremonies were held for the French. These were conducted by the Taovaya and
Iscani chiefs, both of whom were old men skilled in leading such ceremonies.
During them speeches were made, dances held, the calumet smoked, and presents exchanged. The climax of the ceremonies occurred when La Harpe was
carried to an arbor and his face painted. He was then presented with 30 buffalo
robes, rock salt, tobacco pressed into loaves, some mineral pigments, and an
eight year-old Apache captive. The chief apologized for having only one captive
to give La Harpe, since the 17 others in their possession had been consumed a
month earlier in a public feast.
After receiving these gifts, La Harpe reciprocated by giving the Wichitas the
presents he had brought, and several days later left the village to return to his post
on the Red River. He had planned on leaving some of his men behind, pending
approval for locating a trading post at the settlement, but he did not do so since the
Indians would abandon the settlement in November for the winter hunt, and they
would not return until March. La Harpe’s return journey was hectic since the
French no longer had the Kichai guides, food ran out, and the Caddo Indian who
had accompanied them was killed by an Apache war party.
At almost the same time that La Harpe reached the Tawakoni settlement on
the Arkansas River, Claude-Charles Dutisn6 was sent westward from the mouth of
the Missouri River to contact the Wichitas. He reached a Taovaya village, probably located on the Verdigris River near present-day Neodesha in southeastern
Kansas (M. Wede11982:124). He referred to its people as "Panioussa," "Paneassa,"
and "Panis" which were the names Osages and other Siouan-speaking people used
for the Wichita-speaking tribes. It meant "black Pawnee" and perhaps referred to
skin color but more likely to the Wichita custom of heavily tattooing face, arms,
and chest, a custom the more northerly Pawnees did not share. The French came to
refer to the Wichita-speaking peoples as "Panis Piques," meaning tattooed or
pricked Pawnees, and Americans, borrowing from them, sometimes referred to
them as "Pawnee Picts."

Newcomb ~ Historic Indians of Central Texas

35

The Taovaya village had 130 grass houses and somewhere between 200-300
warriors, and there was another village of the same size several miles upstream.
The population of each village was apparently between 1000 and 1250 people, but
between them they had only about 300 horses. The old habit of living in scattered
settlements or hamlets had been abandoned by the Taovayas. The Taovaya shift to
relatively compact villages near other villages was obviously a defensive measure
taken against enemy attacks. The Taovayas reluctantly traded two horses and a
mule with a Spanish brand to Dutisn6 for three muskets, powder, pickaxes, and
some knives. He also learned that they were at war with Apaches, ate Apache
captives, and used leather armor to protect their horses. In warfare they skillfully
employed bows and arrows and a long lance tipped with the blade of a European
sword. He was told that there were other Wichita villages off to the west and
northwest, but oddly, he was not told about the Tawakoni settlement on the
Arkansas, scarcely 100 miles to the southwest.
In 1748-1749, about three decades after La Harpe and Dutisn6 visited the
Tawakonis and Taovayas, deserters from French Louisiana made their way from
the Arkansas Post on the lower Arkansas to New Mexico. They passed through
two Wichita villages situated on the west side of the Arkansas River, identified
as the Deer Creek and Bryson-Paddock archeological sites, about one and a half
miles apart in Kay County, Oklahoma (M. Wedel 1981:5, 1982:127). One of the
villages was fortified with a stockade and a ditch. The villagers were described as
"Panipiques" and also as "Jumanos," a Spanish term employed for several different groups of tattooed natives. One or perhaps both villages were probably
"mostly Taovayas" (M. Wedel 1982:127). For a time this was an ideal location
since in about 1747 the Comanches and some or all of the Wichita-speaking
groups agreed to a mutually advantageous peace. It made the Taovayas prosperous middlemen in the lucrative trade between the Comanches and the French.
The French could ascend the Arkansas by boat as far as the twin villages, and the
villages were easily accessible to the nomadic Comanches. But in 1752, the more
northerly Pawnees also made peace with the Comanches, and French traders took
the more direct route from the Illinois country up the Missouri to the Pawnee
villages where they could trade or obtain horses for the journey to Santa Fe.
Before 1757, the villages on the Arkansas River had moved south to the Red
River where they were reestablished just west of the western Cross Timbers. A
fortified Taovaya village was situated on the north side of the fiver (known
archeologically as the Longest site, Jefferson County, Oklahoma), and an Iscani
village was located a short distance downstream. By 1765, there was a Wichita
(Wichita proper) village north of the Taovaya village and the Iscani village that
was south of the fiver (apparently the Upper Tucker site, Montague County, Texas
[Bell, Jelks, and Newcomb 1967; Calahorra 1765]).
The new settlements on the Red River (the vicinity misnamed "Spanish Fort"
by Americans who settled at the abandoned site in the mid-nineteenth century)
were excellent choices since they bordered on the Comanche range to the west,
could be reached by boat by traders from Natchitoches, Louisiana, and offered a

36

Texas Archeological Society

plentiful source of timber for construction and fuel. There was a good ford,
allowing easy access to the other side of the river, a fine spring, plentiful arable
land along the river, excellent pasturage for horses, and much bison and other
game. According to a Spanish soldier, Antonio Trevifio, who was captured by the
Taovayas in 1764 and lived in the palisaded village for six months, and archeological knowledge of the site, the fortification consisted of an oval, log enclosure
about 130 yards in its longest dimension, 88 yards wide, and was situated in the
middle of a dispersed village on the north bank of the river. It was constructed of
split logs set vertically in the ground and spaced far enough apart so that muskets
could be fired between them. Outside the palisade was an earthen rampart about
four feet high, and beyond it a ditch about four feet deep and more than 12 feet
wide. Inside the palisade were four underground chambers large enough to shelter
all noncombatants (Bell, Jelks, and Newcomb 1967:84-85, and Figure 26;
Calahorra 1765).
After Ortiz Parrilla’s army had surprised and decimated the Yojuane encampment in the late summer of 1759, it continued northward, willingly guided by
captive Yojuanes. Their apparent eagerness to guide the army might have prompted
a more cautious leader to proceed warily. It did not deter Ortiz Parfilla, however,
and his forces were drawn or blundered into an assault on the fortified Taovaya
village. In the ensuing battle, the army was unable to take the village and was
forced into a precipitous retreat, even losing their precious cannons (Ortiz Pan-ilia
1759; Bell, Jelks, and Newcomb 1967:262-265; Newcomb 1976:37-40).
About the time the Taovayas were establishing their fortress on the Red
River, Tawakonis and some of the Iscanis were also moving to the south. Based
on information an Osage war party provided when it visited a camp of Andr6
Fabry de la Bruy~re on the Canadian River in 1742 (M. Wedel 1981:32), the
Tawakonis had moved to the Canadian about 1737, but soon afterwards migrated
to the Red River, and in the 1740s moved farther south into Texas. They apparently first settled in a twin village located on the upper Sabine River, probably at
what is known as the Pearson Site in Rains County, now under the waters of Lake
Tawakoni, about 50 miles east of Dallas (Johnson and Jelks 1958; Duffield and
Jelks 1961). The migration put many miles between them and the aggressive
Osages, and gave them easier access to the French at Natchitoches (John
1975:305-306).
Fray Joseph de Calahorra, a veteran missionary at Nacogdoches, with a small
retinue of soldiers and settlers, joined along the way by about 100 Caddos, visited
the twin Tawakoni-Iscani village in the fall of 1760. They were met, as was
customary, about 10 miles from the twin village and escorted to it. The entire
populace had turned out to make signs of peace and warmly greet the foreigners.
They were welcomed by the four chiefs and then led to tipis especially prepared
for them. Calahorra and his party remained in the village for eight days exchanging presents and being feted and feasted in turn by the chiefs.
Only a street separated the Tawakoni and Iscani villages, and they counted
47 large dwellings, each housing 12 families. The villages had 250 warriors,

Newcomb ~ Historic Indians of Central Texas

37

suggesting a total population of between 1,~ and 1,250 men, women, and
children. Calahorra added that:
the towns are located on a beautiful meadow.., and are beautifully
arranged with both streets and gardens. Their pasture lands are abundant,
are common property, and produce fine breeding horses. Their farm
lands, which they prohibit other tribes from using, are black and firm,
and are maintained perhaps at a distance of a league from the town. They
are accustomed to plant at the proper season all together in one labor.
They gather in great abundance their products of maize, beans, and
pumpkins and immediately divide them up into equal parts. They were
constructing a fort or subterranean passage so they could defend themselves from the Spaniards or any other nation which was making war
against them [Johnson and Jelks 1958:412].
While at the twin villages, Calahorra met with a Taovaya chief and his
entourage of 20 men and six women, who represented the Red River villages. Reestablishment of peaceful relations, including the return of the two cannons and
peace with the Apaches, was discussed, and Calahorra agreed to visit them the
following summer. Calahorra returned to the Tawakoni-Iscani village the following fall, and during his eight-day visit distributed presents and gave certificates of
captaincy and canes, symbolic of that office, to the Tawakoni chief, E1 Flechado
en la Cara, and the Iscani Chief Llaso or Zurdo ("Lefty"). But old and in failing
health, Calahorra could not continue on to the Red River villages. He left with the
Tawakonis and Iscanis the symbols of office for the Taovaya chief and gifts for his
people. Calahorra never succeeded in visiting the Red River villages, and he was
unable to establish missions among either the Tawakoni-Iscani on the Sabine or
the Taovayas on Red River.
The broken promises of the Spaniards and their continued support of the
Apaches, demonstrated by the construction of Mission San Lorenzo de la Santa
Cruz on the upper Nueces River in 1761, soured the Taovayas on an alliance with
the Spanish. In the summer of 1763 the Taovayas raided the San Saba Presidio,
making off with 70 horses and killing three Spaniards, and they appear to have
been among the Norteflos who made life hazardous for the Spaniards at the
mission on the Nueces (Tunnell and Newcomb 1969).
In the fall of 1770, Athanase De M6zi~res traveled up Red River to the
village of San Luis de Cadodachos (La Harpe’s old Nassonite Post near Texarkana)
and held a meeting with Caddo chiefs and seven chiefs of the Tavaiazes (Taovayas),
Tuacanes (Tawakoni), Iscani (Yscani), and Quitseys (Kichais). During the council, one of the Wichita leaders stated that they were no longer angry at the
Spaniards and that the Tawakonis and Iscanis had "abandoned the establishment
which they had in the vicinity of San Antonio Bexar and San Saba and are to-day
living off to one side, not far from San Pedro" (the site of San Francisco de los
Tejas mission, near Weches). Exactly where this "establishment" was and how
long it was occupied is unknown (Bolton 1914, Volume 1:212).

38

Texas Areheological Society

In the following year, the Taovayas formally concluded peace with the
Spaniards at Natchitoches, ratified it at San Antonio, and in March 1772 De
MSzi~res traveled into Central Texas to cement the alliance with its natives.
After visiting the Kichai village near modem Palestine, he continued westward
about 20 miles to a scattered settlement of Iscanis. They numbered 60 warriors
and many more women and children (perhaps a population of 300). Continuing
westward seven leagues (18-19 miles), De M6zi~res visited a Tawakoni village
on the west side of the Trinity River, probably at the mouth of Tehuacana Creek.
When the river was high, it formed "a peninsula where the village is located."
The village had 36 houses, 120 warriors "with women in proportion, and an
infinite number of children of both sexes," perhaps totaling 500-600 people. De
M6ziSres described them as horsemen, who "are most cruel with their prisoners,
whose flesh they eat, after having killed them with long and unheard of torments,
horrible to mankind. They do not bury their dead, but take them to the open field"
(Bolton 1914,Volume 1:288-289). The last sentence is anomalous since there is
abundant evidence that Wichitas buried their dead (Schmitt 1952; Newcomb
1961:263-264).
From these Tawakonis De M6ziSres learned that there was another Tawakoni
village on the Brazos River, 30 leagues (about 80 miles) distant. Although its chief
was reported to be hostile to the Spanish, which had apparently caused the split,
De MSziSres decided to go there in order to "reconcile its inhabitants" and to
persuade them to move to (or move back to) the Trinity village. To reach this
village De MSzi~res "departed from the western course" he had been pursuing to
pass "through broad and pleasant plains, varied by an infinite number of groves"
(Bolton 1914, Volume 1:293). Incredible numbers of bison were encountered, but
what little water was found had been fouled by the herds, marring an otherwise
pleasant journey. The Brazos was low but he was so impressed with the natural
advantages of the site and its location with respect to various settlements that he
recommended a presidio be established there. The village counted 30 families, and
like those previously visited there was a large number of children, suggesting a
population of 150-200 people.
The location of the village cannot be positively determined from the documents; it may have been the Stansbury site, two miles above the Lake Whitney
dam and now under its waters (Stephenson 1970:42, 59-61,277-283), or as Story
(1985:83) suggests, the Stone site, some 20 miles downriver. As early as 1765,
Antonio Trevifio had reported a Tawakoni village about 50 leagues (130 miles)
south of the Spanish Fort villages, apparently on the Brazos, and he was likely
referring to this village (Calahorra 1765).
A few years later, in the spring of 1778, De MSziSres again visited the
villages of Wichita speakers in the Waco region (Bolton 1914, Volume II:193196). After leaving the Kichai settlement at or near its earlier location, and failing
to find the Tonkawa headmen in the vicinity of La Tortuga, he continued westward 16 leagues (about 42 miles) to the Brazos. The river was up, but the
Tawakonis from the village on the west bank assisted his party in crossing. It is

Newcomb m Historic Indians of Central Texas

39

evident that De Mfzi~res had not visited this village before, and his letter implies
that its friendly residents had recently moved from their Trinity River village to
this site. He remarked that:
this village contains about one hundred fifty warriors [perhaps a total
population of 600-750]. It is located in a fertile plain protected from the
overflows of the fiver that bathes it by a high, thick wall [meaning bank],
at whose base rises a spring from which the inhabitants drink and from
which they could draw the water necessary to irrigate the broad plains
where they have planted their crops, but they are ignorant of this advantage [Bolton 1914, Volume II:195].
One hundred apostate Xaraname (Aranama) Indians had settled near the village
and De Mfzi~res importuned the Tawakoni chief to persuade them to return to
their mission. A Tonkawa chief also appeared, and the Tawakoni chief, at the
Frenchman’s urging, suggested that the Tonkawas settle down in a permanent
village.
Story (1985:83) suggests this village was at the Stone site, about eight miles
upriver from Waco, but the Barron Branch site in what is now downtown Waco is
also plausible. Both are about 40 miles from La Tortuga, although the distance
between the Stone site and the one 20 miles above it, which De Mgzi~res next
visited, agrees better with the distance between the Stone and Stansbury sites than
the Barron Branch and Stansbury sites.
From the lower Tawakoni village De Mgzi~res rode up the Brazos to
another village "which here especially is very attractive, one of its banks consisting of a pleasant meadow and the other of beautiful hills" (Bolton 1914, Volume
I: 196). The village was larger than the lower one and De Mgzi~res indicated that
it was the "Chief Post," or principal Tawakoni village (Bolton 1914, Volume
I: 196-197). From this village De Mgzi~res rode northward, keeping the eastern
Cross Timbers to his fight, and a week later reached the villages at Spanish Fort.
His description of the people and their lifestyle is refreshingly ample, and since it
probably applies equally well to their relatives on the Brazos it is quoted at
length. The village on the north bank had 37 houses, the larger on the south side
of the river counted 123:

Each dwelling contains from ten to twelve beds, considering which fact a
conservative estimate places the number of men, including youths, at
more than eight hundred, while that of the women and the children of
both sexes is very large. Their dress, consisting only of shirts, leggins,
and moccasins, is of skins; their leather shields, horse equipment, and
camping tents are of the same material. Their foresight in supplying
provisions shows them to be industrious, for there is no house in which at
present there may not be seen four or five vessels full of maize, each one
estimated at four and a half fanegas, besides a great quantity of beans and
calabashes. [It was April so that these crops had been harvested the

40

Texas Archeological Society
previous year.] They preserve the latter [pumpkins] from year to year,
weaving them curiously like mats. In addition, they raise watermelons
and tobacco in great plenty .... The fish [in the river] are of the best
varieties, but they do not care for them .... Their government is
democratic, not even excluding the women, in consideration of what they
contribute to the welfare of the republic. The women tan, sew, and paint
the skins, fence in the fields, care for the com-fields, harvest the crops,
cut and fetch the In’e-wood, prepare the food, build the houses, and rear
the children, their constant care stopping at nothing that contributes to
the comfort and pleasure of their husbands. The latter devote themselves
wholly to the chase and to warfare. By the first they become rich, by the
second famous. They come to be petty chiefs among their people, not by
the prowess of their fathers, but by their own. To this is added the thought
that in proportion to their achievements they will gain for themselves
happiness in the next life. They have no religion, or very little, the most
noticeable feature of it being the veneration of fire, together with ridiculous superstitions. They are cheerful, affable, and docile in their manner,
compassionate toward the sick, orphans, and widows, respectful to their
elders, generous toward strangers, kind to guests, but in general more
revengeful for injury than grateful for benefits, as is proved by the
atrocities which their prisoners experience at their hands, which are so
great that even to relate them would cause horror and make the narrator a
party to them [Bolton 1914, Volume II:202-204].

In the late summer of 1779, De M6zi~res made his last visit to Central Texas
and its natives. He found the lower Tawakoni village on the Brazos had been
hard hit by the epidemic of 1777-78. But it now counted 250 warriors (in a
probable population of 900), suggesting that some other Tawakoni or Wichitaspeaking group, perhaps the Iscanis, had settled at the village. In a memorandum
of gifts given to its people he identified its chief as Quiscat (Bolton 1914,
Volume II:276-277). This influential leader (also known as Quiscot, Ciscat
Gainor, and Siscat Gaynor) generally attempted to maintain cordial relations
with the Spaniards, and they referred to him as the paramount chief of the
"Yscanis," "Flechasos," and "Taguacanes" (Cabello 1784, 1785). De M6zi~res
also noted that the Tawakonis of the upper village were given the same presents
and that its chief was "Flechazo" (arrow wound). The similarity of this chief’s
name to that of"E1 Flechado en la Cara" (facial scar from an arrow wound?), the
chief of the Tawakoni village on the Sabine some 19 years earlier, is striking.
The two may well have been the same man.
In the fall of 1786, Pedro Vial, a French frontiersman who had lived among
and was well acquainted with the Taovayas on the Red River, was dispatched by
Domingo Cabello, Governor of Texas, to explore a direct route from San Antonio to Santa Fe. But before he departed from San Antonio his mission was
expanded and the journey lengthened. Some young Taovaya and Wichita proper

Newcomb ~ Historic Indians of Central Texas

41

warriors had raided San Antonio for horses and one of them had been killed. Vial
identified the dead warrior as a Taovaya, and the Frenchman was now to proceed
to the Spanish Fort villages to express Spanish displeasure to the tribal leaders
about this hostile activity. Then he was to go on to Santa Fe. The journey did not
go well. While crossing the Guadalupe on the second day out Vial and his aide,
Cristobal de Los Santos, lost their provisions and a horse drowned. By the time
they reached the Colorado River Vial was sick, and five days later, apparently in
the vicinity of the Lampasas River, he fell unconscious from his horse. When he
regained consciousness two hours later, his companion wanted Vial to sign a
note absolving him from responsibility for his likely death. Vial refused to do so
and decided to go to a Tawakoni village for help. Nine days later, traveling north,
they reached the village, but nobody was there; its occupants apparently had left
for their fall hunt. The next day, six leagues (16 miles) farther north, they reached
the Brazos, and four days later, continuing in the same direction, they reached
"Quiscot’s" village.
The Taovaya and Wichita-proper raiders had passed through the village on
their way home; Quiscat had taken some of their horses and given them a severe
reprimand. He made it clear to Vial that he wanted to maintain peaceful relationship with the Spaniards. Vial told the chief of his illness and asked if someone in
the village would venture to cure him. Quiscat answered in the affirrnative, Vial
settled down in the chief’s lodge, and seven week later the frontiersman departed
on his journey cured (Vial 1787; Loomis and Nasatir 1967:268-285). Vial did not
visit Flechazo’s village (possibly the Stansbury site?) even though it was on his
route to the Spanish Fort villages. This suggests that it had been abandoned and
perhaps had been relocated at the empty village Vial had visited earlier.
Allusions to the Iscani band that had lived in a scattered settlement east of
the Trinity River in 1772 become increasingly scarce during the remaining years
of the century. The last reference to them appears to have been made in 1799
when their head chief died (Moral 1799; Elam 1971:200). After this date the
Iscanis apparently were absorbed by one or another of the Tawakoni villages,
were simply termed Tawakonis, or lived at some unreported place in the Waco
area. It has long been assumed that the sub-tribe designated as Waco by AngloAmericans refers to these Iscanis, but this is doubtful (Bolton 1910c:1002;
Newcomb 1961:250).
There is also uncertainty about the origin and meaning of the word Waco.
Lesser and Weltfish (1932:12) state that:
weku’ is said by informants to be derived from wehiko, which latter is
evidently the Wichita rendition of Mexico as pronounced by the Spanish;
it was used for the people of this band because, according to tradition,
they were always fighting with the Mexicans. They are spoken of as
"Indians who were always scouting around."

It is likely, whatever the meaning of the term Waco, that the word was
derived from an early nineteenth century name for a Tawakoni village on the north

42

Texas Archeological Society

bank of the Red River in the Spanish Fort locality. Besides this village, Taovaya
and Wichita proper villages were then nearby on the south side of the river. The
principal chief of the three villages was Awakahea (or Awahakei) of the Tawakoni
village. He died in 1811 while returning from a visit to Natchitoches, and the
Taovayas and Wichita proper could not agree on a successor; consequently the
villages were abandoned (Garrett 1946:403; Sibley 1832:54; Bell, Jelks, and
Newcomb 1967:289-301). According to Anthony Glass, an American trader who
visited these villages in 1808-1809, Awakahea’s north bank village was called
"Huick," or something similar since the only extant copy of this word in Glass’
diary is nearly illegible (John 1982-83:416). As John (1982-83:434, fn 13) notes,
"This may in fact represent one of the earliest occurrences of the name which
Anglos would render as Waco." When the villages dispersed after the chief’s
death, the term Huico was employed for part or all of the Tawakonis who moved
south to the Brazos River, and who apparently established a village at the Barron
Branch site in what is now downtown Waco. Nineteenth century Anglo-Americans wrote and pronounced the word in a variety of ways, the modem pronunciation "way-ko" distorting the original "wee-ko."
Watt (1969:208) has located the Barron Branch site more exactly within
Waco:
the village area extended as far west from the river as the Masonic
Temple at 8th street, and from Barron Branch south to the spring in the
bank of the river at Bridge Street. The big spring, "cold as ice" emerged
from the south side of Barron Branch, near the present school building
at 7th and Jefferson. When the branch was walled up and converted
into a controlled channel, the big spring was destroyed. An historical
marker now designates the spot. A smaller spring still flows from the
west bank of the river immediately south of the Suspension Bridge, at
the point where Bridge Street, first Waco main street, was planned to
meet the river.
Following the purchase of the Louisiana Territory by the United States in
1803, a resident of Natchitoches, Louisiana, Dr. John Sibley, was put in charge
of Indian affairs in the neighboring region. He did not visit the Indians in their
villages and camps, but veteran traders supplied him with information about
them, and delegations of Indians soon came to Natchitoches to trade, receive
presents, and talk with him. The Waco migration to the Barron Branch village is
indirectly supported by his reports. In his first communication about Central
Texas Indians in 1805 he reported that "Tawakenoes or Three Canes" lived on
the west bank of the Brazos, "but are often, for months at a time, lower down
than their usual place of residence, in the great plain on the Tortuga or Turtle,
called so, from its being a hill in the prairie" (near the modem namesake town of
Tehuacana, Limestone County, known archeologically as the Vinson site
[Duffield and Jelks 1961:70-72]). Sibley added that they "are estimated at two
hundred men; are good hunters; have guns, but hunt principally with the bow; are

Newcomb m Historic Indians of Central Texas

43

supplied with goods from Nacogdoches, and pay for them in rugs, tongues,
tallow, and skins" (Sibley 1832:723). But in a newspaper article, apparently
published in about 1818-1820, Sibley said that the "Whacoes" with a population
of 350-400, lived on the Brazos, while "Touwackanies" were then living "at a
beautiful spring of water which discharges into the river Trinity from the west
side" (Abel 1922:92-94).
The Wacos first came to the attention of Stephen F. Austin’s colonists in
August 1823 when a war party returning from a raid on the Tonkawas was seen
while camped on the Colorado River near present La Grange (Barker 19241928:682). The following spring a large Waco and Tawakoni war party of 180
men, again in pursuit of Tonkawas, was discovered by settlers near present
Columbus (Barker 1924-1928:755), and it was assumed that they were responsible for killing Captain Tumlinson near present Seguin (Barker 1924-1928:842843). A short time later, a party of 13 Wacos was discovered approaching the
settlements, and Captain John J. Tumlinson, a brother of the slain man, with
"eleven young Texas boys" pursued the Indians and found them camped about 14
miles above Columbus on the Colorado River. They surprised the Wacos and
killed 12 of them (Wilbarger 1889:204-205). Whether or not the Wacos were
guilty was not considered or determined. Thus was inaugurated the kind of
behavior that characterized Texan and Waco-Tawakoni relations for many years-misunderstanding, Indian forays, and settler and ranger pursuit.
Austin’s struggling colony could ill afford conflict with the Tawakonis and
Wacos, and Austin sent commissioners in June 1824 to the Brazos River villages
to "form a lasting treaty of peace and friendship for ever" (Barker 1924-1928:842845). Thomas M. Duke, one of the commissioners, reported that the Waco
village contained 60 houses, and that the inhabitants had about 400 acres of corn,
beans, pumpkins, and melons under cultivation. He estimated they could raise no
more than 100 warriors, suggesting a population of about 400. Most of the
Wacos were away on a buffalo hunt and an expedition against the Osages, but
Duke delivered to those present Austin’s "talk." In it Austin held out the olive
branch of peace on the one hand and threatened dire revenge on the other if those
responsible for killing Tumlinson were not punished. The Wacos "denied positively the murder of Tumlinson and likewise the stealing of any horses." Duke
also mentioned that a Tawakoni village, three miles below the Waco village on
the east side of the Brazos, counted only seven houses (probably the Gas Plant
site; Bell, Jelks, and Newcomb 1967:45-49). At both villages defensive dugouts
had been created by digging shallow pits and throwing the excavated dirt up
around them (De Shields 1912:67; Berlandier 1969:44).
The Mexican government in August 1825 ordered Austin to destroy the
Waco village. Austin procrastinated, but finally, on April 24, 1826, he invited the
intrusive Cherokee Indians of East Texas to join him in a joint campaign against
the Wacos. Although the government rescinded its order, Austin with 190 men
marched up the Brazos in May to find the Tawakoni and Waco villages temporarily deserted (Barker 1924-1928:1317-1323).

44

Texas Archeological Society

Wacos and Tawakonis sporadically continued to raid farms and ranches in
the next few years, primarily seeking horses, and inevitably bringing on retaliatory
forays by Texans (De Shields 1912:47-48, 73; Wilbarger 1889:174-177,208-209,
604; McLean 1979:537, 554-565). In early spring, 1829, for example, Jean Louis
Berlandier, a member of a Mexican boundary commission, accompanied by an
escort of six soldiers, had their horses and mules stolen from under their noses in
an early morning raid by Tawakonis. Berlandier’s party was camped on Salado
Creek, about 10 miles from the San Antonio presidio, and a party of teamsters who
had passed by the previous evening lost their lives, apparently to the same raiders.
A force sent out to recover the livestock was unsuccessful, as was usually the case
after such raids (Berlandier 1980:387-389).
That same spring the Cherokees, apparently with no further encouragement
from Austin, made a determined assault on the Waco village and allegedly killed
55 of its inhabitants. But they failed to take the village since the Wacos were
protected by their redoubts and Tawakoni reinforcements arrived (De Shields
1912:70-73; Wilbarger 1889:174-177; Watt 1969:217-219).
In the summer of 1830, 120 Cherokees attacked the Tawakoni village at
present Tehuacana, and it was reported that they overwhelmed the village, only a
few of its women and children surviving (De Shields 1912:177-179; Wilbarger
1889:177-179; Watt 1969:219-222; see also Gregory and Strickland 1967:64-65).
But this is doubtful, since Tawakonis continued to inhabit this village at least
sporadically until 1835. That summer Captain R. M. Coleman, under cover of
darkness, attempted to infiltrate the village in a surprise attack. His force of 18
men was discovered, however, and in the ensuing fight three of his men were
seriously wounded and one killed. He retreated to Parker’s Fort near modem
Groesbeck and sent for reinforcements. His messengers encountered Colonel John
Henry Moore, who was already on his way to attack the village with three
companies of volunteers. The combined force assaulted the village to find it
deserted, save for two men and several women and children. The men were killed,
and the women and children taken captive and sold into slavery (Wilbarger
1889:135; De Shields 1912:218-219; Erath 1923:278-279, and Jenkins 1958:23
contain somewhat different Versions of this conflict). The Tawakonis do not seem
to have returned to this village.
The Waco village on Barron’s Branch also had been abandoned prior to 1837
when Fort Fisher, a temporary Texas Ranger post, was established there. It was
spring and the rangers found peach trees in bloom and bison in "possession" of the
village. Old cornstalks stood in the untilled fields and only some of the old
defensive earthworks were still standing (Watt 1969:224).
About the same time that the Wacos abandoned their village, one of the
most publicized and strangest assaults on Anglo-American settlers in Texas was
made on Parker’s Fort. In 1834, two brothers, James W. and Silas M. Parker
with their families and several other families had settled near the head of the
Navasota River some 70 miles east of Waco. In May 1836, their fort (several

Newcomb ~ Historic Indians of Central Texas

45

cabins surrounded by a stockade) was attacked by a mixed party of northern
Comanches and Kiowas. Five people, including Silas and his father were killed.
Two of Silas’s children, Cynthia Ann, aged 9, and her six-year old brother John,
along with Mrs. Rachel Plummer, her infant son James Platt Plummer, and Mrs.
Elizabeth Kellogg were taken captive. Elizabeth Kellogg, Rachel Plummer, John
Parker, and James Pratt Plummer were all released or ransomed through the
efforts of Delaware Indians and other intermediaries. Cynthia Ann Parker grew
up among the Comanches, however, married a Comanche warrior, and was the
mother of Quanah who became a noted chief. In 1839, Rachel Plummer’s narrative of captivity was published, thus publicizing the raid and establishing in
many minds the barbarism and perfidy of Indians. Actually, James W. Parker
was subsequently accused, though not convicted, of having stolen horses in
company with Indians, only to cheat them out of the proceeds. This accusation
along with the fact that northern Comanches and Kiowas had seldom if ever,
before or after 1836, made forays into this region suggests that the attack was
motivated by revenge on a scoundrel (Plummer 1926; Richardson 1933:90; De
Shields 1912:173-186; Newcomb 1961:344-345, 1978:36).
The departure of the Wacos and Tawakonis from their villages marked the
end of the ancient Indian occupation of Central Texas. For a few more years,
however, the area served as a focal point for negotiations between the dispossessed and their conquerors (For the subsequent history of the Waco and other
Wichita peoples see Elam 1971; Newcomb 1961, 1976).
The Tehuacana Creek Council Grounds
Early in 1843, soon after a trading station had been authorized by the
Republic, Torrey and Brothers established a trading post on the bluff overlooking
what is now known as Tradinghouse Creek, a tributary of Tehuacana Creek
(which of course is an alternate spelling of Tawakoni), approximately eight miles
southeast of Waco. This locale was chosen because it was easily accessible from
the white settlements lower down on the Brazos; it was still without white
settlement so that Indians felt relatively secure when coming in to parley; there
was ample pasturage for horses; and bison still frequented the region. The trading
"house," which was at l’n’st a tent or tents rather than a permanent building, was
apparently opened for business in time for a gathering of Indians that spring
assembled at the behest of President Sam Houston. The council between the
commissioners of the Republic and the various Indians who had been persuaded to
attend was held about four miles away from the trading house in the lowlands
closer to the Brazos. In the spring of 1844, the new Superintendent of Indian
Affairs, Thomas G. Western, visited the site and described the bluff overlooking
the council grounds as "a delightful spot." He added that "Mr Sloat is actively
engaged in erecting the necessary buildings for Council house, etc." and a few
days later noted that Sloat had "finished the Council house a building 32 by 20 ft"
(Winfrey 1959-1960, Volume II: 17, 19).

46

Texas Archeological Society

Five major councils were convened at the "treaty grounds" between 1843
and 1846, and small groups of Indians bent on trade and talk made it an active
center for a few years C~Vebb 1952, Volume I: 149-163, Volume II:790-791). The
need for treaty grounds was prompted by Houston who, when he was again elected
in 1841 to the presidency of the Republic, reversed Mirabeau Lamar’s expensive
anti-Indian policy. There was no money to prosecute an Indian war, and Lamar’s
policies had not succeeded in exterminating or evicting the Republic’s natives
(except for the intrusive Cherokees). Even formerly friendly Indians had been
alienated, and the Comanches, after their massacre at the San Antonio council
house in 1840, were unwilling to risk any kind of negotiations with Texans. Out of
necessity, inclination, and perhaps his own political ambitions, Houston pursued a
peaceful and humane Indian policy (Newcomb 1961:350, 1978: 38-39; Gregory
and Strickland 1967:137ff).
Houston quickly employed a group of Indians, primarily Delawares, but also
including such men as Jesse Chisholm (a part Cherokee who was related to
Houston’s former wife), Luis Sanchez, a Mexican Indian, and others to contact the
resentful, suspicious, and hostile tribes and persuade them to meet in council with
Texans and peacefully work out their differences. Jim Shaw, John Conner, Jim
Sagundai and the other Delawares Houston employed had long carried on extensive trading operations with Comanches and other Plains Indians. More importantly, they were respected and trusted by these tribes and by Americans, they
spoke more or less intelligible English, and they were superbly qualified to serve
as guides, interpreters, and mediators (Newcomb 1978:40-41, n.d).
Despite Houston’s determination to make his conciliatory Indian policy
work, it was not until the last days of March 1843 that some of the smaller and
friendlier bands of Indians--a band of Delawares and a band of Shawnees who
earlier had settled near the Cherokees in East Texas, and some of the native
Caddos---could be coaxed into their first assembly at the Tehuacana Creek council
grounds. Tawakonis, Wacos, Kichais, and the Wichita proper had also agreed to
attend the council. But while they were on their way to the council grounds they
were joined by some Kichai warriors who had fresh scalps of three white men they
had killed on the Trinity River. They stopped, discussed the matter, and after a
Caddo passed along the rumor that the presents to be distributed had been infected
with smallpox, they decided not to attend. But Shaw, Sagundai, Sanchez, and
Chisholm arrived at the council grounds a week or so later with about 40 Indians,
mostly Caddos, but also including a minor Waco chief, Acaquash (Winfrey 19591960, Volume I:149-163).
Pierce M. Butler, United States Indian agent for the Cherokees, with an
escort of 15 men, also attended the council. His presence was an added inducement to attract reluctant Indians to the council since they had more confidence
in the friendship and integrity of federal agents than in Texans. Included in
Butler’s entourage was John Mix Stanley, an artist who painted the council
grounds and the leading Indians; his lively account which supplements the
council’s somewhat self-serving documents, was published in a newspaper.

Newcomb ~ Historic Indians of Central Texas

47

Stanley (1843) had some difficulty in getting the Indians to pose for him, but he
quickly resolved the problem:
I commenced painting the portraits of the head Chiefs--but I was first
subjected to their caprice and superstition, and in order to show you
how exceedingly superstitious they are, I will relate the conditions on
which they consented to set. They said I must first paint "Sanches, Jim
Shaw, a Delaware, and Jess Chism, a Cherokee," under whose protection they were conducted into the Texian Council. If they would consent to sit, and no hurt came to them, then they would sit. This was
whipping the D[evil] around the stump, but there was no alternative,
and I complied with apparent willingness to their wishes. After painting the above named subjects, which gave them great satisfaction, they
all came forward in order according to rank, and were delighted with
the idea of being painted, considering it a great honor.
The council was a failure in that the still powerful Comanches were not
represented, and the designation in the treaty of Acaquash as Chief of the
Tawakonis, Wacos, Wichitas, and Kichais was spurious. He was not even authorized to represent the Wacos (Winfrey 1959-1960, Volume I:153-155).
No Comanches were persuaded to come to the council held in the spring of
1844 either, but the efforts of Houston’s Delawares and his other agents bore
fruit that fall. Virtually all of the indigenous and immigrant tribes were in
attendance at the council, but there was one stumbling block to mutual accord.
Buffalo Hump, a leading war chief of the Penateka (or Southern) Comanches
approved the treaty prepared by the Texans except for the location of a boundary
line to be drawn between Texan and Indian country. Both Houston and the
Comanche were adamant, and the articles that dealt with the boundary had to be
struck from the treaty C~¢infrey 1959-1960, Volume II:112). From the point of
view of the Texans the council was a success in that most of the Republic’s
Indians, including the majority of the recalcitrant Southern Comanches, had
agreed to peace.
In the fall of 1845, the Wichita proper finally joined the other Wichitaspeaking tribes in signing a peace treaty with Texas. A few days after the
Wichitas had left the Tehuacana Creek council grounds, news was received that
Comanches under Old Owl and Santa Anna were on their way in to trade and
talk. This was the first time that Santa Anna, an influential and well-known war
chief, and his eleven captains had come to parley. Agents L. H. Williams and F.
E. Eldredge rode out to greet them and escort them to the almost deserted council
grounds. It was a tense meeting; there was little trading and the Comanches were
fully armed. Jim Shaw, the Delaware interpreter, chided them for this breach of
etiquette, and the Comanches responded rather lamely. They obviously did not
intend to be victims of another massacre. Before the traditional pipe had been
smoked, an old chief, apparently Old Owl, rose to address the Comanche warriors insisting that peace must be preserved. After the pipe had been smoked,

48

Texas Archeological Society

Agent Williams made a conciliatory speech, noting that presents would be
distributed at the close of the council. Finally Santa Anna spoke, stating that he
agreed with Old Owl, and that the other great chiefs had urged him to come and
see the Texans and talk with them. Now that he had done so, he said he would
abide by the armistice the other Comanche chiefs had accepted; he would be at
peace. It was the last council the Republic of Texas had with its Indians, since in
a few weeks Texas was annexed to the United States. But it was not the last
council held at the Tehuacana Creek council grounds (Winfrey 1959-1960,
Volume II:399ff).
In September 1845, with annexation in the offing and hostilities with
Mexico probable, Pierce M. Butler and M. G. Lewis were directed by the United
States Commissioner of Indian Affairs to meet with the Texas tribes and establish a peaceful relationship with them. They planned to meet with the Indians at
Comanche Peak, in present Hood County, but by the time their expedition found
the hill and also contacted the scattered Indians it was February. The Comanches
were not willing to hold a talk at the peak (more accurately a "butte"), and they
dictated a meeting at the trading house on the Brazos early in May. The Texas
tribes began drifting in to the council grounds in April, and ultimately most of
them signed the elaborate treaty of !4 articles. It brought most of the Texas
Indians under obligations to the government and secured an exposed flank while
the nation was preoccupied with the Mexican War. For Central Texas it signaled the end of an era, for the frontier quickly moved beyond it. For most of
the Indians it was an admission, perhaps only dimly comprehended, of impending subjugation and dominance by the United States (Kappler 1904, Volume
II:554-557; Winfrey 1959-1960, Volume II:43-61; Foreman 1948). The feeling
had been eloquently expressed, though with naive optimism, by Acaquash at
the Tehuacana Creek council grounds in the spring of 1843:
The soil I now stand upon was once mine, it is now the land of the
Texians and my home is far off in the West. Here in my young days I
hunted the Buffalo and Red Deer and lived in peace and was friends
with all man kind, till the white men of Texas come and drove me from
the home of my youth. Once more I am here in this Council to treat for
peace, I speak truth, I wish for peace and a peace which shall be lasting
as long as the sun rises and sets and the rivers in their channels to run.
The wild fire of war has swept o’er the land and enveloped my home
and people in smoke, but when I return to them and tell them what I
have heard, the smoke will be dispelled and they can find their way to
the Council ground of our White brothers of Texas, and all combine to
quench this fire that heats our blood and impells us on to war. It made
my heart glad to hear my Texas friends say that land and country
should be given to the Red Men for homes, and that liberty should be
granted them to hunt the wild game in their forests [Stanley 1843].

Newcomb m Historic Indians of Central Texas

49

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
It is likely that documentary records will never reveal very much about the
aboriginal inhabitants of Central Texas. Nonetheless, the frustrations of the
ethnohistorian are relieved to some extent by the inferences that can be drawn
from the scant data. Apparently, for example, such natives or presumed natives
as the Cantonas, Sanas, Quichuans, and others were hunters and gatherers who
lived off the bounty of the area’s rather rich and varied environment. This wild
food subsistence base is supported by what is known about the Late Prehistoric
(Neoarchaic) archeological complexes of the region (Prewitt 1981:68). Corn
cobs are occasionally found in Neoarchaic sites, but they seem to have been
imported, probably from Caddoan peoples to the east or Kichai or Wichita
speakers to the north. If some local natives did grow corn or other crops, it is
likely they only supplemented a wild food regimen. That migrant Wichitaspeakers were able to establish productive gardens in the area in the eighteenth
century suggests that population pressure had not led horticulturists to expand
into the area, and/or its native hunter-gatherers had an ancient, deeply ingrained,
relatively secure subsistence such that there was little or insufficient impetus for
them to become gardeners.
Chief among the game animals of Central Texas in desirability but not
likely preponderant in terms of annual total subsistence was the bison. The
region is on the southern margins of their range; bison were usually present in the
winter months, particularly on the Blackland Prairies, but in the summer months
they moved northward leaving few or no animals in the area. This generalization
is flawed to the extent that the movements of bison from season to season and
year to year were so erratic that in some years they may have been virtually
absent, in others present in tremendous numbers with some animals remaining
throughout the year.
The habits of bison also suggest that local hunters probably followed the
seasonal movements of the herds considerable distances, constrained by their
ability to keep up with them and by their relationships with the neighboring
peoples they encountered. In years when bison were plentiful no doubt the region
also acted as a magnet, attracting peoples from less favored areas. It may be
inferred, then, that natives of Central Texas, like the bison-hunting Apaches
encountered by Ofiate on the High Plains, were not strangers to numerous
contacts and probable conflicts with their neighbors. Archeological evidence
supports such foreign contacts in that imported Caddoan ceramics are found in
local Neoarchaic sites and arrowpoints often found in burials seem not to be
funeral offerings, but indicative of the reasons for the individual’s demise (Prewitt
1981:83-84). The widespread use of sign language by the historic tribes of the
region also suggests that the mingling of natives speaking different languages
was an old occurrence.
The most efficient way to hunt bison was communally, and there is a good
probability that when bison were numerous, dispersed nuclear family and

50

Texas Archeological Society

extended family groups joined forces to impound, surround, or use other
techniques to take far more bison than could be secured by lone hunters. There
are, however, no known "jump" sites or other indications of large scale kill sites
in Central Texas. The optimum number of hunters for communal hunts is
unknown, but it was probably larger than the bands of their prehorse Apache
peers (up to about 100 persons), depending upon a variety of factors such as the
number of warriors needed to provide security. It is also likely that leadership
was needed for communal hunts, no doubt which was provided by experienced
or proven hunters. Almost surely, when hunting was productive, surplus meat
was dried or smoked for later use, and perhaps dried meat and hides were used
for trading purposes.
When bison were scarce or absent (normally by mid-summer to early winter), native groups must have dispersed into small family or other kin groups to
exploit local resources. Deer, bear, and smaller mammals were present and
perhaps abundant as were a variety of birds and other animals. Wild plant foods
from pecans and other nuts to berries, seeds, roots, and tubers were probably
utilized seasonally as well and may have supplied the bulk of the natives food in
times of bison scarcity.
That there were years and perhaps occasionally a succession of years when
bison were scarce or absent meant that the native population was limited by the
lean years, not by the bountiful ones. Even when bison blackened its prairies and
surplus meat could be dried or smoked for later consumption, it could be stored for
only several months. In short, despite the incredible numbers of bison that were
sometimes present in Central Texas, they were not the primary factor in regulating
the size of its human population; critical was the regular availability of a diversity
of wild plant and animal foods.
Assuming the general accuracy of this subsistence appraisal, it is evident
that the natives of Central Texas come under the rubric of "band level" cultures
in terms of socio-political integration (Service 1971). But it would be a mistake
to equate them with band level societies situated in less bountiful, more restrictive, or harsher environments such as deserts or the High Plains. Unfortunately,
there appear to be no well-described contemporary groups who inhabited roughly
similar environments and who were subject to like conditions. The erratic habits of bison, for example, probably did not confer an advantage on hunters who
were intimately acquainted with local areas. Thus, there would have been no
particular advantage for a man to remain in the locality of his birth after marriage (patrilocality) because of his extensive knowledge of its terrain and the
habits of its wildlife. This may well explain the matrilocal emphasis of Apaches
as well as that of some of the peoples who came to constitute the Tonkawa tribe.
The frequent patrilocality of band level people is also said to be a response to
conflict and feuding between related, intermarrying bands, since matrilocality
might result in pitting brother against brother. But in this region, apparently characterized by the coming and going of unrelated peoples, this factor was apparently inoperable.

Newcomb ~ Historic Indians of Central Texas

51

It might be argued that large "enhanced" bands (perhaps several hundred
people), hypothesized for the prehorse natives of Central Texas during the bison-hunting season, should more properly be designated as "tribes." But that
they possessed the integrating mechanisms of tribes, such as clans, warrior societies, or other voluntary associations which would have served to make these
groups more cohesive and structured socially and politically is unlikely. If such
tribes had existed their sense of ethnicity probably would have been greater and
historically more persistent, and their ability to repulse refugee or remnant
peoples, and especially to offer more effective resistance to Apache raiders,
would have been more evident. But there is no hint that this was the case; instead the region’s natives seem to have been characterized by a number (possibly a considerable number) of local, kin-related, politically unstructured
entities.
When Europeans became acquainted with Central Texas in the early decades of the eighteenth century, it already had become a haven for displaced
and fragmented native groups, driven northward by the advance of the Spanish
colonial frontier and harried eastward by the explosion of mounted Apache
warriors. Diseases, introduced by Europeans, probably had spread already to
the region, depleting local populations. Horses also had been acquired by the
opening of the century, but that all local groups had an abundant or even adequate supply and had learned or devised the most effective ways to utilize them
is doubtful. Mounted men were of course more productive hunters and could
range farther afield, and they were better able to defend themselves against
enemies. But the adoption of horses was not an unmixed blessing. Adequate
pasturage for their animals added a new factor affecting the permanence and
location of camps. And the more horses a group had, the more attractive targets
they became for others eager to acquire more horses. Apache attacks forced local
groups to join forces and camp together, at least during the bison-hunting season and perhaps habitually. If the Cantonas, Tusonibis, and the Indians of
Rancherfa Grande were characteristic of these alliances, such groups apparently
numbered about 2,000 persons. This may have represented an optimum number-large enough to discourage Apache assaults, yet not so large as to require
constant movement to find adequate pasturage or game.
Several factors appear to have been involved in what must have been devastating Apache raids into Central Texas in the last decades of the seventeenth
century and on into the following century. By the early years of the eighteenth
century, the easternmost Apaches, who became collectively known as Lipans,
had about 75 years to perfect their martial skills as mounted warriors and to
acquire an ample supply of horses. In the 1760s, they were subdivided into at
least 12 bands, each averaging about 400 persons, several of which sometimes
joined forces for raiding and hunting (Tunnell and Newcomb 1969:150-151).
Assuming such bands existed 40-50 years earlier, it is obvious why they were
able to terrorize Central Texas, particularly when they fell on dispersed, poorly
mounted native or refugee groups.

52

Texas Archeological Society

A variety of forces, then, had a continuing, long-term impact on the native
and refugee Indians of Central Texas. The most impressive, although seldom
noted consequence of population decline, population movements, and the introduction of European cultural elements, particularly the horse complex and firearms, was the continuing amalgamation and consolidation of its peoples. It began
at least as early as the last decades of the seventeenth century and continued
among the survivors into the nineteenth century. Survival forced indigenous and
intrusive groups to merge, and as they in turn declined the process was repeated.
Its surprising feature was that consolidated groups were in some cases drawn from
such varied linguistic, geographic, and cultural backgrounds. The most clear-cut
case is that of the peoples who came to comprise the Tonkawa tribe. But even the
groups that became the Wichita tribe in the nineteenth century also probably had
incorporated some alien, non-Caddoan speaking elements.
During the last half of the eighteenth century, Apache dominance of Central
Texas waned and the Wichita tribes gained ascendancy. But the Wichita tribes had
neither the numbers, cohesion, or the political and economic ties with Europeans
that would ensure their predominance. And by the time Anglo-Americans began
to settle the area the Wichita had neither the numbers, military strength, or
political acumen to contest the invasion and usurpation of their lands. The Wacos
may have been the most adept horse thieves on the Texas frontier, as is often
alleged, but if such talents had any impact on their fortunes it was to hasten their
departure from the region.
The story of the Indians of Central Texas is, then, a complex one, a tale of a
land long inhabited by a shifting assortment of people. Ill-equipped to withstand
the direct and indirect impact of the Euro-American assault, they were felled by
introduced diseases and warfare, seduced by the attractiveness of foreign
possessions and much changed as a consequence. Most ultimately disappeared in
a cultural sense, the few surviving tribes being but a faded vestige of their
forerunners.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was supported by the Association of Locally Involved Volunteers
in Education, Waco, Mary Scully-Brown, Director, and Dr. John W. Fox of
Baylor University. I am grateful for their assistance and enthusiasm. I also would
like to acknowledge the many thoughtful comments and suggestions that my
colleagues, Drs. Dee Ann Story and Thomas N. Campbell, have volunteered after
reading a draft of this paper. Story’s broad grasp of Texas prehistory and her
enthusiasm have been enlightening, stimulating, and encouraging. Campbell’s
prodigious labors in ferreting out information, and our numerous conversations
through the years about Texas Indians have added immeasurably to my comprehension of them. It would not be far off the mark to list him as co-author of this
work. Whatever errors of fact or interpretation have crept into this paper are of
course my own doing and not theirs.

Newcomb -- Historic Indians of Central Texas

53

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abel, A. H. (editor)
1922
A Report from Natchitoches in 1807 by Dr. John Sibley. Indian Notes and
Monographs, Volume 25. Museum of the American Indian, Heye Foundation,
New York.
Barker, E. C. (editor)
1924-1928 The Austin Papers. Annual Report of the American Historical Association
for the Year 1919 and 1922. 2 Vols. Washington, D. C.
Bell, R. E., E. B. Jelks, and W. W. Newcomb (assemblers)
1967
A Pilot Study of Wichita IndianArcheology and Ethnohistory. Final Report for
Grant GS-964, National Science Foundation, Washington, D. C.
Berlandier, J.L.
1969
The Indians of Texas in 1830. Edited by J. C. Ewers. Smithsonian Institution
Press, Washington, D. C.
1980

Journey to Mexico, During the Years 1826 to 1834. Edited by S. M.
Ohlendorf, J. M. Bigelow, and M. M. Standifer. 2 Vols. The Texas State
Historical Association in cooperation with the Center for Studies in Texas
History, Austin.

Bolton, H. E. (editor)
1916
Spanish Exploration in the Southwest, 1542-1706. Charles Scribners’s Sons,
New York.
Bolton, H. E.
1910a Waco. In: Handbook of American Indians North of Mexico, edited by F. W.
Hodge, pp. 887-888. Bulletin No. 30, Bureau ofAmerican Ethnology, Volume
II. Washington, D. C.
1910b

Tonkawa. In: Handbook of American Indians North of Mexico, edited by F. W.
Hodge, pp. 998-999. Bulletin No. 30, Bureau ofAmerican Ethnology, Volume
II. Washington, D. C.

1910c

Yscani. In: Handbook of American Indians North of Mexico, edited by F. W.
Hodge, pp. 1002-1003. Bulletin No. 30, Bureau of American Ethnology,
Volume II. Washington, D. C.

1911

The Jumano Indians in Texas, 1650-1771. Quarterly ofthe Texas State HistoricalAssociation 15: 66-84.

1912

The Spanish Occupation o f Texas, 1519-1690. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 16:1-26.

1914

Athanase de M~zikres and the Louisiana-Texas Frontier, 1768-1780. 2 Vols.
Arthur H. Clark Company, Cleveland.

1915

Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century, Studies in Spanish Colonial History
and Administration. Publications in History, Vol. III. University of California
Press, Berkeley.

54

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

Branda, E. S. (editor)
1976
The tlandbook ofTexas, A Supplement. Volume lTi. The Texas State Historical
Association, Austin.

Buckley, E. C.
1911
The Aguayo Expedition into Texas and Louisiana, 1719-1722. Quarterly ofthe
Texas State Historical Association 15:1-65.
Campbell, T. N.
1976a AranamaIndians.In: The HandbookofTexas, A Supplement, Volume III, edited
by E. S. Branda, pp. 33-34. The Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
1976b

Anao Indians. In: The HandbookofTexas, A Supplement, Volume ]II, edited by
E. S. Branda, p. 28. The Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

1976c

Quibaga Indians.In: The Handbook ofTexas, A Supplement, Volume III, edited
by E. S. Branda, p. 766. The Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

1976d

Zauanito Indians. In: TheHandbookofTexas, A Supplement, Volume]]I, edited
by E. S. Branda, p. 1143. The Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

1976e

Sadammo Indians. In: The Handbook of Texas, A Supplement, Volume III,
edited by E. S. Branda, pp. 826-827. The Texas State Historical Association,
Austin.

1976f

Kanohatino Indians. In: The Handbook of Texas, A Supplement, Volume HI,
edited by E. S. Branda, p. 463. The Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

1976g

CantonaIndians. In: TheHandbookofTexas, A Supplement, VolumeIH, edited
by E. S. Branda, p. 143. The Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

1976h

Ervipiame Indians. In: The Handbook of Texas, A Supplement, Volume HI,
edited by E. S. Branda, p. 283. The Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

1979

Ethnohlstoric Notes on Indian Groups Associated with Three Spanish Missions
at Guerrero, Coahuila. Archaeology and History of the San Juan Bautista
Mission Area, Coahuila and Texas, Report 3. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas, San Antonio.

1983

Espinosa,OlivaresandtheColoradoRiverIndians, 1709.SayersvilleHistorical
Association Bulletin 3:2-6, 15-16.

1984

The Cacaxtle Indians of Northeastern Mexico and Southern Texas. La Tierra,
Quarterly Journal of the Southern Texas Archaeological Association 11(1):420.

Campbell, T. N. and T. J. Campbell
1981
Historic Indian Groups of the Choke Canyon Reservoir and Surrounding Area,
Southern Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, University of Texas-San
Antonio, Choke Canyon Series 1, San Antonio.
Chafe, W. L.
1979
Caddoan. In: The Languages of Native America: Historical and Comparative
Assessment, edited by L. Campbell and M. Campbell, pp. 213-235. University
of Texas Press, Austin.

Newcomb m Historic Indians of Central Texas

55

Cole, E. W.
1946
La Salle in Texas. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 49:473-500.
Cox, I. J. (editor)
1905
The Journeys of Rene Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle. 2 Vols. A. S. Barnes &
Company, New York.
De Shields, J. T.
1912
Border Wars of Texas. The Herald Company, Tioga, Texas.
Duffield, L. F. and E. B. Jelks
1961
The Pearson Site, A Historic Indian Site atIronBridge Reservoir, Rains County,
Texas. Archaeology Series, No. 4. Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas, Austin.
Dunn, W. E.
1911
Apache Relations in Texas, 1718-1750. Southwestern Historical Quarterly
14:198-274.
1912

Missionary Activities among the Eastern Apaches Previous to the Founding
of the San Saba Mission. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 15:186-200.

1914

The Apache Mission on the San Saba River; Its Founding and Failure.
Southwestern Historical Quarterly 17:379-414.

Elam, E. H.
The History of the Wichita Confederacy to 1868. Ph.D. dissertation, Texas
Tech University, Lubbock.

1971
Erath, G. B.
1923

Memoirs of Major George Bernard Erath. Southwestern Historical Quarterly
26:207-233.

Folmer, H.
1940

De Bellisle on the Texas Coast. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 44:204231.

Forbes, J.
1959

The Appearance of The Mounted Indian in Northern Mexico and the Southwest, to 1680. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 15(2):189-212.

Foreman, G.
1948

The Texas Comanche Treaty of 1846. Southwestern Historical Quarterly
51(4):313-332.

Forrestal, Rev. P. P. (translator)
1935

Pefia’s Diary of the Aguayo Expedition. Preliminary Studies of the Texas
Catholic Historical Society 2(7): 1-68.

Garrett, J. K.
1946

Dr. John Sibley and the Louisiana-Texas Frontier. Southwestern Historical
Quarterly 49 (3):399-431.

56

Texas Archeological Society

Gatschet, A. S.
1891
The Karankawa Indians. Archaeological and Ethnological Papers of the
Peabody Museum, Volume 1, No. 2. Peabody Museum of Archaeology and
Ethnology, Harvard University, Cambridge.
Goddard, I.
The Languages of South Texas and the Lower Rio Grande. In: The Languages
1979
of Native America: Historical and Comparative Assessment, edited by L.
Campbell and M. Campbell, pp. 355-389. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Gonzalez, A.
1982
The Overlooked Entrada: The Espinosa-Olivares-Aguirre Expedition of 1709.
Sayersville Historical Association Bulletin 2:4-7.

1983

E1 Monte Grande, Texas Inner Frontier: 1691-1795. Sayersville Historical
Association Bulletin 4:2-14.

Gregory, J. and R. Strickland
1967
Sam Houston with the Cherokees, 1829-1833. University of Texas Press,
Austin.

Hammond,
1940
1953

G. P. and A. Rey
Narratives of the Coronado Expedition, 1540-1542. University of New
Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Don Juan de Ohate, Colonizer ofNew Mexico, 1595-1628. University of New
Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

Harrington, J.P.
Southern Peripheral Athapaskawan Origins, Divisions, and Migrations. In:
1940
Essays in Historical Anthropology of North America, Swanton Anniversary
Volume, Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections 100:503-532. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D. C.
Harris, R. K., I. M. Harris, J. C. Blaine, and J. Blaine
A Preliminary Archeological and Documentary Study of the Womack Site,
1965
Lamar County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 36:287-365.
Hodge, F. W. (editor)
1907-1910 Handbook of American indians North of Mexico.BuUetin No. 30,Bureau of
American Ethnology. 2 Vols. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington,
D.C.
Hodge, F. W. and T. H. Lewis (editors)
Spanish Explorers in the United States, 1528-1548. Charles Scribner’s Sons,
1907
New York.

Newcomb ~ Historic Indians of Central Texas

57

Hoffmann, F. L. (translator)
1935
Diary of the Alarcdn Expedition into Texas, 1718-1719, by Fray Francisco
Cdliz. The Quivira Society, Los Angeles.
Hoijer, H.
1933

Tonkawa, An Indian Language of Texas. In: Handbook of American Indian
Languages, Volume 3, edited by F. Boas, pp. 1-148. Columbia University Press,
New York.

Hughes, J. T.
1968

Prehistory of the Caddoan-Speaking Tribes. Ph.D. dissertation, Columbia
University.

Jenkins, J. H. Ill
1958

Recollections of Early Texas, the Memoirs ofJohn Holland Jenkins. University
of Texas Press, Austin.

John, E. A. H.
1975

Storms Brewed in Other Men’s Worlds, The Confrontation oflndians, Spanish,
andFrench in theSouthwest, 1540-1795. Texas A&M University Press, College
Station.

1982-1983 PortraitofaWichitaVillage, 1808.TheChronielesofOklahoma9:412-437.

Johnson, L. Jr., and E. B. Jelks
1958
The Tawakoni-Yscani Village, 1760: A Study of Archeological Site Identification. The Texas Journal of Science 10(4):405-422.
Kappler, C. J. (editor and compiler)
1904

Indian Affairs: Laws and Treaties. 2 Vols. U. S. Government Printing Office,
Washington, D. C.

Kirmaird, L.
1958

The Frontiers ofNew Spain: Nicholas de Lafora’s Description,1766-1768. The
Quivira Society, Berkeley.

Kress, M. K. (with an introduction by M. A. Hatcher)
1932

Diary of a Visit of Inspection of the Texas Missions Made by Fray Gaspar Jos~
De Solis in the Year 1767-68. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 35(1):28-76.

Krieger, A. D.
Un nuevo estudio de la ruta seguida por Cabeza de Vaca, a trav~s de Norte
1955
America. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Universidad Nacional Autdnoma de
Mexico, Mexico City.

1961

The Travels of Alvar Nfifiez Cabeza de Vaca inTexas and Mexico, 1534-1536a.
In: Homenage a Pablo Martinez del R[o en el XXV aniversario de la primera
edici6n des Los or[gines americanos, pp. 459-474. Instituto Nacional de
Antropologfa e Historia, Mexico City.

58

Texas Archeological Society

Lesser, A. and G. Weltfish
Composition of the Caddoan Linguistic Stock. Smithsonian Miscellaneous
1932
Collections 87(6). Washington, D. C.
Loomis, N. M., and A. P. Nasatir
Pedro Vial and the Roads to Santa Fe. University of Oklahoma Press,
1967
NorlTtan.

Margry, P. (editor)
1879-1888 D~couvertes et ~tablissements des Francais darts l’ouest et darts sud de
l’Amerique Septentrionale. Vols. 111 and VI. Paris.
McLean, M. D. (compiler and editor)
1979
Papers Concerning Robertson’s Colony in Texas, Vol. VI. The University of
Texas-Arlington Press, Arlington.
Mooney, J.
Huanchane-Huane. In: Handbook of American Indians North of Mexico,
1907
edited by F. W. Hodge, pp. 701. Bulletin No. 30, Bureau of American
Ethnology, Volume I. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D. C.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961

The Indians of Texas, from Prehistoric to Modern Times. University of Texas
Press, Austin.

1976

The People Called Wichita. Indian Tribal Series, Phoenix.

1978

German Artist on the Texas Frontier, Friedrich Richard Petri. University of
Texas Press, Austin.

1979

The Wichita and Affiliated Tribes of Kansas, Oklahoma, and Texas. Report
for the Wichita Indian Tribe and Its Affiliated Bands and Groups, Namely,
the Keechi, Tawakonie, and Waco, Plaintiffs, vs. The United States, Defendant, United States Court of Claims, Docket No. 371.

1983

Karankawa. In: Handbook of North American Indians, Southwest, Vol. 10,
edited by A. Ortiz, pp. 359-367. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington,
D.C.

n.d.

Forgotten Big Men, The Delaware Indians of the West. MS on file with the
author.

Newcomb, W. W. Jr. and T. N. Campbell
1982
Southern Plains Ethnohistory: A Re-examination of the Escanjaques,
Ahijados, and Cuitoas. In: Pathways to Plains Prehistory: Anthropological
Perspectives of Plains Natives and their Pasts, edited by D. G. Wyckoff and
J. L. Hofman, pp. 29-43. Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Memoir 3.
Duncan, Oklahoma.
Opler, M. E.
1936

The Kinship Systems of the Southern Athabaskan-Speaking Tribes. American Anthropologist 38:620-633.

Newcomb ~ Historic Indians of Central Texas

59

1940

Myths and Legends of the Lipan Apache Indians. Memoirs of the American
Folklore Society, Vol. 36.

1945

The Lipan Apache Death Complex and Its Extensions. Southwestern Journal
of Anthropology 50:122-141.

Parks, D. R.
1979
The North Caddoan Languages: their Subgrouping and Time Depths. Nebraska History 60 (2):197-213.
Penigault, A.
1953
Fleur de Lys and Calumet: Being the Penicaut Narrative of French Adventure in Louisiana. Edited by Richebourg Gaillard McWilliams. Louisiana
State University Press, Baton Rouge.
Plummer, R.
1926
The Rachel Plummer Narrat&e. Edited by James W. Parker. Privately printed.
Prewitt, E. R.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 52:65-89.
Richardson, R. N.
1933

The Comanche Barrier to South Plains Settlement. Glendale, California.

Rohrbaugh, C.L.
An Hypothesis for the Origin of the Kichai. In: Pathways to Plains Prehis1982
tory: Anthropological Perspectives of Plains Natives and their Pasts, edited
by D. G. Wyckoff and J. L. Hofman, pp. 51-63. Oklahoma Anthropological
Society, Memoir 3. Duncan, Oklahoma.
Schrnitt, K.
1952

Wichita Death Customs. The Chronicles of Oklahoma 30(2):200-220.

Schmitt, K. and I. O. Schmitt
n.d.

Wichita Kinship, Past and Present. University Book Exchange, Norman,
Oklahoma.

Service, E. R.
1971
Primitive Social Organization, An Evolutionary Perspective. 2nd edition.
Random House, New York.
Shelby, C. C.
St. Denis’s Declaration Concerning Texas in 1717. Southwestern Historical
1923
Quarterly 26 (3): 165 - 183.

60

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

Sibley, Dr. J.
1832
Historical Sketches of the Several Indian Tribes in Louisiana, south of the
Arkansas river, and between the Mississippi and the river Grande (1805). In:
American State Papers, Class II, Indian Affairs I, pp. 721-725. Gales &
Seaton, Washington, D. C.
Sjoberg, A. F.
The Bidai Indians of Southwestern Texas. Southwestern Journal ofAnthropol1951
ogy 7:391-400.
1953a

The Culture of the Tonkawa, a Tex as Indian Tribe. The Texas Journal ofScience
5(3):280-304.

1953b

Lipan Apache Culture in Historical Perspective. Southwestern Journal of
Anthropology 9:76-98.

Stanley, J. M.
Indian Scenes, etc., Fort Gibson, Cherokee Nation, May 31, 1843. Letter
1843
published in unidentified newspaper. Photostat in author’s possession.
Stephenson, R. L. with an appendix by E. B. Jelks
1970
Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir Area, Central Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 41:37-286.
Stiles, H. R. (editor)
Joutel’s Journal of La SaUe’s Last Voyage, 1684-7. Joseph McDonough,
1906
Albany, New York.
Story, D. A.
TheWalt°nSite:AnHist°ricBurialinMcLermanC°unty’Texas’CentralTexas
1985
Archeologist 10:67-96.
Swanton, J. R.
1942
Source Material on the History and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians.Bureau of
American Ethnology, Bulletin 132. U.S. Government Printing Office, WashingtonD. C.
1985

Tous, G.
1930

FinalRep°rt°ftheUnitedStatesDeS°t°Expediti°nC°mmissi°n’Intr°ducti°n
by J. P. Brain and Foreword by W. C. Sturtevant. (Originally issued, 1939, as
U.S. House of Representatives Document no. 71, 76th Congress, 1st Session).
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D. C.

The Espinosa-Olivares-Aguirre Expedition of 1709: Espinosa’ Diary. Preliminary Studies of the Texas Catholic Historical Society Volume 1 (3): 1-14.

Tunnell, C. D. and W. W. Newcomb, Jr.
ALipanApacheMission, SanLorenzodelaSantaCmz, 1762-1771.Bulletin14,
1969
Texas Memorial Museum, Austin.

Newcomb m Historic Indians of Central Texas

61

Tyler, S. L. and H. D. Taylor (translators)
1958
The Report of Fray Alonso de Posada in Relation to Quivira anTeguayo. New
Mexico Historical Review 33 (4):285-314.
Vamer, J. and J. Vamer (translators and editors)
1951
The Florida of the Inca, by Garcilaso de la Vega. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
Watt, F. H.
1969
The Waco Indian Village and its Peoples. The Central Texas Archeologist
9:195-246.
Webb, W. P. (editor)
1952
The Handbook ofTexas. 2 Vols. The Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
Weddle, R. S.
1964
The San Saba Mission, Spanish Pivot in Texas. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
1973

Wilderness Manhunt, The Spanish Search for La Salle. University of Texas
Press, Austin.

Wedel, M. M.
1971
J.B. B6nard, Sieur de la Harpe: Visitor to the Wichitas in 1719. Great Plains
Journal 10 (2):37-70.
1978

LaHarpe’sl719PostonRedRiverandNearbyCaddoSettlements.Bulletin30.
Texas Memorial Museum, Austin.

1981

The Deer Creek Site, Oklahoma: A Wichita Village Sometimes Called
Ferdinandina, an Ethnohistorian’s View. Ok!ahoma HistoricalSociety Series in
Anthropology, No. 5. Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.

1982

The Wichita Indians in the Arkansas River Basin, Plains Indian Studies. In: A
Collection of Essays in Honor of John C. Ewers and Waldo R. Wedel, edited by
D. H. Ubelaker and H. J. Viola, pp. 118-134. Smithsonian Contributions to
Anthropology No. 30, Washington, D. C.

Wedel, W. R.
1942
Archeological Remains in Central Kansas and their Possible Bearing on the
Location of Quivira. Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections 101:1-24. Washington, D. C.
1959

An Introduction to Kansas Archeology. Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of
American Ethnology, Bulletin 174. Washington, D. C.

Wheat, C. E.
1957
MappingtheTransmississippiWest,1540-1861.Volumel, TheSpanishEntrada
to the Louisiana Purchase, 1540-1804. The Institute of Historical Cartography,
S an Francisco.

62

Texas Archeological Society

Wilbarger, J. W.
1889
Indian Depredations in Texas. Hutchings Printing House, Austin.
Williams, J. W.
1962
New Conclusions on the Route of Mendoza, 1683-1684. West Texas Historical
Association Year Book 30:111-134.
Winfrey, D. H. (editor)
1959-1960 Texas Indian Papers. Volume 1 (1825-1843) and Volume 2 (1844-1845).
Texas State Library, Austin.
Winship, G. P.
The Coronado Expedition, 1540-1542. 14th Annual Report, Bureau of Ameri1896
can Ethnology, Part I. Washington, D. C.
Manuscript Sources
AGI

Archivo General de Indias. Sevilla.

AGM

Archivo General de la Nacion. Mexico.

BA

Bexar Archives. The University of Texas at Austin.

BAT

Bexar Archives Translations, Barker Texas History Center. The University of
Texas at Austin.

BTHC Barker Texas History Center Archives. The University of Texas at Austin.
SFGA

San Francisco el Grande Archives. Mexico

Anonymous
Proceedings of Junta de Guerra y Hacienda in relation to French intrusion into
1754
Spanish dominions, 1/11-2/21, 1754. BAT, Volume 26:50-84. BTHC.
Cabello, D.
8/19/1784 Letter to Nebe. BA, No. 865. BTHC.
5/20/1785 Letter to Rengel. BA, No. 75. BTHC.
7f3/1786

Letter to Ugarte. BA, No. 232. BTHC.

Calahorra, J. de
3110/1765 Letter to Governor Martos. BAT, Volume 42:106-108. BTHC.
Delgado, F. et. al.
11/18/1759 Statement of Opinions. AGI (Dunn Transcripts), BTHC.
Gatschet, A. S.
1884
Tonkawa field notes, collected at Fort Griffin, Texas. Smithsonian Institution,
National Anthropological Archives, Ms. no. 1008.
Massanet, F.
1691
Diario del viage que hicieron los Pes. misioneros que principia en 16 de Maio
y f’malisa en 2 de Agto de 1691. SFGA, Volume 10. BTHC.

Newcomb ~ Historic Indians of Central Texas
Moral
7/22/1799

63

Letter to E1Guezabal, AGM, BA. BTHC.

Parrilla, D. D. O.
11/18/1759 Consulta del Coronel Ortiz Parrilla. AGI, Audiencia de Mexico, 92-6-22,
Dunn Transcripts, 228-240. BTHC.
Vial, P.
1787

Diario que por la gloria de Dios comienzo (yo Pedro Vial) a hacer este Presidio
de San Antonio de Bejar, Hasta arribar al de la capital Villa de Santa Fe por
comision demi Govemador Dn. Domingo Cabello, Govemador de la Provincia
de los Texas, con expresion de las jomadas desde el dia 4 de Octubre de 1787.
BA, AGM Historia, Vol. 43. BTHC.

65

The Vinson Site (41LT1)
A Nortefio Focus Indian Village
In Limestone County, Texas
James E. Smith H
with contributions by
Jay C. Blaine, Kathleen Gilmore,
R. King Harris, and Inus M. Harris

ABSTRACT
The Vinson Site is ahistoric Indian village located in Limestone County, near
present day Mexia. It was excavated by The University of Texas at Austin, the
Texas Archeological Society, and local archeological societies over a twenty year
period. The findings of these investigations suggest that the Vinson Site was
inhabited during the last quarter of the eighteenth century by people who shared
many of the cultural traits assigned to the Nortefio Focus, which, in turn, has been
attributed to Wichita-speaking groups in Texas. Well-det’med house patterns were
found at the site along with English and French trade goods, and certain information recovered from the site suggests that it was used primarily during the late fall
to spring seasons.

INTRODUCTION
The initial discovery of the Vinson Site was made by Edward B. Jelks and
Lathel Duffield. They found the site using historical references to a village located
on an eminence known as La Tortuga (the Turtle) near a large spring (Bolton
1914). The land on which the site is located was at that time leased by Mr. Noil
Vinson, who in addition to giving his permission to excavate on the land, donated
a large number of documented artifacts for study, and assisted in the subsequent
excavations of the site.
The first excavation, which began in October 1961, was by the University of
Texas at Austin under the direction of Edward B. Jelks. House 1 was excavated
over a period of two years, being completed in February 1963. In that same year,
members of the Dallas and Tarrant County archeological societies, working under
the direction of Lathel Duffield and Dessamae Lorrain, excavated House 3.
Preliminary results of the work were reported by Lorrain (1963). During this same
period of time, Mr. Vinson carried out excavations in House 2.
In June 1964, the Texas Archeological Society (TAS) conducted a field
school in Limestone County, Texas, at the Vinson Site. The primary purpose of
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64 (1993)

66

Texas Archeological Society

the field school was to obtain more information on the historic Indian campsite.
An additional objective was to teach field methods to the TAS members and
acquaint them with the archeology of the area.
The field school was much smaller and, therefore, very different than it is
today. The maximum attendance was about 65 people. Several professional
archeologists served in the capacity of "head" archeologist during the two week
field school: Dr. Dee Ann Story guided the first and last portions of the dig and
Drs. Dave Dibble and E. Mort Davis were in charge during its middle portion.
Between 1964 and 1975 houses 4, 7, and 8 were identified. Mr. Vinson
continued working at the site by excavating all of House 4 and parts of Houses
7 and 8. To date, there have been no analyses or publications on this work.
The final field work on the Vinson Site was done in the late 1970s by groups
from the Tarrant County and Central Texas archeological societies who worked
on two structures (House 5 and House 6). This work was under the supervision of
the senior author. Part of the property has now been purchased by a private
individual and a house built on it. The remainder of the property was purchased by
the Archaeological Conservancy and will be protected.
Since 1964, the Vinson site artifacts and manuscript have been worked on by
various individuals. This article primarily updates these analyses, when feasible,
and mainly deals with excavations done at the 1964 field school and the excavation of House 5 by the senior author; information from Mr. Vinson’s work is
included where appropriate.
OBJECTIVES OF THE 1964 TAS FIELD SCHOOL
Few Historic Native American archeological sites have been discovered in
Texas. Even fewer can be associated with archival and historical documents. The
possibility that the Vinson site belongs to both of these categories certainly makes
it an important site to investigate.
After the excavation of Houses 1 and 3, it was apparent that the site needed to
be examined more thoroughly to learn about the historic Wichita-speaking Indians
who were believed to have occupied this site. The 1964 TAS Field School was set
up to pursue this goal. The following objectives guided the field school work:
(1) Study the house patterns.
At the time of the 1964 field school, previous excavations at two historic
sites in Texas thought to be affiliated with Wichita speakers (Gilbert and Pearson)
had yielded no house patterns; only one house pattern was excavated at the
Stansbury site. Additionally, no work had been done in the 1930s on the possible structures at a fourth site, Womack (Figure 1). The excavation of the first
three houses at Vinson showed that excellent house patterns were preserved. One
of the houses was oval in shape while the other two were almost circular, and
thus further excavations were necessary to find out which, if either, was the more
typical house shape.

Smith and others -- The Vinson Site

67

°AMAmLLO

T
,

E~X

A

~

i

S

" J"

\\

’

L{i

Figure 1. Selected Historic Indian Site Locations in Texas.

(2) Obtain a better sample of the artifacts.
Another problem to be addressed was the relative scarcity of artifacts at the
site. A larger sample needed to be retrieved to determine the frequency of the
various types of aboriginal and European goods at Vinson. To investigate the
hypothesis that there might be two cultural components at the site, a nomadic
Tonkawa Indian occupation of the late eighteenth century and a Tawakoni village
there in the first half of the nineteenth century, more temporally diagnostic
artifacts had to be acquired.
(3) Explore the area between structures for features.
At the time of the TAS field school, little was known about the character of
these intra-site areas. Exploration there would have the potential to increase our
knowledge of the layout of a typical Wichita village, and possibly locate areas
with concentrated cultural materials that might have been camping sites of the
Tonkawa.
(4) Determine the cultural affiliation and occupation date of the site.
The primary purpose of this objective was to determine if this was the site of
the 1830 Cherokee battle described by Wilbarger (1889).

Texas Archeological Society

68

DESCRIPTION OF SITE
The site, located on the top of Tehuacana Hill (Figure 2), is in an open field
on the north bank of an intermittent spring-fed creek. The spring, located about
four hundred meters west of the site, is the main water supply for the community
of Tehuacana. The spring-fed creek joins Tehuacana Creek, part of the Trinity
River watershed, about 1.2 km southeast of the site. The springs have been an
important location in historic times as attested by their inclusion on many midnineteenth century maps of the area.
The field in which the Vinson site is situated has been occupied at various
times from the 1700s to the 1930s, when an old farmhouse located in the middle of
the site burned. The field has also probably been cultivated by Ang!o-American
settlers since the Civil War. Artifactual debris from this late occupation is abun-

I

@
!
!

41LT1A
\

tUACANA
\

\

/

0
,

0.5
I

miles

!
°

¯ "-~ -,.S

!

o.

Figure 2. General Location of the Vinson Site.

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

69

dant around the old house site, marked now by an old well casing and portions of
the fireplace.
The known site covers about 25 acres ~igure 3) but the land east of the site
has not been fully investigated; there are no surface indications of Historic Indian
occupation in this area. Possible Historic Indian houses are suspected in the area
nearer the springs (Noil Vinson, 1976 personal communication).

Figure 3. 1964 Site View, showing Backhoe Trenches.

Around the springs numerous Archaic period and Late Prehistoric period
artifacts have been recovered. West of the springs, a large gravel operation has
erased any Irace of occupation that may have been present there. There have also
been undocumented reports that one or more Historic Indian houses have been
found around some of the buildings in the main part of Tehuacana northwest of the
site (Noil Vinson, 1976 personal communication). A recent survey in the
Tehuacana vicinity conducted by Daniel J. Prikryl (1990) produced no additional
evidence of Historic Indian campsites.
GEOLOGY OF SITE
The Vinson Site is located on a prominent outcrop of Upper Cretaceous
limestone in this area of relatively flat topography. This outcrop is along the

70

Texas Archeological Society

Mexia-Talco Fault Zone, which is similar to the Balcones Fault Zone to the west
(Sheldon 1979:152). The rocks of the Upper Cretaceous consist primarily of
marls, shales, chalks, and limestones; sands and conglomerates also occur.
The limestone outcropping at Tehuacana is the type locality for the Kincaid
or lower formation of the Midway group. The Kincaid Formation has been given
the name Tehuacana Limestone (Sellards et al. 1932:532-533).
The natural stratigraphy of the site consists of a loose, tan sandy plow zone
(strata A) with occasional stream pebbles. In strata B, below the plow zone, the
color is only slightly lighter but the sandy soil is more compacted. There are
numerous stream pebbles mixed with the sand. At a depth of 46-60 cm, a layer of
reddish brown clay (strata C) is encountered. This clay is slightly gritty and hardpacked with occasional water-worn pebble inclusions. Beneath this zone- at a
depth of 90-120 cm - is strata D, a fine-grained and hard-packed sand. This zone
extends to at least 150 cm below surface, and grades from a reddish-tan sand
mixed with nodules of clay to a light tan sand.
The large amount of rodent activity at the site has sufficiently mixed the
strata C clay with the strata A and B sands to create a very hard-packed soil during
dry, hot weather. This was the situation during the 1964 TAS Field School.
WICHITA ETHNOHISTORICAL CONTEXT
There have been many disagreements concerning the location of Quivira
(the land of the Wichita), but most scholars have concluded that it lay in the great
bend of the Arkansas River in what is now South Central Kansas (Newcomb and
Field 1967:244). Probable Wichita-speaking Native Americans were first discussed by Coronado in 1541 as living in the province known as Quivira. The
Coronado narratives described the people as being village-dwelling agriculturalists who also hunted bison.
In 1601, Don Juan de Ofiate led a large expedition into the Quivira province, leaving a good description of some aspects of Wichita culture, including a
detailed discussion of their houses and means of agriculture. In 1718, JeanBaptiste Brnard, Sieur de la Harpe was given a grant to explore along the Red
River and to establish trade with the Spaniards living in what is now Texas and
New Mexico. He established a post on the Red River near Texarkana. This post
was maintained until after the Louisiana cession in 1762, giving the French a
great deal of influence among the Indians of Texas and acting as an effective
barrier to the Spaniards (Bolton 1914, Volume 1:35). Any attempt to decrease the
French trade among the natives during this time was met with hostility toward
the Spaniards by the Indian tribes. In 1763, it was boasted that a French flag had
flown over one of the Tawakoni villages for 40 years.
It appears that groups of the Wichitas had migrated into the Central Texas
area by 1750 and were either directly or indirectly receiving French arms and
ammunition during that period. So although the boundary of Spanish territory
during the first half of the eighteenth century lay near the Red River, North and

Smith and others m The Vinson Site

71

North Central Texas was effectively in the hands of the French traders (see
Bolton 1915).
In April 1757, a Spanish mission and presidio was established on the San
Saba River near present Menard, Texas, to establish trade and communication
with New Mexico and to serve the Apache Indians. In March 1758, the
Comanche, Tawakoni, Kichai, and others, attacked the settlement to protest the
alliance of their Apache enemies and the Spanish. The following year, Don
Diego Ortiz Parrilla led a force northward to punish the northern Vibes for their
depredations (Allen 1939). He first attacked a Tonkawa village in Central Texas
before arriving at a fortified Taovayas village on the Red River; this was probably one of the four aboriginal sites in Texas and Oklahoma collectively known
as Spanish Fort (Newcomb and Field 1967; John 1992). Parrilla’s attack on the
village was unsuccessful with a loss of 52 men and two cannons.
Parrilla’s account of the expedition substantiates the influence of the
French traders. He states that a French flag was flown from the center of the
palisaded area and that the Indians were well supplied with French muskets
and ammunition.
Soon after the defeat of Parrilla, Father Calahorra, the missionary at
Nacogdoches, went to two Indian villages on the Sabine River at their request
(Johnson and Jelks 1958). These tribes were the Tawakoni and Yscanis, two of
the vibes that had participated in the massacre at San Saba, but who now wanted
to make peace. Duffield and Jelks (1961:78) state that the Pearson Site may
represent this village complex, but they do note that there is disagreement about
the dating of the site to the 1750s-1760s.
By 1765, after Louisiana was transferred to Spain, the Tawakonis and
Yscanis had become friendly with the Spanish, although the Taovayas on the
Red River continued to raid San Saba chiefly in pursuit of the Apache. During
the late 1760s, Spain reorganized its colonial government as a result of the
Louisiana cession, re-evaluating military and mission settlements. Licensed traders also replaced the free French traders and restrictions were placed on firearms
and other items no longer suitable for hostile tribes. These restrictions were a
blow to the Wichita who had been important middlemen themselves in a trade
system, causing a decline in their stature and in their relations with the Spanish
(Harper 1953).
By the summer of 1771, the Wichitas and Tonkawas were desperate for
trade (Newcomb and Field 1967:272). Athanase De Mdzi~res was now lieutenant-governor at Natchitoches. M~zi~res concluded peace treaties with these Vibes
and made a tour of their country in 1772 to cement the alliance as well as to
investigate rumors of English traders among the Indians (Bolton 1914; Newcomb
and Field 1967:273). Leaving Natchitoches, he traveled to the villages of the
Kichai, Yscani, and Tawakoni now on the Trinity River. Continuing westward,
he traveled through the area between the Trinity and Brazos rivers. He probably
did not pass near the Vinson Site, but his narratives generally indicated that the
Tonkawa inhabited this area.

72

Texas Archeological Society

Upon reaching the Brazos River near present day Waco, Mrzi~res visited
two Tawakoni villages.1 Proceeding up the Brazos River about two hundred miles,
he encountered a Wichita village. Going northeast to the Red River, he made his
final stop at the Taovoyas village before turning south to San Antonio. Bolton
(1914, Volume 1:122) states that this was one of the most notable Colonial
explorations in Texas. Mrzi~res’ report gives a good picture of the tribes living in
Central Texas in the last half of the eighteenth century. When discussing many
aspects of the culture of the Tawakoni and Tonkawa tribes we have relied on
Mrzi~res’ account and other eyewitness sources.
Mrzi~res’ second visit into the central and northern part of Texas came in
the spring of 1778. Spain wanted to unite the northern tribes to destroy the
Apache. A visit into the heart of these villages was seen as an important move
by Mrzi~res to unify the tribes while the plan was being considered by authorities. Mrzi~res traveled from San Antonio to the new pueblo of Bucareli on the
Trinity River. Going north eighteen leagues (about 50 miles), he visited a village of Kichai.
Turning west for fifteen leagues (about 40 miles), Mrzi~res (Bolton 1914,
Volume II: 192) states:
... I arrived at the place which the natives call La Tortuga [The Tortoise].
It is an eminence which commands a broad valley and gives rise to a
large spring of crystalline water [This is believed to be the eminence on
which the Vinson Site is located]. The Tancaques [Tonkawas] live in its
neighborhood, not in permanent houses and in a village, but underneath
(tents of) skins, and in various bands which are directed, maintained, and
moved by the caprice of their petty chiefs and leaders [brackets added].
Continuing west, he again visited the Tawakoni village on the Brazos River
near Waco. Following the Brazos River north, he found another settlement of
Tawakoni above the first. Jelks (1970:277-283) offers evidence that this second
site is the Stansbury Site, the location of the Flechado Village of Tawakoni Indians
later described by Mrzi~res (see Figure 1). From this village, Mrzi~res went along
the western side of the Cross Timbers to the Red River and the two Taovoyas
villages. Whether these are at the same location as the palisaded village attacked
by Parrilla in 1759 has not been verified. It was on this trip that Mrzi~res learned
that the English traders were making inroads among the Wichita tribes (Bolton
1914, Volume II:207).
A year later, in September 1779, Mrzi~res made a third trip through the
northern tribes on his way to San Antonio. Traveling the same route from the
Trinity River to the Brazos River as the year before, he must have traveled by La
~Watt (1969:208) provides a map showing the location of a major Waco village at
the Falls of the Brazos during the mid-1800s. Three other sites, Stone, Waco Village
under downtown Waco, and Gas Plant, show evidence of Historic Wichita occupation
near Waco, Texas.

Smith and others m The Vinson Site

73

Tortuga but made no mention of the village there. Before reaching a Tawakoni
village on the Brazos River, he encountered a large party of Tonkawa, whose chief
was an Apache named E1 Mocho (The Maimed) because he had lost an ear.
M6zi~res tried to persuade E1 Mocho to build a village in the area. The chief
acknowledged that the Govemor of Texas had urged him to do the same, to which
M6zibres stated (Bolton 1914, Volume II:271):
¯.. true to his word, he [El Mocho] has proposed to establish himself in
the pleasant site of La Tortuga as soon as he should return from Bexar,
where the above-mentioned chevalier governor had, again, called him;
that, the news of my march having reached him, he had suspended his
own; that he remains all the firmer in his decision [brackets added]¯
There is no indication, however, that a village was actually established by the
Tonkawas at La Tortuga as E1 Mocho had promised.
MdziEres continued on his route through the Tawakoni village on the Brazos
River to San Antonio by the way of the San Xavier River (now the San Gabriel
River). M6ziEres noted a bad epidemic, perhaps of smallpox, had hit the Tawakoni
very hard. Also, in 1779 the Tawakoni village on the Trinity River was abandoned
and the group joined the other village on the Brazos River (Newcomb 1961:250).
In October 1787, Pedro Vial set out to pioneer a route from San Antonio to
Santa Fe (Loomis and Nasatir 1967); his trip may have given us a good clue to
whom the occupants of the Vinson Site were. According to Newcomb and Field
(1967:282), Vial struck the Tawakoni village on the Brazos River on October
24th, but no one was there. He did find the Tawakonis on the 29th of October, and
Vial went to the house of Quiscot [Quiscat], their chief. The main village of
Quiseat was located on the Brazos River in the vicinity of Waco. Vial seems to
have found them at a temporary camp 12 leagues (about 30 miles) west of the
Brazos.
Vial had been at Quiscat’s village before, but apparently when it was at a
different location. It was not at the place on the Brazos River that MdziEres visited
in 1772, 1778, and 1779 (Bolton 1914, Volume 1:144) but was found on a small
tributary. Newcomb and Field (1967:282) note that Vial was extremely sick and
might not have been accurate in describing his exact location.
Staying with the Tawakonis until December 15th, Vial recovered from his
illness (Vial 1787:7). He then left the village and headed north along the Brazos
River until he reached the Red River east of the Taovayas-Wichita village
(Newcomb 1961:283; Vial 1787:8). Based on distances and locations, it seems
unlikely that Vial could have traveled north along the Brazos River and have hit
the Red River east of the Taovayas village. Another possibility, if Vial was indeed
at the Vinson site, is that he traveled up the Trinity River¯ This would have easily
brought him to the Red River east of the Taovayas-Wichita village. Vial stayed
through the winter at the village, and went on to Santa Fe in the spring.
During the 1780s, Spain had difficulty keeping English traders out of Texas.
In 1785, in an effort to maintain good relations with the Tawakonis, the Spanish

74

Texas Areheological Society

governor invited Chief QuiscaL some of his tribe, and eighteen Kichais to San
Antonio to receive gifts.
Another smallpox epidemic hit the Wichita tribes in 1801. This epidemic
affected them severely, with perhaps half of the tribe dying. This epidemic,
coupled with continuing battles with their Indian enemies throughout the early
part of the ninteenth century, caused further declines in the population of the
Wichita groups.
During the first half of the nineteenth century, the Wichitas were generally at
peace with the United States and Texas. They fought mainly with Osages and
other Indian war parties from the north. In 1861 John Henry Brown (Texas
Almanac 1861:79) wrote about an intertribal fight between the Tawakoni and
Cherokees in 1830. His source was "these facts I obtained in 1842 from an old
Spaniard who composed one of the party, and I have little doubt but they were
furnished by him with fidelity."
According to Brown, the Cherokee attacked the Waco Indian village on
the Brazos River in 1829 to recover horses and other bounty stolen from them.
After several hours of fighting, a group of Tawakoni from a nearby village rode
up and drove off the attackers. A year later the Cherokees, still upset at their
failure to recover their horses, fitted up a war party of 125 warriers to attack the
Tawakoni. Brown (Texas Almanac 1861:79) says the Tehuaeanas were divided,
living in different villages:
One of them and perhaps their most esteemed locality, was at the southern point of the hills of the same name, now in the upper edge of
Limestone County, and the present residence of of Messrs. Boyd and
Moore? Around these springs, there is a large amount of loose limestone
on the surface, as well as in the hills, and the whole surrounding country
is one of rare beauty and loveliness. The Tehuacanas [Tawakoni] had
erected small enclosures of these stones about three feet in height,
leaving occasional spaces about two feet square resembling the mouths
of furnaces [brackets added].
These stone enclosures were covered with buffalo skins and poles, and served as
places of retreat in time of attack.
Although the Tawakoni outnumbered the Cherokees in the 1830 attack, they
were surprised while playing ball and were soon driven into their shelters. After
the Tawakoni had taken refuge in their enclosures, the Cherokee used brush to
burn them out and kill them. According to the History of Navarro, Henderson,
Anderson, Limestone, Freestone and Leon Counties: (1893): "At this time and on
to the time of the revolution in 1836, the Tehuacanos [Tawakoni] had headquarters

2According to NoilVinson (1976 personal cormnunication), the Moore house was near
the springs.

Smith and others m The Vinson Site

75

at Tehuacana Springs in the present territory of Limestone, for they rebuilt their
council house." The same source also states that by 1844 the village was gone and
only white settlers were in the area around the springs.
During the 1840s the Wichita and Tawakoni groups roamed the area between
the Brazos and Trinity rivers. According to P. M. Butler (1846), the Waco,
Wichita, and Tawakoni had been committing depredations upon Texas settlements for the last year (see also Neighbors [1847a, 1847b] for a substantiation of
this statement). In 1855 the Wichita groups were settled on a reservation on the
Brazos River near the mouth of the Clear Fork three miles east of Graham, Texas.
In 1859 they were removed to Oklahoma. Today, they number several hundred
and live in western Oklahoma.
HISTORICAL REFERENCES

Tawakoni (also spelled Tehuacana, Tuacana, and Touacana)

The Tawakoni Indians belong to a group of culturally related tribes known
collectively as the Wichita. The Wacos, Taovayas, Wichita proper, and others
included in this group spoke a common language. The origin of the word Wichita
is unknown, for it is not the Wichita’s term for themselves (Newcomb 1961:249).
The Spanish usually included the Wichita groups among the "Norteios"
(Nations or peoples of the North). M6zi&es described the Tawakoni in 1772:
... (the women) are industrious, devoting themselves to the cultivation of
the soil .... The women make the houses, prepare the food, plant the
fields, tan the skins, gather the crops, and work unceasingly, while their
husbands are never employed except in war or hunting .... They are
most cruel with their prisoners, whose flesh they eat after having killed
them with long and unheard of torments, horrible to mankind .... They
are cheerful, affable, and docile in their manner, compassionate toward
the sick, orphans, and widows, respectful to their elders, generous towards strangers, kind to guests, but in general more revengeful for injury
than grateful for benefits... (Bolton 1914, Volume I:285-289).
The above descriptions are of a settled, organized, agricultural group living in
villages much like that at the Vinson site.
The descriptions of the Wichita villages are of particular interest. Ofiate,
on his expedition to the Quivira in 1601, described the typical Wichita house:
"They (houses) were all round, built of forked poles and bound with rods, and
on the outside, covered to the ground with dry grass. Within, on the sides, they
had frameworks or platforms which served them as beds on which they slept.
Most of them were large enough to hold eight to 10 persons" (Bolton 1916:260).
Castafieda in 1541 (Winship 1896:528-529) and La Harpe in 1719 (Margry
1888:294-295) provide basically the same house descriptions. This type of house
was used by the Wichita until the twentieth century (Newcomb 1961:255). Several

76

Texas Archeological Society

historic descriptions, including Marcy (1866:157), indicate that the Wichita houses
ranged from 30 to 40 feet in diamater.
Newcomb (1961:256) also indicates that Wichita houses had arbors for
summer work and sleeping, and also platforms for drying meat. Padilla, in 1820,
(Hatcher 1920:57) described the Tawakoni houses in the same manner as above
and added that "their granaries are underground. In them they preserve their seeds
for two years."
Sanchez in 1828 (Sanchez 1926:266) further states that "In winter the
women hide the agriculture products in holes which they make in the ground and
the whole tribe sets out to hunt the buffalo and wild bison." Mrzi~res (Bolton
1914, Volume 11:286) and La Harpe (Smith 1959:531) descriptions support this
last statement that the Wichitas abandoned their villages en mass during the winter
months to hunt buffalo, returning only in time for spring planting.
The above accounts indicate, then, that Wichita-speaking groups built large,
permanent houses and had an agricultural lifeway complemented with large game
from the hunt. It is also well-documented that they left their summer village to
hunt for bison during the winter months.
MAPS

A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory has a section
that describes maps with information on the possible location of Wichita-speaking
groups (Newcomb and Field 1967:304-309). Newcomb and Field’s research was
conducted at the Texas State Archives in Austin, in the Library of Congress, and
the National Archives in Washington, D. C. Some of these maps that might pertain
to the Vinson Site are described below.
Maps prior to 1800 were stylized and contained many scale errors. One,
Nicolas de la Fora’s map of the Rubi inspection in the fall and winter of 17671768, locates an Indian village midway between the Trinity and the headwaters of
the Navasota rivers. This would be in the correct location for the place known as
La Tortuga, where the Vinson Site is located, but since there is no identification on
the map naming the village, the identification is not certain.
Maps of the period from 1807 to 1846 generally located at least one and
sometimes as many as three Waco Indian villages on the Brazos River near the
present city of Waco. No map shows a village of Tawakoni Indians at the location
of the Vinson Site, however. The only one of these to show any Indian villages in
the vinicity of the Vinson Site is the 1829 Stephen F. Austin map. Newcomb and
Field (1967:306) describe this map as showing "Pueblos of the Hueco and
Tahacanos... on both sides of the Brazos River south of its juncture with the
Bosque River. Kichais Indians are situated on the Tortuga, a tributary of the
Trinity River." On most maps of the period, however, the Kichais were located to
the east of the Trinity River.
Whether "the Tortuga" refers to the Vinson site location, whether the map
was incorrect in the location of the Kichai village, or whether the village was

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

77

actually a Tawakoni village is not known. However, had a Tawakoni village
existed for any length of time at the Vinson site during the first half of the
nineteenth century, it seems likely that it would have been documented on more
than one map. This is emphasized by the fact that the springs were known and
shown on many maps of the late nineteenth century.
EXCAVA~ONPROCEDURES
In the work prior to the 1964 TAS Field School, a primarj datum was
established on a well casing near the eastern edge of the field. It was assigned an
arbitrary elevation of 100 feet but was not given horizontal coordinates as each
house was excavated as a discrete unit. A site map was made in 1964 with alidade
and plane table locating the primary datum and any known features within the site.
The measurements for excavations were done in feet and inches.
For the field school a grid was staked out using the same well casing as the
primary datum (the well casing used as the primary datum was not on either base
line and no coordinates for the primary datum are known). Two lines, a N500 and
W500, were established. All features from the earlier work were located on this
grid. House 5 (excavated in the late 1970s) and House 6 were also located on this
grid and excavations there used the well casing as the primary datum. House 7 and
House 8 were located on a copy of the original 1964 site map by Mr. Vinson, and
their accuracy is uncertain.
Using a tractor with a backhoe, a series of 17 trenches, 46-60 cm deep, were
excavated to help locate features prior to the beginning of the Field School
investigations ~igure 4). It was hoped that with careful and extensive trenching, a
better idea of what was between the houses would be obtained, and would be
successful in locating additional houses.
Each trench was carefully inspected and any disturbance that might indicate
the presence of a cultural feature was recorded in the trench profiles. It was
decided to trench Feature 25, believed at that time to be a house found by Mr.
Vinson, to gain a better understanding of how such features would look in the
trench profiles.
Hand excavations were done primarily with shovels, while trowels were
reserved for when artifacts were found in situ, at the contact layer between zones,
and near the floor and walls. Since the ground was extremely dry and "as hard as
concrete" during the Field School, not all dirt was screened. Dirt that was screened
was put through one-quarter inch hardware cloth, with a sample of the fill washed
through one-sixteenth inch window screen in an effort to recover glass trade
beads. No records are available that indicate the percentage of dirt that was
screened through one-quarter inch mesh or the percentage of dirt sampled for fine
screening. Apparently only beads were retained from the fine screening, as no
material other than beads was available for analysis. All artifacts recovered in the
1964 TAS Field School were put into sacks which were properly labeled with grid
coordinates. The artifacts were later inventoried and assigned catalog numbers.

78

Texas Archeological Society

HOUSE 3

FEATURE 26

+
NS00
WS00

N700
TIO

4-

NSO0
WTO0

\
HOUSE 2

NSOO
W600

W400

WSO0

\

J

F£ATURE 29

N500

ff

W300
Tll

W500
4-

N300

HOUSE 4"

T15
WSOO

T16

Figure 4. Site Map showing trenches and their relationship to Houses 1-8 and other features.

Excavation conditions were better in the late 1970s when House 5 was
investigated. All dirt was screened through one-quarter inch hardware cloth and
approximately 50 percent of that was fine-screened.
FEATURES
A total of 15 features have been identified from the various Vinson site
excavations. All features were excavated as separate units and recorded on the

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

79

master site map. Cache Pits 1, 2 and 3 in this report were originally recorded as
Feature 25-1, Feature 31, and Feature 32.
House 1 (grid coordinates N425/W650)

The description of House 1 excavations is summarized from an unpublished
manuscript written by Dessamae Lorrain (1963). House 1 was excavated under
the direction of Edward B. Jelks on several field trips from October 1961 to
Februrary 1963. It was outlined by a narrow trench that followed the house’s
perimeter. The interior of the house was then divided into six arbitrary sections.
Sections one and two at the northern end, and section six at the southern end,
were dug by six-inch (15.6-cm) levels from the ground surface. After drawing
the profiles and noting the stratification, it was decided to excavate the remaining three sections by distinct soil units. Where the soil units were thin or not
easily separated, excavated levels combined two, but never more than two, soil
units.
House 1 was oval in outline ~igure 5). It measured about 30 feet (9.2 meters)
in length and 12 feet (3.6 meters) in width at ground level; its long axis was
oriented northwest-southeast. The floor of the house was dug about 18 inches (46
cm) into the clay subsoil. Neither the floor or walls showed any signs of deliberate
preparation.
Six post molds, and a possible seventh, were found in the floor of the house,
according to the field documentation of the structure. There was cedar wood still
remaining in five of them (see Figure 5). The posts form an inner oval ring
approximately 2.5 feet (75 cm) from the outside wall. In addition, there was a
support post equidistant from the east and west walls and 12.5 feet (3.8 meters)
from the north end. The balk around one of the center stakes was not excavated
and there may have been another post to balance the previously mentioned north
support post.
Two circular ash lenses and a fire pit were found in the southern half of the
house. The first, and original, fireplace extended below floor level. It was a basinshaped depression approximately 2.5 feet (75 cm) in diameter and four inches (10
cm) deep. It was equidistant from the east and west house walls and between 7.5
(2.3 meters) and 10 feet (3.05 meters) from the south end. The clay below it was
burned to a depth of approximately 1.25 inches (3 cm). Five inches (13 cm) above,
and partly overlapping the central fireplace, was the first ash lens. It apparently
represents a later second floor level. This floor could not be clearly identified in
most of the house. This lens was smaller than the fire basin, 1.67 feet (51 cm) in
diameter, and only 1.25 inches (3 cm) deep, but the dirt under the lens was also
burned to a depth of 1.25 inches (3 cm). A second ash lens was also found on this
second floor; it was about the same size and the dirt beneath it was also burned
(see Figure 5).
Although no entryway was identified, Dr. Harry Shafer (1984 personal
communication) remembered a packed clay area associated with House 1. It was
located in the middle of the north side of the structure, and led from the top of the

80

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

@

Outline of
house

at

ground
surface

®

0

I

@

Post

(~ Char red

wood

Figure 5. House I Plan View.

clay zone to the bottom of the house pit. The packed clay area was not shown,
however, in the field plan drawing made of House 1.
The profdes show that the house burned. The layer of burned clay and
charcoal was six inches (15.6 cm) to one foot (31.2 cm) thick around the walls, but

Smith and others m The Vinson Site

81

lensed out toward the center of the house; it sloped downward from the walls to
the center of the house. There were no impressions of sticks or grass in this burned
layer. There were, however, a few lumps of grass-impressed daub found in the
upper layers of the house fill.
In the two center sections, burned beams were found just above the burned
clay. They measured up to two feet (61 cm) in length and up to six inches (16 cm)
in diameter. With few exceptions, the burned beams were oriented upward and
outward toward the walls. It appears that the side walls of the house had collapsed
and then were followed by the burning inner framework that fell over them.
Above the burned clay layer and the burned beams was a gray sandy clay
midden with a large amount of bone refuse. The depression formed by the burned
house obviously had then been used as a refuse pit. After the refuse had almost
reached the top of the ground surface, a layer of sterile red clay was placed over it.
The clay was deliberately placed there by humans, but why it was done is
unknown. One possibility is that the depression was used as a landfill for the clay
excavated during the building of a new house.
House 2 (N440/W660)
House 2 had been discovered and partially excavated by Mr. Vinson before
the beginning of the 1964 Field School. Further excavations during the field
school were done in the hopes of obtaining another house plan, establishing the
range of house styles at Vinson, and determining if the different house shapes
represented: (a) occupations by different groups who may have lived at the site at
different times or (b) represented different structure functions.
House 2 was trenched to obtain a profile of a known house as an aid to
identifying other structures in the remainder of the trenches. Trench 5 cut eastwest through the north half of the house to a depth of 2.5 feet (75 cm). Mr.
Vinson had reached the floor of House 2 in only a small portion of its southern
section but had removed much of the central fill. Since the major objective here
was to obtain the floor plan, the backhoe was then used to clean out portions of
the housefill.
House 2 was a circular structure built inside a shallow pit ~igure 6). The
house was 15 feet (4.6 meters) by 17 feet (5.2 meters) in diameter. The floor was
dug approximately 18 inches (46 cm) into the clay and was four feet (1.2 meters)
below the present ground surface. The pit for the structure originated in what was
the plow zone.
The structure had a circle of seven posts with a possible eighth post on the
southeast edge of the circle (see Figure 6). These posts were located from 18 to 30
inches (46-77 cm) from the edge of the structure depression and ranged from 2.55.5 inches (6.5-14 cm) in diameter.
The eighth possible mold is considered only a possible post because it was
shallower and not as distinctive as the others in color. If the eighth post is included
in the wall support ring, then the structure post pattern would lack only the
southwest post of the ring. This portion of the ring is located in the shallower

82

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

~)Charred
(~ Possible

wood
.t~

post

@ Post

.=

edoeoft.~~
Z-=

~,~,~,/o~ I

floor

---. -~
\

,/

\

/

\

/

/

,,,,

\

@

/

\

/

@
Trench

5

\

@0
I
I

0-

@ Q

f
/

©

/

/
/

/
/

/

@

/

@

I

/
t"

0

I

/

I

,

,

5

,

,I

Feet

Figure 6. House 2 Plan View.

0

3
Feet

v’~.:
Outside

o,;oor
Figure 7. Profile of House 2.

edge

I

~,

Smith and others m The Vinson Site

83

portion of the house that may have been destroyed by plowing or other types of
disturbances.
Additional posts were located within one foot (30 cm) of two of the wall
support posts (see Figure 6). These double post arrangements might represent
repair work on the structure, but it seems unlikely that the double posts on the east
side would represent repairs, since one appears to be outside the discernible limits
of the floor. A possible explanation for the pattern would be that the extra post is
part of an entryway.
Inside the wall support ring were four roof support posts. Another double
post arrangement, possibly from the replacement of one of the roof support posts,
was found in the bottom of Trench 5 (see Figure 6). All the roof support posts
were between 4.5-5.5 feet (1.4-1.7 meters) from the edge of the structure. A total
of 14 or 15 posts were found in this structure; seven of them still contained wood
fragments.
No definite entrance was found, although one was carefully searched for
during the excavations. The most probable location for the entrance is on the
eastern side of the structure: this area is next to the double post arrangement
mentioned before and the soil is definitely more compact than the rest of the
structure. There is also a slight rise in the floor elevation there, and the occupational debris and organic staining found on the floor extends outward from the
structure.
A clay ridge was noted along the outside of the structure in several areas
(Figure 7). This embanking of dirt may have aided in keeping the inside of the
structure dry. The fire pit was located near the center of the house and was circular
with a two foot (61 cm) diameter (see Figure 6); the pit was six inches (15.6 cm)
deep. The hearth was completely removed to search for a post mold under the
hearth, but none was found. Several burned beams were found on the floor near
the center of the house. Due to the previous excavation of the house, most of the
beams in the shallower outer edges of the house had been removed or destroyed.
The fragments of baked clay scattered throughout the fill suggests that clay, or
chinking, may have been used to some extent in the house construction, although
they were not present in great numbers. No grass impressions were noted on the
baked clay pieces.
Although the excavations during the field school recorded no bone midden,
Mr. Vinson reported finding a great number of animal bones near the top of the
structure fill It appears that this house was also a refuse dump. No clay layer was
reported by Mr. Vinson, however, covering the bone refuse.
House 3 (N790/W730)
The description of House 3 was also summarized from an unpublished
manuscript written by Lorrain (1963). House 3 was excavated in the spring of
1963 by the Dallas and Tarrant County archeological societies under the direction
of Dessamae Lorrain and Lathel Duffield. The house had earlier been discovered
and partly dug by Mr. Vinson. Since the structure appeared to be fairly small with

84

Texas Archeological Society

simple stratigraphy, and the soil was impossibly hard, it was decided to excavate
House 3 as a single unit. The dirt had to be carefully loosened with hand picks and
removed with shovels. Due to the hardness of the dirt clods, only an unknown
portion of it was screened through one-quarter inch mesh screen. Trowels were
used near the floor and walls.
To maintain vertical and horizontal control two stakes were established on a
north-south line, while a third stake for elevation was located at the eastern edge of
the house. A plan map of the house was drawn, and the elevations were recorded
relative to the ground level at the elevation stake. However, the elevations were
not related to a primary datum. A record of the soil zones in the structure was made
but no profiles were drawn.
House 3 had a subsurface floor like House 1, but there the resemblance
ended. This house was almost circular (Figure 8), with an east-west diameter of 23
feet (7.0 meters) and a north-south diameter of 25 feet (7.6 meters). The floor, with
a central fire basin, was approximately one foot (30 cm) below ground level. The
fire basin had a diameter of two feet (61 cm) and a depth of 1.25 inches (3 cm)
below the floor. A circle of 12 post holes occurred from 2.5 to four feet (73-122
cm) inside the outer edge of the house pit. Ten of these had cedar wood still
remaining in them. Two other posts were found on either side of the fire basin; no
wood was found in them. The size of these posts is unknown, but the descriptions
of them suggest that they are the size of central support posts; however, the field
notes state that "they appear too big for posts."
As with House 1, Shafer (1984 personal communication) remembered a
packed clay area that may have served as an entry ramp for House 3. This packed
clay area was on the west side of the structure, and ran from the top of the clay
zone to the house floor pit.
This house had been burned and there was a concentration of charcoal
between each post hole and the walls of the house. As with House 1, there were a
few lumps of grass-impressed daub.
The stratigraphy of House 3 was very simple. Above the floor and the
charcoal, there was a 0.5 foot (15.6 cm) thick, gray bone refuse midden concentrated in the southern half of the house with a 0.5 foot (15.6 cm) thick sterile clay
layer above it. The house appears to have been burned, abandoned, and used as a
refuse pit.
House 4 (N280/W420)

House 4 was approximately oval in shape, roughly 37 feet (11.3 meters)
through the east-west axis and 20 feet (6.1 meters) along the north-south axis. This
structure had been discovered and partially excavated by Mr. Vinson. The remaining structure excavations were done during the 1964 field school. A backhoe was
used to first clean out the excavated backdirt from the previous work and to cut a
trench along the major axis of the structure, as well as to excavate four trenches
perpendicular to the major axis in an effort to locate the edges of the structure. Due

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

85

/

/
/
/

/
/
/

/
/

Figure 8. Plan View of House 3.

to the hardness of the soil and time constraints, most of the work in this feature
was done with pick and shovel. No indication is given in field school records as to
the amount of soil matrix put through screens.
The house was oriented almost due east-west along its long axis. As shown in
Figure 9, most of the northern half of the house was excavated by the end of the
field school. Only test trenches were put in the southern part of the house.
The structure was almost four feet (1.2 meters) below the present surface
and two feet (0.6 meters) into the clay layer. Nine definite posts were located,
with seven along the north and east edges, while two posts were found in the
middle of the structure. This oval-shaped house is similar in floor plan to House
1, because it apparently had two rings of wall support posts along with the center
roof support posts.
A burned clay floor was located in House 4 when Mr. Vinson’s excavations
were cleaned up. The floor is roughly in the center of the house and may be all that

86

Texas Archeological Society

@

@

Figure 9. Area Excavated at House 4, and projected house outline.

was left of the central fire hearth. A few burned beams were present in the western
part of the structure; however, a considerable charcoal layer was identified just
above the house floor.
The trenching of House 4 facilitated the profiling of this structure (Figure
10). As noted in the profiles, the structure had no bone midden or clay cap. The
floor is not perfectly level, nor is it a clearly prepared surface. The clay ridge that
was seen around the outside of House 2 was not found in House 4.

e

nu.o.

Figure 10. House 4 Profile.

. ¯ Q~,.,~ IJ~t~l,

.°6v ch=~©o=t

F,=t

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

87

House 5 ~560/W520)
House 5 was located in 1976 by the author and Ralph Vinson, brother of the
land leasee. It was primarily excavated by trowels and a double screening procedure using one-quarter inch mesh wire and then window screen, with all cultural
materials being saved. The structure was excavated in 3 x 3 foot (0.92 x 0.92
meters) units, utilizing six inch (15.6 cm) levels. It was hoped these methods
would allow a more complete sample of artifacts associated with the structure or
midden layer to be recovered, and allow for more complete structural and stratigraphic details to be documented. Additional goals of the excavations included
locating the structure’s entrance, and defining structural features outside the pit
portion of the structure.
House 5 was located after observing cultural materials that had been brought
to the surface by pocket gophers. The house was near the well casing used as the
primary datum; the well was close to the old farmhouse that had burned. Consequently, the upper fill of House 5 produced an large quantity of artifacts from the
later historic period occupation at the site. Only a sample of identifiable and
possibly temporally diagnostic artifacts were collected from this historic deposit.
At the time excavations began in 1976, there were no time constraints. The
excavations were conducted on selected weekends over a five year period. In
1981, however, the access to the property was lost, and the field was leveled by
machinery to return it to pasture. Approximately 80 percent of the house had been
excavated up to that point.
House 5 was a large oval structure measuring 34 feet (10.4 meters) along its
major axis and 18 feet (5.5 meters) along its minor axis (Figure 11). The major
axis was oriented 16 degrees west of magnetic north. The floor of this structure
was unprepared, 3.67 feet (t. 1 meters) below the present surface, and excavated
approximately 2.83 feet (0.86 meters) into the clay.
Six definite posts were recorded inside this structure; all had wood remaining
in them. There were no post molds identified. Four possible small posts with small
amounts of wood were found along the edge of the house, and a fifth possible post
was present near the hearth (see Figure 11). There was not enough wood remaining in any of these to form the circular post shape and no post molds were found.
From the pattern of the definite and possible posts, it appears that this
structure had posts just inside the depression that supported the outer wall, as well
as interior support posts in some undetermined pattern. Two of the central interior
posts had been burned.
Although the floor had not been formally prepared, portions could be easily
identified by the presence of a burned orange clay and charcoal-stained surface.
This surface did not cover the entire floor, but was mainly identified in the central
and northern portions of the house. Inside this area were two pits dug into the floor
(Figure 12). One might be a storage pit. It had a diameter of 10 inches (26 cm) and
a depth of one foot (31 cm). The sides of the pit were straight with no burned clay
inside; the pit was also empty of artifacts. This pit may have been used for storage.

88

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 11. Plan View of House 5.

’~

Tan

Plow

zone

sand
Charcoal

Bone

Burned
Brown
some

stained

layer
clay

sandcharcoal

5

0

I,,r,I
Feet

Figure 12. Profile of House 5. Note two pits in floor of house.

layer

Smith and others m The Vinson Site

89

The second pit (20 inches [52 cm] in diameter) appeared to be the central fire
hearth. The sides were straight and fire-baked, and dug into the floor to a depth of
13 inches (34 cm). However, no ash or charcoal was found in the pit.
Immediately above the floor was a thin layer of charcoal flecks and charcoalstained soil indicating that the house had burned. With the exception of three rocks
near the hearth there were no artifacts on the floor of the structure. The house had
apparently been cleaned out before it burned.
After the house had burned, it was used as a trash pit. Most of the artifacts
recovered from the house came from this midden, with the exception of the glass
trade beads, which came from all parts of the fill. The midden, consisting mainly
of deer and bison bone, was six inches (15.6 cm) above the floor and followed
the contour of the house (see Figure 12). It averaged six to eight inches (15.620.4 cm) thick in the southeastern quadrant of the structure and thinned to the
west and north.
The fill above the midden contained more historic material associated with
the old farmhouse than it did aboriginal artifacts. Several ash lens in this upper
strata represent post-Indian occupational debris (see Gilmore, this volume). Gopher activity mixed the artifacts in the upper fill such that levels had little cultural
meaning. The bone bed stopped their activity, allowing this zone and those below
it to remain essentially undisturbed. There was no clay cap on the midden although
some areas of the fill contained small clay lenses. These may represent baskets of
clay that had been dumped into the refuse pit.
No definite entry for House 5 was identified. There was, however, a clay
slope to the floor in the southeastern portion of the structure. With the proximity of
the hearth area to that wall, it seems likely that this may be the entrance.
The trench through the northern end of the structure (see Figure 11) revealed
two large pieces of burned wood and large areas of burned clay just inside the
depression of the structure. The trench extended past the edge of the structure,
where a rise in the clay subsoil was located on the outside edge of the depression
similar to that found in House 2.
House 6
During the testing for House 5, one 3 x 3 foot (0.92 x 0.92 meters) test unit
was put down 60 feet (18.3 meters) northwest of the datum for House 5. This unit
was excavated to a depth of 2.5 feet (76 cm) without hitting the clay subsoil. In
1980 the senior author decided to do additional testing to see if a structure might
be present in that area. A second test unit was excavated 20 feet (6.1 meters) west
of the first, but the clay subsoil was encountered at a depth of 10 inches (26 cm). A
one foot (0.3 meters) wide trench was excavated to follow the clay subsoil until
the edge of the house depression was discovered.
A six foot by six foot (1.8 x 1.8 meters) unit was then excavated to verify the
nature of the depression. The clay dropped sharply to a depth of 20 inches (52 cm)
below the surface. There was a very large amount of charcoal in contact with the
edge of the depression. The clay had been baked orange as it was in the north end

90

Texas Archeological Society

of House 5. One post was found that was six inches (15.6 cm) in diameter and
completely burned. No artifacts, except for a few beads, were found in the
excavations and permission to excavate further on the property was lost before
additional work could be done.
Houses 7 and 8
Two houses, designated 7 and 8 for this report, were partially excavated by
Noil Vinson. They are located at grid coordinates N650/W500 and N650/W370,
respectively. Both houses were reported to have been located by the presence of
bone brought to the surface by gophers, perhaps indicating a midden was present
inside the depression. No records were kept on these excavations and no other
information is available concerning these structures.
Cache Pit 1
Cache Pit 1 is a bell-shaped feature found at the intersection of Trenches 3
and 4 in the area designated Feature 25. The pit was floored with small cedar
saplings (Figure 13 and 14).
The fill of this pit was removed in one foot levels with the clay floor being
reached at a depth of 3.5 feet (1.07 meters), two feet (0.61 meters) into the clay
subsoil. The floor and opening of this pit was approximately five feet (1.52
meters) in diameter. The sides were not straight, but sloped in at the top then back
out toward the bottom (Figure 15a). The floor of the pit was lined with closely
spaced and partially charred wood fragments oriented in a southwest by northeast
direction across the floor (see Figure 14). These charred fragments were about 1.5
inches (4 cm) in diameter. The patterned placement of these wood fragments
suggests they are remnants of flooring rather than a collapsed covering or roof. It
should also be noted that the bulk of the flooring was charred, but no ash or burned
clay was found in association. The artifacts in the cache pit fill consisted of a few
trade beads, bone, and non-descript metal.
Cache Pit 2

Cache Pit 2 is a bell-shaped pit found in the east wall and floor near the south
end of Trench 9. Trench profiles indicate that the pit originated in the plow zone
and extended two feet (0.61 meters) into the clay zone (see Figure 15b). The pit fill
was a gray sand with specks of charcoal throughout.
The feature was excavated in one foot (31 cm) levels. Post-aboriginal nineteenth and twentieth century artifactual materials were recovered from the top
portion of the fill, while only bone was recovered from the lower part of the pit.
The pit’s largest diameter was 3.67 feet (1.1 meters) along the north-south
axis and 3.8 feet (1.2 meters) along the east-west axis. The depth of the pit from
the plow zone to the floor was 2.33 feet (0.71 meters).
About nine inches (23 cm) above the floor, the gray sand fill became more
red and compacted, until what appeared to be its flat bottom was encountered.

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

Figure 13. Cache Pit i showing cedar sapling floor lining.

Charred

Figure 14. Plan map of Cache Pit 1.

wood

91

92

Texas Archeological Society

Su r f a c e,,..,~,

Plow

zone

I
Plow

Lined

Zone

b

Plow

Zone

c

1

I
Feet

Figure 15. Profiles of Cache Pits: (a) Cache Pit 1, (b) Cache Pit 2, and (c) Cache Pit 3.

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

93

Excavations continued until a thin statum of charcoal was exposed. This charcoal
layer was cedar bark strips about two inches (5 cm) wide that covered the entire
floor of the pit (Figure 16), although the grain pattern of the cedar bark lining had
no common direction. Several pieces of bone fragment were found in contact with
the floor.
While it was first thought that the cedar bark material had burned in situ, a
closer examination of the soil samples in the laboratory showed two distinct layers
of charcoal in which none of the matrix appeared to be clearly fired. If the
vegetable material was not burned in situ, it is hard to explain how the carbonized
strips could have been deposited in the pit without fragmenting them. It is also
unclear what the hard packed, red clay layer above the actual floor of the pit really
represents.
Cache Pit 3 (N550/W621)
Cache Pit 3 is a bell-shaped storage pit found in the profile of Trench 2.
Unlike the other two cache pits identified at Vinson, Cache Pit 3 was not lined.
The pit was approximately three feet (0.91 meters) in diameter and extended some
2.5 feet (0.76 meters) below the plow zone; the mouth of the pit originated in the
plow zone (see Figure 15c). Due to a lack of time at the Field School this feature
was not excavated.

Figure 16. Clay cap and floor of Cache Pit 2.

94

Texas Archeological Society

FEATURE 26

TRENCH 2

N

’97.02’

+
97.20"

DEPRESSION

97.59"
DEPRESSIOH

POST MOLD

WOO0
ELEY.
95.52"

Figure 17. Poslartolds and depressions with Feature 26.

MISCELLANEOUSCULTURALFEATURES

Feature 25 (N570/W570)
The area around the intersection of Trench 3 and Trench 4 had a vague, but
extensive, deposit of cultural refuse designated Feature 25. Several small depressions, including Cache Pit 1, were included in this feature. No determination was
made as to the function of any of these features with the exception of Cache Pit 1,
since they were not investigated during the Field School.

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

95

Feature 26 (N765/W605)
At the beginning of the 1964 TAS Field School, this area contained a number
of potholes that were the result of many people removing "bead dirt" to take home
for screening. Mr. Vinson had indicated that this area contained the highest
concentration of beads he knew of at the site.
Trenches 1 and 2 were cut through the area in an effort to locate any houses,
if they were present. The profiles revealed no structural depressions, so additional
test trenches and units were opened to the east and west of Trench 2. One possible
post mold, a small ash lens, and a concentration of refuse containing burned bone,
clay, and ash were found rather than structural evidence ~igure 17). Although no
house was found, this area yielded a higher concentration of artifacts than did any
other provenience at Vinson during the field school. It is possible that this was an
activity area- such as a plaza -or perhaps the cultural materials were associated
with a nearby structure or a covered arbor.
Feature 29
Feature 29 refers to two cedar posts. The first post is seven feet north (2.1
meters), and the second is 20 feet north (6.1 meters), of Cache Pit 2 (see Figure 4).
The two posts were approximately four inches (10 cm) in diameter and in
poor condition. They were found about one foot (31 cm) below the surface and
extended 1.5 feet (0A6 meters) into the clay. Whether these posts are associated
with an aboriginal occupation or with the later Anglo-American occupation is not
clear, but their close proximity to the farm house complex may indicate that these
posts date to the latter occupation. Approximate grid coordinates for the posts are
N430/W485.

Feature 30 (N570/W530)
A burned beam, a burned clay line crossing the trench, and a dip in the clay
subsoil, were found in the extension of Trench 3 eastward from its intersection
with Trench 4. These disturbances appeared to be part of a house independent of
the refuse around Cache Pit 1, and were designated Feature 30.
The northeast quadrant of Feature 30 was excavated in two levels. First the
plow zone was removed, and then the fill was removed to expose the burned clay
and charcoal layer discovered in Trench 3. A definite line of burned clay was
uncovered running in a northwest by southeast direction, and in line with the
burned clay crossing Trench 3. The burned clay was also at the same depth as the
mouth of Cache Pit 1. To the northeast side of the burned clay line was a definite
change in the clay’s appearance: it was extremely hard-packed and contained a
large quantity of charcoal staining and specks. This was thought to indicate the
interior and exterior of a structure. To the southwest of the "floor" itself were
found two small depressions in the clay, some three feet (0.91 meters) in diameter,
and one possible post mold. The possible post mold was approximately seven
inches (18 cm) in diameter and six to eight inches (15.6-20.5 cm) deep.

96

Texas Archeological Society

The artifacts increased in number to the northeast of the burned clay line.
Some were aboriginal, but most related to the post-Civil War occupation of the
site. Only nine glass beads were recovered from the Feature 30 area. Many
fragments of hand-made brick were found in apparent association with the burned
clay line. The same type of brick fragments are found around the fireplace of the
nearby farmhouse. It is suspected, therefore, that Feature 30 was the base for a
nineteenth century Anglo-American wooden superstructure.
DISCUSSION OF FEATURES
The structures found at Vinson were substantial and took considerable
manpower to build. The structures conform to the descriptions given by Bell
(1984) for typical Wichita Confederacy houses. Whether there is any cultural,
functional, or temporal significance in the difference between circular and oval
house patterns at Vinson is unknown at this time.
These structures are thought to have been utilized during the winter months
because they contained central hearths. If these were only houses used in the
summer there would seem to be no need for an interior hearth. The overlapping
ash lenses in House 1 point to periods of vacancy and then reuse of the structure.
Several of the Vinson structures show evidence of burning, but whether the
burning was intentional or accidential is unknown. Most of the artifactual material
in the houses came from the middens located in the structures after they had been
abandoned. House 1 and House 3 had clay caps placed over the middens. Similar
caps were reported at Gilbert (Jelks 1967). The floors of these structures had little
or no cultural material associated with them, possibly indicating that they were
abandoned before they burned or were cleaned out before they were intentionally
set on fire.
Lined cache pits have been found at the Longest site, a Wichita village on the
Red River in Oklahoma (Bell 1984:369). Cache pits are also found in Nortefio
Focus sites in Texas, having been reported at Stansbury (Stephenson 1970) and
Gilbert (Jelks 1967). These types of cache pits are external features and probably
are associated with nearby structures. At Vinson, Cache Pit 1 is in close proximity
to both House 5 and the unexcavated House 6. Cache Pit 3 is near House 7, while
Cache Pit 2 is near no known structure.
ARTIFACT ANALYSIS
The artifacts analyzed and described below from the Vinson site are a
combination of many peoples’ efforts. Dessamae Lorrain worked many hours on
the preliminary sorting and measuring of the artifacts, and much of the information in this report on the chipped stone and ceramics comes from her notes.
Author credits are provided by each of the different relevant artifact sections.
The senior author of this article carried out the remainder of the analyses with the
advice of others.

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

97

The artifacts included here are from three collections: the Texas Archeological
Society Field School, James E. Smith II and Ralph Vinson (House 5), and some
material from Noil Vinson (House 2, House 4, House 6, and House 7).
Chipped Stone Artifacts
There were 221 pieces of lithic artifacts (tools and debris, but excluding
gunflints) recovered during the various excavations at the Vinson site. The tools
were crude and easily made, and the use of a chipped stone technology was not a
major source of tools for the people at Vinson. Most of the artifacts were made
with hard-hammer techniques and showed many hinge fractures. The only quality
piece of worked material that might be attributed to the Vinson people was an
alternately beveled knife. Five of the ten projectile points were Archaic period
types and were probably brought to the village from a site near the springs. Two of
the arrow points may have been made at Vinson, but they are rather poorly
manufactured.
Projectile Points
No. of specimens: 10
The projectile points from Vinson were identified using the Handbook of
Texas Archeology (Suhm and Jelks 1962).
Archaic period projectiles
Yarbrough (two specimens)
Provenience: Surface
Both points are corner-notched with slightly expanding stems (Figure 18e).
The larger piece is beveled on one side. The lithic material for both Yarbroughs
was a typical Central Texas chert.

Length
Width
Thickness
Neck Width
Base Width

Specimen 1
43.2 mm
23.3 mm
8.4 mm
10.5 mm
12.0 mm

Specimen 2
45.3 mm
29.6 mm
8.9 mm
16.2 mm
16.3 mm

Gary (one specimen)
Provenience: House 2
This specimen has a contracting stem and triangular blade on a reddishbrown quartzite (see Figure 18b).

Length
Width
Thickness
Stem Length

43.8 mm
28.6 mm
8.0 mm
15.0 mm

98

Texas Archeological Society

B

D

C

H

F

G

Figure 18. Projectile Points and Preforms: (a-e) Archaic projectile points, (f) preform, (g, i),
unifacial projectile points, and (h) Alba arrowpoint.

Base Width
Stem Length

6.2 mm
15.0 mm

Martindale (one specimen)
Provenience: Feature 30 (1)
This is comer notched with a triangular blade and straight sides (see Figure
18d). This point has the typical "fishtail" notch in the base. It is heavily patinated
and made of Central Texas chert.
Length (est.)
Width
Thickness
Neck Width
Base Width

46.0 mm
26.0 mm
5.8 mm
15.5 mm
18.7 mm

Unidentified (one specimen)
Provenience: Surface (1)
This specimen may be an Early Stemmed projectile (Turner and Hester
1985:87). It is comer-notched with an expanding base that has been ground on all
three sides (see Figure 18c). The blade is convex and the stem is concave. It is
made from a light tan Central Texas chert.

Length
Width

50.0 mm
26.7 mm

Smith and others m The Vinson Site
Thickness
Neck Width
Basal Width

99

8.0 mm
16.3 mm
17.4 mm

Late Prehistoric period projectiles

Alba (one specimen)
Provenience: Surface (1)
This is a complete arrowpoint made from a typical gray Central Texas chert.
(see Figure 18h).
Length
Width
Thickness
Stem Width
Stem Length

19.0 mm
12.0 mm
3.5 mm
4.3 mm
6.0 mm

Perdiz (one specimen)
Provenience: Surface (1)
This piece is the basal portion; it was made on a black chert of unknown
source.

Length (est.)
Width
Thickness
Stem Length

28.0 mm
16.7 mm
3.6 mm
9.6 mm

Fresno (one specimen)
Provenience: Unknown
One Fresno point was apparently recovered from the site, but it was lost
before it could be analyzed.
Unidentified (two specimens)
Provenience: House 5 (2)
Both unidentified arrowpoints are made on flakes that have been worked
only around the edges (see Figure 18g, i)). The quality of workmanship is poor.
They may have been made during the Wichita occupation of Vinson, when flint
knapping methods had begun to be less important. One is made on gray Central
Texas chert, and only vaguely resembles a projectile point in shape. The second
has a form similar to the Scallom type, and is made from brown chert.
Bifaces
No. of specimens: 8
Of the eight bifaces recovered, four were very rough in workmanship
(Figure 19a, b). Three finished pieces appear to be from broken projectile points

100

Texas Archeological Society

A

B

c

H

G

K

N

0

Figure 19. Lithic Tools from the Vinson Site: (a, b, d) Bifaces, (c) Willow-leaf biface, (e, g)
graver/spokeshave, (f, h) spokeshave, (i) scraper, (j) bifacially modified quartz pebble, and
(k-p) edge-utilized flakes.

that may have been brought in to the site. The eighth piece is a broken triangular
preform.
Rectangular Biface (one specimen)
Provenience: Surface (1)
This is a very roughly-made biface with hinge fractures on both sides. A
similar type of biface was found at the Pearson Site (Duffield and Jelks 1961:31).

Length
Width
Thickness

48.2 mm
45.0 mm
15.1 mm

Smith attd others-- The Vinson Site

101

Willow-leaf Biface (one specimen)
Provenience: Surface (1)
This type of artifact has been described at other Nortefio sites as an alternate
beveled knife. It is alternately beveled on the left side and has a slightly rounded
base (see Figure 19c).
Length
Width
Thickness

6.0 mm
2.0 mm
9.0 mm

Preform (one specimen)
Provenience: Surface (1)
This piece is broken and made of a poor quality, gray, Central Texas chert.
Length
Width
Thickness

N/A
23.7 mm
6.7 mm

Broken or Rejected Bifaces (five specimens)
Provenience: Surface (4), Unknown (1)
Of the four broken specimens, two appear to be roughly worked performs
broken in manufacture. The remaining two were probably from completed projectile points. The rejected biface resulted because the knapper was unable to remove
a knot formed by many hinge fractures. Four of the broken or rejected bifaces are
made on tan chert and the other is a gray chert.
Scrapers
No. of specimens: 3
Provenience: Surface (3)
All three specimens are end scrapers with the classic scraper beak (see Figure
19i). The two larger scrapers are approximately four centimeters in length and
width, while the third measured 3 x 2 cm in length and width. They are made on
large flakes with cortex covering over 50 percent of the ventral surface. All edges
of the piece have use wear on them. Seven other scrapers (two side scrapers from
House 1 and five "thumbnail" scrapers from the surface) were reported in Dessamae
Lorrain’s field notes, but were not available for analysis herein.
Spokeshaves
No. of specimens: 4
Provenience: House 2 (1), House 3 (1), House 5 (2)
All notches on the spokeshaves are roughly the same size with a radius of
curvature of roughly eight mm. These tools are on various sized pieces of chert
debris without bulbs of percussion (see Figure 19f, h). All have additional edges
that show use other than as spokeshaves.

102

Texas Archeological Society

Gravers/Spokeshaves
No. of specimens: 3
Provenience: Surface (1), House 5 (2)
These artifacts have gravers and spokeshaves on the same flake (see Figure
19e, g). Two of these tools have the classic chipped graver point. The other had a
point formed by natural breaks which has wear polish and small secondary flaking
along the beak. It measures 2 x 3 cm in size and was made on a chip. Both of the
chipped beak gravers also have a spokeshave or small concave scraper edge
retouched on the opposing face. They all appear to be from Central Texas chert.
Like the two artifacts mentioned above, the third graver/spokeshave served
multiple purposes. It has a small endscraper edge formed along the thick edge of
the piece and a spokeshave along the opposite, thinner edge.
Spokeshaves and spokeshave/graver tools such as these are common in the
Nortefio Focus of Texas and are listed among the stone tools in the trait list
prepared by Duffield and Jelks (1961: 71).
Edge- Utilized Flakes
No. of specimens: 19
Unifacial Flakes (two specimens)
Provenience: Surface (2)
These artifacts show use attrition along one edge and one surface (see Figure
19k-p). Hinge flaking is present on both tools.
Bifacial Flakes (seventeen specimens)
Provenience: Surface (9), House 1 (3), House 2 (2), House 3 (1), House 5 (2)
These artifacts represent a form of lithic tool technology that likely was
utilized by the Historic Wichita occupants of the Vinson site. There is severe
bifacial edge damage due to excessive use on these specimens, but no retouch is
present. On some pieces hinge flaking has obliterated the flake scars along the
edge creating a rounded used tool margin.
These tools appear to have had considerable force applied to produce this
degree of edge attrition. Such bifacial edge damage has been associated with
sawing activities on hard materials (Tringham et al. 1974; Gallagher and Bearden
1976). It is possible that these tools could have been used with sawing activities on
the large amount of bone present in the site deposits (see Yates 1993, this volume).

Retouched Flake

No. of specimens: 1
Provenience: Surface (1)
Only one flake appears to have intentional flaking along an edge. Like the
small scrapers, this retouch was along the proximal end of the flake.

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

103

Lithic Debris
No. of specimens: 173
Provenience: Specific provenience unknown.
The assemblage was divided into four groups (Table 1). Group one, flakes,
have bulbs of percussion. Group two is labeled chunks. This group of lithic debris
had no bulbs of percussion and the pieces were greater than one cm across. Group
three are chips, pieces of lithic debris with no bulb of percussion and smaller than
one cm across. Group 4 refers to quartzite lithic debris. The groups were also
divided into utilized or not utilized categories (see Table 1), while the flakes were
also separated into hard hammer, soft hammer, or biface thinning flakes, as well as
pressure flakes.

Table 1
Utilized Debitage

Chunks
Chips
Flakes
Quartzite

Utilized

Non-utilized

Total

7
2
3
0

54
34
67
6

61
36
70
6

12

161

173

Table 2
Flake Technology

Hard
Hammer

Soft
Hammer

Biface
Thinning

Pressure

Total

Greater than I cm

36

7

3

0

46

Less than 1 cm

2

15

2

5

24

Flakes

104

Texas Archeological Society
Ground/Pecked Stone
Matzo

No. of specimens: 2
Provenience: House 5 (2)
Both mano fragments were made of sandstone. The larger specimen was 10
cm in width, 5.5 cm in length of the recovered portion, and 2.5 cm thick. It appears
to have been utilized even after it was broken.
The smaller mano fragment has been utilized on both sides. The fragment
resembles a section of a disk-shaped object (Figure 20d). It has a center thickness
of 3 cm and tapers to 6 mm near the edge of the piece.

A

0

t

2

3

cent|meters

Figure 20. Groundstone Tools.

4

5

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

105

Smoothed Anvil Stones
No. of specimens: 7
Provenience: House 1 (1), House 5 (6)
The seven pieces of siltstone anvils have been carefully prepared by pecking
and smoothing. They represent at least four separate tools and two different
shapes. The largest specimen (Figure 21a) is roughly semi-circular in shape with a
12 cm diameter. It is seven cm high with fiat top and bottom surfaces. The top has
scars from pounding, while a portion of one side has been broken off from a blow
originating on the top edge. The edges along the side opposite the break also show
battering scars. This tool is complete in shape and was definitely used in its
present form.

A

E

Figure 21. Anvil Stones.

106

Texas Archeological Society

Along the broken edge (called the front) is a carefully prepared lip that
protrudes over the side by six to seven mm. This lip configuration is present on
three of the four specimens of this type. It appears the lip was produced by
pecking and grinding the side to form a smooth, curved surface at the interface of
the side and lip. Portions of the bottom edge are rounded but no lip is present.
The lip itself appears to have considerable wear and polish from usage, and the
bottom has also been smoothed.
Five fragments from House 5 appear to be from non-conjoined pieces of
the same tool. Three of the pieces have the same type of shallow (5 mm) lip as
the anvil stone from House 1. The sixth piece is a fragment of siltstone with no
visible outer edges. All specimens have been burned.
Another fragment of siltstone was recovered from the fill in House 1. It
has a slightly deeper (8 mm) lip. This small fragment has also been burned.
The last specimen, also from House 5, does not have the same shape as
those described above, but it appears to have had a related function. The shape
is that of an equilateral triangle with each side measuring 10 cm. The sides, however, are convex while the base is straight. The edges are rounded, and the entire artifact is smoothed in a fashion similar to the lipped fragments described
above. Unlike those fragments, however, there are no pounding scars. Instead,
many marks that may have been produced by a knife are located on the top and
base surfaces. The height of this object is 4.3 cm. This piece was not burned.
While there is no direct evidence to support a hide working function for
these tools, in general the surfaces and edges of the artifacts were smoothed
sufficiently so as not to damage a pliable material while softening or cutting
actions were performed.
Ground Limestone
No. of specimens: 2
Provenience: Surface (2)
One of these specimens may have been part of a broken mano, although
limestone is rarely used in this manner. The stone was fragmented, but appeared
to be from a circular object with a diameter of 10 cm. Both faces were ground to
form an oval in profile. The thickness of the piece was 30 mm in the center and
tapered to about seven mm at the edge. The entire fragment had been burned. The
edges show no usage or shaping.
The second specimen is an elongated piece of ground limestone that appears
to have been shaped into a rectangular form (Figure 22f). The object is 7.5 cm long
and 1.3 cm thick at the base. The shaped limestone piece tapers to only 8 mm thick
at the narrow and beveled end. Two faces show striations that appear to be cutting
marks and the entire piece has been smoothed. The limestone is not the same
material as most of the stone pipes but it is similarly as smooth. While it does not
appear to have been an abrading tool, its function is undetermined.

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

107

F

H

io

~

2

3

4

s

Figure 22. Groundstone Artifacts. (a) Sandstone Pipe, (b, c) Ground Gaming Pieces, (d, e)
Rubbed Ochre, (f) Ground Limestone, and (g, h) Loaf-shaped Abrading Stones.

108

Texas Archeological Society
Metates

No. of specimens: 3
Provenience: House 4 (1), House 5 (2)
Two metates, one small and the other a bifacially ground slab, were found
in House 5. The third, and largest, was found in House 4.
The small metate is made of sandstone and is rectangular in shape, measuring approximately 9x7 cm. It is a maximum of two cm thick but tapers to four
mm. The grinding/smoothing areas on the slab are in the center, along one of
the diagonal axes, and along the horizontal axis. The metate is sufficiently thin
in the center to suggest it may have been utilized until it broke, and it was then
discarded.
The second metate, from House 5, also appears to have been utilized until
it broke since it is a thin (1-5 cm) grinding slab. The piece measures roughly
9x12 cm. Both faces of the metate have pecking marks as well as extensive grinding striations. There is a slight curvature on both sides of the piece that indicates this is a fragment of a basin-shaped metate (see Figure 20b).
The large metate from House 4 was a 33x26 cm slab of sandstone. The
grinding surface was circular and about 16 cm in diameter.
Possible Gaming Pieces

No. of specimens: 2
Provenience: House 5 (2)
The first of the two possible gaming stones is a quartzite pebble that shows
pecking marks along the edges that apparently shaped the stone into a circular
form. The diameter of the stone is approximately 2.3 cm and it is 8 mm in thickness. The edges of the stone show wear polish (see Figure 22b, c).
The second stone is a small piece of petrified wood that shows extensive
wear along the edges. The stone is almost square, measuring about 2.3 cm along
its sides.
Miscellaneous Lithic Artifacts

No. of specimens: 7
Provenience: House 5 (4), Surface (3)
Six quartz pebbles were recovered that show some form of modification.
The breaks are very angular, but do not appear to have been the result of accidental breakage.
One modified petrified wood fragment was recovered from House 5. The
specimen has been split to form a rectangular piece 40 mm long, 32 mm wide,
and 13 mm thick. The breaks on all sides follow the grain of the wood and left
a naturally smooth surface on all sides except the ends where the split cuts across
the grain of the wood.

Smith and others m The Vinson Site

109

Fossils

No. of specimens: 4
Provenience: House 1 (1), House 5 (3)
A small fossil ammonite, probably from the Cretaceous Period, was apparently utilized as a pendant (Figure 23b). It has a six mm hole in the center that
appears to have been reamed, and also enlarged from wear, possibly by being
worn on a thong around the neck.

4¸

Figure 23. Pendants. (a) Majolica gaming piece, (b) fossil pendant.

In addition to the fossil pendant, three other fossils were recovered. Two of
these were pieces of coral and one was a Ostrea carinata pelecypod. No evidence of modification is present on these specimens.
Hammerstones
No. of specimens: 2
Provenience: House 5 (1), Surface (1)
Two small, circular quartztite pebbles were found with edge battering from
hammerstone use. Neither hammerstone showed extensive use.
Abrading Stones
Quartzite Abrader
No. of specimens: 2
Provenience: House 5 (2)
These abrading stones were river pebbles that had been abraded until the
cortex had been worn through to expose the rough quartzite interior. Over 50
percent of the surface of the larger stone (5 x 3 cm) had been ground away, and
portions of the rough quartzite interior had also been abraded until it was smooth.
The stone is 2.6 cm thick.

110

Texas Archeological Society

The second specimen is much smaller (3.7 x 2.4 cm) but apparently was also
utilized for abrading. The ends of this oval stone are the only portions of the river
pebble that have been utilized.
Sandstone Abrader
No. of specimens: 3
Provenience: Surface (3)
The sandstone abraders are loaf-shaped with one flat side. These types of
abraders are found in other Norteflo sites (Jelks 1967:210).
One of the specimens, recovered from House 5, has a 3.5 cm wide naturally
curved sin-face (see Figure 22g). The naturally curved surface has been extensively utilized for abrading.
Miscellaneous Abrader
No. of specimens: 1
Provenience: Surface (1)
One specimen appears to have had a natural groove that was utilized for
abrading. Its material has not been identified although it is not a sandstone.
Ochre

No. of specimens: 10
Provenience: House 1 (3), House 2 (4), House 3 (1), House 5 (2)
Both pieces from House 5 show rubbed and smoothed areas. The one large
piece measure 9 x 4 cm and shows extensive use. The other nine pieces of ochre
are less than two cm in diameter. Of the 10 ochre pieces, eight are red in color and
two are yellow.
Native-Made Pottery
Only 260 sherds of native-made pottery were recovered during the various
excavations at Vinson. These sherds represent a minimum number of 44 vessels.
The majority of sherds were small and rather nondescript. Information on temper,
decoration, and sherd colors are summarized in Table 3 to Table 5.
From the overall assemblage some tendencies are noted. The major tempering inclusion (not including sand at 43 percent that may not have been an
intentional addition to the paste) was bone (40.8 percent). Shell was present in
11.9 percent of the sherds, hematite or ochre was the tempering agent in five
sherds (2 percent), and grog (crushed sherds) was identified as a tempering agent
in six sherds (2.2 percent).
The primary decorative treatment was brushing of the body surface. It
appears that the brushed sherds were from utility vessels that may have had other
decorative techniques on other parts of the vessel. The brushed vessels tended to
be gray or buff in color (see Table 5). The brushed sherds were predominately
tempered with bone (Table 6).

Smith and others m The Vinson Site

111

Table 3
Sherd Temper
Sand

Bone

Shell

Other

Total

Surface

23

17

22

3

65

House1

12

27

2

41

House 2

25

28

2

55

House 3

13

3

-

16

House 4

3

1

-

4

House 5

9

21

3

Feature 25

11

3

1

Feature 26

16

6

1

2

25

Total

112

106

31

11

260

6

39
15

Table 4
Decoration Methods
Provenience

Incised

Engraved

Brushed

Punctated

Plain

Total

Surface

6

6

11

1

41

65

House 1

4

2

1

1

33

41

House 2

2

1

9

43

55

House 3

-

2

1

12

16

House 4

-

1

1

2

4

House 5

4

9

26

39

Feature 25

1

1

2

11

15

Feature 26

1

4

2

2

16

25

18

17

36

5

184

260

Total

1

112

Texas Archeological Society
Table 5
Sherd Color

Decoration

Gray

Brown

Orange/
Red-Brown Total

Black

Buff

5

14

5

36

Brushed

12

Incised

6

6

1

3

2

18

Engraved

2

7

2

3

3

17

Punctated

1

2

1

1

5

Plain

42

75

7

12

48

184

Total

63

90

16

32

59

260

Table 6
Temper and Decorative Associations in the Vinson Ceramics
Punctated

Plain

Brushed

Inched

Engraved

Shdl

26

2

2

1

Bone

84

17

3

1

1

Grog

1

4

1

Hemafi~

-

4

1

73

9

11

15

4

Temper

None*
* Sandy paste

The engraved sherds are from better made vessels that were predominately
brown in color. The exteriors of the engraved vesels were generally wellsmoothed and polished. Most of the engraved sherds had no discernible temper.
The incised and punctated sherds were mainly gray to brown in color (see
Table 5). While the majority of these decorated sherds had no obvious temper
inclusions, bone, shell, grog, and hematite were all used as tempering materials
for these specimens (see Table 6).

Smith and others n The Vinson Site

113

The plain sherds were also predominately a brown or reddish-brown color,
although it is impossible to tell which are from true plain vessels and which are
from the plain part of decorated vessels. Bone and shell were almost exclusively
the only tempers used for the plain sherds.
Bowls with outside rim diameters of about 20 cm were the most common
vessel forms found during the excavations. Small jars also appear to have been
relatively common although they have a greater range in size. Rims from jars
were recovered with diameters between 10-15 cm. Two vessels, both bowls,
were identified with outside diameters of over 20 cm: one measured 21 cm in
diameter and the other 30 cm. Carinated bowls were represented by a few sherds
that were better made than the other vessels. Bottle forms were not definitely
identified, although three sherds had rough, unfinished interiors and may have
come from a bottle.
The predominant rim form in the 14 rim sherds identified was one that was
vertical (or standing) with simple rounded lips. Another five rims were outcurving
with simple rounded lips, and one other had a vertical rim with a flat lip. The
average thickness of the rim sherds was six mm with a range of four to eight mm.
Only six percent of the body sherds were thicker than 10 mm, and only one was
recognized as a base (or near base) sherd in the assemblage.
Womack Engraved
No. of specimens: 6
Provenience: House 4 (1), House 3 (1), General (4)
Two Womack Engraved sherds were recovered during the field school
investigations. Both sherds have a dark gray paste with a finely ground shell
temper. Both sherds have dark brown, smoothed exteriors with the characteristic cross-hatched triangle motif of Womack Engraved (Duffield and Jelks 1961;
Harris et al. 1965). The interiors are also smoothed with brown surfaces. The
sherds (one with a thickness of six mm, the other 11 mm) are from two different
vessels.
Four 6 mm thick sherds in Mr. Vinson’s collection (Figure 24g, h) have
what appears to be Womack Engraved designs. One sherd is from House 4 and
a second is from House 3, but the provenience of the others is unknown. Although they cannot be definitely identified as Womack Engraved, they are similar enough in design to warrant description here. The exterior of the sherds are
dark brown and roughly smoothed, and they have deep engraved lines. The
interiors are also smoothed and grade from light brown to reddish-brown in color.
The paste of the sherds is dark gray and compact with no visible temper.
Remarks: Duffield and Jelks (1961:39) indicate that this ceramic type dates
to Protohistoric and Historic times, and was manufactured until the latter half of
the eighteenth century.

114

Texas Archeological Society

H
F

Figure 24. Artifacts from the Noil Vinson Collection. (a, d-f) Ceramic Elbow Pipes, (b, c)
Stone Pipes, (g, h) Womack Engraved (i) Majolica Pendant, and (j-1) Baked Clay Figurines.

Goliad Plain
No. of specimens: 10
Provenience: Surface (8), House 2 (2)
Duffield and Jelks (1961:72) describe Goliad Plain as an undecorated, orange-colored ceramic with large quantifies of bone temper. There is much variation in the workmanship on these 10 Vinson sherds of Goliad Plain. The exterior
surfaces are orange in color with pieces of bone temper visible on the exterior
(Figure 25k-n). The outer surfaces are smoothed, although sometimes poorly
smoothed, and the paste is very dark gray, sandy, moderately fine, and compact.
The paste is tempered with abundant finely ground bone.
Differences in the interior surface treatment suggest there are two groups of
Goliad Plain sherds. Group One has a gray and poorly smoothed interior, while

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

115

those in Group Two have well smoothed interiors that grade from yellow-brown
to red-brown in color. It is possible that Group One sherds represent a bottle form
and Group Two open bowl forms. One sherd from Group Two is a handle with two
suspension holes. Two other handles of Goliad Plain were recovered but the
interior surfaces were not present.
Patton Engraved
No. of specimens: 2
Provenience: Surface (2)
Both Patton Engraved sherds are small and weathered (Figure 25f, g). Type
identification was made with the help of the comparative collection at The
University of Texas, Austin. Both sherds are buff colored with a small section of
the characteristic Patton Engraved tick design visible on the exterior surface. The
paste is light gray, fine, and compact with abundant sand used as the tempering
agent. Both pieces were smoothed on the interior and exterior surfaces. The sherds
are five to six mm in thickness.
Engraved

No. of specimens: 9
Provenience: Surface (9)
These small, miscellaneous engraved sherds range in color from brown to
dark gray. Decorative elements on the specimens include parallel lines, crosshatched engraved lines, and combinations of parallel and vertical lines (see
Figure 25i-j).
Incised
No. of specimens: 18
Provenience: Surface (6), House 1 (4), House 2 (2), House 5 (4), Feature 25 (1),
Feature 26 (1)
Most of these incised sherds have parallel lines as the decoration; none of the
sherds were identifiable to type. One sherd had very thin and deep incised lines cut
perpendicular to a single thin line; these lines appear to have been cut with a sharp
instrument, such as a knife. One well-made polished sherd (from a carinated bowl)
had a cross-hatched incised motif below two parallel lines.
Brushed
No. of specimens: 14
Provenience: Surface (6), House 2 (3), House 3 (1), House 5 (4)
All of the brushed sherds are buff-colored. The description of the ceramics
from the Gilbert Site (Story et al. 1967:137) for Emory Punctated-Incised could fit
many of these sherds except for the lack ofpunctations on the Vinson specimens.
All these brushed sherds could derive from the same vessel.

116

Texas Archeological Society

A

¢
D

F

H

Figure 25. Pottery from the Vinson Site. (a) Plain Vessel, (b) Nocona Plain, (c-e) Womack
Engraved, (f, g) Patton Engraved, (h-j) Miscellaneous Engraved, and (k-n) Goliad Plain.

These sherds can be characterized as follows:
Color: interior - tan
exterior - tan
Wall thickness: 6 mm
Paste color: black
Temper: abundant finely-crushed bone.
Surface Finish: Brushed with temper showing on the outer surface. The
inner surface is smoothed.
Miscellaneous Brushed
No. of specimens: 22
Provenience: Surface (5), House 1 (1), House 2 (6), House 4 (1), House 5 (5),
Feature 25 (2), Feature 26 (2)

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

117

These brushed sherds are from utility jars tempered with hematite or grog,
although the majority of them have no obvious temper. They all appear to have a
sandy-gritty paste.
Punctated
No. of specimens: 5
Provenience: Surface (1), House 1 (1), House 3 (1), Feature 26 (2)
These sherds have various forms of punctated designs. It is possible that the
punctations may have been used in conjunction with other types of surface
treatment (such as brushing) since all the punctated sherds come from the top
portions of vessels. The punctations include fingernail-impressed (one specimen
with bone temper and the other with a sandy paste) and stick-impressed (three
sherds with a sandy paste).
Miscellaneous Plain Sherds
No. of specimens: 184
Plain sherds were the predominant type of sherd recovered from the Vinson
site. Of these, ten have the characteristics described for Nocona Plain (Suhm
and Jelks 1962:115); eight of these may be from the same vessel (see Figure

25b).
Nocona Plain
No. of specimens: 10
Provenience: Unknown (8), Surface (2)
These sherds are from heavy shell-tempered utility jars.
Womack Plain

No. of specimens: 3
Provenience: Surface (3)
Three other plain sherds have a gray exterior with a light gray core and finely
ground mussel shell temper. These sherds fit the definition given by Story et al.
(1967:146) for Womack Plain.
Leon Plain
No. of specimens: 7
Provenience: Surface (2), House 1 (2), House 2 (2), House 5 (1)
These sherds compare well with Suhm and Jelks’ (1962:95) description of
Leon Plain in that they are brown to reddish-brown in color, have dark cores,
used pulverized bone for temper, and have wall thicknesses between 3-8 mm.

The rest of the assemblage is generally nondescript and cannot be identified
with any other defined Texas plainwares (see also Tables 3 and 4).

118

Texas Archeological Society
Summary of Pottery Assemblage

The small number of sherds present may not be surprising due to the probable
reliance of the Vinson site occupants on European trade materials such as kettles.
Another possibility that would explain the small pottery assemblage is the short
period of time the site was occupied.
The pottery present conforms to ceramic assemblages from other Nortefio
sites. Womack Engraved is present at Gilbert, Pearson, Womack, and the Longest sites. However, there are some differences: most notably, shell tempered
pottery was present in 44 percent of the sherds at Gilbert and Womack, but only
in about 12 percent of the Vinson sherds. The Longest site was similar to Vinson
in that little shell tempered ceramics were present. Womack Engraved and
Emory Punctated-Incised dominate the identified vessels at both the Gilbert and
Womack sites. At the Longest site, only one sherd could be identified as Womack
Engraved and no Emory Punctated-Incised was found.
No Goliad Plain sherds have been found at any of the Nortefio sites north of
Vinson except at Stansbury; it has also been found at the Stone site. Goliad Plain is
a common aboriginal pottery at Spanish Colonial settlements during the eighteenth
century (Duffield and Jelks 1961:73). The presence of this pottery type in the
southern Nortefio sites can probably be attributed at least in part to their
geographical location in relation to the Spanish Colonial settlements to the south.
European Ceramics
Spanish Majolica Ware
No. of specimens: 5
Provenience: House 2 (1), House 3 (2), Feature 26 (2)
All of the sherds were plain except for the two from House 3. The plain
sherds had a creamy earthenware paste, with a white and opaque glaze.
The first decorated majolica sherd has a small, deep blue decoration along
one edge. It also shows remnants of two drilled holes as well as extensive grinding
along the unbroken edges. This piece is possibly a pendant (see Figure 24i). The
second sherd from House 3 has a decoration consisting of two shades of blue and
appears to have been from a plate. It also has extensive grinding along its
unbroken edge that was done to form a disk, gaming piece, or pendant (see Figure
23a). The diameter of the object is estimated at 3.8 cm. It has a thickness of six
mm. The sherd probably predates 1800 (Anne Fox, 1985 personal communication).
Spanish Lead Glazed Ware
No. of specimens: 2
Provenience: House 5(2)
Two pieces of orange, lead-glazed pottery were recovered from the site. One
had a green decoration of undeterminable pattern while the other was undecorated. Both had orange pastes and could have been from the same vessel. This type

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

119

of lead glazed ware is found at Spanish Colonial sites in Texas that date to the late
eighteenth century.
Goblet Scraper

No. of specimens: 1
Provenience: House 5 (1)
Approximately 20 flakes have been removed from a 19 mm thick, almost
circular, piece of glass to form a scraping tool. The glass appears to be the bottom
portion of a goblet stem. It is 30 mm in diameter and has a smooth concave base
that is approximately 5 mm deep in the center.
The top flaked portion of the specimen forms a classic scraper profile.
Hinge flakes from use of the piece appear in two locations along the margin of
the specimen. There is also one edge with what appears to be a 9 mm in diameter
and 3 mm deep notch. Multiple small hinge flakes are present along this edge of
the tool.
Figurines
No. of specimens: 5
Provenience: House 2 (2), House 4(1), House 5 (2)
These crude clay specimens represent figurines rather than pottery vessels.
Two of these (House 2 and House 4) appear to be from the body portions of
figurines, although exact identification of the figurine’s shape has not been
determined. One 3.5 cm body section may represent a human figure (see Figure
241). It is broken on both ends but portions of the legs are visible.
The second body section is more complete but even less identifiable as to
shape. It is about 0.5 cm long and 2 cm in diameter. It is a more solid figure than
the one described above, with the legs having been broken on it. There appears to
be no "head" area, but a protrusion emanates from a central spot near its top. The
body is lens-shaped when viewed in cross section and is also reddish-orange in
color (see Figure 24j).
The remaining three pieces appear to be figurine legs. Two of these may be
pieces from animals although this is not certain. They are both conical in shape
and approximately 15 mm high. The third appears to be the leg and foot of a
human figure lying on its back (Figure 26g). It is 34 mm long and flat on the back,
and it is 11 mm wide and 6 mm thick. The top is reddish-brown in color while the
back is a dark gray. This color difference may be attributed to firing the figure
while it was lying on its back.
Pipes
No. of specimens: 47
Provenience: Surface (17), House 1 (5), House 2 (10), House 3 (2), and House 5 (13)
All but four of the pottery pipe fragments had no visible temper. Three of
these, all from the same pipe, were sand and bone tempered. The fourth was

120

Texas Archeological Society

C

B

.............. W

F
G
Figure 26. Pipes and Figurines. (a-c) Ceramic Elbow Pipes, (d) Mud-dauber Nest, (e, f )
Ceramic Pottery Smoother (?), and (g, h) Baked Clay Figurine Legs.

tempered only with bone. This particular piece (from House 2) had an expanding
bowl and a body thickness of 10.7 mm. It had a brown, well-smoothed, surface
and a fine compact red clay paste.
The major pipe form at Vinson appears to be a straight-sided elbow pipe
with bowl diameters ranging from 2.5 to 4.0 cm. Thirteen of the pipes were
identified as being the straight-sided form.
Besides the expanding bowl pipe described above, two other expanding
bowl elbow pipes were identified. The pipe from House 3 had a bowl diameter of
3.7 cm (see Figure 26c) and the other from House 5 had a 3.2 cm bowl diameter
(see Figure 26b).
Four of the pottery fragments indicate a bowl of more rounded form, much
like modem-day pipes. The bowl wall rounds into the lip on these forms rather

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

121

than expanding or meeting it at right angles. Unfortunately, not enough of any
single pipe of this form was found to determine if it was also an elbow variety.
All of the pipe lips were flat with the exception of one that had a narrow, flat
margin and beveled into the inside of the bowl. It appeared to have been from a
thinner pipe with a wall thickness of 5 mm. The remainder of the pottery pipe
fragments had no dignostic features, although one pipe may have had a line design
of an unidentifiable style.
Stone Pipes

No. of specimens: 13
Provenience: House 2 (3), House 3 (5), House 5 (3), Surface (2)
Nine of the stone pipe specimens are fragments made of a white chalk or
marl. Another is the lip fragment of an unidentified green stone, and the major part
of a yellow limonite elbow pipe is also represented (see Figure 22a). All of the
pipes, except the latter specimen, were quite fragmented, but all appear to be of the
elbow variety (see Figure 24).
The yellow limonite elbow pipe has a rounded bowl that is more roughly
shaped than the smooth marl/chalk pipes. The pipe is split both along the bowl and
along the stem and has some tobacco cake remaining in the bowl.
Two fairly complete stone pipes are in Noil Vinson’s collection. Both are
made of of the same white chalk or marl material as the majority of stone pipes at
Vinson, but these two are not of the elbow variety. The complete pipe (see Figure
24b) has a s~aight-sided bowl with a 17 mm inside diameter. The stem hole is
smoothed and has an 11 mm inside diameter. The lower corner of the pipe has
been brought to a decorative point.
The second complete pipe (see Figure 24c) has a rounded bowl. The portion
of the pipe where the stem is inserted has been broken. It does not appear that this
was of the elbow variety. Measurements for this specimen were not available.
Fired Dauber Nest
No. of specimens: 2
Provenience: House 5 (1), Unknown (1)
Both specimens show grass impressions (see Figure 26d), and thus were
probably attached to the houses when they burned.
Pottery Smoother
No. of specimens: 2
Provenience: Unknown (2)
One rim sherd had been utilized as a smoothing tool for finishing the surface
of ceramic vessels (see Figure 26f). The sandy paste sherd is 20 mm in length, 15
mm in width, and 9 mm in thickness. Extensive abrasive use has worn one end of
the sherd to a rounded, smooth shape.

122

Texas Archeological Society

One body sberd had also been utilized as a smoothing tool. It was 38 mm
long and has extensively worn marks on it (see Figure 26e)
Daub and Fire Baked Clay
Daub
No. of specimens: 36
Provenience: House 1 (6), House 3 (7), House 5 (10), Random (13)
Twenty-four pieces of daub appear to have been burned, while the rest were
probably sun-baked. Most of the daub had grass or twig impressions on them.
The daub totals are by no means the sum of daub from each feature. During
the field school pieces of daub may well have been mistaken for the hard-packed
soil common to the site during dry weather and thus discarded. Furthermore, much
of the fill in several features (except House 5) was not completely screened.
Burned Clay
No. of specimens: 60
Provenience: Specific provenience information not available.
Small pieces of burned clay were found in all structures. These pieces of
clay had no wattle impressions, and were small nondescript pieces of clay.
Remarks: Even if all the daub that was present in these structures had been
recovered, there is not enough present to indicate that much clay was applied to
any of the structures. At many Caddo houses, thousands of pieces of daub are
common, sometimes outnumbering the pottery sherds. With evidence of many
structures being burned at the Vinson site, daub from the structure walls would
have been more abundant if originally present.

European Trade Materials

METAL ARTIFACTS, by Jay C. Blaine
The analysis of metal artifacts is based mainly on examples available from
Vinson as of late 1983. As with the firearms sample (Blaine 1993, this volume),
several artifacts known to have been collected by various individuals through
the years from Vinson were not assembled in time for analysis here. Numerous
small scraps of oxidized iron and brass/copper (cupreous) pieces, apparently areally well distributed, were also examined. However, counts were not made of
these fragments or of the obviously late nineteenth century metallic debris from
the site.

Smith and others w The Vinson Site

123

Bridle Bits and Attachments
No. of specimens: 13
Provenience: Surface (4), House 1 (2), House 2 (1), House 5 (4), Random [Lot
116 and 200] (2).
Nos. 1-4 are from surface proveniences. No. 1 ~igure 27a) is a bit section
that has been broken or cut through the cheek plate and also through the port
beyond the curb ring sleeve. The lower cheek plate flange has perforated decorations and the curb ring sleeve has filed linear decoration. No. 1, and most of
the following bit specimens (all of wrought iron), cannot be usefully measured,
primarily because of their obvious distortion and lack of completeness.
No. 2 is a distorted cheek plate section with one relatively large (6 to 7
mm) perforation in the undecorated lower flange (Figure 27b).
No. 3 is one side of a port with curb ring sleeve.
No. 4 is a crescent-shaped chin piece (bridge) that is complete except for
a loop at one side. The body and lower edges are decorated by piercing openwork. Measurements: The estimated distance between loop centers is 100 mm;
maximum width, 30 ram.
No. 5 (House 1) is a small spoon-shaped dangler or jingler that was broken
in the attachment loop. Measurements: Estimated length, 28 mm; maximum
width, 10.5 mm.
No. 6, also from House 1, is a broken link of slack chain that is "figure 8"
in shape (see Tunnell and Ambler 1967:69).
No. 7, from House 2, is a jingler type ornament, possibly a specific Fica.
Measurements: Length, 24.5 ram; maximum width, 9 ram.
Nos. 8-10 (House 5) are "figure 8" links of rein chain; the shortest chain is
complete. Measurements: Length, 30 mm; the other rein chain length are unknown.
Specimen No. 11, also from House 5, is about half of a bit that has been
separated through the curb ring sleeve. The relatively short and narrow "U"
shaped cheek plate has one small perforation in the lowest border.
Specimen No. 12, Lot 200, is another jingler, matching No. 7 in form.
Measurements: Length, 23.5 ram; maximum width, 8.3 ram.
Specimen No. 13, Lot 116, is a fragment of bit from the rein base.
Remarks: All of the above bits and attachments appear typical of the range
of Hispanic ring bits from eighteenth century Indian sites in Texas (Harris and
Tunnell 1967:107-109; Blaine 1989). The bits have been cut, broken, or otherwise disassembled, suggesting that such bits may have functioned more as temporary status symbols or curiosities than as necessities since rawhide bridles with
jaw loops had proven efficient and economical for Native Americans. It is hard
to visualize the breakage of bits if used in norma! service, beyond that of individual rein link failures that would have been easily repaired or replaced. It is
believed such factors, together with a demonstrable affinity for recycling metal
trade goods at some stage, probably bear strongly on the usual condition of bridle
bits on Historic Indian sites.

124

Texas Archeological Society

C

A

C
B

0

1

2

3

centimeters

Figure 27. Bridle Bits.

4

5

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

125

KNIVES AND SWORDS, by Jay C. Blaine
No. of specimens: 9
Provenience: Surface (3), House 5(6)
No. 1, from the surface, is a blade tip of a single edged knive with the cutting
edge curving upwards (Figure 28b).
No. 2 (surface) appears to be a tang for a case knife blade that had been
broken forward of the proximal handle pin hole (Figure 28c).

A

B

C
G
F
D

H

K

j

L

M

N

O
R

Figure 28. Knives, Swords, and Metal Arrowpoints. (a-e) Knives, (f) Pommel, (g, h) Knives,
(i) Sword Hilt, and (j-r) Metal arrowpoints.

126

Texas Archeological Society

Remarks: Both knife fragments fully resemble similar areas on complete
knives common in the French trade (Harris, Harris, Blaine, and Blaine 1965:348).
No. 1 is probably either a Type 1 clasp or Type 2 case knife blade tip (Harris,
Harris and Woodall 1967:Figure 21a-d and Figure 22a, d). No. 2, the partial
tang, probably is from a Type 1 case knife (Harris, Harris, and Woodall 1967:Figure 22a, d, e).
No. 3 (Figure 28a), from the surface of House 5, is a complete blade, with
braded pivot pin in place, from a folding knife. Measurements: Overall length,
150 mm; maximum width, 12 mm; diameter of pivot (swivel) pin, 2.5 mm; length
of pivot pin, 15.5 mm.
Remarks: No. 3 is a classic example of a Type 3 "French" clasp knife
(Harris, Harris, and Woodall 1967:Figure 21h), although its probable origin may
be Flemish. This particular type of folding knife was probably more expensive
than the considerably more numerous Type 2 folding knives, but both are prominent in the French trade.
No. 4, from House 5, is a section of case knife blade that was broken or cut
in the blade and through the distal handle rivet hole (Figure 28d). Measurements:
Length, 77 mm; maximum width, 22 mm.
Remarks: No. 4 conforms to the Type 1 case knife (Harris, Harris, and
Woodall 1967:Figure 22a).
No. 5 (House 5) is complete in the distal blade section (Figure 28e), but
snapped across its proximal end. Measurements: Length, 102 mm; width, 11 mm.
Remarks: No. 5 also conforms to the Type 1 case knife.
No. 6, from House 5, probably is a section of knife or sword blade (Figure
28g). The fragment is broken at both ends and curled slightly along the thinner
edge. Measurements: Length, 60 mm; width, 21 mm.
No. 7, House 5, is a sword pommel (Figure 280. A remnant of blade tang
centers in the distal face, and the proximal tang-end protrudes in the proximal
face. The piece is made from wrought iron, and portions of the original surface
remain that show chased decoration. Measurements: Length, including protrusions, 26.5 mm; maximum diameter, 24 mm.
Remarks: The pommels now known from such sites as Gilbert (Blaine
1992:Figure 4) and Spanish Fort appear to mainly represent hilt elements of
broadswords, such as those utilized by Hispanic horsemen and cavalry. The
quality of this particular pommel, however, is more consistent with a better grade
lighter service rapier or small-sword and dagger.
No. 8, House 5, is likely a section of a small case knife tang (Figure 28h),
complete in the proximal end and broken through the rear handle rivet hole.
Measurements: Length, 25 mm; width, 13 mm.
No. 9 (surface) is made of cast brass. It has been broken across each end
(Figure 28i). The cross section is oval, while both linear edges show even hammering generally along the wider and thicker central portions. Measurements:
Length (chord), 61 mm; maximum width, 8 mm; maximum thickness, 6 mm.

Smith and others m The Vinson Site

127

Remarks: This specimen strongly resembles a type of drawer pull handle,
as well as one example of small box handle excavated in Louisiana (H.F. Gregory, personal communication to Jay Blaine). However, Blaine has not observed
the terminal ends of such a pull or box handle, or examples of the accompanying hardware, in the eighteenth century Texas Indian sites that have produced
such specimens. There are undecorated brass small-sword hilt remnants from
the Spanish Fort sites (Blaine reference collection) that utilize simple knuckle
bows precisely like this artifact. These appear identical to the corresponding hilt
elements of French infantry enlisted men small-swords in use by about 1700
(Peterson 1956:Plate 239c).

METAL ARROW POINTS, by R. King Harris and James E. Smith H
No. of specimens: 16
Provenience: House 1 (5), House 3 (2), House 4 (1), House 5 (2), Feature 25 (1),
Feature 26 (1), Trench 7(1), and Surface (3).
All of the metal arrow points from this site were fashioned by the Indians
from scraps of brass (N=9) and iron (N=7). The brass specimens are made of
scrap kettle brass, except for one that appears to be from a fragment of a trade
gun sideplate. Due to the condition of the iron, it is not possible to determine
from what the iron specimens were made (see Figure 28j-r).
As to type, the metal points may be classified as follows: Benton Type A
and Benton Type B, four and five specimens, respectively (Harris and Harris
1967:162); miscellaneous, four specimens; and three fragmentary specimens.
Table 7
Metal Arrow Points
Benton
A

Benton
B

Misc.

Frag.

House 1

1

2

1

1

House 3

1

1

House 5
House 4

1

1

1

1
1

1

1

Surface

1

Total

4

2
1

Feature 26
Trench 7

5
2

1

Feature 25

Total

5

1
1

1

3

4

3

16

128

Texas Archeological Society

The arrow point shown in Figure 30b, made from a gun sideplate fragment,
is a Benton Type A specimen with the distal end sharpened on the edge and
little hack marks on each side of the base. It was then used until the tip broke,
after which the break was smoothed and used again by placing the former distal
end in the shaft. Table 7 shows the provenience of the metal arrow points by
feature and type.
TRADE AXE, by R. King Harris
No. of specimens: 1
Provenience: Surface (1)
A fragment of trade axe in the studied collection was recovered in excavations by Noil Vinson. This fragment (Figure 29g) is comparable in form to French
trade axes (Duffield and Jelks 1961:57-58; Blaine 1988:111-117). The Pearson
site specimen was 12.6 cm in length and had a 6.5 cm wide flaring bit and a rather
small round haft-eye. A complete trade axe has also been found at the Vinson site
from an area closer to the springs; it is in the/’;[oil Vinson collection.

FRENCH BLANKET BALE SEAL, by R. King Harris

No. of specimens: 1
Provenience: House 2 (1)
While excavating House 2, prior to the TAS Summer Field School, Mr.
Vinson found a small lead disk (Figure 30a-a’). It measured 20 mm in diameter, or
a little larger than a U.S. penny, and it was 1.5 mm in thickness. This specimen
was covered with lead oxide. It was carefully cleaned and found to be a French
blanket bale seal of the rivet type.
This type of seal is a lead disk with holes near the center of the disk. Disks of
this type had a strap of lead attached that was passed through one or two holes, and
when pressed with the seal, the lead strap would flatten out and become a part of
the disk. The specimen from the Vinson Site had two holes in the disk, while the
specimens of French seals from Fort Michilimackinac are of the one hole type
(Maxwell and Binford 1961:89).
When the stamping of the seal and spreading of the rivets were achieved in
one operation, the seal of the country or manufacturer would appear on the outer
side of the disk. Sometimes fabric impressions would also be present on the inner
surface of the disk.
When the seal is broken, the center of the seal is usually destroyed. In the
case of the Vinson specimen, the lead strap was broken--thus leaving the face of
the stamped seal complete and unbroken. On the inner side, it bears faint cloth
impressions. On the outer surface, the seal is impressed with a slightly offcentered pattern of a Fleur-de-lis surrounded by a circle that in turn is surrounded

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

B

129

C

A

E

D

F

G

H

L

M
Figure 29. Artifacts in the Noil Vinson Collection. (a) Bracelet, (b) Loops and Triangles, (c)
Loop and Beads, (d-f) Metal Arrowpoints, (g) Trade Axe fragment, (h-k) Gun Sideplates, (1)
Ring Form, and (m) Gun Barrel.

by a laurel-leaf wreath. Along the outer edge of the seal imprint is an octagonalshaped godroon border that surrounds the wreath.
These lead seals were probably used by the Europeans mainly on bales of
blankets. It is entirely possible, however, that they could have also been used on
bottle necks, bundles of hardware, and strings of glass trade beads, all of which the
French traded to Native Americans in the eighteenth century.
At Fort Michilimackinac, a historic site in Michigan, most of the French seals
appear to date during the period of French occupation--from about 1740 to 1760.

130

Texas Archeological Society

!

I

A"

Figure 30. Blanket Bale Seal and Metal Arrowpoint made from Gun Sideplate.

This French fort was taken over by the British in September 1761 (Maxwell and
Binford 1961:13).
This specimen from the Vinson site may be a governmental seal used on a
bale of blankets obtained through the French trade sometime before the end of the
French trade in Texas--which ceased around 1770-1780.

KEITLES, by Jay C. Blaine
Kettle Repair

No. of specimens: 6
Provenience: Surface (1), House 5 (5)
Specimen No. 1 (surface) is roughly squared in outline with single slits at
three of the comers (Figure 31f). Its appearance is that of "kettle brass" that has
been well hammered. Measurements: Average thickness, 0.3 mm to 0.4 mm.
Remarks: No. 1 is an example of a method of patching that is frequently
identified as done by Native Americans (Harris and Tunnell 1967:110); it is
sometimes combined with leather gaskets (Woodall 1967a: 182). This patch is not
applied.
No. 2, from House 5, is a piece of"kettle brass" that is roughly rectangular in
outline. There is a narrow band of kettle brass between the slits with the band ends
passing through the larger piece and then flattened on the opposing face. Measurements: Average thickness, 0.5 mm.
Remarks: This specimen is probably an example of another method of
patching: a single slit is apparently placed on a small (leak?) hole, and a doubled

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

131

C
D

E
F

A
G

K

M

N

Figure 31. Miscellaneous Metal Artifacts from Vinson. (a) Jew’s Harp, (b) Iron Awl, (c)
Possible Arrow Nock, (d) Wire Stock, (e) Kettle Bail Ear, (f-j) Pieces of Kettle Repair, (k)
Piece with "dragon and cloud engraving", and (l-n) Miscellaneous pieces.

thickness of narrow strap brass is then partially inserted. The "inside" ends are
separated and flattened, while the "outside" head is flattened across the strap’s
bend apex.
Nos. 3-6, also from House 5, apparently are patching "straps" or rivets that
show the same shaping and bending characteristics.
Kettle Bail Ear

No. of specimens: 1
Provenience: House 5 (1)
This fragment (Figure 31e) is composed of a heavy cupreous sheet inserted
with a large solid rivet. One rivet end (inner) is spread widely and evenly on the
inner part of the bail ear (Harris and Tunnell 1967:105 and Figure 46); the outer
bail ear has been removed.
Other probable kettle brass fragments are numerous, small, non-diagnostic,
and well distributed over the site. One kettle brass piece shows evidence of
tinning.
Iron Kettle

No. of specimens: 17
Provenience: House 5 (17)

132

Texas Archeological Society

These cast iron pieces represent the rim, part of the body, and the bottom of
an iron kettle; no bail lugs or feet are represented. Two different rim sherds, and
one flat bottom with an obtuse-angled wall juncture, are present in the site
sample. Measurements: One rim sherd is slightly flared with a small remaining
piece of the body. It is 3 mm thick at the rim band, and the rim band is 22 mm in
width. The body thickness is 2.4 ram. The other rim fragment has a more flared
lip with an average thickness of 3 mm. The fragment of flat bottom/body juncture averages 2.5 mm in thickness, and has an interior juncture angle of 102
degrees.
Remarks: There are a minimum of two iron kettles present in House 5. No
cast iron vessels were found at the ca. 1750 Gilbert site despite the exemplary
trade goods sample (Blaine 1992:175-196).

METAL BUTTONS, by R. King Harris, James E. Smith II, and Jay C. Blaine
No. of specimens: 9
Provenience: House 1 (1), House 3 (1), House 5 (3), Feature 25 (1), Surface (3)
During the excavation of the Vinson Site, nine metal buttons were found.
Eight specimens were of European manufacture, while one was probably nativemade. All the buttons were made from brass or bronze.
The native-made specimen appears to have been fashioned from a piece of
kettle brass with two holes punched in the center. A narrow strip of brass was
then placed through the holes that probably served as the means of attachment.
Six of the European buttons can be classified into two types-- Type A and
Type D --in Olsen’s (1963:551-554) typology. Type A is a cast-in-one piece
with a hole drilled in the shank. Five buttons of Type A were found at the Vinson
Site; three had plain faces (Figure 32d) and two were decorated on the face. One
of the decorated buttons had a stylized floral pattern on the face (Figure 32a),
while the other had a pattern of four bars and a series of dots around the rim of
the button (Figure 32c). According to Olsen (1963), the Type A button dates
from 1700 to 1765. The one Type D button is cast with a brass wire set into a
boss on the back. The button was then held in a chuck and spun against a tool,
thus cutting the button to desired thickness; the eye is missing on the Vinson
specimen. The Type D button is dated by Olsen (1963) from 1760 to 1785.
The type A and D buttons were found in a variety of contexts at the site
(Table 8). Two other types of buttons of European manufacture were also recovered in House 5. Button No. 2, of cupreous material, has an off-center brass eye
that was made separately and secured in the button during casting; the presence
of an eye foot cannot be determined. The face is domed, with bevels centering on
a slight circular boss (Figure 32b). The cupped back has been trimmed, showing
slightly irregular turning tool marks centering on the eye base. This type of
button closely resembles South’s (1964:117) type #7 (period of major use from
1726-1776).

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

133

A
B

D

2

3

cm
Figure 32. Buttons from the Vinson Site.

Button No. 3 from House 5 is made of bone; it has been broken through the
cenlral area. Its form is piano-convex with a slightly domed face. The back is fiat
with the broken remnant of a boss in the center. There is a black stain (oxides?)
centering on the boss. The back also shows hand-finishing scratch marks, resembling filing, radiating from the base of the boss. The button is identified as South’s
(1964:119) type #14 (1726-1776).
Remarks: All eight of the datable buttons pre-date 1785, and five of them can
pre-date 1765. The range in button dates implies an occupation in the last half of
the eighteenth century for the site.

134

Texas Archeological Society
Table 8
Metal Buttons
by Provenience and Type

Proveniences
Type

Date

House
1

House
3

House
5

1

1

1

A

1700-1765

D

1760-1785

#7

1726-1776

1

#14

1726-1776

1

Feat.
25

2
1

1

Native-made
Total

Random
Surface

1

1

3

1

3

ORNAMENTAL ARTIFACTS, by Jay C. Blaine
Hawk Bells

No. of specimens: 2
Provenience: Surface (1), House 5 (1)
No. 1, from the surface, is partially crushed but retains a small pellet which
rattles. Its body is formed of thin cupreous (probably brass) material that was
constructed by soldering two flanged hemispheres along their matching and flat
flanges. The top of one half is pierced with two round holes connected by a
straight slit. The other half is broken through its apex where an eye would be
inserted. The flanges on both halves are bordered by two or three closely spaced
fine lines.
Measurments: Estimated diameter at flanges, 16.5 mm; flange width, 1 mm.
No. 2, from House 5, is the undistorted half of a cupreous (probably brass)
hawk bell that retains the eye for attachment. The eye, of round "brass" wire, has
been inserted through a small perforation and the wire ends turned outward to
secure it. A light ring, depressed from the outside, circles the base of the eye. The
edge of the body rim is slightly everted, creating a narrow flange which has traces
of solder. A tiny, unidentified mark, under 1 mm in diameter, is impressed near the
eye.
Measurements: Diameter at rim, 15.5 mm; thickness of wire eye, 1 mm;
"depth" of hemisphere, 6.7 mm.

Smith and others -- The Vinson Site

135

Remarks: No. 1 is a flanged-edge hawkbell type. Judging from the hole, the
eye was a strip form. No. 2 also is flanged (albeit a very narrow flange), but it has
a wire eye. Harper et al. (1967:87-90) estimated that these hawkbell attributes
would date such bells between 1700 and 1850. Woodall (1967a:181-182) found
the flush-edge variety of hawkbell to be prevalent in excavated Nortefio and
possible Wichita sites.
Tinlders
No. of specimens: 8
Provenience: Surface (3), House I (1), House 3 (1), Random [Lot 107, 138, 175] (3)
The three tinklers from surface provenience are all cupreous (kettle brass?),
and are well-formed with either flush edges (1) and overlapped edges (2). All
three are essentially slender, straight-base cone forms (Harper et al. 1967:92 and
Figure 43). Measurments: stock thickness, 0.4 mm; lengths, 21 to 27 mm.
Tinkler No. 4, from House 1, has the same characteristics as Tinklers No.
1-3. Measurements: stock thickness, 0.4 mm; length, 26 mm.
Tinkler No. 5, House 3, is made of iron. This specimen is too badly corroded for measurements, and the tinkler has been broken across the wider end
revealing overlapped edges. It has a slender cone shape with a straight base.
Tinkler No. 6 (Lot 107) is also made from cupreous material, probably kettle
brass, like No. 1-4. Measurements: stock thickness, 0.6 mm; length, 28 mm.
Tinkler No. 7, Lot 138, is made of thin and badly oxidized iron. It has a
slender cone shape with a straight base. Measurement: length, 24 mm.
Tinkler No. 8, Lot 175, is made of "brass" like tinklers No. 1-6. Measurements: stock thickness, 0.5 mm; length, 31 mm.
Remarks: All of the "brass" tinklers above are essentially straight-based
and slender in form (Figure 33h-n). If the Vinson sample above is representative, this trend appears chronologically noteworthy. The tinklers from both the
Womack and Gilbert sites (Harper et al. 1967:Figure 43) are primarily the
pointed-base forms, with many of them widely tapered, and iron examples are
absent or negligible in frequency. These sites predate 1760.
Cylinder Form

No. of specimens: 3
Provenience: House 5 (1), Random (2)
Cylinders (Figure 33o-q) are represented by two overlapped edge tubes,
apparently of kettle "brass." None of the cylinders exhibits the smooth edge
preparation of the tinklers, although they are about the same size as the tinklers
described above.
Pendants
No. of specimens: 5
Provenience: Surface (1), House 2 (1), House 3 (1), House 5 (1), Lot 144 (1)

136

Texas Archeological Society

C

B

A

F

E

D

G

H

0

I

J

K

p

L

N

M

Q

Figure 33. Tinklers and other Decorative Ornaments from the Vinson Site. (a-g) Ring Forms,
(h-n) Tinklers, and (o-q) Cylinder Forms.

Pendant No. 1 (surface) is a triangular piece apparently made of very thin
silver (Figure 34c). An elongated hole has worn through the top edge and a smaller
perforation is centered in the lower border, which has four notches. One face is
smooth, while the other face has four parallel, almost equally spaced, rounded
ridges crossing the face laterally. These ridges appear to have been produced in
relief by lightly abrading the areas between them.

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

A

B

D

C

0

137

1

2

3

cm
Figure 34. Pendants. (a, c, d) Silver Pendants, (b) Possible Coin Pendant.

Measurments: Length, 21 mm; width, 17 mm; thickness at ridges,
approximately 0.3 mm; and thickness between ridges, approximately 0.1 mm.
Pendant No. 2, from House 2, is apparently of silver, with a sub-lxiangular
shape and a rounded, contoured, and notched base (Figure 34a). The apex is
roughly cut and there is a small lipped depression centered below the cuts. The
back of the pendant is flat with a slight rounding toward the borders. The face is
deeply contoured with longitudinal grooves that slightly diverge from the top
down across the pendant. Measurements: Length, 17 mm; width, 13.5 mm;
maximum thickness, 1.4 mm.

138

Texas Archeological Society

Remarks: The appearance of this pendant suggests that it was made from
a somewhat larger original cast silver artifact. In addition, the small lipped depression appears to be an attempt to create a new suspension hole for the piece.
No. 3 (House 3) is perfectly circular in shape, of cupreous (copper?) material, with a neat and round hole near one edge (Figure 34b); this "suspension"
hole is slightly lipped on both sides. Two very faint traces of a wreath or chevron-like bordering design parallel one face edge. Measurements: Diameter, 14.5
mm; thickness, 0.4 mm.
Remarks: Base stock of pendant No. 3 was probably a small coin, button,
or token.
No. 4, from House 5, may be a "pendant" or utilized in some other ornamental fashion. It is cupreous (brass?), not perfectly circular, and has a small
roughly centered lipped perforation on one face of the specimen. The disc is
recently bent. Measurements: Maximum diameter, 16 mm; average thickness,
0.4 mm.
Remarks: The stock for this piece is consistent with kettle "brass."
No. 5, Lot 144, is a slim triangular form, apparently of very thin silver,
with an elongated perforation at its apex (Figure 34d). The lower border of the
pendant is curved with two ridges parallel to the curved base. These ridges were
produced by tooling pressure from the opposite face and were emphasized by
border grooving. Measurements: Thickness, 0.2 mm; length, 19 mm; width, 11
mm.
Remarks: With the exception of pendant No. 2, all of these silver pendant
forms appear to be of Native American craftmanship. They were made of carefully flattened silver coins as stock. No manufacturer’s sheet stock is suspected,
nor are they of "German Silver."
Pendant No. 3 is probably adapted from a cupreous coin, button, or token
from a non-Indian source, while pendant No. 4 is made from flattened kettle
"brass."
At the Spanish Fort sites the thin silver pendants occur primarily in subareas with some degree of ca. post-1775 occupation, based upon the occurrence
of such temporal markers as gun parts, gunflints, and buttons.
Ring Form
No. of specimens: 8
Provenience: House 5 (7), Lot 18 (1)
Four of the "rings" from House 5 are open-ended, cupreous, relatively heavy
pieces that are irregular in circular outline. Their cross sections are essentially
rectangular. Measurements: Maximum diameter range (outside), 12 mm to 24
mm; width range, 4 mm to 11.5 mm; thickness range, 1.5 mm to 3 mm.
Remarks: These rings were manufactured by Native Americans. All of the
specimens were apparently recycled from parts of other forms of trade articles and
include some of cast brass.

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

139

Three additional (House 5) ring forms (see Figure 33d, e) also are openended. These have a more regular circular form, probably due to being made of a
thinner cupreous metal. Two are bands that are essentially rectangular in cross
section, while one is made of a tiny round wire. Measurements: Maximum
diameter range (outside), 9 mm to 13 mm; width range, 0.5 mm to 3.7 mm;
thickness range, 0.5 mm to 1.0 mm.
Remarks: These rings were probably made by Native American craftsmen,
although the tiny 0.5 mm. diameter round wire form is not clearly assignable to
Native American workmanship.
The ring form (of cupreous material) from Lot 18 (surface) is also openended in form and has a circular outline (see Figure 33f). Its cross section is biconvex with flattened edges, while the outer surface is grooved across with both
straight and diagonal lines. Measurements: Maximum diameter (outside), 15 mm;
width, 5 mm; thickness, 2.5 mm to 3 mm.
Remarks: This heavy cupreous section probably is derived from trade bracelet wire stock. The varied diameters of the ring forms above do not necessarily
refer to the size of Indian fingers as such forms, and others, had widely varied
common applications including use on some equine bits.
BRACELET/ARM BAND FORM, by Jay C. Blaine and James E. Smith H
No. of specimens: 4
Provenience: House 4 (1), House 5(2), Surface (1)
Two short sections indicate the large curvature suitable for bracelets or arm
bands. No. 1, from House 5, is cupreous (brass?) with a thin and bi-convex cross
section. Its edges are smooth and regular with one end broken across and the other
rounded towards one edge. The surfaces of the piece are very smooth. Measurements: chord length, 45 mm; width, 9 mm; thickness, 1.4 mm.
No. 2 (surface) is of cupreous material. The top and bottom surfaces have
been flattened by hammering and the sides are smoothly rounded; both ends are
broken. Measurements: chord length, 10 mm; width, 5.5 mm; thickness, 3 mm.
No. 3 is from House 4. It is a complete bracelet made of brass. It is oval in
shape with with a square cross-section (see Figure 29a). Measurements: Thickness, 1.8 mm; major axis, 5.3 cm; minor axis, 4.0 cm; opening at bottom, 2.5 cm.
No. 4 (House 5) is brass with a square cross-section. Measurements: Thickness, 1.8 mm; chord length, 53 mm.
Remarks: The appearance of bracelet/armband form No. 2 is consistent with
partially flattened round-wire stock. The others are short fragments of hammered,
widely curved, and relatively narrow cupreous material. None of these forms had
been completed or showed obvious attempts at the necessary smoothing.
Round Wire Stock
No. of specimens: 6
Provenience: House 5 (1), Feature 28 (1), and Lots 76, 111,174 and 200 (4)

140

Texas Archeological Society

No. 1 (House 5) is cupreous wire stock cut through one end and cut and
broken through the other (see Figure 31d). Measurements: Diameter, 4.8 mm.
No. 2, from Lot 76, is cupreous wire. Measurements: Diameter, 1.4 mm.
No. 3, Lot 111, is cupreous wire stock. It has been cut and broken at both
ends. This specimen is very uniform in thickness and possibly is modem in age.
Measurements: Diameter, 6.5 mm.
No. 4, the Lot 174 specimen, is also cupreous wire stock. It has been cut and
broken at both ends, and there are a pair of grooves angled across the length of
the segment. Measurements: Diameter, 5.8 mm.
The Lot 200 and Feature 28 pieces are both of badly oxidized iron. Measurements: Diameters, 1 and 3 ram, respectively.
Remarks: It is probable that these pieces of round wire stock are byproducts
of segmenting wire stock of various gauges for lengths of bracelets or arm bands
(Blaine 1992:180-181).
EARRINGS, by R. King Harris
No. of specimens: 2
Provenience: House 4 (2)
These earrings are made of small loops of wire with glass beads attached
(see Figure 29c). One loop had three glass beads and the other had two glass
beads. Measurements: Both are 2.0 cm in diameter with 8 mm beads.
METAL TRIANGLES, by R. King Harris
No. of specimens: 2
Provenience: House 4 (2)
Both metal triangles are made from thin iron with holes for hanging (see
Figure 29b). One of these had two rings interlocked with a third ring that held
the meta! triangle. It appears that these artifacts were used for decoration and
may have had beads on the wire loops similar to the earrings described above.
Measurements: approximate equilateral triangles 17 mm on a side.
MISCELLANEOUS METAL ARTIFACTS, by Jay C. Blaine

Jew’s Harp
No. of specimens: 1
Provenience: Surface (1)
This specimen is wrought iron (see Figure 31a). One shank is eroded away
and the tongue is missing. The remaining shank is tapered and slightly diamondshaped in cross section. The head is bi-convex in cross section with the shank
turned up where it develops from the head. Measurements: Length, 62 mm;
width, 33 ram.
Remarks: The occurrence of Jew’s Harps is widely reported for eighteenth
century Colonial-era sites. However, they do not appear to be generally associated

Smith and others m The Vinson Site

141

with the Texas colonial trade with Native Americans. Nonetheless, the condition
of this specimen, and its techniques of manufacture, distinguish it from all of the
other post-Indian occupation iron debris, and may well date from the Indian
occupation at the Vinson site.
Awls

No. of specimens: 1
Provenience: House 1 (1)
The awl is pointed at one end and double-tapered in form (see Figure 31b).
The cross section of the awl is round but does have a narrow flat surface
extending along most of one side. This specimen is probably made of wrought
iron. Measurements: Length, 31 mm; maximum diameter, 3.8 mm.
Remarks: This awl is likely of native-manufacture since it does not match
well-known awl types furnished to Native Americans in the colonial trade.
Rather, it may have been altered to the awl form by Native Americans from a
different, but unknown, original form of iron piece.
Spoon
No. of specimens: 1
Provenience: Lot 197 (1)
The simple iron spoon is broken through the thin handle just beyond the
bowl, and one distal bowl edge is eroded away. Measurements: Length, 140 mm;
maximum width, 47 mm.
Remarks: Since the spoon is not complete and is of iron, definitive assignment is not attempted. Spoons have not been typically associated with the
eighteenth century Indian trade in Texas This specimen seems more consistent
with, but not meaningfully limited to, nineteenth century assemblages.
Other Unidentif’mble Pieces
No. of specimens: 5
Provenience: Surface (2), Lot 2 (1), House 5 (2)
The first specimen in this category is a deeply dished circular form with a
large, slightly oval, circular opening near one border. The surface appearance is
one of dark "brass" with areas of reduction showing the even-bottomed thin
delamination suggestive of plating or clading. The technology of the piece
resembles those made through the punch-press or die (machine) process. There
are no obvious attachment bases on the piece, and it is even and smooth in
thickness. There is no evidence of wear on this specimen (see Figure 31n).
Measurements: Diameter of body, 24 mm; maximum diameter of oval hole, 13
mm; thickness, 0.5 mm.
Remarks: The basic stock and technology of this piece is not common for
metal pieces in eighteenth century Native American sites. Rather, the form is very
suggestive of later nineteenth century Indian headstall ornaments, but the form

142

Texas Archeological Society

cannot be confined simply to those ornaments. Spectrographic analysis of this
specimen probably would be needed for any confident assignment of age and
manufacturing origin.
No. 2, from Lot 2, is mutilated. The original edges of the piece are indicated
along the back of the "D" shape present, and by the edges and immediate
shoulder of the rectangular opening in the opposite side. The appearance of the
material is that of"brass." The edge mutilation appears to have been done with a
sharp-bitted tool (chisel?). Its thickness is even and smooth, and there are no
obvious attachment holes or indications of wear (see Figure 31m). Measurements: Length, 41 mm; width, 19 mm; thickness, 0.8 mm.
Remarks: Observations on stock material and technology of the piece are
the same as for No. 1 above. It has no recognizable form and function.
No. 3 (surface) is probably of cast "brass" with traces of silver-colored
plating. Both face surfaces are evenly flattened by hammering, and detectable
original edge areas indicate a varying curvilinear outline of the specimen. Both
faces show deeply rendered chasing characterized by the square and angled
applications of round hollow-punch work, most frequently within depressed
areas (see Figure 31k).
Remarks: The piece’s decoration is vaguely suggestive of an oriental
"dragon and clouds" form, but no definite zoomorphic elements are recognized.
Specimen No. 4, from House 5, is a short section of round cupreous stock,
cut and broken at one end and filed (?) to a tooled edge at the other. Two
diametrically opposed and converging grooves also meet in a "V"-shaped notch
in the shaped tip of the piece, and the tip edges are smooth. Measurements:
Length, 15 ram; diameter, 4.8 mm.
Remarks: This artifact resembles an arrow shaft nock (see Figure 31c), and
may have been useful to force sinew through thick hide. The wire stock material
and diameter of specimen No. 4 matches speciman No. 1, also from House 5.
No. 5 (House 5) is a roughly cruciform-shaped piece of iron broken out (or
cut?) between a central, squared-hole and two adjacent arms (see Figure 311). It
has been badly oxidized. Measurements: 37 mm x 37 mm; thickness average, 2
mm.
Remarks: Specimen No. 5 was apparently made by Native American coldiron working techniques.
GLASS TRADE BEADS AND NATIVE MADE BEADS, by R. King Harris,
Inus Marie Harris, and James E. Smith H
Glass beads were an important item of trade between the European traders
and the Indians on the Southern Plains in the eighteenth century. A large sample
of glass trade beads was collected from houses, features, and random surface
collections at the Vinson Site. In addition to specimens obtained during the 1964
TAS Field School excavations, bead collections of Mr. Vinson, those of R. King
Harris, and those recovered from House 5 were also studied. The analysis of all
beads, except those from House 5, was done by R. King Harris.

Smith and others E The Vinson Site

143

The beads were classified according to a system originally devised by
Duffield and Jelks (1961:40-51), later modified by Harris, Harris, Blaine, and
Blaine (1965:307-315), and systematized by Harris and Harris (1967:129-160).
Under this system beads are classified on the basis of size, color, shape, use, and
structure.
Beads are graded by size as follows (all measurements are outside diameter):
extra small (0 to 2 mm), small (2 to 4 mm), medium (4 to 6 mm), and large (more
than 6 mm).
A color chart (Bustanoby 1947:28-29 and Plate 8) was used to designate the
color of the beads. The various bead shapes are described with the same terms
used in the Womack Site report (Harris, Harris, Blaine, and Blaine 1965:307-315).
Their function or use is indicated by the terms necklace and garter. Larger beads
were used for necklaces, while medium and small beads were used mostly for
making colorful designs on skins, garters, and other clothing.
As to structure, beads were classified as simple (that is, one homogeneous
layer of glass), compound (formed of two or more different colored concentric
layers of glass), and complex (decorated with stripes, dots, or other designs of
glass pressed into the bead).
Techniques of manufacture are: hollow-cane, faceted, and mandrel or wire
wound. The terms tumbled, untumbled, and twisted have the following meanings:
tumbled after breaking the hollow canes to desired length, the broken glass
sections were placed in a heated drum that was rotated to round the bead’s broken
edges; untumbled--the beads were not tumbled, but were used with their edges
sharp; and twisted--the hollow canes were twisted as they were drawn out in
length.
The bead type numbers for Vinson refer to specific bead types on the Harris
Bead Chart. This is the system of bead classification worked out by R. King Harris
(Harris and Harris 1967:129-1960); please refer to that publication for specific
glass bead type descriptions. The following bead type numbers were represented
at Vinson (Figure 35 and Table 9): 5, 44-46, 48-53, 57, 58, 61, 67, 68, 76, 79-85,
90, 95, 96, 100, 103, 107, 111,114, 115, 122, 123, 126, 134, and 137.
From House 5, fifteen other glass beads are grouped into seven unidentified
types. These beads were not found in the Harris and Harris (1967) Bead Chart:
U1

Large, Harvard Crimson, translucent, bead
mandrel-wound of simple construction. Larger
than No. 100 and No. 144 in Harris and Harris
(1967); one specimen.

U2

Medium, Fern Green, translucent, bead of
simple construction. Barrel-shaped but
irregular due to the multiple cut facets.
Appears similar to Harris and Harris (1967)
No. 131 except in size; one specimen.

144

Texas Archeological Society

<

Figure 35. Identified Beads from the Harris and Harris (1967) Bead Chart.

U3

Medium, Dark Bluebird Blue, barrel-shaped,
semi-translucent around the edges, bead of
simple construction. Bead has multiple cut
facets and is similar to Harris and Harris (1967)
No. 147 except for size; four specimens.

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site
U4

Large, Colonial Yellow, opaque, olive-shaped,
necklace bead of simple construction. Similar
to Harris and Harris (1967) No. 1 except in color;
six specimens.

U5

Large, Colonial Yellow, round necklace bead
of simple construction. Similar to Harris
and Harris (1967) No. 3 except in color; one
specimen.

U6

Large, Dark Bluebird Blue, opaque
tube-shaped bead of simple construction.
The bead may be Harris and Harris (1967) No.
61, except that it is 20 mm long and does not appear
to be tumbled; one specimen.

U7

Large, Violet, translucent, donut-shaped bead
that is mandrel-wound and of simple
construction. No bead of this color is
mentioned in Harris and Harris (1967); one
specimen.

145

In addition to the glass trade beads, two shell beads were recovered from
House 5. One is white in color and the other white with a purple tint. Both were
tube-shaped beads (6 mm in length) with holes of uniform diameter. These types
of shell beads have been identified as shell wampum (Harris and Harris 1967:155).

Discussion
The ratio of 2785 glass beads to three native made-beads illustrates the
popularity of the European trade beads, and probably also the decline of the native
craft of bead making. Of course, this same pattern is also apparent among other
classes of native-made artifacts, as European trade goods became plentiful after
the mid-1700s.
In the manufacture of glass trade beads, generally the most popular technique
is the hollow-cane method. Types No. 5-85, 96, and Nos. 114 through 137 are all
made by the hollow-cane method. Types No. 53, 95, and 100 through 111 are
made by the mandrel or wire-wound method. Type 134 and some of the unidentified beads are examples of glass beads manufactured by the faceted technique.
All of the glass bead types, except for types No. 100 and No. 114, are
popular in sites dated from the mid-eighteenth century to the latter part of the
eighteenth century (Harris and Harris 1967). Types No. 100 and 114, conversely,
are popular in sites of the early to mid-nineteenth century. These two beads,

146

Texas Areheological Society
Table 9.
Provenience of Glass Trade Beads

Bead
No.
5
44
45
46
48
49
50
51
52
53
57
58
61
67
68
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
90
95
96
100
103
107
111
114
115
122
123

H. 1

11
33
11
2
2
8

H. 2

1
21
98
75
28
11
32
36

H.3

H. 4

8
34
9
4

4
9
7
1
1
5
5

2
12

H.5

28
116
315
150
56
30
80
267
1
1

F.25

3
27
34
4
10
16

F.26

1
22
110
60
10
2
55
106

F.30

2
3

1
3

PIT3

3

1

Surf.

Total

2
34
207
40
21
4
39
61

32
219
835
392
126
48
227
514
1
1
2
1
1
1
5
6
24
1
1
28
65
55
22
70
26
3
2
1
11
2
7
4
2
2
1
1
2

2
1
1
1
5
6
23
1
1
1
1

8
22
4
4
21
5

1
2
1
1

9
46
12
7
14
2
2
6
1
6
1
1

1

1

1

2

15
17
2

1
1

24
5
1

2

1
1

4
12
2
4
17
1

1
2
1
1
1
2

1
1
2

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site
126
134
137
UID
Total

5
1

69

376

14
1
1
15

2

76

34

1222

1
1
2

1

99

434

9

4

147
20
5
4
15

462 2785

however, were surface fmds and could well have been brought to the site after
the primary occupation.
Quimby (1966:81-90) discusses dating sites using a glass trade bead chronology. He compared the types of beads from four sites--including Fort
Michilimackinac in Michigan and the Fatherland site in Mississippi and found
that the glass beads on sites dating after 1760 were very different from those on
sites occupied in the t-n-st half of the eighteenth century. Polychrome beads were
much more common in the early eighteenth century, according to Quimby, and
became rare in the later part of the century. The polychrome bead seems to have
been replaced in popularity by multi-faceted cut glass forms in several sizes and
colors (Quimby 1966:88). This type of bead appears to be similar to unidentified
bead types U2 and U3 from House 5 at Vinson. Quimby also goes on to indicate
that manufactured shell beads or wampum were a regular trade item by Europeans
during the same period.
The provenience on most of the beads did not indicate whether they were
retreived from the plow zone, from the middens in the houses, or from areas that
may have been associated with the floors of the structures. This lack of provenience eliminated the possibility of recognizing more discrete occupational periods as indicated by changes in the frequency of the bead types.
The native-made beads represented several different methods of bead manufacture. They included one made of a crinoid section, a second made from a strip
of brass rolled into a cylinder, and a third made of a very small piece of stiff wire
wrapped to form five loops.
The types and frequency of the beads present suggest that the initial occupation of the site was probably after 1750. While many of the beads that are common
at the Vinson site also occur into the 1800s, they do so in reduced numbers. Many
of the beads present at Vinson, however, occur in greatest numbers during the last
quarter of the eighteenth century. It appears, then, on the basis of the beads that the
major occupation of the site ended before 1800.

Post-Indian Historic Occupation
by Kathleen Gilmore
Historic artifactual materials from the 1964 TAS Field School and House 5
were analyzed for the purpose of identifying the post-aboriginal Historic Anglo-

148

Texas Archeological Society

American occupation of the site. Most of this material was recovered from House
5, due to the collection techniques employed in excavations, as well as its
proximity to the old farmstead structure.
Collection techniques from House 5 were selective in that only recognizable
artifacts in good condition were collected. Wire, scrap iron, round nails, and other
nondescript metal artifacts were not saved. The following analysis was done by
Kathleen Gilmore with the assistance by Cecily Pegues.
Glass
A total of 1537 pieces of glass were analyzed according to color and function
type (Table 10).
The datable glass artifacts fall into the following time periods:
NUMBER

DATES

3
78
1
1
1

1850-1870
1880-1925
1920-1964
1929-1954
1929-Present

Historic Ceramics

A total of 392 ceramic sherds were analysed according to vessel type and
ceramic type (Table 11). The data represents the total sherds/minimum number of
vessels.

Historic Metal Artifacts
Although much undatable metal material from the later post-Indian Historic
occupation was not collected during the excavation of House 5, some possibly
diagnostic items were recovered: 23 cut nails, one possible hand-forged nail, two
connecting fragments of a probable metal bucket, and one undated Confederate
Reunion button.
Discussion

The glass collected at 41LT1 dates from the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The earliest date on the glass is 1850 and one piece has a maker’s mark that is
still currently in use. The major historic Anglo-American occupation of the
Vinson site obtained from the glass items appears to be from the last quarter of the
nineteenth century to the first quarter of the twentieth century. The structure is
known to have burned in the 1930s.

Smith and others m The Vinson Site

149

Table 10
Glass Color and Function
Color

Number

Clear
Amethyst
Aqua
Aqua/Clear
Milk
Yellow
Blue
Brown
Bright Green
Olive
Patinated

Total

566
78
224
376
14
1
11
210
29
25
3

1537

Percent
36.82
5.0
14.57
24.46
0.91
0.06
0.71
13.66
1.8
1.62
0.19

Function
Oil -Lamp Chimney
Window Pane
Glass Mugs (drink)
Decorative Items
Fruit Jar -Beads
Fruit Jar -Shoulders
Fruit Jar -Embossed
Other Jars
Other Embossed Pcs
Medicine Bottle
Medicine Bottles
Embossed
Milkglass Jar Liner
Liquor Bottle

Number

Percent

59
376
20
28
10
3
2
7
6
39

3.8
23.8
1.3
1.82
0.6
0.19
0.13
0.4
0.3
2.5

10

0.6

4
1

0.2
0.06

Toiletry Bottle/Jar
Snuff Bottle
Soda Bottle
Wine Bottle
Food Storage Bottle
Unidentified Bottle
Unidentified Bumed
Unidentified General

1
57
1
6
25
34
40
808

Total

1537

0.06
3.7
0.06
0.3
1.6
2.2
2.6
52.0

The largest percentage of identifiable glass material is clear window pane
from the structure; this ranged in color from aqua to clear. Fruit jars recovered
indicate home canning activities, while liquor, wine, soda, and snuff bottles
indicate the consumption of liquor, spirits, and other types of beverages.
Most of the historic ceramics are the remains of domiciliary trash. No
materials were present which could be precisely dated, but most again are from
the late nineteenth and early twentieth century. The presence of the Confederate
Reunion button suggests that one inhabitant of the site may have served in the
Civil War and then established residence on the property after the War. This
would correspond to the time period seen in the glass artifacts. In addition to the

150

Texas Archeological Society
Table 11
Post-Aboriginal Historic Ceramics

Vessel
Type

Stoneware

Ceramic Types
Earthenware Porcelain

Ironstone Yellowware

50/49

3/3

1/1

CUPS

28/19

17/6

4/3

PLATES/
SAUCERS

157/50

4/4

1/1

BOWLS

27/12

UID

52/371

JARS

21/2

CROCKS

8/3

MISC.

6/6

5/4

4/4

Total
Sherds

87

267

28

No. of
Vessels

48

134

17

4/3

6

~Sherds/No. of Vessels

above listed material, two pipe fragments from the Akron Smoking Pipe Co.
(Sudbury 1979:187-189, 276) are dated around the turn of the twentieth century.
The historic Anglo-American settler material definitely dates after the last
possible Indian occupation and no mixing of the artifacts is possible. In this
sample, there is no evidence of any non-Indian materials that date before 1850.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Four objectives guided the 1964 Texas Archeological Society Field School
at the Vinson site. They were: 1) to examine the house patterns; 2) obtain a better
sample of the associated artifacts; 3) explore the areas between the houses; and 4)
determine the site’s cultural and chronological affiliation.
Although the Vinson site produced excellent examples of structures, three
were oval and two were circular. House 1, House 4, and House 5 were oval,
while House 2 and House 3 were circular. No definitive conclusions are offered
as to the meaning of these differences in house shape, but there is no indication
that the houses represent different types of structures used by different cultures
that occupied the site. It also does not seem likely that the same cultural group

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

151

would suddenly change house patterns over the relatively short period of time
that Vinson was occupied; however, the excavation control of the structures was
not always tight enough to clearly prove this point.
Bell (1984:363-378) discusses the archeological characteristics of the
Wichita Confederacy as seen from three major sites in Oklahoma: the BrysonPaddock and Deer Creek sites along the Arkansas River in northern Oklahoma
and the Longest site in the Spanish Fort Complex along the Red River in southern Oklahoma. The Longest Site has been identified as San Bernardo, a fortified
Wichita Village (Bell 1984:364). Archeological investigations place the occupation at the Longest Site after 1750 while the Deer Creek and Bryson-Paddock
sites were primarily occupied during the first half of the eighteenth century.
Bell (1984:367 and Figure 17.2) indicates that three forms of structures
were found at these sites: round structures that ranged in size from six to 10
meters in diameter; oval-shaped structures that varied in size from four by six
meters to 6.5 by 11 meters, and a larger circular structure believed to represent a
community or specialized structure. The round and oval structures were constructed in saucer-shaped depressions with posts generally arranged around the
edges of the depression, although the posthole arrangement varied slightly from
structure to structure. A central fireplace is common to both types of structures.
Both types of structures were also found at Vinson.
One site not mentioned by Bell (1984) that is pertinent is the Upper Tucker
site (Woodall 1967b), another Wichita village (Daniel J. Prikryl, 1993 personal
communication). Upper Tucker excavations uncovered five houses: two of oval
shape and three of circular form. The oval houses were oriented east-northeast to
west-southwest, and measured about 11-12 meters in length and 5-6.7 meters in
width. One oval house had four central posts and a ring of smaller posts inside
the house depression, while the other had a center line of posts suggesting it had
a peaked roof. The afore-mentioned center post structure had a central fire hearth
and a packed clay entrance ramp, but the peaked roof house lacked these features. The circular houses were six to seven meters in diameter with central
support posts; a central hearth and clay entrance ramp was present in one of the
circular houses.
Upper Tucker also had three large bell-shaped cache pits, similar to those
excavated at the Vinson site. The Upper Tucker cache pits ranged between 1.201.65 meters in diameter at the top and 1.35-2.50 meters in diameter at the bottom
of the pits (Woodall 1967b).
In each of the three Wichita villages, numerous small mounds were scattered throughout the village area. These mounds represented trash middens
composed of village refuse. A third feature that is common at these village sites
is cache or storage pits; they vat/in form from cylindrical, to bowl-shaped, to
bell-shaped. Pits found at the Longest site had grass lining and covers. Historical
documents already discussed suggest that these pits were used for winter storage
bins and for granaries to store seeds for next year’s crop. Trash middens are not
founds at Vinson; however, trash pits are present within the depressions of the

152

Texas Archeological Society

abandoned houses. The cache pits that were recorded at the Vinson site are
almost identical in nature to those described by Bell (1984).
The artifact assemblages found in the Wichita sites described by Bell (1984)
varied depending upon the period they were occupied. The later in time that the
site was occupied, the more European trade materials were used as native-made
materials were no longer manufactured. Bell (1984) does list an artifact assemblage that he considers characteristic of pre-European Wichita sites. It includes
aboriginal items made of stone, bone, and pottery. Large numbers of abrading
stones are frequently found, with loaf-shaped and grooved abraders being the
most common. Elbow pipes made of stone or pottery are also typical. Ceramics
found in the sites along the Red River always contain Womack Plain or Womack
Engraved, and crude poorly baked clay figurines are also present. These figufines appear to represent human, animal, and bird forms but specific identifications are difficult to make due to the preservation quality of the specimens that
have been recovered.
Trade items found on Wichita Confederacy sites were primarily of French
origin in sites dating from 1700 to 1760. The northern sites had a much larger
assemblage of aboriginal artifacts by percentage than did the later Longest site. It
appears that the greater availability of trade goods along the Red River caused a
rapid replacement of the aboriginal items of the same nature. Bone whistles,
toothed bone fleshers, and horse trappings were also present at the Longest site.
Bell (1984) states that the Arkansas River villages were abandoned around
1760 due to pressure from the Osage. Their movement was south to the Red River
and the Spanish Fort complex of sites. Some of this southward migration eventually made its way into Central Texas in the last half of the eighteenth century.
Sites in Central and North Central Texas considered to have been occupied
by some constituent tribe of the Wichita confederacy include Gilbert, Pearson,
Stansbury, Womack, Upper Tucker, and Stone. Duffield and Jelks (1961:71-72)
have defined the Nortefio Focus from Texas sites believed to be related to the
southern Wichita-speaking groups. The list of artifacts characteristic of the Nortefio
Focus includes: triangular arrowpoints, snub-nosed scrapers, spokeshave scraper/
gravers, alternately beveled knives, Womack Engraved, Nocona Plain, Goliad
Plain pottery, and elbow pipes made from pottery and stone. All of this material is
found at the five Texas sites listed above, as well as at the Vinson site.
The Pearson site may be the Tawakoni-Yscani village visited by the Spanish missionary, Fray Calahorara, in 1760. However, the recovered artifacts seem
to indicate a date from the late 1700s to perhaps 1835 (Duffield and Jelks
1961:78). No house patterns or features were recorded at Pearson, although a
trenching method similar to the one used at Vinson was employed.
As with Pearson, no house patterns were recorded at the Gilbert site. The
primary features at Gilbert were 21 midden areas with diameters ranging from 20
to 35 feet (6.1-10.7 meters). Five of these were covered by layers of clay that
ranged in thickness from 5 to 18 inches (13-46 cm) (Jelks 1967). It was felt by
the excavators that these middens may have been the location of abandoned

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

153

house sites although no posts were found and the excavations did extend into the
subsurface clay. If these were indeed houses, they must not have been in pits
excavated into the subsoil as the structures at Vinson were. Blaine (1992:187189) suggests the possibility that Gilbert may have been a spring-summer village
and had no need of sturdy structures like those found at Vinson. Two possible
and one definite storage pits have been located at Gilbert; they were not lined.
The site is dated to the third quarter of the eighteenth century (Jelks 1967:244).
The Stansbury Site is located on the Brazos River under what is now Lake
Whitney. It is thought be the archeological remains of the Flechado Village of
Tawakoni Indians visited by MSzi&es in 1778 and 1779 (Stephenson 1970:107108). One structure was discovered at Stansbury that appears to date to the
Flechado Village (Stephenson 1970:67-68). The structure was a rectangular
house, 21 feet (6.4 meters) long and 18 feet (5.5 meters) wide with a central
firepit and a smaller secondary hearth. The central firepit was clearly stratified
with alternate layers of fire refuse and sand, suggesting three separate phases of
occupation (Stephenson 1970:69). Eighteen post molds in an irregular pattern
formed the roof and wall supports. The structure is not subterranean. Five exterior bell-shaped pits were associated with this structure, but none were lined.
Two bone midden areas were excavated. Two burials of extended, supine, adult
males were found with historic trade materials in association. Both burials had
their heads to the east. The site’s Nortefio Focus occupation dates from about the
mid-1770s to 1786.
The Womack Site, located on the Red River in Lamar Country, had occupational features of two types: circular midden areas and burials. The midden areas
were never investigated but were believed to be the remains of houses (Harris et
al. 1965:289). Eight burials were reported to have been found at the site. Four of
the burials discussed by Harris et al. (1965) were all found in a midden accumulation. They had been severely disturbed by plowing, but appeared to be of
extended individuals lying on their back. All but one had native pottery vessels
as grave offerings. One small, baked, possible figurine leg was also recovered.
The site is dated between 1700 and 1730 (Harris et al. 1965).
Although excavations have taken place over a number of years at the
Vinson site, the artifact assemblage is very small. A similar TAS Field School
held at the Gilbert site with about the same number of participants produced a
much greater quantity of artifactual material (Jelks 1967). The artifact assemblage at Vinson includes few aboriginally manufactured materials that can be
directly related to the people who built the structures. Aboriginal artifacts that
were found at the sites and are associated with the eighteenth century occupants
include all the material items expected to be found in a Nortefio Focus site (see
Duffield and Jelks 1961). In addition, loaf-shaped abrading stones and baked
clay figurines were recovered. In sum, this assemblage is typical of Wichitaspeaking groups. However, many of these items-- such as the triangular points
or the Womack Engraved ceramics--are represented by one or a few specimens
or assemblages consisting of a few specimens.

154

Texas Areheological Society

Nevertheless, there are differences between Vinson and the Norte~o sites
discussed above. The pottery types and styles at the Gilbert and Womack sites
are present at Vinson, but the amounts are rather small at Vinson compared to the
others. The same may be said of Fresno arrowpoints.
Mortuary practices are different between the Nortefio sites. At Longest
three burials were extended supine, three were semi-flexed, and another was of
undetermined character. All had their heads to the east and only one had a vessel
included as a grave offering. They were buried around the perimeter of the
village. The two burials at the Stansbury site were both extended supine, again
with heads to the east, but beads were the only grave goods. The burials were
found over 200 meters from the structure. At Womack, by contrast, all of the
burials were found in the midden areas in the main portion of the site. None of
the burials were reported to have had their head to the east but all but one had
multiple vessels as grave offerings.
No burials have been found at the Vinson site although extensive excavations, both controlled and uncontrolled, have taken place over the last 30 years.
M6zi~res (Bolton 1914, Volume I: 289) stated in 1772 that the Tawakoni "do not
bury their dead, but take them to the open field. When they are reproved for such
neglect, they ask if it makes any difference whether the birds and beasts or the
worms eat them." With all the trenching, exploration, and excavation that has
been done at Vinson, it seems unlikely that some burials would not have been
discovered there. Whether the Indians that occupied Vinson did not bury their
dead or whether they buried them away from the site is unknown at this time.
Rohrbaugh (1982:54) argues, based on faunal remains from several known
Wichita camps along the Arkansas River, that they were primarily bison hunters.
In all sites where faunal remains have been analyzed, bison elements were
substantially higher than those of deer. The location of their main villages were
never far away from the bison herds on the plains.
In contrast, at Gilbert a minimum of 127 white-tailed deer were recovered in
the faunal sample. Remains of four bison and a number of other species, particularly turtle, were also reported (Lorrain 1967). No information on the faunal
remains from the Womack, Pearson, and Stansbury sites is available.
At Vinson, nine adult bison and a minimum number of 12 to 17 deer were
recovered from House 5 alone (Yates 1993). Many other species were present.
Unlike the Wichita to the north, then, it appears that the Indians at Vinson were
exploiting all available animal resources.
In summary, based on the structures documented, the presence of cache pits
and midden areas, and the character of the artifact assemblage, it seems probable
that the inhabitants of the Vinson site were affiliated with the Nortefio Focus of
Texas. Identifying the exact group that occupied Vinson, and the time period that
the site was occupied, is more speculative.
The first consideration in this respect is related to the sparse recovery of
aboriginal materials. This alone should indicate a dependency on European trade

Smith and others m The Vinson Site

155

in the area, and when compared to other dated Historic Indian sites places the
occupation at Vinson in the last half of the eighteenth century. A significant fact
about the Vinson assemblage is the lack of French trade materials but the
increased amount of English goods.
’With the French influence in trade declining after 1760, and English guns
becoming common around 1770, additional chronological support is available.
Looking at dateable artifacts in the gun part assemblage, Blaine (1993) dates the
site from about 1760 to 1790. The glass beads found at Vinson could have been
brought there anytime during the last half of the eighteenth century. The dates on
the buttons range from 1700 to 1775, and the blanket bale seal suggests a date of
about 1775. The one silver pendant that does not appear to be aboriginal in
manufacture, but rather a trade item, probably indicates a date after 1760. Moreover, the lack of a larger quantity of trade silver also argues that the occupation
of the site did not extend into the nineteenth century. With all of the dates for
diagnostic trade goods clustering around 1760 to 1775, the strongest evidence,
then, appears to suggests that the Vinson site was inhabited during the period
beginning ca. 1760 and certainly ending before 1800, with the major occupation
lasting from 1760-1780.
When the Vinson site was first selected for excavation by the TAS, it was
believed to be the site of a historically documented Tawakoni village that had
been raided by the Cherokee in 1830. The dates for trade good artifacts
summarzied above for this site would seem to eliminate it as being the one at
which the 1830 attack took place. In addition, no remains of fortifications or the
stones to build such fortifications were discovered at Vinson. Finally, no evidence of a Tonkawa occupation that was reported by Mrzi~res to have been in
the neighborhood of "La Tortuga" was recognized at Vinson.
To address the question of identifying the tribal or ethnic group that occupied the Vinson site, we need to closely compare it again with the other reported
sites whose cultural deposits have been linked to the Wichita tribes, namely
Gilbert, Longest, Stansbury, and possibly Pearson. However, care must be taken
in comparing these sites since Rohrbaugh (1982:52) makes the case that differences between these sites are due to basic cultural differences. Rohrbaugh
(1982:54-55) feels that both Womack and Gilbert are Kichai villages and probably developed out of the Caddoan tradition in eastern Oklahoma. Harris et al.
(1965:287) agree with the assignment of the Womack site to the Kichai. Pearson,
on the other hand, has been suggested to have been the location of a TawakoniYscani village (Duffield and Jelks 1961) while Stansbury is identified as a
Tawakoni site by Stephenson (1970).
The group of Wichita-speaking Indians described by Spanish explorers most
often in this region of Texas were the Tawakoni. In 1803, the United States
purchased Louisiana and appointed Mr. John Sibley as Indian Agent. He left
several documents dealing with the Tawakoni written from material given to him
by French traders (see Sibley 1832). In 1807 Sibley (Hackett 1931-1946, Volume

156

Texas Archeological Society

2:225) stated that "they (Tawakenoes) live on the west side of the Rio de los
Brazos, but they often descend to live for months at a time, leaving their regular
place of residence, to a large prairie, which is on the Tortuga."
The archeological evidence supports the possibility that the Vinson site was
used, abandoned, and reused over a 20-40 year period of time. The overlapping
hearths in House 1 and the use of abandoned structures as refuse pits certainly
suggest this. Yates (1993) argues that the kill pattern of bison and deer in House 5
indicates that the occupation of the site was during the cool and wintery months.
The question may be raised that the bone used in the faunal analysis is
associated with the midden in the houses and not directly with the use of the
houses. While this may be the case, what can be stated is that the people who
procured the bison and deer that were deposited in the middens apparently did so
on a seasonal basis. Both the style of the structures and middens within the
Vinson village site is consistant with the cultural behavior of the Wichitaspeaking peoples in the eighteenth century. Without any reason to believe that
different groups periodically occupied the site at different times, we can make a
reasonable assumption that the bone middens were deposited by the same cultural group living at the site in nearby structures.
Relevant to seasonality issues, Mrzi~res wrote in 1772 (Bolton 1914, Volume I:286) that the Tawakoni "have the same custom of absenting themselves
from their village during the cold season for the purpose of getting a full supply
of dried meat, which is kept for the other seasons of the year." In addition, the
absence at Vinson of agricultural tools such as scapula hoes or digging implements found in other Wichita or Nortefio sites argue that agricultural activities
were not important to the population when they occupied Vinson. The cache pits
found at Vinson and other Nortefio sites were likely to have been used to store
their grain during the winter months while they were hunting bison.
The idea of seasonal patterning between Norteflo sites is only now being
recognized and discussed (Blaine 1992:187-193). If the main Tawakoni village
on the Brazos River was abandoned during the winter months, why would its
inhabitants only go as far as Vinson or perhaps Stansbury? Mrzi~res describes
two conditions in his 1772 expedition through this area that may provide an
explanation. He describes lxaveling north of a Tawakoni village on the Trinity
River for 30 leagues (about 80 miles) through a broad plain to another Tawakoni
village on the Brazos River, encountering an "incredible" number of bison along
the way (Bolton 1914, Volume 1:293). He also describes the area as add and the
Brazos River as having "little water which remains in ~ls [and] is extremely
salty and impotable"(Bolton 1914, Volume 1:293). He goes on to state that the
Tawakonis depend on numerous springs for their water.
Again in 1778, Mrzi~res describes encountering bison (Bolton 1914, Volume II:200-201). This time he encountered them along a route north of what has
been identified as the Stansbury site (Stephenson 1970:107). On this second
expedition, as he turned north he described a "Grand Forest" ~ost Oak Belt) that

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

157

was dense but not wide. He noted that it is adjacent to plains that contain
numerous springs and creeks that attract the bison. It is interesting to note that he
did not encounter bison to the south in the area associated with the Qtfiscat
village. It may be possible, then, that traveling only a short distance during the
winter months, when the bison had its deepest southern migration, would enable
the Tawakonis to find the bison on a more suitable terrain than the area around
their summer village on the Brazos River.
If the artifacts seem to indicate that the Vinson site was inhabited during the
1770s, why did Mrzi~res not visit it on one of his two trips through the area
where the Vinson site is located? Perhaps the answer lies in the fact that he f’trst
came through the area in the early fall, and then in the late spring, and both times
found the village on the Brazos River (On his trip in 1772, he apparently turned
north from the Trinity River and missed the Vinson area altogether). It is also
interesting to note that the Rubi map, which shows an Indian village in the area
of Vinson but none on the Brazos River, was done during the fall and winter of
1767-1768. If the above conclusions are reasonable, then it becomes even more
likely that the Tawakoni village of Quiscat that Vial visited in October 1787,
which had moved 12 leagues west of the Brazos River, may in fact have been the
Vinson site.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Vinson Site was excavated in 1964 by the Texas Archeological Society
and many people have contributed to the completion of this report over the last 30
years. Thanks go to the late R. King Harris, his wife Inus Marie Harris, and Jay
and Jerrylee Blaine, for their work in artifact analysis after the Field School. A
personal thanks also to Jay Blaine for his analysis of the metal artifacts from
House 5 and his patience in this never-ending project.
Without the involvement and cooperation of Ralph and Noil Vinson, I
would never have become involved with this site and this report would not have
reached publication.
Paul Lorrain drafted the figures in this report and his expert ability was a
lifesaver. The Tarrant County Archeological Society participated in weekend
field trips to assist Ralph Vinson and myself in the excavation of House 5.
Without their time and effort much information from the site would never have
been recovered. Thanks to Dale Williams and Charles Clifton who assisted in the
photography. A special thanks goes to my wife, Lorna, and my family, Jamey,
Eric, Greg, and Susan, who worked on the site and supported my effort to write
this report.
Finally, my thanks to Dr. Dee Ann Story for her involvement with the Texas
Archeological Society and this particular project. As the primary professional
archeologist involved during the 1964 TAS Field School, her input, comments,
and criticisms of the manuscript have helped produce a better published report.

Texas Archeological Society

158

REFERENCES CITED
Allen, H. E.
1939

The Parilla Expedition to the Red River in 1759. Southwestern Historical
Quarterly 43 (No. 1):53-71.

Bell, R. E.
1984

Protohistoric Wichita. In: Prehistory ofOklahoma, edited by R. E. B ell, pp. 363378. Academic Press, New York.

Blaine, J. C.
1988

Trade Hatchets from the Gilbert Site. In: The Record, Fiftieth Anniversary
Edition, 42 (No. 3): 111-117. Dallas Archeological Society.

1989

Eighteenth Century Texas Indian Horse Gear. In: In The Light of Past Experience: Papers in Honor ofJack T. Hughes, pp. 93-103. Panhandle Archeological
Society, Publication No. 5.

1992

A Summary and Discussion of Additiona! Findings at the Gilbert Site, an
Eighteenth Century Nortefio Occupation in Rains County, Texas.Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Soc&ty 63:175-196.

1993

Firearms and Related Artifacts from the Vinson Site. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 64:163-186.

Bolton, H. E.
1915
Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century. Publications in History, Vol. IlL
University of California Press, Berkeley.
Bolton, H. E. (editor)
1914
Athanase de Mdzi~res and the Louisiana-Texas Frontier, 1768-1780. 2 Vols.
The Arthur H. Clark Company, Cleveland.
1916

Spanish Exploration in the Southwest, 1542-1706. Barnes and Noble, New
York.

Bustanoby, J. H.
Principles of Color and Color Mixing. McGraw-Hill Book Company, New
1947
York.
Butler, P. M.
1846
Letter to William Medill, dated March 8, 1846. United States Office of Indian
Affairs, Letters Received 1838-1862. B arkerTexas History Center, The University of Texas at Austin.
Duffield, L. F. and E. B. Jelks
The Pearson Site, a Historic Indian Site at Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains County,
1961
Texas. Archeology Series No. 4, The University of Texas, Austin.
Gallagher, J. G. and S. E. Bearden
1976
The Hopewell School Site, A Late Archaic Campsite in the Central Brazos River
Valley. Contributions inAnthropology, No. 19. Southern Methodist University,
Dallas.

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

159

Hackett, C. W. (editor and translator)
1931- Pichardo’s Treatise on the Limits of Louisiana and Texas. 4 Vols.
1946
University of Texas Press, Austin.
Harper, E. A.
1953
The Taovayas Indians in Frontier Trade and Diplomacy, 1719 to 1768. The
Chronicles of Oklahoma 31:268-289.
Harper, L., R. Harper, R. K. Harris, I. M. Harris, E. B. Jelks, and J. N. Woodall
1967
Ornaments. In: The Gilbert Site: A Nortefio Focus Site in Northeastern Texas,
edited by E. B. Jelks. Bulletin of the TexasArcheolog&al Society 37:87-104.
Harris, R. K. and I. M. Harris
1967
Trade Beads, Projectile Points, and Knives. In: A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian
Archeology and Ethnohistory, assembled by R. E. Bell, E. B. Jelks, and W. W.
Newcomb, pp. 129-162. Final Report for Grant GS-964, National Science
Foundation, Washington, D. C.
Harris, R. K. and C. D. Turmell
1967
Miscellaneous European Goods. In: The Gilbert Site: A Nortefio Focus Site in
Northeastern Texas, edited by E. B. Jelks. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 37:105-111.
Harris, R. K. I. M. Harris, and J. N. Woodall
1967
Tools. In: The Gilbert Site: A Nortefio Focus Site in Northeastern Texas, edited
by E. B. Jelks. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 37:18-32.
Harris, R. K., I. M. Harris, J. C. Blaine, and J. Blaine
1965
A Preliminary Archeological and Documentary Study of the Womack Site,
Lamar County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 36:287-365.
Hatcher, M. A. (translator)
1920
Texas in 1820. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 23:47-68.
History of Navarro, Henderson, Anderson, Limestone, Freestone and Leon Counties
1893
The Lone Star State. The Lewis Publishing Company, Chicago.
Jelks, E. B.
Documentary Evidence of Indian Occupation at the Stansbury Site (41-39B 11970
1). Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 41:277-286.
Jetks, E. B. (editor)
1967
The Gilbert Site: A Nortefio Focus Site in Northeastern Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 37:1-248.
John, E. A. H.
1992
A Case Study in the Interdependence of Archeology and History: The Spanish
Fort Sites on the Red River. Bulletin ofthe TexasArcheologicalSociety 63:197209.

160

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

Johnson, L., Jr. and E. B. Jelks
1958
The Tawakoni-Yscani Village, 1760: A Study in Archeological Site Identification. Texas Journal ofScience 10:405-422.
Loomis, N. M. and A. P. Nasatir (editors)
1967
Pedro Vial and the Roads to Santa Fe. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Lorrain, D.
1963
The Vinson Site. MS on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.
1967

Animal Remains. In: The Gilbert Site: A Nortefio Focus Site in Northeastern
Texas, edited by E. B. Jelks. Bulletin ofthe TexasArcheological Society 37:225 243.

Margry, P.
1879-1888 Decouvertes et £tablissements des Francais dans l’ouest et dans sud de
l’Amerique Septentrionale, 1614-1754.6 Vols. D. Jouauat, Paris.
Marcy, R. B.
1866
Thirty Years ofArmy Life on the Border. Harper Brothers, New York.
Maxwell, M. S. and L. R. Binford
1961
Excavations at Fort Michilimackinac, Mackinac City, Michigan, 1959 Season.
Publications of the Museum, Michigan State University, Vol. 1, No. 1. East
Lansing, Michigan.
Neighbors, R.S.
1847a Report to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, June 22, 1847. Senate Executive
Document No. 1, 30th Congress, First Session. Washington, D.C.
1847b

Report to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, October 12, 1847. Senate Executive
Document No. 1, 30th Congress, First Session. Washington, D.C.

Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961
The Indians of Texas. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr. and W. T. Field
1967
An Ethnohistoric Investigation of the WichitaIndians in the Southern Plains. In:
A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory, assembled by R.
E. Bell, E. B. Jelks, and W. W. Newcomb, pp. 240-401. Final Report for Grant
GS-964, National Science Foundation, Dallas and Norman.
Olsen, S. J.
1963
Dating Early Plain Buttons by Their Form. American Antiquity 28:551-554.
Peterson, H. L.
1956
Arms and Armor in Colonial America. Branhall House, New York.
Prikryl, D. J.
1990
APR Conducts Survey at Tehuacana. The Record 45 (No. 1): 1-7.

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

161

Quimby, G. I.
1966
Indian Culture and European Trade Goods. The University of Wisconsin
Press, Madison.
Rohrbaugh, C. L.
1982
An Hypothesis for the Origins of the Kichai. In: Pathways to Plains Prehistory:
Anthropological Perspectives of Plains Natives and Their Pasts, Papers in
Honor ofRobert E. Bell, edited by D. G. Wyckoff and J. L. Hofman, pp. 51-61.
Oklahoma Anthropological Society Memoir No. 3 and The Cross Timbers
Heritage Association Contributions No. 1. Oklahoma City.
Sanchez, J. M.
1926

A Trip to Texas in 1828 (Translated by C. E. Castafieda). Southwestern
Historical Quarterly 29:250-288.

Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1932
The Geology of Texas, Volume I: Stratigraphy. The University of Texas,
Bulletin No. 3232. Austin.
Sheldon, R. A.
1979
Roadside Geology of Texas. Mountain Press Publishing Company, Missoula,
Montana.
Sibley, J.
1832

His toric al Sketches of Several Indian Tribes in Louisiana, S outh of the Arkans as
River, and between the Mississippi and River Grande. In American State
Papers, ClasslI, IndianAffairs, Vol. 1, pp. 721-725. Gales & Seaton, Washington, D. C.

Smith, R. A. (translator)
1959
Account of the Journey of Benard de la Harpe: Discovery Made by Him of
Several Nations Situated in the West. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 62

(Nos. 1-4).
South, S.
1964

Analysis of the Buttons from Brunswick Town and Fort Fisher. The Florida
Anthropologist 17:113-133.

Stephenson, R. L.
1970
Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir Area, Central Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 41:37-277.
Story, D. A., B. Barber, E. Barber, E. Cobb, H. Cobb, R. Coleman, K. Gilmore, R. K. Harris,
and N. Hoffrichter
Pottery Vessels. In: The Gilbert Site: A Nortefio Focus Site in Northeastern
1967
Texas, edited by E. B. Jelks. B ullet in ofthe Texas A rcheological Society 37:112-187.
Sudbury, B.
Historic Clay Tobacco Pipemakers in the United States of America. BAR
1979
International Series 60" 151-431. London.

162

Texas Archeological Society

Suhm, D. A. and E. B. Jelks
1962
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Joint Publication, Texas
Archeological Society Special Publication No. 1 and Texas Memorial Museum
Bulletin No. 4. Austin.
Texas Almanac
1861
A.H. Belo Corporation, Dallas.
Tringham, R., G. Cooper, G. Odell, R. Voytek, and A. Whitman
1974
Experiments in the Formation of Edge Damage: A New Approach to Lithic
Analysis. Journal of FieM Archaeology 1" 171-195.
Tunnell, C. D. and J. R. Ambler
1967
Archeological Excavations at Presidio San Agustin De Ahumada. State Building Commission Archeological Program, Report No. 6. Austin.
Turner, E. S. and T. R. Hester
1985
A Field Guide to the Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press,
Austin.
Vial, P.
1787

Diary of Trip made from San Antonio de Bexar to Santa Fe. Bexar Archives,
Barker Texas History Center, The University of Texas at Austin.

Watt, F.H.
1969
TheWacoIndianVillageandItsPeople.CentralTexasArcheologist9:195-246.
Wilbarger, J. W.
1889
Indian Depredations in Texas. Hutchings Printing House, Austin.
Winship, G. P.
1896
The Coronado Expedition, 1540-1542.In:TheFourteenthAnnualReportofthe
Bureau ofAmerican Ethnology, Smithsonian Institution, 1892-1893, Part I, pp.
329-613. Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D. C.
Woodall, J. N.
1967a Miscellaneous European Trade Goods. In: A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian
Archeology and Ethnohistory, assembled by R. E. Bell, E. B. JelLs, and W. W.
Newcomb, pp. 180-183. Final Report for Grant GS-964, National Science
Foundation. Dallas and Norman.
1967b

The Upper Tucker Site. In: A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and
Ethnohistory, assembled by R. E. Bell, E. B. Jelks, and W. W. Newcomb, pp.
3-14. Final Report for Grant GS-964, National Science Foundation. Dallas and
Norman,

Yates, B. C.
1993

Faunas from House 5 at the Vinson Site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 54:187-225.

163

Firearms and Related Artifacts from the Vinson Site
Jay C. Blaine

ABSTRACT
This paper describes the European firearms and related artifacts (primarily
gunflints) from the Vinson Site in Limestone County, Texas. Analysis of this
material indicates that the firearms at the site date between ca. 1760 and 1790.

INTRODUCTION
A small sample of European firearms and related armament artifacts have
been recovered at the Vinson Site over the years (see Smith, this volume). These
specimens are described in this paper, with the primary focus of the analysis
being the determination of the origin, kind, and dating of the gun parts found at
the site.
Virtually all the analyses were done by the author in 1968. At that time
pertinent reference materials were scarce, and consequently some promising
artifact categories were treated in considerable detail. Although later available
sources on firearms and related artifacts have been added to this paper, no
significant changes in the original findings were required.
An excellent explantion of the problems involved in identifying the origin
and dating of gun parts found in North American archeological sites may be
found in Indian Trade Guns (Hamilton 1960). Peterson (1956) also outlines
some of the difficulties in dealing with these materials. Harris et al. (1965:316320) and Blaine and Harris (1967:33) outline the general scope of the problem
concerning analysis of such material from Texas and Oklahoma sites.
The latter authors conclude that a primary research need continues to be the
publication of detailed descriptions and illuslrations of such material from archeological sites, in conjunction with interpretive analyses. Hopefully, with the
compilation and publication of such gun parts data, generally reliable and useful
interpretations can be obtained.
Before beginning the discussion of the firearms material from the Vinson
site, it is important to point out that because of frequently severe oxidation and
no major cleaning for most of the iron or steel parts, only those dimensions that
(in the author’s judgement) could be determined within 0.79 mm (1/32") of the
original have been listed. Thickness measurements on brass specimens were
taken along the center line of the long axis when possible; most of the brass is
cast brass that is irregular in thickness.

Bulletin of the Texas Areheological Society 64 (1993)

164

Texas Archeological Society

Unless otherwise noted, the general size of the gun parts appears more
suitable for comparatively light fusils (smooth bore) or pistols than from
regulation-sized muskets. All gun parts are assumed to be from flintlocks since
no uniquely percussion gun traits are noted in the assemblage.
ANALYSIS OF FIREARMS MATERIAL
FROM THE VINSON SITE
The reader is referred to Blaine and Harris (1967:Figure 26 and 27) for
illustrations of the type of weapon parts described from the Vinson site. The
terminology of flintlock muskets also is based on Blaine and Harris (1967).
Cock

No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: surface
The cock is made of iron. The comb is plain and rectangular with the long
axis fore and aft, and it is narrow and ungrooved with a step in the forward
surface ~igure ld). The comb end is plain, while the cock base is flat-faced with
beveled edges. The form of the cock is a goose neck with a sharp general
curvature. The cock jaw outline appears oval, but oxidation has severely damaged the edges. The jaw screw hole appears stripped of its threads.
Measurements: Total length, 71.5 mm; dimension from center of tumbler
hole to jaw top is 38 mm.
Remarks: From the basis of its size, proportions, and general curvature, this
cock would fit comfortably amid those from the Gilbert Site; that is, cocks believed to be representative of guns utilized in the mid-eighteenth century French
trade (Blaine and Harris 1967:43-47 and Figure 30-31). However, it would be
unique among that group in one attribute: the comb, although narrow, is rectangular in cross-section with a long axis parallel to the long axis of the jaw. Comparison with the author’s reference collection from several areas at the Spanish
Fort sites that have significant amounts of eighteenth century French trade
materials show the same type of gun cock. It would appear that this gun cock
was a very minor type used in the French trade, probably within the second half
of the eighteenth century, although a non-trade gun from an English source is
also possible. In any case, it is from a civilian, non-militaryfusil.
Frizzen
No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: surface
The term frizzen refers to the combined "steel" and flashpan cover of the
firearm. The top of the steel section is rounded, the front is beveled with one
facet at the top, and there are two more facets parallel to the long axis that extend
down to the flashpan cover section (see Figure lg). The frizzen is slightly curved
and smooth-faced on the striking surface or the "steel."

Blaine m Vinson Site Firearms

165

F

Figure 1. Vinson Site Firearms: a-b, sideplates; c, butt plate; d, cock; e-f, barrels; g, frizzen.

Measurements: Length of steel, 39.9 mm; width of steel, 22.6 mm; width of
pan cover, 22.9 mm; width of pivot body, 7.9 mm.
Remarks: The size and general form of this frizzen is comparable with
seven of the ffizzens from the Gilbert Site (Blaine and Harris 1967:38, 51). The
outer pan cover edge is broken, and whether it was round or straight-edged
cannot be determined. This frizzen is smaller than those common to English
Northwest guns of the nineteenth century.
It is doubtful that this type and size of frizzen indicates the use at the Vinson
site of Northwest trade guns dating after the last quarter of the eighteenth
century. However, it does agree in size and form with those from ca. 1750 era
guns used in the French trade. Unfortunately, typical examples from English
trade guns of the same period are not well defined, meaning we cannot rule out
the possibility that this frizzen might be from such a weapon.

166

Texas Archeological Society
Flashpan

No. of Specimens: 2
Provenience: surface (1), House 4 (1)
Both flashpans are made of iron, and are poorly preserved. Flashpan No. 1
may have been removable, although a possible tang on the pan could be a
fragment of the lock-plate edge. The shape or size of the piece cannot be
accurately estimated, but one attribute stands out: a prominent flash or drip
shield.
Measurements: None feasible.
Flashpan No. 2 is removable and the tang has been twisted and bent. The
lower pan surface appears to be of the faceted or shallow "V" form, while the pan
is bridled (i.e., has a strap that extends to support the frizzen screw).
Measurements: Width across flashpan, approximately 24.6 mm.
Remarks: While not measurable with accuracy, the flash or drip shield on
Flashpan No. 1 is significantly taller than those on typical flashpans for ca. 1750
guns commonly used in the French trade (Harris et al. 1965:321-323; Blaine and
Harris 1967:40-41). The relatively high shield was a consistent attribute for the
Northwest or English trade gun by ca. 1775 (Hanson 1955:65-67). Flashpan No.
1, then, appears most likely to be from an eighteenth century English trade
affiliatedfusil or military firearm.
Flashpan No. 2, being removeable and faceted, is typical of mid-eighteenth
century French trade guns. However, the pan is bridled, a characteristic the
author has not found among the typical ca. 1750 French trade gun flashpans.
Hanson (1955:36) notes that the reinforcing bridle does not appear on Northwest
guns until ca. 1820. This attribute indicates a better quality (possibly military)
eighteenth century gunlock, one not common on ordinary quality locks until the
mid-nineteenth century. In any case, a post-1750 date seems indicated for this
flashpan; a ca. 1775-1820 Kentucky type rifle is a very remote possibility for the
specimen.
Frizzen Spring
No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: House 5
This frizzen spring has broken into two parts, and the break occurred in the
apex of the spring bend; break surfaces are uniformly oxidized and both spring
fragments match in size and edge shape (Figure 21, m). The spring screw of the
piece engaged from within (hidden) and the bulbous finial is complete. The
upper leaf of the frizzen spring is not notched for a bridle rink.
Measurements: Lower leaf, center of screw hole to apex of outside bend,
34.6 mm; upper leaf, end spring to apex of outside bend, 46 mm; maximum
width (spring stud not included), 11.5 mm.
Remarks: The frizzen spring is sized in the upper range for tradefusils but
below military musket in dimensions. Based on its condition, it was probably
still in use when it was broken.

Blaine ~ Vinson Site Firearms

167

¢

D

E

G

H

K

M

Figure 2. Vinson Site Firearms: a-e, trigger guard fragments; f-g, ramrod guide; h, barrel lug;
i-j, side screw; k, sear spring; l-m, frizzen springs.

Sear Spring
No. of Specimens: 2
Provenience: House 2 (1), House 5 (1)
Spring No. 1, from House 2, is complete.
Measurements: Total length, 33.3 mm; width, 9.65 mm.
Remarks: The size of Spring No. 1 definitely suggests that it is from a
military musket.
Spring No. 2, from House 5 (Figure 2k), has the spring loop or tab partially
broken away.
Measurements: Estimated total length, 30 mm; width, 8.5 mm.
Remarks: Spring No. 2 probably is within the upper size range for light

fusits.

168

Texas ArcheologicaI Society
Side Screw

No. of Specimens: 2
Provenience: surface (1), House 1 (1)
Side screws are used to hold the lock plate onto the gun (Figure 2i-j). One to
three such screws pass through the side plate (if used) and the wood stock,
screwing into the inside of the lock plate.
Measurements: Side screw No. 1, length, 44.5 mm; head diameter, 11.9
mm. Side screw No. 2, length, 44.5 mm; head diameter, 11.43 mm.
Remarks: Both side screws could be from the samefusil based on their size.
Trigger Guard
No. of Specimens: 7
Provenience: surface (2), House 2 (1), House 3 (1), Feature 25 (1), House 5 (2)
Guard fragment No. 1 (brass) is a cast finial and a portion of the tang (see
Figure 2a and Figure 3a). It is convex on the external surface, slightly concave on
the internal surface, and thickest in the center. There is a hole through the tang,
and the tang is broken across one end of the piece.
Measurements: Maximum width, 12.7 mm; thickness, 1.65 to 2.0 mm.
Remarks: This is probably the rear tang and finial for a trigger guard and it
was held to the stock by a screw. The shape of the finial, and the cross section of
the tang, do not match any trigger guard examined by the author from eighteenth
century sites such as Womack, Angola (Harris et al. 1965:324-327) and Gilbert
(Blaine and Harris 1967:71-81) where French trade materials were predominant.
The finial shape also does not match those from the ca. 1740 probable English
guns at Fort Frederica (Shiner n.d.) nor described English trade guns dating after
approximately 1770 (Hanson 1955:41).
Guard fragment No. 2 is a cast brass tang section that has been broken
across both ends. One end break was through a countersunk screw hole into the
convex exterior surface of the piece. The cross section of guard fragment No. 2 is
piano-convex, but viewed laterally the tang section is now bent in a "U" shape
with the convex surface to the outside of the specimen. The screw hole is
unusually small in diameter. In plan view the trigger guard is widest at the end
with the screw hole, measuring 1.52 mm wider here than on the other end.
Measurements: Maximum width, 12.7 mm; thickness, 1.65 mm to 2.3 mm.
Remarks: This possible trigger guard tang section also does not match those
from the Womack or Gilbert sites, where ca. 1720 to 1750 French trade guns
were found.
The edge of the break through the countersunk hole has been lightly
smoothed, and the "U" bend is opposite to that normally produced by the
wrenching of such parts from the gun stock. Also, the convex surface has been
left to the outside. All these factors suggest an attempt was made to alter a trigger
guard to a ring (finger?) form. The size of the screw hole probably is indicative
of a screw and guard too small to be practical on a military musket.

Blaine m Vinson Site Firearms

169

\

A

C

i

Figure 3. Vinson Site Firearms: a-b, trigger guard fragments; c, butt plate; d-h, side plates.

Guard fragment No. 3 is a cast brass bow section that has been broken at
each end (see Figure 2c and Figure 3b). The plain bow is piano-convex in crosssection (the piano-surface has a strong mold line), but is slightly asymmetrical
and undecorated.
Measurements: Maximum width, 23.1 mm; thickness of 2.79 mm at the
point of maximum width.
Remarks: This bow section may be from the trigger guard of a light English smoothbore, or trade gun, prior to the period of its final type standardization. There is some resemblance to the bow from a ca. 1775 trade gun illustrated
by Hanson (1955:plate XXIA) except that the Vinson bow is not "cupped," nor
perhaps quite so deep, and it is of brass, not iron. The Vinson bow more closely
resembles those from sporting guns.
The trade gun illustrated by Hanson (1955) also does not have the final
deep bow typical of the Northwest gun in the nineteenth century. Since S. James
Gooding (1960:85) mentions the possible use of the large guard as early as 1740
in Northwest guns, it may have taken fifty or sixty years for this type of trigger

170

Texas Archeological Society

guard to be established as a regular feature. In contrast, the usual bow sections
from weapons believed to be ca. 1720 and 1750 French trade guns bear no resemblance to this Vinson bow (Harris et al. 1965:324-327; Blaine and Harris
1967:71-81). The lack of symmetry and decoration do suggest the piece is of
ordinary quality.
Guard fragment No. 4 is brass, cast, and broken across one end (see Figure
2b). The specimen is from the piano-convex shaped tang, and a single facet
bevels the convex surface across the finished end. The complete end is 0.8 mm
wider than the broken end of the guard fragment.
Measurements: Maximum width, 11.9 mm; thickness 3.30 mm.
Remarks: This is probably a trigger guard tang end. Similar tang ends are
noted on many American "Kentucky" or "Pennsylvania" and "Plains" rifles of
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
Guard fragment No. 5 is of iron, and it has been broken in bow and tang
as well as having been flattened.
Remarks: This specimen is too fragmentary and battered for measurements,
but its appearance is similar to iron and brass trigger guards on French trade
guns in the eighteenth century (Blaine and Harris 1967:71-81). The earliest identified Northwest gun types, dating ca. 1775, have iron guards (Hanson 1955:41).
This guard is not a Northwest type from this period, but could represent an earlier
period English trade or sporting gun.
Guard fragment No. 6, from House 5, is cast in brass (see Figure 2d). It is
part of the bow, broken across both ends, and it is piano-convex in cross-section. The guard has deep, apparently filed, lines that border each edge of the
exterior surface.
Measurements: Maximum length, 19.7 mm; thickness, 2.8 mm; maximum
width (tapered in plan), 15.5 mm.
Guard fragment No. 7, also from House 5, is cast in brass (see Figure 2e).
This complex fragment probably is from the rear, or proximal, part of a guard
bow; it is broken twice across one end of the bow and once across the rear tang
juncture. It is piano- to bi-convex in cross-section.
Measurements: Maximum length, 17 mm; maximum width (tapered in
plan), 14.4 mm.
Remarks: Both House 5 guard fragments are from different trigger guards.
Neither are common mid-eighteenth century French trade examples. Fragment
No. 7 is a guard of split-tail variety. Such guards occur by the late eighteenth
century on English style civilian-oriented fowlers and Pennsylvania (Kentucky)
dries, but usually the guards are much narrower on the latter rifles. The author
is inclined to assign Fragment No. 7 to an English style civilian smooth-bore. A
more complete example of this style of guard was found at the Stansbury site on
the Brazos River (Stephenson 1970:Plate 8K).

Blaine m Vinson Site Firearms

171

Trigger Plate
No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: House 2
This iron trigger plate is complete. The trigger slot is centered laterally,
while the upper plate (toward the muzzle) end has a threaded hole. This end is the
thickest when viewed laterally, and the plate slightly tapers towards its lower
end.
Measurements: Thickness, upper end, 4.83 mm; thickness, lower end, 4.57
mm; distance from the upper end to the center of the threaded hole, 7.11 mm;
total length, 61 mm; maximum width, 16 mm; length of trigger slot, 19.8 mm;
diameter of threaded hole, 4.32 mm.
Remarks: This style of trigger plate was used with a breech tang screw that
passed downward through the tang and engaged the plate. The gun parts from the
Gilbert Site had the same type of trigger plate attachment (Blaine and Harris
1967:61).
Hanson (1955:16-18) notes that all the ca. 1770-1830 Northwest guns he
examined had tang screws coming up from below the tang. Shiner’s (n.d.) report
on 10 trigger plates from the ca. 1740 guns from Fort Frederica included only
one trigger plate from afusil-sized gun. This suggests that trigger plates were not
generally used by the English at that time and with that class of weapon. Unfortunately, the description of the Fort Frederica breech plugs does not indicate
whether the tang screw holes were threaded or were externally countersunk; the
direction these screws were attached to the plate was not determined. Nevertheless, in the light of present knowledge, this trigger plate, if from a trade gun, is
more likely to be from a ca. 1750 French trade gun than from an English
Northwest gun dating after 1830.
Butt Plate

No. of Specimens: 2
Provenience: House 1 (1), House 4 (1)
Butt plate No. 1 (House 1) is a tang and finial section of cast brass that was
broken in the neck of the tang. It is slightly concave underneath the piece and
convex on the external surface. The finial is pierced with a square hole. The
specimen is engraved with an abstract foliate pattern (see Figure 3c).
Measurements: Length, 58 mm; maximum width, 20.3 mm; thickness, 1.52
mm to 2.03 mm.
Remarks: Hamilton (1960:Figure 52, Item 4) illustrates a similar tang from
a Little Osage site dated between 1730-1775. Similar tangs come from a site at
Spanish Fort, Montague County, Texas (J. C. Blaine collection), and the Longest
Site, Jefferson County, Oklahoma (Blaine 1967:Figure 55).

172

Texas Archeological Society

Shiner (n.d.) illustrates four similar tang and finial sections from Fort
Frederica, and the deposition of the Fort Frederica specimens likely dates between 1736 and 1743, but certainly no later than 1760 (Manucy 1959). If the
author understands Shiner correctly, the butt plates with these tangs were relatively flat and held to the stock with seven small nails. The ca. 1755 Northwest
gun discussed by Hanson (1955) also had a nailed butt plate; however, the tang
and finial are undecorated and simpler in overall outline (Hanson 1955:16,74-75).
This butt plate finial and tang section probably is from an English utility
light musket, orfusil, dating between ca. 1700-1770. The Fort Frederica data
showed that similar weapons certainly were in Colonial service by about 1740.
Apparently by then they were also suitable trade goods for Indian use. By the
middle eighteenth century some of this type of gun’s characteristics were shared
by the English Northwest guns, but it has not been determined whether this was
the type of weapon originally intended for the Indian trade (see Hamilton
1980:Figure 51 for additional examples of this type of gun).
Buttplate No. 2, from House 4, is a toe section of cast brass (see Figure lc).
The plate is broken twice, with one break passing through a countersunk screw
hole. The plate has been battered, but appears to have been thickest in the area
around the screw hole. The plate edges are beveled or rounded.
Measurements: Maximum thickness, 2.79 mm; maxumum diameter of screw
hole, 8.64 mm.
Remarks: Butt plate sections similar to No. 2 from Vinson are found on
such sites as Womack (Harris et al. 1965:337-341) and Gilbert (Blaine and Harris
1967:61-67) where ca. 1720 and 1750 French trade materials have been found.
Hanson (1955:18) indicates that English and Belgian manufacturers of the
Northwest trade gun who supplied the American nineteenth century trade furnished two screw butt plates. One of these screws would be in the toe section;
this butt plate section would be similar to the specimen from the Vinson site.
However, Hanson (1955:16, 40, 75-76) further states that all Northwest guns
haveflat butt plates of sheet brass and this appears to be the case from 1775 on.
This Vinson specimen is not flat nor of sheet brass, and it has beveled to rounded
edges. Furthermore, from ca. 1775 to ca. 1826, the butt plate of the standard
Northwest gun was fastened with six or seven small, square, iron spikes (Hanson
1955:16, 40). Additionally, at Fort Frederica, the plates from English light
muskets orfusils were held on the stock by seven square spikes (Shiner n.d.).
Hamilton (1960:Figure 50) illustrates a butt plate section similar to the No.
2 Vinson specimen in company with some butt plates of the nailed-on Northwest
gun type from a site dated 1790-1815. However, he does note that the specimen
used a screw attachment but further contrasts with the Northwest type guns by
virtue of the more rounded butt plate edges.
J. N. George’s (1947:104) description of the good to fine grade eighteenth
century English sporting gun indicates that these weapons also utilized a screw in
the toe area of the butt plate. He illustrates the details of finials, side plates, and
escutcheons believed to be typical or standard for that class of weapon. To date,

Blaine ~ Vinson Site Firearms

173

the author has not matched any gun parts from Texas sites with those illustrated
by George (1947). It seems likely that the finer quality English guns were not a
significant item in the Indian trade in Texas.
In light of the above information, this toe section of butt plate from the
Vinson site is probably from an eighteenth century French trade gun.
Side Plate
No. of specimens: 7
Provenience: House 1 (1), House 2 (2), House 3 (2), House 5 (2)
Sideplate No. 1 (House 1) has been fashioned into a metal arrowpoint from
a probable cast brass side plate (see Figure 3d). The specimen has been lightly
pounded and re-shaped on all edges. An engraved design on the piece, consisting
of a fern-like (flax?) leaf or frond, indicates its probable side plate origin.
Measurements: Length, 39.4 mm; width, 14 mm; thickness, 1.52 mm.
Remarks: Blaine (1967:172 and Figure 55q) describes a side plate from the
Lower Tucker Site, Montague County, Texas, that incorporates two decorative
elements virtually identical to that on No. 1 from Vinson. On the Lower Tucker
specimen each frond or leaf extends from a central design with scalloped borders; the frond on the Vinson specimen also seems based upon a section of
scalloped design. A side plate from the Roseborough Lake Site, Bowie County,
Texas (R. K. Harris collection), has a similar decorative configuration although
the extended floral elements are slightly different.
I presently believe that such side plates probably are from fusils (light
muskets or fowlers) originally introduced in the French Indian trade during the
second half of the eighteenth century. This particular decorative design has not
been found at the ca. 1750 Gilbert Site (Blaine and Harris 1967:68-71).
Side plates No. 2 and No. 3 are from House 2, while Side plate No. 4 is from
House 3. They are all of cast and flat brass. The flat outer surfaces of the
sideplates have fine detailed line engravings. The plate outlines probably were
produced in the casting of the pieces, and then the edges were finish-filed to an
undercut form (i.e., beveled toward the interior surfaces).
Side plate No. 2 (see Figure 3e) is broken across both ends, and Side plate
No. 3 (see Figure 30 has been broken distally at the upper front of the coil. This
piece is complete with a screw hole in the proximal end, and notched along the
coil’s outer edge.
Side plate No. 4 (see Figure 3g) is broken at both ends and through the top
screw tab. The top screw tab also bears head scoring from a side screw.
Measurements: No. 2, Thickness, 1.35 mm to 1.65 mm. No. 3, Thickness,
1.35 mm to 1.60 mm. No. 4, Thickness, 1.27 mm to 1.57 mm.
Remarks: Side plate fragments No. 2 through 4 are from "Dragon" or
"Serpent" side plates; No. 2 is a distal fragment, No. 3 a proximal part, and No. 4
is the medial part of a side plate. Side plates No. 2 and No. 4 closely match in
engraving technique and pattern and may be from the same side plate. Two or

174

Texas Archeological Society

possibly three stylistically similar individual fusils appear to be represented by
the serpent side plates.
The dragon or serpent was used as a decorative motif for side screw plates
from the early seventeenth century to the late nineteenth century. Russell
(1957:127-130) has traced some of the different versions in use through this
period. However, shortly after 1700 the use of serpent side plates was relatively
confined to trade guns and light secondary military or sporting fusils such as
those at Fort Frederica (Shiner n.d.), and eventually the serpent side plates were
used only on trade guns. Their use on trade guns lasted until after the Civil War
in America (Hanson 1955:71). Where the English trade gun is concerned, one
particular form of the serpent plate became standard by the late eighteenth
century (Hanson 1955:15-16, 38-39).
Although the Vinson Site specimens are broken, each fragment can be
matched in general outline with a corresponding portion of a complete standard
serpent plate. The post-1780 standard version is of brass and apparently cast in
an iron mold (Hanson 1955:3, 15). However, the casting produces details of the
serpent both in outline and in low relief. I believe that the fiat specimens like
those from the Vinson Site also were cast in molds that formed them in outline
but left the surface flat. The details of the serpent were then engraved into this
surface. These differences in treatment of surface detail appear to have chronological significance. For convenience, the flat engraved serpent side plates from
the Vinson Site are labelled as engraved-detail and the "standard" version characterized as cast-detail.
Hanson (1955:7) describes the earliest example of a serpent side plate
closely comparable in form to the "standard" version. This side plate, like those
from Vinson, is of flat brass with engraved detail. It is mounted on a early
eighteenth century British light service musket by Walker. W. Keith Neal (cited
in Hanson 1955:39) also states that the design of the serpent side plate later found
on the English trade guns was based upon the side plate of the Queen Anne light
musket. Hanson’s example appears to be just such a weapon; it represents a
direct precursor of the eventually characteristic nineteenth century English trade
gun side plate. The light service muskets or fusils sent to America were obviously more suitable for eventual Indian use than the regulation full-size musket.
Gooding (1960) illustrates a serpent side plate from a pistol by T. Green and
relates that Green made up pattern guns for the Hudson Bay Company in 1715.
As Gooding (1960:87 and Figure 23d) points out, there is a striking similarity
between Green’s side plate and those that later became standard for the Northwest trade gun. Shiner (n.d.) describes engraved-detail flat serpent plates excavated at British Fort Frederica on St. Simons Island, Georgia. These side plates
were found in a 1738-1743 smithy that was sealed over by the 1760s (Manucy
1959:49-51). Hamilton (1960:135-136) illustrates and describes engraved-detail
flat serpent plates from Osage sites in Missouri and assigns them a tentative date
of 1750. Blaine and Harris (1967:70-71 and Figure 38a) note a similar serpent
plate from the ca. 1750 Gilbert Site in Texas and another has been described by

Blaine m Vinson Site Firearms

175

Blaine (1967:172 and Figure 55g) from the Longest site in Oklahoma. Side plate
fragments of this type also have been found at the 1750 Aranama Mission in
Goliad County, Texas. Thus, the spatial distribution of engraved-detail serpent
plates is wide, and temporally they are usually found in sites initially occupied by
at least the third quarter of the eighteenth century.
Therefore, the use of such side plates dates from about 1700 and, as the
following data appear to suggest, they terminate rather abruptly with the appearance of the cast-detail versions. Where Shiner (n.d.) encountered in a ca. 1740
feature some seven engraved-detail flat serpent or similar zoomorphic side plates
at Fort Frederica he found no cast-detail plates. In sharp contrast, however, at
Fort Michilimackinac, Maxwell and Binford (1961:103 and Figure 16a-c), did
not recover from a ca. 1760-1780 English context flat engraved-detail serpent
plates but rather found three fragments of cast-detail plates.
The English occupation of this post dates from 1761 to 1781 (Maxwell and
Binford 1961:13-16). These cast-detail side plates were found in features dated
1734, 1770, and 1772 (Maxwell and Binford 1961:103). The 1734 specimen
could either represent the earliest known cast-detail example of this particular
side plate type, or more likely, be either intrusive or from a similar specimen
from a higher grade, not trade, weapon. There is no present evidence available to
support the use of cast-detail side plates on early eighteenth century trade guns.
Hanson (1955:2, 15-16) describes the earliest known example of the standard cast-detail serpent plate on a complete and datable weapon. This is a trade
gun by a Birmingham maker named Grice, whose work dates from 1770 to 1780.
The only major differences between this side plate and the typical nineteenth
century versions (and apparently the 1770-1772 Michilimackinac specimens)
seems to be in the normally more slender outline and thinness of the earlier side
plates (Hanson 1955:16-18).
In summary, the flat engraved-detail serpent side plate apparently did not
continue to be used on English trade guns after the appearance of the cast-detail
plate. These latter side plates were in use by ca. 1770. Based upon available
information, Blaine (1967:172) proposed that flat engraved-detail serpent side
plates were no longer produced by ca. 1775.
The flat engraved-detail side plates from the Vinson Site probably were
used on the same type of weapon described for the butt plate from House 1; that
is, an English utility light musket orfusil. These weapons date from about 1700
to 1780.
Most of the eighteenth century archival sources note that the guns among
the Indians of Texas are thought to have been from French sources or traders. For
instance, a good supply of French guns and ammunition was noted among the
Tawakoni as late as 1772 (Bolton 1914, Volume I:101). Bolton (1914, Volume
1:74, 77) also notes that by 1772 English firearms had already appeared among
the Taovayas on the upper Red River.
The earliest appearance of English guns among Native Americans in significant numbers in Texas was ca. 1770. In 1772, Captain Luis Cazorla "notes

176

Texas Archeological Society

with surprise" numerous guns with an English trademark "stamped upon the
barrel." Captain Cazorla found these English guns and other European trade
good materials among the Karankawas, Cocos, Bidais, and Xaranames along the
Brazos River a short distance below present Richmond (Castafieda 1939:286).
Cazorla’s investigation of the source of this trade next took him to a village on
the Trinity River above Orcoquisac (near present Liberty). The tribes at this
rancheria--Orcoquisacs, Cocos, Bidais, and Attacapas--were also armed with
English guns. Here Cazorla learned that the English guns had been obtained from
the French trader Dutrive and his brother, who had a trading post one and onehalf days away in Louisiana. These French traders had obtained the guns from
English sources (Castafieda 1939:287).
Possible Side plate No. 5 is the second specimen from House 3 (see Figure
3h). It is made of brass, possibly sheet brass. Decorative detail on the piece was
produced by engraving the side plate’s flat surface. The narrow end of the side
plate had been broken, while the wide end was smoothed across the edge.
Measurements: Thickness, 1.35 mm to 1.47 mm.
Remarks: Side plate No. 5 may be an unknown side plate type based on its
asymmetrical outline, thickness, and decoration.
Side plates No. 6 and No. 7 are distal ends of flat engraved detail serpent
side plates from House 5. Both show the same production characteristics as side
plates Nos. 2-4 described above. Sideplate No. 6 (see Figure lb) has a side screw
hole in the front tab with a screw head scoring mark, while Side plate No. 7 (see
Figure la) has no screw hole and the engraved serpent tongue extends into the
center of the area normally pierced by a front screw hole. Both side plates were
broken across the neck immediately behind the head of the pieces. The plates
were hammered on their interior surfaces to stretch and/or flatten the brass for
final production.
Measurements: No. 6, thickness, 1 mm to 1.4 mm; No. 7, thickness 1 mm to
1.5 mm; No. 6, scoring mark diameter, 13.1 mm.
Remarks: These sections, Side plates Nos. 2-4, and butt plate No. 1 are from
the same type of firearm. The enigmatic lack of a screw hole on Side plate No. 7
is an attribute the author has not previously noted on serpent plates. Hamilton
(1980:Figure 37) illustrates an evolutionary series of serpent side plates, with one
in the series (Hamilton 1980:Figure 37e) very similar to Side plate No. 6 from
the Vinson site.
Ramrod Guide
No. of Specimens: 2
Provenience: surface (1), House 5 (1)
The two specimens are from the same ramrod guide. They are of sheet
brass, and tubular in shape (see Figure 2f, g). This was an intermediate or upper
guide. The flanges have been pierced for two transverse pins to hold it in the
stock. The guide is split lengthwise, while portions of a decorative annular ring

Blaine ~ Vinson Site Firearms

177

parallel each end of the piece. The two annular rings were formed by repousse
while the blank was open.
Measurements: Length, 38.9 mm; thickness at flange, 0.7 mm; thickness at
break, 0.4 mm.
Remarks: The ramrod guides do not closely resemble any the author has
examined from Spanish Fort, Gilbert, or other Texas and Louisiana Historic
Indian sites. It seems unlikely, then, that they are from ordinary or "regular"
French or English tradefusils since both commonly utilized a single pin. Some
French military models did use two pins on ramrod guides before 1750, but the
general appearance of those military rampipes is not similar to this Vinson
specimen (Boudriot 1963:Modeles 1717-1734). Hamilton (1980:Figure 33e, f)
does illustrate one set of French rampipes with two pinning holes, but these are
substantially heavier and more contoured or bellied in profile than the rampipes
from House 5.
Screw
No. of Specimens: 2
Provenience: House 2 (1), House 5 (1)
Both screws are of iron. One is a wood screw and the other is probably a
gun screw (bolt).
The head of the House 2 screw is slightly convex on the exterior surface and
it was beveled underneath it to fit a countersunk hole.
Measurement: Length, 35.8 mm; approximate screw head diameter, 11.4
mm.
Remark: This wood screw probably was used to fasten a butt plate to a gun
stock. This is based on the curvature and size of the head, plus the condition of
the screw itself.
The probable gun screw (bolt) was found in House 5. It is broken in the
shaft and the assumed threaded end is missing. The head is small and underneath
it is flat. It was likely used as a breech tang screw that engaged the tang from
below; this is typical for the earlier English gun.
Measurements: Head diameter, 9.3 mm.
Additional wood screws were found in Feature 31 and House 5, but they
appear to be modem intrusives. These are uniform in size, flat on the head face,
and have uniformly centered and formed screwdriver slots.
Gun Barrel
No. of Specimens: 10
Provenience: surface (2), House 2 (1), House 3 (1), Feature 25 (2), House 4 (1),
Feature 31 (1), and House 5 (2)
The usual gun barrel shape in the French trade is heavier and "octagonal" in
the short breech (proximal end), then tapering smoothly into the lighter and
round forward (distal) part. The breech style, often described as "octagonal,"
usually has only five truly flat upper surfaces (see Figure lf).

178

Texas Archeological Society

Part No. 1 is a round barrel section of extremely oxidized iron that was split
lengthwise. One end is broken or roughly cut while the other, with straight and
smooth edges, may be the muzzle end.
Measurements: Total length, 57.15 mm; estimated bore, 14 mm to 16 mm
(between .56 and .60 cal.).
No. 2 is an iron barrel lug, also called a pin or wire loop, used with a transverse pin to help secure a barrel in the gun stock (see Figure 2h). These pieces
were made separately from the barrel, then secured to the lower barrel surface.
Measurements: Length, 12.3 mm; width, 9.5 mm; height, 6.8 ram.
Remarks: Barrel part No. 1 may be from a .58 cal. smooth bore barrel that is
common to eighteenth century French and English trade guns. The barrel lug or
pin loop is also common on these types of guns.
Part No. 3, from House 2, is a tapered "octagonal" breech section that has
been broken across both ends, so the normal area of maximum diameter is
missing.
Measurement: Maximum diameter remaining is approximately 25.4 mm;
estimated bore, 14.5 to 15.5 mm (.58 to .62 cal.).
Remarks: If the breech was originally over 25.4 mm in diameter, a mideighteenth century French trade gun would be indicated. Given the breakage, it
could also be either an eighteenth century English trade gun, or a nineteenth
century trade gun (Hamilton 1960:126).
Part No. 4, from House 3, is a possible round fragment of a gun barrel. It is
iron, of open ring form, with one rounded ring end and the other broken and
oxidized. The "ring" form is widest opposite the ends of the piece.
Part No. 5, from Feature 25, is an iron breech plug. The tang has been
broken off and flattened by hammering on (or with) the broken end of the breech
plug.
Measurements: Maximum width (as measured across the breech end), 28.6
mm.

Remarks: This breech plug may be from an eighteenth century trade gun, or
conversely from an eighteenth or nineteenth century military gun. The plug’s
screw portion is too badly oxidized for a bore estimate.
Part No. 6, also from Feature 25, appears to be a flattened gun barrel section
from the round part of the barrel.
Part No. 7, from House 4, is a part of "octagonal" breech section with the
breech plug broken off in the bore. The plug end is heavily battered while the
opposite end was broken and collapsed inward toward the bore of the piece.
Measurements: Maximum diameter, 27.9 mm.
Remarks: Barrel part No. 7 is from either an eighteenth century trade or
military gun or an nineteenth century military weapon.
Part No. 8, from Feature 31, is another iron breech plug. It has been broken
across the tang and the breech bore plug base.
Measurement: Maximum width (across the breech end), 28.6 ram.

Blaine u Vinson Site Firearms

179

Remarks: The tang screw direction cannot be determined on this fragmentary
barrel, nor can the bore be estimated. Its length across the plug body where it
contacts the back of the breech again indicates only an eighteenth century trade
gun or an eighteenth or nineteenth century military gun.
Parts No. 9 and No. 10 are from House 5. Part No. 9 is an "octagonal"
section of breech, broken at both ends, with the larger end pounded inward
around its entire circumference. The area of maximum diameter is missing on
the piece.
Measurement: Estimated maximum diameter across the flats, 25.4 mm;
bore estimate, 15 mm to 16 mm (approximately .59 to .62 cal.)
Part No. 10 is a flattened section of round barrel that was subsequently
"mushroomed" by impacts at one end.
Measurement: Length, 52.5 mm; maximum width, 35.5 mm.
Remarks: Native Americans commonly recycled the thinner round barrel
sections by pounding them flat and breaking them into segments by bending.
When these flat segments did not split laterally they sometimes were sharpened
at one end and hammered from the other, then used as chisels. When they did
split, the result was two rectangular pieces of flat iron of relatively uniform
thickness; these provided excellent stock for metal scrapers and other tools.
Lead Shot and Ball and Folded Lead
No. of Specimens: 12
Provenience: surface (4 shot), House 2 (1 ball), House 3 (1 shot, 1 folded lead),
Feature 25 (1 shot), Feature 26 (1 folded lead), and House 5 (3 shot)
Note: All shot "sizes" are based on a table for dropped shot by E. Baker
(George 1947:211).
The first four shot are from the surface. No. 1 weighs 12.2 grains (BB shot);
No. 2, 3.8 grains (#2 shot); No. 3, 2.3 grains (#5 shot); and No. 4, 2.1 grains (#5
shot).
Remarks: Only No. 1, unfired, appears old, but this assessment is based
primarily on the thick patina that obscures how it was formed. Shot Nos. 2-4
appear to be chilled, modern specimens; these three pieces of shot have been
fired.
No. 5 is a hemispherical-shaped lead "ball."
Measurements: Weight, 210.5 grains.
Remarks: This possible bullet from House 2 appears to have been fired. Its
weight indicates a ball of approximately .53 cal. if the ball is intact.
No. 6, from House 3, is a lead shot.
Measurements: Weight, 2.3 grains (Shot size is #5).
Remarks: Shot No. 6 was fired. It appears to be modern, chilled shot like
three of the shot specimens from the surface.
No. 7, from House 3, is a folded piece of lead.

180

Texas Archeological Society

Measurements: The folded piece of lead is a single sheet 2 mm in thickness.
It is approximately 16.5 mm x 18 mm in size.
Remarks: This folded lead piece was probably cut from a larger piece of
sheet lead since its thickness is relatively uniform. Folded lead pads were used
primarily by the military to help secure a gunflint in a gun cock vise. One native
gunflint from the Gilbert Site was held in a lead pad (Blaine and Harris 1967:84).
No. 8, from Feature 25, is a fired and much flattened shot.
Measurements: Weight, 72.0 grains.
Remarks: By weight this shot is small buck, if the shot is intact.
No. 9 (Feature 26) is about half of a plain lead disc that was broken through
a fold.
Measurements: Thickness, 2 mm; length, 33 mm; width, 13 mm.
Remarks: This piece may have been formed from sheet lead.
Nos. 10-12: The last three specimens are shot from House 5. No. 10 weighs
4.5 grains (#2 shot); No. 11 weighs 3.25 grains (#3 shot); and No. 12 weighs 1.25
grains (#8 shot).
Remarks: The shot sample was examined to isolate early forms of dropped
shot, such as "Rupert" shot (Baird 1973). While the shot needs additional cleaning, those that do not appear relatively modern are probably of the post-1769
variety of dropped shot (see Blaine [1973:153] for a general discussion on
problems and procedures in analysis of archeological shot; note, however, that
Baird’s data [1973:83-85] on the "Rupert" form of early dropped shot was not
available for that discussion).
Gunflints
The spaU gunflint is the major form exported to North America between ca.
1700 to 1750, but it was obsolete by 1770. The French blade gunflint then
became dominant by 1775 in Colonial military sites (Witthoft 1966:25, 28).
Apparently the vast majority of both gunflint forms were exported through
French commercial activities. The French blade gunflint then remained dominant
until ca. 1840 in the eastern United States, outnumbering by a 3:1 ratio the
"British" blade gunflint (Witthoft 1966:32). Witthoft (1966:36) also suggests the
earliest "British" blade gunflints date from the period of the American Revolution. Principal lithic sources for the exported spall type come from the low
countries of northern Europe, but from French and English sources for the blade
type (Witthoft 1966:25-40).
Vinson Site spall gunflints with reasonably intact ventral surfaces were all
produced as individual flakes from prepared cores. In color they are primarily
mottled grays with a tan or brown cast. However, three other specimens are dark
to very dark gray, and very similar in color to the "Black" English gunflints of
the nineteenth century (Figure 4).
Four of the blade gunflints (produced by segmenting prismatic blades into
individual gunflints) are of the typical waxy blond appearance characteristic of

Blaine m Vinson Site Firearms

181

Table 1
Gun Parts and Fragments
Surf.

House House House
1

GUNLOCK
Cock
Frizzen
Flashpan
Frizzen
Spring
Sear
Spring
Side
Screw
GUNSTOCK
FURNITURE
Trigger
Guard
Trigger
Plate
Butt
Plate
Side
Plate
Ramrod
Guide
Screw

2

3

Fea.

House

Fea.

House

25

4

31

5

1
1
1
1
1

2

1

2

1
1
1

2

2

1

1
1

BARREL
Breech
Plug
"Octagonal"

(Breech)
Round
Pin
Loop

1
1
1

1

1
1

182

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 4. Vinson Site Gunflints.

conventional French gunflints. One additional broken blade gunflint has a darker
brownish-gray color and was made by a different technology. It was square
heeled, not rounded like the blond chert specimens, and the remnant of a lateral
demi-cone is present; both attributes are characteristic of English blade segmenting techniques. Since this is almost certainly an English gunflint and, if not
intrusive, it is indicative of a post ca. 1776 occupation (see Witthoft 1966:36).
The 27 possible native gunflints (Table 2) are made of opaque cherts. As a
group, they generally are not as skillfully knapped as the native gunflints from
the Womack and Gilbert sites.
Because of breakage, extensive use-damage and/or reworking, only dimensions of two spall gunflints, one blade gunflint, and 10 native gunflints were

Blaine ~ Vinson Site Firearms

183

usefully measureable. As used here, length refers to the measurement between
the designated thinner striking edge and the opposite thicker edge (no European
double working edge gunflints were found at Vinson). Width is the measurement
across the striking (working) edge of the gunflint.
Native-made gunflints commonly have thin striking edges on all four sides,
as they are usually carefully bifaced, and the dimensions given here are simply
oriented to the most suitable striking edge. Possible native gunflints were identified on the basis of their shape and size. However, none of the "possible" native
gunflints have straight-edge battering that is consistent with repeated impact
against a frizzen nor are they carefully bifaced; rather, they had only one edge
suitable for gunflint use.
As noted above, two spall gunflints are reasonably intact. They are 30.6
mm and 21.3 mm in length; widths are 21.1 mm and 30.5 mm, respectively.
One intact blade gunflint is 23.9 mm long and 22.1 mm in width. Ten native
gunflints range from 16.3 to 30.2 mm in length (20.6 mm median length) and
were 14.7 to 27.9 mm in width (median width of 21.3 mm). The largest specimen in this group, measuring 30.2 mm long and 27.9 mm wide, is suitable for
a military musket.
Blaine (1973:152) cautions against using spall and blade gunflint ratios
derived from Colonial military sites in the Eastern U.S. to isolate eighteenth
century Historic Indian sites in Texas. He suggests that the Texas archeological
data may indicate that the spall gunflint was used later here. Hamilton and Fry
(1975:119-121) also make the case that all imported spall gunflints are not
"Dutch" in origin and these gunflints must also be examined for additional
technological attributes for determinations of manufacturer origins.
According to de Lotbiniere (1980:154-159) spall gunflint production in
Britain can be documented through the eighteenth century with some exported to
North America as early as 1700 "as a present for ye Indians." From the foregoing, it is probable that "Dutch," French, and English primary sources are represented among the Vinson Site spaU gunflints, with only a minor (possibly three
flints) English spall representation in the sample. The English blade gunflint
from House 1 remains a key find since this type of gunflint was not made before
ca. 1776 at the earliest.
SUMMARY

The Englishfusils discussed above were being produced before ca. 1740
and it is very unlikely they were still in production by ca. 1775. There is only a
minor indication at Vinson that the ca. 1720 through ca. 1750fusils commonly
utilized in the French trade were present in the Vinson gun parts sample.
The gun parts are from a minimum of five firearms. When such firearms
are recovered in a village context, such as at Vinson, it is common for them to
be found disassembled and certain parts obviously recycled. The absence of some
gun components is to be expected. However, at this site certain gunlock parts

184

Texas Archeological Society
Table 2
Gunflints, Vinson Site

SpaU
Gunflints

Blade
Gunflints

Native
Gunflints

Possible
Native Gunflints

Surface
House 1
House 2
House 3
Fea. 25
Fea. 26
House 4
Random*

6
1
3
1
1
1
1
1

1
2
1

4
4
1

8

1
2

2

TOTALS

15

10

12

1

10

* Believed to be from Houses 3 and 4

such as sears, tumblers, and the short lock screws are notably absent; this lack
of representation has not been previously documented in other Texas sites with
an adequate gun parts sample. The missing parts never seem to occur in an altered or recycled condition, and thus at Vinson these parts were inexplicably
not simply discarded with the other metal gun parts.
European gunflint sample ratios indicate that the spaU form is dominant on
Texas Indian sites that date as late as ca. 1775 when the combined type sample
numbers 20 or more specimens. A single English blade gunflint dates after ca.
1775, probably via a flintlock user in the general site area prior to ca. 1860.
When compared to a ca. 1750-era site such as Gilbert that was marked by
having numerous and varied French trade affiliated goods, the Vinson Site presents a strong contrast. In terms of what materials entered the archeological
record, the folk at Vinson did not often have or use up such tools as hatchets,
axes, hoes, or other common types of metal tools (see Smith, this volume). Their
access to French trade firearms, knives, and brass kettles appears very limited
in kind as well as quantity when compared to Gilbert.
For the above reasons, it is likely then that the Vinson Site occupation
occurred after the 1760s. Also, the inhabitants may have been unable to supply
the deer hides, bear oil, and other products that brought in abundant trade goods;
tribute or treaty goods also appear to have been negligible. Finally, the examined gun parts indicate that the occupation did not extend past ca. 1790.

Blaine ~ Vinson Site Firearms

185

REFERENCES CITED
Baird, D.
1973

His Highness Prince Rupert’s Way of Making Shot. Canadian Journal of Gun
Collecting 1 l(No. 3):83-85.

Blaine, J. C.
1967
Guns. In: A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory,
assembled by R. E. Bell, E. B. Jelks, and W. W. Newcomb, pp. 163-179. Final
Report for Grant GS-964. National Science Foundation, Washington, D. C.
1973

Gun Parts, Gunflints, Ball and Shot. In: Benard De La Harpe and the Nassonite
Post, by M. P. Miroir, R. K. Harris, J. C. Blaine, and J. McVay. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 44:138-158.

Blaine, J. C. and R. K. Harris
1967

Guns. In: The Gilbert Site: A Nortefio Focus Site in Northeastern Texas, edited
by E.B. Jelks. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 37:33-86.

Bolton, H. E. (editor)
1914
Athanase de Mdzi~res and the Louisiana-Texas Frontier, 1768-1780. 2 Vols.
The A. H. Clark Company, Cleveland.
Boudriot, L
1963
Armes a Feu Francaises, Modeles Reglementaires, 1717-1836. Second Series.
Lucien Petitot, Paris, France.
Castafieda, C. E.
1939
The Mission Era: The Passing of the Missions, 1762-1782. Volume IV of Our
Catholic Heritage in Texas, 1519-1936. Von Boeckmann-Jones Co., Austin.
George, J. N.
1947
English Guns and Rifles. The Staclcpole Company, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania.
Gooding, S. J.
1960
A Preliminary Study of the Trade Guns Sold by the Hudson’s B ay Company. In:
Indian Trade Guns, compiled and arranged by T. M. Hamilton. The Missouri
Archaeologist 22:81-95.
Hamilton, T. M.
1980
Colonial Frontier Guns. The Fur Trade Press, Chadron, Nebraska.
Hamilton, T. M. and B. W. Fry
1975
ASurveyofLouisbourgGunflints.CanadianHistoricSitesReportNo. 12:101128. Ottawa, Ontario.
Hamilton, T. M. (compiler and arranger)
1960
Indian Trade Guns. The Missouri Archaeologist 22 (entire volume).

186

Texas Archeological Society

Hanson, C. E., Jr.
1955
The Northwest Gun. Publications in Anthropology No. 2. Nebraska State
Historical Society, Lincoln, Nebraska.
Harris, R. K., I. M. Harris, J. C. Blaine, and L Blaine
A Preliminary Archeological and Documentary Study of the Womack Site,
1965
Lamar County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeolog&al Society 36:287-363.
de Lotbiniere, S.
1980
English Gtmflint Making in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries. In:
ColonialFrontier Guns, by T. M. Hamilton, pp. 154-159. The Fur Trade Press,
Chadron, Nebraska.
Manucy, A.
The Fort at Frederica. United States Department of the Interior, National Park
1959
Service, Washington, D. C.
Maxwell, M. S. and L. R. Binford
1961
Excavations at Fort Michilimackinac, Mackinac City, Michigan, 1959 Season.
Publications of the Museum, Volume 1, No. 1. Michigan State University, East
Lansing, Michigan.
Peterson, H. L.
1956
Arms and Armor in Colonial America. Bramhill House, New York.
Russell, C. P.
1957
Guns on the Early Frontier. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Shiner, J. L.
n.d.
The Excavation of Fort Frederica. Unpublished MS, National Park Service,
Washington, D. C.
Stephenson, R. L.
Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir Area, Central Texas.
1970
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 41:37-277.
Witthoft, J.
1966
A History of Gunflints. Pennsylvania Archaeologist 36 (Nos. 1-2):12-49.

187

Faunas from House 5
at the Vinson Site
Bonnie C. Yates

ABSTRACT
The assemblage of animal remains from just one of the abandoned house
features at the Vinson Site (41LT1) reveals the exploitation strategy of the
occupants of this late eighteenth century Contact Period site in Central Texas. The
natural habits and habitats of the identified faunas in House 5 help to complete the
picture of an environment in which Native Americans could garner sustenance
from a bounty of animal life in nearby streams, woodlands, and prairies. From
butchering patterns, it is evident that the large game was plentiful so that minimal
processing was required of each carcass. Diversity in large and small game is a
hallmark of a healthy environment, and therefore, it can be deduced that these
people made efficient use of the local catchment area--at least for a short time.

INTRODUCTION: THE BONE SAMPLE

Faunal remains from House 5 at the Vinson site (41LT1) were analyzed to
obtain an adequate and representative sample of late eighteenth century Wichita
subsistence activities. The House 5 sample was excavated as one contiguous
assemblage, and unlike previous excavations at the site, the matrix was processed through window screen (see Smith, this volume). Window screening
enables recovery of microfaunas that otherwise would be lost and artificially
underrepresented when processed through larger-grid screens, mad, thus, a more
comprehensive view of faunal exploitation is obtainable (Shaffer 1992). The
animal bones from Vinson were washed prior to submittal to the Zooarchaeology
Lab at the Institute of Applied Sciences (University of North Texas) where the
bones are presently curated. Permanent curation will be at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) where osteological material from the 1964
Texas Archeological Society Field School is housed. Bones from the Field
School excavations were also cursorily examined for the presence of additional
species and to verify observed butchering and species selection patterns represented in the assemblage from House 5.
Bone preservation is excellent in all samples from the Vinson Site. This
results from a number of factors: first, food debris was periodically deposited in
abandoned house floor depressions. The periodicity is in turn a function of
housecleaning and butchering episodes where a large quantity of food debris
may have been dumped at one time, ensuring a protective effect for all but the
last fragments. These were on top of the heap and directly exposed to weathering
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64 (1993)

188

Texas Archeological Society

elements. Furthermore, if any shelter remained from the previously occupied
structure, then these surface-exposed bones would also benefit from some protection until the shelter was destroyed or ruined. Secondly, it is probable that
extra dirt was applied over the mass of rotting debris to alleviate its stench and
reduce chances of camp harassment by hungry scavengers. Additionally, minimal breakage during processing, a near-neutral soil pH, and the relatively short
duration of burial, all favor preservation and enhance identif’mbility and minimum number estimates. A neutral soil pH inhibits the solubility of calcium
phosphate in bone and may preserve bone almost indefinitely (Beik 1973).
The taphonomy of the bone bed, therefore, reflects the behavior of the
human occupants (i.e., periodic dumping of refuse, stench control, and minimal
processing), as well as non-human processes. Non-human processes also include
the actions of tree roots and rodents, for example, that are responsible for mixing
the midden and confounding certain inferences. For example, excavations revealed many rodent burrows throughout the deposit and a mixing of artifacts
from the known, non-Indian, nineteenth century component. Furthermore, bones
of European-introduced animals such as pig and cat found deep in the midden
illustrate the effects of this bioturbation.
BIOGEOGRAPHY AND ECOLOGY
To reconstruct the ecological setting of the Vinson Site, it is important to
know what kinds of vegetation and animals would be expected given the biotic
characteristics of the region. Because only about 200 years have passed since the
Indian occupation, the overall setting resembles present day conditions
(Stephenson 1970). Wood’s (1976) commentary on the colder, moister conditions of the mid-continental Neo-Boral or "Little Ice Age" period (ca. A.D. 15501850) probably caused only minor and imperceptible changes in the distribution
of vertebrate faunas at the latitude of Limestone County, Texas.
Blair (1950) places Limestone County within the Texan Province ~igure
1). This biotic province is characterized as a mesic ecotone where the
interdigitation of woodlands and prairies permits some species in the eastern
Austroriparian Province to reach their western limits, and a few species from the
western Balconian and Kansan provinces to reach their eastern limits. The site is
located in the Blackland Prairie vegetation area, sandwiched between the Eastern
Cross Timbers and the Post Oak Belt. Located in the northeastern corner of
Limestone County, the site lies at the western edge of the Trinity River Basin
near the source of Tehuacana Creek.
Originally the Blackland Prairie consisted of tall grasses, including many
species enjoyed by bison: Western wheat grass (Agropyron smithii), Silvery
beardgrass (Andropogon saccharoides), Little bluestem (A. scoparius), Texas
needlegrass (Stipa leucotricha), and Hairy triodea (Triodia pilosa) (Blair 1950;
Gould 1975). The Vinson Site has an elevation of 600 feet above mean sea level
in an ecotonal setting, with nearby upland prairies and dense bottomland woods

]rates ~ Vinson Site Faunas

189

o

i
0

p
o
9

I
i

"~

KANSAN

0
o

~

o

’,,

BALCONIAN

n

%6

GHIHUAHUAN

#

0

~ T~MAULIPAN
O

Z

<

X

"

0
0
0
Figure 1. Biotic Provinces of Texas (from Blair 1950).
along the creeks feeding the Trinity River. Around the margins of the prairie, oak
savanna dominates the landscape, and other nutritious mast-producing trees such
as black walnuts (Juglans nigra) and pecans (Carya illinoensis) grow in the
bottomlands.
The climate now is probably much the same as in the late eighteenth
century: spring and fall are moist, summer is hot and humid, and winter is
variable with infrequent severity. Rainfall averages 30-45 inches yearly; average
maximum low temperature is between 8 and 20° F, and the average maximum
high is between 103 and 105° F. The last frost for Limestone County occurs
around March 27, and the first frost may appear in mid-November. In this
setting, then, the Wichita hunters and farmers that occupied the Vinson Site
exploited the w~lands and grasslands of a temperate climate with moderate
rainfall and tolerable seasons.
ANIMAL LIFE AND THEIR HABITATS
There are no endemic vertebrates in the Texan Province, but a wide variety
of animal life spills over into this province from east and west to create a rich
ecotonal setting. Table 1 provides a list of mammals known to inhabit the area, as

190

Texas Archeological Society

well as a list of mammalian species identified from the House 5 sample. Table 2
presents the non-mammalian taxa identified in this sample from the Vinson Site.
From these lists, it is apparent that the early occupants of this site enjoyed the
bounty of three biomes--grassland prairies, oak-hickory woodlands, and stream
or riverine habitats.
The grasslands provided the majority of animal protein available and utilized by the site occupants. Bison, pronghorn, and jackrabbit are prairie mammals that are represented in the sample. Bison, by virtue of its abundant meat
yield (160 kilograms of e~ble meat according to White [1953]), was the most
economically important source of meat and other raw materials such as hides,
sinews, bones, and horns for clothing, tools, and trade. Evidence of this importance will be discussed below in a comparison with the use of white-tailed deer.
Pronghorn is identified by only three elements from House 5. In the early
and middle nineteenth century, sightings of small herds of antelope are recorded
for McLennan, Falls, and Robertson counties bordering Limestone County on
the west and southwest (Schmidly 1983). Pronghorn is reported from six archeological sites in the Central Brazos River Valley (Lynott 1977), ranging in age
from the Archaic period at the Baylor Site to Protohistoric remains from the
Hopewell School Site, but no pronghorn is reported from five later sites listed by
Lynott from the Trinity River Valley. Pronghorn remains are also reported from
Pictograph Shelter in the Whitney Reservoir by Stephenson (1970) and from the
Boggy Creek Site in Washington County, about 100 miles south of the study area
(Hasskarl 1961).
Non-mammalian remains of grassland animals in the sample include prairie chicken, western coachwhip snake, and plains leopard frog. These snake and
frog remains may not represent food items; they are not burned and show no
butchering marks. However, because they were recovered as infrequent isolated
elements instead of complete carcasses, their use as food cannot be ruled out in
favor of natural intrusion, which tends to leave articulated skeletons (Shotwell
1955; Thomas 1971). In the case of House 5, disarticulation may be a result of
bioturbation.
Three small burrowing mammals found in this sample are possible, but
unlikely, food sources. Although rodent remains (hairs and caudal vertebrae) have
been found in human coprolite samples from dry caves in South Texas (WilliamsDean 1978) and northern Mexico (Heizer and Napton 1969), other explanations
may account for their presence in House 5. Most likely, cottonrat, pocket gopher,
and mole remains from House 5 represent denizens of the midden and surrounding
landscape rather than human meal debris. What they do reveal is their predilection
for, and therefore the proximity of, sandy or sandy loam soils in the study area,
particularly in the case of moles and pocket gophers. Cottonrats are particularly
common in tall-grass prairies where bluestem, cordgrass, or sedges provide food
and cover (Davis 1978). These small mammals and the non-mammals mentioned
above could certainly provide modest food value, but the energy exchange involved is unwarranted given the presence of large game in the House 5 sample.

Yates ~ Vinson Site Faunas

191

Table 1
List of Mammals Expected to Range in
the Texan Province and those Identified
from the Vinson Site, House 51

Opossum
Mole
Fox Squirrel
Pocket Gopher
Ground Squirrel
Harvest Mouse
Pocket Mouse
White-Footed Mouse
Deer Mouse
Cottonrat
Woodrat
Beaver
Cottontail Rabbit
Swamp Rabbit
Jackrabbit
River Otter
Badger
Racoon
Ringtai!
Long-Tail Weasel
Mink
Spotted Skunk
Striped Skunk
Red Fox
Gray Fox
*2

Coyote
Red Wolf
*2

Bobcat
,2

White-Tailed Deer
*2

Domestics

Expected

Identified

Habitat

Didelphis virginiana
Scalopus aquaticus
Sciuru.~ niger
Geomys cf. breviceps
Citellus tridecemlineatus
Reithrodontomys sp.
Perognathus hispidus
Peromyscus leucopus
P eromyscus maniculatus
Sigmodon hispidus
Neotoma floridana
Castor canadensis
Sylvilagus floridanus
Sylvilagus aquaticus
Lepus californicus
Lutra canade,~is
Taxidea taxus
Procyon lotor
Bassariscus
Mustela frenata
Mustela vison
SpiIogale putorius
Mephitis mephitis

Opossum
Mole

Various
Various

Woedland
Pocket Gopher

Cottonrat

Cottontail
Jackrabbit

Raccoon

Riparian
Skunk

Vulpes fulva
Urocyon cinereoargenteus
Ursus americanus
Black Bear
Canis latrans
Canis rufus
Felis concolor
Felis rufus
Antilocapra americana
Odocoileus virginianus
Bison bison
Felis caius
Sus scrofa
Equus caballus

Grassland
Grassland
Grassy Edges
Various
Woodland
Grassland
Grassy Edges
Woodland
Aquatic
Various
Riparian
Grassland
Aquatic
Grassland
Riparian
Woodland
Woody Edges
Various
Woody Edges
Introduced
Various
Woodland

Various
Riparian
Cougar
Bottomlands
McLennan Co.
Woodland
Pronghorn
Grassland
White-tailed Deer Woody Edges
Bison
Grassland
House Cat
Cosmopolitan
Pig
Cosmopolitan
Horse
Cosmopolitan

1Excludes bats and some rodents.
2Species now extirpated from province.
Sources: Blair (1950); Davis (1978); and Schmidly (1983).

192

Texas Archeological Society
Table 2
Non-Mammals Represented in Faunal
Remains from House 5

Birds

White-fronted goose
Turkey vulture
Red-shouldered hawk
Wild turkey
Prairie chicken
Green heron
Sandpiper
Ivory-billed woodpecker (?)
Cardinal
song birds

Anser albifrons
Cathartes aura
Buteo lineatus
Meleagris gaUopavo
Tympanuchus sp.
Butorides virescens
Scolopacidae
cf. Campephilus principalis
Richmondena cardinalis
Passeriformes

Alligator snapping turtle
Florida box turtle
Pond slider
Western coachwhip
Bullsnake

Macroclemys temmincki
Terrapene carolina
Trachemys scripta
Masticophis flagellum
Pituophis melanoleucus

Reptiles

Amphibians
Woodhouse’s toad
Leopard frog

Bufo woodhousei
Rana cf. utricularia

Fishes
Gar
Bass/sunfish

Lepisosteus cf. osseus
Centrarchidae

The woodland-prairie ecotone may have been more frequently and
dependably exploited by the Vinson inhabitants. White-tailed deer and cottontail
rabbit are the major ecotonal mammals found in the sample. From raw element
counts, deer bones outnumber all other taxa represented. Although deer may be
found today in the Blackland Prairie, they are known to thrive on the acorns of
the oaks and fruits of yaupon, beautyberry, and hawthorn found in the mixed
woodlands of the Cross Timbers (Schmidly 1983).
Cottontail rabbit remains, like those of jackrabbit, are not numerous in the
assemblage, but their presence may indicate that more passive collecting techniques such as snaring were used. The presence of cottontail is another good
indicator of ecotonal exploitation and illustrates that the site occupants took

Yates ~ Vinson Site Faunas

193

advantage of the abundance of game provided by the ecotones, not relying solely
on one or two large meat-yielding species.
Non-mammalian woodland/prairie ecotonal faunas from Vinson consist of
bullsnake, songbirds, and box turtles. Again the remains of snakes and birds may
have been introduced by raptors into the midden. Box turtle is probably a food
item, however, and many fragments are burned; at least eight individuals are
indicated. These adaptable turtles may be found in open woodlands, wooded
edges, fields, stream banks, and moist areas. They eat nearly anything, including
carrion (Collins 1981), an item that may have drawn them into the site and
midden areas only to be caught and used for food and their shells used as vessels.
Other ecotonal forms indicate exploitation of the wooded streambanks. The
riparian faunas identified in the sample include opossum, raccoon, wading birds,
and leopard frog. From the paucity of their remains, none of these animals
provided substantial food resources. Nevertheless, their inclusion attests to the
varied diet available to site occupants and helps reconstruct the catchment area
~igure 2).
The woodlands and their clearings hosted a variety of animals whose bones
are also recorded from House 5. These forest faunas include mammals such as
black bear, cougar, and skunk, as well as two bird species: pileated or ivorybilled woodpecker and wild turkey.
Although bones from the two dangerous carnivores (black bear and cougar)
are not abundant, their presence offers insight into the prowess of the hunters’
skills, and to some extent, into the iconography of the group occupying this site
(see bone artifact discussion below). In this part of North America, bears merely
nap during winter, not truly hibernating, and are particularly attracted to carrion
(Caras 1967). Bear and "panther" hunting constituted great sport for white
settlers in the early 1800s, and sightings persisted in this area into the twentieth
century, although sightings were rare by 1905 (Schmidly 1983). Panthers were
common in the Brazos River bottoms of McLennan County in the mid-1800s, but
bears disappeared from western East Texas around 1850. Skunk bones are common in faunal inventories from aboriginal Texas sites, being ubiquitous creatures
then as now, and obviously not shunned by these hunters.
Of the woodland bird life, the wild turkey holds a preeminent position as an
important food source. According to Schorger (1966:54): "No section of the
country contained such multitudes’ of turkeys as the Oklahoma-Texas area." His
estimate for pre-Columbian turkey populations in Texas is 10 turkeys per square
mile, with almost 20 percent of the entire United States flock located within the
state (namely, two million birds). Schorger’s accounts of nineteenth century
sightings and turkey hunts mention hundreds and sometimes thousands of them
blackening the trees in which they roost. Despite this recorded abundance, there
are only two individual turkeys (15 elements) recognized in the House 5 material.
The other large woodland bird represented in the assemblage is possibly an
ivory-billed woodpecker. This beautiful bird is now considered virtually extinct,
but at one time it occupied all of eastern Texas, including the study area (Jaques

194

Texas Archeological Society

Z
" .4
/4
I

4\

P

©

©

8o

C

°

-j

©

~4

©
<2

8

0

T>

8
<
~J

0

<3

e4

<>

Yates ~ Vinson Site Faunas

195

1947). Oberholser (1974) states that these birds inhabit mature virgin forests and
notes that Native Americans especially valued them for their spectacular ivory
beaks. The closely related, but slightly smaller, pileated woodpecker (Dryocopus
pileatus) still ranges throughout the woodlands of East Texas; it may be this
equally conspicuous, crow-sized, black and red crested bird that is represented
by a fragmentary carpometacarpus from House 5.
The last habitat to be represented in the sample is the aquatic environment.
Proximity to water is axiomatic to hunter/gatherers and agriculturalists. Near the
Vinson Site were reliable spring waters. Small creeks exist there today rather
than actual riverine habitats.
Remains of two fish species, two aquatic turtle species, and bullfrog, along
with the above-mentioned streambank faunas, constitute the riparian community
available for resource procurement. Elements from a small species of gar and a
centrarchid (bass family) were part of the House 5 material; however, no other
fish remains were recorded, suggesting that fishing was not an important subsistence activity. These two fish bones indicate that small sluggish creeks existed
near the site rather than fast-flowing rivers. Pond sliders, like the red-eared turtle,
prefer any quiet water with soft muddy substrate; similarly, snapping turtles are
found in many aquatic situations, preferring those with mud and abundant vegetation (Ernst and Barbour 1972; Collins 1981).
Turning from water to sky, three bird species identified in the faunal assemblage deserve mention here. Red-shouldered hawks hunt small mammals, reptiles, and amphibians in wooded or open areas, usually in moist terrain (Collins
1981); they migrate through Central Texas in early spring and late fall (Robbins
et al. 1966). Turkey vultures are regionally pandemic and a common feature to
Texas skies as they scan open-wooded or hilly ground for carrion. Although
famous as soaring, scavenging, smelly birds, they are accessible targets when
feeding or nesting as they do on the ground surface (Collins 1981). Furthermore,
vultures would be attracted to nesting near, and feeding in, middens containing
deer and bison bones as well as other food refuse.
Evidence of eagle (bald or golden) use exists as a flute made from an ulna
(described below). This use of this bird’s bones imparts an importance beyond
that of a prey species. According to Oberholser (1974), bald eagles prefer nesting
and hunting near clear water or swamps and had a breeding record in adjacent
McLennan County in 1900; he also noted that they scavenge for food in winter.
Although not a scavenger, the golden eagle hunts rodents in the hills, grasslands,
and deserts ~obbins et al. 1966) and is known from specimens also collected in
McLennan County (Oberholser 1974).
That water animals and large birds are found in an aboriginal refuse pile is
not particularly unusual in the region (e.g., Raab 1982); nevertheless, these
faunas from Vinson indicate a local environment dominated by lush bottomland
at the edge of a mature oak woodland, probably fed by a mineral spring, and
nearby upland prairies consisting of sandy and loamy soils with tall and mixed
grasses. Here, the everyday chores and activities of life centered around food

196

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

gathering, with some part of the workday dealing with animal food processing or
animal materials reduction and use. To Binford’s (1981) sequence of carcass
processing (i.e., skinning, dismemberment, filleting or consumption, marrow
extraction, and disposal) then can be added cooking, meat-strip drying, hide
preparation, sewing, and tool-making. This general description of the identified
taxa from Vinson, and the environmental reconstruction of the catchment area,
paints a broad picture of these peoples’ lifestyle. The bones from House 5
indicate that they concentrated their hunting subsistence activities on bison and
deer; i.e., those animals that supplied them with the most meat.
BISON AND DEER REMAINS
Two large ungulates dominate the faunal sample from House 5. These
remains were identified using bison skeletons obtained from the Wichita Mountains Wildlife Refuge in Oklahoma and a selection of deer skeletons ranging
from large individuals from northern latitudes to smaller deer from South Texas
counties. Each deer and bison element was closely compared to those of skelemily similar pronghorn and domestic cow, respectively, to ensure the correct
assignment to the proper taxa. Although pronghorn is represented by a few
elements, deer bone predominates in the assemblage, and no domestic bovine
was identified.
Archeological specimens were sorted by element, side (left or fight), and
end (proximal or distal). Relative age was determined by degree of epiphyseal
fusion; sex of bison was determined using Speth’s (1983) measurements for
fragmentary adult long bones; and condition was noted for state of preservation,
incidence and location of cut marks, burning, and other modification.
Although they belong to the same taxonomic order (Artiodactyla), bison
and deer are ecologically quite different. Bison have fairly stable populations,
long life span, low productivity in relation to standing crop, and are slow to
disperse into new habitats (see Shay 1978). By comparison, deer populations
experience greater fluctuations and individuals do not live as long. They also
have higher production rates while adapting quicker to new habitats. Furthermore, bison and deer habitats overlap at the praifie-forest ecotone, thus providing
a consistent source of abundant animal protein to any hunting group situated in
this kind of setting.
A minimum of nine adult bison is represented in House 5 material by 134
identifiable elements and approximately 300 fib and miscellaneous fragments.
The body parts of bison recovered from this single midden classically indicate
the "Schlepp effect" (Daly 1969): the tendency to leave the larger, less choice
portions of a carcass at the kill site, returning to camp with the meatier and more
easily transported pieces. In the House 5 sample, primarily meaty elements
(limbs and fibs) are present. The hunters either chose not to haul back the huge
skulls, mandibles, pelves, and backbones, or they chose to deposit these in
another trash pile. The former notion is more likely, suggesting some distance

Yates ~ Vinson Site Faunas

197

existed between the Vinson Site and the kill site of these animals. Another
possibility exists: all of the bisons were killed at once, necessitating some selectivity in what to glean from the carcasses by virtue of an abundant kill.
Bison carcasses, therefore, were preliminarily butchered at the kill site; this
determination is based on the virtual absence of lower leg bones, vertebrae,
skulls, and mandibles in this particular midden (Figure 3). In most cases, the
lower leg was removed at the joint between the distal tibia or radiocubitus and
the corresponding tarsals or carpals. Only eight elements (seven tarsals and one
phalanx) from below this juncture are recorded in the House 5 sample; these
elements probably adhered to at least four butchering units returned to the site
based on the presence of two right astragali, two right naviculocuboid tarsals,
and two left maUeoli. All but two of these bones exhibit numerous cut marks.
Deer, by contrast, were brought to the camp unbutchered. All body parts are
represented in this sample of over 900 elements, with only carpals, tarsals, and
ulnae underrepresented. Minimum number of individuals (MNI) estimates on a
per-element basis range from a low of four deer (based on four right second and
third fused tarsals) to a higher minimum of 20 deer (based on 20 lower right third
molars); most of the elements, however, yield MNI estimates between 12 and 17.
The paucity of carpals and tarsals (excluding astragali and calcanea) is
puzzling in light of the abundance of cannon bones (metapodials) and toe bones
(phalanges). If the deer were skinned at the kill site and there was a corresponding lack of metapodials and phalanges, one could postulate that initial dismemberment occurred simultaneously with skinning activities and that the lower leg
bones had been retained with the skin and deposited elsewhere. This does not
seem to be the case, however, given the large numbers of astragali and calcanea
(see Figure 3). Possibly the small but compact carpals and tarsals were lost or
battered beyond recognition during final dismemberment of the lower legs from
the rest of the body. The lack of additional ulnae may represent the salvage and
curation of these elements for tools.
Butchering patterns are quite clear in the bison and deer samples from
House 5 and can be grouped into three processing activities. These different
butchering activities result in distinctive cut marks on bone. Skinning the carcass
results in minor bone cutting because the only bone surfaces likely to be cut are
in those areas of the body covered by thin tissue: lower legs and skull. Dismemberment cut marks occur during disarticulation of manageable meat units and
usually appear between bones on articulating surfaces. Filleting activities free the
meat from the bone as a secondary butchering procedure. In the case of the
Vinson material, primary butchering (skinning and initial dismemberment) of
bison occurred at the kill site, and further dismemberment and filleting probably
occurred at the site itself. Deer and smaller game, on the other hand, were
processed entirely on site.
Cut marks on the bison and deer appear to have been made with both stone
and metal tools. Stone tool marks are generally short, parallel series of cuts with
an open (or U-shape) cross section (Binford 1981:t05). Some of the marks on

198

Texas Archeological Society
~pT,b

prod

80

dRadA
dRad~

70

prod
,ApMC
pMT

6O

d Fern

5O
pUi~
40

o<

A Deer

30

@ B,son

20
I0

50
MGUI

60

70

80

90

I O0

Figure 3. Frequency of Bison and Deer Elements from House 5 at Vinson. Key: MNI=Minimum
Number of Individuals; MGUI=Modified General Utility Index (Binford); Fragmentary
Elements: d=distal; p=proximal; Ast=Astragalus; Calc=Calcaneum; Fem=Femur;
H=Humerus; MD=Mandible; MC=Metacarpal; MT=Metatarsal; Pat=Patella; Phx=Phalanx;
Ply=Pelvis; Rad=Radius; Sc=Scapula; Sk=Skull; Tib=Tibia; Ul=Ulna.

these specimens also resemble the distinctive hairline oblique cuts made by
metal tools, and several femoral, tibial, and vertebral fragments appear to have
been "sliced" from the whole bone with such smoothness that metal must be
considered the cutting agent. These specimens exhibit more or less flat planes of
cancellous tissue, some of which indicate that the slicing motion halted abruptly
inside the cancellous mass. The edge of some of these fragments are straight and
meet at right or obtuse angles. Many are sliced from two sides leaving a rectangular fragment roughly 2.5 cm across. Although carnivore gnawing has probably
obscured this pattern, the repetitive nature and frequency of the pattern recorded
on at least 30 bone fragments represent a type of processing activity indicative of
metal tool use not reported in the literature dealing with Historic aboriginal
butchering techniques. This activity must occur late in the processing procedure,

Yates ~ Vinson Site Faunas

199

and may be ancillary to bone grease manufacturing where long bone shafts and
cancellous elements are smashed, or cleaved, then boiled to render the fat.
While it is asserted that metal implements were employed in latter stages of
processing game, there is inconclusive evidence to support the use of metal
knives in initial butchering activities. Many cut marks appear macroscopically to
be similar to those on bones from prehistoric sites that were made with stone
knives. Whereas, other marks on the House 5 specimens are quite fine and strike
the bone at a 45 degree angle, leaving a deep V-shape cut with one ann of the
profile longer than the other. Replicative experiments by Walker and Long
(1977) cite this general profile as resulting from a steel knife; however, they also
caution associating cut marks with a specific implement because of the variable
results produced in their experiments with tools used at different pressures.
Nevertheless, the artifact assemblage from House 5 indeed contains metal cutting
tools (see Smith, this volume), any of which might have been used during the
various stages of carcass processing.
The site occupants butchered the carcasses of bison and deer in basically the
same way, first removing the limbs from the axial skeleton at the easiest junctures and the skull at the neck. Closer examination found subtle differences in
placement of cut marks on individual elements of deer and bison. For example,
cuts on the dorsal border of the olecranon process of the ulna and corresponding
cuts on the epicondyles (.posterior ridges) of the distal humerus are produced
when separating the upper and lower front limb. Bison remains have both sets of
marks, but deer ulna are not cut in the same way.
Binford (1981:126) notes that this particular combination of marks represents flexed joint cutting; that is, after the animal is stiff and/or frozen: "Stiffness
may be related to the dismemberment being part of secondary butchering activities, or to scheduling problems at mass kills." Likewise, separation of the distal
femur and proximal tibia generally occurs during secondary butchering; these
deer and bison elements from House 5 show characteristic circular cuts around
the intercondylar tubercles of the proximal tibia and cuts on the condyles of the
distal femur, although bison distal femurs are less frequently scarred than deer.
Also, similar dismemberment patterns are noted from cut marks on the femur
heads of both species, for separation of the hind quarters and the axial skeleton,
and again the placement of the cuts vary between species. Additionally, the
acetabuli of deer pelvis fragments exhibit corresponding marks of this dismemberment technique, which entails insertion of a knife into the socket to cut the
ligaments. This technique differs from that described by White (1953) where the
neck of the femur head is cut to remove the hindquarter.
Differences in processing these two game species may be more the results
of the Schlepp effect (i.e., the aforementioned absence of certain bison elements)
and the disparity in size and handling of the carcasses. For example, it is not
possible to compare the processing of pelves because bison pelves are virtually
absent from the assemblage as they were left at the kill site. But differences
between represented skeletal elements reveal variations in butchering techniques

200

Texas Archeological Society

that may be useful to subsequent studies in identifying and comparing ho~,
related cultures processed large game animals.
To summarize the butchering process undergone by either species, the
following description compares the processing evidence collectively for major
individual body sections. Binford’s (1981) distinctions between dismemberment
and filleting cuts constitute the model used, but other descriptions of aboriginal
butchering patterns are also cited. Cut marks are visually represented in Figure 4
for deer and bison.
Skull and Mandibles

Bison heads are represented by very few elements: an unmarked hyoid bone
was recovered that most probably adhered to the tongue upon removal. The
immature appearance of an incisor socket fragment with a longitudinal scratch
below the mental foramen denotes mandible processing (tongue removal) of a
juvenile bison.
Deer heads were processed by smashing the skulls at the crown and then
pulling away the bassiocciput. Some cuts are noted across the occipital condyle
of one specimen and on one of the basilar portions; these cuts probably occurred
upon dismemberment of the skull at the neck. Maxillae are very fragmentary and
consist of not much more than the tooth row itself. A few of these have fine
longitudinal cuts above the second and third molars that may occur when removing the mandibles; the latter are mostly uncut but broken at the corresponding
position of the ascending ramus where it rests against the maxilla. Several
mandibles are basaUy broken, exposing the medullary cavity below the teeth
roots as a result of marrow extraction. Two hyoid fragments exhibit cuts resulting from removal of the tongue.
Ribs and Vertebrae

All three recovered thoracic vertebrae of bison have multiple transverse cuts
on the upper flanks of the neural spine and just below the rib heads. Binford
(1981) attributes these types of cuts to filleting the tenderloin.
These cuts do not appear on thoracic vertebrae of deer where the neural
spines of several specimens have deep jagged cuts or are broken at the bases;
deer ribs, however, exhibit fine short cut marks farther down on the curvature of
the rib. The cervical vertebrae of deer took the brunt of dismembering the skull
from the neck: some atlases have cut marks on the cranial facets (both dorsal and
ventral aspects) and several lower cervicals are cut through the centra, exhibiting
the grease-processing "sliced" appearance discussed previously.
Pelvis and Sacrum

The entire bison assemblage contains only one pelvis fragment (left ilium)
and one sacrum fragment, and both show cut marks. The ilium is from a calf and
is broken midway just below the sacral scar (auricular surface) with three

Yates-- Vinson Site Faunas

201

II

0

0

0

0

v

E

202

Texas Archeological Society

transverse cuts along the lateral border. The ventral surface of the sacrum has a
partial encircling cut just behind the initial centrum. Both sets of marks probably
resulted from dismemberment activities. Their presence in the midden suggests
that they were returned to the site with meat attached.
Contrasting again with bison, deer sacrae show no marksat all. Although
pelvis fragments are quite rare in the bison collection, they rank highest in
element frequency for the deer assemblage (see Figure 3); about 33 percent of
them exhibit dismemberment cut marks primarily around the acetabulum or light
filleting marks running lengthwise over these elements’ extremities. Several of
the hairline marks show characteristics of metal implements.
Hindlimbs

The major trochanter of all but one bison femur has been broken off,
probably as a result of battering and leverage applied backwards against the
innominate during dismemberment of the hind leg. Other dismemberment cuts
exist around the ball of the femur head and distally across the back of the
condyles. Filleting marks occur as fine transverse scratches below the lesser
condyle. Bison tibiae exhibit the fine encircling cuts around the intercondylar
tubercles that articulate with the femur. Binford (1981:116) notes that this dismemberment action occurs when a metal or stone knife is "inserted from the rear
of the tibial-femoral joint and rotated around the intercondylar tubercles." Filleting marks on bison tibiae are found as short oblique cuts across the tibial crest;
small cuts along the margins of the proximal epiphyses of some specimens
probably also resulted from filleting. Cut marks occur on each of the seven bison
tarsals recovered and all of these resulted from detaching the hind limb from the
foot during primary (kill site) butchering activities. The retained tarsals were
returned to the site with the meaty hind limb.
Damage to the greater trochanter of the deer femurs exists on half of the
proximal specimens and appears to result from carnivore gnawing instead of
butchering. Cut marks on the ball of the femur head are similar to those found on
bison bones except they are less frequent on the ball than just beneath it; both
kinds of marks were made during dismemberment. Transverse marks across the
posterior surface of the distal condyles also conform to those found on bison
remains and indicate use of the same method of disarticulating the lower leg at
the knee when preparing the meat for distribution or consumption. Corresponding
marks are also found on the proximal tibia of deer, again similar to bison,
although dismembering marks on the distal tibia of deer are not duplicated on
bison. Filleting marks also differ, with deer having short parallel cuts at the
points of muscle insertion on the distal tibia. Deer metatarsals have few marks on
the proximal ends, the tarsals (especially the calcaneus and astragalus) being the
location of disarticulation and cutting marks; distal condyles exhibit skinning
and filleting marks. Five deer calcanea have marks across the body of the
element that conform to Binford’s (1981) description of filleting and/or

Yates ~ Vinson Site Faunas

203

suspension of the carcass for processing; however, most of these elements are
badly gnawed, thus obscuring the nature of other marks.
Forelimbs
Bison scapulae are rare (four specimens); the two more complete specimens
have dismemberment marks around the neck of the scapula. This type of cut may
be made at the kill site when the objective of primary butchering is to lessen the
weight of the carcass unit to be returned to the village. Alternatively, in at least
four instances from the House 5 midden, complete scapulae or portions were
retained with the foreleg unit prior to their final dismemberment. Three of these
exhibit long filleting cuts on the blade, and the fourth fragment has unusually
deep cuts extending into the inner bone wall from its broken edge, suggesting the
use of a chopping tool (cf., Gilbert 1969). The most complete scapula has deep
cuts and jagged breaks around a rectangular hole formed through the center of
the blade; this piece may have been removed as the preform of a scapula hoe,
although no hoes were recovered from Vinson (cf. Bell et al. 1967:Figure 61c).
The distal ends of bison and deer humeri have similar dismemberment cut
marks except bison humeri also have cuts on the medial face of the condyle; this
latter cut facilitates disarticulation of this joint after rigor mortus has set in and is
associated with secondary butchering and marrow procurement activities (Binford
1981:126). Corresponding cuts on the olecranon of the ulna occur only on bison,
while cut marks from this technique on the anterior face of the proximal radius
occur only on deer ulnae. The difference is most likely one of timing, in that the
freshly killed deer carcass disarticulates easily with cuts to the flexible joint from
the back of the distal humerus and from the front along the face of the radius.
Conversely, the bison carcass would be stiff or frozen after transport and locked
at the joint, requiring cuts along the dorsal crest of the ulna while simultaneously
cutting the posterior face of the distal humerus. Filleting marks on the upper front
limb are generally the same for both species, occurring along the medial crest of
the humeral shaft and on the anterior neck areas of the distal end, as well as
below the medial tuberosities of the proximal radius and along the posterior ridge
of the ulna.
The lower foreleg (metacarpals, carpals, and phalanges) is not represented
in the bison elements, indicating the removal of bison feet at the distal radius.
Bison radii are represented by 11 specimens, and eight show evidence of cutting
(knife) and/or chopping (stone or metal axe) on the distal end. Sixty-five percent
of the minimum number of deer were represented by metacarpals, but very few
carpals were recovered. Like the hindlimb, skinning and dismembering marks
occur across the metacarpal condyles, and short filleting marks appear across the
ridges of the anterior face.
Besides cut marks, other indications of processing, such as burning and
breakage, are informative about certain behavioral activities of the site occupants.
For example, 33 percent of the bison elements from Vinson and 10 percent of the

204

Texas Archeological Society

deer elements have lightly charred spots at or near their mid-shaft breaks. This is
evidence of marrow extraction activities. After f’dleting, the bone shaft is held
over a fire to bum away the tough periosteal sheath covering the surface of the
bone; this charring away of the sheath causes the shaft to break cleanly, without
shattering and contaminating the marrow with bone splinters (cf. Gilbert 1973).
No faunal reports reviewed by this author have commented on this kind of
faunal processing, although many faunal assemblages from Central Texas studied by the author have this characteristic; some examples include bones from the
Franty Watson Site (X41PPll6) (Yates 1979a), Aquilla (X41HI171) (Yates
1979b), and the Late Archaic and Neo-American sites in the San Gabriel Reservoir areas of Williamson County (Yates 1982a, 1982b), as well as those currently
under study from Rowe Valley (41WM437).
Two further comments are warranted regarding this type of processing at
Vinson. First, the bones were only minimally rendered further for bone grease;
unlike in Gilbert’s (1973) description, no attempt was made to smash the bones
of bison or deer as preparation for boiling out the "butter" (see Leechman 1951;
Vehik 1977). Secondly, then, it is possible to infer that the site occupants either
had no knowledge of bone grease rendering (this is doubtful), or they had little
need for it. The latter notion seems more reasonable given the abundant biomass available and procured by the Vinson occupants; the more destitute the
hunter, the more effort will be expended on satisfying basic nutritional needs.
Therefore, the late eighteenth century occupants of the Vinson Site may be said
to have been well fed.
Hunting selectivity is prompted by two factors: (1) degree of human nutritional need, and (2) the quality of the game’s nutritional state. Even though the
Vinson Site occupants did not process their game as thoroughly as possible, the
evidence discussed below suggests that they deliberately chose those elements
high in nutritious marrow, fat, and meat from animals in the best condition at the
time of the hunt.
Selectivity based on age is demonstrated at Vinson by the choice of older
deer. Based on 29 mandibles that could be aged, 66 percent are from deer over
four years of age at death (Table 3). Younger specimens may be absent as a result
of destruction by carnivores, however.
Sex and Seasonality

Sex in deer was not assessed owing to the fragmented condition of pelves,
although at least three males are represented by two left pedicles and a spike fine
in a sample of 24 antler fragments. Speth’s (1983) measuring criteria for sexing
fragmentary adult bison limb elements was used because of the excellent
preservation of bison long bones. Measurements revealed that over 95 percent of
the elements from House 5 are securely within the range of modern bison cows.
This overwhelming selection of cows may reveal the season of procurement
according to Speth’s (1983) data on seasonal changes and differences in marrow

Yates m Vinson Site Faunas

205

Table 3
Age Classes of Deer Mandibles from Midden Area
of House 5, the Vinson Site
Age Classes*
Age Not Assessed
<2 years
2 - 3.5
4 - 5.5
6-7.5

Right
1
4
1
7

18 (+2 left)

Left

1
3 (2 MNI)
3
4
11
20 Minimum

Total
1
5
4
10
9
29
Maximum

*Sevefinghaus 1949
quality between the sexes in bison. Furthermore, Speth (1983:163) finds that the
aboriginal hunter may have been attuned "to the anatomical and physiological
’facts’ of bison."
These "facts," coming to light from modern range management studies,
show that seasonal changes in protein values of important forage plants affect the
physiological maintenance levels of grazers. Figure 5 illustrates the relative
condition of male and female bison throughout an average rainfall year. As Speth
(1983:163) notes, "the changes in the two sexes differ to some extent in degree,
and they are also slightly out of phase. Both sexes are in poorest shape in the
spring, but males reach their lowest point earlier than females and are improving
at the time when females reach their lowest point."
Applying these principals to the Vinson material, a site exhibiting predominantly female bison remains, one can postulate a fall/winter occupation or at least
a fall/winter hunting of bison. This is because at that time of year, males are weak
from rutting behavior and females have stored up reserves for gestation. Therefore, selection for greater fat, prime hides, and better condition is suggested as a
hunting strategy.
Other cool-month evidence in the Vinson fauna is the abundance of fetal
and neonatal bison and deer remains, the presence of migratory fowl, and ethnographic accounts of the kinds of animals hunted in winter by Plains peoples. The
following discussion concerns the first piece of evidence: an abundance of
juvenile material from Vinson. "Juvenile" is def’med as those elements having
unfused diaphyses that are smaller than sub-adult elements and have surficial
qualities indicative of incomplete ossification.
There are at least four juveniles in the post-cranial deer remains. Several
elements appear to belong to a single fawn no older than three weeks at death. A

206

Texas Archeological Society

a
r-

0

o

0
z 12.-o
_J

"o
laJ

o

0
¢)
0

0
u~

LL

~0-

uo!J,!puo9 aA!,~O I a~l

Yates m Vinson Site Faunas

207

left radius and a left humerus are from an older fawn, and another, more
developed humerus is from a fawn from an age category around four months old
at death. Lastly, two fragments of a left femur from a fawn approximately six
months old completes the identifiable juvenile deer sample.
With the exception of the three-week old fawn, the young deer remains
agree with a fall/winter occupation interpretation. This single three-week old
fawn could have been an out-of-season birth or remains from a singular hunting
foray in the late spring.
Young bison are represented by an minimum of six individuals ranging in
age from fetal to six months old at death 0~igure 6). Fetal bison are identified by
two unmatched humeri, an ulna fragment, cannon bone fragments, a proximal
rib facet, and a mandibular condyle. A femur, scapula, and two humeri from
calves estimated at death to be near-term exhibit butchering cuts. A femur and
metatarsal represent a slightly older bison, and it is undetermined whether the
elements came from a single individual; cut marks and charring are evident on
the femur.
The next oldest calf remains include a humerus, proximal femur, and proximal tibia, all from the right side. They also exhibit cut marks (on the humerus)
and charred and exfoliated spiral breaks. The age at death of this individual is
between four and six months. Again these elements may belong to different
calves of similar age, but because they are different body parts, they must be
recorded as one individual. In comparison to a minimum of eight female bison,
there is a minimum of six calves recorded. Although Frison (1974) notes that
female bison may have out-of-season calves, the high correlation between the
number of female bison and unborn or newborn bison is strong evidence for
kills occurring midway or late into the normal gestation cycle of the Southern
Plains herd (see Hornaday 1887; McHugh 1972).
Five juvenile elements are tentatively identified as young pig. This is to be
expected given the presence of adult pig in the later nineteenth century occupation (see Smith, this volume). No juvenile pronghorn elements were identified.
BONE TOOLS FROM THE VINSON SITE
The quest for the identity of site occupants is based in large measure upon
the types of artifacts left behind at the site. Artifacts of bone may not be as useful
for this pursuit as are projectile point types or ceramic styles because the morphological variation in bone tools is dictated in large measure by the intrinsic
design of the vertebrate body. For example, a deer ulna with but a few grinding
strokes is made a generic awl; there is little variation in ulna tool styles. Aboriginal tools of bone rarely provide temporal indicators based on shape alone.
Preferences for a particular tool may, however, represent a cultural selection that
could be revealed by comparing frequencies of specific bone tool types from
different but contemporaneous sites.

208

Texas Archeological Society

Summer

Spr~ng

B
BB
B
B

DB

Fall

W~nter

B

Age at Death, Btson

D

Age at Death, Deer

Figure 6. Age Estimation of Bison (B) and Deer (D) from House 5.

In the artifact descriptions that follow, measurements and morphology are
complemented by comments regarding similar bone tools from roughly contemporaneous or otherwise related assemblages. Descriptions and illustrations of
bone artifacts from the following site reports (among others) were examined for
comparison with the Vinson Site materials:
Wichita Pilot Study (Bell et al. 1967)
Gilbert Site (Lorrain 1967c)
Roseborough Lake (Gilmore 1986)
Toyah component of the Kyle Site (Jelks 1962)
Toyah components from the San Gabriel Project sites (Yates 1982b)

Yates ~ Vinson Site Faunas

209

Whitney Reservoir sites (Stephenson 1970)
Sites in Central Brazos and Trinity River Valleys (Lynott 1977)
Late Prehistoric sites in Kansas (Wedel 1959)
This list is by no means exhaustive, but it does represent a sampling of sites
occupied by hunting/farming aboriginal groups from ca. A.D. 1300 to ca. A.D.
1800 in North Central Texas. Emphasis is given to sites that are within or border
the ecotonal Texan biotic zone (Blair 1950) where the Vinson Site is located. In
addition to bone tools from House 5, other bone and shell artifacts from previous
excavations at Vinson are described herein.
Bone Artifacts of Native Manufacture
Bison Metatarsal Fleshers
Three left bison metatarsals were recovered from the Vinson Site (Figure
7a-c). All three have proximal ends of the element as unmodified bases. Transverse whittling cuts are apparent approximately midway down the shaft on two
specimens as manufacturing marks applied against the anterior face toward the
distal end; the condyles are removed from all three specimens. The two fleshers
that exhibit manufacturing marks do not appear to have been used extensively:
one (Figure 7a) was broken in use not long after its manufacture as indicated by
the light sheen and wear on the whittling marks and the posterior break of the
working tip. The flesher illustrated in Figure 7c broke before use and appears to
have been made too thin distally to take stress from finishing work. The third
flesher (Figure 7b) was extensively used and is split longitudinally from weathering; manufacture marks have been worn away by constant rubbing and the
broken edges of the walls are smooth and rounded. This working tip has a hint of
a toothed edge and is beveled to about a 45° angle; in all other respects it is of
similar manufacture to the other fleshers.
Used to remove fat and flesh from animal hides, fleshers are reported as a
Plains Indian feature in Dismal River Aspect sites (ca. A.D. 1700) in Scott
County, Kansas (Wedel 1959). Likewise, toothed fleshers were recovered from
the Glass Site and the Longest Site (among others) on the Red River in Oklahoma (Lorrain 1967a, 1967b; Bastian 1967). The presence of a series of jagged
chisel marks angled into the shaft (distally) of these specimens match the manufacturing characteristics of the Vinson tools. Similar toothed fleshers have been
found at the Floydada Country Club Site in the Texas Panhandle (Jim Word,
1984 personal communication), again demonstrating the Plains influence.
Burnisher

This highly polished object is 10.6 cm long with a gently rounded base on a
slightly curved subtriangular shaft tapering to a conical tip (broken away after
recovery). Smoothed-over cancellous tissue is visible at the round end of the
burnisher (Figure 8b).

210

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 7. Bison Metapodial Tools from House 5.

Yates ~ Vinson Site Faunas

211

212

Texas Archeological Society

Wedel (1959:Plates 32, 70, 83) does not see these bone implements as
piercing tools but rather as rubbing tools; it is not clear, however, what was
rubbed. He (1959:311) describes the specimens from Kansas as subtriangular
"with slightly flattened, faceted, or transversely striated points.., unlike the
symmetrical polished awl tips." Some of the ones reported by Wedel are fashioned from ribs or neural spines, and considering the curvature and hint of
cancellous tissue apparent on the Vinson specimen, it also may have been made
from a rib or neural spine fragment. Similar tools are described and illustrated by
Lorrain (1967c:Figure 75) from the Gilbert Site.
Flat-tipped A wl/Hairpin/Bodkin
Two highly polished conical fragments resemble a blunt-pointed "needle"
described by Stephenson (1970:83) from Lake Whitney. The complete specimen
from the Stansbury Site has a slanted perforation at one end that enters the top
and exits through the wall (Stephenson 1970:Plate 4f); the opposite end is blunt.
The Vinson specimens exhibit characteristics of both ends of the Stansbury
example. The first has a flat-tipped working end on a conical bone tool fragment
6.7 cm in length (Figure 8d). The other specimen is almost a duplicate of the one
from Stansbury, in that it has a slanted perforation and a blunt (broken?) tip that
is 5.4 cm in length.
According to replicative studies by Richtsmeier (1980), a perforation where
the exterior circumference is greater than its interior can be made with either
stone or metal implements. The difference is detected macroscopically by the
scoring on the interior walls of the different holes. The metal blade creates coneshaped holes (as in the Vinson specimen); a stone tool produces irregular ridges
inside the perforation, appearing "stepped," reflecting the working edges of the
stone tool.
Both specimens from Vinson are polished to a high sheen and exhibit fine
longitudinal striations along their conical surfaces. Being flat-tipped, their function as awls is doubtful; an ornamental function is more likely. They do not,
however, fit the description of hairpins described by Olsen (1979:365) as being
"extremely large, highly polished staffs, with flat broad tips." Olsen (1979:357)
calls a selection of blunt-tipped awls from Grasshopper Ruin "problematical
because they bridge the gap.., between delicate sewing awls and ornamental
hairpins." If indeed the one broken specimen from Vinson that is perforated is
the same type as the other broken specimen that is flat-tipped, then perhaps both
could be called bodkins, or clothing fasteners. Lorrain (1968) describes a flat
polished awl with a rounded end from Crockett County, Texas, that may have
been used similarly to these from Vinson.
Grinding Tool
A left bison tibia fragment from House 5 shows evidence of burning and
grinding of the distal surface. The protuberances forming the sagittal plane are

Yates ~ Vinson Site Faunas

213

completely ground down to the level of the lateral facets; the medial malleolus is
likewise ground to this level. These abraded areas are also slightly charred as if
used to grind something hot. A similar specimen is reported from Awatovi
(Olsen and Wheeler 1978:60). In Texas, similar bone tool specimens have been
reported from sites in the Ray Roberts and Lewisville Lake areas of North
Central Texas (Yates and Ferring 1992) and from Early Caddoan components
(41DT6 and 41DT16) at Cooper Lake in Northeast Texas (Yates 1992).
Another specimen with evidence of grinding is a horn core from a pronghorn. It has been cut from the skull at the base, and then ground flat. The core
tissue is beveled around the base, and there is a small polished area in the beveled
tissue. Also, the anterior edge of the horn core, naturally blade-like, appears to
have some wear, and a slight sheen is evident. Lorrain (1967b) describes an
abraded antler from the Glass Site on the Red River that may have served a
similar function. However, the specific function of this element is unknown.
Chopping Tool

The broken diaphyses (shafts) of two right proximal bison femurs have
charred breaks and small singular areas of polish. When the shafts of long bones
are broken for marrow extraction, the resulting halves and splinters often have
jagged edges. The articular ends can then serve as handles for these dagger-like
objects. Many examples can be found in the North American literature (e.g.,
Frison 1974; Johnson 1976); however, Lyman’s (1984) caution regarding expediency tools is well founded. Nevertheless, the Vinson specimens have wear and
polish confined to a working edge that clearly indicates applied directional force
(see Halstead and Middleton 1972).
Gaming Pieces
Fifteen deer toes (phalanx I) have no proximal ends. Of these, only one
appears to have been ground and beveled, conforming to the shape of perforated
phalangeal cones used in cup-and-pin gaming devices (Figure 8e). None of the
phalanges from Vinson have perforated distal condyles, although five toe bones
do have damaged or degraded and weakened spots between the condyles. Guilday
(1963) illustrates some examples in which the proximal end is only roughly
trimmed (similar to the Vinson specimens), but all are perforated in the distal
ends. If modified at all, those found in the debris of House 5 might have been
discarded preforms or unfinished items.
Pendants
A beautifully-preserved, drilled bear canine (left maxillary) was recovered
from House 5 (Figure 8c). It is 7.44 cm long and 2.2 cm at its widest. Approximately 1.6 cm from the end of the root is an oblong to round perforation
measuring at most 6 mm (outer diameter) and tapering to an inner diameter of 2
mm. The hole was drilled from both sides; the hole is wider and deeper on the

214

Texas Archeological Society

buccal side and slants inward toward the root end. This side was probably drilled
first given that the lingual side of the tooth body is flatter and provides greater
stability. Faint longitudinal striae appear near the hole on both sides. Although
slightly root-etched, the ornament is well-polished over the entire specimen, with
the greatest amount of polish above the perforation. According to Wedel
(1959:208), drilled-bear teeth such as these are reminiscent of those found on
Hopewellian sites, but Lorrain (1967b:36) points out that this ornament type was
probably borrowed by the Wichita from the Caddo. Examples have been recovered from the Longest Site (Lorrain 1967a) on the Red River in Oklahoma and
from the Gilbert Site (Lorrain 1967c) in Rains County, Texas.
Two drilled bison incisors were also recovered from Vinson, although their
exact provenience is unknown. Both were referred to in site excavation notes as
drilled human teeth, but the morphology, slant of attrition, and enamel ridges
compare well with worn bovine incisors, probably bison. Drilled incisors and
canine from deer, coyote, raccoon, and puma have been found in Native American sites; drilled bison teeth are thus not surprising. The Vinson specimens were
perforated from both sides near the root tip. It is unknown if they were recovered
in close proximity to each other as possible remains of a necklace.
Beads

Two bone beads are included in the House 5 materials ~igure 8g, h). One is
2.53 cm in length with an inner diameter of 3.7 mm. It is subtriangular in crosssection with a bone wall thickness of approximately 1.4 mm. Species identification is undetermined. The other bone bead is an unusual specimen made from the
sternebrae of an unidentified mammal. It is small, 9 mm in length, and with a
total diameter of 3.3 mm. It may have been somewhat longer since one end has a
jagged fresh break; the opposite end is smooth and ground flat, showing the canal
structural of the sternebrae. Like the pendants, these beads probably served as
adornment. Similar ornaments are recorded from numerous aboriginal sites,
including Wichita sites along the Red River (Bell et al. 1967), the Gilbert Site
(Lorrain 1967c), from Kansas (Wedel 1959), and from prehistoric sites in the
Whitney Reservoir (Stephenson 1970).
Flute
An intact bone flute is made from the right ulna of an eagle. It is 14.2 cm
long, slightly curved as befits the element, and retains just enough of its diagnostic articulations at its distal end to identify it as an eagle, although exact species
determination is not possible. The Vinson specimen has six finger holes, averaging 3 mm in outer diameter and one mm inner diameter. The blowhole is
triangular, and located near the proximal end of the element with the apex of the
triangle pointed distally. Scoring scratches are visible on the flanks of the long
sides, and there is a distance of 3 cm between the apex of the blowhole and the
first finger hole. The flute is finished to a light polish, and the quill knobs of the

Yates ~ Vinson Site Faunas

215

ulna have been completely ground smooth. The finger holes are located approximately where the quill knobs had been. There are no other marks of decoration
on the object (Figure 9).
A flute from the Longest Site is the geographically and morphologically
closest comparative specimen. It is broken and has no finger holes, but its
blowhole is exactly the same as the Vinson flute (5 x 8 mm in size and with an
isosceles triangle shape). Other examples from the literature either have no
blowhole (cf. the Gilbert Site [Lorrain 1967c:Figure 75g]), or they have rectangular holes (Wedel 1959:Figure 70a), or they have oval holes (Jelks 1965).
Wedel (1959:597) recounts the presence of bone "flageolets" as a "Southwestern
feature" in some of the Dismal River sites in the Central Plains. Two examples
from Southwestern sites can be found in Awatovi (Olsen and Wheeler 1978) and
Grasshopper Pueblo (Olsen 1979).

Scored Rib
A 6 cm length of deer rib bears six parallel transverse cuts at one end. The
intervals between scorings vary between 1 and 2 mm over a length of approximately 1 cm. The scorings were made with a metal blade as indicated by the
hairline cuts with a retained lip of bone. The cuts are located on the inferior
(concave) surface of the midsection of the rib and were made either incidentally
during secondary butchering activities (i.e., filleting) or deliberately as part of
implement manufacture. What kind of implement these scored ribs represent is
not apparent. Wedel (1959) identifies such scored implements either as musical
rasps or as pottery stamping devices. Unlike deeply notched or grooved fragments found at other Texas sites (e.g., the Arnold Site at Cooper Lake [Doehner
and Larson 1978] and the Glass Site [Lorrain 1967b]), the Vinson specimen is
not scored deeply and would not make much sound nor would it leave deep
marks on pottery.
Modified Epiphysis

A proximal bison humerus had a large hole in the medial side of the head of
the humerus. The 6 mm diameter hole is ringed with small battered or pecked
areas. There are deep longitudinal grooves apparent inside the hole in the cancellous tissue. Remarkably, there is a description in the Wichita Pilot Study of a
"worked bison humerus head" from the Glass Site (Lorrain 1967b), and Lorrain
describes similar chopping marks on the outside of the cavity and removal of a
considerable amount of cancellous tissue. This modification may be due to the
removal of this nutritious tissue during food processing activities.
Curated Object (?)
A mineralized fragment of a fish dentition was submitted for analysis with
the bone tools. It is approximately 2.5 x 2 cm in size and bears the remains of
tooth sockets that compare well with those of modern sargo or sheepshead

216

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 9. Eagle Ulna Flute from the Vlnson Site, House 5.

(Archosargus probatocephalus). The exposed sockets are roughly triangular in
shape to accommodate the incisor-like forward teeth of this Gulf fish. It is so
thoroughly mineralized that its presence in the site is best explained as a curated
fossil.
Bone Artifacts of European Manufacture
Double-toothed Comb
This delicate specimen has lost many teeth, and its full length is indeterminable due to breakage (see Figure 8f). Nevertheless, its presence at Vinson is
considered to be additional evidence of the importance of European trade goods
at the site. The comb adequately fits Nrel Hume’s (1970) description of common

Yates ~ Vinson Site Faunas

217

seventeenth and eighteenth century lice combs. Wray (1963) calls these combs
"cootie" combs and describes them as having one row of teeth "usually fine
while the second row was usually coarser." Both rows of teeth on the Vinson
specimen are equally fine, there being less than a millimeter space between teeth
measured at the base. The execution of manufacture is very refined judging by
the regular spacing and linearity of the teeth. The distance between the rows (i.e.,
the body width) is 1.6 cm, maintaining an equal distance from completed end to
broken end, about 3.9 cm. The longest intact tooth measures 0.6 cm, excluding
the terminal teeth which measure four cm from tip to tip (greatest width) and are
each 4 mm wide at the base. The bone itself is probably a split mammal rib,
suggested by a slight curve in the length of the comb and traces of smoothed
cancellous tissue on the body. A lice comb from a nineteenth century historic site
(41DN157) in the Ray Roberts area is another comparable specimens from a site
in Texas (Yates and Ferring 1992).
Knife Handles

Five iron-pegged knife handles further evidence the use of European tools
at Vinson. The flat inner sides reveal manufacturing marks indicating use of
metal hand saws. These fragments still retain the iron pegs, and the remaining
two have indentations where the pegs had been. Each specimen is half of a pair
used to sandwich a knife shank secured by the iron pegs or rivets.
Riveted bone handles came into use in the early eighteenth century (N0el
Hume 1970). The Vinson bone handles were either trade items or possibly belonged to the later Anglo-American nineteenth century occupation, although all
metal utensils were more common in this later period except for ornamental
pieces. None of these specimens are decorated. In fact, one is rather crudely
made, still showing traces of the cancellous tissue on its underside, although
evidence of saw marks and iron rust are clearly visible at one end; its opposite
or outer side is scratched and scored, but the piece is too small to discern a pattern
of any kind. These handles may have been part of folding clasp knives. Clasp
knives usually have two rivets at each end, while the most complete specimen
from Vinson (length 8.6 cm) has three pegs and tapers from butt to shank insertion more like a table knife. A clasp knife, however, was found at the contemporaneous Longest Site with traces of bone adhering to the rust. Harris and Harris
(1967) comment that the handle from the Longest Site was "probably of English manufacture" not fitting the typical French trade knife pattern.
INVERTEBRATE MATERIAL

Approximately 50 items of invertebrate material were submitted for analysis. Remains of landsnails are noted, but were not examined for species identification. The analyzed materia! is exclusively bivalve or clam shell.
Seven of the specimens are complete enough to identify as Lampsilis
anodontoides (N=5) and Uniomerus tetralasmus (N=2). With few exceptions the

218

Texas Archeological Society

preservation of shell is fair to poor, many specimens being quite friable and
powdery. Both species are found in Texas where Lampsilis occupies a wide
variety of habitats including sand, gravel, or muddy bottoms in swift or slow
currents, and at variable depths; Uniomerus prefers muddy bottoms in shallow
waters (Parmalee 1967). Several unidentified specimens, on the other hand,
appear quite strong and fresh, retaining relatively sharp broken (or cut) edges.
SHELL ARTIFACTS
Button
A two-hole button measuring 2.4 cm in diameter was recovered from the
Vinson Site. The button may be of European manufacture, but it is quite rough
and rather crudely made. That is, the holes are of different sizes, there is no
finish to the artifact, and traces of the natural ribbing are visible on the shell’s
exterior.
According to Parmalee (1967:65), Lampsilis was "perhaps the most valued
shell used in the pearl button industry" because of its uniform thickness and
lustrous nacre. Although mussel shell buttons became a great industry late in
the nineteenth century (and this button then associated with the later AngloAmerican occupation at Vinson), its manufacture suggests attempts by the aboriginal inhabitants to mimic buttons possibly displayed by the European traders.
A two-hole shell button was recovered from a Protohistoric period Wheeler
Complex site in Oklahoma (Bell and Bastian 1967).
Pendant Blanks
That the aboriginal occupants at Vinson engaged in a shell industry is
evidenced by many fragments of cut shell from the assemblage. Whereas most of
the suspected preforms or blanks for pendants lack suspension holes, several
have the remains of drilled holes and are cut with notches that could have
retained a cord for suspension.
The criteria used to sort these modified shell fragments are the notches and/
or the partial suspension holes, as well as their shape and angularity. The latter
criterion is admittedly nebulous, but there is a distinct repetition of squares,
rectangles, and triangles with sharp angles and edges, suggesting deliberate
shaping and execution during manufacture. One Uniomerus valve had an excised
triangular blank. Similar triangular mussel shell pendants were found at the
Longest Site (Lorrain 1967a).
It is interesting to note that Noil Vinson has an object in his Vinson Site
collection that resembles these shell pieces although it is made of metal: the piece
is flat and triangular in shape and perforated with small, thin metal rings in the
hole. Another example of triangular pieces of flat metal used by a contemporary
group is found in a burial from the Longest Site (Bell et al. 1967:Fig. 40); a small
flat silver triangle was photographed in situ on the brow of Burial 5. Perhaps the

Yates m Vinson Site Faunas

219

introduced metal replaced shell in the progression of adornment manufacture for
these people.
Shell Spoons
At least one of the more complete Lampsilis valves exhibits a smooth
beveled exterior edge that resembles shell artifacts generally referred to as spoons
or scoops. It is one of the rather powdery specimens, and therefore its identification as such is tentative. Nevertheless, shell disks and shell spoons are reported
from the Glass and Coyote sites in the Wichita Pilot Study (Lorrain 1967a).
Possible Curated Object
A valve from a fossilized Rangia sp. was also submitted along with the
bone and shell artifacts. Unless the site has suitable outcrops for this kind of
fossil, it is suggested that, like the Archosargus dentary fragment, this ecofact
was introduced into the site and possibly curated by the inhabitants, either modem
or aboriginal.
SUMMARY

The animal remains from the late eighteenth century Vinson Site provide
information on the ecology of the site, as well as the subsistence habits and other
behavior patterns of the people that lived there. They hunted many different
animals for meat, hides, utensils, ornaments, and entertainment as revealed by
the bones left in the middens. They may have opportunistically exploited their
own refuse dumps by killing the scavengers that were drawn to the site by the
butchering debris. The ecotonal situation of the site supplied a variety of animals
for hunting, trapping, and fishing. Bison and deer provided the majority of meat,
although smaller game was also procured. The people probably had sufficient
nutrition from this diet as indicated by a pattern of minimal bone processing, an
abundance of animal resources with high species diversity, and the sheer bulk of
the midden contents. The cultural identity of the aboriginal occupants at Vinson
is probably Tawakoni, and not surprisingly, affinities exist among the modified
bones with those from eighteenth century Wichita sites of the Red River Valley
of Texas and Oklahoma.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was funded by the TAS Donor’s Fund, and it is with sincere
appreciation to C.K. Chandler, the Committee, and the Society for their support.
Some of the materials were identified with the aid of specimens kindly loaned by
Dr. Elizabeth Pillaert, Zoological Museum, University of Wisconsin. I would
also thank Dr. C. Reid Ferring for his endless encouragement of my research
endeavors and for use of the zooarcheological collections at the University of

220

Texas Archeological Society

North Texas. I am eternally grateful to Gerald Blow for the graphics and advice
on all things stylish. Gratitude is expressed to Dr. Timothy K. Perttula and Brian
Shaffer for commenting on the draft of this report, and to Nancy G. Reese and
Sam Melant for its preparation.
REFERENCES CITED
B astian, T.
1967

Beik, L.
1973

Native-made Artifacts from Historic Sites. In: A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian
Archeology and Ethnohistory, assembled by R. E. Bell, E. B. Jelks and W. W.
Newcomb, pp. 184-196. National Science Foundation, Grant GS-964, Washington, D. C.

Archeology and the Microscope. Fred A. Praeger, New York.

Bell, R. E. and T. Bastian
1967
Survey of Potential Wichita Archeological Remains in Oklahoma. In: A Pilot
Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory, assembled by R. E.
Bell, E. B. Jelks and W. W. Newcomb, pp. 119-127. National Science Foundation, Grant GS-964, Washington, D. C.
Bell, R. E., E. B. Jelks, and W. W. Newcomb (assemblers)
A Pilot Study of Wichita lndian Archeology and Ethnohistory. National Science
1967
Foundation, Grant GS-964, Washington, D. C.
Binford, L. R.
1981
Bones: Ancient Men and Modern Myths. Academic Press, New York.
Blair, W. F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 2(1):93-117.
Caras, R. A.
1967
North American Mammals. Meredith Press, New York.
Collins, H. H., Jr.
Complete Field Guide to North American Wildlife. Harper & Row, Publishers,
1981
New York.
Daly, P.
1969

Approaches to Faunal Analysis in Archaeology.AmericanAntiquity 34(2):146153.

Davis, W. B.
1978
The Mammals of Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife Bulletin 41, Austin, Texas.

Yates ~ Vinson Site Faunas

221

Doehner, K. and R. E. Larson
1978
Archaeological Research at the Proposed Cooper Lake, Northeast Texas,
1974-1975. Research Report 108. Archaeology Research Program, Southern
Methodist University, Dallas.
Ernst, C. H. and R. W. Barbour
1972
Turtles of the United States. University of Kentucky Press, Lexington.
Prison, G.
1974

The Casper Site: A Hell Gap Bison Kill on the High Plains. Academic Press,
New York.

Gilbert, M. E.
1969
Some Aspects of Diet and Butchering Techniques Among Prehistoric Indians
in South Dakota. Plains Anthropologist 14(46):277-294.
1973

Mammalian Osteo-Archaeology: North America. Missouri Archaeolog&al
Society Special Publications, Columbia.

1980

Mammalian Osteology. Published by the author, Laramie, Wyoming.

Gilmore, K. K.
1986
French-lndian Interaction at an 18th Century Frontier Post: The Roseborough
Lake Site, Bowie County, Texas. Contributions in Archaeology No. 3. Institute
of Applied Sciences, North Texas State University, Denton, Texas.
Gould, F. W.
1975
The Grasses of Texas. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Guilday, J.
1963
The Cup-and-Pin game. Pennsylvania Archaeologist 33(4):159-163.
Halstead, B. and J. Middleton
1972

Bare Bones: An Exploration in Art and Science. University of Toronto Press,
Toronto.

Harris, R. K. and I. M. Harris
1967
Trade Beads, Projectile Points, and Knives. In: A Pilot Study of W&hita Indian
Archeology and Ethnohistory, assembled by R. E. Bell, E. B. Jelks and W. W.
Newcomb, pp. 129-162. National Science Foundation, Grant GS-964, Washington, D. C.
Hasskarl, R. A.
1961
The Boggy Creek Site of Washington County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 30:287-300.
Heizer, R. F. and L. K. Napton
1969
Biological and Cultural Evidence from Prehistoric Human Coprolites. Science
165:563-568.

222

Texas Archeological Society

Homaday, W. T.
1887
The Extermination of the American Bison. United States National Museum,
Annual Report.
Jaques, H. E.
1947
How to Know the Land Birds. William C. Brown Co., Dubuque.
Jelks, E. B.
1962
The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County, Texas.
Archaeology Series No. 5. University of Texas, Department of Anthropology,
Austin.
1965

Archeology of McGee Bend Reservoir, Texas. Ph.D. dissertation, Department
of Anthropology, The University of Texas, Austin.

Johnson, E.
1976
Investigations into the Zooarchaeology of the Lubbock Lake Site. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Texas Tech University, Lubbock.
Leechman, D.
1951
Bone Grease. American Antiquity 16(1):355-356.
Lorrain, D.
1967a Artifacts from Prehistoric Sites. In: A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory, assembled by R. E. Bell, E. B. Jelks and W. W.
Newcomb, pp. 197-203. National Science Foundation, Grant GS-964, Washington, D. C.
1967b

The Glass Site. In: A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and
Ethnohistory, assembled by R. E. Bell, E. B. Jelks and W. W. Newcomb, pp.
24-44. National Science Foundation, Grant GS-964, Washington, D. C.

1967c

Bone and Shell Artifacts. In: The Gilbert Site: A Nortefio Aspect Site in
Northeastern Texas, edited by E.B. Jelks. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 37:212-219.

1968

Archeological Excavations in Northwestern Crockett County, Texas, 19661967. State Building Commission Archeological Program, Report No. 12,
Austin.

Lyman, R. L.
1984
Broken Bones, Bone Expediency Tools, and Bone Pseudotools: Lessons from
the Blast Zone around Mount St. Helens, Washington. American Antiquity
49(2):315-333.
Lynott, M. J.
1977
A Regional Model for Archaeological Research in Northcentral Texas. Ph.D.
dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University,
Dallas.

Yates ~ Vinson Site Faunas

223

McHugh, T.
1972
The Time of the Buffalo. Alfred A. Knopf, New York.
Nrel Hume, I.
1970
A Guide ofArtifacts of ColonialAmerica. Alfred A. Knopf, New York.
Oberholser, n,c.
The Bird Life of Texas. The University of Texas Press, Austin.
1974
Olsen, S. J. and R. P. Wheeler
1978
Bones from Awatovi. Papers of the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and
Ethnology 70(2):35-74. Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology,
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Olsen, S. L.
1979
A Study of Bone Artifacts from Grasshopper Pueblo, Arizona. The Kiva
44(4):341-373.
Parmalee, P. W.
1967
The Fresh-water Mussels of Illinois. Illinois State Museum Popular Science
Series, Vol. VIII, Springfield, Illinois.
Raab, L. M. (editor)
1982

Settlement of the Prairie Margin: Archaeology of the Richland Creek Reservoir, Navarro and Freestone Counties, Texas. Southern Methodist University,
Archaeology Research Program, Monographs, No. 1. Dallas.

Richtsmeier, J. T.
1980
Modified Bone Replication Experiment. Paper presented at the 38th Plains
Conference, November 5-8, Iowa City, Iowa.
Robbins, C. S., B. Bruun and H. S. Zim
1966
Birds of North America. Western Publishing Co., Inc., Racine, Wisconsin.
Schmidly, D. J.
1983
Texas Mammals East of the Balcones Fault Zone. Texas A&M University
Press, College Station.
Schorger, A. W.
1966
The Wild Turkey, its History and Domestication. Oklahoma State University
Press, Stillwater.
Severinghaus, C. W.
1949
Tooth Development and Wear as Criteria of Age in White-tailed Deer. Journal
of Wildlife Management 13 (2): 195 -216.
Shaffer, B. S.
1992
Quarter-Inch Screening: Understanding Biases in Recovery of Vertebrate
Faunal Remains. American Antiquity 57" 129-137.

224

Texas Archeological Society

Shay, C. T.
Later Prehistoric Bison and Deer Use in the Eastern Prairie Forest Border. In:
1978
Bison Procurement and Utilization: A Symposium, edited by L. B. Davis and M.
Wilson. Plains Anthropologist Memoir 14" 194-212.
Shotwell, J. A.
1955
An Approach to the Paleoecology of Mammals. Ecology 36(2):327-337.
Speth, J. S.
1983

Bison Kills and Bone Counts. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Stephenson, R. L.
1970
Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir Area, Central Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 41:37-277.
Thomas, D. H.
On Distinguishing Natural from Cultural Bone in Archaeological Sites. Ameri1971
can Antiquity 36(3):366-371.
Vehik, S.
1977

Bone Fragments and Bone Grease Manufacturing: A Review of Their Archaeological Use and Potential. Plains Anthropologist 22:169-182.

Walker, P. L. and J. C. Long
An Experimental Study of the Morphological Characteristics of Tool Marks.
1977
American Antiquity 42:605 -616.
Wedel, W. R.
An Introduction to Kansas Archeology. Bulletin No. 174. Smithsonian Institu1959
tion, Bureau of Ethnology, Washington, D. C.
White, T. E.
Observations on the Butchering Technique of Some Aboriginal Peoples, No. 2.
1953
American Antiquity 19(2):160-164.
Williams-Dean, G.
1978
Ethnobotany and Cultural Ecology of Prehistoric Man in Southwest Texas.
Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Botany, Texas A&M University, College
Station.
Wood, W. R.
Vegetational Reconstruction and Climatic Episodes. American Antiquity
1976
41(2):206-207.
Wray, C. F.
Ornamental Hair Combs of the Seneca Iroquois. Pennsylvania Archaeologist
1963
33:35-50.

Yates m Vinson Site Faunas

225

Yates, B. C.
1979a Observations on the Faunal Remains Recovered from the Franty Watson Site,
X41PP116. In: The Framy Watson Site and Palo Pinto County Archaeology,
edited by S. A. Skinner and T. Turner. Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
1979b

Observations on the Faunal Remains Recovered from Aquilla Lake Site,
X41HI171. In: Prehistoric Seulements at Aquilla Lake, Texas, edited by S. A.
Skinner. Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

1982a

Vertebrate Faunal Remains. In: Archaeological Investigations at the San
GabrielReservoir, Central Texas, edited by T. R. Hays, pp. 14/33-53. Institute
of Applied Sciences, North Texas State University. Final report to U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers, Contract DACW63-78-C-0012.

1982b

Bone Artifacts. In: Archaeological Investigations at the San Gabriel Reservoir,
Central Texas, edited by T. R. Hays, pp. 15/57-227. Institute of Applied
Sciences, North Texas State University. Final report to U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, Contract DACW63-78-C-0012.

1992

Zooarcheology of Four Woodland/Caddoan Sites at Cooper Lake. In: Excavations at the Tick, Spike, Johns Creek, and Peerless Bottoms Sites, Cooper Lake
Project, Delta andHopkins Counties, Texas, by R.C. Fields, E.F. Gadus, L. W.
Klement, C.B. Bousman, and J. B. McLerran, pp. 457-489. Review Draft.
Reports of Investigations No. 91, Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.

Yates, B. C. and C. Reid Ferring (editors)
1992
Holocene Archeology and Geoarcheology at Ray Roberts Lake, Northeentral
Texas. Institute of Applied Sciences, University of North Texas, Denton.
Submitted to U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Ft. Worth District, Contract No.
DACW63-C-0098.

227

Archeobotanical Evidence from the Cobb-Pool Site,
A Late Prehistoric Farmstead in
Dallas County, Texas
Gaffe J. Fritz

ABSTRACT
The flotation-recovered assemblage of archeological plant remains from the
Cobb-Pool site indicates heavy use of maize. Maize was present in 72.1 percent of
the 43 flotation samples analyzed, compared to 26.6 percent presence for acorn and
16.3 percent for walnut. Squash or gourd find, several types of edible wild seeds,
and a possible tuber were present in low frequencies. Although all maize remains
were loose, usually fragmentary kemels, cupules, glumes, and embryos, their
combined weight surpasses that of any other plant food type. It appears that people
living at Cobb-Pool departed from the generalized hunter-gatherer subsistence
strategy more typical of the Late Prehistoric period in North Central Texas by
intensifying maize production. The emphasis on gardening may have lasted only
a few years in this location, but it was likely repeated elsewhere, exemplifying the
flexibility and diversity of prehistoric adaptations.

INTRODUCTION
The purpose of this paper is to quantify and describe the archeological plant
remains from the Cobb-Pool site (41DL148) and to discuss their significance in
reconstructions of Late Prehistoric period subsistence in North Central Texas.
The Cobb-Pool site in southwestern Dallas County was occupied for a brief
period of time by people who probably grew maize (Zea mays ssp. m~ays) as a
major component of their subsistence strategy. The recovery of an
archeobotanical assemblage with plant food remains dominated by maize rather
than wild plants is unique in the Blackland Prairie and Cross Timbers region of
North Central Texas. Its current singular status may be due in part to the fact that
intensive flotation recovery was practiced by the archeologists from Southern
Methodist University’s Archaeology Research Program who excavated the CobbPool site. When more flotation is implemented at other sites in this area, additional evidence for serious maize production, even if relatively short-term in
duration, may well be presented.
No similar occupations, however, were found at other sites in the Joe Pool
Lake project area or at sites in the Richland/Chambers project area not far to the
southeast. The flotation samples from these other sites were dominated by nutshell and, to a lesser extent, by seeds and fragments of a possible tuber whose
identification is problematic ~ritz 1983, 1986, 1987a, 1987b; Martin et al.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeologieal Society 64 (1993)

228

Texas Archeological Society

1988). The Cobb-Pool occupation appears to represent a group of people who
departed from the food procurement strategy usually practiced in this area during
Late Prehistoric times by investing more heavily in farming, if only for a few
seasons.
HISTORY OF RESEARCH
The Cobb-Pool site, now inundated, is near the confluence of Mountain
Creek and Walnut Creek, tributaries of the Trinity River, not far from the
location of Joe Pool Dam to the southwest of the city of Dallas. The site was
recorded by R. King Harris and Forrest Kirkland in 1941, tested in 1979, and
excavated between 1984 and 1986 by the Archaeology Research Program of
Southern Methodist University under contract with the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, Ft. Worth District (Peter and McGregor 1988).
The excavations revealed a pattern of post holes, pits, and hearth features
interpreted as representing three circular structures, exterior storage or fooddrying platforms, and a large possible earth oven ~eature 2). Diagnostic artifacts
include grog-tempered pottery sherds with incised and punctated decorations and
a collection of arrowpoints with the Alba type as the most abundant (Peter et al.
1988). Radiocarbon dates indicate either a single, early 13th century A.D. occupation or two separate occupations, one at approximately A.D. 1100 and the
other in the early 13th century A.D., although:
whether the site was occupied during one period of the 13th century
A.D. or during two separate periods, the low densities of artifacts from
the Cobb-Pool site suggest that its occupation never extended beyond a
few years (Peter et al. 1988:194).

Recovery of carbonized plant remains was a high priority in the archeological research design for Joe Pool Lake (Moir et al. 1988), and soil flotation was
implemented. The first group of light and heavy fractions was sent to the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (UNC), where I analyzed them in 1985
under the direction of Richard A. Yarnell. In February 1986, I submitted an
archeobotanical report on 12 samples from Feature 2 and one sample each from
Features 3, 4, 6-9, and Post Hole 34 from the Cobb-Pool site, along with 29
samples from three other sites in the Joe Pool Lake Project area ~ritz 1986).
As a result of continuing mitigation efforts, 24 additional flotation samples
from the Cobb-Pool site were sent to the Ethnobotanical Laboratory at UNCChapel Hill later in 1986. These consisted of samples from Features 10 and 11,
from midden deposits, and from 18 post molds. The midden and post mold
samples typically contained very few carbonized remains. Most of these samples
were analyzed by a fellow graduate student, Kristen J. Gremillion. It had been
agreed that no new formal report was necessary if, as turned out to be the case,
previous interpretations were essentially unaltered. I verified identifications and
wrote a letter to the project’s Principal Investigator (Duane E. Peter), discussing

Fritz m Archeobotanical Evidence from the Cobb-Pool Site

229

the implications of the new work. The letter was accompanied by our tabulations
of the new samples’ contents.
The final publication on archeological research in the Joe Pool project area
(Peter and McGregor 1988) did not contain a separate chapter devoted to plant
remains. Instead, sections of the Fritz (1986) report were divided among the
chapters dealing with individual sites, and part of the "Discussion of Subsistence" section in Fritz (1986) was included in a chapter entitled "Exploitation of
Subsistence Resources Within the Mountain Creek Drainage" (Martin et al.
1988). In some cases, sentences were added by the main chapter authors, but the
reader cannot know who wrote what part of the chapter. In other eases, words I
considered important--such as "possibly" when an identification was uncertain-were omitted from the text.
This paper is then the first complete report of archeobotanical remains from
the Cobb-Pool site. Some interpretations differ from those in the Project report
(Peter and McGregor 1988) because they reflect my views alone, and some differ
because I now have seven years of additional paleoethnobotanical experience
and can draw upon contributions to the field by other paleoethnobotanists.

METHODS
Field Methods

The flotation recovery system used in the field was described as a 50 gallon
barrel modified by cutting an overflow chute and adding an overflow valve. The
inner flotation chamber, a five gallon bucket with a 1.6 mm screen bottom, was
attached to the top of the barrel. Buoyant materials that flowed over the chute
were caught in a series of wire mesh screens with openings of 3.2 mm, 1.6 mm,
and 0.8 mm. Duane Peter (personal communication) furnished the following
description of the flotation process:
The barrel is filled with water until it is overflowing. The flotation [soil]
sample is slowly added to the running water above the heavy fraction
screen within the flotation chamber. A garden hose provides the pressure needed to chum the sample within the flotation chamber. Once the
soil has been broken down by the churning water and manual stirring,
the overflow valve is closed. This results in the gradual rise of the water
level in the flotation chamber until it reaches the overflow chute which
directs the water and floated remains through a set of three screens
(light fraction). This process continues for 15 minutes. At the end of that
time, the overflow valve is opened, the water drained off, and the heavy
and light fraction screens are dumped onto newspaper for drying.
Both heavy and light fractions were sorted in the Project laboratory before
shipment to North Carolina, enabling archeologists to remove artifacts and animal
bones for study. For heavy fractions, all obvious carbonized macrobotanical

230

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

remains and any other black items larger than 2.0 mm that were possibly
carbonized plant remains were sorted out and sent, along with the residual matter
less than 2.0 mm from which modified lithic objects had been removed.
Larger grass stems and roots were removed from the light fractions prior to
mailing, and any non-botanical items larger than 2.0 mm were sorted out for
analysis in Dallas. The smaller screen samples (1.6 mm and 0.8 mm) of the light
fraction were sent with no preliminary sorting.
Laboratory Methods

In the Ethnobotanical Laboratory, each sample was weighed and, in order
to facilitate sorting, each Light Fraction and Heavy Fraction was passed separately through a series of graduated U.S. standard sieves with mesh sizes ranging from 4.0 mm to 0.42 mm. The resulting groups of particles larger than 2.0
mm were completely separated and weighed according to type of carbonized
plant and other material present. For certain types of plant remains---maize, acorn
shell, and tuber fragments--particles smaller than 2.0 mm but larger than 1.41
mm were also sorted out and weighed, as were particles of wood and nutshell if
these were not represented by larger fragments in the sample. Seeds of all sizes
were removed and counted. As stated above, the smallest particle size submitted for analysis came from the 0.8 mm screen of the flotation recovery system.
Most current flotation systems are equipped with light fraction mesh of 0.5 mm
or smaller, and some small seeds usually caught by flotation would, therefore,
have escaped recovery by this operation.
Subsamples were taken of two Heavy Fractions by passing the particles
smaller than 2.0 mm through a sample splitter. The Heavy Fractions of these
samples contained more than 200 g each of pebbles and shell fragments smaller
than 2.0 mm in size. One-half of each small-sized Heavy Fraction portion from
Feature 8 and Post Hole 34 was analyzed. Carbonized particles larger than 2.0
mm were analyzed in full, as were the entire contents of Light Fractions. Although Light and Heavy Fractions were analyzed separately and never physically combined, the values reported in Tables 1 through 3 represent sample totals,
with values for the two fractions added together.
Weights to the nearest 0.01 g were determined using an OHAUS 300 electronic balance. Identifications were made with the aid of the Ethnobotanical
Laboratory’s reference seed collection and by referring to standard published
seed manuals including Delorit (1970), Delorit and Gunn (1986), Martin and
Barkley (1961), and Montgomery (1977).
CONTENTS OF THE FLOTATION SAMPLES
Forty-three samples from the Cobb-Pool site were analyzed. Twenty of these
came from nine features (Table 1), nineteen samples came from post holes, and
the other four were from general midden deposits (Table 2).

Fritz ~ Archeobotanical Evidence from the Cobb-Pool Site

.

V

o.o.

0

~~~
VVVVVVVV

o.
V

.

0o
0

o.
V

o.

~J
~=~

00.°°

.N

VVVVV

t.

o

231

232

Texas Archeological Society
o

o
~D
o
o

o
o
oo
o

k~
¯

¯

¯
°

V

"

"

"

V

o.
o o
o

~o

to%

o

o

V

~

~
L) ~
." ~-~

o

o.

¯
V

¯

V

0¯
V

(~.

o.
o

,

V

V

~.~
~’~

o

~.~

o
t~

g

¯ ~

.~

.

.~

¯
o

0

m
0

o.~

Fritz m Archeobotanical Evidence from the Cobb-Pool Site

v

v

V

o

V

~

¯

0

v

V

V

~

~ ~

233

234

Texas Archeological Society

o.

o.

O0

v

o
v

"’VV

r-4

o.

c.i
o

o.
¢q
~J

U~

V

e-4

o.
’,0

V

V

e~
¯
V

¯

"

¯

oo
¯

"
~=~
°~

°~.~

Fritz m Archeobotanica[ Evidence from the Cobb-Pool Site

235

W~ and Nutshell
Wood charcoal was present in all 43 samples, weighing a total of 19.91 g.
Walnut shell fragments (Juglans nigra) were recognized in seven samples (Ubiquity Value [percent of samples containing item]=16.3 percent), weighing 1.02
g. Three samples (7.0 percent Ubiquity) contained small nutshell fragments, with
a total weight of 0.06 g, that could not be classified with confidence as walnut
due to a lack of distinctive surface relief. They are placed in the plant family
category of Juglandaceae, which also includes the genus hickory (Carya). Since
all larger fragments of nutshell could be identified as walnut, however, the small
fragments in these samples may be walnut as well. Those in Feature 10 possibly
came from pecan trees (Carya illinoensis) or other hickory species with thinshelled fruits, but the fragments are too small for walnut to be ruled out.
Acorn shell fragments were found in 11 samples (26.6 percent), but in such
small amounts that fragments larger than 1.41 mm in any given sample failed to
register on the electronic balance that measures weights to the nearest 0.01 g.
The total acorn shell weight of 0.06 g in Table 2 is a value derived by assigning
a weight of 0.01 g to each pair of samples containing items weighing less than
0.005 g, and rounding up to 0.01 g for odd samples. The presence of fragile
acorn shell fragments in 50 percent of the feature samples, a higher Ubiquity
Value than the 20 percent for the much more durable walnut shell, indicates that
acorns were probably the more important food type.
Possible Tuber and Rhizome

Two samples, Feature 10 and Post Hole 34, contained the substance common in flotation samples from sites in the Richland/Chambers Project area classified as possible Psoralea sp. tuber (Fritz 1983, 1987a, 1987b). Most of the
distinctive fragments from the Richland/Chambers archeobotanical assemblages
appear to be parts of the outer cortex. They have hard exterior surfaces that are
frequently finely striated and have raised blister-like features. Larger pieces are
curved, indicating ovoid or fusiform morphology. Inner surfaces are sometimes
hard and either smooth or striated like the exteriors, or they may appear more
porous and starchy; thickness and density vary greatly. Commonly, a laminated
structure can be observed, but the layers are hard, differing from the type of
leafy structure that would be representative of a bulb or bud.
The initial, tentative identification of this material as Psoralea sp. tuber
was suggested by Dr. Richard A. Yarnell and corroborated by Dr. William
Mahler at the SMU Herbarium when archeological specimens from Richland/
Chambers sites were compared under magnification with dissected tubers of
Psoralea latestipulata on herbarium sheets. It must be emphasized, however,
that this is not a firm identification. Underground plant parts are among the most
difficult to identify in the fragmented, carbonized state of the archeological record
(Pearsall 1989).

236

Texas Archeological Society

None of the possible tuber specimens from North Central Texas that I have
examined have diagnostic features that could enable an archeobotanist to make
a species-level determination, at least not without expensive, time-consuming
electron microscopy. None of the experimental digging, processing, and charring work on the dozens of local plants producing edible underground parts has
been done that would allow us to rule out genera other than Psoralea. This genus
is a best guess--still very tentative--based on the morphology of tiny fragments.
Inferences are influenced by the fact that the prairie turnip, Psoralea esculenta,
was an important food plant for native peoples living on the Great Plains during
historic, and presumably prehistoric times (Kaye and Moodie 1978; Wedel 1978).
Psoralea latestipulata is the closest species to Psoralea esculenta currently growing near the Richland/Chambers and Joe Pool Lake Project areas, but other
species in the genus grow in North Central Texas, some even in the Post Oak
Savannahs and Pineywoods east of the Blackland Prairie (Crane 1988; Gould
1975).
Regardless of the identity of the plant that produced these problematic fragments, they are poorly represented at the Cobb-Pool site. Fragments weighing a
combined total of less than 0.02 g occurred in only one feature and one post
hole. This contrasts with better representation of the possible tuber material at
the Baggett Branch site (41DL149) and at sites in the Richland/Chambers Project
area ~ritz 1983, 1986, 1987a, 1987b). In view of their scarcity at Cobb-Pool, I
question any interpretation of subsistence or degree of sedentism at this site that
invokes storage of Psoralea or any other tuber as a major factor in site occupation.
Rhizome weighing a total of 0.01 g was present in one Cobb-Pool sample.
Rhizome fragments are considerably more ubiquitous in other flotation-retrieved
archeobotanical assemblages from North Central Texas, and Crane (1988) suggests they may be lateral roots attached to Psoralea tubers. This is a distinct
possibility, and the resemblance was noticed while examining herbarium specimens of Psoralea during analysis of plant remains from the Richland/Chambers
project area. However, it is my impression that archeological rhizome fragments
are even less frequently assignable to genus or species than are tubers. The fragments from North Central Texas did not strike me as bearing anatomical features distinguishing them from rhizomes in flotation samples from other parts
of eastern North America, where they are usually considered incidental inclusions. The application of electron microscopy to specimens of this sort, however, would be a worthy enterprise. Because both rhizome and tuber fragments
are such minor categories at Cobb-Pool, their identification is unlikely to have
much impact on discussions of subsistence at this site.
Cucurbit Rind
Post Hole 16 yielded a single fragment of Cucurbita pepo rind. The rind
fragment’s thickness of 0.9 mm puts it within the range of both wild and

Fritz m Archeobotanical Evidence from the Cobb-Pool Site

237

domesticated pepo gourds and squashes. Late Prehistoric period maize agriculturalists in North America could have grown any of a variety of domesticated
gourds, squashes, and pumpkins, all of which fall into the species Cucurbita
pepo. It now appears likely that independent domestication of two lineages of
this species took place during prehistory (Decker 1988; Heiser 1989; Smith et al.
1992). Modern representatives of one lineage include jack-o-lantern pumpkins,
zucchinis, orange ball gourds and traditional Mexican calabaza varieties. The
other line includes summer crookneck, scallop or pattypan, and acorn squashes,
and various ornamental gourd types. Members of both groups could have been
present in North Central Texas by the early second millennium A.D. (Story
1990), although the latter was better represented in most of eastern North America
at the time of contact with Europeans in the sixteenth century. It is not impossible
that utilization of wild or weedy pepo gourds persisted into Late Prehistoric
times as well.
Maize
Maize was present in 31 samples (72.1 percent) from the Cobb-Pool site,
making it the most abundant plant food type both in terms of Ubiquity (percent
presence) and weight. Only two samples from features lacked maize. The fact
that maize was present in more than half of the posthole and midden samples is
impressive because of the low overall densities of plant remains in those types
of samples. Maize fragments weighed a total of 2.15 g, but the weight includes
soil hardened inside cupule cavities that could not be removed without potential
damage to the archeobotanical specimens. Even so, the abundance of maize at
this site relative to other plant food types is striking.
Kernel fragments were found in 10 samples, weighing 0.24 g, and cob pieces
occurred in 31 samples for a total weight of 1.91 g. All cob material consists of
loose individual cupules and loose glumes. The total number of sorted cupule
and glume pieces was 475. The 50 percent heavy fraction subsample from Feature 8 contained five cupules. Doubling this figure to project a 100 percent count
for Feature 8, there would be 480 cob pieces from the Cobb-Pool features. Most
of the cupules are fragmentary, however, so the actual number of original cupules could be lower. Since the fragments do not lend themselves to reconstruction, no attempt was made to estimate original cupule count. The hearth feature
(Feature 4) from the interior of Structure 1 accounts for 40 percent of the maize,
with 25 cupules from the Light Fraction and 176 from the Heavy Fraction in
addition to nine glumes, one embryo, and 0.07 g of kernel fragments.
Inferences concerning the type or types of corn being grown at the CobbPool site cannot be made using the fragmentary material available. Current
understanding of regional patterns of prehistoric maize morphology across the
Southern Plains and southwestern Eastern Woodlands is embryonic. Paths of
diffusion and patterns of local evolution have not been demonstrated (Adair 1988;
Ford 1981; Fritz 1990). Even if a good regional data base were available, loose

238

Texas Archeological Society

cupules are poor sources of comparative information. I agree with the following
statement by Bohrer (1985:22), who analyzed plant remains from two Washita
River focus sites in southwestern Oklahoma:
Since each individual cupule has undergone unknown amounts of
erosion and since no whole cobs are present, I believe I would misinform the reader by providing guestimates of row number and cupule
width. A better approach is to tabulate information from other Washita
River focus sites where intact cob sections are available for study.
Although the amount of information yielded by individual cupules and
kernels is limited, all whole specimens from Cobb-Pool were measured. The
single measurable kernel is 6.0 mm wide, 3.3 mm high, and 3.3 mm thick.
Cupule widths vary from 3.2 mm to 8.7 mm. The mean width for 57 cupules is
4.8 mm, with a standard deviation of 1.053 mm. These measurements are small
for prehistoric maize cupules. Average and median cupule widths (based on
measurements of cupules on complete cob segments, not loose cupules) of
Washita River focus sites in Oklahoma range from 5.9 to 7.0 mm (Bohrer
1985:49). Mean cupule width of loose cupules from the Late Woodland (A.D.
580-840) Deer Track site in the Mississippi River Valley of western Illinois is
5.89 mm (N. Asch and D. Asch 1985:90). Late Prehistoric period assemblages in
the Midwest and Northeast, particularly those dominated by 8-row cobs, have
still wider cupules (e.g., 7.2 mm median cupule width at the Angel site in Indiana
[Blake and Cutler 1979:54]). The measurable loose cupules from Cobb-Pool may
not represent cob midpoints and therefore may not be comparable to mean cupule
width values from sites with intact cob sections.
Seeds
Seeds were recovered from 21 samples (48.8 percent Ubiquity), for a total
of 47 seeds plus 10 small fragments considered unidentifiable (Table 3). The
most common seed, with a total of 27 specimens, is the small round vetch or wild
pea type likely to be a species of either Vicia or Lathyrus, or possibly including
seeds representing both genera. This seed type was present in 18 samples.
Specimens range in size from 1.4 mm to 2.2 mm in diameter. None have
sufficiently well preserved coats or hilum areas necessary for taxonomic
determination.
The second most common seed type is maygrass (Phalaris caroliniana),
with seven caryopses found in two samples (four in Feature 8 and three in Post
Hole 34). Two charred chenopod (Chenopodium sp.) seeds came from separate
samples. These are both biconvex specimens, with diameters of 1.1 and 1.2 mm
and relatively thick, deeply pitted seed coats. They are, therefore, morphologically
unlike the domesticated chenopod fruits from sites in the Midwest and Midsouth
(Fritz and Smith 1988), and are presumed to be weedy or wild. The two whole and
one fragmentary sumpweed kernels (Iva annua) from Features 8 and 10 do not

Fritz m Archeobotanical Evidence from the Cobb-Pool Site

239

Table 3
Seeds from the Cobb-Pool Site
Sample
No.
Feature 2
Level 3
Level 5
Level 6
*Level 6r
Level 7
Level 8
Level 9
Level 10
Level 11
Feature 3
Feature 4
Feature 6
Feature 8
Feature 9
Feature 10
Feature 11

Sump- Sun- Aster
weed flower family

Maygrass

Grass
family

Vetch

Cheno- Unid.
pod
Seed

1
1

1
1
1

2

Structure 1
PH 40
Structure 2
PH 32
PH 34

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
6
1
2
1

1
1

1
4

1

3

Post Hole D

1
2

2

2

1

Midden
Unit 266
TOTAL

Unid.
frag.

1
3

1

1

7

4

27

2

2

10

*Level 6 (Rodent)
represent the domesticated variety of this species. The larger whole kernel measures 1.8 x 1.7 mm; the smaller one measures 1.3 x 1.5 mm, well within the size
range for wild populations (D. Asch and N. Asch 1978; Yamell 1978).

240

Texas Archeological Society

Four grass seeds (Poaceae) from four separate samples could not be
identified to genus, nor could one small composite achene (Asteraceae). A
second Aster family achene, from Feature 10, is possibly a wild or weedy
sunflower (Helianthus sp.). Two additional Cobb-Pool seeds remain unidentified.
The vetch, maygrass, and sumpweed seeds deposited at this and other sites
in North Central Texas are likely to have been subsistence items, although low
absolute counts, densities, and ratios indicate nonintensive seed harvesting.
Maygrass and sumpweed are important components of archeobotanical assemblages across the eastern United States, and both are considered native crop plants
during the Woodland and Mississippian periods in some regions (D. Asch and
N. Asch 1985; Cowan 1978; Fritz 1990; Smith 1989; Watson 1989). This is also
true of Chenopodium, but the small numbers of chenopod seeds recovered from
sites in North Central Texas and theft wild-type morphology give the alternative impression that fruits of camp invaders or of weeds in maize gardens may
be represented.
The composite and grass family seeds may be products of prehistoric "seed
rain" within the human settlement. Conversely, they may be byproducts of use of
plants for purposes other than food.

Unknowns
Charred material larger than 2.0 mm that could not be assigned to any of the
above groups of plant remains occurred in 17 samples (39.5 percent Ubiquity).
This "Unknown" category has a total weight of 0.76 g and probably consists
primarily of unrecognizable bark and aberrant wood and nutshell fragments
rather than any other distinct plant type. Most pieces can best be described as
amorphous blobs.

DISCUSSION
Recovery and analysis of plant remains from the Cobb-Pool site document
maize production in the Trinity River basin on the border of the Blackland Prairie
and Cross Timbers belt during Late Prehistoric times. This is not astonishing in
light of the proximity of this area to agricultural societies in eastern Texas and in
the Red River Valley of southern Oklahoma, but previous arguments for agriculturally-based, semi-sedentary or sedentary settlements have not been backed up
by archeobotanical evidence. For example, Stephenson’s (1952) interpretation,
based on indirect evidence, that agriculture was practiced at Wylie Focus sites
was questioned by Lynott (1975) and Marmaduke (1975) when water screening
and pollen analysis failed to recover maize. A total of 22 maize cupules from
seven features and two non-feature samples came from the Richland/Chambers
project: four cupules from Bird Point Island (41FI201) and 18 (mostly fragmentary) from the Little Cedar Creek (41NV173) site. The presence, but low visibility, of maize indicates a generalized adaptation in which the most important plant
foods were nuts, wild seeds, fruits, and the problematic, possible tuber that might

Fritz ~ Archeobotanical Evidence from the Cobb-Pool Site

241

be a species of Psoralea. Although maize was available in North Central Texas
by the early second millennium A.D., it was rarely deposited in quantifies
enabling archeologists to register its presence (Story 1990:Table 56).
The significance of the Cobb-Pool site is that it represents a departure from
what now appears to be the usual subsistence strategy in the region. It may be a
minor site type but is unlikely to be unique: various groups probably invested
more energy in maize production during some years than others. Their choices
may have been influenced by short-term climatic fluctuations or by social rather
than (or as well as) environmental factors. Farming--possibly on a scale small
enough to be more appropriately categorized as gardening--was one option that
could be incorporated successfully at certain times. It did not replace collection
of wild plant foods, especially acorns, walnuts, pecans, and, where locally available, thick-shelled hickory nuts. If gardening was done by women, as would be
expected based on ethnohistoric observations (Swanton 1942, 1979), it did not
necessarily interfere with hunting¯ Although year-round occupation may have
been feasible, other scenarios are possible:
It may be that the occupants.., used the Cobb-Poo! site as a base
camp from which they ventured for hunting trips and other seasonal
activities. It is possible that the site was vacated during certain periods
of the year and was returned to for the planting or harvest season ~eter
et al. 1988:194).
The site’s location on Siliwa sandy loam soil--the best soil in the region
for crop production--and the dominance of maize in the archeobotanical assemblage make it seem likely that corn was grown in the immediate vicinity rather
than acquired by exchange with agricultural groups such as the Caddoans living
to the east. The possibility that the Cobb-Pool occupants were themselves
Caddoan people who ventured onto the Blackland Prairie during budding-off or
short-term expansion episodes cannot be denied on the basis of the plant remains.
Moir et al. (1989) argue that this interpretation is reasonable, and I agree that it
should be kept open to reconsideration in future research efforts.
At this time, however, the majority opinion held by prehistorians responsible for study of the Joe Pool Lake resources is that:
¯.. similarities to Caddoan sites are too generalized to indicate more
than indirect ties to Caddoan people to the east. Instead, the Cobb-Pool
site represents an example of a local group of people who borrowed
some ideas from neighbors .... Corn, as a domesticated plant, was
added to their food resources to compensate for any unexpected changes
in wild plant and animal populations (Moir et al. 1988:32).
This site, then, exemplifies the flexibility and diversity displayed by Native
American people in prehistoric North Central Texas and underscores both the
challenges of recognizing intra-regional variability and the complexity of interpreting prehistoric patterns of subsistence.

242

Texas Archeological Society
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I am grateful to my paleoethnobotanical colleagues Richard Yamell, Kristen
Gremillion, and Cathy Crane for valuable advice and laboratory assistance, to
botanical consultants William Mahler and James Massey for help with herbarium
research and plant systematics, and to archeological colleagues Dee Ann Story,
Duane Peter, Bill Martin, and David Jumey for information enabling me to
attempt regional interpretations of North Central Texas prehistory. I would like
to thank my parents, Genie and Ned Fritz, for raising me on Bachman Creek,
another tributary of the Trinity River not far from Mountain Creek. Although I
am a Dallas County native, my archeological expertise lies mainly elsewhere,
and responsibility for any errors or other shortcomings this distance may have
exacerbated is all mine.

REFERENCES CITED
Adair, M. J.
PrehistoricAgricultureintheCentralPlains.UniversityofKansasPublicadons
1988
in Anthropology No. 16, Lawrence.
Asch, D. L. and N. B. Asch
The Economic Potential of Iva annua and its Prehistoric Importance in the
1978
Lower Illinois Valley. In: The Nature and Status of Ethnobotany, edited by R.
I. Ford, pp. 301-341. Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan,
Anthropological Papers No. 67, Ann Arbor.
1985

Prehistoric Plant Cultivation in West-Central Illinois. In: Prehistoric Food
Production in North America, edited by R. I. Ford, pp. 149-203. Museum of
Anthropology, University of Michigan, Anthropological Papers No. 75, Ann
Arbor.

Asch, N. B. and D. L. Asch
Archaeobotany. In: Deer Track: A Late Woodland Village in the Mississippi
1985
Valley, edited by C. R. McGimsey and M. D. Conner, pp. 44-117. Center for
American Archeology, Kampsville Archeological Center, Technical Report
No. 1. KampsviUe, Illinois.
Blake, L. W. and H. C. Cutler
1979
Plant Remains from the Upper Nodena Site (3MS4). Bulletin of the Arkansas
Archeological Society 20:53-58.
Bohrer, V. L.
1985
Pilot Ethnobotanical Investigations at Two Southwestern Oklahoma Archaeological Sites of the Washita River Focus, 34Wa2 and 34Cu27. Report Prepared
for the National Science Foundation, Grant to the University of Oklahoma,
Department of Anthropology.

Fritz ~ Archeobotanical Evidence from the Cobb-Pool Site

243

Cowan, C. W.
1978
The Prehistoric Use and Distribution of Maygrass in Eastem North America:
Cultural and Phytogeographical Implications. In: The Nature and Status of
Ethnobotany, edited by R. I. Ford, pp. 263-288. Museum of Anthropology,
University of Michigan, Anthropological Papers No. 67, Ann Arbor.
Crane, C. J.
1988
The Cooper Lake Archaeobotanical Remains: Results from the First Season.
Report on file, Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University,
Dallas.
Decker, D. S.
1988
Origin(s), Evolution, and Systematics of Cucurbita pepo (Cucurbitaceae).
Economic Botany 42:3-15.
Delorit, R. J.
1970
An Illustrated Taxonomy Manual of Weed Seeds. Agronomy Publications,
River Falls, Wisconsin.
Delorit, R. J., and C. Gunn
1986
Seeds of Continental United States Legumes (Fabaceae). Agronomy Publications, River Falls, Wisconsin.
Ford, R. I.
1981

Gardening and Farming Before A.D. 1000: Patterns of Prehistoric Cultivation
North of Mexico. Journal ofEthnobiology 1:6-27.

Fritz, G. J.
1983
Analysis of Flotation Data:Archaeobotanical Remains. In: Season Two (1983)
Mitigation of Prehistoric Archaeology in the Richland/Chambers Reservoir,
Navarro and Freestone Counties Texas:Interim Report, by J. E. Bruseth, G.
J. Fritz, R. Huggins, M. Irvine, E. F. Janak, Jr., W. A. Martin, D. E.
McGregor, L. M. Raab, and G. W. Rutenberg, pp. 188-199. Archaeology
Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
1986

Analysis of Carbonized Plant Remains from Prehistoric Sites in the Joe Pool
Lake Project Area, North Central Texas. Report Submitted to the Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

1987a

Analysis of Carbonized Macrobotanical Remains. In: The Bird Point Island
and Adams Ranch Sites: Methodological and Theoretical Contributions to
North Central Texas Archaeology, edited by J. E. Bruseth and W. A. Martin,
pp. 129-136. Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Richland Creek Technical Series, Vol. II. Dallas.

1987b

Macrobotanical Remains [from the Adams Ranch Site]. In: The Bird Point
Island and Adams Ranch Sites: Methodological and Theoretical Contributions to North Central Archaeology: edited by J. E. Bruseth and W. A.
Martin, pp. 244-247. Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist
University, Richland Creek Technical Series, Vol. II. Dallas.

244

Texas Archeological Society

1990

Multiple Pathways m Farming in Precontact Eastem North America. Journal
of World Prehistory 4:387-435.

Fritz, G. J., and B. D. Smith
!988
Old Collections and New Technology: Documenting the Domestication of
Chenopodium in Eastern North America. Midcontinental Journal of Archaeology 13:3-27.
Gould, F. W.
1975
Texas Plants: A Checklist and Ecological Summary. Texas A&M University, The Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, College Station.
Heiser, C. B., Jr.
1989
Domestication of Cucurbitaceae: Cucurbita and Lagenaria. In: Foraging
and Farming: The Evolution of Plant Exploitation, edited by D. R. Harris
and G. C. Hillman, pp. 471-480. Unwin Hyman, London.
Kaye, B. and D. W. Moodie
1978
The Psoralea Food Resource of the Northern Plains. Plains Anthropologist
23 (82): 329-336.
Lynott, M. J.
1975

Archaeological Excavations at Lake Lavon 1974. Contributions in Anthropology No. 15. Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

Marmaduke, W. S.
1975
The Wylie Focus: A Reassessment by the Analysis of Three Typical Sites.
M.A. thesis, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Martin, A. C. and W. D. Barkley
1961
Seed Identification Manual. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Martin, W. A., B. C. Yates, and G. J. Fritz
1988
Exploitation of Subsistence Resources within the Mountain Creek Drainage.
In: Late Holocene Prehistory of the Mountain Creek Drainage, edited by D.
E. Peter and D. E. McGregor, pp. 325-349. Archaeology Research Program,
Southern Methodist University, Joe Pool Lake Archaeological Project, Vol.
I. Dallas.
Moir, R. W., M. M. Green, F. Winchell, and D. H. Jumey
1989
Can Material Culture and Ethnicity be Reconciled for the Late Prehistoric
Caddoan Culture Area? Paper presented at the 1989 Caddo Conference,
Norman, Oklahoma.
Moir, R. W., D. E. Peter, D. H. Jurney, and D. E. McGregor
1988
Archaeological and Historical Investigations of Joe Pool Lake, North Central Texas. Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University,
Dallas.

Fritz m Archeobotanical Evidence from the Cobb-Pool Site

245

Montgomery, F. H.
1977
Seeds and Fruits of Plants of Eastern Canada and Northeastern United
States. University of Toronto Press, Toronto.
Pearsall, D. M.
1989
Paleoethnobotany : A Handbook of Procedures. Academic Press, New York.
Peter, D. E. and D. E. McGregor (editors)
1988
Late Holocene Prehistory of the Mountain Creek Drainage. Archaeology
Research Program, Joe Pool Lake Archaeological Project, Vol. I. Southern
Methodist University, Dallas.
Peter, D. E., D. E. McGregor, B. C. Yates, G. J. Fritz, and J. E. Bruseth
1988
Site 41DL148: The Cobb-Pool Site. In: Late Holocene Prehistory of the
Mountain Creek Drainage, edited by D. E. Peter and D. E. McGregor, pp.
131-198. Archaeology Research Program, Joe Pool Lake Archaeological
Project, Vol. I. Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Smith, B. D.
1989
Origins of Agriculture in Eastern North America. Science 246:1566-1571.
Smith, B. D., C. W. Cowan, and M. P. Hoffrnan
1992
Is It an Indigene or a Foreigner? In: Rivers of Change, by B. D. Smith, pp.
67-100. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D. C.
Stephenson, R. L.
1952
The Hogge Bridge Site and the Wylie Focus. American Antiquity 17:299312.
Story, D. A.
1990
Culture History of the Native Americans. In: The Archeology and
Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain, by D. A. Story, J. A. Guy, B. A.
Bumett, M. D. Freeman, J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, and K. J.
Reirthard, pp. 163-366. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Research Series
No. 38. Fayetteville.
Swanton, J. R.
1942
Source Material on the History and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians. Bureau
of American Ethnology Bulletin 132, Washington, D. C.
1979

The Indians ofthe Southeastern United States. Reprinted edition. Smithsonian
Institution Press, Washington, D. C.

Watson, P. J.
1989
Early Plant Cultivation in the Eastern Woodlands of North America. In:
Foraging and Farming: The Evolution of Plant Exploitation, edited by D. R.
Harris and G. C. Hillman, pp. 555-571. Unwin Hyman, London.

246

Texas Archeological Society

Wedel, W. R.
Notes on the Prairie Turnip (Psoralea esculenta) among the Plains Indians.
1978
Nebraska History 59(2): 1-25.
Yamell, R. A.
1978
Domestication of Sunflower and Sumpweed in Eastern North America. In:
The Nature and Status of Ethnobotany, edited by R. I. Ford, pp. 289-299.
Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, Anthropological Papers
No. 67, Arm Arbor.

247

Pisgah Ridge Chert Distributions: Evidence for
Changing Territorial Size
in North Central Texas
Daniel E. McGregor

ABSTRACT
This paper examines the distribution of a spatially restricted, visually distinctive North Central Texas source of chert (Pisgah Ridge chert). Projectile points
made from this material are identified from archeological sites in the Middle
Trinity River basin and adjacent drainages. The spatial distributions of these
artifacts are interpreted as indicating a progressive reduction in group territorial
size through time.

INTRODUCTION

Recent syntheses of North Central Texas prehistory have emphasized changes
through time in the adaptive strategies of the hunter-gatherers and horticulturalists
that occupied this region (Lynott 1981; Story 1985; Bruseth et al. 1987; Prikryl
1987; Story et al. 1990). Although archeological interpretations are still hampered
by significant factual gaps, the general sequence of developments is reasonably
clear. Suggested developmental trends in the prehistoric use of North Central
Texas include: growing regional populations; increasing sedentarism; and reduction in the size of group territories.
In general outline, these same trends can be recognized for much of North
America, and, indeed, throughout much of the world’s temperate zones during the
Holocene period. Such developments can be characterized as part of an "intensification" of human adaptive strategies (Binford 1983:208-213; O’Brien 1987:182;
Ebert and Kohler 1988:132). One aspect of this intensification process is that
increased population size and "packing" (Binford 1983:210-211) of groups in a
region are accompanied by an increasing localization of resource exploitation. As
geographical regions became packed with people, group mobility was restricted
and resource exploitation was concentrated within smaller territories.
One line of evidence used to support the reduction of group territorial size in
North Central Texas has been the fact that lithic raw material use became progressively more localized during the Holocene (see McGregor 1987a). The frequent
use of presumably non-local, high-quality cherts during the earlier time periods
was replaced by an increasing dependence upon locally available quartzites.
Additional evidence for reductions in territorial size through time is provided by a
study of lithic material use reported in this paper.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64 (1993)

248

Texas Archeological Society

The geographical area of this study is centered within the Middle Trinity
River basin of North Central Texas (Figure 1). The locally available lithic resources in this region occur primarily in upland gravel deposits containing pebbles
Forl

Worth

Dallas

Sabine

Richland

River

C r ee~l

LEGEND
JTehuaeana Limestone
W
Outcrop

Figure 1. Map of the Study Area.

OKnown Source of Pisgah
Ridge Chert
\

and cobbles of quartzite, silicified wood, and chert (Byrd 1971; Menzer and
Slaughter 1971). Although some regional variability exists, the materials in these
gravels are petrologically similar across a widespread geographical area, making
it impossible to attribute artifacts made of these materials to specific source
locations. This circumstance traditionally has restricted the development of lithic
resource utilization studies in this particular region of Texas.
In contrast to most lithics in this area, a far more limited source can be
demonswated for one visually distinctive variety of chert, namely Pisgah Ridge
chert. Numerous collections from archeological sites within the study area have
been examined for artifacts made from this material. The spatial distribution of the
projectile points made from Pisgah Ridge chert is reported in this paper, and this
distribution provides a unique source of evidence about the relative extent of
prehistoric group territories.

McGregor ~ Pisgah Ridge Chert Distributions

249

TRENDS IN NORTH CENTRAL TEXAS PREHISTORY

Any attempt to reconstruct demographic and settlement trends in North
Central Texas prehistory must consider the fact that the major river and creek
valleys of the region have undergone significant changes during the Holocene. It
is important to determine whether recognized archeological gaps resulted from a
lack of former habitation, from erosion of coeval sediments or surfaces, or from
more recent sedimentation over large areas. In North Central Texas, geological
factors hamper our ability to locate and investigate archeological remains from
certain time periods.
Terraces along the Trinity River and its major tributaries are all Late Pleistocene (ca. 20,000 years B.P.) and older in age (Ferring 1986, 1990:261). These
stream valleys were deeply incised in the Late Pleistocene and aggraded rapidly,
though perhaps discontinuously, throughout the Holocene period. The alluvial fill
beneath the floodplains can be as much as 20 meters thick (Ferring 1986, 1990;
McGregor 1987b). Most of the natural channel cutbanks are only about six meters
deep, and expose mainly Late Holocene sediments. While the inner river and
creek valleys no doubt were occupied during earlier periods, much of this evidence is buried even more deeply under the modern floodplains and, therefore, is
not accessible to discovery by standard survey techniques.
Clearly, demographic reconstructions based only on evidence from surface
sites will be biased, especially for the earlier prehistoric periods. The terraces
along the floodplain margins are of sufficient age that site components of all time
periods could be represented. Unfortunately, these sites are most often multicomponent and mixed by bioturbation and pedoturbation processes. These special
problems need to be considered during the following discussion of North Central
Texas prehistory.
Environmental conditions during the Late Pleistocene (ca. 14,000-11,000
years B.P.) were moister and cooler than those of today, and there is evidence
for diminished seasonality with cooler summers and moister winters ~erring
1990:254). Interpretations of the pollen record indicate that grasslands were
replacing the full glacial parklands (Bryant and Holloway 1985). By the Early
Holocene period (11,~-8,000 years B.P.), grasslands dominated the Southern
Plains, although climatic conditions were still relatively moist by modern
standards.
The early Paleoindian Clovis groups entering North Central Texas near the
end of the Pleistocene apparently found a region without other human populations. Throughout the Paleoindian period (12,000-8,0~ years B.P.), high settlement mobility over very large geographical areas and rather brief stays at any one
site are thought to be indicated by the wide geographical distributions of projectile
point styles, frequent use of exotic lithic materials, and a meagerness of archeological remains at the few excavated campsites in or near the North Central Texas
region. Because population densities were very low, there most likely was a
relative lack of competition for resources.

250

Texas Archeological Society

The Middle Holocene (ca. 8,000-4,000 years B.P.) was dominated by the
Atlantic climatic period, generally believed to have been the driest and wannest
time during the Holocene (Bryson et al. 1970; Wendland 1978:278-280). This
resulted in significant shifts in species diversity and plant community composition. In general, xerophytic species proliferated and expanded their distributions.
Mesophytic flora, with limited tolerance for seasonally extreme temperatures,
declined in extent and density (Story 1985:25).
While it has been recognized that the paucity of Early Archaic period (ca.
8,000-5,000 years B.P.) sites is partly the result of the geological factors mentioned above, the available evidence indicates that population densities remained
quite low. Although the Early Archaic correlates in time with the Atlantic
climatic period, regional researchers have been slow to consider what effects the
presumably warmer and drier conditions had on human adaptive strategies. Only
Story (1985:25-39) has addressed this question explicitly, suggesting that
ecotonal areas may have been exploited more frequently during this prolonged
period of aridity.
This general failure to pursue the relationship between environment and
human adaptation is due, at least in part, to the lack of sufficiently detailed
archeological data for the Early Archaic of North Central Texas. Materials believed to date to this period have been recovered primarily from surface collections and mixed site contexts. No isolated Early Archaic site components have
been excavated, and in fact, the recognition of an Early Archaic occupation in
North Central Texas is based primarily on the presence of projectile point types
that have been dated to this time period in adjacent regions (Prikryl 1990:51-52).
Because these Early Archaic artifact types are so widely distributed, Story
(1985:35) has suggested that group mobility remained high and that territories
were large and not well defined (see also Prikryl 1990:71).
Beginning about 5,000 years B.P., the dry conditions began to ameliorate, and
by the Late Holocene (4,000 years B.P. to present) essentially modern climatic
patterns appear to have been established in North Central Texas. However, it is
likely that significant climatic fluctuations continued to occur during the Late
Holocene. After about 1,000 years B.P., evidence for another drying trend is
widely documented, apparently culminating in significant environmental changes
by 750-650 years B.P. in North Central Texas.
Although better known than the preceding period, the Middle Archaic period
(5,000-3,000 years B.P.) occupation of North Central Texas is neither well documented nor adequately dated. An increase in the number of known sites over that
of the earlier periods generally is interpreted as an increase in regional population.
At geologically stable terrace sites, Middle Archaic materials are found mixed
with remains from later periods of occupation. This is the first period for which
Holocene floodplain components are widely exposed in the cutbanks of stream
channels, although excavations at these sites have been very limited. Documented
Middle Archaic site features include substantial deposits of mussel shells in
floodplain sites and small, rock-lined hearths in both floodplain and terrace sites.

McGregor ~ Pisgah Ridge Chert Distributions

251

The Middle Archaic apparently correlates in time with the period of climatic
amelioration that presumably increased habitat productivity. While population
increase might be expected under these environmental conditions, demographic
reconstructions remain imprecise due to both geological factors and a lack of
temporal control. The fact that more regionally distinct artifact styles can be
identified for the Middle Archaic led Story (1985:40) to suggest the development
of smaller spheres of intensive group interaction and an increasing recognition of
territorial boundaries relative to earlier periods (see also Prikryl 1990:71-73).
The most convincing evidence related to the intensification of adaptive
strategies in North Central Texas comes from the Late Archaic period (3,0(~
1,200 years B.P.). A significant increase in population, based on marked increases
in both the numbers of sites and the occupational debris at many of them, is
recognized consistently for the Late Archaic (Lynott 1981:105; Story 1985:52;
Bruseth et al. 1987:237; Prikryl 1987:185). There is increasing evidence that the
vast majority of these sites can be attributed to the latter part (after 2,100 years
ago) of the Late Archaic period. Within the Middle Trinity drainage, the second
half of this time period (2,100-1,200 years B.P.) has been designated the Transitional Archaic (Bruseth et al. 1987:236). The large "Wylie" pits that appear
around 2,100 years B.P. in the Trinity River Basin have been interpreted to have
functioned as territorial markers in a time of increasing regional population
(Bruseth 1987:245; Bruseth and Martin 1987a:283-284).
One line of evidence that has been interpreted as indicating reductions in the
size of group territories comes from studies of lithic material utilization. The
frequent use of presumably non-local, high-quality cherts during the earlier time
periods was replaced by an increased dependence on locally available quartzites
during the Late and, in particular, the Transitional Archaic (Crook and Harris
1952:24; Grady 1978; McGregor 1987a; Prikryl 1987:185-186). This trend toward localization of lithic resource exploitation continues into the following
temporal period.
The beginning of the Late Prehistoric period (1,200-300 years B.P.) is
marked by the introduction of the bow and arrow and ceramics. Evidence for
the use of cultigens has been found throughout North Central Texas, but their
relative economic importance appears to have been quite variable in different
parts of the region and at different times during the Late Prehistoric period.
Further population increases during the early portion of the Late Prehistoric
period have been suggested for some parts of North Central Texas (Bruseth
1987:143). Increasing sedentafism is indicated by the presence of house structures dated to about 850 years B.P. in both the Middle Trinity (Bruseth and
Martin 1987b:166) and the Upper Trinity peter and McGregor 1988) River
drainages.
A drying trend beginning around 1,000 years ago appears to have affected
the distributions of vegetation and faunal resources in North Central Texas. This
environmental change can also be related to regionally significant changes in
the archeological record that occurred around 650-550 years B.P. Throughout

252

Texas Archeological Society

North Central Texas, these changes included an increase in the exploitation of
bison, and a decline in the intensity of occupation.
The drier environmental conditions are thought to have resulted in the eastward expansion of mixed-grass prairies in North Central Texas (Lynott 1979)
and South Central Oklahoma (Drass and Flynn 1990:188); the mixed-grass prairies were preferred by bison. The initial appearance of, or notable increase in,
bison remains is evident in sites dating after ca. 650 years B.P. throughout North
Central Texas (Story et al. 1990:425). However, the relative economic importance of bison is not precisely known, since these sites often contain the remains
of a variety of other animals and plants, including small amounts of maize.
A decline in the regional intensity of occupation is indicated most clearly
by evidence of a decrease in the utilization of residential sites relative to the
earlier part of the Late Prehistoric period (Bruseth et al. 1987:245-247; Peter
and McGregor 1988:367). The later sites lack evidence for substantial structures
and related domestic features, indicating a higher degree of settlement mobility
compared to that of the preceding period. Possible coeval changes in group territorial size have not been given adequate consideration to explain these indications of increased settlement mobility. That such changes may be detectable is
suggested by documented increases in the percentage of chert versus quartzite
arrow points in comparison to those diagnostic of the earlier part of the Late
Prehistoric period (McGregor 1987a:188; Prikryl 1987:148).
PISGAH ~DGE CHERT

This material is easily distinguished from other chert varieties because it
contains abundant pelecypod and gastropod shell fragments that give it a speckled appearance. The unweathered matrix is black (2.5YR2/0) in color, although
it weathers to a white (7.5YR8/0) patina. It occurs as nodules and small seams
in the Tehuacana limestone member of the Kincaid formation on Pisgah Ridge.
Pisgah Ridge is a prominent limestone-capped escarprhent located about six km
west of the town of Richland, in Navarro County, Texas (see Figure 1).
Within the area of Pisgah Ridge, the limestone is exposed discontinuously
over a distance of nine km. To the south it is present below the surface but does
not outcrop again for a distance of 15 km. North of Richland Creek the limestone is not seen again until a point approximately 75 km to the northeast. An
archeological survey of the entire Pisgah Ridge escarpment demonstrated that
outcrops of this chert are restricted to an area atop the ridge that is two km long
by 0.3 km wide.
The Tehuacana limestone member outcrops over a total distance of 200 km,
and could possibly contain chert at other locations. Reconnaissance surveys have
been made of Tehuacana limestone outcrops on both the north and south sides
of Lake Tawakoni on the Sabine River, and in the vicinity of Lake Mexia on the
upper Navasota River (McGregor 1987a). No chert outcrops were discovered in
these areas, and it seem likely that the chert outcrop on Pisgah Ridge is the only

McGregor ~ Pisgah Ridge Chert Distributions

253

source of this material. The fortunate combination of visual distinction, and a
highly localized area of outcrop, makes Pisgah Ridge chert extremely important
from an analytical perspective when examining variations in its use over time
and space.
DISTRIBUTIONAL STUDY
Projectile points made from Pisgah Ridge chert, diagnostic of all time periods
from Late Paleoindian (10,000-8,000 years B.P.) to Late Prehistoric (1,200-300
years B.P.), were recovered during archeological investigations at Richland/
Chambers Reservoir (Bruseth and Martin 1987c; McGregor and Bruseth 1987a).
In addition to the Richland/Chambers collections, several others have been
examined for Pisgah Ridge chert artifacts (Table 1). In many cases, only the
chipped stone tools were studied. However, the lithic debris assemblages have
been examined for the collections from Richland/Chambers Reservoir, Joe Pool
Lake, Tennessee Colony Lake, Lake Palestine, and three sites at Lake Whitney.
Three private collections from sites within the study area also were examined: the Young, Harper, and Reading collections. The Young collection remains
in the possession of Mr. Bill Young of Corsicana, Texas, and is the best documented of the three. Mr. Young’s extensive collection was made from numerous sites located primarily along the Middle Trinity River, Richland and
Chambers creeks, and Aquilla Creek. The Harper collection is curated at Southern Methodist University, and primarily includes sites in the Upper Trinity River
drainage in Dallas and Denton counties. The only Pisgah Ridge chert artifacts
in the Harper collection are from two sites, one in Ellis County and one in
Navarro County. The Reading collection is on display at Navarro College in
Corsicana, Texas. It includes artifacts from sites within both the Middle Trinity
and Upper Navasota River drainages. Unfortunately, the locations of most of
Reading’s sites are based on verbal descriptions only. The original map showing site locations was not available for study.
Most sites yielding Pisgah Ridge chert artifacts were located within the
Middle Trinity River basin, including both Richland and Chambers creeks (Figure 2). However, this material was found to be present at sites in the adjacent
Sabine, Neches, Brazos, and Navasota fiver drainages. Many of the artifacts from
these sites are lithic debris or chipped stone tools that are poor chronological
indicators. In all, 39 different sites contained one or more projectile points made
of Pisgah Ridge chert (Table 2 and Figures 3-5).
This study documented only three projectile points thought to be diagnostic
of the Late Paleoindian or Early Archaic periods. Two of these are San Patrice
points and the third is a Dalton point with the blade reworked into a drill (Figure 3a). Interestingly, two of these specimens are from sites at Lake Fork Reservoir on a tributary of the Sabine River (Figure 6) and are farther from the
known source of Pisgah Ridge chert than any other artifact documented in this
study.

254

Texas Archeological Society
Table 1
Artifact Collections Examined for Pisgah Ridge Chert Artifacts1

Sites/Lakes

Joe Pool Lake
Testing and Excavations
Lake Tawakoni
Limerick Site (41RA8) Excavation Collection
Lake Fork Reservoir
Testing and Excavation Collection
Lake Bardwell
Pecan Springs Site (41EL11) Excavation
Collection
Cedar Creek Lake
Wild Bull Site (41HE61), Lacy Site (41HE70),
and Gossett Bottoms Site (41KFT) Excavation
Collections
Lake Palestine
Testing and Excavation Collections
Lake Whitney
SMU Excavations only-Bear Creek Shelter
(41HI17), Bowling Pin (X41BQ8), and Indian
Springs (X41HI5)
Aquilla Lake
SMU Survey and Testing collections only
Navarro Mills Lake
Strawn Creek Site (41NV67) Excavation
Collection
Richland/Chambers Reservoir
Testing and Excavation Collections
Tennessee Colony Lake

Chipped
Stone
Tools

Lithic
Debris

x

X

x
x
x

X

x

x

x

x

X
X

x

x

x

x

¯ Survey and Testing Collections
1 Reservoir locations shown in Figure 2.

Because the Tehuacana limestone outcrops only about 40 km west of the
Lake Fork sites, it might be reasonable to suggest that an additional source of this
chert may exist there. However, this is unlikely because the chipped stone tool
collection from the Limerick site (Duffield 1959) at Lake Tawakoni was examined
and found to contain no Pisgah Ridge chert artifacts. The Tehuacana limestone

McGregor ~ Pisgah Ridge Chert Distributions

Fort Worth

255

Dallas

kilometers

LEGEND

1
2
3
4
5
6

Joe Pool Lake
Lake Tawakonl
Lake Fork Reservoir
Lake Bardwell
Cedar Creek Lake
Lake Palestine

e

Site Location

7
8
9
10
11

Lake Whitney
Aqullla Lake
Navarro Mills Reservoir
Rlehland/Chambers Reservoir
Proposed Tennesee Colony Lake
Tehuncana Limestone

A Approxlmale Site Location

Figure 2. Locations of Sites Containing Artifacts Made from Pisgah Ridge Chert.

outcrops at Lake Tawakoni (see Figure 2), and if another source of this material
was located in this part of the Tehuacana limestone, its presence in the Limerick
site assemblage would be expected.
Although several similar projectile point chronologies have been proposed
for North Central Texas (McGregor and Bruseth 1987b; Prikryl 1987:104-132;
Story 1990:214-217), it should be noted that some parts of the sequence are
neither well documented nor adequately dated. Expanding stem dart points are
thought to be generally diagnostic of the Middle Archaic (5,000-3,000 years B.P.)
and Late Archaic (3,~-2,100 years B.P.) periods in the Richland/Chambers
Reservoir area. In contrast, contracting stem dart points occur primarily in the
Transitional Archaic (2,100-1,200 years B.P.) period, while arrow points are

256

Texas Archeological Society
Table 2
Sites from which Pisgah Ridge Chert Projectile Points
Have Been Recovered
Sites

Late Paleo-Indian
41FIE03 (San Patrice)
X41WD 13 (reworked Dalton)
X41WD15 (San Patrice)
Expanding Stem Dart Points
41EL1 (Harper’s Bristol site)
41ELll (Pecan Springs site)
Young’s HE26 (Henderson Co.)
Reading’s Tom Tramel Farm site
Young’s 1-116 (Hill Co.)-Kupek site
41HI88 (MaUouf and Baskin
1976:Figure 16c)
Reading’s Site #21
Young’s FR1 (Freestone Co.)
Reading’s Rush Creek site
41NV63 (Powell site)
41NV145
41NV177 (Adams Ranch site)
41FT200 (Hardy site)
41FT201 (Bird Point Island)
Miller’s Lake Palestine site
Straight Stem Dart Points
Young’s N9 (Navarre Co.)
41NV96
41NV182
41NV184
41FT202
Contracting Stem Dart Points
Reading’s Blackhills site

41NV63 (Powell site)
Reading’s Daniel Farm site

Associated Drainage

Figure

Richland Creek
Lake Fork Creek
Lake Fork Creek

3a
3b

Trinity River
Waxahachie Creek
Trinity River
Trinity River
Aquilla Creek
(Brazos Tributary)
Brookeen Creek
(Brazos Tributary)
Navasota River
Trinity River
Rush Creek
(Richland Creek Tributary)
Chambers Creek
Richland Creek
Richland Creek
Richland Creek
Richland Creek
Neches River

Richland Creek
Richland Creek
Richland Creek
Richland Creek
Richland Creek

Briar Creek
(Chambers Creek
Tributary)
Chambers Creek
Trinity River

3e

3d

3g
3i
3f, h, j

4d
4a
4e, f
4c
4b

McGregor ~ Pisgah Ridge Chert Distributions
Reading’s Wolf Creek site

41NV6 (Strawn Creek site)
Reading’s Ed Carroll site
Reading’s Rush Creek site
Young’s N6 (Navarro Co.)
Young’s N107 (Navarro Co.)
41NV206 (Guy’s Garden)
41FT201 (Bird Point Island)
Young’s FR3 ~reestone Co.)
Reading’s Site #116
Arrow Points
Reading’s Tom Tramel Farm site
Young’s N33 (Navarro Co.)
Reading’s Ed Carroll Farm site
Reading’s site #113
41NV203 (Polecat Hill)
41I’rV182 (Irvine site)
41NV171
41F1201 (Bird Point Island)

Wolf Creek
(Richland Creek Tributary)
Richland Creek
Richland Creek
Richland Creek
(Richland Creek Tributary)
Richland Creek
Richland Creek
Richland Creek
Richland Creek
Trinity River
Navasota River

Trinity River
Rush Creek
(Trinity Tributary)
Richland Creek
Richland Creek
Mesquite Creek
(Richland Creek Tributary)
Richland Creek
Chambers Creek
Richland Creek

257

4h
4i
4k
41

4j

5g

5h-j
5d, e
5f
5a-c

representative of the Late Prehistoric period (1,200-300 years B.P.). Straight stem
dart points are more difficult to place chronologically, as variations on this stem
form seem to have been present throughout the Middle Archaic, Late Archaic, and
Transitional Archaic periods.
With the exception of the San Patrice and Dalton points from Lake Fork
Reservoir, the expanding stem dart points are distributed farthest from the known
source (see Figure 6). Expanding stem dart points have been recovered from sites
along the middle Trinity River drainage, the Neches River, the Navasota River,
and tributaries of the Brazos River (Aquilla and Brookeen Creeks). Progressively
smaller clusters are formed by the sites containing contracting stem dart points
and arrow points, respectively (see Figure 6). Reductions through time in the
spatial distribution of Pisgah Ridge chert projectile points clearly are indicated by
these data.
INTERPRETATIONS
The idea that the presence of non-local lithic materials can provide an
indication of the geographical scale of hunter-gatherer settlement systems has

258

Texas Archeological Society

F

G

H

{

J

~CrP,

Figure 3. Expanding Stem Dart Points from Sites in North Central Texas Made from Pisgah
Ridge Chert: (a) X41WD13, (b) X41WD15, (c) HE26, (d) FR1, (e) 41EL1, (f, h,j) 41FI’201,
(g) 41NV145, (i) 41NV177.

been discussed recently in the archeological literature (Binford 1979; Goodyear
1979; Meltzer 1984; Binford and Stone 1985; Gould and Saggers 1985). Based on
ethnographic evidence, Binford (1979:259) suggested that mobile hunter-gatherers tend to obtain lithic materials while going about their normal subsistence tasks.
He observed that the lithic material types in a gwen site assemblage are primarily
a function of the raw materials available in the site cachment area, plus some that
had been procured from the areas of previously occupied sites (Binford 1979:260).
In such cases, the material types within a given assemblage can be seen as a
relative measure of the spatial extent of the occupying group’s territory.
Within a larger region of Texas that includes portions of the present study
area, the documentation of caches and the widespread occurrence of artifacts
made from high quality Central Texas cherts suggests that long distance trips to
quarries and/or interregional exchange activities were involved in the procurement
and distribution of those materials (e.g., Mallouf 1981; Shafer 1981; Tunnell
1979). This does not seem to have been the case for Pisgah Ridge chert. Even
within sites located very close to its source, this material constitutes only a minor
portion (less than five percent) of the chipped stone assemblages (McGregor
1987a). Its sporadic and limited occurrence in collections from sites located more
than 50 km from the source argues against significant long distance direct
procurement or exchange of Pisgah Ridge chert. To account for the regional

McGregor ~ Pisgah Ridge Chert Distributions

G

H

I

J

259

K

Figure 4. Straight and Contracting S tem Dart Points from Sites in North Central Texas Made
from Pisgah Ridge Chert: (a) 41NV96, (b) 41FT202, (c) 41NV184, (d) N9, (e, f) 41NV182,
(g) 41FF171B, (h) N6, (i) N107, (j) FR3, (k) 41NV206, (1) 41FT201.

distribution of Pisgah Ridge chert projectile points, it is suggested that a more
appropriate model should involve the movement of this material through huntergatherer settlement systems in the form of curated artifacts (cf. Binford 1973;
Schiffer 1975; Bamforth 1986).
For the time span for which adequate data were recovered (ca. 5,000-300
years B.P.), the investigations at Richland/Chambers Reservoir documented a
developmental sequence of hunter-gatherer adaptations to a changing local environment (Bruseth 1987; Bruseth et al. 1987). Cultigens appear in the archeological
record after 650 years B.P., but only as a supplement to a subsistence economy
based on the exploitation of wild plant and animal resources. While artifacts
diagnostic of the Paleoindian and Early Archaic periods are known from surface
collections and mixed contexts, there is currently a lack of isolable site components attributable to these periods in the Middle Trinity River basin.
The frequent use of high quality, non-local lithic materials is considered
characteristic of the Paleoindian period in North Central Texas (Lynott 1981:101),
and for North America in general (e.g., Goodyear 1979; Meltzer 1984). This
pattern of raw material use is interpreted most often as evidence that Paleoindian
adaptations were characterized by high settlement mobility over very large territories. The sample of Pisgah Ridge chert points assignable to the Late Paleoindian
period is too limited to allow definite conclusions on raw material use. However, it

260

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 5. Arrow Points from Sites in North Central Texas Made from Pisgah Ridge Chert:
(a----c) 41FF201, (d, e) 41NV182, (f) 41NV171, (g) N33, (h--j) 41NV203.

Dallas

/
kilometers
LEGEND

P = Paleoindian Point
C = Contracting Stem Dart
S - Straight Stem Dart
E = Expanding Stem Dart
A = Arrow

f= Tehauacana Limetone Outcrops
O = Known Source of Pisgah Ridge Chert
Extent of Pisgah Ridge Chert Distributioa
Middle Archaic Period
Transitional Archaic Period
............................... Late Prehistoric Period

Figure 6. Locations of Sites Containing Projectile Points Made from Pisgah Ridge Chert
Showing Decrease in Areal Distribution Over Time.

McGregorE Pisgah Ridge Chert Distributions

261

probably is significant that the San Patrice and Dalton specimens from Lake Fork
Reservoir were the farthest found from the known source of all the projectile
points documented by this study. A relatively high degree of settlement mobility
may be indicated for this early time period. In addition, the reworking of Dalton
point blades is thought to be a trait common to this type (Goodyear 1974) mad
indicates a relatively long uselife for that particular Pisgah Ridge chert specimen
(see Figure 3a).
Although better known than the preceding time periods, the Middle and Late
Archaic occupation of the Middle Trinity River basin is not well documented nor
adequately dated. The features and low artifact densities at stratified alluvial sites
of this time span suggest a series of short-term occupations by small huntergatherer groups. It is suspected that the higher artifact densities found at geologically stable terrace sites represent composites of numerous, short-term occupations.
The distribution of expanding stem dart points made from Pisgah Ridge chert may
indicate that group territories were still large enough to include more than one of
the major river drainages of the region.
In contrast, the distribution of the contracting stem dart points seems to
indicate that Transitional Archaic groups confined their settlement systems to
significantly smaller territories. This evidence is consistent with the often-noted
increase in the number of sites dating to this period and to an apparent increase in
population density (Lynott 1981:105; Story 1985:52; Bruseth et al. 1987:237;
Prikryl 1987:185). The large "Wylie" pits that appear during the Transitional
Archaic period in the Trinity River Basin have been interpreted as having functioned, at least in part, as territorial markers in a time of increasing regional
population (Bruseth 1987:245; Bruseth and Martin 1987a:283-284).
The further reduction in the spatial distribution of the Pisgah Ridge chert
arrow points may indicate even smaller territories for Late Prehistoric period
peoples when compared to the Transitional Archaic period. Increasing sedentarism
is indicated by the presence of house structures at Richland/Chambers Reservoir,
dated to around 850 years B.P. (Bruseth and Martin 1987b:166), and further
population increases have been suggested for the early portion of the Late Prehistoric period 03ruseth 1987:143). Unfortunately, the Pisgah Ridge chert arrow
point sample is small and many specimens cannot be assigned to a temporally
diagnostic type. For these reasons, their distribution offers little insight into
possible variations in territorial size for the three temporal phases that have been
defined for the Late Prehistoric period in North Central Texas (Bruseth et al.
1987:240-247).
CONCLUSIONS

Pisgah Ridge chert is a lithic resource with a distinctive physical appearance
and limited source area, making it ideal for studies of its procurement, distribution, and utilization. The study presented in this paper has attempted to use the
spatial distribution of temporally diagnostic Pisgah Ridge chert projectile points

262

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

to identify changes through time in the relative size of prehistoric group territories.
It should be noted that the distributions shown in Figure 6 are not meant to
represent the actual territorial limits of any particular prehistoric social groups.
Rather, they are thought to provide only a relative measure of group territories
during the temporal periods represented.
The results of this study are interpreted as indicating a progressive reduction
in group territorial size through time. While artifacts of Paleoindian and Early
Archaic age were too limited in number to allow det’mite conclusions, it is notable
that two projectile points diagnostic of the Late Paleoindian period were located
farthest from the known source of Pisgah Ridge chert of all the artifacts documented by this study. Aside from those two specimens, expanding stem (Middle
and Late Archaic) dart points were distributed farthest from the source, circumscribing an area that includes portions of the Neches and Brazos River drainages,
along with most of the Middle Trinity River Basin. Progressively smaller clusters
were formed by the distributions of the contracting stem (Transitional Archaic)
dart points and the Late Prehistoric period arrow points, respectively. It is concluded that these later groups were confined to progressively smaller territories
through time, most likely as the result of increasing population pressures and the
intensification of adaptive slrategies.
These results are consistent with other lines of archeological evidence from
this region. Several previous studies of North Central Texas lithic assemblages
have indicated that raw material utilization became increasingly localized during
the Holocene (Crook and Harris 1952:24, 27; Grady 1978; McGregor 1987a;
Prikryl 1987:185-186), and reductions through time in territorial size have been
inferred. The results of the present study complement those of earlier studies and
provide a visual illustration of the relative changes that may have been involved in
these changes in territorial size.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Many people have helped in gathering the information reported in this paper.
Most important to me has been the continuing interest and advice of Bill Young. I
especially thank Bill for the many field trips and for the long-term loan of artifacts
from his well-documented collection. Others who provided important information
include Larry Banks, Ross Fields, Dave Jurney, Tim Perttula, Duane Peter, Joe
Saunders, Dee Ann Story, and Billy Tallant. David Meltzer and Garth Sampson
provided valuable comments on earlier versions of major parts of this paper. I
thank my wife, Bridget, for editing the manuscript and for her computer expertise.
My interest in Pisgah Ridge chert developed during my participation in Southem
Methodist University’s Richland Creek Archaeological Project. I thank the Principal Investigators of that project, Jim Bruseth and Mark Raab, for encouraging me
to pursue my research interests in a contract setting. The work at Richland/
Chambers Reservoir was funded by the Tarrant County Water Control and Improvement District, No.1.

McGregor m Pisgah Ridge Chert Distributions

263

REFERENCES CITED
Bamforth, D. B.
1986
Technological Efficiency and Tool Curation. Amer&an Antiquity 51(1):3850.
Binford, L. R.
Interassemblage Variability- the Mousterian and the ’Functional Argument.’
1973
In: Explanation of Culture Change: Models in Prehistory, edited bY C.
Renfrew. pp. 227-254. Duckworth, London.
1979

Organization and Formation Processes: Looking at Curated Technologies.
Journal of Anthropological Research 35:255-273.

1983

In Pursuit of the Past: Decoding the Archaeological Record. Thames and
Hudson, New York.

Binford, L. R., and N. M. Stone
1985
"Righteous Rocks" and Richard Gould: Some Observations on Misguided
Debate. American Antiquity 50:151-153.
Bruseth, J. E.
1987
Late Holocene Environmental Change and Human Adaptive Strategies in
Northeast Texas. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University.
Bruseth, J. E., and W. A. Martin
1987a The Wylie Focus: Cultural Reality or Archaeological Myth? In: The Bird
Point Island and Adams Ranch Sites: Methodological and Theoretical Contributionsto North Central Texas Archaeology, edited by J. E. Bruseth and
W. A. Martin, pp. 267-284. Richland Creek Technical Series, Volume II,
Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
1987b

Chronological Assessment: the Culture-Historical Framework. In: The Bird
Point Island and Adams Ranch Sites: Methodological and Theoretical Contributions to North Central Texas Archaeology, edited by J. E. Bruseth and
W. A. Martin, pp. 159-167. Richland Creek Technical Series, Volume ]],
Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

1987c

(editors) The Bird Point Island and Adams Ranch Sites: Methodological and
Theoretical Contributions to North Central Texas Archaeology. Richland
Creek Technical Series, Volume II, Archaeology Research Program, Southem Methodist University, Dallas.

Bruseth, J. E, D. E. McGregor, and W. A. Martin
1987
Hunter-Gatherers of the Prairie Margin: Summary of the Prehistoric Archaeological Record. In: Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations Along the Prairie
Margin: Site Excavations and Synthesis of Prehistoric Archaeology, edited
by D. E. McGregor and J. E. Bruseth, pp. 229-256. Richland Creek Technical Series, Volume III, Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.

264

Texas Archeological Society

Bryant, V. M., Jr., and R. G. Holloway
1985
Late Quaternary paleoenvironmental Record of Texas. In: Pollen Records of
Late Quaternary North American Sediments, edited by V. M. Bryant, Jr. and
R. G. HoUoway, pp. 39-70. American Association of Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas.
Bryson, R. A., D. A. Baerreis, and W. M. Wendland
1970
The Character of Late-Glacial and Post-Glacial Climatic Changes. In: Pleistocene and Recent Enviromnents of the Central Great Plains, edited by W.
Dort, Jr. and J. K. Jones, Jr., pp. 54-74. Special Publication No. 3, Department of Geology, University of Kansas, Lawrence.
Byrd, C. L.
Origin and History of the Uvalde Gravels of Central Texas. Baylor Geologi1971
cal Studies Bulletin 20, Baylor University, Waco.
Crook, W. W., Jr., and R. K. Harris
1952
Trinity Aspect of the Archaic Horizon: Carrollton and Elam Foci. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 23:7-38.
Drass, R. R., and P. Flyrm
Temporal and Geographic Variations in Subsistence Practices for Plains
1990
Villagers in the Southern Plains. Plains Anthropologist 35 (128): 175-190.
Duffield, L. F.
1959
The Limerick Site at Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains County, Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 30:51-116.
Ebert, J. I., and T. A. Kohler
The Theoretical Basis of Archaeological Predictive Modeling and a Consid1988
eration of Appropriate Data-Collection Methods. In: Quantifying the Present
and Predicting the Past: Theory, Method, and Application of Archaeological Predictive Modeling, edited by W. J. Judge and L. Sebastian, ]pp. 97-171.
U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Land Management Service Center, Denver.
Ferring, C. R.
Late Quaternary Geology and Environments in the Upper Trinity Basin. In:
1986
An Assessment of the Cultural Resources of the Upper Trinity Basin, Dallas,
Tarrant, and Denton Counties, Texas, edited by B. C. Yates and C. R.
Ferring, pp. 32-112. Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas State University, Denton.
1990

Archaeological Geology of the Southern Plains. In: Archaeological Geology
of North America, edited by N. P. Lasca and J. Donahue, pp. 253-266.
Centennial Special Volume 4, Geological Society of America, Boulder.

McGregor ~ Pisgah Ridge Chert Distributions

265

Goodyear, A. C.
1974
The Brand Site: A Techno-Functional Study of a Dalton Site in Northeast
Arkansas. Research Series No. 7, Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Fayetteville.
1979

A Hypothesis for the Use of Cryptocrystalline Raw Materials among PaleoIndian Groups of North America. Research Manuscr~vt Series No. 156,
Institute of Archaeology and Anthropology, University of South Carolina,
Columbia.

Gould, R. A., and S. Saggers
1985
Lithic Procurement in Central Australia: a Closer Look at Binford’s Idea of
Embeddedness in Archaeology. American Antiquity 50:117-136.
Orady, M. A.
1978
Considerations of the Texas Archaic Interaction Sphere. Paper presented at
the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Society for American Archaeology, Tucson.
Lynott, M. J.
1979
Prehistoric Bison Populations of Northcentral Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 50:89-101.
1981

A Model of Prehistoric Adaptation in Northern Texas. Plains Anthropologist
26(92):97-110.

Mallouf, R. J.
1981
A Case Study of Plow Damage to Chert Artifacts: the Brookeen Creek
Cache, Hill County, Texas. Office of the State Archeologist Reports No. 33,
Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
MaUouf, R. J., and B. J. Baskin
1976
Archeological Surveys in the Tehuacana Creek Watershed, Hill and
McClermen Counties, Texas. Office of the State Archeologist Survey Report
No. 19, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
McGregor, D. E.
1987a Lithic Raw Material Utilization. In: Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations Along the
Prairie Margin: Site Excavations and Synthesis of Prehistoric Archaeology,
edited by D. E. McGregor and J. E. Bruseth, pp. 185-195, Richland Creek
Technical Series, Volume 1II, Archaeology Research Program, Southern
Methodist University, Dallas.
1987b

Late Quaternary Geology and its Archaeological Implications. In: Introduction to the Richland Creek Project: Environmental Background and Cultural
Setting, edited by J. E. Bruseth and R. W. Moir, pp. 55-58. Richiand Creek
Technical Series, Volume I, Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

266

Texas Archeological Society

McGregor, D. E., and J. E. Bruseth
1987a (editors) Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations Along the Prairie Margin: Site Excarations and Synthesis of Prehistoric Archaeology. Richland Creek Technical
Series, Volume hi, Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.
1987b

Artifact Chronology. In: Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations Along the Prairie
Margin: Site Excavations and Synthesis of Prehistoric Archaeology, edited
by D. E. McGregor and J. E. Bruseth, pp. 171-184. Richland Creek Technical Series, Volume m, Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.

Meltzer, D.
On Stone Tool Procurement and Settlement Mobility in Eastern Fluted Point
1984
Groups. North American Archaeologist 6(1): 1-23.
Menzer, F. J., and B. H. Slaughter
Upland Gravels in Dallas County and Their Bearing on the Former Extent of
1971
the High Plains Physiographic Province. Texas Journal of Science 22(23):217-222.
O’Brien, M. J.
1987
Sedentism, Population Growth, and Resource Selection in the Woodland
Midwest: A Review of Coevolutionary Developments. Current Anthropology 28(2):177-197.
Peter, D. E., and D. E. McGregor (editors)
1988
Late Holocene Prehistory of the Mountain Creek Drainage. Joe Pool Lake
Archaeological Project, Volume I, Archaeology Research Program, Southem Methodist University, Dallas.

Prikryl, D. J.
A Synthesis of the Prehistory of the Lower Elm Fork of the Trinity River.
1987
Unpublished M.A. Thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.

1990

Lower Elm Fork Prehistory. Office of the State Archeologist Report No. 37,
Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Schiffer, M. B.
1975
The Effects of Occupation Span on Site Content. In: The Cache River
Project: an Experiment in Contract Archaeology, assembled by M. B.
Schiffer and J. H. House, pp. 265-269. Research Series No. 8, Arkansas
Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Sharer, H. J.
Archeological Investigations at the Attaway Site, Henderson County, Texas.
1981
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 52:147-178.
Story, D. A.
Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the ’,Vest Gulf Coastal Plain. In:
1985
Prehistoric Food Production in North America, edited by R. I. Ford, pp. 19-

McGregor m Pisgah Ridge Chert Distributions

267

56. Anthropological Papers 75, Museum of Anthropology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor.
1990

Cultural History of the Native Americans. In" The Archeology and
Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain, Volume 1, by D. A. Story, J. A.
Guy, M. D. Freeman, B. A. Bumett, J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive,
and K. J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. Research Series No. 38, Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

Story, D. A., J. A. Guy, D. G. Steele, B. A. Bumett, and M. D. Freeman
1990
Gulf Coastal Plain Adaptation Types: A Preliminary Statement. In: The
Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain, Volume 2, by D.
A. Story, J. A. Guy, M. D. Freeman, B. A. Bumett, J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele,
B. W. 0live, and K. J. Reinhard, pp. 425-434. Research Series No. 38,
Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Tunnell, C. D.
1979
The Gibson Lithic Cache from West Texas. Office of the State Archeologist
Report No. 30, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Wendland, W. M.
1978
Holocene Man in North America: The Ecological Setting and Climatic
Background. Plains Anthropologist 23(82):273-287.

269

The Trinque Site (41ER27),
Erath County, Texas
William A. Cloud and James E. Smith II
with a contribution by Patricia M. Landau and Gail A. Colby

ABSTRACT
Mapping and subsurface testing of the Trinque Site (41ER27), a partially
collapsed rockshelter and associated lithic scatter in southeastern Erath County,
North Central Texas, was conducted in the spring of 1991 by the Office of the
State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission, in conjunction with the Texas
Archeological Stewardship Network. A child interment, initially exposed by an
artifact collector, was salvaged and limited testing yielded three features and
1118 artifacts. From stratigraphic relationships, it appears the burial dates to
either the Late Archaic or Late Prehistoric period at the site, although a burial
pit outline was not discernible. One of the stone features found adjacent to the
burial may be a hearth that was used during mortuary practices. Cultural material dating from the Late Archaic to the end of the Late Prehistoric period was
recovered, although artifacts diagnostic of the Middle Archaic have reportedly
also been collected from the site as well.

INTRODUCTION

The Trinque Site investigation was initiated after Lance Trinque, a
Stephenville native and local artifact collector, contacted the Office of the State
Archeologist (OSA), Texas Historical Commission (THC) in December 1990, to
report his f’md of a human burial. Trinque had been excavating a rockshelter in
southeastern Erath County when he came upon the inhumation, which he immediately re-covered with soil. During a field trip to the site by Trinque, the senior
author, and Dan Prikryl, then of the Department of Antiquities Protection, THC,
it was determined that the burial would be scientifically excavated and the
adjacent intact deposits at the shelter would be tested to obtain associated stratigraphic control. Mr. Jimmy Smith, a local resident and member of the Texas
Archeological Stewardship Network, was asked at that time to assist in the
excavation and report of findings from Trinque’s excavations and our spring
1991 site evaluation.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64 (1993)

270

Texas Archeological Society

FIGURE 1

Location of Trinque Site (41ER27)
¯ m ..,~ o momom ¯ w°m-~.

;TEPHENS i PALO PINTO

i PARKER
I

I

i

I

i~

i
I,
EASTLAND

i

V" ......... "{. HOOD
I ERATH
\

!

i
i
!

i

i JOHNSON

i

ii
1
i ELLIS

i
0

Figure 1. Location of Erath County in North Central Texas and general location of Trinque
Site in the county.

PREVIOUS WORK

Lance Trinque began excavations at the Trinque Site several years before
contacting the THC about the site. When he began his excavations, shallow pot
holes were already present in the eastern portion of the shelter. He dug in several
areas of the rockshelter, finding apparent intact deposits throughout. Although
Mr. Trinque’s excavations were not controlled in the usual archeological sense,

Cloud and Smith ~ The Trinque Site

271

he used extreme care and separated artifacts by approximate levels. Thus, his
collection from the site provided a glimpse of the projectile points present in the
rockshelter, and his collection method suggested these artifacts were from intact
deposits.
THE SITE ENVIRONS

The Trinque Site is located in North Central Texas in the Great Plains
province (Fenneman 1938:106). Within this province, the site is situated Within
the physiographic region known as the Lampasas Cut Plain. It is in southeastern
Erath County (Figure 1), within an area characterized by a topographically high,
rugged landscape with relief similar to the Hill Country of Central Texas. In
Erath County, the average yearly rainfall is 29.17 inches, with three-fourths of
this amount falling between April and October, and the average annual temperature is 64.3 degrees Fahrenheit (Wagner et al. 1973).
Cretaceous sediments from the Trinity Group and Fredericksburg Group are
exposed in southeastern Erath County (Sheldon 1979:113). These marine sediments were deposited during both progressions and regressions of a warm shallow sea. Approximately 80 million years ago, after a major regression of the sea,
erosion began stripping away much of these soft sediments. This portion of Erath
County, known locally as the Chalk Mountain area, remains topographically
high because the upper part of the Fredericksburg Group is composed of very
hard limestone that has protected the lower shales and marls from erosion
(Sheldon 1979:115). The Edwards Formation occurs within the upper part of the
Fredericksburg Group. It is composed of fossiliferous limestone and Edwards
chert, a fine-grained siliceous stone favored for tools by aboriginal groups
throughout much of Texas. In North Central Texas, the Edwards Formation thins
out from the thicker Edwards deposits found in Central Texas (Sellards et al.
1932:339). In Central Texas, the Edwards Formation contains fairly large nodules and relatively thick lenticular lenses of chert. In contrast, the North Central
Texas Edwards chert occurs as small embedded pebbles or thin lenticular lenses
and is somewhat coarser-grained than the Central Texas variety (Larry Banks,
1992 personal communication).
The Trinque Site rockshelter is located within an exposure of Edwards
limestone (Bureau of Economic Geology 1972). At this site, the local Edwards
chert was the predominant lithic resource utilized for tool production, especially
during the Late Prehistoric period. No outcrops of this chert were discovered in
the immediate vicinity of the site, however.
The Trinque Site is at an elevation of 416 meters (1365 feet) above mean
sea level (amsl) and is located at the northernmost head of an unnamed canyon
within the central Brazos River valley. This canyon contributes a headwater
drainage that forms a left bank tributary of Lallah Branch. Lallah Branch drains
northward into Pony Creek, which in turn drains into the Paiuxy River, a major
tributary of the Brazos River.

272

Texas Archeological Society

The canyon drainage is intermittent and flows to the northeast. A fairly
reliable seep spring is located at the southernmost head of this canyon, approximately 125 meters south-southeast of the Trinque Site. Elevation in this heavily
wooded canyon ranges from 378 meters (1240 feet) to 418 meters (1370 feet)
amsl. A wide variety of trees, shrubs, and vines are present including assorted
oaks, Mexican Buckeye, juniper, elm, hackberry, and greenbriar. The modern
fauna includes white-tail deer, coyote, bobcat, cottontail rabbit, gray and red fox,
ground squirrel, rock squirrel, skunk, pack rat, raccoon, opossum, turkey, quail,
dove, and a wide array of other mammals, reptiles, and birds (Lance Trinque,
1991 personal communication).
ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
General Discussion
The archeology of the central Brazos River valley has been extensively
explored by both professional and avocational archeologists since the 1930s.
Professional work has concentrated on survey and salvage excavation connected
with reservoir construction in the area, while serious avocationals associated
with the Central Texas Archeological Society (CTAS) have contributed a great
body of archeological data for this region. The work of these two groups has
served to complement each other in the scope of their investigations.
The earliest archeological endeavors in this area were accomplished by the
CTAS. Frank Bryan, one of the founding members of that group, published the
first overview of the region based on observations made while conducting geological field work (Bryan 1930). Two subsequent publications (Bryan 1936,
1937) concentrated on reporting site survey data from Hill, Navarro, Limestone,
and McLennan counties. The first reported excavation in the region occurred in
1936 at the Waco sewage treatment plant in McLennan County, where members
of the CTAS uncovered what appeared to be a mass burial. Several authors
reported on these excavations in the bulletin of the CTAS (Meroney 1936;
Turner 1937; Lux 1937; Watt and Meroney 1937a).
Another founding member of the CTAS, Frank H. Watt, proved to be the
driving force behind a large number of archeological endeavors in the region. His
publications included articles on historic glass trade beads from the Stansbury
Site in Hill County (Watt 1937; Watt and Meroney 1937b), distinctive notched
stones in the area, which he named "Waco Sinkers" (Watt 1938), pottery sherds
from the Chupek Site in McLennan County that revealed a cultural connection
with the Caddo of East Texas (Watt 1941); he also reported on several excavations undertaken in the area (Watt 1965, 1967, 1978). In all, Frank H. Watt
published well over a hundred articles on the archeology of the region and Texas
(Redder 1985a), and was responsible for numerous other endeavors by the CTAS
that effectively opened the door to understanding the prehistory of the central
Brazos valley.

Cloud and Smith ~ The Trinque Site

273

Professional archeological work in the region began in the late 1940s at the
proposed Lake Whitney reservoir along the Brazos River in Hill and Bosque
counties (Stephenson 1947, 1970; Jelks 1953, 1962). As other area reservoirs
were proposed in the next 30 to 40 years, professional archeologists were able to
investigate additional large tracts of land adjacent to some of the major waterways in the region. Investigations occurred at the Waco Reservoir (later renamed
Waco Lake) in McLennan County (Story and Shafer 1965; Prikryl and Jackson
1985), De Cordova Bend Reservoir (later renamed Lake Granbury) in Hood
County (Skinner 1971), Squaw Creek Reservoir in Somervell and Hood Counties
(Skinner and Humphreys 1973; Gallagher and Bearden 1976), Hog Creek Reservoir in southern Bosque and northeastern Coryell counties (Larson et al. 1975;
Larson and Kirby 1976; Shafer 1977; Hays and Kirby 1977; Henry et al. 1980),
Aquilla Lake in Hill County (Skinner and Henderson 1972; Lynott and Peter
1977; Skinner et al. 1978; Watson 1982; Brown et al. 1987), and the Lake
Whitney area was further investigated when the Corps of Engineers decided to
raise the pool level of the lake three meters (Skinner and Harris 1971; Skinner
and Gallagher 1974; Lynott 1978).
The great body of data from the avocational and professional work indicates
a long aboriginal presence from Paleoindian times through the Historic period in
this area of the central Brazos River valley. Much of the significant excavation
data has come from various rockshelters in the region, especially from the
shelters excavated at Lake Whitney. Rockshelters generally contain soils that
have better stratigraphic integrity than unsheltered areas, and thus, have a better
chance of containing intact cultural deposits. Deposits from this type of setting
usually allow individual components to be distinguished, which are otherwise
unseparable in open sites.
Rockshelter Excavations
Rockshelter excavations have provided much archeological data on the
prehistoric inhabitants of the central Brazos valley. Some of the shelters in this
area have been found to contain well-stratified deposits that have furnished a
wealth of information about aboriginal lifeways during the Late Prehistoric
period, and excavations at rockshelters in the Lake Whitney area in particular
have led to a much better understanding of cultural continuity and change in the
region during this period.
The first rockshelters investigated at Lake Whitney were Pictograph Shelter, Sheep Shelter, and Buzzard Shelter. These shelters, initially identified and
tested during the 1947 investigations at the reservoir, were excavated in 1950
(Stephenson 1970). Two important shelters discovered after the initial inventory
at Lake Whitney were the Blum Rockshelter and the Kyle Site. The former was
excavated in 1952 (Jelks 1953) and the latter in 1959-1960 (Jelks 1962). All five
of these sites were found to contain well-stratified deposits dating from the Late
Prehistoric period. 3elks (1962) used data from the Blum Rockshelter and the

274

Texas Archeological Society

Kyle Site, as well as the Smith Rockshelter in Travis County (Suhm 1957), to
conclude that the Austin phase (formerly termed focus) generally preceded the
Toyah phase in Central Texas. Due to the well-stratified nature of the deposits at
these shelters, he was also able to further define the trait character of those
phases.
Although Stephenson’s work occurred before Jelks’ excavations, it was not
reported until 1970. However, Stephenson’s (1970) findings from his work at
Lake Whitney corroborated Jelks’ conclusions about this time period. The following review of data from the five shelters in the Lake Whitney area is intended
to provide contextual information on the Late Prehistoric period in North Central
Texas relevant to the excavations conducted at the Trinque Site.
Pictograph Shelter, named for six red pictographs within it, had two separate strata. The lowest, Stratum II, contained a variety of features and artifacts
as well as abundant snail and mussel shell; the uppermost cultural deposit (Stratum III) contained fewer features, fewer snail and mussel shell, but a variety of
distinctive artifacts (Table 1). Using these material culture data, Stephenson
(1970:156) generally assigned Stratum II and III to the Austin and Toyah phases,
respectively. All occupation of the shelter was thought to have been seasonally
intermittent.
Sheep Shelter contained two distinct strata (Stratums II and III) that appeared to represent three separate occupations. The earliest occupation of the
shelter (in Stratum II) occurred during the Archaic period. Stratum III contained
both lower and upper occupation zones. The lower zone contained the most
intensive occupation at the site. The upper occupation zone in Stratum III contained no stone features, but had a number of distinctive artifacts (Table 2).
Although clear separation of the components was not observed, Stephenson
(1970:213-214) felt the cultural expressions in the upper and lower portions of
Stratum III were representative of the Toyah and Austin phases, respectively.
Buzzard Shelter was found to contain three separate stratigraphic levels,
although all three were dominated by materials suggestive of the Toyah phase
(Stephenson 1970:185). These strata contained distinctly different features, but
the types of artifacts were quite similar (Table 3). The cultural materials and
strata documented from the site suggested brief use during the Austin phase,
followed by a long series of short-term occupations during the Toyah phase
(Stephenson 1970:185).
The Blum Rockshelter, located in Hill County, was found to contain stratified deposits representative of the Late Prehistoric period (Jelks 1953). Three
strata with cultural material were identified: Stratums 1, 2, and 3. The strata were
easily separated throughout most of the site, except in one area where the
division between Stratums 1 and 2 was obscured; artifacts from this obscured
area were labelled from Stratum 1-2. Features at the site consisted of one hearth,
numerous ash lenses, piles of f’tre-cracked limestone, masses of charcoal, and
snail and mussel shell concentrations. The only hearth feature was found at the
base of Stratum 3, with very few artifacts in association. The lowest occupational

Cloud and Smith ~ The Trinque Site

cpJ

o
g~
I...

.<

,J

t’c~t’.l

t...,

4

275

276

Texas Archeological Society

,.o

~
¯~ g~,~ ~ ~’~

©

o
o

.<

I=

.~~
"o~~

v

r~

Cloud and Smith ~ The Trinque Site

e~

0

i

o
o

N

t’lt~

s

~’~ ~ .~.
¢o

E

277

278

Texas Archeological Society

o
. O

~’~
et

~g

,,,,,l

t,. .l

gl
o

.E

t",l

o

=_

o
L

~

<

r..)

.=.

o
~4

o~
4.a

E

E

E

Cloud and Smith ~ The Trinque Site

279

zone, Stratum 1, contained few artifacts, Stratum 1-2 yielded the widest range of
materials, while Stratum 2 had the largest number of artifacts Cable 4). The data
from this shelter indicated that Scallorn arrowpoints were generally found below
Perdiz arrowpoints at the site, and were thus of greater antiquity. In addition, all
of the sherds from the site were in the Perdiz-Cliffton zone (see Jelks 1953).
Major refinements in definitions for the Austin and Toyah phases came as a
result of Jelks’ (1962) work at the Kyle Site. At this shelter, Jelks found six
major, well-distinguishable strata, of which five contained cultural material dating predominantly to the Late Prehistoric period. Stratums 1 and 2, the deepest
and earliest occupation zones at the site, had Austin phase materials, while
Stratums 4 and 5, the uppermost occupation zones at the site, had a preponderance of Toyah phase materials. Stratum 3 contained a mixture of Austin and
Toyah phase artifacts. Feature and select artifactual data from the Kyle site is
provided in Table 5.
Using data largely from the Kyle Site, but supplemented by data from the
Smith Rockshelter (Suhm 1957), the Blum Rockshelter (Jelks 1953), and observation of unreported data, a list of shared and unshared traits was offered in an
effort to formally define the Austin and Toyah phases (Jelks 1962:84-99). In
Jelks’ list, unshared traits of the Austin phase consist of Scallorn and Granbury
arrowpoints, Godley dart points, Friday type knives, and serrated flakes (Jelks
1962:85-86). Unshared traits of the Toyah phase include Perdiz and Cliffton
arrowpoints, Covington type knives, small drills, snub-nosed end-scrapers, bison bone scrapers, rectangular, spatulate bone objects, locally-made Leon Plain
pottery, and trade pottery from cultures in adjacent regions (Jelks 1962:86-88).
Shared by the two phases were Cleburne type knives, side-scrapers, spall scrapers, crude bifacial implements, gravers, spatulate deer ulna implements, bone
awls, hammerstones, manos, grinding slabs, hematite pigment, smoothed antler
tines, and perforated mussel shells (Jelks 1962:89). Stephenson’s (1970:185-186)
work at the three shelters he excavated at Lake Whitney also suggested that
Austin phase people were more prone to building stone-lined hearths and were
fonder of snails and mussels as dietary supplements than Toyah phase people.
The above rockshelter data from the Late Prehistoric period in North Central Texas indicates that both Austin and Toyah phase people were apparently
entrenched in the area. The Trinque Site investigation reported herein revealed a
cultural zone with undetermined relationships to the Austin phase.
DESCRIPTION OF THE SITE
As noted earlier, the Trinque Site consists of a rockshelter situated high in a
northeast-trending canyon, with an associated hilltop lithic scatter. The site is
approximately 50 meters (east-west) by 40 meters (north-south). The shelter is
about 50 meters long and 4.5 meters deep, and ranges from one to two meters in
height. The shelter faces south and is located just below the Edwards limestone

280

Texas Archeological Society

=.4
=~~
©

°~,~

f~

03

.=.

="

~

Cloud and Smith ~ The Trinque Site

e~
o

o
e~

L

<

e~

o

4Ja

2

281

282

Texas Archeological Society

/

\

S~~e

\.

~ Flake

~ Concentration
Flake

:~/

Concentration
1

J
Burial Location

Slope Direction
0

Approximate
ContOur Lines

5

10

meters

"-_.,’- Shelter Dripline
D

Disturbance

Trinque Site
(~

41 ER27

Roof Fall Boulders

Figure 2. Map of the Trinque Site.

rimrock. The mouth of the shelter is obscured by thick vegetation. The shelter is
divided by a major roof fall; the east and west ends appear as separate shelters.
These two rockshelter areas were designated as Room A on the west and Room B
on the east (Figure 2). The roof fall, containing numerous large limestone blocks,
may well be protecting a large section of intact cultural deposits at the site. The
area above the shelter slopes upward gradually and is moderately vegetated,
primarily with juniper. An occasionally travelled pasture road, running roughly
parallel to the rooms, is located a few meters south of the shelter.

Cloud and Smith -- The Trinque Site

283

284

Texas Archeological Society
Room A

The west room measures 17 meters east to west, is from one to 3.5 meters
deep (north-south), and from 1.5 to two meters in height. Roof-fall limestone
boulders are located in front of the eastern half and east of this room. The slope
below the entrance is moderate, and covered with both trees and shrubs (Figure
3). The hilltop area of the site is easily accessible at a low point in the rimrock at
the western edge of the room.
The intact portion of the floor in Room A is relatively level. Three disturbances in the room were noted and assigned designations upon the initial visit to
the site; all of these excavations were backfilled at the conclusion of the project.
Disturbance #1 was located near the western edge of the shelter. It was 81 cm
(east-west) by 65 cm (north-south) and 28 cm deep. Disturbance #2, located in
the center of the room, had an amorphous shape and was by far the deepest and
most extensive disturbance at the site. It measured 2.27 meters (east-west) by
1.34 meters (north-south), and had a maximum depth of 1.37 meters (eastern
portion of disturbance). The child burial removed during this project came from
the western portion of this excavation, which also produced the majority of
artifacts in the Trinque collection, including Middle Archaic projectile points and
a possible Early Archaic dart point from the deeper deposits. Disturbance #3,
located near the eastern edge of the room, was 91 cm (east-west) by 1.26 meters
(north-south) and 26 cm deep.
Room B

This room is approximately 27 meters east to west, one to 4.5 meters deep,
and one to 1.5 meters in height. Roof-fall limestone boulders are located at the
western edge of the room. The slope below the entrance is steeper and more
heavily vegetated than that observed at Room A, but the intact floor of the room
is relatively flat. The dripline plunges northward at one point while the back wall
plunges southward at another point, creating the effect of three separate areas
(see Figure 3). Disturbance #4, located in the central and largest area of the room,
has an extremely amorphous shape. It is roughly four meters (east-west) by 2.7
meters (north-south) and 10 to 33 cm deep; most of this large disturbance is from
10 to 20 cm deep.
INVESTIGATIVE PROCEDURES

The first visit to the site by the senior author occurred on December 14,
1990. After photodocumenting the Trinque Collection, a general reconnaissance
(including compass and pace mapping) was made of the rooms, talus slope, and
hilltop portion of the site. At that time, four chert tools were surface mapped and
collected: an arrowpoint preform (Figure 4f), one arrowpoint distal fragment, a
Scallorn arrowpoint (Figure 4i), and a Pedernales dart point (Figure 50. The Late

Cloud and Smith ~ The Trinque Site

285

z.v

~..~

286

Texas Archeological Society

Cloud and Smith -- The Trinque Site

Back Wall of Room A

287

,,~

~-’" ~~.f
Disturbance 1
\
I
!

Burial
(Feature 1 )

/

!

!
J

!
I

/

I
TEST
UNIT 1

Dripline ~

~

TEST ..~
UNIT2

]/’/
~
TEST I"-’t"./~,
U NI~ ~XDripline

._.1

N

a3
¢-

c~
<

0

o

0’3

50

100 150

i

r--

centimeters

o

Z

Datum
Testing Grid (41 ER 27)
Figure 6. Testing grid for Room A at the Trinque Site.

Prehistoric artifacts in this group were located at the southern edge of Disturbance #4, while the Pedernales dart point was located within the lithic scatter on
the hilltop.
Plans were made over the winter to return to the site in order to remove the

288

Texas Archeological Society

child burial, determine the stratigraphic integrity of Room A, and instrument
map the site. TASN Steward Jimmy Smith and his Action Team (Laurie Moseley,
Lorna Smith, Sallie Taylor, Jerry Grubis, Deana Grubis, and Lynda Cockburn)
volunteered for this field work along with the senior author, Daniel Prikryl, as
well as Lance Trinque.
The site investigation was conducted on March 7-10 and April 6 and 7,
1991. A north-south (magnetic) base line was established to bisect Room A just
inside the west end of Disturbance #2 (Figure 6). This base line is perpendicular
to the long axis of Room A. An east-west grid line running perpendicular to the
base line was then placed to run down the pasture road south of Rooms A and B.
A permanent horizontal datum point, marked with a quarter-inch piece of rebar,
was established along the north-south base line. The top of this rebar also serves
as vertical datum for the site.
Re-excavation of the child burial (Feature 1), located near the western edge
of Disturbance #2, was undertaken with Mr. Trinque’s guidance. This area was
in Room A, approximately 1.5 meters from the edge of the dripline and two
meters from the back wall of the room.
Test Unit 1, a one meter x one meter square, was one meter west of the
north-south base line in Room A. This unit was strategically placed to explore a
level area near the child burial to locate cultural feaatres and develop a stratigraphic association for the burial. It was hoped that this unit would be sufficient
to define the site’s stratigraphy; however, the deposits bottomed out before
Middle or Early Archaic artifacts (several documented from Disturbance #2)
were encountered.
Test Unit 2 was a one meter (east-west) x 15 cm (north-south) unit. This
unit was placed just south of the child burial to find a portion of the burial pit
outline or uncover any other feature associated with this interment. The unit’s
size was primarily dictated by its location amidst the previously excavated and
backfilled portion of Disturbance #2.
Test Unit 3, another one meter x one meter square, fell under the dripline of
Room A, with approximately half of the unit within the room. Test Unit 3 was
excavated to uncover any Middle Archaic or possible earlier deposits in the
shelter, and thus obtain a more complete strafigraphic record of the room.
All test units were excavated for the most part in 10 cm arbitrary levels as
natural or cultural levels were not discernible; a few thicker levels were used in
sterile or disturbed zones. The matrix from each level was screened through oneeighth-inch hardware cloth. Trowels were used as the primary excavation tool
and were supplemented with ice picks in the lower hard-packed levels.
STRATIGRAPHY

As a rule, stratigraphic breaks were not easily distinguished in the three
excavated units. However, more distinct soil horizons were present in the lower
deposits in the shelter. A total of eight soil strata were recognized in Test Unit 1,

Cloud and Smith ~ The Trinque Site
Scale
20 cm.

TEST UNIT 1
SOUTH WALL PROFILE

I

I

289

Unexcavated

---- Indistinct Boundary

v

VI

VII

VIII
Figure 7. Stratigraphy of Test Unit 1, south wall prof’de.

which had the best stratigraphic integrity of the units (Figure 7). The strata will
be described in sequence from top to bottom.
Stratum L Overlain by several cm of leaf litter; four to eight cm thick;
unconsolidated, very fine, light gray shelter fill (decomposed limestone powder
and small angular roof spalls); sterile of cultural material. This stratum appeared
to cover the entire shelter; its lower boundary was strongly undulating.
Stratum H. Dark brown humus composed primarily of roots and rootlets;
four to 10 cm thick; sterile of cultural material. The lower boundary of this

290

Texas Archeological Society

stratum was indistinct, but appeared to undulate like that of the lower boundary
of Stratum I.
Stratum IlL Loose mixture of organics and dark brown clay loam; fewer
roots and rootlets and some small roof spalls; approximately 12 cm thick; sparse
cultural material. The lower boundary of this stratum abutted a large limestone
roof block (ca. 20 cm thick) that had fallen prior to deposition of Stratum III.
Feature 4 in Test Unit 3 was contained within this stratum.
Stratum IV. Gray loam just beneath the roof block; associated with several
large roots. This stratum was only observed in the central portion of the south
wall, immediately beneath the roof block. No cultural material could be deftnitely related to Stratum IV.
Stratum V. Dark brown clay loam; similar to Stratum III, but with less
organics and more compact; 30 to 40 cm thick; few small roots and rootlets and
some small roof spall; the overwhelming majority of cultural material from
Trinque came from this Late Archaic/Late Prehistoric cultural zone. Both Darl
dart points and ScaUorn arrowpoints were recovered from this stratum. Features
2 (Test Unit 1) and 3 (Test Units 2 and 3) were also recognized in this stratum.
The pit associated with Feature 1 (the child burial) probably originated from this
stratum, although this was not conclusively determined. This zone appeared to
thicken east of Test Unit 1, toward the bulk of the Room A deposits.
Stratum VI. Light gray, sandy clay loam with scattered caliche pebbles;
some small roof spalls and rootlets; 20 to 35 cm thick; much less cultural material than in Stratum V. This stratum also appears to thicken toward the central
portion of Room A.
Stratum VII. Light gray/tan fine sandy clay loam with a high caliche content; some roof spall and rootlets; 15 to 30 cm thick; very sparse cultural
material, possibly deposited through bioturbation. This stratum appeared to
thicken to the west, away from the central portion of Room A. Feature 1 rested
within the top of this stratum, but the pit that contained it must have originated
from above. The upper portion of this stratum was much more compact than its
lower portion.
Stratum VIII. Solidified caliche/marl; very compact; sterile of cultural material; total thickness not determined.
TEST UNITS

Test Unit 1
This unit was carded to a depth of 1.25 meters before the caliche/marl rear
wall was encountered throughout the unit sloping toward the mouth of Room A.
This rear wall was f’u’st uncovered along the north wall of the unit at approximately 65 cm below surface (bs). Once exposed, the caliche/marl rear wall was
found to slope southward at a steady angle until exiting the unit along the south
wall at 1.25 meters. Thus, Test Unit 1 penetrated to the bottom of the floor

Cloud and Smith ~ The Trinque Site

291

oO

x=~

0

oo

b’.

0",

[0

÷

~D

0000~~0000

<
.~.

0

0

°

0

0

0

0

~l

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

.~

~D

~ .~

0

0

0

0

0

0

~

0

0

0

0

0

o
h~

~

oh

~"

~

’,.0

b~

oo

0’~

0

292

Texas Archeological Society
Table 7
Mussel Shell, Faunal Material, and Possible
Manuports Recovered from Test Unit #1

Level

Mussel Shell
Fragments

Faunal Material

Possible Manuports

Totals

1

0

0

0

0

2

0

1

0

1

3

0

1

0

1

4

5

5

2

12

5

16

14

0

30

6

13

17

2

32

7

3

8

1

12

8

2

1

0

3

9

2

2

0

4

10

0

0

0

0

11

0

0

0

0

12"

1

0

0

1

Totals

42

49

5

96

*Excavated as a 15 cm level

deposits in this area of Room A. One feature (Feature 2), a rock concentration,
was located within levels seven and eight.
Cultural material, including stone tools, lithic debitage, burned and unburned bone, mussel shell, and fire-cracked rock were recovered to about 90 cm
bs (Tables 6 and 7). Sparse cultural debris was encountered in the upper 30 cm,
but a fairly thick cultural zone was apparent between 30-60 cm bs. This zone is
referred to in this paper as the Late Archaic/Late Prehistoric cultural zone. Below
60 cm there was a paucity of cultural materials.

Cloud and Smith ~ The Trinque Site

oO

V"~

Ur~

¢o.a
°4

¢¢.}

0

Od

o

<
.u

L)

-g

{.)

o~

-d
o

}<

293

294

Texas Archeological Society
Table 9
Mussel Shell, Faunal Material, and Possible Manuports
Recovered from Test Unit #2

Level

Mussel shell
fragments

Faunal material

Possible
manuports

Totals

*1

4

14

0

18

2

7

22

0

29

3

0

3

3

6

Totals

11

39

3

53

*Excavated as a 24 cm level
Test Unit 2

Test Unit 2 was carried only to a depth of 44 cm. As previously mentioned,
the primary purposes of the unit were to search for a pit outline for Feature 1 and
secure data on any possible associations with the feature. Once this was accomplished, the unit was finished and backf’dled. Thus, Test Unit 2 did not penetrate
to the bottom of the floor deposits in this area of the shelter.
The eastern half of the unit had been severely damaged by Disturbance #2.
The surface elevation at the southwest corner of the unit was 36 cm lower than
the surface elevation at the southeast corner of Test Unit 1. Since these two
points are only one meter apart, the upper portion of Test Unit 2 seems to have
either been removed during the excavation of Disturbance #2, or partially compacted by the path that has been used in accessing Room A. A rock concentration, Feature 3, was partially exposed in the southeast corner of levels 2 and 3 of
the unit. This feature (see below) continued into the northeast comer of Test Unit
3 and may be related to Feature 1, the child inhumation.
Level 1 in Test Unit 2 was removed as a 24 cm thick level to bring it to an
elevation consistent with those in Test Unit 1. The level 1 deposits here correspond in elevation to levels 5 and 6 in Test Unit 1, where the Late Archaic/Late
Prehistoric cultural zone was encountered. Cultural materials were recovered
from all three levels excavated in the unit, although the lowest level produced
very few items (Tables 8 and 9).

Cloud and Smith ~ The Trinque Site

0

"2

t’Q

tt3

t’q

~"

t~

~

c’q

¢q

oo

0

295

296

Texas Archeological Society
Table 11
Mussel Shell, Faunal Material, and Possible Manuports
Recovered from Test Unit #3

Level

Mussel Shell
Fragments

Bone Tool

Faunal
Material

Possible
Manuports

Totals

1

12

1

21

0

34

2

18

0

42

0

60

3

14

0

12

2

28

4

10

0

18

0

28

5

0

0

9

0

9

6

0

0

2

0

2

*7

0

0

5

0

5

54

1

109

2

166

Totals

*Excavated as a 56 cm level
Test Unit 3
This unit was excavated to 1.04 meters in depth before hard-packed caliche/
marl was encountered throughout the unit. Backdirt from Disturbance #2 partially covered the unit prior to excavation. Feature 3, a rock concentration initially observed in Test Unit 2, extended into the northeast comer of the unit in
levels 4-6. A burned rock concentration in level 1 was designated Feature 4.
Excavations in the unit are thought to have penetrated to the bottom of the
cultural deposits, although conclusive evidence for this was not obtained.
Cultural materials were recovered throughout the unit deposits, although
little material was recovered below level 5 (Tables 10 and 11). The first four
levels are within Stratum V (see Figure 7), the Late Archaic/Late Prehistoric
cultural zone. Scallorn and Darl projectile points were recovered from Test Unit
3. Level 7 was excavated as a 56 cm thick level because of diminishing artifacts
and time constraints.

Cloud and Smith ~ The Trinque Site

297

BURIAL EXCAVATION
The burial was initially discovered under a large limestone slab that was in
contact with the skull of the infant. This stone was removed and discarded within
the room. Fortunately, Mr. Trinque took in situ photographs of the stone, which
was subsequently relocated, allowing its original position and elevation to be
determined. After uncovering the infant remains, he carefully placed soil, an
empty bag, and a few limestone rocks over the interment. Then, after more soil
was put down, a small wooden screen was placed in the disturbance and covered
with additional soil (Lance Trinque, 1991 personal communication).
The burial location was roughly centered within the room, being about the
same distance from the back wall and the edge of the overhang or dripline. Our
first task was to remove the overburden (approximately 50 cm) that had been
replaced following the original discovery. Once the skull fragments of the infant
were exposed, the relocated limestone slab was carefully replaced so that feature
elevations could be taken and a scale drawing completed.
FEATURE DESCRIPTIONS
Description of Feature 1
Feature 1 was an infant interment that had been placed in a tightly flexed
position on its left side ~igure 8). The infant was oriented in a west-southwesteast-northeast direction with the head to the west-southwest facing the rear wall
of the shelter. The arms were extended, with the hands apparently in the area of
the knees. The skull had been crushed by the weight of the limestone slab placed
directly above it.
Generally, the skeletal material was found to be quite fragile and had to be
treated with a polyvinyl acetate (PVA) solution before removal (see Appendix
1). The burial had been disturbed by both rodent activities and roots that displaced some of the vertebrae, one femur, the lower ribs, and the hands and feet.
No pit outline was observed above the inhumation, but a distinct color
change, roughly conforming to the shape of the infant, was discovered at the base
of the burial. This color change may represent the base of the grave pit or a stain
from some type of wrapping. Several limestone rocks at the same basal elevation
as the skeletal remains, were uncovered just to the east-southeast. Because of
their proximity to the inhumation, and the similar elevations, these stones are
thought to be associated with the interment.
No grave goods were encountered with this burial, but six animal bone
fragments (unidentified to species) and one small chunk of charcoal were uncovered within the matrix of the feature. The presence of the charcoal and animal
bones may be related to the root and rodent disturbances, to the grave backfilling,
or to the nearby possible hearth, Feature 3.

298

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 8. Feature 1 (infant burial) at the Trinque Site during excavation.

Cloud and Smith ~ The Trinque Site

Root

Figure 9. Plan View of Feature I and Feature 3 at the Trinque Site.

299

300

Texas Archeological Society
Description of Feature 2

An oval concentration of stones, some thermally altered, was discovered in
the north-central portion of Test Unit 1 at 60 cm bs. A total of 12 stones, only
four definitely cracked or discolored from thermal contact, comprise the feature.
In plan view, the feature is a fairly tight oval concentration that measures 52 cm x
20 cm, with a thickness of eight cm; once cross-sectioned, however, it had a
more amorphous jumbled appearance. A dark brown soil stain extended roughly
five to 10 cm around the south and west sides of the feature at its base. On the
north and northeast sides of the feature, the caliche/marl back wall of the shelter
had restricted this stain to the area immediately around the stones. The stained
soil was from two to four cm thick in the area away from the stones but no
evidence of a pit was obtained, as the edge of this soil had an indistinct boundary.
The varying rock depths, and their elongated shape in aggregate, suggest the
feature had either been disturbed or was in secondary context.
Description of Feature 3
A concentration of stones about 50 cm south of the child inhumation was
first discovered in the eastern half of Test Unit 2, in Level 2, at 29 cm bs. A total
of 26 stones, several of them thermally altered, comprise the feature ~igure 9).
In plan view, the feature appeared to be roughly oval, with several tight stone
concentrations located within it. The majority of stones in the feature were found
to have basal elevations between 40-45 cm bs. The largest stone, measuring
approximately 30 cm x 27 cm x 13 cm, lay within the central portion of the
feature. One possible modified hematite pebble was found just above this stone.
This relatively durable pebble had one flattened surface that may have been
created during the process of obtaining hematite pigment.
Description of Feature 4

A concentration of fire-cracked rocks was first exposed near the center of
Test Unit 3 in Level 1 at four cm bs. The concentration consisted of nine
thermally altered stones in two small adjacent clusters. The southernmost cluster
contained five stones while the northern one had four stones (including one
larger stone measuring approximately 30 cm x 20 cm). Overall, the feature
measured approximately 50 cm (north-northwest--south-southeast) by 30 cm
(west-southwest---east-northeast). The stones within both clusters were somewhat jumbled, suggesting they had been redeposited or severely disturbed. Despite the thermal alteration to the feature stones, no accompanying charcoal,
stained soil, or pit outline were present.
ARTIFACT ASSEMBLAGE
A total of 1118 artifacts and 10 possible manuports were recovered in the
three test units at the Trinque site. The artifacts include stone tools and debitage,

Cloud and Smith m The Trinque Site

301

burned and unburned bone, and mussel shell fragments. Manuports, defined as
unmodified items that are not naturally present at the site and thus had to have
been brought to the site by man, include certain snail shells and casts of invertebrate fossils.
Projectile Points
Four Scallorn arrowpoints and three Darl dart points were found in our
excavations. All these artifacts are from Stratum V, the Late Archaic/Late Prehistoric cultural zone.
Scallorn arrowpoints were from Test Units 1 and 3. The three Scallorn
arrowpoints in Test Unit 1 were found from 30-60 cm bs. The t-n’st (30-40 cm
bs) has well-defined shoulders, a bifacially thinned straight base, and a strongly
expanding stem (see Figure 4h). The next (40-50 cm) is missing the distal half
of the blade and the distal ends of both barbs (see Figure 4a). The base is straight
and thinned on one face. The final example from Test Unit 1 is complete except
for tiny pieces of one barb and the distal blade tip (see Figure 4c). It also has an
offset convex base, short barbs, and a moderately expanding stem. The Scallorn
from Test Unit 3 (10-20 cm bs, but equivalent to level 5 in Test Unit 1) has an
expanding stem, straight base, and slight barbs, with most of the blade missing
(see Figure 4d).
The Darl dart points came from Test Units 2 and 3. The Test Unit 2 Darl
(24-34 cm bs) has a thick bullet-like blade and a reworked tip (see Figure 5c).
The stem expands slightly and the straight base has been appreciably thinned. All
blade edges exhibit some beveling, while the left stem edge has been beveled on
one face.
The ftrst Darl from Test Unit 3 (0-10 cm) is complete. It can be classified as
a Darl zephyr (Prewitt 1981) due to its steep lateral edge beveling and ground
stem edges (see Figure 5d). The blade is alternately beveled (the right edge of
both faces) and the blade tip is reworked, the stem is rectangular to square (and
alternately beveled on the left edges of both faces), the base is concave, and the
shoulders are weak. The second Darl (30-40 cm) is an extremely burned fragment (see Figure 5e). This artifact is missing the basal ears, one barb, and most of
the blade; the other barb is not well-defined.
Three chert projectile points were collected during backfilling of the Room
A disturbances: one Perdiz (see Figure 4j), one Scallorn fragment (see Figure
4b), and a Darl dart point (see Figure 5’0). The Perdiz is complete, but shows
signs of reworking as the barb areas have been rounded into shoulders and the
blade tip has a needle-like appearance. The Scallorn a.,xowpoint fragment is
missing the blade tip, both barb tips, and a portion of the expanding stem. The
Darl is complete except for one shoulder tip. This point is strongly beveled on the
left edge of both stem faces and the right edge of both blade faces, giving it a
twisted appearance.
Other formal tools found at Trinque included two arrowpoint fragments,
an arrowpoint preform fragment, two bifacial drill/perforator fragments, eleven

302

Texas Archeological Society

Cloud and Smith ~ The Trinque Site

303

biface fragments, two cores and six core fragments, a bone tool fragment, an
abraded hematite pebble, and a possible modified hematite pebble. All of these
artifacts are from the Late ArchaicA,ate Prehistoric cultural zone.
An arrowpoint fi’agment from Test Unit 1 (60-70 cm) is missing the right
barb, distal tip, and stem (see Figure 4g). Hinge fractures are evident on both the
distal tip and stem breaks. Although this fragment is not typeable, the barb
present and the blade edge/barb angle are suggestive of the Perdiz type. The
other arrowpoint fragment is a distal piece (Test Unit 1, 30-40 cm).
A bifacially worked arrowpoint preform fragment was found at 60-70 Cm in
Test Unit 1. This fragment appears to be a preform to a Scallorn arrowpoint (see
Figure 4e).
Two bifacial perforator/drill fragments were recovered in Test Unit 3 (both
from 0-10 cm). One has most of the edge damage on the right lateral edges of
both faces (Figure 10a), while the other has edge damage mainly on the left
lateral edge of both faces (Figure 10b).
The first biface fragment is a medial section of a dart point or knife preform
from Test Unit 1 (40-50 cm) (Figure 10h). The other biface from this provenience is severely burned and fragmented; thus, its original morphology is unknown.
Test Unit 3 had nine biface fragments: four in level 1 (0-10 cm), one in level
2 (10-20 cm), three in level 3 (20-30 cm), and one in level 4 (30-40 cm). Of the
four level 1 biface fragments, one is the medial section of a knife (Figure 10j),
another is a probable arrowpoint preform, one is a probable dart point stem
fragment, and the last is a small burned ovoid piece.
The level 2 specimen appears to be a Darl preform (see Figure 5a). It has an
elongated triangular shape with one rounded basal corner intact. It has been
basally thinned, but its thickness (6.14 mm) is not consistent with a finished tool.
The level 3 biface fragments include a medial fragment of a probable dart
point or knife, a specimen with a used edge, and a very crude bifacial piece. The
level 4 fragment is a thin reworked distal fragment that was probably part of an
arrowpoint or knife.
The two cores were of a multidirectional form. The one from Test Unit 1
(40-50 cm) has a cube-like shape (Figure 10g) with one convex scoop-shaped
edge with tiny use-wear scars. The other (from Test Unit 3, 10-20 cm) has been
depleted of useable flakes (Figure 10f). Core fragments were recovered from the
three test units, with four in Test Unit 1 (one from 30-40 cm and three from 50-60
cm), and one each in the other two test units (24-34 cm in Test Unit 2 and 10-20
cm in Test Unit 3). Figure 10c and 10d illustrate two of the recovered core
fragments.
Two other probable stone tools consist of an abraded hematite pebble
(Figure 10i) and a possible modified hematite pebble (Figure 10e). The abraded
hematite pebble (Test Unit 1, 50-60 cm) has three relatively flat facets, two of
which have numerous striations. The striations randomly arc or curve across the
facets; their curvature suggest that a circular motion was used in the abrading

304

Texas Archeological Society

process. The possible modified hematite pebble (Test Unit 3, 30-40 cm) is 3.5 cm
x 3.5 cm x 3 cm in length, width, and thickness, is relatively heavy (48.5 g), and
has a 2.4 x 1.9 cm fiat facet. The facet is generally smooth, with about half of the
surface irregular due to thermal alteration. No striations were visible under 30X
magnification, although probable polishing marks were present on a few high
spots. This artifact was associated with Feature 3, and may also have some
relationship to Feature 1, the child burial.
Other Stone, Bone, and Shell Artifacts

Edge-modified lithics were common at Trinque, with 207 recovered in the
limited excavations (55 in Test Unit 1, 11 in Test Unit 2, and 141 in Test Unit 3).
These informal tools have been modifed mostly from use wear, although several
have been trimmed as well. The overwhelming majority of these artifacts were
recovered in the Late Archaic/Late Prehistoric cultural zone.
Unmodified debitage and burned lithic items were also found at the site.
Included in the debitage were two primary flakes, 92 secondary flakes, 162
tertiary flakes, and 250 chips and chunks. The dearth of primary flakes suggests
that initial reduction of lithic raw materials generally occurred at the source or
quarry. The 56 burned lithic items are thermally altered to the point where they
cannot be placed in any of the unmodifed debitage categories.
A total of 197 faunal specimens came from our excavations. Most of these
were recovered in the Late Archaic/Late Prehistoric cultural zone. Since many of
the faunal specimens are fragments without articulated ends, they were not
identifiable to the species level. One bone tool fragment was recovered (Test
Unit 3, 0-10 cm). It has the shape suggestive of the butt end of an awl. The tool
was made from an unidentified mammalian long bone fragment (probably an
Artiodactyal) that was split longitudinally before being shaped with a piece of
sandstone or some other abrasive material; particularly evident are several shaped
facets on the butt end. Both the interior and exterior surfaces of the tool have
shallow grooves related to tool shaping. All of the surfaces appear to have been
subsequently polished, probably with leather. Additionally, the bone may have
been purposefully or accidentally thermally altered.
A total of 107 mussel shell fragments were recovered from our work at
Trinque. Almost all of these came from the Late Archaic/Late Prehistoric cultural zone, except for a few shell fragments found immediately below this zone;
it is unclear whether these fragments relate to an earlier occupation or were
redeposited from the overlying primary cultural zone.
Ten possible manuports were identified from the site: two invertebrate
marine fossils and eight fossilized snail shells. Both invertebrate fossils and five
of the fossilized snail shells were found in the Late Archaic/Late Prehistoric
cultural zone; the other three fossilized snail shells were found just beneath this
zone. The invertebrate marine fossils (both from Test Unit 1, 30-40 cm) resemble
bear claws in shape.

Cloud and Smith ~ The Trinque Site

305

THE TRINQUE COLLECTION

Lance Trinque has 50 lithic artifacts from the site. These consist of 24
arrowpoints, six arrowpoint fragments, one arrowpoint preform, 17 dart points,
and two dart point fragments.
The arrowpoint assemblage is dominated by the ScaUorn type (17 specimens), with Perdiz (two specimens), Bonham (two specimens), Washita-like
(one specimen), Alba-like (one specimen), and Steiner-like (one specimen) also
represented (Suhm and Jelks 1962; Turner and Hester 1985). All of the
arrowpoints and arrowpoint fragments were recovered from the upper 30 cm of
the deposit (Lance Trinque, 1990 personal communication).
The dart points in this collection consist of the Darl type (four specimens),
possible Darl (one specimen), Ensor (one specimen), Frio (one specimen), Image
(two specimens), Marshall (one specimen), Palmillas (two specimens),
Pedernales (three specimens), Gower-like (one specimen), and one small untyped
specimen (Suhm and Jelks 1962; Turner and Hester 1985). These dart points
were found stratigraphically below the arrowpoints from approximately 30 cm to
120 cm below the surface (Lance Trinque, 1990 personal communication). Six
medial and distal biface fragments were found from approximately 120 cm to
137 cm below the surface, but no diagnostic artifacts were secured from these
hard-packed lower deposits.
FAUNAL ANALYSIS
A total of 197 faunal fragments were recovered from the Trinque Site investigations, only one of which was a bone tool. Fifteen specimens were identified to order (Chelonia, Rodentia, Lefomorpha, and Artiodactyal) and nine of
these were identified to the family level (Testudinidae, Cricetidae, LePoridae,
and Ruminantia). Seven specimens could be identified to the species level, including Pseudemys sp. Gray, Sylvilagus spp. Gray, and Odocoileus virginianus
(Zimmermann). Three specimens were identified as Sylvilagus spp. (cottontail
rabbits), three as Odocoileus virginianus (white-tail deer), one as Pseudemys sp.
(slider turtle), one as an unidentified Emydinae turtle (hardshell turtle), five as
unidentified Artiodactyals, and two as unidentified Cricetine rodents (small rats).
Four of the unidentified Artiodactyal specimens are from broken metapodial
fragments (of equal length) that fit together. They show no intentional shaping,
but are strikingly similar in the location of the break of the piece. These specimens possibly represent preforms for some type of bone tool.
Over 51 percent of the 197 faunal specimens have been burned and several
of these also have possible butcher marks. Two of the identified specimens, one
of the Sylvilagus spp. specimens and the Pseudemys sp. specimen, were burned.
These specimens could have been intentionally burned during the cooking process or they may have been tossed into the fire after a meal was finished.

306

Texas Archeological Society
DISCUSSION OF THE SITE AND
ITS CULTURAL CONTEXT

Although test units at the rockshelter did not reveal deeply stratified deposits,
they established that a fairly thick (approximately 30-40 cm) cultural zone existed
in the upper deposits of the shelter. This zone appears to span the end of the Late
Archaic to the beginning of the Late Prehistoric period. Unfortunately, mixing of
this zone prohibited its separation into discrete cultural components. The lack of
identif’mble stratigraphic breaks is probably the result of various bioturbative and
erosive actions.
All four of the cultural features uncovered from Trinque are associated with
this zone. These four features consist of two possible hearths (Features 2 and 4),
the infant burial (Feature 1), and a stone concentration (Feature 3) adjacent to the
burial. All of these features are thought to date to the Late Archaic/Late Prehistoric time period represented by the thick cultural zone in the upper deposits at
the site. Features 2 and 4 appear to be disturbed hearths or hearth remnants that
may have been dumped from another location.
The burial cannot be confidently related to a specific time period due to the
lack of associated diagnostic artifacts and an undefinable burial pit. The burial
was found just below the Archaic/Late Prehistoric cultural zone, but it is impossible to stratigraphically define the interment’s position without a burial pit
outline traceable to the stratigraphic level of its origin. The position of the burial
relative to the cultural zone above it, however, suggests that the inhumation is
likely associated with the middle to upper portion of the zone (or possibly with
the shallow deposits above the zone). These associations, unlike the lower portion of the Late Archaic/Late Prehistoric cultural zone, would at least allow for
a sufficient burial depth to prevent animal or inadvertent human disturbances.
Thus, the burial is thought to date to either the terminal end of the Late Archaic
period or to the earlier part of the Late Prehistoric period.
Feature 3, the rock concentration located just above and south of the child
interment (see Figure 9), was composed of both fire-cracked rocks and thermally
unaltered stones. The lack of intense burning of the stones in the feature may be
explained by several possible scenarios. Either the feature is a disturbed hearth
that was only used for a short period, where most of the stones were not subjected to intense heat, or the stones were gathered and placed there as part of a
cairn with several burned stones having been fortuitously added to the pile. In
either case, the feature appears to have been subsequently disturbed. The proximity of the feature to the child inhumation does suggest a relationship between
these cultural phenomena, however.
Several factors point toward a relationship between Feature 3 and Feature
1, namely: the horizontal juxtaposition of these two features, the similar elevations, and the presence of a possible modified red hematite pebble in Feature 3.
These two features are only approximately 50 cm apart horizontally and are
vertically separated by less than 10 cm. The top of the slab that covered the

Cloud and Smith ~ The Trinque Site

307

child inhumation had an elevation consistent with the elevations recorded for
Feature 3. The possible modified hematite pebble in Feature 3 is the type of
artifact often associated with aboriginal burials in North America and interments
from the Upper Paleolithic in Eurasia, and its presence lends credence to a possible relationship between these features. The following discussion considers this
relationship in more detail.
Use of Red Paint, Red Ochre, and Fire in Human Interments
Red paint, often obtained from grinding hematite pebbles, and red ochre
have been documented at a number of Upper Paleolithic sites in Eurasia (Harrold
1980). They have been reported as occurring in burials, art and non-mortuary
ritual contexts, and domestic contexts (Roper 1991:290). Red paint and ochre
was found with 35 of 67 Upper Paleolithic interments throughout Eurasia
(Harrold 1980:206), and recorded in almost all of the burials from this time period
in the Soviet Union (Roper 1991:291). According to Roper (1991:292-293), red
paint was used in both the cave paintings of western Europe and on portable art
objects, such as animal representations, figurines, and mammoth bones, throughout Eurasia at this time. In addition, red ochre has been found with great regularity on living floors of Upper Paleolithic habitation sites. Roper (1991) also
presented data on the context of ochre occurrences from a number of North
American Paleoindian sites, and suggested its use in this hemisphere was the
product of a long tradition with roots in Eurasia.
The presence of red ochre or hematite pigment at sites- and its use in aboriginal burials -is well documented in North America as well. During the
Paleoindian period in North America, for example, red ochre has been associated with burials (Jenks 1937; Anderson 1966; Lahren and Bonnichsen 1974;
Redder 1985b; Redder and Fox 1988), has been reported covering artifacts such
as cached specimens (Buffer 1963; Frison 1990) and grinding stones (Naze 1986;
Roper 1989, 1991; Meyer and Liboiron 1990), and has been located on a number of living surfaces (Alexander 1963; Jodry and Stanford 1988; Bonnichsen et
al. 1990). Clearly, the use of ochre by Paleoindians in North America is parallel
to the use of this substance during the Upper Paleolithic in Eurasia, and probably represents an extension of that tradition (Roper 1991).
In Texas, red ochre has been reported from a number of archeological sites
occupied throughout prehistory. Its use appears to be common at sites in the
central Brazos valley, and moreover, the use of red ochre at sites and in burials
is a long-standing Native American tradition in the state.
The use of red ochre during Paleoindian times has been documented at
several Texas sites in both campsite (Alexander 1963) and burial associations
(Redder 1985b; Redder and Fox 1988). Redder (1985b:43) reported "one 3-in.square fragment of very fine red ochre" from the double burial at Horn Shelter
No. 2 in eastern Bosque County. This artifact had faceted surfaces and numerous visible striations and was found beneath the left temple of the adult in the
interment (Redder and Fox 1988:8).

308

Texas Archeological Society

Red ochre has been reported from Late Archaic period sites in the Brazos
River Valley, again in campsite (Lynott 1978:43; Forrester 1985:32) and burial
(Hall 1981) contexts. At the Ernest Witte site (41AU36) in the lower Brazos
River valley, Hall (1981:182) found a strong association between Late Archaic
burials and the use of red ochre. Nineteen of the Group 2 burials at the site had
powdered or finely granulated ochre in association, with most of these having
ochre in the head and chest areas.
Late Prehistoric sites with red ochre have been found in North Central (Jelks
1962) and East (Jackson 1938) Texas. At the Kyle site, "fragments of hematite
(a total of 37 pieces) were found in all of the occupational levels reported" (Jelks
1962:59). Jackson (1938) noted that a number of Caddoan burials in East Texas
have had red ochre in association. In general, the sites discussed by Jackson
(1938) were occupied during the Late Caddoan period (ca. A.D. 1400-1680). At
the Mattie Gandy site (41FK4), for example, four pieces of red ochre were found
in association with 90 ceramic vessels (Jackson 1938:105).
Red ochre has also been reported from an Historic Indian burial in the
central Brazos River valley (Story 1985). This interment from the Walton site
in McLennan County had "bits of vermillion" in association (Story 1985:71).
The use of paint in mortuary practices has been well documented ethnographically for historic Indian groups throughout North America (Yarrow 1988).
In these accounts, paint (usually red) was applied to the body, hair, or face of
the corpse and occasionally applied to the faces of the mourners. The Creek and
Seminole Indians of Florida painted the bodies of deceased warriors an unspecified color before burial, while the Pueblo Indians of San Geronimo de Taos used
red vermilion and white chalk paint to adorn the bodies of both sexes after death
(Yarrow 1988:4, 7). The Wah-Peton and Sisseton Sioux of the Dakota Territory
also used red paint in their mortuary practices. After death, warriors of these
tribes were painted red across the mouth, or in the case of especially brave men,
"they paint a hand in black color, with the thumb on one side of the mouth and
the fingers separated on the other cheek, the rest of the face being painted red"
(Yarrow 1988:10). Prior to death, women and children of these tribes who were
expected to die often had their faces painted red. When this could not be done
before death it was done soon afterwards. In addition, males of these groups
usually painted their faces an unspecified color during the mourning period.
Another group that painted the face of the deceased red or yellow was the
Kiowa Apache of Oklahoma and Texas (Yarrow 1988:33). The Werowance
Indians of Virginia and the Congaree or Santee Indians of South Carolina used
red paint on the bodies of the deceased, with the South Carolina tribe additionally applying red paint to the hair of the dead (Yarrow 1988:23). These examples
show that some of the historic Native American groups used paint, especially
red paint, as an important aspect of their mortuary practices.
The possible connection between Feature 1 and Feature 3 is further strengthened by an understanding of another aspect of Native American mortuary customs, namely the use of fire. Cremations, as well as by-products of fire, such as

Cloud and Smith ~ The Trinque Site

309

charcoal, ash, thermally altered stones, and charred food remains, have been
reported from a number of aboriginal burials in Texas (Ray 1936; Morrow 1936;
Jackson 1938; Jelks 1962; Stephenson 1970; Lynott 1978; Hall 1981), and historic accounts mention cremations and the use of fire in many Native North
American interments (Yarrow 1988). One of the earliest occurrences of fire byproducts in a North American aboriginal burial dates to the Paleoindian period
(Anderson 1966). Fire apparently played an important role in the mortuary practices of quite a number of Native American groups.
Jackson (1938:77-113) reported numerous cremated burials and burials associated with charcoal, ash, and charred food remains in an article entitled "Fire
in East Texas Burial Rites." He described six probable cremations from a site in
Titus County that had substantial associated deposits of ash and charcoal. He
also described a number of interments where charcoal or ash deposits were associated with inhumations that had not been cremated or otherwise burned. Some
of these cases involved charcoal in or beneath pottery vessels, but in most instances he described ash, charcoal, or both scattered throughout the burial fill
(Jackson 1938:106-107). Additionally, Jackson described several interments
where charred food remains (deer bones, pecans, kidney beans, and corn cobs)
were found in association with the body.
Fire associated with human interments has been documented at three sites
in nearby Hill County (Jelks 1962; Stephenson 1970; Lynott 1978). At the Kyle
Site, two of the three recovered burials showed evidence of fh’e. One of these
interments was cremated with the charred bone fragments wrapped in an
unwoven fiber mat, while the other was flexed and had been covered with pieces
of burned limestone (Jelks 1962:19-21). Another example of a fire/human burial
relationship comes from a child burial from the Pictograph Shelter at Lake
Whitney. An intense fire that consumed to ash all but the top few pieces of
firewood was apparently built in the burial pit prior to the inhumation. Other
evidence suggested this fire was doused with a heavy, greasy liquid and that the
fire was cold when the burial occurred. This burial was thought to be affiliated
with the Toyah phase component at the site (Stephenson 1970:124). At Bear
Creek Shelter, the only burial uncovered had two small concentrations of burned
rock and charcoal in close proximity. These features were not firmly associated;
however, the location of these concentrations beneath the head and slightly above
and west of the body suggest some sort of relationship. All of these features
were exposed within the Transitional Archaic Occupation Zone II (Lynott
1978:28). The juxtaposition of the burned rock and charcoal concentration just
above and west of this interment is very similar to that of Feature 3 and the
child inhumation at the Trinque Site.
Historic accounts document the use of cremations in burial ceremonies
performed by several North American Indian groups. Cremations were observed
being practiced in this country by several groups, including the Nishinams of
California, the Bonaks of an unknown location, the Tolkotins of Oregon, the
Indians of Clear Lake, California, the Se-nel of California, and the Pitt River or

310

Texas Archeological Society

Achomawi of California (Yarrow 1988). Closer to home, the Coahuiltecan tribes
of South and Southwest Texas were observed practicing cremations on certain
individuals, perhaps shamans, as ordinary persons were buried outside the encampment (Newcomb 1961:51); other historic Indian groups in Texas probably
used this mortuary practice as well.
The aboriginal custom of building fires on or near graves was a practice
that was observed and reported during historic times by several authors
(Newcomb 1961; Yarrow 1988). Yarrow explained that the custom provided a
certain purification for the soul, helped drive away demons, or helped light the
way to the spirit land for the wandering soul (Yarrow 1988:82). The Algonkins
of the northeastern United States, the Yukon of California, and the Eskimo of
Canada and Alaska either lit a fire nightly or kept one burning for a specific
time period to accomplish this end. Yarrow (1988:13) also presented a 1794
account of an exposed grave in New York which states "... near the place where
the head lay were the traces of a fire which they had kindled for the soul of the
deceased to come and warm itself by and to partake of the food deposited near
it." In Fray Francisco Casafias’ descriptions of the Tejas or Hasinai Indians in
East Texas from 1691 to 1722, an account was given of an interment where fire
was used. In describing this burial Newcomb (1961:302) relates that "After the
mourners had wept over the closed grave, some left to fetch tobacco, fire, and
a pot of water to be left on the grave." Thus, the association of fires and aboriginal graves appears to be a well documented one that probably had its origins
deep in man’s past.
The discussion above provides support for a possible circumstantial relationship between Feature 3 and Feature 1. A case for such a relationship has
been made based on: (1) the occurrence of a possible modified hematite pebble
in Feature 3, (2) the proximity of the two features, and (3) the identification of
Feature 3 as a possible hearth. The use of red paint and fires in the mortuary
practices of Native Americans during historic and prehistoric times has also been
shown to have been fairly common.
Other Features

Feature 2, interpreted as a hearth or hearth remnant, was uncovered just
above the bottom of the Late Archaic/Late Prehistoric cultural zone. Only four
of the 12 stones that comprise it were fire-cracked or visibly discolored from
thermal alteration, but several charcoal chunks and flecks were found in association. The time required for stones to crack or become discolored from thermal contact depends on a number of factors, including type of stone, moisture
content, temperature, and distance from the heat source. It is possible that some
of the stones in Feature 2 are hearth stones that never cracked or became discolored, due to the aforementioned circumstances. The presence of charcoal and
the stained soil observed around the feature argue for this stone concentration
being a disturbed hearth. The stones in the feature were jumbled as if they had
been kicked or piled together, with the four thermally altered stones located at

Cloud and Smith m The Trinque Site

311

varying depths in the approximate feature center. Such a configuration suggests
the feature had been disturbed after being used. The depth of Feature 2, just
above the base of the Late Archaic/Late Prehistoric cultural zone, indicates this
feature is probably associated with the Late Archaic component at the site.
The fire-cracked rock concentration designated Feature 4 was exposed quite
high in the upper cultural zone (Late Archaic!Late Prehistoric) at the site. This
feature lacks the characteristics of an in situ hearth, such as charcoal, associated
stained soil, a pit outline, or a definable hearth morphology, and thus it is thought
to be redeposited burned rock. The cultural affiliation of this feature is problematic as the diagnostic artifacts both above and below it reflect the mixed nature
of the deposit in this zone. A Darl dart point was recovered from above the feature
and a probable Darl dart point preform came from the level below it. Additionally, a Scallorn arrowpoint and several probable arrowpoint fragments came from
the approximate level of the feature and the levels below it.
Artifact Assemblage Comparisons
The artifacts from the Trinque Site, including diagnostic and non-diagnostic
tools, bone, lithic debitage, mussel shell, and possible manuports permit a few
generalizations about prehistoric activities at the site. The diagnostic artifacts
(projectile points) from the site support a considerable aboriginal presence during the Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods, with at least some occupation
as early as the Middle Archaic. Diagnostic artifacts from earlier periods were not
recovered in our limited investigations, but may be contained in hard-packed
deposits in certain areas of the site as suggested by the Trinque excavations.
The Late Prehistoric diagnostics from the Trinque Site are dominated by 22
Scallorn and Scallorn-like arrowpoints, commonly associated with the Austin
phase of the Late Prehistoric period in Central Texas (Jelks 1962:84-99; Prewitt
1981:82-83). Recently estimated ages of the Austin phase vary from A.D. 7001200 (Turner and Hester 1985:189) to A.D. 700-1300 (Prewitt 1981:83). Other
Late Prehistoric diagnostic arrowpoints from the site consist of two Perdiz, two
Bonham, one Washita-like, one Alba-like, and one Steiner-like. The relatively
few numbers of these diagnostics at the site suggest they represent short term use
at other times or trade items. Perdiz arrowpoints are typically associated with the
Toyah phase of the Late Prehistoric period in Central Texas (Jelks 1962:84-99;
Prewitt 1981:83-84). The Toyah phase, sequent to the Austin phase, has been
variously estimated to date from A.D. 1200-1500 (Turner and Hester 1985:187)
to A.D. 1300-1750 (Prewitt 1981:84).
It should be noted that the presence of certain diagnostic projectile points
by themselves is not sufficient evidence of affiliation with a given archeological
phase (Johnson 1987). Phases are regional representations of an ethnic group or
a single society during a given time period. Although phases are generally defined
on the presence of stylistically unique tools, clothing, etc., other behaviors, such
as economic pursuits and mortuary practices, should also be considered (Johnson
1987:3). Stylistically unique artifacts, such as Scallorn and Perdiz arrowpoints,

312

Texas Archeological Society

are often attributed to the Austin and Toyah phases, respectively, when no other
cultural traits of those phases are found in direct association. Although these
two phases have been mentioned in this report, it should be noted that testing at
the Trinque Site provided insufficient data for a definite affiliation with either
of these phases.
The other four arrowpoint types from the site represent varieties that are
commonly associated with cultures in areas adjacent to Central Texas. Bonham
arrowpoints, normally found in North Central and Northeast Texas, have been
estimated to date from A.D. 800-1200 (Suhm and Jelks 1962:267), but have also
been theorized to be stylistically related to Perdiz arrovcpoints and perhaps
pointing toward an affiliation with the Toyah phase (Jelks 1962:33). No firm
radiocarbon dates have been secured at this time for Bonham arrowpoints. Alba
arrowpoints are usually found in East Texas, and less commonly in North Central
to Central Texas (Suhm and Jelks 1962:263). These arrowpoints are thought to
date between A.D. 800-1200 (Turner and Hester 1985:163), so the Alba-like
specimen from the Trinque Site may be associated with the Scallorn component
present there. At the nearby Kyle Site in Hill County, only two Alba arrowpoints
were recovered from the extensive remains of the Austin and Toyah phases. One
of those came from the Austin phase zone, while the other was from the mixed
zone between those phases (Jelks 1962:33). Washita arrowpoints are the characteristic projectiles of the Washita phase in Oklahoma (Bell 1958:98-99; Turner
and Hester 1985:195). In Texas, this arrowpoint type commonly occurs in the
Panhandle and in the northern portion of the state, and has been recently dated
between A.D. 1150-1500 at Landergin Mesa in Oldham County (Robert J.
Mallouf, 1993 personal communication). Steiner arrowpoints, normally found in
East Texas, have as their characteristic attribute a deeply serrated triangular
blade (Story 1965:183-185; Turner and Hester 1985:191). Unfortunately, Steiner
arrowpoints have not been related to a specific culture or phase and the affiliation
of the Steiner-like specimen from the Trinque Site remains problematic.
The recovered dart points from the Trinque Site are dominated by the Darl
type (Suhm and Jelks 1962:179-180; Turner and Hester 1985:84); a total of nine
Darl and Darl-like dart points were secured from the Lance Trinque and our
excavations. This dart point type, common in Central Texas westward to the
Lower Pecos and southeastward onto the coastal plain, has been dated to approximately A.D. 200 by Turner and Hester (1985:84). The Darl component at
the Trinque Site, along with the later Scallorn component, comprise the primary
constituents of the upper cultural zone delineated at the site.
Other dart point types recovered from the site consist of one Frio, one Ensor,
two Lange, one Marshall, two Palmillas, four Pedernales, and one Gower-like
specimen (Suhm and Jelks 1962; Turner and Hester 1985). Both Ensor and Frio
dart points are commonly found in Central and South Texas and date from approximately 200 B.C. to A.D. 600 ~umer and Hester 1985:94,100). Since our
excavations at the Trinque Site did not recover Ensor or Frio dart points, it is

Cloud and Smith ~ The Trinque Site

313

impossible to determine what relationship, if any, they had to the upper cultural
zone delineated at the site.
Lange dart points date to the Late Archaic period. They are found primarily in Central Texas, but also occur in the central coastal plain (Turner and Hester
1985:113). At the Greenhaw Site in Central Texas, Weir (1979:46) reports horizontally discrete components clustered about nine burned rock middens, with
Lange dart points associated with the San Marcos phase of the Late Archaic
period (ca. 850 B.C.-A.D. 150).
Marshall dart points, also associated with the San Marcos phase of the Late
Archaic period at the Greenhaw Site, are found primarily in Central Texas (Weir
1979). However, other researchers have placed Marshall points within the Middle
Archaic period, dating them at 1000 B.C. or earlier (Turner and Hester 1985:119).
This dart point type may have persisted over a lengthy time period, thus crosscutting the Middle/Late Archaic division.
Palmillas dart points, found in a broad area from East Texas to the TransPecos, are thought to date to the Christian era (Suhm and Jelks 1962:229-230).
Pedernales dart points, one of the most ubiquitous projectile points from the
Archaic period, are present from Central Texas to the Trans-Pecos region (Suhm
and Jelks 1962:235-237; Turner and Hester 1985:139-140). These dart points
are the primary markers of the Middle Archaic period in Central Texas, roughly
dated from 2250-650 B.C. (Weir 1979:46). Among the Archaic dart points recovered at the Trinque Site, the Pedernales type was second in frequency only
to the Darl type.
Gower dart points, originally defined by Shafer (1963:64) and commonly
found in South Central and Central Texas, are an Early Archaic form thought to
date approximately between 6000-4000 B.C. (Turner and Hester 1985:105).
Thus, the Gower-like dart point unearthed in the Trinque excavations is the
earliest diagnostic recovered from the site.
The number and variety of dart points from the site suggest a long period
of intermittent occupations during the Archaic period. The limited testing data
at the Trinque Site indicates that the site was most heavily occupied during the
Middle Archaic and end of the Late Archaic period.
The non-diagnostic tools recovered from the site can be used to examine
changes in site function through time. The relative absence of formal tools,
excluding projectile points, and the predominance of informal expediency tools
in the lithic assemblage from the site is quite striking. Although the site excavations did recover non-diagnostic formal tools, such as cores, drills or perforators, large biface fragments that probably represent knives, a bone awl, and an
abraded hematite pebble fragment, the relative number of these tools is quite
low. Conversely, a total of 207 edge-modified lithic items were recovered from
our investigations. Spread throughout the excavated levels at the site, these informal tools are flakes, chips, and chunks that have been either utilized as they
were or trimmed for use. The low density of formal tools, and the relatively

314

Texas Archeological Society

high density of expediency tools at the site, suggest that the site probably served
as a hunting camp or short term occupation during most, if not all, of its occupation.
At the Kyle Site in nearby Hill County, 484 "spall scrapers" were recovered from extensive excavations (Jelks 1962:51). These distinctive artifacts
apparently are synonymous with the edge-modified lithics from the Trinque Site.
Small, delicate flakes were removed from the working edges of these tools during
use, creating a beveled edge on one face with a combination of convex, concave, or straight working edges. Jelks (1962:51) found wood shavings in the dry
portions of the Kyle rockshelter, and after conducting experiments in the laboratory, felt that these informal tools "... were most likely used for dressing
down bows, arrow shafts, and other wooden artifacts." Although we did not
conduct experiments aimed at replication, we assume that items other than wood
may also have been scraped or cut with these items.
Use of Raw Materials
Examination of the diagnostic artifacts from Trinque suggests trends in the
lithic sources utilized during the occupation of the site. The lithic materials used
at the Trinque Site consist of local Edwards chert, either Central Texas (nonlocal) Edwards chert, or chert from a local gravel deposit found in the terraces of
the Brazos River valley near Lake Proctor in Comanche County (Larry Banks,
1992 personal communication), and a relatively small sample of petrified wood.
The local Edwards chert is gray to light gray in color, and dominates the lithic
assemblage at the site. This is especially the case from the Late Archaic/Late
Prehistoric cultural zone; however, non-local Edwards chert or the large, finegrained chert gravels near Lake Proctor were utilized to a much greater extent
during most of the Archaic period occupation at the site. Petrified wood apparently was a minor lithic material variety used throughout all occupations.
Faunal Remains

The faunal material from the limited excavations suggests that a broad
range of animals were exploited at or near the site during its occupation. Remains
from a slider turtle (Pseudemys sp.), cottontail rabbits (Sylvilagus spp.), whitetailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus), an unidentified Emydinae turtle (Hardshell
turtle), unidentified Cricetine rodents (small rats), and unidentified Artiodactyals
were found in the site deposits.
The upper cultural zone at the site contained the majority of the identified
faunal material. All of the cottontail rabbit, unidentified Cricetine rodents, and
the unidentified Emydinae turtle remains came from this zone. Also present
within this zone were one of the white-tailed deer specimens and two unidentified
Artiodactyal specimens. Five identified specimens came from the first 10-cm
level just below the Late Archaic/Late Prehistoric zone: these include two whitetailed deer specimens, two unidentified Artiodactyal specimens, and the only

Cloud and Smith ~ The Trinque Site

315

slider turtle specimen. The only other identified specimen, from an unidentified
Artiodactyal, came from the deepest deposits at the site.
Although the data are extremely limited, they suggest that small mammals
such as rabbits and rats were utilized to a greater extent during Late Archaic
and Late Prehistoric times than during any earlier occupations of the site. The
one bone tool fragment seen in the assemblage is probably part of a bone awl.
This finely-crafted specimen undoubtedly took a substantial amount of time to
manufacture and was probably used to sew hides or furs together.
Chronological Synthesis and Site Use
The Trinque Site was occupied from Middle Archaic times, or earlier, until
approximately the end of the Late Prehistoric period. Excavation has shown that
aboriginal use of the site was its highest during the Late Archaic and the Late
Prehistoric periods. Comparisons of the use of the Trinque Site with the nearby
Kyle Site (Jelks 1962) should allow for some generalizations about occupational
use of the site.
The Kyle Site is located up a short tributary canyon system to the Brazos
River and was used throughout much of prehistory, including intensive occupations during both the Austin and Toyah phases. Jelks (1962) used the site, in
conjunction with several other sites with good stratigraphic integrity, to suggest
preliminary definitions of the Austin and Toyah phases in Central Texas. The
cultural deposits from both phases, including a wide array of perishable artifacts, suggest the site was used and reused through the Late Prehistoric period,
probably as a base camp. The size of the Kyle Rockshelter (27 x 12 meters), and
its location near the Brazos River, were probably key factors favoring a longterm intensive use during this period.
In comparing the Trinque Site to the Kyle Site, several important aspects
need to be considered. The two shelters are in similar environmental settings, at
canyon heads, but differ greatly in their relative size and in their respective
distances to major water sources. The Trinque Site rockshelter is a low, shallow
shelter, markedly smaller than the Kyle rockshelter, and also located in more of
an upland setting. Its size probably only allowed use by a relatively small group
at any given time, whereas the vastness of the Kyle shelter could accommodate
a much larger group. The location of the Kyle Site provided its inhabitants easy
access to the Brazos River, while the aborigines at the Trinque Site had to travel
a much greater distance to reach a major water source. Thus, one would expect
the aboriginal utilizations of these two sites during any given time period to be
different.
The excavation data, although limited from the Trinque Site, suggests differences in site functions. While the Kyle Site deposits have large numbers of
artifacts and a broad range of artifact types, the material culture from Trinque is
much more limited in quantity and variety. The material culture from Kyle consisted of over 600 bifacial lithic tools (including over 400 projectile points and

316

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

fragments, 78 knives, five drills, and numerous biface fragments), 10 scrapers,
almost 500 spall scrapers, one chopper, 12 hammerstones, 11 manos, four grinding slabs, one grooved stone, 11 painted pebbles, 49 pottery sherds, 51 bone
implements, 22 other bone objects, 33 antler pieces, two wooden arrow shafts,
100 other wooden artifacts, five pieces of basketry and matting, three pieces of
cordage, one knotted leaf, one shell scraper, five perforated mussel shells, and
three pieces of tanned leather (Jelks 1962). This diverse list of artifacts contrasts with the sparse artifacts from the Trinque site: 23 bifacial lithic tools, nine
cores and core fragments, 207 edge-modifed lithics (synonomous with the Kyle
site spall scrapers), one bone tool fragment, one abraded hematite pebble, and
one possibly modified hematite pebble. Although similarities exist in the material culture between the two sites, especially during the Late Prehistoric period,
the differences suggest different activities occurred at the respective sites. The
Kyle Site was probably a base camp with extended occupations through time,
while the Trinque Site more than likely served as a hunting camp or short term
stopover for small groups. The child inhumation ~eature 1) would not normally
have occurred during use of the site as a hunting camp, but could have resulted
during a short stay by a family group.
In conclusion, limited test excavations at the Trinque Site recorded four
cultural features that are thought to be associated with a buried cultural zone in
the upper portion of the deposit. This zone contains materials that date from the
end of the Late Archaic period to the beginning of the Late Prehistoric period.
Unfortunately, mixing of this zone in the tested area, through bioturbation and
weathering processes, has destroyed much of the integrity of the deposit. However, it is possible that stratified deposits exist in other portions of the rockshelter
where natural processes have not been as destructive. While a definite cultural
association for the infant inhumation was not established, the investigation did
provide archeological information for the Chalk Mountain area of Erath County,
an area previously neglected. In addition, this small field project provided an
opportunity for cooperation between professional and avocational archeologists
that strengthened the archeological data base for the area and region.
APPENDIX 1

BRIEF ANALYSIS OF SKELETAL REMAINS FROM THE
TRINQUE SITE (41ER27)
Patricia M. Landau and Gail A. Colby
The eruption and developmental state of the dentition from Burial 1 indicates that this individual was between eight and nine months old + three months

Cloud and Smith m The Trinque Site

317

at the time of death. It is not possible to estimate its stature or gender. This
estimate is based on the eruption and development of the dentition (Ubelaker
1978).
The overall preservation of Burial 1 is good. The recovery of subadult
skeletal material is problematic due to the fragility of the material, but the on-site
use of preservative (polyvinyl acetate) during excavation allowed the recovery of
elements that would otherwise not have been removed. The polyvinyl acetate
(PVA) was removed in the laboratory during cleaning whenever possible, but in
some instances preservative was left in place to keep the element intact, or when
removal techniques would have damaged the material. This was particularly true
for the fibs, radii, ulnae, and the bones of the os coxae.
No evidence of any disorder is visible that would have impacted the skeleton. Additionally, no evidence of enamel hypoplasia or any other indicator of
nutritional or non-specific stress is observed in Burial 1. Therefore, it is impossible to make any definitive statement about the overall health or nutritional
status of this infant.
The inventory of skeletal remains from Burial 1 was made using Bass
(1987) and Steele and Bramblett (1988) for skeletal identifications.
SKELETAL INVENTORY
Cranial Material
Frontal
Three fragments, including one left orbital fragment with visible metopic
suture, and left orbital fragments.
Parietals
Six fragments, some with impressions for the middle meningeal vessels.
Occipital
Seven fragments, among them a basio-occipital fragment with the epiphysis
for articulation with the sphenoid and left and fight lateral parts.
Temporals
The petrous portions of the left and right temporals are present, along with
the squama of the fight temporal.
Zygomatics
The left zygomatic is complete, while only a fragment of the fight zygomatic is present.

318

Texas Archeological Society
Palatine
One fragment of the left palatine is present.
Nasal
The fight nasal is present.

Sphenoid
The sphenoid is represented by nine fragments.
Maxilla
Two fragments of the maxilla are present: the fight with DP3 and DP4
unerupted but visible, the left with DI1 erupted, and DC1 and DP4 unerupted but
visible.
Mandible
Two fragments of the mandible are present. The deciduous lateral incisors
are erupted, but absent, and the lateral incisors remain in place. Both canines, all
premolars, and left and fight first molars are unerupted but visible in their aveoli.
The first molars are in the process of crown formation and are incomplete.
Loose Dentition
Loose dentition includes left and fight deciduous mandibular canines, a left
deciduous premolar, the fight DF, and the left and fight DI2.

Miscellaneous Cranial Fragments
A number of small miscellaneous cranial fragments are present.
Postcranial Material
Humerii
The left and fight humefii are both present. Distal and proximal epiphyseal
plates are visible on the left humerus, but the distal end of the fight humerus is
absent. Both of these bones were treated in the field with a thick coating of PVA.
Radii
Both radii are present and the left radius is solidified to its accompanying
ulna. The fight radius is in two fragments and the left one is complete. The distal
and proximal epiphyseal plates are visible on both radii.

Cloud and Smith m The Trinque Site

319

Uinae
Both ulnae are present, although the right ulna is in two fragments and the
left one is complete. Distal and proximal epiphyseal plates are visible on both the
left and right ulnae.
Vertebral Column

The vertebral column is represented by a portion of the atlas, four laminae
from thoracic vertebrae, three laminae and centra solidified with PVA, and 12
additional centra.
Ribs
The right Ribs I and II are complete. The remainder of the ribs are represented by 31 fragments, some of which have a thick coating of PVA.
Scapulae

The bodies of both the left and right scapulae are present; epiphyses at the
glenoid fossa and acromion are present on the left scapula. The epiphysis for
the glenoid fossa is present on the right scapula, but only a portion of the
acromion process is intact.
Clavicles
The left and right clavicles are both present, although the acromial portion
of the left one is absent.
Femora

The left and right femurs are both present, and distal epiphyses are present
on both specimens. Epiphyses are visible for the lesser and greater trochanters
on the femora. The epiphysis for the head is visible on the left femur, while a
portion of the distal end of the right femur is absent.
F~ulae
The right fibula is in two fragments, with both the proximal and distal
epiphyseal plates visible. The distal epiphysis of the right tibia is solidified with
PVA to the proximal end of the fibula. The left fibula is represented by a portion of the diaphysis.
Ilia
The left ilium is in two fragments. The auricular surface and the epiphysis at
the ischium are both visible. The right ilium is also represented by two fragments, with the auricular surface and epiphysis visible at the ischium.

320

Texas Archeological Society
Pubis
A fragment of the left pubis is present.
Ischium
A fragment of the left ischium is present.
Metacarpals

Thre~ whole metacarpals with visible epiphyseal plates were recovered,
along with two metacarpal fragments.
Phalanges
Nine phalanges, including one terminal phalanx, are present.
Calcaneus
A fragment of the fight calcaneus was recovered.
Tibiae
Both the left and fight tibiae are present. Both proximal and distal epiphyseal plates are visible on the left tibia. The proximal epiphyseal plate is visible on
the fight tibia, but the distal end is missing.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank a number of individuals for support during this
project. The landowner, Mrs. C. L. Nix, graciously allowed us to work on her
land while providing on-site encouragement. Mr. and Mrs. William Anderson
also extended some North Central Texas hospitality during the fieldwork while
providing access across their land to the site. Thanks are extended to Robert J.
Mallouf, State Archeologist, for his continued encouragement and numerous
suggestions concerning the project. Also quite helpful were Cathy Hoyt and
Hector Meza of the Office of the State Archeologist, who both provided suggestions and help with the generation of this article, and Teresa Howard, who ably
provided most of the drafting. We gratefully acknowledge Patti Landau and Gail
Colby of Texas A&M University for conducting the skeletal analysis in timely
fashion. We appreciate Billy Davidson’s expertise in conducting the faunal
analysis, and thank Dan ~1 for providing his knowledge of North Central
Texas archeology and helping with much of the fieldwork. Also, we thank all of
the participants in the fieldwork for their undying enthusiasm and hard work.
Sallie Taylor was especially helpful in the field with her artwork. We extend
special thanks to Lance Tfinque, who initiated this project and provided muchneeded manpower during its course. His yearning for knowledge challenged us

Cloud and Smith ~ The Tt4.nque Site

321

constantly and resulted in his learning a great deal about proper field techniques
and the preservation ethic. Lance can now truly be viewed as an ally of Texas
archeology.

REFERENCESCITED
Alexander, H. L., Jr.
1963
The Levi Site: A Paleo-Indian Campsite in Central Texas. American Antiquity
28(4):510-528.
Anderson, D. C.
1966
The Gordon Creek Burial. Southwestern Lore 32(1):1-9.
Bass, W. M.
1987
Human Osteology: A Laboratory arm Field Manual 3rd edition. Missouri
Archaeological Society, Columbia.
Bell, R. E.
1958
Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points.
Special Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, No. 1. Oklahoma

City.
Bonnichsen, R., D. Douglas, M. Beatty, M. D. Turner, J. C. Turner, and B. Stanyard
1990
New Paleoindian Discoveries at Mammoth Meadow, Southwestern Montana.
Current Research in the Pleistocene 7:3-5.
Brown, D. O., R. P. Watson, P. C. Patton, J. M. Jackson, and D. E. Peter
1987
Archeology at Aquilla Lake, 1978-1982 Investigations. Research Report 81.
Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Bryan, F.
1930

Archeological Remains in the Black and Grand Prairies of Texas. Bulletin ofthe
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 2:76-84.

1936

Preliminary Report on the Archeology of Western Limestone County. Central
Texas Archeologist 2:81-95.

1937

A Preliminary Report on the Archeology of Western Navarro County and Some
Camp Sites in Hill andMcLerman County. CentralTexasArcheologist 3:70-79.

Bureau of Economic Geology
1972
Geologic Atlas of Texas, Dallas Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Butler, B. R.
1963
An Early Man Site at Big Camas Prairie, South-Central Idaho. Tebiwa 6(1):2233.

322

Texas Archeological Society

Emery, S. and D. J. Stanford
Preliminarj Report on Archaeological Investigations at the Cattle Guard Site,
1982
Alamosa County, Colorado. Southwestern Lore 48(1):10-20.
Fermeman, N. M.
1938
Physiography of the Eastern United States. McGraw-HiU Book Company,
Inc., New York.
Forrester, R. E.
1985
Horn Shelter Number 2: The North End, A Preliminary Report. Central Texas
Archeologist 10:21-35.
Frison, G. C.
1990
Clovis, Goshen, andFolsom:LifewaysandCulturalRelationships.In:Megafauna
and Man: Discovery ofAmerica’s Heartland, edited by L. D. Agenbroad, L I.
Mead, and L. W. Nelson, pp. 100-108. Scientific Papers, Volume 1, The
Mammoth Site of Hot Springs, South Dakota, Inc., Hot Springs, South Dakota.
Gallagher, J. G. and S. E. Bearden
1976
The Hopewell School Site, A Late Archaic Campsite in the Central Brazos River
Valley. Contributions inAnthropology, No. 19. SouthemMethodist University,
Dallas.
Hall, G. D.
Aliens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower Brazos River
1981
Valley, Texas. Research Report 61. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas, Austin.
Harrold, F. B.
1980
A Comparative Analysis of Eurasian Palaeolithic Burials. World Archaeology
12(2): 195-211.
Hays, T. R. and F. E. Kirby
1977
Hog Creek Testing Project: Preliminary Report submitted to USDA Soil
Conservation Service, Temple, Texas, by North Texas State University.
Henry, D. O., F. E. Kirby, A. B. Justen, and T. R. Hays
1980
The Prehistory of Hog Creek: An Archaeological Investigation ofBosque and
Coryell Counties, Texas. Laboratory of Archaeology, Department of Anthropology, University of Tulsa.
Jackson, A. T.
Fire in East Texas Burial Rites. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
1938
Paleontological Society 10:77-113.
Jelks, E. B.
Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
1953
Society 24:189-207.

Cloud and Smith ~ The Trinque Site
1962

323

The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County, Texas.
Archeology Series No. 5. Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas
at Austin.

Jenks, A. E.
1937
Minnesota’s Browns Valley Man and Associated Burial Artifacts. American
Anthropological Association Memoir Number 49.
Jodry, M. A. and D. J. Stanford
1988
Stewart’s Cattle Guard: A Folsom Site in Southcentral Colorado. Current
Research in the Pleistocene 5:11-13.
Johnson, L., Jr.
1987
A Plague of Phases: Recent Sociocultural Taxonomy in Texas Archeology.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57:1-26.
Larson, R. E. and F. E. Kirby
1976
Test Excavations at the L. E. Robertson Shelter and the Stone Rockshelter,
Coryelt County, Texas. Research Report No. 87. Archaeology Research
Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Larson, R. E., D. E. Peter, F. E. Kirby, and S. A. Skinner
An Evaluation of the Cultural Resources at Hog Creek. Research Report No.
1975
84. Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Lahren, L. and R. Bonnichsen
1974
Bone Foreshafts from a Clovis Burial in Southwestern Montana. Science
186(4159):147-150.
Lynott, M. J.
1978
An Archaeological Assessment of the Bear Creek Shelter, Lake Whitney,
Texas. Research Report No. 115. Archaeology Research Program, Southern
Methodist University, Dallas.
Lynott, M. L and D. E. Peter
1977
1975 Archaeological Investigations at Aquilla Lake, Texas. Research Report No. 100. Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Lux, K.
1937

A Detailed Report of Teeth and Supporting Structures as Found in Crania in
Mass Burial. Cet,dral Texas Archeologist 3:34-40.

Meroney, W. P.
1936
A Mass Burial Near Waco. Central Texas Archeologist 2:59-60.
Meyer, D. and H. Liboiron
1990
A Paleoindian Drill from the Niska Site in Southern Saskatchewan. Plains
Anthropologist 35(129):299-302.

324

Texas Archeological Society

Morrow, L G.
1936
A Prehistoric Cremated Burial of the Abilene Region. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Soc&ty 8:17-24.
Naze, B. S.
The Folsom Occupation of Middle Park, Colorado. SouthwesternLore 52(4): 11986
32.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961
The Indians of Texas From Prehistoric to Modern Times. The University of
Texas Press, Austin.
Prewitt, E. R.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 52:65-89.
Prikryl, D. J. and J. M. Jackson
1985
Waco Lake, McLerman County, Texas: An Inventory and Assessment of
Cultural Resources. Reports oflnvestigations, No. 39. Prewitt and Associates,
Inc., Austin.
Ray, C. N.
1936
Some Unusual Cremated Burials Found Near Colorado, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 8:9-16.
Redder, A. J.
1985a Biography of Frank H. Watt. Central Texas Archeologist 10:12-20.
1985b

Horn Shelter Number 2: The South End, A Preliminary Report. Central Texas
Archeologist 10:37-65.

Redder, A. J. and J. W. Fox
1988
Excavation and Positioning of the Horn Shelter’s Burial and Grave Goods.
Central Texas Archeologist 1 hl-10.
Roper, D. C.
1989
Grinding S tones in Plains Paleoindian Sites: The Case for Pigment Processing.
Current Research in the Pleistocene 6:36-37.
1991

A Comparison of Contexts of Red Ochre Use in Paleoindian and Upper
Paleolithic Sites. North American Archaeologist 12(4):289-301.

Sharer, H. J.
1963
Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site: A Stratified Terrace Site in Bell
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 24:57-81.
1977

Letter Report to the USDA, Soil Conservation Service, Temple, Texas on
Testing the Spillway Shelter (41BQ59), Hog Creek, Texas.

Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1932
The Geology of Texas, Vol. 1, Stratigraphy. The University of Texas, Bulletin
No. 3232. Austin.

Cloud and Smith ~ The Trinque Site

3:25

Sheldon, R. A.
1979
Roadside Geology of Texas. Mountain Press Publishing Company, Missoula,
Montana.
Skinner, S. A.
1971
Prehistoric Settlement of the De Cordova Bend Reservoir, Central Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 42:149-269.
Skinner, S. A. and J. G. Gallagher
1974
An Evaluation of Archaeological Resources at Lake Whitney, Texas. Contributions in Anthropology No. 14. Southern Methodist University, Department of
Anthropology. Dallas.
Skinner, S. A. and R. K. Harris
The Archaeological Resources of Lake Whitney, Texas: A Preliminary Report.
1971
Report submitted to the National Park Service by the Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University. Dallas.
Skinner, S. A. and M. S. Henderson
Archaeological Resources of the Aquilla Creek Watershed. In: The Natural
1972
and Cultural Environmental Resources of the Aquilla Creek Watershed, Hill
County, Texas, assembled by S. Alan Skinner, pp. 3-62. Report submitted to
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers by the Institute for the Study of Earth and
Man, Southem Methodist University.
Skinner, S. A. and G. Humphreys
The Historic and Prehistoric Archaeological Resources of the Squaw Creek
1973
Reservoir. Contributions in Anthropology, No. 10. Southern Methodist University, Department of Anthropology. Dallas.
Skinner, S. A., C. Shaw, K. Huckabay, and M. L. Bartsch
1978
An Evaluation of Archaeological Resources at Aquilla Lake. Archaeology
Research Program, Southern Methodist University. Dallas.
Steele, D. G. and C. A. Bramblett
1988
TheAnatomy andBiology oftheHumanSkeleton.Texas A&M University Press,
College Station.
Stephenson, R. L.
1947
Archaeological Survey of Whitney Basin: A Preliminary Report. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 18:129-142.
1970

Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir Area, Central Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 41:37-277.

Story, D. A.
1965
The Archeology of Cedar Creek Reservoir, Henderson and Kaufman Counties,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 36:163-257.
1985

The Walton Site: An Historical Burial in McLerman County, Texas. Central
Texas Archeologist 10:66-96.

326

Texas Archeological Society

Story, D. A. and H. J. Shafer
1965
1964 Excavations at Waco Reservoir, McLennan County, Texas: The Baylor
and Britton Sites. Miscellaneous Papers No. 6. Texas Archeological Salvage
Project, The University of Texas, Austin.
Suhm, D. A.
Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis County, Texas. Texas Journal of
1957
Science 9(1):26-58.
Suhm, D. A., and E. B. Jelks
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Areheological
1962
Society Special Publication 1 and Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin 4, Austin.
Turner, F. A.
1937
Review Of Skeletons From Mass Burial. Central Texas Archeologist 3:29-33.
Turner, E. S. and T. R. Hester
1985
A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts ofTexas lndians. Texas Monthly Press, Austin.
Ubelaker, D. H.
1978
Human Skeletal Remains: Excavation, Analysis, Interpretation. Taraxacum,
Washington, D. C.
Wagner, B. J., J. R. Thomas, E. R. Harris, E. Deleon, C. G. Ford, and J. D. Kelley
1973
Soil Survey of Erath County, Texas. U. S. Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, and Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
Watson, R. P.
1982
The Archeology of Aquilla Creek Reservoir: Implications for a Regional
Research Design from the Central Brazos River Basin, Texas. Unpublished
Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Watt, F. H.
Descriptive Analysis Of Glass Indian Trade Beads Found In Texas. Central
1937
Texas Archeologist 3:61-67.
1938

The Waco Sinker. Central Texas Archeologist 4:21-70.

1941

Preliminary Report on Potsherds from Chupek Site. Central Texas Archeological Society News Letter Part 2-IV:17-19.

1965

Notes on the Clark Site, McLennan County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 36:99-110.

1967

Lookout Point, Lake Waco. Central Texas Archeologist 8:27-39.

1978

Radiocarbon Chronology of Sites in the Central Brazos Valley. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 49:111-138.

Watt, F. H. and W. P. Meroney
1937a Supplementary Report on Mass Burial Near Waco. Central TexasArcheologist 3:27-29.

Cloud and Smith ~ The Trinque Site
1937b

327

Glass Indian Trade Beads in Central Texas. Central Texas Archeologist
3:52-59.

Weir, F. A.
1979
Greenhaw: An Archaic Site in Central Texas. Bulletin of the TexasArcheological Society 47:25-87.
Yarrow, H. C.
1988
North American Indian Burial Customs. Edited by V. L. Smith. Eagle’s View
Publishing Company, Ogden, Utah.

329

Reviews
Rock Art in New Mexico, by Polly Schaafsma. Museum of New Mexico Press,
Santa Fe. 1992. viii + 172 pp., figures and plates.
Reviewed by Douglas K. Boyd, Prewitt and Associates, Inc.
The 1992 edition of Rock Art in New Mexico is a fully revised version of
Polly Schaafsma’s classic 1972 publication that was widely distributed after its
1975 printing by the University of New Mexico Press. Although it follows basically the same format as the original, the 1992 edition is updated to include a
considerable amount of informa tion generated by 20 additional years of rock
art research. The 1992 bibliography is significantly larger and reflects the intensity of research during the past two decades. The 1975 edition had only 74 references cited, compared to 262 in the 1992 edition, thus making the bibliography
an extremely valuable tool in itself. The larger format (9 x 11 3/4 inches), excellent black and white photographs, and stylish layout make this new volume
somewhat of a coffee-table book but it is not just for show. It is quite readable
and can be enjoyed by the interested layperson while being an essential reference for Southwestern archeologists and rock art scholars.
The 1992 edition is a much needed update on New Mexico rock art. The
text has been revised and expanded and a few figures have been added. Although
this edition has a condensed table of contents and no longer has a list of illustrations, the addition of a comprehensive subject index makes up for this. A few
other minor changes in the new edition should also be mentioned. The 1975
edition has three excellent color plates of pictographs which do not appear in
the new edition; undoubtedly a casualty of the increasing publication costs and
an attempt to keep the 1992 edition affordable. A few tables and line drawings
were also deleted, but the information they contain, while of interest to professionals, is far too specific for a synthetic volume of this type. Finally, most of
the maps in the 1992 edition are condensed in size and contain less information.
This is the only regrettable change since the maps no longer show locations of
specific rock art sites discussed in the text. The 1975 maps, while less aesthetic,
did show key site locations and were more helpful for research.
Schaafsma divides the state of New Mexico into four large regions:
Northwestern, Southern, Upper Rio Grande, and Eastern New Mexico and the
Southern High Plains. A separate chapter discusses the rock art within each area,
identifying and describing regional rock art "styles." Schaafsma does not attempt,
however, to understand or interpret rock art symbols in isolation. Each of these
chapters begins with a brief environmental and archeological background and
then traces what is known of the origins and evolution of the region’s rock art.
The rock art styles are defined by a combination of complex factors such as
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64 (1993)

330

Texas Archeological Society

geographic range, chronological placement, technological attributes,
characteristic motifs, or contextual relationships between images or between
landscapes and images. In all cases, Schaafsma relates the rock art styles to the
cultures that produced them. While some styles are better documented than
others, by integrating the iconography with the archeological and ethnographic
records, a rather coherent picture of New Mexico rock art emerges.
Schaafsma does an admirable job of relating a complex array of rock art to
the people who produced it. Throughout the book, rock art is viewed in a holistic
perspective, as an important aspect of culture that is intimately related to the
lifeways and beliefs of the artists. The role of rock art sites and images~how
they functioned within a given society--is masterfully integrated into all the
chapters. From the ceremonial connotations of the Chihuahuan Polychrome Style
(an Archaic style that displays striking similarities to the Pecos River Style in
Texas) to the biographic nature of Historic Navajo and Plains Indian images,
New Mexico rock art displays a wide range of diversity in form and function. Of
special interest are Puebloan shrines: sacred areas which usually include rock art.
Such sites are widespread in the northern Rio Grande and some are still in use by
modern Pueblo Indians. Shrines are a good example of how rock art was often
integrated into its natural surroundings to produce powerful imagery.
Schaafsma explores the intricate relationships between various rock art
styles, such as the similarities apparent in the well known Jornada and Rio
Grande styles. These similarities are by no means coincidental as Schaafsma
points out. The continuity between the Jomada-Rio Grande styles mirrors similarities seen in other aspects of the archeological record. Many of the images
found in Jornada rock art seem to be precursors for later Puebloan images. One
of the book’s more in-depth discussions deals with the origins and evolution of
the Kachina cult. Although there are other theories in the debate, Schaafsma
argues for a Mexican origin and cites the strong similarities between the Southwestern Kachina cult and the Tlaloc (Rain GOd) cult. She surmises, and has
considerable supporting evidence in the rock art, that the Kachina cult then
spread north to the Jornada Mogollon and eventually on to the Rio Grande and
Western Pueblos. The extreme continuity is exemplified by the fact that some
specific Kachinas that appear in ancient rock art are nearly identical to their
modern counterparts.
The Fifth chapter deals with Hispanic rock art. The impact of European
culture on Native American populations was extensive, and is, of course, also
reflected in stylistic changes in the Native American rock art. This influence is
also evident to a large degree in the presence of images produced by Hispanics.
Although the famous site of E1 Morro, where Juan de Oflate’s 1605 inscription is
found alongside the names of hundreds of other travelers, is a widely known
Hispanic site, this aspect of New Mexico’s rock art has received comparatively
little attention. Schaafsma points out that there are many documented cases of
Hispanics producing rock art. One of the most common rock art images in
northern New Mexico is the simple cross. While some were certainly made by

Reviews

331

Christian Indians, many, perhaps most, were probably made by Hispanics. Many
Spaniards, in their attempt to wipe out what was considered to be the pagan
idolatry of the Pueblos, destroyed Indian-made images and replaced them with
crosses. The use of crosses to exorcise Indian petroglyphs appears to have been
very widespread. Schaafsma also points out that rock art may have been, and
perhaps still is, produced by the Penitente brotherhood.
Immediately following Chapter 5 is a brief section entitled "Fakes and
Fantasies" which offers a word of warning to unwary archeologists and rock art
researchers. As an example, Schaafsma describes an "Apache" pictograph site
that is now known to have been made by Boy Scouts participating in an Indian
Lore program while visiting the Mescalero Reservation in 1932.
In her concluding remarks, Schaafsma makes the all important, almost
compulsory, plea for increasing awareness of, and protection for, New Mexico’s
rock art sites. The plea for site preservation is repeated countless times in
archeological reports but such reports usually have a limited disVibution and are
often read only by professional archeologists. The new edition of Rock Art of
New Mexico, however, is certain to follow in the footsteps of the original edition
and will soon become a classic. It will also have a much greater impact on the
general public. The fascinating story and the powerful images in this book should
inspire others to help preserve and protect their heritage.

Near-Surface, High Resolution Geophysical Methods for Cultural Resource
Management and Archaeological Investigations, by Don H. Heimmer,
1992. Prepared by Geo-Recovery Systems, Inc., Golden, Colorado, for
Interagency Archeological Services, National Park Service, Denver, Colorado, ix + 143 pp.
Reviewed by David O. Brown, Hicks & Company

This compendium of geophysical prospecting methods is a well-conceived
and badly needed addition to the archeological literature. Geophysical prospecting made its way into archeological field methods in the 1960s and, after a
plethora of early experiments undertaken by science-minded new archeologists,
the use of these methods has seen a slow and steady growth. Widely used in
Europe, many prospecting methods were primarily popular in the U.S. for historical and underwater archeology. During the last decade or so, however, the
use of such methods has proliferated. The importance of geophysical prospecting has been solidly demonstrated many times over in a variety of situations;
there are few major archeological projects, from survey to excavation, that would
not benefit from the use of one or more methods.
Heimmer’s book is not intended to be a history of the evolution of geophysical methods and their use in archeology. Nor is it a minutely detailed
manual on the use of individual techniques. It is, rather, an overview of the most

332

Texas Archeological Society

important geophysical methods generally in use (and a few that have been used
little at all) in this country. The discussions of individual methods are detailed,
but are aimed primarily at the knowledgeable cultural resource manager rather
than the geophysicist or lay reader. Comparative ranges, limitations, survey
costs, and site requirements are provided, as are details concerning analysis and
write-up of results. The discussion of individt~ methods is enormously useful;
in particular, the discussions of limitations and comparative costs is something
not available from any other source. A fairly comprehensive, but not exhaustive,
bibliography of specific case studies, technical descriptions of available instrumentation, and a glossary of terms round off the volume.
The book is primarily oriented toward terrestrial usages although the discussions of individual methods are general enough to apply in almost any case.
The role of geophysical prospecting methods in underwater archeology, which
has been one of their most important uses worldwide for the last several decades, is given much less space. Another area where the book might have
benefitted from some expansion is in an overall synthesis or general comparison of methods. For example, the inclusion of a matrix of appropriate uses and
cost/effort comparisons would have been of some help in making decisions
between geophysical methods.
Despite very minor limitations, this book is an absolute must for the archeologist or manager who needs to decide on the appropriate, cost-effective use of
a geophysical prospecting technique, as well as an important volume for geophysicists trying to understand the sometimes less than lucidly articulated needs
of the archeologist. It is not a substitute for having a geophysicist involved in a
project (or at the least, an archeologist trained in geophysical methods), but it
will allow the non-specialist to understand the use and abuse of certain systems
and to make wiser choices regarding the available methods.

The Spanish Frontier in North America, by David J. Weber. Yale University
Press, New Haven. 1992. 579 pp.
Spanish Texas: 1519-1821, by Donald E. Chipman. University of Texas Press,
Austin. 1992. 343 pp.
Reviewed by Maynard B. Cliff, Geo-Marine, Inc.

More and more often in recent years, archeologists have become involved
with studies within a subdiscipline of anthropology known as ethnohistory. The
term has evolved to refer to that area where anthropology (including archeology) and history meet (McCall 1969:75-77), and at its simplest, it refers to the
history of non-western groups, or of native peoples unable to write their own
history--those whom Wolf (1982) referred to as "the people without history."

Reviews

333

While some may argue that the use of the term is too ethnocentric and artificial,
saying that it has been used "to separate [ethnohistory] from ’real’ history, the
study of the supposedly civilized" (Wolf 1982:19), the term has achieved widespread acceptance (see for example Rogers and Wilson 1993). But it is also clear,
as Wolf (1982:19) points out, that "the more ethnohistory we know, the more
clearly ’their’ history and ’our’ history emerge as part of the same history," with
’their’ history being "only a component of a common history suppressed or
omitted from conventional studies for economic, political, or ideological reasons." However, the first step in comprehending the "common" history of European and Native American peoples, as it developed in this hemisphere, is to
fully understand the plans, practices, and actions of European peoples as they
spread across the New World after 1492.
For the archeologist interested in Spanish Texas, and in the interaction of
Europeans and Native American peoples within the area today known as Texas,
these two books provide such an understanding. Both are by scholars resident in
Texas (David Weber is Robert and Nancy Dedman Professor of History at Southern Methodist University while Donald Chipman is Professor of History at the
University of North Texas); both have published several other books as well as
numerous articles in Southwestern Historical Quarterly and other professional
journals. Taken together, they provide both a broad background on the history
of the Spanish Borderlands and an in-depth history of Spanish Texas.
Weber’s book is an ambitious attempt to write a history of the entire Spanish Borderlands area, a term first coined by Herbert Eugene Bolton in 1921 and
that today is used by many to refer to "all the territories within the limits of the
United States which Spain once held, from Florida to California," plus in some
cases, the northern states of Mexico (Bannon 1974:2-3). Weber succeeds admirably in achieving his goal, highlighting a period of North American history still
not well known to most of us, and pointing out that Spanish influences and
Spanish architecture are still evident in many areas from California to Florida.
For example, he notes that almost all of the older buildings present in the French
Quarter of New Orleans were actually constructed during the Spanish period in
Louisiana, and draws attention to the fact that Spanish settlement on the Pacific
coast of North America once extended as far north as Neah Bay in what is today
the state of Washington, a decade before Lewis and Clark set eyes on the Pacific Ocean.
Weber’s approach to presenting the history of the Spanish North American
frontier is basically a chronological one, although the sheer magnitude of the
subject matter inevitably causes him to jump around from one area of the Borderlands to another. Despite this, the overall coverage he provides of all areas is
generally good, though California receives noticeably less coverage than do other
areas. This is particularly notable in regard to Weber’s discussion of the background for the settlement of AIta California, involving the slow march of Jesuit
missionaries up the West Coast of Mexico and Baja California (compare, for
example the coverage of the same topic in Bannon 1974). As if to make up for

334

Texas Areheological Society

this lack of discussion, this reviewer found Weber’s coverage of the Spanish
attempts to settle and missionize La Florida and its later attempts to hold its
foothold in what is today the southeastern United States under the continuing
pressure of the English, together with his discussion of the international rivalry
of Spain and England in the area north of California in the late eighteenth century, to be both informative and fascinating. This is especially true in regard to
his discussions of how the political policies of the European powers, and the
changing political climate in Europe, affected the waxing and waning of the
European colonial empires in North America, and by extension their relations
with the Native American groups for which they competed for alliances. Thus,
Weber makes it quite clear that life-and-death dramas involving European and
Native American interactions played out large on the North American stage, had
their ultimate origin in the corridors of power and the marketplaces of Europe,
supporting Wolf’s (1982: 3) contention that "the world of humankind constitutes
a manifold, a totality of interconnected processes, and inquiries that disassemble
this totality into bits and then fail to reassemble it falsify reality."
Among the numerous threads that Weber weaves together throughout his
narrative is that concerned with the interaction between Europeans (including
Spanish, French, and English) and Native Americans on the North American
frontier. The picture that emerges for the Spanish Borderlands is that of a dynamic colonial policy, pursued throughout all of Spanish North America, that
evolved over time from the early encomienda system of New Spain, to the
mission/presidio system of the early and middle eighteenth century, to the better integrated Provincias Internas of the late eighteenth century. The book makes
it clear that throughout this period, Spain’s official policy towards what it saw
as its Native American "subjects" always involved acculturation and integration, although these goals were rarely, if ever, actually met. In practical terms,
Spain’s Native American policy evolved from initial attempts to exploit, to attempts to missionize and acculturate, to finally simply coexisting with the Native Americans on and beyond their northern frontier; rarely was their policy to
exterminate them. These policies were in marked contrast to the economic interaction (and exploitation) actively pursued by the French, and those of removal
and/or extermination pursued by first the British colonists and later by the nascent United States.
The main text of Weber’s book is clear, concise, and easy to read history,
but the real prize in the book is the annotated footnotes. It is in this area that the
true scholarship of Weber’s work shines forth, and this reviewer can truly say
that they were a joy to read. Taken together, they form not so much a series of
footnotes but rather a bibliographical essay, with commentaries and insights on
both recent and older source materials and interpretations. His discussion of the
de Soto route through Texas (of no little interest to Texas archeologists) is a
prime example of this. In this regard, Weber notes the long history of speculation among Texas historians and archeologists and the wide disparity of routes

Reviews

335

that have been proposed, including the most recent one by Kenmotsu et al. (in
Young and Hoffman 1993).
Despite the excellent overall coverage provided for the Spanish Borderlands as a whole, Weber is constrained by the broad scope of his book to provide only limited attention to any one area. To gain a more detailed insight into
any one region within the Borderlands, one must go to a more limited area-specific study. Such a one is that of Donald Chipman for Spanish Texas. Chipman’s
(page xi) stated goal at the beginning of his book is to provide "an adequate
one-volume synthesis of the Spanish experience in Texas and a treatment of
Hispanic legacies enduring beyond 1821," and in this he succeeds very well.
Except for the first chapter, which presents general background material on the
Texas landscape and Native American peoples (unfortunately avoiding the archeological evidence and concentrating only on the contact-period occupants),
the book is a straightforward chronological presentation of the Spanish experience in Texas.
Chapters that may be of particular interest to Texas archeologists are those
concerned with the periods from 1519 to 1543 and from 1722 to 1762 (Chapters
2, 7, and 8). The first period covers the time of initial Spanish exploration and
contacts with Native American peoples, familiar to most of us from the accounts
of the wanderings of Cabeza de Vaca and the remnants of the de Soto entrada.
The latter chapters cover the most critical period of Spanish-Native American
relations on the Texas frontier, starting with the Marquis de Aguayo’s reorganization of the Spanish settlements in Texas and ending with the transfer of
Louisiana from France to Spain at the end of the French and Indian War.
Chapter 2, which covers the period from 1519 to 1543, presents an up-todate discussion of the initial years of Spanish-Native American contact in what
is today Texas, with a consideration of current thinking on such popular misconceptions as the supposed landing of Alvarez de Pineda at the mouth of the
Rio Grande in 1519 and the erroneous placement of the wanderings of Cabeza
de Vaca and his companions through Central Texas between 1532 and 1536 (in
this regard, see also Chipman 1987). The former mistake resulted from a confusion of the Rio de las Palmas of the chronicles with the modern Rio Grande,
when it was apparently the Rio Soto la Marina, located about 250 km (160 miles)
further south (see the discussion of this point in Weddle 1985). This confusion
has also had the unexpected consequence of moving the farthest known limit of
Precolumbian agriculture in northeastern Mexico to the north an additional 250
km in the minds of some researchers (see for example, Salinas 1990).
Chapters 7 and 8, covering the period from 1722 to 1762, are most concerned with the early period of growth in Spanish Texas, and by extension, with
the Native American missions with which it was so bound up. Chipman provides
good discussions of the East Texas mission efforts, the relative successes of the
San Antonio missions, and the failure of the San Gabriel, coastal, and Apache
missions. The real culmination to these efforts to expand Spanish influence and

336

Texas Archeological Society

Spanish settlement in Texas came in 1759 with an attempt to punish the northern
Native American groups in Texas (known collectively as the Nortehos) for their
destruction of Mission Santa Cruz de San Sab~i in March of 1758. This attempt
took the form of a massive military punitive expedition, probably the most
extensive ever mounted in Spanish Texas, against the Norteho villages known
to be concentrated in the area of present-day Spanish Fort on the Red River.
When this expedition failed to achieve its goals, and actually was forced to
withdraw somewhat precipitously, abandoning in the process its cannon and other
military supplies, it brought to a virtual end the most dynamic period of Spanish
expansion in Texas. Robert Weddle (1964) has argued that this military reversal
represents a major turning point in Spanish policy for the northern frontier and
helped to bring on the reforms of 1772, which changed Spanish frontier policy
from a proactive to a reactive stance and withdrew Spanish settlements and
support from the extreme limits reached within the preceding decades. As
Chipman notes, these reforms also brought an end to the active missionizing of
the preceding period, and perhaps more importantly for archeologists, formally
shifted Spanish policy from attempts to missionize the Apaches to a policy of
forming alliances with the Comanche and other Norteho groups against the
Apache, a policy that had serious repercussions in terms of trade and interaction
with the northern groups.
Both of these books are moderately well illustrated with photographs and
both early and modern maps. Weber’s book does contain more illustrations but,
to this reviewer at least, the maps in the volume are less satisfactory than those
Chipman uses because they are too overly generalized to be very useful. However, this is a somewhat trivial and arbitrary complaint to make against an otherwise very satisfactory book. In summary, these two volumes provide an
excellent introduction to both the Spanish Borderlands in general, and to Spanish Texas in particular, and they make a good starting point for building a research library dealing with these subjects.

REFERENCES CITED
Bannon, J. F.
1974
The Spanish Borderlands Frontier, 1513-1821. University of New Mexico
Press, Albuquerque.
Chipman, D. E.
1987
In Search of Cabeza de Vaca’s Route Across Texas: An Historiographical
Survey. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 91:127-148.
McCall, D. F.
1969
Africa in Time-Perspective: A Discussion of Historical Reconstruction from
Unwritten Sources. Oxford University Press, New York.

Reviews

337

Rogers, J. D. and S. M. Wilson (editors)
1993
Ethnohistory and Archaeology: Approaches to Postcontact Change in the
Americas. Plenum Press, New York.
Salinas, M.
1990
Indians of the Rio Grande Delta. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Weddle, R. S.
1964
The San Sab6 Mission: Spanish Pivot in Texas. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
1985

Spanish Sea: The Gulf of Mexico in North American Discovery, 1500-1685.
Texas A&M University Press, College Station.

Wolf, E. R.
1982
Europe and the People Without History. University of California Press,
Berkeley.
Young, G. A. and M. P. Hoffman (editors)
1993
The Hernando de Soto Expedition West of the Mississippi River, 1541-1543:
Proceedings of the de Soto Symposia 1988 and 1990. University of Arkansas
Press, Fayetteville.

339

Journal Notes
Reviewed by Timothy K. Perttula, Texas Historical Commission
In this era of profilerating archeological journals, and their escalating costs
to students, institutions, and libraries, new journals must compete in a field
where good quality journal publications already exist (Reid 1993). Thus, an
important question to consider in evaluating the utility of new journals is whether
they actually contain significantly new and/or different types of archeological
information from that already currently available. Even with new journals, practicing archeologists and interested avocationalists must additionally struggle to
stay abreast of the current literature published here in Texas or internationally.
Texas archeologists further stand accused that they do not "know or care
about the archeology as it is practiced elsewhere... Texas archeologists simply
do not read about what archeologists beyond Texas are doing, and we do not
make the effort to educate ourselves broadly. This is because we mistakenly view
Texas archeology as a world unto itself" (Black 1993:18-19). In these Journal
Notes, then, three new journals are reviewed that are of state, national, and
international scope, and they should be of some interest to practicing archeologists in Texas.

Colonial Latin American Historical Review. Edited by Joseph
P. Sanchez. (Spanish Colonial Research Center, Zimmerman
Library, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131).
Volume 1, No. 1 (Fall 1992, 144 pp.), and Volume 2, No. 1
(Winter 1993, 135 pp.), and Volume 2, No. 2 (Spring 1993,
115 pp.)

The Colonial Latin American Historical Review (CLAHR) is a journal that
publishes original articles, reviews, and book notes dealing with the Colonial era
(1492-1821) in Luso-Hispano America, that is, North, Central, and South
America as well as the Caribbean. The focus is on papers that address this area’s
common Colonial heritage, and thus we may expect original articles on Hispanic
Texas in future issues.
To date, three issues of CLAHR have been published, and they have included archivally documented essays, plus announcements of current history
news, and book advertisements. A selection of published articles ranges from
"Visions of Municipal Glory Undimmed: The Nahuatl Town Histories of Colonial Cuernavaca," to ’The Costs of Empire: Spending Patterns and Priorities in
Colonial Peru, 1581-1820," and to "Historical Objectivity and the Persistence of
Fray Bartolome de Las Casas: A Commentary."
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64 (1993)

340

Texas Archeological Society

Submissions in archeology, history, and Colonial history are invited when
they are relevant to Colonial Luso-Hispano American history. Single issues of
the journal are available for $8.00. Subscription rates are $30 (individual), $35
(institution), and $25 (student).

The Cache: Collected Papers on Texas Archeology. Edited by
Cathryn A. Hoyt. (Office of the State Archeologist, Texas
Historical Commission, P.O. Box 12276, Austin, TX 787112276). Volume 1 (1993, viii + 95 pp.)

The Cache is an occasional journal of the Texas Archeological Stewardship
Network (TASN). This network, created by the Office of the State Archeologist
(OSA) in 1983, is comprised of about 60 experienced avocational archeologists
who volunteer to assist OSA and the professional archeological community in
Texas in preserving and protecting Texas’ archeological heritage. The publication of The Cache is an opportunity for the Stewards to communicate the results
of their state-wide archeological research efforts, making new and significant
archeological information available to the professional and avocational archeological communities.
The first issue of The Cache contains a preface by Robert J. Mallouf, the
Texas State Archeologist, a short introduction to the TASN and the journal by
Dr. E. Mott Davis, Professor Emeritus of Anthropology at The University of
Texas at Austin, and 14 articles by 13 Stewards. The papers are a diverse and
interesting collection of research results on historic and prehistoric archeological
sites in Texas: from the Panhandle to East Texas and from the Trans-Pecos to the
Gulf Coast. The Cache is not available by subscription, but individual copies of
Volume 1 can be ordered for $5.00 from OSA.

Journal of Archaeological Research. Edited by Gary M.
Feinman and T. Douglas Price. (Plenum Publishing Corporation, 233 Spring Street, New York, NY 10013). Volume 1, No.
1 (March 1993, 88 pp.) and Volume 1, No. 2 (June 1993, 78

pp.)

This new journal by Plenum Publishing Corporation has a worthy goal:
presenting useful overviews and current state of the art syntheses of research on a
particular archeological area or topic. This geographical and topical focus is
designed to engender communication across the discipline of archeology and to
facilitate comparative research using the ever-expanding, but hard to obtain,

Journal Notes

341

current archeological literature. The co-editors propose to draw heavily upon the
submissions of their 60+ international board of contributing editors for the areal
and topical coverage, but they welcome contributions from other archeological
scholars.
The f’n’st issue of the Journal of Archaeological Research (JAR) has three
articles. The first is a topical article by Michael E. Smith on New World Complex
Societies, while Robert L. Bettinger and Harry Lourandos discuss in their articles
the nature of hunter-gatherer archeology in the U.S. Great Basin and Australia,
respectively. In the second JAR issue are articles on recent developments in the
analysis of lithic artifacts, world-systems perspectives and archeology, and the
archeology in the New Eastern Europe. JAR promises to be a thought-provoking
journal (wouldn’t it be nice to see in the journal an areal or topical article on some
aspect of Texas archeology), and it is reasonably priced for individual subscriptions ($29.50 for four issues per year). Institutional subscriptions are $95 for
Volume 1.
REFERENCES
Black, S. L.
Nailing the Coffin Shut on the Traditional Approach to Prehistoric Archeology
1993
in Texas: An Epitaph andInquiry into the Afterlife. CulturalResourceManagementNews & Views 5 (No. 1):16-19. Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Reid, J. J.
1993

Editor’s Comer: Reflections on a Style Guide. American Antiquity 58 (1):3-5.

343

AUTHORS
Jay C. Blaine is a retired postal supervisor. As an avocational archeologist his
many published research contributions cover Paleoindian to Historic
Period topics. He is a Past President of the Dallas and Texas
Archeological societies, and was elected a Fellow of the Texas
Archeological Society in 1989. Jay serves as a consultant and
archeological metals conservator for the Williamson Museum at
Northwestern State University, Natchitoches, Louisiana, and consults
for other museums. He is a graduate of San Jose College in California
and has served as a book reviewer for the Society for Historical
Archaeology and for Southern Studies.
Douglas K. Boyd received his M.A. degree in Anthropology from Texas A&M
University in 1986, and then spent a year as a staff archeologist with the
U.S. Bureau of Reclamation in Amarillo, Texas. He moved to Austin in
1987 and is currently a staff archeologist with Prewitt and Associates,
Inc. For the past five years he has served as project archeologist on
survey, testing, and mitigation phases of the Justiceburg Reservoir (Lake
Alan Henry) Project in the Texas South Plains.
David O. Brown received his Ph.D. in Anthropology from The University of
Texas at Austin in 1992. His dissertation addresses Inka occupations in
the Central Highlands of Peru. One of his major research interests is
geoarcheology; he has spent more than 10 years experimenting with
geochemical and geophysical methods in archeology. In recent years, he
has conducted a series of studies utilizing Ground Penetrating Radar.
Dr. Brown is currently employed as Cultural Resource Director at Hicks
& Company, an environmental/archeological consulting firm in Austin,
Texas. Address: 1703 West Avenue, Austin, Texas, 78701.
Maynard B. Cliff is a Senior Staff Archeologist with Geo-Marine, Inc., of Piano,
Texas. Contrary to what was previously reported in the 1992 Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society (for which the editor is sincerely
apologetic), he not only holds a B.A. degree in Anthropology, from the
University of Georgia, but also an M.A. and a Ph.D. in Anthropology and
Archeology from Southern Methodist University. In 1986 he was the
recipient of a Senior Fulbright Fellowship in support of ceramic research
in Honduras, and he has conducted additional fieldwork in Mexico,
Belize, and Ecuador, and in many areas of North America, including
Texas, Louisiana, and Oklahoma. His interests include settlement
patterns, ceramic analysis, household-level economic organization, the
evolution of ranked sociopolitical systems, and ethnohistory. Address:
Geo-Marine, Inc., 550 East Fifteenth Street, Piano, Texas, 75074.

344

Texas Archeological Society

William A. Cloud is a staff archeologist with the Office of the State Archeologist,
Texas Historical Commission. He is a native Texan with over 12 years
of experience in Texas archeology. He received his B.A. and M.A.
degrees from The University of Texas at Austin and has worked across
much of the state. His thesis centered on an analysis of lithic artifacts
from the San Miguel Lignite Prospect in South Texas. An avid interest
in the archeology of Big Bend was fostered by many backpacking trips
to the region, a stint with the National Park Service in Big Bend National
Park, and work with the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department at Big
Bend Ranch State Natural Area. William is a member of the Rock Art
Task Force, a group within the Texas Archeological Society that is
dedicated to the preservation and in-depth recording of rock art in the
state. He is also a member of the Texas Archeological Society, the Big
Bend Archeological Society, and the Travis County Archeological
Society.
Gail R. Colby is a Ph.D. student at Texas A&M University where she was a
1991-1992 Graduate Regents’ Fellow. She is a teaching assistant, and is
currently working on population reconstruction for the Texas Gulf Coast
using dental metric and trait analyses. Her research interests include
osteology, dental anthropology, and population genetics.

Gaffe J. Fritz, born and raised in Dallas, is currently Assistant Professor of
Anthropology at Washington University in St. Louis. After receiving
graduate degrees from The University of Texas at Austin (M.A.) and the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (Ph.D.), she was
Postdoctoral Fellow at the Smithsonian Institution and visiting curator
at the University of Michigan Museum of Anthropology. Archeological
fieldwork and paleoethnobotanical analyses have dealt with sites in the
Ozarks, Arkansas River Valley, Lower and Central Mississippi River
valleys, and with Caddoan sites in Texas and Arkansas. Research
interests include subsistence continuity and change, the creation of
anthropogenic environments, agricultural evolution, and the relationship
between diet and sociopolitical complexity.
Kathleen Gilmore received her Ph.D. in Anthropology from Southern Methodist
University in 1973, and worked for many years at the Institute of
Applied Sciences at the University of North Texas. She has been past
Presidents of the Texas Archeological Society, the Council of Texas
Archeologists, and the Society for Historical Archaeology. Her varied
interests include Caddoan and Spanish Colonial archeology, and
ceramics.
Inus Marie Harris is the wife of R. King Harris. She is a long-time member of
both the Dallas and Texas Archeological societies, and was co-author

Authors

345

with King of many articles on Historic Indian wade materials from sites
in Texas and Oklahoma.
R. King Harris, now deceased, was born and raised in Dallas, Texas. He attended
Southern Methodist University but was unable to complete his degree
due to the Depression and the need to support his family. He was
married to Inus Made Harris.

An amateur archeologist his entire life, King began his career with the
Hall of State Museum in Dallas and became Curator of Collections. He
later worked for the railroad as a fireman and engineer. In 1969, after
his retirement from the railroad, he was appointed Curator in the
Department of Anthropology at SMU. King was the founder of the
Dallas Archeological Society (DAS) and participated in the first survey
of Dallas County. He served the DAS as its President and publisher of
The Record. King also served as Vice President, President, and Trustee
of the TAS, and was elected a Fellow of the society, its highest honor.
King was an authority on the archeology of the Upper Trinity River, as
well as on the entire Caddoan area, Central Texas southward to Waco,
and the Abilene to Sweetwater area of West Texas. In later years, King
became a national authority of Historic Indian trade materials,
particularly beads. He authored over 35 papers on the archeology of
Texas. His large collections are now in the Smithsonian Institution in
Washington, D. C.

Patricia M. Landau is an M.A. student at Texas A&M University, and also the
Archivist for the Brazos Valley Museum. She is currently completing
her thesis on the repatriation of human skeletal remains and is actively
involved in the management of the Texas A&M University Physical
Anthropology Collection. Her research interests include skeletal biology
and cultural resource management.
Daniel E. McGregor is an archeologist with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
Fort Worth Dislfict. He received his M.A. degree from Southern
Methodist University, where he is currently a doctoral candidate. His
research interests include the lithic resources and prehistory of North
Central Texas and northeastern Texas.
William W. Newcomb, Jr. was born in Detroit, Michigan, and after attending
Albion College he received B.A. (1943), M.A. (1947), and Ph.D. (1953)
degrees from the University of Michigan. During World War II he
served in the infantry in Europe. An anthropologist, he has taught at the
universities of Michigan, Colgate, Utah, and Texas. He was Director of
the Texas Memorial Museum from 1957-1978, and is currently
Professor Emeritus of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.

346

Texas Archeological Society
A specialist in North American Indians, he has done field work with the
Delaware Indians, various Plains Indians, ethnohistoric research on
Texas Indians, and served as a witness for the Wichita Indian tribe
before the Indian Claims Commission. He has also participated in
archeological investigations in Arkansas and Texas.
Author of The Indians of Texas and numerous articles on American
Indians, his book, The Rock Art of Texas Indians, was awarded the
Texas Institute of Letters $500 prize for the "most informative and
useful book in the field of general knowledge" published in Texas in
1967, a prize his earlier book also won. Other books reflecting his
continuing interest in North American Indians are The North American
Indians: An Anthropological Perspective (1974), The People Called
Wichita (1976), and German Artist on the Texas Frontier, Richard
Friedrich Petri (1978).
Dr. Newcomb is married to the former Glendora Thielan, and they are
the parents of two children, Mary Elaine and William Andrew. They
have one grandchild and live at 6206 Shoal Creek Blvd., Austin.

Timothy K. Perttula is currently Assistant Director for Antiquities Review with
the Department of Antiquities Protection at the Texas Historical
Commission. He is also Editor of Publications for the Texas
Archeological Society, and senior editor of Notes on Northeast Texas
Archaeology. Address: 10101 Woodhaven Dr., Austin, TX 78753-4346.

James E. Smith, H graduated from Texas Christian University in 1969 with a
Physics degree and began work in the Engineering department at
General Dynamics in Fort Worth. He currently lives in Cleburne with
his wife and four children, and is employed as a teacher. James has been
involved in archeology for 25 years, becoming interested by attending
meetings of the Tarrant County Archeological Society (TCAS). He is
also a member of the Dallas and Texas Archeological societies. He has
served as President of the TCAS, Treasurer of the DAS, and regional
director of the TAS. In addition, he has served the TAS on the Human
Remains Committee and as chairman of the Field School Committee.
James has been an active participant in the TAS Field School, and has
served as Field School director, Camp Boss, and Site Supervisor.
James’ primary archeological interest is Central Texas, and he is
currently involved in several publications and projects in that area. His
involvement with the Vinson site report led to a special interest in the
Historic Indian occupation in Texas. James is currently a Steward for
the Office of the State Archeologist, and directed the excavations at the
Lemens Rockshelter (Somervell County) for OSA.

Authors

347

Bonnie C. Yates is presently with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service as their
forensic mammalogist at the National Wildlife Forensics Laboratory in
Ashland, Oregon. A 15-year member of TAS, she was formerly in
charge of the Zooarchaeology laboratory at the Center for Environmental
Archaeology of the University of North Texas (UNT). She holds a
Masters degree from UNT in environmental resources and zooarchaeology. She is a member of the American Society of Mammalogists, the International Congress of Archaeozoologists, and the
International Congress of Morphology. Bonnie was the first recipient of
the TAS Donor’s Fund, which was applied toward completion of this
study of the Vinson site House 5 faunal remains.

