BULLETIN of the

exas

Society
/

\

VOLUNE 46

b

PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY AT AUSTIN, TEXAS, 1975

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
The Society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and
scientific undertaking: the study of man’s past in Texas and contiguous
areas. The Bulletin offers an outlet for the publication of serious research on
history, prehistory and archeologicaI theory. In line with the goals of the
society,

it

encourages

scientific

collection,

study

and

publication

of

archeological data.
The Bulletin is published annually for the distribution to the members of
the Society. Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers and do not
necessarily represent the views of the Society or the editorial staff.

Officers of

Society 1974 !975

President: FRANCIS STICKNEY (Midland)
President-elect: DR. S. ALAN SKINNER (Dallas]
Secretary-Treasurer: HOWARD MIJZdM (Dallas]
Editors: DR. HARRY ]. SHAFER (College Station)
DR. T. R. HESTER (San Antonio}
Newsletter Editor: ANNE FOX [San Antonio)
Immediate Past-President: DESSAMAE LORRAIN lAva, Mo.)
Directors (in addition to the above): C. K. CHANDLER [Houston}, FRANK AL
WEIR (Austin), DR. R. K. HARRISON (Texarkana), PAUL P. STEED [Dallas],
]AMES H. WORD (F!oydada}, RICHARD B. GREEN {Waco].
f{egional Vice-Presidents: MRS. DONNA MCGLOHON (Amarillo), CLAUDE
BRO\~gN (Lubbock), TOMMY HICKS [Dublin], ROBERT D. VERNON, JR.
{Sherman}, JACK KLATT (Houston), DR. EUGENE O’BRtEN (San Antonio],
JOHN R. WAYLAND (Corpus Christi} ]AMES E. WARREN [George West),
W. L. RICHMOND (Austin), MRS. F. C. STtCKNEY (Midland}, LESLIE DAVIS
{E! Paso), ]ON L. GIBSON [Lafayette, La.).

Membership and Publications
Membership in the Society is for the calendar year. Dues are as follows:
Regular--S7.50; Chartered Societies and Institutionat--$10.O0; Contributing
--$25.00; Life--$150.O0. Al! members of the Society receive the Bulletin,
which is published annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is
mailed out about four times a year. A monograph series. Special Publications, is also published by the Society. Back issues of the Bulletin, up to and
including Vohme No. 39, that are still in print may be obtained for $5.00 per
volume. Subsequent volumes are available at a cost of $7.50.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretaw-Treasurer, Texas Archeologica! Society, Southern Methodist University, Box 165, Dallas, Texas 75275.
~>~, Copyright by the Texas Archeologica! Society, 1975.

Bulletin of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Volume 46/1975

Harry J. Shafer, Senior Editor
Thomas R. Hester, Co-Editor

Harry J. Shafer, Cover Design

PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY AT AUSTIN, TEXAS
1975

TABLE OF CONTENTS

................

The Cogdell Burial in Floyd County, Texas
James H. Word and Anne Fox .............................

1

Skeletal Material from the Cogdell Burial in
Floyd County, Texas
Glen H. Doran and Robert M. Malina ........................

65

Magnetic Delineation of Individual Shipwreck Sites:
A New Control Technique
Carl J. Clausen and J. Barto Arnold III ........................

69

Pollen as an Indicator of Prehistoric Diets in
Coahuila, Mexico
Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr ..................................

87

Late Prehistoric Cultural Patterns Along the
Lower Rio Grande of Texas
Thomas R. Hester ....................................

107

Archeological Investigations of Four Sites in
Southwestern Coahuila, Mexico
Lorraine Heartfield ...................................

127

The Clear Fork Gouge Revisited
Joel L. Shiner ......................................

179

Austin Phase Burials at the Pat Parker Site,
Travis County, Texas
John W. Greer and Robert A. Benfer .........................

189

Notes on Some Archeological Materials from the
Palo Duro Creek Area of Hansford County, Texas
Jimmy L. Mitchell ....................................

217

Porosity and Retiring Tests on Ceramics from the
the George C. Davis Site, Texas
J. Barto Arnold III ....................................

231

NOTES
Paleoecological Considerations and
East Texas Archeology
John E. Keller ......................................

243

Comments on Woodland Cultures of East Texas
Harry J. Shafer .....................................

249

IN MEMORIUM
Miles P. Locke
T. G. Lawrence, Jr ...................................

BOOK REVIEWS
The Museum Journal XV, 1974: History and Prehistory
of the Lubbock Lake Site, Craig C. Black
Vaugtm M. Bryant, Jr ..................................

255

257

Archeological Investigations Along Armand Bayou,
Harris County, Texas, Frank Hole
Tom Dillehay ......................................

Field Methods in Archaelogy, Thomas R. Hester,
Robert F. Heizer and John A. Graham
D. Bruce Dickson ....................................

258

261

THE AUTHORS ................................... 265

THE COGDELL BURIAL
IN FLOYD COUNTY, TEXAS
JAMES H. WORD AND ANNE FOX

ABSTRACT
This paper reports the discovery of an historical Indian burial in Floyd
County, Texas. Investigations of this find. the Cogdell Burial site, produced
an abundance of artifactual material including beaded garments, jewelry,
blankets, a saddle and several utilitarian objects. Descriptions of these artifacts are presented.
Although the burial had been removed from its original context, information regarding the body position and burial customs was obtained.
Comparisons with published accounts and unreported burials of similar
age in the Texas Tech and Panhandle-Plains Historical Museums verify
some of the cultural practices reported for the Comanche burials and
question others. Two additional burial customs for the Comanche are
suggested on the basis of archeological findings.
Research associated with the Cogdell Burial site artifact analysis indicates that a main source of Indian trade goods for this area of the south
plains was through the Comanchero. Second and third-hand acquisition of
European goods was provided by association with other Indian groups
and by predatory raids against white settlements and aboriginal enemies.
Dating on the basis of artifact content, the time of the burial appeared to
have been between 1850 and 1860.

INTRODUCTION
Late in February of 1972, D.M. Cogdell telephoned the senior
author that a burial had been discovered on his ranch. He recognized
the potential of the find and donated the skeletal material and
associated burial offerings to the Floyd County Historical Museum.
The burial was brought to town in a burlap bag. Upon opening the
bag, objects definitely associated with an historic burial were
revealed. Although some of the skeletal parts, wooden artifacts,
leather and cloth were damaged by rodents, the numerous offerings
prompted further inquiry, and an arrangement was made for the site
to be visited the following Saturday. Although the burial had been
removed from its context, it was hoped that careful interrogation of
Bruce McFall (discoverer of the burial and son of the Cogdell Ranch
foreman) and screening of the matrix would yield information concerning placement of burial offerings in relation to the body.
William J. Mayer-Oakes of the Department of Anthropology at
Texas Tech University was contacted, and he sent a group of his
students to assist in the necessary field work.

2

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Prior to the interview of Bruce McFall, the senior author prepared
a series of questions designed to reveal as much information as
possible concerning the circumstances of the burial and the relative
location of the associated burial goods. Bruce stated that he was
riding a horse and observed a niche or small cave in the east face of
the Llano Estacado escarpment. He noted that it was nearly filled
with rocks and assumed that the roof had collapsed. Moving some
of the rocks, McFall heard a metallic "clink" and upon further
investigation found a brass bracelet. More rocks were removed, exposing the skull. McFall left and a day or so later returned and completely uncovered the burial. It was at this time that Sid McFal],
Cogdell foreman, learned of the discovery and advised D. M. Cogdell.
While the interview was taking place, the Texas Tech students
established a datum point and began mapping the burial site.
Associates of the senior author began screening the material which
had been thrown down the slope in front of the cave, and a considerable amount of additional cultural material was recovered.
While both authors contributed to identification and analysis,
there are areas in which each assumed primary responsibility. Anne
Fox analyzed and described beads, leather clothing and
miscellaneous leather. ]ames H. Word is responsible for the other
portions of the report, including analysis of the saddle leather.
LOCALE OF THE BURIAL

waters of many of the major rivers of Texas. Hall Creek flows
southeasterly (Fig. 1) where it joins the North Fork of the Pease River.
Short, dry tributaries of Hall Creek form a dendritic pattern, and it is
one of these southerly flowing drainages that containect the burial site
THE BURIAL NICHE
The niche selected for the burial faces west and is near the upper
rim of a short canyon (Fig. 2). It is 253 cm. wide at the opening and
widens to a maximum width of 315 cm. midway to the back. The
maximum depth from the overhang to back is 256 cm. at a point in the
southeastern part and gently narrows to a depth of 147 cm as the back
wall angles outward. The floor of the niche is slightly undulating with a
pronounced dip near the rear wall. The roof is more irregular than the
floor, attaining a maximum height of 128 cm. near the back.

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

3
\

TEXAS

A
....
("’)

BU IAL SITE
"’l
CAPROCK ESCARPMENT ..j
DRA NAGE
POND OR PLAYA

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

~.i

,._.---..,.II

-~-- ~’ ....
I"

l\"

l~
i

FIGURE 1, Location map of Cogdell burial site.

THE BURIAL
The depression or pit is 58.8 cm. wide and 181.3 cm. long {Figs. 3, A

4

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

5

The body was placed on its left side facing west (Fig. 4). The left arm
was bent sharply at the elbow with the hand over the upper pelvis. The
right arm was bent less acutely and extended past the lower part of the
pelvis. The right leg was extended. The left thigh angled outward and
the lower leg was flexed with the foot under the right leg.
Over the chest were two travois poles broken into three nearly equal
parts and, with a travois brace, these poles were placed in a fan shape
with the apex of the "fan" over the chest. Limestone-caliche rocks
varying from 15 to 24 cm. in maximum diameter were placed over the
body to form a cairn, A small fire was built on top of the mound of
rocks.

LOCATION OF ARTIFACTS
Since the body and a majority of the burial goods had been removed
from their original position, the placement of burial goods is based on
information gathered from Bruce McFall and from deductions based on
copper stains from brass objects.
Dessicated and copper-stained flesh in the vicinity of the left ear
helped to determine the placement of a series of hair ornaments. Impressions in the flesh matched the shape of the hair ornaments and
provided further proof of the location of these objects.
A necklace consisting of hairpipe and glass beads was placed about
the neck (Fig. 4). Above the left and right elbows and above the left
hand at the wrist were brass bracelets. A gold plated brass ring was
on the ring finger of the left hand.
The balance of the burial offerings were located toward the mouth of
the cave. Beside the body was a cluster of artifacts (Fig. 4). These will
be described as they were located from south to north. A decorated
saddle rigging ring was the southernmost artifact. Just to the north was
an iron "D"-shaped rigging ring. Both were probably parts of the saddie rigging, A circular silver concha was next. Two abalone gorgers
were the most northern goods. To the west of the previously mentioned
concha was yet another concha. Directly south of this second concha
were the remains of a saddle tree. The saddle horn was to the north. To
the right of the saddle (westward) was a small hand mirror and south
of the mirror was an eye hoe. A concha was found on a small shelf-like
projection in the north wall of the burial chamber. The provenience of
the fourth concha is unknown.
The body was probably clothed in a cloth shirt, leather leggings, and
moccasins. It was wrapped in a series of blankets and possibly a buffalo robe. Another set of leather clothing was found in the burial niche.
These leather goods were folded with the beaded parts inside and

6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

_1
_1
It_

:::i:i-

._3
Z

::::::::::::::::::::: >- 5
ta3

.. ==========================
a
I._,._.1
IzB

....... :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

7

iiiiiii

r~

g

<,:<-:+:+:+:+:+:,:<+:+:-

o

.,.,...-.-.,...,.,., ,., ¯ ¯ .,,..,....
.’.’.’,’,’n’,’.’.’n’.-.’.’n’.-.,.-.,
<+:.:<.:<<.:.:<-:+:+:,:.:+:.
,’.’n’,’,’.’.’n’n’.’.’.’.’.’,’.’.’.’
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
".’,’n’.’.’.’.’.’.’.’.’.’.’.".’.’.’,’.’,’."
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
".’.’.’.’.’.’.".’.’,’.’.’.’,’,’,’n’.’.’n’." :
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
-:.:<<-:+:+:<+:-:.:+:+:<.:,:.:+:-:<+
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
:-:-:-:+:-:+:+:<<+:+:+:<+:<-:+:+:+
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
-:-:<<+:+:+:+:+:+:.:<.:+:+:+:+:.:+:.
:+:+:<+:.:+:<+:.:+:.:<+:<+:.:.:+:.:.:<.

~2

°~,..t

\

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: ::::::::: :::::

i:i i:i:i:i:i:i:i:i:i:i i i:i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i:
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::iiii
~

i i i i i i i !i i i i i i i i

I

I

0
c.O

0

r6

8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

9

when the site was first visited by the senior author, these objects
were found at the northern end of the niche. McFall does not recall
the location of the beaded leather goods; but he states elsewhere in
our interview that as objects were discovered, they were placed
either behind or beside him, If this situation is correct, the pieces
of beaded clothing were originally at the feet of the deceased.

ARTIFACTUAL MATERIAL
ELOTHING. Fabrics and leather goods were found with the burial.
Without question many of these represent parts of clothing. When the
burial place was visited, some of these objects had been removed
from their original context and placed at the north end of the burial
niche. Copper stains on various garments gave clues as to their
location relative to the body,
Cloth Clothing. Large fragments of a cotton shirt were recovered.
It is probable that the shirt was made by folding a length of cloth and
sewing down the sides with holes left for the arms. Cotton thread
stitched in simple over-and-under fashion along the selvage joined the
edges of the cloth to form a loosely fitting pullover shirt. The weft and
warp have a thread count of 120 per 2.5 cm. The weave is simply one
over one. The selvage is of plain finish. Copper stains from brass
bracelets on the arms and upper body and on the shirt substantiate
the location of this garment.
Leather Clothing. Most of the leather, which includes all tanned
animal skins, was delivered to the junior author in the approximate
state in which it was removed from the ground. Soil and rodent clung
encrusted everything and there were wadded-up pieces and layers of
gnawed and torn fragments, some showing blue and white beading
apparently still in place on the leather.
The task of gently easing apart and cleaning these fragments was
accomplished gradually over a period of time, using a dull knife and
stiff brushes to scrape and chip off as much filth as possible without
damaging the leather. Meanwhile, a search was made for a method of
relaxing the skins in order to determine their original shape and
dimensions.
After consulting a number of authorities, no consensus was
reached on the method to use in softening the skins and that the only
way was to go slowly and evolve the best method for each particular
case. Since the ingredients for leather preservation found in most
handbooks are difficult to obtain, complicated to use, and usually
specified for book bindings rather than for dirty, fragile archeological
specimens, it was decided to experiment first with Lexol. Lexol is a

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

I0

product used at the Witte Museum in San Antonio for restoration of
historical objects made of tanned leather, and recommended by Anderson (1968: 56-57). A letter from the Lexol Corporation assured the
junior author that their product is "an emulsion of the purest animal
fat liquors," and that it is currently being used by archeological
teams in the United States and Greece. After experimenting with
various methods of application, it was determined that the best
technique was to lay the object out on wire mesh and apply the
solution with a small paint brush, gradually stretching and flattening
the leather as the Lexol soaked in. Each leather fragment was treated
in this way, spread on wire mesh so that air could reach both sides,
and left in a well-ventilated room for several weeks. Materials so
treated were restored to their original shape and texture and were
not sticky or oily when thoroughly dry. A minimum of darkening occurred in some areas, which could be reversed by gently brushing or
scraping with a dull knife after the article was dry.
Identification of the animals from which the skins were taken was

ARTICLEA -- Beaded Moccasin (Fig. 5, A).
.2
cm.
simple white
.2 ÷ cm.
simple blue
The preserved fragment includes enough beading to suggest that the
only colors used were blue and white, with a preponderance of blue, and a
white stripe down the instep. The colors and pattern are unlike anything in
Beads:

the Witte Museum’s collection (Comanche or otherwise) or observed in
other published works On Indian artifacts. This. plus the fact that the
beads are nearly all .2 to .3 cm. in diameter, gives the feeling of an older

COGDELL BURIAL SITE
piece, perhaps pre-1865. The sole is .6 cm. thick, which is unusually heavy
compared to observed specimens. The skin is probably deer or antelope.

ARTICLE B -- Beaded Garment (Fig. 5, B).
simple white
.2
cm.
simple blue
.2
cm.
simple white
.3 + cm.
compound white
.3
cm.
The simple white and blue .2 cm beads dominate with the larger simple
ones used mostly in the border. Twenty compound white beads are scattered throughout the body of the design. It has been impossible to determine what type of garment this was. The angle at which the beaded strip
was applied to the skin does not correspond to any garment known to the
authors, but it may be some sort of shirt. The skin is probably deer or antelope.
Beads:

ARTICLE C

--

Beaded Leggings (Fig. 6, A).

Beads:

simple white
.2-.3 + cm.
simple blue
.2-.3 + cm.
compound white
.2-.3 + cm.
The presence of nearly 100 compound beads, plus the fact that the
majority of all the beads are over .3 Cm.. tends to date this piece earlier
than the others. There can be little doubt that this was a fragment from
leggings, from the placement of the beaded strips and the length and
proportions of the remaining garment fragments. Traces of fringe and ties
are still present on one piece. The similarity of the bead colors and pattern
and beading technique to those of a bag collected by Jean Louis
Berlandier in the early 19th century (Berlandier 1969: Plate 19} and one in
the collection of the Witte Museum (Fig. 6, B) are interesting to observe.
It is very likely that they are contemporary. The leather is nearly
identical to that of Article B.

ARTICLE D

Beaded Strip

simple white
.3 + cm.
simple blue
.3 + cm. (2 shades}
Only small fragments remain of a beaded strip which differs from those
on the other garments in the width of the rows in which the beads are applied. The beading resembles that of Article C. however, and could be from
that garment.
Beads:

ARTICLE E -- Pair of Moccasins.
These appear to be identical to those illustrated in Figure 32 of Berlandier (1969: 181) and identified as Comanche. They still retain the imprint of

11

12

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

/D

A

B

FIGURE 5. Beaded objects. A, fragment of beaded moccasin; B,
fragment of beaded garment.

COGDELL BURIAL SITE ......

13

B
FIGURE 6. Beaded objects. A, fragment of beaded leggings; B,
beaded Comanche hunting pouch in the Witte Museum, San Antonio.

14

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the feet of their owner, and he may have been wearing them when he was
buried.

Leggings typically have side fringes, but none are on this garment. From
the cut and patternS of stress, this garment appears to have been a plain
leather leggingl Perhaps it was similar to those painted by Lino Sanchez y
Tapia and described by Ewers in Berlandier (1696: Plate 3. 157) as "skin
leggings which fit rather snugl~ ab0ve the knees, bUt Which are extended
into triangular fringed fla~s below the ~ees.’~ several Seams ~nd a hem
along tWo Sides are sewn with a fine cotton thread, and the leather is
darker than that of the other garments ~hd obviously tamed in ~ different
manner. This could conceivably be a garment obtained in trade or by
raiding the Anglo or Mexican settlements.

BEADS. The majority of the loose beads recovered from the matrix of
the burial probably came from the damaged beaded objects of
clothing, so they are included and described here.
A great deal can be determined about a burial from careful
examination of beads, headwork, and leather when they have been
properly cleaned and restored. While the processes are timeconsuming, the results are well worth the effort. Detailed observation, examination and analysis, however, while yielding interesting results in themselves, cannot be of too much value unless
they are done with an understanding of the ethnological and
historical setting of the burial in question. With these points in mind,
the junior author embarked on a thor0ugh search of ethnological and
historical sources which might throw light on the materials under
examination. This proved to be of great help in interpreting what was
observed about the artifacts.
The study of beads proceeded from a preliminary assumption, due
to its location in known Comanche territory and to the preponderance
of blue beads and the color known to have been favored by this tribe
according to Ewers (in Berlandier 1969: 178) and Wallace and Hoebel
(1952: 77), that this was a Comanche Indian burial. This assumption
was reinforced by the illustration of a beaded Comanche pouch in the
Berlandier Collection at the Smithsonian Institution [Berlandier 1969:
Plate 19) which closely resembles one fragment from the burial in
ead colors and proportions. The opportunity was taken to closely
examine and compare a similar bag in the Witte Museum collection
which was accessioned as an early Comanche hunting pouch (Fig. 6,
B).
There is no need to elaborate upon the process of manufacture and
distribution of glass and shell trade beads in the 19th century. The

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

15

subject has been thoroughly explored in previous publications,
especially by Orchard (1929), Woodward (1965: 4-17), and Ewers
(1957: 29-85). Terms used here are those which are generally accepted in bead descriptions. A simple bead is one homogeneous piece
of glass, a compound one is formed of two or more concentric layers,
and unless otherwise indicated, beads are of hollow-cane manufacture. It has been the junior author’s observation that in the analysis of
bead size, the length can vary as much as .2 cm. within a type on a
single beaded object, especially on those made during the early 19th
century. The diameter is therefore the measurement which is of most
use in comparative dating, and is the only one recorded in this report.
Information on the beads from this site was collected in several
ways. A complete list of beads in the possession of the original excavators was provided by them. Jim and Dot Word laboriously picked
out over 64,000 beads before delivering the remainder of the back dirt
(approximately 350 pounds} to San Antonio. It was obvious that the
matrix was too rocky to dissolve in water and it would require a lifetime to pick out all the beads individually. Reducing the pebbly soil
with muriatic acid proved too expensive and inefficient. The
following method was evolved for estimating the total number of
beads. Since the dirt had been packed in bags of approximately eight
pounds each, 16 pounds of back dirt were measured into a large container and thoroughly mixed together. From this amount, one pound
was weighed out and all the beads picked out by hand and recorded
and the total number of each type of bead in this portion was projected from these numbers. Since there was no way to be sure that beads
were evenly distributed throughout the back dirt, it was all weighed
and examined in this manner and totals projected for each 16 pound
batch.
In the following listing, the blue and white embroidery bead totals
were estimated in the above manner. Since no additional necklacesized beads were found in the sorting of back dirt, it is assumed that
these totals are complete. All of the extra small blue beads (#180)
and many of the small blue embroidery beads were extremely fragile, and the totals reflect only a portion of the number actually
present.
Numbers and approximate dates asslgned to bead types and their
descriptions are those used by R. King Harris (Harris and Harris
1967: 139-162}. Also included are some types recorded by him since
1967. These identifications have all been confirmed in consultation
with Mr. Harris. The blue seed or embroidery beads can be divided
into three sub-types according to the shade of blue and the ap-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

16

pearance of the glass. Further studies may show some dating value in
pursuing this further, but for the purposes of this report they are all
added together in the totals. Numbers have not as yet been assigned
to these types, and the descriptions are those of the author. Sizes
refer to bead diameters as follows: large, over .6 cm.; medium, .4-.6
cm.; small, .2-.4 cm.; extra small, .0-.2 cm.
Glass Necklace Beads (over .5 cm)
Harris’ Number
77. Large, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent, donut-shaped
necklace bead of simple construction. (1740-1820)
130. Large, dark Bluebird Blue. barrel-shaped, translucent,
faceted bead of simple construction. There are 16 to 20
186.

187.

189.

190.
194.

facets on the surface of the bead. (1820-1836)
Large, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of mandrel-wound simple construction, The glass is porcelainlike in texture,
Medium, white, opaque~ olive-shaped necklace or garter
bead of mandrel-wound simple construction. The glass is
porcelain-like in texture. (19th century)
Medium Harvard crimson, translucent, olive-shaped
necklace or garter bead of mandrel-wound simple construction.
Large, white, opaque, barrel-shaped necklace bead of
simple construction.
Large, Brick Red, opaque, donut-shaped, necklace bead of
compound construction. The inner layer of glass is opaque
white. This type is generally referred to as "Cornaline
d’Aleppo’ ." The red over white replaced the red over
translucent translucent green about 1850.

Totals
76

22

27

16

1
50

24

Glass Garter or Embroidery Beads (under .5 cm)
50.

134.

87.
180.
44.

45.

Small, black, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of simple
construction. Glass is porcelain-like in texture. (17001836)
Small, dark Amber, barrel-shaped, translucent, faceted
garter bead of simple construction. The facets appear to
be pressed and Vary from four to eight in number. (1767)
Small, brick red. over red opaque, donut-shaped garter
bead of compound construction. (1740)
EXtra small Yale Blue translucent, donut-shaped garter
bead 0f simple constructi0n (1836-1850) Very fragile.

8

1
70 +

Small, white, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of simple
construction. The glass has a porcelain-like texture. (17001836)
Small, white, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of compound onstruction. The inner layer has a porcelain-like

55,700

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

texture, and the outer layer is clear but has a slightly
frosted appearance, probably due to age. (1700-1836)

17

180

Blue A. Small, bright blue, semi-translucent, donut-shaped embroidery bead of simple construction; may correspond to
Ray and Jelks’ "translucent blue." (1964: 132)
Blue B. Small, aquamarine, translucent, donut-shaped embroidery bead of simple construction. Glass has
longitudinal striations and bubbles, and beads are fragile:
Blue C. Small, blue, translucent, donut-shaped embroidery bead
of simple construction. Glass has longitudinal striations;
may correspond to the "translucent aquamarine" of Ray
and Jelks (1964:132}
Shell Hairpipes
7.2 cm. long, .7 cm. maximum diameter
3.0 cm. long, .6 cm. maximum diameter

93,000

1
2

Judging from bead types alone, this burial would appear to date
sometime after 1850, the approximate date of the introduction of the
white-centered Cornaline (#194) into the Texas area (Harris, personal communication), and before the 1880’s when shell hair pipes
were replaced by bone (Ewers 1957:62).
Ray and Jelks have suggested (1964: 139-140) that seed beads used
in the 18th century tended to be larger than those used in the 19th,
and that there may have been a gradual change from one size to the
other which could be useful in dating Indian burials. A synthesis of
bead diameters from reported historic burials in the PanhandlePlains region of Texas as reported by Ray and Jelks and by Parsons
(1967: 92) is Shown in Table 1.
Checking this another way, Ray and Jelks suggest that there was a
gradual change in the proportions of compound versus simple white
seed beads over a period of time. The result of adding the earlier
Pearson Site (Duffield and Jelks 1961) in Rains County to the above
sites, again using Ray and Jelks’ and Parson’s statistics, is shown in
Table 2.
It appears, according to these methods of analysis, that the 41FL45
site should date somewhere between 1840 and 1860. It is interesting to
note that projected totals show 4% of the blue seed beads and 20% of
the white to measure .3 cm. and over. By Ray and Jelks’ standards,
this should put the date between 1850 and 1860.
The varieties of bead sizes served to reinforce Richard Conn’s
(1972: 9) observation that the use of the pony bead (over .3 cm.) was
primarily a matter of choice rather than availability since all sizes of
beads were represented. The use of the colors blue and white was
also a matter of choice, though it is hard to determine who was

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

18

o

o

Z
o
o

z~
8

Z

z

g
r~
r~

0

g~

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

19

making the choice, the traders who offered them or the Indians who
demanded them.
Since only one whole hair pipe bead and two fragmentary ones
were found, they were probably not a part of a breastplate or a multistranded necklace such as those described by a trader with the
Comanche in 1642 (Ewers 1957: 50) and by a member of Capt. Marcy’s
expedition in 1854 (ibid.: 51). A munber of beaded awl cases and
pouches in the Witte Museum collection, attributed to the Plains
tribes, have two or three shell hair pipes strung on the thongs by
which they were suspended from the belt. All of these objects would
date after 1870 to judge from the size, colors, and patterns of the
beads [Lyferd 1940: 58; Conn 1972: i0), but the tradition could go back
much further. Hair pipes were also worn suspended from the ears in
the pre-reservation period by men of the Kiowa, Kiowa-Apache, and
the Comanche tribes (Ewers 1957: 76).
Beads are a common item to be found in historic burials. Of the 13
other burials examined or reports studied, ten report beads. The
Merrell burial and the child burial from the Panhandle-Plains
Historical Museum did not have glass beads in the material
examined. However, the circumstances of these discoveries may have
been such that glass beads, if present, were not observed or were
kept by those making the discovery. Mr. Walter Merrell, who was one
of the individuals discovering the Merrell burial, stated that the soil
containing the body was not screened [personal communication), so
beads could have been present, but not observed. Bennett did not
recover any beads from the Dawson County burial (1966: 78). Suhm
reported a fragment of buckskin with beads still attached by the lazy
stitch method (Suhm 1961: 104). Ray and Jelks (1964: 129-131) did not
report any beaded objects, but the loose beads recovered probably
represent a necklace, and no doubt other objects were beaded that
did not survive. The Yellowhouse burial (Newcomb 1955: 187)
produced evidence of beaded moccasins and the remains of a breastplate of hair pipes were noted. Parsons [1967: 87-90) recovered loose
glass beads and fragments of textiles (ibid.: 90-91) with beads still
adhering to the cloth. The Caprock burial (Conner, Allison and
Runkles, ms.) was associated with glass beads and one fragment of
deer skin with beads still attached which probably represented a
fragmentary clothing item. The McKaskle burial from near Stanton,
Texas, yielded fragments of cloth with bead work still attached and
the Biddy burial from near Paducah, Texas, produced loose beads.
Hester [1966) reported the occurrence of over 100 loose blue and
white glass beads with a historic burial near Ozona in Crockett
County.

20

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

SADDLE. In order to acquaint the reader with saddle construction, a
brief description will be given. The first process was to shape a saddie tree. Often a forked limb of adaptable shape was used for the
fork. The horn and fork were of one piece. The bars and cantle were
made and joined to the fork. In saddles made in the mid-part of the
19th century, the various parts were bonded with glue and nailed.
They were further strengthened by covering with wet rawhide. When
the rawhide shrank upon drying, the saddle frame was quite sturdy.
In the better saddles, the under parts next to the horse were padded
with soft leather or heavy felt to prevent injury to the horse. Often the
saddle was decorated with tooled designs.
Saddle Fork (Fig. 7, A, B). It

appears to have

been made from the

fork of a soft-wooded tree such as cottonwood. The evidence for this is in
the grain of the wood and cambium extending down the inner sides of the
gullet. The wood has the texture of cottonwood which is common
throughout this region. Saw marks on the back of the fork indicate the saddle was commercially made. Fragments of heavy tooled leather, common to
saddle manufacture, also suggest this. The actual shaping of the horn and
fork appears to have been done either by a draw knife or a wide bladed
chisel. The top of the horn was formed by a chisel. The gullet was definitely
formed by chiseling away excess wood. The fork is badly damaged by both
termite and rodent action, All narrow and angular edges are damaged by
the ravages of gnawing rodents. The neck of the born is for all practical
purposes non-existent since it joins or meetsthe upper part of the fork. The
angle of the fork would produce a narrow but low pommell. The maximum
width of the horn is 8. cm. (viewed from the front). The part of the horn and
saddle tree next to the rider is straight and is the part with the saw marks.
The horn arcs gently forward and overhangs the neck and gullet. This is
typical of the Santa Fe style saddle (Livingston, n.d.). The entire fragment
is 24 cm. from the base of the fork to the top of the horn. The fork tapers
slightly inward from the lower to upper part ....
Saddle Cantle. A fragment of wood with two drilled holes may be a part
of the cantle of the saddle (Fig. 8, A). It has the curve of this part of the saddle. The crudely drilled holes probably provide a means of attaching}he
rawhide undercovering to the cantle. One hole is 1 cm. from the side and
top and the other is 2.5 cm. from the edge and 1.4 cm. from the top. These
holes are slightly oval. It is possible that the holes represent efforts to
repair the saddle. The specimen is thicker (1.2 cm.) at the lower edge in
cross section and tapers to a rounding edge.
Saddle Leather. Fragments of saddle leather and rawhide were
recovered from the Cogdell burial. Al! have been badly damaged from
rodent action; however, some parts can be identified. Two fragmentary
straps were recovered. One is 22.9 cm. long, to which is attached a cir-

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

FIGURE 7. Saddle fork. A, top view; B, side view,

21

22

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
cular ring 9 cm. in diameter (Fig. 8, B), and was probably a girt strap.
The strap is folded back and secured with rawhide thongs to form a loop
which attaches the strap to the ring. The other strap (Fig. 8, C) is 40.5 cm.
long and 5.4 cm. wide and was probably a stirrup strap. The leather of
this object has been split and appears to have been stitched to a soft
leather or felt lining. One end has been cut lengthwise for some unknown
reason.
Several segments of the rawhide underpart of the cantle were found.
Two pieces of rawhide (Fig. 8, D) were joined by over- and under lacing,
utilizing the seam to conform the rawhide to the edge of the cantle. Holes .3
cm. in diameter were used to attach the rawhide to a leather covering and
to the saddle tree. Another rawhide fragment (Fig. 8, E) is also a cantle
part. It is joined in a similar manner to the previously described fragment.
Two circular holes 1¯2 cm¯ in diameter and 1.3 and 1.5 cm. from the edge
were probably used to lace the rawhide to the saddle tree. The first mentioned rawhide fragment fits into a section of saddle leather. Remains of
iron brads .3 cm. in diameter indicate the entire covering of rawhide and
leather was attached to the saddle tree in this fashion¯ A small piece of
wood probably represents a part of the cantle and matches one part of the
rawhide and leather. These parts are undecorated.
A large fragment of leather (Fig. 8, F) was probably a saddle skirt. It has
been badly damaged by rodents and is 42.3 cm. long and 14.5 cm. wide.
Decorations tooled into the leather can be faintly seen. Three types of
decorations were used. The principal design appears to be interlocking
"S’s" (Fig. 9] on the skirt edge. Parallel lines varying from two to three in
number have been tooled into the leather along the outer edge vertical to
the skirt axm and above the lower S decoratmn. Above the S des gn
and parallel to the vertical lines are a series of rosettes consisting of small
circles of equal diameter (Fig. 9). Forward of the vertical lines are a serles
of oval holes varying from 2 cm. to .6 cm. on the long axis. These were
probably used to fasten the skirt to the underskirt of the saddle.
A badly damaged irregUlar leather fragment with a maximum length of
32.2 cm. ~d 21.1 cm. wide was probably a part of the fender. It may have
been decorated with rosettes, but it is so badly weathered that this cannot
be said with any certainty. One edge has been altered by cutting off a section of unknown Width. A strip of leather 5.2 cm. wide was laced to it with
leather thongs. Variously spaced oval holes suggest that the underside of
the fender was faced with some sort of material such as soft leather or
heavy felt.
No other leather parts of the saddle were recovered. It is possible that
salt-hungry rodents completely destroyed the rest of the saddle.
Iron Saddle Fixtures. A fragmentary "D" ring (Fig. 10, A) was found
to the inside and forward of the saddle (between the saddle and the body).
Exact measurements are not possible since one end has eroded away.
Along the straight element it is approximtely 11.0 cm. long. It is estimated
that the distance from the straight part to the extreme back of the "D" is
about 8.5 cm. This type of object was and still is used to fasten straps from
the saddle to the girt or cinch,
A second piece of saddle hardware {Fig. 10, B) has the appearance of a
"’D" ring with specialized adaptations. A rectangular projection was made

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

A

B

23

C

D

G

0

FIGURE 8. Saddle parts and iron hoe. A, fragment of wooden saddle
cantle; B, leather strap ring; C, stirrup strap; D, E, rawhide saddle
parts; F, saddle skirt; G, iron eye hoe.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

24

/

(
/

2

5

4

5

CM.

FIGURE 9. Decorated saddle skirt fragment.

/

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

....

25

on the lower curve of the "D" 2.0 cm. from each edge. The projection extends 3.1 cm. down and is 6.7 cm. wide. The lower, straight bar of this object is worn. A strap was either attached to or passed around this part. It is
estimated that the original length was 11.3 cm., with a maximum width of
8.2 cm. from the lower part of the rectangular projection to the extreme
back bar of the "D" ring. It is decorated by crescentic impressions .55 cm.
wide from the beginning of the curved part and down both legs of the rectangular projection. They are randomly spaced and appear to have been
made by a die while the object was heated sufficiently to recmve an impression.

Inquiring into the possible function of this object, local rancher
Charlie Lewis, descendant of a pioneer Floyd County ranching family,
suggested that it may have been attached to a saddle and the rectangular part received the girt strap.
CORDAGE (Fig. i0, C). Four fragments of cordage were recovered from
the burial. Their original provenience is unknown, and as a consequence
their function cannot be determined. Since a bit was not found with the
material recovered, it is possible that they are fragments of a hackamore.
Two segments are 4.7 and 6.5 cm. long respectively and were disassociated from the two longer specimens. 19.2 and 21.1 cm. long. Thelong specimens appear to have been coiled into loops and are cemented at one bend
of the loop by rat dung. The ends away from the loop bends are not present
and were possibly gnawed away by rodent action.
The unidentified fibers are coarse, much like the fibers of bear grass,
which is abundant in the area. Thirty-eight to 42 fibers were gathered
together and joined in a loose Z twist to form strands. Four strands were S
twisted tightly to form a four ply rope 1.3 cm. in diameter. The original
diameter of the shorter pieces cannot be determined because they have
loosened, but they are s~flarly made and were probably the approximate
diameter of the longer fragments.
BRASS SALIVATERS (Fig. 10, D). Three brass objects were identified
by Curtis Tunnell (personal communication) as "salivaters", without any
certainty that they served this or a similar purpose. To our knowledge a
Spanish bit was not recovered. Brass or copper salivaters were common in
Spanish bits (Fig. 11). Three or four strips of brass or copper were looped
about one or two bars across the port of the bit. They have the appearance of buckle tongues and are similar in form. Pieces of brass 5.8 to 6.1
cm. long were cut from sheet brass. The widths vary from .35 to .40 cm.
and the thickness from .10 to .15 cm. The loop attaching the salivaters to
the bar was formed by bending about the port bar. The distal end was
doubled back .2 cm. and hammered fiat. The shanks are from 2.1 to 2.3
cm. in length.

Examples of Spanish bits at the Witte Museum were examined for
salivaters and the objects recovered from the Cogdell Burial are
similar.

26

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

"t2

:’t:q
©

m-

~d

.t..i
0~
,.m
’XD

¢5
v-i
L.x.q

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

27

SALIVATERS

FIGURE 11. Spanish bit showing where salivaters were located.

Horse trappings are the most common denominator of all the burial
goods recovered from Historic Indian interments, All but two of the
thirteen Historic Indian burials examined contained horse gear of one
sort or another. Only the child burial and Collingsworth County burial
in the Panhandle.Plains Memorial Historical Museum did not have
horse trappings,
....
TRAVOIS POLES. Two travois pO1 es were each
broken into three sections of approximately the same length and placed in fan shape with the
apex over the chest area. One travois pole was made of lodge pole pine
with diameters of 4.8 cm. at the distal end and 3.2 cm. at the proximal end.
The distal part (dragging end) is beveled from wear for a distance of 24.2
cm. This part is 114.0 cm. long, the mid-section is 90.0 cm. long, and the

28

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
proximal end (hitching or tie end) is 101.4 cm. in length. The proximal end
had a biconical hole burned through it 7.0 cm. [ram the end. The hole is
oval and 1.1 cm. by .85 cm The outside of the biconical hole is 1.5 cm. on
one side and 1.4 cm. on the other side. In order to divide the travois poles
into three parts, they were hacked to a depth varying from .5 to 1.0 cm. by
an axe or hatchet and then snapped.
The second travois pole is shorter, being 281.5 cm. long. This specimen
was made from a species of juniper. The distal part is 99.0 cm. long and the
taper resulting from being dragged is 22.8 cm. long. The midsection is 94.5
cm. in length. The proximal or hitching end is 88.0 cm. long. The tie hole is
highly worn and does not appear to have been made by burning. The edges
of the hole where the tie thongs rubbed are depressed at an upward angle
toward the most proximal part (about 15 degrees of the long axis of the
travois pole). This travois is not as straight or symmetrical as the lodge
pole pine specimen. The various small limbs and twigs were neatly trimmed and it is highly polished along the upper two-thirds of its length. Its
4.6 cm. diameter at the dragging end reduces to 2.6 cm. at the proximal
end. The tie hole is 7.5 cm. from the proximal end.
TRAVOIS BRACE. This object appears to be a brace to keep the
travois poles from spreading apart. Sometimes there were one or two additional cross braces according to the need and situation (Lowie 1936: Fig.
12). This particular specimen is 56.1 cm. long and made from juniper. It
was placed with the travois poles and for this reason it is assumed that it
performed this function. The ends were cut deeply, probably by an axe.
and snapped off. The ends were left unsmoothed. Its entire surface has a
high sheen or polish. No bark is present. It is 3.8 cm. at the larger end and
3.2 cm. at the small end. Several small scorched areas are randomly
spaced on the larger end to about the center of the brace Hack marks are
randomly located over its entire surface. These scars appear to have been
made by an object more like a knife than a heavier object like an axe.

PERSONAL ITEMS. This group of artifacts includes objects of ornamentation as well as objects not normally classed as clothing.
Brass Bracelets (Fig. 12, A). Fourteen brass bracelets and one
fragment were recovered from the burial. All are round to ovoid in outline.
The wire from which the bracelets were made is .45 cm. in thickness. The
diameters of complete or reconstructed bracelets vary from 8.4 to 9.65 cm.
Four are not altered in any way. Ten specimens and a fragment are flattened laterally. The flattened surfaces have the appearance of being hammered. Lengths of wire varying from 24.2 to 26.1 cm. were cut and bent.
Th.ey appear to have been adjusted by leaving gaps or by overlapping. The
re was cut in four ways -- by cuts from opposite sides at an angle,
squarely across the wire, scored or notched and snapped and by cutting
through at an angle from one side. The flattened surfaces have partly
obliterated the manner in which the wire was cut.

Ray and ]elks (1964: 135-137) recovered similar specimens at the
Watson site, as well as some that were decorated. The White site

COCDELL BURIAL SITE

29

(Suhm 1962: 94-97) produced both decorated and undecorated
specimens. The child burial observed at the Panhandle,Plains
Historical Museum had simple, undecorated bracelets’ Other
unreported historic burials with brass bracelets are the Dean Ranch,
McKaskle and Biddy burials from the Texas Wech Muse~, and the
Caprock burial (Conner, Allison and Runldes ms.}. A single specimen
was fo~d in ihe Dawson County burial reported by Bennett (1968:
78)’ Brass braCeieis have been fo~d ~ historic burials in CroCkett

Hair Ornaments (Figl 121 B): Ten circular brass ornaments were
found tied by an overhand knot in a three-ply plait of hair which was worn
on the left side in the vicinity of the temple: Two others and three frag:
ments were probably part of the hair ornament since they are of the same
form and Were recovered in the back dirt: The thickness varies from .25 to
.30 cm. Lengths of wire, varying from 14.9 to 18.8 cm. were cut and bent
to shape, resulting in diameters from 4.8 to 8.3 cm. The manner in Which
they were cut can not be determ~ed since the ends have been altered in
various ways. Three were flattened inside and out, resultihg in
rectangular cross-sections. In the others, the brass wire was unaltered
except for the ends, which were tapered to a dull point. The hair
ornaments are nearly perfect circle and were possibly bent about a
circular objecL There is no incising’ notching, or other decoration.
The McKaskle burial in the Texas Tech MUseum had a silver con-

cha on the right brow which was probably a hair

ornament or

plate.

The only other reference to hair ornaments in the vicinity is made by
Woodall (1967: 83), who described a small triangular,shaped silver

alloy ornament located in the temple area: .... ......
Finger BJng. The discoverer of the burial found a complete commercially made finger ring. On the assumption that the ring was gold and
would bend, his science teacher squeezed it between his fingers and broke
it. Dr. Frank Dougherty of West Texas State University tested the basic
metal of the ring and found it to be brass plated with gold. The gold was
worn off in many places with only a remnant of the plating still present.
Using the fragment, it can be determined that the outside diameter is 2.3
cm,, .i cm. thick, and .3 cm. wide. It was worn on the ring finger of the right
hand, as indicated by the greenish stain on the first joint of the third finger.

Dr. James A. Hanson of the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum in
Canyon and a student of the Historic Indians writes, "there is nothing
really diagnostic in the goods except perhaps the ringi If it is not German silver, I think a date of 1830-1850 would be in order."
Suhm (1962: 89)reported a brass finger ring from the White site. In
this instance the ring was oversized for the child remains. The
McKaskle burial produced two sheet brass rings on the right hand.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

30

Ray and Jelks (1965: 134) reported seven rings of brass wire and two
of brass straps. A silver ring was recovered from the Caprock burial
(Conner, Allison and Runldes ms.), and Newcomb (1955: 188) reported
a copper ring from the Yellowhouse burial.
Silver Conchas. Conchas of silver are one of the most common articles found with Historic Indian burials in this area. Of the thirteen
burials, six produced conchas. Four were recovered from the Cogdell
Burial. Two were placed between the saddle and the body (Fig. 4),
one was found on a small shelf in the northeastern part of the burial
niche, and the provenience of the fourth is not known. Several
viewers gave varied opinions of the metal from which the conchas
were made. In order to determine the true content, a test was run by a
metallurgist, and the results indicated silver of + 98%. Sterling is
92.5% pure. This does not rule out the possibility that the conchas
were made from coins. Dr. James A. Hanson (personal communication) stated that in melting, silver tends to revert to a purer
state.
CONCHA A (Fig. 13, A). This specimen is 5.9 cm. on one axis and 5.3
cm. on the other. Three millimeters from one edge is a square hole .15 cm.
wide. Such a hole could have been made by a square nail. The edge is
beveled and decorated by incised lines about the perimeter. They are
about .05 cm. long and spaced from .025 to .075 cm. apart at an angle of 30
degrees from the edge. It has a consistent thickness of .225 cm. and is Concavo-convex. The convex surface is well polished but has faint "wear"
scratches running in various directions. An area of .5 cm. on each side of
the square hole is worn and the incised marks are nearly worn away. The
reverse (concave} side is slightly rough or irregular. In the central part are
two openings, square on three sides. The fourth side, which faced to the
outer edge, is formed by two arcs joining to form a "peak." The .4 cm. section between these openings is slightly depressed, suggesting that leather
or cloth was passed through one hole, over the separating bar and back
down the opposite hole. Pressure from such action could depress the
separating bar. The square hole also suggests that it was at times worn as
a pendant. No indication of how the concha was formed can be discerned.
No stress cracks, usual in formation by a cold process such as the anvilhammer method, are present.
CONCHA B (Fig. 13, B). This concavo-convex specimen is nearly circular being 6.5 em. on one axis and 6.7 cm. on the other. It is centrally perforated by a circular .4 cm. hole. On opposite sides are two elliptical holes
.1 and .3 cm. punched from the convex side. On one edge is a stress crack
.55 cm. long. Cut marks made by a sharp object such as a knife, varying
from .! to .7 cm. in length at an angle varying from 30 degrees to 45
degrees, are spaced from .05 to .3 cm. apart. A circular polished area 2 cm.
in diameter around the central hole suggests this concha was possibly

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

31

secured by a leather washer on its convex side; it may have been attached
to clothing or possibly worn as a hair plate.
CONCHA C (Fig. 13, C). This concha is 6.4 by 6.7 cm. in diameter. It is
perforated by truncated triangles joined by their apices. A semicircular
notch .4 cm. in diameter has been cut in the center of the base of one of the
triangles. The truncated triangles were cut out by a knife or similar thin.
sharp object. On each side of the narrow part of the opening are .1 by .2
cm. oval holes punched from the concave side. This specimen could easily
have been secured to clothing or to a hair braid by passing a small pin
through the two holes and under or through the fabric, or in a similar
fashion in a hair braid. It is 2.6 cm. from the base of one truncated triangle
to the base of the other and 1.4 cm. wide at the juncture of the triangles.

CONCHA D (Fig. 13, D). This specimen is also circular being 6.4 cra. on
one axis and 6.7 em. on the other. It is centrally perforated by two semicircles 2.2 cm. along the diameters divided by a bar .3 cm. wide. The bar
separating the semicircles is slightly depressed, indicating that cloth was
brought up through one of the holes, over the bar. and down through the
other hole. It could have been utilized in a similar fashion as a hair plate.
The semicircular holes were made by a series of cuts varying from .5 cm. to
.9 cm. long, made with a keen edged object. The bar separating the semicircular segments was cut in a similar fashion.
It is possible that specimens B, C, and D were made from sheet
metal or were cast from coin silver. To test the first possibility, the
thickness of each specimen was measured by a micrometer. The
result produced a thickness varying from .0052 to .0089 cm. The
variation of thickness of .0037 cm. is of interest and indicates the
possibility that all three were made from the same piece of material.
For example, the variation in Specimen B indicates a thinning of only
.0007 cm. from the center to the edge. Forming objects by the anvilhammer method from soft, thin sheet silver would result in little
variation in thickness.

Small Animal Skin. From the hair remaining, this article appears to be
the pelt of a member of the weasel family, probably the long-tailed or
bridled weasel, Mustela frenata frenata, whose range extends today
across Mexico and Texas (Ford 1951: I05).
Furred pelts were used for many purposes by the Indians of the
southwest. Catlin (1926: Fig. 172) painted a Comanche warrior in 1834
with a breech clout and a quiver of fur. Mason describes a number of
types of fur quivers from various tribes (1893: 631-680]. Another
possible function for the animal skin is that it might have been part of
an amulet or pouhahante, a combination good luck charm and oracle
common among Indians of the southwestern area. Berlandier (1969:

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

32

54, 91, 116) mentions these objects several times in respect to the
Comanches, explaining that they are usually small, stuffed animals or
a portion of one, attached to the shield or carried around the neck or
in the hair.

Mirror (Fig. 12, C).

A small hand mirror 7 cm. wide by 9.15 cm, long
and .3 cm. thick was found just outside and toward the forward part of the
saddle fork. It may have had a frame at one time, but there is no evidence
that it was in a frame of any sort. One corner has what appears to be an
old break -- possibly dating from the time of the burial or earlier. In any
event, no fragments were recovered from the screening of the disturbed
matrix. Nearly all of the silvering has eroded away and all surfaces are
patinated.

Newcomb and Field (1967: 271) report that mirrors were a part of
Navarette’s trade goods, and de Mezieres (Bolton 1914:132-134 and
200-202) included mirrors as a trade item. Wallace and Hoebel (1952:
280) list mirrors as one part of the goods used to lure the Comanche
into coming in for treaty talks with Anglos during the mid-1850’s. It is
surprising that only three other mirrors have been found associated
with burials. The Caprock site contained two mirrors (Conner, Allison
and Runkles ms.), and the Watson site (Ray and Jelks 1964: 137) reported one mirror.
Historic accounts give instances of mirrors being used as
heliographic devises in directing activities of warriors during combat
and in horseback games.

Silver Buckle Tongue (Fig. 12, D). A silver object was recovered
while screening back dirt on the talus slope. It has the overall appearance
of a buckle tongue except the loop to attach the tongue to the buckle bar appears to have t~een cut off by a narrow, sharp tool such as a knife. This object is 2.6 cm. long, .55 cm. wide midway, and .5 cm. wide at the most
narrow part. The sides are generally parallel but expand slightly midway
between the two ends; it is .55 cm. Wide at this point, and .35 cm. from the
distal end it reduces to .4 cm. The distal end is rounded and is slightly
turned downward, Since the proximal end has been severed, it was probably altered to serve some other purpose ~ possibly as a decorative object
tied to a garment by the constricted part near the distal end.

Elk Tooth Pendants (Fig. 12, E). Two drilled elk teeth were
recovered from the grave fill. The placement of these objects is not known;
however, illustrations of Plains Indians in the collections of the
Smithsonian Institution (Ewers 1957 Plate 33b) indicate that elkteeth were
frequently attached to jackets or shirts.
~e cogdell specimens are biconically drilled at the root section. The
holes vary from .2 to .35 cm. in diameter and the outer part of the holes
vary from .4 to .5 cm. It is possible that one specimen is older than the
other, as the outer edges of the hole are more worn ....

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

~

33

!~

i’

~i~

~i~,

~

~

~,ii

i~

~i

i~

~

B

E
D

¢
0

/0
,

FIGURE 12. Brass bracelets, hair ornaments, mirror, buckle, tongue,
elk tooth pendants. A, brass bracelets; B, brass hair ornaments in
braided hair; C, mirror; D, silver buckle tongue; E, drilled elk tooth
pendants,

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

34

Of all the burial goods examined by the senior author in the collections of the Panhandle-Plains Historical and Texas Tech Museums, no
other examples of drilled elk teeth were found. Parsons (1967: 83-84)
found three drilled elk teeth at the Morgan Jones site.
Abalone Shell Pendants. Two abalone shell pendants were
recovered from near the chest area of the burial and toward the
mouth of the burial chamber.
PENDANT A.

This specimen is 7.3 cm. wide and 8.8 cm. in length. The

edges are slightly convex and the corners are rounded. The o~zerall outline
is rectangular. Two biconically dri!led holes at one end were probably used
for attachment to some object, possibly to one of the leather garments. The
two holes are .3 cm. in diameter. The upper end is slightly more narrow
than the distal end.

PENDANT B. This specimen is slightly smaller than Pendant A. The sides
are nearly straight, but are very slightly convex. It is 6.9 cm. wide and 8.7
cm. in length The corners are rounded. At the proximal end are three
evenly spaced biconically drilled holes. The two outer holes are .3 cm. in
diameter and the central one is .4 cm. in diameter. In addition to the attachment hales, small decorations were drilled into the lower or distal end.
These holes are .1 cm. in diameter and spaced .3 cm. apart.

While these objects have been arbitrarily called pendants, it is
possible that they were gorgers or hair ornaments. Shell objects of
this nature are extremely rare in this area. Abalone shell ornaments
were recovered from an Antelope Creek focus burial north of Borger,

decorative or ceremonial object. While shell ornaments of the various
marine molluscs of the larger variety are rare, they occasionally ocour in this area. Olivella shell beads are a co~on form of bead
recovered.
Necklace. As a matter of convenience, necklace beads and shell
hair pipes are described in this report in the section dealing with
beads.
Blankets (Table 3), Fabrics were found with the burial. How they
were placed in relation tolhe body is not known for certain. They were
removed and placed at either end of the burial niche when the burial was
disturbed by McFall. It is assumed that these fabrics were blankets in
which the body was wrapped, since copper stains hint that they were
wrapped about the body. In addition, a sequence of blanket wrappings can

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

35

\

\

/

\

\

~0
\

\

\

/

A

B
/

\

/

/

0
q

I
!

/

2
I

,3
I

FIGURE 13. Silver conchas. A, Concha A; B, Conoha B; C, Concha C;
D, Concha D.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

36

be determined because a fragment 7 cm. to 7.6 cm. thick was recovered
that was cemented together in some manner (possibly by body fluids or
rat urine). A red commercial blanket was next to the body and a Navajo
or Pueblo blanket composed the outer layer.
The blanket fabrics were examined by Dr. Joe Ben Wheat of the University of Colorado Museum, and his analysis (personal communication) is the
basis of interpretation of these two items. The fragments of a striped
blanket probably represent a single object, It appears that there was a
broad red and white stripe, perhaps near the center. One fragment has a
red stripe with beaded or speckled weave, Several fragments have narrow
alternating red and gray-tan stripes. Several fragments have yellow, graytan and red stripes repeated several times. Another fragment contains
wide white and gray-tan stripes in a wider white-speckled red stripe. The
thread count is eight per .25 cm. and the weft is 24 per .25 cm. The date of
manufacture was between 1820 and 1850.
The commercial blanket is of napped diagonal twill plain weave, two
over two. except the black band which is plain tapestry. Blankets of this
type generally have a black band at each end. The selvage is of plain finish.
The thread count is twenty-four per .25 cm. for the warp. The diagonal
weft is eighteen per .25 cm. and the tapestry weft varies from thirty-eight
to forty per .25 cm. Blankets of this type were made between 1825 and
1865.

Suhm (1962: 103) recovered fragments too small for identification
from the White site. The W. H. Watson site in Fisher County (Ray and
Jelks 1964: 137-138) produced woolen fabrics, as didthe Morgan Jones
burial in Crosby County (Parsons 1957: 90-91), and in both instances
the fabrics were too fragmentary for identification. Examination of
historic burial goods at the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum and
the Texas Tech Museum resulted in two instances of recovered
fabrics.
Buffalo Ro be.

Numerous small fragments have traces of the wooly hair

of the buffalo still clinging to them and the yellowish, glazed appearance
observed on robes in the Witte Museum collection. There are several
fragments which include the seam which usually ran up the center of a
robe. but there is no trace of paint.

Jose Maria Sanchez y Tapia painted a Comanche in such a garment
before 1828 [Berlandier 1969: Plate 2). Wallace and Hoebel (1952: 81}
describe a typical Comanche robe as having no decoration except a
stripe down the seam.
FAUNAL REMAINS, Placed near the feet and toward the opening of the
burial chamber were the remains of what in all probability was a food offering. Of the seven bones of either Bos or Bison, five may have been
cooked, which altered their appearance. The other two do not seem to have
been subjected to any unusual circumstances. The unaltered bones consist

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

37

o

o

o

~

O

z~

o
ca

Z

.~.~

~ooo

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

38

of an astragalum and a second phalange. It has been the observation of the
senior author that artifacts of bone are nearly always better preserved in
aboriginal sites than bone scrap or waste. This is possibly due to impregnation of oils from handling. It has also been observed that bones lying
beside a bone artifact often times are in a poorer state of preservation. Is
this difference due to impregnation of the bone by fats as a result of either
boiling or roasting? In any event, five bones were altered in some manner
and in addition one large bone was severed near a joint end by sawing. It is
possible that two other bones of this group could have been sawed, but due
to rodent damage this can not be determined. All five have been damaged
by rodents to the degree that positive identification as to Bison or Bos can
not be determined {Ernest L. Landelius, personal communication}. On the
other hand, the astragalum and second phalange have been but slightly
damaged by gnawing, further indicating that these bones were not as attractive to rodents as were the other five.

Other examples of possible food offerings can be cited. In the
White site (Suhm 1962: 106), the presence of deer or antelope bones
suggest a possible food offering. Two historic burials in the collections of the Panhandle-Plans Historical Museum also contained
possible food offerings. In one instance rabbit bones were found with
a child burial, and in the second instance the hump section of a bison
was associated with an adult male burial. With similar circumstances at the Cogdell site, there is a strong possibility that the
Bos or Bison bones are a food offering, and this practice may be more
common than previously believed.
In addition to the Bos or Bison bones, turkey buzzard and rodent
bones were found throughout the matrix. The rocks covering the
burial had been thrown out of the cave; in examining these rocks the
excrement of turkey buzzards was evident, and fragments of buzzard
egg shells were noted. It appears that the site of the burial was also
used as a nesting and roosting place by these birds. Evidence of
rodents was plentiful, not only from the bones, but also by urinecemented dung clinging to artifacts and by an abundance of rat dung
throughout the deposits. None of the bird or rodent bones showed any
evidence of alteration.

MISCELLANEOUS OBJECTS. Several miscellaneous objects were
recovered from the fill around the burial. These are described
below.
Leather. One object consists of two carefully cut. rectangular pieces of
very thin leather folded one inside the other. Judging from the texture and
the hair remaining, the skin may have come from the underside of a deer.
The shape and construction do not suggest any known object.
Another object consisted of three layers of very thin leather laid one
within the other. The leather looks and feels like that of the preceding object, but has no hair. Again. there is no clue to its use.

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

39

Wood. Two wooden objects similar in construction were recovered.
While one is incomplete due to rodent gnawing, it has the appearance of
the complete specimen. The complete specimen (Fig. 14, A} is 17.0 cm. long,
2.8 cm. wide with a maximum thickness of .6 cm. The ends are rounded and
it is ellipsoidal in cross section. It appears to have been shaped by a knife.
The rounded ends indicate that it was nearly cut through and then snapped
off. Two or more were possibly made, as indicated by the cut and snap
technique of the complete specimen. The wood appears to be some type of
pine. The incomplete specimen is 12.7 cm. long. It has the width and
thickness and cross section of the previously described specimen. The
identification of these objects and their function are unknown:
Two fragments of what were probably of the same item were found. Termite action has so badly damaged the fragments it can not be determined
what the object was. A limb about 2.6 cm. in diameter of an unknown
species of tree was girded by a knife and either broken or cut completely
through. The outer bark was smoothed by a sharp object such as a knife.
Two fragments of squared wood were found. It can not be determined
what the complete object was. The bark remaining on one of the sides appears to be wild plum, of which there is an abundance along the banks of
the streams in this area. The squared sides are highly polished and no Cut
marks are visiblel It was squared by trimming three sides of a small branch, leaving the bark on the fourth side. Length measurements are of little
value since the fragments are so small. The diameter is 1.3 cm. on one
axis and 1.6 cm. on the other.
A branch of a fruit tree, probably wild plum, was recovered. Both ends
are broken. Twigs were neatly trimmed off. Groups of cut marks are present about midway, and random cuts are irregularly spaced along the rest
of this specimen. It is 23.8 cm. long and 1.5 cm. in diameter. Due to its fragmentary state, it is impossible to determine the function of this artifact.
Glass Lens (Fig. 14, B). A glass lens with a central minus correction
was found in the burial matrix. McFall did not recall where it was located
in relation to the body or to other artifacts. The lens was taken to school
and in showing it to classmates, it was dropped. A triangular fragment .9
cm. wide along the beveled edge and 3.8 em. long was recovered.

In order to get an opinion regarding the age and use of the lens,
the fragment was sent to Mr. J. C. Sticksel, regional manager of the
American Optical Company. Sticksel forwarded the fragment to Mr.
E. W. Tillyer, manager of the lens division of the American Optical
Company. His reply is as follows:
"After considerable analysis, it seems that the lens is a ’myodisc’ and is
approximately 50 years old. We base that age on two factors:
1. The glass is well annealed and these annealing techniques came
into being about 1920. However, that one decision alone is not sufficient
because there is a possibility that the lens was exposed to unintended
heat, and, therefore, was annealed,

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

40

B

C

D

E
0

I

I

!

4
I

!

I

5
I

CM.

A
FIGURE 14. Miscellaneous artifacts. A, wooden object; B, glass lens;
G, lead ball; D, brass rim pipe; E, brass chain.

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

41

2. The edging of the lens fragment was done with equipment available after 1920.
At first, I thought it was a cement wafer type lens, but after developing the whole from the fragment, it looks as though it was actually a high
minus."

In order to verify the data from the American Optical Company. the
fragment lens was sent to Mr. Earl F. Adams, senior product administrator of Bausch and Lomb, Opthalmic Division. Additional comments are as follows:
"The lens appears to have a rather sophisticated toric surface and compound lenses of this type have been developed in this century.
The lens was flouresced to compare with our present day crown glass
and they appear to be the same. This is not particularly significant, however, as soda-lime glass compositions have been in existence for many
years.
The lens fragment looks like a watch crystal or the cover for some type
of small gauge. The central minus portion is a product of recent times
and the bevel edge would suggest a gauge."

The reconstructed lens is 4.1 cm. in diameter and the central minus
is 1.6 cm. in diameter. There is a polished bevel .015 cm. wide about
the circumference.
Three questions naturally come to mind when the lens is considered. (I) The burial occurred sometime after 1920. Interviews with
long time residents of this area do not reveal any such event as Indians visiting the immediate area. Ranchers check their livestock
daily and it would have been difficult for such an event to have gone
unnoticed. There is no ethnohistoric reason that can be found for Indians to return to this area for a burial. (2) Another possibility is that
it was accidentally dropped in the burial crevice. (3) The third
possibility is that pack rats found the lens close by and introduced it
into the burial place. This is the most probable explanation, as pack
rats had extensively used the burial niche, and the lens is not too
heavy for a large rodent to have transported. In any event, the lens is
inconsistent with all the other burial goods.
No other such optical object has been discovered in either
published or unpublished burials in this area.
Iron Hoe (Fig. 8, G). An eye hoe was recovered east of the saddle tree
and to the outside of the burial chamber. The original length of the hoe
blade was approximately 18,1 cm. The width from the edge of the blade to
the lower part of the eye socket is 11.8 cm. Viewing the hoe from the handle
side, it can be seen that the right edge has been worn or cut away. The central reinforcing "rib" runs from the base of the eye toward the blade edge

42

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and was the center of the hoe. The left side is 9.1 cm. wide and only 5.7 cm.
to the right edge. The cutting edge of the hoe does not exhibit any unusual
use, but the sides indicate that they were heavily used in a hammering or
battering process. It is apparent that the right side was used more extensively than the left side since this is the narrower part as measured
from the center rib. The top of the eye has been scored as though it had
been used as an anvil for cutting with a chisel or other sharp edged tool.

In an attempt to discover as much as possible about eye hoes, the
Scovil Hoe Company and True Temper Tool Company were written
concerning the history and method of manufacture of this particular
tool. The Scovil Hoe Company replied and sent samples of their hoes
from the 1890 to 1905 period and from 1905 to the present. The hoe
found with the burial is definitely not of Scovil manufacture.
D. W. Fisher, Plant Manager of Scovil Hoe Company, described the
manufacturing process prior to 1905 as follows:
"Our company began making hoes in I~14 and during the 1850’s
developed a process of making hoes that consisted of forming an eye
socket, a ferrule, a throat, and a blade. Each piece was separate and hot
welded together to form the semi-finished product which was then
frimmed, ground, and painted. Around 1900, our process was refined from
a production point, but the eye construction remained about the same as
before. About 1920. we again changed the process of making hoes and
machines replaced men. The hoe retained the same outward appearance,
but was drawn from one piece of steel, thus making it a much stronger
tool."

It is obvious that the Cogdell Burial hoe is not of Scovil manufacture
since it is of one piece manufacture. Photographs of the hoe were sent
to Dr. Charles E. Hanson, Director of The Museum of the Fur Trade at
Chadron, Nebraska. In his reply he states,
"The eye hoe is a type that was popular throughout most of the 19th
century and occupied too long a span to be valuable for dating purposes.
We have copies of pages from a Sheffield tool catalogue ca. 1815 which
illustrated two patterns very similar to yours. Both were obviously made
for exportation to the United States.
From the examples we have here, your hoe seems typical of the 18151860 period."

Similar hoes have been recovered from the Merrell burial and th~
Merrell Comanchero site (41FL19), both of which are a short distance
from the Cogdell Burial.
Lead Ball (Fig. 14, C]. A lead ball was recovered from the talus slope
by Jim Servatius of Plainview, Texas. and was lent to the author for
examination. It appears to have been cast in a worn bullet mold. as each

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

43

half is slightly off-set, It has a diameter of 1.636 cm. along the seam of the
mold and a diameter of 1.588 cm. on the axis 90 degrees to the mold seam.
The spue was neatly trimmed. A ball of this size suggests a rifle or musket
of approximately .65 caliber with a moderately thick patch. The surface
is slightly pocked, probably the result of corromve soil action. There is a
small gouged-out rectangular area about .05 cm, deep. There are no
rifling or patch impressions, which indicates that it was never fired.
Since no firearms were found with the burial, no conjecture can be made
of its purpose or significance.
Brass Ram Pipe (Fig. 14, D). A tabular brass object 1.45 cm. long
with a .9 cm. outside diameter and a .8 cm. inside diameter was recovered
in screening the talus slope. It was made from sheet brass 1.45 cm. long
bent into a cylinder. It was decorated with two grooves about .05 cm. wide
and spaced .15 cm. apart from each end. It has the appearance of a ram
pipe from either a small caliber muzzleloading rifle such as a squirrel rifle
or a small caliber pistol. However. it has no flange to accept a fastening pin
to the barrel. No weapon was found with the burial, and the single lead
ball of large caliber does not match the size of the ram pipe, Normally the
ramrod is just slightly smaller than the bore diameter (just enough smaller
to clear the bore of the weapon), How this object was utilized is not known.
Brass Chain (Fig. 14, E). A fragment of brass chain 2.5 cm. long was
recovered, It was from brass wire .1 cm. in diameter and about 1.5 cm.
long. A loop was made out of approximately one half the length of the wire.
The resulting loop is .3 cm. [outside diameter). A similar loop was made
with the other half, but at a 90 degree angle. This forms two chain loops
made of one piece of wire. Another piece of wire of similar length was
passed through the loop of the first double link and again bent to form a
second segment of the chain. This process is continued until the length of
chain is completed. This is probably a machine made chain. The widths of
the loops are consistent. No other fragments of this chain were found, and
its use is unknown.

GENERAL DISCUSSION
COMPARISONS OF BURIAL PRACTICES. The Morgan ]ones site (Parsons 1967) in Crosby County is the only burial in northwestern Texas
that has been found and reported by a professional archeologist. Unfortunately, the burial goods from this site were relatively scant and
it had been badly disturbed by rodents and other animals. The other
reported burials had been disturbed in varying degrees by human action.
An attempt will be made to compare burial goods and behavioral
patterns of the Historic Indians (Tables 4 and 5). It is felt that this information should be made available to other researchers. The data
from materials resting in repositories and the few published reports
have been consolidated into a mass of data which, hopefully, will
reveal characteristics heretofore unknown or not recognizable in in-

44

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

dividual reports. The senior author visited the Panhandle-Plains
Historical Museum in Canyon, Texas and the Texas Tech Museum in
Lubbock. The recently discovered Cap rock burial is in manuscript
form (Conner, Allison and Runkles, ms.) and the authors have
graciously let us have a copy of the paper they are preparing for
publication. The unreported burials represent seven burials, or over
double the number that have been reported from this area.
Historic burials have been reported by Newcomb (1955}, Suhm
(1962), Ray and ]elks (1964), Bennett (1968), Hester {1968), and the
previously mentioned Morgan ]ones site by Parsons {1967}. However,
the burials reported by Hester (1968) will not be included in this
analysis because burial goods are limited to only a few items and
burial details were not recorded. Including the Cogdell burial there
are 13 historic burials from which to draw inferences and to synthesize characteristics. Each interment contains one or more unique
burial goods as well as elements in common. These minor characteristics will not be dealt with at this time for they do not seem to have
a common denominator except to demonstrate that people are individuals and are not bound by rigid customs. Table 4 gives the
characteristics for each burial.
One of the problems involving analysis of unreported burial traits is
that only the Yellowhouse (Newcomb 1955), White (Suhm 1962), Watson (Ray and ]elks 1964), Morgan ]ones (Parsons 1967), Caprock (Conner, Allison and Runkles ms.} and Cogdell burials are adequately
documented as to location, position of the body and/or burial goods.
As for the unreported burials used for statistical purposes, it is
assumed that all the burial goods were given to the repositories, but it
is probable thai items were lost, given away or kept by the donors.
Small objects could have been overlooked if the matrix was not
carefully screened, and this is not known. The three female burials
and six male burials do not indicate a great difference in burial offerings. Another possibility is that some of the burials occurred at
times of stress (if it is assumed that all the burial offerings are
present), or that the deceased was not a person of prominent family
or tribal status, as reflected in the paucity of burial goods. On the
other hand, it is a possibility that t~hose ~th copious funerary offerings were highly respected.
It appears that some burial goods were consistently placed with the
body. In compiling a list of burial goods, there is no way to determine
if some items were occasionally leh out or were of perishable nature
and were not evident when the burial was discovered. For example,
glass beads would probably be associated with either or both beacted
garments and necl<laces, iherefore, any list is probably incomplete

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

45

when the burial was found in an unsheltered place. Another factor
already mentioned is the method used in recovering burial goods. If
the matrix was screened, imperishable items would be relatively complete; but if the matrix was not screened, many smaller items would
not be represented.
The list (Table 4) included here represents what was associated
with the burials either in reports or in donations to the two museums.
The most common material was horse gear of one sort or another
(present in eleven of the thirteen burials). Brass bracelets and glass
beads were the next most common items and were found with ten of
the thirteen burials, European tools such as hoes or similar objects
and fabrics were recovered in eight instances, Native-made artifacts,
finger rings, conchas and hair pipes are well represented ~th siX occurrences. Metal knives, possible food offerings and leather garments occurred in five burials, but leather garments probably should
have a higher representation. Perhaps rodent action and failure to include tattered and soiled fragments of garments account for the low
representation. European utensils, tinklers, buttons, hawk bells,
pigment, body wrappings and shell beads or pendants have a frequency of four out of the thirteen.
.....
It was surprising to find only three mirrors, de Mezieres (Bolton
1914) and Navarette (Newcomb and Field 1~967) list mirrors as standard items of trade. Wallace and Hoebel (1952) state that goods
including mirrors were used to lure the Comanches to treaty conferences, and that a warrior spent much of his time grooming and
was especially proud of his hair. Equally surprising was the
recovery of wooden or metal kegs and buckets and musical
instruments associated with three burials. Aboriginal necklaces or
pendants of perforated animal claws and teeth were to be expected.
The recovery of only two European weapons may be the result of not
all such items being included in the material donated to the museums.
It is also possible that firearms represented articles so vital to every
day need they were not commonly left as an offering. Metal pendants
may have been overlooked unless the matrix was carefully screened.
Those objects found only once probably represent the whim of those
giving memorial gifts and it would be unusual to find all burial
offerings to be consistent.
Aboriginal objects such as projectile points, bifaces, and scrapers
were frequently placed with the body and may be a hold-over from
more primitive times. European tools and utensils appear to be a common grave offering and metal knives were the most common of such
objects observed or reported.
There are twenty-one burial traits recorded by Berlandier (1969),
Wallace and Hoebel (1952), Newcomb (1961), and K. Ten Kate

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

46

TABLE 4
HISTORIC BURIAL CHARACTERISTICS

PHYSICAL
TRAITS

Merrell Child
PPHM PPHM

CoUinsworth

Dean McKaskle

Biddy

PPHM

TTM

TTM

TTM

Caprock

SEX

M

?

M

F

M

"~

F

AGE

Adult

Child

Adult

Adult

Adult

Child

Adult

?

Flex

?

Flex

Ext

~

Flex

Open

Niche

Open

Niche

Niche

Niche

X

x
x
x

x
X
x

X
X
x
x

X
X
X
x
X

x
x
X

BODY PosrrION

NICHE OR OPEN Niche
BURIAL GOODS

Horse gear
Bracelets
Glass beads
Fabrics
European tool
Ind. artifacts
Finger rings
Conchas
Hair pipes
Metal knives
Food offering
Leather garm’ts

X

Euro. utensils
Tinklers
Buttons
Bells
Pigment
Body wrapped
Shell pendants
Mirror
Barrel-keg

X

Perf. claw-teeth
Mus. instrumts.
Euro. weapons
Ceremon’l fire
Metal pendants
Pipe
Hair ornament
TOTALS

X
X

X
X
X

X
x
x

X
X
x

x

x
X
x

X
x

X
x

x
X

x
X
x
x
X

x
X
X

X

X

X

x
x
X

X
x

X

X
X
x
X

X

9

3

4

7

18

14

10

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

47

TABLE 4 [continued)
HISTORIC BURIAL CHARACTERISTICS

White

Watson

Yellowhouse

Morgan Jones

Dawson Co.

Cogdell

?

F

M

M

?

M

Child

Adult

Adult

Adult

Adult

Adult

?

Ext

Flex

Flex

Ext

Ext

Open

Niche

Niche

Niche

Niche

Niche
Totals

x
X
x
X
X
X
x
x
X

x
x
x
X
X

x
x
X
x

x
X
x
x
X
X

X
x
X
x

x
X
X
x
X

11
10
10
8
8
6

x
X
X

X
x

x
X
X
x
x

X

6
6
6
5

X
x

x
X
X

5
5
4
4
4
4

x
x

x

4

x
X
x

4
4
3
3
3
3

x

2
2
2
1

15

11

12

x

1

17

134

48

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

(Hester and Stross 1973a).* These traits are listed in Table 5. Only
two traits are common in all four accounts; six are reported only once
by one or another, five are recorded twice, and three traits are
common in nine instances. However, some of these behavioral
patterns can not be tested from archeological recovery. The
behavioral patterns associated with burials that can not be verified
are as follows: burial was the same for those killed in battle and those
who died in camp; men accompanying the deceased on a raid cut their
hair and wept; the bathing of the corpse; body mutilation of
mourners; destruction of the deceased’s possessions not included as
burial goods; destruction of the tipi and a funeral dance. However,
many of the burial practices can be compared either by direct
evidence or be inference. These are as follows: body flexed and
bound in position; face and/or body painted with vermillion; body
dressed in finest clothes; wrapped in buffalo robe or blanket; flexed
body buried in sitting position or on side; body taken to grave site on a
horse; buried in crevice or secluded place; body faced to east;
deceased’s possessions buried with him; saddle and bridle included in
burial goods; grave covered with rocks; ceremonial fire built; favorite
horse killed; and life after death. Thus, there are fourteen burial
traits reported in ethnographic accounts that can be verified from
published and unpublished data and from direct evidence or by
inference.
According to various accounts, beginning with Berlandier in the
1830’s to 1883 (H. Ten Kate), it appears that some of the practices
were abandoned, perhaps from necessity. However, even though
restricted by reservation life, the Comanches apparently continued to
fellow traditional practices as far as possible.
interments made while the group was permanently encamped were
probably given full ceremonies (Berlandier 1969: 96). By inference it
is possible that death away from the main camp resulted in abbreviated ceremonies. Wallace and Hoebel (1952: 149) report that
burial took place as quickly as possible and that the body was
prepared with considerable care ,However, if death occurred while
on the trail or on a raid, it is possible that short cuts were taken.
Wallace and Hoebel (1952: 150) and Newcomb (1961: 173) state that
the body was bound in a flexed position before rigor mortis had set in
Some additional burial traits, not included in the present analysis, are reported by
Hester and Stross (1973b: 43-44}. These were recorded by a trapper who claimed to have
been a Comanche captive ca. 1820-1840. Certain of the traits are similar to those reported by Berlandier (see Table 5) during roughly the same time period. These include the
killing of a favorite captive to accompany the deceased [Berlandier 1969: 96; Hester and
Stross 1973b: 43).

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

4g

T<× × × ~

~<

××
g

I
i.o
o

× ×× × × × × X × × × X × ×

~4

z

×

Z
O
X × × × × X × × × × × × × × × ×

×

¢o

.-g
o

"6

:g
××

x

×

×

x×××

×~
co

~O

Z
;;.I

I

I

~4
O

o

o

:--.1

~

o

° ~ g.~ ~ ~
~ ~ ~ ~ ~Oo~
~ ~ ~.~.-

.r~ ~: ~ii
~ ~ ~ o~.~

~ ~ ~

~ x~o
~4~

I

I

o

o

Z Z

50

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and if possible was buried in a crevice. There is no evidence of any of
the bodies being bound since bindings have not been found and four
bodies were either fully extended or the legs bent only slightly. Two
crevice burials were flexed. Those buried on the Llano Estacado and
some distance from the escarpment were flexed. In crevice burials it
was noted that orientation of the face in an easterly direction depended on how the burial chamber was oriented; this is inconsistent with
Wallace and Hoebel’s and Newcomb’s statements. In the Cogdell
burial the small shelter ran north and south, but the head was facing
west. In any case, none of the records indicate that the body was
placed in a sitting position. The Watson site (Ray and lelks 1964: 127)
is an exception in that this female was buried in a standing position
and for statistical purposes is considered extended.
The reported practice of burying a bridle and saddle with the
deceased appears to be a common trait and may be symbolic of the
reported custom of killing a horse near the grave (Wallace and
Hoebel 1952: 152; Berlandier 1969: 96). Suhm (1962: 117) reported
horse bones associated with the White site; it is the only published account of this practice, which may have been optional.
The wrapping of the body in blankets or bison robe appears to be a
trait as reported by Berlandier (1969: 95), Wallace and Hoebel (1952:
150) and Newcomb (1961: 173) when there was ample time to provide
a full burial ceremony. However, the unreported burials and ones interred in the open can not be used for analysis since burial wrappings
may have deteriorated. The occurrence of pigment is also probably
biased and should be higher on the list due to lack of trained observation and dissipation of pigment stains in non-crevice burials.
Suhm (1962: 96-97) found items such as finger rings and bracelets
too large to have been worn by the deceased. The Cottle County child
had oversized bracelets, files, adult sized stirrups, knives,and metal
powder cans. In these two burials it seems that offerings were made
which were nol personal possessions of the deceased. This trait
would be difficult to determine in adult burials since no out of context
offerings could be discerned, but probably is a custom as reported by
Wallace and Hoebel (1952: 195), Newcomb (1961: 174), and Berlandier (1969: 96). They state that outsiders who had no personal claim to
share in the estate could establish a claim against the estate of the
survivors by providing property of their own to be buried with the
deceased.
Wallace and Hoebel (1952: 151) state that sometimes a fire was
built and a funeral dance was held. It is not stated that the fire was
built on the grave covering the body. However, the McKaskle and

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

51

Cogdell burials had fires built on the grave, suggesting that in some
cases this was a custom. The possible use of ceremonial fires may be
an indication of special status or may result from some purification
ceremony.
In the Cogdell burial two travois poles were broken into three
nearly equal parts and placed over the chest along with a travois
brace. Wallace and Hoebel (1952: 151), Newcomb (1961: 173), and
Berlandier (1969: 96) state that the tipi in which the deceased died
was destroyed. The broken travois poles may be symbolic of the
destruction of the tipi, or the body may have been transported to the
place of burial by travois which may have been the last vestige of the
tipi to be destroyed.
Suhm (1962: 106), in her report of the White site, reported faunal
remains that may have been food offerings. In the examination of
unreported burials three other instances were noted where faunal
remains were with the body, and the Cogdell burial definitely had
food offerings. The Merrell site contained the remains of a bison
hump; the child burial at the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum
contained the remains of a rabbit. The McKaskle burial produced a
bowl containing possible remains of food. The Cogdell burial food offerings were represented by either Bison or Bos bones which had
been sawed by a steel saw and placed by the body.
There is an additional possible burial custom suggested by the
Cogdell burial. There were two sets of clothing and moccasins. One
set was on the body and the other folded and placed near the body.
Berlandier (1969: 96) states a warrior’s clothes were buried with him
when circumstances permitted. The clothing on the body was of plain,
every day type. Berlandier (1969: 50) reported that the Comanche
were poorly dressed except when going to war. This suggests that
special clothing was worn only on important occasions. The clothing
placed beside the body was highly ornamented with bead work. Thus.
it appears that the best and most treasured objects of clothing were
not regularly worn, but were reserved for the anticipated after life of
the deceased. Wallace and Hoebel (1952: 186-187) and Newcomb
(1961: 188) gave a detailed account of the belief in existence beyond
death in which the ideal life was anticipated. It would seem natural
that the best clothing would be reserved for this great event.
Wallace and Hoebel (1952: 214) state that a Comanche wife was
considered chattel. Berlandier (1969: 118) states that the Comanche
were polygamous and this provided the husband with more servants.
Women were bought and could be abandoned at any time. This implies that women were generally held in low esteem and served as a
labor force and as a source of children. However, Wallace and

52

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Hoebel (1952: 214) state that sometimes women were allowed in council meetings. Apparently some women were held in greater esteem
than reported by Berlandier. The Caprock burial in Garza County
(Conners, Allison and Runkles ms.) had an abundance of grave goods
and the Watson site (Ray and Jelks 1964) had more than average
burial offerings.

HISTORIC ABORIGINAL TRADE One of the least known activities
dealing with Historic Indians of the southern Plains concerns trade
goods or items of European derivation. One facet of this problem is:
who were the traders, and did all the various tribes and clans have
equal access to their goods? As far as can be determined at this date,
this problem can not be resolved, but some light can be shed on this
issue.
In an effort to learn as much as possible about where glass beads in
particular were coming from, T.N. Campbell of the University of
Texas at Austin was consulted. His thoughts disclosed three possible
sources of European goods. He suggested that there was no need to
have direct contact with traders. In other words, one group having a
vis-a-vis access to trade goods probablyhad contact with more inaccessible Indians. Inthis way groups of Indians in remote areas could
acquire trade goods by second and third hand. Newcomb (1961: 161)
states that the Quahadi band of Comanche occupied the Cogdell
burial area and were more isolated frorn the active trade areas of the
French and Spanish. Goods such as glass beads, brass wire, mirrors,
cloth, guns and other desirable goods could have filtered into the area
from people to the east and west. It was also suggested that European
goods were probably acquired through raids and by taking coveted
objects from corpses of victims, either aboriginal or European. The
Comanche, once they had established their domain on the southern
Plains after 1780, frequently raided as far south as northern Mexico
(Campbell and Field 1968: 129). Bolton (1914) in his comprehensive
work on the governorship of de Mezieres cites many instances of
Comanche raids as early as 1768 and as far east and southeast of
their regular territory as east Texas (Grand Cado) and Bahia del
Espiritu Santo, the Presidio of San Antonio, and neighboring places.
i~edro Vial (Loomis and Nasatir 1967) made several trips into the
southern Plains from late 18th century to early 19th century recording several interesting observations concerning the relationships of
the Comanche and the people of New Mexico. Vial stated that Spanish
colonists in New Mexico lacked many of the comforts of the times. Under such circumstances it is unlikely that glamour objects such as
beads and brass wire would be imported for trade to Indian groups.

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

53

Instead, goods normally brought into distant areas for every day use
or locally made items would more likely be trade material.
Vial’s reports offer clues as to how goods filtered down to the
Comanche. Trading fairs were held with some regularity in Taos and
were attended by Navahos, Cheyenne. Kiowa, Kiowa-Apache and
Comanche. In addition to Spaniards, English, French and American
traders were present at various times in th e western Red River area.
Undoubtedly there was ample opportunity for desirable goods to be
acquired through these sources. It is also likely that there was a
cultural interchange between groups. In such circumstances designs
in beaded leather could have passed from one group to another. Many
of the goods such as brass,beads, saddlery, silver, blankets, cloth,
mirrors and other objects could have been available.
Almaraz’s (1971} translation of the governorship of Salcedo from
1803 to 1813 reveals Comanche raids in the central Texas and San Antonio areas. Taylor and Hammons (1957} give good evidence (18171822} that the Comanche were actively raiding in southern settlements of Texas during Martinez’s governorship. While Spanish
trade with Indian groups diminished during the governorships of
Alvarez and Martinez, illicit trade was taking place. Acquisition of
European goods by raiding is a strong possibility if not an established
fact.
It is highly probable that the Comanche had opportunities to
acquire European goods from their aboriginal and European enemies
and from the Apache in particular. Wedel [1959: 74} writes that by
1739 the Apaches had been displaced by the Comanche in the area
northeast of Santa Fe. It is possible that some of the European goods
in the hands of the Comanche resulted from such conflicts since the
Apache were mortal enemies of the Comanche and their Wichita
allies. The treaty with the Wichitas in the 1740’s (Newcomb and
Field 1967: 241} consolidated the eastern front of the Comancheria
and the treaty with the Kiowa about 1790 (ibid.} provided security on
the northern front. These treaties are significant since they made
possible the consolidation of their territories and provided the opportunity for raids into eastern New Mexico and into the south against
the Apache.
This brings up the question as to where the Commanche bands
who had contact with European traders got the bulk of their trade
goods. The treaty with the Wichita increased the input of trade
goods. The French had established a rapport with the Wichita
earlier in the 18th century. Newcomb and Field (1967: 268] state that
Indians were given presents which included beads and blankets in
1761. In 1759, the French were trading guns and other items to the

54

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Wichita {ibid.: 264). Still later, Navarette sent Calahorra presents of
mirrors, clothing, hoes, beads, wire and cloth {ibid.: 271). During the
governorship of de Mezieres, from 1768 to 1780, gifts were given to
maintain peace on the frontier north of San Antonio. De Mezieres
(Bolton 1914) gives inventories of goods which included shirts, guns.
blankets, cloth, copper kettles, gun powder, balls, vermillion, glass
beads, thread, axes, adzes, knives, hawkbells, tobacco, mirrors,
wire and other goods. These peace offerings continued during the
entire governorship of de Mezieres. While these goods were
generally traded with Indian groups bordering the Edwards Plateau
and East Texas, illegal trade was also active during this time. Illegal
traders accepted deer skins, bear fat, and buffalo hides for their
wares {Bolton 1914}. It is of interest to note that, in the manifests
given by de Mezieres, the most common colors of beads were blue,
white, red and black; but blue and white dominated. Bolton further
reports that in September, 1778, de Mezieres set out with a small
escort with gifts to visit the Indians of the north.
Almaraz (1971: 12, 72, and 157) reported hostile Indians {Comanche) in the vicinity of San Antonio during the governorship of Salcedo
from 1808 to 1813. Salcedo requested reinforcement from
Nacogdoches for protection against the Comanches. It is interesting
to note that the raids generally lessened from mid-spring through
December, which probably coincided with the migration of bison.
Taylor and Hammons (1957) state that the raids were so numerous
that they became "old hat" and no longer merited special mentioning.
Padilla {Hatcher 1920: 53-56) reported on the Indians of the Province of Texas and listed the Comanche as the most numerous of the
hostile tribes. He states that up te 1811 the Comanche were not so
well armed (it is assumed he meant with firearms]. However, a
revolution had broken out in Mexico and the Comanche became emboldened and raided, taking great numbers of livestock and
prisoners.

still a lightly populated region and still predominantly an Indian country (Berlanclier 1969: 11. Berlandier (ibid.: 31} reported that in September, 1828, the arrival of Indians at frontier presidios was a special
occasion. It was reported that several hundred Comanches visited
Bexar for trading. It is further stated that even the most hostile Indians (Apache, Charticas, and Comanche) engaged in at least a little
trade. Nacogdoches was an active trade center and furs and hides
were bartered. The other Mexican presidios had neglected trade and

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

55

Berlandier stated that it was too late for them to compete. The Indians were particularly interested in knives, hardware, weapons,
ammunition, and spirits. Berlandier (1969: 120) states that the Comanche had been trading in Santa Fe, New Mexico, for over a century;
silver ornaments for personal adornment and horses are listed as
items of trade.
American traders were also competing for the Indian trade at this
time and were coming to the Indian encampments for horses taken
from the townspeople. In addition to the items acquired from
Nacogdoches, the American traders offered cloth and cinnabar.
The most direct trade with the Comanche of the Llano Estacado
was with the Comancheros. The most complete study of this relationship has been reported by Kenner (1969). By early in the 19th century,
trade had developed to the point that regular meeting places had been
established. One place frequently mentioned is the Quitaque Creek
area which lies but a few miles northeast of the Cogdell burial. Prior
to Kenner’s report, Haley (1935) published a brief paper on Comanchero trade. He mentions beads as a trade item (ibid.: 163~. Common
goods listed for barter are ammunition, lead, muskets, knives, calico,
whisky, flour and bread. Kenner (1969: 85) adds saddlery, metal
arrow points and blankets. Kenner (ibid.: 94) reports that captives of
the Comanche were ransomed by the Spanish. The ransom for a
young woman was "two striped blankets, ten yards of blue cotton
drilling, ten yards of cotton shirting, two handkerchiefs, four plugs of
tobacco, one bag of corn, and one knife." Kenner (1969: 178) gives an
inventory of goods taken in the year 1867 from a group of Mexicans
(Comancheros) who lacked a trade permit from the New Mexican
territorial government. The inventory includes corn meal, Mexican
hard bread, butcher knives, files, vermillion, shirts, flannel, vests,
iron hoops, ducking, calico, shelled corn, tea, sugar, flour, letter
paper,candy and percussion caps.
Lowell H. Harrison (1965) reported on the activities of three
Comancheros in the 1860’s in court action brought by Goodnight and
Sheek against the United States in an effort to recoup losses of cattle
and horses from depredations of the Comanche. It was alleged that
the Comancheros traded goods to the Comanche for stolen livestock.
In sworn testimony of Tafoya (previously a Comanchero), a
generalized list of trade goods is given which includes beads, flour,
baked bread, cloth and calico. The testimony of Julian Baca (ibid.: 89]
states that trade also took place with the Kiowa as well as the Comanche. This statement is of interest because all of the witnesses mention
the Quitaque area just off the Llano Estacado escarpment as one of
the principal trading centers and Harrison’s is the only account of

56

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Kiowas being in the vicinity of the Cogdell burial in the 1870’s.
Newcomb (1961: 195) states that the Comanche and Kiowa treaty was
concluded about 1790 and thereafter the Kiowa, Kiowa-Apache, and
Comanche shared trading territories and often raided together.
However, the normal range of the Kiowa and Kiowa-Apache was
generally in the northern part of the Texas Panhandle, and the
Quahadi band of the Comanche was south of the Red River, as shown
by Newcomb (1961: 161}.
From the foregoing discussion it can be demonstrated that while
the Comanche of the southern High Plains were remote from Spanish,
French, English, and American traders, they probably had access to
goods through second and third hand contacts as well as by raiding
and warring against other Indian groups. Comanchero trade was
generally of more mundane goods, but beads and other exotic
materials may have been occasional trade items. War parties and
raids probably provided a considerable volume of goods consisting of
glass beads and brass wire bracelets; in other words, goods that
could be easily transported by fast moving raiders on horseback.

CONCLUSIONS
It is difficult to account for the 150,000 beads in this burial in the
light of a dozen early travelers’ descriptions of the Comanches as
using few beads and little decoration on their clothing. Juan Antonio
Padilla in 1820 said the Comanches wore "only a breechclout," adding buffalo skins in cold weather (Padilla 1920: 54). In 1844, Josiah
Gregg observed, "Comanche dress consists of the usualleggins, moccasins, flap and blanket or robe." The only mention he made of beads
is that they were worn in the hair (1933: 432).
Early artists such as Sanchez y Tapia in 1828 [Berlandier 1969:
Plates 2 and 3) and Catlin in 1830 (1926: Figs. 165, 168-172) show only
necklace beads. Bollaert s sketch of 1844 (Berlandier 1969: Fig. 18)
shows a bag similar to the beaded ones of the Berlandier and Witte
Museum collections, but the drawing is too vague to be sure if it is
beaded. The Berlandier collection (which could date anywhere from
1828 to 1851) contains only three beaded articles -- the pouch mentioned above, a smaller pouch (Fig. 35) and a simple band on a
feathered bonnet (Fig 29). To judge from the photographs and
descriptions, the beads are primarily blue and white and over .3 cm.
in diameter, with the exception of the small beaded pouch which has
other colors as well and smaller beads.
There is a gap of about thirty years between the time of these
accounts and the start of the reservation period in 1870. After a con-

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

57

certed effort to locate early beaded items, it is the reluctant conclusion of the authors that nearly all of the preserved Comanche
materials in the United States date from 1870 on. These later articles
are so obviously influenced by other Plains tribes in their color and
design as to make identification nearly impossible unless there is
documented provenience. By this time also the bead size is almost
without exception in the extra small (.2 cm. or smaller) range.
The 41FL45 site appears to fall in the little known period of early
contact and trade when the Spanish traders from New Mexico,
French from New Orleans, and Americans from the Mississippi were
bringing in seed beads in increasing numbers, and contact between
the tribes brought about amalgamation of designs and innovations in
dress. For instance, it was not until after 1840 that the Comanche
began to wear shirts of any kind, according to research done by Mary
Jane Schneider (1969:8) in an interesting article on change and
development in Plains Indian clothing.
A number of questions have yet to be answered concerning bead
work of this 1840 to 1870 period.
1. Was a preference for blue and white beads limited to a few
specific tribes, or was it perhaps a universal preference during this
early period? Lewis and Clark found the same preference among the
Indians of the Columbia River area in 1805 (Shiner 1961: 209]. A site
on Berrian’s Island in th e Columbia, which dated from the middle
1700’s into the early 1800’s, yielded over 600 beads, of which about
75% were blue and the rest largely white (Osborne 1957: 98). The
Spanish in extensive trade with the Comanches, Lipans, and Tancahuas at San Antonio in 1808, distributed only blue and white beads
in equal proportions (Curtis 1955: 74). Traders at Bent’s Fort in the
1840’s observed that "white and blue beads in that order were
preferred by Cheyenne women," while red beads were not popular
(McNitt 1962: 37).
2. Was the acceptance and use of the "pony bead" as an embroidery bead among the Comanches accomplished gradually over a
period of time and, if so, can this gradual acceptance be used as a
means of comparative dating of sites? More work must be done before
this tentative theory can be substantiated. Materials from a number
of unpublished sites in the area would appear to bear out the dating
sequence, but these and other similar ones containing datable artifacts will have to be carefully analyzed before conclusions can be
drawn.

3. Why are there no eyewitness accounts of these early beaded
garments? Were they extremely rare or for some reason kept from
the view of outsiders? Historian T. R. Fehrenbach h as suggested (per-

58

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

sonal communication) that the Comanche were not particularly
hospitable or communicative toward early settlers and travelers
during this period, which might account for the lack of descriptions.
4. How accurately would the artifacts found in a Comanche grave
reflect the date of burial? There is some evidence that treasured articles were sometimes given at death to a friend or relative, despite
the tradition that a man’s most treasured possessions were buried
with him (Wallace and Hoebel 1952: 152). The chance of the presence
of such heirloom objects is certainly great enough to be taken into
consideration during analysis.
5. What was the source of these early "pony beads" and was there
more than one country making them? Were all-of the traders
acquiring them from the same source, or might it be possible to tell
Mexican from New Orleans traders’ goods? Arthur Woodward (1965:
9) says that some glass beads were manufactured in France and
Czechoslovakia in the early 19th century, It is also possible that glass
beads were being made in Mexico, perhaps in Puebla (King Harris
personal communication).
6. At what point in time did the Comanche begin to use the more
complicated geometric designs prevalent in the reservation period?
Only the simplest stripes, bars, and squares were used on what appear to be the earliest pieces. This corresponds with Lyford’s descriptions of the earliest pony bead period among the Sioux, which was
1800-1840 (1940: 66).
7. Are there documented early beaded garments of Comanche and
other Southern Plains tribes still in existence in museum collections
which might help to answer these questions? Richard Corm of the
Denver Art Museum has remarked on the similarity of these beaded
fragments to examples of historic Jicarilla Apache and Comanche
man’s shirts and leggings in that museum’s collection (personal communication, 1973).
An ever present problem dealing with Historic burials from this
area is "to which tribe did the deceased belong?" Probabilities will
be discussed, but it can not be resolved with any certainty.
About 1790 the Comanche, Kiowa, and Ki0wa-Apache signed a
treaty (Newcomb 1961: 195) and the three groups shared hunting
grourlds in the northern Llano Estacado. They also raided together.
7Wallace s map (1960) showing the known historic camps of the three
people indicates that after 1840 the Kiowa and Kiowa-Apache were
more active in the area north of the Prairie Dog Fork of the Red River.
If the burial dates between 1850 and 1860, we can narrow the
possibilities considerably. Whiting s report of 1849 (Bender 1927: 130)
recommended placing troops on the Red River to hold in check the

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

59

northern Comanche. No mention is made of the Kiowa or KiowaApache. In Kenner’s comprehensive study of Comanchero trade
{1969}, mention is made of a relationship between New Mexican
traders and Comanche in the vicinity of the burial. Harrison’s report
(1965} of Goodnight’s and Sheek’s attempt to collect damages resulting from cattle and horse thefts by Comanche cites the testimony of
three ex-Comancheros. In each instance, their activities were in the
Quitaque area and principally with the Comanche. Wallace (1964: 23)
states that in 1865 the Quahadi band of Comanches occupied an area
along the headwaters of the Colorado, Brazos, and Red Rivers. He
also states that the Kiowas had left the reservation due to unrest
resulting from poor quality goods they were receiving from the
federal government. At this time, they joined the Comanche and were
raiding in the vicinity of Waco. Ewers (in Berlandier 1969: 135) re-

ports in a footnote that Indian agent Fitzpatrick stated that the
Kiowa-Apache in 1850 had for many years lived with the Kiowas and
Comanches. Berlandier (1969: 135) places the Kiowa-Apache on the
Red River by 1830. It is evident that the Kiowa and Kiowa-Apache often joined in raids on settlements. However, the Cogdell burial individual did not appear to have died from wounds since no evidence of
violence was noted, It is possible that a lethal projectile missed all the
bones, but it is unlikely since the rifles of this period were of large
caliber. A pure lead projectile mushrooms quite rapidly and it would
be fortuitous if it missed all the bones. It can be assumed that the
deceased was in his own environment. The burial offerings suggest a
full ceremony without duress.
No positive identification can be made from burial goods. It was
hoped that beaded designs on leather clothing would be of assistance,
but such articles for the estimated time of death have not survived in
any appreciable number. Jack Hughes of West Texas State University
and Frank Weir, archeologist for the Texas Highway Department
(persona] communication) feel that the alternate banding of blue and
white beads suggests a northern Plains influence. On the other hand,
illustrations by Berlandier and collections of Comanche beaded objects in the Witte Museum in San Antonio are similar to Cogdell burial
material.
The strongest possibility is that the Cogdell burial represents a
Comanche interred between 1850 and 1860.

60

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
In any endeavor, archeological or otherwise, a great many people make
contributions -- some greater than others. The authors are deeply appreciative of these people.
We gratefully acknowledge the cooperation of Bruce McFal]. discoverer
of the burial, whose keen observations were most helpful. L. D. Britton.
Paul and O.R. Mclntosh. Don and Dan Daniel. Larry ]ones and Dallas
Ramsey, all of Floydada, Texas: and Enrico Pizzini (foreign exchange
student at Floydada High School of Rome. Italy} were patient screeners.
Dr. William 1. Mayer-Oakes of Texas Tech University responded to a call
for help by sending a crew headed by Eduardo Mimiago and lane Gould,
who mapped the burial site.
Identification and advice on skins from which various items were made
was done by Ernest E. Roney, Jr., assistant to the director of the San Antonio Zoological Society. Assistance on bead design, sources, and dating
was graciously received from Richard Corm, curator in the Native Arts
Department, The Denver Arts Musuem; John C. Ewers, Senior Ethnologist,
Smithsonian Institution; and R. King Harris of Dallas, Texas.
Correspondence with Dr. Robert E. Bell Oklahoma University: Dr, T. N.
Campbell and Dr. Ernest Lundelius, The University of Texas at Austin: Dr.
]ames A. Hanson, The Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum at Canyon
Texas: and Dr. Charles Hanson, The Museum of the Fur Trade, Chadron,
Nebraska, were helpful in identifying and dating cultural material and
trading activities. ]. C Sticksel and E. W. Tillyer of the American Optical
Company and Earl F. Adams of Bausch and Lomb were helpful in dating an
optical lens. D. W. Fisher of the Scovfl Hoe Company gave helpful details of
eye hoe construction.
Jim Servatius; Mrs. R. R. Ehresman of Plainview. Texas: Mr. Fairy McWilliams of Silverton, Texas; and Mrs. Bobby McWilliams of Quitaque,
TeXas shared information on material they recovered from the site.
Dr. Mary Elizabeth King of Texas Tech Museum and Billy R. Harrison of
the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum graciously made available
Historic burial materials for study and analysis. Dr. Joe Ben Wheat.
University of Colorado Museum. Boulder. Colorado, identified and dated
blankets associated with the burial.
Two people are due special recognition. D. M. and ]oni Dell Cogdell, on
whose land the burial was discovered recognized the cultural potential of
the burial. Their cooperation and interest made this report possible.
Last and certainly not least, Dorothy Word and Henry Fox were understanding and sympathetic and patiently endured hours of neglect: to
them is due the deep appreciation of the authors.

COCDELL BURIAL SITE

61

REFERENCES CITED

Almaraz, Felix C., Jr.
1971 Tragic Cavalier, Governor Manuel Salcedo of Texas. University of
Texas Press.
Anderson, Adrienne
1968 The Archaeology of Mass-produced Footware. Historical Archaeology, Vol. II, pp. 56-65.
Bender, A. B.
1927- Opening Routes Across West Texas, 1848-1850. Southwestern Quar28 terly. Vol. XXXVII. No. 2, pp. 116-135.
Bennett, R. A.
1968 Dawson County Historical Burial. Transactions of the Fourth
Regional Archeological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and
Western Texas, p. 78.
Berlandier, Jean Louis
1969 The Indians of Texas in 1830. Edited by John C. Ewers. Smithsonian
Institution Press.
BoRon, Herbert E.
1914 Anthanase de Mezieres and the Louisiana-Texas Frontier, 1768-1780.
(2 Vols.). Cleveland.
Campbell. T. N. and W. T. Field
1968 Identification of Comanche Raiding Trails in the Trans-Pecos, Texas.
West Texas Historical Association Year Book.
Catlin, George
1926 North American Indians. Vol. II. Edinburg
Corm, Richard G.
1972 The Pony Bead Period: A Cultural Problem of Western North
America. The Society for Historical Archaeology Newsletter, Vol. 5,
No. 4, pp. 7-13.
Conners, Mrs. R. S., Mr. and Mrs. Rex Allison, and Frank A. Runkles
ms. The Caprock Site: A Historic Indian Burial in Garza County, Texas.
Unpublished Manuscript.
Curtis. Albert
1955 Fabulous San Antonio. Naylor, San Antonio.
Duffield. Lathel F. and Edward B. Jelks
1961 The Pearson Site: A Historic Indian Site in Iron Bridge Reservoir,
Rains County, Texas. The University of Texas. Department of Anthropology, Archeology Series, No. 4.
Ewers, John C.
1957 Hair Pipes in Plains Indian Adornment. Bureau of American
Ethnology Bulletin 164, pp. 29-85.
Ford, Alice (Compiler and Editor)
1951 Audubon’s Animals. The Quadrupeds of North America. New York.
Gregg, Josiah
1933 Commerce of the Prairies. Southwestern Press.
Haley, J. Evetts
1935 The Comanchero Trade. Southwestern Historical Quarterly, Vol.
XXXVII, No. 3, pp. 157-176.

62

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Harris, R. King and Inus Marie Harris
1967 Trade Beads, Projectile Points, and Knives. A Pilot Study of Wichita
Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory. Assembled by Robert E. Bell,
Edward B. ]elks, and W. W. Newcomb. National Science Foundation
Report, pp. 129-162.
Harrison, Lowell H.
1965 Three Comancheros and a Trader. Panhandle-Plains Historical
Review, Vol. XXXIII, pp.73-93.
Hester, Thomas Roy
1968 Notes on Some Historic Indian Artifacts Found near Ozona, Texas.
Newsletter, Midland Archeological Society; June, 1968, pp. 2-4.
Hester, Thomas R. and Fred H. Stross
1973a H. Ten Kate’s Account of the Burial of a Penateka Comanche at Fort
Sill, Oklahoma, 1883. Southwestern Lore, Vol. 39, No. 1, pp. 9-10.
Hester. T. R. and F. H. Stross (editors)
1973b Ethnographic Information on the Comanches Gathered from the
Mouth of a Trapper Who Was Th eir Prisoner _for Thirteen Years (by
Leon de Cessac). Archaeological Research Facility, University of
California. Berkeley.
Kenner, Charles L.
1969 A History of New Mexican-Plains Indian Relations. University of
Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Livingston. Phil
n.d. Tex Tan’s Cavalcade of American Saddles. Tex Tan Western
Leather Co.. Yoakum Texas.
Loomis. Noel M. and Abraham P. Nasatir
1967 Pedra Vial and the Roads to Santa Fe. University of Oklahoma Press.
Norman.
Lowie, Robert H.
1963 Indians of the Plains. Natural History Press. Garden City, N. Y.
Lyford, Carrie A.
1940 Quill and Beadwork of the Western Sioux. U. S, Office of Indian Affairs.
Mason, Otis T,
1893 Nerth American Bows. Arrows. and Quivers. Annual Report of the
Smithsonian Institution, pp. 613-680.
McNitt, Frank
1962 Indian Traders. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman, Okla.
Newcomb. W. W.
1955 An Historic Burial from Yellowhouse Canyon, Lubbock County.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 26, pp, 155-189.
1961 The Indians of Texas from Prehistoric to Modern Times. University
of Texas Press, Austin.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr. and William T. Field
1967 An Ethnohistoric Investigation of the Wichita Indian Archeology and
Ethnohistory. A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and
Ethnohistory. Assembled by Robert E. Bell, Edward B. Jelks and
W. W. Newcomb. National Science Foundation Report, pp. 240-331.
Orchard. William C.
1929 Beads and Beadwork of the American Indians. Museum of the
American Indian, Heye Foundation.

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

63

Osborne, Douglas
1957 Excavations in the McNary Reservoir near Unatilla, Oregon. River
Basins Surveys Papers, No. 8. Bureau of American Ethnology
Bulletin, No. 166.
Padilla, Juan Antonio
1920 Texas in 1820. Translated by Mattie Austin Hatcher. Southwestern
Historical Quarterly, Vol. No. XXIII, pp. 47-68.
Parsons, Mark L.
1967 Archeological Investigations in Crosby and Dickens Counties, Texas,
During the Winter, 1966-1967. State Building Commission Archeological Program Report, No. 7.
Ray, Cyrus N. and Edward B. lelks
1964 The W. H. Watson Site: A Historic Indian Burial in Fisher County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 35, pp. 127141.
Schneider, Mary Jane
1968 Plains Indian Clothing: Stylistic Persistence and Change. Bulletin of
the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. XVII, pp. 1-55.
Shiner, Joel L.
1961 McNary Reservoir: A Study in Plateau Archeology. River Basin Survey Papers, No. 23. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin. No. 179,
pp. 149-266.
Simm, Herbert S. and Donald F. Hoffmeister
1955 Mammals. Western Publishing Company.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1962 The White Site: An Historial Burial in Yoakum County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 32, pp. 85-119.
Taylor, Virginia H. and Juanita Hammons
1957 The Letters of Antonio Martinez. Last Spanish Governor of Texas
1817-1822. Texas State Library, Austin.
Wallace, Ernest
1960 Map of the Habitat and Range of the Kiowa and Comanche Indians
1835~1867. Texas Technological College, Lubbock.
1964 Ronald S. Mackenzie on the Texas Frontier. West Texas Museum
Association, Lubbock.
Wallace, Ernest and E. Adamson Hoebel
1952 The Comanches, Lords of the South Plains. University of Oklahoma
Press, Norman.
Wedel, Waldo R.
1959 An Introduction to Kansas Archeology. Bureau of American
Ethnology Bulletin, No. 174, Washington.
Woodall, J. Ned
1967 Miscellaneous European Trade Goods. A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory. Assembled by Robert E. Bell, Edward B. Jelks, and W. W. Newcomb. National Science Foundation
Report: pp. 180-183.
Woodward, Arthur
1965 Indian Trade Goods. Oregon Archaeological Society Publication No.
2.
Floydada, Texas
San Antonio, Texas

SKELETAL MATERIAL FROM THE COGDELL BURIAL
IN FLOYD COUNTY, TEXAS
GLEN H. DORAN AND ROBERT M. MALINA

The following text describes the skeletal material from 41FL45, the
Cogdell burial site.
MATERIAL

The skeleton was in excellent condition. A few elements of the hand
and feet were missing. There also was slight rodent damage,
especially to the orbits and nasal aperture. Greenish stains were
found on the left wrist, distal end of the left humerus, several ribs and
the left side of the skull. Large amounts of preserved flesh resulted in
the articulation of major portions of the skeleton including the
following:
I. Cranium and mandible.
If. Right scapula, clavicle, sternum, third through ninth
thoracic vertebrae, right humerus, radius, ulna, lunate,
triquetral, pisiform, first through seventh right ribs, and
seventh and eighth left ribs.
III. Left radius, ulna, pisiform, lunate, navicular, greater
multangular, and first metacarpal.
IV. Tenth through twelfth thoracic vertebrae, eleventh and
twelfth right ribs, right innominate and sacrum.
V. Left innominate, femur, patella, tibia, fibula, and all the
bones of the left foot.
VI. Right patella, tibia, and fibula.
The rest of the skeleton except a few hand and foot bones are present.
Measurements (Table 1] of the skeleton were taken following standard anthropometric techniques (Bass 1971}. The skeleton will be
displayed in the Floyd County Historical Museum and for this reason
complete disarticulation was not possible. Several estimates are included when accurate bone measurements were not possible.* Other
measurements were not possible due to the articulated condition of
the skeleton.
The skeleton is that of a male exhibiting the classic metric and nonmetric male characteristics (conformation of pelvis, mastoids, chin,
etc.). There is occasional minor lipping of the vertebrae and based
upon the maturational stages of the faces of the left and right os

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

66

TABLE I

(Measurements in millimeters)
176

Maximum length (glabella-occiput)

135

Maximum breadth of cranium

132

Basion-bregma height

88-90*

Minimum frontal breadth

142"

Bizygamatic breadth

124

Bicondylar breadth

111

Bigonial breadth

115

Total facial height

74

Upper facial height

56*

Nasal height

30*

Nasal breadth

40*

Orbital height (left)

45*

Orbital breadth (left)

322

Humerus (left)

238

Radius (left)

261

Ulna (left)

449

Femur [right)

357

Fibula [right)
*Approximation, accurate within 5 mm.

pelvis (pelvic casts) age was estimated to be between 35 and 45 years.
Based on regression coefficients for white males (Trotten and Gleser
1958) with the 0,06 cm, correction for individuals over 30years of age,
the stature was estimated to be between 168 and 173 cm.

DENTITION
The incisors show shoveling although this is obscured by the extreme dental attrition (dentine exposed over the major portion of the
incisors). Attrition is marked in the check teeth. All but the second
and third molars exhibit dentine exposure. More precise discussion
of the degree of dental attrition was not possible due to the articulation of the mandible and the cranium. The right canines are
both pushed labially, resulting in malocclusion.

COGDELL SKELETAL MATERIALS

67

PATHOLOGY
The skeleton appears free from pathology except for a slight
buildup and honeycombing of tissue on the proximal end of the right
fifth metacarpal, possibly the result of fracture or infection.

REFERENCES CITED
Bass, William M.
1971 Human Osteology: A Laboratory and Field Manual of the Human
Skeleton. Missouri Archaeological Society. Columbia, Missouri
Trotter, M. and G. C. Gleser
1958 A revaluation of the Estimation of Stature Based on Measurements of
Stature Taken During Life and of Long Bones after Death. American
Journal of Physical Anthropology, n. s., 16 (1): 79-123.
Texas Department of Highways and Transportation
The University of Texas at Austin

MAGNETIC DELINEATION OF INDIVIDUAL
SHIPWRECK SITES:
A NEW CONTROL TECHNIQUE
CARL J. CLAUSEN AND J. BARTO ARNOLD

III

ABSTRACT
This report describes an efficient though low-cost means of controlling a
magnetic survey to delineate the localized distortions created in the earth’s
magnetic field by the ferrous components of a Colonial period shipwreck
site. The results of the application of this survey technique to a small mid16th-century Spanish shipwreck located off the Texas coast in the western
Gulf of Mexico are presented in computer-drawn magnetic contour map
form and in a three-dimensional perspective rendition.
Following the magnetic survey the wreck site, which lay entirely hidden
below unconsolidated bottom sediments near shore, was completely excavated utilizing underwater archeological techniques. The preliminary
results of this excavation -- in terms of the identification, mass and
distribution of the artifactual remains creating the localized distortions
recorded during the survey and their relationsihp to the rest of the artifact
assemblage at this site -- are discussed. In areas where shipwreck
remains lie below sediments or are otherwise concealed from visual detection. the guidance provided by these in-site surveys can be of inestimable
value to the archeologist in conducting efficient underwater excavations.
Finally, the design of the cultural resource surveys the United States
government currently requires of private companies leasing outer continental shelf lands for oil and gas exploration is criticized in light of the
results of this survey. Recommendations are made for increasing the effectiveness of these outer continental shelf surveys in terms of discovering
wreck sites of these small, though culturally quite significant ships typical
of nawgation in the Western Hemisphere during the periods of exploration,
colonization and early development.

INTRODUCTION
Experience has proven that the magnetometer, an electronic instrument capable of remote detection and measurement of localized
distortions in the earth’s magnetic field caused by ferrous artifacts, is
the single most useful tool so far utilized for locating historical period
shipwreck sites. The customary magnetometer survey, in a search
mode with relatively widely spaced tracks -- whether employed in
the search for sunken ships by persons interested in the recovery of
valuables (Potter 1972: 31-33; Meylach 1971: 227-228) or by those with
an interest in the recovery of historical objects (Link 1959: 71-75), or
more recently, for scientific investigation of shipwrecks as ar-

7O

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

cheological targets (Breiner and MacNaughton 1965; Clausen 1966;
Hall 1966; Green, Hall and Katzev 1967; Green 1970; Hays and Herrin
1970; Arnold 1974; Lenihan 1974; and Arnold and Clausen 1975) -- is
designed simply to locate sites. However, the contribution of the
magnetometer in obtaining data useful to the archeologist need not
end there. A survey with closely spaced parallel tracks confined to
the general locale of an already discovered site, referred to in this
report as an "in-site delineation survey", can provide a detailed
preview of the site in the form of a magnetic contour map before excavation commences. In areas where shipwreck remains lie below
sediments or otherwise are concealed from visual detection, the
guidance provided by these in-site surveys can be of inestimable
value to the archologist in conducting excavations at the site (Clausen
1966).
As always, in magnetic surveying and in archeology generally, the
key to the value of the data and their full exploitation is the careful
control of their acquisition. Radio and radar-based electronic
positioning systems now exist which admirably fulfill the control
requirements of both search mode and in-site delineation mode
magnetic surveys (Arnold and Clausen 1975). These sophisticated
systems are expensive but are available for use through lease or
lease-purchase agreements.
A survey set up with optical surveying instruments and controlled
visually and with the assistance of radio communications requires
more input in man-hours, but costs far less. The subject of this report
is a recently developed, simply executed, and inexpensive method for
controlling the closely spaced tracks necessary for the production of
a detailed contour map of the magnetic phenomena created by a shipwreck site situated close to a shoreline. Most important, accuracy is
not sacrificed if care and judgment are exercised both in acquiring
the data and in selecting sites to be surveyed in this manner.
We successfully utilized the method described in this report during
the summer of 1972 for the in-site delineation of two of the three
Spanish ships of the flora of 1554 wrecked in the Gulf of Mexico off
Padre Island in April of that year. The wrecks -- designated sites 41
KN 10(UW) and 41 WY 3(UW) -- are located 600-700 m offshore in
water depths ranging from 5 to 7 m. The total area covered by these
two in-site delineation surveys was 55,000 m2 and 80,000 m2 respectively. The report also will reveal new means of treatment and
utilization of these data and will comment upon both the results and
their implication in the effective design of surveys to locate similar
sites.

MAGNETOMETER SURVEY

71

SURVEY TECHNIQUE
The survey is set up and run in essentially the following manner. A
base line is established, more or less parallel to the shore, alon~
which two sets of evently spaced, paired ranges are erected (Fig. I).
The first set, which is designated by letters, is established at right
angles to the base line directly opposite the wreck site extending in
both directions slightly beyond the width of the site. Further up the
base line, the second set of ranges, designated by numbers, is
established at an appropriate angle to the base line to guide the survey vessel obliquely over the site toward shore. As is typical of ranges
in maritime use, the front member of the pair is shorter than the rear
member so that both are visible from the water and can be lined up to
maintain a true course. The survey tracks controlled by the second
set of ranges mentioned above were spaced at 5-m intervals and run
at a 45° angle both to the base line, and in this instance, to the shore.
The letter ranges were spaced at 15 m for the wreck covering the
smaller area and at 30 m for the largest site.
During the survey, the helmsman of the research vessel towing the
sensor of the magnetometer simply keeps the track ranges visually
aligned as he guides the vessel across the survey area toward the
shore. During the traverse of the site along each of the numbered
tracks, an observer equipped with binoculars stationed at a
designated point near the magnetometer operator carefully watches
the letter ranges on shore. As each pair of letter ranges comes into
alignment the observer notifies the operator who indexes with an appropriately lettered event mark the chart recording of the
magnetometer data being acquired. If desired, and if the sea state is
anything other than calm, we recommend that the shore party set up
a transit bet~veen the track ranges at the points designated "x" in
Figure i, and observe the course of the vessel as it approaches them.
Using this instrument with the aid of two-way radio, the helmsman
can be both checked for accuracy and given assistance in guiding the
vessel along the track.
Because of the nature of the control system, a helmsman usually
can maintain a course more accurately while conning a vessel toward
the ranges. For this reason, but also because it was quickly
discovered that considerable "noise" (up to seven gammas} was introduced in the magnetic record when running a reciprocal track
seaward against the wave and swell action, all runs for data were
made from southeast to northwest toward shore. The noise observed
was apparently the result of several factors. In the area in which the
surveys were undertaken, the coast trends generally north and
south, and in the summer the predominant waves and swells ap-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

72

x

I

x

i--

2

I’-

3
4
x

5
x

b

xi

7

x

I

A

D

¯

o_
F

°

¯

G

¯

¯

!

.

PAIR OF: RANGE MARKERS

c)

TRANSIT STATION FOR SHORE
ASSISTED COURSE GUIDANCE
VIA RADIO
SURVEY VESSEL TRACK

MAGNETOMETER SURVEY

73

proach from the southeast. Taking these seas almost "bow on" while
heading away from the ranges introduced greater inconsistencies in
the velocity of the vessel along the track and appreciably increased
pitching, yawing and rolling of the vessel. These motions had an adverse effect particularly on the mechanical pens of the strip chart
recorder used with the magnetometer and very possibly on the
magnetometer. The sensor of that instrument "porpoised" somewhat
at the end of the tow cable, alternately approaching the mineral
sands of the bottom as the vessel was slowed by a wave and then
rising toward the slight field generated at the air/water interface.
Acquiring all the magnetic data on courses run on the same heading
also seemed to minimize unwanted local magnetic variation attributable to geological sources. The turn-around time {i.e., the time
between the completion of a successful run and the return of the
vessel to a point outside the seaward boundary of the survey area, in
a position and on a course to begin a new run} can also be utilized by
the shore party in moving to and setting up the survey instrument on
the next station.
It is, of course, the association of the magnetometer readings obtained in the above surveys with the coordinates of a grid system
which makes possible the production of the contour map of the
magnetic distortions created by the wreck. In reducing the magnetic
data from the strip chart record in preparation for contouring, one
grid axis is provided by the numbered vessel tracks. The lettered
event marks along each track provide the second axis. Along this
second axis the spacing of the data sample extracted for contouring
should be reduced by interpolation of the distance between event
marks. In the two surveys described in this report, this distance -- 15
m in one instance and 30 m in the other -- was divided into units
closely approximating, at that angle of interception, the 5-m spacing
of the numbered tracks.
It should be noted that the matrix produced by this survey system is
not a right-angle grid forming squares or rectangles, but a grid
forming parallelograms. This factor creates no difficulty for the investigator confined to manually contouring a site, but if the data are
to be handled by a computer, the matrix must be corrected to a rightangle grid. Also, all positioning information acquired in these surveys
relates to a station within the vessel and not to the sensor of the
magnetometer which is the point from which the magnetic data are
being collected. In our surveys the difference between these two points was approximately 50 m. This delay must be corrected for in the
data prepared for entry into the computer, or the position of the
wreck in reference to the survey points along the shore will be

74

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

displaced by the same distance. Computer programs already exist
which will take these data and plot both two-dimensional (Fig. 2) and,
for interpretive purposes, three-dimensional perspective renditions
(Fig. 3).
An additional dimension can be added to the survey by running a
high-resolution, recording fathometer concomitantly with the
magnetometer during the traverses of the site and indexing its chart
record in the same manner events are recorded on the magnetometer
strip chart. These data may be used to produce a bathymetric map of
the bottom in the area of the site.
Subsequent to the surveys described above, the first and smaller
site surveyed
41 KN IO(UW) located at Universal Transverse Mercator grid coordinates 669, 518mE and 947,480mN, Zone 14 -- was
completely excavated by the Underwater Archeological Research
Section of the Texas Antiquities Committee during the summers of
1972 and 1973. On the basis of both archeological and archival
evidence, this wreck now is believed to represent the remains of the
vessel San Esteban, a nao, or possibly a Castillian rigged carabela of
probably 150-250 tons, a vessel typical of the early periods of exploration and colonization in the Western Hemisphere. With the exception of the large quantities of rock ballast carried by this ship, all

and crew were recovered -- in all, a total of almost 12,000 kilos of encrusted metal and other material.
The surviving artifactual materials and the rock ballast at this site
had migrated downward through the sediment and lay scattered atop
a dense, level substratum of gray Pleistocene Age clay. The loose unconsolidated sediments overlying this clay in the immediate area of
the wreck were approximately 1.5 m deep and consisted primarily of
sand containing scattered lenses of soft silts and shell "hashes."
Since the greatest elevation of any of the remains of the wreck was

vocated {Peterson 1965: 26, 41, 42, 44, and Plates 2-4).
Great precision could be achieved in guiding the excavations by
utilizing two surveying stations on the base line ashore and simple

MAGNETOMETER SURVEY

\

LJ

75

76

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

trigonometry, in conjunction with the magnetic contour map. In fact,
on the first day of excavations during the 1972 field season, the
project team was able
within minutes -- to locate and identify the
first target selected for examination. This was a somewhat isolated
anomaly of approximately 30 gammas (Fig. 2,a) and identified as a
large, mid-16th-century, forged4ron ship’s anchor.
In addition, the same two stations on the survey line can be utilized
as base points for establishing the provenience of artifacts and
features encountered during excavation of the site. A web of subbase points, consisting of 0.7-m lengths of serially numbered,
aluminum rods driven securely into the basement clay, was
established across the site as excavations progressed. The location of
the sub-base points in this network was accurately determined,
initially by standard surveying techniques (i.e., triangulation by
theodolite sightings from the survey stations to special range rods extending vertically through the air/water interface from the sub-base
point on the bottom) and by trilateration underwater, using metric
tapes, from two or more already established points. The locations of
all artifacts and features encountered in the wreck site were
established by trilateration from two, preferably more, of these subbase points. The position of the features was recorded both on the
master site plan and in the requisite field notes. A report detailing the
results of t~he archeological investigations carried out at this site,
believed to be the earliest verified shipwreck yet found in the
Western Hemisphere, and the analysis of the concomitant archival
research dealing with the historical background of the 1554 fleet, is
currently under preparation and is ......... to be ready for
publication sometime in 1976.

DISCUSSION
Virtually complete excavation and removal of all artifactual
material associated with the wreck at site 41 KN 10(UW) followed the
in-site delineation survey described above. The excavations per-

this site.
All intensive distortions, up to 125 gammas, revealed by the
magnetic survey, proved to represent concentrations of out-of-se trice

MAGNETOMETER SURVEY

77

78

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and/or unserviceable, forged-iron ships’ anchors and armament, in
various combinations {Fig. 2, c and d). These artifacts had been
stored in the top few decimeters of the rock ballast in the hold of the
vessel with their long axis apparently laid parallel with the keel. Less
intense distortions, on the order of 15-35 gammas, were found in this
wreck to be created by these same categories of artifacts but usually
singly as in the case of Fig. 2, a or in pairs (Fig. 2, e). Distortions of 1015 gammas were created by concentrations of iron ship’s fastenings
such as spikes, throughbolts, or small fittings such as deadeye or
main brace frames and short lengths of brace chain, barrel hoops or
other small iron artifacts. Flattened or gently rounded plateaus such
as that existing along the southwest edge of the wreck (Fig. 2, b) were
the result of a more or less even scattering of these same types of
smaller iron artifacts in densities of approximately 0.34 to 1.5 artifacts per m2 interspersed, in some instances, with scattered ballast
stone in densities of 5 to 11 stones per m2 (Clausen ms.}.
The results of the survey were not faultless, however. An apparently spurious anomaly of approximately 25 gammas located just
east of the anomaly {Fig. 2, a) created by the intact anchor at the
northwest end of the wreck, did not directly correspond to an artifact
or concentration of artifacts. So little is understood regarding the
nature of the magnetic signatures created by multicomponent forgediron anchors and cannon of the type found in these early sites, that
we cannot dismiss the possibility that this anomaly was a bona fide
magnetic phenomenon related to a nearby artifact. The image may
also have been the result of a slight course deviation on the part of the
survey vessel which went unnoticed. Another anomaly of some 30
gammas, corresponding to a second large anchor found seaward and
isolated from the main body of the wreck, was displaced some 20 m to
the northwest on the survey map, due to an error on the part of the observer in identifying a letter range.
From the survey and excavation of this relatively small, mid-16thcentury vessel and others of later centuries with which the senior
author has been involved both in Florida (Clausen 1965, 1966) and
elsewhere, we find that the typical magnetic signature of a wreck of a
Colonial or later sailing vessel of wooden or composite construction
will consist of a central area of magnetic distortion characterized by
a number of intense and generally localized anomalies surrounded
and, depending upon the depth and dispersion of the wreck in some
instances, interspersed by scattered smaller magnetic disturbances.
In the typical pre-1850s shipwreck, especially those earlier than the
19th century, the more massive distortions, for the most part, will
represent individual cannon and anchors or groups of these artifacts.

MAGNETOMETER SURVEY

79

In later vessels of this period, iron winches, anchor chain, iron
ballast, and the larger elements of the ship’s construction (such as
iron knees, breast hooks, steering gear, and heaw elements of the
rigging, including cranse irons and parrels), as well as surviving
industrial cargo (e.g., machinery), will contribute to, or in some cases
replace, armament in these intense distortions. Throughout the entire
period, the less intense distortions will represent both concentrations
and scatterings of smaller iron artifacts such as ship’s fastenings,
spikes and throughbolts, and more minor elements of the ship’s gear
and rigging.
The final plan of the distribution of the artifacts recovered in the
excavation of the site was unfinished at the time this report was
prepared. However, a comparison of the field plan prepared during
excavation of the site with the two-dimensional magnetic map
provided by the in-site delineation survey represented by Figure 2,
suggests that fewer than 10 of the 1,500+ individual artifacts
recovered were found outside the 5-gamma magnetic contour line encompassing the main and satellite parts of the site. Furthermore, with
the single exception of one large ceramic fragment, an olive jar sherd
found a dozen or so meters north of the main part of the wreck, the
remainder of the few artifacts found outside the 5-gamma contour
were all located within a few meters of this zone, which suggests that
if more accurate data could have been acquired, permitting contouring at one- or two-gamma intervals, many of these artifacts might
have been encompassed within the area of magnetic disturbance.
The senior author suggested in an earlier publication that the
correlation between the distribution of the ferrous components of a
Colonial period vessel lost under these conditions and the remainder
of the artifact assemblage at the site would prove to be very close
(Clausen 1966: 79-80). However, we do not believe that this relationship is normally as close as the results of the preliminary analysis of
the excavation of this mid-16th-century site suggest. Our reservations
are based chiefly on two points. First, the remains of colonies of the
benthic organisms Ostrea equestris and Crassostrea virginica, as
well as other species of bivalves and gastropods, were discovered
adhering to the upper two-thirds of the large conglomerates raised
from the site, unassailable evidence that the depth of the unconsolidated sediment in the area of the wreck has varied markedly.
At least once in the past the conglomerates were largely or perhaps
entirely exposed long enough to permit these organisms to flourish
(I. S. Holland and N. I. Maciolek, the University of Texas Marine
Science Institute at Port Aransas, personal communication, 1973}.
Second, during excavation of the site, depressions which appeared to

80

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

be the result of scouring rather than compression, were noted in the
dense gray clay on which the artifacts rested. These depressions
were particularly noticeable, reaching a depth of 10-20 cm about the
contact points, the flukes and rings, of the large anchors.
The evidence of variable sediment depth and scouring suggests that
during hurricanes, and perhaps other intense storms, greatly accelerated alongshore transport of sediments occurs off Padre Island.
Once, during a hurricane, the senior author, using scuba, dived in the
surf zone near a wreck lost in 1715 off the geologically similar Florida
East Coast Barrier Island system to observe the effects of the storm on
bottom sediments. While observations certainly were difficult in such
a situation, it was noted that the alongshore transport of sediment
was remarkably accelerated. So much sand and shell was in motion
along the bottom, that it was impossible to determine where solid bottom started. Approaching the bottom during the storm was analogous
to swimming in the slurry created in the pipeline of a giant dredge.
Under similar conditions at this 1554 wreck site it is difficult to
believe that isolated ceramic and glass sherds with specific gravities
not greatly unlike shells and shell fragments would not have been
swept away, particularly in this area where the basement clay is
level, almost featureless, and slick, and hence offers little impediment
to tumbling or sliding materials. Secondly, the position of more than
850 of the artifacts recovered at this site was permanently fixed,
through encasement in conglomerates weighing approximately I001,000 kg. These large conglomerates iypicallyform about the iron anchors, cannon, and larger fastenings at a site as the corrosion
products from these artifacts migrate out and downward through the
enveloping sediment and adjacent wreck remains. This process traps
sand, shell, ballast stone, and artifacts alike in a cementlike,
irregularly shaped mass with the parent artifact at the core. At
present, our knowledge of how rapidly this envelopment process occurs is vague. However, current estimates by experts in the field of
preservation of artifactual remains recovered from shipwreck sites
indicate that iron and steel artifacts begin to react rapidly and that
most if not all of the formation of these conglomerates probably takes
place within 10 to 20 years of the introduction of the items to the environment (Don Hamilton, Antiquities Conservation Laboratory, the
University of Texas at Austin personal communication, 1975). For
example, the steel axles of a child’s plastic toy automobile recovered
in 1967 from near a more than 250-year-old ship in the Atlantic off
Florida were completely overlain with an encrustation composed of
sand, shell, and the corrosion products of the steel which was identical in make-up and even color to that encasing the iron artifacts

MAGNETOMETER SURVEY

81

from the nearby wreck.
It is significant that with the exception of perhaps three ceramic
sherds, the remaining 15% of the artifacts recovered from the site
which were not entrapped in clongomerates were objects of high
specific gravity fabricated of metal -- either iron, bronze, silver, lead
or gold. The remainder of the sample of ceramics from the site, some
160-170 sherds representing a wide variety of types, were discovered
in the preservation laboratory during the dissection of the large
conglomerates. It is of interest here to note that the only means
through which a representative sample of ceramic types and articles
fabricated of glass could be secured at this site was by recovering the
conglomerates in which they were entrapped.
Typically in shipwrecks, the artifact sample is heavily selective
toward inorganic and/or inactive items capable of surviving the
biological and chemical ravages of the marine environment (Clausen
1967: 44-46). All the above evidence at this site indicates a further
bias toward articles fabricated of material of greater specific gravity
than glass or ceramics which could not easily be moved away by
storm-generated currents and concomitant sediment flow. Also, this
site was discovered by treasure hunters prior to passage into law in
1969 of the Texas Antiquities Code, which now protects such cultural
resources. What effect the activities of this group may have had on
the artifact sample at the site is unknown.
Consequently, we urge caution in accepting the evidence of the
very close relationship of the ferrous components to the rest of the artifactual remains found at this particular 16th-century wreck site, as
typical for sites near shore except perhaps in this general area of the
western Gulf of Mexico. The senior author has examined many wreck
sites elsewhere in the Gulf of Mexico, the Atlantic, and the Caribbean
where, because of different bottom and sediment types and current
characteristics, even tiny sherds of glass and ceramic fragments not
bound up in encrustations were present in great abundance.
Another important conclusion can be drawn from th e survey data.
It is commonly held that the effective strength of dipolar magnetic
distortions, the type represented by most shipwreck materials, is inversely proportional to the cube of the distance. A formula for expressing this is given in Breiner (1973: 42) as T = M

r3 ,

"T" being the

anomaly in gauss, "M", the dipole moment in centimeter-gramsecond, and "r", the distance in centimeters. Taking into consideration water and sediment depth over the wreck, less sensor
depth below the surface, we determined that the average sensorto-target range during the survey of Site 41KNI0(UW) was ap-

82

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

proximately 6.5 m. The largest distortion in the local earth’s magnetic
field measured during the survey was 125 + gammas created by the
mass of wrought iron near the center of the wreck (Fig. 2) which consisted of the ship’s sheet anchor and miscellaneous armament and
fastenings. Using the above formula with these values, 125 + gammas
at a sensor-to-target range of 6.5 m, we calculate that the strength of
the distortion created by these remains would have diminished to approximately three gammas at a range of 22.5 m. At that point, the
anomaly created by this wreck very likely would be indistinguishable
from the "noise" level present in even the most sophisticated
magnetometers typically in use for offshore surveys. In short, in
deeper water, at sensor-to-target ranges in excess of 25-30 m, this
wreck, for all practical purposes, would become undetectable.
The small size of the 1554 wreck which was the subject of this survey, is not at all unusual for a vessel of the periods of exploration,
colonization and early development in the Western Hemisphere. Our
archival research indicates that these early vessels in many instances, especially during the first century after discovery, were
quite small. Morrison [1942: 120), for example, estimates the
displacement of Columbus’ Capitana, the Santa Maria, to have been
less than 100 tons. English, Spanish, and French archival records
throughout the 16th and 17th centuries clearly indicate that vessels of
less than 100 tons displacement often sailed to and about the New
World, and that vessels of only 200 tons displacement were common.
Lacking specific historical context, it may be said that from the point
of view of cultural analysis and history, the most valuable shipwrecks
are those dating from the first centuries after discovery (Clausen
1967: 44-46).
COMMENT
Recently the Bureau of Land Management and the United States
Geological Survey, both agencies of the Department of the Interior,
have tried to formulate regulations to protect and preserve such
cultural resources as shipwrecks and drowned prehistoric habitation
sites in areas of the outer continental shelf under their jurisdiction.
Cultural resources in these areas are considered endangered by accelerated efforts of petroleum interests to exploit the abundant fuel
resources of the shelf area in response to increasing national and
world energy demands.
The number of shipwreck sites on the outer continental sheld is admittedly very limited in terms of the total population of shipwrecks in
the Western Hemisphere. We estimate now on the basis of both our

MAGNETOMETER SURVEY

83

archival research and survey experience that less than 9% of the
total number of shipwrecks lost in the New World between 1492 and
1900 are located more than 5 km from land or from submerged
navigational hazard (Clausen ms.}. Nevertheless, those few wrecks
which are located in the deeper colder waters on the outer shelf
should be less scattered and the materials in them better preserved
than those sites found in shallow coastal waters; hence, when
technology of recovery has advanced sufficiently, they may present
archeological targets of prime importance.
In view of the economic realities of the problem, these agencies
have elected to satisfy their obligations to protect these sites by
requiring that the corporations responsible for disrupting the sea
floor conduct surveys to locate and protect through simple avoidance
these cultural resources prior to well-drilling, pipeline-laying, and
related activities which would endanger the sites (U.S. Department of
the Interior 1974, 1975). The most recent publication on this subject,
subtitled "Minimum Geophysical Survey Requirements to Protect
Cultural Resources," requires exposure of the survey area to the
array of instrumentation aboard the survey vessel in parallel tracks
spaced at 150-m intervals, and recommends that the sensor of the
magnetometer be 6 m or less above the water bottom interface (U.S.
Department of the Interior 1975].
On the basis of the findings presented in this paper, we submit that
the 150-m track spacing presently required in these offshore surveys
even under the most ideal conditions (i.e., adequate functioning,
accurate positioning system with programmable track plotter,
magnetometer sensor altitude 6 m or less above the bottom, and a
moderate sea state) -- results, at best, in sampling only some 25O/o 30% of the lease areas in terms of detecting these smaller, though
culturally more significant early wreck sites. It is true that this
assessment is based solely on the capabilities of the magnetometer,
but this instrument, if properly applied, has proven over many years
of application to be the only remote sensing device capable of detecting all Colonial and later period wreck sites. The other principal instrumentation the government requires in the surveys (i.e., the sidescan sonar and sub-bottom profiler) will very likely prove to be of
very limited use in detecting these early sites, or for that matter,
probably any wrecks of wooden construction lost for longer than 100
years. The sub-bottom profiler is employed in this instance to reveal
sub-bottom features such as sediment horizons and possible disconfortuities which might be related to drowned land forms (former
drainages of rivers and streams and perhaps former barrier island
systems and associated lagoon and other embayments -- prime

84

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ecotone areas) where the probability of association with prehistoric
camps or the hunting-and-gathering activities of early man would be
high. Unless, by chance, the survey vessel passes directly over a
buried or semiburied wreck site, or unless the survey party purposely
directs the vessel over an anomaly already detected by the
magnetometer, the probability is very low that this instrument would
detect a wreck of the nature we are concerned about here.
The side-scan sonar also will prove of little use in detecting these
older wrecks of wooden construction. At depths of 200 m or less, the
structure (at least above the turn of the bilge) can be expected to
have collapsed through biological and chemical action and would be
scattered to some degree by currents, unless the site happens to be
located in an area of very limited or no loose sedimentation. The principal use of this instrument in the present surveys is to provide an additional perspective in identifying topographic features which might
relate to drowned land forms. Conventional side-scan sonar systems
do not have a sub-bottom capability. Hence, like the sub-bottom
profiler, it is used in this instance to determine possible areas of
prehistoric occupation. Its application to shipwrecks in these surveys
is limited almost solely to identifying whether magnetic or acoustical
anomalies are nonburied, steel-hulled wrecks.
Consequently, we recommend dropping the ineffective blanket surveys of large areas now undertaken which, through faulty design, are
missing an estimated three out of four of the important early sites (except perhaps in areas crossed by present or historically documented
sea lanes, where the probability of sites presumably would be higher)
in favor of more concentrated surveys. These should be made with
parallel tracks spaced not more than 50 m apart and confined to the
general area of disturbance the well site (plus an additional area or
buffer zone of potential physical and/or magnetic disturbance
around the area to be disrupted) and along pipeline routes. We also
recommend that the notice stipulate that the height off the bottom of
the magnetometer sensor be no greater than 6 m, and that a separate
record of sensor altitude either off the bottom or below the surface
(or both) be maintained during the survey (Clausen 1974]. Otherwise,
we predict that a disproportionate number of steel-hulled, recent
shipwreck sites of limited archeological value will be discovered in
these surveys at the expense of the scientifically more valuable early
wrecks.
Finally, in areas where the remains of Colonial period wrecks
either lie partially, or, as in the case of the 1554 site described in this
report, totally buried in unconsolidated sediments, or are
camouflaged by marine growth such as corals on reef areas in the

MAGNETOMETER SURVEY

85

tropics or the many varieties of benthic algae common off rocky
coasts at higher latitudes, the guidance afforded the archeologist by
an in-site delineation survey can be of inestimable value in
maximizing the cultural data collected and in raising the efficiency of
the underwater operations in general. In fact, so successful has this
approach proven, that we now believe it to be an essential
preliminary step to the thorough and efficient excavation of virtually
any Colonial period shipwreck.

REFERENCES CITED

Arnold, J. Barto, III
1974a A Magnetometer Survey of the Nineteenth-Century Steamboat Black
Cloud. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol, 45, pp. 225230.
1974b The Archeological Applications of Computerized Contour and
Perspective Plotting. Newsletter of Computer Arhcaeology, Vol. 10,
pp. 1-7.
Arnold, J. Barto, III, and Carl J. Clausen
1975 A Magnetometer Survey with Electronic Positioning Control and
Calculator Plotter System. Paper presented to the Sixth
International Conference on Underwater Archeology. Charleston,
S.C.
Breiner, Sheldon
1973 Applications Manual for Portable Magnetometers. Geometrics, Palo
Alto, California.
Breiner, Sheldon, and Michael D. Coe
1972 Magnetic Exploration of the Olmec Civilization. American Scientist,
Vol. 60, pp. 556-575.
Breiner, Sheldon, and K.G. MacNaughton
1965 The Applications of Magnetometers to Underwater Archeology.
Paper presented at the Second Conference on Underwater
Archeology. Toronto.
Clausen, Carl J.
1965 A 1715 Spanish Treasure Ship. Contributions of the Florida State
Museum. Social Sciences, No. 12 ....
1966 The Proton Magnetometer: Its Use in Plotting and Distribution of
Ferrous Components of a Shipwreck Site as an Aid to Archeological
Interpretation. Florida Anthropologist, Vol. 19, pp. 77-84,
1967 Some Comments on Pre-1800 Sites: Maritime. Historical Archeology,
Vol. 1, pp. 44-46.
1974 Letter to the directors of the Bureau of Land Management and
United States Geological Survey regarding Notice 74-10, dated May
10, 1974, on file in the records of the Texas Historic Commission.
Ms. Site report on the Texas Antiquities Committee’s underwater

86

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
archeological research project: The Excavation of a Spanish Wreck
of 1554, manuscript in preparation.

Green, J.N,
1970 A New Sea-Going Magnetometer Detector Head. Archaeometry, Vol.
12, pp. 167-172.
Green, J.N., E.T. Hall, and M.L. Katzev
1967 Survey of a Greek Shipwreck Off Kyrenia, Cyprus. Archaeometry,
Vol. 10, pp. 46-56.
Hall, E.T.
1966 The Use of the Proton Magnetometer in Underwater Archaeology.
Archaeometry, Vol. 9, pp, 32-44.
Hays, T.R., and Eugene Herrin
1970 Padre Island Pro)ect: Report to the Texas Antiquities Committee.
Institute for Underwater Research, Dallas.
Lenihan, Daniel
1974 Preliminary Archeological Survey of the Offshore Lands of Gulf
Islands National Seashore. In Underwater Archeology in the
National Park Service, edited by Daniel Lenihan. Division of
Archeology, Southwest Region. National Park Service, Department
of the Interior.
Link, Marion Clayton
1959 Sea Diver. Rinehart and Co., New York.
Meylach, Martin, and Charles Whited
1971 Diving to a Flash of Gold. Doubleday and Co.. Garden City, N,J.
Peterson, Mendel
1965 History Under the Sea. Smithsonian Institution Publication 4538.
Washington, D.C.
Morrison. Samuel Elliot
1942 Admiral of the Ocean Sea. Little, Brown and Co., Waltham, Mass.
Potter, John S., Jr.
1972 The Treasure Diver’s Guide. Rev. ed. (first printed in 1960).
Doubleday and Co., Garden City, N.J.
U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Land Management and U,S.
Geological Survey
1974 Notice to lessees and operators of federal oil and gas leases in the
Outer Continental Shelf, Gulf of Mexico area: minimum geophysical
survey requirements to protect cultural resources. No. 74-10.
1975 Notice to lessees and operators of federal oil and gas leases in the
Outer Continental Shelf, Gulf of Mexico area: minimum geophysical
survey requirements to protect cultural resources. No. 75-3
(supersedes No. 74-10),
Texas Antiquities Committee
Austin, Texas

POLLEN AS AN INDICATOR OF PREHISTORIC DIETS
IN COAHUILA, MEXICO
VAUGHN M.

BRYANT, JR.

ABSTRACT
This paper reports information derived from the pollen analysis of 47
human coproHte specimens recovered during the excavation of Frightful
Cave, Coahnila, Mexico. The age of the coprolites range from approximately 7.500 B. C, to A.D. 300 and are grouped into three major
categories based upon their provenience in the site. The data from these 47
human coprolites are used to: (1) reconstruct prehistoric diet patterns, (2)
predict specific periods of site occupancy, and (3) distinguish between
economic and background pollen types. In addition, the coprolitic data are
used for making limited generalizations concerning possible vegetational
changes in the Frightful Cave area during the past 9.500 years.

INTRODUCTION
Human coprolites recovered during the archeological excavation of
Frightful Cave were sent to Dr, Gary F. Fry of Youngstown State
University who conducted an analysis of the macrofossil contents.
Small subsamples (ca. 1-2cc) of each of the 47 human coprolites were
extracted by Fry and sent to the Texas A&M Anthropology Research
Laboratory where I processed and analyzed them for their pollen contents.
Each of the samples was reconstituted into a moist state using the
trisodium phosphate method developed by Callen and Cameron
(1960). Standard 200 grain pollen counts were attempted for each
sample as first suggested by Barkley (1934). In 26 of the samples it
was possible to obtain counts of between 200-300 pollen grains. Of the
remaining 21 samples all but seven contained between 100-200 pollen
grains, Of the total 47 samples only seven contained fewer than 100
grains or were totally void of pollen. The tabulation for each of the 40
samples containing more than 100 pollen grains is shown in Figure 1.
The human coprolites from Frightful Cave are organized into three
distinct categories based upon their provenience within the site.
Associated material from each category has been radiocarbon dated
(Stuckenrath n.d.}. The coprolites recovered from the lower strata of
the site are lumped into the category called "lower" and consist of 15
human coprolites that range in age from 7,500-5,000 B, C. The "middle" category contains 16 human coprolites recovered from strata
which have been dated between 5,000-2,000 B, C. The last of these
three categories is termed "upper" and consists of 16 human
coprolites recovered from strata dated from 2,000 B. C.-A. D. 300.

5000 -

2000BC-AD300
SAMPLE NUMBER

2

I

4

5

6

II

12

4

18

23 24 25 30

36 41

42

3

8

7

9

13

POLLEN TYPE
Aco¢io
Agove

11.5

O#lea

23"5

Dosylirion

0"5

6

5
0"5

Lout#on o

4

4

6"5

2,5

30

8

0.5

Compositoe(HS)
Pinus

5

4

2"5

0.5

0"5

0"5

1.5

2

2.5

0.5
4.5

20
14‘5

3

2

3

8

25

2.5

I

I

0.5

I

9

2

60,5
57

1.5

Umbelliferae

Compositae(LS)

5
9

1.5
0.5

18

20

6.5

0,5

Unknown A
Cheno-Am

20

7.5

0.5
3

2

I

Portulecu
Solenun

13.5

1.5

1.5

Opunti#

0"5

0"5

I

62

II
3.5
7-5
11-5

5
II
21

0.5 14,51
21.5

495 24’5
3

1,5

6

I
13
49

2

4
13"5

5

4
16"5

56

13"5

7

45‘5

12

3

20

9.5 14.5

4

II

3.5

1.5

1°5

2

11.5

21

2
14"5

I
88

24’5

7

I

"0.5

4.5

4

I

5

2

8

8

8

1.5

0,5

I

2.5

3.5

23

39

25

0.5

2

4.5

80.5

I

2

90.5

Alnus
Quercus
Celtis

3,5

3

9
1

3

dugl#ns

4

I
I

0,5

13

1.5

4

3

5

t3

I
1.5

0.5

Cerye

2.5

0.5

dlmus
Gromlneoe
Cyperaceae

2

0.5
B

I0

13

20

33

33

4

24

12

8.5

2

4

1"5

9

2.5

32

I

II-5 36,5 4"5

I

0.5

0-5!

Artemis/#

13-5

12-5

2.5

0.5!7"5

2

I

2

I

2

Typ h e
Ephedro

I

Berber/s

0.5

I

0.5

0.5

3

Caryophylleceoe

.5

I

I

Cruciferae
Jolroph#
LobiQtoe
~(alvaceae

I
0.5

I

7.5

I

0,5

Noline

2

Onagroceoe

0"5

I

Prosopis

1"5

0"5

0"5

Ph#ce/ie

0"5

Rhus

0-5

0-5

0"5

t .5

0"5

I

Selix

0"5

Verbeno
Unknown

I
3

2

3

5

7

2"5

3

2"5

2

2

1

1.51

2

3.5

3"5

5

3

TOTAL PERCENT

TOTAL COUNT

FIGURE 1. Pollen counts of prehistoric human coprolites from
Frightful Cave.

6

I

2000 BC

0.5

r

2°5

24’5 2 2

7500 - 5000 BC

’

I 2

62

7

57.5

I 0

8.5

7.5

I

4

1

7-5

0.5 0.5

4

0-5

d

2.5

2

7.5

31-5
4

I

I

12

19

1.5

i
5-5

0.5 i

0°5

0.5

0.5

1.5

0.5

10.5
6

J i’

0,5

6.5

0-5

1.5

1.5
0.5

I

0.5

85

0.5

42

0,5

4

2.5

!

50

0,5

39

95

13.5

9O5

0,5

3.5

52

3.5

I

2.5

I,5

I

20

16

10.5 8.5

2

25

12.5

53

6

I,5

I

57,5

4

59

20.5 3.5

27,5 8.5

25

12

0.5

2.5

6-5

2.5

2

I

4.5

7.5

I

4

7

2,5

34

!4.5

I

I

4

45

4-5

8,5

14.5

2.5

2°5

5

2.5

0.5
0
2

14"5

4

3

0.5 59-5

90

I

5-5

2.5

2.5

20

4

I

5
4

I

I
1°5

72

I

0.5

I,5

I

1.5

5.5

I

0"5

6,5

1.5

2
0.5

I
4

4

8

I 5

0.5
0"5
2

17-5 6"5

10.5

I

5

3

I

3

0.5
0"5 2.5i

4

I0

8"5

3

8

0.5

11-5

I

6.5

I

I

0"51

0.5
.5

-5

I

24

0.5

9

0.5

0.5

I

!1.5

4

0"5

0"5
0.51

0.5

I ’5

0.5

0"5

0-5

I

0.5

0"5

0°5
I

¯5

9O

i95i

4

"5

4

2

3.5

5

3

3

2.5

0"5

2.5

5 1.5 0"5

1"5

I

90

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
ANALYSIS

The pollen types recovered from these human coprolite specimens
are grouped into three distinct categories: {1} economic pollen, (2)
background pollen and {3) pollen that could have resulted from either
economic or background sources which I have termed "special
economic pollen types".
Economic pollen was found in almost all of the human coprolite
specimens examined from Frightful Cave. In many cases these pollen
types are represented by high percentages which suggest the intentional eating of flowers and/or pollen for its flavor, food value, or
suspected medicinal effects. Some might argue that such high
economic pollen counts could have been ingested as part of the normal pollen rain that settles on foods later eaten by man, or from the
eating of non-floral plant foods such as leaves, stems or fruits. These
alternatives have been investigated (Bryant 1969} and found to be
highly improbable. Likewise, I have found (Bryant 1969} that in certain regions local drinking water sources and normal pollen rain are
unlikely to account for the ingestion of more than approximately 2%
of any specific economic pollen type. The only exception would be
"special economic pollen types" which are from wind pollinated
plants such as those from certain species of composites and taxa in
the category termed "Cheno-Am".
In reviewing the data found in the coprolite specimens from Frightful Cave I shall consider the presence of any economic pollen type in a
quantity of 10% or greater to represent the direct ingestion of that
specific plant’s flowers and/or its pollen. A lower level of 2-3%
economic pollen could have been used instead of the 10% level in
view of past studies of human coprolites from the Amistad region
(Bryant 1974a}. However, while the presence of economic pollen in
percentages of more than 10% is interpreted to reflect the eating of
flowers and/or pollen, low percentages below 10% may not always
represent the direct ingestion of a specific plant’s flowers due to the
possibility of interflower contamination by insects. Therefore, if a
coprolite specimen contained 10% cactus pollen and 2% agave
pollen, for example, I would interpret the data to reflect the eating of
cactus flowers. On the other hand, while the 2% agave pollen in that
same coprolite may also reflect the additional eating of agave
flowers, it is also possible that such a marginal percentage of
economic pollen could have resulted from the interflower insect contamination of the cactus flower with a few agave pollen grains.
Special economic pollen types are different from economic types
since their pollen could be ingested as part of the food or by accident.

PREHISTORIC DIETARY ANALYSIS

91

Plants in this category produce large numbers of pollen grains which
become airborne and float in the wind currents until they drop to the
ground as one of the abundant contributors to the local pollen rain.
Thus. during the summer flowering season a person could ingest a
number of special economic pollen grains by a variety of methods
other than direct flower eating. This could include special economic
pollen types such as Cheno-Am, low-spine Compositae, and high-spine
Compositae, trapped in the mucus of the nose and lungs which is later
swallowed, pollen drunk as part of local drinking water sources, and
pollen that settles on foods about to be eaten. However, unless either
the seeds or the flowers of these types were being eaten one would
not expect to find pollen percentages of this type in excess of approximately 40% (Bryant 1974a).
There are a number of pollen types found in the Frightful Cave
coprolites which do not appear to have resulted from the direct eating
of certain plant foods and they are termed "background" pollen
types. Thus, these types tend to reflect pollen types found in the normal pollen rain of northern Mexico. Even th ough these background
types do not reflect any ethnobotanical significance in the Frightful
Cave coprolites the reader should not assume that these types are
always to be considered as background species. Typha and Ephedra,
for example, are classified as background types in this study yet in
other studies (Napton and Kelso 1969; Riskind 1970] one, or both of
these pollen types have been shown to reflect prehistoric man’s
dietary patterns.
Some of the background pollen types found in the Frightful Cave
coprolites are useful as indicators of probable seasonality of site
usage and they will be discussed later in this report. Other
background types, however, are useful only as indicators of plants
which at one time composed part of the local vegetation in the vicinity
of Frightful Cave.
The background pollen types fall into two broad categories: (I)
anemophilous -- those that are produced in large numbers and are
from plants which rely upon the wind to disperse their pollen, and (2)
zoophilous -- those that are produced in lesser quantities and are
from plants which rely upon insects to disperse their pollen.
Lower Level -- (7,500-5,000 B. C.)
During the early period of site occupation (7,500-5,000 B. C.) the
dominate economic pollen types found in the recovered human
coprolites consisted of Opuntia, Leucaena, and Umbelliferae. In addition large quantities of special economic pollen types such as

92

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Cheno-Am and low-spine Compositae were recovered from coprolites
dating from the early period of site occupation.
The pricklypear cactus (Opuntia) has a large, heavy grain which is
not suited to airborne travel and thus would not be a common component of any normal pollen rain fallout. Individual flowers in this
group of cacti produce a large number of anthers and pollen grains so
that the eating of even one flower would incorporate hundreds or
even thousands of pollen grains into a single fecal sample. In looking
at the pollen data from these human coprolites (Fig. 2) it is evident
that pricklypear cactus flowers were one of the more frequent food
choices during the early time period of site occupation.
Cactus flower eating is not unique to the Frightful Cave area.
Palmer (1878) noted that California Indians often ate freshly picked
pricklypear cactus flowers and used others ta flavor a type of fermented drink. In a similar study of the Pima, Castetter and Bell {1942}
reported that cactus flowers were an important diet item and were
ranked second only to mesquite in importance of gathered wild plant
foods. Previous studies of prehistoric human coprolites also note the
use of cactus flowers as food. Martin and Sharrock (1964) found high
percentages of cactus pollen in human coprolite samples recovered
from Basketmaker and Pueblo period sites in the Glen Canyon region
of Utah. I (Bryant 1974a) also found that cactus flowers seem to have
represented an important diet item for the Late Archaic inhabitants
of the Amistad Reservoir area located to the north of Frightful Cave.
In reference to the frequency of use (Fig. 2) it appears that
pricklypear flowers were eaten far more often at Frightful Cave
during the earlier period (7,500-5,000 B. C.) of site occupation than
during the later period after 5,000 B. C. This change in diet seems to
have been due to some unknown cultural change in dietary preference rather than to a loss of cactus availability in the local environment. The macrofossil plant remains recovered from these
same human coprolites showed no similar decrease in the eating of
cactus pads and cactus fruit after 5,000 B.C.
The occurrence of leadtree (Leucaena) pollen in the human
coprolites from Frightful Cave is most common in samples from the

\

z

\

w
_..J
.._J
O

\

13-

~j
i

~rNNk!;.;,,,
o
Z

o
L~

%

L.~

_.J

O

\
I
C.O

i}~’;~"~-’~ }~’~~’*~’~’~’~ ~ ~ ~ ;’~’~’~’ ~ ~ ~’~"~ ~ ~"~’~’;~’~’~%9 ~

z~

\

Z

C~
LL..

Z
w
r’~

~,~2;’:-’:."5’;~,,,’~.’~.’ ~’’ ~" , ,’~:-’," ;" -;’.’,’;~

I---

%
LU
O.
>.I--

Z
..J
._J
O
o_

r~
La3

.._l
W

~
i

o_ l~ o°
~ ._;

o

_.j
c~

._3
ILl

o
o
o

-- l~ oo
=s~ . o

o~L~

-..3
W

o
o°

u_; ~
o
._~
._

o
r--

o
o

--

:z=

FIGURE 2, Changing importance of the use of certain economic
pollen types at Frightful Cave as revealed from the analysis of
prehistoric human coprolites.

94

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

eaten. In other instances, such as in sample 38 from the early period
of site occupation where leadtree pollen is present in a percentage
greater than 40%
it is obvious that the leadtree flowers were
actually eaten.
Umbelliferae plants have long been associated with man and today
many of our modern spices and herbs come from plants of this group.
In North America many different species of Umbelliferae were eaten
as food by aboriginal groups. Ethnographic records reveal that the
tubers were cooked or eaten raw (Spinden 1908), the leaves were
made into salads (Chamberlin 1911), the seeds were ground and eaten
(Harvard 1895), and the flowers were boiled to make tea (Brown
1868). The pollen grains from the many taxa in this plant family are
similar in shape and morphology and therefore difficult to separate
beyond the family level. Umbelliferae pollen was not common in these
coprolite samples, yet in one sample (sample 26) from the early period
of site occupation 90% of the total pollen was from some unidentified
member of the Umbelliferae plant family. In order to reach such a
high percentage of Umbelliferae pollen a person would have had to
eat individual flowers, drink the pollen as part of a beverage (tea) or
eat the leaves and flowers as part of a salad. Only in this one sample
from the lower occupational period (7,500-5,000 B. C.) of Frightful
Cave did the pollen record indicate the obvious use of some type of
Umbelliferae flowers as food. In the other coprolite samples where
Umbelliferae pollen is present it occurs in such low percentages that
it could be considered as a possible interflower or background contaminant.
A number of plants belonging to the Chenopodiaceae plant family
and to the plant genus of Amaranthus are known to have been used
throughout many areas of the American Southwest and Northern
Mexico (Barrows 1900; Castetter 1935; Elmore 1943; and Fewkes
1896). Collectively these plants are termed "Cheno-Am" by pollen
analysts (Martin 1963) since it is almost impossible to distinguish the
pollen types of this group from one another with the use of the light
microscope. Suspected use of these plants as food by the prehistoric
inhabitants of Frightful Cave is revealed in the pollen analysis of the
coprolites. Those pollen data revealed the highest percentages of
Cheno-Am pollen in coprolites dating from the earliest periods of site
occupation (Fig. I). Ilowever, the percentages of Cheno-Am pollen
found in the Frightful Cave coprolites dating from occupation periods
after 5,000 B. C. are 10w and suggest that they may have resulted
from sources such as the normal pollen rain which undoubtedly settled on prepared foods about to be eaten.
There are several justifications for using high percentages of
Cheno-Am pollen as indicators for prehistoric diet preferences of

PREHISTORIC DIETARY ANALYSIS

95

these plants. Unlike most of the other economic pollen types, high percentages of Cheno-Am pollen in human coprolites could result from
eating the seeds, eating the leaves, or eating the flowers. A plant’s
pollen does not often become mixed with its seeds yet among taxa of
the Cheno-Am this does result. Among many species of the Cheno-Am
group individual plants flower continuously over a number of weeks
and even months. As a result, when the earliest flowers turn to
mature seeds other flowers on the same plant are still in their
pollination stage, Thus during the collection and winnowing of ChenoAm seeds using aboriginal methods pollen from maturing flowers
near the top of the plants can become incorporated with the mature
seeds gathered from the lower portion of the plants. In addition,
Bryant and Larson (1968) found in the Amistad Reservoir area of
Texas large quantities of goosefoot seeds (Chenopodium)in the same
human coprolites that contained high percentages of Cheno-Am
pollen. Martin and Sharrock (1964) report similar results in their
study of human coprolites from the Glen Canyon area of Utah. ..................
Individual plant types within the family Compositae can be divided
into several categories based upon differences in their pollen morphology, One of these groups is termed "low-spine" and includes
those composite genera with pollen types having surface spines
shorter than two microns in height. The pollen in this low-spine
composite group is anemophilous (wind-pollinated) and is thus produced in great numbers and dispersed by the wind (ragweed is one
of the better known members of this composite group). These attributes make low-spine composite pollen one of the more common
background types found in normal pollen rains. Thus, considerable
amounts of low-spine pollen up to about 40°/o could be expected to
be inadvertently swallowed or eaten along with other foods and
would not reflect utilization of these composite plants as food. Most
of the low-spine pollen in the human coprolites from Frightful Cave
undoubtedly falls into this category. However, in one coprolite
sample (number 35) dating from the lower period of site occupation
low-spine composite pollen was recovered in a percentage greater
than 55% and thus strongly suggests more than iust an accidental
ingestion of this pollen type. !n that sample the high percentage of
low-spine pollen suggests the direct eating of composite plants,
their seeds, and/or their flowers. A similar situation was reported
in the Mammoth Cave area of Kentucky (Bryant 1975b) where large
numbers of Ira (marsh-elder) seeds were found in the same human
coprolite samples containing more than 50% low-spine composite
pollen.

96

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Middle Level -- (5,000-2,000 B. C.)
The coprolitic pollen records suggest that diet patterns during the
middle period of site occupation differed from those of the earlier
period. Opuntia, Leucaena, and Umbelliferae were important during
the earlier period yet are replaced in importance during the middle
period by Acacia, Agave, and Solanum.
The pollen evidence suggesting the use of acacia as food is not
strongly represented in the coprolitic record from any period of site
occupation at Frightful Cave. Acacia pollen was found in only eight
samples and reaches a significant level of more than a few percent in
only one sample (Sample 43) which dates from the middle time period
(5,000-2,000 B. C.) of site occupation. The 12% acacia pollen in that
single sample may reflect the eating of acacia flowers, or the drinking
of acacia tea. The practice of acacia flower eating by the early
inhabitants of Frightful Cave admittedly is weak yet it does seem to
exist, since one would not normally ingest more than about 2% acacia
pollen from background sources (Bryant 1969).
Agave plants are a common component of many arid and semi-arid
environments in the American Southwest and Northern Mexico.
Ethnographic and ethnobotanical studies have demonstrated that
these plants were utilized for making fermented liquor, used as food,
and sought for their fibers. Palmer (1878) has also noted that in
California. for example, the flowers were collected and eaten for
their flavor and nectar contents. Approximately two hundred miles
north of Frightful Cave in the Amistad Reservoir area of southwest
Texas agave flowers were a common item in the prehistoric diet
(Bryant 1974a). The coprolitic pollen evidence suggests that at Frightful Cave agave flowers were also one of the more important flower
foods in prehistoric man’s diet and reached their height of utilization
during the middle occupation period. This apparent trend may reflect
the increased availability of agave plants or a change in diet
preference during the middle time period.
Nightshade (Solanum) pollen is present in only a few of the
coprolite samples from Frightful Cave. Known aboriginal dietic uses
of nightshades are centered mostly upon the eating of the tubers or
leaves (Sparkman 1908; Castetter 1935) and no mention is made of the
flowers being specifically sought as food sources. In spite of this lack
of ethnographic evidence it is still possible that nightshade flowers
were individually picked and eaten. The high percentages of nightshade pollen in samples 1 and 3 represent ingestion of the flowers
either directly, or indirectly as part of a salad. Nightshade pollen is
missing from the early period coprolite samples and is present in only
a few of the middle and later period coprolites. The highest frequency

PREHISTORIC DIETARY ANALYSIS

97

of occurrence, however, is linked to the middle period of site occupation.
Upper Level -- (2,000 B, C.-A, D, 300)
During the last major period of site occupation several new
economic pollen types dominate the human coprolite samples. Dalea,
Dasylirion, Portulaca and Unknown type A pollen were found in the
coprolites during the earliest two occupational periods yet did not
become dominate types until the final period of site occupation after
2,000 B. C. One of the special economic pollen types (high-spine composite} was also a common type found in most coprolites but assumes
importance as a diet indicator only during the upper period of site occupation ....
Dalea is a legume that is commonly found in many areas of the semiarid and arid Southwest and is a plant that would have been available
for utilization by the prehistoric inhabitants of Frightful Cave. Dalea
pollen is present in more than one-half of all the human coprolites
from Frightful Cave that contained sufficient pollen for analysis and
indicates a steady increase in use from early through late occupation
periods of the site. In many of the coprolite samples dalea pollen occurs in low percentages which may reflect a minimal utilization of
this flower as food. However, dalea pollen production per individual
flower is low, thus proportionately one would have to eat a number of
dalea flowers before its pollen would be found in abundant quantities
in a coprolite.
Sotol plants, like agave, produce conspicious flowers which are
easy to harvest. In the Amistad Reservoir area of southwest Texas
sotol flowers were an important part of Late Archaic peoples diet. In
that region I found that sotol pollen sometimes reached percentage
levels greater than 60% in human coprolite samples (Bryant 1974a).
In the Frightful Cave human coprolite samples, however, sotol pollen
is restricted to very low counts even though it is slightly more
frequent in the human coprolites from the final period of site occupation. In spite of its slight increase in certain site occupational
levels it is still suspected that most, or all, of the sotol pollen found in
the Frightful Cave coprolites may have resulted from sources other
than the direct eating of sotol flowers. This assumption is further
strengthened by the fact that there is a 81% correlation between the
presence of both sotol and agave pollen in the same coprolite samples.
Since these two liliaceous plants are found in similar habitats, have
similar flowering periods, and are pollinated by many of the same insect species it is probable that when the prehistoric people ate the
flowers of either plant they mght also have ingested a few pollen

98

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

grains of the other taxa. In any case, sotol flowers were not nearly as
important a diet item in the Frightful Cave area as they were in an
almost identical habitat 200 miles to the north in the Amistad region.
Purslane (Portulaca) pollen was found in only six of the human
coprolite samples from Frightful Cave. The low percentage of purslane pollen in most of those six samples may have resulted from interflower insect contamination, yet in one sample (sample 41) dating from
the upper period of site occupation the occurence of 60°/o purslane pollen probably resulted from the direct eating of the actual
flowers. The flowers may have been picked and eaten individually or
could have become accidently incorporated during the preparation of
a purslane leaf salad. Ethnographic sources do not mention the
specific use of purslane flowers as food yet both Rusby (1906) and
Elmore (1943) state that fresh purslane leaf salads were eaten by Indian groups living in the arid Southwestern United States. Other
evidence of its prehistoric use was found in human coprolite samples
recovered from Pueblo I and Pueblo Ill levels an Antelope House,
Arizona (Williams-Dean and Bryant 1975). As seen in Figures i and 2
the utilization of purslane as food is apparently restricted to the upper period of site occupation at Frightful Cave. Such limited usage
could have been cultural or may instead reflect an increased
availability of this plant in the local flora.
Unknown pollen type A is classified as an economic type because
the pollen grain morphology suggests that the parent plant was a type
that requires insect pollination. As such its pollen would not be expected to be found as part of the normal pollen rain of the region and
thus it could only have become incorporated into the coprolite as the
result of flower eating. There are no obvious clues as to which plant il
may rep resent except that its morphology compares favorably with
other pollen types of the family Leguminosae. A picture of this pollen
grain is included in Figure 3 in hopes that someone may recognize it.
Unknown pollen type A was recovered in coprolites dating from the
middle and upper periods of site occupation yet the highest concentration seems to have occurred during the upper time period.
The high-spine group of composites includes a number of taxa of
similar morpholopy all of which have pollen grains with surface
spines longer than two microns. Plants in this group produce pollen
that is dispersed by insects and therefore its pollen is usually weakly
represented in the normal pollen rain. Although this pollen type is
found in many of the Frightful Cave coprolite samples it reaches
significant percentages of over 45% mainly in coprolites dating from
the upper period of site occupation. In those instances of high pollen

PREHISTORIC DIETARY ANALYSIS

99

DL--J
B

t_.I

C

L_J

FL._J

L I__I
NI
J I.___I

K I._.I

0 ~

R L

._]

FIGURE 3. Representative pollen types found in prehistoric human
coprolites at Frightful Cave. Scale by each photo represents 10
microns. Note that each pollen grain has been enlarged to a slightly
different scale so that is morphological features can be more clearly
seen. Pollen types include:
A. Leucaena
B. Agave
C. Portulaca
D. Alnus
E. Onagraceae
F. Ulmus
G. Compositae (high-spine)
H. Artemisia
I. Dasylirion

J.
K.
L.
M.

Acacia
Labiatae
Cheno-Am
Ephedra

N,

Gramineae

O. Unknown A (three views)
P. Celtis
q. Opuntia
R.

Pinus

i00

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

percentages the most probable conclusion is to assume that it
resulted from the eating of high-spine composite flowers and/or
seeds. This assumption is further strengthened by the coprolite
macrofossil data which reveal that Helianthus (sunflower) seeds
were found in coprolite samples 4, 11, 36, and 42 from the upper occupation period which also contained high-spine composite pollen
percentages over 45%. I have also found similar correlations (Bryant
1974b) in human coprolites from Mammoth Cave where there was a
100% correlation between the presence of Helianthus seeds and highspine composite pollen in the same samples.
Unlike some seed-bearing plants, members of the high-spine composite group produce seed clusters in the form of "heads" which
allows for their easy harvest. Among the Apache, for example, sunflower seeds were regularly harvested late each fall by the women of
the tribe (Castetter and Opler 1936). The usual harvest technique employed by the Apaches was to place a basket underneath the sunflower head and then strike the back of the head sharply knocking the
seeds into the basket. Later, the seeds were ground into flour, made
into a dough, and then baked on hot stones or in hot ashes. Experiments conducted in our laboratory at Texas A&M University have
shown that the above method of sunflower seed collection will result
in the incorporation of sunflower pollen into the ground flour. This occurs because some of the sunflower pollen becomes trapped in among
the seeds and is then inadvertently collected in the basket and later
ground into flour along with the seeds-In this manner it is possible,
and even probable, that high-spine compositae pollen could eventually become part of a human fecal specimen.

SEASONALITY
It has been shown (de Lumley 1969; Bryant 1974a, 1974b) that the
pollen contents of prehistoric human coprolites can be used to
provide valuable clues as to the probable seasonality of site occupation. There are several ways in which this can be done. In human
coprolite samples where there is little background pollen and much
zoophilous economic pollen it is possible to suggest seasonality. It is
also possible to suggest seasonality when large percentages of
specific types of background pollen are present in coprolite samples.
(3n the other hand, weak representations of certain background types
or the total absence of pollen in human coprolite samples are not
useful clues as to probable seasonality.
Certain indications as to the probable seasonality of site occupation can be determined from the Frightful Cave coprolitic pollen

PREHISTORIC DIETARY ANALYSIS

101

data. However, in most cases when the determination of seasonality
is based upon high percentages of economic pollen types the assumption is made that the pollen was ingested during the season when the
plant was in flower. For example, in samples where large quantities
of cactus pollen are present (samples 38, 40 and 44) I assume that it
reflects the eating of fresh cactus flowers rather than the eating of
dried cactus flowers during a later season of the year. This assumption is based upon several factors: (i) most ethnographic sources
already cited report that when flowers were eaten they were
generally eaten fresh, and (2) many subsistence level hunting and
gathering societies did not, as a general rule, store dried foods for
later use.
Lower Occupational Period -- Coprolitic data from the lower occupational period (7,500-5,000 B. C.) at Frightful Cave reflect a
dominant summer and fall seasonality of site usage. In addition there
are four coprolite samples for which probable seasonality can not be
assigned.
Five of the coprolite specimens (sample 10, 38, 40, 44, 45) from this
time period reflect definite late spring or summer seasonality. In each
of these five coprolite specimens Opuntia is one of the dominant
represented pollen types and probably resulted from the direct
ingestion of fresh cactus flowers during the late spring and/or summer pollination period of those plants. The assignment of seasonality
for these five coprolites is also strengthened by the presence of other
zoophilous pollen types such as Agave, Dalea, and Leucaena.
Three of the other coprolites from this lower occupational period
(samples 26, 32, 35) contain data suggestive of either a summer or
early fall seasonality. In coprolite specimen 26, for example, 90% of
the pollen is from an unidentified taxon of Umbelliferae and 92% of
the macrofossil remains are fibers from some unidentified plant.
Genera of the family Umbelliferae bloom during different periods of
the summer and early fall. As stated earlier, the leaves, stems, and
flowers were often sought as food by early aboriginal groups in North
America, therefore it is possible that both the pollen and plant fiber in
coprolite specimen 26 could represent the gathering and eating of
flowering Umbelliferae plants during some period of either the summer or early fall.
Fall or winter seasonality is represented by the contents of three
coprolites (samples 21, 34, 39) from the lower occupational period of
Frightful Cave. Each of these three coprolites contains high percentages of Cheno-Am and/or high-spine Compositae pollen. Both

102

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

pollen types could have adhered to the seeds of these plants and been
ingested along with the seeds. This proposition is strengthened by the
macrofossil data which show that these seed types were indeed part
of the diet in these three samples. Since Helianthus as well as many of
the Cheno-Am species mature during the late summer and early fall,
their seeds could have been collected and eaten during that time
period. However, the possibility of seed storage for later winter use
must also be considered as a possibility. A spring and/or early summer seasonality is not likely for these three samples since they contain very little indicator pollen from those seasons.
Four of the coprolites (samples 19, 28, 46, 47) from the lower occupational period do not contain any pollen or contain such small
amounts that it is not useful for the reconstruction of either diet or
seasonality. Absence of pollen does nol always reflect a winter
seasonality as some might assume. It is true that except for/uniperus
and certain types of grasses atmospheric pollen levels should be at
their lower percentage during the winter months; yet other factors
could result in the absence of pollen in human coprolites. For example, in each of these four samples the macrofossil evidence shows that
the primary diet item was large amounts of plant fiber. The
prehistoric inhabitants of Frightful Cave could have collected and
eaten large amounts of plant fiber during any season of the year, and
therefore it is not wise to try to speculate as to the season represented
by these four coprolite samples.

Middle Occupational Period -- The coprolites dating from the middle
occupationalperoid (5,000-2.000 B. C.) at Frightful Cave are similar to
those of the upper period in that both groups reveal a predominate
pattern of summer and early fall seasonality. The middle occupational period coprolites wl~ich indicate a late spring or summer
seasonality (samples 15, 16, 17, 27, 29, 31, and 33) contain high percentages of pollen from plants (Agave, Dalea, and Opuntia) which
pollinate during the late spring and summer months. Two of these
coprolites (samples 27, 29) also contained large percentages of whole
cactus seeds which may have resulted from the eating of a few of the
previous year s mature cactus fruits still attached to the plant, or the
eating of some early maturing cactus fruits.
The coprolites from this period suggesting a late summer or early
fall seasonality (samples 3, 13, 22, 43) contain high percentages oI
whole seeds from plants which produce mature fruits in the late summer or early fall (-Asclepius, Celtis, Diospyros, Helianthus, and Opuntia). In addition most of these samples lacked significant quantities of

PREHISTORIC DIETARY ANALYSIS

103

zoophilous economic pollen and instead contained pollen types from
plants such as Gramineae and high-spine Compositae which bloom in
the late summer .....
Three coprolites from the middle occupational period (samples 7, 8,
and 9) each contained high percentages of Quercus pollen combined
with either Agave, Dalea, or Opuntia pollen. The combination of these
two factors suggests that these coprolites may represent an early
spring seasonality rather than either a summer or fall season. Oak
trees pollinate in the early spring yet their pollen is an airborne type
that could become recycled and incorporated into coprolites dating
from other seasons of the year, as is suggested for samples 16, 22, and
27. However, the complimentary association of significant amounts of
economic pollen with the presence of oak pollen is interpreted to
reflect a spring seasonality. The absence of coprolites reflecting a
winter seasonality may have been caused by some of the same
reasons mentioned earlier.

Upper Occupational Period -- The coprolites analyzed from the upper
occupational period (2,000 B. C.-A. D. 300) of Frightful Cave suggest
primarily a summer (sample 1, 2, 12, 14, 18, 23, 24, 30 and 41) and
early fall (sample 4, 5, 11, 25, 36 and 42) seasonality of site occupation. Many of the coprolites from this period assigned summer
seasonality contain high percentages of economic pollen types such
as Agave, Dalea, Solarium, and Portulaca which probably represent
the eating of these flower types during their summer flowering
season. The macrofossils recovered from these same coprolites include large numbers of Prosopis and Opuntia seeds. The Prosopis
seeds probably resulted from the eating of mesquite pods which begin
to mature in that region of northern Mexice by mid-summer while the
Opuntia seeds could have been swallowed during the eating of cactus
fruits which also begin to ripen by mid-summer.
The coprolites of this period representing a fall seasonality lack
significant amounts of economic pollen and instead contain large
amounts of pollen types such as grass and high-spine Compositae
which bloom in the late summer and early fall. These samples also
contain significant quantities of Prosopis, Opuntia, and Diospyros
seeds all of which would be most available in the early fall. I doubt
that these samples which I have assigned to a fall season could
represent a winter diet. Persimmon fruits, mesquite pods, and cactus
fruits are best eaten at maturity when the sugar content is the
highest. Furthermore, if these seeds were being stored for later winter use they would probably have been ground into flour and

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
therefore would not have appeared in the coprolite specimens as
whole seeds. Castetter and Opler (1936) note that the Apaches stored
certain types of seeds (mesquite, sunflower, and screwbean) which
were later ground into flour during the winter months and eaten.
Baegert (1952) also noted that the Indians of lower California ground
cactus seeds into flour during the winter months yet ate the ripe fruits
during the fall rather than storing them for later use.
The absence of coprolites from this occupational period representing other seasons of the year could be due to either or both of the
following possibilities: (1) Frightful Cave may have been occupied by
prehistoric man only during the warmer seasons of the year, or (2)
different hygenic habits may have been practiced dflring the colder
seasons of the year resulting in human defecation either outside the
shelter area or in regions of the shelter which were not excavated by
the archeologists.

SUMMARY
The Frightful Cave coprolites provide us with one of the longest
records of prehistoric man’s diet anywhere in northern Mexico or the
American Southwest. The coprolite macrofossil analysis combined
with my pollen analysis of these same specimens has revealed that
the prehistoric inhabitants of Frightful Cave ate a wide variety of
foods. In some cases the diet items consisted of fruits, leaves, bulbs,
and/or seeds. In other instances the people ate flowers and/or the
flower pollen.
In adition to the diet information these coprolites also provided insight into the probable seasons of site occupation and limited inferences about the paleoenvironment. With the possible exception of
only three specimens the coprolites from Frightful Cave indicate
primarily a cycle of spring and early fall site occupancy. Furthermore, the weak representation of certain pollen types such as
pine, alder, and cattails suggests an absence of these plants in the
local paleovegetation of the Frightful Cave area. If these plants ever
grew in the vicinity of Frightful Cave it would have to have been prior
to 7,500 B. C. The pollen data can also be used to demonstrate that
other plant types such as walnut, pecan, elm and Morman tea were
either absent in the local vegetation composition or were present in
very low quantities.

PREHISTORIC DIETARY ANALYSIS

105

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I wish to thank Dr. Edward R. Meyer, Ms. Glenna Williams-Dean and
Mr. Glen H. Weir for their assistance with this project. Dr. Meyer helped
with the identification of certain pollen types. Mr. Weir drafted the
illustrations, and Ms. Williams-Dean offered helpful suggestions in the
preparation of this manuscript. Special thanks is also extended to Dr. Gary
F. Fry who was kind enough to supply me with his data relative to the
macrofossil contents of these coprolite samples.

REFERENCES CITED

Baegert, J. J.
1952 Observations on Lower California: Notes and Translation by M.
Brandenburg and C. Braumann, University of California Press,
Berkeley.
Barrows, D. P.
1900 The Ethnobotany of the Coahuila Indians of Southern California.
Ph.D. dissertation on file at the University of Chicago library.
Brown, R.
1868 On the Vegetable Products used by the Northwest American
Indians, as Food and Medicine, in the Arts, and in Superstitious
Rites. Botanical Society of Edinburgh Transactions (1866-1868) Vol.
9, pp. 378-396.
Bryant, Vaughn M., Jr.
1969 Late Fullglacial and Postglacial Pollen Analysis of Texas Sediments.
Ph.D. dissertation on file at the University of Texas at Austin
library.
1974a Prehistoric Diet in Southwest Texas: The Coprolite Evidence.
American Antiquity, Vol. 39, No. 3, pp. 407-420.
1974b Pollen Analysis of Prehistoric Human Feces from Mammoth Cave
Kentucky. Archeology of the Mammoth Cave Area. Academic Press,
New York, pp. 203-209.
Bryant, Vaughn M., Jr. and Donald A. Larson
1968 Pollen Analysis of the Devil’s Mouth Site, Val Verde County, Texas.
In: The Devil’s Mouth Site, The Third Season, 1967 by William M.
Sorrow. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No. 14.
Austin, pp. 57-70.
Castetter, E. F.
1932 Uncultivated Native Plants used as Sources of Food, New Mexico
University Bulletin, No. 266.
Castetter, E. F. and W. H. Bell
1942 Pima and Papago Indian Agriculture. University of New Mexico
Press.
Castetter, E. F. and M. E. Opler
1936 The Ethnobotany of the Chiricahua and Mescalero Apache.
Ethnobiological Studies in the American Southwest III. The
University of New Mexico Bulletin: Biological Series, Vol. 4, No. 5,
pp. 1-68.

106

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Chamberlin, R. V.
1911 The Etlmobotany of the Gosiute Indians of Utah. Memoir of the
American Anthropological Association No. 2, pp. 331-405.
Elmore, F. H.
1943 Ethnobotany of the Navajo. University of New Mexico School of
American Research Monograph Vol. 1, No. 7, pp. 1-136.
Fewkes, J. W.
1896 A Contribution to Ethnobotany. American Anthropologist Vol. 9, pp.
14-21.
Harvard, V.
1895 Food Plants of the North American Indians. Bulletin of the Torrey
Botanical Club Vol. 22, pp. 98-123.
de Lumley, Henry
1969 A Paleolithic Camp at Nice. Scientific American, Vol. 220, No. 5, pp.
42-50.
Martin, Paul S.
1963 The Last 10,000 Years. A Fossil Pollen Record of the American
Southwest. The University of Arizona Press, Tucson. Arizona.
Martin, Paul S. and F. W, Sharrock
1964 Pollen Analysis of Prehistoric Human Feces: A New Approach to
Ethnobotany. American Antiquity, Vol. 30, No. 2, pp. 168-180.
Napton, Lewis K. and G. Kelso
1969 Prehminary Palynological Analysis of Lovelock Cave Coprolites, An
Archeological and Paleobiological Investigation in Lovelock Cave,
Nevada, Kroeber Anthropological Society Special Publication No. 2,
pp. 19-27.
Palmer, E.
1878 Plants Used by the Indians of the United States. American
Naturalist, Vol. 12, pp. 593-606.
Riskind, David H.
1970 Pollen Analysis of Human Coprolites from Parida Cave. Papers of
the Texas Archeological Salvage Project No, 19, pp. 89-101.
Rusby, H. H.
1906 The June Wild Foods of the United States. Country Life in America
Vol. 10, pp. 202-204.
Sparkman, P. S.
1908 The Culture of the Luisene Indians. California University Publication
in American Archeology and Ethnology No. 8, pp. 187-234.
Spinden, H. J.
1908 The Nez Perce Indians. Memoir of the American Anthropological
Association No. 2, pp. 165-274.
Stuckenrath, R.
n.d. Radiocarbon Dates from Frightful Cave. In: Frightful Cave, edited by
W. W. Taylor (in press).
Williams-Dean, Glenna and V. M. Bryant, Jr.
1975 Pollen Analysis of Human Coprolites from Antelope House. Kiva
(in press).
Texas A&M University

LATE PREHISTORIC CULTURAL PATTERNS ALONG
THE LOWER RIO GRANDE OF TEXAS*
THOMAS R. HESTER

ABSTRACT
Recenl research in the lower Rio Grande area of Texas has produced
new information on the late prehistoric peoples of that region. In this
paper, data are presented on the chronology, settlement system, subsistence regime, trade contacts, and technology of this period. Regional
variations of late prehistoric culture are examined and comparisons are
made with late prehistoric developments in the adjacent Chihuahuan
Desert.

INTRODUCTION
Adjacent to the Chihuahuan desert to the west is the area of
northeastern and southern Texas, which Blair (1950} has termed the
Tamaulipan biotic province (Figure 1). The Rio Grande is a drainage
common to both the Tamaulipan and Chihuahuan provinces, with the
upper and middle portions (ending about Del Rio) within the
Chihuahuan and the lower reaches of this river in the Tamaulipan
area. The bulk of the area within Blair’s Tamaulipan province is in
southern Texas, and it is this portion that I will review in this paper.
This region has had many labels attached to it, including "Southwest
Texas," "South Texas Plains," "West Gulf Coastal Plain," the
"Brush Country," and the !’Rio Grande Plain., Today, the environment of the area can be described as a semiarid and megathermal; with annual rainfall varying from 46 cm to 91 cm, decreasing
from east to west. The dominant vegetation pattern is a thorny brush
woodland, dominated by mesquite, acacia, prickly pear cactus, and
other bristly shrubs. Riparian forests of oak, elm, hackberry, ash,
pecan and cottonwood can be found along the major stream courses.
Before we examine the late prehistoric manifestations of this
region, it is first necessary to set these late occupations in an environmental perspective. Some ethnohistorians and archeologists
have made the mistake of assuming that present-day environmental
and vegetational conditions were also present in the prehistoric
period. On the contrary, there is substantial historic and archeological data that much of this region was a savannah grassland,
with the modern fauna supplemented by such species as bison, an-

*Paper presented at the symposium "Prehistoric Adaptations in the Chihuahuan Desert," Society for American Archaeology annual meeting, Dallas, May, 1975.

108

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

FIGURE 1. The Chihuahuan and Tamaulipan Biotic Zones of Texas
and northeastern Mexico {after Blair 1950).

telope and prairie dog. The widespread mesquite forests which choke
the area today are a comparatively recent phenomenon. The spread
of mesquite and associated thorny plants is probably the result of
several factors, including the commercial livestock industry (which
led to overgrazing and the increased dispersal of mesquite seeds),
short-term climatic changes, and the suppression of grassfires. The
latter factor is of particular interest, and several authorities have
speculated that the cessation of aboriginal burning of the grasslands
was perhaps the major factor in the spread of mesquite (Harris 1966:
408; Wells 1970: 213). Of course, we should not think that mesquite
was absent in the area, nor should we conjure up visions of broad expanses of grassy prairie. Given early Spanish accounts, it is apparent
that mesquite was present, in upland gravel areas and scattered
along the steam channels (Wynd 1944: 228). As Harris (1966: 416] has
written:
"the spread of mesquite should be seen not as an invasion of natural
primary grassland, but as part of the re-occupation by woody plants of

areas in which secondary grass communities had attained dominance as a
result of human interference."

Still, the vegetational pattern was a far cry from that of today.

PREHISTORIC CULTURAL PATTERNS

109

In addition to vegetational differences, it is certain that there was
more surface water available in the late prehistoric than in modern
times. Historic accounts confirm that the major drainages (and many
of their tributaries) were perennially-flowing streams as late as the
early decades of the 20th century. Overgrazing and the resultant
watershed destruction led to muddy runoffs which clogged the
springs feeding these creeks. Coupled with this was the lowering of
the water table through intensive deep-well irrigation for farming. All
of these human agencies have managed to turn the streams into dusty
channels, carrying water only after local rainstorms.
In brief, the late prehistoric environment was radically different
than that of today. The countryside was more open and water was
more abundant. We do not have enough evidence to say if these conditions extended back into the preceding Archaic (although I suspect
they did) or whether these optimum conditions were present for only
a few centuries during the late prehistoric.

LATE PREHISTORY IN THE CHIHUAHUAN DESERT
Prior to looking at the late prehistoric period along the lower Rio
Grande, I think it is appropriate to present a brief summary of late
prehistory in the Chihuahuan desert area. Much of the Chihuahuan
desert has seen little in the way of intensive archeological work, and
thus our information on the late prehistoric peoples is rather sketchy,
In the lower Pecos sector, the years of salvage archeology
associated with the Amistad reservoir produced a long cultural
sequence, primarily reflecting a long Archaic tradition. According to
the literature, arrow points appear late in this sequence, around
A.D. 1300; however, Gary Moore informs me (personal communication) that he has obtained several radiocarbon dates placing
the appearance of arrow points at ca. A. D. 800. These specimens,
largely of the Perdiz and similar contracting stem forms, but with occasional Toyah, Scallorn (corner notched) and triangular specimens,
are infrequent in occurrence. At two sites, Devil’s Mouth (Johnson
1964) and Javelina Bluff (McClurkan 1968), bone tempered plainware
was associated with arrow points. There are no data on late
prehistoric settlement or subsistence in the lower Pecos area.
However, climatic data presented by Story and Bryant (1966: 156) indicate that xeric conditions prevailed, with an increase in cedar, oak,
mesquite and agave.
In the Trans-Pecos, there is a diverse, and poorly known, situation
during the late prehistoric. There is the inadequately defined "Liver-

110

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

more Focus," whose traits include occupation of open campsites and
rockshelters, and the use of contracting stern arrow points, small end
scrapers, and beveled knives (Lehmer 1960: 125). However, the temporal and geographic extent of this cultural entity
or even whether
it truly exists -- remains undetermined. In the Big Bend area, late
prehistoric occupations are represented by several kinds of arrow
points including the Perdiz, Toyah, Livermore and other stemmed
forms. Campbell (1967: 11) notes that settlement patterns remain the
same as in earlier Archaic times.
To the west of Big Bend, there is something totally different than
found in the lower Pecos and adjacent areas. In the La Junta district,
at the confluence of the Rio Conchos and Rio Grande, archeological
studies have revealed the remains of a sedentary population with pit
houses, a variety of ceramics, and agriculture. This is the Bravo
Valley Aspect of Kelley, Campbell and Lehmer (1940). To the north, in
the E1 Paso district, the late prehistoric has a distinctly Southwestern
flavor, represented by largely the Jornada Branch of the Mogollon
(Suhm, Krieger and Jelks 1954).
In the western areas of the Chihuahuan desert, specifically in the
Coahuila district, late prehistoric materials have been recognized by
Taylor (1966) and Heartfield (1975). Taylor has defined the Jora Complex, beginning sometime after A.D. 1000, and distinguished by the
occurrence of Perdiz, Toyah, Garza, triangular and side-notched
arrow points. These projectile point forms are largely shared with the
Bravo Valley Aspect. The Garza type has also been found in the E1
Paso area (Lynn et al 1975) and onto the Texas High Plains (Runkles
1964). Accompanying the arrow points are a variety of plain and
decorated ceramics, which Taylor (1966: 83) and Heartfield (1975)
link to the E1 Paso wares of Jornada Branch. Other traits of the Jora
Complex include small end scrapers and various lithic and wooden
artifacts (Taylor 1966: 82). Midden circles, found in late prehistoric
contexts in the Trans-Pecos area. also occur in the Jora complex,
perhaps indicative of a food preparation technology widespread in
the Chihuahuan desert in late times.
In general, the eastern part of the Chihuahuan region (the lower
Pecos, Big Bend, and Southeastern Trans-Pecos) has evidence of a
late prehistoric population which changed little from the earlier Archaic patterns aside from the use of the bow and arrow and the
manufacture of a limited amount of bone tempered pottery. The
western part, in far westernTexas andnortheastern Mexico, saw the
introduction of Southwestern-type cultures in the E1 Paso and La Junta districts, and perhaps influence of some sort on into western

PREHISTORIC CULTURAL PATTERNS

111

Coahuila reflected by the presence of a similar arrow point tradition
and diagnostic ceramics.

LATE PREHISTORY ALONG THE LOWER RIO GRANDE
A wealth of information has been obtained during the past five
years on the late prehistoric occupation in the southern Texas portion
of the Tamaulipan province. Most of the data are derived from excavations and surface investigations in the northwestern sector,
which is that area nearest the Chihuahuan desert. Before examining
these data, let us first quickly review the other late prehistoric
manifestations in the region. Research in the coastal strip of southern
Texas has led to the recognition of two archeological complexes
dating from late prehistoric times. One is the Brownsville complex of
the Rio Grande delta (Figure 2), with a material culture dominated by
artifacts of shell and a sophisticated shell-working technology. In
addition, the Brownsville complex appears to have had extensive
trade contacts extending down the northern Mexican coast and into
the desert areas of northeastern Mexico. A distinctive phenomenon
associated with the Brownsville complex was disposal of the dead in
special cemetery sites (Hester 1969). However, little is yet known
about the settlement and subsistence systems of this complex (Prewitt
1974}.
On the central and south-central Texas coast, we find the Rockport
complex {Figure 2). Occupation sites are usually confined to coastal
or bayshore margins. Cemetery sites, some apparently of Rockport
age, are also found. The cultural inventory includes stemmed arrow
points (mainly of the Perdiz type}, sandy-paste ceramics, often
decorated with asphaltum, and a core-blade industry. James E. Corbin (1974} has recently published a review of the Rockport complex;
Harry ]. Shafer and I have prepared, for publication later this year, a
study of the core-blade technology (Hester and Shafer 1975}.
The late prehistoric in the interior is less well known, except for the
northwestern sector discussed below. These are numerous late
prehistoric sites, characterized by the occurrence of arrow points
and associated lithics, and a widely-distributed bone-tempered plain
pottery (Hester and Hill 1971}. There are areas, such as the Falcon
Reservoir and Starr County district along the lower Rio Grande where
recognizable prehistoric components are extremely rare (cf. Nunley
and Hester 1975}.
I want to focus the rest of this discussion on the late prehistoric
evidence from the northwestern sector, primarily in Dimmit and

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

112

STUDY AREA

ROCKPORT
COMPLEX

1oo
J

MILES
BROWNSVILLE
COMPLEX

FIGURE 2. Southern Texas. The locations of the Rockport and
Brownsville complexes are indicated. The study area in Dimmit and
Zavala Counties (see Figure 3) is also shown.

Zavala Counties (see Figure 3; Hester and Hill ig73, ig75). The data
have been derived from studies carried out by the author and T. C.
Hill, It., an amateur archeologist, and from the work of the
Chaparrosa Archaeological Project, directed by the author in northwestern Zavala County since 1970. This research has obtained information on all phases of the region’s prehistory, and the available
data have been summarized in numerous papers (Hester 1970; Hester
1974; Hester lg75a, Ig75b; Hill and Hester 1971).
Our sample of late prehistoric sites number in the dozens, and the
locations of major sites are shown in Figure 3. All of the presently
documented sites are occupation loci, generally with concentrated

others are linear, paralleling the stream cour se. Although the precise
horizontal extent of most of the sites has not yet been determined,
they approximate 3600 ms.

PREHISTORIC CULTURAL PATTERNS

113

FIGURE 3. Dimmit and Zavala Counties, Southern Texas. Locations of
significant late prehistoric sites are shown.

114

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Distribution of late prehistoric settlements in the study area follow
a predictable pattern. They are concentrated in riparian microenvironments on the banks of large creeks or on the Nueces River and
its former channels. There is, occasionally, the re-use of older, Archaic sites but in general the late sites are horizontally separated.
Their proximity to more modern stream channels may reflect the
shifting of drainage patterns in late times. In some instances, Archaic
deposits are found to underlie the late p?ehistoric middens; other Archaic sites are found in mid-floodplain and on the bordering uplands.
When late prehistoric sites are not in the riparian zone, adjacent to
the stream channel, they are also found in the floodplain-riparian
ecotone, just back from the channel.
Intrasite patterning of the late sites remains poorly known.
Horizontal, open area excavations have been carried out at only one
site (41 ZV 83). Data from this site and other tested or surfacemapped sites indicate the presence of pits, sometimes filled with bone
or with ash and baked clay, of workshop areas usually related to
biface reduction, refuse clusters of snails and mussel shell, and
hearths. Hearths will sometimes be isolated without much surrounding debris, or there are occasional clusters of hearths and concentrated debris around them. At two sites, 41 ZV 155 and 41 ]W 8
(the latter outside the study area) there appear to have been areas in
the site used for disposal, as large concentrations of bison, deer, antelope, and other mammalian remains have been found in what may
be old erosional cuts in which trash [including potsherds, debitage,
and broken poinls) was thrown.
In my discussion of the material culture of the late prehistoric sites,
I will confine myself to data from excavated sites. The dominant
projectile point form is the stemmed Perdiz type. Corner notched, expanding stem arrow points similar to Scallorn and Edwards also occur, as do triangular points similar to the Fresno type. Also included
in the arrow point series is a thick, stubby form technologically
resembling miniature dart points. Stratigraphic evidence suggests
that these begin in the late Archaic and continue through the late
prehistoric.
It is difficult to discern any internal sequence within the arrow
point assemblage. There are at least two sites, elsewhere in south
Texas, Berclair (Hester and Parker 1970) and 41 JW 8, which yielded
only Perdiz points. Yet in the northwestern sector, data from exCavations suggest that the several arrow point styles co-existed in the
late prehistoric. This is in contrast with the Austin and Toyah phase
sequence defined for central Texas. Perhaps the most convincing

PREHISTORIC CULTURAL PATTERNS

115

evidence of contemporaneity comes from a refuse accumulation at
the Tortuga Flat site in Zavala County in which triangular points and
Scallorn co-occurred.
The lithic tool kit also includes end and side scrapers, often made
on blades. Four-edge beveled lozenge shaped knives, bifacial drills,
and perforators or gravers made on small flakes are known from excavated contexts.
Debitage analysis has been carried out for several later prehistoric
sites. Both percussion and pressure techniques are represented, and
in general, flakes are smaller than those produced in the earlier lithic
industries in the region. Flakes were used for the manufacture of
arrow points, scrapers, perforators, and casual cutting tools.
Sometimes, only minimal edge trimming was required to shape an
arrow point. A number of blades and exhausted polyhedral blade
cores have been found. Some blades were used for making Perdiz and
other arrow points, as well as some very small end scrapers~ the
larger blades were fashioned into end scrapers and other scraping
tools. This blade technology is widespread in the south Texas, central
Texas, and Texas coastal late prehistoric. Perhaps reflecting
available lithic resources, the size of the blades, and the tools made
on them, vary from region to region (Hester and Shafer 1975; Green
and Hester 1975).
Ground and polished implements are rare. No milling slabs are
reported from the late prehistoric and manos are infrequent. Hammerstones are, on the other hand, quite common, and are usually
made on small cobbles of purple quartzite. A deeply engraved tubular
sandstone pipe was found at one late site; at another, a rim fragment
of a micaceous schist vessel was excavated.
Bone-tempered plainware pottery is associated with the late
prehistoric sites and although it is not found at all sites, it has been
documented at 50-75 surface sites and in excavated contexts at
several others. Numbers of sherds per site vary from a half-dozen to
two or three thousand. The pottery has affinities with the Leon Plain
ware of central Texas. It is usually undecorated, though some vessels
are incised or red painted, formed by coiling, with hard and wellsmoothed exteriors and poorly finished interiors. Vessel shapes are
poorly known, although most seem to have been small, roundbottomed jars or bowls, with loop handle and lug attachments. Ollas
are known for a site in the northeastern sector of the region.
The pottery is tempered with finely-crushed bone fragments.
William R. Dickinson of Stanford University has described the results
of his petrographic examination of samples of the pottery:

116

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
"Sand-sized angular fragments of broken bone form about 20% of the fired
ware. The fire clay body contains scattered angular grains of quartz silt
and rare subangular to subrounded grains of quartz sand. From the setring, I suppose the body is an alluvial clay of some kind. Perhaps the bonetemper technique was a last resort in the absence of generally available
sandy deposits on alluvial floodplains" (Dickinson letter to T. R. Hester,
March 12,1973).

One of the most interesting aspects of research in the late
prehistory of the region is the faunal information that is beginning to
appear. In Table i, faunal data for 8 south Texas late prehistoric
sites are listed. Only 41 JW 8 lies outside the northwestern sector. At
least forty-one individual species are represented, and the information would indicate that little in the way of potential meat
resources was neglected. Large mammals, such as bison, pronghorn,
and whitetail deer are present, with the latter the most common.
However, in frequency of occurrence and in the number of individuals present per site, the small mammals (jackrabbit, cottontail
rabbit, packrat, and cotton rat) are apparently the major meat
resource. Fish, birds and reptiles also figured prominently in the late
prehistoric diet, with turtles the best represented in the present data.
Other food resources found at the late sites include large numbers of
land snails, which, based on ethnohistoric accounts, were gathered
as a food source, and the shells of freshwater mussel. The only direct
evidence of plant food is in the form of hackberry seeds and charred
fragments of acorns. However, we know from ethnohistoric accounts
that the gathering of plant foods was perhaps the most important activity in the regional subsistence regime.
Of particular significance in the faunal lists are the presence of
mammals which are no longer in the region, including bison, antelope
and prairie dog. Taken together, these species support the argument
for open, perhaps savannah, vegetational patterns in the late
prehistoric. Conspicious by their absence are the j avelina or peccary,
and the armadillo. Both are considered to be recent intruders into the
region, and the faunal data bear this out. Quail, a popular game bird
in the area today, is also absent. These birds are rather easy to trap
or snare, and their total absence in the faunal lists must indicate their
absence in the late prehistoric faunal assemblage. Since these birds
favor a brushy habitat, their absence may also reflect savannah conditions.
A review of the faunal tabulations reveals no recognizable
predilection for any particular microenvironment for the hunting (or
gathering) of animals. Bison and antelope were certainly more common in the uplands. Deer and many of the small mammals inhabited a

PREHISTORIC CULTURAL PATTERNS

117

TABLE I.

Table 1. Fauna from Late Prehistoric Sites in Southern Texas. Sites 41 ZV 155, ZV 60,
ZV 14. and Holdsworth II (ZV H-II) are described in Hester and Hill [1975).

Common Name
*Bison
*Pronghorn (antelope)
White-tail deer
*Grey Wolf
Coyote
Jackrabbit
Cottontail rabbii
Raccoon
Bobcat
Opossum
Grey Fox
Hog-Nosed Skunk
Southern Plains Packrat
Cotton Rat
Pocket Mouse
White footed mouse
Mexican ground squirrel
Ground squirrel
Plains pocket gopher
*Prairie dog
Gopher
Box turtle
Slider turtle
Turtle
Frog
Fish
Catfish
Alligator gar
Rattlesnake
Bullsnake
Ratsnake
Water snake
Racer snake
Snake
Horned toad
Heron
Wild turkey
Mockingbird
Duck
Roadrunner
Bird

ZV
155

ZV
60

X
X
X

X
X

X

X

X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X

X

X
X

X
X

X

X
X

X

ZV
H-I]

ZV
123

ZV
14

ZV
152

X

JW
8
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X

X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X

X
X

x

x
X
X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X
X

*Species no longer present in tim region.

x
X
X
X
X
X

X

X
X

x
x
x

X
X
X
X

X
X

x
X
x

X

X

X
X

DM
28

X

TABLE II.
Table 2. Late Prehistoric and Historic Fauna from Scorpion Cave, 41 ME 7, Medina
County, South-central Texas. Numbers in parentheses indicate the total number of
excavated levels in which one or more individuals were recognized. Faunal data cour~
tesy of George Judson (San Antonio). Judson is preparing a report on the site, and the
full faunal data will be published in it.
6" Levels
3
2
1
Common Name
Bovid*
Whitetail deer
Goat (domestic)
Pig (domestic)
Black bear
Beaver
Raccoon
O’possmn
Ringtail (civit cat)
Striped skunk
Cottontail rabbit
Armadillo**
Fox squirrel
Mexican ground squirrel
Packrat
Cotton rat
Plains pocket gopher
Cave bat
Mouse-ear bat
Yellow mud turtle
Slider Turtle
Western box turtle
Western mud turtle
Soft Shell turtle
Turtle sp.
Racer snake
Rattlesnake
Rat snake
Bull snake
Leopard frog
Frog sp.
Freshwater drum
Fish sp.
Fox sparrow
Mockingbird
Warbler
Broad-wing hawk
Greenwing teal
Duck sp.
Wild turkey
Canada goose

(7)
(18)
(3)
(1)

(2)
(14)

(3)
(9)

(1)
(1)

(1)
(2)
(1)
(4)
(13)
(1)
(1)
(9)
(1)
(2)
(2)
(1)
(1)
(1)
(3)
(1)
(1)
(3)

(3)
(14)
(1)

(1)
(2)

(1)
(9)
(3)
(1)

(1}
{4)
(1)
(1}

(3)
(4)

(2)

(1)
(3)
(1)

(1)
(1)

(2)
(1)

(3)

(1)
(1)

(1)
(3)

(2)
(1)
(2)

[1)
(1)
(3)
(8)
(1)

{1)
(1}

(1)
(1)
(1)
(5)
(1)

(3)

*Bovid: bison or cow. Associated artifacts in levels 2 and 3 indicate presence of bison.
**Armadillo: this is a recent introduction to the fauna of south-central Texas, probably
not appearing until after A.D. 1900 (Billy Davidson personal communication).

PREHISTORIC CULTURAL PATTERNS

119

variety of closely-spaced microenvironments. The riparian microenvironment and the riparian-floodplain ecotone would have been the
habitat of many of the small mammals, rodents, reptiles and birds. In
general, most of the fauna represented in the late sites could have
been obtained in the immediate site area or without venturing far
from the streamside camps. As more data become available, we
should be able to examine the seasonality of site occupation given the
presence of migratory waterfowl and other seasonally-specific fauna.
If one compares the faunal lists from the northwestern sector with
those from late prehistoric and early historic aboriginal occupations
in south-central Texas and the south Texas coast, some immediate
differences can be noted. For example, at Scorpion Cave (41 ME 7)
west of San Antonio (see Table 2), antelope, jackrabbit and prairie
dog are absent, probably reflecting local environmental conditions.
Although there is the emphasis on deer and small mammals we saw to
the south, there seems to have also been a preference at this site for
turtles and birds. Interesting is the occurrence of Canada goose, and
greenwing tea!, present in the area only during winter migrations.
In examining the late prehistoric and historic fauna from the
Kirchmeyer site (41 NU 11) on the south Texas coast, we note the
heavier emphasis on locally available marine resources (Table 3).
Bison and whitetail deer remains are present, but antelope and
prairie dog are not. The small mammals were sought (and here,
swamp rabbit is found along with cottontail), and there was the
utilization of reptiles and birds. Note the occurrence of black bear,
also present at Scorpion Cave, but absent elsewhere in the south
Texas faunal record. The domesticates identified at Kirchmeyer are
surface finds, linked either to European use of the site area or to the
known historic Indian occupations at the site.
Speaking in highly general terms, the subsistence endeavors of the
late prehistoric peoples throughout southern Texas reflect locally
(and probably seasonally) available meat resources, but there is a
widespread and apparently heavy use of whitetail deer, small mammals, rodents, fish, and reptiles. Bison may have appeared only
cyclically in the region; we have little evidence of their presence in
Archaic deposits.
There are several other aspects of the late prehistoric period that I
want to very briefly mention. Mortuary practices are poorly known in
the interior; flexed and extended burials seem to have been placed at
random, within and outside of campsites. Along the coast, interment
in discrete cemetery areas was the burial mode. Trade contacts were
widespread. Interior and coastal groups exchanged a variety of
materials. The people of the Brownsville complex apparently main-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

120

TABLE m.

Table 3. List of Identified Fauna. Kirchmeyer Site (41 NU 11), Southern Texas Coast.
The faunal remains are from various excavated and surface contexts, including late
prehistoric and historic aboriginal occupations.
Bison
Horse
Bovid (cow or bison)
Whitetail deer
Domestic goat
Domestic pig
Black bear
Coyote
Domestic dog
Striped skunk
Raccoon
Jackrabbit
Cottontail rabbit
Swamp rabbit
Plains pack rat
Cotton rat

Rattlesnake
Box turtle
Slider turtle
Alligator
Turtle sp.
Crustaceans
Gafftop catfish
Hardhead catfish
Fish sp.
Black Drum
Star Drum
Drum sp.
Sheephead
Redfish
Sea trout

Wild turkey
Domestic turkey
Greenwing teal
Bird sp.

tained trade contracts with the Huasteca. Additionally, at some interior campsites of late prehistoric date, obsidian and pottery from
both Mexico and New Mexico have been found.
Population size is unknown. Both the archeological evidence and
early historic records indicate that we are dealing with fairly small
groups, perhaps microbands of 20-60 people.lt is likely that these late
prehistoric groups coalesced seasonally, as they did in early historic
times, to harvest plant foods such as acorns, prickly pear fruits, and
other seasonally available plant resources.
The dating of the late prehistoric in southern Texas remains imprecise. Radiocarbon dates available from five sites indicate a range
from A. D. 1440 to A. D. 1760.Although the latter date would place the
occupations within the historic era, the sites have produced absolutely no evidence of historic contact. I suspect tl~at additional
radiocarbon dates, some currently being processed, will push the
beginning of the late prehistoric back tO around A. D. 1300. In any
event, the late prehistoric in southern Texas is certainly a very late
phenomenon, as it was in parts of the Chihuahuan province.

PREHISTORIC CULTURAL PATTERNS

121

CONCLUDING COMMENTS
Given the significant environmental differences between the
Chihuahuan and Tamaulipan provinces, perhaps even more marked
in late prehistoric times, I think there is little to be gained from a
detailed comparison between cultural patterns in the two areas. We
should note, however, the similarities between the late prehistoric
remains from the lower Pecos and the southeastern Trans-Pecos m~d
the materials in southern Texas. Unfortunately, so little is knowl~
about the late prehistoric in the eastern Chihuahuan area that we
cannot go much beyond this generalization.
By the same token, we cannot make sweeping generalizations about
late prehistoric lifeway in southern Texas. We know that the
ecological relationships of that period were different from those of
today, and that we cannot look at late prehistoric patterns of adaptation from the perspective of the modern environment. What appear
to be two distinct adaptations were made, perhaps reflecting little
more than the efficient utilization of local resources. These were the
maritime (or coastal; Rockport, Brownsville) and savannah (interior)
adaptations, which I have outlined in an earlier paper (Hester 1971).
The savannah adaptation, found in the interior, is best known from
the northwestern sector. However, there are hundreds of surface
sites scattered throughout the interior which bear related cultural
materials, in the form of arrow point, bone-tempered pottery and certain lithic tools. Thus, we know that this hypothesized adaptation was
quite widespread and the present radiocarbon evidence also suggests
that it was quite late.
What broke the long-lived Archaic pattern around A. D. 1300-1400?
Beginning at this time, we can recognize changing settlement patterns
and the introduction of new cultural traits, particularly arrow points,
bone-tempered pottery, beveled knives, a core-blade technology, and
so forth. It is possible that the new settlement trends may reflect
nothing more than adjustments to shifting drainage patterns.
However, the new cultural inventory is something distinctly different
from that of the so-called Archaic.
Are we seeing, in this late prehistoric era, the adoption by local
peoples of new traits and activities brought about by environmental
changes, diffusion, or intracultural contacts? Or, are we looking at
the movement of new populations into portions of the region? The
source of such populations might be the Toyah phase of central
Texas, in which very similar cultural inventories are found beginning
around A. D. 1200 (Shafer 1971). Given my research in the region, I
see no firm evidence for this latter explanation. If new groups had

122

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

moved in, I think we could recognize co-existing native peoples who
did not accept these new traits. Such is not the case, with the possible
exception of the Falcon Lake-Starr County districts. When one looks
at the overall picture, it is obvious that the new traits of the late
prehistoric are widely distributed throughout the savannah area.
Perhaps there is another process which might better explain the
spread of these new traits into the region. Dillehay (1974) has observed that there was a marked expansion of the bison range around
A. D. 1200-1300. He has also noted the migration of bison herds into
southern Texas at this time, although when he wrote, he did not have
the evidence we have recently obtained, that bison were actually
present as far south as Alice in deep south Texas, 120 miles south of
San Antonio. I find it interesting that the phenomenon of late
prehistoric development in southern Texas coincides with the influx
of bison, a faunal component which had been largely absent (given
our present data) in the Archaic of this region. While I seriously
doubt that any of the south Texas peoples ever became full-fledged
bison hunters, they undoubtedly had to make some readjustments,
particularly in their subsistence system, and perhaps even in the
placement of settlements (cf. Gunnerson 1972). I think that the intrusion of bison brought with it the appearance of new cultural traits.
The Plains-like culture of the Toyah phase peoples had the same kinds
of artifacts that we now see appearing in southern Texas. Are these
new accoutrements nothing more than diffused cultural elements
from the Plains? Are we seeing here the same southward spread
of Plains culture that had a century or two earlier led to the development of the central Texas Toyah phase? Although I have not
thought this out in any detail, I presently favor this explanation as the
major mechanism for the development of late prehistoric culture in
southern Texas.

PREHISTORIC CULTURAL PATTERNS

123

REFERENCES CITED

Blair, W. F.
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science Vol. 2, No. 1,
pp. 93-116.
Campbell, T. N.
1967 Archaeological Survey of the Big Bend National Park. Part I.
Mimeographed report submitted to the National Park Service.
Corbin, J. E.
1974 A Model for Cultural Succession for the Coastal Bend Area of Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society Vol. 45, pp. 29-54.
Dillehay, T. D,
1974 Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains.
Plains Anthropologist Vol. 19, No. 65, pp. 180-196.
Green, L. M. and T. R. Hester
1975 The Finis Frost Site: A Toyah Phase Occupation in San Saba County,
Central Texas. Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society Vol. 44, pp. 6988.
Gunnerson, D. A.
1972 Man and Bison on the Plains in the Protohistoric Period. Plains Anthropo!ogist Vol. 17, No. 55, pp. 1-10.
Harris, D. R,
1966 Recent Plant Invasions in the Arid and Semiarid Southwest of the
United States. Annals, Association of American Geographers Vol. 56,
pp. 408-422.
Heartfield, L.
1975 Archaeological Investigations in the Charcos de Risas Desert,
Coahuila. Paper presented at the conference "Prehistory of
Northeastern Mexico and Texas," Monterrey, Mexico.
Hester, T. R.
1969 The Floyd Morris and Ayala Sites: Discussion and Comparison.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society Vol. 40, pp. 157,166.
1970 An Interim Statement on Archaeological Research at Chaparrosa
Ranch, Texas. Report submitted to the Office of the State Archeologist, Austin.
1971 Hunters and Gatherers of the Rio Grande Plain and the Lower Coast
of Texas. Paper presented at the symposium on Texas Archeology,
annual meeting, Texas Academy of Science, Nacogdoches.
1974 Some Observations on Archaeology at Chaparrosa Ranch, 1974. La
Tierra Vol. 1, No. 3, pp. 19-22,
1975a Chipped Stone Industries on the Rio Grande Plain of Texas. Texas
fournal of Science, Vol. 26, Nos. 1-2, pp. 213-222,
1975b An Overview of Prehistoric Chronology in Southern and SouthCentral Texas. Paper presented at the conference, "Prehistory of
Northeast Mexico and Texas,, Monterrey, Mexico.
Hester, T. R. and R. C. Parker
1970 The Berclair Site: A Late Prehistoric Component in Goliad County,
Southern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society Vol. 41,
pp. 1-24.

124

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Hester T. R. and H. J. Shafer
1975 A Preliminary Study of Blade Technology on the Lower Texas Coast.
Plains Anthropologist, Vol. 26, Nos. I-2, pp. 213-222.
Hester, T. R. and T. C. Hill, Jr.
1973 Prehistoric Occupation at the Holdsworth and Stewart Sites on the
Rio Grande Plain of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
SocietyVol. 43, pp. 33-75.
1975 Archaeology of the Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric Peoples of
Southern Texas. Ms. submitted for publication.
Hill, T. C., Jr. and T. R. Hester
1971 Isolated Late Prehistoric and Archaic Components at the Honeymoon
Site (41 ZV 34), Southern Texas. Plains Anthropologist Vol. 15, No. 54,
pp. 52-59.
Johnson, L., Jr.
1964 The Devil’s Mouth Site. Archaeology Series, No. 6, Department of Anthropology, University of Texas at Austin.
Kelley, J. C., T. N. Campbell, and D. Lehmer
1940 The Association of Archaeological Materials with Geological
Deposits in the Big Bend Region of Texas. Sul Ross State Teachers
College Bulletin, Vol. 21, No. 3.
Lehmer. D. J.
1960 A Review of Trans-Pecos Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society Vol. 29 (for 1958), pp. 109-144.
Lynn, W, B. Baskin, and W. R. Hudson, Jr.
1975 A Preliminary Archeological Reconnaissance of Selected Public Free
School Lands in E1 Paso County, Texas. General Land Office and
Texas Historical Commission, Archeological Survey Report, No. 13.
McClurkan, B. B.
1968 Test Excavations. Javelina Bluff. Val Verde County, Texas. Fall, 1966.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project, Austin.
Nunley, J. P. and T. R. Hester
1975 Assessment of Archaeological Resources in Portions of Starr County,
Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, University of Texas at
San Antonio Archaeological Survey Report, No. 7.
Prewitt, E. R.
1974 Preliminary Archeological Investigation in the Rio Grande Delta of
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society Vol. 45, pp. 55-66.
Sharer, H. T.
1971 Late Prehistory of Central Texas. Paper presented at the symposium
on Texas Archeology, annual meeting, Texas Academy of Science,
Nacogdoches.
Story, D. A. and V. M. Bryant, Jr.
1966 A Preliminary Study of the Paleoecology of the Amistad Reservoir
Area. Report to National Science Foundation.
Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin oJ the Texas
Archeological Societ3 Vol. 25.
Taylor, W. W., Jr.
1966 Archaic Cultures Adjacent to the Northeastern Frontiers of
Mesoamerica. Handbook of Middle American Indians Vol. 4, pp. 5994.

PREHISTORIC CULTURAL PATTERNS

125

Wells, P. V.
1970 Historical Factors Controlling Vegetation Patterns and Floristic
Distributions in the Central Plains Region of North America. In:
Pleistocene and Recent Environments of the Central Great Plains,
University of Kansas, Special Publication Vol. 3, pp. 211-221.
The University of Texas at San Antonio

ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS OF FOUR SITES IN
SOUTHWESTERN COAHUILA, MEXICO
LORRAINE HEARTFIELD

ABSTRACT
Four surface sites in the Desierto de Charcos de Risa were investigated.
Artifacts spanning late Paleo-Indian to modern times were recovered.
Although this region is included in the overall archeological pattern in
northern Mexico, many artifact styles are specific to a small area. Among
these, are pottery and projectile point styles.

INTRODUCTION
In 1967, I excavated four sites in the Charcos de Risa Desert of
southwestern Coahuila, Mexico (Fig. 1) (Greene 1971). The excavations were conducted under the auspices of the Northeast
Mexico Archeological Project directed by Jeremiah F. Epstein,
University of Texas at Austin. Funds were provided by the National
Science Foundation.

GEOLOGICAL SETTING AND ENVIRONMENT
The four sites are located in the general region known as the
Laguna or Comarca Lagunera. The Charcos de Risa basin is a narrow
elongated desert oriented northwest by southeast. The southern
mouth opens on the Laguna Mayran and the northern on the Lagunas
La Leche and Palomas. The basin is bordered on the east by the
Sierra del Sobaco and on the west by the Sierra Tlahualillo. The sites
are located along the dry channel of the Rio Charcos de Risa at the
southern end of the desert.
The Laguna lfes slightly south of the Bolson de Mapami. Eardley
(1951: Fig. 338) and Maldonado-Koerdell (1964: 5) include the area in
the Western Sierra Province. Interior drainage characterizes this
basin-and:range region, and following rains, the basins are frequently covered by water. Salts collect in the lower parts of the basins and
are observable on the surface. Active dune fields are common.
According to Tamayo and West (1964: 115), water drained into the
Laguna near San Pedro de las Colonias from the Rio Nazas before it
was dammed, creating many lakes. The largest, the Laguna Mayran,
had a diameter of more than a mile.
According to the Koeppen Classification (Escoto 1964: 205-208),
Coahuila is a true desert. The mean annual ground temperature is
greater than 77° F. The difference between day and night tern-

128

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

FIGURE 1. Location map of recent archeological excavations in
Coahuila, Mexico.

SOUTHWESTERN COAHUILA

129

peratures is extreme and cold winters are contrasted by hot summers. The mean annual precipitation is 25 cm. with greater than 40%
variability. Thunderstorms occur most frequently during the summer
(Ibid. 197-204).
FLORA AND FAUNA
Common flora in the Laguna includes Agave, Opuntia, Cereus,
Euphorbia, Larrea, Dasylirion and Prosopis (Aveleyra et al 1956: 41).
Many mammals are common to the area. Among these are rodents,
especially rabbits and carnivores. Birds are numerous but I observed
no water fowl. According to local inhabitants, deer are rare.
Early Spanish reports (Griffen 1966: 114) indicate that the area was
dry except near the lake margins. Fish, water fowl, fruits and nuts
were reported in the wetter areas.

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
Before Europeans reached the Laguna region the effects of the
Spaniards were felt. Horses extended the range of indigenous groups
in north central Mexico resulting in a rapid change in population
distribution. Later, Indians from diverse cultural backgrounds united
to harrass the Spaniards, and many punitive expeditions were then
mounted against the Indians. Also, missionization and its concommitant European diseases decimated the aboriginal population.
Finally, deportation, assimilation and extinction obliterated the
native inhabitants of the Lagmla.
William B. Griffen (1966) has written an extensive study of the
early historic period in north central Mexico. Readers are referred to
this excellent report for greater detail.

ARCHEOLOGICALBACKGROUND
Before 1967, only two major archeological investigations had been
conducted in the study area. The first of these was in the central part
of Coahuila, the Cuatro Cienegas Basin. W. W. Taylor (1956, 1966)
surveyed open sites and excavated several cave deposits. Subsequently he developed a cultural sequence based oll artifact
typology and radiocarbon dates from the cave materials.
Aveleyra et al [1956] described archeological materials from caves
and open sites throughout the Laguna. The most spectacular site is a
rich mortuary cave, Cueva de la Candelaria.
Many archeological investigations were conducted under the
auspices of the Northeast Mexico Archeological Project. In 1960,

130

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Jeremiah F. Epstein conducted archeological surveys in Nuevo Leon
and Goahuila. This was followed by excavation of the San Isidro site
in Nuevo Leon (Epstein 1969). Parts of Nuevo Leon and extreme
Southeastern Goahuila were surveyed by Burney B. McClurkan and
Glen S. Greene in 1963. Both McGlurkan (1966) and Nance (1971) excavated sites in Nuevo Leon. The central part of Southern Goahuila
from the Nuevo Leon border to Torreon was surveyed by Dudley M.
Varner (1967). In 1966 an intensive survey was conducted near
Torreon by Ronald W. Ralph and me. Also, in 1966, William Irwin
located and excavated two large sites in the Laguna Mayran. Finally,
in the spring of 1967 1 returned to the Laguna and excavated the four
sites that are the subject of this paper ..........................

THE SITES AND EXCAVATION PROCEDURE
The sites C-189, C-190 and C-191 are adjacent to and almost continguous with one another. Site C-190 lies between C-189 and the
riverbed; site C-191 is slightly south of C-190. These three sites consist
of from 100 by 100 to 100 by 200 meters of scattered debris; cracked
basalt, hearths, burials, lithic and ceramic artifacts.
Site C-198 is located several kilometers northeast of the other sites.
One edge of the site is adjacent to a large mesquite stand. The surface, 150 by 300 meters is littered with debris which includes streamrolled cobbles. Milling stones are more prevalent on the surface than
at the other sites.
The sites proved to be extremely shallow. It was hoped that some
stratigraphic artifact distribution would be discovered, but there was
little cultural material below i0 centimeters and no artifact differentiation existed from the surface to the lower limit of the deposit.
Each site was mapped and excavation units were established.
Placement of the units was based on high artifact concentration and
an attempt to sample different parts of each site. It was hoped that
the excavation units would indicate spatial differences among the artifact assemblages. Unfortunately, this was not the case.
The lack of spatial differences (both vertical and horizontal) among
the artifact assemblages within each site is a function of the unconsolidated midden matrix and erosional factors. Wind deflation of
the sites lowered the artifacts onto a common (present day) surface
and destroyed the vertical record. Horizontal mixing of artifact
assemblages is due to lateral movement caused by sheet erosion; all
of the sites are subject to widespread vertical runoff of flood waters
following heavy rains.
Intensive surface collections were made at each site. A dune area
between C-190 and C-191 was sampled and all specimens are treated

SOUTHWESTERN COAHUILA

131

as members of the collection of either C-190 or C-191. For provenience
detail, see Greene (1971).

FEATURES
Burials
Three burials were removed from C-189. Skeletal remains at C-191
and C-198 were not removed due to extreme decomposition from exposure and because the field season was concluded prematurely, The
terminology applied to the burial descriptions is adopted from
Sprague (1968: 479-485}.
The remains of the first burial, Feature 6, were badly deteriorated.
The axis of the skeleton was east by west with the cranium in the
east. The burial was a primary inhumation extended on the back. No
artifacts or pit outline were associated with the burial. No age and
sex determination could be made. However, the individual was
probably a small child beCause 0nly the central portions of the long
bones remained: These long bone fragments were small,
Two additional burials (Features 7 and 8) were lying side by side.
Both skeletons were partially scattered on the surface. The maximum
depth of both burials was 10 cm: below the surface.
The long axis of one burial (Feature 7) was northwest by southeast
with the cranium in the southeast. The burial was a primary
inhumation, extended on the back with the hands along the sides’ The
skull, lower limb long bones, pelvis and all but three vertebra were
missing or fragmented. The outline of an irregular burial pit was
evident around the lower portion of the skeleton. No artifacts were

associated with the burial. The individual is believed to have been an
adolescent because the vertebral epiphysis were unfused. No sex
determination was possible.
The long axis of the second burial (Feature 8) was east southeast by
west northwest. The cranium was in the west northwest. The burial
was a primary inhumation extended on the back with the hands along
the sides and the left leg crossed Over the right. The individual was an
adult because all epiphysis were fused. No sex determination was
made. There were no artifacts nor evidence of a burial pit.
Hearths
Three possible hearths were documented during excavation of site
C-189. One possible hearth was excavated at site C-190:

132

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Features i and 2 from C-189 are probably parts of a single hearth.
Thirty-two small (diameters range between 5 and i0 cm.) basalt rocks
were scattered across an area of 50 cm. diameter. There was no apparent orderly arrangement among the stones. No evidence of firehardened earth, charcoal or artifacts was associated with the
features.
The second possible hearth at C-189 is Feature 3. Three basalt
rocks (approximate diameters, 15 cm. each) and one smaller rock
were scattered across an area of 25 cm. diameter. There was no
orderly arrangement, associated charcoal or artifacts.
Features 4 and 5 represent the third possible hearth from C-189. A
cluster of 7 stones (diameters of 15 cm. each) were scattered within
an area 29 cm. in diameter. A large charcoal fragment was recovered
from among the rocks. There was no fire-hardened earth nor were
there artifacts associated with this possible hearth.
The single possible hearth from C-190 was excavated. This
(Feature I) consisted of 9 basalt rocks and charcoal fragments. Seven
of the stones were located along an irregular north-south axis. The
two remaining stones were 23 and 30 cm, west of these. No artifacts,
charcoal, or fire-hardened earth was discovered.

ARTIFACTS
Analysis of artifacts from northern Mexico is hampered by the lack
of detailed comparative information. Therefore, lengthy descriptions
of all artifact categories are included and related to established,
culturally significant types. Since categories have been combined
from the 1971 report (Greene 1971) they are carefully referenced
here. All unclassifiable fragments are omitted from this report.
Because analysis of the artifacts indicated that no vertical or
horizontal significance could be demonstrated, artifacts are reported
only by site. Refer to Tables I, II, III, and IV for proveniences not ineluded in the text.
Projectile Points
Primary sorting criterions are dart and arrow point categories.
Mean dart point weights are greater than 2.5 grams and mean arrow
point weigl~ts are less than 2.5 grams (Fenega 1953).
The outlines of the proximal or basal portions of projectile points
are used to define the primary categories. These are: contracting

on the observation that stem or base treatment is significant:

SOUTHWESTERN COAHUILA

133

although obviously, not all sub-categories within a single stem treatment are contemporaneous. This is not unique. Johnson (1967) demonstrated the chronological significance of basal characteristics among
projectile points from central and southwestern Texas. Stem characteristics are refelcted in the typology of central Coahuila (Taylor
1966) and are significant among the projectile point changes in northern Mexico and adjacent Texas which are summarized by Epstein
(1969).
The final sorting criterion is based on common typology. Projectile

points are compared to

types when possible and provisional

types are described. Many point forms from central and southwestern Coahuila have been briefly described by Aveleyra et al
(1956) and TaylOr (1966) but systematic description is lacking. In order to provide comparative data, detailed descriptive information
about each projectile point type. provisional type and untyped
category is included in the text of this paper.
DART POINTS
A total of 167 dart points was recovered from the four sites. These
include: contracting stemmed (49 specimens), straight stemmed (3
specimens), expanding stemmed (80 specimens), side-notched (17
specimens), miscellaneous stemmed (4 specimens), unstemmed (14
specimens).

CONTRACTING STEMMED
Among the contracting stemmed dart points are three types defined

by Taylor (1966), one provisional type and four untyped categories.
Acatita (Fig. 2, a-c)
There are seven specimens in this provisional type. The blades are
triangular with recurred or convex edges. Alternate or unifacial beveling
of the blade edges is common. With one exception the stems are short,
narrow and strongly contracted to slightly expanded. The exception has a
long stem. Stems may be asymmetrica! to the medial axis of the blade with
thinned or Unthinned bases. The regularly barbed shoulders are equal to or
slightly longer than the stems. One shoulder of a single specimen is descending. It may have been fractured. Dimensions: length, 2.6-318 cm.; length of
stem, 0.8-1.0 cm. and exception, 1.4 cm.; width across sh0ulders, 2.1-2.9
cm.; width of base, 0.8-1.1 cm.; thickness 0.5-0.7 cm.; weight, 2.3-4.3 grams.
Remarks: Greene (1971) class i, Group 5; Class III, Group 7; pages 24, 25,
33; Plate 2, m-q and 44.
Duran (Fig 2, d-f)
These thirty specimens conform to Taylor’s Duran type (1986: Fig. 3, bottom row left). They are characterized by opposed blade notches, barbed or

134

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

straight shoulders and bulbous stems. Most are crude and thick although
two have thin broad" blades. Most specimens have two sets of opposed
blade notches but one set or more than two sets does occur. Dimensions:
length, 2.5-4.0 cm.; width across shoulders, greater than 1.2-2.3 cm."
thickness, 0.4-0.7 cm. Remarks: Similar specimens from Poza Salada are
illustrated by Aveleyra et al. (1956: Lam. I h,i). Greene (1971} Class III.
Group 13; pages 43-49; Plates 3, ii-yy and 4, a-k. Silva and Hester (1973: 151.
Fig. 2,e-q) recovered comparable specimens from eastern Durango.
Gobernadora (Fig. 2,g)
This specimen conforms to the Gobernadora type as illustrated by
Taylor (1966: third row right). The blade is triangular, edges straight and
barbs are regular. The stem is bulb shaped, expands medially and contracts to a sharply pointed bffacially thinned base. Dimensions: length, 6.3
cm.; width across shoulders, 2.9 cm.: thickness, 0.6 cm. Remarks: Greene
(1971) Class I. Group 1. Subgroup 1; page 19; Plate 2,a.
lora (Fig. 2,h)
Three specimens are comparable to lora points (Taylor 1966; Fig. 3. first
row). The stern is broken from one dart point. The triangular blades have
concave or convex edges. Shoulders are variable, being both regularly barbed or one regularly barbed and the other descending. Bases are bifacially
thinned and convex. The base of each stemmed specimen has a shallow
central notch, thus differing from Taylor’s examples. One specimen has an
alternately beveled blade and stem. The beveling on the blade and stem are
opposed. Dimensions: length, 3.8-4.1 cm.; width across shoulders. 2.6-3.3
cm.; thickness, 0.543.7 cm. Remarks: Aveleyra et al. (1956: Lam II a) also
illustrates this form. Greene (1971) Class I, Group I, Subgroups 2 and 3;
pages 19-20; Plate 2.b-c .....
Untyped A (Fig. 2,i-j)
These four specimens have triangular blades with straight, convex or
recurred edges. Shoulders are regularly barbed and shorter than the
stems. Stems are straight or asymmetrical with bifacially thimled bases.
On one specimen, one blade edge is unifacially notched from file tip to the
shoulder. Dimensions: length, 2.8-3.9 cm.; width across shoulders, 1.6-2.2
cm.; thickness, 0.443.8 cm. Remarks: Greene (1971) Class I, Group 2,
Subgroup 2 and Group 3; pages 20-22; Plate 2,d and i.
Untyped B (Fig. 2,k)
These are proximal fragments of two large dart points. The shoulders
have small regular barbs. Stems are short, asymmetrical to the medial axis
with straight edges and convex bases. The base of one is unifacially thinned. The other is unthinned. Dimensions: length greater than 2.7 em.; width across shoulders slightly greater than 3.7 cm. thickness, 6ff43.8 cm.
Remarks: Greene [1971) Class I, Group 4, Subgroup 1; page 23; Plate 2,j-k.
Untyped C (Fig. 2,1)
The thick triangular blade of this specimen has one straight and one convex edge. The convex edge is deeply notched distal to a descending
shoulder. The opposite shoulder is regularly barbed. The stem edges are

SOUTHWESTERN COAHUILA

135

b

c

d

e

g

I

I

q

0¸¸

r

s

?,~~
CM

FIGURE 2, Dart Points. a-c, Acatita; d-f, Duran; g, Gobernadora; h,
Jora) i-j, Untyped A; k, Untyped B; 1, Untyped C; m, Untyped D; n,
Untyped E; o-p, Charcos; q-r, Finesterre; s-t, Vertiente.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

136

straight and the bifacially thinned base is convex. Dimensions: length,
greater than 3.6 cm.; width across shoulders, 2.1 cm.; thickness, 0.8 cm.
Remarks: Greene (1971} Class I, Group 6; page 25; Plate 2,r).
Untyped D (Fig. 2,m)
This unique specimen has a broad triangular blade with alternately
beveled edges. The barbs of both shoulders are fractured. The short stem
has straight edges. The base is a wide bifacially thinned notch. Dimensions: length, 4.0 Cm.; width across shoulders, greater than 3.2 cm.;
thickness, 0.6 cm. Remarks: Greene (1971} Class I’ Group 8; page 26; Plate
23.

STRAIGHT STEMMED
Only three dart points have straight stems. None can be placed in a
previously described or provisional type.
Untyped E (Fig. 2,n)
Of these three specimens only one is complete. Two specimens are
stemless but the blade morphology is so similar that they are tentatively included in the description. All are symmetrical and well-made. Blades are
long, triangular and have slightly convex edges. Shoulders are small and
straight or slightly barbed. On the complete specimen the stem and base
edges are straight. The base is bifacially thinned. Dimensions: length,
greater than 3.5 cm.; width across shoulders, 2.4 cm.; thickness, 0.6 cm.
Remarks: Greene (1971) Class II, Group I and possible Group 1: pages 2627; Plate 2, u-w

EXPANDING STEMMED
Among the expanding stemmed dart points are three provisional
types and six untyped categories.
Charcos (Fig. 2, o-p)
Although the forty-nine artifacts in this category are considered members of a provisional type, research beyond the scope of this paper indicates that temporal and spatial bounds are definable (Greene 1971).
ThuS, a confirmed type is indicated The specimens are divided into three
varieties On the basis of a morphological feature: blade notching. The
varieties may not be culturally significant and are presented here for
descriptive purposes onlY. The varieties are: Charcos unnotched (7), singlenotched [39), and double-notched (2).
Charcos dart points have triangular blades with irregular, straight or
convex edges. Shoulders are asymmetrical" one undeveloped or descending, the opposite barbed. One specimen has two barbed shoulders but one
is shorter than the other. The barbed shoulder ranges from short to long,
narrow to wide and is usually hooked toward the stem. The blade edge
distal to the weakest shoulder is straighter than the opposite edge. Bifacial
or unifacial notches occur on this straighter edge. Stems vary from short to
long with bifaciaUy thinned concave, straight or convex bases. Dimensions:

SOUTHWESTERN COAHUILA

length, 2.7-5.7 cm. with most between 3.0-4.5 cm.; length of stem, 0.7-1.3
cm.; width across shoulders, 1.6-3.2 cm.; width of base, 1.0-1.7 cm;
thickness 0.5-0.7 cm.; weight, 2.5-7.3 grams. Remarks: Aveleyra et al (1956:
Lain. VIc X a-c] illustrates a similar specimen from Poza Salada and the
Bolson de las Delicias. Greene (1971) Class IIL Group If, Subgroups 1-9:
pages 35-41; Plates 2, xa,-yy, 3, a-bb.
Finesterre (Fig. 2, q-r}
There are five specimens in this provisional type. Blades are leaf-shaped
or triangular with convex edges. The blade of one specimen is recurved
near the tip. Shoulders are asymmetrical; one undeveloped or descending,
the opposite straight or barbed. Stems are broad with convex or slightly
concave bases. With one exception, bases are bifacially thinned. Dimensions: length, 1.9-4.2 cm.; length of stem. 0.7-1.0 cm.; width across
shoulders. 1.7-2.5 cm.. width of base. 1.0-1.8 cm.; thickness, 0.3-0.7 cm.:
weight, 1.3-6.0 grams. Remarks: Greene (1971) Class III, Group II.
Subgroups 10-12; pages 41-42; Plate 3, cc-gg, A similar specimen is
illustrated by Taylor (1966: Fig. 5, top row, fourth from right} which he
assigns to the Middle and Late Coahuila Complex.
Vertiente [Fig. 2. s-t)
These five specimens comprise a provisional type. Blades are triangular
with straight or concave/convex blade combinations. Shoulders are barbed and shorter than the stems. With one convex exception, stem edges are
straight or concave. Bases are concave and bifacially thimled. Although
stems are expanding, they are not bulbous. Dimensions; length, greater
than 3.6-greater than 4.0 cm.; length of stem, 0.8-1.2 cm ; width across
shoulder, 2.2-2.8 era.; width of base, 1.2-1.6 era.; thickness. 0.5-0.7 era.;
weight, greater than 2.1-greater than 6.1 grams. Remarks: Greene [1971)
Class III, Group 2; page 29; Plate 2, aa-ee. These dart points are similar to
some Middle and Late Coahuila Complex specimens (Taylor 1966: Fig. 5).
Untyped F (Fig. 3. a.b)
These thirteen specimens are all fragments and may be members of
previously described types. All are irregularly shaped With long narrow
stems and barbed shoulders. Stems of two specimens are bulbous. Dimensions: length, 2.2-3.5 cm.; width across shoulders, 1.6-greater than 2.9 cm.;
thickness, 0.4-0.9 cm. Remarks: Greene (1971) Class III, Group 3, 5, and 6;
page 29-33; Plate 2, ff-nn, pp, qq,
Untyped G (Fig. 3, c)
This specimen has a broad leaf-shaped blade with edges constricted
near the tip. Shoulders are barbed and shorter than the stem. Stem edges
are concave and the base unthinned. Dimensions: length, 3.2 cm., width
across shoulders, 2.5 cm.; thickness, 0.9 cm. Remarks: Greene (1971} Class
III, Group 4; page 32; Plate 2, oo.
Untyped H (Fig. 3, d)
This is a proximal fragment of a large projectile point. The blade is
broad and the shoulder barbed. The stem edge is concave and the
bifacially thinned base convex: Dimensions: length, greater than 3.3 cm.;

137

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

138

m

r

o
0

1

l

3

4

$

5

ON

FIGURE 3. Dart and Arrow Points. a-b, Untyped F; c, Untyped G; d,
Untyped H; e, Untyped I; f, Untyped J; g, Untyped K; h-i, Ensor-like; j,
Untyped L; k, Untyped M; q, Gharcos-like; l, Untyped N; m, Abasolo;
n, Catan; o, Lerma; p, Matamoros; r, Untyped O; s, Untyped P.

SOUTHWESTERN COAHUILA

139

thickness, 0.8 cm. Remarks: Greene (1971} Class III, Group 12; page 43;
Plate 3, hh.
Untyped I (Fig. 3, e)
This short dart point has been reshaped. The broad blade has recurved
edges. Shoulders are barbed. Stem edges are convex and the irregular
base is thinned. Dimensions: length, 2.6 cm.; width across shoulders, 2.3
cm.; thickness~ 0.6 cm. Remarks: Greene (1971} Class III, Group 8; page 34;
Plate 2, ss.
Untyped J (Fig. 3, f)
These three specimens appear to have been fractured during manufacture. They are thin proximal fragments with broad stems, narrow notches
and barbs that are the same length as the stem. Dimensions: length of stem,
0.5-1.1 cm.; thickness, 0.4-0.6 cm. Remarks: Greene (1971) Class III, Group
1: pages 27-28; Plate 2, x-z.
Untyped K (Fig. 3, g}
Both of these specimens have distinctive concave bases. Shoulders are
barbed and stem edges convex. Dimensions: length, greater than 2.9 cm.;
width across shoulders, greater than 1.2-slightly greater than 2.8 cm.;
thickness, 0.5-0.6 cm. Remarks: Greene (1971) Class III, Groups 9 and 10;
pages 34-35; Plate 2, tt-uu.

SIDE-NOTCHED
Side-notched dart points include specimens of one previously
described type and two untyped categories.
Ensor-like (Fig. 3, h’i}
.......
There are thirteen specimens in this type (Suhm and Jelks i962). Blades
are leaf-shaped and shoulders barbed. Bases are convex and slightly less
than or equal to the width of the shoulders. The larger stems are slightly
wedge-shaped. Ensor-like dart points are larger and more symmetrical
than the Sca!/orn-like specimens. There is more variety among these than
Ensor type specimens illustrated by Suhm and Jelks (Ibid.}. Dimensions:
length, 2.7-4.1 cm.; length of stem, 0.8-1.6 cm.; width across shoulders, 1.62.4 cm.; width of base, 1.3-2.1 cm.; thickness, 0.4-0.8 cm.; weight, greater
than 1.2-4.8 grams. Remarks: Greene (1971) Class IV, Groups 1, 2, and 4;
Subgroups 1-3; pages 49, 50-52; Plate 4, 1, m-o, s-w. Suhm and Jelks (1982}
describe the Ensor dart point type. Taylor (1966: Fig. 5, third row, fourth
from right} illustrates a similar specimen among Middle and Late Coahufla
Complex projectile points.
Untyped L (Fig. 31j}
These three specimens are crude, asymmetrical and thick in crosssection. With one exception (unnotched}, shoulder notches are shallow and
shoulders descending. Bases are bifacially thinned. Dimensions: length,
4.3-4.8 cm.; width across shoulders, 1.8-1.9 cm.; thickness, 0.6-0.9 cm.
Remarks: Greene (1971} Class IV, Groups 8 and 9; pages 60-66; Plate 4, xx-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

140

Untyped M (Fig. 3, k)
This dart point has a broad blade and stem. The blade is short. One
shoulder and blade edge are broken. The other stem edge is straight and
the shoulder barbed. One stem edge is straight and the other convex. The
base is bifacially thinned. Dimensions: length, 2.8 cm.; thickness, 0.5 cm.
Remarks: Greene {1971} Class IV. Group 5; page 55; Plate 4, gg.

MISCELLANEOUS STEMMED FORMS
There are only two categories of miscellaneous stemmed forms.
Although one category includes a specimen that is comparable to
specimens in a defined type, the others cannot be compared to known
forms.
Charcos-like [Fig. 3, q)
This specimen is similar to the Charcos type but is extremely large.
Dimensions: length, shghtly greater than 9.1 cm.; width across shoulders,
greater than 5.1 cm.; thickness, 1.0 cm. Remarks: Greene (1971} Eccentric
Form Class II; page 120; Plate 11, g.
Untyped N [Fig. 3,1)
The three specimens in this category are unique. The first dart point has
one descending shoulder and adjacent concave stem edge. The opposite
shoulder is barbed with a short stem. It appears to be a tang jutting from
the blade edge (Fig 3, n) The second specimen has a triangular blade with
one unnotched edge. The opposite edge is notched. The final specimen is a
proximal fragment. One blade edge is straight with a small projection or
tang near the basal junction. The opposite blade edge is concave and unnotched. The bffacially thinned base is notched near the junction with the
concave blade edge. Dimensions (in order of description) length, 2.8, 2.9
cm. width across shoulders, 1 9 1.7 cm.; thickness, 0.6, 0.5, 0.7 cm.
Remarks: Greene (1971) Class V; pages 62 63: Plate 4, zz; Plate 5, a,b.

UNSTEMMED
Among the unstemmed projectile points are four previously defined
types and one untyped category.
Abasolo (Fig. 3, m)
Four specimens conform to the Abasolo type as described by Suhm and
Jelks (1962). Dimensions: length (one specimen). 4.5 cm.; width, 1.7-2.1 cm.:
thickness, 0.6-0.9 cm. Remarks: Greene [1971} Class VI, Group 8.
Subgroups 1 and 2; page 67; Plate 5, m-n. MacNeish includes similar
specimens among the Abasolo Round Base category from the Sierra de
Tamaulipas (1958: 62-64; Fig 23, 15-21), Taylor (1966: Fig. 4, top row left)
includes similar specimens among Espantosa points of the Early Coahuila
Complex.
Catan (Fig. 3, n)
There are four specimens comparable to the Caton type (Suhm and Jelks
1962). None are beveled. Dimensions: length, 2.9-3.7 cm.: width, 1.4-1.7

SOUTHWESTERN COAHUILA

141

cm.; thickness, 0.5-0.7 cm. Remarks: Epstein (1969: 18-20, Fig. 4, A-F)
describes Catan points from Nuevo Leon. Greene (1971) Class VI, Group 8,
Subgroups 4-6; pages 68-69; Plate 5, p-r. MacNeish (1958: 68-69) describes
Catan Round Base specimens from Tamaulipas. Silva and Hester (1973:
150, Fig. 2, a-c) recovered Catan points from the Robles site in eastern
Durango.
Lerma (Fig. 3, o)
Two specimens correspond to the Lerma type (Suhm and Jelks 1962).
One specimen is extremely small. Dimensions: length, 4.0-6.3 cm.; width,
2.0-2.3 cm.; thickness, 0.9-1.5 cm. Remarks: Epstein (1969: 22-23, Fig. 4, P-S)
reports Lerma points from Nuevo Leon. Greene (1971) Class VI, Group 7;
page 66; Plate 5, k-1. MacNeish (1958: 62) describes Lerma points from
Tamaulipas. Taylor (1966: 67; Fig. 3, row 2; Fig. 4, row 1 and 2 left)
includes similarly shaped specimens among Fragua and Espantosa points
and assigns them to the Early Coahuila Complex~ Silva and Hester (1973:
150, Fig. 2, d-f) found Lerma type dart points on the Robles Site in eastern
Durango. As part of a varied surface collection, the specimens can not be
dated.
Matamoros (Fig. 3, p)
Three dart points are classified as Matamoros type (Suhm and Jelks
1962). Dimensions: length, 1.8 cm.-greater than 1.8 cm.; width, 1.4-1.5 cm.;
thickness, 0.3-0.4 cm. Remarks: Epstein (1969: 23-24; Fig. I-K) discusses
Matamoros points from Nuevo Leon. Greene (1971) Class VI, Groups i and
6; pages 63, 65-66; Plate 5, c, d, j. MacNeish (1958: 68) reports Matamoros
Triangular points from Tamaulipas.
Untyped O (Fig. 3, r)
This is a thick, crude elongate dart point. Edges are steep and concave.
The bifacially thinned base is convex. Dimensions: length, greater than 1.7
cm.; width, 1.5 cm.; thickness, 0.3 cm. Remarks: A similar specimen is
described by Epstein (1969: 35; Fig. 4, T) as Miscellaneous, C: Long,
Narrow, Round Base. Greene (1971) Class VI, Group 8, Subgroup 3; page 6;
Plate 5, o.
ARROW POINTS

A total of 49 arrow points were recovered from the four sites.
These include: contracting stemmed (nine), side-notched (thirty-four
specimens), unstemmed (six specimens).
CONTRACTING STEMMED
Among the contracting stemmed arrow points are three untyped
categories. No specimens comparable to known or provisional types
were recovered.
Untyped P (Fig. 3, s)
There are seven specimens in this category. Due to the morphological
variety among these artifacts, I hesitate to classify all as members of a

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

142

single type. They may represent a hodgepodge of unfinished or rejected
specimens of several types. All are crude and asymmetrical having been
made by modifying only the flake edges. Five specimens have regularly
barbed shoulders, two have one barbed and one descending shoulder. Four
have a single unifacial notch on one blade edge. One has a unifacial notch
on both blade edges. These specimens are comparable to some flake points
attributed to the Coahuila or Jora Complexes by Taylor (1966: Fig. 6, first
row left). Dimensions: length, 2.1-3.7 cm.; width across shoulders, 1.6-2.2
cm.; thickness, 0.2-0.7 cm. Remarks: Greene (1971) Class I, Group 2,
Subgroup 2; page 21; Plate 2, e-h.
Untyped Q (Fig. 4, a)
This specimen is similar to the dart points described in category Untyped
A. Dimensions: length, greater than 2.3 cm.; thickness, 0.7 cm. Remarks:
Greene (1971) Class I, Group 4, Subgroup 2; page 23; Plate 2, 1. This
specimen may be comparable to a Middle and Late Coahuila point
illustrated by Taylor (1966: Fig. 5, fifth row left).
Untyped R (Fig. 4, b)
This specimen has a long narrow triangular blade with one straight and
one recurred edge. Shoulders are asymmetrical and descending. The long
stem has concave edges and an unthinned base. Dimensions: length, 3.9
cm.: width across shoulders. 1.5 cm.; thickness, 0.5 cm. Remarks: Greene
(1971) Class I. Group 7; page 26; Plate 2. s.

SIDE-NOTCHED
Side-notched arrow points are comparable to three known types
and one provisional type. One of the known types, Scallorn, has not
previously been described in Coahuila.
Diaz (Fig. 4, c-e]
The three specimens in this provisional type are thick. Cross sections at
mid-blade are almost circular. Blade edges are irregular and alternately
beveled. Shoulders are descending. The stems are irregular with concave
edges. Only one base is bifacially thinned. Dimensions: length. 2.7-2.9 cm.:
length of stem, 0.7-1.1 cm.; width across shoulders, 1.3-1.8 cm.; width of
base. 1.2-1.6 cm.; thickness 0.6-0.7 cm.; weight, 1.8-2.5 cm. Remarks:
Greene (1971) Class IV, Group 3; pages 50-51; Plate 4, p-r.
Harrell (Fig. 4, f-g)
These three arrow points conform to the Harre/! type as defined by
Suhm and Jelks (1962). Dimensions: length, 2.4-2.9 cm.: width across
shoulders, 1.0-1.2 cm.; thickness, 0.3 cm. Remarks: Greene (1971) Class IV,
Group 7 SUbgroup 8 page 59 Plate 4 ss-uu. These may be related to a
Sierra Madera specimen illustrated by Taylor (1966: Fig. 27, first row center) and possibly related to Toyah arrow points.
Scallorn-like (Fig. 4, h-i)
These twenty-six specimens conform to the morphological characteristics described for Scallorn arrow points (Sulun and Jelks (1962).

SOUTHWESTERN COAHUILA

143

However, Sca!!orn points have not been previously reported in Coahuila.
Dimensions: length, 1.9-3.0 cm.; width across shoulders, 1.4-1.7 cm.;
thickness, 0.3-0.5 cm. Remarks: Greene (1971} Class IV, Group 4,
Subgroups 4-9 and Groups 6-7; Subgroups 1-7; pages 52’59; Plate 4, x-z, aaff, hh-rr Taylor (1966: Fig. 6, top row right and Fig. 27} illustrates similar
specimens among Coahuila and Jora Complex projectile points.
Toyah or Sierra Madera (Fig: 4, j)
These two specimens are comparable to Toyoh arrow points (Suhm and
Jelks i962) or sierra Madera projectile points (Taylor 1966: Fig. 27, top row
and second row left). They are thicker and cruder than the Harrell points
with proportionately smaller blades and larger stems. Shoulders are
descending. Dimensions: length, 2.7 cm.; width across shoulders, 1.4-1.5
cm.; thickness, 0.4-0.6 cm. Remarks: Similar projectile points from Poza
Salada are illustrated by Aveleyra et al. (1956: Lam. IV. c-d; Lam. X, d).
Greene (1971) Class IV, Group 7, Subgroup 9; page 60; Plate 4, w-ww.

UNSTEMMED
Only two unstemmed categories of arrow points were found. Both
are comparable to known types.
E1 Muerto or Fresno (Fig. 4, k)
Five arroW points are E1 Muerto type (Taylor 1966: Fig. 27, fourth row]
which are assigned to the Jora Complex. Blades are thin and triangular
with straight Or concave bases. One long and narrow specimen has finely
serrated blade edges. BaSes are bifacially thinned. Dimensions: length, 1.82.9 cm.; width, 1.5-1.7 cm.; thickness, 0;3-0.4 cmi Remarks: These are
similar to specimens from Poza Salada (Aveleyra et al 1956: Laml IV, h-n).
Greene (1971) Class VI, Groups 2, 4, 5; pages 64-65; Plate 5, e, f, h, i.
Garza (Fig. 4,1)
Only one specimen is a Garza arrow point (Runkles 1964), Dimensions:
lengthi greater than 1.7 cm. width 1.5 emil thickness, 0.3 cm:i Remarks:
Greene (1971) Class VI, Group 3; page 64; Plate 5, g. Similar specimens
described by Taylor (19661 Fig. 27, sac6nd r0~ right) as Cienegas points
have a notched concave baSe. The base 0f this specimen is notched but not
concave. He assigns Cienegas points to the Jora Complex.

SUMMARY AND CHRONOLOGICAL PLACEMENT OF PROJECTILE
POINTS
A total of 216 projectile p6ints were recovered from the four sites in
the Desierto de Charcos de Risa. Both dart and arrow point forms are
represented and include specimens of thirteen previously defined
types, five provisional types and eighteen untyped categories.
Although stratified deposits from the Charcos de Risa were not encountered, comparison of similar projectile point forms from surrouncling areas enables the presentation of a chronologically ordered

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

144

b

m

n

d

c

o

p

q

FIGURE 4. Arrow Points and Bifaces. a. Untyped Q;b, Untyped R; ce, Diaz; f-g, Harrell;h-i, Scallorn-like; j.Toyah or SierraMadera; k,
E1 Muerto or Fresno; 1, Garza; m, Symmetrical Gouge; n, Irregular
Gouge; o, Notched Gouge; p. Narrow Elongate Implement; q,
Assymetrical Thin Biface; r, Elongate Thin Biface; s, Subcircular,
Suboval and Teardrop Thin Biface; t-u, Leaf-shaped to Triangular
Thin Bifaces ....

SOUTHWESTERN COAHUILA

145

TABLE I. PROVENIENCES OF PROJECTILE POINTS
PROJECTILE POINTS

C-189

C-190

C-191

C-198

Total

Dart Points
Contracting Stemmed (Total)

14

22

5

8

Acatita

1

2

2

2

7

Duran

9

15

2

4

30

Gobernadora

0

1

0

0

1

Jora

1

2

0

0

3

Untyped A

1

1

1

1

4

Untyped B

0

1

0

1

2

Untyped C

1

0

0

0

1

Untyped D

1

0

0

0

1

0

2

1

0

3

Straight Stemmed (Total)
Untyped E
Expanding Stemmed (Total]
Charcos

49

0

2

1

0

3

16

16

14

34

80

11

4

6

28

49

Finesterre

0

2

3

0

5

Vertiente

1

3

0

1

5

Untyped F

3

4

2

4

13

Untyped G

0

1

0

0

1

Untyped H

0

1

0

0

1

Untyped I

0

0

1

0

1

Untyped J

1

0

2

0

3

Untyped K

0

1

0

1

2

1

8

6

2

17

0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

6
2
0
2
1
1
4
2
2
0
0
0

6
0
0
1
0
1
I
0
0
0
1
0

1
0
1
1
0
1
9
2
2
2
2
1

13
3
1
4
1
3
14
4
4
2
3
I

0
0
0
0

6
6
0
0

2
1
1
0

1
0
0
1

9
7
1
1

Side-Notched (Total]

Ensor-like
Untyped L
Untyped M
Miscellaneous Stemmed Forms (Total]
Charcos-like
Untyped N
Unstemmed (Total]
Abasolo
Catan
Lerma
Matamoros
Untyped O
Arrow Points
Contracting Stemmed (Total]
Untyped P
Untyped Q
Untyped R
Side-Notched (Total]

1

18

8

7

34

Diaz

0

1

1

1

3

Harrell

0

2

0

1

3

Scallorn-like

1

13

7

5

26

Toyah or Sierra Madera

0

2

0

0

2

0

4

2

0

6

El Muerto or Fresno

0

3

2

0

5

Garza

0

1

0

0

1

Unstemmed (Total]

146

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

sequence. This sequence is based on projectile point stem and base
characteristics discussed by Taylor (1966) for the Cuatro Cienegas
Basin in central Coahuila, Epstein (1969) for northern Mexico and adjacent Texas, and Johnson (1967) for central and southwest Texas.
The southwest Texas sequence is further supported by Dibble (1967)
and Story and Bryant (1966). Although the projectile point sequence
is established, absolute chronological dates are difficult to confirm
and should be regarded as estimates in this paper.
References to the Altithermal climatic period are based on Antevs
(1955, 1962) but no effort is made to determine the applicability of the
concept in northern Mexico. Nance (1972) regards Altithermal
climatic conditions to have been a factor affecting cultural developments in northern Mexico. Bryant (1974) discusses the pollen record
in the Amistad Reservoir of southwest Texas and considers the
possibility that Post-Glacial climatic change was gradual and increasingly arid.
A lengthy cultural succession is indicated by projectile point comparisons. Points ranging from late Paleo-lndian to late prehistoric
times are included among the sample recovered from the Charcos de
Risa.
The earliest projectile points recognized are two Lerma and four
Abasolo specimens. Both types are unstemmed dart points. Lerma
dart points are associated with Late Paleo-lndian, pre-Altithermal
times. Nance (1972: 171-175) notes that Lerma points have been dated
between 7,500 B.C. and 5,000 B.C. The terminal date in northeastern
Mexico is uncertain but the Lerma type probably does not persist
after 5,000 B.C. Abasolo is more difficult to place temporally but
appears to post-date Lerma. Epstein (1972:54) points out that in
Tamaulipas and Nuevo Leon, Abasolo may post-date the Altithermal
[5,000-2,500 B.C.). The major problem seems to be one of type recognition. Taylor (1966: Fig. 4, top row left) illustrates specimens of
the Espantosa type which are comparable to the Abasolo points recovered from the Charcos de Risa. Taylor recovered these among
Early Coahuila Complex materials indicating a pre-Altithermal association. Thus, if the four Abasolo specimens from the Charcos de Risa
are related to Taylor’s Expantosa points, a pre-Altithermal, pre-5000
B.C. time is indicated. If the Abasolo specimens are representative of
the defined type, they postdate the Altithermal and 5,000 B.C. (Suhm
and Jelks 1962:165].
Following late Paleo-lndian, pre-Altithermal times, there appears
to be a gap in the cultural sequence in the Charcos de Risa. No Early
Archaic (Altithermal) projectile points have been recognized in the
sample. Johnson (1964: Table 1, Fig. 25) dates the Early Archaic in

SOUTHWESTERN COAHUILA

147

southwestern Texas between 5,000 and 3,000 B.C. At Arenosa Shelter
Early Barbed dart points were associated with a C-14 date of
3410+ 170 B.C, (Dibble 1967). Story and Bryant (1966) place Early
Barbed forms between 7,000-4,000 B.C. and Nolan and Pandale
between 4,000-2,500 B.C. The hiatus in the dart point sequence
reflected inthe Sample from the Charcos de Risa is not unexpected.
Epstein (1972: 54, 55) discusses the apparent absence or recognition
of occupation in northern Mexico during Altithermal times and Nance
(1972) considers the problem in detail.
In the Charcos de Risa, the stemless Late Paleo-lndian projectile
points are followed by typically Middle Archaic contracting stemmed
dart point forms, A total of 49 contracting stemmed dart points are
among the sample. Seventy percent (34) are comparable to types
described by Taylor (1966) indicating similarity between the Charcos
de Risa and Central Coahuila during the Middle Archaic part of the
Coahuila Complex. These types are: Duran (30 specimens), Gobernadora (i speciman), and Iora (3 specimens). The seven provisional
type Acatita points and eight specimens from untyped categories A-D
appear to be forms confined to the Charcos de Risa and are not
represented in the sample Taylor recovered from the Cuatro Cienegas
Basin, It should be noted that arrow point form, untyped category Q is
comparable to dart point form untyped category A. A larger sample is
needed to determine the range of form and weight among similar dart
and arrow points.
Concrete dates from the Middle Archaic in Coahuila are
problematical. In Nuevo Leon, McClurkan (1966: 70) reports contracting stemmed Gary points are approximately 1,200 A.D. and
Shumla points from A.D. i00 to A.D. 200. MacNeish includes Gary
points in the artifact assemblage of Tamaulipas from 200 or 150 B.C.
until A.D. 500 but did not find Shumla type points, lohnson (1964: Fig.
25) places contracting stemmed types Almagre, Langtry, and Shumla
in the Texas cultural sequence between 3,000 B.C. and sometime after 2,000 B.C. Story and Bryant (1966: Table 1) place Almagre,
Langtry and Val Verde types between 2,500 B,C, and 1,000 B.C. Absolute dates for the Middle Archaic in Coahuila will, of course,
depend on excavation of stratified deposits and recovery of radiocarbon samples.
Contracting stemmed dart point forms are followed by expanding
stemmed, corner notched dart points which probably mark the inception of the Late Archaic. A total of 80 dart points were recovered:
three provisional types and six untyped categories are represented.
Only 12 percent (5 provisional type Finesterre and five provisional
type Vertiente specimens) are comparable to forms recovered by

148

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Taylor in Central Coahuila. This indicates divergence of specific attributes but adherence to the overall projectile point form among the
inhabitants of southwestern and central Coahuila during these times.
The remaining corner notched specimens are provisional type Charcos (49 specimens) or Untyped categories F-K (21 specimens). One exceptionally large artifact may be associated with the Charcos point
style. It is described as a Miscellaneous Stemmed Charcos-like
specimen. Although confirmation is lacking the Charcos projectile
point form may have persisted throughout the Late Archaic and
possibly later.
During the Late Archaic, side-notched dart points appear later
than the corner-notched forms (Johnson 1964: Fig. 25). In the Charcos
de Risa this form is represented by thirteen Ensor-like and four Untyped categories L and M dart points. Taylor (1966) illustrates sidenotched Ensor-like specimen among Middle and Late Coahuila Complex projectile point styles.
The Late Archaic is difficult to date by inference and no direct
dates can be provided for Coahuila. In nearby Nuevo Leon, McClurkan (1966: 70) found no comparable expanding stemmed cornernotched forms. However, he has dated the side-notched Ensor type
from A.D. 600 to A.D. 1,090 or later. In Texas, Johnson (1964: Fig. 25)
indicates that corner-notched and side-notched dart points span the
period from sometime before 1,000 B.C. until after 1,000 A.D.
Arrow points, commonly accepted as markers of Neo-lndian times
are a complex assemblage in the Desierto de Charcos de Risa. They
include: (1) corner-notched forms; three provisional type Diaz, three
Harrell, twenty-six Scallorn-like, two Toyah or Sierra Madera type.
(2] unstemmed forms; five E1Muerto or Fresno type, one Garza type.
Only the provisional type Diaz specimens are not comparable to Jora
Complex points illustrated by Taylor (1966), suggesting widespread
projectile point similarity throughout Coahuila during late times.
The problem of relating arrowpoint forms and late dart point forms
in Coahuila is expressed by Taylor’s (Ibid.} hesitancy to place a terminal date on the Coahuila Complex and a firm beginning for the Jora
Complex. Apparently, the Jora Complex begins sometime after A.D. 1
(Taylor, 1966: Fig. 30). McClurkan dates arrow points in the NL92
deposits in Nuevo Leon by A.D. 800 (1966: 70). Story and Bryant (1966:
Table 1) note the introduction of arrow points in southwestern Texas
between A.D. 1000 and A.D. 1600.
Internal chronological divisions among arrow point forms is also
problematical. McClurkan (1966: 70) found both stemmed and side
notched specimens at NL92 but could not stratigraphically separate

SOUTHWESTERN COAHUILA

149

the types. It should be noted that the form most common among the
Charcos de Risa Sample, Scallorn-like, was not recovered in Nuevo
Leon.
According to Suhm and Jelks (1962) Scallorn arrow points slightly
postdate (A.D. 500 to A.D. 1200) the Ensor type (100-200 B.C. to A.D.
500-1000). The relationship and dates of these two forms in Coahuila
is an interesting problem. Also, in Texas (Ibid.) Scallorn apparently
pre-dates Harrell, Toyah, Fresno and Garza types.
Two unstemmed dart point forms, Catan and Matamoros specimens
were recovered. These can not be placed in the chronological scheme
at this time. Epstein [1972: 55) notes that triangular points in norrhea stern Mexico span Archaic and early Neo-Indian times and can
not be used as time markers. Taylor (1966) did not find these types in
Coahuila but current research indicates that Catan and Matamoros
are important among projectile point forms in Coahuila.
Bifaces

GOUGES
Symmetrical (Fig. 4, m)
This triangular specimen has convex sides, a pointed distal end and
biconvex cross section. The concave proximal end is the result of flake
removal from the central surface. Compared to the other gouges this
specimen is well made. Dimensions: length, 3.4 cm,; width, 2.0 cm.;
thickness. 0.6 cm. Remarks: Greene (1971] Thin Bifaces, Class II, Group 4,
Subgroup 2; page 88; Plate 7, j.
Irregular (Fig. 4, n)
Both of these specimens are triangular with irregular edges. One
specimen is bifacially thinned. The other is bifacially modified only on the
proximal end. that is the end from which the ventral flake was removed.
Dimensions (in order described}: length, 3.8 and 4.6 cm.; width. 2.6 and 2.4
cm.; thickness, 1.0-1.3 cm. Remarks: These specimens are similar in shape,
but smaller than the Clear Fork Gouges described by Epstein (1969: 39-42,
Fig. A-I). Greene [1971} Thinned Bifaces Class III, Group 4, Subgroup 2 and
Group 8; pages 89-90; Plate 7, k, o.
Notched (Fig. 4, o)
The distinguishing feature of these three thick, triangular specimens is a
notched concave proximal end, Dimensions: length, greater than 2.8-5.9
cm.; width, 2.5-3.5 cm.; thickness. 0.6-1.6 cm. Remarks: Greene [1971}
Thinned Bifaces Class III. Groups I and 2; pages 96-97; Plate 7, p-r.
NARROW ELONGATE [Fig. 4, p)
There are five shaft-shaped implements. One end of each specimen is
pointed; the opposite is irregular or convex. Dimensions: length. 2.0-4.8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

150

cm.; width, 0.8-2.0 cm.; thickness, 0.3-0.9 cm. Remarks: Greene (1971}
Narrow Elongate Implements: page 119; Plate 11, c-f.

THIN BIFACES
With the exception of the asymmetrical bifaces, all of the forms
grade into the succeeding category. Divisions are an attempt to
minimize variation among specimens of each category.
Asymmetrical (Fig. 4, q}
These forty-six specimens are the thickest of the thin bifaces. They were
shaped by percussion. Cortex remains on the surfaces of some specimens.
Two specimens have one pointed end Two have short wide stems. Dimensions: length, 1.9-8.3 cm; width, 2.0-5.1 cm.; thickness, 0.8-2.7 cm.
Remarks: Greene [1971) Thin Bifaces Class I. Groups 1-3; pages 80-82: Plate
5, x-z, aa-bb, 6, a.
Elongate (Fig. 4, r)
There are twenty-four artifacts in this category. Shapes range from
specimens with convex ends, one slightly narrower than the other two
specimens with one convex end and one pointed end. Some are unthinned
and others well thinned. Cortex is evident on some surfaces. Dimensions:
length, 3.2-7.0 cm.; width, 2.8-5.2 cm.: thickness, 0.5-3.2 cm. Remarks:
Greene (1971) Thin Bifaces Class II Group 1: pages 82-84; Plate 6, b-l,
Subcircular, Suboval and Teardrop [Fig. 4, s)
The outlines of these eleven specimens range from subcircular to
suboval to almost teardrop shaped. All are thick and crude with irregular
edges Cortex remains on some specimens. Dimensions: diameter, 4.0-4.34.9 X 5.9 cm.: thickness, 1.1-2 2 cm. Remarks: Greene (1971) Thin Bifaces
Class II Group 2; pages 84-85~ Plate 6, m-o)
Leaf-shaped to Triangular (Fig. 4, t-u)
These fifty-four specimens range from leaf-shaped to slightly teardrop
shaped to triangular. Proximal ends are straight, irregular or convex. Cortex remains on some surfaces. Only fifteen specimens are thinned. Dimensions: length. 3.3-6.9 cm.: width. 2.4-4.0 cm.: thickness, 0.6-1.7 cm.
Remarks: Greene (1971) Thin Bifaces Class II Group 3; pages 85-88; Plate 6,
p-v, 7, a-i.
THICK BIFACES
Eight specimens are heavy implements made from cobbles or large
flakes. They are characterized by bifacial edges struck by percussion from
around a portion of the circumference. The side opposite the bifacial edge
is blunt. All have semicircular outlines. Three are fragments. Dlmenmons:
circumference, 7.0 X 7.9-10.7 X 12.3 cm.: thickness, 2.8-3.7 cm. Remarks:
These specimens seem to correspond closely with Epstein’s continuous
edge bifaces group A and B (1969, pages 48-50 Fig. 8). Greene (1971} Thick
Bifaces Class I; pages 98-99. Mcclurkan [1966, Fig 17, p. 49) reports heavy
choppers but the:~ tend to have a rectangular outline. MacNeish also reports sub-rectangular choppers (1958: 85; Fig. 29,13-14}.

SOUTHWESTERN COAHUILA
Unifaces
SERRATED
One specimen has a symmetrical leaf-shaped blade with convex edges.
One edge is irregularly serrated. One shoulder is straight. The opposite
shoulder and the base are fractured. Dimensions: length, equal to or
greater than 3.4 cm.; width across shoulders, greater than 2.7 cm.;
thickness, 0.3 cm. Remarks: Greene (1971} Eccentric Form Class I; page
120.
STEMMED (Fig: 5~ a)
This is a proximal fragment of a stemmed uniface. It is side notched with
a concave; bifacially thinned base. The edges of the ventral face are
slightly modified. Dimensions: length, greater than 3.0 cm.; width across
shoulders, greater than 2.5 cm. Remarks: Aveleyra et al (1956: 75-77; 172=
172; Lam III) illustrates and describes similar specimens. Greene (1971)
Thin Unifaces Class V; page 116; Plate 10, g.
SUBTRIANGULAR
Large (Fig. 5, b)
These five specimens were shaped by percussion with pressure flaking
confined to the edges. Three specimens have ventrally thinned striking
platforms at the broad end. The pointed ends of two specimens are striking
platforms. Two specimens were made from cortex flakes and three from
secondary flakes. Dimensions: length, 4.6-5,4 cm.; width, 2.6-3.4 cm.;
thickness, 1.0-1.1 cm, Remarks: Greene (1971) Thin Unifaces Class I Group
1: Subgroup 1; page 101; Plate 8, a-c,
Small {Fig. 5, c-d)
Twenty-one specimens have a subtriangular outline. Most were shaped
by percussion with little or no ventral edge modification. Bulbs of percussion and striking platforms are present on both broad and pointed ends.
Dimensions: length, 2.4-5.4 cm.; width, 1.7-3.4 cm.: thickness. 0.4-1.3 cm.
Remarks: Greene [1971} Thin Unifaces Class I Group 1. Subgroups 2 and 3.
Groups 2 and 3, Fragments; pages 101-104; Plate 8. d-p.
SUBCIRCULAR AND SUBOVAL (Fig. 5, e)
Fifty-nine specimens are made from cortex or secondary cortex flakes.
The outlines of some specimens are not modified. Some have steep edges.
Many specimens have minimal ventral modification. All were chipped by
percussion. Dimensions: circumference: 2.1 X 3.3-7,7 X 8.2 cm.; thickness.
0.9-2.4 crn, Remarks: Greene (1971] Thin Unifaces Class If: Plates 8. r-v, 9,
a-k.

THICK
These six thick heavy implements were made from cobbles or large
flakes. Each is characterized by a predominately unifacial edge around the
entire circumference or a portion thereof. Dimensions: circumference, 8.5
X 9.0 cm.; thickness, 2.6-4.3 cm. Remarks: Greene (1971} Thick Unifaces:
pages 117-116; Plate 10, h-i, 11, a-b.

151

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

152

MODIFIED FLAKES
Two hundred and thirty-five flakes exhibit one or more modified edges.
Dimensions: length, 1.5-10.0 cm.; width, 1.8-7.0 cm.; thickness, 0.4-2.6 cm.
Remarks: Greene (1971) Thin Unifaces Classes Ill and IV; pages 111-115;
Plates 9, l-n, 10, a-f.

Cores
Three categories of cores were recovered from the sites. Because
additional flake removal from the cores would be impractical or yield
exceptionally small flakes, all of the cores are considered exhausted.
Therefore, flake scars on the cores are reminiscent of flakes which
were least desirable. Specimens from two categories have been
secondarily modified.
ROUND-OVAL (Fig. 5, f)
These twelve cores were fashioned from round or oval cobbles as well as
large primary flakes. They are subcircular in outline with biconvex cross
sections. Cores from which flakes were struck in regular succession
around the circumference tend to have a dorsal and ventral apex. On the
other hand. cores from which flakes were struck from two opposing edges
of the circumference tend to have a dorsal and ventral longitudinal ridge.
Cortex remnants are sometimes evident on the apexes or as blunt obstructions at right angles to the edge. These cores are bifaces. One
specimen is limestone. Dimensions: circumference, 5,6 X 8.7 cm.;
thickness. 3.2-5.6 cm. Remarks: Greene (1971) Cores Class I; page 122-125:
Plate 11, i-l.
SUBCYLINDRICAL (Fig. 5, g-h)
The twenty-four cores in this category are made from cobbles or large
initial flakes. They are subcylindrical to subconical in longitudinal cross
section. The central faces are either natural or prepared striking platforms with slightly convex, fiat or concave surfaces. Scars of the flakes
struck from these platforms taper toward the dorsal ends. As a result, the
dorsal surface of a core is either a sharp apex or an irregular face smaller
in diameter than the ventral platform. The sides are long and essentially
straight, bearing the scars of the removed flakes. Some specimens are battered. Dimensions: length, 2.6-5.3 cm.; ventral diameter, 2.2 X 2.9-7,2 X 7.9
cm.; dorsal diameter, not measurable-2.2 X 5.9 cm. Remarks: Greene (1971)
Cores Class II; pages 125-130; Plates 12, a-j.

IRREGULAR (Fig. 5, i-j)
The eleven specimens in this category consist of asymmetrical pebbles
and one large flake from which flakes have been removed in a nonpatterned fashion. There are cortex remnants on ten specimens. Irregular
edges on each specimen indicate attempts to prepare a platform or shape
an artifact. Thus, additional evidence is needed to determine if these
specunens are cores or pebbles discarded after initial efforts to shape
them failed. Three specimens are battered. Dimensions: length, width and

SOUTHWESTERN COAHUILA

153

0

t

2

3

4

5

CM

c

d

FIGURE 5. Unifaces, Cores and Pottery. a, Stemmed Uniface; b,
Large Subtriangular Uniface; c-d, Small Subtriangular Uniface; e,
Subcircular and Suboval Uniface; f, Round-Oval Core; g-h,
Subcylindrical Cores; i-j, Irregular Cores; k-l, Chalchihuites-like
Pottery; m, Arenal Red Washed

far.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

154

thickness, 4.2 X 3.8 X 2.5 cm. and 3.7 X 3.0 X 2.2 cm. Remarks: Possibly
these can be compared to Epstein’s Core-like Pebble Bifaces and Core-like
Angular Bifaces (1969: 52-53: Fig. 9, D, E). Greene (1971) Cores Class Ifl;
pages 130-131; Plate 12, k-1.

Special Features on Chipped Stone Artifacts
BEAK LIKE PROJECTIONS
The twenty-eight beak like projections or gravers were formed: (1) on the
pointed end, (2) on a corner, (3) on the side at the junction of two flake
scars. All were made on thin unifaces. Remarks: Greene (1971) Special
Features on Chipped Stone Artifacts Class I; pages 132-134: Plate 10. c.
SEMI-LUNATE CONCAVITIES
Twenty-eight specimens have semi4unate concavities cut into a continuous edge. Three have two concavities. Two also have beak like projections. With the exception of a single thin biface, all are on thin unifaces.
Remarks: Greene (1971) Special Features on Chipped Stone Class II; pages
134-135; Plate 13, a.

Ground and Pecked Stone
BOWL SHAPED MORTAR
This is an irregularly circular limestone bowl with a flat base and
restricted rim. The lip is flush with the rim. The interior is conical with the
wider end at the mouth. Interior and exterior surfaces were shaped by
pecking. The interior surface is smoother than the exterior The incised
rim pattern includes a single irregular horizontal line 1.8 cm. below the lip.
The enclosed zone between the lip and line is filled with adjacent alternate
point-up/point-down triangles. A faint remnant of red paint is visible on
the body. Dimensions: maximum diameter, 14.6 X 16 cm.; height, 10.4 cm.;
diameter of mouth, 8.6 X 8.7 era,; depth of interior, 5.3 cm. Remarks:
Greene (1971) Bowl Shaped Mortar; page 137.
MILLING STONES
Of the four milling stones, three are large slabs of rock and one is a flal
cobble. None shows evidence of intentional shaping. One specimen has an
elongate ground depression, another has a circular depression. Three are
limestone and three are vesicular basalt. The entire surface of two
specimens is slightly ground. Dimensions: length and width. 21.7 X 27.0
cm.-31.1 X 35,2 cm. thickness, 5.6-11.2 cm. Remarks: Greene (1971) Milling
Stones; page 137,
HANDSTONES
Single Grinding Surface
There are eight specimens in this category. Six are limestone, one
vesicular basalt and one is of unidentified lithology. All have a single
flattened grinding surface. Some have been shaped by pecking, others are
unshaped cobbles. Dimensions: length and width, 9.9 X 12.8 cm.-10.4 X 10.6

SOUTHWESTERN COAHUILA

155

cm.; thickness, 4.2-6.2 cm. Remarks: Greene (1971) Handstones, Class L;
pages 137-139; Plate 13, b-c.
Double Grinding Surface
This subrectangular, tabular cobble has two parallel grinding surfaces.
Corners are rounded. One grinding surface is smoother than the other. It is
possible that one surface was flattened for shape and not for an additional
grinding surface. The material is unidentified. Dimensions: length and
width, greater than 12.8 X greater than 8.2 cm.; thickness, 5.2 cm.
Remarks: Greene (1971) Handstones Class II; page 139; Plate 13, d.
STONE MAUL OR PESTLE
One end is wider than the other on this ovate limestone specimen. The
surfaces are convex with gently rounded edges. All surfaces are pecked,
the wider end being smooth with large pits. Dimensions: diameter, 8.3 X
10.6 cm.; height, 6.7 cm. Remarks: Greene (1971} Possible Stone Maul or
Pestle; page 139; Plate 13, e.
BEADS
All of the seven stone beads are disc shaped. With one oval exception all
are circular. Each specimen has a single perforation drilled from one or
two sides. Dimensions: diameter,

o.7-1.4 cm.; diameter of perforation, 0.4-

1.0 cm.; thickness, 0.2-0.7 cm. Remarks: Stone beads similar to these
specimens are common in the Laguna region (Aveleyra et al. 1956, p. 124).
Greene (1971) Beads; pages 141-142.

SPHERICAL GROUND STONE FRAGMENT
The outer surface of this specimen is ground smooth and engraved with
a design of diagonal lines. A portion of the design has been rubbed or
ground smooth. The color is light green and the type of stone undetermined.
Dimensions: diameter, 3.2-3.3 cm. Remarks: Greene
Spherical Ground Stone Fragment; page 143.

(1971~ Possible

TUBULAR PIPE FRAGMENT
Both ends of this cylindrical limestone artifact are fractured. It is
slightly cone shaped. The outer surface is rough and pitted and
longitudinal striations are visible on the surface of the perforation. Dimensions: length, 4.9 cm.; diameter, 3.9 and 3.0 cm.; diameter of perforation,
1.4 cm. Remarks: Greene (1971) Tubular Pipe Fragment; page 143; Plate 13,
g. McClurkan (1966, p. 56, Fig. 21, c) reports two cylindrical pipe fragments
from Cueva de la Zona de Derrumbes in Nuevo Leon.

Pottery
ARENAL
Temper and Paste
These specimens comprise a provisional type. The temper consists of
clear and vein quartz. Occasional mica and feldspar particles occur. Particle shape ranges from subangular to subrounded; and size from small to

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

156

TABLE II. PROVENIENCES OF OTHER LITHIC CATEGORIES

BIFACES

C-189

C-190

C-191

C-198
2

Total
6

Gouges (Total)
Symmetrical
Irregular

2

1

1

0

0

0

1

1

1

1

0

0

2

Notched
Narrow Elongate
Thin Bifaces (Total)
Asymmetrical
Elongate
Subcircular
Triangular

1

0

1

1

3

1

3

1

0

5

21

37

25

52

135

14

9

9

14

46

2

9

3

10

24

2

1

5

3

11

3

18

8

25

54

2

1

1

4

8

0

1

0

0

1

0

0

0

1

1

2

7

8

9

26

1

1

2

1

5

I

6

6

8

21

18

22

8

11

59

1

2

1

2

6

81

52

25

77

235

1

4

5

2

12

2

11

5

6

24

5

3

3

0

11

16

18

8

14

56

8

9

5

6

28

8

9

3

8

28

0

0

0

1

1

1

0

0

3

4

Hand Stones (Total)
Single Grinding
Double Grinding

2

0

0

7

9

1

0

0

7

8

1

0

0

0

1

Stone Maul
Beads
Spherical Fragment
Tubular Pipe

o

0

1

0

1

2

1

3

1

7

1

0

0

0

1

0

1

0

0

1

Thick Bifaces
UNIFACES

Serrated
Stemmed
Subtriangular (Total)
Large
Small
Subcircular and Suboval
Thick
Modified Flakes
CORES

Round-Oval
Subcylindrical
Irregular
SPECIAL FEATURES ON CHIPPED STONE
(Total)
Beak-like
Semi-Lunate
GROUND AND PECKED STONE
Bowl Shaped Mortar
Milling Stones

SOUTHWESTERN COAHUILA

large with medium to large particles most abundant. Although the concentration of temper ranges from sparse to abundant, abundant is by far
the most common. In most sherds the paste is nearly obscured by the vast
number of temper particles. The paste is fine and soft.
Texture: Compact to very friable depending on the amounl of temper
present. Friable sherds are the most common.
Color: Various shades of buff, brown, black and red are represented.
Considerable variation on a single sherd is common.
Core: Cores vary from darker in the center than on the edges to light or
dark throughout.
Wall thickness: 9.4-1.6 cm.
Lip and rim: Inverted, straight, everted with thinned, unthinned and
thickened lips.
Method of manufacture: Coiling.
Special features: Sherds have perforations or mending boles.
Remarks: Greene (1971) Pottery Class I: pages 144-148: Plates 13. h. 14.
a-d, Fig. 8: Tables 2-7.
Arenal Plain
Number of specimens: Total 3.022. C-189: body, 1,480: lip, 181; total,
1,661. C-190: body, 231; lip, 31; total. 262. C-191: body, 184; lip, 29; total,
213. C-198: body, 814: lip, 72; total, 886.
Shape and size of vessels: A portion of a small vessel with a globular body
and constricted rim was recovered from the dune surface between sites C190 and C-191. Height is approximately 18.8 cm. and the wall thickness
ranges from 0.6-0.9 cm. Three fragments of a possible open spout were
recovered from the surface of site C-190. One conical leg fragment was
recovered from the surface of C-189.
Arenal Red Washed
Number of specimens: Total 337. C-189: body, 10; lip, 8; total, 18. C-190:
body, 184; lip, 9; total, 193. C-191: body, 106; lip 4; total, 110. C-198: body,
13; lip, 3; total, 16.
Shape and size of vessels: Portions of four vessels, two large jars and two
bowls were found. The first jar (Fig. 5, m) includes 85 sherds from the surface of C-190. The vessel has a globular body, slightly thickened base, constricted neck and a straight thinned rim. Interior and exterior surfaces are
smeared with red wash. Dimensions are: body diameter, 29.3 cm.; neck
diameter, 25.2 cm.; diameter of mouth, 22.6 cm.; height, 28.3 cm.; wall
thickness, 0.7-1.0 cm. Thirty eight sherds of a jar were recovered from the
dune surface between C-190 and C-191. The lip is thinned and the neck
strongly inverted. Four opposed pairs of perforations apparently were
made to mend a fracture. The vessel diameter is approximated between 35
and 40 cm. and the wall thickness ranges between 0.6-0.8 cm. Redwash is
visible on exterior and interior surfaces. A portion of one bowl recovered
from C-191 indicates a globular body and constricted neck. Red wash occurs on interior and exterior surfaces. Diameter of the mouth is in excess
of 37.0 cm. and the wall thickness ranges between 0.5 and 0.7 cm. A second
bowl was recovered from the dune surface between C-190 and C-191.
Twenty-three sherds revealed a globular body and slightly thickened base.
The lip is thinned and the rim inverted. The diameter exceeds 33.0 cm. The

157

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

158

wall thickness is between 0.7 and 1.9 cm. Decoration: Red wash applied to
interior and/or exterior surfaces. It appears to have been smeared with a
cloth or handful of weeds for red wash occurs in broad bands or covers an
entire portion of a vessel. It is frequently difficult to distinguish between
sherds washed red or fired red. The frequency of red wash on interior
surfaces indicated bowls or jars with large orifices. The large size of some
vessels of this type is confirmed by the particially restorable vessels
described.
Arena! Incised and Punctated
Number of specimens: Total, 529. C-189: body or body and plain lip, 338;
decorated lip, 67: appendages, 1: total, 406. C-190: body or body and plain
lip, 26" decorated lip, 3. total, 29. C-191: body or body and plain lip, 5:
decorated lip, 1; total, 6. C-198: body or body and plain lip, 52; decorated
lip, 36: total 88. Decoration: Sherds are incised and/or punctated. The
body sherds are described among six categories: (1) circular punctations (Fig. 6. a); (2) double rings of circular panctations (Fig. 6, b); (3)
diagonally opposed rows of parallel incised lines (Fig. 6. c); (4) irregular
linear punctatinns, usually in rows as if made with a comb (Fig 6. d); (5)
combination of linear punctations and incised lines as in categories 3 and 4
(Fig. 6, e); (6) combination of circular punctations and incised lines as in
categories 1 and 3 (Fig. 6, f). There are six incised lip designs: (1) alternating rows of parallel lines (Fig 6, g]; (2) diagonally placed rows of
parallel lines, may be fragments of category i (Fig. 6, h); (3) simple zig zags
(Fig. 6, i); (4) chevrons (Fig. 6, j); (5) single horizontal line bifurcating the lip
(Fig. B, k); (6) bifurcated chevrons (Fig. 6,1).
There is a total of 528 sherds (omit the appendage); of these, 120 are lip
sherds. Of the lip sherds, 107 are decorated and 13 are plain. The body portions of 437 sherds are decorated. Among the lips occurring with decorated
bodies 13 of the lip surfaces are plain and 16 are decorated.
Arenal Variant
These sherds are distinctively more compact than the Arenal sherds
previously described. Plain, red washed and incised sherds occur.
The plain sherd numbers are: Total, 48. C-189: Body, I0; lip, 0; total, 10.
C-190: body, 4; lip, 1; total. 5. C-191: body, 24; lip, 3; total 27. C-198: body, 5;
lip, 1; total, 6. Lips and rim occur as straight or everted and thinned or unthinned.
l~he red washed sherd numbers are: Total, 13. C-190: body, 9; lip, 2: total.
11. C-191: body, I; lip, 1; total. 2. Thinned lips with everted and inverted
rims occur. The red wash is presenl on interior and/or exterior surfaces.
The incised sherd numbers are: Total, 8. C-190: body, 1; lip, 0; total, 1. C191: body, 5; lip, 0; total, 5. C-198: body, 1; lip, 0; total, 2. Design category 3,
parallel-incised lines that are diagonally opposed, and category 4,
irregular and slightly linear punctations are represented. Shape and size
of vessels: No restorable vessels were recovered. A single vessel leg was
found which is a horse shoe-shaped projection modeled from the side of a
vessel. The open end is almost flush with the vessel wall and the closed end
of the horse shoe is raised. The vessel wall adjoining the appendage is incised with irregular lines. The pattern is too fragmentary to be defined.

SOUTHWESTERN COAHUILA

159

0
b

a

¢

e

f

body designs

///\\\

k

hp designs

I

FIGURE 6. Decorative Motifs of Arenal Incised and Punctated
Pottery. a-f, Body Designs; g-l, Lip Designs.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

160

CHALCHIHUITES-LIKE POTTERY
These five sherds are definitely intrusive and are comparable to
Chalchihuites wares. Chalchihuites ceramics span A.D. 300 or 500 to A.D.
1350 (Kelley 1966: 102,109).
One sherd, suggestive of a bowl with smoothed interior, has an unthickened base that sharply undercuts the vesse! side. One subconical leg
extends from the base at the junction of base and side. Wear on the bottom
of the leg indicates that the appendage was angled away from the body of
the vessel. A single dark red line encircles the vessel at the junction of base
and side; the upper margin is sinuous and the lower, straight. On the side
above the line a fragment of red paint remains. The leg is smeared with red
paint, interior and exterior surfaces are smoothed and slightly lusterous.
Unpainted areas are buff and gray.
Another sherd is a base and body fragment or a base and rim fragment.
It is sharply angular in cross section. The sherd is buff or orange with two
red horizontal lines on the lower part of the sherd. An irregular fragment
of a pattern occurs on the upper portion.
Two buff colored sberds have fragments of red designs on the interior
surfaces. One of these is illustrated in (Fig. 5, k).
One sherd (Fig. 5. l) has an everted thin lip and appears to be a fragment
of a short vessel. The lip and exterior surface are painted with a red
design. There is a thick line around the lip. Just below the lip there are two
horizontal lines. The upper has a single tick mark extending towards the
lip. The lower has tick extending down. Two unticked horizontal lines occur below the first set. The panel between this lower set contains an
irregular scroll pattern and scattered circular dots. There is a thin shallow
groove on the exterior surface. The sherd was snapped but the fracture did
not follow the groove. Number of specimens: Total, 5. C-190: body, 3; total,
3. C-198: body, I. Remarks: Greene (1971) Pottery Class X.
CONCHOS PLAIN
Temper and paste: Although large and medium sized white particles are
visible on the surface and throughout the interior of each sherd, they are
less frequent and smaller than those in El Paso Brown and El Paso
Polychrome-wares. Clear and vein quartz are the most frequent temper
particles. Mica and feldspar are present. Particle shape ranges from
subrounded to subangular Particle size range is from small to large with
large particles slightly smaller than those of the El Paso pottery. Medium
and small particles are the most abundant. The paste is platy, fine or
granular.
Texture: The texture range includes compact to slightly friable
specimens. No sherds are as friable as some of the Arenal specimens.
Color: Color is one of the most consistent and striking features of these
sherds. They are dark buff to reddish brown.
Core: Cores are very distinct in this type. They are thick and dark grey.
Wall thickness: 0.5 to 0.8 cm.
Lip and rim: One everted rim has an unthinned lip, another straight rim
sherd has a thickened lip.
Method of manufacture: Not determined.
Special features: None.
Decorations: The dark red on the surfaces of some sherds may be red
wash or paint.

SOUTHWESTERN COAHUILA

Number of specimens: Total, 73. C-189: body, 6; lip, 2; total, 8. C-190:
body, 65; lip, 0; total, 65.
.....................
Remarks: Greene (1971) Pottery Class III; pages 151-152. These sherds
were compared to Conchos Plain sherds collected by J.C. Kelley and stored
in the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Austin, Texas.
Schackelford (1955) assigns Conchos pottery to the time between A.D. 1200
to A.D. 1800.
EL PASO BROWN AND EL PASO POLYCHROME WARES
Temper and paste: The most distinctive feature of this class is the temper. Large white particles are evident on the surface and throughout the
paste of each sherd. Clear and vein quartz, the most abundant temper particles, range from subangular to angular. Some of the temper may have
been crushed. The paste ranges from platy to granular.
Texture: Ranges from compact to slightly friable. No specimens are as
friable as Arenal pottery.
Color: Shades of brown, red, buff and black occur.
Core: Most cores are dark gray or black but some sherds are light
throughout.
Wall thickness: 0.3 to 0.8 cm.
Lip and rim: Rims are everted with thinned or thickened lips.
Method of manufacture: Not determined.
Special features: One specimen has a possible circular perforation.
Another specimen has a ground and snapped edge.
Shape and size of vessels: No indication.
Decoration: 105 sherds are plain; 4 have a possible red wash; 11 are
brushed; i is incised and i is covered with black paint.
Number of specimens: Total, 123. C-189: body, 7: lip, O; total. 7. C-190:
body, 17; lip, 3; total 20. C-191: body, 68; lip, 9; total 77. C-198: body, 16; lip,
3; total, 19.
Remarks: Greene (1971) Pottery Class If; pages 148-150. These
specimens were compared to El Paso sherds from near Samalavuca,
Mexico and loaned by Vernon R. Brook. El Paso ware is commonly reported
from adjacent areas of southeastern New Mexico, Texas and northern
Mexico [Vernon Brook, 1971: personal communication). Hester and Hill
(1969) report similar sherds from south Texas. Taylor (1966: 63, 83) reports
El Paso Brown sherds probably associated with Iota Complex and Late
Coahuila Complex. McGregor (1965: 359-360) places El Paso Brown and El
Paso Polychrome pottery between A.D. 900 and A.D. 1400 and associates
them with Mesilla, Dona Aria and El Paso phases of the lornado Branch of
the Mogollon.
SANTIAGO
Temper and Paste: The specimens in this provisional type have a temper
of assorted minerals, primarily clear and vein quartz. Particle shape
ranges from subangular to subrounded; size, from small to large with
medium sized particles most abundant. The amount of temper ranges from
moderate to abundant with moderate most common. The paste is granular
or occasionally platy.
Texture: Ranges from slightly compact to friable. Most sherds are
slightly friable.

161

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

162

Color: Shades of buff, brown, red and black are common.
Core: Cores may be light or dark throughout or darker in the center.
Wall thickness: 0.5 to 0.9 cm.
Lip and rim: With one exception, all have everted rims with thinned, unthinned or thickened lips. The exception is thinned and straight.
Method of manufacture: Coiled.
Special features: One sherd has been ground to a disc shape. There is no
perforation.
Shape and size of vessels: No indication.
Decoration: Body sherds are plain or red washed on either or both surfaces. The lips and rims of some sherds are red washed. On the exterior of
one sherd two verticle stripes extend from a red lip.
Number of specimens: Total, 660. C-189: body, 270; lip, 16; total, 286. C190: body, 181; lip, 12; total, 193. C-191: body, 67; lip, 10; total, 97. C-198:
body, 73; lip, 11; total, 84.
Remarks: Greene (1971) Pottery Class IV; pages 152-153. Although some
of the sherds grade into Arena! on one extreme and Conchos on the other, I
feel that they are separable on the basis of temper, texture and core
characteristics.

SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION OF POTTERY TYPES

A total of 4,818 potsherds was recovered from the four sites in the
Charcos de Risa. They include intrusive as well as locally manufactured ceramics.
The most numerous pottery category is 3,957 sherds of provisional
type Arenal. Four varieties are included: undecorated, 3,022; red
washed, 337; incised and punctated, 529; variant, 59. On the basis of
numbers and wide distribution, this provisional type is considered indigenous. Seriation studies beyond the scope of this paper indicate
that Arenal pottery may be the earliest in the sample and the
varieties may be temporally significant. Undecorated vessels are
common throughout the sequence. Incised designs appear to be
overlapped or replaced by punctated designs and in later times, only
undecorated and red wasl~ed varieties persist. Arenal variant is a
compact variety that includes undecorated, red washed and incised
and punctated sherds. The compactness may be a result of increased
firing temperature and reflect refined technique.
The other provisional type, Santiago, also appears to be locally
manufactured. A total of 660 sherds (undecorated and red washed)
were recovered. Seriation indicates that this type did not appear until
after linear incised pottery of the Arenal provisional type disappeared.
The termination of provisional types Arenal and Santiago is
mknown but Correlation with dated intrusive types indicate that both
:ypes survived until after A.D. 1200-1300.

SOUTHWESTERN COAHUILA

163

Among the intrusive pottery are five sherds comparable to
Chalchihuites wares. Chalchihuites types occur between A.D. 300 or
500 and A.D. 1350 (Kelley 1966: 102, I09}.
Seventy three Conchos Plain sherds were recovered. These date
between A.D. 1200 and A.D. 1800 (Schackelford 1955). Conchos Plain
is considered an intrusive type but future research may extend its
range into southwestern Coahuila.
Intrusive, El Paso Brown and El Paso Polychrome wares were also
found. The sample includes 123 specimens; 105 undecorated, 4
possible red washed, 1 black painted and 11 brushed. These occur in
far west Texas, adjacent New Mexico and Mexico between A.D. 900
and A.D. 1400.
The combined time span of the three intrusive ceramic categories
are from as early as A.D. 300 or 500 (Chalchihuites-like] to A.D. 1800
(Conchos). However, the three wares overlap temporally between
A.D. 900 and A.D, 1350. There is no evidence that all of the intrusive
types reached the Charcos de Risa during this brief span.

Other Ceramic Artifacts
PIPE FRAGMENTS
Three cylindrical pipe stems and one bowl fragment were recovered.
The paste of the stem fragments is hard and smooth. Temper is sparse and
consists of small sand grains. The paste and temper of the bowl fragment is
comparable to Arenal pottery. Greene (1971) Pipe Stems and Possible Pipe
Bowl Fragment; page 162. Mason (1937: 134-141; Figs. 2, a, 3) reports i pipe
stern from Pueblito, 5 kin. south of Durango City, and another from Arroyo
Quelito near Zape. MacNeish (1958: 130) reports a pipe stem fragment
from Tamaulipas and attributes it to the Los Angeles Component.
CLAY BALLS AND HEMISPHERES
There are a total of 40 specimens. Thirty-seven are clay balls shaped by
rolling the clay between the palms. There is considerable range in slze
[diameters of 1.9-3.6 cm.} and degree of roundness. Surface finishes range
from smooth to rough. The surfaces of three specimens are scratched. One
specimen has a single groove incised around the circumference. One other
specimen has several deep furrows on the surface made while the clay was
wet. Three specimens are hemispheres. Apparently, these were made by
cutting clay balls in half and grinding the fiat side smooth. Thirty four
specimens are comparable to Arenal pottery. Five others are comparable
with Arenal Variant and one with the temper and paste of the pipe stems.
Greene (1971} Clay Balls and Hemispheres; pages 162-164. MacNeish
(1958: Fig. 43, el illustrates an incised and punctated clay ball.

SPINDLE WHORLS
Biconical
Sixteen specimens were recovered. One is so small that it may be a
bead. All are biconically shaped with a single perforation through the vet-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

164

tical axis. They are crude and surfaces are eroded. The surfaces of three
specimens are scratched. One specimen was mashed while wet. The temper and paste of 13 specimens corresponds to Arenal pottery. Two are
comparable to the temper and paste of the pipe stems. The height and width ranges from 1.8 X 2.3-2.2 X 3.8 cm. with one exception, 1.0 X 1.6 era.
Greene (1971) Spindle Whorls, Class I; pages 164-165; Fig. 15, c. Mason
(1937, page 136, 138) reports biconical spindle whorls from a site located
on the Nazas River near Hervideros, Durango.
Discs
There are seven perforated potsherd discs. All are irregularly circular
with crudely ground edges. Four specimens were made from Arena1 pottery, one from Arena1 Variant and one from Santiago pottery. Greene
(1971) Spindle Whorls, Class II; page 166.
FIGURINES
The sample consists of four cylindircally shaped figurines. The tops of
the heads are flattened. Three specimens have no arms or legs. Two of
these have lower ends larger in diameter than the upper or head ends. The
nose of one specimen (Fig. 7. a, b) is a small vertical wedge. There are:
eyes on either side of the nose; two nostrils beneath the nose; and below the
nostrils, a mouth. All are small circular punctations. The lower portion of
the second specimen (Fig. 7. c, d) is divided into two distinct legs. Above the
abdomen is a single, deep, circular perforation. There is a deep fracture on
one side of the upper front. The wedge protruding from one side may
represent an arm, a turned head, or a breast. There are no eyes, nostrils or
mouth. The third specimen (Fig. 7 e) has punctated eyes, nostrils and
mouth as well as a vertical wedge nose. The nose of *the last specimen (Fig.
7 f) is a small beak. There is one eye (the other may be eroded); a fracture
in the nostril region; and no mouth.
The temper of three specimens is sparse, fine sand and the paste is
dense and fine. The temper and paste of two specimens is slightly finer
than Arena! pottery. Greene (1971) Figurines pages 166-167; Plate 15, d-i.
Shafer (1975) discusses clay figurines recovered from southwestern
Texas. These anthropomorphic forms may include males as well as
females. They are associated with the Middle Archaic period. Association
of the southwestern Texas forms with the Charcos de Risas specimens in
unconfirmed.

CLAY CYLINDERS
Twentythree irregularly shaped cylinders were recovered. All are fractured on at least one end. They may represent coil fragments, figurine
parts and possibly vessel legs. None are decorated. Nineteen specimens
have temper and paste identical to Arenal pottery. The paste of the remaining specimens is compact and fine and the temper is fine and sparse
sand. Greene (1971) Miscellaneous Clay Cylinders, page 68.
DAUB
Fifty-one specimens appear to be daub. They are small amorphously
shaped clay lumps with grass and stick impressions on the surfaces. These
may be fragments from burned clay covered brush structures or clay lined
hearths. Greene (1971) Daub; page 168.

SOUTHWESTERN COAHUILA

165

b

a

d

C

e
0

1

2
ON

FIGURE 7. Figurines.

f

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

166

TABLE III. CERAMIC ARTIFACTS OTHER THAN POTTERY
C-189

Pipe Fragments
Clay Balls and Hemispheres
Spindle Whorls (Total)
Biconical
Discs
Figurines
Clay Cylinders
Daub

C-190

C-191

C-198

Total

0

3

0

0

3

9

13

3

15

40

1

15

2

5

23

1

14

1

0

16

0

1

1

5

7

0

4

0

0

4

8

5

0

10

23

28

2

3

18

51

Shell and Bone
SHELL
Disc Beads
Eight of these beads are circular and one is rectangular. All have a
single central perforation drilled from one or both sides. Seven are white
and two are black. Greene (1971) Beads. Class I; pages 170-171.
Gastropod Beads
Six beads are Marginella and Olivella shells from which the apex was
removed. The shells include: oliVella undotella Lamark, 4 specimens;
Olivella sp., 1 specimen Marginella sp. of M. apicina Menke or M. curta
Dowerby (Peter Rodda personal communication 1969]. Four other
specimens were fashioned from unidentifiable gastropod shells. Both apex
and base were removed so that the beads consist of the cylindrical body
whorl. Greene (1971) Beads Class II’. pages 171-172.
Pelecypod Fragments
Five pelecypod valve fragments with one or two perforations were found
classified as beads. Shape ranges from rectangular with rounded edges to
irregular with dubious edge modification. Greene (1971) Miscellaneous
perforated shells; pages 172-172.

Remarks on Beads
The shell and stone beads can be compared with those from Cueva
de la Candelaria (Aveleyra et al. 1956: pp. 118-128 and Lain. 43-44).
Beads were found strung on bracelets, necklaces, and in strings of eccentric patterns. Also, they were found onflores (rattle-like objects of
fiber and wood), strung on a shaft of wood, and forming mosaic-like
patterns on the base of guardpuas. The marine shell beads recovered
from Candelaria are Olivella sama, a Pacific shell, and Marginella
apicina, a Gulf of Mexico gastropod (Ibid., p. 126).

SOUTHWESTERN COAHUILA

167

BONE
An irregular-elongate, flat bone fragment has a single perforation. The
perforation is located in the center of the fiat surface and was drilled from
both faces. The fragment is eroded and was broken when recovered.
Greene (1971) Bone: page 173.
.....

Historic Artifacts
Fragments of modern bottles, pottery, metal and plastic were recovered
from the surfaces of sites C-189 and C-198. Cartridge cases and a spent
bullet are among the artifacts from C-198, C-190 and the dune surface near
C-190. None date earlier than 1895.
Sixty-four of the pottery specimens are indistinguishable from pottery
used today. However, much of that pottery was used in the area during
early historic times. It is notable that all but ten sherds were recovered
from C-198.
Two sherds of tin-enameled earthenware of probable nineteenth century
origin (Tunnell 1966) were recovered from C-198. Both have green exteriors and cream white interiors. The glaze of both surfaces has bubble
holes. Greene (1971) Historic Artifacts, pages 174-180.
TABLE IV. SHELL AND BONE
Shell (Total)
Disc Beads
Gastropod Beads
Pelecypod Fragments
Bone

5

7

6

6

2

2

4

1

9

2

1

2

5

10

1

4

0

0

5

1

0

0

0

1

24

FAUNAL REMAINS
Gastropods (John Clark: personal communication, 1969) include
Heliosoma trivolis (Say), Rabdotus alternatur marias
(Albers), Rabdotus sp. and Pseudosuccinea columella (Say). The pelcypod
Uniomerus tetralasmus (Say) was identified by Henry Van der $chalie
(personal communication: 1969). All live in ponds, sloughs or lakes.
Van der Schalie suggests that the pelecypods may represent the
southernmost range of the species.
Vertebrate remains include: Canis latrans, Citellus spi!osoma,
Lepus californicus, Odocoilus virginianus, Sigmodon hispidus and
Sylvilagus floridanus (James E. Corbin: personal communication,
1969). Medium and large bird bone fragments were recovered.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
Comparison and internal analysis has revealed much about the
cultural sequence and artifact associations in the Desierto de Char-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

168

cos de Risa, Coahuila, Mexico. In the following sections, discussion of
the artifact sequence and conclusions are presented. These include
brief summaries of the projectile point and pottery sequences presented within the text of the artifact descriptions as well as; lithics other
than projectile points, ceramics other than pottery, shell and bone artifacts, historic artifacts and faunal remains. Comments on cultural
processes in the Charcos de Risa concludes this section. A statement
of major problems and concluding remarks close the paper.
Hopefully, the brief problem section will help the reader understand
the difficulties facing researchers concerned with the prehistory of
northern Mexico.
Summaries and Comments
THE PROJECTIL E POINT SEQUENCE
The projectile point sequence will be briefly recounted in this section. It is based primarily on comparisons with established sequences
in surrounding areas discussed by Epstein (1969), Johnson (1964 and
1967), Taylor (1966), Dibble (1967) and Story and Bryant (1966).
The earliest projectile point forms recovered in the Charcos de Risa
are stemless, leaf shaped dart points: Lerma and possibly Abasolo.
Similar dart point forms were found (Taylor 1966) in the Cuatro
Cienegas Basin and related to the Early Coahuila complex. Lerma, a
late Paleo-lndian form, has been dated in northern Mexico as early as
7,000 B.C. and probably persisted no later than 5,000 B.C. (Nance
1972). Thus, it appears to be confined to the time of the preAltithermal climatic interval.
As expected, no expanding stemmed Early Barbed dart points were
recognized in the sample. These are dated during the Early Archaic
period in Southwestern Texas from 5,000 B.C. to 3,000 B.C. [Johnson
1964 and 1967) or 7,000 B.C. or 4,000 B.C. (Story and Bryant 1966).
Slightly later dart point types, Nolan and Pandale were not found. EPstein (1972) and Nance (1972) consider the absence of Early Archaic
dart point forms to be an apparent gap in the cultural sequence
during Altithermal times.

of Central Coahuila. Dates for the Middle Archaic in Texas are referred and should be regarded as estimates. Johnson (1964) dates the
Middle Archaic in Texas between 3,00{3 B.C. until sometime after
2,000 B.C. In Nuevo Leon, McClurkan (1966: 70) dated Shumla type

SOUTHWESTERN COAHUILA

169

dart points from A.D. 100 to A.D. 200 and Gary points at approximately A.D. 1200. Story and Bryant (1966: Table 1) place Middle
Archaic dart point types between 2,500 B.C. and 1,000 B.C.
Expanding stemmed, corner notched dart points are evidence of
Late Archaic occupations in the Desierto de Charcos de Risa. Only 12
percent of the specimens are comparable to forms recovered by
Taylor (1966) in Central Coahuila indicating less homogeneity between the two regions during the Late Archaic (Middle and Late
Coahuila Complex). This speculation is further supported by the large
number of provisional type Charcos points, a well developed, but
regionally confined dart point style.
In Texas, the later part of the Late Archaic is marked by the appearance of side notched dart point forms (Johnson 1964]. The sample
from the four sites in the Charcos de Risa includes Ensor-like and 4
untyped categories of side notched dart point forms. Taylor (1966) includes an Ensor-like form among Middle and Late Coahuila Complex
points.
Dates for the Late Archaic are uncertain. In southwestern Texas,
the Late Archaic began before 2,000 B.C. and persisted later than
1,000 B.C. (Johnson 1964). In Nuevo Leon, McClurkan (1966) found no
comparable corner notched forms but the slightly later side-notched
Ensor type was recovered and dated from A.D. 600 to A.D. 1000.
Arrow points, representing late prehistoric times, include both side
notched and stemless forms. With the exception of provisional type
Diaz, all are comparable to forms recovered from Central Coahuila
(Taylor 1966). Efforts to place arrow point stern or base attributes into a sequence are premature. Although Scallorn type appears to predate Harrell, Toyah, Fresno and Garza types in Texas (Suhm and
lelks, 1962) McClurkan was unable to stratigraphically discriminate
among arrow point forms recovered from NL92 in Nuevo Leon.
Both Catan and Matamoros dart points were recovered from the
Charcos de Risa. These stemless forms can not be placed in a temporal framework. Epstein (1972) discusses the uncertain position of
triangular points within the northern Mexican chronological scheme.
OTHER LITHIC ARTIFACTS
Both bifacial and unifacial chipped stone artifacts were recovered
and several forms are comparable to specimens from nearby regions.
Many of the biracial and unifacial categories probably represent
blanks and preforms; stages within the tool manufacturing sequence,
Among the bifaces are symmetrical, irregular and notched gouges.
The irregular specimens are similar in form but smaller than Clear
Fork gouges recovered from the San Isidro Site in Nuevo Leon (Ep-

170

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

stein 1969). Clear Fork gouges have been associated with Paleo-Indian
projectile point forms, but because the sample from the Charcos de
Risa is small (2 specimens) and divergent in size it should not be considered evidence of these early times in southwestern Coahuila. Eight
thick bifaces were. recovered. They may be comparable to forms in
Nuevo Leon (Epstein 1969; McClurkan 1966) and Tamaulipas (MacNeish 1958). No chronological associations are evident. The only
unifacial form comparable to examples elsewhere is a single stemmed
specimen. Similar artifacts were recovered from the adjacent Laguna region by Aveleyra et al. (1956).
It is difficult to place biracial and unifacial artifacts within a temporal framework at this time. However, Taylor (1966: 67) suggests
that, in Central Coahuila, bifacial implements occurred earliest,
then gave way to both biracial and unifacial forms which were later
replaced by a predominance of unifacial forms. Finally, retouched
flakes replaced unifacial forms in frequency. Portions of this sequence are supported by finds at the San Isidro Site in Nuevo Leon (Epstein 1969: 119-120).
Three categories of cores were recovered from the four sites. Most
appear to be exhausted. These remains indicate that chipped stone
tools were manufactured on the sites. None of the cores can be placed
within a chronological framework and the location of the stone
quarries is undetermined.
Among the ground and pecked stone artifacts are: a bowl shaped
mortar, unshaped milling stones, hand stones, and a stone maul or
pestle. All are evidence of plant food preparation on the sites. None of
the artifacts can be dated.
Disc-shaped stone beads are similar to undated specimens
recovered from the adjacent Laguna (Avelyera et al. 1956). Other
stone artifacts include a tubular stone pipe and a spherical ground
stone fragment. Tubular stone pipe fragments were recovered from
NL92 in Nuevo Leon (McClurkan 1966) but no spherical ground stone
objects have been reported from nearby sites.
THE POTTERY SEQUENCE
Apparently, two types of pottery were manufactured by the prehistoric inhabitants of the Charcos de Risa. The earliest, provisional
type Arenal, includes several varieties which may be temporally
significant: (1) Plain vessels were probably manufactured throughout
the sequence. (2) Incised designs may be temporally overlapped or
replaced by punctated design elements. (3) Although the inception of
red washed decoration is undetermined, this technique persisted un-

SOUTHWESTERN COAHUILA

171

til the end of the Arenal sequence. The compact variety, Arenal
Variant, may be the result of more intensive firing techniques. The
temporal significance is undetermined.
A slightly later, locally manufactured pottery is provisional type
Santiago. It appears that this pottery was not manufactured until after linear incised pottery of provisional type Arenal was no longer
made.
Although no absolute dates can be associated with Arenal and Santiago pottery, correlation with intrusive types suggests that both
provisional types persisted later than A.D. 1200-1300.
The intrusive pottery includes Chalchihuites-like, Conchos, and E1
Paso Brown and E1 Paso Polychrome ceramics. A lengthy time span is
covered by these wares: A.D. 300 or 500 to A.D. 1800. The intrusive
pottery overlaps chronologically between A.D. 900 and A.D. 1350 but
there is no evidence that all three were introduced into the Charcos
de Risa during this time.
OTHER CERAMIC ARTIFACTS
Cylindrical pipe stems and a bowl fragment were found. Although
pipe stems have been reported from Durango (Mason 1937) and
Tamaulipas (MacNeish 1958) it is impossible to make cultural or temporal associations.
Other clay artifacts difficult to place within an absolute temporal
span are: clay balls and hemispheres, biconical spindle whorls, and
circular discs fashioned from potsherds. The paste of most of these
artifacts is comparable to the paste of Arenal pottery and probably
contemporaneous. One potsherd disc was made from a Santiago
sherd.
Four cylindrical clay figurines were found. Three specimens have
recognizable heads with facial features. One specimen has two legs,
no recognizable face and a possible arm, nose or breast. Based on
examples from southwestern Texas (Sharer 1975), the Charcos de
Risa specimens may represent three male and one female forms. By
association with dated projectile points, Sharer correlates several
southwestern Texas figurines with the Middle Archaic. Although
similar to the Texas specimens, none of the Charcos de Risa
specimens are identical and none have been found in the region between Texas and southwestern Coahuila. Thus, on the basis of the
small sample and lack of supportive comparisons, I am hesitant to
place the anthropomorphic figurines from the four sites within a
specific time period.
Numerous clay cylinders appear to be remnants of coils, figurines
or vessel legs. The paste of most specimens is identical to Arenal pot-

172

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tery paste. This is additional evidence that Arenal pottery was
manufactured on the sites.
Daub specimens are the only evidence of constructed features such
as living structures or hearths. No associated pit or floor outlines
were found.

SHELL ARTIFACTS
Two categories of shell beads were recovered; circular and rectangular disc shaped, Marginella and 01ivella shells with removed
apexes. Similar specimens were found in nearby Cueva de la Candelaria (Aveleyra et al., 1956). Taylor (1966: 83-84) attributes these
and other elaborate materials from the Laguna region to the Mayran
Complex. He states that these artifacts may have some time depth and
persisted until approximately A.D. 1500.
The Marginella and 01ivella shells include Pacific and Gulf of
Mexico species. These, considered with intrusive pottery indicate
widespread external contacts.
HISTORIC ARTIFACTS
Most of the historic artifacts are indistinguishable from articles
commonly used in the region today. However, two sherds of tinenameled ware are probably of 19th century origin. These may be
earlier because a mission was established in the Laguna during the
16th century (Griffen 1966).
FAUNAL REMAINS
Few faunal remains were recovered. These include gastropods,
species usually associated with standing water. Small mammals, deer
and bird skeletal material was also found. Little can be concluded
but, damper climatic conditions during parts of the past may be
indicated.
Cultural Processes in the Charcos de Risa
On the basis of the materials recovered from the four sites, the
Desierto de Charcos de Risa was occupied by prehistoric peoples
throughout a long time span extending from Late Paleo-Indian to
historic times. Undoubtedly, climatic conditions fluctuated through
ime but analysis of these changes is beyond the realm of this report.
The continuity of occupation of the four sites is undetermined. With
the exception of the Early Archaic Period there is no evidence that the
sites were or were not abandoned seasonally or for long periods of
time. During the Early Archaic the area mayhavebeen abandoned or

SOUTHWESTERN COAHUILA

173

suffered severe population depletion. The gap in the cultural sequence is based on negative evidence; lack of radiocarbon dates and
the absence of Early Barbed points which are markers of the Early
Archaic in southwestern Texas. We must not neglect the possibility
that other projectile point forms such as leaf-shaped stemless or contracting stemmed dart points occurred in southwestern Coahuila
during the Early Archaic or Altithermal times and that there is no gap
in the cultural sequence.
The archeological evidence indicates that during Archaic times the
inhabitants of the Desierto de Charcos de Risa were mobile hunters
and gatherers with no permanent settlements. The lifestyle was comparable to the lifestyle of Archaic peoples throughout arid northern
Mexico and adjacent Texas. Some of the inhabitants of the region
may have maintained an Archaic-like economy during post-Archaic
times. Locally manufactured pottery, spindle whorls, and inferences
from the historic records are evidence that some form of agriculture
may have been practiced during post-Archaic times. There is no
evidence of permanent settlements which suggests that dependence
on planted foodstuffs was marginal.
Outside contact is indicated by the presence of intrusive pottery
from the north, south and west although these items may have
reached the Charcos de Risa through a complex trade network. The
intrusive ceramics date the time of exterior contact between A.D. 300
or 500 to A.D. 1800.

Problems
There are numerous problems in Coahuila archeology today,
Nearly all can be attributed to two factors: (1) There are few written
reports and these contain little descriptive detail; (2) Few stratified
cultural deposits have been excavated.
1, It may be difficult or impossible to locate stratified deposits in
the future. Most cave deposits have been looted or mined. Surface
sites are subject to wind deflation and sheet erosion.
2, Climatic regimes are not well defined in this vast region.
Geochronological, paleobotanical and faunal analysis are needed.
3. There are discrepancies in the absolute dates between Texas
and northern Mexico although general artifact sequences seem consistent.
4. There is no confirmed evidence of man or his activities during
the Middle Archaic (Altithermal) period.
5. The projectile point sequence is not confirmed by stratigraphic
evidence. Major considerations are: the place of triangular points in

174

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the temporal and spatial framework, the local development and intrusion of arrow points, and development of a model of lithic implement production and function reflecting changes in time and
space.
6. Lithic associations are restricted to projectile points. Little is
known about the other items in the lithic assemblage.
7. Although intrusive ceramics can be dated in a general manner,
specific dates and associations with local ceramics and other artifacts is conjectural.
8. Most artifact comparisons have been made with materials
recovered from Tamaulipas, Nuevo Leon and adjacent Texas.
Western and southern affiliations (Zacatecas, Durango, Chihuahua.
and southern Texas} have rarely been considered.
9. Several internal problems are specific to Coahuila. Burial practices are not conclusive; association between open site burial and
mortuary caves (such as Candelaria)are unknown. The sparse
evidence of Spanish influence is unsettling. Projectile point form
diversity between southwestern and central Coahuila is not
adequately described.

Closing Remarks
A general model of the cultural sequence in the Desierto de Charcos de Risa has been presented. A list of problems is included. These
are not all of the problems but they indicate the vast amount of
research still to be done. Hopefully, future investigations will answer
many of the questions posed and add much needed detail to the model
of prehistoric settlement in southwestern Coahuila.

SOUTHWESTERN COAHUILA

175

REFERENCES CITED

Antevs, E.
1955 Geologic-Climatic Dating in the West. American Antiquity, Vol. 20,
pp. 317-335.
1962 Late Quaternary Climates in Arizona. American Antiquity, Vol. 28,
pp. 193-198.
Aveleyra Arroyo de Anda, L., M. Maldonado-Koerdell, and P. Martinez del
Rio
1956 Cueva de la Candetaria. Vol. 1. Memorias del Instituto Nacional de
Anthropologia e Historia, No. 5.
Bryant, V.M.
1974 Late Quaternary Pollen Records from the East Central Periphery of
the Chihuahuan Desert. Manuscript, Anthropology Research
Laboratory. Texas A & M University.
Dibble, D.S.
1967 Excavations at Arenosa Shelter, 1965-1966. Report Submitted to the
National Park Service by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project.
University of Texas at Austin.
Eardley, A.J.
1951 Structural Geology of North America. New York.
Epstein, J.F.
1969 The San Isidro Site: An Early Man Campsite in Nuevo Leon, Mexico.
Archaeology Series. No, 7, Department of Anthropology, The
University of Texas at Austin.
1972 Some Implications of Recent Excavations and Surveys in Nuevo Leon
and Coahuila. The Texas lournal of Science, Vol, 24. No. 1. pp. 46-56.
Escoto, J.A.V.
1964 Weather and Climate of Mexico and Central America. Handbook of
Middle American Indians, Vol. 1, edited by Robert Wauchope and
others, pp. 187-215.
Fenega, F.
1953 The Weights of Chipped Stone Points: A Clue to Their Functions.
Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, Vol. 9, No. 3. pp. 309-323.
Greene, L.H.
1971 Archeological Investigations in the Desierto de Charcos de Risa.
Coahuila, Mexico, M.A. thesis, University of Texas at Austin.
Griffen, W.B.
1969 Culture Change and Shifting Populations in Central Northern
Mexico. Anthropological Papers of the University of Arizona, No. 13.
Hester, T.R. and T.C. Hill, Jr.
1969 Mogollon Ceramics from Southern Texas. The Artifact, E1 Paso
Archeological Society, Vol. 7, No. 3, pp. 11-15.
Johnson, L., Jr.
1964 The Devils Mouth Site. A Stratified Campsite at Amistad Reservoir,
Val Verde County, Texas. Archaeology Series, No. 6, Department of

176

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.
1967 Toward a Statistical Overview of the Archaic Cultures of Central
and Southwestern Texas. Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin, No. 12.
Kelley, J.C.
1966 Mesoamerica and the Southwestern United States. Handbook of
Middle American Indians, Vol. 4, pp. 95-110.
McClurkan, Burney B.
1966 The Archeology of Cueva de la Zona de Derrumbes: A Rock Shelter
in Nuevo Leon, Mexico. M.A. thesis, University of Texas at Austin.
McGregor, J.C.
1965 Southwestern Archeology. University of Illinois Press.
MacNeish, R.S.
1958 Preliminary Archeological Investigations in the Sierra de
Tamaulipas Mexico. Transactions of the American Philosophical
Society, Vol. 48, pp. 1-209.
Maldonado-Koerdell. M.
1964 Geohistory and Paleogeography of Middle America. Handbook of
Middle American Indians, Vol. 1. edited by Robert Wauchope and
others, pp. 3-30.
Mason, J.A.
1937 Late Archeological Sites in Durango, Mexico from Chalchihuites to
Zape. Twenty-fifth Anniversary of Studies, Vol. 1. Publications of
the Philadelphia Anthropological Society, University of Pennsylvania
Press, pp. 127-146.
Nance, C.R.
1971 The Archeology of La Calsada: A Stratified Rock Shelter Site. Sierra
Madre Oriental, Nuevo Leon. Mexico. Ph.D. dissertation. University
of Texas at Austin.
1972

Cultural Evidence for the Altithermal in Texas and Mexico.
Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, Vol. 28, pp. 169-192.
Runkles. F.A.
1964 The Garza Site: A Neo-American Campsite Near Post, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeologica! Society, Vol. 35, pp. 101-126.
Schackelford. W.J.
1955 Excavations at the Polvo Site in Western Texas. American
Antiquity, Vol. 20. No. 3, pp. 256-262.
Sharer, H.J.
1975 Clay Figurines from the Lower Pecos Region, Texas. American
Antiquity. Vol. 40, No. 2, Pt. 1, pp. 148-158.
Silva, P, and T.R. Hester
1973 Archeological Materials from a Nonceramic Site in Eastern
Durango, Mexico. Contributions of the University of California
Archeological Research Facility, No. 18.
Sprague, R.
1968 A Suggested Terminology and Classification of Burial Description.
American Antiquity, Vol. 33, No. 4. pp. 479-485.

177

SOUTHWESTERN COAHUILA

Story, D.A. and V.M. Bryant
1966 A Preliminary Study of the Paleoecology of the Amistad Reservoir
Area. N.S.F. Research Report (GS-667).
Suhm, D.A. and E.B. Jelks
1962 Handbook
of Texas
Archeological

Archeology:

Type

Descriptions,

Society Special Publication No.

I

Texas

and the Texas

Memorial Museum Bulletin, No. 4.
Tamayo, J.L. and R.C. West
1964 The Hydrography of Middle America. Handbook of Middle American
Indians, Vol. 1, edited by Robert Wauchope and others, pp. 84-121.
Taylor, W.W.
1956 Some Implications of the Carbon-14 Dates from a Cave in Coahuila,
Mexico. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 27, pp. 215234.
1966 Archaic

Cultures

Adjacent

to

the

Northeastern

Frontiers

of

Mesoamerica. Handbook of Middle American Indians. Vol 4, edited
by Robert Wauchope and others, pp. 59-94.
Tunnell, C.
1966 A Description of Enameled Earthenware from an Archeological
Excavation at Mission San Antonio de Valero (The Alamo). State
Building Commission Archeological Program Report, No. 2, Austin.
Varner, D.M.
1967 An Archeological Investigation of Hearths in Northeastern Mexico.
M.A. thesis, University of Texas at Austin.

Northeast Louisiana University
Monroe, Louisiana

THE CLEAR FORK GOUGE REVISITED*
JOEL L. SHINER
ABSTRACT
Clear Fork Gouges, their attributes and covariation of attributes are
examined in an attempt to determine morphological and functional
regularities as well as relationships with endscrapers. As might be expected, the relationships are statistical and force the archeologist to work
with relatively high numbers of specimens. The gouge is a generic entity
and any attempts to divide it into stylistic or morphological types must
procede with caution.
INTRODUCTION
After years of field work, Cyrus Ray (1941) described a stone implement and named it the Clear Fork Gouge. Considering the time and
the contemporary quality of Texas archeology, his morphological
descriptions and historical considerations of this phenomenon were
more than adequate. He defined the gouges in terms of 441 specimens.
Nearly 90% of these were triangular in outline. Nearly 60% were
made on bifaces, and practically all had bits with a "scooped-out" appearance. He related these gouges to a "Clear Fork Culture", a concept which fortunately has not been pursued. Apparently, his
placement of the gouge as later than what we now call Paleo-lndian
and earlier than arrow-points and pottery is largely supported. All in
all, his observations were very perceptive. Forty-five years after his
initial impressions of 1928, there is not much to add except for quantitative reporting and more analytical work.
The definition worked very well for the area around Abilene. but
soon collectors began to recognize the form farther east, southeast.
and northwest. The question began to arise as to whether similar
forms near Fort Worth. San Antonio, and Tyler were the same thing
as Ray’s gouge. At the same time. many students began to speculate
as to the use or uses of the gouge. Unfortunately, the questions were
not followed up with a scientific rigor, and new type names were
submitted without the proper attention paid to form, function, association, or time. Speculations as to use remained unsupported.

*About the time this paper was submitted in 1973. three studies of these subtriangular flaked stone implements were published. Hester. et al. [1973) made an
analytical study of possible functions while Howard (1973) did experimental work.
Chandler (1974) conducted an analysis of wear patterns on a sample from the Falcon
area. Hester’s findings verify my own conclusions of halting and the studies of Howard
and Chandler do not conflict with my own hypotheses.

180

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

In 1968, I collaborated in a study of gouges from the Acton site
(Blain et al. 1968). Since we defined the class in terms of Ray’s work,
it is reasonable that we found our gouges to be very much like his.
A second collection of gouges and scrapers, over 300 in number,
was obtained from Webb County in south Texas. It was only an uncontrolled surface collection, but showed enough consistency and
regularity to permit the formulation of several initial hypotheses. For
the most part, I was interested in the question of how well the concept
of gouge fitted the concept of morphological type, and how shapes and
sizes of these artifacts varied geographically and temporally.
The third collection was made available through the courtesy of
R. K. Harris of Dallas. This group was from the McClean site near
Abilene, Texas. It is believed that these most nearly conform to Ray’s
original "type" specimens.
METHODOLOGY
Certain measurements were taken in a standard manner. Length
was understood to be the maximum distance measured from the distal
end or bit to the proximal end (Figure 1, A). The width is measured at
the bit and is always at right angles to the length (Figure 1, A).
Thickness is measured at the bit to the maximum height of the flaking
that created the bit (Figure 1, B). It is measured at right angles to the
ventral face of the tool. The edge angle is measured on the bit with
one arm of the goniometer resting on the ventral face of the tool and
the other tangent to the axis of the bottom rows of stepped retouch
flakes (Figure 1, C). If the edge is undercut by wear or resharpening,
the arm is held parallel to the bottom row. This angle is difficult to
read because each flake varies somewhat. Thus, it is registered as
70-74,75-79, or 80-84, etc.
The next set of attributes are recorded by observation. As we had
recorded in 1968 (Blaine et al. 1968), gouges and similar tools are
made on bifaces, inverse flakes with the cortex forming what we
might regard as the ventral face, and flakes (or blades). The latter
may be retouched on the ventral face by thinning or truncating the
bulb of percussion
Flakes usually curve along the striking axis so that the ventral face
is incurvate or excurvate. In addition, lateral edges of these flakes
are chipped, ground, or both.
The next series of observations concerned bit wear as an indicator
of use. No simple measurements or observations would suffice here;
neither were there guidelines in any published work on stone tools.
Within the large group of gouges and scrapers from Webb County,

CLEAR FORK REVISITED

181

\

\

C

\

l
D

FIGURE 1. A, methods of recording length and width. B, method of
recording thickness. C, method of measuring edge angle. D, Different
positions of use wear; top is scraping and bottom is planing.

there were many shapes, attributes, apparent wear patterns and,
seemingly, many regularities. The initial study consisted of examining
approximately 500 specimens under the binocular microscope until
certain ideas began to take form.
Wear could be isolated as several kinds and in several places.
Lateral edges were blunted by chipping and then ground with a
rotary-all-over motion. Facets of polish occurred either on the ventral
surface aft of the bit or at the apex of the bit and the ventral surface.
Tiny rows of flakes on the bit seem to undercut and spoil the cutting

182

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

edge. Logic seemed to demand that the lateral edges were
deliberately dulled (to aid in halting?), ventral surface polish was the
result of push-plane use, and apex wear was the result of scraping.
Such observations and logic permitted the formulation of several
hypotheses which could be partially if not rigorously tested. This was
accomplished by making replicas of the "gouge" and "scraper"
shapes, and then using them on several kinds of materials such as
woods, hide, bone, etc. The results of these preliminary tests will be
presented later.
That these scrapers and gouges were halted in some sort of handle
is almost a certainty. There is no scientific proof nor any indisputable
evidence of this but there are data that support it (Hester et al. 1973;
Howard 1973; Chandler 1974). All attempts to use these tools handheld indicate the inefficiency of that technique (Howard 1973). A
careful examination of both faces, along flake scar ridges and other
high spots revealed a few areas of light wear. but there was no
regularity to them. It is apparent to me that we have not acquired the
proper techniques of observation to determine if these tools were
halted.
In regard to attributes, both metrical and morphological, there
remains the task of matching them in search of co-variances or causeand-effect relationships. The most obvious combinations are those of
shape and wear patterns. Standard statistical tests were run on the
associations among triangular shape and "scraper" wear or "pushplane" wear; between flake curvature and wear forms; between
flake or biface and either wear or overall shape.
The last set of data needed to complete this study are distributional
in nature. The problem is to identify certain configurations of shape
and wear and where these things cluster in geographical space and in
time. This is not as easy as it sounds since not all archeological reports agree on which attributes constitute a gouge and which make
an end scraper. In addition, dating is most precarious since most
dates on artifacts are indirect and many decisions are made on the
style of points present. Jack Hughes (personal communication] believes the Clear Fork Gouge to be of early Archaic, or possibly PaleoIndian age in the Texas Panhandle. Most workers in central and
south Texas believe it to be Archaic (e.g.Hester and Kohnitz 1975].

RESULTS
i

i

.

from 26 mm. to 70 mm. The mean width is 38.7 mm. with proportionate
variations. The mean thickness is 12.3 mm. and the angle of the bit is

CLEAR FORK REVISITED

183

about 66°. These figures vary only minutely from those of Hester et al.
(1973). About 83 percent of the tools are on flakes that are either excurvate, or else have been flaked to produce a ventral face that is
longitudinally convex. Most of the ventral faces have been flaked; in
fact, 65% of the gouges have been made on bifaces.
The observations made so far might seem to be a bit premature
since I have not yet defined what a "gouge" is. It is only after running
many attribute covariance tests that enough regularities appeared to
justify using the term with any confidence, Clear,cut facets of fiat
polish on the ventral surface are closely associated with the
triangular outline, slightly convex or straight bit, thick bit which has
a "scooped,out" appearance, A series of measurements shows that
the polish is a result of movement against the abrasive agent at an
angle around 25°. Further, the movement is the result of the bit
(distal) end moving forward, If the contraption for hafting has the bit
facing the operator, then the tool is drawn toward him.
The first statistical test was made with 201 specimens that showed
wear. Of these, 74 had scraper facets and 127 had push-plane facets.
Divided another way, 88 specimens were triangular with relatively
straight bits and 113 were oval with convex bits. If the two classes in
the first division are proportional to the two classes in the second
division, then the attributes are random.

Oval outline
Triangular outline
Total

Scraper

Push-Plane

Wear

Wear

59

Total

54

15

73

88

74

127

201

X2 = 26.32

A standard chi-square test shows that at a 95% probability randomness of the variables should be rejected. In simplest words, there
is a high probability that the triangular shape is linked with pushplane wear.
A second test compared scraper wear with a concave longitudinal
ventral face and push-plane wear with a convex ventral face: The
number of specimens available for this study was 157 and the breakdown was as follows:
.....
Concave
Scraper wear
Push-plane wear
Total

Convex

Total

22
11

44
80

66
91

33

124

157

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

184

A chi-square value of 10.4 rejects the hypothesis at the .99 level
that the variables are independent.
Thus, "scraper" wear is associated with an oval shape, a convex
bit and an incurvate flake or blade. "Push-plane" wear is associated
with a nearly straight bit on a more or less triangular outline and an
excurvate flake or blade ......
The group of objects that we are calling gouges are sometimes
made on bifaces that look like preforms for projectile points,
sometimes on large flakes, and sometimes on pebbles. In the third
form, the cortex face corresponds to the ventral face of a flake. This
last form is apparently never used for scrapers. In a test to compare
flake and biface forms with wear patterns the following data were
used.
Scraper
Wear
Flake
Bfface
Total

Push-Plane
Wear

Totals

35
9

33
13

68
22

44

46

90

X2 = .92

The low value of X2 indicates a high probability of independence of
the variables. In other words, both flake and biface forms were used
randomly for scraping or planing.
In comparing flake or biface forms with triangular and oval
outlines clear associations are evident.

Triangular

Oval

Shape

Shape

Totals
101

Flake

35

66

Biface

39

6

45

74

72

146

Total

Xz = 33.6

Biface forms tend to covary with triangular outlines and flakes
with oval outlines.
A fairly simple hafting device permitted the use of either gouge
(low angle pushplane) or scraper (high angle drawing motion) with
considerable do’ward pressure and a constant angle (Figure 1, D).
Both scraping and planing motions were done, independently of
course, on scrap shoe leather, bois d’arc wood, deer antler and green
beef bone.

CLEAR

FORK REVISITED

185

The first lesson learned was that it takes more work than I had
imagined in order to produce wear on an edge. Approximately 2000
strokes of about 15 to 30 cm. in length, under heavy pressure barely
made a small polished facet on the ventral surface of a pushplane
when used on hard leather. Heavy scraping on hard leather introduced some nibbling undercutting of bits, but no polished facet. It
is believed that hides stretched in frames might produce this kind of
wear, but green hides are difficult to obtain. Ethnographic examples
are frequent (Lowie 1954: 58-9; Davis 1969: 54) .....
Both kinds of wear, pushplane polish and nibbling scraper
deterioration, appeared to be identical to forms isolated among the
hundreds of original specimens examined. At magnifications up to
600x, no apparent differences could be detected. This is not proof, but
it is infinitely better than purely inductive reasoning. Many more experiments are needed.
Moving from the area of south Texas to the north, the next major
collection of associated pushplane-scraper tools is from the Acton
site about 25 miles southwest of Fort Worth, Texas. The same general
relationships among endscrapers and gouges, length-width ratios,
shapes, and technology tend to appear in the Acton material as did in
the Webb collection. The Acton specimens are just slightly smaller in
all dimensions, have the same mean edge angle and close to the same
ratios of bifaces, flake curvature and edge grinding as were recorded
in south Texas.
The small sample of 25 gouges from the McClean site show larger
size overall. They are 50% longer, 150 wider, and i0% thicker.
Other observations do not vary significantly from means established
for Webb or Hood Counties, nor do the standard deviations.
Since there is reasonable support for the hypothesis that the Clear
Fork Gouge has regular parameters of shape, size, and use marks and
since we know its spatial and its temporal distribution, the question
arises as to its status as a type. The answer must be no. The variation
within the form is large enough that each specimen must be examined
for wear patterns, manufacturing techniques and other attributes,
designating it as a type does not make it a research tool. More importantly, we do not know anything about ethnic affiliations of this
phenomenon. At best, the Clear Fork Gouge is a generic type with a
range of shapes and varied manufacturing techniques. As such, it differs significantly from the end scraper. It is not a functional type
since it was used both as pushplane and as scraper. It is not an historic-index type since we cannot relate it to real or artificial societies
of the past. Thus, when we use the name Clear Fork Gouge, we may
think of the range of shapes reported by Ray (1941) and of two ac-

186

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tivities, planing and scraping. If really well designed research programs support other associations, they will add to our understanding.
From descriptive data, I will turn to speculation in hope that these
ideas may lead to directed research on the overall problem. My
feeling is that the primary use of the Clear Fork Gouge was in thinning
bison hides. I feel that the distribution in space represents the
southern area of bison exploitation during the period we call the Archaic. I am not able to visualize a group of ethnic tribes occupying all
of this area from just north of Monterrey, Mexico to southern
Oklahoma, nor do I believe this to be necessary.
Testing of the bison-gouge relationship will necessitate a more
careful reporting of artifacts and their context. The internal structure of sites, especially regarding concentrations of activity related
tools and debris, must be recorded. Presence and absence of bones
together with their context will be important. Better dating methods
are needed. Radiocarbon dating is too expensive and point styles are
not reliable except where extensive tests have been made. My feeling
is that the use of consecutive typological analyses (morphological,
functional, stylistic) reported in a statistical manner may help the
studies. Naturally, this would mean more work and a closer
cooperation among specialists in different fields.
Testing of reasons for the temporal range of Clear Fork Gouges
would be difficult. It is hard to imagine why the implement did not survive into the late prehistoric era.
Despite a few apparent temporal and areal exceptions, the form
known as the Clear Fork Gouge appears to have continuous
distribution. It is restricted to the Archaic period and tc a dumbbell
shaped area running from south central Oklahoma to north central
Mexico (Figure 2). This area is constricted in the center along the
Balcones escarpment near Austin and San Antonio. Although large
flint artifacts are exceotionallv abundant in the Hill Country around
Uvalde, Llano and Fredericksburg, Clear Fork Gouges are conspicuously rare.
Morphologically speaking, the Clear Fork Gouge is distinct from the
large endscraper of the Archaic Period. Functionally, however, only a
strong statistical probability links gouge with low-angle push-plane
activity and the end scraper with high-angle scraping. The definition
unfortunately must employ some non-metrical lerms such as "bit
.......
stralght
to shghtly convex, edges stralght to sl ightly convex , "
"
....
" These attr ibutes are
longitudinal
cross-sechon ’ usually biconvex.
the ones most frequently associated with wear patterns indicative of
the push-plane motion. In addition, the Clear Fork Gouge maybe made

CLEAR FORK REVISITED

187

/

/
/

I
\

I
/

\

/

\

/
/
/

\

/
/

|

/

I
I
I
I

\

/
J

/

/

,

I
I

I
!
I
!
/

,,’\

//

/;

I

I
\
\
\

/
\

FIGURE 2. Primary distribution
occurrences are not noted.

/

z

of Clear

Fork Gouges.

Single

on a biface or a flake. The bifaces are rarely "well finished," but instead, usually look like preforms in the percussion state. Flakes
usually have bulbs truncated or thinned by chipping. Cortex on the
dorsal face is almost non-existent. The strongest attribute is still the
isosceles triangle with the bit on the short side. Also, the bit is the
thickest portion of the tool.

188

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
REFERENCES CITED

Blaine, Jay C., R. K. Harris, Wilson W. Crook, Jr. and Joel L. Shiner
1968 The Acton Site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 39,
pp. 45-94.
Chandler, C. K.
1974 Use Wear Analysis of "Clear Fork" Tools From the Falcon Reservoir
Area, Southern Texas. La Tierra, Vol. 1, No. 4, pp. 15-21.
Davis, Christoper
1969 North American Indian, Hamlyn Publishing Co., London.
Hester, Thomas Roy, Delbert Gilbow and Alan D. Albee
1973 A Functional Analysis of "Clear Fork" Artifacts from the Rio Grande
Plain, Texas. American Antiquity, Vol. 38, No. 1, pp. 90-96.
Hester, Thomas R. and Harvey Kohnitz
1975 Chronological Placement of "Guadalupe" Tools. La Tierra, Vol. 2, No.
2, pp. 22-25.
Howard, Calvin D.
1973 A Study of the Clear Fork Gouge. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 44, pp. 51-60.
Lowie, R. H.
1963 Indians of the Plains. American Museum Science Books, New York.
Ray, Cyrus
1941 The Various Types of the Clear Fork Gouge. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 13, pp. 152-156.
Southern Methodist University

AUST PHASE UR ALS AT THE PAT PARKE S TE,
TRAVIS COUNTY, TEXAS
JOHN W. GREER AND ROBERT A. BENFER

ABSTRACT
A Neo-American cemetery site in the rolling prairie country in central
Texas east of Austin yielded remains of at least 17-20 human burials.
Nearly all of the ten recognizable burials were flexed on their back or
side, with skull to the n0rthl and faced either east or west. Ab0riginai
grave goods consisted of deer antler, a marine shell pendant; and possibly
Scallorn arrow points. The burials are tentatively identified as early
Austin phase, dating about A.D. 800-1000.

INTRODUCTION
The Pat Parker site was brought to the attention of the
Department of Anthropology of The University of Texas at Austin in
1960 by the landowner, who found human bones eroding from a
slightly raised area beside the creek near his home. Controlled
limited excavation under the aegis of the Department of Anthropology uncovered several human burials, artifacts, and other
cultural debris presumably attributable to an early Austin phase
occupation. The purpose of this report is to describe and evaluate
the site.

THE SITE
The Pat Parker site (41 TV 88] is in northeastern Travis County,
northeast of Austin, on a small rise in the bottomland beside a
tributary flowing eastward into Gilleland Creek, This is a large
drainage system flowing southward into the Colorado River 16 miles
east of Austin. The site is about 7 miles east of the Balcones
Escarpment, the eastern edge of the Edwards Plateau, in an area of
open rolling prairie locally dissected by the major creek drainages.
Grasslands abound in the prairie areas, now mainly farmlands,
while the bottomlands along the creeks are often forested and in
brush. The site is on a small knoll about 100 feet south of the creek.
Deposits consist of a black midden nearly devoid of burned rocks.
Flint cobbles and pebbles occur naturally over an area of several
acres surrounding the site, but not on it. Construction of a stock tank

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

190

abutting the northwest side of the excavation area led to the
discovery of the burials.

EXCAVATION PROCEDURES
Horizontal and vertical locations were referenced to an arbitrary
datum at the site. Excavation followed a grid of 5-foot squares
excavated in 6-inch levels. Ten squares were excavated to an
average depth of two feet. No differentiation of natural zones was
recognizable. All excavated deposit was loosened by trowels and
screened through IA-inch mesh hardware cloth. All flint, bone, shell,
and considerable historic Euro:American debris was collected.
Notes, drawingsl maps and photographs made during excavation are
on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin.

THE MIDDEN
The midden was apparently about 60 feet east-west along the
creek and 30 feet north-south perpendicular to the creek, although
its blending with the surrounding soils made accurate delimitation
impossible. Certainly it constituted at least the
recognizable
nucleus of the site. Aside from occasional chipped stone
manufacture debris (flakes, cores), tools, and similar artifacts
(unfinished objects, by-products), the midden content was nearly
entirely a black or dark brown compact soil, almost clay-like -- the
typical blackland vertisol-type soil. Below about 2-3 feet, soil became
lighter, more compact, and seemingly totally void of occupational
debris. Hearths and other activity features, other than burials, were
not encountered. Internal soil changes, including burial pits or
outlines, for the most part were not visible. This necessitated
excavation in arbitrary horizontal and vertical units. The rarity of
heat-fractured limestone rocks is not surprising, since no limestone
outcroppings occur nearby. Since research was oriented entirely
toward the recovery of burials, other portions of the site were not
tested.

HUMAN REMAINS
Ten recognizable burials (Fig. 1) were exhumed from an area
about 10 x 10 feet and about 1.5 feet deep. Either a large mass grave
pit or individual graves were dug into an existing midden of black
soil containing flint flakes and animal bone fragments. Grave fill

AUSTIN PHASE BURIALS

191

was midden soil; no grave pits or grave outlines were recognizable
in the field. Burial numbers given here are the field catalog
numbers. Burial data are presented in Tables 1 and 2. In most cases,
field notes record the presence of various artifacts near a skeleton
without giving the precise location; those comments are included in
th e following descriptions.
Burial i.

Four individuals are represented: a 12 year old female (?), a
25 year old male, a 30 year old male, and a 35 year old male with pro-

nounced muscle attachments. Two disturbed fragmentary male skeletons.
one on top of the other, were oriented with the skulls to the north and
facing west. The distal part of a Darl point was near the pelvic region of
one individual. Unusually large deer antler fragments from one animal
were aligned north-south as if placed on top of the bodies or beside them
Additional fragments from the same antler were between Burials 1. 3.
and 4. and appeared to be in direct association with those burials, suggesting that several people were buried al the same time in a common
grave. The proximity of the individuals to each other and the similarity of
skeleton orientation and position also suggest mass burial.
Observations: Many loose teeth have medium wear. and one molar is
heavily worn. One worn molar has caries and a worn premolar has a
large abscess at the base of the crown. Incisors are shovel-shaped.

Burial 2.

A loosely flexed skeleton of a 15 year old female lay on her
back with the skull, arms. and legs on their left side. The skull was
oriented northward with the face to the east. An associated marine shell
pendant (Fig. 6,a} was possibly originally attached to the right wrist. A
Darl point and a Scallorn point were found near the skeleton.

Burial 3.

This 40 + year old male was fairly tightly flexed on its left

side. Both hands were folded under the chin, and the skull was oriented
to the north, facing east.
Observations: Incisors are strongly shovel-shaped

Burial 4. A heavily muscled adult male was oriented northward, facing
east. The body was tightly flexed on its left side with legs to the east.
Burial 5.

A semi-flexed adult lay on its right side. oriented northward.
The initial discovery pit removed the upper portion of the skeleton. A
Scallorn point (Fig. 2,a), a probable Scallorn distal fragment (Fig. 2.b),
and a Darl point were found near the skeleton.

Burial 6.

An infant (possibly fetal} is represented by a few skull fragments found in a disturbed area.
Burial 7. A heavily muscled adult male was oriented northward, lying
loosely flexed on its left side and facing east.
Burial 8. An adult was oriented northward, with the skul! facing west
It was tightly flexed on its right side with the hands drawn up under the
chin. An arrow point fragment was found with the skeleton.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

192

PARKER SITE

PAT

(41TV88)

IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII11

IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII!1!11111111

initial
discovery
pit

Y

no. 2

no.l
no. 3

.1.,

n O.

modern

oo

no. 9

m

N
i

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~I~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~I

FIGURE 1. Excavation plan, showing locations of burials. No burial
pit outline was evident.

AUSTIN PHASE BURIALS
Burial 9.

193

An adult was oriented northward, loosely flexed on its left

side, and faced east.

Burial 10.

A 35 year old male was oriented northward, loosely flexed

on its left side, and faced east.
Additional Material. At least six individuals, including two fragmentary skulls, are represented by the bones from the initial discovery
pit. All the skeletal material is fragmentary and some may belong to any
of the burials excavated by the university personnel. One of the two
skulls and some upper limb and torso bones must belong to Burial 5.
Individuals not represented in other parts of the excavation (as evidenCed
maInly by pelvis and patella fragments} include a child, a 15 year old
adolescent, and at least two adults.

DISCUSSION. Skeletons in a recognizable position include Burials 1
(two individuals), 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, and i0. The Burial 6 infant bones
represent another individual. Additional nonarticulated bones raise
the number of individuals in the excavated portion of the site to at
least 17 and perhaps 20, both male and female, ranging inage from
newborn to over 40.
Most burials are fairly consistent in pattern.
moderately to tightly flexed, usually (six of the ten
tons) on their left side facing east. Orientation
northward. Individuals of Burial 1 and probably
terred together. The compactness of the entire

Individuals were
articulated skelewas consistently
3 and 4 were inburial area, the

closeness of the burials, the overlapping features between some
burials (i.e. the antlers with Burials I, 3, and 4), and the uniformity
of interment indicate that the site is a cemetery, and seems to suggest that most, if not all, individuals were interred during a very
short period, possibly at one time. The cause or causes of death are
unknown.
Burial offerings (at least the recognizable nonperishable ones)
apparently were rare. A perforated marine shell probably was attached to the adolescent girl. Two Scallorn points from the initial
discovery pit may have been associated with the burials, though not
assuredly actual grave goods. Other projectile points (Scallorn and
Darl) found near the graves may have been placed in the graves or
may have been accidentally included in the grave fill,

OSTEOLOCICAL OBSERVATIONS
The postcranial material from these burials is fragmentary and
has not been analyzed. Cranial material is in poor condition; the reconstructed skulls are warped, and measurements for the two adults

-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

*~
o

, ,~,~,

.<

°~

g
.<

d

~.~

m
M
m

AUSTIN PHASE BURIALS

195

and one adolescent are approximate. Mandibles are in better condition and their measurements are accurate. Mandibles are all
rugged, but none is exceptionally so. Age was determined by criteria
of McKern and Stewart (1957); sex and mensuration follow the criteria of Montagu (1960).
The mental foramen of the 40 year old male from Burial 3 seems
pathological in being 7 mm in diameter. The mandibular third molars
are impacted on the same individual. Dental wear is generally excessive in all teeth at the site; secondary dentine is often evident.
The congenital absence of the mandibular third molars on four of
the eight mandibles complete enough for observation is noteworthy.
Both lower molars were congenitally absent from the mandible of
the adolescent female Burial 2. Only the !ower left molar was absent
in another female. Both lower molars are missing from the male
Burial 10, and the molar was missing from the right mandible (the
only part recovered) of a male in Burial 1. Dahlberg (1949:170-172)
has suggested that congenital absence of the third molar might be a
useful genetic trait, and he documents a wide range of percentage
differences for various groups (Ibid. Table 34). Goldstein (1948:72,
Table 6) reports 12% congenital absence of one or more mandibular
third molars for 173 Texas Indians. Thus, the small sample from the
Pat Parker site demonstrates considerably greater congenital molar
absence than is usual for Texas Indians.
Of the dozen incisors recovered, most lower incisors were weakly
or not at all shovel-shaped. Most upper incisors were weakly to
medium shovel-shaped.
One restorable male skull has Wormian bones and a complete
Inca bone. Two female skulls have Wormian bones, and an Inca
bone is present on the skull of Burial 2. The male skull is wide; the
two female skulls have narrow vaults.
Cranial and mandibular measurements are shown in Table 2,
together with measurements of an Austin phase skull from the Kyle
site in Hill County (lelks 1962) for comparison.
THE ARTIFACTS

Artifacts from the site were divided for description in a
traditional manner according to material and then into categories
generally describable as fineness of workmanship. Historic materials
follow aboriginal debris, since the interest in this report is strictly on
the Indian occupation. Thus, the artifactual order is ceramics,
chipped stone ( shaped tools followed by debitage), non-chipped
stone, bone, shell, and the variety of historic materials.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

196

03
:~

03

I

I
.-k

I

I

03
o~

;B
;M
03

o
"B

¢o

03

03

--¢[o

I

03
~.~

o

03

~

m
~

¯
m

03

03

I

I

I

I

03

~1~ ~03 03

¢

N

,-~03

2~

03~

AUSTIN PHASE BURIALS

197

Artifacts were generally scattered throughout the small
excavated portions of the midden. The nature of this portion of the
site is a shallow deposit seemingly perforated with burial pits,
historic pits, and relatively modern filled gullies. Artifact locations
therefore probably are mostly secondary. Artifact distribution
tables for this situation are meaningless and therefore are not
presented,
Aboriginal Pottery (6 sherds)
Six sherds are from, at most, two vessels of the same type.
Vessel form. Presumably medium-small jar or fairly deep bowl. Rim
very slightly outcurved, direct, with a flattened lip. Walls 5-6 mm thick;
lip 4 mm wide.
Exterior surface. Floated and very well polished; buff, tan, and reddishtan.
Interior surface. Finely smoothed to well-polished; buff to dark gray.
One sherd has a naturally red interior surface (not slipped}.
Paste. Contains a fair amount of quartz sand and some small inclUsions
of red material (presumably clay}. Appearance ranges from a lightcolored shale-like texture to what appears more like a very fine mud
(30x].
Core. Light gray to light red.
Temper. Sand if anything, probably none. Looks as if sand was part of
the clay and was not intentionally added. No bone or shell.
Provenience. Five sherds from surface; one from the uppermost sixinch level.
Remarks. Appearance, thickness, and outwardly observable attributes
are similar to sherds recovered by Tunnell (1962:111] from the Oblate
Site in Comal County (Texas Archeological Research Laboratory collections, Austin). Microscopically (30x} the pastes are radically different:
the paste of the Oblate sherds is tempered with bone fragments; the paste
of the Pat Parker sherds is a fairly homogenous clay.
Arrow Points (n = 21)
The 14 finished arrow points are all expanding-stem points (Fig. 2),
here referred to as Scallorn (Suhm et aL 1954:506-507}. Two points (Fig.
2,a-b) from Burial 5 in the initial discovery pit are made either from limestone or from flint which has since desilicified and turned chalky,
possibly from chemical action. The predominance of concave-base forms
in deposits with Darl points suggests that this variety is an early form of
Sca!!orn. Dimensions: 19-42 (est.) x 11-15 x 3-4 ram.
Four bifacially flaked unnotched specimens (Fig. 3) seem equivalent to
Jelks’ (1962} Granbury and Fresno types, but probably are Scallorn preforms (Sollberger 1970}. Dimensions: 22-49 (est.) x 12-17 x 3-5 ram.
Three distal fragments were also found (Fig. 2,n).

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

198

f

\

t
f

e

d

c

b

a
/\

j

i

n

g

t

k

I \

o
I

m

I

I

/_.,
I

cm

FIGURE 2. Expanding-stem arrowpoints.

Dart Points [n= 27)
This fairly coherent grouping of Transitional Archaic-Neo-American
dart points is characterized by rectangular to expanding stems, straight
to concave bases, and fine pressure retouch. The sample consists of 15
Darl points [Fig. 4,a-k), 3 Fairland (Fig. 4,m-n), 7 distal blade fragments
’, and 2 medial fragments.

AUSTIN PHASE BURIALS

t

199

\

b

0
I
C]

1
cm

FIGURE 3. Unnotched arrowpoints.

Unnotched Thin Bifaces (n = 29}
These are thin, moderately well-worked pointed bifaces with no stem.
Form A (n= 2; Fig. 5,c) is wide, thin, and we]]’worked, has straight
blade edges and is widest at the base. The concave base has fairly sharp
basal corners. Dimensions: 89 (est.) x 38-45 x 7-8 mml
Form B (n = 3; Fig. 5,d} is narrow, rectangular in outline, and has nearly
straight blade edges. The straight to slightly convex base has definite,
though rounded, basal corners. These are similar to the narrowest
specimens of ]elks’ (1962:45) Cleburne type knives.
Form C (n= 3;Fig. 5,a-b) is very small, teardrop-shaped, widest at the
midblade, and has convex blade edges, a rounded base, and no basal
corners. These are similar to the smallest specimens of ]elks’ (1962:45)
Cleburne type, but are smaller, and also to his Granbury parker arrow
points. They are somewhat thicker and more crudely worked than the
arrow points from Pat Parker, and are probably preforms. Dimensions:
25-43 (est.) x 18-26 x 4-6 ram.
Form D (n = 2) are large, wide, fairly thin proximal fragments widest
about one-third of the way from the base. They have convex blade edges
and slightly concave to straight bases with rounded basal corners.
Dimensions (est.}: 57 x 34 x 9 mm.
Medial and distal fragments (n = 19) are not identifiable to form.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

200

/

a

c

b

d

e

ty~

g

h

i

j

k

FIGURE 4. Dart points, a-k, Darl; 1, Darl blade fragment; m-n,
Fairland.

Scrapers (n = 17]
Flakes with retouch on one or more edges of one face are grouped
according to location and shape of the retouched edge. The term "scraper"
is used here in the traditional descriptive sense, and may or may not
e~quate wilh the actual tool function.

AUSTIN PHASE BURIALS

201

C

0

I
d

4

l

I

i

I

CITI

FIGURE 5. Thin bifaces, a-b, Form C; c, Form A; d, Form B.

Form A (n = 1} are snub-nose scrapers made from initial cortex flakes,
are elliptical in outline, and have one end steeply beveled. Dimensions: 60 x
40x 15mm.
Form B (n= 1) are "spokeshaves" or "notches" with a small, steeply
beveled semicircular concavity 6-15 mm wide (average 9 mm} and
unifacially chipped on one or more edges of a cortex flake. Two flakes have
double concavities, one next to the other on the same edge. Four flakes are
additionally retouched.
Form C (n = 4) are small secondary flakes, not intentionally shaped, with
minor retouch on one or more edges. They average 40 mm in length.
Large Drills {n = 2)
These are the larger Archaic-type drills (as opposed to small NeoAmerican flake drills} with narrow shafts. One fragment with a triangular
base is 65 mm wide and 21 mm thick (max.), and was probably originally 80
mm long. Another appears to be a thin Kinney or Tortugas-like dart point
with a concave base, dully pointed basal corners, and straight lateral
edges. The distal half is reworked into a drill shaft 10 mm wide and 5 mm
thick. The complete Specimen probably was about 50 mm long; the base, 28
mm wide. Uniform flaking on the latter specimen suggests it is not a
reworked dart point, but is an intentional drill form.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

202

Graver (n= 1)
A small core with a natural beak-like projection presumably was used as
a graver (or perhaps as a small drill or punch}. Numerous minute use scars
on the lateral edges near the tip are evidence of use.
Burin In = 1)
Intersecting burin facets form a chisel-like edge which appears to have
been intensively used. Several dart points and thin biface fragments have
burin facets originating from either a worked edge or a snapped break. A
few scrapers have burin facets originating from a steeply, unifacially
retouched edge. Several specimens exhibit considerable wear on the
distal, chisel-like edge; the edge wear is dulling (rounding, micro-flakes,
etc.} as if the tools were used in a chiseling motion.
Choppers (n = 5)
Four large pebbles have large flakes bifacially removed to form crude.
curved cutting edges. Cortex remains on one or both faces on three
specimens and the edges are extensively battered. The remaining
specimen is a large initial cortex flake with one edge ventrally retouched.
Flakes and Cores
Several hundred flakes with no retouching or use marks are part of the
normal detritus of flintnapping. At least 18 cores have variable attributes
and range in size from 25-130 mm. Analysis of flakes and cores has not
been done.
Manos {n = 6}
These are mostly fragmentary handstones or mullers. Three are of
friable red granite, two are of quartzite, and one is of limestone. One
specimen has grinding facets on both faces and no marginal pecking; one
face is ridged, the other convex. Another has at least three convex and
three concave grinding facets 25 mm in diameter. Another has mildly
convex grinding facets on both faces. The limestone mano is triangular in
cross-section and has been burned.
Steam-worn Pebbles [n = 3)
One quartzite and two limestone pebbles are 42-57 mm in maximum
dimension. No areas of pecking or grinding are visible.
Bone Needle In= 1; Fig. 6,b)
A small smoothed bone sliver 5 mm wide has a small biconical hole 2 mm
in diameter near the rounded proximal end. The distal end is broken, and
the shaft is undecorated. Present length is 16 mm: total length was
probably at least 35 mm.
Marine Shell Pendant (n = 1; Fig. 6,a)
The left valve of a heavy, though small, ridged bivalve mollusc, probably
of Gulf coast origin, was found on top of the left forearm of the 15 year old
girl of Burial 2. It is 49 mm from end to end. 48 mm from beak to outer lip

AUSTIN PHASE BURIALS

FIGURE 6. Shell pendant from Burial 2, and bone needle.

the outer edge and 1.3 mm wide where it breaks into the interior of the
clam: the shall is 7 mm thick at this point. Although the perforation may be
cultural, it could be due to a boring marine gastropod. Shells. especially
cockles, often occur naturally along the coast, perforated in this manner,
although the cockle umbo is thinner than this shell and the perforation is
usually more narrowly conical. Identification is based on criteria set forth
by Morris (1951) and comparison with reference collections at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin.
The shell belongs to the Arcidae family form Neotia ponderosa (the
Ponderous Ark), and eastern coast type commonly found in deep water
(and washes onto beaches) from Cape Hatteras southward to the West
Indies, and rarely as far northward as Cape Cod. It is also similar to such
Cardiidae family forms as Dinocardium robustrum (the Great Heart
Cockle) and Trachycardium maricatum (the Common Cockle), but the Pat
Parker specimen is heavier and has fewer ribs (24) than most Cardiidae
(the old term Cardium us no longer used). The beak also turns forward,
causing the ribs to curve forward a great deal, while the cockles usually
have central beaks and straight ribs. In addition, cockles have conspicuous
up-curved teeth on the ribs, a feature absent on the Pat Parker specimen.
Historic Materials
The Pat Parker Site was evidentally used as a trash dump by non-Indian
occupants. European and Anglo-American articles were abundant on the
surface and in the upper excavated levels. Ceramics consisted mainly of
white-paste earthenwares (transfer, hand-painted, stamped, feather edge,
plain) and patinated glass bottle fragments. Three mold-made clay pipe

203

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

204

bowl fragments were also found. Other items include mother-of-pearl
buttons, harmonica fragments, combs, round and square nails, fence
staples, a bridle bit, stirrup, saddle and harness trappings, metal bucket
fragments, an iron hoe, barrel hoops, and other metal objects, many of
which have not been identified. Such perishable materials as textiles,
modern corn remains, and various seeds presumably post-date indian
occupation, probably near the middle or end of the 19th century.

FAUNAL REMAINS
A partial sample of bones was identified by Ernest L. Lundelius.
Jr. (Department of Geology, The University of Texas at Austin): bison
or cow, deer, opossum, cottontail rabbit (Sylvilagus sp.), cotton rat
(Sigmodon hispidus), unidentified bird, soft-shell turtle, and domestic pig. Due to the mixture of aboriginal and modern materials
in the excavated area, there is no way to distinguish the animals
used by prehistoric Indians from those killed by modern Europeans.
Deer antler fragments were abundant and represent at least five or
six antlers, all attributable to the aboriginal occupation. As
mentioned earlier, a cache of antler fragments was near Burials i,
3, and 4. Additional distributional information is unavailable.
Shell remains include numerous complete and fragmentary shells
of unidentified freshwater mussels, apparently obtained locally for
food. None show alteration or Use. The pendant described above from
a Ponderous Ark shell (Burial 2) came from the Gulf coast.

DISCUSSION
Artifactual and skeletal materials from the Pat Parker site seem
attributable to an early Neo-American occupation probably near the
beginning of the Austin phase. Presumably this would be sometime
around A.D. 800-I000 (Greet 1974:37; Prewitt 1974:22-32). Detailed
evaluation of the late Historic occupations and debris is beyond the
scope of this paper.
Placing the occupation in the Austin phase is based on traits generally believed to be representative of that period 0elks 1962):
Scallorn points, Granbury preforms (?), thick drills, and the carryover of Dad and Fairland dart points from the Transitional period.
Although the relationships between burials and artifacts in the surrounding matrix are tenuous, some Scallorn points seem to be
directly associated with skeletons, especially Burial 5. Two points
found by the landowner during the initial discovery, probably near
the head of Burial 5 may be burial inclusions. Aboriginal pottery
was on the surface and in the upper six inches of deposit, and may
repr

.... a’later O~C

erhaps Toyah’,phase:~ Other’ Toyah

AUSTIN PHASE BURIALS

205

phase traits, however, such as Perdiz arrow points, Covington
knives, and small flake drills are lacking at the site.
Placement in the early part of the Austin phase is due to the
suggested contemporaneity at the site of the Scallorn and Dad points.
The two types were found together, both immediately adjacent to
skeletons, and also in nonburial areas of the excavation. The
possibility exists that the two types occurred together because of
deposit mixing, but the simplest explanation seems to be
contemporaneity. Even so, it is unknown whether the two styles are
used by a single group or represent different groups. Although Darl is
a type most common to central Texas, Scallorn is a major type not
only in central Texas but also along portions of the Texas Gulf coast
and the coastal plains (Sulam et al 1954:506; Corbin 1974). Some sort
of coastal contact, possibly no more than indirect trade, is clearly
indicated by the perforated marine shell from Burial 2.
At least one additional explanation of the burials must be considered. The shallow depth of the skeletons (1.5 to 2 feet below the
present surface with little noticeable recent erosion) suggests that
the graves were dug from somewhere near the present surface.
Since the skeletons are clearly Indian and were buried by Indian
customs (orientation and position), the burials might be the result of
the most recent Indian activity at the site; that is, they might be
equated with the most recent Indian artifacts or, less plausibly, they
might be representative of a group leaving no recognizably late material remains.
The problem here is in designating the latest Indian artifacts. The
Scallorn-Darl assemblage appears to be a coherent group of associated types not followed at this site by other projectile point types.
The pottery, however, probably belongs to a later group, for data
are accumulating to indicate that pottery is very rarely associated
with Scallorn points. To our knowledge, the only site in central
Texas which may have pottery definitely associated with Scallorn is
the Wheatley site in Blanco County (Greer 1974), a single component
site presumably representing an overlap period of the Austin and
Toyah phases. Scallorn points at Wheatley seem smaller and different in outline from those at Pat Parker (other Wheatley forms
include Perdiz, Eddy, Cuney, and a wide rectangular-stem form). The
pottery at the Wheatley site has a coarser paste with some sand and
shell temper. Sherds from the Oblate Site in Comal County (Tunnell
1962) are remarkably similar to those from Pat Parker and likely are
part of an assemblage containing a distinctive form of Perdiz with
prominant, sharp barbs and a long, wide and pointed stem with
convex edges. The Oblate Site also contained a concave-base

206

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Scallorn form similar to the south-central Texas Edwards type (Sollberger 1967; Hester 1971:67-68), which seems to predate pottery. It
seems probable that the Pat Parker sherds are the only diagnostic
remains of a late Perdiz (late Toyah phase?) visit. If so, the burials
could date to this later period.
Turning to the burials, where position could be determined all
the bodies were oriented with the heads to the north (which is also
toward the adjacent creek). It is uncertain whether the direction the
body faced (six east and four west) was of any importance.
Two Austin phase burials were recovered at the Kyle site in Hill
County (Jelks 1962:21). A 30-35 year old female lay on its left side,
oriented to the northwest, and faced northeast. This situation is almost identical to most of the Pat Parker individuals. The other Kyle
burial was a 3-4 year old child, also flexed on its left side, but
orientation and direction the skeleton was facing are not given.
Neither of the Kyle burials had associated grave goods.
Stephenson (1970) reports additional Hill County burials which
are probably attributable to the Austin phase. Burial 1 in Pictograph
Cave is a child 3-4 years of age, flexed on its left side with the head
to the east (Ibid. p. 124). Burial i in Sheep Shelter (Ibid. pp. 193-196)
is an adult male, flexed, with the head to the east. Burial 2 is a male
(?) child, flexed, with the head to the west. Burial 3 is a double
burial with an adult male and an adolescent female semi-flexed on
their right side facing northwest and the heads to the northeast.
Burial 4 is a male (?) child, flexed, with the head to the southwest.
None of the burials had associated grave goods.
Another burial presumably attributable to the Austin phase is reported from the Cottonwood Terrace site on the Colorado River in
Burnet County (Benfer and Benfer 1965). The skeleton is a 28 year
old male oriented northward and tightly flexed on its left side facing
east. It was covered by five very large granite rocks; a biracial
granite mano lay directly on top of the skull. A Scallorn coryell was
"in the crumbling bone beneath and immediately surrounding the
cervical-thoracic iunction of the vertebral column" flbid. D. 32).
Hester and Collins (1969) have reported what they believe to be
Austin phase burials from the Frisch Auf! site in Fayette County.
Their results may be summarized as follows: (1) Two skeletons were
represented by two skulls and the postcranial material from one individual. Both were oriented southward, presumably flexed on their
right side facing generally east. Two nearly identical Scallorn sattler
arrow points were against the ribs, obviously grave goods. (2) One
skeleton of a child was oriented southward, flexed on its right side

AUSTIN PHASE BURIALS

207

facing east. No grave goods were associated. (3) An infant was
oriented southward in a flexed position. Grave goods included a
utilized antler tine fragment (flaking tool?), a smoothed and shaped
section of petrified wood of almost the same form as the antler, and
an unaltered freshwater mussel shell. (4) A broken carnivore
baculum from disturbed fill is believed to be from a grave.
The Loeve-Fox site (Prewitt 1974] is an Austin phase cemetery on
the San Gabriel River in Williamson County, northwest of Pat
Parker. About 25 burials (mostly single) were placed at different
times in an area about 10 feet square (though perhaps larger). The
earlier burials were loosely flexed; the later were tightly flexed,
perhaps to preserve the limits of a well defined cemetery area. Most
were oriented with heads to the north and lay on either side. Grave
goods were essentially absent; a conch shell object was associated
with one individual. Scallorn points and fragments imbedded on or
between bones in fatal positions indicate violent deaths.
Reported burials must be carefully evaluated before hypotheses
regarding Austin phase burial patterns are proposed, lelks reports
that the Kyle site burials are undoubtedly assignable to the Austin
phase on the basis of their stratigraphic position. The geographic
location of the site is certainly in keeping with the Edwards Plateau
image for Austin phase concentration. The same is true for Stephenson’s burials from the same area, although Pictograph Cave Burial 1
and Sheep Shelter Burial 4 are presumed late Austin phase and may
actually be early Toyah phase.
The Cottonwood Terrace skeleton from Burnet County is west of
the Balcones Fault and is in the area for which the Austin phase was
originally defined. A problem of interpretation exists with the uncertainty of assignment of Cottonwood Terrace to the Austin phase as a
cultural unity. During excavation it was uncertain whether the Scallorn point found near the vertebrae was a grave good, or was the
cause of death. The only safe inference is that the individual must
have died during the time Scallorn points were in use. Another item
worth noting is the treatment of the body during burial: a mano was
placed on the skull, and the body was covered with large rocks. Both
practices are common local traditions, probably with considerable
time depth, and are found over much of Texas (Greer and Benfer
1963:234). Although large stones are essentially absent in the
vicinity of Pat Parker and also Frisch Auf!, the Hill County sites
(Kyle, Pictograph Cave, Sheep Shelter) are limestone rock shelters.
The absence of stones covering the burials (presuming the lack of
mention in the reports indicates the absence of stones) seems sig-

208

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

nificant. Only Burial I in Pictograph Cave was covered with hearthstones and ashes, after a fire pit was cleaned out to put the body in.
There also seem to be few problems with the assignment of LoeveFox or other nearby sites in Williamson County (Prewitt 1974) to the
Austin phase. The area is within currently accepted boundaries for
the Austin phase, and there can be no doubt that some of the people
were killed by someone using Scallorn points. Presumably the victims
were enemies of Austin phase groups. Prewitt believes the victims
and the survivors who constructed the cemetery were Austin phase
peoples (he prefers an interpretation of intra-Austin phase warfare
or the culling out of undesirable members of a group by the dominant
majority). The early dates and the general consensus that only Austin
phase groups making Scallorn points lived in the area during this
general A.D. 800-1200 period would seem to support him. There are,
however, other possibilities, such as conflicts with other peoples,
whether or not they hunted with Scallorn points or the more recently
introduced Perdiz.
Frisch Auf! presents a problem of phase identification because of
the location of the site. Several skeletons in a small area of the site
seem to date from a very short period. Two nearly identical Scallorn
points occur as grave goods with one burial and link the Scallorn
form with the burial traits. Unfortunately, the site’s location in Fayette County places it in the intermediate prairies between the lower,
eastern coastal plains and the hills of the Edwards Plateau west of
the fault line. Previous workers (e.g. Kelley 1951:137) have pointed
out the unique nature of this intermediate area and have warned
against including such sites in adjacent archeological areas without
considerable caution. It is therefore uncertain whether the Frisch
Auf! burials belong to the central Texas Austin phase, such coastal
entities as the Rockport or Galveston Bay phases, or some other cultural unit -- whether a unique, local manifestation or an unrecognized complex from an adjacent area. The southern orientation of
the skeletons and the number and variety of grave goods suggest
that something different is going on, but the significance of the variation cannot be evaluated at this point.
The Pat Parker site falls into the uncertain category also. The admixture of Scallorn and Darl points suggests a time near the introduction of Scallorn in the Travis County area. The difficulty of evaluating the association of projectile point types with any burial, however, restricts a definite linking of burials with any particular point
style, such as Scallorn. Although pottery was found in upper levels,
data from other sites indicate the introduction of pottery at a later

AUSTIN PHASE BURIALS

209

date and suggest that we should dissociate the sherds from the
points -- actually from all the other artifacts at the site, a rather
uncomfortable position. Recent Anglo materials reflecting farm life
were mixed in the upper levels also, and in general there was considerable disturbance in the burial area (deposits outside the burial
area were not adequately tested}. This mixing also supports the explanation that the sherds are later than Scallorn points and recently
have been mixed into subsurface deposits.
Having thus set up at least two questionable aboriginal occupations, and taking into account the shallowness of the burials, one
could argue for a much later, post-Austin phase date for the burials,
or even a post-Darl occupation by later Austin phase groups using
only Scallorn points. The presence of the marine shell as a grave
good indicates coastal contacts which, as with Frisch Auf!, confuses
the situation slightly, since the type and degree of interaction between central Texas and the coastal areas are presently unknown.
Several marine shells and coastal sherds have been found in sites
near the Colorado River in Travis, Burnet, Llano, and San Saba
counties (e.g. Jackson 1938:111,112, 117; Prewitt 1974:55-67), so it is
known that coastal contacts were experienced by at least some
central Texas groups.
Harry J. Shafer (personal communication 1975) and Elton Prewitt
(1974; personal communication 1975) have suggested an extension to
Shafer’s (1971) central Texas model. They see designated cemtery
areas as a pattern well established at least by the Austin phase in
the Blackland Prairie of central Texas. These cemetery areas are
isolated horizontal units (rockshelters or open sites) in which
several individuals were placed, seemingly at different times. The
burial areas often seem to be limited to a well defined area about i0
feet in maximum diameter and used over a fairly long period of time,
perhaps 100 years or more. This, to us, seems to indicate some sort
of formally marked and bounded area, such as a house or fenced
area, recognizable to and understood by possibly several generations. Examples for the cemetery hypothesis seem to include mainly
Loeve-Fox, Pat Parker, Frisch Auf!, Harte-Overcash (Polecat Hollow), and a few others (see Prewitt 1974 for a more comprehensive
review of central Texas burials).
Shafer also views the situations at Aycock Shelter (Watt 1936)
and the Asa Warner site (Watt 1956) as examples of what he terms
"Austin-Toyah cemeteries". These last two sites, both located near
Waco, contain Perdiz points, in some cases inside the body cavities,
but no Scallorn. According to Watt (1936), Aycock apparently con-

210

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tained a Transitional period midden (Darl, Ensor, and related projectile point forms} into which burials {containing Perdiz points} were
placed. Watt [1956) describes Asa Warner as a Toyah phase
occupation (with burials} with considerable contact with east Texas,
as evidenced by pottery and ear spools, among other things.
The Harte-Overcash Site is a deep, stratified open site in Travis
County about six miles south of Pat Parker. Of interest here are the
burials near the surface, mostly scattered (though some may be intentionally grouped} around the extensively occupied portion of the
site (areas outside the area of concentrated occupational debris
were not tested}. The burials are probably Nee-American in age (because they are shallow), but associations are uncertain. The materials and contexts have not been analyzed and it is not known
whether the burials could be considered a cemetery situation utilizing an existing midden, patronizing a selected and recognized area
for burial, whether their placement here is simply haphazard burial
within an existing midden, or some combination of the two (E. Mott
Davis, personal communication 1975).
The cemetery hypothesis should be carefully considered. With the
inception of the Austin phase (the traditional beginning of the NeeAmerican period, which should designate a cultural change as well
as an elaboration of materials), quite possibly not just arrowpoints
(and by implication the bow and arrow} were introduced into the
local Transitional phase (of Shafer 1971) of central Texas, but probably a number of other cultural alterations took place as well. One
of these could have been a more formal designation of burial areas,
whether or not they were set aside from the occupation area. Formal cemeteries of this sort, likewise, might tend to suggest larger,
more permanent villages, but this is speculation. Cemeteries seemingly continue into the Toyah phase.
Prewitt (1974) has pointed out the commonness of marine shell
objects (e.g. conch shell pendants} being found with at least one of
the burials at each site. These obviously indicate some sort of contact with the Gulf coast, and he suggests that these objects may relate to status. If so, we could be dealing with something like formerly
designated burial plots for an extended family or some other kind of
distinguishable social groups. Extensive testing at such sites as
Loeve-Fox might reveal additional cemetery areas and make possible
hypotheses regarding such things as intrasocial composition or the
distribution of families or social groups within a camp.
An important question regarding such cemetery situations as
those reported by Watt (1936, 1956} and Prewitt (1974), however,

AUSTIN PHASE BURIALS

211

revolves around who was being buried and by whom. Perdiz points
clearly were the cause of death in some individuals (e.g. Asa
Warner and Aycock Shelter}, but this does not necessarily mean
that they are totally within a post-Scallorn time period or cultural
pattern. Scallorn points also have been the direct cause of death at
some sites (Cottonwood Terrace, Loeve-Fox, and others; see Prewitt
1974:55-67). Even assuming that the use of Scallorn points died out
shortly after the introduction of Perdiz points (and the myriad of
other Plains-oriented Toyah phase traits), there easily could have
been a time during which the two point styles were both in use in the
same area (e.g. the Wheatley site, Greer 1974}. Next we must assume that for this particular case, the designated, specially chosen
projectile point forms are equatable with cultural phases, and that
these phases are equatable with different peoples (see Frison et al.
1974 for alternate assumptions}. There seems to be considerable evidence for this interpretation (as discussed by most of the people in
the bibliography}. Burials from sites indicating agression and/or violent deaths could be from a time in which Austin and Toyah phase
groups were in contact. For instance, Austin phase people could
have been killed with Toyah phase weapons and buried according to
practices similar to other Austin phase sites (flexed position on either side in a very shallow pit, oriented with the head usually to the
north). Had the initial contact between the two groups been unfriendly, such burial situations might be expected to occur rather
commonly. Ethnohistoric discussions (Kelley 1955:989 from Bolton
1912:16; Bryan 1956) and archeological reports (Aynesworth 1936;
Prewitt 1974} might be of use to someone constructing and evaluating a model of the agressiveness of Toyah phase peoples and their
relationships with other cultural groups.
Prewitt (1974:50; personal communication 1975} does not believe
that inter-phase warfare is a reasonable possibility, and prefers to
consider (1) internecene warfare involving territorial rights among
people of a single cultural pattern (e.g. the Austin phase) and (2)
genocide to relieve the group of responsibility for supporting aged,
sick, or otherwise unproductive members of the society. We strongly
prefer the warfare interpretation and see no reason to reject either
inter- or intra-phase conflict.
FINAL STATEMENT
The significance of the Pat Parker site lies mainly in its contribution of data regarding Austin phase burial customs. Unfortunately,
these phase-wide patterns, if such actually existed, are uncertain at

212

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

this time due to the difficulty of assigning burials with certainty to
Austin phase groups. Simply comparing burials containing Scallorn
points is inadequate, due to the probability of unrecognized subdivisions of the Austin phase. The basic cultural units and their local
manifestations or technofacies (Frison et al. 1974) must be defined in
terms of content, time, space, and external relations before we can
compare social aspects and hope to arrive at meaningful generalizations regarding central Texas groups.
At present the general pattern for late burials in central Texas is
one in which burials are often clustered in relatively small, apparently formally designated cemetery areas. Of particular interest are
groupings about I0 feet in diameter on open sites of scattered (horizontally extensive) midden debris. These groupings appear to have
been marked for several years during their use in some recognizable
and understood way, such as being a fenced-off area, a small house,
or an area beside surface markers. Craves probably were shallow,
and appeared either as single or multiple burials. Apparently individual graves were not marked, as indicated especially well at
Loeve-Fox and Aycock where skeletons were cut through by later
graves. Violence of some yet undetermined character is indicated by
projectile points commonly being the cause of death. Burial goods
are rare, although any site with a rather large number of individuals
usually has some sort of marine shell (Gulf coast) jewelry, indicating
direct or indirect contact with the Gulf coastal environmenl or with
coastal peoples. Deer antler also seems fairly commonly included in
the burial area. Future studies undoubtedly will add more to this
model in terms of social aspects and temporal and areal differences.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Excavation at the Pat Parker site was a cooperative effort under the
general coordination and supervision of E. Mort David (Department of
Anthropology) and Kenneth Honea (then of the Texas Memorial Museum] of
The University of Texas at Austin. The multitude of cheerful volunteer
laborers included members of the Texas Archeological Society, University of
Texas Archeological Society, Travis County Archeological Society, and
students of The University of Texas at Austin. E. B. Jelks, Curtis Tunnell, and
T. W. McKern served as consultants. During analysis of the materials and
preparation of the report, T.N. Campbell, E. Mort Davis, Dee Ann Story,
Alice Benfer, Patricia A. Treat, W. Raymond Wood, Harry J. Shafer, Thomas
R. Hester. and Elton R. Prewitt aided considerably in their direction,
criticism,

comments and general help. J.F. Epstein. E.B. ]elks, Curtis

Tunnell, Ernest L. Lundelius, Jr., and T. W. McKern assisted in classification
and description of materials relating to their specialities. Extra thanks and

AUSTIN PHASE BURIALS

213

appreciation are due the landowner, Pat Parker, and his son Gordon, who
through their insight in reporting the exposed burials, their allowing
scientific work, and their continual help and courtesy during the many
bothers and inconveniences caused by our field crew, added another bit of
information to our meager but growing knowledge of Texas prehistory.

214

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
REFERENCES

CITED

Aynesworth, K. H.
1936 Flint Arrowhead Wounds of Bones as Shown in Skeletons in Central
Texas. Bulletin of the Central Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 2,
pp. 74-79.
Benfer, R. and A. Benfer
1965 An Austin Focus Burial. Texas Engineering and Science Magazine,
Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 31-32.
Bolton, H. E.
1912 The Jumano Indians of Texas, 1650-1771. The Quarterly of the Texas
State Historical Association, Vol. 20, pp. 66-84.
Bryan, F.
1956 Early Texas Travelers. Central Texas Archeologist, Vol. 7, pp. 56108.
Corbin, J. E.
1974 A Model for Cultural Succession for the Coastal Bend Area of
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 45, pp. 29-54.
Dahlberg, A. A.
1949 The Dentition of the American Indian. In: The Physical Anthropology
of the American Indian. pp. 138-176. The Viking Fund. Inc. New
York.
Frison, G. C., M. Wilson, D. J. Wilson
1974 The Holocene Stratigraphic Archaeology of Wyoming: An
Introduction. In: Applied Geology and Archaeology: The Holocene
History of Wyoming, by M. Wilson (Ed.). The Geological Survey of
Wyoming, Report of Investigations. Vol. 10. pp. 108-127.
Goldstein, M. S.
1948 Dentition of Indian Crania from Texas. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology, Vol. 6, No. 1, pp. 63-84.
Greer. J. W.
1974 Archeological Investigations at the Wheatley Site. Blanco County,
Texas. Report submitted to the Texas Historical Commission.
Austin.
Greer, J. W. and R. A. Benfer
1963 Langtry Creek Burial Cave. Val Verde County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vot. 33. pp. 229-251.
Hester, T. R.
1971 Archeological Investigations at the La Jita Site, Uvalde County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 42, pp. 51148.
Hester, T. R. and M. B. Collins
1969 Burials from the Frisch Auf! Site: 41 FY 42. The Texas lournal of
Science, Vol. 22, No. 3, pp. 261-272.

AUSTIN PHASE BURIALS

215

Jackson, A. T.
1938 The Fall Creek Sites. The University of Texas Publications 3802.
Anthropological Papers, Vol. 3, No. 1, Austin .....
Jelks, E. B.
1962 The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County,
Texas. Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at
Austin. Archaeology Series 5.
Kelley, J. C.
1951 Stephenson and Krieger on "Culture Chronology in Texas".
American Antiquity, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 137-139.
1955 Juan Sabeata and Diffusion in Aboriginal Texas. American
Anthropologist, Vol. 57, No. 5, pp. 981-995.
McKern, T. W. and T. D. Stewart
1957 Skeletal Age Changes in Young American Males. Technical Report
EP-45. Quartermaster Research and Development Center,
Environmental Protection Research Division, U.S. Army. Natick,
Mass.
Montagu, M. F. A.
1960 A Handbook of Anthropometry. Charles C. Thomas, Pub.
Springfield, Ill.
Morris, P. A.
1951 A Field Guide to the Shells of our Atlantic and Gulf Coasts. The
Riverside Press, Cambridge.
Prewitt, E. R.
1974 Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site, Williamson
County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 49.
Sharer, H. J.
1971 Late Prehistory of Central Texas, 500 B.C. - 1700 A.D. Paper
presented at the 74th Annual Meeting of the Texas Academy of
Science, Stephen F. Austin State University, Nacogdoches, Texas.
Solberger, J. B.
1967 A New Type of Arrowpoint with Speculations as to its Origin. The
Record, Vol. 23, No. 3, pp. 16-22. Dallas.
1970 Preforms are not Projectile Points. Bulletin of the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society, Vol. 19, pp. 151-154.
Stephenson, R. L.
1970 Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir Area, Central
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 41, pp. 37286.
Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 25,

216

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Tunnell, C. D.
1962 Oblate: A Rockshelter Site. In: Salvage Archeology of Canyon
Reservoir: The Wunderlich, Footbridge, and Oblate Sites, by L.
Johnson, Jr., D. A. Suhm, and C. D. Tunnell. Bulletin of the Texas
Memorial Museum, No. 5. Austin.
Watt, F. H.
1936 A Prehistoric Shelter Burial in Bell County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Central Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 2, pp. 5-27.
1956 Archeological Materials from the Asa Warner Sites. Central Texas
Archeologist Vol. 7, pp. 7-29.
University of Missouri
Columbia, Missouri

NOTES ON SOME ARCHEOLOGICAL MATERIALS
FROM THE PALO DURO CREEK AREA
OF HANSFORD COUNTY, TEXAS
JIMMY L. MITCHELL

ABSTRACT
This paper reports on a private collection of artifacts from Hansford
County, Texas, an area which is almost unknown in the Texas archeological literature. Even though this collection is small and was not obtained under controlled conditions, it nonetheless represents a useful index
of the cultural materials found in this remote area of the state.

BACKGROUND
Relatively little archeological material has been reported from the
upper tier of counties of the Texas Panhandle. This region is not included in the Jelks, Davis, and Sturgis (1960) review of the archeology
of the state, nor in Kelley’s (1964) subsequent report on the Llano
Estacado. Kelley (1964: 1) limited her study to the Llano Estacado
proper which she defined as being bounded on the north by the
Canadian River. Collins (1971) recently reviewed the archeology of
the area but similarly restricted his study to the Llano Estacado,
focusing primarily on the southern edge of the area.
Known archeological sites in the northeastern Texas Panhandle include a "Panhandle Pueblo" site at the Handley Ranch on Wolf Creek
in Ochiltree County, and the Lipscomb Bison Quarry site in Lipscomb
County (see Figure 1). Wormington (1957) locates the Lipscomb site
eleven miles southwest of the town of Lipscomb, Texas. Wedel (1961)
reports that eighteen Folsom projectile points were recovered at this
site in association with a mass of fossil bison bone. Almost’all of the 21
articles listed by. Campbell (1960) forLipscomb County deal with this
one site.
The Handley Ranch village site in Ochiltree County is the major site
which has been reported for the area in the literature (Holden 1929:
Moorehead 1931, 1933; Ellzey 1966) and is generally now considered
to be a Panhandle Aspect site (Baerreis and Bryson 1966; Collins
1971; Bousman n.d.). It has recently been the subject of a verbal
report by Rolla Shaller (1973) who summarized prior~s~Ludies. This site
and the Lipscomb Bison Quarry site are the only archeological sites
which are fairly well reported in the three county area, although
other sites are known to local collectors,

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

218

OKLAHOMA

HANS FOR O

/

/
OPERRYTON
OGH

I

LTREE

.~#.

"i ,i~~.,’ i~’~ ° o M B
--0

~
?MAN
g?

.;

I

..~r ///
./

i /
(

.!

J

:

¯

©

I00°

FIGURE I. Archeological sites in the northeastern Texas Panhandle:
1, area on Palo Duro Creek; 2, Panhandle Aspect village on the
Handley Ranch; 3, Lipscomb Bison Quarry site.

This paper will deal with a collection of artifacts found in Hansford
County, along Palo Duro Creek (see Figure 1). Studer’s field map of
the Panhandle shows no sites in the county (1931: 142). Campbell’s
bibliography of Texas archeology (1960: 186) notes only two articles
with any reference to Hansford County and these deal with rock art
graver
g
e.

HANSFORD COUNTY ARTIFACTS

219

These articles are dated 1940 and 1942; apparently no work has been
done in the county since that time.
The Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin has no
record of any site for Hansford County (Dorris L. Olds, personal communication 1972). This lack of published material or even site reports
from Hansford County represents a serious gap in the archeological
record of the Panhandle.
The specific area of concern for this report lies north of the town of
Spearman, Texas. This is a very rugged area where the Palo Durc
Creek has cut a substantial canyon. The creek lies at about 2850 feet
where the top of the canyon rim is from 3000 to 3050 feet above sea
level. The main creek bed is joined by a number of side streams and
washes, so that it is very difficult country to survey. The creek bed
varies from a very sandy soil to gravel and rock, and its appearance
changes considerably after the occasional major thunderstorms.
Since so little is reported of this county in the archeological
literature, it appeared to be a good area for surveying amateur collections in order to define the archeological problems of the area and
assess the need for future research. As Heizer (1974)has noted, archeological resources are finite and professional and serious
amateur archeologists will be increasingly dependent on such collections for data in the future. The initial step in documentation of collections is, of course, to locate and secure the cooperation of local
collectors.
Mr. Robert Cochran is a local Hansford County collector. In
August, 1969, we visited this area of Palo Duro Creek, and recovered
two of the specimens discussed later in this report (Figures 2,c and
4,c). The remainder of the artifacts reported here were collected by
Mr. Cochran and his son over a period of several years.

THE ARTIFACTS
The sample reported here is quite small and yet, since they are the
only artifacts reported from Hansford County, they provide information on the local prehistoric cultures which has not previously
been available. The specimens are shown in Figures 2 through 4.
Metric measurements are given in Table 1. The metric data is a very
abbreviated version of the standard data elements developed by Binford (1963) as adapted by Luchterhand (1970). The specimens reported here are neither complete enough nor numerous enough to
warrant inclusion of all the data recommended by Luchterhand.

Large Projectile Points -- Figure 2 illustrates the larger points from
this collection. These specimens are significantly greater in mean

220

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

length, width and weight than are the small projectile points
shown in Figure 3. {Means tested with 5 values of 3.957, 5.566, and
4.555; all significant at p < .01). As can be seen in Table 1, the
thickness of projectile point specimens ranged from .2 cm to .5 cm;
mean thickness for the large points was .4166 cm and for the small
points was .3269 cm, but this difference is not significant at the
p < .01 level, largely due to the variability of the smaller points
which themselves range from .2 to .5 cm. The significant differences
in length, width and weight suggest that their grouping into the two
categories of large and small points is valid. These groupings
correspond to the popularly named classes of dart points and arrow
points (Suhm and ]elks 1962).
Figure 2. a and b -- These specimens are fairly large, expanding base
dart points which are made of Alibates dolomite. Similarly shaped prolectile points have been reported from Archaic Bison Kill sites in Hall and
Donley Counties (Tunnell and Hughes 1955: Collins 1968a); [rom late
Woodland sites in Hutchinson and Potter Counties {Hughes 1962: Green
1967}; and from the Roy-Smith site. a Panhandle Aspect locality in the nearby Oklahoma Panhandle (Schneider 1969}. Thus. these expanding base
dart points are somewhat typical of finds in the Texas and Oklahoma
Panhandle areas bui they are apparently not diagnostic of any single
period since they are reported from Archaic. Woodland and Panhandle
Aspect sites.
Figure 2. c -- This specimen is also an expanding stem projectile point
but is unusual enough to deserve separate comment. It is also made of
Alibates material and feels smoothed on the base. This mav be due to
natural causes since it was found in the stream bed in tumbled gravel. Instead of straight-in notching, as on the other expanding stem points, the
notches on tlus specimen are a combination ot angles which suggests that
more than one step was involved in preparing the notches. This unusual
type of notching has not been reported on any other Panhandle specimen.
Figure 2. d
One shoulder of this point is rounded and the other, which
is broken appears to have been barbed. It is also made of Alibates
material but is primarily a light gray in color with faint maroon and tan
streaks.
Figure 2, e and f -- These two specimens are smaller than the other dart
points and have bulb-shaped bases. The barbs and general shape of these
points are similar to the attributes of one variety Of the Williams point type.
Bell (1960: 96) illustrates such bulbar bases for some Williams points and
notes that the type occurs in eastern Oklahoma. He also reports that the
type shares some characteristics with the Castroville. Palmillas and Marcos point types.

Small Projectile Points -- Figure 3 illustrates a series of small expanding stem projectile points, which show considerable variability
in size and shape.

HANSFORD COUNTY ARTIFACTS

221

b
d7

C

d
2
I

I
CM

FIGURE 2, Large projectile points: a-c, expanding stem points; d,
rounded stem point; e-f, bulbar base points.

222

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Figure 3, a and b -- These are very small corner-notched points. They
are very similar to specimens recovered at CR-1 (A175) in Moore County,
Texas (Glasseock and Glasscock 1955: Plate 17. t and n). Glasscock and
Glasscock report eight such points including one made of obsidian, and observe that this point type is "rare" in the Texas Panhandle although they
are said to occur frequently in the sand bql section of West Texas and in
the headwaters area of the Red River.
Figure 3. c through e -- These small projectile points appear to be
similar to the Scallorn point type (Suhm and Jelks 1962). Scallorn points
have been recovered at late Woodland sites in the Texas Panhandle
(Hughes 1962; Harrison and Griffin 1975) but are not reported from later
complexes [Duffield 1964: Keller 1975) of the area. Thus. such points would
appear to be diagnostic of the Woodland period for this area of the state.
The specimen illustrated as Figure 3. e is exceptionally small for a Scallorn
point: its metric measurements are less than those given as the normal
range for Scallorn points by Bell (1960: 84) and Suhm and Jelks (1962: 285).
Figure 3. f and g -- Triangular points without notching are most frequently said to be Fresno points. Moorehead (1931: Figure 41) illustrated
similar points from the Handley Ranch. Duffield [1964) reports them from
the Panhandle Aspect sites in Hutchinson County, and Lintz [1972) has
recently reported similar points from the McGrath site near Guymon in
the Panhandle of Oklahoma. Such points are also reported from late Woodland sites [Hughes 1962) and from site components which are later than
the Panhandle Aspect at the Black Dog Village site [Keller 1975).
Figure 3. h -- This crude specimen resembles a Toyah point (Suhm and
Jelks 1962). It is quite distinct from the other points in both material and
workmanship. Toyah points are not usually reported from the vicinity of
the Texas Panhandle but have recently been reported in Lamb County,
Texas (Randall 1970) and at the Adobe Mound site (41AD3) in Andrews
County, along with Fresno. stemmed and side-notched points (Collins
1968b).
Figure 3 i and j -- These two points appear te be Washita points (Bell
1958), a type which occurs widely in the Panhandle-Plains area. Washita
points are frequently found in the Panhandle Aspect (Duffield 1964) as well
as in the Custer Focus [Lintz 1974) and the Washita River Focus (Bell 1973)
in adjacent areas of western Oklahoma. Duffield (1964) has pointed out
that their relative frequency decreases in later sites where the proportion
of Fresno-like points increases.
Figure 3. k
This thick, rough projectile point somewhat resembles the
Young type (Suhm and Ielks 1962). Suhm and Jelks estimate that the Young
type has the same cultural affiliation as the Scallorn type but Duffield
(1964) reports Young points associated with Fresno and Washita-like sidenotched points at the Medford Ranch site and the Spring Canyon site in
Hutchinson County, where no Scallorn points were recovered.
Figure 3. 1 and m -- These specimens are too fragmentary for
classification bul they are both made of materials probably not native to
the Panhandle-Plains area. The point illustrated as Figure 3, 1 has some
resemblance to the Trinity point type: it is made of a tan colored chert and
has a high glossy sheen which suggests that it may have been heat treated.
The specimen shown as Figure 3. m is made of an orange-tan flint which is
unusual for this area.

HANSFORD COUNTY ARTIFACTS

223

G

d

g

h

k

/

/
0
t

rn

2
J

/

1

4
I__l

CM

FIGURE 3. Small projectile points: a, b, corner notched points; c-e,
expanding stem points; f, g, triangular points; h-j, notched triangular
points; k-m, unclassified points.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

224

Bifaces and Miscellaneous Pieces -- The artifacts shown in Figure 4
represent the remainder of this collection.
Figure 4, a through c

i

These fragments of bifaces are interesting in

terms of material and workmanship. The specimen illustrated as Figure 4.
a is made of a dark brown flint has a fairly thick cross section (.8 cm) and
has fine reworking along its edge. Figure 4, b shows a biface made of
Alibates material which is very thin (.4 cm} and also has excellent workmanship. The fragment illustrated as Figure 4. c is larger, thicker (.8 cm),
and much cruder but is also made of Alibates dolomite.
Figure 4, d
This complete biface is of a mottled grey color but there is
a small amount of dark maroon speckle at one end which suggests that it is
probably Alibates material. Duffield (1964) reports similar specimens as
ovate knives at two of the three Panhandle Aspect sites at the Sanford
Reservoir. Sollberger (1971} suggests that such oval knives are
unretouched forms which become alternately beveled knives, a form
frequently recovered from Panhandle Aspect sites, through resharpening
of its edges.
Figure 4, e -- The piece is an excellent example of an end scraper. The
reverse face of this specimen is a single plane with the bulb of force very
evident at the smaller end. The leading edge is finely worked and is
somewhat dulled. Duffield reports similar scrapers from Hutchinson County (1964: Figure 16. D-F), but this type of scraper is widespread in the
Plains area and is reported as far away as the middle Missouri area of
North Dakota (Lehmer 1971}.

DISCUSSION
The study of this small collection demonstrates that there are a
variety of archeological materials in Hansford County which can and
should be analyzed. This becomes a critical issue since a dam is
planned for this area of Palo Duro Creek and yet no sites are on record, nor are there any reports in the literature to alert state agencies of the need for a comprehensive archeological investigation.
Even with the limited amount of material reported here, there are
several serious questions which can be raised about our present understanding of the prehistory of the upper Panhandle region. One
such question emerging from an examination of published reports
concerns the diagnostic value of large expanding base dart points
which previously had been thought to be horizon markers within the
Archaic period (Tunnell and Hughes 1955) based on stratigraphic
work in other areas of the state or general type descriptions. Work in
the Texas Panhandle and in western Oklahoma in recent years indicates thai such forms are found at sites assumed to be Archaic
(Twilla Finch, Sitter Ranch, etc.), in Woodland sites (Lake Creek,
41MO5, 41PT29), at Custer Focus sites, and in Panhandle Aspect sites
,these large ex-

HANSFORD COUNTY ARTIFACTS

225

b

G

C

o
I

1

2
;

I

4
I

CM

d

FIGURE 4. Miscellaneous pieces: a-c, bifaces; d, plains knife; e,
scraper.

226

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

panding base dart points are increasingly associated with plain, sidenotched, and basal notched triangular arrow points. At the Roy-Smith
site in Oklahoma, where there was a multiroom stone structure, the
arrow point types predominate and the dart points are rare
(Schneider 1969). In later Panhandle Aspect sites and post-Panhandle
Aspect components, these large expanding base projectile points appear to be absent (Keller 1975). Thus, this size and style of projectile
point can no longer be considered as temporally diagnostic of the Archaic stage. Presently, some of the sites thought to be Archaic in this
area are so designated primarily on the basis of these kinds of points;
such sites may need to be re-evaluated.
A second issue is the potential for the Scallorn point type to be
diagnostic in the Texas Panhandle of a Woodland horizon which is
earlier than the Panhandle Aspect (Hughes 1962; Harrison and Griffin 1975). Moorehead (1931) noted the possibility of such an earlier
horizon on the basis of ash lenses underneath the walls of the massive
stone structures at the Handley Ranch site. Such an earlier occupation strengthens Hughes’ hypothesis of an in situ development for
the Panhandle Aspect (Hughes 1968). Lintz (1974) and Bell (1973)
have presented convincing cases for similar in situ developments in
western Oklahoma, the Custer Focus (A. D. 800-1100) and the subsequent Washita River Focus (A. D. 1100-1400). Their re.cent works
synthesizing information of these two Plains Village developments
represent substantial contributions to the archeology of the Southern
Plains. Unfortunately no comparable analysis of the Panhandle
Aspect has yet been published, though such a synthesis is sorely
needed (Keller 1975).
The presence of Scallorn, Toyah and small corner notched arrow
points also raises the possibilty of some type of relationship between
the Panhandle and those parts of Central and West Texas where such
forms are common. Dibble and Lorrain (1968) postulated such a
relationship on an Archaic time level between the Bonfire Shelter and
the Twilla site of the lower Panhandle based on the presence of large
expanding base dart points and fossil bison bone in both locations.
Dillehay (1974] has recently restated this hypothesis, attributing it to
Hughes and Dibble, and studied the presence of bison in both areas as
a possible causal factor. Certainly this hypothesis deserves further
study since it implies another possible source of influence in the
presently unclear developmental sequence of Texas Panhandle archeological complexes.
The artifacts reported here do establish thai the Woodland and
Panhandle Aspect horizons, which have been demonstrated in other
parts of,the Texas and Oklahoma Panh~dles,, are, a!s~,present in the

HANSFORD COUNTY ARTIFACTS

227

Palo Duro Creek area of Hansford County, an area previously
unreported in the archeological literature. Archaic occupation may
be indicated but cannot be demonstrated conclusively since the large
dart points are also found in Woodland and Panhandle Aspect
horizons.
In this northernmost tier of Texas counties, a great deal of work is
yet to be done, even in the basic documentation of sites. Hopefully,
such work will be done in this area of Palo Duro Creek before it is
inundated by the lake presently planned for the area.
While archeological work in this remote area of the northeastern
Texas Panhandle is not as glamorous or as immediately rewarding as
in some other parts of the state, this brief report has demonstrated
that there are archeological materials and problems in this area
which need study. Very little has been published about this specific
area in the past 30 years and it is possibly one of the least known
areas of the state. At this stage when so little professional work has
been done in this region, the examination of amateur collections is a
particularly fruitful method of research.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
My thanks to Mr. Robert Cochran and his son for permitting me to study
their collection; to the late Sam Handley for a personal tour of his sites: to
lim Barlow of Lackland Air Force Base for assistance with the
illustrations; and to Dr. Dave Dibble for lending references and being concerned with my bibliography. Special thanks to Dr. Thomas R. Hester for
locating Moorehead’s book and for having the patience to critique a number of drafts of this paper over the last three years.

228

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
REFERENCES CITED

Baerreis, David A. and Reid A. Bryson
1966 Dating the Panhandle Aspect Cultures. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. 14, pp. 105-116.
Bell, Robert E.
1958 Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile
Points. Special Bulletin No. 1, Oklahoma Anthropological Society.
1960 Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile
Points. Special Bulletin No. 2, Oklahoma Anthropological Society.
1973 The Washita River Focus of the Southern Plains. In: Variation in Anthropology. (Lathrap and Douglas ed.), Illinois Archaeological Survey.
Binford, Lewis R.
1963 A Proposed Attribute List for the Description and-Classification of
Projectile Points. Miscellaneous Studies in Typology and
Classification. Anthropological Papers, Museum of Anthropology,
University of Michigan, No. 19, pp. 193-221.
Bousman. C. Britt
n.d. Archeological Assessment of Alibates National Monument. Archeological Research Program, Southern Methodist University.
Campbell. T. N.
1960 Texas Archeology: A Guide to the Literature. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 29, pp. 177-254.
Collins, Michael B.
1968a A Note on Broad Corne~-Notched Projectile Points Used in Bison Hunting in Western Texas. J~he Bull-Roarer, Vol. 3 (2), pp. 13-14.
1968b The Andrews Lake Ldcality: New Archeological Data From the
Southern Llano Estacado, Texas. Unpublished M. A. Thesis, University of Texas at Austin.
1971 A Review of Llano Estacado Archaeology and Ethnohistory. Plains
Anthropologist, Vol. 16 (52}, pp. 85-104.
Dibble, David S. and Dessamae Lorrain
1966 Bonfire Shelter, A Stratified Bison Kill Site, Val Verde County, Texas.
Miscellaneous Papers No. 1, Texas Memorial Museum, The University of Texas at Austin.
Dillehay, Tom D.
1974 Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains.
Plains Anthropologist, Vol. 19 (65), pp. 180-196.
Duffield. Lathel F.
1964 Three Panhandle Aspect Sites at Sanford Reservoir, Hutchinson
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 35,
pp. 19-82.
Ellzey, Tom S.
1966 A Panhandle Aspect Site (Preliminary Report). Midland Archeological Society Special Bulletin No. 1, pp. 59-65
Glasscock, Keith, and Alma Glasscock
1955 A Preliminary Report on CR-1. an Indian Campsite in Moore County,
Texas. Panhandle-Plains Historical Review, Vol. 28, pp. 96-105.
Green, F. E.
1967 ~rcheological Salvage in the Sanford Reservoir ,Area~,, ManuscripLon

HANSFORD COUNTY ARTIFACTS

229

file at the Southwestern Regional Center, National Park Service, Santa Fe, New Mexico.
Harrison, Billy R. and Bob T. Griffin
1975 An Infant Burial in the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of the Texas Archeelogical Society, VoI. 44 [for 1973), pp, 61-68.
Heizer. Robert F.
1974 Some Thoughts on Hoaxes and Fakes. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 45, pp. 191-196.
Holden, W. E.
1929 Some Recent Explorations and Excavations in Northwest Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society, Vol.
1, pp. 23-25.
Hughes, Jack T.
1962 Lake Creek: A Woodland Site in the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 32, pp. 65-84.
1968 Prehistory of the Caddoan-Speaking Tribes. Ph.D. Dissertation.
Columbia University. University Microfilms, Ann Arbor.
Jelks, E. B., E. Mott Davis, and H. F. Sturgis (ads.)
1960 A Review of Texas Archeology, Part One. Bulletin of the Texas Archological Society, Vol. 29, pp. 1-176.
Keller, John E.
1975 The Black Dog Village Site. Texas Highway Department Publications
in Archaeology, Highway Design Division, Report No. 5.
Kelley, Jane H.
1964 Comments on the Archeology of the Llano Estacado. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 35, pp. 1-18.
Lehmer, Donald J.
1971 Introduction to Middle Missouri Archeology. Anthropological Papers
No. 1. U. S. Department of Interior, National Park Service.
Lintz, Christopher
1972 The 1972 O.U. Field School. Oklahoma Anthropological Society
Newsletter, No. 20 (6), pp. 8-9.
1974 An Analysis of the Custer Focus and Its Relationship to the Plains
Village Horizon in Oklahoma. Papers in Anthropology, Vol. 15 (2),
Department of Anthropology, University of Oklahoma.
Luchterhand, Kubet
1970 Early Archaic Projectile Points and Hunting Patterns in the Lower
Illinois Valley. Illinois Archaeological Survey, Monograph No. 2.
Moorehead, Warren K.
1931 Archaeology of the Arkansas River Valley. Phillips Academy; Andover.
1933 The Importance of Texas as an Archeological Field. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 5, pp. 9-13.
Randall, Mark E.
1970 The Archaeology of the Lamb County, Texas Area. Lower Plains Archeo!ogical Society Bulletin Number 1, pp. 43-53.
Schneider, Frederick
1969 The Roy-Smith Site (By-14} Beaver County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the
Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. 18, pp. 119-179.
Shaller, Rolla
1973 The Wolf Creek Expedition, A Review. Paper presented at the 1973

230

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Texas Archeological Society Annual Meeting, Lubbock, October 30,
1973.
Sollberger, J. B.
1971 A Technological Study of Beveled Knives. Plains Anthropologist, Vol.
16 (53), pp. 209-218.
Studer, F. V.
1931 Some Field Notes and Observations Concerning Texas Panhandle
Ruins. In: Moorehead, Archae!ogy of the Arkansas River Valley, pp.
131.143.
Suhm, D. A., and E. B. Jelks.
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. The Texas Archaeological Society Special Publication No. 1 and the Texas
Memorial Museum Bulletin, No. 4.
Tunnell, C. D. and J. T. Hughes
1955 An Archaic Bison Kill in the Texas Panhandle. Panhandle-Plains
Historical Review, Vol. 28, pp. 63-70.
Wedel, W. R.
1961 Prehistoric Man on the Great Plains. University of Oklahoma Press.
Wormington, H. M.
1957 Ancient Man in North America. Denver Museum of Natural History.
Popular Series No. 4 [4th Edition).

Lafayette, Indiana

POROSITY AND REFIRING TESTS ON CERAMICS
FROM THE GEORGE C. DAVIS SITE, TEXAS
J. BARTO ARNOLD

III

ABSTRACT
Retiring experiments involving porosity and color change were performed on a sample of the pottery from the George C. Davis Site. The
technology of ceramic production at this site was elucidated through these
experiments the results of which are described in this paper.

INTRODUCTION
The George C. Davis Site (41 CE 19) is located on a Pleistocene terrace of the Neches River in Cherokee County, Texas, and is bisected
by Texas State Highway 21 approximately midway between the towns
of Crockett and Rusk. The site had been occupied by prehistoric Caddo Indians from about A. D. 700 to A. D. 1250 (Story 1972: i). Major
features of the site include two earthen temple mounds (Mounds A
and B), an earthen burial mound (Mound C), and an extensive village
area. The W.P.A. sponsored excavations at the site from 1939-1941
reported by Newell and Krieger (1949). From 1968 to 1970 excavations were carried out under the supervision of Dee Ann Story,
Director of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin. The ceramic collection from this site
forms the body of data from which samples were taken for this
porosity and refiring study. A more extensive ceramic analysis of the
1968-1970 collection is available in Arnold (1973).

POROSITY AND REFIRING TESTS
The main coloring agents in clay are the naturally occurring impurities such as iron compounds and carbonaceous matter. The firing
atmosphere, temperature, and duration operate upon these impurities to produce the color the vessel will possess after firing
(Shepard 1968: 103). The firing atmosphere may be oxidizing, containing free oxygen, or reducing, containing gasses that take oxygen
from constituents of the clay. Oxidation produces clear colors, and
reduction produces gray (Shepard 1968: 103).
....
Grays and blacks can also be obtained if the firing temperature is
too low to drive out carbonaceous matter and to change iron compounds to iron oxide (Ibid.) Smudging is another means of intentionally producing grays and blacks by causing carbon to be
deposited on the vessel during firing. Smudging can be accomplished

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

232

when smoldering fuel comes in contact with the pottery at the end of
the firing process. Sooty smoke from such substances as wood chips
and saw dust or powdered dung can also produce smudging (Shepard
1968: 88).
The colors produced by the iron compounds depend upon a number
of variables. Colton (1939: 266) says the main variable is the percentage or iron content (Table 1). Shepard (1968: 103) points out that
there are other variables in operation such as iron compound particle
size and distribution. These factors reduce the level of confidence
which can be placed in Colton’s statements on color. Also it must be
remembered that grays and blac ks can be produced due to the simple
lack of oxidation of carbonaceous matter. Reduction is not the only
cause of blacks and grays.
Table 1
The Effect of Iron on Color [From Colton 1939: 266)

Iron Content
1%
1%

- 3%
3%

Oxidized

Reduced

Almost White

White

Buff

Gray

Red or Brown

Dark Gray to Black

Duration of firing can also affect the final color of the pottery. If a
high enough temperature is not reached and maintained for a sufficient period of time colors may not be clear, or if the surface is fully
oxidized there may be a dark core indicating residual carbonaceous
matter the carbon having been burned from the surface only
(Shepard 1968: 104). An oxidized surface and a dark core are a
frequent occurrence in this collection (Table 2).
Retiring tests can be helpful in determining original firing conditions. By retiring at a relatively high temperature in a controlled atmosphere and observing color change some aspects of the original
firing atmosphere may be inferred. A short retiring at relatively low
temperatures should clear the colors of sherds that have been
smudged (Shepard 1968: 105,217-220).

change in firing temperature causes a change in porosity in a given
paste~,The, specific changesencounte~ed in refiring sherds from ~s

POROSITY AND REFIRING TESTS

233

Table 2
Exterior Surface Color Vrs. Core Color

COLOREXT
COUNT I
COL PCT IDARK
LIGHT
MIXED
ROW
I
TOTAL
I
2 I
i I
3 I
COLRCORE
........ ~ ........ I ........ I ........ I
99 I
I
I
267 I
7~ I
a40
BLACK OR DARK GR I e3.5 I 51.8 I 59,7 I 55,3
I
2 I
52 I
161
I
~ I
253
LIGHT GRAY
I
33.3 I
31.3 I 32,3 I 31,8
I
3 I
5 I
87 I
18 I
102
CLEAR
I
3,2 I
16,9 I
8,1
I
12.8
I
COLUMN
TOT4L

150
19.6

515
64,8

RAw CHI SOUARE =
23.673@6 WITH
SIGNIFICANCE =
,0~0!

120
15,6

795
1~0,0

4 DEGREES OF FREEDOM,

collection will be discussed below. Furthermore, comparing porosity
before and after retiring at a relatively high temperature may give
some idea of the potential of the paste under consideration. It is
possible to combine retiring for porosity and color in a single test.
All retiring tests were performed in an American Art Clay Company Standard Economy Electric Kiln, Type ECI5. The kiln is
equipped with a thermocouple-pyrometer system made by the same
company. The centigrade scale is marked in 250 increments.
Experiment No. 1

-- Color and Porosity Test

The combined color and porosity change retiring experiment was
carried out for a small sample of each of ten main pottery types
(Table 3) from the George C. Davis Site. In this way any variation between types as well as an average for all the types, can be observed.
Fifteen sh erds were drawn at random from each type. The porosity of
the sample of 150 sherds was determined before and after retiring by
means of the formula suggested by Shepard (Shepard 1968: 127).
Shepard’s formula, "recommended by the Committee on Standards
of the American Ceramic Society," (ibid.) was chosen over the alternate formula suggested by Nelson (1971: 143) because it was felt that

234

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

its allowance for the volume of the sherd added a dimension of accuracy not afforded by Nelson’s simple percentage weight increase.
Shepard’s formula derives the apparent percentage of porosity by
dividing the weight difference of the sherd before and after soaking in
water by the volume of the sherd and multiplying by 100.
The color of 100 sherds, ten randomly selected from each set of fifteen, was recorded using the Munsell Soil Color Chart (1954) both
before and after retiring. Since for the color change test no statistical procedures were to be applied, it was felt that the whole original
150 sherd sample need not be used. All the sherds were retired in an
electric kiln. The kiln was heated slowly and continuously over a
period of three hours to a maximum temperature of 11000 C, a temperature well above the high of 7000 - 8000 C that could be expected
from an aboriginal open air tiring [J.A. Neely, personal communication). The temperature of 11000 C was maintained for thirty minutes,
and then the kiln was turned off and allowed to cool overnight while
remaining closed.
The change in the color of the sherds retired was dramatic. From a
relatively broad range of rather dark brown, gray, reddish brown,
and reddish gray colors the retiring under the oxidizing conditions of
the electric kiln produced a remarkably narrow range of light red and
red colors. This applies to surface color and core color. In many cases
a light surface color had been present with a dark core. Note the tight
clustering of value, 4 - 5, and chroma, 7 - 8, in the "after" columns of
Table 4.
The porosity tests on the sherds before retiring yielded fairly
uniform results (Table 3). An analysis of variance inherent in these
porosity figures will help in their interpretation. Since the sample
sizes are equal, a F-maximum test -- a simple yet robust test for
homogeneity of variances
is applicable (Bruning and Kintz 1968:
110-111). The F MAX of 4.51 with fourteen degrees of freedom is not
significant at the .05 level, and therefore it is concluded that the
variances are homogeneous before tiring. The same is true of the
porosity measurements taken after retiring which yielded an F MAX
of 4.08 with fourteen degrees of freedom. There is no significant
difference betweentypes reflected in the porosity results.
The porosity percentages measured after retiring consistently
showed an increase for all types [Table 3). Interestingly enough, the
weight of the individual sherds decreased and their volume increased. Many of the sherds developed a network of shallow surface
cracks after retiring. Therefore, the clay involved, whether it was in
a natural state or modified before use, was suited only for a limited
firing range. If temperatures above that range were
, ex-

POROSITY AND REFIRING TESTS

235

pansion would cause surface cracks. There was also a notable
change in the ringing sound given by the sherds when dropped on a
table top. The sound this produced became distinctly higher and
clearer after refiring.

Table 3
Average Apparent Porosity Before and After Refiring
Ceramic Types

Before

After

Davis
Duren
Dunkin
Kiam

25%
22%
20%
24%

Weches
Crockett
Pennington
Hickory
Holly

22%
22%
19%
26O/o
23%

31%
31%
28%
37%
27%
30%
20%
28%
28%

Bowles Creek Plain

25%

29%

Mean
Standard Deviation

23o/o

30O/o

2.25O/o

2.78O/o

Experiment No. 2 -- Smudging Test
A separate sample of twenty-five black 0r dark gray sherds was
selected from Holly Fine Engraved, a type possibly intentionally
smudged. Test chips were broken off of these sherds for this refiring
experiment. According to Shepard (1968: 217,220) a short firing in air
(oxidizing atmosphere} at 500° C should be sufficient to clear a sherd
that has been smudged. If no significant Change in color is observed
then the dark color must be attributed to reduction during firing or
lack of oxidation or carbonaceous material in the clay.
The test chips were fired in the electric kiln used in the previous experiment at a temperature of 500° C for fifteen minutes.
In every case the refired test chip when compared to the sherd
from which it was removed proved to be a lighter color (Fig. 1). Further evidence of smudging can be seen in the presence of a few sherds
in the sample analyzed from the recent collection. These sherds have
a dark surface color and a light core color (Table 2}; two of the five
sherds with this characteristic are classified as Holly Fine Engraved.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

236

TABLE 4.
Surface Color Designations Before and After Retiring
Holly Fine Engraved
before

after

7.5YR4/2

dark brown

2.5YR5/8

red

7.5YR4.5/2

dark brown

2.5YR5.5/8

red

7.5YR3.5/2

dark brown

2.5YR5/8

red

5YR5/4

reddish brown

2.5YR5/8

red

5YR5.5/3

reddish brown

10R6/8

light red

5YR4.5/2

very dark gray

IOR5.5/7

red

5YR4/2

very dark gray

2.5YR5/7

red

5YR4.5/1

dark gray

2.5YR6/8

light red

5YR4.5/2

dark reddish gray

IOR4.5/7

red

2.5YR5/6.5

red

IOR5/7

red

5YR4.5/3
5YR5/3
7.5YR4.5/2
5YR4.5/2.5
5YR3.5/1
5YR3.5/1
5YR3.5/1
5YR5.5/6
7.5YR3/2
5YR5/2

reddish brown
reddish brown
brown
dark reddish gray
very dark gray
very dark gray
very dark gray
yellowish red
dark brown
reddish gray

10R5/8
10R5/7
10R6/8
10R5.5/8
10R5/8
10R5.5/6
10R5/8
2.5YR5.5/8
10R5.5/8
10R5/6

red
red
light red
red
red
red
red
red
red
red

7.5YR3.5/2
5YR4.5/6
5YR4.5/6
5YR5/6
5YR5/6
5YR4.5/2
7.5YR4.5/2
7.5YR4.5/4
5YR5.5/4
5YR5/3

dark brown
yellowish red
yellowish red
yellowish red
yellowish red
dark reddish gray
brown
brown
reddish brown
reddish brown

Hickory Fine Engraved

Pennington Punctated-lncised

5YR4/1.5
7.5YR4/2
7.5YR4/2
7.5YR4/4
5YR3.5/1
5YR5.5/2
5YR4.5/4
5YR 5.5/4
7.5YR5/3
5YR5.5/6

10R5.5/8
IOR5/6
2.5YR5/8
2.5YR5.5/8
IOR5.5/6
IOR5.5/6
10R5.5/7
10R5.5/7
2.5YR5/8
10R4.5/7

Crocker Curvilinear Incised
2.5YR5/8
dark gray
2.5YR5/8
dark brown
10R5/7
dark brown
10R5.5/6
dark brown
10R5.5/7
verydark gray
10R5/6
reddish gray
2.5YR5/8
reddish brown
2.5YR 5/8
reddish brown
10R5/6
brown
10R5.5/8
yellowish red

red
red
red
red
red
red
red
red
red
red

red
red
red
red
red
red
red
red
red
red

237

POROSITY AND REFIRING TESTS

TABLE 4 (continued)

Weches Fingernail Impressed

before

after

10R5/7

red
red
red
red
red
red
red
red
red
red

Davis Incised
reddish brown
reddish brown
reddish brown
light reddish brown
dark reddish brown
brown
yellowish red
yellowish red
yellowish red
red

2.5YR4.5/8
2.5YR6/8
10R5.5/7
10R4.5/8
10R4.5/8
10R4/7
10R5/8
10R4.5/8
10R5/8
10R5/6

red
light red
red
red
red
red
red
red
red
red

5YR4/3
5YR5/3
5YR5.5/4.5
2.5YR4.5/2.5
2.5YR4.5/2
5YR5.5/6
5YR5/6
7.5YR5/4
5YR4/1
2.5YR5/6

Dunkin Incised
reddish brown
reddish brown
reddish brown
weak red
weak red
yellowish red
yellowish red
brown
dark gray
red

10R4.5/8
10R4/8
2.5YR5.5/8
10R4.5/6
10R4/8
10R5.5/8
10R5/6
10R5/8
10R4.5/8
10R5/8

red
red
red
red
red
red
red
red
red
red

5YR4/3
5YR5/3.5
5YR4/1
5YR4.5/1
2.5YR5.5/6
2.5YR5/3
2.5YR4.5/2
7.5YR4.5/2
7.5YR3/2
5YR4/2

Kiam Incised
reddish brown
reddish brown
dark gray
dark gray
red
weak red
weak red
brown
dark brown
dark reddish gray

10R4/6
2.5YR5/8
10R4/8
2.5YR8/8
2.5YR6/8
2.5YR5/8
2.5YR5.5/8
2.5YR5.5/8
10R5.5/8
10R5/6

red
red
red
light red
light red
red
red
red
red
red

5YR5/3
2.5YR5/4
2.5YR5/4
5YR4.5/3
5YR5/4
5YR4/3
5YR3.5/1
5YR3.5/1.5
2.5YR5/6
5YR3/2

reddish brown
reddish brown
reddish brown
reddish brown
reddish brown
reddish brown
very dark gray
very dark gray
red
dark reddish brown

5YR4.5/3
5YR5/3
5YR5/3
5YR6/4.5
5YR5/2.5
7.5YR4.5/4
5YR5/6
5YR3.5/1.5
5YR5/6
2.5YR5/6

10R5.5/8
2.5YR5.5/8
2.5YR5/8
2.5YR5/8
10R5/7
10R4.5/8
....

10R4.5/7
10R5/6
10R4.5/7

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

238

TABLE 4 (continued)
Duren Neck Banded
after

before
5YR5.5/4
5YR4.5/3
5YR5/3.5
5YR5.5/3
5YR5.5/4
2.5YR4.5/2.5
7.5YR4.5/2
5YR4.5/1
5YR5/1.5
5YR4.5/2

5YR4/6
5YR5/2.5
2.5YR4.5/2
2.5YR4/2
2.5YR4/2.5
2.5YR5/6.5
2.5YR5.5/6
5YR6/7
5YR4.5/3
5YR3.5/1

reddish brown
reddish brown
reddish brown
reddish brown
reddish brown
weak red
brown
dark gray
gray
dark reddish gray
Bowles Creek Plain
yellowish red
reddish gray
weak red
weak red
weak red
red
red
reddish yellow
reddish brown
very dark gray

2.5YR5.5/8
10R5/7
2.5YR5/8
2.5YR6/8
10R5.5/6
10R5/8
10R5/7
10R5.5/7
2.5YR5.5/8
10R5/7

red
red
red
light red

10R4/7
10R5/7
10R5.5/6
10R5.5/8
10R5/6
2.5YR5.5/8
10R5/7
2.5YR5.5/8
2.5YR5.5/8
10R4.5/8

red
red
red
red
red
red
red
red
red
red

red
red
red
red
red
red

POROSITY AND REFIRING TESTS

239

FIGURE 1. Holly Fine Engraved sherds from which chips were removed for the smudging test and then reattached. The dark section
of each sherd is the original shade and the light section is the retired
test chip.

CONCLUSIONS
The remarkable uniformity of the results of the porosity tests indicates that vessels of any or all of the various Davis Site pottery
types could have been made from similar batches of prepared clay
body or paste, and tiring conditions of time and temperature were not
greatly different for individual types. This indicates a striking homogeneity of technology and clay sources. By way of comparison of
the seventeen types of pottery from Pecos whose average apparent
porosity was tested by Shepard (1968: 128) the range of values was
about 1 - 24°/o after retiring and about 21 - 40°/o before. The range of
average apparent porosity of Davis Site pottery was 27 - 37% after
retiring and 19- 26%

before.

240

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The fact that the retiring tests produced such similar colors indicates constituent clays used in the manufacture of the tested types
are similar in origin and chemical constitution. Since the retiring conditions definitely oxidized the test sherds, it is probably safe to use
Colton’s figures and to conclude that the iron content of the clay is
greater than three percent (Colton 1939: 226).
The colors produced by the retiring test show that one or more of
the following conditions was in operation:
i. The tiring temperature was not high enough for complete
oxidation.
2. The tiring duration was not long enough for complete
oxidation.
3. The tiring atmosphere did not possess sufficient free
oxygen for complete oxidation.

Although the Davis Site pottery has a fairly high porosity the paste
was well suited to the conditions of aboriginal tiring employed. The
tests showed thai if the higher temperature necessary for complete
oxidation and clear colors was reached the paste would develop
cracks and an even higher porosity.
The retiring test for smudging indicates that this process was indeed employed by the potters of the Davis Site.

POROSITY AND REFIRING TESTS

241

REFERENCES CITED
Arnold, J. Barto Ill
1973 George C. Davis Site Ceramic Analysis -- Excavations of 1968-1970.
Unpublished Report in Lieu of Thesis. Department of Anthropology,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Bruning, James L. and B. L. Kintz
1968 Computational Handbook of Statistics. Scott, Foreman and Company.
Dallas.
Colton, Harold S.
1939 The Reducing Atmosphere and Oxidizing Atmosphere in Prehistoric
Southwestern Ceramics. American Antiquity, Vol. 4, pp. 224-231.
Munsell Color Company, Inc.
1954 Munsell Soil Color Charts. Baltimore.
Nelson, Glenn C.
1971 Ceramics: A Potter’s Handbook. Third Edition. Holt, Rinehart and
Winston, Inc., Dallas.
Newell, H. Perry and Alex D. I<rieger
1949 The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoirs of the
Society for American Archaeology, No. 5.
Shepard, Anna S.
1968 Ceramics for the Archaeologist. Publication 609 (6th printing). Carnegie Institution of Washington. Washington, D.C.
Story, Dee Ann
1972 A Preliminary Report of the 1968, 1969, and 1970 Excavations at the
George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Report of Field Research conducted under National Science Foundation (GS-2573 and
3200) and Interagency Contract between the University of Texas at
Austin and the Texas Building Commission and the Texas Historical
Survey Committee, Austin.
Texas Historical Survey Committee

NOTES

PALEOECOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS AND
EAST TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY
JOHN E. KELLER

ABSTRACT
Archeologists have frequently tended to generalize ecological
considerations when applied to archeological problems. An example is
presented which explains procedures and reveals some possible avenues
of interpretation. Investigations into subsistence resources, strategies,
and scheduling models are suggested and examples are presented. The
value of local as well as generalized material is stressed and the possible
consequences of such studies are indicated.

While paleoecology is, at present, in vogue in archeological
thought, there are indications that the subject is not completely
understood by all members of the archeological "fraternity" (Butzer
1975). There is often a tendency to pay only lip service to the concept
and a disinclination to utilize the information collected to its fullest
extent. The complexity of the situation is frequently blurred when
generalized works like those of Blair (1950) are utilized to the
exclusion of other sources. While the general utility of such sources is
undeniable, they often have less than adequate information to
contribute to the interpretation of localized conditions and the
examination of the interrelations existing between the site and its
environment.
The Davis site (41CE19) and the middle Neches River region
provides an example of the type of local information valuable in the
implementation of proper ecological studies. Previous information
indicated little other than the site lies within the broadly defined
Austroriparian biotic province (Blair 1950). Basically this is a source
of index species information but it supplies very little about local
conditions. For example, there is little information on the different
biotic communities making up the separate components of the
ecological system in operation, or the individual species comprising
consumable subsistence resources.
The collection of this sort of information requires investigation of
various sources. Actual on-the-ground survey can supply a great deal
of information and may be valuable for the delineation of discrete
biotic communities. However, simply tabulating the present species
and their occurrence does not provide the whole solution. Past
conditions may be examined in the light of present information but to

244

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

really evaluate the situation requires the input provided by modern
ecological theory. In this respect the concepts of vegetative
succession and climax stability (Odum 1963: 87) are particularly
important. Vegetation typically follows an identifiable progression
from initial colonization to establishment of a climax state (Odom
1963: 87-88). This progression can be predicted and as a result some
extrapolation of the past from the present is possible. There are, of
course, limits to the extent of this extrapolation. However, the
stability of the climax state and the buffering effect of the dominant
vegetation type, a mixed evergreen deciduous forest, would seem to
indicate that the same conditions have persisted for some thousands
of years (Odum 1963: 87-88). This interpretation, which receives
confirmatory evidence from historic accounts (Keller 1974) indicated
that conditions are to be expected in which various subtypes of a
mixed deciduous/evergreen forest predominate. While definition of
the biotic communities existing within this generally homogenous
climax configuration is purely arbitrary, it is possible to distinguish
some separation. On this basis four major zones, aquatic,
bottomlands, terrace, and uplands, can be defined.
All of these zones are capable of supplying some subsistence
material although some are definitely more important than others on
this basis. Of perhaps equal importance are the ecotonal areas
separating the major zones. Here, in keeping with the concept of edge
effect {Odum 1959: 278) a high degree of species diversity and individual numbers have resulted in increased productivity. In light of
these developments it seems obvious that strong ecological considerations were in operation in the selection of the Davis site
location. However, the importance of the ready availability of such a
broad range of natural subsistence materials from so diverse but adjacent communities can not be doubted. This would be especially true
if wild subsistence materials were as important as investigation indicates. Hardwood nuts, as evidenced by archeological recovery,
were indicative of this importance. Such an occurrence, especially in
the light of the dietary value of such resources (Woods 1899:74-751 is
hardly surprising (Richard Ford, personal communication). A tremendous amount of humanly consumable energy was thus available to the
inhabitants of the Davis site. Exactly how much of these potential
resources were actually used is, of course, impossible to state. Some
idea of the magnitude of caloric energy available can, however, be
gained from tl~e fact that only 5°/0 of the total could supply approximately 15,000 persons on an annual basis. Large populations
could be, tllus, a distinct possibility, even without agriculture.

PALEOECOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS

245

Despite the tremendous amount of energy available for exploitation, some scheduling is implied by the seasonal availability of
subsistence resources. When dealing with floral materials, particularly those with high caloric values, scheduling is of primary importance. The problem seems particularly acute when dealing with
foods that are high in carbohydrates and fats. Since the main sources
of these materials, nuts and corn, are only seasonally collectable in
the middle Neches region, a subsistence schedule may be hypothesized based on the availability of these foods.
Thus, if scheduling is conceived of in terms of carbohydrates and
fat collection, the historic Caddoan practice (Swanton 1942: 131) of
cultivating two distinct corn crops offers a considerable advantage in
subsistence. The first or "little corn" crop might be expected to
mature in early to mid-June, depending on when it was planted and
local weather conditions (Newcomb 1961: 292). This crop would
provide an excellent source of high energy at the time when calories
were generally lacking in the natural system. A high amount of concentrated energy would also be valuable in meeting the demands of
planting and maintaining the second or "flour corn" crop. By late
August or mid-September this second crop would mature and would
offer a high quality and easily stored source of caloric energy
valuable in meeting the subsistence demands of the winter season.
Crop failure cannot be completely discounted, but there was little
chance of whole-scale failure.
It is in relation to reduced agricultural crop harvest that the basic
value of the fall nut crop can be discerned. Probably this was normally a subsistence supplement, but the nut crop would, in times of
crop failure, actually supplant agricultural products as a dietary
resource. The differential maturation and reproductive rates of the
various nut producing species (Goodrum, Reid, and Boyd 1971: 525)
are particularly important in that total mast failure is precluded.
Failures in one or even a number of species are not likely to seriously
alter this essentially stable resource configuration (Goodrum, Reid
and Boyd 1971: 525).
The concentration of naturally available carbohydrates during the
fall also has important consequences for the exploitation of faunal
resources. High population densities of such species as deer are expected to be concentrated in the areas of mast production (Smith
1974: 34). Deer population are, by virtue of their density and the onset
of breeding season, especially susceptible to human predation at this
time.
Nut collecting and hunting may then be viewed as two subsistence

246

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

activities that could be carried on nearly simultaneously in the same
geographically restricted areas. A subsistence scheduling strategy
utilizing this combination of resources would be highly successful for
a relatively sedentary population which also relied on agricultural
products.
While the models mainly incorporate what are believed to be
primary activities, it should be clear that other resources were also
utilized. Subsistence activities, particularly those involving resource
collection could have been carried on throughout the year. Some activities such as mussel collection or exploitation of spring fish runs
are incompletely understood and could well have had more importance than indicated by the models.
The projected scheduling strategy is highly viable since wholescale subsistence failure seems virtually precluded. Individual
resource failure may occur, but the effects of this situation would be
mitigated or completely nullified by recourse to other materials. An
additional advantage is the predictable nature of the resource involved. People familiar with their environment, such as the inhabitants of the Davis site surely were, would be aware sometime in advance of probable yields and plan accordingly. A considerable
amount of potential flexibility is provided to the cultural system in
operation. A knowledgeable group would be able to alter its subsistence strategy quite easily in order to take advantage of an abundance of one resource, or to recover from another’s failure. This allows for a maximization of resource potentials and the allocation of
labor to non-subsistence activities.
As an example, the Davis site and indeed the whole middle Neches
region is somewhat less than ideal in that the environmental reconstruction is more hypothetical than desirable. This is due to a variety
of uncontrollable factors. Nevertheless, this example does illustrate
the uses of ecological studies in archeology and serves to indicate
some of the sources of information that should be utilized for proper
evaluation. It certainly indicates the value of thorough as opposed to
generalized investigation.

PALEOECOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS

247

REFERENCES CITED

Blair, W. Frank
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas/ournal of Science, Vol. 2, pp.
93-117.
Butzer, Karl
1975 The Ecological Approach to Archaeology: Are We Really Trying?
American Antiquity, Vol. 40, pp. 106-111.
Goodrum, P. D., V. H. Reid, and C. E. Boyd
1971 Acorn Yields, Characteristics, and Management Criteria of Oaks for
Wildlife. Wildlife Society of America, lournal of Wildlife
Management, Vol. 35, pp. 522-527.
Keller, John E.
1974 Subsistence Paleoecology of the Middle Neches Region of Eastern
Texas. Ph.D. Dissertation, The University of Texas at Austin.
Newcomb,W. W., Jr.
1961 The Indians of Texas. The University of Texas Press, Austin.
Odum, Eugene P.
1959 Fundamentals of Ecology. 2nd ed. W. B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia.
1963 Ecology. Holt, Reinhart and Winston, New York.
Smith, Bruce D.
1974 Middle Mississippi Exploitation of Animal Population: A Predictive
Model. American Antiquity, Vol. 39, pp. 274-292.
Swanton, J. R.
1942 History and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians. Bureau of American
Ethnology Bulletin, 132.
Woods, Charles P., and L. H. Merrill
1899 Nuts as Food. Maine Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin No. 54.
Orano, Maine.
Austin, Texas

COMMENTS ON WOODLAND CULTURES
OF EAST TEXAS*
HARRY I. SHAFER

ABSTRACT
The subject of this paper is the late Archaic adaptations of eastern
Texas and western Louisiana. The material assemblage of the late Archaic
cultures is discussed and compared to the Woodland tradition in the
Eastern United States. The temporal and spatial occurrence of a Hopewell
manifestation in east and southeast Texas is also discussed.

The Woodland tradition of the Eastern United States is characterized by cord-marked and fabric-marked ceramics, burial mounds, and
other earthworks, and at least the beginning of agriculture (Willey
1966: 267). At the onset, if we are going to call the material in the
following discussion "Woodland", we must broaden this definition by
being less particular about surface finish on ceramics, less particular
about the presence of mounds, and to impose a prerequisite of hunting-gathering efficiency which may have provided the basis for the incorporation of incipient horticulture.
The late Archaic in central and southern east Texas is characterized by a lithic assemblage consisting of contracting and parallel
stern dart points (Gary and Kent) plus an assortment of nondiagnostic biface forms, many of which are apparently the failures in
projectile point manufacture. No diagnostic uniface forms are
recognized and one is struck by the virtual absence of unifaces in this
assemblage. It should be pointed out that this is not so in the northern
part of east Texas, especially in the post-oak savannah region, where
numerous uniface tools -- those we call gouges and adzes -- occur.
For the convenience of this discussion I will refer to the lithic
assemblage described for the central and southern part of east Texas
(Figure 1) as the Gary assemblage. This assemblage has been found
underlying ceramics, but it is also associated with ceramics. Sites are
numerous and are usually located on small sandy knolls or ridges
situated either in or at the edge of stream valleys, Surveys at
Livingston Reservoir and Lake Conroe clearly show that sandy
locations were preferred.
The widespread popularity of the Gary assemblage in both time and
space serves as a good indication that the introduction of ceramics
was not made by populations with different technology invading the
*Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Texas Archeological Society, Austin,
November, 1972.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

250

\

~OUTHEAST
TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL STUD’~

L

r/

,~REAS

.....

FIGURE i. Southeast Texas showing location of archeological study
areas.

area. The adoption of ceramic technology was made by indigenous
populations and had no apparent affect on either the settlement pattern or stone technology. The same sandy knolls and ridges were occupied. Again, sites were usually small, but sites of several acres are
known in both the Livingston and Conroe Reservoir districts.
Subsistence data on the Gary assemblage (both preceramic and
ceramic] are virtually non-existent north of the coastal plain.
Charred walnut shells and deer bones were recovered at Conroe

WOODLAND CULTURES

251

(Shafer 1968); deer was found at Livingston (McClurkan 1968); Webb
et a!. (1969) report hickory, walnut and pignut hulls from the Resch
site in Harrison County; Story (1965) reports deer, raccoon, bison, tortoise, and fish at the Gossett Bottoms site in Kaufman County. The remains at the Gossett Bottoms site suggest rather extensive use of
prairie-grassland and riverine environments which were located
nearby.
Despite the paucity of ecological data in archeological sites the
overall situation is not unlike other areas of the Eastern United
States; a successfully adapted hunting-gathering subsistence with
some degree of permanency (probably on a seasonal basis although
the seasonal patterns cannot as yet be defined) which readily adopts
ceramic technology at the utilitarian level.
There is regional variation in the early ceramics of east Texas, to
be sure. In the northern part, the early ceramics are grog tempered
vessels and Williams Plain seems to be the predominant type. In central and southern east Texas, sandy paste ceramics are the earliest.
This sandy paste ware is evidently contemporaneous with the
Tchefuncte Period on the coast and near Marshall in central east
Texas. In both localities, Tchefuncte and Tchefuncte-like ceramics
occur with indigenous sandy paste pottery.
The sandy paste ceramics are predominantely plain with both
rounded and fiat bases. Hemispherical bowls and cylindrical jars
predominate. Shapes indicate vessels were utilitarian in nature (i.e.,
cooking and serving vessels) and traces of charred organic matter on
sherds are frequent and support this supposition.
Incised, incised-punctated, and punctated decorations occur
rarely; lip notching occurs occasionally, but seems to be more common along the coast. Previously defined types Bear Creek Plain
described by Jelks (1965) at McGee Bend Reservoir, Goose Creek Plain
(Suhm and ]elks 1962: 55, 57) and its many variations, and McClurkan’s "Fat Orange" from Livingston Reservoir are all part of the
sandy paste tradition.
In some areas of east Texas, particularly in the central portion, the
sandy paste tradition is succeeded by grog-tempered and bone tempered Coles Creek and Caddoan ceramic assemblages. This change
took place about A. D. 700-800. In the coastal region, grog tempered pottery becomes dominant about A. D. 950 (Aten 1971) although
sandy paste pottery continues; it(sandy paste) remains the dominant
ware in the lower Trinity and San Jacinto river basins.
The full distribution of sandy paste pottery in east Texas is not
known at the early time level nor is this introductory period dated. It
is apparently spread over much of the central and southern portions

252

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

by the time of the Marksville period in the Lower Mississippi Valley
which begins about the time of Christ. Marksville Stamped pottery
is found at Jonas Short (]elks 1965), and Coral Snake (McClurkan et al
1966; ]ensen 1968) mounds (Coral Snake was in Toledo Bend Reservoir on the Louisiana side and Jonas Short was in McGee Bend -Lake Sam Rayburn). This type (Marksville Stamped) has also been
reported at the Resch site near Marshall (Webb, et al 1969), in the
lower Sabine (Aten and Bollich 1969) and as far west as the Trinity at
Livingston Reservoir (McClurkan 1968). It is also found in collections from Orange and Jefferson counties housed at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory. In all sites mentioned above, sandy
paste pottery is dominant.
Jonas Short and Coral Snake mounds are part of a vaguely defined
Hopewellian expression in western Louisiana and eastern Texas. We
do not know the full extent of it as yet; perhaps it encompasses the
area included in the distribution of the sites mentioned where
Marksville Stamped has been found. The Bellevue Focus defined by
Fulton and Webb (1953) may be a part of a local variation of the same
expression. The ceramics in the Bellevue Focus sites are predominantly grog-tempered and the mounds lack the exotic goods recovered from Jonas Short and Coral Snake.
The latter two sites (Jonas Short and Coral Snake) had cremations
in central depressions as well as cremations and probably flexed
burials at the base of the mounds [or perhaps on surfaces within the
mounds). The accompanying artifacts together constitute an impressive array of exotic objects mixed with an indigenous lithic
assemblage consisting of Gary and Kent projectile points and percussion chipped bifaces, mostly of local cherts and silicified wood.
There are also sites in both reservoir areas which yielded sandy
paste pottery and the Gary lithic assemblage.
Mounds similar in form are known as far west as the Neches, and
the sandy paste pottery and local lithic assemblages virtually in-

however, that ,are do not know if this entire area was involved in the
Hopewell interaction.
The Adena and Hopewell similarities exhibited at Jonas Short were
noted by ]elks (1965); McClurkan (1966) and ]ensen (1968) were also
cognizant of the Hopewell-like nature of the Coral Snake assemblage.
~nis Hopewell expression shares basic underlying similarities with
other Hopewell manifestations. The Hopewell as recognized by
Struever (1964) and Caldwell (1964) represents a conglomeration of
regional cultural traditions each adapted to their respective en-

WOODLAND CULTURES

.......

253

vironments but which were interacting on a social level reflected in
certain burial practices and material goods. The exotic materials in
association with the burials reflects participation in an exchange network which transported objects over considerable distances; some
degree of social stratification is also indicated. The main point to emphasize here is that like other regional cultures reflecting participation in the Hopewell interaction, the Hopewell of east Texas and
western Louisiana represents a regionally adapted forest economy
which adopted a position in the interaction.
In short, I am stating that the sandy paste ceramics and the Gary
lithic tradition represents a local Woodland manifestation which was
involved for a time in the Hopewell interaction. This sandy paste-Gary
lithic assemblage continued after the demise of the Hopewell
although the geographic extent diminished somewhat.
It is appropriate to point out that judging from radiocarbon dates
from Coral Snake mound reported by Jensen (1968) and the Resch site
by Webb et al (1969), this Hopewell complex had absolutely nothing to
do with the Caddoan culture which appeared in these areas at least
400 and possibly as much as 1400 years later. One archeologist has
stated that the Caddoan settlements are unmistakably the elements
that supported the mounds (Gibson 1970). I am saying that, in view of
the chronological data, it is impossible for the Caddoan Indians to
build mounds and bury their dead in them hundreds of years before
the people appear on the scene.
Findings in Livingston (McClurkan 1968) and Conroe (Sharer 1968)
reservoirs indicate that in these areas, the sandy paste ceramics continue to be the dominant ware despite the introduction of grogtempered and bone tempered pottery; this is probably equivalent to
the time of the Caddoan development in the adjacent region to the
north. In the southeast portion of the state, the Woodland expression
survives probably until Historic times. This is inferred on the basis of
a continuum of the sandy paste pottery. The indigenous Indian groups
in this area were the Bidai, Deadose, Patiri, and Akokisa, all
Atakapan speakers (Newcomb 1961: 315-329). It is suggested that
these groups represent the historic survival of Woodland culture in
east Texas.

REFERENCES CITED
Aten, Lawrence, E.
1971 Coastal Southeast Texas Archeology. Paper presented at the Caddoan Conference, Magnolia; Arkansas.

254

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Aten, Lawrence E. and Charles Bollich
1969 A Preliminary Report on the Development of a Ceramic Chronology
for the Sabine Lake Area of Texas and Louisiana. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 40, pp. 241-258.
Caldwell, Joseph R.
1964 Interaction Spheres in Prehistory. Hopewellian Studies, Illinois State
Museum Scientific Papers. Vol. XII, No. 6, pp. 133-143.
Fulton, Robert L. and Clarence H. Webb
1953 The Bellevue Mound: A ere-Caddoan Site in Bossier Parish,
Louisiana. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 24, pp. 1842.
Gibson, Jon
1970 The Hopewellian Phenomenon in the Lower Mississippi Valley.
Louisiana Studies, Vol. IX, No. 3.
Jelks, Edward B.
1965 Archeology of McGee Bend Reservoir. Doctoral Dissertation, University of Texas, Austin.
Jensen, Harold P.
1968 Coral Snake Mound, X16 SA 48. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 39, pp. 9-44.
McClurkan, Burney B.
1968 Livingston Reservoir, 1965-66. Papers of the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, No. 12, The University of Texas at Austin.
McClurkan, Burney B~, William T. Field, and J. Ned Woodall
1966 Excavations in Toledo Bend Reservoir, 1964-65. Papers of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, No. 8, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Newcomb, W. W. Jr.
1961 The Indians of Texas from Prehistoric to Modern Times. The University of Texas Press.
Shafer, Harry J.
1968 Archeological Investigations in the San Jacinto River Basin. Montgomery County, Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project, No. 13, The University of Texas at Austin.
Story, Dee Ann
1965 The Archeology of Cedar Creek Reservoir, Henderson and Kanfman
Counties. Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 36,
pp. 163-258.
Struever, Stuart
1964 The Hopewell Interaction Sphere in Riverine -- Western Great Lakes
Culture History. In: Hopewellian Studies, Illinois State Museum ~cientific Papers, Vol. XII, No. 6.
Webb, Clarence H., Forrest E. Murphey, Wasley G. Ellis, and H. Roland
Green
1969 The Resch Site, 41 HS 16, Harrison County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 40, pp. 3-106.
Willey, Gordon
1966 An Introduction to American Archaeology, Vol. 1: North and Middle
America. Prentice-Hall.
Texas A&M University
College Station, Texas

IN MEMORIUM
Miles P. Locke
Miles P. Locke, a long time resident of Waco, died January 4, 1975 after
suffering a stroke. His death represents a real loss to archeology in Texas
and particularly in central Texas. He is, and will continue to be, missed.
Miles was born in Hillsboro and received his High School Diploma from
Stamford High in 1939. He graduated wtih a Degree in Civil Engineering
from Texas A&M and later was awarded a M.S. Degree in Economics from
Baylor University in 1957. He served in the infantry during WW II and was
recalled for one year during the Korean Affair. He was a First Lieutenant.
He was a registered professional engineer of Texas and served as Vice
President, President and Director of the Central Texas Chapter of the Society of Professional Engineers. He served as a committeeman for the Texas
Society of Professional Engineers and was a member of both the State and
National Society of Professional Engineers.
In spite of his busy professional career Miles was able to find time for his
favorite activity, archeology. He was president of Central Texas Archeological Society for the 1967-1968 year and again for the 1972-1973 year. He was
a director during the 1974-1975 year. From 1967 until the time of his death
he was publisher of the monthly newsletter of the Central Texas Archeologieel Society. He was program chairman from 1967 until his death. In addition
to his active participation in the affairs of the local society, he served as Regional Vice President of the Texas Archeological Society for the years 19691970 and 1970-1971.
One of his favorite summer activities was the annual TAS Field School
and he attended them regularly. In 1971 he was "Camp Boss" when the
Field School was near Kerrville. He was Chairman of the TAS Field School
Committee in 1972 and again in 1973.
Although Miles was an amateur archeologist, he took a professional attitude towards its study. His death is a loss to professional and amateur alike
because he knew and worked with both.
T. G. Lawrence, Jr.
Waco, Texas

BOOK REVIEWS
The Museum /ournal XV, 1974: History and Prehistory of the Lubbock Lake
Site. edited by Craig C. Black. West Texas Museum Association Lubbock,
1974. 160 pages, ill.
Today the topic of Early Man and his culture in the Americas is still a much
studied and debated subject among both the layman and professional anthropologists. Recent work in the Andes of Peru by R. S. MacNeish has
yielded radiocarbon dates in association with man-made artifacts from
periods of the past over 19,000 years old and recent racemization dates from
human skeletal material in California have been announced by G. F. Carter
which are more than twice as old as the Andean material. Not all archeologists are ready to accept either or both of these studies as the earliest
evidence of man in the New World yet one thing is becoming certain: the long
established and traditionally accepted maximum dates of i0,000-15,000 years
for man’s presence in the New World is in serious jeopardy. Along with the
controversy as to when man first entered the North American continent is the
controversy as to what kind of a culture these early people possessed. The
Lubbock Lake report offers some new ideas and raises new questions about
the culture of early man in North America.
The Lubbock Lake report presents a collaborative effort by eight separate
authors, The first three articles provide a general summary of previous work
conducted at the site prior to the 1970’s and is essential background information since it helps to explain the importance of the site and the reasons
for the renewed studies currently in progress. Represented in these articles
is one on the historical background of the Lubbock Lake site by W. C. Holden,
one on the early WPA excavations conducted in the late 1930’s and early 40’s
by J. B. Wheat and finally a brief summary by J. H. Holden on the artifacts
recovered from the Lubbock Lake site prior to the 1970’s. The remaining articles of this volume cover a variety of aspects mostly related to the results of
the current renewed excavation efforts during the 1970’s. There are two articles, one by C. Johnson and the other by C. V. Haynes, Jr., on the geologic interpretation of the paleoenvironment and depositional sequence of the area
during the past 15,000 years; another of the articles, by E. Johnson, is an interpretation of the zooarcheology and listings of the specific types of faunal
remains thus far recovered at the Lubbock Lake site; and finally there are
two general articles on the Paleo-Indian period, one by W. J. Judge on projectile point form and function and the other on faunal changes during the last
15,000 years in North America by E. L. Lundelius, Jr.
The Lubbock Lake report is well suited for use as a reference source since
its chapters are easy to read and are arranged in a chronological sequence.
The subject matter is well illustrated (except on page 70 where the
photograph is too dark, and pages 84 and 109 where the site map is over-

258

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

reduced and thus is illegible in areas) and contains sufficient bibliographies.
However, there are a few discrepancies in the text which tend to confuse the
reader. For example, on page 94 Johnson states that no diagnostic artifacts
have yet been recovered from Stratum 3 of the Lubbock Lake site yet on page
137 Haynes states that Portales type artifacts were found in Stratum 3. Again
on page 90 Johnson says that a radiocarbon date of 12,650 + 250 years was
obtained from clam shells in Stratum 1, whereas on page 137 Haynes states
that a radiocarbon date of 12,650 + 250 years was obtained from mollusc
shells in the middle of Stratum 2. In another instance, on page 136, Haynes
describes the Lubbock Lake Stratum 1 as consisting of three units (sand,
gravel, and an overlying layer of gray sand), while on page 90 lohnson
discusses the presence of only the gravel and sand deposits of subunits la
and lb of Stratum 1 even though his schematic diagram on page 88 shows
three subunits (la, lb, le) of Stratum 1. I realize that these examples of inconsistencies probably represent misprints or minor oversights yet for the
layman or researcher who is trying to use the data in this book it becomes a
confusing problem of deciding which statements are correct and which are
not. My only other criticism is that two of the articles {by Judge and Lundelius) do not specifically deal with the Lubbock Lake site yet are included in
this book entitled, "History and Prehistory of the Lubbock Lake Site."
Although both articles are of interest and add new information to the subject
of the Paleo-Indian Period. they seem out of place in this volume.
No book, especially one containing the ideas of a number of different
authors, is ever perfect and minor errors will almost always exist. Furthermore, as any reviewer knows, it is far easier to criticize the work of
someone else than it is to actually write an article for a book. Thus, on all accounts the merits of this book far outweigh its minor faults and I would recommend it to anyone wanting a useful reference dealing with Lubbock Lake and
the more general topic of the Paleo-Indian Period.
Vaughn M. Bryant Jr.
Anthropology Research Laboratory
Texas A&M University

Archeological Investigations Along Armand Bayou, Harris County, Texas.
Edited by Frank Hole. Technical Report Number Two, Department of Anthropology Rice uniVersity, Houston, Texas. Report Number Two, Housion
Archeological Society September, 1974. ix + 97 pp. No price given
Archeological Investigations Along Armand Bayou is an eighteen site
report publication based on joint field work by Frank Hole, Michael J.
O’Brien, and Bonnie Laird Hole of Rice University and members of the

BOOK REVIEWS

259

Houston Archeological Society. Although the title implies a broad study along
the bayou, the major portion of the monograph is a basic archeological treatment of excavated artifactual and shell debris from a second season of work
at 41 HR 82, the Fullen site.
The report is edited by Frank Hole and is divided into three sections. The
introductory section by Hole is a rather simplistic review of the appropriate
problems of Upper Gulf Coast archeology. Emphasis is placed on the need and
rewards of (1} employing an ecological approach to archeological problems,
(2} utilizing historical documentation on the area. and. (3} developing a data
recovery technique that would distinguish "thin layers across a horizontal
surface" (p. 7) which might reveal "separate events in the accumulation of
the site" (p. 7}.
The reader may be disappointed to find tenuous connection with Hole’s introductory statements and the results of research as reported by Michael
O’Brien and Bonnie Hole.
The section on sites surveyed and excavated, by O’Brien, is a traditional
approach beginning with generalized statements on the geological and environmental characteristics of the area. Survey data on the 18 sites are
reported only briefly and are not analyzed in great depth; the bulk of the section is devoted to excavations at the Fullen site. The treatment of data from
this site is primarily descriptive in nature and contains brief statements
about the ecological setting, history of previous work at the site (O’Brien
1971}, reasons for choosing the locale for additional research, and an
assessment of the function of the site and its place in the cultural history of
the region.
O’Brien’s section is by far the most lengthy and most informative in the
monograph. One of the more creative and potentially useful aspects of
O’Brien’s work is a much needed attribute analysis of systematically
recovered ceramic materials from coastal sites. This is particularly relevant
since ceramics are currently the most diagnostic artifacts from sites in the
region. Additionally, O’Brien analyzes the various artifact and shell "layers"
or "zones" arriving at three distinct occupational phases and reflects "that
the basic ways that the Indians used the site did not change throughout its
history" (13. 70). This analysis and interpretation of occupational layers or
zones is interesting, though not entirely convincing.
The reviewer is disappointed in that O’Brien made no attempt whatever to
postulate a more precise chronological period of occupation for the site. With
the relatively well-established ceramic chronology for the area, coupled with
his sherd attribute analysis and previous reserach, it seems fairly certain
that a more precise temporal placement of the site in regional chronology
could have been advanced. An additional major weakness is that O’Brien
does not adequately combine his previous research at the Fullen site with
what he has reported in this monograph. One would think that the relationship between two different seasons of work at the same site would have been
explored more fully. Despite some problems, this section does provide substantial documentation for future investigations along Armand Bayou.

260

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Probably the most interesting aspect of the study, although seemingly
tangential to the principal focus of the monograph since it assumes roughly
20% of the total text, is the final section by Bonnie Hole, entitled "Analysis of
the Molluscs." Much of the section is devoted to examination of the recovered
Rangia cuneata refuse (i.e., shellfish valves) from 41 HR 82 for purposes of
delineating separate depositional and/or occupational layers and what this
might mean with respect to "prehistoric utilization of the area" and "past environments" (p. 81). The primary focus is on (1) individual valve condition
(whole or crushed), age, and size for a specified sample of shellfish debris
from each excavated layers at 41 HR 82, and, (2) suggestive field techniques
for improving shell midden analysis, all of which have significant implications
for future research. That temporal and spatial changes do occur in the numbers, condition, age, and size of molluscs within "shell middens," as
remarked upon by B. Hole, there can be little argument.
Also, she raises some very interesting questions regarding the interplay of
the "over-collecting" of molluscs by prehistoric groups, environmental conditions, and presumably demographic factors within individual clam
populations that were being exploited (p. 93}. It is, however, important to
remember that not all changes in an estuary subsistence system, such as that
of the Armand Bayou area, need to have environmental causes (which B. Hole
is aware of [p. 91-96}. The study of the interaction of human groups and a
basic marine environment in a cultural system is significant, but it is just as
significant to understand that there may be other aspects of that system that
have an indirect and as yet archeologically unrecognized impact on these
particular interactions and thus the observed data. Variability may also be
accounted for by product redistribution networks among discrete groups occupying different biotic zones along or near the bayou, or even differential
exploitation of these zones by one group and so on. Granted that there was no
direct evidence reported to indicate such phenomena, the problem warrants
consideration just as much as the questions raised by B. Hole in this section.
The treatment of the shell material is definitely one of the main assets of
this monograph, but this reviewer wonders if it might not have been just as
useful to deal with the relevance of these marine items as a dietary source
and as an indicator of seasonality of subsistence exploitation along the bayou
by prehistoric groups. Methodological procedures for such approached are
available in a number of recent publications pertaining to various coastal
regions in North America and Europe.
In format, the monograph as a whole is well designed for its purpose and
the paper quality and illustrations are good. I found a few typographical
errors.
In summary, the strength of this volume is in its descriptive analysis and
concern for distinguishing discrete depositiona! shell and artifact layers in a
’shell midden, especially in the sections by O Brien and B. Hole. In spite of
the richness of new material it brings together on one area of the coast, one
finishes this work with the feeling that it might have done more. The fault lies
less with the individual sections, which on the whole are quite interesting,

BOOK REVIEWS

......

261

than with the lack of substance to convey a sense of the volume’s conclusions
or overall results.
Thus, the impact of this work will vary according to the background of the
reader. For those unfamiliar with Upper Gulf Coast archeology, the work
provides some insight into current research problems and the nature of
prehistoric sites and artifacts in the study area. For the areal specialist, it
has greater potential as a sampler of future research possibilities in the
region. Finally, even with its faults, it has aided in setting new methodological
standards for excavating coastal sites and reveals how much our expectations of archeological reports by professionals have changed over the
past few years.
REFERENCES CITED
O’Brien, Michael I.
1971 The Fullen Site, 41 HR 82. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
Vol. 42, pp. 335-366.

Tom Dillehay
University of Texas at Austin

Field Methods in Archaeology. Thomas R. Hester, Robert F. Heizer and
John A. Graham. Mayfield Publishing Co., Polo Alto. 1975, 6th edition, 408
pp.
A new edition of Field Methods in Archaeology is to many archeologists of
my generation equivalent to a remake of a James Dean flick: what needed to
be said was said; so why try to revive the old thoroughbred for another trot
around the track? After all, most archeologists trained in the last decade or
so used the fourth and then the fifth editions with great effect. The basics
were all there, the special skills bad to be acquired elsewhere anyway, and
the unique field situation -- being unique -- could be met only in the field, not
in a textbook. Then of course there was that rather intemperate review of the
fifth edition by Binford (1968: 806-808), which seemed to suggest that
"cookbook approaches" to field techniques were all wrong, that we couldn’t
get "all the data" as such standard methods implied, and more than that we
had to let our problems condition -- nay, determine
our methods. So out
cookbook, out bathwater, out, it would seem, baby too. But with all this, why
still another edition of Field Methods?
One can very easily supply himself with the answer by examining this
latest version. "Version" is perhaps the word to use, rather than merely
"edition," for the authors have extensively edited, rewritten and expanded
the original chapters or replaced them altogether with essentially new essays

TEXAS

262

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

by other scholars. To cite a few examples, gone is the rather makeshift
approach to mapping and site layout of the earlier editions and in its place is
a very professional treatment of the topic by Lewis Napton. My only real
quibble with Napton is that in his discussion of preparing maps for
publication, he uses a handlettered example (Figure 4-14, page 62), which is
only a moderate improvement over the sketch of the same map (Figure 4-5,
page 48) shown earlier. Surely, use of a Leroy lettering device or press-on
letters is called for in a figure meant to represent a type specimen of a
publishable map.
A more adequate treatment of faunal analysis is also provided in the new
edition. Alan Ziegler enlarges the discussion to include, not merely the care
and feeding of faunal remains in the field, but an outline of their treatment
and analysis in the laboratory as well. His summary of some techniques for
rendering raw data into comparable form (pp. 186-191) is especially useful
and may also be germane in other classes of artifactual material. Collins
follows a somewhat similar track in his reworking of the chapter on human
skeletal material, stressing thai in addition to their uses in archeology such
remains are important for studies of human micro-evolution in general.
Perhaps unique in essays on burials, Collins includes a caveat alerting
excavators to observe "local statutes regarding human remains" (p. 163): a
sign of the times certainly, and of the burgeoning legalism which threatens
to engulf us all.
Adams’ essay on stratigraphy combines an excellent review of the basics
of observation and recording with some sallies into problem areas such as the
use and applicability of sampling strategies. Adams also suggests an
intriguing linguistic analogy in which he makes a kind of emic-etic distinction
between stratigraphic units and interpretative units in archeology (p. 155).
Finally, a list of solid references on stratigraphic problems is presented,
although personally I would like to have seen works germane to the problems
of areal and regional cross-correlations of stratigraphy included as one of the
categories. A minor point: we must credit Nicolaus Steno in 1669 with the
ea rliest modern formulation of the concept of stratigraphy (Haber 1959: 21;
Steno 1916) rather than William Smith in the 1790’s as Adams (p. 148)
suggests.
Most of the other chapters in the book have been similarly improved or
updated with the curious exception of Sonia Ragnir’s now classic "Review of
Techniques for Archaeological Sampling" (Chapter 15). Although this
remains a useful treatment of the subject, it would seem to me that the
widespread, almost knee-jerk, application of sampling in contract archeology
and in the preparation of environmental impact statements would justify an
expanded evaluation of the strengths and weaknesses of the approach.
Finally, three new appendices have been added including one with tables of
equivalents and conversion factors (which is an invaluable aid to those like
myself who have difficulty recalling that a meter equals 3.28 feel and such

like).
Why a new edition of Fie!d Methods? Why, indeed. This last decade of

BOOK REVIEWS

263

massive numbers of archeological field projects, both problem-oriented and
"public," combined with an almost surrealistic theoretical foment have
demonstrated to this archeologist at least that some kind of agreement over
fundamentals is essential to the discipline. Moreover, it seems apparent that
the most fundamental kinds of questions that can be asked about any
individual’s research is not whether his "paradigm" has been derived from
the old archaeology or the new one, from Marxism, from settlement
archeology or even, God forbid, from structuralism a la Levi-Strauss. Rather,
they are: does he maintain adequate provenience, does he record standard
kinds of data in a form intelligible to others, does he make decent maps and
.know how to draw stratigraphic profiles, and so on and on. A gulf separates
those archeologists who have mastered such fundamentals from those who
have not, and this gulf is far greater, far more unbridgeable than those real
and imagined theoretical differences which also divide us.
A science is, after all, a kind of language and in it, as in any form of
communication, mutual intelligibility is of the essence. The words used must
have connotations which are shared, the categories of meaning must be
mutually comparable. The "words" of the archeological language are the
field and laboratory data we collect; the spatial, temporal and distributional
relationship into which we organize these words are our sentences. The
"grammar" by which we generate and order these sentences is made up of
our theory and our methodology. By updating and refining a methodological
classic, Hester, Heizer and Graham will have enhanced the clarity and
coherence of archeological "speech" for years to come.
REFERENCES CITED
Binford, Lewis R.
1968 Review of "A Guide to Field Methods in Archaeology: Approaches to
the Anthropology of the Dead" by Robert F. Heizer and John A.
Graham. American Anthropologist, Vol. 70, pp. 806-808.
Haber, Francis C.
1969 Fossils and Early Cosmology.

In Bentley Glass,

Owsei Temkin,

William L. Straus, editors Forerunners of Darwin: 1745-1859. The
John Hopkins Press, Baltimore, pp. 3-29.
Steno, Nicolaus
1916 The Prodromus of Nicolaus Steno’s Dissertation Concerning a Solid
Body Enclbsed by Process of Nature within a Solid. Translated by J.
Winter. University of Michigan Studies, Humanistic Series.

D. Bruce Dickson
Texas A&M University

THE AUTHORS
I. Barto Arnold received his B.A. and M.A. degrees from The University of
Texas at Austin. He is currently the State Marine Archeologist for the
Texas Historical Commission and Texas Antiquities Committee. Arnold’s research interests include underwater archeology, use of magnetometers and other remote sensing instruments in archeology, use of
computers in archeology, and ceramic analysis. Publications include
"A Magnetometer Survey of the Nineteenth Century Steamboat Black
Cloud (Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, 1974}. Address: Texas
Antiquities Committee, Box 12276, Capitol Station, Austin, Texas
78711.
Robert A. Benfer is Associate Professor and Chairman of the Department of
Anthropology at the University of Missouri, Columbia. He received his
Ph.D. degree from The University of Texas at Austin and has pursued
research interest in the areas of physical anthropology and archeology. Dr. Benfer has conducted research in Texas, Mexico and Peru.
Publications include "A Design for the Study of Archaeological Characteristics" (American Anthropologist, 1967}, "Factor Analysis as
Numerical Induction: How to Judge a Book by its Cover" (American
Anthropologist, 1972}, and "Classification and Sampling" (in Sampling
in Archaeology, University of Arizona Press}. Address: Department of
Anthropology, University of Missouri, Columbia Missouri 65201.
Vaughn M. Bryant, lr. received his Ph.D. degree from The University of
Texas at Austin in 1969 and is currently Associate Professor of Anthropology and Botany at Texas A&M University. Dr. Bryant has conducted research in the areas of palynology and paleoenvironmental
reconstruction. Publications include "Prehistoric Diet in Southwest
Texas: The Coprolite Evidence" (American Antiquity, 1974}, "The Role
of Coprolite Analysis in Archeology" (Bulletin, Texas Archeological
Society, 1974), and "The Coprolites of Man" (Scientific American,
1974). Address: Anthropology Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843.
Carl I. Clausen earned his B.A. in social sciences and in 1964 an M.A. in anthropology from the University of Florida in Gainesville. Since that
time he has worked actively in the specialized field of underwater archeology. In 1972 Clausen joined the Texas Antiquities Committee to
design, develop and direct that committee’s Padre Island Underwater
Archeological Research Project. Currently a private archeological consultant, he holds a contract with the State of Texas to complete a research report on the committee’s archeological work of the 1554 Span-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

266

ish shipwreck sites of Padre Island. Clausen has numerous publications to his credit. He has recently been appointed an adjunct professor of The American Institute of Nautical Archeology. Address: CCC
Enterprises, Route 5, Box 27, Georgetown, Texas 78626.
D. Bruce Dickson received his doctorate from the University of Arizona in
1973 and is currently an Assistant Professor of Anthropology at Texas
A&M University. Dr. Dickson has conducted archeological fieldwork in
Central America as well as the American Southwest and Southeast.
His major research interests include archeological method and theory, paleogeography and the prehistory of southern North America and
Mesoamerica. Recent publications include "Archaeological Test Excavations at the Sam Houston Schoolhouse. Maryville. Tennessee, 1973"
(Tennessee Archaeologist, 1975), "Settlement pattern stability and
change in the middle Northern Rio Grande region, New Mexico: A Test
of some Hypotheses" (American Antiquity, 1975}, and "Pueblo Arroyo
Hondo and the Pattern of Stability and Change in the Pueblo Cultures
of the Middle Northern Rio Grande Region, New Mexico" (School of
American Research, Research Monograph Series, in press, ms. 1973}.
Address: Department of Sociology and Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843.
Tom

D Dillehay is a Ph.D candidate in the Department of Anthropology,
The University of Texas at Austin. He is presently a Visiting Professor
of Anthropology at the Universidad Catolica de Chile (Temu_co}. He has
had extensive archeological field experience in Texas and spent one
year working in Peru. Among his publications are: "Late Quaternary
Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains" (Plains Anthropologist, 1974} "Prehistoric Subsistence Exploitation in the Lower Trinity
River Delta, Texas’ (Research Report No. 51, Texas Archeological
Survey, 1975} and "El Valle de Chillon en el Tawantinsuyu" (Arqueologia-Socia1: in press}. Address: 5507 Fox Hill Lane, Dallas, Texas
75232.

Glen H, Doran is an archeologist with the Texas Department of Highways
and Public Transportation. He earned his B.A. and M.A. degrees in
anthropology from The University of Texas at Austin. His principal research interests are archeology and esteology of prehistoric populations. Address: Texas Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Archeology Section, Austin, Texas 78701.
Anne A. Fox is a Research Associate at thB Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio. She has also served
as a Research Associate at Witte Museum in San Antonio. She has
been an active member of the Texas Archeological Society and is currently editor of Texas Archeology. Her publications include "Archeo-

THE AUTHORS

267

logical Investigations at Fort Griffin State Historic Park, Texas, February, 1972, (Texas Archeological Survey). Address: 106 Fawn Drive,
San Antonio, Texas 78231.

John W. Greer received his BIA. and M.A. from The University of Texas at
Austin and presently is Research Assistant at the University of
Missouri-Columbia where he is working on his Ph.D. Greet has done
archeological work in the Plains, Southwest, Germany, Spain, and
Mexico. Publications include "A Typology of Midden Circles and MescalPits" (Southwestern Lore, 1965), and "Excavations at a Midden
Circle Site in E1 Paso County, Texas" (Bulletin, Texas Archeological
Society, 1968). Address: Department of Anthropology, University of
Missouri, Columbia, Missouri 65201.
Lorraine Heartfield earned her M.A. degree in anthropology from The University of Texas at Austin and is completing her doctoral diSsertation
from Washington State University. She has done archeological research in northern Mexico, Louisiana, Texas; Washington and Spain.
She is currently a Research AsSociate (archeologist)for the Research
institute; NortheaSt Louisiana University, Address: GeoScienCes Department, Northeast Louisiana University, Monroe; LouiSiana 71201.
Thomas R: Hester received his doctoral degree from the University of California at Berkeley, and is presently Associate Professor of Anthropology and Director, Center for Archaeological ResearCh at The University
of Texas at San Antonio: Professor Hester has done archeological
work in Texas, particularly the central and southern partsl the Western United States, Mexico, and Egypt. Some of his publications include
Field Methods in Archaeology (with R.F. Heizer and J.A. Graham,
1975). Chronological Ordering of Great Basin Pre-History (i973), and
"New Data on the Archaeology of the Haush: Tierra del Fuego" (with
A. Chapman; Journal de la Societe des Americanistes, Paris). Address:
Division of Social Sciences, University of Texas at San Antonio, San
Antonio, Texas 78285,
John E. Keller received his Ph.D: degree from the University of Texas at
Austin and is currently employed as an archeologist for the Texas Department of Highways and Public Transportation. Dr. Keller has been
involved with the highway salvage project throughout Texas and has
also worked in England, Georgia, and Kentucky. His research interests
include paleoecological studies, definition of subsistence potentials
and strategies, faunal analysis, and settlement patterns. His most recent published work is The Black Dog Village Site (Texas Highway Department PubliCations in Archaeology, No. 5, 1975) and he is the author of a number of other publications. Address: 2700 Cavileer Avenue, Austin, Texas 78757.

268

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

T.G. Lawrence, Jr. is an active amateur archeologist in the central Texas
area. He received his Ll.B. degree from Baylor University and is employed by the Federal Government. He has served as Director of the
Central Texas Archeological Society for the years 1968-1970, 19731974 and also served as the President for the 1974-1975 year. Address:
2236 Wendy Lane, Waco, Texas 76710.
Robert M. Malina received his Ph.D. in anthropology from the University of
Pennsylvania. He is currently Associate Professor in the Department
of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin. His research interests are in physical anthropology with a focus on human physical
growth and development, human adaptability, and skeletal biology of
earlier human populations. His recent research has been focused on
the malnourished populations in Mexico and Guatemala. Address:
Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas, Austin. Texas
78712.
Yimmy L. Mitchell is a Major in the U.S. Air Force and is presently working
on a doctoral program in industrial psychology at Purdue University. A
native Texan (Wichita Falls), he received an M.S. degree from the
Ohio State University in 1966 and has completed some graduate-level
course work in archeology with The University of Texas at San Antonio during 1973 and 1974. Among his interests are such areas as site
documentation, artifact taxonomies, and the development of cultural
sequences. Publications include "Ground Stone Ornaments in Southern Texas" (La Tierra). Address: 2719 Henderson, West Lafayette.
Indiana 47906.
Harry ]. Shafer is Assistant Professor of Anthropology and Coordinator,
Archeological Research Laboratory, at Texas A&M University. He received his doctorate in anthropology at The University of Texas at
Austin. Dr. Sharer has conducted archeological investigations in many
areas of Texas, and has also worked in Israel. He has published a
number of monographs in the Texas Archeological Salvage Project
Series, and is the author of "Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site:
A Stratified Terrace Site in Bell County, Texas" (Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, 1963), "Notes on Uniface Retouch Technology"
(American Antiquity, 1970), "Clay Figurines from the Lower Pecos Region Texas" (American Antiquity, 1975). Address: Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University College Station. Texas
77843.

loel L. Shiner is Professor of Anthropology at Southern Methodist University.
He is a graduate of U.C.L.A. and received his Ph.D. degree at the University of Arizona. He has carried out archeolegical work in many
parts of the United States and in Egypt. His primary interests are pre-

THE AUTHORS

269

historic stone technology and historic archeology. Publications include
"The McNary Reservoir: A Study in Plateau Archeology" (River Basin
Surveys Papers, No. 23), "Component Analysis for Archaic Sites" (Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, 1969) and "Activity Analysis of a
Prehistoric Site (Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, 1970). Address:
Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University, Dallas,
Texas 75275.
]ames H. Word is a former president of the Texas Archeological Society and
is currently a member of the Board of Directors. He is an active amateur archeologist with major interests in the Llano Estacado and lower Pecos regions of Texas. He is the author of "The Country Club Site"
(Bulletin of the South Plains Archeological Society,

1963),

"Mont-

gomery Ranch Site" (Bulletin of the South Plains Archeological Society,
1965), "Excavations at Baker Cave" (Bulletin of the Texas Memorial
Museum, 1970) and "The Dunlap Complex" (Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 1971). Address: 108 W. Missouri St., Floydada,
Texas 79235.

Luformatfon for Contributors
The Bulletin of the Texas Archeologicol Society publishes original papers in the field

of American archeology. Emphasis is placed on Texas and adjoining areas M the
United States and Mexico, but papers on other areas will also be considered, Articles
concerning archeo!ogical technique, method, or theory are encouraged.
Manuscripts must be typed, double-spaced, on 8~

x 11 white paper. Footnotes

should be avoided or kept to a minimum. Reference to published literature, by author,
date, and page or figure number should be placed within parentheses in the body of
the text, with ful! bibliographic citations at the end. See this issue of the Bulletin for
examples.

Authors

should

also

consult

"Information

for

Authors",

in

2¥;x~s

Archeology, Vol. 18, No. I (January, 1974) oi" write to the Editors for a copy.
The proportions of fulbpage illustrations [picture or drawing p!us captions) should
be suitable for reduction to the effective page size of the Bulletin of 4¼ x 7 inches.
Plates may be printed either horizontally or vertically, but allowance for the caption to
be printed the same ~rection must be made. Captions for illustrations should be listed
in numerical order and placed behind the list of references cited.
A complete manuscript is one with: a title page, an abstract, main body, references
cited, appendices (if necessary), figure captions, and completed photographic and
drafted plates. Only complete m(muscripts will be considered.
Papers published in the Bulletin are abstracted and indexed in ABSTRACTS IN
ANTHROPOLOGY,
Manuscripts should be addressed to:

[1976] Dr. Thomas R. Hester, Center for

Archaeological Research, Division of Social Sciences, "f~e University of Texas at San
iKntonio, San Antonio, TX 78285; or [1977] Dr. Harry J. Shafer, Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843.

15

