BULLETIN
OF THE

Texas Archaeological and
Paleontological Society

Volume Two

SEPTEMBER
1930

Published
by the
Society at
Abilene,
Texas

BULLETIN
OF THE

Texas Archaeological and
Paleontological Society

Volume Two

SEPTEMBER
1930

COPYRIGHT 1930 BY TEXAS ARCHAEOLOGICAL
AND

PALEONTOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Published
by the
Society at
Abilene,
Texas

The Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
OFFICERS
CYRUS N. RAY, President
JULIUS OLSEN, First Vice President
E. B. SAYLES, Corresponding Secretary-Treasurer
OTTO O. WATTs, Recording Secretary
DIRECTORS
CYRUS N. RAY, D. O.
W. C. HOLDEN, Ph. D.
JULIUS OLSEN, Ph. D., Sc. D.
OTTO O. WATTS
E. B. SAYLES
RUPERT N. RICHARDSON, Ph. D.
GEORGE C. ENGERRAND, M. A.

REGIONAL VICE PRESIDENTS
COLONEL M. L. CRIMMINS,
DR. J. A. UDDEN, Austin
Fort Sam Houston
DR. JOHN C. BRANBERY, Lubbock
H. T. FLETCHER, Alpine
TRUSTEES
DR. JOHN C. GRANBERY, DR. STEWART COOPER, W. A. RINEY
Three Years
C. A. HOWARD, DALLAS; PROF. OTTO O. WATTS, JUDGE W. R. ELY
Two Years
GEO. C. MARTIN, ROCKPORT; ERNEST W. WILSON,
JUDGE FRED COCKRELL
One Year

PUBLICATIONS COMMITTEE
DR. JULIUS OLSEN, FRANK GRIMES, DR. W. C. HOLDEN

The painstaking care and cooperation of the executives
and workmen of THE ABILENE PRINTING & STATIONARY
C OMPANY and the W EST TEXAS E NGRAVING COMPANY,
Abilene, Texas, in printing this BULLETIN are acknowledged
by the Publications Committee.

BULLETIN
OF THE

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological
Society
TABLE

OF CONTENTS

TWO SITES ON THE CALLO DEL OSO, NUECES, COUNTY, TEXAS,
by George Castor Martin ................................................................................................................ 7
A VASE AND SOME CARVED STONES AND PEBBLES FROM NUECES, COUNTY, TEXAS,
by George Castor Martin ............................................................................................................... 14
THE CANADIAN VALLEY EXPEDITION OF MARCH, 1930,
by W. C. Holden ............................................................................................................................ 15
A ROCK SHELTER IN COKE COUNTY,
by E. B. Sayles .............................................................................................................................. 22
ORNAMENTATION ON THE POTTERS OF THE TEXAS COASTAL TRIBES,
Text and Illustrations by Wendell H. Potter ................................................................................... 26
REPORT ON SOME RECENT ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESEARCHES IN THE ABILENE SECTION,
by Dr. Cyrus N. Ray ...................................................................................................................... 29
BURNED ROCK MOUNDS OF SOUTHWEST TEXAS,
by Ernest W. Wilson ...................................................................................................................... 38
SHELTER CAVES OF THE EL PASO DISTRICT,
by Eileen E. Alves......................................................................................................................... 41
SOME INDIAN ILLUSTRATIONS, PREHISTORIC AND HISTORIC,
by Col. M. L. Crimmins................................................................................................................. 45
ARCHAEOLOGICAL REMAINS IN THE BLACK AND GRAND PRAIRIES OF TEXAS,
by Frank Bryan .............................................................................................................................. 50
TEXAS PALEONTOLOGICAL NOTES,
by C. A. Howard ........................................................................................................................... 55
FIELD WORK OF MEMBERS ...................................................................................................................... 60
SECRETARY AND TREASURER’S REPORT ...................................................................................................... 62
Original Price $3.00
Abilene, Texas

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

Plate 1.
Plate 2.
Plate 3.
Plate 4.
Plate 5.
Plate 6.
Plate 7.
Plate 8.
Plate 9.
Plate 10.
Plate 11.
Plate 12.
Plate 13.
Plate 14.
Plate 15.
Plate 16.
Plate 17.
Plate 18.
Plate 19.
Plate 19-A
Plate 20.
Plate 21.
Plate 22.
Plate 23.
Plate 24.
Plate 25.
Plate 26.

Page
Texas Coastal Sites ...................................................................................................... 8
Artifacts From Texas Coast ....................................................................................... 11
Artifacts From Texas Coast ....................................................................................... 12
Rock Shelter in Coke County ..................................................................................... 23
The Principle Groups of Petroglyphs ......................................................................... 24
Artifacts From Rock Shelter ...................................................................................... 25
Texas Coastal Pottery ................................................................................................ 27
Texas Coastal Pottery ................................................................................................ 27
Texas Coastal Pottery ................................................................................................ 28
Artifacts from Folsom Camp Site .............................................................................. 30
Stratified Occupation Levels ..................................................................................... 31
Artifacts and Bones From Central West Texas Sites .................................................. 32
Boat Shaped Mortar Hole Site ................................................................................... 33
Artifacts From Deeply Buried Hearth Levels ............................................................ 34
Deeply Buried Hearth Level ...................................................................................... 35
Burned Rock Mounds ................................................................................................ 38
Artifacts From Caves in the El Paso District ............................................................. 41
Artifacts From Caves in the El Paso District ............................................................. 42
Artifacts From Caves in the El Paso District ............................................................. 43
Artifacts From Caves in the El Paso District ............................................................. 44
Katcinas ..................................................................................................................... 46
Mimbres Pottery Designs ........................................................................................... 47
Mimbres Pottery Designs ........................................................................................... 48
Petroglyphs on the Falls Ranch, Three Rivers, New Mexico .................................... 49
Blackland Belt Artifacts ............................................................................................ 51
Blackland Belt Artifacts ............................................................................................ 53
Tracks of Dinosaur Trachodon, Mammoth and Mastodon Teeth ................................ 56

Figure 1.
Figure 2.

A. C. Ruin, Northwest Texas ..................................................................................... 18
Typical Wall Section, A. C. Ruin, N. W. Texas .......................................................... 19

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

7

TWO SITES ON THE CALLO DEL OSO,
NUECES COUNTY, TEXAS
BY GEORGE CASTOR MARTIN
The Callo del Oso bay and its tributary creek
extends in a southerly and then a westerly direction
into the mainland from the southern shores of
Corpus Christi Bay, Nueces County. This body of
water has approximately twenty miles of shore line
when the encircling edges of its many small islands
and the shores of its coves are taken into
consideration. The entire shoreline and all of the
islands were extensively used by the Indians for
camping purposes, but investigation of this section
of the coast has not been finished. In this article
only two campsites are described, the first situated
on the northwest bank of the False Oso, the second
the first campsite north of the western approach to
the Mud Bridge.
There is a peninsula formed by the junction of
the False Oso and Corpus Christi Bay. A campsite
covered all the shoreline here. The north-facing
portion of the camp extends along Nueces Bay for
about one-half mile, its western end sparsely dotted
with tepee sites, the remains of which show as the
high clay banks erode. Much broken pottery lies
scattered on the ground, much broken flint, and
arrow-heads are found after every rain. Toward
the eastern end of the peninsula the debris becomes
more plentiful until the tip of the point is reached,
and here the surface is covered with shells,
potsherds and chips. (Plate 1, Fig. 3). In two piles
of conch shells here, two implement of bone were
found. They were made from the long bones of an
animal, probably a deer. One was complete, but
was broken in half. It measured four inches in length,
about one third of one inch in width, and had been
rubbed to a flat symmetrical point. In all, eight
specimens of this type have been taken from
different camps on the Oso, all of them in connection
with piles of conch shells. Other implements of
like material but pencil-shaped were also found
on Oso sites, one at a site near Viola, another on
one of the islands in the Laguna Madre. All but
two were found in connection with piles of conch

shells, the exceptions being one taken from the
topsoil where a tepee had stood, the other from a
pile of oyster shells where it was found in contact
with a bone tube which was beautifully made and
polished. On the Oso sites, wherever conch shells
are found in heaps, they usually have holes broken
through one side of the shells. It would appear that
the conch were roasted in the shell, the hole broken
into the side so that the shrunken meat could be
reached and removed with the aid of one of these
bone implements. This theory is practically proved
by one specimen with deeply worn indentations
running around it where its sides had been scratched
deeply by the edges of the rough hole in the shell,
and by several broken ones, the breaks always
occurring where the edge of the shell formed the
fulcrum for the bone pick. One of the bone picks
mentioned above measured eight inches in length.
It was in six pieces when found, but was mended
perfectly and is now in the Witte Memorial
Museum, San Antonio. Where shells are found in
piles here it is due to the fact that the topsoil is
oozy muck blown up on the clay banks from the
bottom of the Oso in very dry years. The Indians
heaped their refuse on this, into which it sank until
it reached the clay, and more wind drift collecting
on this covered the piles deeply and preserved them.
In very dry years this process of building up the
topsoil continues, but the climate of the coastal
country is undergoing a very rapid change and the
rainfall is much greater than in times past, and banks
that have taken centuries to grow into what they
were until recently are rapidly eroding. Thus a pile
of shells held in place by the enveloping topsoil of
past years is slowly uncovered by the soil being
gradually washed from it, and is left on the surface
in practically the exact form in which it was
originally piled.
From the point of the peninsula, running
southwesterly along the northwestern bank of the
false Oso, for a distance of over one-half mile, was

8

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

Plate 1.
TEXAS COASTAL SITES.

site during the Civil War, states that in
those days it was covered with brush,
was not eroded, and no Indian remains
were noticed. Years later, after Mr.
Dunn became interested in
archaeology, the brush was grubbed
away and the bank began to erode.
Skeletons began to be exposed, and at
one time according to Mr. Dunn,
sev\eral carloads of bones could have
been picked up from the surface. Mr.
Dunn obtained many skulls at this time,
all of which have since been stolen
from him by boys. While the writer
was excavating a portion of this site
August 26, 1929, a former owner of
the property, Mr. Martin Pearse,
passed the spot and stopped to talk.
He stated that he bought the property
about the year 1900 and that at that time
over five thousand skeletons were
exposed on the surface (this was
shortly after the 1900 storm), all the
bones in fine hard condition. In recent
years Mr. Dunn has removed more
skeletons from the site, ant Mr.
Alexander Cox, of Corpus Christi, has
removed five complete skulls in the
past year, besides finding, many which
were crushed and broken. During July,
1929, he removed one skull, complete
but distorted by earth pressure, and
found three others in fragments, the
upper sides of these not more than six
inches below the present surface.

The writer began his excavation at
the edge of the hole made by Mr. Cox.
He dug a trench a foot wide and two
1. Bone pit on the Callo del Oso.
feet deep, seven feet long, and began
2. Mud Bridge site; Geo. C. Martin standing at relic
slicing down its edge with a trowel
bearing stratum.
and a stiff brush. Bones were found
3. Large camp site on Callo del Oso.
from six to fourteen inches below the
surface. (Plate 1, Fig. I). They were in
the principal part of the camp. It is now a slope every imaginable position, some upright in the
varying from fifty to one hundred and fifty feet in ground, others lying crossing each other in all
width, grassed over in places, and badly eroded directions. Some of them were broken and in
elsewhere. Mr. John B. Dunn, who worked on this fragments before burial and only portions of them

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
were present. The first skull located was that of an
infant. Only the top of the skull was present, and
while in size it was no larger than that of an average
newborn Caucasian, the fontanelle was completely
covered, the sutures of the anterior fontanelle and
coronal having united. These bones crumbled and
went into pieces when gently brushed to remove
the sand. Two inches from this one, another infant’s
skull was found, and this was in about the same
condition as the first, but was kept together until it
could be photographed in connection with a third
and larger skull several inches to its right. The last
mentioned was found only after the careful but
unsuccessful cleaning of still another infants skull,
which, as it broke away disclosed that it had been
crushed against the top of the larger skull, and was
seated on it much in the form of a cap or hat. The
larger skull was then carefully exposed. It was small
in size, but the teeth showed it to have belonged to
an adult. It was face downward, and below it was
the remains of a hand and wrist with all the bones
present and articulated, but no arm bones were
connected with it. To the west of this skull a lower
and upper jaw of another skull lay on its left side,
perfectly articulated, and this was photographed
together with the infants skull and the large skull
lying near it. When attempt was made to remove
the group from the soil, all fell apart, though well
covered with dry shellac, and it was found that the
two adult skulls had been crushed into each other.
The space occupied by these five skulls was less
than two square feet. No body bones were
connected with the skulls, but beside the articulated
hand already mentioned as being below the face of
one of them there was a thick layer of broken long
bones, ribs, and vertebrae forming a layer on which
they rested.
Six inches east of the group last described, a
single complete lower jaw was found, and near it
loose teeth from an upper jaw. A foot further east
was the top of another skull, lying with the crown
downward, and in the brain cavity were portions
of the jaw, teeth, part of a rib, the upper joint of a
thigh bone, and some sections of broken long bones.
Of the infant burials only skulls were found except
in one instance, and in this case skull, vertebrae,
ribs, and the bones of one upper arm were found in

9

place. One complete arm was missing, as was one
forearm, and no bones of either the pelvis or legs
were present. Notable among the articulated bones
were the hand and wrist previously mentioned, a
single adult leg, flexed, with knee joint and knee
cap present, and with ankle bones complete, but
without the bones of the feet, and ten vertebrae
joined as in life but not connected with any other
bones. One lower leg bone had in it three incisions
evidently made while the bone was still green.
These were shallow and rather wide, and appeared
as though made with a stone knife used in the manner
of a saw. Another bone showed that it had been
struck a glancing blow, evidently with a flint hatchet.
In two days spent in excavating this site by the writer
and Mr. Wendell H. Potter, twenty-one skulls were
uncovered, none of them in such condition that they
could be preserved. The size of the ditch was seven
feet in length, its breadth four feet. The layer of
bones lies about eight inches below the present
surface, and extends eight or ten inches further down
into the soil. The original surface was about twelve
inches higher at this spot, and it was from this layer
of earth above the bones that the skeletons described
by Mr. Pearse and Mr. Dunn came. During the
digging described above, the only manufactured
item of interest found was a single flat disc of clam
shell, drilled, and this was lying against one of the
skulls. Conch shells were found with the bones. In
earth thrown up by another excavator, a portion of
a shell pendant was found, its sole ornamentation
an edging of small nicks. It was drilled for the
purpose of suspension. Excavation done by Mr.
Dunn yielded a cylindrical pipe of chalky substance,
this ornamented in the same manner as the pendant,
and a sword hilt of silver, of Mexican manufacture,
embossed by Aztec designs. The portion of the
pendant is in the Witte Memorial Museum, San
Antonio, the pipe and sword hilt in the collection
of Mr. Dunn, in Corpus Christi. The surface of the
entire campsite, wherever eroded, is covered with
the shells of edible mollusks. Potsherds are present
but scarce. Artifacts are rare where the bones are
found, but it must be remembered that the site has
been eroding for thirty years and has been much
hunted over. In uneroded portions of the top of the
hill, the surface shows flint and shells as much as

10

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

three hundred yards back from the edge of the Oso.
The banks of the Callo del Oso were probably the
most thickly inhabited section of the Texas coast,
and finds will be made here for many years to come.
There are two theories concerning the bones
found in the excavation made by the writer. Mr.
Cox believes that the camp was attacked in force,
the raiders beaten off, the dead of both sides buried
in a large pit or ditch. The theory is not unreasonable
in view of the fact that two distinct types of skulls
were removed from the ground here by him, but it
does not explain the reason for so many bones being
so badly broken, disarticulated and scattered. It does
not explain most of the skulls being largely separated
from the bones of the bodies to which, they
belonged, nor the fact that most of them rest above
a layer of leg, arm and body bones. Careful
examination of the remains uncovered by the writer
has convinced him that the particular portion of the
camp excavated by him was originally a pit into
which were thrown the remains of cannibal feasts,
and further digging will be done to see if more
information can be obtained and perfect specimens
of skulls secured. Apparently about ninety per cent
of the bones 90 far recovered were those of women
and children.
The foregoing portion of this article was written
in the Summer of 1929. Up to that time the writer
had removed soil covering twenty-eight square feet
for a depth of about twenty-four inches and had
uncovered twenty-one skulls or portions of as many
different ones, and had removed portions of
skeletons to account for about forty burials. During
September, October and November, three additional
visits were made to the site and the number of skulls
located was brought up to fifty-three, the total
excavated area being about fifty square feet. During
these visits several skulls were removed in almost
perfect condition, and many complete skeletons of
adult, children and infants were uncovered. With
the bones was a single grinding or rubbing-stone
worn smooth on one side and two triangular
arrowheads of large size. Dr. J. Alden Mason, of
the Museum of the University of Pennsylvania, was
present at the time of one visit to the site, and he
uncovered one fairly complete adult skeleton, the

body lying on its side, head in a vertical position,
the lower jaw having fallen loose from the skull
and dropped onto the bones of the chest and
shoulder. On this occasion a digging tool made from
a triangular piece of conch shell was found with
one skeleton. Dr. Mason assisted in the work of
uncovering several other incomplete skulls and
skeletons.
The best finds resulting from a visit to the site
were made by Mr. John B. Dunn of Corpus Christi.
His excavation was begun where the writer left off.
Slight chipping away of the earth at the side of the
trench revealed the presence of a skeleton, and the
earth above it was carefully removed. The bones
proved to be those of a young person. The body
had been interred lying flat on its stomach, face
downward, legs and feet straight and in line with
the body, both arms extended above the head in the
attitude of a person diving, the palms of the hands
downward and these resting on another adult skull.
Two small “bird-points” were found in the soil
close to the bones. (Plate 2, Fig. 2). Around each
wrist were a number of small square pieces of
mother of pearl, each drilled with two holes, and
around the neck and down on the chest were
numerous small pendants of the same material, each
of these bored with one hole. In all, sixty-four of
these ornaments were in such condition that they
could be removed and preserved. (Plate 2, Fig. 2).
Many were mere chalky impressions in the soil.
With the shell pieces forming the bracelet were two
bone objects, almost flat oblongs one and oneeighth by three-quarters of an inch, these were not
drilled and both were ornamented with like designs
in incised lines. From the soil near the body was
taken a single black bone bead (judging by its color
it is probably ivory) wonderfully carved. It is five
eighths of an inch in length, seven-sixteenths of an
inch in width, and flattened oval in outline. An
incised line forms a ring around the unflattened
portion of the bead, and it is drilled from the upper
to the lower surface instead of being drilled
lengthways. One flattened surface is marked off by
incised lines in such manner that it gives the
appearance of a carved beetle, and the other side
is marked with incised lines which might have been
intended to represent legs. Its general appearance

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

11

suggests a scarab. Also near the bones
Mr. Dunn found a single mother of pearl
pendant, quite thick, and in perfect
condition. Its length is about two inches,
rounded at the top, straight edged at the
bottom, two holes drilled through it at
the rounded end, the straight edged
bottom having three notches cut into it
and four drilled holes, the notches being
cut so that they indent the edge between
the holes.
“Mud Bridge” Site
The “Mud Bridge” campsite on the
Callo del Oso, was discovered by the
writer June 15, 1929. It has peculiar
features well worthy of description.
(Plate 1, Fig. 2). It is situated on a much
eroded bluff a short distance north and
west of the “Mud Bridge” at a pot
where the bluff forms a point extending
toward the water. In dry seasons the Oso
at this point dries up to a large extent
and strong Gulf breezes blow the dust
from its bottom up onto its high banks.
The camp was located on the clay
subsurface of the bluff and since
occupation accumulated blown dust has
formed a topsoil varying from three to
eight feet or more in thickness over the
entire site. The evidence is plain where
erosion has occurred recently, the
ground below the level of the bottom of
Plate 2.
the topsoil being covered with lumps
ARTIFACTS FROM TEXAS COAST
of burned clay mingled with flint chips,
some broken shells, and fragments of 1. Effigy bowl and incised stones.
bones, the three to eight feet of topsoil 2. Ornaments and small projectile points from a burial on
covering the clay not showing the
the Callo del Oso.
slightest evidence that Indians ever
camped on it. Each eroded slope shows
its thick layer of topsoil totally free of remains and straight bases, and a number of knives, one curved,
refuse, and below it is a slope of clay subsurface the others triangular, all with projections at the sides
covered with such debris. The exposed portion of which permitted the forefinger a broad space to
the site covers several acres. Potsherds and bird- rest on and so allow the user to exert more pressure
points are absent. The artifacts found consisted on the implement than would have been possible
entirely of triangular arrowheads with rounded and had the implements been made with a double edge

12

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
flint, and with them was a large
stone shaped not unlike an axe,
the place where its edge would
have been flattened by
hammering. At this spot a number
of arrowheads had evidently
been made, and it is possible that
the “knives” and hammer-stone
were used in the manufacture of
these, the former used to chip
with. The projections on the
sides of the artifacts which may
have served the purpose of knives
are not an uncommon feature on
the Texas coast. The writer has
three others, one from Banquete
Creek, one from the shore of
Copano Bay, one from another
site on the Oso, all three finely
worked specimens and showing
this feature. The hammerstone is
much larger and heavier than any
other stone used for this purpose
as yet found between Matagorda
and Baffin Bays, and is of unusual
shape. Its material is not native
and it is doubtful if it could have
been found by the Indians
anywhere within a fifty mile
radius of the campsite where it
was picked up.

A word or two should be
inserted here as to the windblown
topsoil of the Oso’s banks. On
September 1, 1929, the writer
Plate 3.
accompanied by Mr. Henry Fulton
ARTIFACTS FROM THE TEXAS COAST
and Mr. Alexander Cox, visited
the most southwesterly site on the
1 and 2. Points made form Conch shell.
Oso. The tide had been low for a
3. Flake scraper, slightly retouched.
week or more, and there had been
9. Point with leverage plane from Callo del Oso.
but little rain. The wind was
All artifacts except Fig. 9 from Mud Bridge site.
blowing strongly from the
Scale: Fig. 16, 2 3-5 inches in length.
southeast, and as the party stood
on the campsite last mentioned
or narrow back. (Plate 3). These knives (eight in and looked off toward the westward toward the
all if the writer remembers correctly) were found next small peninsula, clouds of dust and sand filled
close together, surrounded by chips and flakes of the air obstructing the view to such an extent that

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
the hill less than one-half a mile away was entirely
blotted out at times and was continually swept with
thick clouds so that no clear view of it was
obtainable. How long it would take to deposit the
accumulation covering the “Mud Bridge” site under
such conditions is highly problematical.

Early in 1929 Mr. Geo. C. Martin sent to Abilene
a large amount of human skeletal material from
Texas coast sites.
These bones represented bones of individuals
of several quite different anatomical types. Some
had skulls of modern shape and thickness with
straight long bones, the bone substance of these
unaltered except by age. Another type possessed
rather flat, narrow, extremely thick and rather
heavily mineralized skulls.

13

Two heavily mineralized portions of the shafts
of the long bones have numerous transverse cuts in
them. Several femora sent me have quite marked
antero-postero curves somewhat similar to
Neanderthal types. The normal human tibia or shin
bone has on the inner side of the crest or shin “a
smooth, slightly convex surface” which is known
as “the internal or subcutaneous surface of the shaft
which is covered only by skin and superficial fascia
except in its upper fourth.” (Cunningham Anat.) Two
of the tibiae or shin bones sent here by Mr. Martin
had instead of slightly convex surfaces, a well
marked guttered or depressed condition of the bones
down the internal or subcutaneous portions. Mr.
Martin stated in correspondence that some of these
heavily mineralized human bones were recovered
from the bottoms of bay waters after Gulf storms.
CYRUS N. RAY, President.

Some of the frontal and parietal portions of these
skulls are far thicker than any human skull bones
Mr. Martin’s article was read by me before the
ever previously seen by me. One frontal bone
State meeting of the Society held in Abilene in
measured seven-sixteenths of an inch thick and
October, 1929.
several others very slightly under that thickness.
In July, 1929, a companion, Carl Chelf, and I
These thick skull bones and portions of several
were conducted to the sites described by Messrs.
long bones are so heavily mineralized that they clink
George C. Martin and Wendell H. Potter.
like porcelain dishes when knocked together.
The site on the Oso has been known locally for
Several of the frontal bones have large pieces
a long time. The Mud Bridge site was discovered
of sandstone concretion firmly fixed to the insides
by Mr. Martin after he had made previous visits to
of the skulls. Some have evidence of marine life
the same vicinity that revealed nothing until this
incrusted on the outside. When examined with a
site was uncovered by favorable winds following
geologist’s lense the mineralized structure is quite
dry weather during the winter of 1928-29.
apparent.
E. B. SAYLES, Secretary.

14

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

A VASE AND SOME CARVED STONES AND PEBBLES
PROM NUECES COUNTY, TEXAS
BY GEORGE CASTOR MARTIN
In September, 1929, a Mexican trespassing on
one of the posted ranches along Petronila Creek
(also called Petronita and Santa Petronita) saw in
the bank, where a landslide had exposed it, the side
of a pot. With buried treasure in mind, the vessel
was roughly removed from the soil, and was badly
broken in the process. According to the story of the
discoverer, this pot was inverted over another one,
and both were filled with soil which had seeped in
through the cracks between them. The second pot
was removed in pieces, and the sole content was
found to be a small vase of dark brown color,
glazed, and formed somewhat like a bird, wings
and tail projecting from it, the neck and opening
being in the position of the bird’s head and neck.
(Plate 2, Fig. 1). In removing the vase, it also was
broken, but not badly, the fracture being at the
juncture of the bowl and the neck so that it was
easily mended. Nervous about having made the
discovery illegally on another man’s property, the
Mexican hurried with his find to the private museum
of Mr. John B. Dunn, of Corpus Christi, where he
disposed of it for a small sum, but being in fear of
prosecution for his trespass he refused to divulge
the exact site of his find. He stated that it was on
the bank of Petronila Greek, however, and promised
to go back for fragments of the larger pots. Mr. Dunn
informed the writer of his acquisition, and a hurried
trip was made to Corpus Christi to examine it. The
vase was found to be of material and workmanship
entirely unlike any of which potsherds have been
found between San Antonio and Baffin Bays on the
Texas coast, and was probably manufactured in
Louisiana or Arkansas.l Its body is practically
spherical, flattened at the base, protuberances
extending from each side and from the back to
simulate wings and tail, the neck of the vessel taking
the place of the bird’s neck and head. Extreme height
from base to top of neck is five and three-sixteenths
inches, width across top of wings is five and seveneighths inches, and the diameter of the bowl, outside
measurement, is about four and three-quarter inches.
During the examination it was found that the vase
was slightly more than half full of a mixture of sand,
clay and leaf mould, hard packed almost to the
consistency of sandstone. This was broken up and
loosened with a heavy knife, and was removed
through the hole in the vase where the neck had
been broken off. One of the lumps refused to
crumble under pressure, and after continued

washing and gentle scrubbing it was found to be a
pebble of sandstone, on which, carved in relief, is
the figure of an alligator or lizard, the end of the
tail extending around the edge of the stone to its
reverse side. The sandstone composing the pebble
and the earth in the vase had been in contact for so
long a period of time that the two had almost united
and it was impossible to completely clean the stone
without risk of injuring it.
The curious feature of the find lies in the fact
that after the vase was mended and an attempt to
replace the carved stone back in the vessel was
made, it was found that to do so was impossible,
as the entrance measures only twenty-two
millimeters in its widest diameter, the carved pebble
twenty-four millimeters. The fracture through which
the pebble had been removed was new and fresh.
The condition of the soil in which the pebble was
embedded proves absolutely that it was not placed
in the vase after the neck was broken therefrom, so
only one conclusion can be reached, and that, that
the alligator carving was enclosed in the vessel
when it was made. On certain campsites on the
Rincon Ranch, Aransas County, the writer found
lumps of white sandstone which had been used for
abrading purposes, and these were heavily
impregnated with oil or grease, evidently used by
the Indians much as the modern white man uses oil
on his oil-stone in edging steel implements. The
carved alligator stone also has a heavy oil content,
either obtained while in the process of manufacture,
or by coming in contact with oil or grease which
had once been in the vase in which it was found.
Carved pebbles and stones are rare along the Texas
coast, but are not entirely unknown. The artifacts
shown by the two upper figures of Plate 2, Fig. 1,
was found within the present limits of Corpus
Christi, in what was Salt Lake, a marshy body of
water now filled in and built upon. This carving is
of flint, much discolored by age, originally dark
brown, now a creamy white Colonel M. L.
Crimmins, internationally known authority on
pictographs and petroglyphs, pronounced it a
representation of a manatee. Dr. Warren K.
Moorehead pronounced it a “record-stone,” also
stating that it was an animal effigy, the most
southerly find of such that had come to his notice.
1. Mr. Martin writes that Dr. J Alden Mason, of Univ. of Penna.
Mus., stated the pot was likely from mid. Miss. Valley.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

15

THE CANADIAN VALLEY EXPEDITION OF MARCH, 1930
BY W. C. HOLDEN
The Bulletin of he Texas Archaeological and
Paleontological Society of September, 1929,
Volume I, contains an account of the excavations of
the Turbo ruins during March, 1929, by the writer
and some colleagues from McMurry college. In
March, 1930, Texas Technological college sent an
expedition to the same vicinity of the Canadian
Valley. Dr. M. A. Stainbrook, Dr. A. L Strout, Dr.
John Granberry, Dr. W. M. Young, Dr. C. C. Schmidt,
Professor F. A. Kleinschmidt, Mr. H. B. Carroll,
faculty-members, and Clydo Drake, Herschel
McFarland, Leland Mast, and Charles Adams
students, accompanied the writer. The site for our
excavations had been previously selected for us by
Mr. Floyd V. Studer of Amarillo, who had already
secured excavation privileges from the owner of
the property where the ruin was located.

loam and the surface is only a few feet above the
creek bed. This supplied the fields with subirrigation; and here was raised the corn which the
inhabitant ground on the huge metate stones found
in the ruin. As for defense, a storming party would
have approached with difficult from three
directions. The weakness in defense lay in one
direction, the west. Incidentally the founders of the
ruin chose the most beautiful spot in the whole
country.

The ruin is 163 feet long and 52 feet wide.2 The
north section of the ruin, 26 feet in length exhibit
characteristics quite different from the remainder
of the building. The wall foundations are much
narrower; the stones used in them are more
diminutive; and the rooms are smaller and much
more irregular. In fact, there are many evidences
When we arrived in Amarillo, Mr. Studer that the north section is the oldest, and that the
conducted us without loss of time to the ruin, which building progress from north to south.
is located on a small creek near there. The ruin is
The A-C ruin is one of the largest and best
difficult of approach; the camp equipment and
preserved ruins of the slab stone type in the Texas
supplies had to be carried down a steep slope
Panhandle. It has suffered some at the hands of
several hundred feet to a site suitable for a camp.
vandals, but its isolated and somewhat inaccessible
The place had previously been designated by location has caused it to sustain less damage from
Mr. Studer as the A-C ruin, and we continued to “bonehunters” than many other ruins in the region.
refer to it in the same way. Its location was, at the By far, the greatest injury suffered by the A-C ruin
time of its habitation, ideal for utility, defense and has been due to the oil industry. A pipe line
aesthetics. The creek on which it is located flows construction crew, while laying a pipe line across
north, and makes a horseshoe bend to the east. A the canyon just above, cut and blasted a wagon road
ledge of ground of perhaps an acre extends out into transversely across the north central part of the ruin.
the bend of the creek at an elevation about midway
The expedition was fortunate in having among
between the creek bottom to the east and the top of
its members persons of varied and specialized
the bank to the west. The ledge commands a view
training. Mr. Clyde Drake, senior geological
of about two miles up the creek to the south and
engineering student, with a plane table instrument
five miles down the creek to the north The ruin
and other equipment, did the mapping and plotting
extends north and south almost across the entire
of the site. Professor F. A. Kleinschmidt, head of
east side of the ledge. When the site was inhabited,
the architectural engineering department of the
as well as today, water was to be had in the creek
college, made numerous sketches and detailed
below. Both above and below the ruin the creek
drawings. Dr. M. A. Stainbrook, geologist and
bottom widens in several places sufficiently to
paleontologist, furnished valuable technical
permit of fields of several acres. The soil is a sandy
information.

16

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

We started excavating with a trench from the
southwest corner of the ruin and extended it
northward inside, and along, the west wall. For
convenience we used the southwest corner as a
starting place for all measurements. The west wall
is of solid and well ordered construction. The
bottom has an average thickness of from four to
four and one-half feet. The lowest course is
composed of two layers of flat stones from twentyfour to thirty inches in height set on edge about three
feet apart. Between the two layers of stone is hardpacked earth. The second course of the wall consists
of two other layers of flat rocks on edge set inside
the outer layers of the lower course. These layers
are filled with hard-packed earth. A third course of
the same kind, but narrower, appears above the
second course. The second and third courses have
occasional rocks put in transversely, apparently for
the purpose of tying the wall together as bricklayers
often place bricks transversely in a wall for the
purpose of holding the longitudinal layers together.
For the most part only the first course of the wall is
left standing. In several places however the second
course is in place and undisturbed; and in one place
the third course is intact. There is evidence that
there was a fourth course consisting of a single row
of rocks on edge and held in place by adobe. At
one spot where the third course is still in place, the
wall is almost five feet high. Another course would
have made the wall approximately six feet high.
There were sufficient loose rocks which had fallen
just inside or outside the base of the wall to have
brought it to that height. The space between the outer
edge of the first course and the base of the second,
as well as the outer edge of the second and base of
the third, was filled with hard adobe material of
yellow clay. In other words this adobe was packed
into the offset with the outside sloping from the
bottom edge of the first course of stones to the top
edge of the second course, and so on. Inside the
wall, the yellow adobe was plastered with a
material somewhat the color of gypsum or of wood
ashes. In all, the wall was substantial and well
ordered, and should have been adequate protection
against wind and rain.
As we extended the longitudinal trench northward
we came to a transverse wall at exactly sixteen

feet from the south end wall. The transverse wall
was primarily of adobe, but contained a rock core.
As to whether this wall runs entirely across this
portion of the ruin will not be known until complete
excavations can be made. Our trench at this point
was four and one-half feet wide, hence we
uncovered only that much of the wall. For
convenience we will designate the space between
the south end of the ruin and this first transverse
wall as room 1.
One of the most important discoveries in the AC ruin was made in room 1. It has long been a
matter of considerable speculation as to what kind
of roofs these stone slabs had. Beneath the floor
level we found evidence which is not conclusive
but fairly indicative of the nature of the roof. The
floor level in room 1 is from twenty-six to thirty
inches below the present surface and is easy to trace.
It consisted of about four inches of yellow clay
which was carried in when the house was built and
tamped on the surface of the original ground level.
The old ground soil was a grey river sand. The top
of the clay floor is covered by a thin layer of ashes
and charcoal. In many places it has a rich greasy
color. In room 1 we dug below the floor level,
thinking we might find burials. We found no
skeletons, but we did find four holes in the sand.
The holes were in a line north by south four feet
from the west wall. The holes were two, five,
eleven, and fifteen feet, respectively, from the south
wall. Each was two inches in diameter and from
eighteen to twenty-four inches deep. When we
uncovered the first hole we attached no particular
significance to it. When the others were discovered
to be in line with the first their importance became
evident. It is most probable that they supported the
roof timbers. If this were the case, the room
evidently consisted of a light framework of wood
covered with some king of light material.
Speculations as to what the “light framework” might
have been was a matter on which the discussion
turned around the camp fire in the evening. Every
possibility was introduced. By a process of
elimination all the possibilities were discarded until
two remained. The party became unanimous in the
belief that the covering was either a thatch made of
bear grass (yucca) which is abundant in that region,

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
or it was made of buffalo hides put on in shingle
style. To the first alternative someone objected
that the grass may not have grown in the vicinity
when the ruin was built. Dr. Stainbrook pointed
out that geologists were of the opinion that
conditions in that region had changed very little
during the last 5000 years and that it was highly
probable that the tall bear grass was more abundant
one thousand or two thousand years ago than now.
On the other hand the region was the very heart of
the buffalo range. The living water in the creek
caused the buffalo to come to it during the dry
seasons in countless numbers. The deep canyon
walls together with the irregular meanderings of
the creek made it comparatively easy for the
builders of out ruin to have killed the buffalo, even
with their crude spears. The buffalo hide theory
seems as highly probable as the grass thatch theory.
To return to the holes beneath the floor level in
room 1, the fact that the holes were below the floor
with no evidence that they extended above the floor
constituted a mystery needing explanation.
Someone soon framed a theory which seems
perfectly plausible. The roof and wood work of
the building could have burned down at the time of
its abandonment or later. In that case the slender
upright posts would have burned to the floor.
Subsequent centuries of wind action filled in soil
above the old floor. In time the parts of the posts
below the floor level rotted away, leaving their
impressions in the packed sand.
It may be well to mention a third roof type
possibility with a reason for its elimination.
Someone suggested a flat roof of adobe. Such a
type seemed highly probable. A roof of that kind
would have required heavy logs as cross timbers.
The cross timbers would have had to have been
long enough to have reached across the widest room,
a distance of twenty-six feet, or they would have
had to have been supported at the joints by heavy
upright timbers. In regard to the first alternative,
there are no timbers in that region long enough and
straight enough to span twenty-six feet, and in regard
to the second, the posts that fitted into the holes we
found could not have supported heavy timbers, to
say nothing of the additional weight of the adobe.

17

Granting that the roof was of grass thatch or of
buffalo hide shingles, it must necessarily have had
considerable slope. The width of the rooms in the
central and south sections of the house was too great
to have permitted of all the slope being in one
direction, in lean to fashion; so it is most probable
that the rood sloped from the center. It is to be
remembered that the whole theory of the roof
restoration had been based on the assumption that
the holes beneath the floor level once contained the
roof supports. It is possible that these premises are
wrong.
Twenty-five feet from the south end of the ruin
or nine feet from the first transverse wall we
encountered a second transverse wall. It was
fourteen inches thick and composed of slab stone
on edge filled in between with adobe. Room No. 2
then is nine feet long and of unknown width.
At the second transverse wall, the main west
wall offsets about eighteen inches to the west. Due
to this offset our trench from the second transverse
wall to the third wall was six feet wide. This
widening of the trench enabled us to discover a
longitudinal wall extending from the second
transverse wall to the third transverse wall, making
room 3 six feet wide and seventeen feet long, inside
dimensions. Almost in the center of room 3, reaching
entirely from the east wall to the west wall was a
bench five feet and nine inches wide and twelve
inches high. It was made by placing a number of
stones on edge, all of them extending just twelve
inches above the floor level, and filling in between
with natural clay which was carried from the canyon
bank at some distance away. The top and sides of
the bench were covered with a one inch layer of
the same yellow clay of which the floor was made.
The cleavage between the superimposed wind
blown soil and the bench was so distinct that when
the filled in soil was removed the yellow covering
of the bench remained smooth and firm. The finding
of the bench brought forth many speculations from
members of the party as to what its use may have
been. Someone designated it as the “bed”; and
“bed” it remained in the expedition’s parlance.
The third transverse wall, which is forty-two
feet from the south end of the ruin, is of unusual

18

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

interest. It is almost two feet thick. The first eighteen
inches of the wall consists of adobe with a core of
large stones set on edge. Above this course is
horizontal masonry of flat stones set in mud mortar.
We ascertained the length of this wall by extending
a transverse trench along it on its north side. No
intervening longitudinal walls were encountered.
This makes room 4 twenty-four feet wide, inside
dimensions. The fourth transverse wall, sixty-seven
feet from the south end, or twenty-four feet from
the third transverse wall, is of adobe, and in
thickness and construction is very similar to the
first transverse wall. Room 4 is twenty-four feet
square.
The fifth transverse wall is thick and heavy and
similar in construction to the third transverse wall.
The first course of eighteen inches is of adobe with
a stone core. Above this is horizontal masonry. The
size of room 5 is problematical as our trench along

the west wall was not over four feet wide. The
north wall and a part of the west wall of room 6
are missing. Erosion has carried away the
superimposed soil to the floor level at that place.
The stones of the missing walls could have washed
over the bank of the ledge nearby or they could
have been carried away. The road made by the pipe
line workers passes through rooms 6, 7, and 11.
The fifth and sixth transverse walls are in part
exposed. The sixth transverse wall is similar in
construction to the second transverse wall. An
unusual feature of the sixth wall is a door thirty
inches wide at its intersection with wall B. This
was one of two doors found in the ruin, both of
them in the interior. Our trench followed along wall
B to the seventh transverse wall and east along that
wall to the northeast corner of room 8.
That portion of the ruin north of the seventh
transverse wall constitutes a separate unit of the

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

ruin. As stated before, the rooms are small and
irregular in shape. The foundations of the exterior
walls are on much smaller scale than the other parts
of the building. Several of the interior walls consist
of a single layer of stones on edge. Time did not
permit of the excavation of this section. The walls
and rooms which we traced out are indicated in
Figure. 1.
An interesting place in the north section is Room
12. The room is semicircular in shape and sixteen
feet in diameter from north to south. From east to
west it is twelve feet across. On the floor below on
the east side is a hearth. On the west side leading
to room 9 is a passage twenty inches wide with
walls of even and well fitted stones on edge on
either side. Some curious relic hunter had already
dug a huge hole in the center of room 12. He had
gone below the floor level and destroyed whatever
evidence there may have been there. It is possible

19

that this room was some form of kiva. Just to the
south of the west end of the passage connecting
room 12 and 9 is an object which strongly resembles
a modern pueblo fire place. The rocks above did
not appear smoked, but charcoal and ashes were
found in the bottom of it.
Longitudinal walls C and D are of the sametype and construction as wall A on the west side. It
is quite probable that rooms 18, 19, and 20 are cut
into a number of smaller rooms by short transverse
walls between C and D. Room 21, which is eight
feet wide and nine feet long, extends down the
slope, and its floor level is between two and three
feet below that of the main part of the ruin. It is
possible and probable that a series of rooms
extended north of room 21 along wall D, and that
wall E once extend at least to the fifth transverse
wall. If that were true erosion has destroyed the
major portion of wall E.

20

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
Artifacts

The artifacts which were discovered in the A-C
ruin are not so numerous as one would expect from
the imposing size and appearance of the place. With
less than one-tenth of the total area excavated, there
is yet time for the quantity of artifacts to become
considerable. At the risk of becoming tiresome, I
will list and describe the things we found in
connection with the ruin; for the value of this paper
depends largely upon the accuracy and diligence
used in describing the utensils and implements used
by the builders of these slab stone houses.
In room 1 the floor level was on the average
twenty-six inches below the present surface. In this
room, as everywhere else in the ruin were numerous
faint chips of various sizes and shapes some of them
being exceedingly thin. On the floor level in the
southwest corner of the room was a very good piece
of charcoal about one inch square. Nearby was a
fragment of bone spade and a mussel, or fresh water
clam shell. Mussels are still to be found in the
streams of the region. The shells were probably
used by the occupants of the slab-stone ruins as
scrapers, scoops and ornaments. The excavated
portion of room 1 contained two hearths. One,
which was six feet from the south wall and four
feet from the west wall, was fourteen inches below
the floor level; the other, nine feet from the south
wall and one foot from the west wall, was on the
floor level.

coarse grained, fire blackened, a thin black slip on
the inside and basket like indentions on the outside.
A comparison of the A-C sherds with sherds from
the Tarbox ruin, something like twenty miles to the
northeast, shows the two types to be similar in
appearance, workmanship and material; but all the
A-C potsherds have a thin black slip on the inside
while those from Tarbox have no slip. A pressure
flaker was found near the west wall. A few feet to
the north lay a potsherd much larger and thicker
than the first.
Room 5 contained on the floor level a large
potsherd like the other sherds, a flint scraper, a
portion of a bone spade and a well worked flint
core. The transverse trench along the north side of
the third transverse wall revealed a number of
broken animal bones, some potsherds and a large
mussel shell. Two post holes were uncovered
below the floor level. The holes were one foot from
the west wall and five feet apart.
Room 5 was found to have the usual broken
bones, flints, flakes, and potsherds. Below the floor
level three feet from the west wall and five feet
from the north wall was a hearth two feet in
diameter. It was made by setting flat stones on edge
in a circular fashion. The hearth was more than
twelve inches deep, and was filled with ashes, small
round stones, and fragments of large buffalo bones.

Near the west wall of room 2, about fifteen
inches below the surface and fourteen inches above
the floor level, beneath a well placed layer of rock,
was the lower jaw of a buffalo. The layer of stones
had every evidence of a Plains Indian burial, but
nothing save the buffalo jaw bone was found. The
bone mentioned was evidently placed there by the
subsequent Plains Indians, as it was clearly above
the floor level. Fragments of buffalo bone were
found at various places on the floor level of the
ruin.

In the northwest corner of room 7 on the floor
level we found a crushed pot. Some of the pieces
are missing, but the pot can be easily restored. Its
mouth is seven and three-quarters inches in
diameter. The neck is two inches long and the body
is round. The rim tapers off almost to an edge. The
bulge of the neck is fully a third of an inch in
thickness. The material is of the one coarse, grey
substance as the sherds already described. The
inside of the pot contains a thin black slip. In the
northeast corner and below the floor level some
eighteen inches is a hearth very much like the one
below room 5.

The floor level of room 3 was from thirty to
thirty four inches below the present surface. On the
floor level near the south wall of the room we
encountered our first potsherd. It was of grey color,

Room 8 revealed nothing but a crude spearhead
and a flint scraper. In the center of room 12 were
two hearths, one below the other. The first hearth
was twelve inches below the floor level and was

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
ten inches deep and thirty inches in diameter. Ashes
to the depth of six inches covered the bottom. This
hearth was floored with flat stones one and onehalf inches in diameter. The second hearth was
twenty-four inches below the floor level. It was
about ten inches deep and eighteen inches in
diameter. About two gallons of animal bones were
taken from the two hearths. A part of a broad flat
spade made from a buffalo shoulder blade, and an
excellent bone awl came from the first hearth. About
five inches below the second hearth was a layer of
large, flat stone. One stone was twenty inches long,
eighteen inches wide and eight inches thick. The
others were not taken out, but appeared as large.
Below this layer of stones was the clear, Yellow
River sand. It is to be remembered that neither of
these hearths had any connection with the hearth
found on the floor level of this room.
To the east of the ruin near the edge of the hill
are four small, iso1ated, circular rooms shown in
Figure 1 as Cl, C2, C3, and C4, respectively. The
largest one is C2, which has a stone floor and is
eight feet in diameter. The most interesting one was
C4, which was excavated by Mr. Studer. It is four
feet in diameter; and in the southwest side on a
narrow bench, about eighteen inches from the
surface and twelve inches from the floor level was
a small hearth of yellow clay. On the floor level
were a perfect specimen of bone spade highly
polished, two fragments of flint knives, several
mussel shells and many broken animal bones.
At the base of wall D on the east side we
uncovered a huge metate. It is significant to note
that no arrow points were found in the excavation.

21

Mr. Studer had previously found one on the foot of
the bank where the road was cut through the ruin,
but he was not certain whether it had come from
the floor level or whether it had slid down from the
surface. It is also to be remembered that no arrow
points were found in the Tarbox. Many were found
on the surface, but none on or near the old floor
levels. Spear heads were found there in abundance,
but no arrow heads.
There is much more to be done on the A-C ruin.
The most immediate task is to make several
transverse trenches, and then longitudinal trenches
along walls C and D. Eventually it is our plan to
excavate the entire area but that will no doubt be a
matter of three or four years. We could have made
a more spectacular showing this time, but it was
our purpose to begin a systematic plan of
excavation, and we doggedly held to our purpose,
leaving the spectacular finds to come in season.
We made no attempt to find the burials or the rubbish
heaps. That will provide thrills in the future. Our
main object on this trip was to discover the anatomy
of the ruin as nearly as possible for purposes of
restoration. In this we succeeded even better than
we expected at the outset. The relationship of the
hearths below the floor levels to the ruin proper is
a matter which we can not explain as yet, but
doubtless future excavation will clear this matter
up.
1. For a general description of the Canadian region and the
distribution of the slab stone ruins in the Panhandle see Bulletin of
the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society, Volume
I, September, 1929.
2. See figure 1.

22

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

A ROCK SHELTER IN COKE COUNTY
BY E. B. SAYLES
Through the courtesy of Mr. C. H. Wylie, the
owner of the land, a small rock shelter on Oak Creek
in Coke County, Texas, was investigated. In it were
found a number of petroglyphs and three hearth
levels. The shelter is in a ledge of sand stone twenty
feet above the bed of the Creek, but below flood
level. (Plate 4, Figure 1).
The opening of the shelter faces toward the north
and is thirteen feet across. The depth of the shelter
is eleven feet, and the height at the entrance to the
undisturbed clay level is eight feet. Greater height
is given to the eastern half of the shelter than to the
western part by a half dome in the ceiling. It is on
that part of the ceiling here the half dome joins the
western part of the shelter that the principal
petroglyphs appear. (Plate 4, Figure 2, also Plate
5, Figure A).
They fill a space seven feet eight inches long,
and at the widest point, are twenty inches in height.
There is no confusion in their appearance as they
are not superimposed. They were evidently made
by some blunt implement that was rubbed on the
sand stone, after the design had first been outlined.
Some of the deepest and widest figures are a perfect
fit for the forefinger, as the bottom of these
engravings are rounded. Only a few of the larger
incisions have angles where the two sides meet.
This is a characteristic, however, of the narrowest
and shallowest lines, which appear to have been
cut by some sharp instrument.
Immediately below the offset in the ceiling
where the majority of the petroglyphs appear, and
near the entrance to the cavern, is a separate group
of figures. (Plate 5, Fig. C). On the rear wall is
another small group principally composed of
incised lines about eight inches long, parallel and
staggered with some cross hatching.
Another large group appears upon a slab of sand
stone that at one time must have been attached to
the ceiling, or immediately adjacent to it. (Plate 5,
Figure B). When in place, this slab divided the
shelter in two almost equa1 parts. On the upper
portions of this stone partition, and facing the east,
are a number of deeply incised designs. Many of

them seem to be in prolongation of similar lines
from above, crossing in a variety of patterns. Some
of these lines are an inch and a half deep, the usual
depth of the other figures being from a half to threequarters of an inch.
An additional set of figures was discovered upon
a large stone that extends along the entire eastern
part of the shelter. (Plate 4, Figure 3). This stone
forms a fairly even shelf forty-seven inches below
the ceiling and sloping from the front toward the
rear of the shelter. From its flat top an apron extends
at an angle of about 45° toward the floor of the
cave. On this sloping apron are some designs
similar to those on the slab that once divided the
shelter.
A single incised line of the same general shape
as those just described, but only about twelve inches
in length, is cut on the face of the opening on the
northeastern wall. While it is greatly eroded, its
general form is that of the other long cigar shaped
lines in other parts of the shelter.
The sand stone that forms the shelter and on
which the petroglyphs appear is hard, impregnated
with iron, with a great number of small pebbles
imbedded in it. It is light yellow in color banded
with white and light buff, but within the shelter it
has weathered a dark brownish red similar to the
adjacent soil. The entire ledge is covered with green,
blue and yellow lichens, which also appear on the
ceiling in the western part of the shelter, covering
the petroglyphs there, and the single line on the
northeastern wall.
When the shelter was found, it had been gone
into by “treasure hunters.” Sand, clay, charcoal,
fragments of river shells, bones, and flint, had been
thrown out of the shelter, almost closing the
entrance. An investigation was undertaken with the
aid of Carl Chelf, a young, enthusiastic and helpful
companion on many of my archaeological trips.
The material that had been thrown out together
with the disturbed soil within the shelter was first
screened. In this were found deer and turkey bones,l
a flake knife, a triangular point, and a thin flake
scraper, with numerous flakes and chips of flint.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

23

Five inches of light red silt and clay separated
With this done, it was seen that the shelter had
filled in from its floor level of undisturbed clay a this hearth level from that above, which consisted
depth of six feet, six inches, which had brought the of two inches of dusty ashes mixed with a great
fill within twelve inches of the
ceiling at the entrance along the
eastern side and covered part of the
ceiling to the west. The removal and
screening of the undisturbed fill in
that part of the shelter that had not
attracted the treasure hunters was
next undertaken. This was found to
be filled with a mass of living roots,
many as large as two inches in
diameter. The top of the fill was so
close to the ceiling that it was
difficult to commence a shelf that
might be carried downward. Three
days were spent in the tedious work
of loosening the soil about the roots
in excavating to the undisturbed clay.
During the progress of this work,
four strata of charcoal and other
evidences of occupation were
encountered, each separated by a
stratum of sterile silt and clay. These
all appeared along the north eastern
part of the shelter and directly below
the opening in the roof. But there was
no evidence of fire on any part of the
ceiling or without the shelter, such
evidence being confined entirely to
the stratified levels within the shelter
itself.
In describing the different hearth
levels, the lowest, being the one
nearest the original floor of the
shelter, is described first.
The undisturbed clay floor
consisted of a light bluish clay and
immediately on top of it was a thin
stratum of yellow sand and pebbles,
mixed with small pieces of sand
stone. Then appeared a stratum
eleven inches thick of light yellowish
pink sandy clay and pebbles. Resting
directly on this was a hearth of small
sand stones, with very small pieces
of charcoal, also the bones of deer,
skunk, turkey and a species of small
bird, fragments of heavy fresh water
shells, and many flakes of flint.

Plate 4.
ROCK SHELTER IN COKE COUNTY.
1. Entrance to the shelter in back of man; sandstone ledge.
2. Part of petroglyphs on projection from ceiling in the
eastern part of the shelter.
3. Large stone along eastern wall of shelter, bearing a
number of incised lines; hearth stones in place.

24

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

Plate 5.
THE PRINCIPLE GROUPS OF PETROGLYPHS
A. On the ceiling facing east; particularly shown in Plate 4, Fig. 1. (The length of the group is 7
feet 8 inches. All of the other figures drawn to scale).
B. On partition slab.
C. On ceiling near entrance. (The relative positions of the three groups in the drawing are those of
the various groups in the shelter itself.)
quantity of very fine charcoal. In this stratum were
numerous thin flakes and some large nodules, of
flint; fragments of heavy shells, the bones of deer
and turkey; two chips flaked along the edge; one
thin flake worked to a point, with a long flake
removed on each side, and four fragments of small
points, all finely worked. The hearth covered an
area two by three feet and was efficiently built of a
number of pieces of sand stone resting in a trough
formed by the large stone along the eastern part of
the shelter and a smaller one just to the west of it.
This hearth was placed directly below the opening
in the ceiling and extended almost to the wall on
this part of the shelter. This level appeared to have
been used longer than any of the others, judging by
the accumulation of debris.

the eastern part of the shelter were below this hearth
level, many of them extending below the level of
the hearth below it.
Every stratum between hearth levels was sterile.

Five inches above the last hearth and separated
from it by a stratum of silt and clay appeared eight
inches of charcoal in large firm pieces, some partly
burned wood, mixed with sand. In this eight inch
stratum there was no flint, hearth stones, nor
artifacts, but the bones of deer, turkey, and some
smaller bird; there was also a quantity of bluish
green bottle glass. A part of the bottom of the bottle
showed it to be a “short” bottle with deep
indentations, similar to those appearing at a close
by frontier post, abandoned in 1867. This stratum
Seven inches of clay and silt separated this was not horizontal, but sloped sharply from the
hearth from that above, which consisted of three opening above the eastern wall toward the rear of
pieces of sand stone, the farthest resting against the the shelter. This deposit was only thirty-four inches
below the ceiling near the entrance. On top of it
wall to the northwest. In this hearth level were
pieces of charcoal, fragmentary bones of turkey and was a stratum twelve inches think of sandy silt and
deer, and some flint, making a stratum three inches on top of this there was ten inches of light yellowish
thick. All of the charcoal in this and the first two pink sandy loam, which contained a great deal of
hearth levels was readily powdered when pressed leaves, sticks, and pebbles. Since the level
between the fingers, and each of these hearth levels containing the glass was so near the ceiling, it is
probable that is does not represent as occupied
was horizontal to the original clay floor of the
shelter. All of the figures upon the large stone along level, but had washed in from above. This is further
suggested by the decided slope in the stratum itself,

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

25

totally unlike the other levels, and no hearth stones overlying soil had not been disturbed, as it was
were found in it.
thickly matted with the roots from close by living
trees.
The western part of the shelter was not
investigated as this had largely been disturbed by
In addition to this shelter with its petroglyphs,
treasure hunters. A test hole was placed eight feet the vicinity of this site has some interesting features.
in front of the shelter. At a depth of three feet, six Extending along the eastern bank of Oak Creek for
inches through the same red silt and clay that formed a distance of four hundred yards to the south of the
the various strata on the inside of the cavern, shelter are scattered workshops, with numerous
charcoal and burned sand stone were found. This rejects, and a few finished implements,
hammerstones, etc. Immediately to the east of the
shelter are a number of small circular stone hearths,
and to the north of them is a low natural mound on
which a burial was reported and from which a large
quantity of white, blue, green, and red glass beads
were picked up. Further to the north are two burned
rock mounds, twelve to fifteen feet across, with an
extensive camp site adjacent. In the sand stone
ledge on the bank of the Creek to the west of this
campsite are two deep boat shaped mortar holes
one largely eroded away. And still further to the
were found a number of hearths and a level of
occupation three and a half feet below the present
surface of the ground. There is also another
campsite on the west side of the stream and about
six hundred yards lower down, containing a great
number of hearth. And from the narrative of an eye
witness2 the general vicinity of this site was
occupied by more than twenty thousand Plains
Indians for several months in 1854 during a
conference with Government officials, with the
view if their locating upon reservations.
The glass in the highest level above the hearths
would suggest that the shelter was occupied prior
to the establishment of the nearby post in 1852.

Plate 6.
ARTIFACTS FROM ROCK SHELTER
1. Scraper; showing flake removed length
of artifact.
2. Reverse of scraper.
3. Cross section of scraper.
4. Flake point.
5. Reverse of flake point.
6. Cross section of flake point. (Natural size).

While only a few artifacts were found within
the shelter, they are not wholly dissimilar to the
types of artifacts found on the surface in the adjacent
camps, and in other camp sites in the general
vicinity. But the technique of the flake scraper and
the small point, each made by retouching the edges,
and each with long flakes removed from the surface,
so that the implement is thinner through the center
than towards the margin, is only known in one other
site of the more than two hundred recorded sites in
this section of the state. (Pl. 6).
1. All bone material was submitted to and identified by Dr. J. W.
Gidley, of the Nat’l. Mus., Washington.
2. Account of E. L. Deaton, quoted in Frontier Times, Vol. 5,
No. 5, Feb., 1928.

26

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

ORNAMENTATION ON THE POTTERY
OF THE TEXAS COASTAL TRIBES
TEXT AND ILLUSTRATIONS BY WENDALL H. POTTER
Along the Texas coast from Baffin Bay
northward to the Matagorda Peninsula, including
the islands of Padre, Mustang, San Jose (St. Joseph),
and Matagorda, potsherds are found on most of the
Indian campsites. These sherds differ from those
found North and East of Matagorda which are easily
recognizable as of Caddoan origin. They differ also
from the sherds found South and West of Baffin Bay
and along the Rio Grande, the territory occupied
by tribes of a stock known to have been
Coahuiltecan.

flakes of shell appeared plentifully in the structure
of these sherds.
Class II

Cooking ware of lighter type, four to six
millimeters in wall thickness, usually smoothly
finished both inside and outside, but some
specimens showing small grooves and ridges on
the surface, probably made to reduce the
slipperiness of the vessel and thereby lessen the
danger of breakage. These ridges or grooves were
evidently made with a tool of shell, notched along
In the territory covered by this article resided
one edge, specimens of which have been found on
many tribes which has been classed as Karankawan,
the campsites. But a small percentage of the sherds
the southern section occupied by tribes mentioned
in this class show the tempering flakes of shell which
in Fray Garcia’s “Manual” as speaking the
are very prominent in those of Class I, and the flakes,
Coahuiltecan tongue, and many tribes or groups of
when present, are smaller. Vessels of this class
individuals as yet not classified. However, as the
show contact with smoke and soot, but it is doubtful
potsherds found are all evidently of one culture,
if they were placed in direct contact with the coals.
and as they answer in most features the pottery
described by Gatschet as having been seen in
Class III
process of manufacture by the Karankawa Indians,
A ware made to contain water and other liquids,
and, as they differ entirely from the potsherds found
wall thickness varying between two and four
in the heart of Coahuiltecan territory along the Rio
millimeters in thickness, with some pieces found
Grande, these may safely be attributed to the
measuring as little as one and one-half millimeters.
Karankawas or to such of the Coahuiltecan tribes
It is in this class that practically all the decorated
as lived in close proximity to the Karankawas and
sherds as yet found appear, and in this class only
had adopted their methods and style in pottery
that the practice of waterproofing with crude asphalt
making. These sherds may be roughly divided into
obtained. Thousands of sherds show smooth coating
three classes, and each of these into many
of asphalt, sometimes on the outside of the vessel,
subdivisions, but, as it is with the third of these
sometimes on both sides, but usually inside.
only of which this article treats, the first two willGatschet mentions the use of asphalt paint by the
passed over with but brief mention.
Karankawas, made by melting the crude product
Class I
with animal oil. He also mentions a red paint as
being used by them, but if such was used it was not
Cooking ware of heavy type, seven to nine
lasting as no sherd shows red decorative features.
millimeters in wall thickness, smoothly finished on
Pots waterproofed with asphalt on the inside were
outside, roughly within, and frequently showing
heated, the coating material melted in the vessel
impressions of the fingers of the makers. Sherds of
which was then turned and twisted until it was
this type all show direct contact with hot coal and
evenly distributed. Sherds in this class do not show
are sometime thickly encrusted with soot. Large
any tempering shell.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
DRAWINGS
Plate 7
No. 1. A border made by two incised lines
running around the pot and parallel with the edge,
the space between the lines divided into triangles.
No. 2. A border made by a series of groups of four
short incised lines, each group touching the other
and making four continuous lines parallel with the
edge, a series of saltires or crosses incised below.
No. 3. A border made by a single incised line
running around the vessel, the edge of the bowl
painted black, the space between the incised and
painted lines occupied by a roughly-made dancette
line. No. 4. A border composed of a small bone or
twig into the rim while the material was still soft.
No. 6. Ornamental edge made by cutting notches of
triangular shape into edge. In some specimens these

Plate 7.
TEXAS COASTAL POTTERY

27

notches were made while the material was still soft,
in others the notches were made after the pots were
baked. Two holes drilled near the edge were
evidently for the purpose of suspension. No. 7.
Ornamental edge made by pressing bone or twig
into the rim at somewhat irregular intervals. No.
8. Ornamental edge made as was No. 6, the notches
made after the pot had been baked. In addition to
the notches, the edge of the vessel had been thinned
by abrasion, the spaces between the notches made
somewhat pyramidal. No. 9. An embattled edge
made by removing rectangular pieces at intervals
from the edge. No. 10. Ornamental edge made
while the vessel was still soft, the implement made
in cutting it being pressed straight downward, then
twisted upward to remove the clay from the notch.
Many of these notched edge sherds show a narrow

Plate 8.
TEXAS COASTAL POTTERY.

28

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

out with a fine pointed tool. No. 12. Similar to
No. 11, but with a tiny and very uniform depressions,
evidently made with a roulette wheel, taking the
place of the “v” markings. No. 13. Similar to No.
11, but decorated with asphalt paint only, the stripes
being closer together. No. 14. Similar to No. 11
and No. 12, but with a row of short incised
Plate 8
horizontal lines between the painted stripes. No.
No. 11. Neck of a water bottle with bordering
15. A small bowl ploughed up in almost perfect
edge of asphalt paint and downward stripes of the
condition from the soil of Arrowhead Island in the
same material, between each pair of painted stripes
Laguna Madre. Sherds found on most campsites
a parallel line of tiny “v” shaped incisions picked
show this form of decoration to have been
exceedingly common.
border of asphalt paint around the outside of the
rim, this border never being as deep as the
accompanying notches on the outside of the vessel,
but sometimes extending down inside the vessel
for a half inch or more.

Plate 9
No. 16. Water container reconstructed from
sherds found on the Blink Bonnie campsite, Aransas
County, North of Rockport. The sherds from this
specimen were found at different times and are now
scattered. One is in the National Museum, another
in the Museum of the University of Pennsylvania,
etc. Sherds showing the necks of the vessels ringed
with asphalt paint, spotted with the same material
below, are not very common, but have been found
on campsites in Aransas, San Patricio, and Nueces
Counties. No. 17. Vase from the northern end of
the Live Oak Peninsula, Aransas County. Only
portions of this specimen were found. It is not
certain that two handles were attached to this pot,
as portions of only one were found with it. A very
narrow border of black paint edges the opening.

Although Gatschet mentions that Karankawan
pottery was always made without handles, several
handles have been found. Another unusual feature
worthy of note was the finding on Arrowhead Island
of part of the neck of a pot which had within it a
shoulder on which a lid could rest. This specimen
showed traces of asphalt paint decoration.

Plate 9.
TEXAS COASTAL POTTERY.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

29

REPORT ON SOME RECENT ARCHAEOLOGICAL
RESEARCHES IN THE ABILENE SECTION
BY DR. CYRUS N. RAY
While this paper will give a general account of
the most important of the author’s investigations
during the past year, it will deal more in detail
with the deeply buried stratified human camp site
deposits. Investigations have revealed many
evidences tending to confirm the author’s early
conclusion that the Abilene section was on of the
areas occupied by human beings in very ancient
times. Whether or not any of these very deeply
buried occupation levels were tenanted by man in
any previous geological period, I am not prepared
to say at the present time; however, I will offer
evidence to prove that they extend into exceedingly
remote times.
A Folsom Culture Camp Site
Between two mountains near Abilene there is a
deeply eroded dry gully in which water is found
only immediately after rains. It appears that
formerly the valley had filled with gravel at the
bottom and this had been covered with ten or
twelve feet of light soil composed of a mixture of
red clay and sand (probably partly wind blown).
Later deep gullies had worn through this pinkish
soil down to the gravel. In the sides of the eroded
banks several feet below the original surface are
exposed old human hearths, mussel shells, flint
flakes, and artifacts of unusual design. Several
arrow point with channels up the centers were
found here. A typical one measures 2 1-8 inches
long and 7-8 of an inch wide, has no notches, and
the barbs are formed by the projections on each
side of the deeply recessed bases. While the above
have been said by authorities, “to closely approach
the Folsom points” they were larger and not so
fine workmanship. Recently while showing this site
to Mr. Floyd V. Studer, of Amarillo, the latter found
a part of the central portion of a Folsom point
which is typical in every way except size of the
finest Folsom technique. Plate 10, Fig. 6, 7. The
piece is 1 3-8-inches long and 6-8 of an inch wide
and deeply channelled on both faces. A broad thin

scraper with a minute retouch around the edge of
one side was found buried in the side of the vertical
clay creek bank here at a depth of eight feet from
the original surface. (Plate 10, Fig. 1.) Artifacts
from the above site are shown on plate 10 and are
numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10 and 11. Figures 8
and 9 are of two very heavily patinated specimens
from a surface site. They are totally unlike the other
artifacts from that site.
Limestone Incrusted Artifact
Both in the Folsom camp site described above
and in other sites exposed by deep erosion in such
formations the author has found flint artifacts which
have large areas of their chipped surfaces covered
with heavy limestone incrustations. The tools most
commonly found with hard stone incrustations over
flint flaked surfaces belong to the large, thick,
deeply recessed based implements of unknown use
described on page 18, Vol. 1 of the Bulletin of The
Society.
While the above mentioned artifacts are not at
all similar to the Folsom points, several were found
at about the same level in the same valley. Plate 10
Fig. 2.
Carved Fossil Bone Artifact
Situated near Abilene is a small dry creek which
only contains water during rains or immediately
after. This small shallow branch winds through its
flat valley floor and its overflows have exposed a
quite large camp site covering the flood plain. In
this site many crudely made large projectile points,
hammerstones and small hearths containing from
eight to ten large stones were found.
In the bottom of one of the side gullies the author
found a heavy hard petrified bone of some large
animal (Plate 12 Figs. 6, 7). It is 9 l/2 inches long,
2 5/8 inches wide at the larger end and 21-16 inches
wide at the smaller end. It has been further flattened

30

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
petrified. Another similar fossil animal bone was
found in a human hearth which had eroded out of a
gulley in the highest gravel terrace. Plate 12, Figs.
8 and 9.
Deeply Buried Texas Hearths
After the finding of the two peculiar mineralized
skeletons described in the May 1929 issue of The
Scientific American, the author began a systematic
investigation to determine if such or deeper sites
existed elsewhere in the river banks of Central West
Texas. In August 1929 a spear head was found
embedded in another high Brazos River bank at a
depth of eight feet accompanied with traces of
hearth stones and charcoal. Plate 14 Fig 9. In
September in a third high bank far distant from the
first, a definite stratum containing ashes, charcoal,
burnt hearth stones, flint chips, mussel shells and
animal bones was found in the high bank of a small
creek near where it entered the Brazos River. This
stratum outcropped eight feet from the surface of
the ground. Here excavation was carried back into
the face of the nearly vertical bank for several feet,
Mr. E. B. Sayles, Prof. Otto Watts and Dr. J. Richard
Spann assisting in the work. Views of bank and
hearth stones shown on Plate 11, Figs. 1 and 2.

Plate 10.
ARTIFACTS FROM FOLSOM CAMP SITE
Figs. 1 and 2 show limestone incrustation.
Fig. 7.Cross section of Fig. 6.
Scale: Fig. 11 2 1-2 inches in length.
at the larger end by cutting away about one half of
the articular portion although the other side and end
of the articular facets are smooth and solid. At the
smaller end the articular facets are intact but the
shaft just above them has been carved down on both
edges to make a handle which nicely fits the hand.
The peculiar feature about this specimen is that it
is now composed of too hard material to haw been
carved with flint tools but there is no evidence in
the site of metal tools. It is the author’s opinion that
the bone was carved while fresh and has since

Many fragments of large animal bones which
had been broken to extract the marrow were found.
These had very sharp, hard, thin edges as though
just broken, although the bones were yellowed with
age and had a resonant ring when knocked together
as though partly mineralized. One bone had several
transverse cuts in it. In addition to the numerous
bones and mussel shells, flint chips, and burnt
hearth stones were very abundant. Beaver teeth and
deer bones were found. One battered quartz
harmmerstone was found. At one place where hearth
stones were particularly abundant in a layer of
charcoal and ashes the stones seemed to have been
set in a concentric layer. Just outside the edge and
on the original floor level, Mr. Sayles found a thin
nicely chipped square based knife or spear head. It
was 3 3-16 inches long and 1 13-16 wide at the
base. Plate 14, Fig. 8. A short distance down the
creek and on the opposite high vertical bank was
another charcoal shell and burnt rock stratum. The

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

31

charcoal seam here was much thinner but was could be had to the seven or eight feet of vertical
outlined by occasional hearth stones and shells. bank face at the top.
Assisted by Prof. Otto Watts, steps were cut into
Measurements showed this stratum to have been
the almost vertical lower portion so that access
deposited much later as it was buried only four
feet below the soil surface. Despite the
difficult footing, we dug several shallow
test holes back into the stratum. Many
humanly made flint flakes were found
embedded. The author dug back about
eight inches into the bank and exposed a
small bird point embedded in place.
Plate 14 Fig 11. This proved to be an
arrow point of one of the Sand Dune
types with only the tip of the point
missing. This find as well as the other
bird-point found buried between six and
seven feet deep with the two peculiar
skeletons on the Matthews Ranch shows
that these patterns of bird points were
used for a long period in this region. Plate
14 Fig 12. Several hundred yards farther
up this small creek is another high bank.
At this place is a thick stratum of hearth
stones, ashes, charcoal and mussel shells
buried at a depth of fourteen feet below
the soil surface. This layer is situated on
top of a stratum of red clay which is about
a foot thick, this red clay layer lies on
top of a undisturbed horizontal stratum
of Permian limestone which here
constitutes the creek floor or bed. Little
digging has been done here thus far on
account of the depth of the stratum and
the hardness of the clay. Thus far no flints
have been found at this site.

Plate 11.
STRATIFIED OCCUPATION LEVELS.
Figs. 1 and 2 show excavation of hearths where charcoal,
artifacts, and bones were found buried at a depth of 8 feet.
Figs. 3 and 4 show hearth site where two projectile
points were found buried at a depth of 24 1-2 feet; Fig. 3
shows artifact in place at center of lower half of picture.

Situated about a mile from the last
described site and on the high bank of
the Brazos River where another dry creek
branch enters it is another series of
stratified human camp sites. Beginning
with the soil surface there is a large flint
worker’s camp site covering the hill top
above the river. This site shows no
evidence of white contacts, yet the
hearths and flint and shell debris is still
mostly exposed on the soil surface. The

32

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

Brazos River flows near the foot of the hill and at
this place are situated some high banks where a
small creek entering the river curves in such way
that it washes against and caves in one side and the
river the other side of the high river bank. Here on
both faces are exposed flint, shell and charcoal
hearth layers at several depths approximately four,
six, and eight feet deep. At another site situated
on Elm Creek many miles from the above
described group of camp sites is the deepest
buried series of hearths ever found by the author
(24 to 27 feet). Plate 15.

bank. A picture of this artifact in place is shown on
Plate 11 Fig 3; it is seen in the center of the lower
third of the picture, the other end being firmly
embedded in the hard clay. Surrounding it were two
embedded flint flakes. At various places along the
bank several other humanly made flint flakes were
found embedded in place.

This site was discovered by the author in
January 1930. At this place Elm Creek is
undercutting its vertical high banks where a curve
of the stream throws the current against them. Here
lie exposed various regularly laid horizontal
strata of sands, clays, and gravels. At a depth from
the surface of the soil of twenty-four feet lies a
stratum of hard solidified gravel of an average
thickness of eight inches. The edge of this gravel
stratum lies exposed at the same level for a
distance of several hundred yards along the
vertical face of the high creek bank. From
immediately below this gravel layer to a distance
of three feet below it are several strata of charcoal
and burnt hearth stones. The charcoal varies from
thin streaks to heavy hearth deposits of from four
to six inches thickness surrounding fire blackened
stones. Deposits of ashes, charcoal, and flint chips
may be traced for a distance of one hundred and
twenty-five feet along the face of the bank. Plate
11. Figs. 3 and 4 and Plate l5.
At the time the site was discovered several
projectile points and numerous humanly made flint
flakes and a much battered hammerstone were
found in the loose gravel of the dry creek bed
immediately below the charcoal outcrops. Also
three humanly made flint flakes were found
embedded in place in the charcoal levels below
the hard gravel stratum. After the heavy spring
rains and high creek rises, the author again visited
the site and found that the bank had caved off to a
considerable extent. Six inches below the hard
gravel stratum and in the charcoal deposit, he
found the point of a peculiar flint object projecting
straight out from the vertical face of the red clay

Plate 12.
ARTIFACTS AND BONES FROM CENTRAL
WEST TEXAS SITES
Fig. 1. Stone pestle.
Fig. 2. Abalone shell pendant from mortar hole
site.
Fig. 3, 4, 5. Flint points from same site.
Figs. 6 and 7. Petrified carved animal bone.
Figs. 8 and 9. Petrified animal bone from hearth.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
A hundred feet further down stream a flint
projectile point was found embedded at the same
level. Mr. E. B. Sayles and Prof. Otto Watts of
Simmons University were taken to the site and the
specimens were photographed in place. Later with

33

the assistance of Mr. Sayles excavation was made
above and down to the top of the hard gravel
stratum at two places to determine whether any
openings may have existed in the gravel stratum
through which the artifacts below could have been
washed at some previous time. Plate
11, Fig. 4. No openings were found
and the gravel was found to extend in
a very hard unbroken floor back into
the bank. The artifacts found both in
the loose gravel in the creek bed
immediately below and those firmly
embedded in place were of peculiar
and distinctive forms.
Figs. 3 and 5, plate 14 are those
found embedded in place. Figs. 1, 2,
6, 7 and 10 of Plate 14 are some of
the artifacts found in the loose gravel
in the creek bed below. None of these
projectile points showed any
evidence of barbs, stems or notches.
All were of leaf shapes. The one
found imbedded with point sticking
out was a slender well made artifact
of the solutrean double pointed laurel
leaf type. Plate 14 Fig 3. The tip of
the point of one end had been broken
off. The other point found embedded
was broader, thicker, rounded, and
flattened at one end and pointed at the
other. Plate 14, Fig. 5. The broader
end had evidently been flattened for
hafting. This long oval type was also
found in a specimen from the loose
gravel below. Plate 14 Fig 6.
It is also interesting to note here
that the same type of point (Plate 14
Fig 4) was also found deep in a gravel
pit on Dead Man Creek by Mr. Watts,
the pit owner.

Plate 13.
BOAT SHAPED MORTAR HOLE SITE
Figs. 1 and 3. Eroded holes.
Fig. 2. Sandstone ledge on top of which holes are found.
Fig. 4. Two well preserved holes.

While visiting the site with the
author, Mr. Ernest W. Wilson found a
projectile point in the loose gravel of
the creek bed which had an unusually
thin, sharp pointed blade which was
slightly twisted, square based, and

34

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
beautifully chipped. Plate 14 Fig 7. The
charcoal found at these sites has been
tested in the chemical laboratory of
Simmons University and found to be real
charcoal.
How old these various hearth levels
are the author will not attempt to say, it
will require much further study before
one can be able to estimate age.
In this same region exist hundreds of
stone age camp sites and hearths and
some of these lie on the surface soil
immediately above some of the deep
sites. None of these stone age surface sites
show any contacts with white
civilization. Texas is one of the places
where some of the earliest white contacts
in America were made with the Indians.
Presumably then iron should have
superseded flint at an early date in this
region. Yet we find that time has either
not yet covered up the larger number of
Indian camp sites or they are still within
plow depths. In the light of the above facts
the author cannot see how the above
described sites can be other than
exceedingly ancient.
Some Ancient Mortar Holes

Plate 14.
ARTIFACTS FROM DEEPLY
BURIED EARTH LEVELS
Figs. 3 and 5. Found firmly imbedded in place at a
depth from the surface of 24 1-2 feet.
Figs. 8 and 9. Found in place at 8 feet below the
surface.
Fig. 11. Found in place at 4 feet below the surface.
Fig. 12. Found in place at between 6 and 7 feet below
the surface.
All other figured artifacts found loose in the creek bed
below the 24 feet depth hearth level.
Scale: Fig. 7 is 4 inches in length.

Mr. E. W. Douthit of Abilene, Texas,
recently requested the author to examine
some peculiar holes in a ledge of rocks
located on his ranch, southwest of
Colorado, Texas. A week end trip was
made to the place in company with Mr.
J. H. Lowry, and it was found that the
holes were made by man. Two weeks
later on another week end trip complete
measurements were made by the author
and photographs were taken by Mr. E. B.
Sayles.
The weathered conditions of the
mortar holes found, and the remarkable
features connected with the associated
camp site were unusual enough to require
detailed description. (Plate 13, 1, 2, 3,
and 4).

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
The site is on the east side of a north and south
mile wide valley in the low mountains. This valley
is a nearly flat flood plain of a small dry creek
which is only a few miles long. Water does not
flow except immediately after summer rains and
this collects in shallow pools which remain not
more than a month after. The rainfall is not great
and falls mostly during the summer months.
Rising abruptly out of the east edge of this plain
is a ridge of hard sandstone twenty-five or thirty
feet high which projects like a peninsula out into
the plain from a higher hill back of it. Immediately
back of the ridge the land slopes to a basin like dry
drainage which arises on the hill back of the ledge.
This leaves a ledge which drops abruptly in front
and slopes slightly away to the back of it. This ledge
is composed of quite large boulders of very hard

35

sandstone most of which lie flat or nearly so. All
along the crest of this ridge for a considerable
distance, some ancient race of people has excavated
numbers of boat shaped mortar holes. Counting
remnants as well as complete holes, we found a
total of eighty-four mortar holes. Forty-four of these
had eroded badly. (Plate 13, Figs. 1, 3). The erosion
may have been partly due to wind blown sand but
in the opinion of the author was mainly due to the
mechanical wear and chemical action of the water
which has fallen on each rock during the ages since
the holes were made. The reason for this belief is
that where the rocks have lain perfectly flat, the
holes have filled with wind blown sandy soil and a
thick growth of grass has preserved them. Where
the latter were dug out and measured little erosion
was shown.

Plate 15.
DEEPLY BURIED HEARTH LEVEL.
The author is pointing to charcoal stratum buried 24 1-2 feet deep where two flint points were found
embedded in place. Three feet below this stratum is another charcoal and flint chip stratum.

36

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

One of a group of ten soil filled holes situated
on a level topped rock, showed the following
measurements; the length was 15 3-4 inches, the
width 6 3-4 inches in the middle widest part, and
the depth was 13 inches. One rock had seven holes,
five filled with soil. The center one was dug out
and measured as follows: length 17 3-4 inche8,
width 7 1-2 inches, depth 17 inches. (Plate 13 Fig.
4.) Another one in the same rock showed length 17
inches, width 10 1-2 inches and a depth of 15
inches. The latter though partly filled with soil was
eroded near the top. The width was abnormal due
probably to its situation near the edge where rain
water flowed across it from the middle portion of
the rock. One stone had four holes in it. Nearly half
of this stone was worn away to a considerable depth
leaving only the bottoms of three holes on the
southeast side where there must have been a slight
slope. (Plate 13, Fig. 3.) The northwest portion had
been more level, a hole which had evidently been
situated on the edge of the point where the marked
erosion began had its northwest end intact and the
depth here was 13 inches. The southeast end of the
same hole was only six inches deep. From this point
southeast the whole rock had been removed to
considerable depth. The next hole east of it had
only five inches of the bottom left. Another one had
only 3 1-2 inches of the bottom left and another
hole was only 4 1-2 inches deep. If these holes had
originally been only thirteen inches deep like the
remaining end of one of them evidently there had
been an erosion of the top of the stone varying from
9 1-2 to 8 1-2 inches at the southeast end and some
less where the slope started.
On another rock which had a little more slope
there were five bottoms of holes. The deepest one
was situated on the highest part of the rock where it
was nearer level, its length was 14 inches, its width
6 1-2 inches, its depth 8 inches. The length of
another one was 13 inches, its width 5 inches, its
depth 6 inches. The dimensions of one lower down
were length 81-2 inches, width 4 1-2 inches, depth
4 inches. Measurements of another were length 6
inches, width 2 1-2 inches, and depth 1 1-4 inches.
The latter was the most shallow and as to be
expected was situated on the lower side of the
slanting surface of one of the larger rocks. The rocks

varied in size from six to eight or ten feet across,
and there is no possibility that any water has ever
flowed over them except that which has fallen from
the skies directly on each rock. As the most perfectly
preserved grass sod filled holes varied from 15 to
17 inches deep and seemed rather uniform in depth,
form and size, it seems reasonable to make the
deduction that all were formerly of somewhat near
that depth. As the rock is very hard, somewhat like
limestone in hardness, it must have taken ages of
time for rain drops and the small flow that they
would create on each rock to have worn the solid
surfaces of these rocks away to depths of l1 to 15
inches. The problem of figuring such an age is more
than the author cares to undertake.
One hundred and two scrapers of crude design
were found, also three additional scrapers of fine
keel backed type. Five complete arrow heads (Plate
12, Figs. 3, 4 and 5), and twenty-eight broken
projectile points, five flint hammerstones and three
manos were found. One large paleolithic type
sinuous edged hand axe was found. It was 7 inches
long and the blade was 4 3-4 inches wide. It was
found in the edge of a hearth which had been
exposed by the erosion of a gulley wash. The slope
immediately back of the ledge and the rocky hill
east of it were strewn with flint chips. A few
fragments of mussel shells were found and one
almost complete shell which was deeply fluted was
found.
One peculiar scraper with a long channel down
the center lengthwise was found. A paddle shaped
arrow head made from a flat flake and left flat on
one side was found. (Plate 12, Fig 4.).
Search of the area revealed no source from
whence a large number of people could have
obtained water enough to have established the kind
of permanent camp indicated. Ranchmen say that it
is many miles to any permanent spring or stream
where a reliable water supply now exists.
Furthermore there were no oak or other nut trees
near there from which seeds or nuts could have
been obtained. The valley below was filled with
mesquite trees and it is possible that the makers of
the holes may have ground the hard mesquite beans
in them.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
Mr. D. D. Parramore stated that he had first
observed the holes twenty-eight years ago and that
they were then worn down as much as at the present
time and that he had not observed the slightest
change in them during that period.
On the side of a mountain situated about one
quarter of a mile east of the ledge, Mr. Lowry found
a beautiful iridescent Abalone shell pendant 3 inches
long, 1 1-8 inches wide at the top and 1 7-16 inches
wide at the bottom. It had three holes drilled in the
top. (Plate 12, Fig. 2). This pendant and also a
recessed based unbarbed projectile point, nearly
two inches long found by the author, (Plate 12, Fig.
5), were found in a small gulley below a large
overhanging rock where they evidently had washed
from under its shelter. It is possible that these may
have been lost under the rock shelter at a later date.
A very interesting find was made by Mr. Sayles
immediately back of the ledge containing the mortar
holes. It was the larger portion of a small bird point
which was flat on one side and of exactly the same
culture type as the one later found in the soil taken
from the graves of the two flat headed
dolichocephalic skeletons found by the author in
Shackelford County. The author has examined other

37

groups of mortar holes at several widely separated
points in Texas, notably near Christoval and San
Saba, Texas. All other such holes seen have been
quite round and about eight inches across and a
foot deep. The boat shaped holes maintain the same
shape from top to bottom. A remnant only a few
inches long is wide in the center and brought to
dull points at the ends exactly like the uneroded
ones. How the work was done is hard to deduce.
(Plate 12, Fig. 1, shows a stone found in Jones
County which may have been a pestle. It is twentythree inches long and 2 1-3 inches in diameter. Such
pestles of stone or wood may have been used but
none were found on the site. However, three flat
mano stones were found on the site.) No other
artifacts which might have been used either as
pestles or grinding stones have been found.
When we take into consideration the many
indications of age, such as stone erosion,
disappearance of water supply and the presence of
a known ancient form of arrow point with the fact
that the site is within thirty-five miles of Colorado,
Texas, where the extinct form of bison skeleton was
found associated with flint projectile points, we
have a site of very interesting probabilities as to
extreme age.

38

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

BURNED ROCK MOUNDS OF SOUTHWEST TEXAS
BY ERENST W. WILSON
From the time of the first settler down to the present
day the South one-half of the Western part of Texas,
has been a ranching country. In this section of the State
the searcher after archaeological remains will find them
to be least disturbed. The camp sites, mounds and
other remains of peoples who inhabited this section in
the past, have, in many counties, never been explored
or studied by the archaeologist.

mounds are found, but only those mounds having these
peculiarities will be discussed in this paper.

The writer has found mounds on the headwaters
of the Frio, Llano, San Saba and Colorado rivers and
on the lower Pecos. All of these rivers have their heads
in the part of Texas described in the beginning of this
paper. Plate 16, Figure 1, shows a burnt rock mound.
Plate 16, Figure 2, shows a cross section of a mound
It is a curious fact that in parts of this section of the which was fifty feet in diameter. It has been cut across
State, there are found piles or mounds of burned rocks. by road making. In the center it is less than three feet
The size of the rocks in them is less than one’s doubled thick.
fist. They are in circular piles or mounds. The mounds
vary in circumference from
possibly 16 to 50 feet, and
from a few inches to sometimes
3 feet high in the center. When
dug into, they are found to be
composed of stones of the
general size referred to above
mixed with ashes and dirt. The
base of the mound proper
always extends into the ground.
They are covered to depths
which vary to as much as two
feet. The rocks in the mounds
are of limestone similar to those
found in abundance on the
nearby hills. The entire mounds
show the effect of having been
thoroughly burned, but not
excessively burned. When the
rocks have not been disturbed
the mounds are always round.
A farmer who had hauled off
the rocks of mounds, would
often remark that after being
leveled and plowed for many
years the burned foundations of
them always remained and
Plate 16. BURNED ROCK MOUNDS
could not be effaced. Hearths
1. Mound; rocks scattered by erosion and cattle.
and possibly other types of
2. Cross section through mound, cut by road grading.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
This section of Texas, is sometimes called the arid
part of Texas, but it is well watered with many streams
of clear water, and they are bordered with tall timber
among which are some of the finest pecan trees in
Texas. On top of the hills the country varies from cedar
brakes to rolling black divide land covered with liveoak
trees. To this day game is found, and particularly is the
wild turkey common. It was an ideal place for Indians
or pre-historic man to live. There are thousands of
these mounds scattered over this section. The finest
specimens are found in Menard, Edwards, and Kimble
Counties, and Westward from there towards the
Pecos. Every river and small creek and water hole
has its quota.

39

existence. The following general characteristics of the
mounds are summarized:
FIRST: No mound of this type has been found by
the writer out of the sotol country. This statement calls
for a description of the sotol plant. It was commonly
called soto grass by the settlers. It belongs to the yucca
family, there being at least two species in the state,
Dasylirion texanum in south and central Texas, and
Dasyliriom wheeleri in the western portion of the State
west of the Pecos and Devil’s River. The plant has
serrated leaves of something over one-half an inch in
width. The leaves grow out of a large bulb. The bulb
was used as food by the Indians, and the first settlers.
It has been almost exterminated by the early cattlemen
feeding it to their cattle in dry winters. They would go
out with grubbing hoes and dig up the bulbs for the
cattle to eat. This plant grew in profusion over the
section described at the time the first settlers came in.
The area covered by the mounds was also originally
covered with the sotol plant.

The location of a particular mound was always near
wood and water at the time of its construction. The
watercourse near its location might have since changed
its course, but the old creek or river bed remains to
tell the story. Some mounds are located on the divide
country, but they are always near a wet weather water
hole or lake. When placed near a water course the
SECOND: The mounds are composed of
mound was placed above the ordinary high water
limestone rocks only. A kind of rock which will not
mark, but the open space desired back of a camp-site
stand excessive burning.
did not always appear desirable in locating a mound.
THIRD: Every mound has been well burned but
The writer lived in Kimble County on the
not excessively burned.
headwaters of the Llano river from the year he was
born until the year 1920. When he was a boy, the
FOURTH: Every mound contains ashes and dirt.
country had just been settled and was devoted to the
FIFTH: They are located, as a rule, some distance
live stock industry as it is today. The mounds were a
from a regular camp-site.
great source of interest and curiosity to him. His
grandfather, who was in this section before it began to
SIXTH: Every mound dug into extends into the
be settled by white men was approached on the subject ground.
and he pronounced them to be Indian remains. But
The early literature relating to this particular locality
few people had even noticed them, but those that had,
will be called upon to tell us something about this
thought them to be Indian remains. But their purpose
subject. The first quotation will have to do with “soto
was a sealed book. For many years the writer has
grass” or “wild artichokes” as a food, and is as follows:
been trying to find out why piles or mounds of burned
The dinner consisted of bear steaks, flapjacks,
rocks should have been left by Indians or pre-historic
fried in bear’s oil, hard tack, a pot of boiled
man.
rice, coffee, etc., and wild artichokes, which last
Every indication points to the fact that the Indian
grew abundantly in the vicinity of the camp. The
or pre-historic man of this section of Texas, was a
wild artichokes mentioned in the foregoing bill
practical man. He did not waste effort, and every effort
of fare, grow abundantly in some portions of
was used to sustain life. Since the mounds are so
northwest Texas, usually upon rocky and barnumerous and have the same general characteristics
ren soils. The plant is very similar in appearthere must have been a practical reason for their
ance to “bear grass,” but its leaves are serrated

40

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

and of a deeper green The best mode of cooking them in the woods, is the same as that for
cooking a beef or deer’s head. A trench is dug
and a fire built in it. When thoroughly heated,
the ashes and coals are raked out and the roots
put in and covered with them, where they are
left for several hours. Prepared in this way they
are really an excellent vegetable, and make a
very acceptable addition to the hunter’s ordinary repast.l
Another interesting statement which seems to bear
on the mound proposition is a statement made by F.
M. Buckelew, who was captured by Indians when he
was a boy fourteen years of age, in the year 1866. He
was captured in the Sabinal Canyon by the Lipan
Indians and taken further West to the Pecos country.
Another choice food of these Indians, and one
in almost constant use, was the “Soto” root, or
bulb of the soto plant, which grew in great abundance along these western rivers, and which,
when accessible, formed a choice winter food
for cattle. In the preparation of this plant for
food, large quantities of the bulbs were gathered and collected in a place suitable for a large
kiln. A large circular hole was then dug three or
four feet deep and several feet in diameter. In
this hole they would place a large pile of wood
and rock in such a way that the rocks would
become thoroughly heated by the time the wood
was consumed. The rocks were then replaced
in such a way that the soto could be placed on

and around them. When this was completed,
brush and leaves were placed next to the soto,
and the entire heap covered over with dirt so as
to make it air tight. This was allowed to remain
several days during which time the heat from
the rocks would penetrate the soto, and thoroughly cook it. When satisfied that the contents
were thoroughly cooked they would remove the
dirt and leaves, exposing a glistening white heap
of crisp soto. The bulbs were then spread out
in the sun where they could dry. When perfectly
dry, the flakes or thin layers would separate
easily. This completed, the task of preparing it
for food was just begun, as it was necessary to
make large holes in rocks or logs in which the
soto was placed when it was beaten and ground
by large wooden pestles until it resembled white
flour. This flour was then mixed with water and
made into small cakes and baked in the ashes
and embers of a fire.2
The Lipan Indian method of cooking “Soto Grass”
very easily fits into the description of the burned rock
mounds as they exist today. The dirt would be removed
after the cooking process had been completed, next
came the removal of the bulbs. This would leave the
pile of rocks, and they naturally settled into a mound
of burned rocks mingled with ashes and dirt.
1. Young Explorers, or the Adventures of Jack Doebel, pp.
129, 130.
2. F. M. Buckelew, Buckelew, The Indian Captive, published
by the Mason Herald, 1911, pp 72, 73.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

41

SHELTER CAVES OF THE EL PASO DISTRICT
BY EILEEN E. ALVES
In giving a report on the work being done in the
immediate vicinity of El Paso, you must think of
the location in which we find the caves and
scattered villages as on the high mesas between
the Franklin and Organ Ranges on the west, and to
the east, the Sacramentos and Huecos. The region
covered does not exceed fifty miles to the north
and east of El Paso, and is not in the Rio Grande
valley, but south of the Tularosa basin. The Jarillas
to the north, with their wealth of turquoise account
for the many turquoise ornaments found in the caves,
and on the desert sands.
It is a region of dry lakes, fed by the storm
drainage of the enclosing mountains, but
also being filled up by sand by the
erosion of water and wind. The water
contained in these lakes grows less year
by year, and now waves of sand, instead
of waves of water are lapping over the
very villages themselves. The pueblos
are situated around these lakes while the
caves are high up on the western rim of
the Huecos.

energetic type have reduced the interior to a state
of chaos, but even so, it has been possible to trace
two or more former occupations by the layer of
ashes, fiber, and grasses under the guano and rats’
nests. The votive offerings massed in the front part
of the cave may belong to a different tribe and time,
than the sandals and planting sticks buried in the
rear. But I am sorry to say, the objects found must
be described as a whole, as no care was ever
exercised in unearthing them as to position of layer,
and rabbit stick and lovely pendant were merely
treasure but never looked on as torn pages of an
ancient history.

In some of the caves have been found
unmistakable signs of the Basket Maker
Period, such as the atlatl, or dart thrower.
Others have wonderful petroglyphs
which Col. Crimmins has pictured and
described. The ruins below may belong
to the early Pueblo Period, though some
we are excavating now are very like pit
houses from the thin walls plastered on
the sand bank itself, the floor sloping
apparently to an entrance, the holes for
the roof poles and the little circular
firepits. But it is too early to even hazard
a guess, and we are waiting for some
expert opinions on the subject.
The large cave, called the
Ceremonial Cave, found by R. W.
Stafford, is the subject of this report, and
contained the collection I will describe.
Treasure hunters of a most malignant and

Plate 17.
ARTIFACTS FROM CAVES IN THE EL PASO DISTRICT

42

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

wide, and part of a burial basket. The Cosgroves
found several fine burial baskets which are now at
the Peabody Museum. All through the sand, cactus
and guano are found strings in great quantities, also
knots, netting, a string apron and cords showing
In dividing the artifacts under the heading of stone
little coils that at one time contained feathers. In
wood, textiles, etc., or under the
subtitles of ornaments I want very much
a careful comparison with the shelter
caves of other parts of Texas. We have
been so identified with the archaeology
of Arizona and New Mexico that some
way we hardly realize we are a part of
Texas. The Peabody Museum of Harvard
includes our Ceremonial Cave with the
Chaves Caves at Las Cruces, New
Mexico, in their late report, and we
speak of our pottery sherds as Little
Colorado, Middle Gila, Middle Rio
Grande, Casas Grandes, and Mimbres,
and we do not know if your pottery, your
artifacts, or your cultures are akin to ours
or not.
The condition of the cave with broken prayer
sticks, atlatl darts, and torn and shattered sandals
lying just any where, would have made the angels
weep.

Ornaments
In ornaments we have many beads,
many of them on the original string. They
are made of stone, shell, bone, wood,
turquoise and the little pearl seeds that
grow in northern New Mexico. (Plate
17, Figure 1, also Plate 19, Figure 1).
In mosaic are two pieces of pearl
mosaic, and one pendant of turquoise
laid on wood. A large arm band is the
finest thing in our collection. It has 123
pieces of turquoise mounted on a coiled
basketry foundation fastened to it with
a red vegetable gum. Pendants in highly
polished abalone, also in malachite and
other stone make a brilliant showing of
the jewelry of these ancient peoples.
(Plate 18, Figs. 1, 2 and 3).
Textiles
In textiles were secured specimens
of different styles of weaving. Styles that
have been found in northern New
Mexico and as far south as Yucatan,
Mexico. We have a large bag, a small
basket, mat 8 inches long and 5 inches

Plate 18.
ARTIFACTS FROM CAVES IN THE EL PASO DISTRICT
Fig. 1. Shell inlaid comb.
Fig. 2. Shell Beads.
Fig. 3. Ornaments of abalone shell.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

43

Stone
one morning Mr. Cosgrove and Mr. Alves dug up
110 sandals, and later over 800 more went to the
In stone, a few manos, one ball, some spear
heads, knives, atlatl points, and many beads and
Peabody museum (Plate 17, Figure 2).
pendants. (Plate 19, Figure 2).
Pottery
Pottery, very conspicuous by its
absence, only a few sherds scattered
outside, 3 to be exact, and those may have
been left by wandering Indian of a much
later period. A tiny bowl, one and a half
inches in diameter, of very crude
construction, was buried deep in the
debris of the cave far to the back.
Wood
However, fortunately, articles of
wood were found in great abundance and
wood tells the story of the long, long
years. There were several atlas darts
hollow at one end and well bound with
fiber or rawhide. The stone points tied
in the split fore shafts were still in the
darts exactly as the dead owners left
them. (Plate 19, Fig. 3). A carved black
stone and several forearm pieces
showed these people used the atlas
instead of bows and arrows, and the use
of the atlas proves a great antiquity.
Rabbit or throwing sticks, showing the
carving of the four interrupted parallel
lines, this carving being found far to the
north and south, were in great numbers.
We have 12 perfect ones.
Long stalks of yucca bound in fiber
with tassels and streamers suggest prayer
sticks, very different to the short peg like
prayer sticks of the much later cliff
dwellers.
Fine polished sticks of hard wood
about 14 inches long, bound in groups of
5 or 6, might have been used in the
threshing of the delicate grass seeds, or
Plate 19.
again may have been hair ornaments.
ARTIFACTS FROM CAVES IN THE EL PASO DISTRICT Good authorities differ on their use.
Fig. 1. Wooden objects.
Fire sticks tell their story plainly, so
Fig. 2. Atlatl points with original hafting; large flint
does the charred rim of cotton wood bark
points.
that fits the hand and could only have been
Fig. 3. Fiber wrapped sticks.
used to shovel sand or ashes.

44

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

Pieces of turtle shell, a bone with a saw toothed
edge, awls made of bone, a needle of cactus thorn
with the long fiber thread attached and strips of
wood sewed together too fragile for a cradle board,
may be part of masks used in ceremonial dances.
They must have raised small gardens of squash
and corn in those far off days when waves of
precious water washed the shores of the now dry
lakes for we have several much used planting sticks
and many pieces of squash rinds and tiny corn cobs.

The squash rinds have been repaired with fiber
stitching, and the only grain of corn we have is of a
bright red color.
Burials
Mr. and Mrs. Cosgrove for the Peabody
museum, found three magnificent burials with
several basket, and a fine fiber mat The three bodies,
a man, a woman and a tiny child were lying in a
natural position of sleep and were closely wrapped
in robes of fur and feathers. This burial
was in a hole in the rock floor of a small
adjoining cave, not as deep as the usual
cist burial of a Basket Maker. Soon, I
hope, we will have a report on the shape
of the skulls, etc.
Passing from the dust and darkness of
the cave, below lie the many ruins of
pueblos or pit houses. Badly washed by
floods, cattle daily cross its wind swept
surface. It is most surprising the amount
of beads, pendants, arrow points, and
bracelets that still can be picked up. A
carved frog in a white satiny stone, a
carved stone for the winding of thread, a
tiny paint pot cut in a solid stone pebble,
and arrow points too fine except for
ceremonial purposes, are gems of art of
which any age may well be proud.

Plate 19a.
ARTIFACTS FROM CAVES IN THE EL PASO DISTRICT
Fig. 1. Objects of wood and fiber.
Fig. 2. Turquoise studded armlet.

To sum up, the caves and pueblos have
many things in common but in so many
ways are different. The lack of pottery in
the cave and the mass of sherds from so
many cultures in the pueblos, the same
thing with the stone artifacts are
outstanding differences. The atlatl in the
cave, the arrow points on the plains. Do
they mean a difference in time, a different
culture or do they merely mean that the
dry atmosphere of the protected cave has
preserved sandals, baskets, etc., that
could not have survived the years on the
wind swept or flooded mesas? The
scattered pages are all around us, but oh,
the care we must take in reading their
meaning until the whole volume is
complete, which I am afraid will be
never. Those great vandals, Time and
Man, have done their work of destruction
only too well.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

45

SOME INDIAN ILLUSTRATIONS PREHISTORIC AND HISTORIC
BY COL. M. L. CRIMMINS
Our American Indians had several ways of
recording their ideas and I will tell of some of their
more common methods in the’ southwest, during
prehistoric and historic times.
The earliest evidences of an ideograph is the
petroglyph and Dr. Walter Hough and others mention
them as being associated with the Basket Makers.
The common’ petroglyph associated with them was
that of the Rocky Mountain sheep. The petroglyphs
cover a period probably extending from the earliest
Basket Makers to the Pueblo Indian culture of historic
times. Most of them were photographed at Judge A.
B. Fall’s Ranch at Three Rivers, New Mexico. Two
miles from these petroglyphs we found the site of a
pre-Pueblo village which was located through the study
of these petroglyphs. From the designs of many we
decided that they belong to the same period as the
pre-Pueblo Mimbres. We therefore looked around
for a site such as this people selected for their villages,
and having found it, excavations were made by Mr.
and Mrs. C. B. Cosgrove, now with the Peabody
Museum at Harvard, in June, 1925. Our prediction
was confirmed and a typical pre-Pueblo village was
unearthed.
The pre-Pueblo Mimbres petroglyphs were so
striking that Dr. J. Walter Fewkes, who was then the
Chief of the Bureau of American Ethnology at the
Smithsonian Institution, contemplated writing a
monograph on thirty-five petroglyphs he selected from
my collection of photographs, as being typically
Mimbres. The brachycephalic head with the eye on
the side is quite typical of the Mimbres. Then we had
some Pueblo designs such as the terraced cloud
symbol and the rain, and also the geometrical figures
which were so popular among them. We had many
petroglyphs of the Basket-Makers’ Mountain sheep,
and probably some of the petroglyphs, were made by
the post-Basket-Makers, as there was reason to
suppose there was a lapse of occupation of this
section.

We are often asked to express our opinion of the
meaning of these petroglyphs. We do not wish to go
to the extremes of Henry R. Schoolcraft who evidently
wanted to show Congress that he had earned the
$80,000.00 appropriated in 1842 and found a meaning
for everything. We are rather inclined to follow the
views of Dr. Julius H. Steward of Berkeley, California.
Schoolcraft married the granddaughter of an Indian
Chief about 1823, while agent of Indian affairs, so he
evidently was in close touch with Indian methods of
thought. However, an understanding of one tribe of
Indians does not always aid us in understanding others,
for a symbol in one tribe may have a different meaning
in another. Although the Hopi and the Zuni are
neighbors the colors and animal symbols for the
different cardinal directions are not the same.
While we are on the topic of the Hopi I will show
some colored pictures of their Katcines. These
Katcines were intermediary between man and Gods,
by whom petitions were sent to the deity through
“Intermediate channels”-as we say in the army. The
religious figures of saints and their statues correspond
as closely as anything we have in common. They did
not worship the Katcina doll which replaced the man
actor when he was absent. But the doll was an
explanation or symbol. After the dance was over it
was given to the children, who were taught the meaning
of the symbolic dress and decorations, just as we teach
our children that the figure of St. John the Baptist is
shown as a shepherd with a shepherd’s crook in his
hand and that of Christ with a crown of thorns on his
brow.
From the study of the Katcina pictures we can judge
the desires of these people. 1. Powamu is the Katcina
of Bean-Planting, (Plate 20, Fig. 1). Her festival is the
first of the year, it is the most elaborate, and it starts
about February first and lasts from sixteen to twenty
days. It celebrates the return of the Katcinas from their
sojourn below the earth. Beans are planted in all the
kivas in Walpi, Sichumovi, and Hano where they are
forced to grow in super-heated rooms. Ahul, the sun

46

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

preside over the cardinal directions
for help to procure white earth from
which to make fine pottery. Then we
have Momo, the bee Katcina. (Plate
20, Fig. 3). The importance of bees
who produce the only saccharine food
for these people, is paramount. He is
shown with a bow and arrow and
shoots blunt arrows at children, and
when they cry out from being struck,
he squirts water over the sore spot
from a syringe which is supposed to
cure it like a mother’s kiss will with
our children. Tetanaya is the wasp
Katcina. The Macibol Katcina carries
a huge rattlesnake, with his left arm
inserted in his body to give it life-like
movements, and a false left arm
hanging from his shoulder to deceive
the spectators. Buli Mana is the
butterfly Katcina on whose head is a
tablet showing the rain clouds in
terraces and spoken of as “the steps
to heaven.” She is not able to show
her hair in whorls on the side of her
head which shows that she is a
maiden, so she has the symbol of
maidenbood, the squash blossom,
painted on the tablet. Tunwup Taamu
the mud-head clown, is shown with
yucca whips in his hand and a diabolic
expression on his face and he chastises
and frighten children. Nuvak is the
beautiful snow Katcina. Snow is
always associated with good crops,
for the melted snow is absorbed by
Plate 20.
the soil and is of much more benefit
KATCINAS.
than the heavy showers which
1. Powamu.
2. Tumae
3. Momo
4. Televai
sometimes come in the spring and do
not soak in the soil. White snow about
god, is supposed to arise on the night of February the eyes, is surrounded by green, as grass is at the
1, and his picture is shown herewith. Tumae, the edge of the snow capped hills and mountains. Spring
white earth Katcina is shown with a white mouth lightening is shown by little red snakes on the head
(Plate 20, Fig. 2). Her left eye is yellow, the Hopi with sprouting corn between them. Alosakais the
color for east, and the right is green for west, and new fire of life or germ Katcina. Fire is a living
chin red for south, and by these different directions, being, like love was to the ancients and is a mystery
it means an appeal is made to the powers who and a spirit. The creation of fire is symbolic of the

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

47

creation of life. The making of
new fire is a sympathetic magic
or symbolic prayer for the
rejuvenescence of nature.
Muzribi is a bean Katcina and the
curved sprouts of the bean are
shown on his cheeks. Helilulu
has a yellow east and a green
west eye with a mountain lion’s
skin around his neck and Yucca
whips in his hands. He took part
in the sun festival called Pamurti.
Pohaha is a four-horned Katcina
and is shown as a terrifying
stranger with a fringed legging
like those worn by the Plains
Indians-the Comanches and
Apaches who murdered their men
and stole their women, children
and crops. Kwacuc Alek Taka is
a Katcina of Zuni origin and is
shown with upright Eagle tail
feathers on his head and a green
mask with a red back. Sioavatc
Hoya is a man dressed like a
woman, and he makes a rasping
noise with a sheep’s scapula
scraped over a notched stick.
Pautima is a Zuni sun god, who
takes, part in the bean-sprouting
festival.
The pottery designs of the
Mimbres, are the most brilliant
ceramic expressions of the prehistoric Indians of our southwest.
The bird design shown has
outstretched wings with hanging
feathers of exceptional form. (Plate 21. Fig. 2). Legs
are not shown which leads to the belief that the
back of the animal is represented. The tail was
obscurely shown in the photograph, which made it
impossible to obtain a good drawing of this organ.
This is one of the few dorsal representations of a
bird, most of the others being shown from one side.
The position of the hanging feathers of the wings is
exceptional.

Plate 21.
MIMBRES POTTERY DESIGNS
(Note: On the reredos of the Owakulti altar at
Sitcomovi on the East Mesa of the Hopi there is a
similar figure with drooping wings feathers. Here
it probably represents the Sky god, as there are
several stars near it.)
One of the most instructive pictures in the Eisele
collection is the bowl shown in Plate 21, Figure 3,
upon which are represented three butterflies with

48

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
light cream and the figures are painted
in brown merging into black. The
ordinary symbol of the butterfly is, of
course, triangular; but in this case we
have this insect shown from one side,
which is a very rare position in Pueblo
pictography.
Here we have a form where wings,
body, tail, and head are outlined with
straight lines. The head is triangular,
black in color, with two dotted eyes. The
wings are also triangular and are
crossed by parallel lines. The body is
rectangular and the tail ends in two
triangular black points. The peripheral
zone of decoration of this vessel is zigzag
and triangular lines, the character and
shape of which are shown in the figure.
(Plate 21, Fig. 7) .
Whether this picture represents
fishermen who have captured a large
fish, some fish legend or a ceremony
connected with fishing, is unknown, but
each of the four participants have a line
connected with the fish’s mouth and
above the group, is an upright pole with
feathers attached at intervals. (Plate 21,
Fig. 8). Every man has a different attitude
and faces of all are painted white and
black.

Plate 22.
MIMBRES POTTERY DESIGNS
outspread wings, two with extended and one with
retracted probosces. Each butterfly has two wings,
around the edge of which are the customary dots
which are almost universally found on butterfly
figures from the Hopi to the Gila Valley. In the
middle of this group stands a man who carries on
his head a small vase which he holds in position.
One of the butterflies clinging to the elbow of the
man by its feet, extends its proboscis as if to take
the contents of the vase. The color of this vase is

This figure represents two
quadrupeds with heads of lions and two
geometric designs irregularly terraced,
with white border. (Plate 21, Fig. 9). The
interior is marked with parallel lines.
The head is short and calls to mind that
of a carnivorous animal, there is a white band about
the neck, the tip of the tail is white. The rectangular
body is lozenge-shaped with dots.
This figure belongs to the Eisele collection and
was found in the same ruin as figure 1. It represents
a wading bird (ibis) with correspondingly long legs
and neck, along which are four small fishes. (Plate
21, Figure 10). A short distance from its beak is
another fish, apparently about to be devoured by
the bird.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

49

There are four figures in this picture
all different; two were evidently intended
to represent men with human bodies and
heads of animals. (Plate 22, Figure 11).
Each carries a rattle in one hand and a
stick to the end of which is attached a
feather, or a twig with leaves, in the other.
This picture shows a mountain sheep.
(Plate 22, Fig. 12).
This picture represents a trapper
snaring birds in the snow. His hair is tied
down his back, he has a blanket wrapped
around him. He has made a wattle fence
with four openings, and has placed a
snare in each. He has caught three birds.
(Plate 22, Figure 13).
This picture represents a Mesilla
quail. (Plate 22, Fig. 14).
This picture shows a fish being eaten
by two cranes. This fish has the general
contour of a “buffalo fish” and the same
square flappers and semi-lunar gills
found in pictographs on the Detroit Ranch
70 miles northwest of El Paso. (Plate 22,
Fig. 15).
This picture is of a Grasshopper.
(Plate 22, Fig. 16).
I will now give you an idea of
pictographs made during the historic
period. The black pictographs found at
Plate 23.
Ft. Davis have two of the mule deer or
PETROGLYPHS
ON
THE FALLS RANCH,
black tailed deer shown in its
THREE RIVERS, NEW MEXICO.
characteristic high-bounding gait in
1. Prepueblo Mask with vertical pupils like rattle
which it takes off with all four feet at the
snakes; puma’s paw on chin.
same time and lands on all four at the
2. Buffalo; probably of Jumano’s origin.
same time. The antlers have the tines
3. Figure with Brachycephalic prepueblo profile,
pronged while the white-tailed deer have
holding sky and rain symbols; to the left, geometric
undivided tines. The pictograph shows
symbol and horned lizard.
an Indian riding a horse. It will be noticed
that this horse has an arched neck like
deer or white-tailed deer. The antlers are
the early Spanish horses of the Arab type and not characteristic of those of a full grown buck, as they
the straight-necked mustang of a later period. The have no brow tines and the branches are directed
pictographs from Meyer’s spring near Camp Bullis, forward. A stagecoach with a sack of mail strapped
seventeen miles north of Dryden show a red Virginia on behind is shown by another pictograph.

50

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

ARCHAEOLOGICAL REMAINS IN THE BLACK
AND GRAND PRAIRIES OF TEXAS
BY FRANK BRYAN
bed of soft marl of Cretaceous age. This marl is so
soft and exfoliable that it actually disintegrates faster
where unprotected by soil than even sandy soil
erodes away. Even in still water it goes into a
suspended solution. That feature of the subterranean
strata has also worked against the accumulation of
any large amount of prehistoric camp debris in one
spot. The marl, which is some three thousand feet
With such a history, one can but wonder what
thick and tilted toward the southeast at a low angle,
the prehistory was. Of all the great area of the North
is not all of even hardness. Interstratified through it
American continent, no one section combined more
from top to bottom are numerous thin layers of chalk
natural features favorable to aboriginal man. The
and sandstone which are comparatively hard. The
winters were mild and the summers not overly hot.
streams in cutting down through the marls, (and they
Alive with buffalo and small game and broken at
are cutting down at a remarkably fast rate on account
regular intervals by well watered streams, lined
of the country as a whole being rapidly lifted up by
with heavy timber that furnished ample protection
some great pressure from below,) strike those hard
from the occasional storms of winter and the hot
layers. Here the drainage courses find the cutting
noon day sun of summer, those prairies offered all
vertically, much harder than horizontally. So the
that aboriginal man must have desired.
hard layers are used as tilted floors to work on and
But here the abundance of natural advantages the marl beds ahead on the down dip side are
worked against the development of any spectacular undercut. This the streams find so easy that they
remains of prehistoric man. The flimsiest of shelters keep steadily on the down dip side of their flat
was all that was necessary in the way of housing. bottoms. And here on their flood plains are dumped
Game was so plentiful that any kind of a permanent the sand and gravel debris that is brought down
dwelling place was a liability in that the game would during high water periods.
soon learn to avoid it. Any place in the shady
This tendency of the streams of riding a hard
bottoms of the streams was a suitable camp site.
ledge down dip, leaves its mark on the topography.
Even today no peoples of equal culture elsewhere
With the flood water debris dumped on the up dip
live in such temporary abodes as do those of the
side and a clean marl bank ahead to work on a file
plains.
tooth profile remains. The long north and south
With the very nature of the country breeding a ridges have steep west faces and long gentle slopes
free and easy existence it is to be expected that the that dip to the east at about the angle of dip. The
remains of the prehistoric peoples would be freely lower portions of the slopes are smeared over with
distributed, and that those remains would, at first a feather edge of the sand and gravel debris that
glance, appear to be insignificant. But the more the trail behind the bottoms.
prairies are searched and the finds classified, the
Since the best location for a camp is in the
more significant they become.
bottom on the up dip side of the stream, a good
To properly interpret the remains of prehistoric shady camp site on the bank of a stream today will
man, as found on the Black and Grand Prairies of be across the bottom at a later period. Some time
Texas, it is necessary to get a clear picture of the later it will be hanging precariously to the side of
origin of the prairies themselves and examine into the hill, and still later, the sand and gravel will
the changes that time has made in them. These have washed off, leaving the site exposed.
Prairies derive their black waxy gumbo soil from a
In modern times no portion of Texas has played
a more important part in history than the Black and
Grand Prairies. No section has been so sought after
nor has any other been under more flags. Fought for
by the French, Spanish, and Indians, it has been in
turn owned by Spain, Mexico, Republic of Texas,
and the United States.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
On the prairies, prehistoric man was wont to
shift his camp with the stream. Thus he has left his
history strewn out all along the long gentle dipslope hills instead of in neat, well stratified middens
as he did not far away in the limestone country to
the west and southwest.

51

In those middens the oldest cultures are found in
the lowest levels. The accumulation of camp debris
has been confined to a very limited area, instead of
back farthest from the streams as is the case on the
prairies. In the middens all of the bones and other
perishable material has been preserved as the
deposits have not been
torn into by the agencies
of erosion. On the
prairies, once a camp site
has been left a few
hundred yards in the rear
by a nomadic stream,
erosion sets in and all of
the sand and gravel is
cleaned off the site, taking
with them bone fragments
and other readily
disintegrating material.
Only those artifacts made
of
indestructible
materials withstand those
assaults. Even the hard
sandstones, from which
metates are usually made,
become so soft as to
crumble in the fingers.

Plate 24.
BLACKLAND BELT ARTIFACTS
1 to 5 inclusive. Sand dune types
6 to 14. Types found only with pottery.

There are those who
argue that the somewhat
insignificant prairie sites
are nothing more than
small summer hunting
sites; that early man, in
these parts, made his
permanent home around
the large springs of the
Balcones fault zone. Here
the middens of camp
debris, mingled in a
number of instances with
a large amount of talus
from the adjacent steep
hill sides, measure up to
close to ten feet thick.
With their hundreds of
tons of waste and their, no
doubt, great antiquity,

52

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

those middens are apt to give a false impression as
to where ancient man preferred to live. There are
comparatively few of them when figured on a square
mile basis and the material in them has been
transported only a few hundred yards. Hence the
amount of waste, is in proportion, much higher than
on the prairies where every stone had to be
transported over a hundred miles, at least, and
probably over two hundred miles as a whole, as
the great bulk of it came from the Ouachita
mountains of southeastern Oklahoma and western
Arkansas. With few exceptions, the mano stones
are of Arkansas novacolite which out crops in a
very limited area just south of Fort Smith, Arkansas.
There is on the prairies hardly an acre of ground
that does not have a few pieces of that stone or
some fragments of imported flint on it. Every stream,
including the smallest drains, has been lived on
continuously from one end to the other. In tons of
imported and worked material the prairies, as a
whole, probably, on a square mile basis, exceed
the fault zone country by ten to one.

There are certain shapes that cling to the streams
and some that cling close to the tops of the hills.
Then a great intermediate class are apt to be found
almost anywhere but usually clinging pretty close
to the edges of the bottoms; where they are washed
down with the sand and gravel terrace debris as it
follow8 the stream’s down dip.
Roughly the artifacts can be easily separated into
three general classes, high, low, and intermediate;
based on elevation above the beds of the streams.
Of these three general classes there are, of course,
numerous minor classes. The low, artifact found
right in the flood plains of the streams, are readily
divided into two general classes, those found
associated with pot sherds (Plate 24, Figures 6 to
14), and those not associated with sherds.

The pot makers, and those using polished stones
(celts of a dark serpentine are the only polished
stone implements so far found), were among the
last of the aborigines to live on the prairies as their
camp sites are always on sand flats where the
topography has altered little since they left. Their
From a point of security, the prairies had all the
camp sites are somewhat larger than the average
advantages as there is no cover as safe as open
and it is possible that they cultivated some land as
cover. On them the chances of being ambushed, the their camps are always on sites well selected for
favored tactics of aboriginal war, were negligible. that purpose. Several different types of sherds are
In the limestone hill country the midden sites were found.
comparatively easily surrounded. As a hunting
The flint work of the pot makers is of the highest
ground in both summer and winter the advantage
type,
and practically all show pressure flaking.
was all with the prairies.
They were, however, either immediately preceded
That the prairies were inhabited continuously or followed by some of the crudest inhabitants of
over a long period of time is evident by the the prairies-a people so crude as to have no skilled
enormous amount of material that is found workmen among them and evidently so unreliable
everywhere. Not only is the volume large but the
that they had no commercial intercourse with other
range in type and kind is large. Of arrowheads alone parts, where high grade flint was to be had. They
there are twenty three distinct classes, that range in depended entirely upon local gravel deposits for
age from heads of black flint so fresh as to not have their material and broke crude heads of a simple
the first mottled specks of patina on them to heads thick shape out of pebbles and small boulders taken
of the same black flint so old that they have a rind from that gravel. Their crude heads are found in all
of white patina over a sixteenth of an inch thick.
of the lower sites. When found in sites which contain
There is a definite tendency for the color of the no other heads show them to have been a people
flints found to change as the distance from the who traveled in small bands as those sites are rarely
streams increases. The unaltered ones being almost more than a couple of rods across and sparsely
universally found in sites below the present flood covered with broken pebbles and crude quartzite
water levels. Not only does the color change with knives and projectile points.
distance from the stream but the shape also changes.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
The highest and older cultures can be separated,
geologically, from the intermingled intermediate
zone by a general terrace level, caused by a pause
in the uplifting of the country as a whole. This pause
lasted long enough for the streams to be forced to

53

stop cutting downward and spread out laterally
forming flood plains somewhere close to five times
as wide as their present flood plain levels. Since
that pause the country as a whole has been lifted up
about fifty feet and the evidence of that pause is
still plainly seen in the even
height of the general sand and
gravel terrace level.
For convenience the artifacts
found in that general terrace level
will be called “sand hill types”
as the terrace level is pretty
generally marked by barren sand
hills (Plate 24, Figures 1 to 5).
Once the land on them was
cleared and put under the plow the
wind erosion began and in places,
where old stumps and such have
been left as markers, the top four
to six feet has already blown off.
The artifacts, being too heavy to
be moved by the wind have settled
down and now on the surface
there is concentrated in a few
inches in depth all the flints that
were in the four to six feet that
has blown off.

Plate 25.
BLACKLAND BELT ARTIFACTS.
From intermediate and lower sites, with no pottery.

Peculiar to the sand hills are
five projectile point shapes, found
there and nowhere else. They are
a quartzite bobbin (Quartzite
pebbles ground down and notched
on both ends; some being finely
balanced in shape but the great
majority being very crude; some
having no work done on them
other than the fine grooves cut into
their ends.) None of the ordinary
end scrapers are found in the sand
hills but, instead, the scrapers are
made by sharpening the thin edges
of the flakes in a straight line,
whereas the ordinary keel backed
end scrapers, common to the
lower levels, have the thick end
of the flake finished in a
semicircular shape.

54

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

It is on the sand hills that the highly patinated
specimens are found. Some arrowheads being
altered to a depth of more than a sixteenth of an
inch. Since none of the artifacts have been found
actually in place in the terrace deposits, which are
immediately post glacial in age, the question as to
whether they belong to the age of the terrace is
unanswered. The evidence points that way.
Back above the sand hill level are found
occasional remnants of an even older terrace, that
stands close to one hundred and fifty feet above the
beds of the streams. In the remnants of that terrace
only four artifacts have been found. They are all of
about the same size and shape and are, in fact,
nothing more than sharpened stones, remarkably
similar in size and shape to the European “Coupde-pong.” Their age is also an open question.
In addition to these two terrace levels, and of
probably even greater importance as to the antiquity
of man on the American continent, is a thick deposit
of Quatenary sands and gravels in northern
McLennan county. At present here is a thickness of
some two hundred feet of that deposit exposed in
an area where it has been faulted down next to
cretaceous beds. In it are found, in place, numerous
flints that with little imagination can be said to have
been artificially shaped. That phase, of all so far
found, is open to doubt, and until unquestionable
shapes are found nothing will be proved. The finding
of artifacts in those deposits would put the age of
man on this continent back into preglacial times
and, for that reason, they justify a close searching.

In conclusion the Black and Grand prairies
contain gravel deposits which may contain evidence
of first importance as to the age of man on the North
American continent. They are strewn with all the
implements common to stone age man the world
over, some of great antiquity as measured by
patination they contain polished stone implements;
and several ages of pot makers made their homes
upon them. One image, typically Mayan, has been
found close to McGregor in McLennan County and
on White Rock creek in northern McLennan County
is an old crucible shaped lime kiln that, from the
size of the trees in it and the absence of local history,
is at least Spanish if not Mayan, it is said to be
typical in shape to both. Thus with all ages of
American man present on the prairies for a day, as
it were, and each leaving his mark, the prairies have
a brief of his history in stone—a history that can be
written once all the facts are known and properly
correlated and interpreted.
This writer has covered some sixteen hundred
square miles of the prairies in close detail in the
course of geological field work and in an effort to
interpret the story told by the thousands of artifacts
that have come under foot has made a special map
for that purpose, a map barren of all confusing lines
except roads and streams for location. On it the
exact spot that each artifact is found is recorded. It
is from that map, as it stands today in its partially
finished state, that the ideas herein expressed are
drawn. There is much yet to be learned; and many
wrong conclusions will probably be drawn; so that
the keeping of a collection in a well organized
workable condition remains of first importance.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

55

TEXAS PALEONTOLOGICAL NOTES
BY C. A. HOWARD
(It is part of the writer’s hopes that this brief sketch
will stimulate late among the people of Texas an interest
in the great wealth of Paleontological material that lies
within the boundary of our State.)
Texas soil has given up remains of forms of
prehistoric life of types that have been found at no
other place in America. I have in mind the skeleton of
the finback reptile “Dimetrodon gigas,” found near the
town of Seymour, Baylor County.l This great
amphibian was probably the dominant type in the
American Permian, reaching a length of from 6 to 7
feet and a height of about 5 feet. It crawled along the
ground much as modern reptiles do, and in all likelihood
lived along the borders of pools and swamps, feeding
upon the smaller reptiles and amphibians. The striking
spines which formed a crest along the back were
elongations of the vertebrae (From the Permian of
Texas photo page 601).2 Dr. R. T. Hill in describing
the fauna of the Glen Rose beds says, “In the typical
Comanche peak section the lower 30 feet is marked
by numerous mollusks, forming a massive agglomerate,
above which is a single stratum, from which one
exceedingly rare fish, the only specimen of its genus
hitherto found in America “Macrepistius Arenatus”
Cope, has been procured Prof. E. D. Cope3, says
abundant remains of vertebrata were found in the Loup
Fork bed North of the South fork of Red River, East
of the eastern escarpment of the staked plains. Prof.
Cope in commenting on the extinct mamalia ‘Diplarthra’
says: the genus is like Hippidium in dentition and like
the Hippotherium in the structure of the feet. Its principal
distribution is North America, where it is confined, so
far as yet known to the Loup Fork beds. Prof. Cope
also describes a megalonyx Leptostomus from the
Blanco beds and states that the discovery is of much
interest, as carrying back our. knowledge of the
presence of this genus of Sloths in North America to
an older terrain than that in which it has been hitherto
known to occur.

pits. Among a number of mammoth skulls, bearing
splendid tusks, were bones of Equus Scotti the Texas
horse, an ancient bison, species undetermined; bony
scutes from the skin of the giant sloth, a finely preserved
occiput of a large sabre-tooth cat (the Sabre-tooth
tiger), a species of Pleistocene Camel and part of the
skull and teeth of a four pronged antelope (Tetrameryx
Shuleri). Remains of this species of antelope have been
found at no other place in the entire world.
5

It is interesting to note that Dr. R. T. Hill in 1886
found Dinosaur bones near the town of Lambert, in
Parker County. The location where the sands were
exposed is south of the railroad just east of Grindstone
Creek, a little to the north of the town.
6

Mr. W. E. Wrather has described in a very
interesting manner the Dinosaur tracks found in
Somervell and Hamilton Counties. Mr. C. W. Gilmore
of the Smithsonian Institution replies to Mr. C. B. James
of Hamilton, concerning these tracks as follows:
“These are in all probability the foot prints of one
of the large three-toed Dinosaurs. Similar footprints
have been reported to the authorities of the Institution
from near Glen Rose, Texas. (Plate 26, Figures 1 and
2). The fossil remains of an animal known as
Trachodon, have been found in Cretaceous rocks of
Texas, which are of-sufficient size to have made such
tracks as those depicted.”
Mr. F. F. Sturgis, Engineer and Naturalist of Dallas,
report a location in Mills County, about 2 to 5 miles
south of the town of Star on Bennett Creek, where
there are Dinosaur tracks leading in two directions.
There is also a large groove associated with these tracks
that is thought to be an impression of the tail. Other
marks or impressions are said to be where the reptile
sat down, leaving an impression of his haunches. One
foot print measures 22 inches from heel to tip of toe.
Another track shows a claw missing. The tracks all
show to be three-toed.

4

Dr. R. S. Lull of Yale describes specimens found
by Dr. E. W. Shuler of S. M. U. in the Dallas sand

7

"The localities and Horizons of Permian Vertebrate
Fossils in Texas” show a wide variety of vertebrate

56

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

forms to have lived in the North Central
part of the state. In either one or three of
the sub-divisions of Permian time. Prof.
Cummins outlines the general section as
follows: The earliest and most easterly
being the Wichita followed successively by
the Clear Fork and Double Mountain.

Vertebrate Localities of Wichita
Division
Onion Creek-A few miles east of
Archer City there is tributary on the south
side of the Little Wichita River called
Onion Creek. Near the mouth of this
stream, the first fossil vertebrate of the
Texas Permian was found by Prof. Jacob
Boll.
Cottonwood Creek-This creek is
about ten miles south of Archer city and is
a tributary of the South Fork of Little
Wichita.
Fire Place-This is on the west side of
the South Little Wichita, about six miles
south of Archer City. It is one of Boll’s
localities.
Elm Creek-A tributary of the South
Fork of the Little Wichita, about 12 miles
southwest of Archer City. Collections
were made on the east side of creek.
Fossils: Dimetrodon gigas, D.
dollovianus
Post Oak Pens-This locality is south
of the head of Kickapoo Creek, on the
head of the South Fork of the Little
Wichita River about 15 miles southwest
of Archer City. From here, quotes Prof.
Cummins, “I took quite a collection of the
teeth of fishes.”

Plate 26
1. and 2. Tracks of Dinosaur Trachodon.
Fig. 1. Length of impression 14 1-2 inches; width
13 1-4 inches.
3. Tooth of Mammoth. (Extreme length 8 1-2
inches.)
4. (Extreme length 6 1-2 inches.)
Fossils: Empedias allatus, Dimetrodon incisivus,
Naosaurus cruciger.

Long Creek-This creek runs into the Little Wichita
Slippery Creek-This is a small creek that runs into
on the north side, just a little west of the Copper mines the North Fork of the Little Wichita from the north
-This locality is four miles west of Archer City.
side almost directly south of the town of Dundee, and

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

57

a little above the mouth of Briar Creek on the south slab was procured from a gulch a few miles south
side.
of Kiowa Peak in Stonewall County.”
Fossils: Trimerorhachis sp., Eryops sp., Dimetrodon
incisivus, D. giganhomogenes, Ctenosaurus sp.

The writer having lived in Dallas County for
the past 15 years has naturally kept on the watch
for any remains of prehistoric life that could be
The Eryops mentioned above represents a very
found or that which might be brought to light in the
interesting gigantic amphibious reptile, the remains of
various sand and gravel excavations.
which are now in the Field Museum in Chicago and
elsewhere.
From the above I have taken out from the Lagow
Sand beds a fine lower jaw bone of the Mammoth
(Plate 26, Fig. 3), containing a splendid tooth. A
Vertebrate Localities of Clear Fork Division
number of other odd bones belonging to the same
animal, also a fragment of wood belonging to a tree
Coffee Creek-In the Northeastern corner of Baylor
that grew in Pleistocene times. The structure of the
County, about 4 miles west of Military Crossing, a
wood fiber resembling that of the modern Post Oak.
small stream, generally dry, runs into the big Wichita
River from the north. An old cattle trail crossed the
At Chalk Hill, on the Fort Worth Pike, I have found
Big Wichita River about three miles above the mouth many “sharks teeth”; although popularly called sharks
of Coffee Creek. As will be seen, this was a very teeth, it is possible that some of these belonged to
prolific locality for collectors.
some other form of fish. At this same locality there are
invertebrates by the hundreds. All these fossils occur
Fossils: Diplocaulus Magincarnis, D. Iimbatus, D.
in the Eagle Ford Shales of Upper Cretaceous Age.
sp., Trimerorhachis mesops, Zatrachys microphalmus,
Eryops sp. Acheloma Cumminsi, Anisodexis
At Records crossing on the Trinity River I have
imbrocarius, Diadectes phaseolinus, D. sp., Pariotichus taken out portions of the ribs of a giant water reptile
aguti, Captorhinus anguaticeps, Pantylus trypychus, P. somewhat resembling the Mosasaur. It has been
coicodus, Labradosaurus hamatus, L. sp., estimated by the fragments of the whole skeleton that
Demetrodon gigas, D. dollovianus, Naosaurus claviger, was at one time exposed to view that the reptile
N. Cruciger, N. Macrodus, Edaphosaurus pagonias. measured about thirty-five feet in length.
Brushy Creek-Six miles northwest of Seymour in
On a creek northwest of the City there was also
the head of Brushy Creek, which runs into the Big found a fine jaw bone fragment of some marine reptile,
Wichita River on the south side.
containing two fine teeth.
Fossils: Eryops sp., Diadectes sp.
Stamford-While connected with the Texas
Geological Survey, Prof. Cummins states that he
collected some vertebrates from the Clear Fork beds
in Haskell County, near Oteys Creek, not far from the
present town of Stamford.
Vertebrate Localities of the Double Mountain
Division
Kiowa Peak-A few years ago, states Prof.
Cummins, “I procured a sandstone slab with
impressions of tracks of a reptile, but no attempt has
been made to identify the animal making them. This

As a final description of the various fossil
vertebrates and their location in Texas perhaps I should
not fail to mention the so called petrified snake found
by Mr. W. E Shoopman of Vera, Texas, near Truscott.
Mr. Shoopman brought the specimen to Dallas a few
years ago. Dr. E. W. Shuler and Dr. F. N. Duncan
were in doubt as to what the fossil was, though they
both incline toward the belief that it belongs to the
amphibian family. It has characteristics of both reptiles
and amphibians, but it is not believed that any Fossil
identical with it has ever been found before. Referring
to the specimen, Dr. Shuler said, “It is probably new
to science both as to species and genera. It has many
amphibian characteristics, but resembles the modern
snake in general appearance. Perhaps the closest

58

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

modern group is that of the (gymnophiona) or legless
amphibia, which are snake-like in appearance. The
fossil is a remarkable one.
Texas, as a whole, is rich in fossil remains—so rich,
in fact, that Yale University, Chicago University,
American Museum of Natural History, Field Museum,
National Museum, Los Angeles Museum, and even
the British Museum and many other institutions of the
sort have sent expeditions down here to recover such
fragments and take them back to the respective
museums of those establishments of learning.
These institutions and perhaps others send
expeditions regularly into our State and remove its
paleontological treasures while Texans permit it, not
realizing the historical and educational value of the
fossils.

Bibliography
(This bibliography covers those publications which
either deal entirely or touch upon the Paleontology of
Texas).
1. Cope, E. D. — Vertebrate Paleontology of the
Llano Estacado; 4th annual Report Geological
Survey of Texas, 1892.
2. Cope, E. D. — Paleontology of the Vertebrata;
Geological Survey of Texas; 1891.
3. Cope, E. D.— Contribution to the knowledge of
the Blanco beds of Texas; Philadelphia Academy
of Science Proc. Part 2; 1892.

Below are listed a few Texas Counties and the fossil 4. Cope, E. D. — Paleozoic Fishes; U. S. National
Museum Proceedings, Vol. 14. 1892.
vertebrate fauna found therein:
Baylor, Dinosauri; Dallas, Mammoth, Mastodon, 5. Cragin, F. W. — Invertebrate Paleontology of the
(Plate 26, Fig. 4), Camel, Smilodon, Antelope, Equus,
Texas Cretaceous; 4th Annual Report Geologic
Reptilian; Denton, Mammoth; Hamilton, Dinosauri
Survey of Texas, 1892.
(Tracks); Mills, Dinosauri (Tracks); Navarro,
Mammoth; Parker, Dinosauri; Palo Pinto, Mammoth; 6. Cummins, W. F. — Geology of Northwest Texas;
Somervell, Dinosauri (Tracks); Stonewall, Dinosauri
(Contains list of Pleistocene and fresh water shells).
(Tracks); Taylor, Mammoth; Tarrant, Dinosauri,
4th Annual Report Geologic Survey of Texas.
Mammoth, Mastodon.
1892.
1. A. W. Graben in A Comprehensive Geology.
2. R. T. Hill, Geography and Geology of the Black and
Grand Praires of Texas, page 159.
3. Vertebrate Paleontology of the Llano Estacado; pages
18-20-49-51.
4. “Fauna of the Dallas Sand Pits.” American Journal of
Science; Vol. 2, 1921.
5. 21st Annual Report, U. S. G. S., Part 7, p. 192.
6. Dinosaur tracks in Hamilton County, Texas; The Journal
of Geology, Vol. 30, 1922.
7. By Prof. W. F. Cummins in the Journal of Geology, Vol.
16, 1908.
8. Professors of Geology and Biology in S. M. U.

7. Singley, J. A. — Natural History of Texas; (Part
1, Texas Mollusca. Part 2, Texas Birds). 4th Annual
Geologic Survey of Texas. 1892.
8. Hyatt Alpheus. — Carboniferous Cephalopods;
4th Annual Geologic Survey of Texas. 1892.
9. Drake, N. F., & Thompson, R. A. — The
Colorado Coal field of Texas; (Contains fine list
of Invertebrate fossils and their locations). 4th
Annual Report Geologic Survey of Texas. 1892.
10. Marcou, Jules. — The Cretaceous and
Carboniferous Rocks of Texas; Proceedings of
the Boston Society of Natural History, Vol. 8. 1861.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

59

11. Knowlton, F. H. — Fossil Plants from Texas; 22. Wrather, W. E. — Dinosaur Tracks in Hamilton
American Geologist, Vol. 16. 1895.
County, Texas; Journal of Geology, Vol. 30. 1922.
12. Fontain, W. M. — Fossil Plants from the 23. Paleontology of Malone Jurassic Formation of
Comanche Series of Texas; U. S. National
Texas, with Notes on Malone Mountain Near
Museum Proceedings, Vol. 15. 1893.
Sierra-Blanco, Texas. U. S. G. S. Bulletin No. 226.
13. Merrill, J. A. — Fossil Sponges from the 24. Flora of Woodbine Sand at Arthurs-Bluff, Texas;
Cretaceous of Texas. Harvard Collections,
U. S. G. S. Prof. Paper No. 129-G.
Museum of Comparative Zoology, Vol. 28. 1896.
25. Berry, E. W. — Paleontology; McGraw Hill Book
14. Hill, R. T. & Vaughan, T. W. — The Lower
Company. 1929.
Cretaceous Gryphaeas of Texas; U. S. G. S.
Bulletin No. 151.
26. Grabau, A. W. — A Comprehensive Geology; D.
C Heath &Company. 1921.
15. Harris, G. D. — Neocene Mollusca of Texas;
American Paleontologist, Vol. 1, No. 3. 1895.
27. Williston, S. W. — Water Reptiles, Past and
Present; University of Chicago Press.
16. Hill, R. T. — Paleontology of the Cretaceous
Formation of Texas; Washington Biological 28. Hill, R. T. — Geography and Geology of the Black
Society Proc., Vol. 8. 1893.
and Grand Prairies of Texas. U. S. Geological
Survey, Part 7, 1900.
17. White, I. C. — Fossil Plants of the Permian Beds
of Texas; Bulletin Geological Society of America, 29. Cummins, W. F. — The Localities and Horizons
Vol. 3. 1892.
of Permian Vertebrate Fossils in Texas. Journal of
Geology, Vol. 16. 1908.
18. Gidley, J. W. — A new Species of Pleistocene
Horse from the Staked Plains of Texas; Bulletin 30. The Cenozoic Deposits of Texas; (Tells of many
American Museum of Natural History, Vol. 13.
Fossils and their localities).
1900.
31. Lull, R S. — Fauna of the Dallas Sand Pits.
19. Bose, Emil. — The Permo-Carboniferous
American Journal of Science, Vol. 2. September,
Ammonoids of the Glass Mountains of Texas;
1921.
University of Texas Bulletin No. 1762. 1917.
32. Berry, E. W. — Fruits of a Date Palm in the Tertiary
20. Case, E. C. — The Permo-Carboniferous Red
Deposits of East Texas. American Journal of
Beds of North America and Their Vertebrate
Science, Vol. 37. 1914.
Fauna; Carnegie Institution of Washington No.
207. 1915.
33. Prof. Angelo Heilprin. — The Eocene Mollusca
of the State of Texas. Prof. of Acad. Natural
21. Lucas, F. A. — Animals of the Past; Handbook
Sciences; Philadelphia, October, 1890.
American Museum of Natural History No. 4. 1922.

60

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

FIELD WORK OF MEMBERS
Mrs. Eileen E. Alves, of El Paso reports that a
museum building is projected for El Paso. During the
spring several burials have been found connected with
what seems to be a pit house culture, located within
thirty miles of El Paso. These were accompanied by
potsherds but no other artifacts.
Frank Bryan of Waco, has made extensive studies
of patination, form and geological distribution of local
artifacts, a paper on some of his finds appears in this
number of the Bulletin.
Col. M. L. Crimmins, of San Antonio, is now at
El Paso and will continue his study of pictographs and
petroglyphs in that section. During the past year he
has given lectures on pictographs and petroglyphs at
San Antonio, Abilene, College Station, El Paso, and
Austin, Texas. Photographs and other records were
made of pictographs and petroglyphs at Sierra Alta,
Ojo del Alamo and Cornudas del Alamo (Northeast
of El Paso), Texas and Three Rivers and Taos, New
Mexico.
With Roscoe Conkling of El Paso an inspection of
the excavations of Bishop Cap Peak, north of El Paso
was made. Here human bones associated with those
of the ground sloth, Alllerican camel, etc., were found.
And with Clyde T. Reed, President of the Texas
Academy of Science, inspection trips were made to
Hueco Tanks, Cornudas and Ojo del Alamo, all north
of El Paso, and to Three Rivers, New Mexico.
During June, Col. Crimmins was in the east doing
research in the American Museum of Natural History,
and in conference with N. C. Nelson, Curator of
Prehistoric Archaeology of that institution and with
George C. Valliant, Assistant Curator of Mexican
Archaeology.
Henry E. Elrod of Houston is making a comparative
study of the patina of Texas stone artifacts with the
eoliths and paleoliths of Europe. A large part of his
researches have been done along the Coast of Texas
in the vicinity of Rockport, where he has recently found
42 beads made from human bones which still retain
their coat of red paint.

Dr. W. C. Holden, of Lubbock is continuing his
investigations of the Texas Panhandle area.
C. A. Howard of Dallas reports carrying on
researches in California Museums during the past
summer on certain Quatenary animals, remains of
which frequently occur in his section.
A. T. Jackson of Mineola has completed a
voluminous preliminary study of Texas pottery and has
carried on investigations in the vicinity of Llano. He
spent two weeks in Wood County and considerable
time in Camp County with Dr. J. E. Pearce of the
University of Texas, where numerous vessels of
apparently Caddoan origin were excavated.
Geo. C. Martin, Wendell H. Potter, and E. H.
Sellers, of Rockport, and Alexander Cox and John
B. Dunn of Corpus Christi are continuing their
investigations of the Coastal region. Mr. Martin reports
many new sites have been recorded and one shell heap
excavated. During the past year Messrs. Martin and
Potter have published the second part of their
Preliminary Survey of that section, and report the third
part will soon be ready for publication.
During the past summer, Dr. J. E. Pearce, of the
Department of Anthropology, University of Texas, has
investigated a shell mound containing a burial, located
by Messrs. Martin and Potter and Dr. E. H. Sellards,
head of the Texas Geological Survey has made a
reconnaissance and press report on a site, fully
described by Mr. Martin in this issue of the Bulletin,
and which was identified by Mr. Martin sometime ago
as a site of greater age than the other Coastal sites in
that vicinity.
Mrs. Annie Moran, of Weatherford, has spent
several months at Deming, New Mexico, gathering
local material. Mrs. Moran has accumulated a fine
collection of pottery and flints.
Dr. Cyrus N. Ray of Abilene, reports the discovery
of many deeply buried hearth sites, some of which are
described in this issue of the Bulletin.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

61

In addition many new surface and near surface sites
Floyd V. Studer, of Amarillo reports that most of
have been found and collections made therefrom.
his work is reconnaissance, but some field work was
done during the year.
Mortar hole groups have been examined near
Christoval, San Saba, and Paint Rock, and others have
Four new pueblo sites were located, and one room
been reported in Jones, Taylor and Stephens Counties. was inve3tigated, showing the masonry to be typical
of all other similar sites; pottery sherds also typical.
Comparative studies of patina and mineral
Few artifacts found.
incrustations of artifacts have been made. Also enough
human skeletal material from the Abilene and Coast
Eight new Plains type sites were found,
sections has now accumulated so that comparisons of accompanied by typical artifacts.
both structure and mineralization of bones may be
Through Mr. Studer’s arrangements, Dr. W. C.
made.
Holden and party excavated a site that is reported in
Three previously unreported human burials have this Bulletin.
been found; two of sand dune type.
Sixty trips were made during the year to various
Teeth and bones of mammoth at one place, of sites.
mastodon at another, and unidentified elephas bones
Field exploration parties from the University of
were found at a third site.
Micbigan, and University of California visited the
Potsherds have been found in seven local sites and territory and were shown numerous fossil sites by Mr.
reported in others. Most of this is thick, having several Studer, where many specimens were collected. Mr.
types of incised and finger nail decorations, some of it Studer also collected numerous specimens from the
appears to show brush marks or scratches and some Triassic, Pliocene, Pleistocene and Miocene beds in
is entirely plain. The color is light brown outside and his section, chiefly Buettneria, phytosaur, horse, camel,
black inside. Sand appears to have been used in rhinoceros, teleocerous, mastodon, elephant and dog.
tempering some of this type. Another type of pottery
Other field trips were made by Mr. Studer in the
not so commonly found is of light reddish brown color
vicinity of Tahoka, Muleshoe, through New Mexico
on both sides and is quite thin, and appears to have
and Arizona, and around Abilene, San Antonio, Austin,
been tempered with crushed limestone.
and Temple.
E. B. Sayles, of Abilene reports the recording of
Mrs. Maud D. Sullivan, of El Paso reports that
46 sites in this vicinity, including 9 sites at which pottery
the El Paso Archaeological Society is planning an active
occurs. A small rock shelter and sand dune burial (in
program for the coming winter. During the spring
addition to that described in this number of the Bulletin)
lectures were given.
have been excavated. A flint quarry with adjacent work
shops extending for nearly three miles, has been
Prof. Otto O. Watts, of Abilene, has made a
identified and investigated; in connection with this preliminary investigation of a rock shelter in the western
quarry were a number of works similar to rock cairns part of the State. A ledge nearby contained 184 boat
in other localities. A series of rock shelters were shaped mortar holes. Pottery sherds, similar to those
located, one with seven right and left hands outlined in of the Plains region, and of the decorated wares of
oxide of iron.
New Mexico were secured. Also a good collection of
flint facts was made.
Three unreported sites containing remains of
Pleistocene animals recorded.
Prof. Victor J. Smith, of Alpine, has carried on
additional rock shelter investigations in his area.

62

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

SECRETARY AND TREASURER REPORTS
Report of Secretary-Treasurer for a Period ending October 25, 1929:
RECEIPTS:
116 Memberships------------------------------------------------------------$ 348.00
DISBURSEMENTS:
Charter------------------------------------------------------$ 10.00
Printing, Stationery, postage, forms, and other supplies.--------

60.50

300 Copies of Bulletin No. 1, printing, engraving, etc. --------

245.21

Exposition at Hilton Hotel, Abilene-----------------------------15.00

$330.71

Balance, cash on hand ------------------------------------------------------- $ 17.29
Audited and found correct by Ernest W. Wilson, Chairman, and Otto O. Watts and Frank Grimes,
members of Auditing Committee.
During the past year, eleven meetings of the Society have been held at Abilene.
Correspondence with members, institutions, and others interested in our activities has increased to a
very large volume.
Exchange publications and museum specimens are rapidly accumulating but there are no present
facilities for display of these for the benefit of members and the public.
E. B. SAYLES, Secretary-Treasurer
_____________
The First Annual meeting of the Society was held at Abilene on October 26th, 1929.
During the morning session, following the President’s address, papers were read by: Judge Ernest
W. Wilson, Notes on Texas Burned Rock Mounds; Col. M. L. Crimmins, Some Indian Illustrations of the
Southwest, Prehistoric and Historic, illustrated with sides and drawings; and Prof. Otto O. Watts, Maya
Supercivilization of ancient America, illustrated by slides.
During the afternoon session, papers were read by: Mrs. Eileen E. Alves, Shelter Caves of the El
Paso District, illustrated by photographs and accompanied by a large representation of artifacts; Dr. W.
C. Holden, Archaeology and Religion; and a paper read by the Secretary prepared by George C. Martin,
Two Sites on the Callo Del Oso, Nueces County, Texas, illustrated by photographs and accompanied by
a collection of artifacts from that section.
Judge O. L. Sims of Paint Rock gave a talk on pictographs and showed a large collection of drawings
from many sections of the State.
At the business session held during the luncheon at the Hilton Hotel, the Secretary’s report was
audited and approved, and the Constitution amended to provide for a Recording Secretary, Prof. Otto W.
Watts, of Simmons University being elected to hold this office. All officers were re-elected for the
period ending October, 1930.
Program meetings were set for the first Tuesday of December, February, and April, respectively,
with an annual meeting in October.
Dues for the period ending October, 1930, were assessed at $3.00.
OTTO O. WATTS, Recording Secretary.

