TEXAS
ARC HEOLOGICAL
SOCIETY Vo,um~6~,,992

Timothy K. Perttula, Editor
Beth Ogden Davis, Associate Editor

Published by the Society at Austin
1992

CONTENTS

Commemorating the Columbian Quincentenary
The Columbian Quincentenary: Archeo!ogical and Historical Perspectives
from Texas
Timothy K. Perttula ........................................... 1
Material Culture of the Spanish Explorers
Cathryn A. Hoyt .............................................. 7
Coronado’s American Legacy: An Overview of Possible Entrada
Artifacts and Site Types, and a Discussion of Texas Sites
Diane Lee Rhodes ............................................ 27
From E1 Paso to Eagle Pass: Spanish Entradas along the Lower Rio
Grande in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries
Joseph P. S6nchez ........................................... 53
Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition: The Evidence from Texas
James E. Bruseth ............................................ 67
Spanish Exploration of the Texas Coast, 1519-1800
Robert S. Weddle ................... ~ ........................ 99
French, Spanish, and Indian Interaction in Colonial Texas
Kathleen Gilmore ........................................... 123
The Mayhew Site: A Possible Hasinai Farmstead, Nacogdoches County,
Texas
Nancy Adele Kenmotsu ....................................... 135
A Summary and Discussion of Additional Findings at the Gilbert Site,
an Eighteenth-Century Nortefio Occupation in Rains County, Texas
Jay C. Blaine .............................................. 175
A Case Study in the Interdependence of Archeology and History: The
Spanish Fort Sites on the Red River
Elizabeth A. H. John ......................................... 197
Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation and Colonial Period
Acculturation: Archeological and Ethnohistoricat Evidence
Robert A. Ricklis ............................................ 211
Reviews
First Encounters: Spanish Exploration in the Caribbean and the United
States, 1492-1570. Jerald T. Milanich and Susan Milbrath, eds.
Maynard B. Cliff ............................................ 245
Ethnology of the Texas Indians (No. 7). Thomas R. Hester, ed.
Timothy K. Perttula ......................................... 250
Archaeology of the Spanish Missions of Texas (No. 21). Anne A. Fox, ed.
Timothy K. Perttula ......................................... 250
Documentary Evidence for the Spanish Missions of Texas (No. 22).
Arthur R. G6mez, ed.
Timothy K. Perttula ......................................... 250
Columbian Consequences. Volume 2, Archaeological and Historical
Perspectives on the Spanish Borderlands East. David Hurst Thomas, ed.
Timothy K. Perttula .......................................... 251
AUTHORS

................................................... 257

The Columbian Quincentenary:
Archeological and Historical Perspectives from Texas
Timothy K. Perttula

ABSTRACT
This issue of the Bulletin of the TexasArcheological Society presents a series
of archeological and historical perspectives on the Columbian Quincentenary
(1492-1992) in Texas.

The year 1992 is the 500th anniversary of the first of four voyages of
Christopher Columbus, or Cristobal Colrn (Taviani 1991), to the New World.
Although these voyages have been frequently characterized as voyages of discovery, in truth they were voyages that initiated contacts and encounters among vastly
divergent cultures and peoples of the same world (Milanich and Milbrath 1989;
Viola and Margolis 1991). These encounters began the process of profound cultural,
environmental, and technological changes that have since reverberated around the
world. Garcilaso de la Vega, el Inca, himself the son of a Spanish conquistador and
Incan royalty, wrote that"there is only one world, and although we speak of the Old
World and the New, this is because the latter was lately discovered by us, and not
because there are two" (Garcilaso de la Vega 1966, I:9).
To recognize the significance of these New World encounters and to shed light
on the "social, demographic, ecological, ideological, and human repercussions of
European-Native American encounters" (Thomas 1991 :xv), the Texas Archeological Society decided to focus the 1992 Bulletin on the legacy of Columbus as seen
in Texas. This is an opportunity, foremost, to delve into the complex and diverse
historical and archeological records relating to the first encounters between the
Europeans and the Indians in Texas after 1492. Also of importance is exploration
of the role of the Native Americans in the history of Texas, as well as the
examination of some of the main--although often neglected--consequences of
these contacts (such as the introduction of disease and declines in population) for
the indigenous peoples of the state. This focus on the archeological and historical
implications of the Columbian Quincentenary in Texas can rightly help to reveal to
a wide audience the many cultural achievements of the Native Americans and
Europeans who lived and continue to live in the state of Texas, and of their
encounters and exchanges through time. It is hoped that communication of this story
will help "to educate the public about the remarkable archeological legacy left by
Texas’s original inhabitants" (Shafer 1986:6).
In these papers, the authors describe this process of encounters between Native
Americans and Europeans in various regions of Texas. The initial entradas and

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 63 (1992)

2

Texas Archeological Society

encounters, from the Panhandle region to the Gulf Coast--when the Spanish
explorers first contacted such important Native American groups as the Caddo, the
Karankawa, and the Jumano--are discussed by Diane Rhodes, Joseph P. Sanchez,
James E. Bruseth, and Robert S. Weddle. Elizabeth A. H. John, together with
Weddle and Sanchez, "excavates" further into historic documents and texts (e.g.,
Ramenofsky 1991) to illuminate later seventeenth and eighteenth century explorations by the S panish and French in Texas. Their work clearly brings out the historical
significance of European-Indian political and economic relationships that contributed to the success of both Spanish and French colonial pursuits and Native Indian
lifeways (see also Castafieda 1936; John 1975; Weddle 1985, 1991 for excellent
studies of European-Indian interrelationships from the sixteenth to the nineteenth
centuries in Texas).
Archeological investigations conducted in Florida, the southeastern United
States, and the Caribbean during the last ten years (Milanich and Milbrath 1989;

COMANCIIE

LmAN
APACHE

ATAKAPAN

o
I
o

]00 MILES

_-~_~

T--J

IOOKILOMETERS

--

Gulf of Mexico

-- " ~ ~

Figure 1. Map of Texas showing locations of Historic Indian Groups from about the
sixteenth to mid-eighteenth centuries (adapted by Rick E. Jarnigan from a map drawn by
Kathy Roemer).

Perttula ~ The Columbian Quincentenary

3

Thomas 1990) have made it possible to understand well the material culture of the
European explorers and colonists who ventured into Texas. Cathryn A. Hoyt, James
E. Bruseth, and Diane Lee Rhodes review the record of material culture, discuss the
types of artifacts to be expected on archeological sites in Texas that are associated
with Spanish explorers such as Coronado and de Soto, and, in the case of Bruseth
and Rhodes, use the available evidence to suggest the routes these explorers
probably took across the state. The difficulty in tracing these routes seems to be due
to the scarcity of sixteenth century European artifacts on Indian sites of that period,
to the limited archeological investigations of Historic Indian sites, and to the effects
of European diseases that contributed to massive population declines and group
movements between the time of initial European contact and the earliest reliable
Spanish and French documents (for the impacts of disease in the Spanish Borderlands, see many of the papers in Thomas 1989, 1990, and 1991 and Cook and Lovell
1991).
Jay C. Blaine, Kathleen Gilmore, Robert A. Ricklis, Nancy A. Kenmotsu, and
James E. Bruseth use the archeological evidence uncovered from Wichitan, Caddo,
and Karankawan sites dating to the contact period to examine European-Indian
relationships in Texas. Their papers demonstrate the cultural diversity of the Native
Americans who lived in Texas, the types of interactions these groups had with
Europeans at different times, the material evidence of those interactions, and the
nature of the changes in aboriginal cultures that resulted from colonization, disease,
the introduction of missions, the development of the fur trade, and other processes
(see also Hester 1989; Perttula 1991).
Hester (1991), Kniffen, Gregory, and Stokes (1987), Campbell (1988), Salinas
(1990) and Smith (1992), as well as the references cited in the various articles in this
volume, are only a selected sample of the recently published scholarly literature on
the Indians of Texas. The study of this literature is a good way to begin to
comprehend the history and archeology of the indigenous inhabitants of Texas since
the "discovery" of the New World.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I particularly thank the various authors who willingly volunteered to contribute
to this volume and met the tight deadlines for production. I also appreciate the
opportunity Jimmy L. Mitchell, Editor of the TAS Bulletin, provided me when he
asked me to assemble these papers. Bonnie Yates and Beth Ogden Davis performed
yeoman editing duties, and I gratefully acknowledge their assistance.
REFERENCES CITED
Campbell, Thomas N.
1988
The Indians of Southern Texas and Northeastern Mexico: Selected Writings of
Thomas Nolan Campbell. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.

4

Texas Archeological Society

Castafieda, Carlos E.
1936
Our Catholic lteritage in Texas, 1519-1936. Volume I, The Mission Era: The
Finding of Texas, 1519-1693. Von Boeckmann-Jones, Austin.
Cook, Noble David, and W. George Lovell (editors)
1991
"SecretJudgementsofGod":OldWorldDiseasesinColonialSpanishAmerica.
University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Garcilaso de la Vega, el Inca
Royal Commentaries of the Incas. Translated by Harold V. Livermore. 2 vols.
1966
University of Texas Press, Austin.
Hester, Thomas R.
1989
Texas and Northeastern Mexico: An Overview. In: Columbian Consequences,
Volume 1. Archaeological and Historical Perspectives on the Spanish Borderlands West, edited by David Hurst Thomas, pp. 191-211. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.
Hester, Thomas R. (editor)
Ethnology of the Texas Indians. Volume 7 of the Spanish Borderlands
1991
Sourcebooks, general editor, David Hurst Thomas. Garland, New York.
John, Elizabeth A. H.
1975
Storms Brewed in Other Men’s Worlds: The Confrontation ofIndians, Spanish,
and French in the Southwest, 1540-1795. Texas A&M University Press,
College Station.
Kniffen, Fred B., Hiram F. Gregory, and George A. Stokes
1987
The Historic Indian Tribes ofLouisiana from 1542. Louisiana State University
Press, Baton Rouge.
Milanich, Jerald T., and Susan Milbrath
1989

Another World. In: First Encounters: Span&h Explorations in the Caribbean
and the United States, 1492-1570, edited by Jerald T. Milanich and Susan
Milbrath, pp. 1- 26. Ripley P. Bullen Monographs in Anthropology and History,
No. 9. Florida Museum of Natural History, University of Florida Press,
Gainesville.

Perttula, Timothy K.
1991
European Contact and Its Effects on Aboriginal Caddoan Populations between
A.D. 1520 and A.D. 1680. In: Columbian Consequences, Volume3. TheSpanish
Borderlands in Pan-American Perspective, edited by David Htrrst Thomas, pp.
501-518. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.
Ramenofsky, Ann F.
1991
Beyond Disciplinary Bias: Future Directions in Contact Period Studies. In:
Columbian Consequences, Volume 3. The Spanish Borderlands in Pan-American Perspective, edited by David Hurst Thomas, pp. 431-436. Smithsonian
Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Perttula -- The Columbian Quincentenary

5

Salinas, Martin
1990

Indians ofthe Rio Grande Delta: Their Role in the History ofSouthernTexas and
Northeastern Mexico. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Shafer, Harry J.
The Future of Texas Archeology. Texas Archeology (Newsletter of the Texas
1986
Archeological Society), 30( 2): 1-6.
Smith, F. Todd
1992

On the Convergence of Empire: The Caddo Indian Confederacies, 1542-1867.
Texas A&M University Press, College Station. In press.

Taviani, Paolo Emilio
1991

Christopher Columbus: Genius of the Sea. Italian Journal 5(5-6):5-37. Italian
Academy Foundation, New York.

Thomas, David Hurst
1991

Cubist Perspectives on the Spanish Borderlands: Past, Present, and Future. In:
Columbian Consequences, Volume 3. The Spanish Borderlands in Pan-American Perspective, edited by David Hurst Thomas, pp. xv-xxii. Smithsonian
Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Thomas, David Hurst (editor)
1989

ColumbianConsequences, Volume 1.ArchaeoIogicalandHistoricalPerspectives
on the ,Spanish Borderlands West. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington,
D.C.

1990

Columbian Consequences, Volume 2.Archaeological and Historical Perspectives
on the Spanish Borderlands E(~s’t. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington,
D.C.

1991

Columbian Consequences, Volume 3.7"he Spanish Borderlands in Pan-American
Perspective. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Viola, Herman J. and Carolyn Margolis (editors)
1991

Seeds of Change: A Quincentennial Commemoration. Smithsonian Institution
Press, Washington, D.C.

Weddle, Robert S.
1985

Spanish Sea: The Gulf of Mexico in North American Discovery, 1500-1685.
Texas A&M University Press, College Station.

1991

The French Thorn: Rival Explorers in the Spanish Sea 1682-1762. Texas A&M
University Press, College Station.

Material Culture of the Spanish Explorers
Cathryn A. Hoyt

ABSTRACT
Very little material associated with the sixteenth century explorers has been
identified from archeological excavations in Texas. Although the brief nature of
the explorers’ visits to Texas may, in part, explain this phenomenon, another
explanation may lie in the dearth of information about sixteenth century material
culture. The author has identified specific items of material culture such as clothes,
weapons, pottery, and trade goods that were mentioned in the explorers’ accounts
and provides brief descriptions of what we should expect to find based on
archeological data and museum collections.

INTRODUCTION

The Quincentenary anniversary of Christopher Columbus’s first voyage across
the Atlantic honors one man and one voyage, but the 1992 celebrations will, in
reality, commemorate the Age of Exploration, aperiod in which European influence
was felt around the world within a few decades.
In Texas, the Age of Exploration began in 1528--when Cabeza de Vaca and
several companions were washed ashore near Galveston--and continued throughout the sixteenth century with the explorations of Coronado (1542), de Soto/
Moscoso (1542), DoCampo (1546), Espejo (1582), and Sosa (1590). The routes
traveled by these explorers through Texas are controversial, due in part to a lack of
identifiable sixteenth century contact sites.
This outline of the material culture of the sixteenth century Spanish explorers
is based on the published narratives of their expeditions and on archeological finds
from throughout the southern United States. Because of the broad nature of the
subject, special emphasis is placed here on specific material items that are mentioned in the narratives and on the durable diagnostic artifacts that may still be
preserved in archeological sites.
EXPLORERS

Clothing
Spanish soldiers of the sixteenth century did not wear uniforms like those of
their modem counterparts; instead, each individual soldier was stylishly outfitted in
silks, brocades, velvet, and lace (Figure 1). An inventory of clothing taken from
Spanish soldiers after the defeat of the Spanish Armada in 1588 included breeches
made of cloth of gold, colored cloaks with gold lace, an embroidered jerkin overlaid
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 63 (1992)

8

Texas Archeological Society

with gold lace, and a blue taffeta hat trimmed with a silver band and plume of
feathers (Martin and Parker 1988:32). The finery, plumes, and bright colors were
necessary because, according to a seventeenth century Spanish military expert, they
"give spirit and strength to a soldier so that he can with furious resolution overcome
any difficulty or accomplish any valorous exploit" (Martin and Parker 1988:33).
This extravagant dress, however, was not always thought appropriate or
desirable. When de Soto called a muster before departing from San Lucar for the
New World in 1538, he noted with some disgust that, whereas the Portuguese turned
out in polished armor, the Castilians were dressed "very showily, in silk over silk,
pinked and slashed" (Lewis 1984:139). He ordered another muster for the following

Figure 1. A Spanish musketeer of the sixteenth century (drawn by Hector Meza from a
reconstruction by Ian Lowe in Martin and Parker 1988).

Hoyt ~ Material Culture of Spanish Explorers

9

day but was again disappointed to find that the Castilians were dressed i n"very sorry
and rusty shirts of mail" and were armed with very poor lances.
The recovery of European textiles from archeological sites is very rare except
under special conditions, such as the Spanish Armada wrecks of 1588, where,
preserved under sand and silt, archeologists found silk tassels, gold buttons, and a
cloak collar of silk and wool (Martin and Parker 1988; Crddit Communal 1985).
Found more frequently are brass fittings such as buckles and aglets. Aglets are
small pieces of brass rolled around the ends of laces to facilitate threading the laces
through eyelets in clothing. Brass aglets first appeared in the early fifteenth century,
when they were used to fasten hose to short jackets or doublets (Boucher 1967:196);
they were used until the seventeenth century in both functional and ornamental
roles. Aglets are still in use today, particularly on the ends of shoe laces.
Aglets have been found in several sixteenth century archeological sites,
including Nueva Cadiz, a Spanish New World site in Venezuela occupied between
about 1509 and 1545 (Willis 1980:36), the Spanish ships wrecked on Padre Island,
Texas, in 1554 (Arnold and Weddle 1978:291), the Spanish Armada vessels
wrecked off the coast of Great Britain and Ireland in 1588 (Martin and Parker
1988:34), and a late-sixteenth-century shipwreck site in Bermuda (Bermuda
Maritime Museum catalog no. 79:155-225). The aglets from these sites are made
of brass rolled to form cones averaging 22 to 25 mm in length. Often, bits of fiber
are preserved inside the aglets.
Armor

Armor, whether a three-quarter suit of plate armor or a padded jacket and coat
of mail, was a vital part of an explorer’s equipment. Baltasar de Obreg6n, author of
Cr6nica comenlario 6 relaciones de los descubrimienlos antiguos y modernos de
Nueva Espa~a y del Nuevo Mexico, which was first published in 1584, stresses the
importance of carrying good armor on expeditions. In addition to medium-mesh
coats of mail, Obreg6n recommends "helmets having flaps of chain armor on the
sides to protect the neck and the back of the head. One should wear breast plates and
jackets of buckskin, and escuaguipiles [padded armor] outside of and beneath the
armor as protection against flint-tipped arrows. It is important to have breeches of
chain armor, leather shields, horse armor, and knotty woven blankets" (Hammond
and Rey 1928:232).
Wearing such armor caused discomfort and worse among the explorers. Alvar
Ntifiez Cabeza de Vaca (Covey 1984:38) notes that "many men developed raw
wounds from the weight of their armor." In addition, European armor often proved
ineffective against the stone-tipped arrows of the Native Americans. When an
Apalachee archer demonstrated that he could shoot an arrow through two shirts of
mail at a distance of 50 paces, many of de Soto’s soldiers put aside their mail for
quilted cloth doublets which, in addition to being more effective against arrows,
were also more comfortable to wear (Ewen 1989:115-116).
By carefully studying the narratives of the explorers we can get some idea of
the types of armor that were most frequently carried. For example, Cabeza de Vaca

10

Texas Archeological Society

(Covey 1984:43) tells us that a Spanish gentleman, or hidalgo, was shot through the
neck "at the edge of his cuirass." The mention of the cuirass, a steel breastplate,
indicates that the hidalgo was probably a member of the light cavalry. During the
sixteenth century, the light cavalry wore armor consisting of a cuirass, short thigh
guards known as tassets, shoulder guards (spaulders), gauntlets, an open helmet,
and sometimes sleeves of mail (Blair 1958:119).
Perhaps the most common armor carried on the expeditions was mail. Made
into shirts, gauntlets, collars, and even breeches, mail was worn by everyone from
the commander to the expedition’s dog. Obreg6n stresses the importance of
carrying good coats-of-mail made of medium mesh,
for if it is very fine it is destroyed by rust, and arrows pierce it more readily
than if it is coarser. Thus the mesh should not be too small or too large but
medium, because that resists the force of the arrow more effectively. It
does not need to be cleaned, which is not the case with the fine mesh
[Hammond and Rey 1928:232].
In general, mail of the sixteenth century was made by wrapping a wire around
a mandrel and cutting it off into rings. The rings were then linked and the ends
riveted to secure the ring in place (Wedel 1975:187) (Figure 2). In the early sixteenth
century most mail was made from round wire (Wedel 1975; Burgess 1960).
Pieces of armor believed to date to the sixteenth century have been recovered
from several sites in the southwestern United States. Mail is reported from sites in
New Mexico (Ellis 1955), Kansas (Terry and Terry 1960; Wedel 1975), and Texas
(Olds 1976:99-101). The mail fragments from Texas, recovered from a ship of the

Figure 2. Chain mail made o fround wire links fastened by rivets (drawn by Hector Meza from
several sources).

Hoyt-- Material Culture of Spanish Explorers

11

1554 fleet, were made of brass, rather than the more common iron. Brass mail has
also been noted from a sixteenth century site in Florida (Mitchem 1989:104).
Plate armor is less frequently found on archeological sites, although fragments
of plate armor altered into beads have been recovered from aboriginal burial
mounds in Florida (Mitchem 1989:104). A rare find consisting of a complete
breastplate was recovered from a late sixteenth century shipwreck in Bermuda
(Peterson 1967:8), but, unfortunately, due to the poor condition of the artifact and
the lack of proper conservation procedures, the breastplate disintegrated soon after
it was recovered.
Another unusual find was made in 1951 on the site of what is believed to be San
Gabriel del Unque, Ofiate’s first settlement in New Mexico. Jos6 Abeyta, a resident
of the area, unearthed a steel helmet that was later identified as a late fifteenth- or
early-sixteenth-century salade (Lambert 1952). The salade was a type of open
helmet worn by crossbowmen and arquebussiers (Peterson 1952).
Weapons
The weapons carried by the explorers fall into four main categories: (1)
personal weapons such as swords and daggers, (2) staff weapons, (3) crossbows, and
(4) firearms.
Sixteenth century illustrations (Figures 3, 4) indicate that most soldiers,
whether part of the cavalry or the infantry, were armed with both swords and small
parrying daggers. These parrying daggers, designed to be held in the left hand while
the sword was held in the right, were introduced in the fifteenth century when the
style of sword play changed from a cutting to a thrusting action. During the fifteenth
and early sixteenth centuries, the daggers had disk-shaped guards and cylindrical
pommels (Stone 1934:199). By 1550, however, swords and parrying daggers were
made with matching hilts (Norman and Wilson 1982:25).
A well-preserved sword of this period was recovered by archeologists from a
site in northwestern Georgia that is believed to have been visited by de Soto in the
summer of 1540. Other evidence of Spanish swords from the same site was found
in a mass grave where one of every five Native American skeletons bore slash marks
made by European, rather than aboriginal, weapons (Blakely 1989:30).
Staff weapons are the weapons most frequently mentioned in the explorer’s
accounts. Although the general term lance is most commonly used, contemporary
illustrations indicate that several different types of staff weapons were used.
True lances were carried by the cavalry. The lance was 10 to 14 feet long with
a leaf-shaped iron blade at the end. The heavy infantry carried a somewhat similar
weapon known as a pike. The pike was slightly longer than a lance, ranging in length
from 16 to 20 feet, but had a similar leaf-shaped blade at the end. Between the midfifteenth and mid-seventeenth centuries, the pike was a very popular defense against
the cavalry. The long pikes held the cavalry at bay while the musqueteers and
crossbowmen reloaded their weapons.
Other iron staff weapons used during the sixteenth century and illustrated in
contemporary drawings were the partizan--an Italian weapon introduced in the

12

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 3. A sixteenth century musketeer armed with a musket, dagger, and sword (drawn by
Rick E. Jamigan fTom Darrick, "Images oflreland," 1585, in Martin and Parker 1988, page
48).

fifteenth century--the pollaxe--a popular weapon of the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuriesiand the halberd a long-handled axe that was used throughout Europe
during the sixteenth century (Stone 1934; Norman and Wilson 1982).
Another weapon mentioned with some frequency is the crossbow. Crossbows
were one of the principal weapons carried on all of the early expeditions, but by the

Hoyt-- Material Culture of Spanish Explorers

13

Figure 4. A sixteenth century infantryman armed with a pike, sword, and dagger (drawn by
Rick E. Jamigan from Darrick, "Images of Ireland," 1585, in Martin and Parker 1988, page
48).

last quarter of the sixteenth century they had been replaced by firearms as the
military weapons of choice. Several nearly complete examples were recovered from
the wrecks of the 1554 fleet (Olds 1976; Arnold and Weddle 1978), but crossbows
or crossbow fragments are very rare from terrestrial sites. However, evidence for
their use is found in the recovery of steel and copper tips from crossbow quarrels.
Crossbow quarrels--the shafts shot from crossbows--were much shorter and
heavier than the arrows used with long bows. Points for crossbow quarrels had solid,
pyramid-shaped tips and constricted necks that fit over the quarrel shafts (Figure 5).
Several quarrel points made of copper were recovered from the early excavations
of Pecos Pueblo and "Bandelier’s Puaray" in New Mexico (Ellis 1957:209). Iron
points have also been excavated from a Florida site believed to be Hernando de
Soto’s winter camp of 1539-1540 (Ewen 1989:116). All of these points, both
copper and iron, are 4 to 5 cm (1.5 to 2.0 in.) long.
Two types of military firearms--the matchlock arquebus and the musket-were carried on sixteenth century explorering expeditions. In the early sixteenth
century the arquebus or hacabuche, was a firearm more than 5 feet long, often
weighing as much as 35 pounds. By the mid-sixteenth century, however, the term

14

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 5. Crossbow quarrels (4.5 inches long) (drawn by Hector Meza from Ellis 1957, p.

210).
musket was used to describe these heavier weapons, and the term arquebus referred
to a smaller firearm that weighed 14 to 18 pounds (Lavin 1965; Kist et al. 1974).
Because of the great weight and size of the military muskets, forked rests were
needed to prop the guns up while they were being fired.
In archeological contexts we are most likely to recover pieces of the ignition
mechanism, such as lockplates or serpentines, from these types of weapons, or
fragments of the wrought iron barrels. Although other ignition systems such as the
wheel-lock, snaphance, and flintlock, were developed during the sixteenth century,
the simple matchlock was preferred for exploration expeditions. As late as 1596,
Pedro Ponce de Le6n requested 500 arquebuses and 100 muskets for a voyage to the
Indies. These were presumably matchlock weapons, as the scribe noted that Ponce
de Le6n"understood that they used wheel locks in the Indies and now he knows that
although they are available it is not suitable to take them on this discovery" (Lavin
1965:47).
The preference for matchlocks lay in the simplicity of the firing mechanism.
Obreg6n, in his equipment list for expeditions, warns that "most [of the firearms]
should be operated by fuse because it often happens that the damp powder makes
the firing of the flintlocks difficult. Moreover the harquebuses with fuses are easier
to handle. The ones with flintlocks often need a mechanic to make repairs and to
replace the pieces that get out of order" (Hammond and Rey 1928:232).
The origin of a sixteenth century firearm can often be determined from the
shape of the stock. The Spanish preferred to rest the butts of their guns against their
shoulders, so their stocks had flared ends. French guns had sharply curved stocks
because the French held their guns against their chests to shoot, whereas the
Germans preferred straight, narrow stocks because they held their guns to their

Hoyt m Material Culture of Spanish Explorers

15

cheeks and rested the stocks on their shoulders. By the early seventeenth century,
most nations had adopted the Spanish-style gun.
In addition to the private weapons and small arms carried by the Spanish
soldiers, Coronado took four bronze cannons on his expedition. Traveling with
cannons through the southwestern desert must have taken a toll on both men and
cannons, because eventually the guns, described as being in poor condition, were
left at the village of Chia (Winship 1922:62).
ANIMALS

In addition to the remains of sixteenth century weapons, other indicators of
contact period sites can be found in faunal assemblages. The earliest explorers rode
horseback and were accompanied by dogs. Several Indian tribes encountered by the
explorers had dogs; horses, after becoming extinct in North America during the
Pleistocene, were reintroduced to the New World by the Spanish in the sixteenth
century. Horses were taken on all of the exploring expeditions and were believed
to be"the most necessary things in the new country, because they frighten the enemy
most, and after God to them belongs the victory" (Abbass 1986:22).
However, the use of horses was both a blessing and a curse. The increased
mobility that horses gave the Spanish was tempered by the fact that the cavalry was
effective only in open terrain. Finding fodder for the horses was a problem in the dry
Southwest, and many horses died while crossing mountains, fording rivers, and
wading through the swamps of the Southeast. The de Soto expedition departed
Havana with about 250 horses and returned with less than 30 (Swanton 1985:89-

9O).
Finding food and dealing with the environment were major problems, but other
factors also took their toll. Obreg6n warned that
large quantities of iron for horseshoes and the largest possible amount of
nails should be brought. If the iron gives out during the expedition it causes
great inconvenience and makes it impossible to go any farther, as happened on our expedition. Because the horseshoe nails gave out we were
forced to turn back, leaving many horses behind [Hammond and Rey
1928:233].
Wrought iron nails, believed to be from the de Soto expedition, and horseshoes,
believed to date to the expedition of Tristan de Luna (1559-1561), have been
recovered from archeological sites in Florida and Alabama (Hudson etal. 1989:131).
DAILY LIFE
The chronicles of the expeditions give very little information about the day-today lifestyle of the explorers. However, from a passing reference to a hailstorm that
"broke all the crockery of the army" (Winship 1922:69) and from the archeological
record, particularly in Florida, we know that various types of utilitarian and

16

Texas Archeological Society

tableware ceramics were carried by the explorers. Because of the large body of
literature concerning Spanish ceramics and the wide variety of ceramics in use
during the sixteenth century, this discussion touches only on pottery that has been
associated with sixteenth century exploring expeditions (see Deagan [1987],
Goggin [1964, 1968], and Lister and Lister [1974, 1976, 1982] for more detailed
information about sixteenth century ceramics).
The utilitarian ware most frequently encountered on early Spanish sites is
probably the coarse earthenware Olive Jar (Figure 6). These amphora-shaped jars
with constricted necks were the cardboard boxes of their day and were used to
transport and store many types of goods, such as olive oil, olives in brine, wine,
beans, chick peas, lard, and tar (Goggin 1964:256).
Although Olive Jars were in use from about 1490 through the late eighteenth
century, the type most frequently encountered on early contact sites is Goggin’s
Early Style Olive Jar. These jars are characterized by their globular form, flaring,
everted mouth, two strap handles set high on the shoulders of the jar, and interiors
often with a bright emerald to muddy brown lead glaze; the outsides characteristically have a thin white slip. Vessel walls range in thickness from 4 mm to 12 mm

u

Figure 6. Early Style Olive Jar (drawn by Hector Meza from Deagan 1987, Figure
4.3a).

Hoyt-- Material Culture of Spanish Explorers

17

(Goggin 1964). Early Style Olive Jars are most frequently found on Spanish sites
dating to the first three-quarters of the sixteenth century. By around 1570, the Early
Style jars were being replaced with the handleless Middle Style jars with their
distinctive ring-shaped necks and egg-shaped bodies (Goggin 1964; Deagan 1987).
Other coarse earthenwares recovered from sites associated with sixteenth
century explorers include Green Bacfn ware (Mitchem 1989:104), a sixteenth
century utilitarian earthenware distinguished by the emerald green lead glaze on the
interior of the vessel (Deagan 1987). Although Green Bacfn ware does not appear
in sites after about 1600, care should be exercised when working with collections
from the American Southwest, where very similar wares were imported from
Mexico in the eighteenth century (Barnes 1980).
Archeologists have also recovered fine earthenwares from a site associated
with the winter camp of the de Soto expedition in Florida (Ewen 1989:114). Two
types of tin-glazed earthenware and an unglazed bisque ware known as Bizcocho
ware have been identified. Bizcocho ware is made of a fine paste that was molded
into ornate shapes and decorated with incised lines and appliqudd figures. Bizcocho
ware has been found on Spanish sites throughout the Caribbean in contexts that date
before 1550 (Deagan 1987:43).
The tin-glazed earthenware recovered from the de Soto site in Florida includes
Columbia Plain ware and Caparra Blue ware. Columbia Plain ware is the most
frequently encountered tin-glazed earthenware found in the New World and dates
from initial contact through the early seventeenth century. The vessels are made of
a fine, cream colored paste covered with an off-white, cream, or greyish tin enamel.
The vessel forms most often found are broad-rimmed plates (platos) or bowls
(escudillas) (Deagan 1987:56) (Figure 7). Caparra Blue is another distinctive early
sixteenth century tin glazed earthenware. According to Kathleen Deagan (1987:63),
the only vessel form known for this ware is the albarelo, or Spanish drug jar (Figure
8). These jars, found on Spanish sites in pre- 1550 contexts, have white or off-white
glaze on the interiors and solid blue glaze on the exteriors.
TRADE GOODS

Although armed to the teeth and quick to use their weapons, the Spanish
exploring expeditions followed their official policy of conquering with goodwill
rather than brute force. To this end, the exploring parties carried large quantities of
trade goods for distribution to the native populations, de Soto’s trade goods included
bolts of cloth, iron tools, glass trinkets and mirrors, and beads and bells (Swanton
1985:55). The importance of these trade goods to the explorers is illustrated by the
fact that Cabeza de Vaca, after surviving six weeks at sea and a shipwreck, was still
able to give beads and bells to the Indians he encountered shortly after his landfall
near Galveston (Covey 1984:56).
Beads
Since many excellent publications have dealt with the identification of early
trade beads (e.g., Smith and Good 1982; Deagan 1987; Smith 1983), only the most

18

Texas Archeological Society

~i~’!~’ :!, ~r,.~-:°.,: ~,"-’, , " ~ :~’;’,~,~’i~’~~’

~,+,1., ~’~.,~’-")~i’;f>’~:,:’;";

0
I

~’.I-~~" ’’~’~ ~#,o’,)l.\

5 CENT IM ET £R S
I

I

I

r

I

Figure 7. Forms of pre-1550 Columbia Plain ware (drawn by Rick E. Jarnigan from Goggin
1968, p. 120).

distinctive of the sixteenth century trade beads are discussed here.
One of the best indicators of the early sixteenth century are the large, squaresectioned, drawn-glass Nueva Cadiz Plain beads (Figure 9), which are always found

Hoyt ~ Material Culture of Spanish Explorers

19

Figure 8. Caparra Blue abarelo, 16.8 cm high (drawn by Hector Meza from Deagan 1987,
Figure 4.30).

in contexts predating 1550 and have been found in sites in Florida, Georgia, and
Alabama that are associated with the de Soto expedition and other early explorers
(Mitchem and Leader 1988; Milanich and Milbrath 1989). These beads are made of
clear, turquoise, navy, light blue, or opaque glass in one to three layers (Deagan
1987:163). (The variety of three color combinations is well illustrated in the bead
collection from Tatham Mound in Florida [Mitchem and Leader 1988]). The color
combinations include cobalt blue and thin white with a translucent medium blue
core; turquoise blue and thin white with a navy blue core, cobalt blue and thin white
with a translucent light blue core, translucent navy blue and thin white with a
translucent navy blue core, and turquoise blue and thin white with a translucent
purple core. Single-colored Nueva Cadiz beads of translucent dark navy blue,
translucent cobalt blue, and transparent cobalt blue were also recovered.
Another distinctive sixteenth century bead type is the Chevron or Rosette bead
(Figure 10), made of multilayered red, white, and blue glass that forms a star when
viewed from the end. The sixteenth century Chevron beads are usually faceted and
made up of seven distinct layers, but by the seventeenth century, Chevron beads had
only five layers and were usually tumbled (Deagan 1987:164-165). Chevron beads
have been recovered from several sites in Florida associated with the de Soto
expedition (Mitchem and Leader 1988; Mitchem 1989:107).

Figure 9 Nueva Cadiz Plain bead. (Drawn by Rick E. Jarnigan from several sources.)

20

Texas Archeological Society

m

Figure 10. Chevron bead (drawn by Rick E. Jamigan from several sources.)
Although they are the most distinctive, Nueva Cadiz and Chevron beads are not
the only types of beads used for trade during the sixteenth century, for shipping
records of the period mention green, yellow, clear,"colored", blue, black, and white
beads made of glass, coral, jet, metal, bone, and stone (Deagan 1987). The wide
variety of beads manufactured during the sixteenth century has been well illustrated
( See Smith and Good 1982).
Bells

Small brass bells, often called hawk’s bells, were another important item in the
explorer’s trading kit. The bell most often associated with sixteenth century Spanish
sites is known as the Clarksdale bell (Figure 11). According to Mitchem and
McEwan (1988:39 40),
a Clarksdale bell is characterized by a wide (ca. 5 mm) attachment loop
which was secured by pushing the ends through a hole in the top and
soldering the separate ends to the interior, a square flange around the
"equator" where the two hemispheres were crimped together, an
undecorated surface, and two holes connected by a narrow slit in the lower
hemisphere.
These bells have been recovered from early contact period sites throughout the
Southeast (Mitchem and McEwan 1988:44).

Figure 11. Clarksdale bell (drawn by Hector Meza from Milanich and Milbrath 1989, p. 102).

Hoyt-- Material Culture of Spanish Explorers

21

A second type of bell known as the Flushloop bell is also found on contact
period sites (Figure 12). Flushloop bells are distinguished from Clarksdale bells by
the method of joining the two hemispheres of the bell and attaching the loop. The
attachment loops for Flushloop bells are much thinner than those of Clarksdale bells
and were secured by pushing the loops through holes in the bells and spreading the
ends apart on the interior. The two hemispheres of the bell were not crimped together
as in Clarksdale bells, but instead were soldered flush together (Mitchem and
McEwan 1988:40). Studies have shown that Flushloop bells are most often
associated with British or French contact period sites dating to the seventeenth
century and later (Mitchem and McEwan 1988).

1 INCH

0

]
0

.I

I
1 CENTIMETER

Figure 12. Flushloop bell (drawn by Rick E. Jarnigan from Mitchem and McEwan 1988,
Figure 3).
Tools

Although not as well documented as beads and bells, iron tools were also
carried as trade or gift items by the late sixteenth century. At least 61 chisels, 77
wedges, 72 hatchets, 30 knives, and one adze were given to the chiefs and other
important men encountered by Juan Pardo during his exploring expedition of 15661568 in the southeast (DePratter and Smith 1980:70-71). Whether the earlier
exploring expeditions carried iron tools is uncertain; the members of the Narvfiez
expedition found themselves without tools when they considered building a boat to
leave Florida (Covey 1984:45).
Tools are one of the most difficult artifacts to date accurately. They changed
very little through time and, because of the rarity of sixteenth and seventeenth
century examples, adequate typologies have not yet been developed. However,

22

Texas Archeological Society

well-preserved tools from sixteenth century contexts are being recovered from both
land and underwater sites (e.g., Milanich and Milbrath 1989; Cr6dit Communal
1985; Rule 1982; Hoyt 1985; DePratter and Smith 1980), greatly increasing the
potential for learning about the development of early historic tools.
CONCLUSIONS

The trail of the Spanish explorers has been closely followed by researchers
throughout the Southeast, into the Plains area, and among the pueblos of New
Mexico. However, very little sixteenth century material has actually been identified
in Texas. There are many reasons for this, including the difficulty of identifying
sixteenth century artifacts, as well as the nature of the explorer’s visits to Texas.
Unfortunately, most explorers who ventured into Texas were just passing
through. We do not have the winter camps or other sites that represent long-term
Spanish occupation during the sixteenth century. Even the overnight campsites, as
Moscoso’s group found, were quickly stripped of artifacts by the Indians who"were
accustomed to come and search the camp for whatever of value might have been left
within it" (Vega 1988:526).
However, the ethereal nature of the explorers’ contact with Texas should not
discourage attempts to expand our knowledge of this fascinating period in Texas
history. The Quincentenary observations in 1992 provide the perfect impetus for
renewal of interest in this period by studying privately owned and museum
collections, thereby contributing to the story of the sixteenth century explorers in
Texas and in North America as a whole.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I thank Helen Simons and Robert J. Mallouf for their advice, encouragement,
and continued support, also Hector Meza and Rick Jarnigan for their excellent
drawings.
REFERENCES CITED
Abbass, D. K.
1986
Horses and Heroes: The Myth of the Importance of the Horse to the Conquest
of the Indies. Terrae Incognitae 18:21--41.
Arnold, J. Barto Ill, and Robert S. Weddle
1978
The Nautical Archeology of Padre Island. Academic Press, New York.
Barnes, Mark R.
1980

Mexican Lead-Glazed Earthenwares. In: Spanish Colonial Fromier Research,
compiled and edited by Henry F. Dobyns, pp. 91-110. Spanish Borderlands
Research, No. 1. Center for Anthropological Studies, Albuquerque.

Blair, Claude
1958

European Armour. B. T. Batsford Ltd., London.

Hoyt ~ Material Culture of Spanish Explorers

23

Blakely, Robert L.
1989
A Coosa Massacre. Archaeology 42 (3):30.
Boucher, Francois
1967
A History of Costume in the West. Thames & Hudson, London.
Burgess, E. M.
1960
A reply to Cyril Stanley Smith on mail making methods. Technology and
Culture 1 (2): 151-155.
Covey, Cyclone (translator and editor)
1984

Cabeza de Vaca’s Adventures in the Unknown Interior of America. Reprint
edition, University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

Cr&tit Communal
1985
Trdsors de l’Armada. Crddit Communal de Belgique, Brussels.
Deagan, Kathleen
1987
Artifacts of the Spanish Colonies of Florida and the Caribbean. Smithsonian
Institution Press, Washington, D.C.
DePratter, Chester B., and Marvin T. Smith
1980
Sixteenth Century European Trade in the Southeastern United S tates: Evidence
from the Juan Pardo Expeditions (1566-1568). In: Spanish Colonial Frontier
Research, compiled and edited by Henry F. Dobyns, pp. 67-77. Spanish
Borderlands Research, No. 1. Center for Anthropological S tudies, Albuquerque.
Ellis, Bruce T.
1955
A Possible Chain Mail Fragment from Pottery Mound. ElPalacio 62(5-6): 181184.

1957

Crossbow Boltheads from Historic Pueblo Sites. El Palacio 64(7-8):209-214.

Ewen, Charles R.
1989
Anhaica: Discovery of Hernando de Soto’s 1539-1540 Winter Camp. In: First
Encounters: Spanish Explorations in the Caribbean and the United States,
1492-1570, edited by Jerald T. Milanich and Susan Milbrath, pp. 110--118.
University of Florida Press, Gainesville.
Goggin, John M.
1964
The Spanish Olive Jar. In: Indian and Spanish Selected Writings, pp. 253-298.
University of Miami Press, Coral Gables.
1968

Spanish Majolica in theNew World. Yale University Publications in Anthropology, No. 72. Yale University Press, New Haven.

Harnmond, George P., and Agapito Rey
1928
Obreg6n’s History of l 6th Century Explorations in Western America. Wetzel
Publishing Co., Inc., Los Angeles.

24

Texas Archeological Society

Hoyt, Cathryn A.
1985
Tools from Shipwrecks: A Collection of Sixteenth and Seventeenth Century
Tools at the Bermuda Maritime Museum. Tools and Trades 3:36-55.
Hudson, Charles, Marvin T. Smith, Chester B. DePratter, and Emilia Kelley
1989
The Tristan de Luna Expedition, 1559-1561. In: First Encounters: Spanish
Explorations in the Caribbean and the United States, 1492-1570, edited by
Jerald T. Milanich and Susan Milbrath, pp. 119-134. University of Florida
Press, Gainesville.
Kist, J. B., J. P. Puype, and R. B. F. van der Sloot
1974
Musket, Roer & Pistolet. W. Gaade b.v., Den Haag.
Lambert, Marjorie F.
Oldest Armor in the United States Discovered at San Gabriel del Yunque. El
1952
Palacio 59(3):83--87.
Lavin, James D.
1965
A History of Spanish Firearms. Arco Publishing Co., Inc., New York.
Lewis, Theodore H. (editor)
1984
TheNarrative of the Expedition o f Hemando de Soto by the Gentleman of Elvas.
In: Spanish Explorers in the Southern United States 1528-1543, edited by
Frederick W. Hodge and Theodore H. Lewis, pp. 133-280. Texas State
Historical Association, Austin.
Lister, Florence, and Robert Lister
1974
Majolica in Colonial Spanish America. Historical Archaeology 8:17-52.
1976

A D escriptive Dictionary for Five Hundred Years of Spanish Tradition-Ceramics [13th Through 15th centuries]. Special Publication Series, No. 1, Society for
Historical Archaeology.

1982

Sixteenth Century Majolica Pottery in the Valley of Mexico. Anthropological
Papers of the University of Arizona, No. 3. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.

Martin, Colin, and Geoffrey Parker
1988
The Spanish Armada. W. W. Norton & Co., New York.
Milanich, Jerald T., and Susan Milbrath (editors)
1989
First Encounters: Spanish Explorations in the Caribbean and the United States,
1492-1570. University of Florida Press, Gainesville.
Mitchem, Jeffrey M.
1989
Artifacts of Exploration: Archaeological Evidence from Florida. In: First
Encounters: Spanish Explorations in the Caribbean and the United States,
1492-1570, edited by Jerald T. Milanich and Susan Milbrath, pp. 99-109.
University of Florida Press, Gainesville.

Hoyt-- Material Culture of Spanish Explorers

25

Mitchem, Jeffrey M., and Jonathan M. Leader
1988
Early Sixteenth Century Beads from the Tatham Mound, Citrus County,
Florida: Data and Interpretations. 7~e Florida Anthropologist 41(1):42--60.
Mitchem, Jeffrey M., and Bonnie G. McEwan
1988
New Data on Early Bells from Florida. Southeastern Archaeology 7(1):39--49.
Norman, A. V. B., and G. M. Wilson
1982
Treasures from the Tower of London. Lund Humphries Publishers Ltd. for
Sainsbury Centre for Visual Arts, University of East Anglia, London.
Olds, Dorris L.
1976

Texas Legacy from the Gulf." A Report on Sixteenth Century Shipwreck Material,s" Recovered from the Texas Tidelands. Miscellaneous Papers No. 5, Texas
Memorial Museum, and Publication No. 2, Texas Antiquities Committee,
Austin.

Peterson, Harold L.
The Helmet Found at San Gabriel del Yunque, New Mexico. El Palacio
1952
59(9):283-287.
Peterson, Mendel
Ordnance Materials Recovered from a Late Sixteenth Century Wreck Site in
1967
Bermuda. Military Collector & Historian. Spring: 1-8.
Rule, Margaret
1982

The Mary Rose. The Excavation and Raising of Henry Vlll’s Flagship. Conway
Maritime Press, London.

Smith, Marvin
1983

Chronology from Glass Beads: Tilt Spanish Period in the Southeast, ca. A.D.
1513-1670. In: Proceedings of tilt 1982 Glass Trade Bead Conference, edited
by C. Hayes. Rochester Museum and Science Center Research Reports, No. 16,
pp. 147-158, Rochester N.Y.

Smith, Marvin, and M. E. Good
1982

EarlySixteenthCenturyGlassBeadsintheSpanishColonialTrade.Cottonlandia
Museum Publications, Greenwood, Mississippi.

Stone, George Cameron
1934

A Glossary of the Construction, Decoration, and Use of Arms and Armor. Jack
Brussel, New York.

Swanton, John R.
1985

Final Report of the United States de Soto Expedition Commission. Smithsonian
Institution I~ess, Washington, D.C.

26

Texas Archeological Society

Terry, Kenneth, and Ina Terry
1960
Chain Mail and other Exotic Materials from South Central Kansas. Plains
Anthropologist 6 (12)Pt. 2:126-129.
Vega, Garcilaso de la
1988

The Florida of the Inca. Translated and edited by John G. Varner and Jeannette
J. Varner. Second paperback edition, The University of Texas Press, Austin.

Wedel, Waldo R.
1975
Chain Mail in Plains Archeology. Plains Anthropologist 20 (69):187-196.
Willis, Raymond F.
1980
Nueva Cadiz. In: Spanish Colonial Frontier Research, compiled and edited by
Henry F. Dobyns, pp. 27-40. Spanish Borderlands Research, No. 1. Center for
Anthropological Studies, Albuquerque.
Winship, George Parker (translator and editor)
1922
The Journey of Coronado 1540-1542. Allerton Book Co., New York.

27

Coronado’s American Legacy:
An Overview of Possible Entrada Artifacts
and Site Types,
and a Discussion of Texas Sites
Diane Lee Rhodes

ABSTRACT
Archeological research done in conjunction with the National Park Service’s
1990-1991 Coronado Trail study, supports an in-depth analysis of site features and
artifacts that might be considered characteristic of a "Coronado" archeological
site. No Coronado sites have been definitively identified for Texas, but this brief
overview of Texas Panhandle Protohistoric period sites highlights the need for
additional site-specific research. Further analyses of artifacts held in area repositories are needed to determine their age, provenience, and cultural associations.

INTRODUCTION

In 1988 Congress authorized the National Park Service to conduct a study of
Coronado’s 1540 entrada through the states of Arizona, New Mexico, Texas,
Oklahoma, and Kansas to evaluate the route for possible inclusion in the National
Trails System. The legislation directed researchers to (a) review all original Spanish
documentation on the entrada route, (b) continue the search for new primary
documentation, and (c) examine all information on the archeological sites along the
"trail" (National Park Service 1991).
ARCHEOLOGICAL RESEARCH

Beginning in the spring of 1990, the author carried out research in archeological
records seeking information on sites that may be related to Coronado’s 1540s
entrada. Archeological research was focused on (1) the sites that show a Spanish
presence during the sixteenth century, (2) American Indian sites that may have been
occupied during Coronado’s entrada, and (3) abandoned sites such as Chichilticalli
that were mentioned in the Spanish accounts. Research was limited to the routes
Coronado himself would have traversed.
It was assumed that Coronado’s expedition was led by Indian guides who
probably followed pre-existing trails. Although many of the indigenous plants,
animals, and peoples of the area may have changed since Coronado’s time, it was
assumed that the general topography has not changed significantly.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 63 (1992)

28

Texas Archeological Society
The Study Area

At first glance, the search for archeological sites seemed fairly straightforward.
However, for a variety of reasons, definition of the study area was difficult. The
entrada was a one-time event that left behind no clearly defined trail; rather, much
of the entrada followed a series of intersecting routes that were traveled by different
members of the expedition at different times, as they explored the country from key
points along the way. The vague and contradictory Spanish accounts of the
expedition have led to a great deal of speculation, and scholars have not been able
to reach agreement on a route, instead, proposing various routes as many as 200
miles apart.
To help refine the geographical area of study, the primary documents--the
entrada letters, journals, and accounts--were researched, and a matrix was developed that included the time of travel, place, distance, direction, and composition of
the group the Spanish writer was accompanying. The composition of the group was
important, for it influenced the rate of travel, the route, and the type of archeological
sites left behind. Ethnohistoric accounts were also collected and analyzed to see if
correlations could be made between the expedition and American Indian oral
history, or between cultural attributes and descriptions of native peoples given in the
narratives.
Next, the major historical and archeological studies of the route were collected and analyzed. Many contemporary archeologists, cultural geographers,
and historians were consulted, and their research efforts were factored into the
analysis. The proposed routes that appeared to be the most historically feasible
and accurate were transcribed onto topographic maps of the states to outline a
broad study corridor.
Types of Coronado Sites
The next step in the process was to define some of the characteristics expected
in a hypothetical Coronado entrada site, and list and describe artifacts that might be
representative and/or diagnostic of this entrada. Information was collected on what
a Spanish site of this time might look like, who the explorers were, and what they
would have brought along or lost along the way. S tudies of Spanish material culture
and sites of the period were examined to help with the identification of salient clues
to the route. Reports on the de Soto sites and those excavated at Santa Elena (the
colonial capital of Spanish Florida from 1566 to 1587, located on Parris Island,
South Carolina), as well as sixteenth century Spanish shipwreck sites off the coast
of Texas, were particularly useful. Experts on fifteenth- and sixteenth century
archeological sites were also consulted.
Problems with Site Definition
There are, however, some basic differences between the Coronado expedition
and other Spanish entradas. Coronado never made connections with his supply
ships; his expedition was a long journey overland, often through desolate terrain.

Rhodes ~ Coronado’s American Legacy

29

After an initial foray in Mexico, Coronado’s army traveled light, apparently
planning to live off the land (except for domestic livestock brought along for food).
Except for the food and arms, which they carried on their backs, each member of the
advance group took only a few necessary items that weighed no more than a pound
(Coronado 1940:163), so the types of artifacts associated with architecture and
special activities found at other sixteenth century sites would not be expected in
Coronado expedition sites.
Other sixteenth- and early seventeenth century Spanish explorations and
colonization efforts surely left behind many of the same types of artifacts, still
further obscuring the diagnostic nature of the archeological remains from Coronado’s
entrada. In addition, most of the archeological work in the West has not focused on
the Coronado period, but rather on prehistoric sites or on sites of the later Spanish
Colonial period.
Several other factors make it difficult to identify potential Coronado sites. A
large contingent of Indians from what is now Mexico, and Indian guides from the
various Pueblo and Plains groups, accompanied the expedition and brought their
own equipment and supplies. Food (presumably stored in native pottery vessels),
clothing, and other subsistence goods were also procured along the route from
various Mexican and American Indian groups, so the physical remains from the
Coronado expedition could include native pottery, weaponry, and personal items,
as well as game animals, fire hearths, and other items--an assemblage of features
and artifacts virtually identical to thousands of prehistoric sites across the Southwest. Camping areas for each of the groups accompanying the expedition might
contain diagnostic artifacts and features, but subtle differences between the Spaniards and their Indian guides in distributions of artifacts and arrangement of
campsites probably would not be easy to detect.
The narratives describe Coronado’s group as an army. To twentieth century
America, the term army implies a hierarchical organization whose equipment,
personal gear, and camping patterns are fairly well prescribed and uniform.
Coronado’s group included soldiers, priests, women, and dilettantes, each with his
own baggage. These individuals and various small groups were privately funded,
came from varying backgrounds, and used different weaponry and equipment.
Because the frontier of New Spain was a long way from the European continent and
from Spanish supply bases, equipment was often antique or makeshift. For these
reasons the Coronado expedition would not be expected to leave behind the orderly,
stereotypical pattern of archeological features that would characterize a modern
army.
Location of sixteenth century Spanish artifacts at a site also does not necessarily mean that Coronado was in the area. American Indian groups occasionally
obtained Spanish equipment and weaponry, which they may then have transported
hundreds of miles, especially on the plains. Because of its rarity, the weaponry or
equipment, probably obsolete in European terms, may have been treated as
heirlooms to be passed down in families. Perhaps a century or more later, these
treasured objects would become part of the grave goods interred with the owner in

30

Texas Archeological Society

areas far removed from the place of acquisition, or reworked into practicable
weapons and tools such as metal arrowpoints.1
Probable Characteristics of Coronado Campsites
Because the geography of the area probably influenced the location of campsites, the Spanish narratives describing landscape features can be used to focus upon
potential site locations. For example, the flat, trackless region described by the
Spaniards is almost certainly the Llano Estacado of the Southern Plains, and the
barrancas seen by the expedition bear a strong resemblance to those cut by the major
river systems in the Texas Panhandle--perhaps the Canadian or, most likely, the
Palo Duro river system.
The Spanish narratives also specifically mention both salt and fresh water
sources along the route. Salt water playa lakes appear to be generally south of the
border between Parmer and Bailey counties, so if we assume that the playa lakes
have changed little over the past four centuries, this line can provide additional
information regarding possible locations of sites that, presumably, would be near
water.
Additionally, the narratives describe a mound of bison bone piled along the
shores of one of the playa lakes. There are many reports of bison bone deposits-and many playa lakes--in the Texas Panhandle, but one of the largest deposits of
prehistoric bone is at Silver Lake in the far northeast corner of Cochran County.
Some historians suggest that this may have been one of the sites visited by the army
on its return to Cicuye (Kiser 1978).
On a more specific level, it is expected that campsites would probably be on
fairly level ground near the water and forage necessary for the livestock. Sites
associated with the army would probably cover a relatively large area (because of
the size of the group), but it is expected that artifacts and traces of the camp would
be scattered and shallow (excepting the winter encampment). Unfortunately, in the
Texas Panhandle where soil formation is slow, it may be difficult to differentiate
between a prehistoric site created by repeated visits to an area by small groups of
Indians, and a single short visit by Coronado’s group to a large temporary Indian
encampment. It is clear, however, that many hearths would be needed to provide
food for this large group, so radiocarbon dating, thermoluminescence dating, or
obsidian hydration dating of samples from a large site could help date components
in the site.
At a large campsite there could be some clustering of different camping patterns
and artifacts throughout the area, because each of the different ethnic and class
groups would probably tend to camp together. Again, careful analysis of the features
and assemblages on large sites could prove productive. This site clustering was
apparently true of the winter encampment along the Rio Grande where it is thought
lIn their manuscript on Comanchero activities in the Texas Panhandle, Frances Levine
and Martha Freeman (1982) describe several historic Indian burials that contain both native
and Euro-American artifacts.

Rhodes ~ Coronado’s American Legacy

31

that Coronado and his men occupied one of the pueblos, while the herders, Indian
guides, and the rank and file of the army camped nearby.
Vierra (1989:3) suggests that the Coronado winter campsite is New Mexico site
LA54147, and "represents a series of contemporaneous campsites associated in
some way with the occupation of the pueblo [Santiago Pueblo (LA326)]." The
campsites at LA54147 consisted of a series of shallow dugouts about 10 cm deep
and ranging from 2 to 5 meters in diameter with both interior and exterior hearths
(Vierra 1989:223). Distance between the dugouts ranged between about 1 and 5
meters (Vierra 1989:Figure 11). The dugouts, which were surrounded by a surface
scatter of artifacts, may have been covered by brush shelters and/or tents; postholes
were found around one of the dugouts, suggesting some sort of superstructure.
Shortly after their abandonment, the dugouts were filled with soil mixed with
burned com, beans, wild plants, and bones (i.e., game species, birds, and domesticated sheep), potsherds, bits of charcoal, ground stone, burned adobe, and metal
artifacts including nails, clothing attachments, and armorL Radiocarbon dating of
corn samples from the site gave a mean date of A.D. 1527 (Vierra 1989:225).
Most of the lithic debitage found at LA54147 was from activities related to core
reduction and was of local raw materials. However, the artifact assemblage included
a Mesoamerican blade fragment of Pachuca obsidian from the Valley of Mexico.
Other nonlocal materials include comal (griddle) fragments, which "appear to be
made of a thin tabular sandstone exposed in the Placitas area" a few miles northeast
of the site (Vierra 1989:223).
The ceramic assemblage at this site was dominated by Rio Grande Glaze E
pottery. No majolica, Glaze D, Glaze F, or European vessel forms were identified.
This suggests that the "ceramic assemblage is precolonial, dating to ca. A.D. 15251625" (Vierra 1989:72). Almost all of the utility wares were of local manufacture;
the glaze wares came primarily from the Pajarito Plateau, the upper and middle Rio
Grande, and the Galisteo Basin. The few intrusive trade wares appeared to be typical
of area pueblo sites for this time period. The ratio of bowls to jars is 1:1, which is
in contrast to a bowl:jar ratio of 4:6 from the nearby Santiago Pueblo (Vierra
1989:223).
Although the winter encampment site---because of its relatively long occupancy during the winter months--probably would not be typical of the remains left
behind by Coronado’s group on much of the entrada, full examination of site data
for LA54147 provides some insights into site patterning and material culture of a
possible Spanish expeditionary site. In summary, this site includes both Indian and
Euro-American artifacts, game and domesticated animal bone, an atypical distribution of vessel types, and obsidian imported from Mexico. Glaze E pottery can be
considered a hallmark of this time period in New Mexico, and the absence of other
glazed pottery suggests an event of a fairly short, discrete time span. The distribution

2During the 1930s, crossbow boltheads were recovered from Santiago Pueblo, which is
adj acent to LA54147. One of the boltheads was recovered from the body of an individual who
had apparently died of his wounds.

32

Texas Archeological Society

and type of features within the site--especially the dugouts--do not appear to be
characteristic of either the indigenous Pueblo groups nor of the Plains traders who
may have visited the site.
Campsites left by scouting parties and the advance guard would probably be
much more difficult to identify, since they would be small and ephemeral. However,
the narratives suggest that cairns and other markers were left behind by the scouts
to identify the route for the more slowly moving army. The Spaniards left other
markers behind as well. Wooden crosses set into piles of stone were placed at
strategic areas along the route to claim the land for Spain and as part of the
expedition’s mis sionary efforts (Niza 1940:79). Wooden stakes were driven into the
ground for tethering the horses (Mendoza 1940:157) and temporary corrals or
stock-containment features of stone or wood may have been left along the route as
the expedition moved towards Quivira; other traces might be remains of the bridge
across the Cicuye River and graffiti carved into rocks.
The narratives indicate that the Spaniards encountered two different Indian
groups--the Teyas and the Querechos--on their trek across the Plains. Sites of the
late Prehistoric and Protohistoric period in the Texas Panhandle include those
associated with the Tierra Blanca and Gavza complexes (see Hughes 1991). These
complexes may be the remains of the Indian groups Coronado encountered en route
to Quivira from the Rio Grande. Delineation of a common boundary or contact zone
between these two groups could help focus research activities upon specific areas
and sites.
It is clear from the narratives that Coronado’s group followed their Indian
guides along pre-existing trails for much of the route. Some prehistoric trails were
documented by early explorers; indeed, occasional traces of prehistoric routes are
still visible on the Plains, and, because prehistoric trails probably led through the
gentlest topography and along water sources, later historic trails may have followed
the same routes across the landscape. It has been suggested by Blakeslee (personal
communication, May 1991) that Comanchero trails that are visible today, or have
been documented historically, followed earlier prehistoric routes across the Texas
Panhandle. If so, these identifiable trails may provide clues to the route followed by
Coronado’ s party. On the other hand, Coronado’s letter to the King suggests that the
army was for a time lost on the vast Llano Estacado, lacking any sort of landmark
or identifiable trail (Coronado 1990:201).
Considering all these factors, some possible indicators of the Coronado
expedition would be traces of campfires, crude rock walls or other temporary corrals
for livestock, cairns, crosses, bridges, and graffiti. These would be expected in areas
where wood or buffalo chips, water, and forage were available.
ARTIFACTS OF THE CORONADO EXPEDITION
Lists have been compiled from the Spanish narratives of the specific items that
were brought along by Coronado’s expedition. Other specialty items--although

Rhodes ~ Coronado’s American Legacy

33

they were not mentionS---may have been taken on the expedition by clerics and
craftsmen (see also Hoyt and Bruseth, both in this volume).
Spanish or Mexican ceramics may have been brought along to serve for storage
or tableware. For example, on his journey to Hawaikuh, Estevan took a variety of
trade items and "green plates" (Alarc6n 1990:141). The origin of these plates is
unknown, but it is possible that they were of green lead-glazed coarse earthenware
similar to those found at Santa Elena (Skowronek et al. 1988:253-258). The Santa
Elena green lead-glazed earthenwares have a pinkish paste, and are found in several
forms, including a pie-plate variety. This ware may be representative of the
sixteenth century French ceramic tradition (Skowronek et al. 1988:258). The green
plates also may have been a variety of green-glazed Lebrillo ware, a cream-tan
earthenware with noticeable mineral inclusions that was produced predominantly
from A.D. 1490 to 1600 (Deagan 1987:48-50).
Coronado’s men--particularly the officers--probably carried some ceramic
items in their mess kits, and several authors describe the Old and New World
majolicas, porcelains, and coarse earthenwares available to the Spanish conquistadors (see Deagan 1987; Lister and Lister 1987; Olds 1976; South et al. 1988).
The ubiquitous olive jars common in the Spanish empire during this period
could have been used to transport some of the foodstuffs--including wine, raisins,
sugar, and oil (Coronado 1940:176). Olive jars were amphora-shaped ceramic
vessels with restricted necks, stoppered with cork and often sealed with pitch
(Deagan 1987:31). These ceramic jars were used primarily to store and transport
goods, especially liquids, overland. Some of the storage vessels found at Santa
Elena were of a majolica-like buff paste with lead glaze on both surfaces, and some
were decorated with incised marks (Skowronek et al. 1988:283).
It is also likely that some of the ceramics used to transport the subsistence items
carried by Coronado’s group were made by indigenous Indian groups. The narratives report that by the time Coronado and the advance guard reached the Zuni area,
the men and horses were in "such great need of food that I thought we should all die
of hunger... [for] altogether we did not have two bushels of maize" (Coronado
1940:167). This passage from Coronado’s letter to Mendoza could suggest that
since the storage containers brought with the small group from Mexico had been
discarded as the grain was used, we would not expect to find them in Texas. Food
procured from the Zuni pueblos might have been carried eastward in native ceramic
vessels of Zuni origin.
During the winter of 1540 to 1541, the Spaniards seized grain from local Pueblo
groups along the Rio Grande, and almost certainly these foodstuffs were acquired,
transported, and stored in jars of local manufacture. The excavations at campsite
LA54147 yielded an atypically high frequency of glazeware jars (Marshall
1989:93),which can be explained in several ways. Almost certainly some of the high
proportion of storage vessel sherds result from Spanish consumption of stored
foodstuffs during the winter of 1541, followed by on-site disposal of the jars.
However, if the Spaniards used metal cooking pots rather than ceramic vessels to

34

Texas Archeological Society

prepare their meals, the proportion of cooking to storage vessels would also be
skewed)
Mobility may be another factor causing a high ratio of service wares, i.e.,
ceramic samples from along Chacoan roads "reveal a configuration similar to that
of LA54147" (Marshall 1989:93). Marshall also suggests that differences in dietary
and cooking habits may have influenced the comparative data for LA54147; groups
who rely on roasted or baked foodstuffs require fewer cooking vessels than do
groups who boil their food.
Castafieda (1940:238) noted that pottery and gourds used for cooking and food
storage were broken by a hailstorm that caught the Spaniards in a steep-sided
canyon. This may have been one of the canyons of the Canadian River system, or
more likely, the Palo Duro system somewhere in the north central part of the Texas
Panhandle. This verifies that when the army left Tiguex (and/or Pecos) in search of
Quivira, they were transporting ceramics with them, and it is likely that these
ceramics were made by native potters. However, the narratives fail to mention the
source of the Spaniards’ supplies as they left for Quivira. Supplies may have been
acquired from the pueblos along the Rio Grande. However, it is possible that the
food stored by the residents of Tiguex was virtually exhausted by the spring of 1541,
forcing the Spaniards to seek subsistence goods from other areas such as Taos,
Pecos, or the pueblos of the Galisteo Basin.
There is also another question; were these locally made wares the Glaze E
wares of the time or were they the anomalous "bean pot" wares common to the
pueblos (Waldo Wedel, personal communication, February 1992)? It is possible too
that some containers or ceramics brought from Mexico, including Sonoran burnished wares, were also lost in the Plains hailstorm.
The Spaniards took dogs with them on the entrada, together with goats, mules,
sheep, horses, and cows. Castafieda (1896:542) remarked that the arm y’s livestock
on the Plains east of Pecos consisted of 1,000 horses, 500 cattle, and 5,000 sheep:
In addition, there were many pack-mules carrying extra supplies and a few pieces
of artillery (Winship 1896:379). Coronado (1940:43) took pigs along on his 1539
expedition to Topira, but there is no mention of these animals in the narratives of

3Few of the sherds found at LA54147 have the blackening of the exterior surface that
would be expected if the vessels had been used for cooking. Yet "it is clear that culinary
activities were frequently conducted in the site area" (Marshall 1989:93).
4 These numbers have been questioned by some authorities who suggest that Castafieda
exaggerated or perhaps estimated the number of livestock leaving Culiacan, rather than the
size of the herd taken onto the Plains. It is evident, however, that at least some of the animals
survived the journey, for sheep, mules, and a horse were given to Father Padilla on his
departure for Quivira in the fall of 1541 (Jaramillo 1990:212). Also, Castafieda notes that
some sheep were left with Fray Luis at Cicuye in the spring of 1542 (Castafieda 1940:271).
Of the seven sixteenth century Spanish entradas into New Mexico, it appears that only
Coronado and Ofiate brought domesticated animals into the Rio Grande Valley (Vierra
1989:226).

Rhodes ~ Coronado’s American Legacy

35

the 1540-1542 expedition. Several of the horses, together with their saddles and
equipment, were lost in a buffalo stampede on the Plains. So it is clear that in the
appropriate context (as at LA54147), the finding of bone from domestic animals in
good association with sixteenth century American Indian sites could be an important clue in establishing the route of Coronado’s entrada.
Items taken by Coronado for trade with the Indians included pearls, glassware,
paternosters, jingle bells, and cloaks and other items of clothing (Castafieda
1940:217)5, but it is not clear just what sort of glassware Castafieda was referring
to. Glass sherds found in the sixteenth century deposits at Santa Elena were from
fancy decorated Venetian glass containers (South et al. 1988). Since these items
probably were too bulky and fragile to survive Coronado’s long journey overland,
the glassware items taken for trade may have been smaller and of heavier glass.
It is not clear what Castafieda meant by paternosters taken to give to the Indians,
but these items were probably either special beads in rosaries used to say the Pater
Noster, or the rosaries themselves (Ox ford English Dictionary 1971: 551). Paternosters are beads of Venetian drawn glass that are individually finished and decorated
(Francis 1979:13).
In addition to wine and oil carried in some sort of containers, the friars
accompanying the expedition might have carried kits containing all of the items
needed for the celebration of mass and the other sacraments. These kits may have
included items such as a crucifix, chalice, a palette containing a holy relic, a book
of prayers or orders, and some vestments.
Selected trade beads, like the paternosters and Nueva Cadiz beads, provide
potentially diagnostic artifacts that can be dated to the Coronado time period. Nueva
Cadiz beads are
cane beads of square cross-section, with or without a twist; most commonly they are in various shades of blue.., these square cross-section cane
beads have only been found in the New World, in Spanish contact sites
[Liu and Harris 1982:1-6].
Nueva Cadiz beads are thought to have been produced and traded between 1500
and 1550, and had probably gone out of fashion by about 1560. The shorter varieties
of the Nueva Cadiz beads may also have been used in association with spherical
beads until the latter part of the century (Smith and Good 1982:10-11).
These beads evidently were introduced to the New World as trade items shortly
after Pizarro conquered Peru in 1532-1533. The author did not find any specific
references to early sixteenth century trade beads in the Texas Panhandle, but
Spanish trade beads in sites in Oklahoma and Kansas suggests contact between
native peoples and early Spanish explorers elsewhere on the High Plains. For

5Kessell (1979:7) suggests that these were"artificial pearls." However, it appears that
Fray Marcos--and perhaps Coronado after him--took samples of real pearls to show the
Indians what the Spaniards were looking for (Niza 1940:64).

36

Texas Archeological Society

example, a single glass trade bead found at the Goodwin-Baker site in western
Oklahoma (34RM14) has been identified as an example of the Nueva Cadiz Plain
type (Sudbury 1984:32). This small, square glass bead has a thin exterior glass layer
of translucent Independence Blue and a thicker inner core of transparent turquoise
glass. Both layers have drawn air bubbles "suggestive of manufacture by the hollow
cane technique" (Sudbury 1984:31). The inner and outer layers of this 4.9-by-6.2mm bead are separated by a thin white layer. Similar beads found in the southeastern
United States are thought to date to the period of initial Spanish exploration (see
Hoyt and Bruseth, both in this volume).
Bells were common trade items during this period in parts of the southeastern
United States. For example, bells were documented for Indian trade in the 1528
Narv~iez expedition, and were "well known from sixteenth century contexts,
particularly the De Soto expedition" (South et al. 1988:142). The"jingle bells" may
have been the small Clarksdale variety (Figure 1) commonly known for their use on
horse harnesses, or they may have been small and bell-shaped, designed for use on
clothing like priests’ robes.

1 INCH

Figure 1. Clarksdale Bells (adapted from South et al. 1988:143, 144).

Because parts of clothing fasteners and decorations--large and small wire
hooks and eyes, brass and iron buckles, bordado trim, metal stars, and aglets--have
been recovered from several mid-sixteenth-century Spanish sites, apossible Coronado
site might contain such artifacts. Since the wire hooks and eyes and the buckles from
this period so closely resemble modern fasteners, readers are referred to South et al.
(1988:121-142) and Vierra (1989:134-137) for further information on these types
of artifacts.
We have no details on the type of clothing worn by Coronado’s group, but,
judging from the inventory and the speed with which troops were mustered, it is
unlikely that the force had uniforms (Byron A. Johnson, personal communication,
July 27, 1992). Ball buttons were, however, used by both soldiers and the upper
classes in sixteenth century New Spain (South et al. 1988:132-135). Because the
most common fasteners found in the excavations at Santa Elena were metal ball
buttons (Figure 2), it is possible that this sort of artifact would be found in a
Coronado site. The small round ball buttons found at Santa Elena and Fort San
Felipe averaged about 10 mm in diameter, excluding the heavy extended loops used
for attachment. These buttons were made of plain brass or a gray alloy and came in
two styles--atauxia or acero buttons. The term atauxia refers to gilded or painted

Rhodes ~ Coronado’s American Legacy

37

buttons generally used on Spanish cloth; the plain ungilded acero buttons-commonly but misleadingly known as damascene buttons--were used on English
cloth (South et al. 1988:132-135).

10 MILLIMETERS

Figure 2. Metal ball buttons (adapted from South et al. 1988:134).

Bordado trim generally consists of coiled copper or gold wire or embroidered
strands of string used as an ornamental braid on clothing of the upper classes. Small
metal bordado stars, usually copper or silver, were used as decorations on horse gear
and clothing (South et al. 1988:147). These handmade stars varied in their general
configuration and in size, style, and number of points (Figure 3).

10 MILLIMETERS

Figure 3. Metal stars (adapted from South et al. 1988:146, 147).

Aglets, also known as aiglet or aiguillette, or copper lacing tips, were commonly
attached to leather thongs or ribbons used to fasten parts of clothing or half-armor
together (Figure 4). These small tips were about an inch long, with "a seam from
folding sheet copper into a slightly tapered tube" (South et al. 1988:135). Sometimes
gold aglets used by the wealthy were decorated with pearls or other jewels.

38

Texas Archeological Society

1

CENTIMETER

Figure 4. Copper aglets (lace tips) (after South et al. 1988:138).
No doubt additional supplies and equipment were taken by the expedition’s
tailor, doctor, and priests. Metal artifacts from Santa Elena and from the New
Mexico Expeditionary site include thimbles, pins, and scissors--all of surprisingly
modem looking design (Vierra 1989:134-137; South et al. 1988:151-155).
Crude medical instruments and small vials or containers for medicinal potions
may well have been taken by the "incompetent newsmonger" who went along to
"watch over the health of the army and tend its wounds" (Hammond and Rey
1940:8). Commonly, medicinal vials of this period were "tall and cylindrical with
slightly restricted necks and either bulbous or everted rims" (Deagan 1987:137).
A variety of tools would have been needed for various tasks such as wood
cutting, harness repair, or blacksmithing. For example, early Spanish tools found in
New Mexico include knife blades, an axe, and sheep shears (Vierra 1989:147-149).
A bugle was certainly taken along by the army bugler (Hammond and Rey 1940:13),
and, because some women accompanied the army, feminine clothing fasteners,
decorations, and jewelry might also be expected among the archeological remains.
Horses were critical to the success of the expedition, so supplies brought with
the army surely must have included equipment for shoeing the horses, together with
a supply of iron and nails. It is also assumed that items of horse gear including
stirrups, spurs, and bits may have been lost along the way; archeologists have found
a cinch ring, a bit, a horseshoe, and a variety of nails at early Spanish sites along the
Rio Grande. Horseshoe nails and nails used in small wooden boxes or saddles might
also be expected in a Coronado site (Vierra 1989:131-134).
The expedition’s muster roll suggests that a wide variety of weaponry was
taken along on the journey, including armor of Castille and arma de la tierra. Aiton
(1939:11) translates this phrase as arms of the country, but Hammond and Rey
(1940:88) read this as native arms or native weapons. The ethnocentric Spaniards
may have been making a distinction between arms produced by Old World
craftsmen and weapons made in Mexico or other parts of the New World that were
thought to be poorer in quality (Byron A. Johnson, personal communication, July
1992). Alternatively, arma de la tierra may have been used to describe American

Rhodes -- Coronado’s American Legacy

39

Indian weaponry such as the bow and arrow, which some Spaniards had by this time
adopted for their own use.
The muster roll for the expedition lists weapons such as crossbows, arquebuses,
one- and two-handed swords, daggers, lances, and other odd pieces. Types of armor
taken by the expedition include horse armor, coat of mail, appurtines, head armor,
heavy hide or mail breeches (zaragiielles), plate armor, mail loin guards, gorget
armor for the throat, head armor of the country, gauntlet, corselet (armor for the
upper body), helmet or casco, casque with chin piece, a form of helmet known as
a sallet with beaver, and an army helmet to cover the head 0Zigure 5).Coronado’s
personal armor was gilded and included a "fine helmet ornamented with plumes"
(Hammond and Rey 1940:8).
Several types of helmets were in use during Coronado’s time, including an
escofia (a metal skullcap favored by archers), a borgofiota (a helmet derived from
the French, known in Spain before 1520), a morri6n (a boat-shaped open-faced
helmet generally popular in the latter part of the sixteenth century), and a "war hat,"
or capiello defierro, which was the predecessor to the morri6n but with a turneddown brim. Casco or celada was a generic term used for several types of helmets
that either fully or nearly fully enclosed the face and head (Byron A. Johnson,
personal communication, July 27, 1992).

Collar
/
Idron

uard
or Skirt

\

Cuisse-j

Greave i-

i)

Figure 5. Composite drawing with names of parts of armor.

40

Texas Archeological Society

The expedition also had six or seven bronze pedreros, or stone mortars. By the
time the Spanish reached Tiguex, the mortars were in poor condition, and four of
them were left at ZiaPueblo for safekeeping (Hammond and Rey 1940:8; Castafieda
1940:233). The fate of the other pedreros is unknown.
It is unclear just how many of the items listed in the muster roll were actually
brought as far as Quivira. Some unnecessary items apparently were discarded
before the expedition reached what is now Arizona. Johnson (1988: 8) suggests that
heavy armor was too "ungainly and too confining for long or rapid marches," so
armor may have been primarily chain mail, padded vests, or other chest and arm
protection, plus some sort of helmet. Jack plates--small rectilinear brass or iron
plates from flexible armor (Figure 6)--were found at both Santa Elena and along
the Rio Grande (South et al. 1988:115; Vierra 1989:135). The irregularity and
hammered appearance of these metal plates suggests local manufacture in the New
World. Generally, the jack plates were fastened in an overlapping pattern by rivets
between two folds of coarse canvas to create "the conquistador’s version of a
modem-day policeman’s ’flak jacket’" (Vierra 1989:135). Other metal artifacts
found on Expeditionary sites include buckles and hinges of various types that may
have been used with armor for both men and horses. Bits of chain mail have been
found along the Rio Grande, as well as in sites in Kansas, Texas, and Arizona.
However, at present no determination has been made of the exact date or source of
this chain mail, so none of it can be linked with any certainty to the Coronado
expedition.

¯,

1

-J

INCH

Figure 6. Jack plates from armor (adapted from South et al. 1988: l 16 and Vierra 1989:135).
The narratives also document the presence of the ballestas or crossbows, and
arcabuces on the journey. The Spanish used three types of crossbows-- the ballesta
de gafa, the ballesta de armatoste, and the ballesta de cranequin (Johnson 1988:9).
These types were differentiated by the way the bow was armed. The most common
military crossbow, the ballesta de gafa, utilized a detachable "goat’s foot" lever to
ann the bow (Johnson 1988; Figure 7).
Crossbow bolt points (quarrels) varied in shape, size, and material (iron or
copper), depending upon their specific function and place of manufacture (Figure
8, a). Crossbow bolt points found along the Rio Grande and at the Spanish colonial
capital of Santa Elena, at Pecos, and at Hawikuh, generally resemble metal pen
points between 3.5 and 5.0 cm long (Ellis 1957:209; Vierra 1989:145; South et al.

Rhodes ~ Coronado’s American Legacy

41

1988:103-108). To make the bolt tips, flat pieces of metal were rolled and
hammered into shape, which annealed the tips and left the bases open for inserting
the bolts (Figure 8, b).

Figure 7. Drawing of a typical crossbow, showing the goat’s foot lever (adapted from South
et al. 1988:104).

Some authors believe crossbow parts and bolts may be diagnostic of the
Coronado expedition (Vierra 1989:227). Crossbows were used at one of the Zuni
towns, at Pecos, and at pueblos along the Rio Grande. Possibly some of the crossbow
bolts were made of a ferrous material, but the majority of those found along the Rio
Grande were made of copper by native craftsmen. By the time of the next Spanish
entrada, the arquebus had begun to replace the crossbow. In this frontier region,
however, use of the crossbow may have persisted well into the seventeenth century
(Williams 1991:2).
Unfortunately, crossbow bolts were not always correctly identified by early
archeologists. Moreover, past archeological excavations often lacked good stratigraphic controls or in-depth reports that would have allowed researchers to
distinguish the remains of the Coronado expedition from those of later entradas.
It is possible that parts such as triggers, serpentines, or matchcord guide
tubes could have been lost from the arcabuces taken along by Coronado’s group.
The Spaniards were the acknowledged experts in the use of the arquebus--a
matchlock weapon developed by the Spanish during the fifteenth century--and
a surprisingly accurate weapon. South, Skowronek, and Johnson (1988:96) suggest that the "Spaniards were the acknowledged experts, replacing English bowmen as the most feared infantry in Europe." Coronado’s men may have carried
the light caliver type of arquebus rather than the longer musket, but in either
case, it is quite likely that lead shot from this weapon could be found in
Coronado-era archeological sites, especially on those where hunting or a battle
had taken place.

42

Texas Archeological Society

A

1 INCH
B
Figure 8. Several types of crossbow bolts, a (adapted from South et al. 1988:106, 108, and
Ellis 1957:209), and crossbow bolt tips, b (adapted from South et al. 1988:106, 108, and Ellis
1957:209).

The weapons and armor carried by Coronado and his men appear to be similar
to those described in early Spanish manuals that discuss ways to outfit an expedition. The manuals cover such details as health and medicines, recruitment of priests,
and types of weapons and armor to bring along. For example, the Milicia y
Descripcion de las Indias (Vargas Machuca 1892) states that

Rhodes ~ Coronado’s American Legacy

43

in the Indies, Spani~ds principally used cross-bows, chain mail, plate
armor (breast plates), small muskets, rodelas (oval or heart-shaped leather
shields).., after much experience the best and most advantageous were
muskets, quilted cotton vests, broad swords, cotton helments [sic] (headgear) and visors, rodelas, partial horse armor, leather jackets, and mail
coats.6

In summary, artifacts that might have been left by the Coronado expedition
include horse gear (horseshoe nails and pieces of bridles and stirrups), metal tools
for fitting horseshoes and repairing leather goods and clothing, clothing parts (rolled
copper aglets, and fasteners like hooks and ball buttons), personal and religious
items (ceramic mess kits, jet Rosary beads, and simple lead and brass crosses),
domestic animal bone (horse, sheep, and cattle) and other food refuse, pottery,
gourds, and other storage and cooking vessels, trade goods (beads, small bells, glass
dishes, metal knives, and pearls), and weapons, particularly crossbow bolts and lead
shot.
OVERVIEW OF SOME TEXAS PANHANDLE SITES
Several factors limited the scope of this paper and contributed to some
unintentional biases. For example, the research, which focused on site forms and
published reports, was completed about two years ago, so data presented here do not
include more recent findings. Also, the terminology used on site forms to describe
artifacts varied widely, for example, Puebloan ware, Glazeware, Rio Grande ware,
Glaze IV, Glaze E, black pueblo pottery, and on virtually all site forms, temporal
assignments such as Late Prehistoric or Protohistoric lacked specific dates.
Coronado’s Entry into Texas
It is very likely that geographical factors had a strong influence on the route
chosen by Coronado’s guides in their eastward march from Pecos. Jaramillo
(1896:588) wrote that the expedition forces had been traveling in a generally
northeast direction along "those streams which are among the cows [bison]" for
eight or 10 days. This suggests that the early part of their route paralleled a major
drainage, possibly the Canadian River. However, within a short time after reaching
the first Querecho camp, the group apparently left the drainage and struck out across
plains that are believed by most authors to be the Llano Estacado.
Although the imposing facade of the Llano Estacado presents a physical
barrier to travel, there are several places on the south side of the Canadian River
where Coronado’s group could have ascended the caprock with relative ease

°translation of the original Spanish contained in a letter from Byron A. Johnson, of the
Albuquerque Museum, to the author. Typescript in National Park Service files at the Denver
Service Center.

44

Texas Archeological Society

(Jack Hughes, personal communication, Spring 1990; Waldo Wedel, personal
communication, February 1992). The explorers could have followed the
Canadian River drainage for a short distance into Texas, possibly ascending onto
the Llano Estacado somewhere near Alamosa Creek. Another access point could
have been along the old east-west route from Santa Fe that ascended the scarp on
the Bridwell Ranch near Sand Point, due west of Simms, Texas (Speer 1981).
The Apache Canyon route, which approximates New Mexico Highway 80, also
provides feasible access. Further south, the drainages of Tierra Blanca Creek,
Frio Draw, and Running Water Draw not only provide water and grazing, but
also a natural pathway eastward through gentle slopes onto the vast plains of the
Llano Estacado (Figure 9).

0
~,’~

~AMARILLO

~Pa,o Duro Canyon

Tierra

\

~Caprock Canyon State Park

I

I
50 MILES

I
I
_!

Figure 9. Map of the Texas Panhandle, showing the Llano Estacado and the Canadian River.

Rhodes-- Coronado’s American Legacy

45

We would expect to find at least some of the archeological sites left behind by
the Querecho and Teya bison hunters who were visited by the Spaniards. Descriptions of the Indian camps suggest too that they should contain evidence of many
hearths, traces of activities associated with lithic procurement, manufacture, and
use, tipi rings, and signs of procurement and processing of food, especially bison.
These Plains hunters probably were using such items as small end scrapers,
triangular arrowpoints, alternately beveled four-edged knives, and oval basin
metates (Hughes 1991).
Several small side-notched and triangular arrowpoints, including Garza, Washita,
Harrell, Fresno, and Lott types, were commonly used by Plains groups during the
Protohistoric period. Manufacture of these arrowpoints generally began after about
A.D. 1000, and continued to around A.D. 1600 or, for Fresno points, A.D. 1800
(Bell 1958; Suhm and Jelks 1962).
Coarse-tempered and micaceous ceramics are also thought to be associated
with these Protohistoric peoples. The Coronado narratives make it clear that these
Plains groups traded with the Puebloan groups along the Rio Grande, so Glazeware
ceramics (especially Glaze E wares), Puebloan utility wares, obsidian, and other
nonlocal materials might also be found in their encampments.
No early Spanish sites are reported for the northern Texas Panhandle, but many
Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric sites fitting this general profile of the Querecho
and Teya encampments are known from along the Canadian River in the northwestern Panhandle. For example, research of site files for the western parts of Oldham
and Hartley counties indicates that there are some Apachean or Late Prehistoric
(after about A.D. 1400) sites on bluffs or ridges overlooking the Canadian River.
Site 41OL225, south of the fiver near its confluence with Horse Creek, has buried
hearths and probable tipi rings7. Other such campsites north of the Canadian River
are 41OL157, with its slab-lined hearths and possible Mogollon ceramics, and site
41OL150 in the Punta de Agua Creek drainage. Southwestern obsidian, cordmarked pottery, and mano and metate fragments have been found at the latter site,
together with a stone gorget and micaceous plain sherds.
Some scrap metal, reportedly the residue of manufacture of historic metal
arrowpoints, was found at site 41HT1, a multicomponent campsite along Punta de
Agua Creek. Other sites along this same drainage (41HT3 and 41HT4) have
extensive evidence of quarrying, hearths, and many artifacts, including abrownware
sherd with a possible exterior slip.
Sites 41HF8 and 41HF86, in the vicinity ofPalo Duro Reservoir near Spearman,
have components that date to the Protohistoric period (Christopher Lintz, personal
communication, April 22, 1992 ). Radiocarbon dates for these sites generally range

7The site numbers preceded by A are from Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum site
records. Numbers beginning with D are from the Gila Pueblo system used by E. B. Sayles to
catalog sites. The numbers beginning with 41 are the trinomials used by the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin.

46

Texas Archeological Society

between 320!-_25 years and 46~_75 years B.P. In these two sites there were metal
artifacts, Olivella shell beads, and possible Apachean ceramics.
Many Protohistoric period sites are documented for the Lake Meredith area
~igure 9). For example, a metal arrowpoint was found at 41PT114, Puebloan
ceramics were found at 41MO96, and possible tipi rings and Apachean wares were
found at 41MO21,41 MO55, and 41PT73. According to files at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, a metal breastplate was reportedly found in 1947 in
Carson County, but its exact description and location were not recorded. Another
unauthenticated find includes glass trade beads and metal cone danglers from near
Red Deer Creek.
A polished, burnished ceramic ware, tentatively identified as Mogollon, was
found at a large site (41OL200) on Agua de Piedra Creek in Oldham County.
However, because burnished ceramic wares were also known from Protohistoric
Sonoran sites, these ceramics may merit further examination. Farther away from the
Canadian River on Agua de Piedra Creek, the Rocky Dell site (410L4) has remains
of mortar holes, tipi rings, and ceramics. Prehistoric and historic pictographs and
petroglyphs at this site depict Puebloan characteristics, as well as horses, a church,
and tipis. These drawings are often superimposed over earlier styles of rock art,
suggesting a long continuum of use.
Several sites in the headwater canyons of the Alamosa drainage appear to
postdate the Panhandle aspect (after about A.D. 1500), based on the presence of
micaceous or pyrite-tempered brownwares. These include sites A 1146 and 41 OL24,
as well as 41OL36 where brownware is found in association with large hearths.
These three sites are close to a possible entry point onto the Llano Estacado--an
upper canyon of Middle Alamosa Creek northeast of Landergin.
Many tipi ring sites have been reported along the Tierra Blanca drainage from
east of Hereford to the vicinity of Buffalo Lake. Site A1140 is a possible Late
Prehistoric, Apachean, or Comanche, structure of caliche slabs. Site A1139 nearby,
where the pottery includes black micaceous and redware sherds, is a possible
Apachean village of slab houses or tipi rings. Other concentrations of tipi rings are
at Texas D:4:1 and D:4:2, east of Hereford. The nearby Tierra Blanca site (41DF3)
appears to be a Plains hunter-gatherer base camp whose artifacts include obsidian,
bison bones, and Puebloan ceramics (primarily Glaze D wares dating to about A.D.
1500).
Obsidian flakes, Rio Grande Glaze Polychrome, rock features, and a great deal
of burned rock were found at the Ivy Ranch site, A264/41DF12, along Tierra Blanca
Creek, and, in the vicinity of Buffalo Lake, site 41RD35 appears to be a multicomponent site containing possible pit houses, Mogollon brown ware, and Washita
points. Northwest of the lake a contact period site (41RD24) contains abundant
burned rock, Rio Grande Glaze ware, and a blank for an iron point.
Several Floyd County campsites have Apachean and Puebloan pottery, glass
trade beads, and metal artifacts. One of the better-known sites, the Floydada
Country Club site (41FL1), has a mixture of prehistoric and historic materials,
including Eastern Pueblo, utility, polychrome, and micaceous ceramics, turquoise,

Rhodes ~ Coronado’s American Legacy

47

metal projectile points, glass beads, and Olivella beads (Word 1991). Fresno,
Perdiz, Harrell, Lott, and Washita arrowpoints and metal tinklers are also reported
from this site.
Rock art with a Spanish motif is found along the Double Mountain Fork of the
Brazos at site 41GR414, and Southwestern style rock art is found at 41GR57.
Southeast of Lubbock in the Justiceburg Reservoir area, sites 41KT53 and 41KT51
have majolica wares, features resembling tipi rings, possible lead sprue and other
metal fragments, a horse tooth, and a Longhorn horn core (Douglas Boyd, personal
communication, April 22, 1992). Both Southwestern and Plains ceramics are
represented in these sites, together with trade goods such as turquoise, Olivella, and
glass beads. Radiocarbon dates for these sites suggest an occupation period between
the late 1400s and 1600s.
Unfortunately, the site data were not sufficiently specific to make it possible to
pinpoint Coronado sites in Texas. Site forms for contact period sites might carry the
notation metal point or glass beads or Pueblo pottery, but almost always they have
no further description of the type of material, the morphology of the artifact, its age,
or its technology. Most of these artifacts were collected by local landowners, many
of whom are no longer living.
Additional research is clearly needed to verify the present locations of these
artifacts and to identify them properly. Virtually all of the Spanish artifacts found
throughout the Southwest and in the Plains lack specific proveniences, and many of
the items held by collectors or exhibited in museums are identified only by the ranch
or county where they were found. For these reasons, sites and collections in Texas
hold great promise--but equally great challenges--for future investigation of
Coronado’s trek to Quivira.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Unfortunately, there is neither time nor space to list the many, many archeologists, librarians, cultural geographers, and historians who took time from their busy
schedules to help me find information on Coronado’s entrada. I hope they understand the deep gratitude I feel for their help. I especially thank Dr. Waldo Wedel and
Mildred Mott Wedel for their patience and thoughtful assistance during the entire
project. Dr. Jack T. Hughes shared his extensive knowledge of Panhandle archeology with me, and any fault in the transliteration of the vast quantities of information
he gave me is mine alone. Richard and Shirley Flint have unselfishly shared
bibliographies and information, as did Dr. Byron A. Johnson, of the Albuquerque
Museum. Dr. Russell Skowronek pointed out the excellent Santa Elena studies as
well as several other important works dealing with Spanish artifacts. The staff
members of the Panhandle-Plains Museum, West Texas State University, the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, the Office of the State Archeologist, the Texas
Historical Commission, and the several libraries at The University of Texas were
unfailingly patient and helpful, and artist David Hesker produced the excellent
drawings. Lastly, I dedicate this paper to the memory of Margaret Harper, whose

48

Texas Archeological Society

keen zest for life and integrity made the research on Coronado’s route such an
exciting venture.
REFERENCES CITED
Aitort, Arthur S.
1939
The Muster Roll and Equipment of the Expedition of Francisco Vazquez de
Coronado. The William L. Clements Library, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
Alarc6n, Hernando de
1990
Report of Alarc6n’s expedition. In: The Journey of Coronado 1540-1542,
translated and edited by George P. Winship, pp. 124-155. Fulcrum, Golden,
Colorado.
Bell, Robert E.
1958
Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points.
Oklahoma Anthropological Society Special Bulletin No. 1. Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Oklahoma City.
Castafieda, Pedro de
Relacion de la Jornada de Cibola Conpuesta por Pedro de Castafieda de Nacera
1896
(translated by George P. Winship). In: The Fourteenth Annual Report of the
Bureau of Ethnology, Smithsonian h~titution, 1892-1893, Part L pp. 414-469
(Spanish text) and pp. 470-546 (English translation). Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, D.C.
1940

Castafieda’s History of the Expedition. In: Narratives of the Coronado Expedition 1540-1542, edited by George P. Hammond and Agapito Rey, pp. 181-283.
The University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

Coronado, Francisco Vfizquez de
1940
Letter of Coronado to Mendoza, August 3, 1540. In: Narratives ofthe Coronado
Expedition 1540-1542, translated and edited by George P. Hammond and
Agapito Rey, pp. 162-! 78. The University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
1990

Translation of a Letter from Coronado to the King, October 20, 1541. In: The
Journey of Coronado 1540-1542, translated and edited by George P. Winship,
pp. 200-204. Fulcrum, Golden, Colorado.

Deagan, Kathleen
1987
Artifacts of the Spanish Colonies of Florida and the Caribbean 1500-1800,
Volume I: Ceramics, Glassware, and Beads. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington, D.C.
Ellis, Bruce T.
1957
Crossbow Boltheads from Historic Pueblo Sites. El Palacio 64:209-214.

Rhodes -- Coronado’s American Legacy

49

Francis, Peter, Jr.
1979
The Story of Venetian Beads. The World of Beads Monograph Series 1.
Pamphlet published by Lapis Route Books and distributed in the United States
by Comerless Cube, Lake Placid, New York.
Hammond, George P. and Agapito Rey (editors)
1940

The Narratives of the Coronado Expedition 1540-1542. The University of New
Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

Hughes, Jack T.
1991
Prehistoric Cultural Developments on the Texas High Plains. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 60:1-55.
Ivey, James E., Diane Lee Rhodes, and Joseph P. Sanchez
1991
The Coronado Expedition of 1540-1542: A Special History Report prepared for
the Coronado Trail Study. U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park
Service, Santa Fe and Denver.
Jaramillo, Juan
1896
Narrative of Jaramillo (translated by George P. Winship). In: The Fourteenth
AnnuaI Report ofthe Bureau ofEthnology, Smithsonian Institution, 1892-1893,
Part I, pp. 584-593. Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.
1990

The Narrative of Jaramillo. In: The Journey of Coronado 1540-1542, translated
and edited by George P. Winship. Fulcrum, Golden, Colorado.

Johnson, Byron A.
1988
Arms and Armor of the Spanish Conquest: A Brief Description. Manuscript on
file, Albuquerque Museum, Albuquerque.
Kessell, John L.
1979
Kiva, Cross, and Crown: The Pecos Indians and New Mexico 1540-1840.
National Park Service, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
Kiser, Edwin L.
1978
The Re-examination of Pedro de Castafieda’s Bone Bed by Geological
Investigations. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 49:331-339.
Levine, Frances and Martha Doty Freeman
1982
A Study of Documentary and Archeological Evidence for Comanchero Activities in the Texas Panhandle. Manuscript on file, West Texas State University,
Canyon.
Lister, Florence C. and Robert H. Lister
Andalusian Ceramics in Spain and New Spain: A Cultural Register from the
1987
Third Century B.C. to 1700. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Liu, Robert K. and Elizabeth Harris
NuevaCadiz and Associated Beads. Pamphlet copyrighted by G. B. Fenstermaker,
1982
Lancaster, Pennsylvania.

50

Texas Archeological Society

Marshall, Michael P.
1989
The Ceramic Assemblage. In: A Sixteenth-Century Spanish Campsite in the
Tiguex Province, by Bradley J. Vierra. Museum of New Mexico, Laboratory of
Anthropology Note No. 475:75-115, Santa Fe.
Mendoza, Antonio de
1940
Instructions to Fray Marcos de Niza. In: Narratives of the Coronado Expedition
1540-1542, edited by George P. Hammond and Agapito Rey, pp. 58-62. The
University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
National Park Service
1992
National Trail Study and Environmental Assessment, Coronado Expedition:
Arizona/New Mexicoffexas/Oklahoma/Kansas. National Park Service, Denver Service Center, Denver.
Niza, Fray Marcos de
1940
Report of Fray Marcos de Niza, August 26, 1539.In:NarrativesoftheCoronado
Expedition 1540-1542, edited by George P. Hammond and Agapito Rey, pp.
63-82. The University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Olds, Dorris L.
1976
Texas Legacy From the Gulf." A Report on Sixteenth Century Shipwreck
Materials Recovered From the Texas Tidelands. Texas Memorial Museum
Miscellaneous Papers No. 5, and Texas Antiquities Committee Publication No.
2. Austin.
The Oxford English Dictionary
1971
The Compact Edition of the Oxford English Dictionary. The Oxford English
Dictionary, Volume 2, P-Z. Oxford, England.
Skowronek, Russell K., Richard E. Johnson, and Stanley South
1988
The Sixteenth Century Spanish Imported Ceramics at Santa Elena: A Formal
Analysis. In: Spanish Artifacts from Santa Elena, by Stanley South, Russell K.
Skowronek, and Richard E. Johnson, pp. 205-305. University ofSouth Carolina
Anthropological Studies No. 7, University of South Carolina, and South
Carolina Institute of Archaeology and Anthropology, Columbia.
Smith, Marvin T. and Elizabeth Good
EarlySixteenthCenturyGlassBeadsintheSpanishColonialTrade.Cottonlandia
1982
Museum Publications, Greenwood, Mississippi.
South, Stanley, Russell K. Skowronek, and Richard E. Johnson
1988
Spanish Artifacts from Santa Elena. University ofSouth CarolinaAnthropological Studies No. 7, University of South Carolina, and South Carolina Institute of
Archaeology and Anthropology, Columbia.
Speer, Roberta D.
Field Trip Record, Bridwell Ranch, October 2, 1981. On file, Texas Historical
1981
Commission, Austin.

Rhodes ~ Coronado’s American Legacy

51

Sudbury, Byron
1984
A Sixteenth-Century Spanish Colonial Trade Bead from Western Oklahoma.
Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society 33:31-36.
Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks (editors)
1962
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Joint Publication, Texas
Archeological Society Special Publication No. 1, and Texas Memorial Museum
Bulletin No. 4. Austin.
Vargas Machuca, D. Bernardo de
1892
Milicia y Descripcion de las lndias, escrita por El Capitan D. Bemardo de
Vargas Machuca. Volumen Primo and Segundo, Liberia de Victoriano Suarez,
Madrid.
Vierra, Bradley J.
1989
A Sixteenth-Century Spanish Campsite in the Tiguex Province. Museum ofNew
Mexico, Laboratory of Anthropology Note 475. Santa Fe.
Williams, Jack S.
Comments on the Draft Coronado Trail History Study. Manuscript on file,
1991
Southwest Regional Office, National Park Service, Santa Fe.
Winship, George P.
1896
The Coronado Expedition. In: The Fourteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of
Ethnology, Smithsonian Institution, 1892-1893,Part l, pp. 329-613. Smithsonian
Institution, Washington, D.C.
Word, James H.
1991
The 1975 Field School of the Texas Archeological Society. Bulletin ofthe Texas
Archeological Society 60:57-106.

53

From E1 Paso to Eagle Pass:
Spanish Entradas along the Lower Rio Grande
in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries
Joseph P. Sdnchez
ABSTRACT
In the sixteenth century, the search for Quivira inspired early Spanish
explorers to move northward along the Mesa Central of Mexico toward and beyond
the Rio Grande. Later, Franciscan missionaries, Hispanic settlers, and military
personnel established missions, settlements, and forts south of and along a rugged
frontier that stretched from E1 Paso to Eagle Pass and beyond. In spite of its
importance to Spanish Colonial expansion, the history of that area is little known.
Yet that region saw much activity in the period from 1580 to 1700, and its history
is intriguing partly because it pointed the way to the eventual founding of Texas.

The history of the area between E1 Paso and Eagle Pass is linked to that of New
Mexico, Chihuahua, Coahuila, Nuevo Le6n, and Tamaulipas. The period from
1524, when Panuco was established, to the 1570s, when the Santa Barbara and the
Saltillo mining frontiers opened up, was one of expansionism beyond the Gran
Chichimeca frontier that had stalled the northward movement of the Spanish for
several decades. Between 1580 and 1680, slavers, explorers, prospectors, settlers,
and missionaries criss-crossed the area with relative frequency. They, too, represented the many expansion projects by Spain to occupy new frontiers along the
lower Rio Grande. Renewed interest in the part of Texas east and north of the Rio
Grande took place after 1680, when E1 Paso was founded as a result of the Pueblo
Revolt in New Mexico. Indeed, early missionary activity into that area after 1692
originated from both the New Mexico missions and those in Chihuahua, Coahuila,
and Nuevo Le6n.
Spanish interest in the Rio Grande first resulted from maritime explorations
along the Gulf Coast as early as 1519, when Alonso de Pineda, sailing for Francisco
Garay, a rival of Hemfin Cortes, discovered "a large river" with many Indian
villages along its banks (Navarrette 1837-1880:147-148). Having spent 40 days
there, Pineda mapped the area and called the large river Rio de las Palmas.
Impressed by the report, Garay made plans to settle the Rio Grande and sent Diego
de Camargo with three ships and 150 men to colonize the area. However, because
of hostility of the natives, the Camargo expedition abandoned its weakly held
outpost, losing several men and one ship in the process. Garay, undaunted,
attempted again to settle the Rio Grande, this time armed with a charter to the land
known as Amichal. But that, too, would come to naught. The importance is that one
end of the Rio Grande had become the object of Spanish interest.
Bulletin of the Texas Areheological Society 63 (1992)

54

Texas Archeological Society

Sixteen years later, four men, castaways from the ill-fated Panfilo de Narvfiez
expedition that had been wrecked on the Texas coast, made their way across
southern Texas, hoping to reach any of the few but scattered Spanish outposts north
of Mexico City. It was 1535 when Alvar Nufiez, better known as Cabeza de Vaca,
and three companions criss-crossed southern Texas, reaching different points along
the Rio Grande (Pacheco et al. 1864-1865:269). One of these points is believed to
be in the vicinity of Del Rio, another at Santa Elena Canyon in the Big Bend, and
a third in or near present E1 Paso (Bishop 1933:137). They were the first Europeans
to see what lay beyond the Rio Grande and to realize the extent of the river from its
mouth to a point somewhere in the interior. Vaca’s Relaci6n did not escape the
interest of later explorers, who were aware of its contents.
In 1540, the expedition of Francisco Vazquez de Coronado wended its way
from Culiacan, in western Mexico, through Sonora and eastern Arizona before
reaching Zuni, in western New Mexico (Bolton 1949:ii; Hammond and Rey
1940:15-17). From there, Vazquez de Coronado sent an advance guard westward.
Led by Hernando de Alvarado, the detachment passed Acoma and, a few days later,
reached a large fiver that he named Rio de Nuestra Sefiora (Hammond and Rey
1940:183; Pacheco et al. 1864-1865:304-317, 511-513). Along it there were many
Indian villages, and Alvarado and his men were even more impressed with the
length of the river when they traveled as far north as Taos Pueblo on its east. They
must have learned that the river originated in the mountains far to the northwest, in
present southern Colorado. With V~quez de Coronado, then, more was learned
about the Rio Grande.
Beginning with the expedition of Francisco S~inchez de Chamuscado (Hammond
and Rey 1940:67-150), the exploration of New Mexico would be reoriented from
the route taken by Vazquez de Coronado. For nearly four decades after the Cibola
expedition, Spanish prospectors and slavers had ventured beyond the last outposts
in present Chihuahua, Coahuila, and Nuevo Le6n. By the late 1570s, mining towns
had been established at Santa Barbara in Chihuahua and Saltillo in Nuevo Le6n.
Through these unknown explorers, much knowledge about the land beyond these
towns was gathered, although the Rio Grande and what lay beyond it was known
only to the few who had dared to cross it.
The expedition of Francisco Sfinchez Chamuscado was the first legal expedition to cross the Rio Grande from the direction of Santa Barbara and to report on
what lay beyond. Yet more significant than the information he gathered was the
route he took, for it later became part of the famous Camino Real de Tierra Adentro,
which ultimately ran from Mexico City to Santa Fe in New Mexico. Motivated by
Franciscans hopeful of expanding their missionary field, the expedition set out in
June 1580.
The trail blazed by S~nchez and his Indian guides ran north from Santa Barbara
along the Rio San Gregorio, one of the upper branches of the Rio Conchos, to its
confluence with the Florido and beyond to the Rio Conchos (Hammond and Rey
1940:68). From there they continued northward along the often traveled route to the
Rio Grande. After going a short distance past the Rio Florido, they met several

Sdnchez m Spanish Entradas Aaong the Lower Rio Grande

55

Indian tribes to whom they gave the name Conchos. These Indians presented them
with pumpkins, mesquite beans, and com. Approaching the Rio Grande, they
encountered other tribes whom they called the Raya--later known as the Rayados-who spoke a language similar to that of the Conchos (Hammond and Rey 1940:6970). Hern~n Gallegos, one of the chroniclers of the expedition and former slave
runner who knew the country well, described these groups by writing in unabashed
colonial terms: "They go about naked like savages. They are lazy, capable of little
work, and dirty. They sustain themselves with quantifies of calabashes, ground
mesquite, mushrooms, prickly pears and fish from the river" (Hammond and Rey
1940:70).
Five leagues beyond the country of the Rayas, the expedition came upon
another tribe of Indians they called the Cabris or the Pazaguantes. They, too,
inhabited the area near the junction of the Conchos and the Rio Grande, but they
spoke a different language from the tribes previously met. More complimentary
about them, Gallegos wrote, "The Cabris are a very handsome, very spirited, very
active, and more intelligent than the people previously met. They are of large stature
and their face, arms and bodies are striped with pleasing lines" (Hammond and Rey
1940:70-71). Later, the Cabris would be associated with the much larger tribe that
lived north of the Rio Grande, the Jumanos. The Cabris, like most of the tribes they
met along the route, were friendly. They cultivated small patches of land seasonally,
and they appeared to be more industrious than those tribes they had met farther south
(Hammond and Rey 1940:71).
Moving beyond the Cabris, the expedition reached La Junta de Los Rios, near
present Presidio, where the Conchos enters the Rio Grande. There, they found many
Indians and erected several crosses among them. Gallegos called the new tribe
Amotomanco, later known as the Otomoaco. Of them, he wrote, "The men are very
handsome and the women beautiful" (Hammond and Rey 1940:73). Typical of the
natives in the area, the Amotomanco wore stripes on their faces; they lived in houses
made of sticks and brush plastered with mud. They raised corn and stored an
abundance of pumpkins and beans. The Amotomanco were part of the Jumano
nation who ranged in a wide area north and east of the Rio Grande in the Southern
Plains where they hunted buffalo (Hammond and Rey 1940:73).
Once at La Junta, it appears that they continued along the west bank of the Rio
Grande, although it is not possible to determine with certainty whether they crossed
the river at this point to continue their march. If they crossed it, they did so
momentarily, that is, for a short reconnaissance of the other side, before resuming
their march on the west bank.However, before reaching the Rio Grande, Gallegos
reported that "to reach this river, the largest to be found in the Indies, we left the
Conchos on our right, with our backs to the south" (Hammond and Rey 1940:75).
It is known that Fray Agustin Rodriquez and some of his companions crossed the
river, spent a day or two a short distance from La Junta, but rejoined the expedition
on the west side because it was easier to travel (Hammond and Rey 1940:75).
Moving up the Rio Grande for a distance of 5 or 6 leagues above its junction
with the Conchos, they encountered another tribe of Jumanos who had copper and

56

Texas Archeological Society

turquoise pendants that they had obtained through trade (Hammond and Rey
1940:76). The Jumanos told them that if they continued upstream for 13 days, they
would encounter many clothed people who cultivated much corn, calabashes,
beans, and much cotton, which they wove and made into blankets and clothes.
Gallegos wrote (Hammond and Rey 1940:77) that the Spaniards asked them
if any men like us had passed that way, and they replied that long ago four
Christians had passed through there. By the description they gave us we
say plainly and clearly that it m ust have been Alvar Nufiez Cabeza de Vaca,
because according to his account he had come by way of these people.
The expedition was one month out of Santa Barbara. Still on the west bank, they
continued their march up the Rio Grande where they met other Jumanos who also
recalled Cabeza de Vaea. Finally, they reached the last of the Jumano settlements,
a group they called Magdalena (Hammond and Rey 1940:78), south of the present
ruins of Fort Quitman in Texas. Three days from there, they reached the marshlands
that extend from the Guadalupe to E1 Paso (Hammond and Rey 1940:80). Encountering fewer and fewer tribes, they traveled 15 more days. Sometime during this part
of the journey, they crossed the river to the east side, for their next stop was the most
southerly Piro Pueblo of New Mexico, which they called San Felipe (Hammond and
Rey 1940:81). They found the Pueblo deserted but well stocked with supplies. The
expedition continued northward until they reached Puaray, in the valley of present
Albuquerque, and from there they explored as far north as Taos Pueblo, as far east
as the Canadian and Pecos rivers, southeast to the saline lakes beyond the Manzano
mountain range, and west to Zuni Pueblo before returning to Santa Barbara
(Hammond and Rey 1940:12-14).
The sequel to the Sfinchez Chamuscado expedition was that of Antonio de
Espejo (Hammond and Rey 1940:153-237). Encouraged by the Franciscans, who
reported that some of their brethren had been left in the pueblos of the Rio Grande,
Antonio de Espejo agreed to lead the next expedition north to rescue them. In
November 1582, the new expedition left Santa Barbara and assembled at San
Bartolome, a mining outpost nine leagues north of Santa Barbara, on the San
Gregorio River. Fray Bernardino Beltran was technically in command, but as
military commander, Antonio de Espejo was the recognized leader of the expedition. Moving clown the San Gregorio to the Conchos, as the previous expedition had
done, they met the Conchos, the Pazaguantes, and other tribes of the Jumanos
(Hammond and Rey 1940:155-158). Espejo and his men adopted a studied eye
concerning the various tribes. They observed that the tribes adjoining
the Pazaguantes on the Conchos and extending for some distance up the
Rio Grande were known as the Patarabueyes or the Otomoacasl those
living at the junction of the rivers and south of it were called Abriades; and
those who lived across the Rio Grande and roamed the plains in pursuit of
buffalo were known as the Jumanos proper (Mecham 1926:122).

Sdnchez m Spanish Entradas Aaong the Lower Rio Grande

57

By December 9, they reached the Rio Grande at La Junta, which S~chez
Chamuscado named Rio del Norte for the first time. Resting for eight days, they
camped a short distance from an Indian settlement they called San Bernardino. They
traded with the natives for maize, beans, mescal, dried pumpkins, gourd vessels,
buffalo skins, and bows and arrows. At La Junta, they visited another Indian village,
which they called Santo Tomfis. There they found a cross that had been raised the
year before by Fray Rodriguez and his companions (Hammond and Rey 1940:163).
From Santo Tomfis they crossed over the Rio Grande into Texas. Apparently,
this is the first recorded crossing into Texas. Of the event, Diego Perez de Luxan
wrote,
We went on this day (December 10, 1582) as previously stated, half a
league farther (from Santo Tom,is) to a pueblo situated on the opposite
bank of the river which Chamuscado’s men called Del Norte (sic). The
pueblo was on a high ridge with many flat-roofed houses; below were
many other houses forming a sort of suburb. Its cacique was called Casica
Mayo. In this pueblo they kissed the hand of the Father and brought
presents as in the others. They named this pueblo San Juan Evangelista.
Here they found another cross which the said Gaspar de Luxan and his
companions had erected; this they had in a neatly kept plaza .... They slept
there that night and the next morning they went to another pueblo .... In
this pueblo and in all the others they told us how Cabeza de Vaca and his
two companions and a negro had been there. The Indians of this pueblo are
all farmers, as the river is very appropriate for it [Hammond and Rey
1929:59].
The Spaniards named the second town on the east side of the Rio Grande,
opposite the mouth of the Conchos, Santiago. They spent eight days there among
the Jumanos and they visited nearly all the settlements in the vicinity of La Junta de
los Rios on both sides of the Rio Grande (Hammond and Rey 1929:163). On
December 17, continuing their march north, they crossed back to the west side of
the Rio Grande. Forty-five days after they had left La Junta, they arrived in the
southernmost pueblos of the Piros in New Mexico.
Like Sfinchez Chamuscado, the expedition explored in all directions from the
Rio Grande Valley. Espejo and his men visited the Rio Grande pueblos, explored
westward to the Verde River in Arizona, and eastward to the Great Plains. Finally,
on July 5, 1583, the party reached the Pecos River and followed it as closely as
possible in the hope of finding a new way back to La Junta de los Rios (Hammond
and Rey 1929:121). By August 6, after traveling for a month down river, they
encountered Jumanos who were hunting. Lfixfin wrote that through their interpreter,
Pedro, a Patarabuey Indian, they learned that the Pecos "came out very far down
from the Conchos River; that they would take us by good roads to the junction of
the Rio del Norte and the Conchos rivers, which is among the Pataragueyes"
(Hammond and Rey 1929:124).

58

Texas Archeological Society

Espejo and his men were the first Europeans to explore the Pecos River, but
more importantly, they were the first white men to travel the land between the
Pecos and La Junta de los Rios. Basically, they followed a route from presentday Pecos, Texas, past Toya Creek, below Toya Lake, then across to present
Toyahvale in the vicinity of Balmorhea, where they encountered more Jumanos
(Castafieda 1936:178-180). Following a route from Balmorhea, they passed
through the vicinity of Fort Davis and headed southward through present Marfa.
On August 14, they continued marching over plains and camped in "a very large
valley, where there were some pools of rain water" (Hammond and Rey
1929:125). They rested there four days and traveled six leagues more "over bad
roads through a very rough sierra" before they reached the Rio Grande "nine
leagues from the pueblo which seems to be San Bernaldino of the Patarabueyes"
(Hammond and Rey 1929:125). They were north of La Junta de los Rios,
probably in the vicinity of present Ruidosa or Candelaria.
When they arrived on the Rio Grande, they were once again among the
Jumanos, particularly the Patarabueyes, whom they had seen on the way north
several months previously. "All the rancherias there gave us a grand reception,"
wrote Ltixfin,"according to their custom and gave us quantities of ears of green corn,
cooked and raw calabashes, and catfish. They put on great dances and other
rejoicings as a sign of peace" (Hammond and Rey 1929:125-126). Espejo and his
men remained there two days. On August 20, they marched down the Rio Grande
and reached San Bernardo at La J unta a day later. There they crossed the Rio Grande
and visited the pueblo of Santo Tomfis on the north bank of the Conchos. Because
of high water on the Conchos, they remained there three days, resting and trading.
Finally, on August 26, Espejo and his companions began the last lap of their journey
back to Santa Barbara. They had been gone 10 months; they had explored more than
350 miles of the Pecos River and, after abandoning the river, were the first to journey
cross-country to the Rio Grande near its con fluence with the Rio Conchos (Castafieda
1936: t 79-180).
The reports of the expedition aroused widespread interest and desire among
Spanish officials to occupy the lands that were visited. They reported on the land,
possible routes, the disposition of natives, the climate and natural resources, as well
as its possible mineral wealth. But in the end, it would be the religious motivation,
namely the desire to establish missions in the area, that would inspire the next legal
expeditions northward to occupy the land along the Rio Grande drainage.
Meanwhile, on the faraway frontier of Saltillo, Nuevo Le6n, another dramatic
story unfolded that would add new information about what lay beyond La Junta de
los Rios and the mouth of the Rio Grande. In 1590 the ambitious and daring Gaspar
Castafio de Sosa, governor of Nuevo Le6n, set out to settle New Mexico, albeit
illegally, since he had not received official permission to do so (Shroeder and
Matson 1974:9). Castafio de Sosa recruited colonists from Almaden near presentday Monclova, for they had been accustomed to crossing the Rio Grande, and
appeared to have knowledge of the Pecos River. With promises of a great silver find
in New Mexico, he persuaded nearly 200 men, women, and children to go to New

Sdnchez ~ Spanish Entradas Aaong the Lower Rio Grande

59

Mexico in search of rich mines. On July 27, 1590, Castafio de Sosa and a wagon train
of settlers left Almaden (Shroeder and Matson 1974:29).
Following a northern course, they camped on the Nadadores River in the first
week of August. Then they continued their journey until they reached the Rio
Salinas, probably present Rio Aura in Coahuila, then crossed the Rio Sabinas and
what appears to have been the Rio San Diego a few miles below present Villa Acufia.
Finally, on September 9, 44 days out of Almaden, they reached the Rio Grande,
some distance below the mouth of the Pec0s River, probably near present Del Rio,
Texas (Shroeder and Matson 1974:32).
They camped for three weeks, hopeful that a messenger with instructions from
the viceroy would validate their expedition. But none was forthcoming. Meantime,
several scouting expeditions were sent out to find a passable route for the carretas
(wagons). In the end, Castafio de Sosa decided to follow the original plan to find the
Pecos River and ascend it to New Mexico. Just below the Rio Laxa, or present Devils
River, the expedition crossed the Rio Grande because that location offered them the
best possible place to ford (Shroeder and Matson 1974:34). Once safely across, they
camped, while scouts moved northwestward to find the best route to the Pecos
River. Because of the rugged terrain and the dense thickets, the scouts were unable
to find a passable route for the wagons. Finally on October 24, a suitable route was
found and two days later they reached the Pecos, where they camped for two days
(Shroeder and Matson 1974:49-50).
By the end of October, the expedition was on its way north following the Pecos
River to their destination in New Mexico where they settled among the Rio Grande
Pueblos for more than a year. The significance of the expedition, however, is the
route they blazed to the Rio Grande and the Pecos River. New knowledge of the
lower Rio Grande was furnished by the expedition, but, alas, Castafio de Sosa, its
latest explorer, was arrested and found guilty of illegally trespassing on the King’s
land (Shroeder and Matson 1974:8-10).
Another illegal entry into New Mexico took place in 1594. The information
regarding the expedition led by Francisco Leiva Bonilla and Antonio Gutierrez de
Humafia is scant and somewhat fragmented (Hammond and Rey 1940:323-326). It
is known that as a result of tracking rebel Indians in northeastern Nueva Vizcaya-present Chihuahua--that Leiva and Gutierrez decided to cross the Rio Grande.
They proceeded northward in violation of their authority toward the pueblos of
Puaray, Taos, and Pecos. From Pecos, they traveled to the Great Plains, where the
expedition was wiped out by an Indian attack (Hammond and Rey 1940:323).
Meanwhile, the governor of Nueva Vizcaya sent Pedro de Cazorla to overtake them,
but by that time, Leiva and Gutierrez were beyond the reach of the law. S till, the two
expeditions added to the growing frequency of Spanish entradas to the Rio Grande
and beyond.
In 1598, the Spanish crown authorized Juan de Ofiate to lead an expedition to
establish a settlement in New Mexico. After many delays, it left the valley of San
Bartolom6 in the Bolson de Mapimf bound for San Geronimo on the Conchos River.
Four hundred men, of whom 130 had their families, took up the march. The baggage

60

Texas Archeological Society

train consisted of 83 wagons and carts, as well as 7,000 head of stock. Although the
route to La Junta de los Rios was well known, Ofiate did not follow the tortuous
course of the Conchos River, but cut across directly to the ford at present E1 Paso
(Hammond and Rey 1953:16).
For months on end, the air of northern Chihuahua resounded with the sharp
cracks made by the whips of drivers as they pushed the caravan farther toward the
Rio Grande, which they reached at the end of April 1598. On the occasion of
reaching the river, one settler wrote,
On April 30, 1598, day of the Ascension of our Lord, at the Rio del Norte,
Governor don Juan de Ofiate took possession of all the kingdoms and
provinces of New Mexico, in the name of King Felipe II, our lord, in the
presence of Juan Perez de Donis, royal notary and secretary of the
jurisdiction and expedition. There was a sermon, a great ecclesiastical and
secular celebration, a great salute and rejoicing, and in the afternoon, a
comedy. The royal standard was blessed and placed in charge of Francisco
de Sosa Pefialosa, the royal ensign [Hammond and Rey 1953:314-315].
Although the expedition continued northward to New Mexico and certain
fame, the significance of the moment was that the ford at E1 Paso had been
established and became part of the Camino Real that was used as the point of entry
beyond the Rio Grande. The Ofiate expedition had followed the river to a point
where the mountains came down to form "the pass of the river and the ford"
(Hammond and Rey 1953:315). The crossing was named "Los Puertos", although
later it would be known as E1 Paso del Norte. The warm spring sun of May 4
witnessed the activity as Ofiate’s army and 40 Indians, on that desolate place on the
earth, moved their cargo, carts, and livestock across the river. It was near there that
they met the first Indians from New Mexico (Hammond and Rey 1953:315).
Little by little, knowledge of the Rio Grande was gathered so that by 1598,
Spanish frontiersmen had considerable information about its length. In 1601 Enrico
Martfnez, a cosmographer, drew a map of New Mexico (Hammond and Rey
1953:955) for Juan de Ofiate showing the course of the river from Taos Pueblo in
the north to its mouth near present Brownsville, Texas, in the south. In the interim,
knowledge of the Rio Grande was hard earned, and the route to New Mexico
provided part of the solution to the puzzle. The relatively heavily traveled Camino
Real continued to usher in a pageantry of settlers, missionaries, politicians, and
Indians from different parts of the Empire. Once a base of operations was
established in New Mexico, Spanish frontiersmen explored in all directions--west
to the Colorado River of Arizona; north to Taos; east to the Great Plains; and
southeast toward the Nueces River. Perhaps the explorations southeast to the
Nueces River were rooted in missionary efforts to convert the Jumanos. Certainly,
the miraculous visitations of the Venerable Mother Marfa de Agreda were influential in motivating missionaries such as Fray Juan de Salas in 1629 to visit the
Jumanos and some Apachean groups in southwestern Texas about 300 miles eastsoutheast of Isleta Pueblo in New Mexico (Forrestal and Lynch 1954:57n, 121).

Sdnchez m Spanish Entradas Aaong the Lower Rio Grande

61

In 1632, Father Salas made a second expedition to the Jumanos (Thomas 1982).
This time he traveled along the Colorado River as far as the Concho River near
present San Angelo, Texas. Moving southward, Salas and his companions reached
the Rio de las Nueces. There, Fray Juan de Ortega stayed for six months ministering
to the Jumanos.
The initial ventures southeast of New Mexico were intriguing to Spanish
officials. Yet it would be another 15 years before a military expedition would be sent
in that direction from New Mexico. In 1650, General Hernfindo de la Concha
ordered Captains Hern~n Martfn and Diego del Castillo to explore the "Nueces"
River (the present Concho River in Texas) and the surrounding country with a group
of soldiers and a number of Christian Indians (Thomas 1982:26-28). They set out
from Santa Fe and, crossing through southwestern Texas, reached the Concho
River. They had marched nearly 600 miles to visit the Jumanos (Thomas 1982:5).
In the six months of their visit, they explored for pearls, which they claimed they
found, though they were of poor quality, and they gathered much information about
the land and its people.
Pursuant to their instructions, the two captains traveled down the present
Concho towards "the east and inclining to the south through the lands of the
Cuitoas, Escanjaques and Aijados" (Thomas 1982:27). Eventually, they came to
the nation called Tejas and Friar Alonso de Posada described the lands they
occupied:
This nation of the Tejas runs from south to north, the distance that lies from
the Rio del Norte to the Rio de las Nueces, which must be about one
hundred leagues. In width it must be as many leagues from east to west.
From the far limits of this nation to the coast and Gulf of Mexico there must
be about fifty more leagues to the east, and the said fifty leagues are
occupied by disorganized Indian tribes who neither sow nor reap, because
according to the information of the country bordering the coast, this is
filled with many sandy stretches and sand dunes. On its northern boundary,
the country of the Tejas adjoins that of the Quiviras .... They plant and
gather their crops of corn; their lands are fertile; they have abundant
irrigation from the streams that flow from the north; and they utilize the
wild cows called cibolas and the wild fruits found on the Nueces on which
they border. The nations of the Tejas, from whose limits Captains Hermin
Martfn and Diego del Castillo returned by the same route to Santa Fe, is in
28 degrees of latitude [Thomas 1982:28].
Two more Spanish expeditions entered the Nueces River drainage--one in
1654 led by Diego Guadalajara from Santa Fe (Thomas 1982:29); and the other in
1683 under Juan Dominguez de Mendoza from E1 Paso (Thomas 1982:6). The
significance of the last two expeditions is that they were military in character and
resulted in knowledge of the Jumano country and of the Tejas Indians and their
neighbors. The latter expedition resulted in a set of recommendations pointing to the
development of the area from E1 Paso to the Bahfa del Espfritu Santo on the Texas

62

Texas Archeological Society

coast. All of the information became useful to subsequent efforts of missionaries in
the next century.
Although Spanish entradas from New Mexico had been preceded by earlier
efforts to explore beyond La Junta de los Rios, the Spanish advances east of the
confluence of the Rio Pecos and the Rio Grande had been undertaken for a longer
period. Eagle Pass had long been the focus of Spanish attention, for it was one of
the early gateways to the Texas frontier. West of there, Del Rio had served the
interests of Castafio de Sosa, who, historically, represented part of the Spanish
efforts in the development of that area. Both Del Rio and Eagle Pass would, in the
long haul of Texas history, stand as natural monuments to the pioneering efforts of
Hispanic frontiersmen to establish a foothold in Texas.
The earliest of these pioneers was Alvar Nufiez Cabeza de Vaca and his three
companions who as castaways of the ill-fated 1528 Florida expedition of Panfilo de
Narv~iez desperately made their escape from tribes who had held them in bondage
in south Texas. By 1535, they had made their escape westward to the Balcones
Escarpment, thence southwest to the Rio Grande in the vicinity of the Devils River
near Del Rio. From there they reached the outskirts of the Chisos Mountains and,
once in the area, they approached Santa Elena Canyon in the present Big Bend
National Park. Proceeding eastward, they reached the Pecos River and were led by
natives across 50 leagues "of desert, over rough mountains, which being dry were
without game" (Hodge 1907:99). These were evidently the Davis Mountains. Not
far from there, Cabeza de Vaca and his companions reached another point along the
Rio Grande, possibly within sight of present Presidio, Texas. It is possible that they
were led by natives up the Rio Grande to present El Paso and north of there, probably
as far north as present Las Cruces. Soon after, they left the Rio Grande and crossed
southwestward toward Sonora, where they were ultimately rescued.
By the 1600s much was known about the Rio Grande. However, renewed
interest in the river east of Eagle Pass resulted from news that the Dutch had
entered the Gulf Coast and threatened the Spanish claim to Texas. In 1638, the
governor of Nuevo Le6n received confusing rumors from Indians that a landing
had been made on the northeastern Texas coast by men different from Spaniards
"with blond beards and hair, who wore red socks, steel plate corselets and hats,
and who carried longer arquebuses" than those of the Spaniards. Fearing that the
Dutch had made an entry along the Rio de las Palmas, or Rio Grande, the governor of Nuevo Le6n decided to notify the viceroy of an expedition he had mounted
against the intruders. Led by the Sargento Mayor Jacinto Garcfa de Sepfilveda, a
detachment of 40 men were sent to investigate the rumors (Garcfa 1909:151155). On August 16, 1638, Garcfa de Sepfilveda left Cerralvo and 4 days later
reached the Rio Grande far to the south of Mier and proceeded down-river possibly as far as present Brownsville. The rumor was false, for no signs of an intrusion could be found. Still, Spanish officials kept a wary eye on all points of the
Rio Grande. In 1663, Alonso de Le6n, el viejo, explored the Rio Grande about
its mouth to reconfirm past knowledge concerning the mouth of the river still
called Rio de las Palmas (Garcfa 1909:203-206).

Sdnchez m Spanish Entradas Aaong the Lower Rio Grande

63

But in the interior of the Rio Grande Valley a real threat existed. After 1600,
Indians from the north and beyond the Rio Grande increased their hostilities against
Spanish outposts at Saltillo, Monterrey, and Cerralvo and carried out depredations
as far west as Chihuahua and Casas Grandes. Outraged, Spanish authorities carried
out punitive expeditions against the warring tribes (Garcfa 1909:221-223). In
October 1663, after decades of hostile Indian activity, a company of more than 100
men from Saltillo and Monterrey under the command of Juan de la Garza departed
for the Rio Grande. Traveling northward from Monterrey, they encountered the
warring tribes of the Cacaxtles in the vicinity of present Eagle Pass (Garcfa
1909:221-223; Bolton 1912). The Cacaxtles were prepared for the Spaniards, and
a hard fight ensued. Apparently the expedition was a success for the Spanish, for the
raiding abated for a short while. De la Garza and his men had crossed the Rio Grande
in pursuit of their enemy.
Spanish activity continued in the area of Eagle Pass the following year when
the Cacaxtles were again attacked at nearly the same place as the year before
(Castafieda 1936:9). Again in 1665, another expedition, this time led by Fernando
de Azcue, the alcalde mayor of Saltillo, attacked the Cacaxtles after crossing the Rio
Grande near Eagle Pass (Garcfa 1909:228-229). The expedition was large, more
than 400 men, including 300 Bobole Indians, and was led by Azcue, Juan Cavazos,
and Ambrosio Cepeda.
Although the expeditions of de la Garza and Azcue were punitive, they added
new knowledge about the Rio Grande and Eagle Pass. They are also significant
because they established another element in the written history of the area. The
expeditions demonstrate the intense Spanish persistence in the pacification of that
part of the river.
Slowly, the frontiers of Chihuahua, Coahuila, Nuevo Le6n, and Tamaulipas
were moving towards the Rio Grande. It was only a question of time before
Franciscan missionaries would advance the mission frontier beyond the river.
Already the Franciscans were eyeing the "Great Kingdom of Texas." Indeed, in
1676, when the Bishop of Guadalajara, Manuel Fernandez de Santa Cruz, visited
Coahuila, he was ready to promote the evangelization of the Tejas, north of the Rio
Grande (Bolton 1912:26). Already by 1675, the expedition ofFernando del Bosque
had assisted missionaries beyond the Rio Grande. Since 1673, Fray Juan Larios and
his companions had spent three years working among the natives in the area between
Eagle Pass and Del Rio and had gone as far north as the Nueces River near present
Uvalde (Bolton 1908:284).
Meanwhile, a new era in Texas history was dawning. The Spanish push beyond the Rio Grande had been preceded by the pioneering efforts of those who
had daringly crossed the Rio Grande between Del Rio and Eagle Pass. In the
1680s, Spanish fears of a foreign invasion were realized when shocking news
reached them of the establishment of a French fort along the Texas coast. Led by
Rene Robert Cavalier, Sieur de La Salle, the French had indeed landed on the
Texas coast at Matagorda Bay in 1685 (Bannon 1963:95; see also Weddle, this
volume).

64

Texas Archeological Society

In the course of establishing his fort, La Salle undertook two expeditions into
the interior of Texas, one of which reached the Rio Grande. The La Salle expedition
to the Rio Grande was undertaken in the winter of 1685 and spring of 1686
(Castafieda 1936:292-293). La Salle claimed that he had reached a large river and
that the only reason he had not invaded Nueva Vizcaya was because of the poor
condition of his men and his lack of confidence in his Indian allies (Castafieda
1936:292-293). On that expedition, La Salle reached the Rio Grande somewhere
between Del Rio and Eagle Pass.
Fearing a French invasion, the Spanish spent considerable time, resources,
and men searching for La Salle’s fort (Castafieda 1936:301-340). They later
found it, destroyed by Indians, and with a few survivors living among various
tribes in East Texas. Between the missionary drive across the Rio Grande and
the supposed French invasion, East Texas soon became a focal point of Spanish
activity.
One of the French manhunters was Alonso de Le6n. After two previous
fruitless attempts to find the French fort, he was pulled back to help establish a
Spanish villa and presidio in Coahuila. Simultaneously, he was named governor of
the province (Portillo 1984:145-146). While putting down a revolt of the Tobosos
in Coahuila he learned of a Frenchman who had become an Indian chief (Portillo
1984:175). Le6n then organized an ex pedition to find the French renegade. Relying
on information from Indians regarding the location of the Frenchman, Le6n
departed from present Monclova, crossed the Rio Grande in the vicinity of Eagle
Pass, and proceeded to a point near Brackettville, Texas. On May 18, 1688, after
several days’ march from the Rio Grande, Le6n found the Frenchman, Jean Gery,
and took him back to Coahuila (Portillo 1984:178). There, he interrogated him,
learning that La Salle’s fort had been destroyed. Gery was willing to take him there
and show him the French outpost. Finally, Le6n would see the destroyed French
settlement in Texas, for in 1689, Gery led him to the place. The French menace led
by La Salle was over.
Two years later, in 1691, Domingo Ter~in de los Rios was named governor of
the Provincia de los Tejas, making him the first governor of Texas (Bancroft
1884:402). He was instructed to set out as soon as practicable and establish eight
missions among the Tejas and neighboring tribes. Although he was to find practical
routes to East Texas, he was to understand that his chief role was to help the
missionaries accomplish their goals under Father Damian Massanet. Therefore, on
May 16, 1691, the expedition set out from Monclova northward toward the Rio
Grande, which was crossed at Eagle Pass, and con tinued to the Nueces and on to East
Texas. History was made on that entrada, for it was the founding expedition of Texas
proper (Bancroft 1884:402). And indeed, it was the last major seventeelath century
expedition to pass through Eagle Pass. The road for the establishment of San
Antonio had been blazed for many decades before Governor Martfn Alarcon
formally established the villa in 1716, and the early explorers who had traversed the
Rio Grande from E1 Paso del Norte and Eagle Pass had played an extraordinary role
in its history.

Sdnchez -- Spanish Entradas Aaong the Lower Rio Grande

65

Spanish advances along the Rio Grande, forming the northern boundaries of
present Chihuahua, Coahuila, Nuevo Ledn, and Tamaulipas, resulted from early
exploration of that region, as well as later efforts of Franciscan missionaries from
Queretaro who advocated maintaining that area solely as a mission field, especially
after the expeditions of Femando Bosque and Alonso de Le6n in the 1670s and
1680s. The first missionary attempt of the East Texas frontier by Father Massanet
ended in failure with its abandonment in 1693. Finally, by 1698, Massanet’s
proposal to establish a base of operations for his missionary activities by founding
a Spanish settlement on the lower Rio Grande to support his efforts was realized, for
that year a mission--Nuestra Sefiora de los Dolores at Punta de Lampazos--was
established on the extreme northern end of Nuevo Ledn. In 1699 another mission,
San Juan Bautista del Rio Grande, was founded. After two attempts to found San
Juan Bautista, the mission was finally established at Eagle Pass. There a fort, the
Presidio of the Rio Grande, was established in 1700, then the easternmost interior
fortification on Spain’s northern frontier in North America. Later, two otfier
military posts were established in the same area, one at San Bernabe, the other at San
Francisco Solano. Northeast of there, Franciscan missionaries worked to establish
a permanent foothold on the Texas frontier at San Antonio. The Rio Grande between
E1 Paso and Eagle Pass in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries was the anvil upon
which future Spanish colonial development would be hammered out for the frontier
areas of Chihuahua, Coahuila, Nuevo Ledn, Tamaulipas, and Texas.

REFERENCES CITED
Bancroft, Hubert Howe
1884

North American States and Texas, 1531-1800. A. L. Bancroft, San Francisco.

Bannon, John Francis
1963

The Spanish Borderlands Frontier, 1513-1821. Holt, Winston and Rinehart,
Los Angeles.

Bishop, Morris
1933
The Odyssey of Cabeza de Vaca. Century, New York.
Bolton, Herbert E.
1908

Spanish Exploration in the Southwest. Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York.

1912

The Spanish Occupation of Texas. The Texas State Historical Association
Quarterly XVI.

1949

Coronado, Knight of Pueblos and Plains. University of New Mexico Press,
Albuquerque.

Castafieda, Carlos E.
1936

OurCatholicHeritage in Texas. Volume I, The Discovery of Texas, 1519-1690.
Von Boeckmann-Jones, Austin.

66

Texas Archeological Society

Forrestal, Peter P., and Cyprian J. Lynch (editors and translators)
Alonso de Benavides’ Memorial of 1630. Academy of American Franciscan
1943
History, Washington, D.C.
Garcfa, Genaro (editor)
1909
H istoria de Nuevo Le6n con noticias sobre Coahuila, Tejas, Nuevo Mexico, por
el Capitan Alonso de Le6n, un autor anomino y el General Fernando Sdnchez
de Zamora. Vda. de C. Bouret, Mexico.

Hammond, George P., and Agapito Rey (editors and translators)
1929
Expedition into New Mexico made by Antonio de Espejo, 1582-1583; as
revealed in the journal of Diego Perez de L~xdn, a member of the party. The
Quivira Society, Los Angeles.
1940

Narratives ofthe Coronado Expedition, 1540-1542. University of New Mexico
Press, Albuquerque.

1953

Don Juan de Ohate, Colonizer ofNew Mexico, 1595-1628. University of New
Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

1966

The Rediscovery ofNew Mexico, 1580-1594. University of New Mexico Press,
Albuquerque.

Hodge, Frederick W. (editor)
1907

The Spanish Explorers of the Southern United States, 1528-1543. Charles
Scribner’s Sons, New York.

Mecham, Lloyd J.
Antonio de Espejo and his journey to New Mexico. Texas State Historical
1926
Association Quarterly, Volume XXX, No. 2.
Navarrette, Femando (editor)
1837-1880

Coleccion de los Viages y Descubrimientos que hicieron por mar los

espanoles desdefines del siglo XV... 5 vols. Imprenta Nacional, Madrid.
Pacheco, Joaquin F., Francisco de Cardenas, and Luis Toarres de Mendoza (editors)
1864-1865

Coleccion de Documentos lneditos Relativos al Descubrimiento,

Conqu&ta y Organizacion de las Antiguas Posesiones Espanoles de America y
Oceania. 42 vols. Madrid.

Portillo, Est6ban L.
1984
Apuntes para la Historia Antigua de Coahuila y Texas. Biblioteca de la
Universidad Autonoma de Coahuila, Saltillo.
Shroeder, Albert H., and Dan S. Matson (editors)
1974
A Colony on the Move: Gaspar Castaho de Sosa’s Journal, 1590-1591. School
of American Research, Santa Fe.
Thomas, Alfred Barnaby (editor and translator)
1982
Alonso de Posada Report, 1686. Perdido Bay Press.

67

Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition:
The Evidence from Texas
James E. Bruseth

ABSTRACT
Several artifacts found over the past several decades are attributed to the de
Soto expedition of 1542 as it wandered through Texas, but it is unlikely that any
of these, except for a spur from near Corsicana, Texas, were left by the expedition.
The Corsicana spur is of the style worn by the conquistadors, but this type of spur
was also used by later Spaniards, particularly along the northern borders of New
Spain (Mexico). Other kinds of evidence, such as iron objects from arms and armor
and bioarcheological data on European disease-induced epidemics--similar to
what is found at European archeological sites of the sixteenth century in the
Southeast--are more likely candidates for Texas and should be sought from
archeological sites.

INTRODUCTION

Over the past 50 years, several artifacts from North and East Texas have been
attributed to the 1542 de Soto expedition’s travel through Texas in search of New
Spain--today’s Mexico. Some of these artifacts have been reported in issues of the
Dallas Archeological Society’s Record (Crook 1988; Hanna 1940; Harris 1951),
but others have not been described in publications and remain in private collections.
In this paper the author examines these objects to the extent possible--some are no
longer available for observation--and attempts to determine their authenticity as
artifacts of the de Soto expedition.
The Columbus Quincentenary is a propitious time to examine these artifacts,
for this year’s celebration of Columbus’s discovery of the New World in 1492 has
stimulated scholars throughout the world to reexamine narratives and other historical documentation relating to early European exploration of the Americas. New
information has come to light on many of these explorations as a result of this
revived interest (cf. Milanich and Milbrath 1989; Thomas 1990).
Especially important are the major advancements that have been made in
identifying the archeological residue of the expedition. Only 20 years ago, our
knowledge of the archeological record from the early sixteenth century Spanish
occupation was very limited (Mitchem 1989:99), but it has been established that the
presence of several specific artifact types can verify the passage of the de Soto
expedition. This new information comes in large part from studies of artifacts found
at archeological sites in the Southeast and the Caribbean that show evidence of
European contact (Smith 1987; Deagan 1987). The Martin site, reported to be the
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 63 (1992)

68

Texas Archeological Society

1539 to 1540 winter encampment of the de Soto expedition (Ewen 1989, 1990), is
of particular significance. Recent excavations at the site have identified several
artifacts left by de Soto’s army, including coins, Spanish ceramics, glass beads,
metal objects, and pieces of chain mail armor.
The Route
For centuries scholars have debated the route of the de Soto expedition through
the United States; the most extensive and thorough research was undertaken by the
De Soto Commission in 1935. Under the chairmanship of John R. Swanton, the
Commission examined a wide range of information including archives in the United
States and Spain, early maps, possible artifacts from the expedition, and historical
narratives. The result was a monumental volume by Swanton (1939) entitled The
Final Report of the United States De Soto Commission.
Since the De Soto Commission study, other researchers have further examined
de Soto’s route, adding significant new detail and accuracy from archeologieal and
historical information to theCommission’s findings (e.g., Hudson etal. 1984, 1989,
1990; Brain et al. 1974; Schambach 1989; Morse and Morse 1983; Kenmotsu et al.
1990; Bruseth and Kenmotsu 1991). Undoubtedly, the delineation of the expedition’ s
route is far more accurate today than it was in 1939 when Swanton’s report
appeared.
This is not to say that all aspects of the route have been worked out with equal
accuracy and detail. Disagreement on major segments remains, particularly for the
part of the army’s travel west of the Mississippi River. This is in part a result of the
untimely termination of the most valuable narrative by de Soto’s secretary, Rodrigo
Ranjel, whose day-by-day account ends abruptly while the expedition is camped at
the Mississippi River (Bourne 1904). Without this important source, the reconstruction of the route through southern Arkansas, Texas, and Louisiana is all the more
problematical. The discontinuation of the narrative also confirms the paramount
importance of archeology in verifying the expedition’s western route.
Recent analysis by Hudson, DePratter, and S m ith (1989), makes it clear that the
expedition landed in Florida at Tampa Bay and traveled through the northern part
of the state until winter (Figure 1). They spent the winter of 1539 to 1540 in present
day Tallahassee, and for the next two and a half years they wandered through the
Southeastern United States. During this time, they traversed today’s states of
Georgia, South Carolina, North Carolina, Tennessee, Alabama, Mississippi, and
Arkansas.
In the summer of 1542, they entered Texas. De Soto had died of illness in
Arkansas, and command of the expedition had been assumed by Luis de Moscoso.
Several routes have been proposed for the expedition in Texas; the most recent is
the one offered by Bruseth and Kenmotsu (1991). According to this analysis, which
combines archeological, linguistic, and geographic data with historical narratives,
the expedition’s most likely route was south from the Red River along Trammell’s
Trace towards Nacogdoches (Figure 2). From here, they followed the Old San
Antonio Road to the Guadalupe River, at which point they abandoned hope of

Bruseth ~ Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition

69

Figure 1. Map showing the routes of de Soto (based on Hudson, DePratter, and Smith 1989
and Bruseth and Kenmotsu 1991 for the part through Texas) and Coronado (based on
National Park Service 1991).

reaching New Spain by an overland route. They then retraced their steps to the
Mississippi River, built several large barges, and sailed back to New Spain.
Arms and Supplies
Understanding the types of materials carried by the expedition is critical to the
assessment of possible de Soto artifacts found in Texas. The narratives provide the
main source of information, although they provide surprisingly few notations about
the army’s supplies. A detailed account by an anonymous member of the expedition,
referred to as a Gentleman of Elvas, was translated from the original Portuguese by
B uckingham Smith in 1866 (Bourne 1904), and a brief narrative by Luys Hernandez
de Biedma, also a member of the expedition, is useful but omits parts of the
expedition (Bourne 1904). A major treatise on the expedition produced by Garcilaso
de la Vega, known as the Inca (Varner and Varner 1951), is a romanticized version
of the expedition that was written years later. It is based on two now-lost written
accounts by members of the army, and on stories told to the Inca by a member of
the expedition. A careful comparison of the Inca and Elvas narratives shows that
Garcilaso also relied upon the Elvas narrative. Other roughly contemporary
historical documents, such as Obreg6n’s History of l 6th Century Exploration in
Western America (Hammond and Rey 1928), provide additional information.
There are contradictions among the accounts, such as discrepancies in the
number of men who landed; the Ranjel account notes that 570 men landed, Elvas
cites 600 men, and Biedma mentions 620 men (Swanton 1939:87). The most
discrepant source is by Garcilaso, who suggests that more than a thousand men

70

Texas Archeological Society

OKLAHOMA

Figure 2. Map showing the route of de Soto as proposed by Bruseth and Kenmotsu 1991.

landed, but his estimates are generally not considered accurate (Swanton
1939:87).
The expedition comprised individuals from several different vocations. Aside
from those with military backgrounds, there were two shoemakers, a sword cutler,
several tailors, a carpenter, and clergymen (Swanton 1939:81). Between 223 and
243 horses, a large number of hogs, and dogs were also brought ashore to
accompany the army (Swanton 1939:89).
The narratives suggest that the men had traditional European arms and armor.
The rodeleros, or swordsmen on foot, would have carried steel swords and shields

Bruseth ~ Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition

71

known as targets (Peterson 1956:115), and de S oto had a private guard of halberdiers
(Swanton 1939:86). A halberd was a weapon developed in thirteenth century
Switzerland consisting of a staff-mounted iron head with a lance for thrusting, an
axe for chopping, and a hook for dragging mounted soldiers from their horses
(Johnson 1988:126). The narratives also mention lances used by the army. These
probably were pikes with polearms--flattened and pointed iron heads on long
wooden shafts. We know from the accounts--particularly the Elvas narrative-that
the expedition also had ballasteros, men with crossbows, and arcabuceros, or
individuals using guns. The guns were probably wheellock or matchlock arquebuses ~eterson 1956:12-13).
Many of the soldiers had armor. Chain mail is mentioned in the accounts, and
full plate armor probably was also worn by members of the expedition (Peterson
1956:116). Another type of armor consisted of heavy quilted cloth. The horses had
armor as well, which could have been chain mail, plate, or the nonmetallic quilted
cotton cloth. Horses were one of the Spaniards’ major advantages over the Indians
(Swanton 1939:89), and they would have been carefully protected and guarded.
In addition to material related to fighting and self-protection, the expedition
brought items to trade to the Indians. Although the narratives do not provide much
detail about these materials, glass beads, mirrors, iron knives, and clothing were
traded or given as presents (Swanton 1939:55). Quite interestingly, at the province
of Cofitachequi in present day South Carolina, the de Soto expedition encountered
Indians with glass beads, rosaries with crosses, and iron axes--all of European
origin (Bourne 1904:100). Even at this early date, trade materials from previous
Spanish intrusions were making their way to interior Indian settlements.
Artifacts from the Southeastern United States
Detailed analysis of early European materials from the Americas during the
past three decades has identified several artifacts that are known to date to the
sixteenth century (Brain 1985a, 1985b; Smith 1987; Smith and Good 1982; Deagan
1987; Ewen 1989; Mitchem 1989, 1990). Excavations at the Martin site, identified
as de Soto’ s winter camp at the Apalachee town of Anhaica, has provided one of the
best inventories of items that might be expected in the archeological record from the
expedition. The site, in downtown Tallahassee, was discovered in 1987 by B. Calvin
Jones while he was looking for a seventeenth century Spanish mission (Ewen 1989,
1990).
A detailed analysis of artifacts from the site has yet to be published, but the
assemblage is known to include some distinctive items (Ewen 1990:88). The
Spanish ceramics include an early style of Spanish olive jar, types of majolica, and
an unnamed variety of lead-glazed earthenware with a soft, red, sandy paste. Several
glass beads were found, including gooseberry, blown glass, faceted amber, Nueva
Cadiz, and faceted Chevron types. Metal items included wrought iron nails and
tacks, a crossbow quarrel (tip), iron links of chain mail, and five coins. Two of the
coins have been dated between 1505 and 1517; the remaining three can be
temporally placed only in the sixteenth century or earlier 0~wen 1990:89).

72

Texas Archeological Society

Similar artifacts have been found elsewhere in the southeastern United States
and, although they do not necessarily indicate direct contact with the army, do
provide evidence of the passage of the expedition (Brain 1985a:99). In particular,
glass beads have been determined to be one of the best indicators of early Spanish
exploration (Ewen 1989:114). Two types of beads are particularly important and
have been found at several sites. The first is called Nueva Cadiz, named for an
archeological site with remains of a Spanish port town located off the coast of
Venezuela (Smith and Good 1982:10). The bead is usually multilayered and
multicolored, with the exterior color usually mostly blue or turquoise over interior
clear or white glass (Deagan 1987:162-163) (Figure 3). The Nueva Cadiz type has
been dated to the first half of the sixteenth century (Deagan 1987:163; Smith and
Good 1982:11; Mitchem 1989). These beads have been found at several sites from
Florida westward to Oklahoma (Figure 4). The Oklahoma example is unique in that
it is one of the only two Nueva Cadiz bead found west of the Mississippi River, and
it is a logical candidate for association with the Coronado expedition (Sudbury
1984:33). It is puzzling that more examples of these beads have not been found,
particularly in the Southwest. The beads are known from circum-Caribbean, South
American, and Mexican contexts where early Spanish exploration and colonization
took place. It is likely that some such specimens have been overlooked in Southwestern collections. This certainly could be a productive area for future research in
the identification of Coronado’s route, particularly through Texas, Oklahoma, and
Kansas where the route is less certain.
An equally distinctive bead that was traded by early Spanish explorers,
including de Soto, was the Chevron type--a multilayered bead with as many as
seven layers of red, white, blue, and sometimes green, glass (Deagan 1987:164165). The exteriors are usually blue, and the ends on many have been faceted to
expose the underlying colors (Figure 3). When viewed from the end, the facets
cutting through the glass layers form a star. Chevron beads date from the sixteenth
century through the beginning of the seventeenth century (Deagan 1987:165), so
they are not indicators only of de Soto and contemporary explorations, but of later
intrusions as well.
Chevron beads are widely distributed in the southern United States (Figure 4).
They have been found at the Parkin site in Arkansas (Klinger 1977; P. Morse
1981:71) and most likely reflect the movement of de Soto shortly after he crossed
the Mississippi into Arkansas. These beads have also been found at Hawikuh, New
Mexico (Smith and Good 1982:51). A star chevron bead, as well as other unidentified types, has been noted from central Kansas, and these beads probably mark the
presence of Coronado in the Southwest (Wedel 1959:500; Sudbury 1984).
Metal artifacts of types identified with de Soto have been found throughout
much of the Southeastern United States. Most are iron objects whose original forms
can be identified, but without doubt many more iron artifacts have rusted beyond
identification or were sufficiently modified by Native Americans that they can no
longer be recognized as Spanish in origin. Wrought iron chisels--thought to be
items given out by the de Soto exped ition--have been found at some early European

Bruseth --Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition

73

Figure 3. Beads that are indicators of the presence of early Spanish explorers. Top row,
Nueva Cadiz glass beads; bottom row, faceted Chevron beads from the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries; beads from the sixteenth century typically would have seven layers
of glass.

contact sites; other metal arti facts of interest are a piece of plate armor from a burial
in the Tatham Mound in Florida (Mitchem 1990:56) and a sixteenth century twoedged hilt sword from the King site in Georgia (Hally 1988:56).
Halberds have been found from several sites in the central southeastern United
States (Figure 5), all but one from Arkansas or Mississippi. The significance of this
restricted distribution is not known but may simply reflect better reporting from
Arkansas and Mississippi. As noted earlier, de Soto had a guard of halberdiers
(Swanton 1939:86) and mention is made in the narratives of the loss of halberds on
at least two occasions (Dickinson 1987); other losses probably went unreported.
Chain mail, usually consisting of rusted iron links and, less often, of brass links,
has been found at Southeastern sites. Overall, though, the occurrence of chain mail
is rare. Chain mail armor apparently lost popularity during subsequent centuries and
was increasingly replaced by iron plate armor (Johnson 1988; Peterson 1956).
Another explanation for the dearth of chain mail found in archeological
contexts may be that much of it was discarded along the way. At the province of

74

Texas Archeological Society

de Soto

A tltrntic
Ocean

Gulf of Mexico
o Chevron Bead
u Nueva Cadz

Figure 4. Map showing locations of Nueva Cadiz and Chevron beads in the southern
United States (based on Smith and Good 1982, and Sudbury 1984).

de Soto

A tlantic
Ocez~

Gulf of Mexico

Figure 5. Map showing locations of Halberds in the southern United States (based on
Dickinson 1987).
Apalachee, Garcilaso describes a test the Spaniard tried on their coats of mail
(Vamer and Varner 1951:235-236). They had an Indian shoot an arrow through one
of their best mail coats placed over a basket. To their surprise, the arrow completely
penetrated the mail. They tried the experiment again, this time with two coats of
mail, and the arrow again penetrated the armor. The Spaniards then began using
quilted cloth "three or four fingers thick," which was found to offer greater

\

Bruseth ~ Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition

75

protection from native arrows. According to Garcilaso, the coats of mail were then
discarded (Varner and Varner 1951:236), although we know from the narratives that
not all mail was abandoned, since reference is made to its use later in the expedition
(Varner and Varner 1951:523).
Clarksdale bells have been found at several southeastern sites (Figure 6) from
Florida to Arkansas. These distinctive brass bells derive their name from the town
in Mississippi where a large number have been recovered (Brain 1985a:105). The
bells, made from sheet brass, have been found in sixteenth century Spanish contact
sites, not only in the Southeast, but also in the Caribbean (Mitchem 1989). A
Clarksdale bell found at the Carden Bottoms site in western Arkansas (Brain
1985a:Figure 5-3) is the authentic de Soto artifact found to date closest to Texas.

de Soto
Coronado

A tlantic
Ocean

Gulf of Mexico

Figure 6. Map showing the locations of Clarksdale bells in the southern United States
(adapted from Mitchem and McEwan 1988).

ARTIFACTS FROM TEXAS

Over a period of 50 years, several artifacts of supposed de Soto origin have been
reported from Texas (Figure 7). An effort was made to locate these items and to
reexamine them in the light of what we know today about materials used by the
expedition. Some artifacts could be located, but others have disappeared and could
be seen only in photographs or through written descriptions.
To assist in this examination, several authorities in the identification of early
European artifacts were consulted. The individuals who have graciously agreed to
provide their expertise for this paper are: Dr. Helmut Nickel, former Curator of the
Department of Arms and Armor at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York
City; Dr. Jeffrey Mitchem, Station Archeologist at the Parkin Archeological State
Park in Arkansas; and Mr. Jay C. Blaine, an avocational archeologist considered the

76

Texas Archeological Society

leading Texas authority on early French and Spanish artifacts. The opinions of the
authorities are not always in agreement. Consequently, their positions are presented
as accurately as possible, and the author’ s conclusions follow the discussion of each
artifact.
Chain Mail Gauntlet
In the late 1950s, Wilson W. Crook, Jr., a member of the Dallas Archeological
Society, was contacted by a young man who had found a chain mail gauntlet, or
glove, at the Elm Fork of the Trinity River near Dallas (Crook 1988) (Figure 8).
Crook visited the site where the glove was found and was told by the young man that
it had come from a gully about a meter (3 feet) deep in the alluvium of the Elm Fork
(Wilson W. Crook. Jr., 1990 personal communication). The author has examined
the gauntlet, which is part of the R. K. Harris Collection at the Smithsonian
Institution, and took several photographs (Figure 8).

Figure 7. Map showing the locations of possible early Spanish artifacts in Texas.

In an article on this and other possible de Soto artifacts from the Dallas area,
Crook (1988) stated that the gauntlet was sent for identification to the Department
of Arms and Armor at New York’s Metropolitan Museum of Art. The result was that
"it was identified as a cheap 16th century gauntlet commonly used by poor soldiers
of the Mediterranean Latin Nations, originally on a leather gauntlet beneath the light
chain mail" (Crook 1988:109). A careful search for this letter was made by the
author in records of the Harris Collection at the Smithsonian Institution, but the
correspondence apparently has been lost.
The glove, which is only partially intact, covering only the thumb and two
adjoining fingers, is made of small metal rings, about 0.5 cm in diameter, butted

Bruseth --Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition

77

Figure 8. Chain mail gauntlet from alluvium in the Elm Fork of the Trinity River near
Dallas.

together; the part of the glove that covered the last two fingers is missing. The
gauntlet is made of a nonferrous metal, and despite some apparent oil or grease
staining, shows no evidence of rust or tarnish.
Dr. Nickel was asked to view slides of the gauntlet, and provided the following
comments:
The mail gauntlet fragment, as far as I can see from your close-up slide, is
made up from butted rings, and not from rings riveted closed, as would
have been the unshakable rule in the 16th century. I think that this fragment
was part of a fencing gauntlet for the left hand. In a pinch, it would enable
a fencer to grab his opponent’s blade and immobilize it, while he could
thrust home. This was not exactly cricket, of course, and therefore the mail
would be covered by innocent-looking leather. Again, the date for this mail
could be anytime after 1600 [Nickel 1991].
Dr. Mitchem observed the same slides of the gauntlet, and noted that he has
seen quite a bit of mail from sixteenth-century contexts, including the
Martin site (the supposed de Soto campsite) in Tallahassee, and a number
of Caribbean sites. I’ve also examined examples in museums and collections in Spain. Real mail made for bodily protection is made of iron rings,
not silver or other metals. Its original purpose was to diffuse and deflect

78

Texas Archeological Society
blows by slashing weapons, so a tough metal was necessary. I also note by
careful examination of the close-up slide that the individual rings are made
by bending wire until the ends abut. Utilitarian mail is always constructed
of rings which are made by riveting the overlapping ends to make them
very strong [Mitchem 1991].
The same slides were sent to Blaine who observed that
the mail gauntlet of Harris may well be the third of the same kind from
Texas. Crook (1988) writes of one "quite like ours" found near Vernon,
Texas. Another, also closely matching the Dallas specimen in several
details, was found on the North rim of Blanco Canyon some 8.5 miles [13
km] S.E. of Floydada. Apparently there may be significant occurrence of
similar mail gauntlets in Texas. The Dallas gauntlet’s rings are in a
standard pattern but apparently not fastened together at their individual
ends. Current data indicates this cheaper kind of construction saw very
little use in Europe until quite late times. Such mail was much more
common in the East. In the U.S., archeological examples probably dating
to the latter 16th century do usually have overlapping and riveted ring ends
as original construction [Blaine 1991].

Blaine brings up the existence of other gauntlets from Texas sites. Through
the help of Ms. Nancy Marble, Chairman of the Floyd County Historical Commission, who was instrumental in the acquisition of the Floydada gauntlet by
the museum, the author obtained information on the gauntlet from the Floydada
area that bears not only on the Floydada glove, but also on the Dallas County
specimen. As part of this effort, Ms. Marble sent copies of newspaper clippings
and correspondence relating to the glove, and copies of this material were sent
to the Texas Historical Commission. Two of the letters are of particular interest;
the first is a letter dated February 17, 1966 by Dr. W. W. Newcomb, then Director of the Texas Memorial Museum. Newcomb, who had been asked to examine
the glove, responded,
This acknowledges receipt of the chain mail gauntlet. It is "International
mail," that is the pattern of five interlocking links, the ends of each round
link being pressed together rather than being riveted as was the case of
earlier European mail. This type of mail was cheaper and was used mostly
in Spain, France, and Italy. It apparently dates from the middle of the 16th
century into the 17th. I’m not satisfied about the metal used; it appears to
be zinc coated bronze, but this is a wild guess.
Blaine (1991) is correct in observing the similarities between the Dallas County
and Floyd County gloves. From Newcomb’s description and a newspaper photo
supplied by Ms. Marble, it can be seen that the two are quite similar, clown to the
pattern of the tear and the missing fingers. Attempts to locate the gauntlet from the
Vernon area failed because no local informant who knew of its existence could be

Bruseth ~ Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition

79

found. The author suspects that the glove Crook (1988) refers to as the Vernon
gauntlet may in fact be the Floyd County gauntlet.
A second letter on the Floyd County gauntlet written by Dr. Newcomb on
March 14, 1966 quotes from correspondence by R. K. Harris, of Dallas. Harris had
been asked to look at the gauntlet, and he responded to Newcomb as follows:
I do have a chain mail gauntlet from the Dallas area. It was found in the
Trinity River bottoms near Dallas [Crook (personal communication,
1990) has indicated that the glove was instead found along the Elm Fork,
a tributary of the Trinity River] after a large overflow of the river. It is the
same material and construction as the one sent to you. We sent ours to
Mexico City and they told us it was a chain mail gauntlet and probably
dated from the 16th or 17th century. Ours even has only three fingers
remaining like yours .... Three or four iron rings were found with ours but
the young man that found them said [they] were so rusty that they fell to
pieces.
This letter is also missing from the Harris Collection at the Smithsonian
Institution, and we cannot determine who in Mexico City made the identification
mentioned by Harris of the gauntlet from Dallas County.
What can be said about the Dallas County gauntlet today? As Nickel points out,
it does not fit the type of mail commonly used in the sixteenth century, and, as
Mitchem also observes, it is not similar to archeological specimens found in the
Southeast and elsewhere. However, it is worth noting that Obreg6n remarked that
the Coronado muster roll included swordsmen who carried armored gauntlets
(Hammond and Rey 1928:78-108). That the Dallas County gauntlet could have
served such a function--similar to Nickel’s suggestion--is a possibility, but it
appears that if the glove was made in the sixteenth century, it would most likely be
made of iron and have riveted links. The evidence seems to rule out the gauntlet as
a de Soto artifact.
Trinity River Tabar
An East Indian tabar found along the Trinity River during the early 1950s
is mentioned in two publications. The first is the September-October 1951 issue
of the Dallas Archeological Society’s Record, in which R. K. Harris reports on
the discovery of an "axe or mace looking implement." According to the article,
two boys playing along the banks of the Trinity River near Dallas discovered a
rusty piece of iron protruding from the bank, and, after they unearthed it and
removed the rust, they brought the piece to Harris, who was the local authority
on such items at the time, for identification. Harris photographed and drew the
object (Figure 9) and sent a photograph to the Metropolitan Museum of Art for
identification.
The letter from the Metropolitan Museum on the identification of the tabar was
located by the author during a search of the Harris Collection at the Smithsonian
Institution. Dr. Stephen V. Grancsay, then curator of the Department of Arms and

80

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 9. Photograph of an East Indian tabar from the Trinity River in Dallas County.

Armor for the Metropolitan, examined Harris’s drawing and responded on September
28, 1951, "The weapon of which you sent a drawing is an East Indian battle axe
(tabar). There are in this Museum several examples of this general type of weapon,
including the knife which fits into the haft."
The tabar is a fighting axe used by East Indian soldiers that has a curved cutting
head, and sometimes, a square hammerhead or a shm~ened pick on the opposite side
(Byam 1988:32-35), although this part is missing from the Trinity River example.
A hollow handle conceals a dagger, providing another weapon. The surface of the
weapon may be inlaid with silver and gilt (Byam 1988:34-35), as seems to be the
case with the Trinity River specimen.

Bruseth -- Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition

81

The comments on this artifact by the authorities contacted for this article were
largely in agreement. According to Dr. Nickel,
The battle axe found at the Trinity River is an East Indian tabar, as one of
my predecessors at the Metropolitan Museum must have told Mr. Crook,
some forty years ago. However, as to the dating of this tabar, I would prefer
not to call it "15/16 century" [as Crook (1988) suggests]. Though the
general shape of East Indian weapons has changed very little over the
centuries, it has to be kept in mind that great numbers of these traditional
arms were manufactured practically to the present day, not so much for
tribal warfare.., but for sale as tourist souvenirs in the local bazaars
[Nickel 1991].
Nickel goes on to comment that the photograph shows the specimen to be in
very good condition, and notes that its "unrusted" quality makes it doubtful that the
artifact had been in the ground since the time of the expedition. Although Harris
(1951 ) describes the tabar as being rusted when found by the boys, it is doubtful that
they could have cleaned it to its present"newlike" state; rather, the artifact probably
never was very rusted.
A photograph of the tabar was also viewed by Dr. Mitchem, who commented,

I can’t tell you much about the"tabar," except that is certainly isn’t typical
of weapons known to be associated with sixteenth-century expeditions. It
sure is fancy, and I have to defer to the Metropolitan people on its
identification. Battle axes of about this size and configuration were still
used as late as the first half of the sixteenth century, though they were no
longer part of the standard weaponry [Mitchem 1991].
And Blaine adds that while the tabar could date to the sixteenth century,
like Dr. Nickel I find the excellent condition begs for explanation where
the context supposedly is grounding for hundreds of years. Unless cached
in some very unusual way the pristine appearance of the surfaces, thin
edges and decorative detail is, to say the least, highly improbable for the
climate and soil conditions in the Dallas area [Blaine 1991].

Taken together, the evidence suggests that the tabar is an unlikely candidate for
the de Soto expedition. Such weapons, when found in sixteenth century contexts in
the Southeast, are typically of iron and rusted.
Trinity River Halberd

In his article on de Soto artifacts from the Dallas area, Crook (1988) briefly
mentions a "Medieval halberd" from the Trinity River, a metal object brought for
examination in the 1960s to R. K. Harris by a young couple who found it while
picnicking along the Trinity River. Crook (1988:109) describes the halberd as being
"similar to those used by the Tower of London beefeaters." Apparently Harris tried

82

Texas Archeological Society

to acquire the piece, and although the couple would not part with it, they did permit
him to photograph it. However, the author’s thorough search of the Harris Collection records at the Smithsonian failed to locate the photograph.
Without more information on this object--particularly a photograph or a
drawing--little can be said about its relationship to the de Soto expedition. As noted
earlier, halberds found in sites of the southeastern United States appear to relate to
the Spanish army. They were popular from the fourteenth through the seventeenth
centuries, and during this time they changed from simple forms resembling bills
(axelike) to more elaborate types used for pageantry (Brett 1894:112). Since
halberds were made for many years after the time of de Soto, the Trinity halberd
cannot be dated without more specific data.
Corsicana Spur and Key
In 1990, two early European arti facts were brought to the attention of the author
by Mr. William L. Young, an avocational archeologist from Corsicana. One, a 25cm-long spur, has a downward-curving shank, and has notably long spikes (7.5 cm)
forming the rowel (Figure 10). The specimen is very rusted, and one of the arms of
the heel band is missing. The other artifact is a 12-cm-long key and is also very
rusted. Both artifacts were found near the confluence of the Trinity River with
Richland or Tehuacana Creeks (Bill Young, 1991 personal communication).

Figure 10. Photograph of a spur found near Corsicana (courtesy of Bill Young).

Dr. Nickel (1991) suggests, in part based on the spur’s decorative curls, that it
and the key could date to the first part of the eighteenth century. Dr. Mitchem,
however, based on observations of archeological examples of spurs from the
Southeast and circum-Caribbean, believes

Bruseth m Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition

83

the best candidate for a genuine sixteenth-century Spanish artifact is the
iron spur from Corsicana. It is a classic example of the typical type of spur
used by the conquistadors. The attached iron "scrolls," along with other
features, identify it as from this time period. I’ve seen both pictures and
archeological examples of very similar examples from sixteenth-century
contexts in the Caribbean and elsewhere [Mitchem 1991].
Dr. Mitchem referred the author to the discussion by Simmons and Turley
(1980:110-113) of Spanish Colonial spurs and other iron objects. According to
these authorities, the Corsicana specimen is a "conquistador spur," and they
illustrate a similar example from the Pecos Pueblo of New Mexico (Simmons and
Turley 1980:Plate 21). This type of spur was used by European knights in the late
Middle Ages and was brought into the New World by the conquistadors, hence its
name.
J. C. Blaine’s observations on the Corsicana spur parallel those of Dr. Mitchem.
I have come to believe this spur clearly reflects a 16th century Spanish style
origin. How early in that century this form came into significant use is not
presently secured. The style is generally accepted as that used by the
Conquistadors, although perhaps mainly because we can’t precisely
isolate an earlier Spanish style in the Americas .... In conu’ast to Dr.
Nickel’s observation of this particular spur... I presently find no reason
to support a "likely" date as late as the early 18th century. I’ve seen no
evidence for that so far from Texas and New Mexico sites of the 18th
century where some spur styles from the 17th century do persist into as late
as the early 18th century. However, that spurs styled like the [Corsicana]
specimen could still be produced that late is regrettably true. Even though
this spur may be of New World origin, this would not necessarily prevent
an early production. Hispanic smiths are known to have been active by the
1520s in our hemisphere [Blaine 1991].
What can be concluded about the Corsicana spur? Although the experts do not
agree, the experience of Blaine, who has examined thousands of European artifacts
from Texas and surrounding states, must be given priority. Moreover, his remarks
parallel Mitchem’s, and both lead to the conclusion that the Corsicana spur is
probably an old artifact; how old is difficult to say. Simmons and Turley (1980:111)
note that the conquistadors used these spurs, but they also indicate that they were
used later in borderland areas such as Texas, New Mexico, and California. The site
where this specimen was found needs archeological testing to obtain more information before we can make further progress on this issue.
Little information was obtained about the Corsicana key. Mitchem (1991)
observes that they have been found at Puerto Real, Haiti, but is not able to offer
more specific information. Blaine (1991) notes that the key has the "flavor" of
frontier blacksmithing, and was probably repaired or was made of poor quality
stock.

84

Texas Archeological Society
Longview Spur

During a visit to Longview in 1990, Dr. Norman Black told the author about a
possible de Soto spur from the area in the possession of Mr. Bill Fisher, proprietor
of a local hardware store. The author contacted Mr. Fisher, and, with his assistance,
was able to examine it. According to Mr. Fisher’s best recollection, the spur was
found in the 1920s in a field 8 to 10 km (5 to 6 miles) northeast of Longview, but
no more specific site information is available.
The artifact is 22 cm long, and has a rowel length of 7 cm (Figure 11). The shank
is straight, and the spur is made of a nonferrous, silver-colored metal. The surface
of the arms of the heel band and the shank are engraved with either parallel lines or
small leaf-shaped designs.
Concerning the Longview spur, Nickel observes that
it still preserves stylistic elements of the late 15th century in its straight
shank, and the thickness of the arch-shaped branches encircling the heel.
However, the length of the spikes of the rowel--while typical for the
Spanish spurs of the 17th and 18th century--might be excessive for a
period before the last quarter of the 16th century. Before 1600, footwear,
shoes and boots alike, was practically heelless, and these overlong spikes
would have made it most difficult to take even a few steps before

Figure 11. Photograph of a spur found near Longview (courtesy of Mr. Bill Fisher).

Bruseth ~ Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition

85

mounting. For this reason, even taking in account the conservatism of
Spanish fashion, it seems to be safest to date this spur to some period after
1600 [Nickel 1991].
Mitchem notes that he is
a bit suspicious of the Longview spur. It is so fancy and heavy that I would
think it more likely is 18th-19th century. Simmons and Turley [1980] note
that heavy, richly-ornamented spurs were typically used by Mexicans
during this period. The slide makes it look like it’s made of some alloy of
gold, possibly tumbaga (sometimes called guanin), an alloy of gold and
copper. If it is made of silver, it has definitely been cleaned or it would be
black with tarnish [Mitchem 1991].
Blaine comments
I have never encountered a spur quite like the one from near Longview.
Except for the large rowel, it certainly resembles what a greatly shortened
version of the 15th-16th century tilting spur would look like. The Longview
spur also lacks adequate strapping capability for early and hard usage and
would require such as a fully developed boot for adequately mounting. In
no way does it reflect early Hispanic practices in this respect and I believe
this is the more critical attribute here .... Overall the Longview spur adds
up a bit too modern to me. My guess is a 19th century origin parade kind
of spur but I lack some confidence here, especially judging from slides
only [Blaine 1991].

All of the authorities agree that the Longview spur is not an early sixteenth
century object, so it can be concluded that it is an unlikely candidate for a de Soto
artifact.
Chalicelike Ceramic Vessels from Camp and Franklin Counties
In a report on the prehistoric Tuck Carpenter site in Camp County, Turner
(1978:98-103) describes the results of excavation of a Late Caddoan Period Titus
phase site with several middens and a cemetery containing 44 graves. One of the
graves contained a chalicelike vessel--a small bowl with a podestal base of a form
similar to a communion chalice.
Since only one grave contained a vessel of this type, Turner researched
surrounding sites and contacted workers in Arkansas and Oklahoma about the
occurrence of other chalicelike vessels. He located two other examples, one from
the Johns site and one from the Gandy site, both within 20 miles of the Carpenter
site (Figure 12). No vessels of this type were reported by the contacts from outside
of Texas.
Turner (1978:103) suggests that the shape of the vessels was influenced by the
de Soto expedition. The evidence for this, beyond the obvious similarity in form, is
an uncorrected radiocarbon date for the Tuck Carpenter site of A.D. 15902-_60

86

Texas Archeological Society

0

1

[

i

0

1

i

I

2
I

INCHES

2 CENTIMETERS

Figure 12. Photograph of the chalicelike vessel from the Gandy site (41FK 4) (photograph
taken with the permission of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, where the
artifact is curated).

obtained on charred logs from a grave. The absence of other European artifacts
indicates that the site was occupied prior to major French and Spanish contact with
the Caddo that occurred in the region after about 1700.
Although Turner’s observations are intriguing, if the chalicelike vessel is a
result of DeSoto’s presence, we would expect to find other types of material
showing the army’s presence to be found, particularly in the graves. At sites in the
Southeast that show definite contact with de Soto, many items traded or left by the

Bruseth m Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition

87

expedition made their way into mortuary contexts (e.g., Mitchem 1991; P. Morse
1981:69; Langford and Smith 1990). It could be argued, however, that at this point
in the expedition, the army was largely depleted of its supplies, and there was little
to be left for the Titus phase people.
Perttula (1989:100) notes the similarity of these vessels to stemmed glassware
examples used during the sixteenth century Spanish occupation in the circumCaribbean. He notes that the Tuck Carpenter site is in the general area included in
his plotting of the expedition’s route through eastern Texas. Thurmond (1990:233)
also notes the occurrence of these vessel forms and examines the possible connection of the de Soto expedition with the Titus phase. These artifacts seem to be
gaining acceptance as far as reflecting contact with the army, but some problems
remain. According to Elvas (Bourne 1904:97) during the battle of Mauilla, many of
the army’s supplies were burned, including "the ornaments for saying mass."
Consequently, it is difficult to know what articles the Spaniards would have had
with them to be copied. Perhaps the chalicelike vessels reflect native manufacture
of a form described by members of the expedition. If so, why are these objects not
found in sites in other areas visited by the expedition?
Mississippian Vessels t’rom the Honey Springs Site
In the October 1940 issue of the Dallas Archeological Society’s Record, was
an article written by Henry Hanna Jr. entitled "Most Interesting Dallas County
Campsite." The article describes the Honey Springs site (actually 41DL68 and
41DL71) located on terraces along the south side of the Trinity River in Dallas
County. The site gets its name from the presence of several springs in the vicinity
and the occurrence of honey bee hives in area trees (Hanna 1940:2). In addition to
the artifacts, Hanna states that "some Indian skeletons" were found along a creek
after a hard rain, evidently being washed out by the creek. A grooved axe was found
near the skeletons.
Of particular interest for the present paper is Hanna’s (1940:9) reporting of
several vessels and other artifacts found on a sandy slope of the site. The context and the conditions of discovery of the vessels are difficult to discern. Hanna
(1940:9) states that "thus far six whole specimens have been unearthed while
large parts of five others have been found--all within a space of ground three
by six feet. The depth at which this pottery was found was approximately two
and one-half feet."
He goes on to note that "the surface of this sandy slope has yielded many
interesting specimens." Three effigy heads made of pottery were found, which had,
no doubt, been broken from pottery vessels.
It is not clear from the article whether Hanna was involved in the discovery and
collection of the vessels and other associated artifacts or if he is reporting their
earlier unearthing. The answer to this question comes from the site form completed
by Forrest Kirkland in December 1940. Kirkland notes that Mr. Perry Overton
owned the land and states that the landowner dug up the vessels in 1934, some six
years before their reporting by Hanna.

88

Texas Archeological Society

Kirkland’s site form suggests that the vessels are Caddoan; Hanna made no
comments on their cultural affiliation, but simply observed that they were unusual
for Dallas County. The true significance of the vessels came years later when the
Dallas Archeological Society sent photographs for examination to the Ceramic
Repository at the University of Michigan. The result of this showed that the vessels
were"St. Francis Ware... known from the region of St. Francis County, Arkansas"
(Crook 1988:90).
Since the St. Francis River of northeastern Arkansas is one of the areas where
de Soto is thought to have traveled through the province of Casqui, even staying
at its principal town--the Parkin archeological site (Morse and Morse
1990:202)--the vessels were of great interest to the author. With the help of
Wilson Crook, Jr. and Daniel Prikryl, the latter an archeologist with the Texas
Historical Commission, the vessels and associated artifacts were found in the
possession of Mrs. Henry Hanna, the widow of Henry Hanna. We visited Mrs.
Hanna at her home in Dallas, and she kindly allowed the author to observe and
photograph the artifacts.
All of the vessels are small, ranging from 30 cm to nearly 70 cm in diameter,
and are of several forms. Three are bowls, two are jars, and one is a bottle. All
except the bottle are decorated with either nodes (Figure 13, A, B, D), strap
handles (Figure 13, D, E), or animal effigy appliqu6 (Figure 13, C); in this case
the effigy is a frog. Other artifacts in the Hanna Collection are two effigy

A

B

D

E

F

Figure 13. Ceramic vessels from the Honey Springs site (41DL68 and 41DL71 ); A and B
are bowls; C is a frog effigy bowl; D and E are jars, and F is a bottle.

Bruseth m Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition

89

appendages broken from vessels, a strap handle, a long basalt celt, and two stone
discoidals.
To identify the artifacts in the light of current Mississippiperiod ceramic
typology, photographs of the vessels were sent to Dr. Dan Morse, of the Arkansas
Archeological Survey. According to Morse,
with the exception of one jar handle sherd.., and an unknown object
¯.. the artifacts could date within the period of AD 1400-1650. The
handle sherd is evidently Manly Punctate and should date circa late
13th and 14th century. The pottery and discoidals are fairly typical of
this region. The long basalt celt is rare but has been found here,
although the shape is atypical. There was a specialized basalt industry
centered in the Blytheville, Arkansas, region after AD 1400. The basalt was mined in the volcanic cones in the Missouri St. Francis Mountains .... The impression I get from your pottery is that the vessels
probably are from a site located in northeast Arkansas near the Mississippi River and as a group date essentially pre-De Soto (1450-1550)
rather than post-De Soto (1550-1650). They could represent the
Nodena Phase (thought to be the province of Pacacha) or possible
phases further south, all visited by the expedition before De Soto died.
The reason I say the Mississippi River rather than the St. Francis River
is based on the presence of the bowls with notched appliqud rim strips,
which are more characteristic of the "Memphis" sub-region .... However, I do not think these artifacts represent an assemblage obtained by
the De Soto Expedition. Broken and rather crude items are represented. Missing are more typical artifacts in use, including pottery,
about 1541 [Morse 1991].
Although the army had an entourage of hundreds of Indian slaves, many of
them women, who would have accompanied the expedition into Texas, it seems
doubtful that they would carry such an unusual assortment of vessels and other
objects. Morse (1991) notes that one miniature vessel must have been a toy, and
two other vessels are too small to have been cooking jars; they may have been
used for condiments. The frog effigy jar is the type of vessel used as burial
furniture for children. It seems doubtful that in Texas the expedition--desperately hoping to find its way back to New Spain--would be carrying nonutilitarian
vessels. Moreover, why would they have two ceramic effigy heads, a clay strap
handle sherd, stone discoidals--presumably gaming stones--and a large basalt
celt? The stone artifacts in particular would add unnecessary weight during the
march.
Although the evidence is insufficient to support a final conclusion, it seems
unlikely that the artifacts are from the de Soto expedition. They are more likely to
be artifacts from Arkansas, collected by a member of the Overton family or by
someone else and given to the family. Moreover, they seem to be from both grave
and nongrave contexts.

90

Texas Archeological Society
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

Nearly all scholars agree that the de Soto expedition passed through Texas, and,
with this consensus, it is only logical to expect that some archeological evidence of
the expedition will be found. None of the possible de Soto artifacts recovered in
Texas over the years can be unequivocally related to that army. The Corsicana spur
is probably the best candidate, but as noted previously, this type of spur was used
in later times, particularly in the borderland areas of New Spain. The chalicelike
vessels from northeastern Texas, although of native manufacture, may reflect
contact with the army. All of the other artifacts have sufficient temporal or
typological problems to rule them out as de Soto artifacts.
Since the army spent several months in Texas, why is there not more evidence?
To answer this we need to bear in mind some facts about the expedition. When the
soldiers reached Texas, they had been traveling for three years in the southeastern
United States. There is no mention in the narratives about handing out gifts or
trading with the Texas Indians, and quite possibly most--if not all--trade items
such as bells, beads, and iron chisels had been given out. In fact, the soldiers were
not only short of items for trade, but they did not have enough iron with them to make
horseshoes, so their horses went unshod (Swanton 1939:89). We also need to keep
in mind the fact that the soldiers in Arkansas, before deciding to head westward into
Texas, had lost their leader de Soto and their main interpreter Juan Ortiz, both of
whom died. With the death of Ortiz, they had difficulty communicating with the
Indians; for what used to be understood in "four words, it became necessary to have
the whole day" (Bourne 1904:147). Moreover, the expedition was down to about
300 fighting men and 40 serviceable horses (Swanton 1939:87). Therefore, on
entering Texas the expedition was probably left with only minimal military gear,
essential horse trappings, and personal items.
This is not to say that finding a campsite from the de Soto expedition, or
identifying a Native American archeological site with evidence of contact with the
army, is impossible. Both types of settlements existed in Texas, and both should
have left some archeological evidence. However, the search for these sites will
require very careful examination of the material evidence.
Probably the most likely artifact to expect from such a Texas site would be an
iron object. Much of the chain mail armor may have been left in Apalachee after it
was found to be ineffective against native arrows, but plate armor would have been
of considerable advantage against Indian weapons and would have been kept.
Remaining military weapons, such as halberds, crossbows, swords, and shields also
would have been important. Although these weapons were being carefully conserved because they could not be resupplied (Brain 1985a:103), some were
undoubtedly lost, as the narratives indicate; one only needs to look at sites in the
Southeast where weapons have been found (Smith 1987; Dickinson 1987; Hally
1988; Mitchem 1989, 1990).
Any metal items from the expedition would undoubtedly be in poor condition,
and might have been modified by Indians (e.g., Mitchem 1989:105). We may also

Bruseth -- Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition

91

find objects of European type made out of local materials. For instance, Coronado
employed Native Americans to manufacture crossbow bolt heads out of indigenous
copper (Ellis 1957). We might expect the crossbow’s iron nuts, which served as a
release mechanism, to have been manufactured out of bone and be preserved in an
archeological context (Ellis 1957:211). Halberds, like the specimens from Arkansas, could also be present and identifiable as relating to the expedition.
We should be looking for other types of evidence as well. We know that a large
drove of swine accompanied the expedition. Upon de Soto’s death, the army
auctioned off his personal property, which included 700 hogs, to other members of
the expedition (Swanton 1939:90-91). The expedition also gave hogs to Indian
chiefs along the way (Swanton 1939:90-91), and the remains of these animals
should be present as rare elements in lists of archeological fauna.
The expedition started with 223 to 243 horses, and upon return to the
Mississippi River to build barges for sailing to New Spain, they had about 30 left
(Swanton 1939:89). Some of these horses undoubtedly died in Texas, and could
show up as a minor representation in the faunal assemblage of an otherwise
prehistoric site.
And finally, our best evidence of the expedition might come from
bioarcheological analysis of human skeletal remains. Early European expeditions
and attempts at colonization in the Americas introduced new diseases--measles,
smallpox, and influenza--the effects of which were devastating (Dobyns 1983;
Smith 1987). Ramenofsky (1987:69) calls the sixteenth century the disease century
of the Southeast, and notes that it was a time of dramatic population decline and
settlement relocation. These same diseases would have been carried or spread into
Texas and should be manifested in the archeological record.
Although it is difficult to identify specific disease-related skeletal pathologies
(Hutchinson 1990:64; Smith 1987:60), there are other ways to look for evidence of
epidemics. Efforts have been made to look at major shifts in settlement in Texas
during the sixteenth century (Perttula 1989; Thurmond 1990). Other types of
evidence, such as the increased incidence of mass burials or the large-scale use of
cemeteries during limited periods (cf. Smith 1987:60-68), need to be fully exploited. Perhaps the short term use during the Titus phase of large cemeteries,
interpreted by Perttula (1989:158) to be community graveyards, actually reflects
passage of the army. These cemeteries seem to have originated during the sixteenth
century and could reflect increased mortality from European diseases. Detailed
skeletal studies might help resolve this issue.
Evidence for traumatic death in skeletal remains should also be sought.
Although members of the expedition may have been short of supplies, they
seemingly had no limitation in their willingness to fight the native populations, and
the expedition had at least two major battles with Indians during the journey through
Texas. The first was at Naguatex along the Red River, and the other was during an
encounter with the Aays near San Augustine. Other encounters are likely but were
simply not reported in the narratives. Hudson, DePratter, and Smith (1988:130)
observe that incidents that became commonplace were less often recorded, and

92

Texas Archeological Society

small-scale battles are likely to have fallen into this category by the time the
expedition was west of the Mississippi River.
Recent work with skeletal remains in the Southeast at such sites as King in
Georgia (Blakely 1988), Tatham Mound in Florida (Mitchem 1990:56), and Parkin
in Arkansas (Murray 1989) has produced evidence of skeletons with wounds from
metal-edged weapons. Similar evidence of trauma should be found in cemeteries of
native groups in Texas.
In summary, although the possible de Soto artifacts from Texas are not
conclusive indicators of the expedition, other types of more definitive evidence
should be present in the archeological record, and efforts need to be made to search
for them. Our best clues of what to expect will come from sites in the southeastern
United States that have been shown to relate to the expedition. The expectations we
form for a Texas site, however, need to be tempered by the reality that by the time
the army reached the state its supplies of European manufacture had diminished.
Nonetheless, some evidence of the expedition should be present. Garcilaso notes
that the Indians scavenged the army’s abandoned camps, and any distinctively
European objects could have been carried away from de Soto expedition camp sites
and ended up in native sites in the area. Such items will be rare, and probably of
poorly preserved iron.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

First and foremost, I thank Mr. Wilson W. Crook, Jr. Although the final
conclusions of this study probably differ from what he would argue, he deserves
credit for his 1988 article that stimulated the author’s interest in this problem. Mr.
Crook also kindly assisted the author in locating the Honey Springs site and in
finding the vessels from the site.
Several other individuals have helped by freely providing technical expertise.
Dr. Helmut Nickel, Dr. Jeffrey Mitchem, and Jay C. Blaine all graciously examined
photographs of several of the possible de Soto artifacts from Texas, and their help
and expertise have been invaluable. Dan Morse looked at the Honey Springs vessels
and related artifacts and provided critical information regarding these items.
Although the author has ~ied to state the positions of these individuals accurately,
he takes full responsibility for any failure in rendering their opinions faithfully, and
certainly bears full responsibility for the final conclusions.
Daniel Prikryl also assisted the author in locating the Honey Springs site and
in finding the vessels from the site. Without his assistance and suggestions, this
important information probably would not have been uncovered. Mr. William L.
Young, avocational archeologist from Corsicana, brought the Corsicana spur and
key to the author’s attention and provided photographs. Dr. Norman Black,
Chairman of the Gregg County Historical Commission, brought the Longview spur
to the attention of the author; his assistance is greatly appreciated. I also thank Mrs.
Henry Hanna, who, on very short notice, agreed to let the author examine her late
husband’s collection of artifacts from the Honey Springs site.

Bruseth --Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition

93

Thanks are also due to Dr. James Crocker, of the Smithsonian Institution. Dr.
Crocker helped the author locate the chain mail gauntlet in the R. K. Harris
Collection.
Several persons provided editorial advice for this paper. The author’s wife,
Toni Turner, reviewed the first draft and helped to render it more readable. Dan
Prikryl, Nancy Kenmotsu, and Tim Perttula also provided editorial advice, and their
comments have improved the manuscript. Finally, Jim Bonar produced the final
black and white photographs, and his help is appreciated.
Lastly, I want to thank Dr. Brian Babin, Commissioner with the Texas
Historical Commission. Dr. Babin is also a member of the United States De Soto
Commission and has been a constant source of encouragement on research into the
de Soto expedition.
REFERENCES CITED
Blaine, Jay C.
Letter to the Author dated August 7, 1991. On file at the Texas Historical
1991
Commission, Austin.
Blakely, Robert L. (editor)
1988
The King Site, Continuity and Contact in Sixteenth-Century Georgia. The
University of Georgia Press, Athens.

Bourne, Edward G. (editor)
1904
Narratives of the Career of Hernando de Soto in the Conquest of Florida. 2
Volumes. A. S. Barnes, New York.
Brain, Jeffrey P.
1985a The Archeology of the Hemando de Soto Expedition. In: Alabama and the
Borderlands’, From Prehistory to Statehood, edited by R. Reid Badger and
Lawrence A. Clayton, pp. 96--107. University of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa.
1985b

Introduction: Update of De Soto Studies since the United States De Soto
Expedition Commission Report. In: Final Report of the United States De Soto
Commission, by John R. Swanton, pp. xi-lxxii. Reprinted. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Brain, Jeffrey P., Alan Toth, and Antonio Rodriguez-Buckingham
1974
Ethnohistoric Archeology of the De Soto Entrada into the Lower Mississippi
Valley. The Conference on Historic Site Archaeological Papers, 7: 232-289.
Brett, Edwin J.
1894
A Pictorial and Descriptive Record of the Origin and Development ofArrns and
Armor. Sampson Low, Marston, and Co., London.
Bruseth, James E., and Nancy A. Kenmotsu
1991

Soldiers of Misfortune: The de Soto Expedition Through Texas. Heritage
9(4):12-17.

94

Texas Archeological Society

Byam, Michele
1988

Eyewitness Books, Arms and Armor. Alfred A. Knopf, New York.

Crook, Wilson W., Jr.
1988
Did Moscoso (Later Part of the De Soto Expedition) Reach the Trinity River in
the Dallas Region? The Record 42(3): 109-110.
Deagan, Kathleen
1987
Artifacts of the Spanish Colonies of Florida and the Caribbean 1500-1800,
Volume 1: Ceramics, Glassware, and Beads. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington, D.C.
Dickinson, Sam
1987
Arkansas’ Spanish Halberds. The Arkansas Archeologist 25/26:53-62.
Dobyns, Henry F.
1983
Their Number Become Thinned. The University of Termessee Press, Knoxville.
Ellis, Bruce T.
1957
Crossbow Boltheads from Historic Pueblo Sites. ElPalacio 64(7-8):209-214.
Ewen, Charles R.
1989
Anhaica: Discovery of Hernando de Soto’s 1539-1540 Winter Camp. In: First
Encounters, Spanish Explorations in the Caribbean and the United States,
1492-1570, edited by Jerald T. Milanich and Susan Milbrath, pp. 110-118.
University of Florida Press, Gainesville.
1990

Soldier of Fortune: Hernando de Soto in the Territory of the Apalachee. In:
Columbian Consequences, Archeological and Historical Perspectives on the
Spanish Borderlands East, Volume 2, edited by David Hurst Thomas, pp. 8391. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Halty, David J.
1988
Archeology and Settlement Plan of the King Site. In: The King Site, Continuity
and Contact in Sixteenth-Century Georgia, edited by Robert L. Blakely, pp. 316. The University of Georgia Press, Athens.
Hammond, George P., and Agapito Rey (translators and editors)
1928
Obreg6n’s History of l 6th Century Explorations in Western America. Wetzel,
Los Angeles.
Hanna, Henry, Jr.
1940
Most Interesting Dallas County Indian Campsite. The Record 2(2):2-11.
Harris, R. K.
1951
French or Spanish or What Is It? The Record 10(1):2.
Hudson, Charles M., Chester B. DePratter, and Marvin T. Smith
1988
The Victims of the King Massacre: A Historical Detective’s Report. In: The
King Site, Continuity and Contact in Sixteenth-Century Georgia, edited by
Robert L. Blakely, pp. 101-134. The University of Georgia Press, Athens.

Bruseth ~ Artifacts of the de SoW Expedition
1989

95

Hemando de Soto’s Expedition through the Southem United States. In: First
Encounters, Spanish Explorations in the Caribbean and the United States,
1492-1570, edited by Jerald T. Milanich and Susan Milbrath, pp. 77-98.
University of Florida Press, Gainesville.

Hudson, Charles M., John E. Worth, and Chester B. DePratter
1990
Refinements in Hernando de Soto’s Route through Georgia and South Carolina.
In: Columbian Consequences, Archeological and Historical Perspectives on
the Spanish Borderlands East, Volume 2, edited by David Hurst Thomas, pp.
107-119. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.
Hudson, Charles M., Marvin T. Smith, and Chester B. DePratter
1984
The Hemando Expedition: from Apalachee to Chialla. Southeastern Archeology 3:65-77.
Hutchinson, Dale L.
1990
Postcontact Biocultural Change: Mortuary Site Evidence. In: Columbian Consequences, Archeological and Historical Perspectives on the Spanish Borderlands East, Volume 2, edited by David Hurst Thomas, pp. 61-70. Smithsonian
Institution Press, Washington, D.C.
Johnson, Bryon
Arms and Armor of the Spanish Conquest: A Brief Description. Manuscript on
1988
file, Albuquerque Museum, Albuquerque.
Kenmotsu, Nancy A., James E. Bruseth, and James Corbin
1990
The Route of the de Soto Expedition through Texas. Paper Presented at a
Symposium on de Soto in the Caddoan Area, University of Arkansas Museum,
Little Rock.
Klinger, Timothy C.
Parkin Archeology, A Report on the 1966 Field School Test Excavations at the
1977
Parkin Site. The Arkansas Archeologist 16/17/18:45-80.
Langford, James B., and Marvin T. Smith
1990

Recent Investigations in the Core of the Coosa Province. In: Lamar Archaeology, Mississippian Chiefdoms in the Deep South, edited by Mark Williams and
Gary Shapiro, pp. 104-116. The University of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa.

Milanich, Jerald T. and Susan Milbrath (editors)
First Encounters, Spanish Explorations in the Caribbean and the UnitedStates,
1989
1492-1570. University of Florida Press, Gainesville.
Mitchem, Jeffrey M.
1989
Artifacts of Exploration: Archeological Evidence from Florida. In: First Encounters, Spanish Explorations in the Caribbean and the United States, 14921570, edited by Jerald T. Milanich and Susan Milbrath, pp. 99-109. University
of Florida Press, Gainesville.

96

Texas Archeological Society
1990

Initial Spanish-Indian Contact in West Peninsular Florida: The Archeological
Evidence. In: Columbian Consequences, Archeological and Historical Perspectives on the Spanish Borderlands East, Volume 2, edited by David Hurst
Thomas, pp. 49-59. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

1991

Letter to the Author dated October 14, 1991. On file at the Texas Historical
Commission, Austin.

Mitchem, Jeffrey M. and Bonnie G. McEwan
1988
New Data on Early Bells from Florida. Southeastern Archeology 7:39-48.
Morse, Dan F.
Letter to the author dated July 10, 1991. On file at the Texas Historical
1991
Commission, Austin.
Morse, Dan F., and Phyllis A. Morse
1983

Archeology of the Central Mississippi Valley. Academic Press, New York.

1990

The Spanish Exploration of Arkansas. In: Columbian Consequences, Areheological and Historical Perspectives on the Spanish Borderlands East, Volume
2, edited by David Hurst Thomas, pp. 197-210. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington, D.C.

Morse, Phyllis A.
1981
Parkin, The 1978-79 Archeological Investigations of a Cross County, Arkansas
Site. Arkansas Archeological Survey Research Series, No. 13, Fayetteville.
Murray, Katherine
Bioarcheology of the Parkin Site, Cross County, Arkansas. The Arkansas
1989
Archeologist 27/28:49-62.
National Park Service
1991
NationalTraiIStudy EnvironmentalAssessment, Coronado Expedition, Public
Review Draft. National Park Service, Denver Service Center.

Nickel, Helmut
Letter to the Author dated February 24, 1991. On file at the Texas Historical
1991
Commission, Austin.
Perttula, Timothy K.
1989

Contact and Interaction between Caddoan and European Peoples: The Historic
Archaeological and Ethnohistorical Records. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of
Washington, Seattle.

Peterson, Harold L.
1956

Arms and Armor in Colonial America 1526-1783. Stackpole, Harrisburg.

Ramenofsky, Ann F.
1987
Vectors of Death: The Archeology of European Contact. University of New
Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

Bruseth -- Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition

97

Schambach, Frank F.
1989
The End of the Trail: The Route of Hemando De Soto’s Army through
Southwest Arkansas and East Texas. The Arkansas Archeologist 27/28:9-33.
Simmons, Marc, and Frank Turley
1980
Southwestern Colonial Ironwork, The Spanish Blacksmithing Tradition from
Texas to California. Museum of New Mexico Press, Santa Fe.
Smith, Marvin T.
1987
Archeology ofA boriginal Culture Change in the Interior Southeast, Depopulation during the Early ttistoric Period. University of Florida Press, Gainesville.
Smith, Marvin T., and Mary Elizabeth Good
1982

EarlySixteenthCenturyGlassBeadsintheSpanishCoIonialTrade.Cottonlandia
Museum Publications, Greenwood, Mississippi.

Sudbury, Byron
A Sixteenth Century Spanish Colonial Trade Bead from Western Oklahoma.
1984
Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society 33:31-36.
Swanton, John R.
1939

Final Report of the United States De Soto Expedition Commission. 76th
Congress, 1st Session, House Document, no. 71. Government Printing Office,
Washington, D.C..

Thomas, David Hurst (Editor)
1990

Columbian Consequences, Archeological and Historical Perspectives on the
SpanishBorderlandsEast, Volume 2. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington,
D.C.

Thurmond, J. Peter
1990

Archeology of the Cypress Creek Drainage Basin Northeastern Texas and
Northwestern Louisiana. Studies in Archeology 5, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas.

Turner, Robert L.
1978
The Tuck Carpenter Site and Its Relation to Other Sites within the Titus Focus.
Bulletin of the Texas ArcheoIogical Society 49:1-110.
Vamer, John, and Jeanette Vamer (translators and editors)
1951

The Florida of the Inca. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Wedel, Waldo R.
1959
An Introduction to Kansas Archeology. Bureau ofAmerican Ethnology, Bulletin 174. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

99

Spanish Exploration of the Texas Coast, 1519-1800
Robert S. Weddle

ABSTRACT
Spanish exploration of the Texas coast began with the voyage of Alonso
Alvarez de Pineda in 1519. In the early stages, it was sporadic, o ften accidental, and
frequently tragic. The purposeful exploration began in 1685 with news that a
French colony had been established in Spanish territory. Eventually found on
Garcitas Creek above Lavaca B ay, the colony had been destroyed by the Karankawas.
Fear of foreign intrusion remained the primary motivation for Spanish exploration
of the Texas coast throughout most of the Colonial period. The Karankaw an tribes,
who held the barrier islands along file middle Texas coast until their strength was
eroded by the Comanches and encroaching Europeans, were the greatest deterrent
to Spanish control. Despite the m any recormais s ance expeditions recounted herein,
no Spanish port worthy of the name ever was developed on the Texas coast.
Modern research, aided by wider accessibility of sources, is chipping away at
some of the myths and misconceptions that have muddled the historiography of
Texas’s earliest episodes of discovery and exploration. The idea that Alonso
Alvarez de Pineda sailed up the Rio Grande in 1519, for example, is gradually being
put to rest. Similarly, the claims that he named this river the Rfo de las Palmas and
that Francisco de Garay attempted a settlement at its mouth are being abandoned by
more-knowledgeable historians.
The basis for such revision is found in the works of sixteenth century writers
such as Bernal Dfaz del Castillo (1955, Vol. 2:104) and Peter Martyr (Martff de
Angleria 1944:523-527, 569-583), as well as a few scattered documents of the
period. These sources make it clear that the name Rfo de las Palmas first designated
the Rfo Soto la Marina and that the river ascended by Alvarez de Pineda actually was
the P~nuco.
The myth that Cabeza de Vaca traversed the heart of Texas on his trek westward
is being surrendered more grudgingly; it has become increasingly clear that he
actually crossed the lower Rfo Grande and traveled through northern Mexico
(Chipman 1987:127-148). Other new interpretations associated with the Narvzfez
expedition are being offered also: that Cabeza de Vaca’s initial landing was not on
Galveston Island but at Follett’s Island (now a peninsula) just to the west; that
Narv~iez himself, instead of being lost at the mouth of the Mississippi, disappeared
into the Gulf after anchoring at Matagorda Bay.
Hernando de Soto’s men, seeking the Rfo P~inuco by sea in 1543 as Narv~iez had
done 15 years previously, narrowly escaped a similar disaster--being tossed on to
the Texas shore by heavy seas. After caulking their crude bergantines with tar like
that which still wshes up on Texas beaches from natural seeps, Soto’s men entered
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 63 (1992)

100

Texas Archeological Society

two Texas bays "six leagues" apart. They therefore appear to have been the first
Europeans to explore Matagorda and Corpus Christi bays (Smith 1968:189).
Modem scholarship brings out the fact that the Soto expedition was not quite the
dead end that earlier writers assumed it to be. It had considerable influence on later
entradas in the Southeast, especially that of Trist,Sn de Luna y Arellano, and led
indirectly to further exploration of the Texas coast.
Perhaps the greatest confusion of all surrounded the wreck of three Spanish
merchant ships in 1554. Due largely to Agustfn Dfivila Padilla (1596:273), a
Dominican friar who wrote in the sixteenth century, the disaster was long presumed
to have occurred on the Florida peninsula in 1553. The ultimate proof to the contrary
developed in the the 1960s when treasure hunters discovered the remains of one of
the ships off Padre Island, near Port Mansfield. Subsequent archeological and
historical research by the Texas Antiquities Committee resulted in discovery of the
wreckage of the other two ships and established proof of their identity (Arnold and
Weddle 1978).
The shipwrecks, combined with reports of the Soto entrada, influenced Tristfin
de Luna y Arellano’s attempt to form a settlement at Pensacola Bay (Ranjel 1557).
To find the most appropriate site, Viceroy Luis de Velasco sent Guido de Lavazares
to explore the coast from the Rfo de las Palmas (Soto la Marina River) to the Florida
peninsula. On the Texas coast, in latitude 28°30’, Lav~ares discovered a large bay,
which he named San Francisco, and went ashore to take possession for the Spanish
Crown (Lavazares 1558). This appears to have been Matagorda Bay, which he
found to be shallow and uninviting--an assessment that La Salle was to prove more
than a century later.
The shipwrecks of 1554 also provided the excuse for Luis de Carvajal y de la
Cueva to enter Texas in 1572 from Nuevo Lern, to punish the coastal Indians for
their "many murders, robberies, and other crimes on ships that have wrecked there"
by taking them captive and selling them into slavery (Weddle 1985:337). This, from
all accounts, was the first Spanish expedition to cross the lower Rfo Grande into the
present state of Texas. Carvajal, who held a concession to all previously unclaimed
territory 200 leagues north and west of Tampico, made slave raiding his main
business, and he probably entered Texas on several occasions to take slaves. The
enmity he created among the coastal Indians erected a barrier that few dared
penetrate for more than a century and a half. In consequence, the approach to Texas,
after considerable delay, would be made by way of a long overland trail through
Coahuila.
Instances of sixteenth century European contact with the Texas coast were
sporadic, often accidental, and usually associated with tragedy. They he!ped to flesh
out the New World map, but they contributed little toward eventual settlement. The
more purposeful explorations began in 1685 with reports that La Salle had planted
a French colony on the Gulf Coast somewhere between Apalachee Bay and
Tampico. Thenceforth, to the end of the Colonial period, Spanish attention to the
coast was most often motivated by fear of foreign intrusion (Faulk 1964:113). Such
motivation even entered into the humanitarian concern for rescuing shipwreck

Weddle ~ Spanish Exploration of the Texas Coast, 1519-1800

101

victims from the reputedly cannibalistic Karankawan tribes, for the castaways often
were foreigners. At the same time, thorough coastal exploration, and hence effective
settlement and development, was held in check by those same Indians, who reigned
supreme on the barrier islands between Galveston and Corpus Christi bays.
Just how little had been learned of the northern Gulf coast by La Salle’s time
is demonstrated by the bewilderment with which Spanish officials approached the
task of finding the intruders, and French knowledge was certainly no better than
Spanish. As ably demonstrated by Peter Wood (1984:294-323), it was just such a
lack of knowledge--and not secret design or navigational error--that caused La
Salle’s misplaced landing on the Texas coast rather than at the mouth of the
Mississippi River.
The Spanish search for La Salle comprised six expeditions by land and five by
sea and lasted more than three years. As officials in Mexico City began planning the
effort, they confronted their own ignorance. Information that La Salle had reached
the Gulf of Mexico from Canada via a river called "Michipipi" served only to
confuse; the name meant nothing to the Spaniards. It was surmised that this river was
the same as the one shown on maps since Alvarez de Pineda’s time as the Rfo del
Espfritu Santo, but no one could be found who had visited it (Weddle 1973:24-25;
1991:42).
In January 1686, Juan Enrfquez Barroto and Antonio Romero, both senior
captains and pilots of the Armada de Barlovento, sailed from Havana to seek the Rfo
del Espfritu Santo, supposing it to be the place ofLa Salle’s landing. Reaching the
mouth of the Mississippi, they failed to find any clue to the Frenchmen’s whereabouts. On their recommendation, two shallow-draftpiraguas, suitable for entering
shallow bays and inlets, were built for the next voyage, which left Veracruz on
Christmas Day, 1686. In the interim, the sargento mayor Alonso de Le6n had led
two overland expeditions from Cadereyta in Nuevo Le6n, first to the mouth of the
Rfo Grande, then across southern Texas to Baffin Bay. Both marches bore negative
results (Le6n et al. 1961:194-203).
With captains Martfn de Rivas and Pedro de Iriarte in command of the two
piraguas, Enrfquez and Romero sailed as pilots. Enrfquez, as chief pilot on the
command vessel, kept the expedition diary. This document, which details a
complete circumnavigation of the Gulf of Mexico, has a special significance for
Texas. It relates not only the finding of the wreckage of La Salle’s ships, but also
the exploration of the principal Texas bays and river mouths, of which there had
been no previous account. The origin of many of the names for Texas coastal
landmarks that appeared on maps for the next century (Figure 1)--some even to the
present--are found in this diary (Enrfquez Barroto 1687:149-206 [see Weddle
1987]).
The diary reveals that the voyagers sounded the mouth of the Rfo Grande on
March 14, 1687, while naked natives with bows strung menaced from the beach.
Reaching Aransas Pass, they sounded the bar and gave the name Rfo de San Jos6ph
to the lagoon behind the barrier islands. A shore party exchanged gifts--tobacco
and beads for fish--with bald and tattooed natives whom Enrfquez identified as

102

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Piano del lago de San Bernardo. This map uses Enr~quez B arroto’s names for Texas
Coastal features correctly, with the exception of R~o de Flores. In some respects it resembles
the work of Manuel de C~rdenas, who mapped the Matagorda Bay complex in 1690, but
neither author nor date has been established (from the Museo Naval, Madrid). The key along
the top of the map reads as follows: A. Estero de Juan Sordo; B. Guadalupe; C. Estero de
Guadalupe; D.Buena Vista; E. Pueblos de los Franceses; F. Rio de Idem; G. Rio de Sn.
Marcos; H. Rio del Spiritu Sto.; I. Lago de Idem; J. Lago de todos Santos; K. Lago de Sn.
Bernardo; L. Punta de Culebras; M. Rio de la Trinidad; N. Punta de Sn. Francisco; O. Boca
Chica; P. Barra de Sibolas; Q. Rio de Flores.

Pelones. The Indians offered arrows with the tips removed as peace tokens, but the
Tamaholipa interpreters brought from Tampico could not converse with them.
March 30 was Easter S unday--the Pasqua Florida or Pasqua de Flores. As the
two small vessels passed between barrier islands to anchor in a "large bay,"
EnrQuez Barroto named the passage R~o de Flores. It is identifiable today as Cedar
Bayou, which divides San Josd and Malagorda islands, where La Salle had first put
his soldiers ashore more than two years previously. It was here that the voyagers
found the first sign of the invading Frenchmen--ship fittings recovered from an
abandoned Indian canoe.
On April 3, the piraguas anchored off Decros Point, Matagorda Peninsula’s
western tip, at 28°23’N. Close at hand, Pass Cavallo opened into Matagorda Bay,

Weddle ~ Spanish Exploration of the Texas Coast, 1519-1800

103

which Lav~ares in 1558 had named Bahfa de San Francisco. It now was named Rfo
de San Bernardo, for the feast day of Saint Bernard. The leeward point, southwest
of the entrance to the bay, was named San Francisco; the opposite point was called
Punta de Culebras for its many snakes.
Three leagues up the peninsula, the explorers found the wreckage ofLa Salle’s
barkBelle and salvaged usable items of rigging and ordnance. Guided by a captured
English pirate called Juan Poule, who had been there previously, the ships explored
most of the bay and probably passed Sand Point to enter Lavaca Bay. But signs of
La Salle’s fort, abandoned the previous January to a feeble contingent of maimed
and misfits, eluded them.
Along the west bayshore, the explorers encountered Indians "of large stature and very robust of limb," who refused an invitation to board the vessel
(Enrfquez Barroto 1687:174). When the Spaniards sought to use forcible persuasion, one of the Karankawas attacked with a knife and gave shouts that
brought a shower of arrows from his companions. Spanish musket fire soon put
the Indians to flight.
All in all, the Rivas-Iriarte expedition found Matagorda Bay much the same as
Lavazares had: shallow and uninviting, little more than two fathoms deep anywhere. Surely any Frenchmen who had attempted to land here had met with disaster.
The searchers sailed east on April 10, giving coastal features the names by
which they were to be identified on various European maps for years to come: Caney
Creek was called Boca Chica; the San Bernard River, Rfo de Zfvoras (Cfbolas); San
Luis Pass, Rfo de Santa Suzana. Indians seen along the way were friendly and had
no fear of firearms, indicating that they had never before encountered Europeans.
Discouraged by the shoals surrounding the mouth of Galveston Bay, the
mariners named it Rfo Bajo ("Shoal River") and sailed on. So far, the diarist
observed, the Texas coast had exhibited
only saltwater lagoons and barren sand dunes along a treacherous coast
offering no ports and no prospect for shipwreck victims but torture and
death at the hands of barbarous Indians [Enrfquez Barroto 1687:178].
The Sabine River, discharging a current of fresh water, was named Rfo Dulce.
Judging it too shallow to have interested La Salle, the voyagers gave it scant
attention. Among the Atakapa Indians on the Calcasieu River they found two
castaways from a Spanish privateer galley and through them heard news that caused
them to turn back and explore further.
The castaways were a Mexican youth named Nicolfis de Vargas and an
Apalachino Indian from San Luis de Apalache in Florida. They had deserted the
galley after the captain died and the surviving remnant of the crew ate the corpses
of their shipmates. The Indians supplied what was taken as a possible sequel to the
tale: they had seen on a river to the west a wrecked ship, which the natives of that
vicinity had burned to get nails for tipping their arrows. The men from the ship, they
said, had acquired horses from the Indians; the Atakapa had seen them hunting
buffalo on horseback with firearms, but the mariners had since gone inland. Such

104

Texas Archeological Society

news might have pertained to the missing Spanish galley or to La Salle’s colonists.
In either case, it had to be investigated.
Returning to Sabine Pass, the piraguas entered in six fathoms but found the
channel pinched in by oyster banks half a league upstream. They inched forward
another quarter league through a narrow passage of three fathoms toward the lee
shore before the channel played out altogether. Within sight of Sabine Lake, they
maneuvered with oars to a mud-bottomed anchorage of twelve spans. Not even the
canoes could go farther.
Indians who had come on foot from the Calcasieu then appeared to advise them
that this was the wrong river; they had meant the next river to the west. With one
of the Indians as guide, the Spaniards proceeded to make the first recorded
exploration of Galveston Bay. The guide directed them to a wooded promontory
two leagues from the bay mouth, where he claimed to have seen the white buffalo
hunters encamped. Ensign Francisco Aldama followed the Indian two leagues
inland to a cluster of dome-shaped native huts, long since abandoned. The explorers
at last concluded that the guide was lying; it appeared that the natives of this region
had destroyed both the ship and the starving remnant of the crew. As for La Salle,
his ships must have been lost in a storm; his colonists had surely perished from
starvation (Enrfquez Barroto 1687:195,196).
The Rivas-Pez voyage, making a complete circumnavigation of the Gulf of
Mexico, was overdue by the time it returned to Veracruz. Two frigates, commanded
by captains Francisco L6pez de Gamarra and Andr6s de Pez, had been sent to look
for the piraguas. Although the reconnaissance was repeated, the size of the ships
precluded the minute coastal examination made by the smaller vessels (G6mez
Raposo 1944:149).
In August 1688, the two piraguas, captained by Rivas and Pez, made another
voyage to the Texas shore. The captains sent canoes exploring up the Rfo Grande
for five days, then proceeded to Matagorda Bay, where they found the derelictBelle
virtually destroyed by the elements. They coasted the entire bay, went ashore to kill
a buffalo, and bartered with the Karankawas for fish but received no news of the
French colonists playing out the tragic drama of Fort Saint-Louis’s final days
(Fernzindez Carrasco 1688).
La Salle’s ruined settlement, victim of a recent massacre, was found by Alonso
de Le6n on his overland march from Coahuila on April 22, 1689. Only half a dozen
children who were living among the Karankawas and a handful of colonists who had
accompanied La Salle on his fatal march to the Hasinai Caddo of eastern Texas
remained alive. The captured French children, whose parents were Lucien and
Isabelle Talon, were taken to Mexico City to be reared as servants in the viceroy’s
household. It was they who eventually gave the only eyewitness account of the
massacre and the fate of the Barbier infant, the first white child born on the Texas
coast; after the mother was slain, a Karankawa warrior seized the baby by the heels
and bashed its head against a tree (Talon 1698:237). Two of the Talon brothers,
repatriated and returning to America with the Sieur d’Iberville, were yet to have a
part in exploring the Texas coast.

Weddle -- Spanish Exploration of the Texas Coast, 1519-1800

105

Le6n, reaching La Salle’s colony, assumed that he had found the Bahfa del
Espfritu Santo, where La Salle was supposed to have settled. He therefore gave that
name to the Matagorda Bay complex. Thenceforth, the bay complex had two names:
Espfritu Santo and San Bernardo, the name given to it by the Rivas-Iriarte
expedition. Today, the lagoon between Matagorda Island and the mainland is called
Espfritu Santo Bay.
La Salle’s incursion gave rise to Spain’s defensive posture on the northern
frontier and resulted in the founding of the first Franciscan missions in eastern Texas
in 1690. Later the same year, Captain Francisco de Llanos commanded a voyage to
map Matagorda Bay, with Manuel Jos6ph Cfirdenas y Magafia as mapmaker (Llanos
1690). Cfirdenas’s map of the bay complex (Weddle 1973:Plate 11) was a landmark.
Carlos de Sigtienza y G6ngora, meanwhile, had taken Le6n’s field notes and
Enrfquez Barroto’s coastal chart and produced a map ofLe6n’s route from Coahuila
and the coast from the Rfo Bravo to East Matagorda Bay. He gave currency to the
place names assigned by Le6n and Enrfquez. Although present-day cartophiles tend
to discount the Spanish contribution to mapping the New World, the influence of
Sig~ienza and especially Enrfquez Barroto on French maps of the Gulf coast is
indisputable. Guillaume Delisle, the renowed mapmaker, owed them a great debt
(Jackson et al. 1990).
The primary focus of Spanish exploration and mapping of the Texas coast so
far had been Matagorda Bay, somewhat apart from the area chosen for settlement.
Reports of French penetration of Caddoan territory from the east caused the
Spaniards to believe that the immediate threat lay in that direction. Additionally, the
Hasinai seemed infinitely more promising as prospects for conversion than the
hostile Karankawan tribes. For such reasons Spanish missions were founded in the
pine-forested region of present-day Houston County in 1690 (see Corbin 1991).
Following the abortive expedition of Domingo Terfin de los Rfos, the first man
titled governor of Texas, in 1691-1692, to reinforce and extend the East Texas
missions, the enterprise was abandoned. The exposed Texas coast was forgotten-until a new French threat appeared. Events farther east, meanwhile, set the stage for
renewed Spanish-French confrontation in Texas. The Spaniards held Pensacola,
while the French became entrenched at Mobile. With Philip of Anjou--the French
king Louis XIV’s grandson--on the Spanish throne, the Spanish colonials were
checkmated in their desire to push the Frenchmen out. France and Spain joined
forces against England in the War of the Spanish Succession. Then, in 1714, the
French trader Louis Juchereau de Saint-Denis appeared out of the Texas wilderness
at the Spanish post of San Juan Bautista de Rfo Grande, guided by two of the Talon
brothers. The time had come, Spanish officials decided, to reassert their claim to
eastern Texas. While they did so in 1716, the French set up shop at Natchitoches.
Saint-Denis, playing his own game, had maneuvered both nations like chess men
to attain his goal of having French and Spanish settlements close enough to each
other for trade (Weddle 1991:196).
The death in 1715 of Louis XIV terminated the Family Compact by which
France and Spain were bound to each other. The two nations were restored to

106

Texas Archeological Society

their traditional posture as colonial adversaries. The establishment of New
Orleans by the French in 1718 was matched by the Spaniards’ founding of San
Antonio. There followed Texas Governor Martfn de Alarc6n’s inspection of his
jurisdiction, including the area around Matagorda Bay. Reaffirming the Spanish
claim, he visited the Fort Saint-Louis site and "took lawful possession (in King
Philip’s name) of all the bays, lakes, and neighboring lands in the manner
required" (C61iz 1935:66-67).
All this was with a view to occupying the bay, to which the French still laid
claim on the basis of La Salle’s intrusion. The War of the Quadruple Alliance,
erupting in ’1719, again focused French attention on Matagorda Bay, but two
expeditions sent to explore it failed to find it. Captain Jean B6ranger sailed past it
in 1720 to explore Aransas Bay instead. The following year, B&anger as ship
captain took Jean-Baptiste B~nard, Sieur de La Harpe, to occupy La Salle’s old site
but landed instead at Galveston Bay (Weddle 1991:216-223). In the meantime, the
Marquis de San Miguel de Aguayo, Alarc6n’s successor, sent troops to begin the
founding in 1721 of Presidio de Nuestra Sefiora de Loreto de la BaMa on the Fort
Saint-Louis site. Mission Nuestra Sefiora del Espfritu Santo de Zfifiiga was founded
nearby the following year. Aguayo, on his visit in 1722, sketched a crude map of the
bay (captioned Mar Ancho del Seno Mexicano), showing the relative locations of
the presidio and the mission (Weddle 1973:Plate 12).
The specific role of Presidio de la Bahfa was to guard the coastal region against
foreign invasion, while supporting the nearby mission for the Karankawan tribes.
Yet the garrison acquired little knowledge of the coast beyond its immediate
environs. The lack of vigor in exploring the territory is exemplified by the
commandant Juan Antonio Bustillo y Ceballos, who in 1725 was ordered to seek a
more suitable site for the mission and presidio. Instead of making a reconnaissance,
he chose a convenient spot on the Guadalupe River near the San Juan Bautista road
(above present-day Victoria) and borrowed from the faulty Aguayo map for his
report. Halving the distance from the old site to the new, he placed the new location
only three or four leagues farther from the mouth of Espfritu Santo Bay and claimed
the bay could be reached by descending the Guadalupe (Bustillo y Ceballos 1726).
More-accurate information was soon to be compiled, only to be lost in the maze
of official files. In November 1727, Pedro de Rivera arrived at La Bahfa on his
presidial inspection tour aimed at economizing and correcting abuses. Rivera’s own
report (1945:116) notwithstanding, the most significant coastal data came from a
map by his young military engineer, Francisco Alvarez Barreiro. From La Bahfa,
Rivera sent Alvarez Barreiro with twenty soldiers of that post and San Antonio de
B6xar"to explore the coast, ports, bays, lagoons, and land between this presidio and
the Neches River" (Rivera 1945:123). The engineer spent 35 days and logged 363
miles in making the most comprehensive exploration of the upper Texas coast to that
time.
The extent of Alvarez Barreiro’s reconnaissance is shown on his map, Plano
corographico e hidrographico (Weddle 1991:242-243), which gives many of the
river courses and locations of Indian villages and mission settlements. It depicts the

Weddle ~ Spanish Exploration of the Texas Coast, 1519.1800

107

entire Texas coast, including the barrier islands, with relative accuracy, representing
a significant milestone in coastal cartography.
Alvarez Barreiro’s errors were to be repeated, even after the map itself was
superseded. The map of Jos6 Antonio de Alzate y Ramfrez (Martin and Martin
1982), published in Madrid in 1768, leans heavily upon the Piano, repeating
conceptions outdated by twenty years. In the interim, Joaqufn Orobio Basterra, as
commandant of La Bahfa on the Guadalupe, explored the coast in both directions.
In July 1745, in response to rumors of a French landing near the mouth of the Trinity,
he was ordered to reconnoiter the coast east ofLa Bahfa, a sector of which he seems
to have known little or nothing---Alvarez Barreiro’s reconnaissance notwithstanding. Setting out in October to explore the Matagorda Bay area, he turned back
because of flooded coastal marshes. He then sent a detail down the Guadalupe to see
if it could be navigated to its mouth, which he believed to be in Matagorda Bay, that
he might proceed thence along the coast in dugout canoes. In less than a day’s travel,
the soldiers found the river too choked with drifts to proceed.
Orobio, with soldiers from San Antonio de B6xar and San Juan Bautista, set out
up the Camino Real in January 1746. At the Trinity River crossing, at least 140 miles
from the river’s mouth, the local Indians advised against following the river
downstream as he had intended. He traveled on to Nacogdoches and Los Adaes.
Along the way, his fears of foreign invaders were exacerbated by reports that
actually pertained to the French ship Superbe, wrecked at the mouth of Matagorda
Bay the previous May. While Orobio chased rumors, two-thirds of Superbe’s
castaways, walking toward Tampico, were slain by Indians (Weddle 1991:253).
From Los Adaes, near present-day Robeline, Louisiana, Orobio marched
southwest for almost a month to reach several Bidai rancher[as. It was among the
Bidai that he learned of the French disaster and of a search party from New Orleans
that had withdrawn out of fear of the Karankawan tribes. He learned also that French
traders were making inroads among the Akokisa via the Trinity, Neches, and Brazos
rivers. The Spaniards traveled"west by southwest" among the Akokisa habitations,
supposedly on the San Jacinto River, seeking further sign of the elusive foreigners.
Finding little, they returned to La Bahfa along a more direct route (Orobio Basterra
1746).
In 1747, Orobio Basterra was called upon to lead a Texas troop in Jos6 de
Escand6n’s multipronged exploration of the region that was to make up the colony
of Nuevo Santander. With 50 soldiers from La Bahfa and Los Adaes, he spent two
weeks in January exploring along the San Antonio River, seeking a new site for
Presidio de la Bahfa and Mission Espfritu Santo, which Escand6n hoped would be
the northern anchor for the new colony. He chose the site on the San Antonio, at
present-clay Goliad, called Santa Dorotea. This river, he reported, flowed into
Espfritu Santo Bay (actually San Antonio Bay), "six leagues" away--another
example of faulty understanding of the immediate territory--where a good anchorage offered the means of supplying the settlement and guarding the coast. Then, on
February 16, the explorers struck south to traverse the proposed Nuevo Santander
region itself.

108

Texas Archeological Society

Reaching the Nueces River, believed until this time to join the Rfo Grande, they
followed it to its mouth to find that it entered a large bay, which was given the name
San Miguel Arcfingel (Escand6n 1747). With its mouth concealed within Corpus
Christi Bay, this was the river shown on maps since the 1520s as Rfo Escondido
("Hidden River"). More than two centuries had been required to reveal it.
As Orobio traveled south through dry country scarcely seen by Europeans since
Cabeza de Vaca, he named the prominent features: La Purfsima Concepci6n (Agua
Dulce Creek), Lago de la Santfsima Trinidad (Baffin Bay), and the salt lakes in
Willacy and Hidalgo counties (Sal Vieja and Sal del Rey), which he called San
Francisco Xavier. From the salt lakes, he turned southwest along a trail occasionally
used by Nuevo Le6n settlers to reach the salines. At the Rfo Grande crossing called
Paso del Cfintaro, above present-day Roma, Orobio received Escand6n’s order to
return to his post.
Orobio, in response to an Akokisa petition for missions, embarked in May 1748
on a new exploration of the upper coast. It was a step toward the eventual founding
of Mission Nuestra Sefiora de la Luz del Orcoquisac (Akokisa) and Presidio de San
Agustfn de Ahumada. Traveling northeast on a course paralleling the coast some 40
miles inland, he was met at the Trinity by an Akokisa band coming up the river in
canoes. Thence he explored downstream, visiting the natives’ small irrigated fields
of corn and vegetables and noting arable lands, abundant timber, and facility of
irrigation from the Trinity. Starting out to explore east from Trinity Bay, he shortly
found himself in an extensive timbered swamp with dense undergrowth--unsuitable
country for a mission site. He turned back to reconnoiter Trinity Bay, the river, and
its tributaries. After choosing a site for the proposed mission on a stream called
Arroyo de Nombre de Dies, he took up the march for his presidio on June 29, still
avoiding the coast between the Trinity and Guadalupe rivers (Orobio Basterra
1748). The Akokisa (or Orcoquisac) mission, however, must await a direct foreign
threat.
In the meantime, the information from Orobio’s reconnaissance was put to use
by Jacinto de Barrios y Jfiuregui, who took office as governor of Texas in 1751. The
data served Barrios’s contraband trade operation, especially when it was threatened
by French interlopers. In 1754, a French trader from Louisiana, Josdph Blancpain,
established a trading post near the mouth of the Trinity. Barrios sent Lieutenant
Marcos Ruiz to arrest Blancpain and his companions, who were sent as prisoners
to Mexico City (Ruiz 1754). The episode touched off a flurry of exploration,
followed by establishment in May or June 1756 of Presidio de San Agustfn.
The post was placed temporarily on the site of Blancpain’s trading post, some
two leagues east of the mouth of the Trinity River, while the Trinity and.San Jacinto
river drainages were explored lk~r a more suitable site. This reconnaissance was
carried on by Domingo del Rfo, Bernardo de Miranda, and Barrios himself. Some
10 leagues west of the San Jacinto and 20 leagues from the coast, Miranda
discovered the springs of Santa Maria del Alcazar and later took to Mexico City the
governor’s recommendation for removal of the post to that location. In the capital,
Miranda sought to inform the viceroy on the lower Trinity by sketching a crude map

Weddle ~ Spanish Exploration of the Texas Coast, 1519-1800

109

(Weddle 1991:299) on which the Mississippi River is made one with the Red; the
San Jacinto is made to flow directly into the G ulf instead of Galveston Bay; and both
the Neches and its tributary, the Angelina, are shown as entering the Gulf, the
Angelina east of the Neches instead of west--evidence that the exploration to date
was far from complete.
Barrios, meanwhile, changed his mind; the presidio stayed where it was until
the hurricane of 1766 forced a short move. Soldiers of the post continued to play a
role in coastal exploration; a road was opened to La Bahfa. But the littoral between
the Trinity and the Guadalupe, so long a concern for the viceroy, remained
unexplored and most of it in the firm grasp of the Karankawan tribes (Weddle
1991:295-301).
At the close of the Seven Years’ War in 1763, France was eliminated from
colonial rivalry. The English, owning all the former Spanish and French territory
east of the Mississippi but the "Isle of Orleans," quickly filled the void as the chief
thorn-in-side for the jealous Spaniards. As rumors of foreign invaders so often
moved the Spaniards to action, it was rumors of an English threat that brought forth
the 1766 exploration of Padre Island.
In 1765, Malaguita Indians from the Padre Island vicinity brought to Mission
San Juan Bautista on the Rfo Grande reports that white invaders were settling on the
"Islas Blancas" near the mouth of the Nueces River. The New Spain viceroy,
Marqu6s de Cruillas, called upon Jos6 de Escand6n, the colonizer of Nuevo
Santander, to report on the Texas barrier islands. To explore these isles of shell sand,
the viceroy called on Diego Ortiz Parrilla, commandant of the Coahuila presidio of
Santa Rosa del Sacramento.
Escand6n sent Captain Blas Marfa de la Garza Falc6n of Camargo and his son
Jos6 Antonio to reconnoiter the coast between the Rfo Grande and Garza Falc6n’s
ranch outpost, Estancia de Santa Petronila, "five leagues" south of Corpus Christi
Bay. The Garza Falc6ns also made a preliminary reconnaissance of Padre Island.
Escand6n received information from a coastal fisherman, who described the "large
pastureland surrounded by lagoons," extending along the coast from the Rfo Grande
to the Nueces River. Only with storm surge, he said, was this area separated from
the mainland; therefore it could not properly be called an island. From the mouth of
the Nueces to the Bahfa del Espfritu Santo (Matagorda Bay), he described a series
of sandbanks that were completely inundated in times of high water (Escand6n
1766).
Ortiz Parrilla’s Coahuila force,.joined by 25 Nuevo Santander soldiers led by
the younger Garza Falc6n, set up camp on September 7, 1766, on the beach referred
to as "Playa de la Bahfa de Corpus Christi," or"Playa de Corpus Christi." There the
company waited out six days of drenching rain and high wind triggered by the
hurricane that ravaged the presidio and mission on the lower Trinity River (Ortiz
Parrilla 1766). Garza Falc6n and the Nuevo Santander soldiers then reconnoitered
the island, crossing the shallow lagoon "two leagues" wide. From Old Corpus
Christi Pass to Brazos Santiago, they trekked over a stoneless strip of barren sand
supporting only small clumps of stunted laurels and willows and a coarse, red grass.

110

Texas Archeological Society

On Brazos Island, amid bits of rigging from ships of all sizes, lay the broken hulk
of a 20-gun English frigate, but no other trace of Europeans (Garza Falc6n et al.
1766). The only Indian signs were abandoned rancherias at the lower end of the
island, where Ortiz Parrilla’s map (1767b) indicates habitations of the Manos de
Perro, Patrines, Piguisas, Pasnaaus, and Malaguitas.
A navigator in the company who had often sailed along the Tamaulipas coast
was surprised to find the area explored not connected to the mainland; this "Isla de
San Carlos de los Malaguitas," as the explorers now called it, was continuous except
for three storm passes, which in times of high water made it appear to be four (Garza
Falc6n et al. 1766).
The floods resulting from the hurricane forced Ortiz Parrilla to take a roundabout route to La Bahia. Arriving at that post with his troop from Coahuila, he
was informed by soldiers just arrived from the devastated Presidio de San Agusffn
that all the coastal lowlands were flooded. Further exploration was well-nigh
impossible. The soldiers gave depositions on the coast from the Nueces to
Galveston Bay, which were submitted with Ortiz Parrilla’s own report (1766,
1767a) and Ortiz Parrilla’s map of the entire coast. The map represents Padre
Island fairly accurately, although Baffin Bay is notably absent, and what appears to be Corpus Christi Bay is separated from the Nueces River. At the lower
end, Brazos Island is in its proper place. Arroyo Colorado, entering the Gulf in
southeastern Willacy County, is called Arroyo de San Miguel. The upper end of
the island, divided by a storm pass, evidently represents Mustang Island. On its
northern tip are shown habitations of the Carancaguases (Karankawas), Copanes
(Copanos), and Piguacasas (Piguiques) (Ortiz Parrilla 1767b). Above Corpus
Christi Bay, Copano Bay appears as Bahfa de Santo Domingo, fronted by a small
island of the same name. Beyond the coastal bend, the coastline is presented
less accurately, and place names assigned previously are wrongly applied. Ortiz
Parrilla contributed to advancement of coastal knowledge, but only for the sector that he had actually visited.
Presidio de San Agustfn was abandoned early in 1771, j ust ahead of the frontier
reorganization plan that ruled it no longer necessary. English traders took advantage
by opening trade with the Akokisa and their neighbors. With such news in July 1772,
the Texas governor, Bar6n de Ripperdzi, ordered out Captain Luis Cazorla, who only
the previous month had assumed command of Presidio de la Bahfa, located since
1749 on the San Antonio River at present-day Goliad.
Cazorla, with 40 men from San Antonio de B6xar, followed the "Orcoquisac"
road toward the abandoned settlement on the Trinity. Among Indian rancherfas of
diverse tribal elements--Karankawa, Coco, Bidai, and Aranam(e)--he observed
much evidence of trade with Europeans. C~orla was prevented from reaching the
mouth of the Trinity by a swamp but got close enough to determine that the river
flowed through Trinity and San Jacinto bays to reach the Gulf (Pichardo 1931,
Volume 1:393-397). On the return trip, he followed the San Jacinto River to its
mouth in Galveston Bay, thus disproving the map concept of both Miranda and Ortiz
Parrilla.

Weddle ~ Spanish Exploration of the Texas Coast, 1519-1800

111

At the Brazos, the explorers groped their way down the left bank to the river’s
entry into the Gulf, near present-day Freeport. About three leagues from the Gulf,
they found the stream divided into two channels half a league apart. A maze of
lagoons, knee-deep on the horses at ebb tide, lay within the fork, spreading out in
an impenetrable thicket. On the beach, the soldiers found a ship’s boat embedded
in the sand and a rotted sea chest containing some rosaries and jewelry and 15 pesos
in Spanish coin: mute testimony to the fate of some luckless ship whose crew had
been swallowed up by the "Cannibal Coast."
Having been the first to explore the mouths of the San Jacinto and Brazos rivers
by land, Cazorla on a 1776 expedition broadened knowledge of the mysterious
barriers whileinvestigating the wreck on Matagorda Island of a ship whose crew had
been murdered by Karankawas. Near the former La Bahfa site on the Guadalupe
River, Cazorla learned from captured natives both the location of the wreck
("Toboso Island") and the identity of the culprits. He found the latter encamped at
the mouth of the Guadalupe, where he surrounded them and seized their canoes.
Sending the horses around the bay, Cazorla embarked in the canoes. The two
groups rendezvoused at the paraje del bergantin, a wharf near the mouth of San
Antonio Bay. Thence, the captain and 21 men crossed the league-wide lagoon on
horseback to reach Matagorda, or Toboso, Island, which C~orla says had not been
visited by Spaniards since 1749. The ship, a deep-draft English commercial frigate,
lay on the beach, having broken up and released her cargo for the natives to plunder.
Amid the wreckage the soldiers found the decomposed body of one English sailor.
Cazorla (1776a), noting the remnants of many ships that littered the beach, deplored
the pitiful misfortunes of the countless ships lost on this coast [where] the
poor sailors fortunate enough to escape the shipwreck fall into the hands
of the heathen Indians... and are victims of their cruelty.
Trying to explain the coastal topography, the captain wrote that Culebra Island
began at "the port called Matagorda" and "according to what they tell me, runs
eastward almost to New Orleans." Toboso Island, extending west from Matagorda
Bay, he said, continued to the mouth of the Nueces River. Citing the difficulty of
reaching the islands by land, he warned that foreigners might penetrate the territory
by ascending the rivers. He proposed clearing the "heathen nations" from the islands
and erecting a fort equipped with a shallow-draft vessel to patrol the coast (Cazorla
1776b). The plan went unheeded.
The Karankawa, having been admonished by Cazorla, informed him when a
French ship was driven by storm upon the Texas coast the following winter. La
Bahfa’s rescue force saved the castaways. But the natives continued their depredations, and others besides Cazorla were advocating their extinction. One of these was
Athanase de M6zi~res, veteran French soldier and trader at Natchitoches, who had
entered Spanish service in 1769. M6zi~res served both Texas and Louisiana as
Indian agent, diplomat, and explorer. Paying scant heed to political nuances, he
sought to solve the problem of the Karankawa tribes’ barrier-island stronghold by
involving Louisiana in exploring the lagoon between islands and mainland and

112

Texas Archeological Society

opening a port on the Texas coast. Louisiana Governor Luis de Unzaga y Amezaga
responded favorably to the M6zi~res plan, and Teodoro de Croix, as
commandant-general of the new Provincias Internas jurisdiction, cleared the way
for this rare instance of cooperation between provinces. The joint expedition sailed
from New Orleans on December 13, 1777, after Bernardo de Gfilvez had succeeded
Unzaga as Louisiana governor.
G~ilvez assigned Luis Antonio Andry, an engineer and captain of the royal
schooner E! Sehor de la Yedra, to explore and map the coast as far asSan Bernardo
(Matagorda) Bay. Andry was accompanied by his young son (a cadet), Isidro Millet
(second officer and pilot), and 11 other sailors. Among the latter were Tom,is de la
Cruz, a Christianized Maya Indian, and a former La Bahfa soldier, Crist6bal G6mez,
who claimed knowledge of the Texas coast and its Indians. The vessel was long
overdue in New Orleans and given up for lost before its actual fate was known.
When at last news came, it was from an unexpected quarter: the Maya Cruz had
turned up as a Karankawa slave (Cabello 1779).
As Cruz told it, Yedra entered Matagorda Bay in March 1778, the exploration
and mapping essentially complete and provisions exhausted. When Indians appeared on shore, G6mez, who knew many of the Indians in this vicinity, volunteered
to lead the shore party; he and four companions expected to obtain food from the
natives for their walk to La Bahfa, where they would get provisions for the ship.
Days passed without word. When the captain fired a signal gun, two Indians
appeared, claiming to be soldiers from La Bahfa. Unsuspecting, Andry brought on
board the apostate Karankawas Josdph Marfa and Mateo, brothers whose trademark
was treachery and murder. They won the mariners’ confidence, and the captain sent
three more men ashore with them to look for the missing men. The two Indians soon
returned without the sailors. Instead, several companions of Jos6ph Marfa and
Mateo suddenly appeared, and the massacre began. Five of the remaining six sailors
were slain (Cabello 1779).
Some four months later, in July 1778, the Indians of Mission Rosario, including
the aged mother of Jos6ph Marfa and Mateo, took flight under the influence of the
two renegades. As they made their way toward their barrier-island refuge, the old
woman could not keep up. Josdph Marfa shot her through with an arrow and left her
body on the trail (Cabello 1779).
Many of the fugitives, pardoned by Governor Ripperdfi, soon returned to the
missions, but Josdph Marfa, Mateo, and a few others remained in the wilds. In
February 1779, Fray Joaqufn de Escobar, minister of Mission Rosario, went to urge
them to come back and found Tomfis de la Cruz, held by Josdph Marfa as his slave.
The renegade surrendered his captive upon the priest’s demand. Cruz recounted the
massacre first to La Bahfa Captain Jos6 Santoja, then to the new Texas governor,
Domingo Cabello.
Proposals for further exploration of the Texas coast, and for subjugation of the
troublesome Karankawas, passed back and forth between Cabello in San Antonio,
Croix in Chihuahua, and G,’ilvez in New Orleans. Mdzi~res offered what may have
been the most feasible plan: a union of the Spanish horse soldiers from the Texas

Weddle ~ Spanish Exploration of the Texas Coast, 1M9-1800

113

presidios and the Louisiana boat crews, each element to function in its accustomed
sphere (Bolton 1914, Volume 2:299-302). But Spain’s entry into the war with
England on the side of the American colonies in May 1779 put the matter on hold.
The Andry affair, however, was by no means forgotten by Bernardo de G~lvez.
Following his successes against the English in West Florida, G~ilvez was elevated
to captain-general of Cuba, Louisiana, and the Floridas. In that capacity, he ordered
Jos6 de Evia to survey and map the Gulf coast from the Florida peninsula to Bahfa
de San Bernardo.
Evia, having begun his reconnaissance on the east, exchanged his schooners at
the Atakapas post on Bayou Teche for smaller craft before proceeding to Texas with
two verchas and two pirogues. In apprehension of the hostile Karankawa groups, the
boats carried 20 well-armed militiamen from the Opelousas post besides Evia’s
regular crew of 36 (Holmes 1968:93). On reaching the Sabine, July 10, 1785, the
captain put his crew on guard against surprise Indian attack and proceeded down the
coast under oar and sail. Buffeted by heavy swells, as Narv~iez’s and Moscoso’s
boats had been, his craft stood in constant danger of being driven on to the lee shore.
Reaching Galveston Bay, Evia perceived its potential as a deep-water port and
postponed his reconnaissance for his return voyage. The boats entered the lagoon
between Galveston Island and the mainland and advanced westward with oar and
sail in four- and five-foot water. They exited through San Luis Pass on the next day
and coasted west in the open sea to San Bernardo Bay.
Aware of the bloody history of Spanish and French encounters with the
Karankawan tribes at this location, Evia doubled his defensive stratagems. An
entrenchment was made around his camp, guarded by the swivel guns. The Indians,
however, appear to have caused no problem.
On July 20, while Domingo de Lemos sounded the bar with the pirogues, Evia
took the other two boats and began mapping the bay. After working around the point
of Matagorda Island (Enrfquez Barroto’s Punta de San Francisco), where La Salle
had made his first camp in 1685, he sailed up the west side of the bay to sketch the
shoreline and trace the inner margin of Matagorda Island. A diminishing larder and
lack of potable water caused the expedition to withdraw on July 22. Next day, they
began mapping Galveston Bay (Figure 2). Finding "good depth", the bar sufficient
for ships drawing 15 to 16 feet, Evia gave it the name it still carries, honoring the
governor and captain-general, Bernardo de Gillvez, who had by this time been made
viceroy of New Spain to succeed his late father (Holmes 1968:102).
After the larder was replenished by a deer hunt, the boats sailed on eastward on
the twenty-sixth in search of fresh water. At the Sabine, the water in the mouth was
brackish; only by difficult rowing through Sabine Lake was fresh water finally
found in the mouth of the Neches River. The Texas reconnaissance ended abruptly
as a heavy thunderstorm forced the boats to get underway at two o’clock in the
morning.
Evia, however, was not yet finished with Texas. In Mexico the following
March to report to Viceroy Gfilvez, he received new orders: to reconnoiter the
coast from Tampico to San Bernardo Bay, with particular attention to the Rfo

114

Texas Archeological Society

,(

Figure 2. I ) lano de la B ahfa de Galveston, by Jos6 de Evia, 1785. Holmes (1968) has a different

Evia map of the bay with a different cartouche but identical configuration. Why Evia chose
the particular English form for the name is a puzzle (Museo Naval, Madrid).

Bravo (R~o Grande), because its course extended from the Interior Provinces.
He sailed from Veracruz on June 5, 1786, with two vessels carrying, besides the
crew, 50 infantrymen of the Zamora and Corona regiments, commanded by
Captain Elfas de Castro--the protection Evia felt was necessary against the coastal
Indians. Gathering additional support as he ascended the coast to Tampico, he

Weddle ~ Spanish Exploration of the Texas Coast, 1519-1800

115

had a schooner, a coastal vessel (barco de la costa), a launch, and four canoes
(alternately called piraguas).
At Altamira, Castro recruited 20 mounted men to follow the expedition along
the beach. The canoes sailed close to shore to sound the coast and sketch its
outline; the larger vessels stayed farther out. Nearing the mouth of the Rio
Grande, the explorers were met by 25 cavalrymen from the upriver settlements
of Reynosa and Camargo, who were to be their escort on the Texas coast. The
boatmen sounded 7 to 10 feet of water over the bar, four fathoms within; the
river was 120 varas (330 feet) wide at the mouth and at seven leagues upstream.
After registering the Barra de Santiago (Brazos Santiago), the boats proceeded
northward along Padre Island. Among fragments of ships wrecked here or
brought by the current, Evia recognized part of the DragOn, on which he had
once sailed; the vessel had been wrecked on Bajo Nuevo in the Bay of Campeche
more than three years previously.
In observed latitude 28°10’N on August 11, the piraguas entered a bay that,
according to the natives, was called Corpus Christi. The coastal pilots of Nuevo
Santander informed the captain that the Nueces River emptied into the bay. Evia
identified the pass as "the one they call Caballos," resembling that of Bahia de
San Bemardo (Holmes 1968:183). To the northwest was Lago (Rio) de San Jos6,
so named by Enrfquez Barroto in 1686. Thence, the boats sailed northeastward
along the barrier island to the point where they had turned back the previous
year; there, the boats turned back toward the Rio Grande.
The time alloted for Evia’s voyage was much too short to permit a complete survey, so his efforts were directed at the bays that offered possibilities for
navigation. The reconnaissance nevertheless was a milestone. Evia’s map data
were useful to others, including Juan de Lingara on his well-known map of the
Louisiana-Texas coast, which came in for considerable attention from 1804 to
1821 in the attempt to unravel the Louisiana boundary question (Holmes
1968:26).
Even before Spain’s retrocession of Louisiana to France and France’s sale
of the territory to the United States, the matter of the boundary between Louisiana and Texas focused attention on the Gulf Coast. In 1789, the commandant
at Natchitoches, Luis Carlos de Blanc, proposed extending his jurisdiction to
the Sabine River. The matter was dragged through official channels until 1791,
when the viceroy, the second Conde de Revillagigedo, issued orders for exploring Texas and its coasts with a view to opening commerce between the two
provinces and redrawing the boundary. The reconnaissance was to begin at
"Espfritu Santo Bay" and proceed to
the coast of that of San Bernardo and the adjacent small islands where
live the Indios Carancaguases [Karankawas] and other roving bands
who locate their rancherfas on them, as well as on the mainland.
And so on to the Trinity River and "the port to which the pilot Jos6 Ant.
Evia gave the name of Galveston" (Revi!lagigedo 1791).

116

Texas Archeological Society

\

/’\
\

/

/

f

:

!~ LA PROU~N 37~ ~ T~XAS~

Figure 3. Plano Geografyco de la Prouyncya de Texas, "by disposition of Subinspector
Colonel" Fdlix Calleja, 1807. Calleja became New Spain’s viceroy (1813-1816). The map,

Weddle n Spanish Exploration of the Texas Coast, 1519-1800

117

which reflects little knowledge of previous explorations, creates more confusion than it
dispels (Archivo Histdrico Nacional, Madrid).

118

Texas Archeological Society

The plan had many worthy objectives: the opening of a Texas port, fortifying
San Bernardo Bay to curb the ravages of the Karankawas, detailed mapping of
the region, and much more, including consideration of the boundary change. A
1793 Crown decision against shifting the provincial boundary seems to have
ended the matter. Already, the Mission Nuestra Sefiora del Refugio had been
founded for the Karankawans and Aranames near the mouth of San Antonio Bay.
The site had been chosen following Fray Jos6 Francisco Garza’s reconnaissance
of the coast from Lavaca Bay to the mouth of the Nueces River. In July 1793,
Juan Cort6s, the La Bahfa commandant, inspected the new mission’s environs
with special attention to the Indians’ retreat on Toboso Island from San Antonio
Bay to the "Port of Matagorda." He found Matagorda Bay to be too shallow to
accommodate even packet boats or smacks. The island--"more appropriately
called Purgatory"--was without potable water or forage and swarming with
blood-sucking mosquitoes (Cort6s 1793). Two years later, the mission moved
inland, to present-day Refugio, Texas, where it functioned until 1828.
Mission Refugio, combining its efforts with those of missions Rosario and
Espfritu Santo, was not an unqualified success at solving the problem of the
coastal tribes. Neither was it an outright failure. By 1804, "very few runaway
families" remained of those who traditionally inhabited the barrier islands and
blocked Spanish efforts to control the Texas coast. The trouble caused by these
apostates had virtually ceased (John 1991:174). To Spanish coastal exploration,
the Karankawans had provided one of the principal motivations (surpassed only
by that of preventing foreign intrusion) and also the greatest obstacle.
No port worthy of the name was ever developed on the Texas coast during
Spain’s tenure. The Spaniards, in fact, were ambivalent about the developmnent
of ports and settlement of the coast, which would have facilitated contraband
trade and helped to spread knowledge of Spanish possessions abroad. The jealousy with which the Spaniards sought to keep knowledge of their territories from
other nations may also have kept it from their own; information on earlier explorations seems seldom to have been on tap when it was needed (Figure 3).
With the fading of the native menace, the expeditions of the Spaniards most
often made coastal reconnaissance in response to rumors of foreign intrusion-sometimes groundless, sometimes not. The knowledge that came from such
efforts fell short of giving them mastery of the coast. Invaders--Napoleonic
exiles, freebooters, filibusters, and revolutionaries--persisted to the end.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This paper was made possible through the assistance of a research grant from
the National Endowment for the Humanities. The grant, which enabled the author
to work in the principal archives of Spain, was awarded for his larger study of
discovery and exploration encompassing the entire Gul for Mexico, from which this
paper is drawn.

Weddle J Spanish Exploration of the Texas Coast, 1519-1800

119

REFERENCES CITED
Abbreviations
AGI

Archivo General de Indias, Sevilla

AGN

Archivo General y Pfblico de la Naci6n

BTHC

Barker Texas History Center, University of Texas at Austin

PI

Provincias Internas, in AGN

Arnold, J. Barto III, and Robert S. Weddle
The Nautical Archeology of Padre Island: The Spanish Shipwrecks of 1554.
1978
Academic Press, New York.
Bolton, Herbert Eugene (editor)
1914
Athanase de Mdzikres and the Louisiana-Texas Frontier, 1768-1780. Two
volumes. Arthur H. Clark, Cleveland.
Bustillo y Ceballos, Juan Antonio
1726
June 18. Letter to the viceroy. AGN, PI 236, BTHC transcript.
Cabello, Domingo
1779
March 20. Extract o frepor t. In: Concesion de una pension a la viuda de d. Ysidro
Millet, Madrid, March 18, 1791. AGI, Audiencia de Mexico, legajo 1160, no.
223.
Cazorla, Luis
1776a June 5. Diario. AGN, PI 99, BTHC transcript.
1776b

June 12. Letter to viceroy. AGN, PI 99, BTHC transcript.

C6liz, Francisco
DiaryoftheAIarc6nExpeditionintoTexas,1718-1719.TranslatedbyFritzLe°
1935
Hoffmann. The Quivira Society, Los Angeles.
Chipman, Donald E.
In Search of Cabeza de Vaca’s Route across Texas: An Historiographical
1987
Survey. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 91(2):127-148.
Corbin, James E.
1991
Retracing the Camino de los Tejas from the Trinity River to Los Adaes: New
Insights into East Texas History. In: A TexasLegacy: The OldSanAntonio Road
and the Camino Reales. A Tricentennial History, 1691-1991, edited by A.
Joachim McGraw, John W. Clark, Jr., and Elizabeth A. Robbins, pp. 191-219.
Texas State Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Austin.
Cortfis, Juan
1793
Aug. 23. Report to Manuel Mufioz. B~xar Archives, BTHC.

120

Texas Archeological Society

D~ivila Padilla, Agusffn
1596
Histdria de la fundacidn y discurso de la provincia de Santiago de Mexico,
de la Orden de Predicadores, por las vidas de sus varones insignes y casos
notables de Nueva Espaha. Pedro Madrigal, Madrid.

Dfaz del Castillo, Bernal
Historia verdadera de la conquista de la Nueva Espaha. 2 volumes. Editorial
1955
Porrua, Mexico City.
Enrfquez B arroto, Juan
1687
Diary of the Voyage. In: La Salle, the Mississippi, and the Gulf: Three Primary
Documents (1987), edited by Robert S. Weddle, pp. 149-205. Texas A&M
University Press, College Station.
Escand6n, Jos6 de
1747
October 28, Queretaro. Letter to viceroy. AGN, PI 179, pt. 1. BTHC transcript.
1766

May 2, Villa de Nuevo Santander. Letter to viceroy. AGN, PI 110. BTHC
transcript.

Faulk, Odie B.
1964
The Last Years of Spanish Texas, 1778-1821. Mouton, The Hague.
FernAndez Carrasco, Pedro.
1688
Diario del viaje. AGI, Audiencia de Mexico, legajos 616.
Garza Falc6n, Josg Antonio, Eugenio Fermindez, and Mateo Marffnez
Sept. 24, Real de Santa Petronila. Ynforme. AGI, Audiencia de Guadalajara,
1766
legajos 511.
Gdmez Raposo, Luis
1944
Diario del descubrimiento que hizo el Capit~n Don Andr6s del Pez (/kilo de
1687). In: Colecci6n de diarios y relaciones para la historia de los viajes y
descubrimientos 4:115-150. Instimto Hist6rico de Marina, Madrid.

Holmes, Jack D. L. (editor)
Josd de Evia y sus reconocimientos del Golfo de Mexico. Ediciones Jos~ Porrfia
1968
Turanzas, Madrid.
Jackson, Jack, Robert S. Weddle, and Winston De Ville
Mapping Texas and the Gulf Coast: The Contributions of Saint-Denis, Olivdn,
1990
and Le Maire. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.

John, Elizabeth A. H. (editor)
1991
Views from a Desk in Chihuahua: Manuel Merino’s Report on Apaches and
Neighboring Nations, ca. 1804. Southwestern tIistorical Quarterly 95 (2): 139175.
Lavazares, Guido
1558
Declaracidn. Real Academia de la ttistoria, A/115, folios 84-86, Madrid.

Weddle ~ Spanish Exploration of the Texas Coast, 1519-1800

121

Llanos, Francisco de
Diario y derrota del Viaje que se hecho y Ejecutado a la B ahfa de S an Bemardo.
1690
AGI, Audiencia de Mexico, legajos 616.
Ledn, Alonso de, Juan Bautista Chapa, and Femando S~inchez de Zamora
1961
Historia de Nuevo Le6n, con noticias sobre Coahuila, Tamaulipas, Texas y
Nuevo Mdxico. Biblioteca de Nuevo Ledn, Monterrey.
Martin, J. C., and Robert S. Martin
1982
Contours ofDiscovery: Printed Maps Delineating the Texas and Southwestern
Chapters in the Cartographic History ofNorth America, 1513-1930. Portfolio.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

Martfr de Anglerfa, Pedro
Ddcadas delNuevo Mundo. Translated by D. Joaquin Torres Asensio. Editorial
1944
Bajel, Buenos Aires.
Orobio Basterra, Joaqufn
1746
Diligencias practicadas por Dn Joaqn Orobio Capn de laB alga sobre establecimto
de Franceses. B4xar Archives, Bahia, 1743-1778. BTHC.
1748

July 22. Consulta. Archivo San Francisco el Grande, Volume 19:95. Photostat,
BTHC.

Ortiz Parrilla, Diego
1766
October 7-14, Presidio de la Bahia. Testimonio de las Diligencias practicadas
por e! Coronel Don Diego Ortiz Parrilla en que de puntial noticia de la Ysla de
los Malaguitas. AGI, Audiencia de Guadalajara, legajos 511. BTHC transcript.
1767a

June 21, Mexico City. Consulta. AGI, Audiencia de Guadalajara, legajos 511,
BTHC transcript.

1767b

Plano que manifiesta la Costa del Seno Mexicano desde el Rio grande del Norte
que est~i en 24 grados y 40 minutos de latimd Septentrional hasta la Bahia de Sn.
Bemardo que se ha!la en la de 29 grados y 20 minutos. Museo Naval, B aVI-CaB
no. 1. Madrid.

Pichardo, Jos6 Antonio
Pichardo’s Treatise on the Limits of Louisiana and Texas, edited by Charles
1931
Wilson Hackett. Volume 1 of 4. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Ranjel, Rodrigo
1557
April 25. Letter to the Spanish Crown. AGI, Audiencia de Mexico, legajos 168.
Revillagigedo, Conde de
1791
April 6. Ynstruccidn que deverfi observar Dn. N. Pral., comisionado para el
importante desempeno de reconocimiento que hart de hacerse en la Provincia de
Texas. AGI, Audiencia de Mexico, legajos 2506.

122

Texas Archeological Society

Rivera y Villaldn, Pedro de
1945

Diario y derrotero de lo caminado, visto y observado en el discurso de la visita
general de Pr ecidios situados en las Provincias Ynternas de Nueva Espaha, que
de 6rden de su magestad execut6 D. Pedro de Rivera. Edited by Guillermo
Porras Mufioz. Mexico City.

Ruiz, Marcos
1754
Sept. 20. Auto. AGI, Audiencia de Guadalajara, tegajos 329.
Smith, Buckingham (translator)
1968

Narratives ofDe Soto in the conquest ofFlorida, as told by a Gentleman ofElvas
and in a relation by Luys Herndndez de Biedma. Palmetto Books, Gainesville,
Florida.

Talon, Pierre and Jean-Baptiste
1698
Voyage to the Mississippi through the Gulf of Mexico. In: La Salle, the
Mississippi and the Gulf." Three Primary Documents (1987), edited by Robert
S. Weddle, pp. 225-258. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Weddle, Robert S.
1973
Wilderness Manhunt: The Spanish Search for La Salle. University of Texas
Press, Austin.
1985

Spanish Sea: The Gulf of Mexico in North American Discovery, 1500-1685.
Texas A&M University Press, College Station.

1987

(editor) La Salle, the Mississippi, and the Gulf: Three Primary Documents.
Texas A&M University Press, College Station.

1991

TheFrenehThorn:RivalExplorersintheSpanishSea,1682-1762.TexasA&M
University Press, College Station.

Wood, Peter H.
1984

La Salle: Discovery of a Lost Explorer. The American Historical Review
89(2):294-323.

123

French, Spanish, and Indian Interaction
in Colonial Texas
Kathleen Gilmore

ABSTRACT
Efforts by Spain and France to control the native peoples in Colonial Texas,
and to advance and hold their territorial borders near the present Texas-Louisiana
border, were approached differently by the two powers. Spain used the missionpresidio system, viewing the Indians as ignorant children to be taught and saved.
France used trading, with the trader becoming the Indian’s friend. Archeological
manifestations of these different forms of interaction include the mission and
presidio ruins and the presence of French trade goods such as faience and gun parts
in sites across Texas.

What is now Texas was the scene of a virtual "cold war" between France and
Spain in the first half of the eighteenth century. Spanish claims to the area were
based on Cabeza de Vaca’s long and tough trek across it in the 1520s and 1530s.
France based her rights on La Salle’s trip down the Mississippi River in 1682, when
he claimed for France the Mississippi River and all the land drained by it and its
tributaries.
La Salle’s plan was to control his claim by placing a settlement at the mouth of
the Mississippi River, but in 1685 he unintentionally sailed on past the Mississippi
and landed instead at Matagorda Bay.
Spain had neglected the exploration and settlement of Texas until after La
Salle’s expedition, when Spain suddenly realized that La Salle’s settlement on
Garcitas Creek near Matagorda Bay (Figure 1) might give France an excuse to claim
the territory crossed by Cabeza de Vaca some 150 years earlier.
La Salle hid his little colony from the Spaniards, but not from the Indians. After
a long search it was finally located, three years after it was founded, by Alonso de
Le6n in 1689; most of the inhabitants had been killed, and the village had been
sacked.Even the tough Spanish soldiers seemed to have been touched by the fate
of the colony, for one soldier wrote a poem of lament (Weddle 1973:187).
The next year de Le6n returned to the village site, burned it, and proceeded
eastward to establish missions among the Caddoan-speaking Tejas or Hasinai, who
were friends of the French, on New Spain’s eastern border (Bolton 1963:145). In
this way the Spanish in Texas began their pattern of advancing and holding the
frontier with the mission-presidio system. These missions, however, were abandoned in 1693 because of the lack of supplies and lack of interest among the Tejas.
France now began to place colonies on the Gulf Coast, acting to hold the claims
made by La Salle on the Lower Mississippi River. Frenchmen also were exploring
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 63 (1992)

Texas Archeological Society

124

I

i

,..,".

Red

Nassonite Post

;k,~/
......
East Texas Missions

San

.~

L "k~Migue! /
~ ~.~o~h:L
Presidio’~ .....

T EXA S
San Antonio

®

/ AL°Ss
./;~’’’~ ~.--~’---~.

Presidio
Loreto

’%.,,
.,~

~ _,

~ :~-., %:~’;: ’
’ ~ .....
,~,.~ : "

San Juan Bautista ~ La’Salles Ft. St. Louis

Figure 1. Map of Louisiana and part of Texas showing settlements and missions along the
Spanish-French border in the early eighteenth century.

the rivers and making friends with the Indians. In 1714, the colorful Louis Juchereau
de St. Denis founded a trading post on the Red River among the Natchitoches
Indians, only a few miles from New Spain’s eastern border. St. Denis promptly
loaded his pack mules with merchandise and set out for San Juan Bautista, the
Spanish presidio on the Rio Grande. This trip, Weddle (1973:265) remarks, was a
blatant commercial venture, spurred by Cadillac, the French governor of Louisiana,
and abetted by the Spanish padre Hidalgo, who wanted to return to the missions of
East Texas. It was the beginning of the full-fledged French trading in Texas.
The Spanish response to the threat of a French settlement practically on their
border was to send Domingo Ramon to East Texas in 1716, guided by none other
than the wily St. Denis, who in the meantime had married the Spanish commander’s
granddaughter. The entrada established six missions and a presidio. One of the
missions, San Miguel de Linares, was in present-day Robeline, Louisiana, about 20
km (12 miles) from the French village of Natchitoches. Although the French
menace was ever present, St. Denis did not seem to be a part of this threat; he

Gilmore-- Fremch, Spanish, and Indian Interaction

125

willingly helped Spain secure the border, but at the same time he created a nearby
black market for his goods. As one author (Weddle 1973:265) put it, this plot was
"nothing more or less than the bartering of Texas to the Spaniards to establish illicit
trade--surely one of the biggest real estate giveaways in history."
Spain and France went to war in Europe in the summer of 1719, and, because
of inadequate military support, the lack of Indian cooperation, and panic after a mild
show of aggression from Natchitoches, the Spaniards again abandoned the mission
establishments of East Texas, this time until the summer of 1721. Meanwhile, in the
spring of 1719 the Frenchman, Bdnard de la Harpe, ascended the Red River past the
Great Bend (near present-day Texarkana) to establish a trading post among the
Nassonite Caddo group. This village, one of the Kadohadacho villages, had been
visited by some of the survivors of the La Salle colony in 1687 and by the Spaniard,
Ter~in de los Rios in 1691.
La Harpe was ordered to do his"utmost in order to succeed at entering into trade
with the Spaniards of the province of Texas, the Kingdom of Le6n and New
Mexico" (Smith 1959:75). To further this aim he wrote a polite letter to Father
Marsillo (which is probably French for Margil), suggesting that the opening of
commerce with Natchitoches and the Nassonite Post, whereEuropean goods would
be available at reasonable prices, could benefit the conversion of pagans. La Harpe
further suggested that Father Marsillo contact his friends in New Mexico, Paral, and
New Ledn, and that, furthermore, the padre would receive five percent of the total
sales (Smith 1959:257). Father Marsillo wrote back, probably from Mission
Dolores at present San Augustine, that he would indeed write to his friends, but since
it was not appropriate for a friar to participate in commerce, the correspondence
should be kept secret (Smith 1959:373). But the war broke out between France and
Spain, and la Harpe, instead of trading toward the south, explored the country to the
north of the Red River.
With the East Texas establishments abandoned, Spain feared that France could
take over Texas. Moreover, Frenchmen, St. Denis included, continued to be friendly
with the Indians and were trading them guns for furs. To hold the frontier that had
been abandoned in 1719, the largest expedition yet, led by Marquis de Aguayo,
started across Texas in the spring of 1721. This expedition must have created a
spectacle (and a lot of dust), for it had 500 men, almost 3,000 horses, 600 head of
cattle, 900 sheep, and almost 800 mules, 600 of which carried loads of clothing,
arms, munitions, and supplies (Forrestal 1934). The war had ended the fall before,
but Aguayo was under orders to continue with the plan to restore the missions. His
orders noted that no more than a defensive war should be waged, and then only if
the French encroached on Spanish territory (Forrestal 1934:6). The expedition
restored the six East Texas missions, founded a presidio at Los Adaes near Mission
San Miguel on the easternmost border, reestablished both the presidio for the
protection of Mission Concepcidn, and another one west of there near the Tejas and
the Neches rivers (Forrestal 1934:58).
When the expedition returned to the San Antonio River, where a presidio and
two missions had already been built, part of the expedition was sent to Garcitas

126

Texas Archeological Society

Creek near Matagorda Bay to establish a mission; across the creek they built a
presidio (employing the dominance principle) squarely atop the site of the former
French village. The diary of the expedition reported that French artifacts were found
m trenches dug for foundations of the fort (Forrestal 1934:63). Archeological
research has also confirmed French artifacts dating to the period of the French
colony at the Garcitas Creek site (Gilmore 1986a:61).
By 1722 Spain held the eastern border of Texas with two presidios, the coast
with one presidio, and the interior with one, all with associated missions. In contrast,
France held the border adjacent to Texas with two military posts, one with a fort, and
one with a small garrison. Several unofficial traders’ villages may have been along
the border. These contrasting approaches to the frontier were founded in different
viewpoints about the native peoples.
Clearly for a country to hold and control a province or colony, the native
residents must be controlled. In Spain’s mission-presidio system Spain established
control by collecting the Indians into permanent settlements at the mission. There
the padres taught them agricultural and industrial skills and instructed them in the
Catholic faith and the Spanish language, thereby making them useful Spanish
subjects. Yet many nonsedentary Indians of Texas remained in the missions only as
long as they were cold or hungry; even the sedentary Indians of East Texas preferred
their dispersed settlements to living in large groups in the missions. The Spanish
method, according to Newcomb (TunneU and Newcomb 1969:41), "was, in fact, a
broad gauged attempt to destroy every facet of native culture and replace it with the
civilization of the Spaniards."
Some scholars argue that the conversion of the Indians to Christianity was a
byproduct of the political issue of holding the frontier, and the late Father
Engelhardt (Bolton 1962:9) believed that the Spanish monarchy cared not one whit
for the success of religion except where it promoted political schemes. The
historian, Herbert E. Bolton (1962:10), argues, however, that the monarchy was
sincere enough, but it was so hard up that it could not finance religious projects
unless they served political ends as well.
Comparing the attitudes of Spain, France, and England toward the Indians,
John TePaske (1971:35) suggested that to Spain and her padres the Indian was a
noble savage whose only defects were his false religion and idleness. The English,
he noted, had little concern for the soul of the Indian and maintained the perspective
that "the only good Indian was a dead Indian."
The French attitude differed from both the Spanish and English. Missionizing
had been practiced in New France (Canada), but it was less important in Louisiana.
Bienville, writing in 1725, recognized the value of missionaries for the Indians, not
only for their missionary efforts, but also for their later-known roles as "Indian
agents." Bienville suggested that the missionaries report what was happening
among the Indians to the post commanders, that they prevent quarrels between the
traders and the Indians, and that they should see to it that the traders’ prices were not
too high (Rowland and Sanders 1932:515). Trading practices and spying seem to
have taken precedence over saving souls.

Gilmore -- Fremch, Spanish, and Indian Interaction

127

The French trader became the Indian’s friend or he lost his job, or perhaps he
lost his head, so the relationship became somewhat symbiotic, that is, of mutual
benefit. The natives furnished what the trader wanted--hides, tallow, or slaves-in return for what the Indian wanted--guns, brandy, and beads. Many of the traders
lived with or married Indian women; the traders became almost Indians themselves,
but the Indian women changed little (Rowland and Sanders 1929:207). Some of the
soldiers also married native women. At least three of the six French soldiers
stationed at the CaddoNassonite Post on the Red River had native or metfs wives
(Gilmore 1986b). On the other hand, the Spanish soldiers, who were not above
taking mistresses, seldom married natives; in fact many brought their Spanish wives
with them to the presidios. The French policy of condoning intermarriage, according to TePaske (t971:78), built "a cultural bridge which led the natives to trust the
French and give them their affection."
Are these different approaches and attitudes manifested archeologically? A
pattern left in the ground by a mission or presidio with surrounding compound walls
would differ from the less formal plan left by a village, although a trading village
might also have a fortification wall. A trading village like the Deer Creek site in
Oklahoma would yield a wide variety of trade goods (Wedel 1981). Clearly,
documentary research should be carried out before sites are excavated to provide
working concepts of the sites’ functions.
The Spanish settlements built of wood on the eastern border of Texas have long
since disappeared, and only the sites of Mission Dolores de los Ais near San
Augustine and, east of it, Presidio le los Adaes, have been systematically tested by
archeologists. B ut when other sites are found, patterns of walls left in the ground like
those at Mission Dolores (Figure 2) and San Xavier (Figure 3) should be found (see
Corbin et al. 1980; Gilmore 1969).
Other manifestations of European-Indian interaction are found in the artifacts
themselves. French gun parts are distinguishable from Spanish, and the tin-gl~ed
ceramic wares, called faience when made in France (Figure 4) and majolica when
made in Mexico (Figure 5) can be separated by country of origin. So when artifacts
of French origin are found in sites of known Spanish affiliation, they indicate some
form of French trade. We know the French post at the Nasoni Caddo (Gilmore
1986b) was a metfs village because most of the wives there were Indian or of mixed
Indian-French heritage. Archeological test excavations at the site were limited, and
few French luxury items were found, but although French gun parts were found,
nearly all the ceramics were native-made, lending support to the observation that
Indian women who married Frenchmen remained much the same and did not
become acculturated to French behavior.
French faience made up ahnost 44 percent of the tin-glazed wares found at the
Spanish presidio of Los Adaes (Gregory 1973:Tables 14 and 15), and French gun
parts and a French coin were also found in the excavations. This post--the Spanish
capital of Texas for fifty years--was more than 350 miles from its legal supply point
at San Antonio, so illicit trade was operating by necessity, but probably also by
desire, through the French post of Natchitoches only 20 km (12 miles) to the east.

128

Texas Archeological Society

o
GO

o

0

o

~

2oMET ERS

"Tm’r~ W ALL OUTLINE
Q POST MOLD.
~ TRASH PIT’.

@ WELL
Figure 2. Plan showing the excavation of the palisade wall at Mission Dolores (from Corbin
et al. 1980:Figure 6).

At Mission Dolores de los Ais, French faience made up 78 percent of the tinglazed wares (Corbin et al. 1980:215). However, since most of this faience was
recovered outside the mission compound wall, the excavators suggest the possibility that a French trader was in residence, illegally, of course.
Later Spanish colonial sites also yield strong evidence of French trade. At
Presidio Ahumada, near the eastern border of Texas on Galveston Bay, 46 percent
of the tin-glazed wares were of French faience (Tunnell and Ambler 1967).
Following the dominance principle again, this presidio was built by the Spaniards
at the 1750s trading post belonging to the Frenchmen Blancplain (Weddle 1991:293294), which may account, at least in part, for the high percentage of faience. Sherds
Qf faience were also found at Mission Concepcion in San Antonio (Scurlock and Fox
1977:57), Mission Rosario near Goliad (Gilmore 1974:Plate 14), at Mission San
Lorenzo in Real County (Tunnel l and Newcomb 1969), and at Rancho de las Cabras
near Floresville (Taylor and Fox 1985:31). Whether these small finds across Texas
reflect the presence of a French trader is unknown, but they do attest to the
widespread distribution in colonial Texas of goods manufactured in France. The
trade that la Harpe and Father Marsillo were unsuccessful in establis.hing in 1719
surely must have been successfully established not long afterward.
SUMMARY

Can each of these contrasting approaches be evaluated in terms of its
effectiveness in holding and advancing the frontier in Texas and in dealing with
the native peoples? This is difficult to do since the borders were held by the

Gilmore ~ Fremch, Spanish, and Indian Interaction

129

\
f

\

J
J

\
\

o
\
\
\

\
\

\

\
J
J
J
J
J
J

oo

J
J
J
J
J

J

O

POST MOLD

.~ WALL OUTLINE
O--

0

6 METER~

Figure 3. Plan showing file wall trenches at Mission San Xavier (from Gilmore 1969: Figure
6).
respective countries until 1763, when Louisiana was ceded to Spain. After almost
80 years of being paranoid about French aggression, Spain acquired French
Louisiana with little effort. The tattered "Pine Tree Curtain" on their common
border was no more.

130

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 4. Some sherds of eighteenth century French faience ware.

Figure 5. Some sherds of eighteenth century Mexican majolica ware.

Gilmore ~ Fremch, Spanish, and Indian Interaction

131

As for Indian policies, it would be helpful to have some first-hand evaluations
by the Indians, but none can be found. However, French policies concerning trade
and making friends with the Indians proved advantageous to the Spaniards in at least
one instance. In 1753, an Indian uprising against the East Texas missions and
Presidio Los Adaes was narrowly averted when the French trading post called Le
Dout (possibly in present Wood County) was ordered off Texas soil by the Spanish
authorities, but the force of 500 uprising Indians was placated by their French
friends, and the order to move the post was ignored (Perttula and Gilmore 1988:93).
The fact that Spain continued the French trading system after her takeover of
Louisiana argues for the success of the system.
Regardless, both Spanish padres and French traders acted as Indian agents; the
padres viewing the Indians as children to be taught and disciplined, and the traders
viewing them as equals to be exploited. But to archeologists and ethnohistorians, the
Spanish padres are better appreciated than the French traders because the padres,
well educated and observant--albeit culturally biased--left records about the
natives and the country. There is no doubt that the padres were sincere in saving the
souls of the Indians, but unfortunately, most of the French traders could not write,
so few records of their exploits were made; it is the artifacts of French origin that
authenticate their widespread activities.
Although the mission system in East Texas was a virtual failure (three missions
were moved to San Antonio in 1731), the mission-presidio establishments managed
to hold Texas against the French aggression that prompted Spain to take action.
Thus, France provided Spain with the impetus for the initial settlement of Texas.
REFERENCES CITED
Bolton, Herbert E.
1962
The Mission as a Frontier Institution in the Spanish-American Colonies.
Academic Reprints, Texas Western College Press, E1 Paso.
1963

Spanish Exploration in the Southwest, 1542-1706. Barnes & Noble, New York.

Corbin, James E., T. C. Alex, and A. Kalina
1980

Mission Dolores de los Ais: Archaeological Investigations of an Early Spanish
Colonial Mission, San Augustine County, Texas. Papers in Anthropology No.
2. Stephen F. Austin State University, Nacogdoches.

Forrestal, P. P.
1934
Pena’s Diary of the Aguayo Expedition. Preliminary Studies of the Texas
Catholic Historical Society, Volume 1I, No. 7. Austin.
Gilmore, Kathleen
1969
The San Xavier Missions: A Study in Historical Site Identification. Texas State
Building Commission, Archaeological Program Reports, No. 16. Austin.
1974

Mission Rosario: Archeological Investigations, 1974.TexasParksandWildlife,
Historic Sites and Restoration Branch, Archeological Report No. 14, Part II.
Austin.

132

Texas Archeological Society

1986a

La Salle’s Fort St. Louis in Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 55:61-72.

1986b

French-Indian Interaction at an 18th Century Frontier Post: The Roseborough
Lake Site, Bowie County, Texas. Contributions in Archaeology No. 3,
Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas State University, Denton.

Gregory, H. F.
1973

Eighteenth Century Caddoan Archaeology: A Study in Models and
Interpretations. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology,
Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

Perttula, Timothy K., and Kathleen Gilmore
1988

Archaeological Survey along Mill Race Creek and Tributaries, Wood County,
Texas: 1987-1988. Contributions in Archaeology No. 6, Institute of Applied
Sciences, North Texas State University, Denton.

Rowland, D., and A. G. Sanders
1929
Mississippi Provincial Archives 1701-1729: French Dominion, Volume 2.
Mississippi Department of Archives and ttistory, Jackson.
1932

Mississippi Provincial Archives 1704-1743: French Dominion, Volume 3.
Mississ’ippi Department of Archives and llistory, Jackson.

Scurlock, D., and Daniel E. Fox
1977

An Archeological Investigation of Mission Concetxzion, San Antonio, Texas.
Texas Historical Commission, Office of the State Archeologist Report 28,
Austin.

Smith, R. A. (translator and editor)
1959

Account of the Journey of Benard de la Harpe: Discovery Made by Him of
Several Nations Situated in the West. Southwestern ttistorical Quarterly
62(1 ):75-86; 62(2):246-259; 62( 3):371-385; 62(4):525-541.

Taylor, A. J., and Anne A. Fox
1985

Archaeological Survey and Testing at Rancho de las Cabras, 41WN30,
Wilson County, Texas. Fifth Season. The University of Texas at San Antonio,
Center for Archaeological Research, Archaeological Survey Report No. 144,
San Antonio.

TePaske, J.
1971
French, Spanish, and Indian Policy on the Gulf Coast, 1513-1763: A
Comparison. In: Spain and her Rivals on the Gulf Coast, edited by E. F.
Dibble and E. W. Newton, pp. 9-39. Proceedings, Second Gulf Coast History
and Humanities Conference, tfistoric Pensacola Preservation Board,
Pensacola.

Tunnell, Curtis D., and J. Richard Ambler
Archeological Excavations at Presidio San Augustin de Ahumada. Texas
1967
State Building Commission Archeological Program, Report No. 6, Austin.

Gilmore ~ Fremch, Spanish, and Indian Interaction

133

Tunnell, Curtis D., and William. W. Newcomb, Jr.
1969
A Lipan Apache Mission, San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz, 1762-1771 Texas
Memorial Museum, Bulletin 14, Austin.
Weddle, Robert S.
1973
Wilderness Manhunt: The Spanish Search for La SaUe. University of Texas
Press, Austin.
1991

The French Thorn: Rival Explorers in the Spanish Sea 1682-1762. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.

Wedel, Mildred M.
1981
The Deer Creek Site, Oklahoma. A Wichita Village sometimes called
Ferdinandina: an Ettmohistoric View. Oklahoma Historical Society, Series in
Anthropology No. 5. Oklahoma City.

135

The Mayhew Site: A Possible Hasinai Farmstead,
Nacogdoches County, Texas
Nancy Adele Kenmotsu

ABSTRACT
Prewitt’s excavations of the Mayhew site, 41NA21, in 1975 yielded an
artifact assemblage that seemed to represent a single component dating to the
Allen focus. Recent analysis of the data has basically supported this hypothesis
and also strongly suggests that the site was an eighteenth century Hasinai
Caddo farmstead.

INTRODUCTION

The Mayhew site, 41NA21, identified in 1972, was named for Thomas
Mayhew, a knowledgeable avocational archeologist from Nacogdoches who has
recorded several sites in the vicinity of Bayou Loco (Prewitt et al. 1972). In April
1975, the Texas Archeological Salvage Project (TASP), known today as the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory-Sponsored Projects, carried out archeological
excavations at the site. These excavations were under the direction of Elton R.
Prewittand were undertaken in anticipation of the construction of LakeNacogdoches,
a water supply reservoir for the City of Nacogdoches.
Evidence is explored here in the hope of proving the hypothesis that the
Mayhew site represents the remains of an Hasinai Caddo farmstead; the hypothesis
was developed after a suggestion by Dee Ann Story that this site might provide an
opportunity to study a single-component site. In a review of the artifact assemblage,
several aspects of the collection suggested that it was a farmstead. First, the major
part of the assemblage consists of small plain and brushed sherds that strongly
suggest a domestic occupation. Because of their uniformity in paste, temper, and
surface treatment, the sherds seemed to represent a single component. Second, the
remainder of the assemblage includes both aboriginal and early European artifacts,
all of which seemed consistent with a domestic function for the site. Third, the
nearby Deshazo site has been interpreted (Good 1982; Story and Creel 1982) as a
historic Caddoan hamlet. Spanish priests (Casafias 1968) described the historic
Caddoan settlement system as one of small hamlets surrounded by isolated
farmsteads. It seemed probable, then, that farmsteads would be found near the
Deshazo site. Finally, the excavation undertaken at the site was extensive; according to Prewitt (1975), 21 percent of the site was excavated in a large block. These
aspects of the site favored an analysis that centered on whether the site had indeed
been a Caddoan farmstead.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 63 (1992)

136

Texas Archeological Society

The importance of such a study has been noted by Story (1990:334-336), who
pointed out that the basic unit of Caddoan settlement systems is the household.
However,
Caddoan habitation loci.., have not been adequately investigated ....
Most excavations have been too limited to permit accurate characterization of the settlement size and structure .... As a result, the most
fundamental building blocks of the Caddoan settlement system--the
household and community--are poorly understood [Story 1990:336].

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

Now inundated by Lake Nacogdoches, the Mayhew site was on the west bank
of Bayou Loco in central Nacogdoches County, in the Piney Woods of East Texas
(Figure 1). Nacogdoches County is characterized by a warm, temperate climate that
is typical of the southeastern United States. Summers are long with hot, humid
temperatures; winters are cool and relatively short (Creel 1982a: 14; Bomar 1983).
Annual rainfall in the county averages 127 cm (50 inches) (Dolezel 1980:2). Snow
is not common in the region, but frosts are frequent during the late fall and winter
when most low vegetation dies back to ground level.
Bayou Loco
Nacogdoches County
@

TEXAS

Figure 1. Map of Texas showing the location of Bayou Loco and the Mayhew site.

Soils formed in this humid environment under forest vegetation tend to be
acidic clay, or sandy loams more than acidic clays and clay loams (Doleze11980:3).
At the Mayhew site, the soils are a shallow, orangish tan sandy loam over a redorange sterile clay. According to the soil survey for Nacogdoches County, soils at
the site are of the Tuscosso-Hannahatchee association, which are loamy bottomland
soils. Because of flooding, "these soils have low potential for cultivated crops"
(Dolezel 1980:11), and are used ahnost exclusively for pasture land. Hardwoods
dominate the vegetative cover.
The Nacogdoches area consists of rolling hills dissected by many perennial
streams, one of which is Bayou Loco, which flows roughly southward from the
Mayhew site to a place some 20 km (12 miles) distant, its confluence with the

Kenmotsu ~ The Mayhew Site

137

Angelina River. In the vicinity of the Mayhew site the stream is well entrenched,
with many meander loops in a wide, flat floodplain. Since the floodplain has only
a slight elevation gradient in this area, Bayou Loco is sluggish and overflows its
banks frequently during heavy rains (Prewitt et al. 1972:2; Creel 1982a: 17). The low
elevation gradient also causes the small tributaries of Bayou Loco to fan out quickly
at the margins of the floodplain and drop their sediment and water loads in the
floodplain rather than in the channel itself. The resulting alluvial fans probably were
quite fertile and suitable for aboriginal agriculture (Creel 1982a: 17).
Situated on the west side of Bayou Loco, the Mayhew site was contained on a
small knoll about 30 meters in diameter (Figure 2). The site was bounded on the
southeast and east by a marshy area in the Bayou Loco floodplain, on the west and
southwest by a seeplike boggy area, and on the north by an erosional gully that
separated it from another sandy knoll just north of the gully (Prewitt 1975). The
floodplain intersected the valley wall northwest of the site, and the land rose steeply
to the uplands just west of the site. Creel (1982a: 15) notes that the three microenvironments (riparian, bottomland, and upland) around sites in the reservoir contained many floral and faunal species that could have been readily exploited by
prehistoric and early historic aboriginal populations. These include various species
of fish, white-tailed deer, turkey, duck, rabbit, pecans, acorns, herbs, berries, and
other edible foods (Creel 1982a:15). Early historic accounts indicate that the
modem environmental setting has been essentially unchanged since A.D. 1700
(Espinosa in Swanton 1942:274; Casafias 1968:44).

Figure 2. Photograph showing excavation in progress at thc Mayhew site, April 1975.

138

Texas Archeological Society
CONDITION OF THE SITE

The history of land use at site 41NA21 and its immediate surroundings is not
entirely clear, but there is some evidence (Kenmotsu n.d.) that postdepositional
disturbances have been minimal. This is important because of the high percentage
(about 34 percent) of small, thumbnail-sized plain and brushed body sherds
recovered at the site. Most other sherds measure from 2 to 3 cm in diameter. One
possible explanation for the quantity of small sherds is that they are a result of
plowing, but Prewitt (1975; Personal comm un ication 1987) has argued strongly that
the site has never been plowed. The lessee of the pasture where the Mayhew site is
located told Prewitt he had never plowed the pasture and, moreover, that the boggy
areas surrounding the site argue against the feasibility of plowing; the floors of the
excavation units and the profiles show no evidence of plow scars. Finally, Prewitt
does not consider the small size of sherds evidence of plowing, because other sites
in the reservoir area that have been plowed do not have the number of small thumbnail sized sherds found at Mayhew (e.g., 41NA13/27 [Deshazo] and 41NA22).
Therefore, it is assumed here that the site was not plowed.
ARCHEOLOGICAL AND ETHNOHISTORIC BACKGROUND

The dominant component at 41NA21 is the Allen phase, but an Early Ceramic
period component comprising 22 sandy paste sherds, three Gary dart points, a
polished stone, and four pitted manos is also found at the site (Kenmotsu n.d.). The
small inventory and lack of features associated with the Early Ceramic component
indicate that it was adequately separated from the Allen phase material.
The Allen phase dates from A.D. 1600 to 1800 (Suhm et al. 1954:221; Story
and Creel 1982:36). It was during this time (e.g., 1690), that Spanish missions were
first established in East Texas. Although they were abandoned in 1693, another
series of missions was established in 1716 in or near the various divisions of the
Hasinai--the southern Caddo. Mission Concepci6n was on the Angelina River,
somewhere near present-day Douglas (Corbin 1991, personal communication), a
modern community about 5 km (3 miles) northwest of the Mayhew site. Mission
Guadalupe was established among the Nazadachotzi Hasinai (Casafias 1968:47) at
the present-day city of Nacogdoches, some 16 km (10 miles) east of the Mayhew
site (Corbin 1991, personal communication). The Spanish remained in the southern
part of East Texas until 1772, although Mission Concepci6n, together with several
others, was permanently withdrawn from East Texas in 1731. Mission Guadalupe,
however, remained until 1772.
In 1714, Saint-Denis established a French trading post at Natchitoches, and
France began to maintain regular contact with native populations (Cox 1906:10);
previous French contact had been infrequent. Once established, the French post at
Natchitoches endured, and in time became a thriving commercial center. The focus
of French trade was directed primarily at the Caddo on the upper Red River (Wedel
1981:37), although clandestine French trade with other East Texas native groups
continued throughout the eighteenth century (Bolton 1915:35; Gregory 1973:239).

Kenmotsu ~ The Mayhew Site

139

The Spanish priests who came to East Texas brought a limited supply of trading
goods, and these quickly dwindled. In letters to their superiors in Mexico they
pleaded for more and better goods to entice potential converts:
If only I... [had] had, in this year and three months that I have been with
them, some hawkbells, knives, strings of glass beads, and a blue cloth
which they greatly appreciate, and some blankets and other presents to
give them, I could have had a convent made of the best materials that you
could have made of the things that there are here [Casafias 1968:65].
These and similar pleas indicate that there was a general paucity of Spanish
goods in East Texas during those years, and suggest that most European goods in
Allen phase sites were acquired from the French.
When the Spanish and French first traveled to the general region of Houston,
Anderson, Cherokee, Rusk, and Nacogdoches counties in the late seventeenth
century, the region was occupied by Native Americans variously called the Hasinai,
Asinai, Assoni, Assnay, and Cenis (Casafias 1968:43; S wanton 1942:7-38). Casafias
(1968:47-48) described the Hasinai (as they will be called herein) as agriculturally
based groups where individual families within each group lived at some distance
from other families in small clearings where they grew their crops. Espinosa (in
Swanton 1942:274) confirmed Casafias’s account of the Hasinai by stating that
these natives do not live in congregations reduced to a Pueblo, but rather
each parciality of the four principle groups, live on ranches, dispersed from
each other, the primary motive being that each family seeks a small parcel
competent for their harvest and that has enough water for their needs.
The Allen phase was defined first as the Allen focus (Story and Creel 1982:36),
based on cemetery sites in Anderson and Cherokee counties that were partially
excavated in the 1930s by the University of Texas (Suhm et al. 1954:221). In addition to the cemetery sites in Anderson and Cherokee counties, Allen phase sites have
also been recorded in Houston, Rusk, and Nacogdoches counties. The ceramic part
of the artifact assemblage consists of several recognized types, including Patton
Engraved, Hume Engraved, Poyner Engraved, Killough Pinched, Maydelle Incised,
and plain and brushed utilitarian wares, together with occasional late trade pottery
from other native groups, together with Spanish majolica and occasional other
European ceramics (Suhm et al. 1954:219-221). Other parts of the artifact assemblage consist of lithic, bone, shell, and glass and metal European artifacts. The lithic
assemblage includes small triangular and contracting-stem arrowpoints (notably
Cuney, Tumey, Talco, Fresno, and rarely, Perdiz [Suhm et al. 1954:220]), Jowell
and Anderson knives, which appear to be restricted to burials (Cole 1975:175), small
snub-nosed scrapers, and battered stone. The lithic material found in Allen phase
sites is generally of nonlocal origin (Cole 1975:163-174; Girard n.d.: 135), and the
shell used for beads and pins was from the Gulf Coast. European artifacts recovered
from sites of the Allen phase include glass beads, iron axes, adzes, chisels and other
heavy iron tools, brass and iron pots, case knives, gunflints, and metal gun parts.

140

Texas Archeological Society

Allen phase cemeteries were fairly well patterned, contained extended interments, and were often near midden debris (Cole 1975; Good 1982). Males were
buried with more material goods, such as arrowpoints and ceramic bottles; female
graves contained more European and exotic goods (Cole 1975:359). All Allen phase
structures that have been excavated are round, probably used for habitation, and
ranged in diameter from 9 to 12.2 meters (Good 1982). Good (1982:61) hypothesized that storage facilities "are surely represented by the numerous darkly stained
disturbances found within and around the structures," and that storage racks could
be inferred from the rectangular configurations of postholes.
The Allen phase shares several traits with the Frankston focus, which is defined
for the preceding period (A.D. 1500 to 1600). Frankston focus sites have been
recorded in the same general area, and are believed to be ancestral to the Allen phase
(Suhm et al. 1954:221). Ceramic assemblages are similar, although there is more
Poyner Engraved than Patton Engraved in the Frankston focus (Kleinschmidt
1982:226). The primary difference between the Frankston focus and the Allen
phase, however, is the absence of early European historic material in Frankston
focus sites.
THE MODEL

It is proposed that the Mayhew site represents a small Hasinai Caddo farmstead
as described by Father Casafias in 1691 (Casafias 1968:49). The initial impression
that Maybew might be a farmstead was based on its small size, lack of a cemetery,
lack of mounds, large number of ceramic sherds, and the general utilitarian
character of the arti fact assemblage. One of the most striking aspects of the artifact
assemblage at the Mayhew site is the near absence of sherds more than 3 cm in
diameter. Too, the greater number of the sherds have plain or brushed exteriors,
hinting at a domestic function for the site. The small size of the knoll on which the
site is situated and the frequency of flooding of the surrounding land suggest that
all occupation would have been confined to the knoll itself. Although there are other
knolls in the floodplain, the nearest is about 40 meters to the north, and in their
surface inspection, Prewitt’s crews failed to see any artifacts there. These factors,
combined with evidence from the artifacts, suggest that the Mayhew site was indeed
a Hasinai farmstead.
Unfortunately, the strongest evidence for a farmstead--architectural remains-is absent at Mayhew. There are three possible reasons for their absence: 1) there was
a house, but it was not detected during the excavations; 2) there was never a house
at the site; or 3) there was a house, but it was outside of the excavated area. The first
possibility was discussed with Elton Prewitt (1987, Personal communication), and
it was his conclusion that the excavators had not missed any postmolds. The units
had been carefully troweled twice, and no postmolds, except for a single possible
postmold in the north-central part of the site, were detected. The second possibility-that there never had been a house at the site--would mean that the site had been
used for another purpose, which seems unlikely, for, as noted above, if the Mayhew

Kenmotsu-- The Mayhew Site

141

site had been a dumping ground for an occupation in another area, that would mean
that the material dumped would have been transported some 40 meters across land
that was sometimes boggy. Therefore, the author again returned to the hypothesis
that the Mayhew site was a Hasinai farmstead. In the absence of architectural
remains, the hypothesis was tested by establishing expectations of what remains
would be yielded by a farmstead of the Hasinai. Five expectations were developed,
each of which is discussed below in some detail and is based on models of Hasinai
Caddo settlement systems that have been suggested by Wyckoff and Baugh (1980)
and Story and Creel (1982). These models are derived from secondary accounts of
mission priests and other eighteenth century European residents and visitors to East
Texas who described aspects of the Hasinai settlement pattern. Those European
accounts consistently describe dispersed farmsteads where individual Hasinai
families resided in quasi-isolation from other families. Therefore, the expectations
of the model are as follows.
1. 7"he Mayhew site consists of the general refuse scatter in a habitation area
rather than of refuse from a trash midden created by the use of the knoll
exclusively for disposal.

Activities of both large and small groups produce refuse, and some
ethnoarcheological investigations have been directed specifically toward the study
of refuse (e.g., Bin ford 1978; 1980; Yellen 1977; Hayden and Cannon 1983), based
primarily on the assumption that human behavior is patterned. The patterns of
discard of refuse, however, vary from group to group. According to O’Connell
(1987:75),"the relationship between behavior and its reflection in the archeological
record is apparently more complex than many have imagined. Nevertheless, clearcut patterns in refuse distribution are evident."
One of the facts verified by ethnoarcheological studies is that there are two
types of refuse. One type comes from locations deliberately established for disposal
of trash; the other type is the scatters of refuse found in primary living or activity
areas. Here, the former is termed trash midden and the latter is termed living-surface
residue. O’Connell (1987) suggests that there are differences between these two
types of refuse,
A strong pattern of size sorting is apparent [in Alyawara settlements].
Large items (more than 5 cm in length) are generally tossed onto the
nearest part of the [trash] m idden at time of discard. Small items are more
often dropped in the activity area at or near their location of last use. S ome
of these small items are subsequently swept to the edge of the [trash
midden] .... Despite the sweeping, many small refuse items remain in the
activity area [O’Connell 1987:82].
S imilar d i sposal pattern s were noted by B i n ford (1980) at Nunami ut residen tial
base camps. !Kung sites do not contain areas of deliberate trash disposal (Yellen
1977:115), but O’Connell (1987:100) concludes that the lack of trash in their sites
was due to the temporary occupation (e.g., 5 to 10 days) of sites by the ?Kung. "One

142

Texas Archeological Society

would predict that in !Kung camps occupied for longer periods of time, secondary
disposal would be more common" (O’Connell 1987:100). The archeological record
from some sites in East Texas reflects this general pattern. It was anticipated that a
comparison of the material remains from the Mayhew site with sites containing
trash middens and/or living- surface refuse would result in data to confirm or refute
expectation number 1.
2. Evidence that daily tasks (cooking, food storage, tool making, etc.) were
carried out by small nuclear or extendedfamilies will be manifested by small
concentrations of artifacts.

In his study of the structure of Alyawara sites, O’Connell (1987) examined the
creation of the archeological record in a camp composed of households and activity
areas. Despite complexity in the formation processes of the camp, his data make it
clear that it is possible to identify one or more household areas, adjacent special
activity areas, and trash middens (O’Connell 1987:105). He also notes (1987:91)
that these patterns are clearest on the fringes of large sites or where they are not
compromised by superimposed occupations.
Computer-generated maps showing densities of artifacts and features at several
archeological investigations in East Texas (e.g., Bruseth and Perttula 1981:55) or
on the margins of East Texas (McGregor et al. 1987:50-52) have assisted in the
identification of activity areas. The basic assumption behind the maps is that
clusters of artifacts and features "identify the loci of human activity" (Brnseth and
Perttula 1981:55). Contours on these maps represent levels of density of artifacts.
Density maps developed for the Richland Creek project were also useful in the
interpretations of intrasite patterning when limited investigations at a site"provided
only a partial picture of how site occupations were structured spatially" (McGregor
et al. 1987:49).
Since previous efforts had successfully used the patterning of artifacts to
interpret archeological sites, and since only one possible feature (a posthole) was
encountered during excavations at the site, it was anticipated that maps of artifact
densities might emphasize concentrations of artifacts of the same or similar classes
in the site. Such concentrations, if indeed there should be any, might be clues to the
types of activities that had been carried out at those loci. Moreover, it was
anticipated that the concentrations would make it clear that a variety of activities had
been carried out at the site.
3. The ceramics will be utilitarian.
Most often, pottery is manufactured to serve as containers in day-to-day
activities. This purpose can be accomplished with simple, undecorated vessels
formed in shapes and sizes to accommodate specific needs. Decorative elements
on pottery are an "embellishment beyond the procedures used in forming the...
final vessel shape and finishing its overall surface" (Rice 1987:144). Such
decorative elements can be minor or they can be very elaborate, requiring
considerable effort. Pottery used in routine daily activities would tend to have

Kenmotsu ~ The Mayhew Site

143

fewer elaborate decorative elements, since such pottery would have a shorter uselife (Longacre 1985).
It was anticipated that, as a farmstead, the Mayhew site would yield ceramic
sherds with few decorated elements, and the site would have little to no elaborately
decorated pottery. However, it is difficult to identify elaborate pottery at Caddoan
sites. Legged vessels have been assumed to have ritual or ceremonial uses.
Anderson, Gilmore, McCormick, and Morenon (1974), and Cole (1975:319) noted
that animal effigy bowls appear to be associated with individuals of high status.
Most Caddoan ceramics, however, regardless of surface treatment, appear to have
served utilitarian purposes. For example, Stokes and Woodring (1981:236) comment that "the early Caddoan [ceramic] assemblage at Davis represents a community-wide.., ceramic tradition." In the Benson’s Crossing site, the "vessels in the
[trash] midden were almost certainly cooking and eating vessels that had been in
everyday use up until they were broken and thrown away" (Driggers 1985:92).
Many of these sherds had decorative elements. Similarly, the trash midden at
Deshazo contained vessels with a wide range of surface treatments (Fields n.d.:444).
Analyses of vessels from Allen phase burial sites tend to underscore the
generally utilitarian nature of most ceramic types in these sites. In her analysis of
eight Allen phase burial sites, Cole (1975:219) noted that the ceramic vessels in
Allen phase burials were quite similar from one grave to another, indicating that the
various styles present, including Patton Engraved, Hume Engraved, Darco Engraved, etc., were not manufactured for any one group among the eight burial sites.
In addition, the
ceramics coming from the burials.., show signs of usage (nicks, worn
spots, reworked vessels, etc.) which would preclude their being specially
produced burial wares. I have considered the ceramic offerings to be
everyday ware [Cole 1975:211].
In his analysis of the whole vessels from the Desh~o burials, Fields (n.d.:413)
reached a similar conclusion:
All five major surface treatment techniques identified in the sherd
collection are represented on the whole vessels. [In addition] more than
half.., of the motif and element categories of the incised or engraved
sherds are represented in the vessel collection. These facts point up the
fairly high degree of similarity between the sherd [collection from nonburial context] and vessel collections [from the cemetery].
The collection from Mayhew then, should have pottery types similar to those
at the eight Allen phase burial sites and at Deshazo. In addition, the site should have
few or no effigy or legged vessels.
Finally, the proportion of decorated to nondecorated ware at Mayhew should
differ from special activity sites such as the A. C. Saunders site, which has been
interpreted as a ceremonial center (Kleinschmidt 1982). In his vessel-batch analysis, Kleinschmidt (1982:240) identified surface decorations other than brushing on

144

Texas Archeological Society

more than 82 percent of 1264 vessels. At Deshazo, 51 percent of the whole vessels
from the burials and 51 percent of the body sherds had surface treatments other than
brushing (Fields n.d.:402-413, 431). It is expected that the Mayhew sample will
have a percentage closer to Deshazo than the percentage identified at A. C.
Saunders, supporting the third expectation in the model.
4. The artifact assemblage at the Mayhew site will reflect a range of utilitarian
activities rather than specialized use of the site.

In her analysis of eight Allen phase burial sites, Cole (1975:327-331),
identified several mortuary offerings that appear to indicate the acquired status of
selected individuals. The special offerings include animal effigy vessels, Anderson
knives, Jowell knives, metal knives, hawk bells, marine shell beads, blue-gray
schist, and glass beads. Similar goods in the burials at Deshazo (Good 1982:88)
were interpreted as status items. These include stone tools (two flint scrapers and
a white sandstone abrader), metal knives, a possible rattle, a clay pipe, and a copper
bell. If these artifacts are status items, it is unlikely that they would be in the living
surface residue from small farmsteads.
Analysis of the material remains at the A. C. Saunders site led to the inference-based on several unique aspects of the site and its collections--that the site had
functioned as a ceremonial center (Kleinschmidt 1982:240). First, the ash mound
and midden mound features are unique. "Of the 668 sites known in the six county
region, only 5 other mound sites are identified, none of which closely resembles this
site" (Kleinschmidt 1982:238). The sheer numbers of vessels from the midden
(N=1264) dwarf other collections (Kleinschmidt 1982:234). Moreover, the prominence of engraved vessels (45.5 percent) is unusual. It is known that the Mayhew
site did not have the special features of Saunders, but it is expected to have smaller
proportions of both vessels and engraved vessels. Finally, artifacts at Mayhew
should represent daily family activities, such as cooking, sleeping, manufacture of
clothing, and procurement of food.
5. The artifact assemblage will be consistent with a site with a population of
four to seven people.
The estimated size of Hasinai fam il ies is not well documented. Joutel (1851:102)
described dwellings in Hasinai hamlets that housed as many as eight families, so
they would certainly have populations of much more than seven individuals.
However, he also noted that there were both medium-sized and small houses (Joutel
1851:102). Further, upon entering the region occupied by the Hasinai, he remarked
on the random nature of the settlement pattern, since he often encountered "on the
trail cabins at a distance from each other" (1851:102). Writing several years later,
Fray Espinosa (in Swanton 1942:274) describes isolated farmsteads with individual
families. None of these early accounts, however, refers to the size of individual
families. Indirect evidence, however, suggests that families may have been small.
Both the early French and early Spanish accounts of marriage customs mention the
frequency of divorce among the Hasinai and the women’s insistence on monogamy

Kenmotsu ~ The Mayhew Site

145

(Casafias 1968:51; Espinosa in Swanton 1942:274; Joute11851:102,104). Casafias
(1968: 51) states that
the thing I approve is that they have only one wife at a time. Ifa man wants
to take a new wife, he makes a difference between them, never living with
them both at the same time. If the first wife finds that he has another wife
in view, she makes it a point of honor.., to leave him at once.
These descriptions of male-female relations suggest that farmsteads would
have been occupied by only one woman of child-bearing age together with her
children, or older women. Considering these data, it is here assumed that a Hasinai
farmstead would have been occupied by male and female heads of household, two
or more children, and, at times, grandparents who may or may not have occupied
a second dwelling.
Analyses of vessel batches at the Mayhew site, based on work by Cook (1972),
Arnold (1985), Driggers (1985), and Longacre (1985), have been used to estimate
site population. Pottery vessels break from time to time, so various researchers have
studied modern populations to determine the average number of vessels broken per
family per year (Cook 1972; Arnold 1985; Longacre 1985), and it is assumed (Cook
1972) that prehistoric groups broke similar numbers of vessels per family per year.
If this is true, one can infer populations at Caddoan sites--from data gathered from
sherd counts--on the basis of the number of vessels broken per year (Keller
1974:188; Driggers 1985:90). Both Keller and Driggers began by utilizing the
analysis by Cook (1972). However, both ultimately reached their own conclusions
about the quantities of vessels broken each year. Keller established a base line of five
per family per year; Driggers used four and a half pots broken per family per year.
In a recent ethnoarcheological study, Longacre (1985:339) found fewer pots broken
per family per year (e.g., 1.2) than had been estimated by Keller or Driggers.
However, Longacre (1985:345) notes an influx of plastic bottles replacing ceramic
vessels, so the number of broken pots in modern sites is concluded to be fewer than
would be found in the pre-plastic-bottle era (Longacre 1985:345). Therefore, the
estimates of Driggers and Keller are assumed to be more applicable than those of
Cook, Arnold, and Longacre to the Mayhew site.
To make an estimate of population, the percentage of the site that has been
excavated must be established (Driggers 1985:91), and it is also helpful to know
how long the site was occupied.
EXCAVATIONS AND THE MATERIAL REMAINS

The Texas Archeological Salvage Program conducted the final investigations
at Mayhew in 1975, when, in all, 15 crew-days were spent at the site. The primary
source for the descriptions of the excavations is the daily log kept by Elton Prewitt
during that 1975 fieldwork. Maps, photographs, and other materials on file at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) were also used to clarify or
enhance those field notes. However, since this author did not participate in the

146

Texas Archeological Society

excavations, the description is, to some extent, an interpretation of the field notes,
maps, and photographs.
In all, 55 contiguous, 2-by-2-meter units were excavated by hand (See Figure
2), and all soil was screened through quarter-inch hardware cloth. At first, units were
excavated in 5 cm levels to the red-orange basal clay, but eventually this method was
discontinued in favor of excavation of the area as a single unit after Prewitt (1975)
concluded that "41NA21 is a single component site occupied only after historic
contact times." Two anomalies were noted at the site during the excavations: one
was a large irregular area where the red-orange, basal clay was seen at about 10 cm
below ground surface in several contiguous units. The other anomaly was a possible
posthole described as a shallow stain 5 cm in diameter and 10 to 15 cm deep. No
other anomalies were found, and only the artifactual evidence is used in interpretation of the site.
Domestic Artifacts
Domestic artifacts (Table 1) comprise all of those artifacts concluded to have
been used in relatively regular, routine, and daily activities associated with household duties. This category includes artifacts that were used in food storage or
preparation (ceramics, ground stone), and/or typical household chores (bone
tools, glass, metal, and some lithic artifacts). Pipes are also incorporated into
the domestic artifacts, since some evidence suggests that they were used on a
daily basis in Late Prehistoric and Historic period Caddoan houses (Napoleon
n.d.:364).
Ceramic sherds are the largest artifact class at the site. Except for the seven
fragments of pipes, all of the ceramics are fragments of broken vessels. More than
half of the sherds had evidence of brushing (Kenmotsu n.d.), a surface treatment
technique that is found in the Neches and Angelina drainages with increasing
frequency after A.D. 1300, and especially at Allen phase sites (Kleinschmidt
1982:238). Only 2981 sherds of the total ceramic inventory had surface decoration
other than brushing. As noted previously, although total numbers of sherds are high,
the sherds themselves are quite small (Figure 3). More than half are less than 3 cm
in diameter, and several thousand are less than 1 cm in diameter. Only 13 sherds in
the entire collection measure more than 5 cm in diameter.
The dominant tempering agent is bone, found in at least 80 percent of all sherds.
Bone temper is commonly found in Allen phase sites and, to a lesser extent, in
Frankston focus sites (Fields n.d. :443; Kleinschmidt 1982). Nineteen design motifs
other than brushing were identified on the body sherds; more than half of the
decorated body sherds (N=1595) are Patton Engraved. In addition to Patton
Engraved, decorated body sherds are engraved, punctated, or incised, often with
brushing; most are small.
The frequency of surface treatments on rim sherds contrasts markedly with that
of the body sherds. Most rim sherds have some form of decoration other than
brushing. Another distinction between the body sherds and rim sherds is the
percentage of Patton Engraved, which, although it dominates the design motifs of

Kenmotsu u The Mayhew Site

147

Table 1. Domestic Artifacts from the Mayhew Site, 41NA21.
Class
Vessel ceramics

Pipe ceramics

Type/Subclass
Plain and brushed body sherds
Base sherds
Patton Engraved body sherds
Other decorated body sherds
Natchitoches Engraved (rim and body
sherds)
Emory Punctated-Incised rims
Patton Engraved rim sherds
Plain and brushed rim sherds
Other decorated rim sherds
Vessel appendages
Pipe fragments

11
101
322
193
5
7
11

Ground stone
Antler tine

1
5

Glass
Brass kettles

18,238
52
1595
938
69

4

Battered and other stone
Bone tool

Quantity

Rim fragments

4

Nails

6

Chisel

1
17

Other metal
Nonweaponry lithics

Debris
Exhausted cores
Lithic tools

33
10
39

the body sherds, could be identified on only 101 rim sherds; most rim sherds are less
than 1 cm in diameter.
Vessel batches were established for the rim sherds from the Mayhew site
(Kenmotsu n.d.: Appendix I). Minimum vessel counts (or vessel batches) are not
new, for Krieger (1949:217) was an early proponent of such analysis; he reasoned
that total sherd counts were not useful in determining accurate estimates of specific
pottery types. Following Krieger’ s suggestion, Th urmond and Kleinsch m idt (1979)
made a vessel batch analysis and identified 134 vessels in a pit east of Mound C at
the George C. Davis site. Thirty more vessels were identified in a nearby feature
(Stokes 1981:375) using the same analytical technique. In both efforts, researchers
believed the vessel batch analyses provided more realistic information about the
frequency of pottery types discarded in the features than could have been derived
from raw sherd counts.

148

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 3. Body sherds from the Mayhew site: Above, brushed body sherds measuring less
than 1.9 cm; Below, brushed body sherds measuring more than 1.9 cm.

A similar study was carried out by Driggers (1985:62) on ceramics from the
Benson’s Crossing site (41TFt 10) now under Lake Bob Sandlin, and minimum
vessel counts were also made for the A. C. Saunders site (Kleinschmidt 1982). By
using vessel batches, Driggers (1985:40) was able to identify at least 209 vessels at
the site and concluded that the effort had yielded a much more detailed description
of the ceramic assemblage, had resulted in estimates of the duration of occupancy
and population, and had made more precise examination of vessel shape and size
possible (Kleinschmidt 1982:97-99). Kleinschmidt’s (1982:97) analysis of the
ceramic assemblage from the midden at the A. C. Saunders site was completed in
a similar manner; there, 1264 vessels were identified (Kleinschmidt 1982:191).
The vessel batch analysis made on the Mayhew collection (Kenmotsu
n.d.:Appendix I) included only rim sherds. Considering the small size of many
sherds from the Mayhew site and the many plain and brushed body sherds, it was

Kenmotsu -- The Mayhew Site

149

believed that to include the body sherds would introduce too much subjectivity into
the analysis. The exception to this is vessel 46, a possible Natchitoches Engraved
vessel whose 69 sherds include both rim and body fragments. In all other cases only
rim sherds were counted, since use of body sherds would risk duplication of vessel
counts. Sixty-one vessel batches were recognized from rim sherds, so total counts
of vessels are in marked contrast to those at the A. C. Saunders site, which has many
more vessel batches. Too, there is much less variety in design motifs on the vessels
at Mayhew than on those at Saunders (Figure 4).

Figure 4. Photograph of three vessel batches: Top, B atch 34, Brushed rim sherds; Left, Batch
43, Incised rim sherds with diagonal motif bordered by horizontal line; Right, Batch 15,
Punctated rim sherds.

The next largest class of artifacts is lithics, with 82 specimens; in all the
remaining artifact classes there are fewer than 20 specimens. Fifteen diverse
specimens of battered and ground stone comprise five identifiable classes of
artifacts: battered stones, abraders, milling stones, unpitted manos, and pitted
stones. One bone antler tine was recovered from 41NA21 together with five small
fragments of clear and green glass too small (less than 2 cm in diameter) to

150

Texas Archeological Society

determine their age. The brass kettle fragments are also small (less than 2 cm) and
may all be from the same kettle. The nails are rectangular in cross section and of
varying lengths, and like the other ferrous metal artifacts, all are heavily corroded
and quite fragile.
The 82 chipped stone artifacts from the Mayhew site are here assumed to
represent non-weapon-related specimens. However, the 33 pieces of debris and the
10 exhausted cores could be the end results of either weapons or domestic tool
production. In the absence of better information, all are included under domestic
artifacts, but the debris is interesting in two ways. First, the stone is not from local
sources; many specimens are of a gray-blue chert. Second, some of the debris is
apparently the result of bipolar reduction, a reduction strategy often used when raw
material consists of small cobbles or pebbles. In the analysis, an effort was made to
identify source material from comparative material at TARL by comparing Mayhew
specimens to those in the well-analyzed and reported Desh~o collection (Girard
n.d.), which contains evidence of bipolar reduction and nonlocal material. The
lithics include both manufacturing debris (cores, reduction flakes, etc.), and tools.
The non-weapon-related stone tools from Mayhew include seven unifaces, two
bifaces, three perforators, two probable gravers, one strike-a-light, and 24 utilized
flakes.
In summary, the inventory of ceramic and glass sherds, lithic material, brass
kettle fragments, nails, and the bone tool that are the bulk of the Mayhew collection
appears to be consistent with domestic activities. Ceramic sherds dominate all
artifacts with 21,491 specimens; these sherds are similar to those in the collections
from Deshazo in surface treatment, high percentage of brushed body sherds, and
low percentage of engraved or incised sherds.
Wearing Apparel
Beads are the only wearing apparel represented in the Mayhew collection;
thirty-four glass beads and one chunk of glass beads, partially melted and fused,
were recovered from the site. Only 19 of the individual beads and the chunk of fused
beads are still in the collection; the others were lost or stolen in 1978 (Elton Prewitt,
personal communication, 1987). The 19 specimens are white, blue, and black; one
is white with thin blue stripes (Kenmotsu n.d.). All but one of the beads were made
by the simple drawn method (Harris and Harris 1967:135-137; Deagan 1987:170172). The exception is a single bead from Mayhew that is a fragment of a bead made
by the wire method (i.e., wrapping a thin wirelike ribbon of glass around a cylinder)
with thin stripes of another color applied to it. Like drawn beads, wound beads were
also relatively easy and inexpensive to manufacture, and they are also believed to
have become more popular than drawn beads in the New World during the
eighteenth century (Deagan 1987:160).
Only seven of the beads in the collection--the colored beads and the complex
bead have been dated by comparison with beads from well-dated Spanish colonial
contexts (Deagan 1987:172). The seven dates range between A.D. 1550 and 1800.
The blue seed beads in the lump of fused beads have the longest time range (i.e.,

Kenmotsu ~ The Mayhew Site

151

1550 to 1800). If the latest date is removed, their range is between A.D. 1575 and
A.D. 1750. Under the Harris and Harris classification (1967), 14 of the 19 beads
from 41NA21 are types usually associated with the early eighteenth century. Two
(types 76 and 27) were introduced into theNew World between A.D. 1740 and 1767,
and at least 10 are types that do not appear as trade items after 1767 (Harris and
Harris 1967:156-157). No types that Harris believed were introduced after 1767
were found in the collection. Tentatively, then, it appears that most of the beads are
from the period between A.D. 1575 and 1750, which places them well within the
Allen phase.
Weaponry
Weapons and weapons-related artifacts at the Mayhew site are of both native
and European manufacture. The native-made weapons consist of bifacially chipped
arrowpoints and four native-made gunflints; the European weapons are gun
furniture and gunflints.
The bifacially chipped weapons are all arrowpoints (Figure 5): one Perdiz,
eight Fresno, one Maud, and four too fragmentary to classify. These arrowpoint
styles tend to be associated with the Allen phase, although Perdiz has a much
greater time span and is more closely associated with the preceding Frankston
focus (Suhm et al. 1954:185). Based on their similarity to the nonlocal chert
identified by Girard (n.d.) at Deshazo, all of the arrowpoints apparently are of
nonlocal material.
Fresno arrowpoints are generally associated with historic Indian groups (Story
1990:251), especially in Central, North, and East Texas. Whereas the triangular
Cuney arrowpoints are more closely associated with Allen phase burial sites (Suhm
et al. 1954:293; Cole 1975:177-178), Fresnos have also been recovered in small
numbers from several Allen phase burials (Cole 1975:177-178), and there were two
among Desh~o’s Triangular Bi faces (Girard n.d.: 84). On the other hand, they have
been recovered in substantial quantities from the Gilbert (Allen et al. 1967:194) and
Roseborough Lake (Miroir et al. 1973:123) sites.
The Maud arrowpoint (Suhm etal. 1962:281) is of white-tan chert with slightly
recurved shoulders, a concave base, and some serrations visible on its opposing
margins. No Maud points were identified at Deshazo (Girard n.d.), the eight Allen
phase burial sites (Cole 1975:177), or Mission Dolores (Corbin et al. 1990:121).
One was recovered from Gilbert (Allen et al. 1967:135) and four from the
Roseborough Lake site (Miroir et al. 1973:123).
Six gunflints (Figure 6) were recovered from investigations at the Mayhew
site. Two are honey colored and of French manufacture; the other four are of native
manufacture. All are within the size range of gunflints for flintlock rifles. The two
French gunflints, easily identified by their translucent honey-yellow color, are
roughly wedgelike or chisellike in transverse section and were manufactured by
spall technology rather than from blades (Hamilton and Fry 1975). The heels of both
tend to conform to the curved D shape of French gunspalls, but the narrower of the
two appears to have undergone rejuvenation, so its sides are slightly rounded.

152

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 5. Arrowpoints from the Mayhew site. Top row, Fresno; Middle row, Unidentified;
Bottom left, Maud; Bottom right, Perdiz.

Despite their physical dissimilarities, wear patterns on all six specimens are
remarkably similar. Based on other gunflint studies (Kenmotsu 1990:111; Hamilton
1960), the wear patterns include extensive step flaking along working edges, and
some small areas also show evidence of crushing. Several have more than one
working edgeia pattern of rejuvenation that has been noted on other gunflints from
East Texas (Kenmotsu 1990).
Both the rejuvenation of gunflints and their manufacturing technique have
important implications for the dating of the Mayhew site. French gunflints dominated the market until about A.D. 1790 (de Lotbiniere 1984:vii-viii). From about
A.D. 1650 to 1750 French production was dominated by gunspalls in contrast to
a blade technology that was not perfected until about A.D. 1750 (Blanchette
1975; Hamilton and Fry 1975:111-113). The presence of two French gunspalls
suggests a date before A.D. 1750, and the presence of aboriginally manufactured gunflints also hints at an early eighteenth century date. Native manufacture of gunflints typically "continued until an accepted and reliable source of
European gunflints was available" (Kenmotsu 1990:97). Since it is known that
by A.D. 1700 French bills of lading document thousands of gunflints sent to
French colonies (Hamilton 1979:210), and the French were trading in the Bayou
Loco region by A.D. 1714, the Mayhew gunflints suggest a date between A.D.

Kenmotsu ~ The Mayhew Site

153

Figure 6. Gun-related artifacts from the Mayhew site. Top row, L to R; Three butt plate
fragments (two probable), Two trigger guard fragments. Next to top row, L to R; Three side
plate fragments with dragon head/lacy pattern, Possible frizzen spring, Side plate screw,
Cock fragment. Middle row, L to R; Six lead balls and a ramrod fragment. Next to bottom
row, L to R; Four native-made gunflints, Two French gunflints. Bottom row; Gun barrel with
battered end.

1700 and 1750. This date corresponds well with the dates of the beads and of
the metal gun furniture from the site.
Gun parts at Mayhew include an incomplete gun barrel, two fragments of
trigger guards, 11 side plate fragments, four pieces of butt plates, two side plate
screws, one flintlock cock, two iron ramrod fragments, and six lead balls (Figure 6)
(Kenmotsu n.d.). The gun barrel is basically intact, and has been rejuvenated into
a different tool by beveling both ends. Although little gun-related material was
recovered from the Desh~o site, and none from the eight Allen Phase burial sites
(Cole 1975:199), other East Texas sites have also contained gun barrels with
beveled ends. The Gilbert site (41RA13) in Rains County had 23 fragments of gun
barrels, most of which were battered or flattened (Blaine and Harris 1967:59). One
gun barrel from the Pearson site (41RA5) is also flattened "as if it had been used as
a scraper or gouge" (Duffield and Jelks 1961:54). Several beveled fragments were
also recovered from the Roseborough Lake site (Miroir et al. 1973:143). Hamilton
(1960:126), working with material remains from Seneca and Osage sites, also found

154

Texas Archeological Society

a high incidence of beveling of gun barrels and concludes that the Osage used them
as fleshers and scrapers for removing flesh and fat from hides.
A sufficient amount of the design can be detected on the two trigger guards to
make suggestions as to their identi fication possible. They are quite similar to artifact
B217 from the Tunica site material. The Tunica trigger guard, which is classified
as Type C, dating from A.D. 1685 to 1730--is a type of inferior quality commonly
traded by the French to native groups (Hamilton 1979:212). Since they are so
similar, a manufacturing date of A.D. 1685 to 1730 has been assigned to these
specimens, and it is here concluded that they came from a French flintlock rifle.
Fragments of at least three side plates were recovered from Mayhew, and four
appear to be parts of a single brass side plate of a flintlock gun. All four are
characterized by a lacy, open pattern that is distinct from the patterns of the solid side
plates manufactured in France after about A.D. 1715 and in England after A.D. 1750
(Blaine and Harris 1967:67). Three of the fragments are nondiagnostic curved
fragments with curvilinear engraved designs. The fourth specimen has a dragon’s
head and half of the rear screw hole that was used to attach the side plate to the
wooden flintlock stock. The designs are considered representative of guns of second
quality that were produced in France from A.D. 1680 to 1730 in sizable quantities
for trade (Hamilton 1968:3-7). Since the French are known to have been trading in
the general Mayhew area by the early 1700s, it is here concluded that these four
fragments are from a single side plate from an early eighteenth century (about A.D.
1700-1730) French trade gun. Five fragments of what appear to be two other side
plates are also in the Mayhew collection. These heavily corroded fragments are of
a solid flat form that became popular in France after 1715 and in England after 1750
(Blaine and Harris 1967:71).
The four fragments of brass butt plates are believed to be the remains of two butt
plates; one is a flat, cast piece of brass with no identifying characteristics, and the
other three fragments appear to be from a single butt plate of Hamilton’s Type C,
dating between 1685 and 1730 (Hamilton 1979:212).
The additional gun parts are fairly fragmentary, and those that are of cast iron
are corroded and in poor condition. Based on the present evidence, there is sufficient
material for one, and possibly two probable broken or damaged and subsequently
discarded flintlock rifles. Despite the fragmentary condition of many of the parts,
some are sufficiently complete to make it possible to suggest a manufacturing date.
The side plates and trigger guard indicate a date of A.D. 1685 to 1730, and appear
to be from a French Type C trade gun (Hamilton 1968).
The dating of the Mayhew site is based primarily upon the known dates for the
European artifacts recovered from the site. To a lesser extent, the native-made
artifacts from the site were used in determining the approximate dates of its
occupation. Some of these artifacts (gunflints) suggest that the Mayhew site was not
occupied before A.D. 1700, and others (gun parts) suggest that abandonment was
no later than A.D. 1750. S everal of the gun parts (trigger guards, butt plates, and side
plates) are from French trade guns manufactured between A.D. 1685 and 1730.
Possible fragments of another flintlock rifle were manufactured in France beginning

Kenmotsu ~ The Mayhew Site

155

about A. D. 1715. It can be further in ferred that the guns date to the period between
A.D. 1700 and 1750, since there was only limited French activity in the southern
areas west of the Mississippi before A.D. 1700, and Natchitoches was not established until A.D. 1714. The beads recovered at Mayhew also generally date to the
first half of the eighteenth century. None of the types introduced after A.D. 1767
were identi fled in the collection, and there was only one in the collection of the types
that were introduced after A.D. 1740. One of the bead types has a long time span
(i.e., A.D. 1550 to 1800); the remainder have been recovered from Spanish Colonial
sites dating between A.D. 1575 and 1750.
The similarity of the material remains at Mayhew to those from Deshazo also
suggests that the Mayhew site may date to about the same time period as Deshazo.
Two archeomagnetic dates are available for Deshazo: A.D. 1715_+30 and A.D.
1710-2_34 (Good 1982:78). The Deshazo artifact assemblage has many classes and/
or recognized types, and the Mayhew site has fewer recognized types or classes;
those that have been identified at Mayhew tend to have equivalents at Deshazo.
Mayhew resembles Desh~o in its proportion of brushed to plain ceramics. By
weight, brushed body sherds at Mayhew oumumber plain body sherds three to one,
a ratio nearly identical to the proportion of brushed to plain body sherds at Deshazo.
This is in contrast to the earlier A. C. Saunders site, where only 50 percent of the
sherds are brushed. The popularity of brushing at Mayhew strengthens its similarity
to Deshazo. Fields (n.d.:443) noted the increase and tentatively concluded that
brushing was more popular in the Allen phase as a surface technique than in the
preceding Frankston focus. These data suggest that Deshazo and Mayhew share a
common time span.
INTERPRETATION

The dominant component at Mayhew is the historic Indian component that has
been assigned to the Allen phase. This component is represented by more than
21,000 ceramic artifacts, contracting stem and triangular arrowpoints, other lithic
artifacts, and European-manufactured artifacts such as gun parts, gunflints, brass
kettle fragments, beads, and nails. This artifact assemblage conforms to those at
other Allen phase sites (Cole 1975; Creel 1982c; Good 1982).
In order to determine whether the Allen phase component at Mayhew is the
remains of a Hasinai farmstead, it was necessary to determine that the Allen focus
collection at 41NA21 represents a single occupation rather than a series of
occupations. Since the site has no features, its interpretation must rely on the artifact
assemblage.
As already noted, all of the dates of the European goods tend to coincide,
suggesting that they come from a single occupation. Too, there are some indications that the European goods are primarily of French origin, which conforms
well with the fact that the French were the dominant source of trade goods in
East Texas in the early eighteenth century. Although several Spanish missions
were established in East Texas between 1690 and 1722, letters from the priests

156

Texas Archeological Society

(Casafias 1968; Hidalgo in Swanton 1942:242) to their superiors in New Spain
indicate that at that time they generally lacked both staples and trade goods. Too,
a single source for the European goods also supports a single occupation, since
sequent occupations could result in a greater variety of material at the site from
a greater variety of sources. The native-made artifacts also tend to support a
single occupation, for the ceramic collection is relatively uniform in surface
treatment, paste, temper, and colors. There is greater diversity in the source
material of the lithics from the site, but a considerable number of the lithics
appear to be from the same gray-blue chert source. In sum, the material remains
from Mayhew are fairly homogeneous, suggesting that they reflect one occupation rather than sequent occupations.
1. The Mayhew site consists of general refuse scatter in a habitation area rather
than refuse from a trash midden resulting from the use of the knoll
exclusively for disposal.

Ethnoarcheological studies (cf. O’Connell 1987; Binford 1980; Yellen 1977)
have noted that some small groups have discard-areas set aside for deliberate
disposal, where the artifacts are larger (e.g., more than 5 cm) than those in the
general living area. These areas are trash middens, and are distinct from the areas
of living-surface residue that have small fragments of refuse scattered throughout.
Trash middens have been identified in Hasinai and prehistoric Caddoan sites
in East Texas, and are known at Deshazo (Good 1982:53), Benson’s Crossing
(Driggers 1985:34), and the ash mound midden at the A. C. Saunders site
(Kleinschmidt 1982:41). In all three sites the middens are believed to he areas of
deliberate trash disposal. In all three sites the middens are distinguished by their
distinctly dark soil color and their many large artifacts. The most prominent trash
midden at Deshazo was associated with structure 7 (Good 1982:55); located south
of the structure, it"yielded very high artifact densities and a good sample of faunal
remains. It represents the most concentrated trash or midden deposit at the site"
(Creel 1982b:41). Although there were some postmolds in the midden, Good
(1982:55) suggests that these were from supports for outdoor structures. Moreover,
Creel (1982b:40) noted that "midden-stain was not ubiquitous across the site," and
that the darker stain in this m idden was readily visible. In his analysis of the Deshazo
ceramics, Fields (n.d.:418) states that"the high density in [the midden] makes sense
because this unit appears to sample a midden.., based on high artifact frequency,
relatively abundant faunal remains, and scarcity of cultural features." The ceramic
density in the midden was 453 sherds per cubic meter (Fields n.d.:418), whereas
sherd density in areas of structures averaged about 100 sherds per cubic meter.
Moreover, sherd size in the Deshazo trash midden was considerably greater than at
Mayhew. Lithic material in the midden also exceeded the totals in the other units at
the site (Girard n.d.: 143).
At Benson’s Crossing site, the trash midden is described (Driggers 1985:105)
as

Kenmotsu ~ The Mayhew Site

157

an extensive midden deposit roughly circular in plan and somewhat lensshaped in section; characterized by dark organic staining; 12 to 13 m in
diameter and approximately 15-20 cm in depth; associated artifacts
include numerous sherds, lithic debitage, lithic tools, and burned clay; also
associated with this feature were mussel shells, and bones of several whitetail deer, nutshells, and seeds.
In all, more than 20,000 sherds and 4800 pieces oflithic debris and tools were
recovered from this midden (Driggers 1985:36). About half of the sherds measured
more than 2 cm (Driggers 1985:53). Two other aspects of this trash midden merit
mention; first, Driggers concludes that the "stylistic and technical uniformity"
(1985:86) of the sherds from the feature is so consistent that the trash midden was
the result of occupation by a single group of people, and, second, he concludes that
the trash resulted from an occupation of two or more extended families for about 30
years (Driggers 1985:93).
Kleinschmidt describes the trash midden at the A. C. Saunders site (Feature 2)
(Kleinschmidt 1982:41) as "roughly circular" and measuring 19.7 meters north to
south, 16.4 meters east to west, and about 78.7 cm high. It had a "recognizably
distinct soil" that was a black-red color and contained red sand, clay, ashes,
charcoal, and artifacts (Ibid.). The midden has been tentatively called a discard area
for a ceremonial center (Kleinschmidt 1982:238-240). In all, this part of the site
yielded 6730 sherds, together with other artifacts (Ibid.:84). Total density of sherds
per cubic meter is about 33, less than at Deshazo, but the number of sherds and other
artifacts from the midden is probably understated. Excavated in the 1930s when"the
goals were primarily to collect... Caddoan artifacts, especially whole vessels"
(Kleinschmidt 1982:18), photographs on file at TARL show large piles of sherds,
bone, and other remains that were discarded in the trash midden. Only the finest
specimens were returned to Austin. The photographs attest to the many large sherds
(e.g., more than 5 cm in diameter) and also to the many large bones that were not
collected.
The descriptions of these three trash middens are at odds in several respects
with the material recovered from Mayhew. First, Mayhew did not have a noticeably
darker soil color. During the excavations at the site, Prewitt’s field notes include a
perplexed comment wondering why the site has "no more midden stain than it does"
(Prewitt 1975), and during the 1987 interview, he repeated that comment. Color
photographs of site excavations show that the soil was brownish orange: the absence
of darker soil color suggests that the Mayhew deposit is not a trash disposal area.
Second, the average sherd size in the middens at Deshazo, Benson’s Crossing, and
the A. C. Saunders site was considerably larger than the average sherd size at
Mayhew. This is in keeping with the findings of O’Connell (1987:95) at Alyawara
sites. At Alyawara sites artifacts in trash middens are generally larger than those in
the living areas. Moreover, the average sherd size in the Mayhew site agrees well
with experimental studies of the effects of foot trampling (Nielsen 1991). The
dominant damage to sherds from foot trampling is a general breakdown in sherd size

158

Texas Archeological Society

until a unimodal size distribution with a mode of 30 mm or less is achieved
(Ibid.:495-596). The mode at Mayhew is less than 30 mm. The small sherds at
Mayhew are also in keeping with archeological evidence from other contexts. The
Juntunen site in the Great Lakes had a high proportion of very small sherds in areas
that were concluded to have seen heavy traffic (McPherron 1967:288-289).
Similarly, sheet trash at historic sites is o f notieeably smaller size in pathways, areas
adjacent to porch steps, entryways, and in other areas of heavy foot traffic (Moir
1987). The sherd densities at Mayhew may be the result of trampling.
It should be noted that there are many more sherds at the site than in the three
trash middens. Densities in most of the site exceed 650 sherds per cubic meter.
However, the densities at the Mayhew site are related to the smaller average sherd
size and do not appear to reflect the breakage of more vessels there. Vessel batches
from Benson’s Crossing and A. C. Saunders indicate that there were many more
vessels at these sites than at Mayhew. At Benson’s Crossing, 209 vessels were
inferred from 10,369 sherds (Driggers 1985:47), and at Saunders, 1264 vessels were
inferred from 1465 rim sherds and 47 body sherds (Kleinschmidt 1982:97). In
contrast, only 61 vessels could be inferred from the rim sherds at Mayhew, so the
large number of sherds at Mayhew apparently reflects the effects of foot trampling.
Another difference between the trash middens at Deshazo, Benson’s Crossing,
and A. C. Saunders and those at the Mayhew site is their faunal inventory. There
were significantly higher quantities of faunal remains in the trash middens at
Deshazo, Benson’s Crossing and the A. C. Saunders site than at Mayhew. According to Henderson (1982:133), "most of the faunal debris [at Deshazo] was obtained
from the [trash] midden in Area D, which yielded numerous diagnostic artifacts of
the Allen phase." The total bone count from Mayhew was 45, compared to 852
identifiable vertebrates from Deshazo. The bone counts underscore the distinction
between the Mayhew deposit and the trash middens at the other three sites.
In summary, this expectation is tentatively confirmed. There is some archeological evidence that the remains at Mayhew are residue from an occupation rather
than from a trash disposal area. The ceramics from Benson’s Crossing--a site with
a trash midden--include a high percentage of small sherds, but the remainder tend
to be more than 30 mm in diameter, larger than the sherds at Mayhew. In addition,
the middens at the Deshazo and A. C. Saunders sites contained a higher percentage
of large sherds than small sherds. Moreover, the dark staining at the other three sites
was not seen at Mayhew, suggesting that the Mayhew site reflects a function other
than trash disposal. Finally, lithic and bone densities at the Deshazo and A. C.
Saunders sites are considerably higher than at Mayhew, further suggesting that
Mayhew was not a trash midden.
2. Evidence that daily tasks (cooking, food storage, tool making, etc.) were
carried out by small nuclear or extendedfamilies will be manifested by small
concentrations of artifacts.

Ethnoarcheological studies (O’Connel11987) have indicated that activity areas
can be identified in some archeological sites. Several recent investigation in or near

Kenmotsu m The Mayhew Site

159

East Texas (Bruseth and Perttula 1981; McGregor et al. 1987) have used computergenerated maps to identify activity patterns at prehistoric sites. Since the Mayhew
site lacks evidence of features, it was hoped that artifact concentrations might be
revealed by maps illustrating concentrations of the material remains, and it was
assumed that these concentrations probably would be the remnants of the activities
carried out at the site.
In view of the small quantities of all artifacts other than ceramics, the
distributions of ceramics, beads, battered and ground stone, and weaponry recovered from Mayhew were plotted by hand, and drafted on a computer (Figures 7, 8,
9, 10). However, contrary to the expectation, no clear, obvious, and definable
concentrations can be seen on these diagrams, although there may be some tentative
trends. First, if the ceramic totals (Figure 7) in any unit reflect the intensity of
trampling in that part of the site, then the area of heaviest foot traffic was northeast
of the site datum, with a smaller concentration north of the datum and a lighter
concentration east of the datum. Most of the beads (Figure 8) are in the area north
and east of the datum, but the largest cluster of beads is directly southwest of the
datum, well removed from the ceramic concentrations. A smaller concentration of
beads is in the northeast corner of the block excavation, and coincides with one of
the ceramic concentrations. The battered and ground stone (Figure 9) has one of the
lightest scatters; its only cluster lies between two of the ceramic concentrations.
Finally, as with beads and ceramics, there is a concentration of weaponry-related
artifacts in the northeast part of the block excavations (Figure 10), and a slightly
smaller concentration near the datum coincides with the heaviest concentration of
beads, but there was no ground stone in these units, and ceramics are less
concentrated in this part of the site.
In summary, no clear artifact concentrations could be identified in the site.
Since an estimated 21 percent of the site was excavated, any concentrations
should have been detected. There are, however, some trends in the patterning of
some of the artifacts. Some areas of the excavations had noticeably heavier
concentrations of sherds, possibly indicating areas of heavier foot traffic, and,
within or near these concentrations were slightly denser concentrations of beads,
battered and ground stone, and weaponry-associated artifacts.
It may be that trends are all that can be expected in farmsteads; the site
investigated by O’Connell (1987:105) was fairly large and complex. Because of
the frequency of relocation and abandonment of households at the site, household clusters could be sorted out through artifact patterning, but individual clusters displayed "little internal structure, except as a function of size sorting"
(Ibid.). In addition, the small artifacts in living area refuse are often scattered
across the site:
Razor blades and tobacco tabs are not used together.., nor is either
functionally connected with pull tabs from soft drink cans. Yet all have
very similar distribution patterns, largely because they are similar in size
[O’Connell 1987:95].

160

Texas Archeological Society

~,ontour Interval - 100 Sherds

0
o

4 METERS
Datum

Figure 7. Contoured diagram showing distribution of ceramics laid over a plan of the grid
system at the Mayhew site (41NA21).

O’Connell’s study suggests that the internal site structure may have been
obliterated by relocations of activities to accommodate changes in weather, personal preference, etc. If that is true, the search for trends rather than concentrations
in artifact patterning may be a more appropriate goal for sites like Mayhew.
Regardless, the data are certainly minimal, and the trends are sufficiently limited
that confirmation of the expectation has not been achieved.
3. The ceramics will be utilitarian.

In their analyses of other Allen phase sites, Cole (1975:211) and Fields
(n.d.:413) highlight the fact that most pottery types from this time were manufactared for utilitarian purposes, so it was anticipated that the collection from Mayhew
would have pottery types similar to those at the eight Allen phase burial sites and
at Deshazo. In addition, the site should have few or no effigy or legged vessels.

Kenmotsu -- The Mayhew Site

161

/ xg

LAx I

\x xlxU;x

N

/)

Contour Interval- 1 Bead

x

~X

0
o

4 METERS
Datum

Figure 8, Contoured diagram showing distribution of beads laid over aplan of the grid system
at the Mayhew site (41NA21).

Cole’s (1975:319) analysis of Allen phase burial site collections indicated that
animal effigy vessels are rare and are associated with burials of individuals of high
status. Finally, it was also anticipated that the proportion of decorated to nondecorated
ware at Mayhew would differ from the proportions at cemeteries or special activity
sites such as A. C. Saunders.
To some extent, this expectation was borne out. Plain and brushed sherds, with
18,238 sherds, dominate the collection of 21,491 ceramic sherds from the site.
However, the vessel batches based on rim sherds do not demonstrate the same
dominance of plain and brushed vessels. In the 61 vessel batches, there are six plain
and three brushed vessels; all of the remaining 52 batches have decorative elements,
including neck-bands, punctations, incisions, or engraved lines (Table 2), so surface
treatment is evidently more frequent than was anticipated. Some authors (Cole
1975:211; Fields n.d.:449) suggest that decorated vessels---except for animal effigy

162

Texas Archeological Society

i,

lxl

x

Contour Interval - 1 Artifact

N
4 METERS

0
~,

Datum

Figure 9. Contoured diagram showing distribution of battered and ground stone artifacts laid
over a plan of the grid system at the Mayhew site (41NA21).

vessels--were used for utilitarian tasks, and a fairly high proportion (85 percent) of
Mayhew vessels have some form of surface treatment. Although these numbers fail
to support the expectation, the vessel batches at Mayhew are distinct from those at
Saunders in their proportion of engraved wares. At A. C. Saunders, 45.5 percent of
the batches are engraved; at Mayhew only 10 percent are engraved. A similar
distinction with engraved pottery is found in Allen phase cemeteries, where pottery
in graves tends to be engraved rather than punctated, brushed, or plain (Cole
1975:347). However, although engraved pottery is found among utilitarian wares,
engraved wares seem to be preferred for pottery used in nonutilitarian contexts.
These differences suggest that at Mayhew there is indeed a higher concentration of
utilitarian pottery than is found at special activity sites.
In sum, this expectation is tentatively affirmed. Neither animal effigy vessels
nor legged vessels were identified in the collection. The absence of these wares,

Kenmotsu ~ The Mayhew Site

163

i

x
x

Contour Interval - 1 Artifact

N
LXX

0

4 METERS

v

o

Datum

Figure 10. Contoured diagram showing distribution of weapon-related artifacts laid over a
plan of the grid system at the Mayhew site (41NA21).

together with the evidence that there are fairly high percentages of engraved ware
in ceremonial or cemetery areas, supports the expectation that the pottery from
Mayhew is utilitarian in function.
4. The artifact assemblage at the Mayhew site will reflect a range of utilitarian
activities rather than specialized use of the site.
As a whole, the Mayhew artifact assemblage confirms this expectation, for the
artifacts are dominated by utilitarian ceramics, with engraved wares comprising
only 10 percent of the ceramics. Among the other artifacts in the collection, only the
34 beads could be considered nonutilitarian. On the other hand, although beads are
sometimes recovered from Allen phase burials (Cole 1975:175), they are not found
exclusively in burials, and Good (1982:88) did not include beads among the special
mortuary offerings at Desh~o, even though there were many in the collection.

164

Texas Archeological Society
Table 2. Vessel Batches By Surface Treatment.
Average Number of
Sherds per Batch

Number of
Vesset Batches

Plain

26

6

Surface
Treatment

Brushed

16

3

Neck-Banded

5

4

Brushed~unctated

3

6

Punctated

7

12

Patton Engraved

11

8

Natchitoches Engraved

69

1

Emory Punctated-Incised

7

1

Parallel Vertical Incised

8

2

Pinched-Appliqued

3

1

Diagonal Incised

1

3

Notched/Nicked Rim

1

2

20

3

4

6

1

3

Horizontal Incised, Unticked
Incised w/Diagonal Motif bordered
by Horizontal Incised Line
Diagonal Incised

Espinosa (in Swanton 1942:288) notes that women often incorporated beads into
their costumes. The other artifacts from Mayhew, which-based on the evidence
from the battered and ground stone--are for battering, food and/or pigment
grinding, cracking and chopping hard foods (such as nuts), hammering, and
smoothing--all utilitarian activities. The weaponry at the site consists ofarrowpoints,
gun flints, gun furniture, and lead shot, which would serve the needs of a farmstead
to acquire meat and fur pelts. In addition, the pipes in the collection would have been
typical of households in the Allen phase (Napolean n.d.), and the nails, chisel, bone
tool, metal kettle, and glass are consistent with activities associated with daily needs
rather than special functions. Finally, in the chipped stone artifact collection from
the site are perforators, a graver, one knife probably used for cutting, two bifaces,
one strike-a-light, and six uni faces that apparently were used for scraping (Kenmotsu
n.d.). These artifacts and their use-wear patterns reflect activities that would be
expected as part of the day-to-day routine of a farmstead.
The reuse of several artifacts at the site strengthens the interpretation that the
material remains reflect utilitarian activities. The gun barrel recovered from
Mayhew had been rejuvenated into another tool, perhaps a scraper or gouge; the
gunflints also have been resharpened and rejuvenated.

Kenmotsu ~ The Mayhew Site

165

Finally, the expectation was confirmed by the absence of metal knives,
Anderson knives, Jowell knives, hawk bells, marine shells, and blue-gray schist.
These artifacts have been known (Cole 1975) to be associated with the grave goods
of individuals of high status, and since the accounts of early Spanish priests have
indicated that individuals of high status did not live in isolated farmsteads, the
absence of these goods at Mayhew supports the expectation.
5. The artifact assemblage will be consistent with a population offour to seven
people at the site.
Rim sherds were separated from other Mayhew sherds in order to make a
minimum vessel count. Minimum vessel counts have several advantages over raw
sherd counts, for they provide a more complete approach to the frequency of vessels
used and broken at a site, a better estimate of the frequency of vessel surface
treatments, range and frequency of the vessel forms used at the site, population
estimates (Driggers 1985:40), and, since they, by identi fying vessel form, have been
used to suggest site function (Arnold 1985:11).
Theresults of the minimum vessel counts have not been as productive as hoped,
largely because of the small sherd size. Some data concerning vessel surface
treatment and population estimates could be inferred, but the small sherd size
precluded any evaluation of vessel form, so the range and frequency of vessel forms
at Mayhew could not be determined, and without vessel form, site function could
not be inferred. However, the study is not considered useless; some information
relating to population size and length of occupation was gained from the minimum
vessel counts..
In all, 61 vessel batches were identified from the 690 rim sherds (Kenmotsu
n.d.:Appendix I). Although 116 rim sherds could not be grouped into vessel
batches due to their small size, the remainder apparently represent distinct vessels. The numbers of sherds in the batches vary from one to 69, and many of the
batches have less than six sherds. However, the distinctive characteristics of lip
treatment, rim form, thickness, and decorative elements are sufficiently different that in some cases separate vessels can be inferred from single sherds. Temper in 60 of the vessels is bone, but many also have grog temper. Slightly more
than half of the batches have everted rims (n=32); the remaining rims are straight
or direct.
Seven sherds were identified as Emory Punctated-Incised, a style that has not
been well typed, but which appears to be associated with the historic Allen phase
in the Neches and Angelina drainages (Fields n.d.:400). Emory Punctated-Incised
is represented in the Deshazo collection, the ceramic sherds from Mission Dolores
(41SA25) in San Augustine (Corbin et al. 1990: 105-107), and in the collections
from Los Adaes (Gregory 1973:338-348). Natchitoches Engraved (Vessel Batch
46) is represented by 69 sherds (Figure 6); the crosshatching within a curved
engraved line appears to conform to this type. Natchitoches Engraved is typically
found in Late Caddoan period and Historic Caddoan period sites northeast and east
of Bayou Loco (Fields n.d.:395; Gregory 1973:356-358).

166

Texas Archeological Society

To make an estimate of population, it is necessary to know how much of the site
was excavated, and, if possible, the approximate duration of occupation (Driggers
1985:91). At Mayhew, Prewitt estimated that about 21 percent of the site was
excavated, but duration of occupation is not certain. If 61 vessel batches represent
21 percent of the vessels broken at the site, then 290 vessel batches would represent
100 percent of the vessels broken at the site. If five vessels were broken each year
by each family, then the Mayhew site would have been occupied for 58 years by one
household, or 29 years by two households, probably consisting of one house with
male, female, and children, and one house with grandparents, since site size is too
small to have held more than one or two structures as big as those at Deshazo. These
figures are consistent with a site population of four to seven individuals. Interestingly, a time span of 29 to 58 years is consistent with the dates of manufacture for
the European goods recovered (e.g., A.D. 1700-1750). In sum, the vessel batch
analysis supports the expectation.
SUMMARY

Does the Mayhew site (41NA21) in fact represent a Hasinai farmstead? The
artifact assemblage from the site is dominated by more than 20,000 ceramic sherds,
most of which are very small plain or brushed body sherds. Their uniformity in
temper (e.g., bone with some grog), color, and surface finishing techniques,
together with the presence of Patton Engraved sherds, indicates that they represent
a historic Indian component of the Hasinai Caddo. Early European trade goods at
the site dating to the early eighteenth century lend support to an affirmative
conclusion. In the light of this evidence, five expectations were set forth to test the
hypothesis that Mayhew was a Hasinai farmstead.
In general, the expectations are supported; the first expectation is concerned
with the evidence of whether the site represented a trash midden or living area
residue. Unlike the trash middens at Deshazo, Benson’s Crossing, and A. C.
Saunders, the Mayhew deposit lacks the dark organic staining of trash middens,
appreciable quantities of faunal remains, and sizable quantities of lithics or large
sherds. These facts confirm the first expectation that the site was a living area. The
second expectation seeks to identify activity areas in the site by means of artifact
densities. Although there are some possible trends of variability in artifact density
across the site, the trends are tentative, and the expectation is not so well supported.
The third and fourth expectations deal with the presence or absence of utilitarian
artifacts at the site. No animal effigy or legged vessels were identified in the
collection, there is less engraved ware at Mayhew than in graves or in ceremonial
sites, and the remainder of the artifacts strongly suggest utilitarian purposes. In the
light of these results, the third and fourth expectations appear to be confirmed. The
final expectation is concerned with deriving a population estimate for the site. The
estimate rests on a vessel batch analysis and the total area of the site. Sixty-one
vessel batches were assembled, using the rim sherds in the collection, and, based on
these vessels, it is projected that 290 vessels were broken at the site, and that the site

Kenmotsu ~ The Mayhew Site

167

was occupied for 29 to 58 years by a maximum of one or two families. These figures
are consistent with a population of four to seven individuals at Mayhew, confirming
the final expectation. In summary, it appears that the Mayhew site in Bayou Loco
Reservoir was the farmstead of a single or extended family of the Hasinai Caddo,
occupied between A.D. 1700 and 1750.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Several individuals have been instrumental in the development of this effort,
but any errors are my own and not because of advice freely given. Dee Ann Story
first suggested that I undertake the analysis and interpretation of the site, and then
kindly and wisely shepherded me through the pitfalls of such an analysis. In
addition, Timothy K. Perttula provided advice and persistently urged its completion. Darrell Creel, of TARL, provided access to their collections and commented
on an early draft. The staff of the Department of Antiquities Protection at the Texas
Historical Commission were helpful in many ways. Jan Guy was a source of
encouragement and offered thoughtful comments. Finally, appreciation is owed to
Jeannie for her patience with long hours at night devoted to Mom’s work.

REFERENCES
Allen, G. L., Jr., Pauline Allen, Joe Cochran, Lathel F. Duffield, R. C. Forrester, Jr., Elbert
D. Helm, Isabell R. Lobdell, David Lubell, Roy E. Padgett, and Robert L. Tapscott
1967
Stone Tools. In: The Gilbert Site: A Nortefio Focus Site in Northeastern Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeolog ical Society 37:191-211.
Anderson, Keith M., Kathleen Gilmore, Olin F. McCormick, Ill, and E. Pierre Morenon
1974
Archeological Investigation at Lake Palestine, Texas. Contributions inAnthropology No. 11, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Arnold, Dean E.
1985
Ceramic Theory and Cultural Process. Cambridge University Press, New York
Binford, Lewis
1978
Dimensional Analysis of Behavior and Site Structure: Learning from an Eskimo
Hunting Stand. American Antiquity 43:330-361.
1980

Willow Smoke and Dogs’ Tails: Hunter-Gatherer Settlement Systems and
Archeological Site Formation. American Antiquity 45: 4-20.

Blaine, Jay C.
Analysis and Description of Armaments and Associated Items. In: Presidio
1982

Nuestra Sehora del P ilar de los A daes, Excavations: 1982, by H. F. Gregory, Jay
C. Blaine, and Shelia Morrison, pp. 110-143. Williamson Museum, Northwestern State University. Natctfitoches.

168

Texas Archeological Society

Blaine, Jay C., and R. K. Harris
1967

Guns. In: The Gilbert Site: A Nortefio Focus Site in Northeastern Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 37: 33-86.

Blanchette, Jean-Francois
Gunflints from Chicoutimi Indian Site (Quebec). HistoricalArchaeology 9:411975
54.
Bolton, Herbert E.
1915
Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century, Studies in Spanish Colonial History
and Administration. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Bomar, G. W.
1983
Texas Weather. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Brain, Jeffrey P.
1979

Tunica Treasure. Papers of the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Volume 71. Harvard University. Cambridge.

Bruseth, James E., and Timothy K. Perttula
Prehistoric Settlement Patterns at Lake Fork Reservoir. Texas Antiquities
1981
Permit Series Report 2. Texas Antiquities Committee. Austin.
Casafias, Francisco
1968
Relacion Sobre los Indios del Este de Texas. In: Primeras Exploraciones y
Poblamiento de Texas (1686-1694), editado por Lino Gomez Canedo, pp. 3968. Academy of American Franciscan History. Monterrey.
Cole, Nancy Mottashed
1975
Early Historic Caddoan Mortuary Practices in the Upper Neches Drainage, East
Texas. Unpublished Master’s Thesis, University of Texas at Austin.
Cook, Sherburne F.
1972

Can Pottery Residues be Used as an Index to Population? Contributions of the
University of California Archeological Research Facility 14:17-40. Berkeley.

Corbin, James E., Heather A. Brown, Mary G. Canavan, and Sharon Toups
1990
Mission Dolores de los Ais (41SA25): San Augustine County, Texas, Archaeological Investigation, 1984. Papers in Anthropology, Number 5. Stephen F.
Austin State University. Nacogdoches.
Cox, Isaac J.
1906
The Texas-Louisiana Frontier. The Quarterly of the Texas State Historical
A ssociation 10:1--75.
Creel, Darrell G.
1982a The Environmental Setting. In: The Desh~o Site, Nacogdoches County, Texas,
Volume 1, edited by Dee Ann Story, pp. 33-50. TexasAntiquitiesPermitSeries,
No. 7. Texas Antiquities Committee, Austin.

Kenmotsu m The Mayhew Site

169

1982b

Site Description and Investigation. In: The Deshazo Site, Nacogdoches County,
Texas, Volume 1, edited by Dee Ann Story, pp. 3-19. Texas Antiquities Permit
Series, No. 7. Texas Antiquities Committee, Austin.

1982c

Artifacts of Non-Native Manufacture. In: The Deshazo Site, Nacogdoches
County, Texas, Volume 1, edited by Dee Ann Story, pp. 113-130. Texas
Antiquities Permit Series, No. 7. Texas Antiquities Committee, Austin.

Deagan, Kathleen
1987

Artifacts of the Spanish Colonies of Florida and the Caribbean, 1500-1800.
Volume 1: Ceramics, Glassware, and Beads. Smithsonian Institution Press.
Washington D.C.

De Lotbiniere, Seymour
1984

Introduction, Updating Skertchly. In The Manufacture of Gunflints, by Sydney
B. J. Skertchly, pp. i-vii. Museum Restoration Service, Alexandria Bay, New
York.

Dolezel, Raymond
1980
Soils of Nacogdoches County, Texas. Soil Conservation Service and United
States Forest Service in Cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment
Station. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.
Driggers William, G.
1985
A report on the Analysis of the Ceramic Vessel Materials from the Benson’s
Crossing Site (41TT110) Titus County, Texas. Unpublished Master’s Thesis,
University of Texas.
Duffield, Lathel F., and Edward B. Jelks.
1961

The Pearson Site, A Historic Indian Site at Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains County,
Texas. Archaeology Series, No. 9. Department of Anthropology, University of
Texas. Austin.

Fields, Ross C.
n.d.
Analysis of Native-Made Ceramics. In: The Deshazo Site, Volume 2: Texas
Native Made Artifacts and Synthesis, edited by Dee Arm Story, pp. 370-508.
Texas Antiquities Permit Series, Unpublished manuscript on file at the The
Archeological Research Laboratory, Austin.
Girard, Jeff S.
n.d.
The Chipped Stone Collection: A Technological, Functional and Typological
Analysis. In: The Deshazo Site, Volume 2: The Native Made Artifacts and
Synthesis, edited by Dee Ann Story, pp. 47-235. Texas Antiquities Permit
Series, Unpublished manuscript on file at tile Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, Austin.
Good, Carolyn E.
1982

Analysis of Structures, Burials and Other Cultural Features. In: The Deshazo
Site, Nacogdoches County, Texas, Volume 1, edited by Dee Ann Story, pp. 51112. Texas Antiquities Permit Series, No. 7, Texas Antiquities Committee,
Austin

170

Texas Archeological Society

Gregory, H. F.
1973
Eighteenth Century Caddoan Archaeology: A Study of Models and
Interpretations. Unpublished dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Southern
Methodist University. Dallas.
Gregory, H. F., Jay C. Blaine, and Sheila Morrison
1982

Presidio NuestraSehora del Pilar de los Adaes, Excavations:1982. Williamson
Museum, Northwestern State University. Natchitoches.

Hamilton, T. M.
1960
Some Gun Parts from Eighteenth Century Osage Sites. The Missouri Archeologist 22:120-149.
1968

Early Indian Trade Guns: 1625-1772.ContributionsoftheMuseumoftheGreat
Plains, Number 3. Lawton, Oklahoma.

1979

Guns, Gunflints, Balls and Shot. In: Tunica Treasure, Papers of the Peabody
Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Volume 71, by Jeffrey P. Brain, pp.
206-217. Peabody Museum o fArchaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University,
Cambridge.

Hamilton, T. M., and Bruce W. Fry
1975

A Survey of Louisbourg Gunflints. Occasional Papers in Archaeology and
History 12:101-128. National Historic Parks and Sites Branch, Parks Canada.
Ottawa, Canada.

Harris, R. King, and Inus Marie Harris
1967

Trade Beads, Projectile Points, and Knives. In: A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian
Archeology and Ethnohistory, edited by R. E. Bell, E. B. Jelks, and W. W.
Newcomb, pp. 129-162. Final report to the National Science Foundation, grant
NSF GS-964.

Harris, R. K., Inus M. Harris, and J. Ned Woodall.
1967
European Trade Goods, Tools. In: The Gilbert Site: A Nortefio Focus Site in
Northeastern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society. 37:18-32.
Hayden, Bruce, and A. Cannon
1983

Where the Garbage Goes: Refuse Disposal in the Maya Highlands. Journal of
Anthropological Archaeology 2:117-163.

Henderson, Jerry
1982
Faunal Analysis. In: The Deshazo Site, Nacogdoches County, Texas, Volume
1, edited by Dee Ann Story, pp. 131-157. Texas Antiquities Permit Series, No.
7, Texas Antiquities Committee, Austin
n,d.

Analysis of the Bone Tools. In: The Deshazo Site, Volume 2: The Native Made
Artifacts and Synthesis, edited by Dee Ann Story, pp. 11-16. Texas Antiquities
Permit Series, unpublished manuscript on file at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, Austin.

Kenmotsu ~ The Mayhew Site

171

Joutel, M. T.
1851
Diario Hist6rico del t~ltimo vijae que Hizo M. de la Salle Para Descubrir el
Desembocadero y Curso deI Missicipi. Escrito en Idioma Frances pot M. T.
Joutel, Traducido al Espafiol por el Coronel Jose Maria Tomel. Jos~ Desnoues.
New York.
Keller, John
1974
The Subsistence Paleoecology of the Middle Neches Region of East Texas.
Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of
Texas, Austin.
Kenmotsu, Nancy Adele
1990

Gunflints: A Study. HistoricaIArchaeology 24:92-124.

n.d.

Analysis and Interpretation of the Mayhew Site, 41NA21, Bayou Loco,
Nacogdoches County, Texas. Unpublished manuscript on file at Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas, Austin.

Kenmotsu, Nancy Adele, James E. Bruseth, and James E. Corbin
1993

Moscoso and the Route in Texas. In: The De Soto Expedition West of the
Mississippi: 1541-1543, edited by Gloria A. Young. The University o f Arkansas
Press. Fayetteville.

Kleinschmidt, Ulrich Karl.
1982
Review and Analysis of the A. C. Saunders Site, 41AN19, Anderson County,
Texas. Unpublished Master’s Thesis, Department of Anthropology, University
of Texas, Austin.
Krieger, Alex D.
1949
Part 1I. Analysis and Interpretation. In: The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee
County, Texas, by H. Perry Newell and Alex D. Krieger, pp. 51-240. Memoir
of the Society for American Archaeology, No. 5. Society for American Archaeology, Menasha.
Longacre, William A.
1985

Pottery Use-life among the Kalinga, Northern Luzon, the Philippines. In:
Decoding Prehistoric Ceramics, edited by Ben A. Nelson, pp. 334-346.
Southern Illinois University Press. Carbondale.

McGregor, Daniel E., Jeffery Bohlin, James E. Bruseth, Gayle J. Fritz, Richard Fullington,
Holly Hathaway, Phillip Murry, and David R. Pheasant
1987
Excavations at41FT193, the Perry Site. In: Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations along
the Prairie Margin: Site Excavations and Synthesis of Prehistoric Archaeology,
edited by Daniel E. McGregor and James E. Bruseth, pp. 29-52. Richland Creek
Technical Series, Volume III. Archaeology Research Program. Institute for the
Study of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist University. Dallas.
McPherron, Alan.
1967

The Juntunen Site and the Late Woodland Period of the Upper Great Lakes.
Anthropological Papers No. 30, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

172

Texas Archeological Society

Miroir, M. P., R. King Harris, Jay C. Blaine, Jason McVay, Donald C. Book, Floyd
Cigoinero, Roger McVay, Joe B. Raffaelli, and Paul E. Schoen.
1973
B6nard de la Harpe and the Nassonite Post. Bulletin of the TexasArcheological
Society 44:113-168.
Moir, Randall W.
1987

Refined Earthenwares and Rural Ceramic Traditions. In: Historic Buildings,
Material Culture, and People of the Prairie Margin, Architecture, Artifacts, and
Synthesis of Historic Archaeology, edited by David H. Jurney, and Randall W.
Moir, pp. 97-120. Richland Creek Technical Series, Volume V. Archaeology
Research Program, Institute for the S tudy of Earth and Man. Southern Methodist
University. Dallas.

Napoleon, Patty Neuhaus
n.d.
Analysis of the Native-Made Ceramic Pipes. In: The Deshazo Site, Volume 2:
The Native Made Artifacts and Synthesis, edited by Dee Ann Story, pp. 336369. Texas Antiquities Permit Series, unpublished manuscript on file at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Austin.
Nielsen, Axel E.
1991
Trampling the Archaeological Record: An Experimental Study. American
Antiquity 56:483-503.
,
O’Connell, James F.
1987
Alyawara Site Structures and Its Archeological Implications. American Antiquity 52:74-108.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1975

Bayou Loco: Investigations and Speculations. Paper Presented at the Caddo
Conference, Texas A&M University. On file at Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, Austin.

Prewitt, Elton R., John W. Clark, Jr., and David S. Dibble
1972
An Assessment of the Archeological and Historical Resources of the Bayou
Loco Reservoir Area, Nacogdoches County, Texas. Research Report No. 11.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project, University of Texas, Austin.
Rice, Prudence
1987
Pottery Analysis, A Sourcebook. University of Chicago Press. Chicago.
Stokes, Janell
1981
Appendix 3, Descriptions of Vessels Represented by Sherds from F196-11, Unit
64. In: Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site, Cherokee
County, Texas: Summers of 1979 and 1980, edited by D. A. Story. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, Occasional Papers, No. 1. University of
Texas, Austin.

Kenmotsu ~ The Mayhew Site

173

Stokes, Janell, and Joe Woodring
1981
Native Made Artifacts of Clay. In: Archeological Investigations at the George
C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas: Summers of 1979 and 1980, edited by
D. A. S tory. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Occasional Papers, No.
1. University of Texas, Austin.
Story, Dee Arm
1990
Culture History of the Native Americans. In: Archeology and B ioarcheology of
the Gulf Coastal Plain, by Dee Ann Story, Jan A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M. D.
Freeman, J. C. Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, and K. J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366.
Research Series No. 38. Arkansas Archeological Survey. Fayetteville.
Story, Dee Ann, and Darrell G. Creel
1982
The Cultural Setting. In: The Deshazo Site, Nacogdoches County, Texas,
Volume 1, edited by Dee Ann S tory, pp. 20-34. Texas Antiquities Permit Series,
No. 7. Texas Antiquities Committee, Austin
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Kreiger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25.

Swanton, John R.
Source Material on the History and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians. Smithsonian
1942
Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology, Bullentin 132. Washington, D.C.
Thurmond, J. Peter, and Ulrich Kleinschmidt
1979
Report on the Fall 1978 Investigations at George C. Davis Site, Caddoan
Mounds State tlistoric Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin.
Varien, Mark D.
n.d.
Analysis o f Ground Battered and Polished Stone. In: The Deshazo Site, Volume
2: The Native Made Artifacts and Synthesis, edited by Dee Ann Story, pp. 1734.Texas Antiquities Permit Series, unpublished Manuscript on file at theTexas
Archeological Research Laboratory, Austin
Wedel, Mildred M.
1981

The Deer Creek Site, Oklahoma: A Wichita Village called Ferdinandina, An
Ethnolfistorian’s View. Oklahoma l l istoric Society Series in Anthropology No.
5. Oklahoma City.

Wyckoff, Don G., and Timothy G. Baugh
Early Historic Hasinai Elites: a Model for the Material Cultural of Governing
1980
Elites, Mid-Cominemal Journal of Archaeology 5:225-288.
Yellen, John E.
Archeological Approaches to the Present, Models for Reconstructing the Past.
1977
Academic Press. New York.

175

A Summary and Discussion of Additional Findings
at the Gilbert Site, an Eighteenth-Century
Nortefio Occupation in Rains County, Texas
Jay C. Blaine

ABSTRACT
The Gilbert site, characterized in the 1967 Bulletin ofthe TexasArcheological
Society as an eighteenth century component of the Nortefio focus, was thought to
be a village of the Tawakoni, Kichai, or Yscani Indians. A large sample of trade
goods at the site was thought to be French, and its analysis constituted a major
contribution to knowledge of those artifacts. Subsequent investigations offer
alternatives to some conclusions and add new dimensions to the site’s interpretation.

INTRODUCTION
A formal investigation of the G ilbert site (41RA 13) was initiated in the summer
of 1962 by the Texas Archeological Society (TAS). The first group dig organized
by the TAS, this project was the immediate predecessor of what has become the
annual TAS Field School. The published results of this work comprise Volume 37
of the Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society (Jelks 1967), and readers of this
article are urged to familiarize themselves with that important study.
Preliminary testing had yielded metal artifacts, possibly dating to the eighteenth or early nineteenth centuries, which were associated with native-made
pottery and lithics. Once the probable extent of the nonnative artifact recovery was
realized, one primary goal was to identify the time period involved. Other early
goals were to attempt specific identifications and the most likely sources of these
nonnative goods. The earlier testing had revealed some remnants of flintlock
firearms that could have been made at any point in a long time span. Examination
by specialists of a very similar but limited sample of flintlock firearms and other
artifacts presumed to be trade goods from the Pearson site (41RA5) had not clarified
the problem of sources or isolated a very useful time span for that site (Duffield and
Jelks 1961:77-79). The Pearson site, also in Rains County, was assigned to the
Nortefio focus.
The Nortefio focus was proposed to link several different sites apparently
occupied during some part of the eighteenth or early nineteenth centuries by groups
of"Southern" Wichita-speaking peoples. The scope of the archeological evidence
indicated that the Gilbert site also could be assigned to the Nortefio focus.
The shared language, Wichita, is one of the four languages of the Caddoan
peoples (the others are Caddo proper, Pawnee, and Arikara); the associated tribes
are the Taovaya, the Tawakoni, the Yscani, the Waco, and the Wichita proper. The
Bulletin of the Texas Archeolog&al Society 63 (1992)

176

Texas Archeological Society

Kichai are also included in the Nortefio focus although they spoke a separate
Caddoan tongue and were less well known (Newcomb 1961:250). The collective
term, Nortef~os (Nations or peoples of the North), was a label created by the
eighteenth century Spanish authorities mainly for lumping together the contrary
Texas Wichita-speaking groups and their affiliates. The label generally included
varied tribes who were known to the Spanish in provincial Texas but who lived to
the north of San Antonio, beyond effective Spanish control. Story (1985:85-86) has
now confined use of the term Norteho to a descriptive role for isolating the body of
archeological evidence attributed to the southern Wichita peoples themselves.
The Gilbert site, it is now realized, was to offer an unusually rich opportunity
for archeological observation of a group of Native Americans during a period when
both their own traditional tools and livelihood strategies, and those then available
through European contacts, were flourishing. Because the time span appeared to be
reasonably well limited and the site was mostly intact, the process of acculturation
in particular, surely would be happening here and should be clearly visible.
However, it is probable that we failed to realize the full potential of this opportunity.
Now, some 29 years later, no comparable Texas contact period site has been studied.
In addition, some major questions arising from the study of the site still remain
unanswered and require further consideration.
EARLY PROCEDURES AND FINDINGS
The Gilbert site has yielded the premier artifact sample presently known and
studied from among the Texas sites assigned to the Nortefio focus. However
probable it might appear, a Nortefio affiliation in the ethnohistorical sense is less
secure. Under "Conclusions" in the Gilbert site report, the probable tribal identification of the occupants is identified as Tawakoni, Kichai, or Yscani (Jelks
1967:244); subsequent authors have also suggested either Kichai again (Rohrbaugh
1982:54), or Caddoan (Skiles et al. 1980:9-10).
The Historic occupation of the site was estimated at between about 1730 and
1770, based on analysis of time-sensitive remains of firearms and glass beads. The
eventual recovery of a 1749 French coin, drilled for use as a pendant but essentially
unworn, helped emphasize the probable mid-eighteenth century context. Proposals
that the bountiful European goods found at the Gilbert site were primarily derived
from the French trade also were to prove valid.
Although there was to be a five-year delay before the excavation results would
be published, TAS members continued work at the site, and the additional artifact
sample was incorporated into the final report. In addition, the Harrises and the
Blaines used pertinent data gained from investigations at Gilbert to help clarify the
analysis of the Historic period artifacts from the Womack site, also assigned to the
Nortefio focus. (The Womack site would see earlier publication [Harris et al.
1965:287-363]).
With permission from the Gilberts, R. K. Harris and the author continued
testing at the Gilbert site on an intermittent basis after 1967. A detailed examination

Blaine -- Additional Findings at the Gilbert Site

177

of 19 more French trade hatchets recovered by Blaine from the site after 1966 has
been published (Blaine 1988:111-117), as have more summaries of the findings at
the Gilbert site (Richmond et al. 1985:128-129; Fox 1983:42-45).
Feature 8
Feature 8, the most prominently mounded feature on the site (Figure 1) was not
tested by the TAS, probably because of three large potholes there. In March 1965,
a slumping of one lower face in the most central pothole slightly exposed what
proved to be the end of a flintlock gunlock. A 3-foot (0.92 m) test square excavated
down to the gunlock exposed two more gunlocks nested atop the first. The
uppermost gunlock was at the contact between an overlying red clay deposit, some
26 cm thick at this point, and a dark brown sandy deposit that contained this cache.
The red clay zone was capped with a sandy loam layer 5 to 8 cm thick; the maximum
thickness of the red clay cap in the test square was 39 cm.

@

@

METERS

Figure 1. Plan of the Gilbert site, Upper Sabine River drainage, northeastern Texas.

178

Texas Archeological Society

The fill excavated above the gunlocks had very few artifacts, but the dark brown
zone contained several broken deer bones, one broken end scraper, and a fragment
of smoothed sandstone. Despite the ordinary nature of this part of the feature, the
three gunlocks themselves may justify extra consideration for Feature 8 in the future
(Blaine and Harris 1967:47-52).
Only the most easily removed parts (the upper cock jaws and their screws)
were missing from two of these gunlocks; the jaw screw was missing from the third
gunlock, but the upper jaw was present (see flintlock musket diagrams in Jelks
1967:Figures 26 and 27), although it had been moved to the inside of the gunlock
and hung loosely over the sear arm. This particular placement indicated that the
gunlock had been laid in place with some care and not simply tossed to the ground.
This gunlock also has no frizzen. The close association and placement of these three
gunlocks also argue against their random disposal onto a trash midden.
These gunlocks were the only relatively complex firearms components in the
site that had not been completely disassembled. Several other gunlocks here are
traceable only by their often widely separated parts, so this cached group may have
special significance in the function of this feature, perhaps reflecting a version of
the "killed" offerings that are sometimes associated with burial rituals.
Feature 20
Soon after the Gilbert report was submitted for publication, testing at Feature
20 revealed the only unmistakable storage pit found there. Unlike the two pit
features of undetermined function found during the TAS investigations (Jelks
1967:14-15), this was a classic bell-shaped pit (Figure 2). The pit’s bottom was 101
cm below the surface; the lower half had been excavated 52 cm into the basal red
clay. Virtually all of the bone found was in the lower 29 cm of pit fill; all were deer
bones except for a few pieces of box turtle shell. Although the pit fill had a very high
ash content, including some small pieces of charcoal and four fragments of burned
bone, there was no evidence of any general burning of either the artifacts in the fill
or the pit walls and floor. At the very bottom of the pit was one slightly damaged
clay elbow pipe with a slight spur at the hee!, typical of those found elsewhere in the
site (Jelks 1967:Figure 66).
The lowest 29 cm of pit fill also had such Historic period artifacts as one
Cornaline d’Aleppo glass bead in bugle form, a fragment of probable mirror glass,
several small fragments of disintegrated iron, and a fragment of a European spall
gunflint. This same sample of fill also contained nine pieces of unmodified stone,
two stones altered by abrasion or pecking, 67 small chert flakes and chips (four of
Florence chert from northern Oklahoma), six small end scrapers, two distal tips of
arrowpoints and one reworked Fresno point of Florence chert, three sherds (one
probably Womack Engraved), and a few small pieces of bark.
Except perhaps for the bone component, the pit fill seems characteristic of the
refuse to be expected from a series of housekeeping efforts in a limited area of the
site. Prior testing in Feature 20 itself did not indicate anything suggesting a floor
level. From surface to clay, the deep sand matrix had a clean, almost sugary,

Blaine m Additional Findings at the Gilbert Site

179

J

/

\

/

\

I
\
\

I
I

i

i

\

0

t
0

1 FOOT

i

I
1 METER

Figure 2. Plan and profile of the bell-shaped pit in Feature 20 at the Gilbert site.

-)¢

180

Texas Archeological Society

composition without midden staining or apparent lensing. This sand zone averaged
39 cm in depth and, except for one firearm part, the upper 21 cm of sand contained
no artifacts. The remaining 18 cm down to the clay contained the balance of the
artifacts in these sands. Since as many as three small Gary points were also found,
it appears probable that the excavations in the feature area also sampled prehistoric
deposits.
LATERPROCEDURES

The Blaines worked at the Gilbert site until the 1980s, when the appearance of
survey markers for the Lake Fork Reservoir that was to be constructed by the Sabine
River Authority terminated the investigations.
In the earlier post-TAS dig phase, all of the excavations were confined to the
areas around the known features. However, several excavation units were still open
and soon attracted attention from non-TAS members. The site was especially
vulnerable to the public; it had several different owners who had long allowed
access to fishermen. On one memorable day, Harris and Blaine underwent hours of
very close scrutiny by a series of nonfishermen who approached, one by one, from
the river bottoms. These folk, it developed, were lookouts for a very large game of
chance that was taking place nearby. We were both pleased to have been judged
although obviously eccentric, apparently not a threat.
Early use of a metal detector at the site merely resulted in locating the TAS’s
kitchen trash pit, according to R. King Harris, and a few years were to pass before
increasing signs of such use by others became obvious again. Fortunately, by that
time at least most of the more easily detected metal artifacts had been located,
mapped, removed, and conserved by Blaine. Two of the later collections made by
others who used metal detectors eventually became available for examination and
recording. In each of these samples, a fragment was found to cross-fit one collected
by Blaine. Regrettably, no specific recording of locations, context, or any other
associations had been done by these collectors. The scope of their combined
samples, apparently collected over a very limited number of visits, highlights the
impact that skilled metal detector operators can have on a Historic period site. This
was especially notable in the bias towards the recovery of the copper alloy artifacts
in comparison with those in the controlled collection. These nonferrous artifacts are
preferred by collectors because they are judged as initially more attractive, can be
polished up, and do not soon fall apart in collection displays. The more experienced
operators commonly can tell the difference between these brass and iron metals
without excavation and usually will ignore the least desired iron objects, passing
over iron objects comparable in size to a small nail.
One of these outside collections contained seven pieces of brass round stock in
three different diameters; one at 3.7 mm, three at 5.3 mm, and three at 6.3 mm. The
longest piece was 50 mm and the shortest 14 mm long. All are, then, characteristic
of remnants left over from forming C bracelets from stock. A single such bracelet
was found in the TAS excavations (Jelks 1967:Figure 46a). Only this outside

Blaine ~ Additional Findings at the Gilbert Site

181

collection provided evidence that wire of at least three different diameters was being
supplied to the site as stock and that bracelets were made at the site. This emphasizes
how scant and vulnerable the evidence of some function s can be in the archeological
record. It seems probable that the evidence of this particular workshop was found
in one very small area and that the workshop was the product of one individual.
Once it became evident that sporadic disturbance of the site was continuing
from year to year, a form of salvage investigations was initiated. This procedure was
undertaken with serious misgivings, however, because it had to involve extensive
use of the metal detector, and any degree of justification for its use was again based
on the need to salvage information from the site before it became totally disturbed.
Since the use of the metal detector is vulnerable to abuses if no proper controls
are maintained on the findings, care was taken to maintain satisfactory controls at
this level. Up to this time, attempts to maintain the customary controls during the
post-TAS excavations themselves were frequently thwarted. In cases where a test
pit could not be excavated, recorded, backfilled, and concealed in one visit, it
became all too common to find that these excavations had been thoroughly shoveled
through by others before they were completed. Sometimes there was no evidence
of screening; possibly the goal in these instances had been worms for fishing. Here
also, as is often the case, weekend excavations were soon trampled by pastured
cattle.
A set of improvised controls was created in an attempt to reduce the regrettable
impact on the site resulting from the location and removal of metal artifacts through
detector use. Once an object was located as precisely as possible, very minimal
disturbance of the matrix was done to reach it. In this site the vast majority of such
artifacts detected were less than 13 cm deep and were excavated by trowel.
Commonly the artifacts were small enough that an area no more than 8 or 10 cm in
diameter was disturbed, and the nature of matrix in this area was recorded, as was
the position of the artifact if it was not parallel to the general ground surface. The
depth below surface was recorded, and any other objects from the area of disturbance were assigned lot designations. All earth excavated from the standard tests
was sifted through quarter-inch screen and, at the maximum, in the absence of
recognized soil zoning or cultural levels, troweled or shoveled in 6-inch (about 15
cm) levels.
For mapping, each artifact location was plotted by using a prismatic compass
and a tape measure, then recorded on a master site map (this map is on file with the
author and is available to appropriate persons). The entire historic archeological
area of the Gilbert site was remapped for consistency and to include the newer
locations. A partly arbitrary diameter of twenty feet (6.1 m) was assigned for each
midden excavated by the TAS, and any findings outside these 20-foot circles that
were in apparently undisturbed areas were recorded and mapped individually
(Figure 1).
After factoring out the metal objects of recent age, about 580 artifacts recovered
throughout the site by use of the metal detector were mapped. More than nine
percent of the artifacts from the limited area that had been opened for retrieval of

182

Texas Archeological Society

the metal were accompanied by other artifacts, such as animal bones and/or
potsherds or lithics. It is certain that there were some other potentially useful
associations, but they were not obvious because of the severely restricted size of
each retrieval excavation.
However, there were other indications of hidden features. Mapping of the metal
signals revealed cluster patterns that indicated specific subareas with possible
features. The mapping of metal artifacts also revealed that the eighteenth century
area of the Gilbert site is about a third larger than had been previously known (Figure
1); the added territory and the main part of the site appear to be essentially
homogenous. There are seven new cases of cross-fitting broken brass firearms parts
from separate parts of the site. Features 2 and 4 of the TAS excavations were linked
in this way to matching pieces found deep in the extended site area; the pieces of the
Feature 2 match were 190 meters apart.
The 580 metal artifacts found in the more recent investigations at the Gilbert
site represent a diversity of tools. The fu!l range of the 240 firearms specimens
include butt plates, trigger guards, side plates, barrels, gunlocks, rampipes, sears,
and screws, and a single escutcheon (see below). S mall fragments of kettle brass and
iron account for more than 216 more artifacts (including six brass kettle lugs),
followed by 48 folding- and case-knife fragments, four of which were complete
knives. Iron axes or hatchets are represented by 19 pieces (see Blaine 1988), and
there are 16 bridle bit pieces, including rings, mouth and cheek bars, bridges, two
"figure 8" links, and one port. There are eight iron hoes in the metal detector sample,
seven possible Spanish sword fragments (2 blades, 4 guards, and 1 pommel), and
seven iron scrapers manufactured from larger pieces of metal. Rounding out on the
metal assemblage are five awls, three pairs of scissors, three iron projectile points
(two are arrow sized and the third is a spear), and a single skewer.
The two most outlying metal clusters tested proved to be midden concentrations with no obvious surface indications; the areas involved had never been in
cultivation, and neither midden had been capped with clay. These features were
designated F-B 3 and F-B4, and their contents, although fewer in numbers, generally
matched well with those from features excavated by the TAS. Again, however, there
was no evidence of postmolds, floor surfaces or suitable depressed sections,
fireplaces, or other structural features noted in the excavated areas. A few clay
lumps were identified, but not enough to assume the existence of wattle and daub
houses; the occasional daub impressions were small, probably from grasses or very
slender twigs. The bits of daub found in at least six other features at this site were,
as was customary, presumed to be from clay-plastered houses (Davis et al. 1967:1415). More recently, however, the assumption that such daub always indicates houses
or huts in the Caddoan-speaking area has been seriously questioned (Gilmore
1986:23-24).
It seems clear now that any future attempts to clarify details of site usage should
focus on the intermidden areas rather than on the middens themselves, for larger
areas need to be exposed to make it possible to recognize possible postmold
alignments and to evaluate activity areas. For example, of the later sample of 19

Blaine ~ Additional Findings at the Gilbert Site

183

more French trade hatchets reported at the Gilbert site, only three were closely
associated with midden concentrations (Blaine 1988:111-117).
At least two noteworthy categories are now added to the Gilbert site artifact
inventory: hoes and swords. Five French trade hoes and parts of at least three sword
hilts, all from the same type of sword, have been identified in this later sample. Two
of the hoes (Figure 3) were found nested or cached together with a box turtle
carapace in Feature F-B3, but neither hoe shows any signs of use or damage, perhaps
indicating that this midden may have been among the last to have been used; or the
absence of wear might indicate that no tasks required hoes. These hoes are of
different types; both are among the eighteenth century forms reported from the
Trudeau site in Louisiana, another site strongly oriented to supplies from French
sources (Brain 1979:144-148). In the sample from Gilbert, since one of these hoes
bears the same stamped C B mark that is found on one of the French trade hatchets,
we know that both types originated from the same manufacturer. Regrettably, there
is nothing else these marks can tell us at this time beyond indicating that the hoes,
together with many other items used in the French trade, probably were supplied
from production intended for the domestic French market.
The sword remains include parts of three or more individual sword guards and
onepommel, as well as two possible blade fragments (Figure4). These swords were
of the regulation Spanish cavalry broadsword type commonly in use by 1750
(Brinckerhoff and Chamberlain 1972:79-80).
The metal artifact sample from the site assemblage is now severely skewed, but
real benefits have been gained from the sample. Enough additional firearms remains
have been added to the original sample that both personal and French trade types can
be isolated at the site, as can those of probable military origin. Among the French
trade guns themselves, even the different grades of quality indicated in lists of
supplies for French Louisiana can be demonstrated, so the high quality of the fusil
hardware at Gilbert, some of which have thoroughly professional hand engraving
and design, is very evident (Figure 5). The decorative escutcheon is the only
example known from the site, and the sideplate is the only complete version from
Gilbert. The formidable depth and validity of the overall French trade gun sample
from the Gilbert site has been clearly established.
The count for firearms pieces from recent investigations was 240; in addition,
32 more have been verified in other collections, so the total is now 440 firearms
pieces from the Gilbert site. However, this figure is somewhat misleading because
the larger parts--the barrels in particular have invariably been reduced to several
pieces. Their thinner-walled sections can be flattened with relative ease and often
tend to split into halves that make convenient stock for tools such as projectile points
and scrapers.
Taking various combinations into consideration, it can be estimated that at
least 20 individual firearms were discarded and reduced to parts and fragments
here. Why were they discarded? Springs are elements of these flintlocks that are
especially susceptible to breakage, and the mainsprings are the most frequently
broken; five of at least nine found so far are broken. That leaves four such

184

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

0
!

I

!

3 CENTIMETERS
J

Figure 3. Photograph illustrating the two different types of trade hoes cached in Feature FB3 at the Gilbert site.

Blaine -- Additional Findings at the Gilbert Site

0
1

I

1

185

3 CENTIMETERS
l

Figure 4. Photograph of parts of a Spanish sword hilt and a drawing incorporating a bilobate
shell guard (adapted from Brinckerhoff and Chamberlain 1972: 80-82).

186

Texas Archeological Society

3 CENTIMETERS
I

0

t,

0
!

3 CENTIMETERS
I

Figure 5. Photographs of an engraved silver(?) escutcheon, above, and a brass sideplate for
fusils, below, both from the Gilbert site.

weapons that apparently were discarded for other reasons. There has been only
one obvious barrel failure--a ruptured muzzle---typical to this day of the damage resulting from firing similar guns when they are plugged with mud or snow.
Too, an eventual wearing of the frizzen face from repeated abrasion by the
gun flint can remove the necessary case-hardened surface and result in sparking
failure, but this fault probably will not be traceable on archeological specimens.
In several cases from other sites, the threaded parts of side screws and cock jaw
screws have been moderately flattened; since these threads were almost worn
away, the flattening probably was a logical field expedient for tightening the

Blaine -- Additional Findings at the Gilbert Site

187

mechanism in the absence of replacement parts or threading tools. The long
service lives of at least some of these shoulder guns from Gilbert are demonstrated by the fact that some of the engraved decorations have almost disappeared
from the brass furnishings as a result of polishing alone.
A list of supplies for the Colony of Louisiana in 1733 includes parts for
gunlocks for trade guns (Brain 1979:300-301), including cocks, frizzens, and
unspecified springs.
The Nature of the Occupation
Considering the size of the Gilbert site and the affluence reflected by the sheer
quantity and nature of the European goods found there, it seems almost proven that
this was a sedentary village, but a village usually needs to be a year-round
occupation site for a substantial part of its population. Villages commonly have
structures for shelter, which can be expected to leave construction signs in the
ground. The need to shelter and feed most of the population at a given time,
especially during long winter months, calls for extensive use of fire hearths and
storage pits. The demographics of a village population probably will result in a
relatively significant death rate, often manifested by burials and even cemeteries.
Identification of pottery-making sites and task-specific work by women are also
excellent indicators of permanent villages.
A broad menu of seasonality factors in the archeological record, including
construction of substantial shelters, winter-oriented procurement of food, and the
presence of agricultural tools, provides markers that indicate a relatively permanent
village, as contrasted with the more limited attributes of shorter-term occupations.
The data on the Gilbert site, by these criteria and at the present stage of investigation,
apparently do not demonstrate an occupation at the village level. Without question,
however, there was an occupation at a very intensive level and probably of a special
nature.
When definite seasonal preferences can be traced in the occupation of sites,
they can be used to help distinguish between the relatively permanent villages and
signi ficantly shorter-term usage o f si tes. Lorrain (1967:234), studying the estimates
of age at death for 11 of the white-tailed deer at the Gilbert site, and assuming that
the fawns were born in May or June (Lorrain 1967:231), concluded that they were
taken throughout the year. However, Gregory (1973:245) points out that these data
are based on Florida deer and that they may not apply to northeastern Texas where
the climate and vegetation environments are different. In support, Gregory (1973)
offers examples of fawn births in seasons other than May or June for Louisiana.
More recent data using deer teeth for this purpose support an estimate of a late
winter or early spring kill season for the remains of three out of four white-tailed
deer from one trash pit at the mid-eighteenth century Trudeau site in the Lower
Mississippi Valley. Here a di fferent seasonal estimation technique was used, which
depended on the local ecology and, most especially, on the average dates of the first
and last killing frosts (Spiess 1988:418-419). In both examples, only a very limited
selection of the deer teeth was suitable for these estimates; therefore, for these and

188

Texas Archeological Society

the above reasons, a larger data base with emphasis upon more environmental
factors seems warranted.
R. K. Harris reported finding plum pits in at least one midden at the Gilbert site
(Gregory 1973:246). The Blaines also found plum pits in two more features.
Gregory (1973) notes that this fruit ripens only in late summer in Texas.
The Blaines found pieces of box turtle shell in the Feature 20 pit and many
pieces in F-B3 and F-B4; at least eight of the other features contained similar
remains. These terrestrial turtles are not active and available except in late spring,
summer, and early fall, as are their kin on the site to this day.
Although limited, these floral and faunal data also lend stronger support for
a general spring-to-fall season of occupation than for an occupation that continued through the winter months. In Gregory’s (1973:240-245) discussion of his
original model for an eighteenth century Caddoan hunting camp, this summer
period meshes quite well with the two stages of a seasonal round lived in encampments that were located away from the major village base and its agricultural resources and demands. Still, there is no reason to deny the possibility that
some episodes of occupation could have taken place in winter months, especially in view of the bell-shaped pit in Feature 20, and that some deer could
have been taken then as needed.
Gregory (1973:238-240), after examining the Gilbert site report, proposed that
its interpretation as a village site did not fully utilize other important data. For
Gregory, the findings suggested not a permanent village, but rather some type of
hunting camp with emphasis on gathering deer hides, and with one or two
seasonality phases that centered on the summertime.
In the analysis of animal remains, Lorrain (1967:225-229) counted the remains
of at least 127 white-tailed deer from only four of the middens. Half or more of these
deer carcasses were complete when they were brought into the site, but the general
absence of caudal vertebrae indicated that most hides were removed from the site,
and it was suggested that these were traded forEuropean goods. Gregory (1973:239)
states that the proposed occupation period for the site (about 1730 to 1770) coincides
well with the time of the maximum Louisiana trade for deer hides by the French. It
is worth noting here that the sheer size (418) of the original sample of end scrapers
also lends extra support to a fully implemented deer hide operation on a commercial
scale.
Gregory’s proposed Caddoan hunting camp model for the mid-eighteenth
century provides a valuable outline for comparing the attributes found at Gilbert
with those characteristic of a relatively permanent village occupation. However,
some details of a basic hunting camp model probably are too limited to accommodate the needs and composition of a workforce engaged in commercial hide
procurement as seems to be the case at Gilbert. For example, it appears probable that
a higher degree of task sharing might be called for under these special circumstances, and so there could be more female (or family?) participation there than
would be expected in the customarily male-dominated activity levels suggested by
Gregory (1973).

Blaine -- Additional Findings at the Gilbert Site

189

If future investigations fail to find house patterns at Gilbert, it should not be
assumed that there was no effective form of shelter there. Gregory (1973:239-240),
lacking adequate documentation on this aspect of seasonal Caddoan hunting
practices, used pertinent shelter data from the Pawnee--their kinsmen to the north.
For shelter in the summer encampments of their seasonal rounds, the Pawnee used
generally oval frameworks of small saplings covered with skins. A description of
the use of small field tents of deer skins by a Petit Caddo chief is quoted by Gregory
(1973:248), and elsewhere, the Caddo have been known to use temporary shelters
when hunting; their use of skin tents near Natchitoches, Louisiana, is also suggested
in French archival records (Kniffen et al. 1987:115).
The direct archeological evidence for such shelters under most conditions,
would be easily missed. With this forewarning, however, and with some emphasis
now on the areas between middens, more very careful work at Gilbert could still
provide answers needed for the fullest understanding of the types of activities that
took place there.
Evidence of agriculture that would be expected at a village, such as milling
stones or metates, manos, mortars for plant processing, and tools for cultivation
such as hoes, has not materialized so far at the Gilbert site. One bison scapula hoe
and one mano comprise the total of native tools that could have direct agricultural
applications. Even so, this mano, or muller, could be prehistoric, since it was found
in the same square and level in Feature 20 as a Gary projectile point. That leaves only
the five complete iron trade hoes, four of which show no evidence of use on their
sharp working edges; the fifth apparently was broken up for its metal. These tools
probably were brought directly to the site by a trader with a somewhat generalized
inventory. Another possibility is the diversion by theft--not uncommon in those
times--of a load of goods intended and more suitable for trade elsewhere. In any
case, the abandonment of apparently unused tools in the site remains puzzling.
There is no obvious sign of any loss of knapping skills among the makers of the
lithic artifacts found at the site; the Fresno arrowpoints and native-made gunflints,
for example, are finely crafted. The metal points also appear to be native-made, but
they are comparatively few in number. Some kinds of cherts are still being imported
from distant sources, and lithic scrapers far outnumber iron scrapers.
Despite the remarkable concentration and array of European goods at the
Gilbert site, the material evidence of other cultural adaptations has not been easy to
understand. Perhaps the best clues to these adaptations can be found in the alteration
of metal artifacts. Blaine (1988:116), in examining the trade hatchets from Gilbert,
noted from their condition that they were used primarily used for working metal
rather than wood. At Gilbert, there is a very strong pattern of experimentation with
metals; virtually everything of metal that could be cut and/or broken into smaller
pieces has been reduced, but as yet there is no readily discernible pattern of selective
removal from the site or of on-site use of many of the metal artifacts that may have
been produced.
The two trigger guards of brass from Feature F-B4 (Figure 6) seem to illustrate
this treatment of metal; these guards have been broken into smaller parts, and,

190

Texas Archeological Society

0
~,,

3 CENTIMETERS
I

I

l

Figure 6. Photographs of two broken, but almost complete, brass fusil trigger guards from
Feature F-B4, Gilbert site.

except for one rear finial, the only missing parts are the guard bows. Many virtually
identical segments of bows and finials broken from the same kinds of brass trigger
guards were scattered around the site, but they have not been modified further. This
situation may be analogous to cracking open a cobble of unfamiliar stone to see if
something of use is revealed by or because of the reduction process. In the absence
of a proper metal-working tool kit, the experimental hacking and breaking of large
units of metal into more useful smaller ones may simply be an application of an old

Blaine -- Additional Findings at the Gilbert Site

191

technology to a new medium, but the thoroughness and repetition of this particular
activity seems to reflect behavior more than simple curiosity.
Story’s team examined the pottery from Gilbert and drew several very
important inferences (Story et al. 1967:186-187). Among these are the suggestions
that "a single integrated socio-cultural group" accounted for the historic Native
American ceramics. Most of the decorated pottery was Caddoan in tradition, and
some types can be identified with the Historic Caddoan peoples in Texas. However,
the great diversity of the ceramics precludes a strictly local origin for the pottery
assemblage, and the fact that many vessels had been repaired or otherwise modified,
suggests that local pottery making, if any, was rather limited, and that acculturation
was possibly causing their replacement with European vessels.
Story and her colleagues (Story et al. 1967:187) also believe that the Gilbert
sample of plain pottery with bone and shell tempering was not typical of Late
Caddoan or Historic Caddoan ceramics. However, data now available indicate a
probable flux in Caddoan ceramic traditions at this particular period.
Gregory (1973) compared the native Caddoan pottery from Los Adaes with
pottery from other sites in northwestern Louisiana that were at least in part
contemporary with Gilbert. He found bone to be the major tempering agent, with
shell combinations following in frequency. In addition, Gregory found that the
major use of bone tempering was most evident after about 1740. Since he also found
that bone tempering was less common in the contemporary Caddo sites to the east,
he proposed that this trait originated among the more westward Caddoan groups;
this proposal is supported by more recent data from East Texas (H. F. Gregory,
personal communication, 1991).
All European containers found at Gilbert, except for a few bottle fragments,
were kettles (cooking vessels) of copper alloy. Examination of the reported sample
of bail ears from these thin metal vessels indicates that there were at least five kettles,
and at least four more can be isolated from the newer sample. All nine or more of
these containers are broken, and a few of the pieces were used as raw material for
ornaments, chiefly tinkler cones. From the evidences of wear, including some
repairs of the bail holes, it is obvious that these kettles saw much service before they
failed.
Oddly, it seems that there is no evidence of cast iron kettles at Gilbert, although
they were available through trade by this time. Judging from both the repaired
native-made pottery and the copper alloy metal kettles, some factors (including
mobility?) were causing considerable attrition among both of these classes of
containers. The sturdier iron kettles appear to have been especially desirable
because of their durability, but did their increased weight make them liabilities in
extended special-purpose encampments, so were the sturdy iron vessels left behind
in the more permanent village?
When the Gilbert site was occupied, that part of Texas had been well within
Spanish borders for many decades, but this was a mere technicality and did not
involve any real Spanish presence or influence. The amount of physical evidence
from Gilbert that can be identified as probably of Spanish origin is virtually

192

Texas Archeological Society

submerged in a sea of French trade material. With the exception of the horse gear,
only one firearms part, five parts of sword hilts (Figure 4), pieces of handle plate
from a belt knife or short sword, and four case-knife blades with spike tangs are the
sum of Spanish evidence at Gilbert. The latter two types of artifacts were linked to
Spanish origins since publication of the Gilbert site report in 1967 (e.g., Blaine
1982:123-125). The blades from the swords that are represented only by their hilts
probably underwent the conversion into metal spears and lance blades that has been
commonly documented as a practice of Native Americans in the Historic period.
Each of two brass parts of firearms pictured in the 1967 report was stamped with
a slightly different CrownR mark (Blaine and Harris 1967:Figure 37), and two more
pieces with Crown R marks, also brass gun furniture, have been excavated from
Feature F-B4. In this case, the two marks are apparently identical; all four parts are
broken but still do not appear to be stout enough to have come from military
firearms. Where enough of the shape has survived, the parts are consistent with
French civilian or trade shoulder gun styles. Although there apparently is no logical
connection or proof of any direct linkage, it must be noted that a Crown R mark was
required on military swords and guns produced for the Spanish crown by Royal
Ordinance beginning in 1728 (Brinckerhoff and Chamberlain 1972:30).
During the occupation of the Gilbert site by Native Americans, the policy of the
Spanish government still prohibited the supplying of firearms to the Indians of this
province (Bolton 1914, Vol. I:40). Just how efficiently the French traders circumvented this policy is dramatically underscored by the firearms sample from Gilbert.
Among the large array of French fusils tracked so far, there is only one example each
of English and Spanish firearms. The latter is represented by a single part--a
miquelet frizzen. One such frizzen, apparently modified into a scraper, has come
from the Spanish Fort locale in Montague County, Texas, and it is possible that the
Gilbert frizzen arrived on the site as a single part that was intended for similar
modification.
The seemingly casual discarding of so many useful metal objects, including
several undamaged knives at Gilbert, implies a remarkable degree of affluence, and
this generous example of waste is repeated in other categories of artifacts. The
indicated lack of interest in husbanding some of these resources suggests that the
possibility of shortages in supplies was not being seriously considered; this in turn
could imply that suppliers of such goods were actually on the site. The traders may
have been there for the sole purpose of bartering for hides, and perhaps even to
participate directly in the hunting and processing of the hides. However, the
descriptions of the living habits of French traders and/or woods runners of this
period lend no support to the possibility that their presence can be recognized solely
through archeology.
CONCLUSIONS
Although we have gained extra insight into their behavior and activities, the
tribal identity of the Native Americans who left all these clues at Gilbert remains

Blaine -- Additional Findings at the Gilbert Site

193

uncertain. The data now best support two most promising lines of inquiry; one leads
through the southern Wichita to the Tawakoni, Kichai, or Yscani, as originally
suggested by Jelks (1967), and is supported by the general Nortefio character of the
archeological evidence. The other line o finquiry leads through the Caddoan groups.
The nature and frequency of the affiliations with Caddoan pottery traditions seem
especially telling at Gilbert, and even in quantity alone, the difference between the
amount of pottery used at Gilbert and in the more westerly, roughly contemporaneous (about 1750) and plains-oriented Nortefio sites at the Spanish Fort locale is
startling. Although native ceramic pipes are well represented in both places,
evidence for pottery among the Nortefios to the west is quite scarce in comparison
with the sample from the Gilbert site. Mobility alone should not have been a
significant factor, since both groups had horses and/or mules.
It is possible that what now appear to be definite Caddoan influences at Gilbert
may yet reflect the participation of an ethnological Nortefio sponsor; this would be
the Kichai, who are normally associated with the southern Wichita under the same
Nortefio umbrella, but are the least well known with that designation.
Rohrbaugh (1982:51-61) examined the possible origin of the Kichai with
emphasis on the native ceramics in the Arkansas River basin and hypothesized that
both the Gilbert and Womack sites might be identified with the Kichai. He quotes
Swanton (1942:54), who observed that the Kichai as a group habitually attached
themselves to the Wichita or their affiliates, or to the Caddo. Apparently the
language differences were not a real barrier, and these peoples apparently were
unusually mobile and adaptable. If this is a true characterization of the Kichai, it
follows that Kichai material culture might, at any given time, strongly reflect
influences from either or both southern Wichita or Caddo sources. At Gilbert, then,
it is also possible that we are seeing the results of one of these Caddo-Kichai
collaborations.
At present, one approach seem s most likely to help clarify problems like the one
at Gilbert. Such an approach would require a timely effort to further seek out,
identify, and analyze Caddoan habitation sites of the eighteenth century; any
additional emphasis should focus on the sites closer to the western fringes of the
Caddoan heartland. These habitation sites are unusually vulnerable to destruction
because of their high metal content and the uncontrolled use of metal detectors by
pothunters.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I express special gratitude to the John C. Gilbert and Lennon Gilbert families
for permitting continuing investigation of this site over a period of several years.
Hiram F. Gregory very generously allowed me to excerpt information freely from
his unpublished dissertation, which was especially relevant to this study. I also
express appreciation for the influence of the late R. King Harris, who urged my full
participation at Gilbert and encouraged this neophyte in many other ways. And
fundamental, as always, has remained the contribution of my wife, Jerrylee M.

194

Texas Archeological Society

Blaine. Although not always as eager about archeology as some of us, Jerrylee has
always worked generously, intelligently, and effectively to give direct support to
those of us who are more eager.

REFERENCES CITED
Blaine, Jay C.
1982
Analysis of Armaments and Associated Items. In: Excavations: 1981-1982,
Presidio de Nuestra Sehora del Pilar de Los Adaes, by Hiram F. Gregory with
Jay C. Blaine and S. Morrison. Office of State Parks, Baton Rouge.
1988

Trade Hatchets from the Gilbert Site. The Record. Fiftieth Anniversary Edition,
42(3): 111-117. Dallas Archeological Society.

Blaine, Jay C., and R. King Harris
1967
Guns. In: The Gilbert Site, A Nortefio Focus Site in Northeastern Texas, edited
by Edward B. Jelks. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 37:33-86.
Bolton, Herbert E.
1914
Athanase de Mdzikres and the Louisiana-Texas Frontier, 1768-!780. 2 vols.
Arthur H. Clark, Cleveland.
Brain, Jeffrey P.
Tunica Treasure. Papers of the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnol1979
ogy, Volume 71. Harvard University, Cambridge.
Brinckerhoff, S. B., and P. A. Chamberlain
Span&h Military Weapons in Colonial America 1700-1821. Stackpole Books,
1972
Harrisburg, Pennsylvania.
Davis, E. Mott, Kathleen Gilmore, L. Harper, R. King Harris, Edward B. Jelks, Charles A.
Smith, Jr., and B. Yancy
1967
The Site. In: The Gilbert Site, A Nortefio Focus Site in Northeastern Texas,
edited by Edward B. Jelks. Bulletin of the TexasArch.eologicalSociety 37:1-15.
Duffield, Lathel F., and Edward B. Jelks
1961
The Pearson Site: A Historic Indian Site in Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains County,
Texas. Archeology Series, No. 4. Department of Anthropology, The University
of Texas, Austin.
Fox, Daniel E.
1983
Traces ofTexas History : Archeological Evidence ofthe Past 450 Years. Corona,
San Antonio.
Gilmore, Kathleen
1986
French-Indian Interaction at an 18th-Century Frontier Post: The Roseborough
Lake Site, Bowie County, Texas. Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas
State University, Contributions in Archeology No. 3. Denton.

Blaine ~ Additional Findings at the Gilbert Site

195

Gregory, Hiram F.
1973
Eighteenth Century Caddoan Archeology: A Study in Models and Interpretation.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Southern
Methodist University, Dallas.
Harris, R. King, Inus M. Harris, Jay C. Blaine, and Jerrylee Blaine
1965
A Preliminary Archeological and Documentary Study of the Womack Site,
Lamar County, Texas. Bulletin ofthe Texas Archeological Society 36:287-363.
Jelks, Edward B. (editor)
1967
The Gilbert Site, a Nortefio Focus Site in Northeastern Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeolog ical Society 37:1-248.
Kniffen, F. B., Hiram F. Gregory, and G. A. Stokes
1987

The Historic Indian tribes of Louisiana From 1542 to the Present. Louisiana
State University Press, B~ton Rouge.

Lorrain, Dessamae
1967

Animal Remains. In: The Gilbert Site, a Nortefio Focus Site in Northeastern
Texas, edited by Edward B. Jelks. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
37:225-243.

Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961
The Indians of Texas from Prehistoric to Modern Times. University of Texas
Press, Austin.
Richmond, Jean A., William L. Richmond, and John W. Greer
1985
Texas Archeological Society Field Schools, 1962-1982. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 54:105-184.
Rohrbaugh, C.L.
An Hypothesis for the Origins of the Kichai. In: Pathways to Plains Prehistory:
1982
Anthropological Perspectives of Plains Natives and Their Pasts, Papers in
Honor of Robert E. Bell, edited by Donald G. Wyckoffand Jack L. Hofman, pp.
51-61. Oklahoma Anthropological Society Memoir No. 3. Oklahoma City.
Skiles, B. D., James E. Bruseth, and Timothy K. Pertmla
1980

A Synthesis of the Upper Sabine River Basin Culture History. The Record
(Newsletter of the Dallas Archeological Society) 36(1):1-10.

Spiess, A.
1988

Appendix H: Archaeozoology of a Tmdeau Trash Pit. In: Tunica Archaeology,
by Jeffrey P. Brain, pp. 418--422. Papers of the Peabody Museum ofArchaeology and Ethnology, Volume 78. Harvard University, Cambridge.

Story, Dee A.
1985

The Walton Site: An Historical Burial in McLennan County, Texas. Central
Texas Archeologist 10: 66-96.

196

Texas Archeological Society

Story, Dee A., B. Barber, E. Barber, E. Cobb, H. Cobb, R. Coleman, Kathleen Gilmore, R.
King Harris, and Norma Hoffrichter
1967
Pottery Vessels. In: The Gilbert Site, A Nortefio Focus Site in Northeastern
Texas, edited by Edward B. Jelks. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
37:112-187.
Swanton, John R.
1942

Source Material on the History and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians. Bureau of
American Ethnology, Bulletin 132. Washington, D.C.

197

A Case Study in the Interdependence of Archeology
and History: The Spanish Fort Sites on the Red River.

Elizabeth A. H. John

ABSTRACT
Astride the Red River in Montague County, Texas, and Jefferson County,
Oklahoma, just west of the Cross Timbers, a complicated cluster of sites manifests
prehistoric activity as well as historically significant villages of the Taovayas,
Wichita, and kindred groups. In 1967, anthropologists of both states collaborated
in sampling the archeological and archival evidence. Although their results fully
confirmed the potential usefulness of comprehensive excavation and analysis,
such an attack has yet to be mounted. Meanwhile, newly discovered Spanish
documents underscore the urgency of uncovering all that these sites can tell about
the formative encounter of Indian and European cultures that these sites exemplify.

Late in the nineteenth century, Anglo-American settlers on the Red River rim
of Montague County, Texas, guessed that the collapsed walls of an apparent fort
witnessed a shadowy Spanish past. How could they not have named the place
Spanish Fort? Every season’s plowing along both sides of that distinctive bend
between the ninety-eighth meridian and the Cross Timbers turned up a fresh
evidential harvest of European and aboriginal artifacts.
Unfortunately, most of the material that surfaced was lost until local rancher
Joe Benton announced in the 1920s that he would pay for such finds. Subsequently,
the collection of artifacts that Benton had begun in boyhood swelled into a
voluminous array for which he eventually built a museum beside his home on the
outskirts of Nocona.1 To support his collection, the dedicated Benton also acquired
all the pertinent literature he could locate, and generously invited scholars to
examine his materials.
Fortunately for Benton’s purposes, the phenomenon had also engaged the
interest of archeologists and historians. In 1914 and 1915, historian Herbert Eugene
Bolton published clarifying evidence from Spanish documents. The fort had been
Indian rather than Spanish, built in the 1750s by the long-forgotten Wichitan band
called Taovayas, whose strategic site on an international boundary had given them
singular importance (Bolton 1914, Vol. II: 185; 1915:90). Bolton meant to have the
story of the Taovayas developed by one of his many graduate students at the
University of California, but a paucity of accessible documents made it such an

The priv ate museum is faithfully maintained by Benton’s heirs, who welcome visitors
upon suitable advance arrangement.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 63 (1992)

198

Texas Archeological Society

impractical research problem that none of his candidates was ever foolhardy enough
to pursue it.
In contrast to the paucity of documentary evidence, the physical evidence
presented archeologists with an embarrassment of riches. Not only was there a
bewildering accumulation of artifacts, with little record of provenience, but there
was also a complicated cluster of sites that indicated both prehistoric occupations
and historic Wichitan activity. The extent and complexity of these manifestations
demanded a more comprehensive attack than the funding of archeologists in either
Texas or Oklahoma could support. It was not until the mid- 1960s that a federal grant
from the National Science Foundation permitted anthropologists in the two states
to collaborate in a systematic sampling of the archeological and archival data. Their
results provided more than adequate justification for extensive excavation and
analysis of Montague County’s Wichitan sites and their counterpart in Jefferson
County, Oklahoma (Bell et al. 1967). But a quarter of a century later, a comprehensive study of these vitally important sites is still awaited by concerned scholars,
buffs, and, perhaps most importantly, by the Wichita tribe, whose ancestral
experience these sites embody.
Perhaps the inquiry can be revitalized now, in keeping with the Quincentenary
emphasis on the encounter of Indian and European cultures that these sites
exemplify. Coincidentally, the construction of a long-needed highway bridge
across the Red River, just downstream from Spanish Fort, is sparking a new flurry
of public interest in the historical significance of the place, which some local
citizenry view as a potential magnet for tourists. However mixed the motives, it is
surely time to find out what these intriguing sites can tell.
Not the least of the challenges is to mesh the documentary evidence with that
which has been found on the ground. A cautionary example is the matter of the
location of the Taovayas fort, which was long thought to be obvious. After all, the
place name Spanish Fort commemorates the visible remains of a fort on the right
bank, or Texas side, of the Red River in the late nineteenth century. Spanish visitors
reported the Taovayas village on the right bank of the river in 1778, and historians
found no reason to question the apparent agreement of physical and documentary
evidence.
But the official reportage of the first Spanish encounter with the Taovayas fort
in 1759 does contain ambiguities that render the exact location--left bank or fight
bank--uncertain. An Oklahoma anthropologist proposed the left bank, or Oklahoma side, as an alternative in 1965 (Duffield 1965), to the considerable skepticism
of most scholars familiar with the pertinent documents. But three decades later, we
find that the language of the 1759 reports also left contemporary authorities in
Mexico City uncertain about the exact location of the fort.
For Spanish officialdom, the question was resolved in 1763 by a crude map that
caught my eye in Seville in 1983 (Figure 1). That map and its accompanying
affidavit constitute the earliest testimony that Spaniards obtained from a witness
well acquainted with the physical structure of the fort of the Taovayas and its
environs.

John m Spanish Fort Sites on the Red River

199

Early in 1763, the commandant of Presidio San Sabfi learned that the
well-behaved Frenchman who had recently enlisted in his company was actually a
deserter from the old French fort on the Arkansas River. Since his departure from
the Arkansas Post, Pedro Tamamint had visited all the villages of the Taovayas,
Tawakonis, Yscanis, and their allies, and had been many times in the fort of the
Taovayas. Naturally, the commandant seized this providential opportunity for
first-hand news of Indians who had continued to plague the S an Sabfi enterprise ever
since destroying its infant mission in March 1758.
On January 15, 1763, Commandant Felipe de Rfibago y Terfin summoned
soldier Pedro Tamamint and ordered him to make a map with its base point at New
Orleans, showing the locations of all the Indian villages in relation to the presidios
of San Sabfi, Los Adaes, and San Antonio de Brxar) In addition, he should provide
a sworn declaration of all the distances between settlements, describe the mode of
living of each of the Indian nations, and give his view of the means of bringing them
to justice.
That was too much to demand of a thirty-two-year-old soldier who did not
know how to write. But within five days Tamamint produced a primitive map that
gives the essential relationships in the region and clearly shows the fortified
Taovayas village on the left bank of the Red River. On January 20, he reported back
to Commandant Rfibago, who interrogated him before two witnesses and, having no
official scribe available, recorded the answers himself. Presumably R~ibago also
wrote on the map the labels identifying the symbols that Tamamint had drawn. The
Frenchman swore to the accuracy of the map and to the truth of his answers to
R~ibago’s questions.
As for distances, Tamamint’s own experience was that from the houses of
French hunters near the Cadohadachos, it was a four-day journey up the Red River
to the contiguous pueblos of the Yscanis and the Taovayas. Having once been sent
to Natchitoches during his service at the Arkansas Post, he estimated the distance
from the Taovayas to Natchitoches to be a little more than a hundred leagues (about
260 miles). After deserting the Arkansas Post, Tamamint had gone to the fort of the
Taovayas, but it had been a year since he last saw it.
Tamamint’s map shows the villages of the Yscanis and the Taovayas on the left
bank of the Red River (Rio de Natchitoches), the former, downstream and the latter,
upstream, on opposite sides of an apparent tributary flowing into the Red River
(Figure 1). A small circular village symbol denotes the Yscanis; a larger rectangle
denotes the Taovayas fort, with many tiny circles inside and out, perhaps representing houses within and without the enclosure.
2 The map (Figure 1) is filed in the Archivo General de Indies (AGI), Mapas y Planos,
Mfixico, #527, as "Presidio de San Sab~i hasta Adaes, 1763." A copy is in the Texas State
Archive’s Inglis Collection of photographs of manuscript maps from the AGI, entitled
"Fuerte de los tahuallas," 1983/18-30, map #2784. The supporting documents are in AGI,
Mfixico, 1933-A; a microfilm copy is available at the Bancroft Library, University of
California at Berkeley.

200

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Presidio de San Sab~ hasta Adaes, 1763. This diagrammatic map shows New
Orleans at the lower left, and tile Mississippi River along the lower margin, with its

John -- Spanish Fort Sites on the Red River

201

\
\

\

2

/

tributaries branching off to the northeast. (Map reproduced by courtesy of the Texas
State Archives.)

202

Texas Archeological Society

Other circular symbols locate the Cadohadachos, Tawakonis, Kichais,
Tonkawas, and Yojuanes, within an arena bounded by the Spanish presidios of San
Antonio de B6xar, San Sab~, and los Adaes, and the French posts of Natchitoches
and Cadohadachos. Just east of the road from B6xar to Los Adaes, Tamamint shows
the villages of the Ais and the Nacogdoches connected to one mission and, rather
puzzling, a village of"Yndios mansos" connected to another mission. Nearest Los
Adaes, on the road to B6xar, are two"casas de Ybarbos," the only private dwellings
shown, indicating Tamamint’s awareness of that family’s prominence in the
Texas-Louisiana marchlands. His depiction of French and Indian establishments
from New Orleans to the Illinois country, together with his grasp of Texas
geography, suggests how widely Tamamint had ranged before turning up at San
Sab~i.
Asked by Commandant R~bago to describe the construction of the Taovayas
fort, Tamamint explained that it was built of thick posts stuck in the ground in the
manner of scissors, with their closed points well joined, standing more than four
varas (roughly twelve feet) above ground. Between every two pairs was a small
aperture through which the Indians could operate their weapons from inside the said
scissors, which made a passageway. On the inside, as on the outside, the stakes were
embedded in earth more than two varas high (roughly six feet). The enclosure was
as large as that of Presidio San Sab~,3 and a spring in the middle provided a pool of
easily accessible drinking water. Moreover, the villagers had shown Tamamint an
abundance of foodstuffs--corn, dried meat, beans, etc.--that they kept well hidden
within the fort. Unquestionably, these people were well prepared against a siege.
As to Indian populations, Tamamint ventured no separate counts of villages,
but he guessed that the Taovayas, Yscanis, and other pueblos could muster more
than 3,000 men, all armed with guns. Many of them had as many as four or five good
firearms, as well as plenty of arrows, small hatchets, and all sorts of Indian weapons.
They also had many axes, hoes, and bars--all of French manufacture--acquired
during their years of trade with the French. But a year earlier (1762), the governor
at New Orleans had banned that trade on pain of death. It was probably no
coincidence that Tamamint had last visited the Taovayas fort a year ago: the French
trade interdiction may well have driven him to seek alternative subsistence on a
Spanish payroll in Texas.
Commandant R~ibago hoped this new intelligence would help him win permission for another punitive expedition against the Taovayas. However, authorities in
Mexico City drew quite another conclusion. Since Tamamint’s map proved that the
villages and fort were on the left bank of the Red River, they were indisputably in

3 The copy says "el tamafio de esse Presidio"--i.e., that presidio--but the context
indicates that this should be"este presidio"--i.e., this presidio, meaning San Sab~, which was
the site of the interrogation and the only presidio that has meaning in this context. This is one
of several instances of carelessness on the part of a copyist: e.g., both witnesses are named
Antonio at the beginning of the document; at the end, one is Rafael. The declarant’s name is
written as Tamint as well as Tamamint.

John ~ Spanish Fort Sites on the Red River

203

the territory of Louisiana---close enough to the Arkansas and Cadohadacho posts
to be subdued and managed through those French jurisdictions rather than at great
expense to the treasury of New Spain.
Of course, the Taovayas could not guess that all likelihood of another Spanish
expedition against them had vanished, and they knew all too well the relentless
menace of their Osage enemies. Hence they continued to expend prodigious labor
on their defenses. In the summer of 1765, two and a half years after Tamamint’s
report, another eyewitness reported substantial elaborations of the Taovayas
fortifications.
Soldier Antonio Trevifio, lately returned from a cordial six months’ sojourn as
the honored captive of the principal chief of the Taovayas, reported that the fort’s
interior circumference was now occupied by four very large subterranean houses,
capacious enough to hold all the people who could not participate in defending the
village against invaders. The exterior defenses had also been amplified: Trevifio
described an earthen rampart all around the outside, mounded to a height of more
than a vara and a third (about four feet), which served the defenders as a cover
against enemy fire. About four paces from it, a very deep ditch ran from east to west
in order that nobody could come near it on horseback. Moreover, there was now a
third village--that of the small band called Wichitas---contiguous to the Taovayas
on the north, while that of the Yscanis was at the same distance to the south. Trevifio
estimated that all three villages together could muster about 500 men-at-arms. They
enjoyed a thriving trade with the French, especially with a beloved man they called
Antonio, who had been established for many years on the Red River, perhaps 40
leagues (about 104 miles) downstream from the villages:
However elaborate the defenses of the Taovayas were, they proved inadequate against the Osages who had driven them southward from the Arkansas
River basin in the 1750s. By 1772, less than two decades after that migration,
Osage marauders forced them out of their Red River villages. The Taovayas
took refuge in broken country much farther upstream, while the Wichitas fled to
an arid treeless plain far up the Brazos; the Yscanis may have taken refuge with
the Tawakonis much farther downstream on the Brazos. Presumably the triumphant Osage destroyed not only the three Red River villages but also the great
fort, for there are no subsequent reports of such a structure on the left bank. The
demolition was so thorough as to leave no obvious traces. Not until 1967, at the
end of the National Science Foundation Pilot Project, were archeologists able to
discern at the Longest site (34Jfl) in Jefferson County, Oklahoma, outlines of
a structure that possibly marks the long-sought mid-eighteenth-century fortification (Bell et al. 1967).
4 Declaration of Antonio Trevifio, August 13, 1765, in certified copy of proceedings
concerning return of Trevifio by the Taovayas Indiana, March 20-August 16, 1765. B6xar
Archives (BA), Barker Texas History Center, The University of Texas at Austin. As noted
in Newcomb and Field (1967:270), Trevifio’s testimony also confirms the left bank location
of the Taovayas fort.

204

Texas Archeological Society

By 1778, the Taovayas and Wichitas returned to their strategic Red River locale
on the western margin of the Cross Timbers, encouraged by promises of protection
and prosperity within a system of Spanish alliances. But this time the Taovayas
planted their village of 123 houses on the right bank; only the little Wichita band
ventured back to the left bank to build their 37 houses2
So began a nearly continous 30-year occupancy, with the dominant Taovayas
presence making the right bank of the Red River the principal hub of activity.
Unhappily, the Osage menace continued, fluctuating only in greater or lesser
degree, depending on circumstances in the Osage world. Spanish authorities were
rarely able to fulfill their promises of aid and trade, much less to respond to the
repeated pleas of the Taovayas to send them soldiers, missionaries, and even
settlers, to bolster the Wichitan hold on the Red River site that crown envoy
Athanase de M6ziEres had deemed in 1778 the "master key of the north." Indeed, by 1786, the situation on the Red River was so discouraging, and the desire
for closer involvement with the new Spanish-Comanche axis so great, that the
Taovayas and Wichitas moved briefly to the Pedernales River, an ill-advised
experiment in which they persisted only half a year before retreating to their
Red River site.6
Two maps, drawn by men who visited the villages in 1787 and 1788, confirm
the return of the Taovayas, Wichitas, and Yscanis to the Red River’s distinctive
bend between the ninety-eighth meridian and the Cross Timbers. Pedro Vial’s map
shows three villages there in 1787: the "taviache" and "ouichita" [Taovayas and
Wichitas] on the right bank, and the "Yachequariches" [variation on Yscanis?] on
the left bank. In July 1788, when Vial paid a return visit with the New Mexican
officer Francisco Xavier Fragoso, the latter drew a map (Figure 2) showing at that
5 The story of the Wichitan bands is a principal thread of John (1975), and is easily
discerned from the index by researchers not concerned with the larger context addressed in
that book.
6 It is puzzling that Newcomb and Field (1967:281) warn that the"Rio de los Pedernales"
of the 1786 move should not be confused with the modem stream; official Spanish reportage
from B~xar consistently refers to the Rio Pedernales in a context agreeing with the modem
usage.
7"Mapa et tierra qe. yos. pedro Vial taingo transzitau en St. Tafee este dia 18 de octubre
de Lann. 1787." The whereabouts of the original Vial map are unknown, so it can be studied
only through photographic copies, one of which is reproduced in Carl I. Wheat (1957: facing
p. 126). Appearing on the reverse, facing p. 127, is "Mapa del Territorio Comprendido entre
la Provincia de Nuevo Mexico y el Fuerte de Natchitoches y Tex as, 1789," drawn by Frago so,
which shows the route he and Vial traveled from Santa Fe to Nachitoches, 1788-1789. The
original is in Mapas y Pianos, A.G.I. Seville; a photograph can be seen in the Inglis
Collection, Spanish Map #2781, at the Texas State Archives, through whose courtesy both
the Fragoso and Tamamint maps are reproduced in this article. A manuscript copy of the
Fragoso map can be seen in the J. P. Bryan Collection, B arker History Center, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Wheat’s (1957:238-239) discussions of the two maps reflect the paucity of knowledge
about the context of these maps in 1957.

John ~ Spanish Fort Sites on the Red River

205

bend "pueblos de los Jumaes," a slight garbling of the term "Jumanos," under w hich
New Mexicans ordinarily lumped the Wichitan groups.7
In order to ensure adequate reportage of the 1788 expedition, the governor of
New Mexico sent two literate Spanish officers with the laconic Frenchman Vial.
Still, little description of the Red River villages emerged. Fragoso’ s diary noted that
two of the villages were on one bank of the river and one on the other, in a setting
of extraordinary beauty. Santiago Fernandez remarked in his diary that there were
17 houses in the first of the Jumanos villages reached by his escort party, and roughly
the same number in each of the two other villages, which were within half a league
(about a mile and a third) of the first. All three had fields of maize, beans,
watermelons, and squashes? Perhaps more intriguing is the description of terrain,
especially by Fragoso, emphasizing the hills which figured on the Vial and Fragoso
maps and became well-known guideposts for later travelers to these villages.
Conspicuously absent in Spanish documents, either on the maps or in the
various reports of visitors to the area after the 1760s, is mention of a fort at the
Wichitan villages on the Red River. That seems odd, considering the proven skill
of the Wichitas in the construction of forts and the perennial need for protection from
Osage marauders. Moreover, some fortification would have been eminently desirable to protect on that exposed frontier the lively trade--Indian, European, and,
ultimately, Anglo-American-- that the Wichitan villagers always invited and often
enjoyed.
That the Wichitan bands on the Red River actually did continue to build
fortifications is indicated by the 1808 diary of Anthony Glass, an
Anglo-American trader who visited the Taovayas and Wichita villages on the
right bank during his sojourn of several weeks in the left bank village that he
understood to be called "Huick" (John 1982-3:422). Glass observed that "their
forts are of a very slender construction made of mud which they retire to when
attacked by an enemy.’’9
This first--and perhaps sole--description from an Anglo-American visitor
meshes with a conjecture that late eighteenth century Spanish and French visitors
considered some fortification of Wichitan villages such a routine feature that it did

SThe descriptions of the villages by Fragoso and FernS.ndez can be most conveniently-albeit cautiously---examined in the translation of their diaries published in Noel M. Loomis
and Abraham P. Nasatir (1967:322-339).
9Huick may be the first documentary occurrence of the name Anglo-Texans would later
render as Waco. The term Huico--given as a name for one of the Tawakoni villages--occurs
in a Spanish trader’s report o f the 1811 dispersal of the Wichitan villagers from the Red River,
when some of them moved south to settle near the Tawakonis (Bernardo Montero to Manuel
Maria de Salcedo, Nacogdoches, January 3, 1812, BA). Contemporary Wichitas say that the
correct pronounciation is Wee-ko rather than Way-ko. Governor Cordero noted that the left
bank villages were known at San Antonio as Yascarros (Antonio Cordero to Nemesio
Salcedo, Bfxar, July 30, 1808, BA); the name more often occurs in Bfxar documents as
Yscanis.

206

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 2. The map drawn by Francisco Xavier Fragoso (reproduced by courtesy of the

John w Spanish Fort Sites on the Red River

\

Texas State Archives).

207

208

Texas Archeological Society

not warrant mention in their usually meager reports. This is not to suggest that the
Wichitan bands ever again built a fort as substantial as their first one on the Red
River in the 1750s and 1760s, but it does indicate that archeologists can reasonably
expect to find fortifications on the right bank as well as the left.
Another intriguing possibility for archeological discovery would be evidence
of the earliest blacksmithing on the northern Texas frontier. Frenchman Pedro Vial,
known among Indians as Manitou, plied his trade as a blacksmith while living
illegally with the Taovayas in the early 1780s, before he found his more famous
niche in the Spanish service as an explorer and emissary to Indians. Antonio Gil
Ybarbo reported a decade later that"monsieur Manitou" had maintained a forge by
the spring from which the Taovayas drew water. Unfortunately, that clue is less
specific than it may seem, because Gil Ybarbo lumped the pueblos on both sides of
Red River under the name Taovayas.1°
After Vial had left, Spanish authorities heard worrisome reports of other smiths
operating illegally at the Taovayas villages on the Red River, repairing guns and
making knives and lances. By the 1790s, a blacksmith named La Lima had
established a forge in the middle of the Taovayas pueblo whose leader the Spaniards
knew as el Flechazo. As lieutenant governor at Nacogdoches, Ybarbo ordered La
Lima and his wife hauled back to Natchitoches, whence they came, leaving most of
his equipment with the Indians. Had any villagers learned enough from Vial and his
successors to make some use of that forge?
Here arises yet another challenge to mesh what the documents tell us with what
the ground reveals. An extraordinary number of metal objects--including many
quite baffling fragments--has been a major factor in attracting attention to these
sites ever since news of the unusual incidence of artifacts began to circulate. A
partial, but hardly sufficient, explanation survives in accounts of trade and gift
goods. Does a further explanation lie in metal-smithing, and can the site(s) of the
eighteenth century forges be found?
While archeologists await their long-overdue opportunity to tackle these
tantalizing sites, historians remain alert for further archival evidence. My own most
recent and quite unexpected discovery in Seville in 1983, the Tamamint map,
illustrates the serendipity factor in a quest that began for me in 1949, when, for an
undergraduate history thesis, I sought an explanation for the many European and
Indian artifacts that farmers had been turning up for decades in the remote
southeastern corner of Jefferson County, my home county in Oklahoma. No tyro
could have wished better luck. My first venture in primary research led to the twin
villages of the kindred Taovayas and Wichita bands, where various Indian, Spanish,
French, and Anglo-American forces met from about 1757 to 1813, an important
story that had never been told.
The ramifications were virtually unlimited. Moreover, the evidence lay prin-

1°Manuel Mufioz to Antonio Gil Ybarbo and Gil Ybarbo to Mufioz, San Antonio de
B6xar, April 27, 1794, BA.

John ~ Spanish Fort Sites on the Red River

209

cipally in the rich store of Spanish documents that I have been exploring at every
opportunity ever since, while becoming nearly as fascinated with Hispanic as with
Indian cultures. Better still, the effort to understand--as opposed to merely
documenting--the Indian experience took me into cultural anthropology and
ethnology. In effect, the momentum of the inquiry that began with those Wichitan
sites on the Red River led directly into the rather conlxoversial subdiscipline of
ethnohistory, a hybrid that was just beginning to emerge in the 1950s. It was the
beginning of a lifework in which archeologists’ generous sharing of information has
been indispensable.
REFERENCES CITED
Bell, R. E., Edward B. Jelks, and W. W. Newcomb, Jr.
1967
A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory. Final Report for
Grant GS-964. National Science Foundation, Washington, D.C.

Bolton, Herbert E.
1914
Athanase de M&ikres and the Louisiana-Texas Frontier, 1768-1780.2 vols.
Arthur H. Clark, Cleveland.
1915

Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century. The University of California Publications in History, Volume 3. Berkeley.

Duffield, L. F.
1965
The Taovayas Village of 1759: In Texas or Oklahoma? Great Plains Journal
4:39-48.
John, Elizabeth A. H.
1975

Storms Brewed on Other Men’s Worlds: The Confrontation oflndians, Spanish,
and French, 1540-1795. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.

1982-

Portrait of a Wichita Village, 1808. The Chronicles of Oklahoma 60 (Winter),

1983

pp. 413-437.

Loomis, Noel M., and Abraham P. Nasatir
1967
Pedro Vial and the Roads to Santa Fe. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr., and W. T. Field
An Ethnohistoric Investigation of the Wichita Indians in the Southern Plains. In:
1967
A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory, by R. E. Bell,
Edward B. Jelks, and W. W. Newcomb,Jr., pp. 240-354. FinalReportfor Grant
GS-964. National Science Foundation, Washington, D.C.
Wheat, Carl I.
1957
Mapping the Trans-Mississippi West. The Institute of Historical Cartography,
San Francisco.

211

Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation and Colonial
Period Acculturation: Archeologkal and
Ethnohistorkal Evidence
Robert A. Ricklis

ABSTRACT
Contrary to popular belief, the Karankawans of the central coast of Texas did
not consistently reject Euroamerican cultural influences up to the time of their
extinction in the nineteenth century as an identifiable population. A synthesis of
archeological and ethnohistorical data suggests that the Karankawans achieved
peaceful interaction with the Spanish on the colonial frontier. Archeological data
indicate that the aboriginal adaptive strategy took advantage of a broad ecotonal
enviromnent that encompassed both the coasta! estuaries and the adjacent
prairie-riverine environment. Seasonally oscillating patterns of settlement and
subsistence emphasized procurement of estuarine resources in the fall and winter,
and terrestrial game during the spring and summer, a pattern that persisted through
colonial times. As various pressures for interaction with the Spaniards intensified
in the late 1700s, the Karankawans established ongoing relations, apparently
facilitated by integrating the institution of the mission into their traditional
adaptive system at the level of a basic ecological resource. This synthesis of
long-established cultural patterns with the foreign institution of the mission helped
to lay a foundation for the incipient acculturation that took place during the early
nineteenth century among Karankawan groups.

INTRODUCTION
According to popular wisdom, the Karankawan Indians of the Texas coast were
a fierce and unfriendly people who led an extremely primitive existence and
remained intractably resistant to Euroamerican cultural influence until their final
demise in the mid-nineteenth century. In the perception of many Colonial Spanish
missionaries and military personnel, they were at best an intractable folk, and at
worst, vile and treacherous savages. Most later Anglo-Americans held them in
similar low esteem, viewing them as a dangerous impediment to progressive
settlement of the coastal prairies. These perceptions, repeated and magnified
through time in popular folklore, ultimately became the basis for a generally
negative judgment of Karankawan culture (e.g., Kilman 1959).
With anthropological hindsight, such condemnations of entire cultures are now
seen as highly suspect. In the New World, insights provided by historical distance
and decades of scholarly research, have provided less biased assessments of Native
American peoples and their cultures. It is now clear that the Precolumbian New
World was not a sparsely populated wilderness, but a settled place, inhabited by
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 63 (1992)

212

Texas Archeological Society

many native groups who had expert knowledge of their environments, rich
mythologies and folklore, and, in many cases, highly complex and aesthetically
sophisticated societies. With an awareness of earlier ethnocentric biases, modern
researchers have extended less-perjorative attention to the Karankawans. The
notion that these coastal people represented a nadir in human societal development
has been brought into question (Gilmore 1984), and ulterior motives have been
recognized in the early denigration of this native people (Newcomb 1983).
Nonetheless, some basic facets of Karankawan culture and history have remained
obscure.
The recent archeological and historical research summarized here offers some
degree of insight into native lifeways before the Euroamerican intrusion and begins
to trace the basis for some of the processes of change that operated during the
Historic era. Archeological data point to a settlement and subsistence strategy that
took advantage of seasonal peaks in the availabilities of key resources. The
aboriginal lifeways of the Karankawans included seasonally oscillating use of
coastal, estuarine, and terrestrial resources of the prairie-riverine environment.
Historical data show that, contrary to long-held assumptions, the Karankawans
(Figure 1) experienced a significant degree of peaceful acculturation to Spanish
cultural patterns during the latter part of the Colonial era. Furthermore, there is
evidence that there was a significant linkage between aboriginal adpative patterns
and late Colonial period acculturation, and that real change was related to the
Karankawan’s ability to integrate the foreign institution of the mission strategically
into their long-established and highly traditional cultural-ecological patterns.
THE ABORIGINAL KARANKAWAN ECOSYSTEM:
ENVIRONMENT AND ARCHEOLOGY
Environmental Resource Zones: Key Spatial and Seasonal Patterns
The Karankawan homeland of the central Texas coast is a broad ecotone,
situated between the marine environment of the Gulf of Mexico and the inland
coastal plain. The area is marked by five major, nearly contiguous estuarine bay
systems, protected from the high energy wave action of the open Gulf by a long
chain of barrier islands (Figure 1). Streams of varying sizes discharge fresh water
into the bays, and the bayfiagoon estuaries are connected to the open Gulf by a series
of narrow tidal passes.
The outer mainland shoreline, parallel to the modern barrier islands, consists
geologically of the Ingleside unit of the Beaumont Formation, a sandy clay stratum
several kilometers wide that represents a Pleistocene barrier island or strandplain
(Brown et al. 1976; McGowen et al. 1976). Here, sandy soils and stable sand dunes
of the Ingleside support extensive and often dense stands of oak, predominantly live
oak and blackjack oak (Jones 1983). Just inland are the extensive Beaumont and
Lissie Formations, consisting of fluvial deltaic sediments believed to have been
deposited by extensive Pleistocene riverine distributary systems (Brown et al.
1976). The nearly flat surfaces of the Beaumont and Lissie formations were once

Ricklis m AboriginaI Karankawan Adaptation

213

Figure 1. Map of the central Texas coast, showing major rivers and approximate locations of
the five major Karankawan groups.

covered with grass prairies, and, in places, oak savannas, both of which have largely
given way to varying densities of thornbrush.
Many subparallel perennial streams flow through the Coastal Plain. Today,
floodplains of the larger streams support dense arboreal vegetation, as they
doubtless did in prehistoric times. This includes species of hackberry, elm, cottonwood, oak, and mesquite, as well as the economically useful pecan.
The shallow protected bays and lagoons lying behind the barrier islands
provided a rich variety of exploitable resources. High photosynthesis rates in
shallow waters, combined with nutrients entering the bays through riverine discharge, were the basis of a complex food chain including planktons, shellfish, and
fish. Bay-lagoon shellfish resources of economic potential include moderatesalinity bivalves such as oyster (Crassostrea virginica), bay scallop (Argopectin
irradians), southern quahog (Mercenaria campechensis), and various high-salinity
gastropods, most notably lightning whelk (Busycon perversum). In general, there is
a north-south trend of increasing salinity along the Texas estauries, due to increasingly xeric climate and concomitant reduction of freshwater discharge. As a result,
low-to-moderate salinity oysters predominate to the north, and higher salinity
bivalves and gastropods become increasingly abundant toward Corpus Christi Bay

214

Texas Archeological Society

(see Steele 1988). Baffin Bay supports none of the larger, economically useful
shellfish species, due to its hypersalinity (see Hester 1980). Found in rivers that are
heavily influenced by secondary and tertiary bay areas, and often in dense beds
along estuarine zones of rivers, is the common rangia,Rangia cuneata (La Salle and
De la Cruz 1985).
The bays and lagoons of the Texas coast abound in fish. Economically useful
species include black drum (Pogonias cromis), redfish (Sciaenops ocellata),
speckled sea trout (Cynoscion nebulosus), and Atlantic croaker (Micropogon
undulatus). Black drum and redfish are the largest species, the adults weighing
several kilograms (Beckman et al. 1988; Beckman, Wilson and Stanley 1988).
These species spawn during the winter-to-early spring and fall, respectively
(Simmons and Breuer 1962), when they aggregate in large numbers.
A rich and varied terrestrial fauna complements the estuarine species of the
Karankawan homeland. In spite of a wide range of avian and mammalian species,
archeological data indicate that by far the most economically significant terrestrial
faunal species in aboriginal times were the white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus)
and bison (Bison bison) (Ricklis 1990). Deer are, and doubtless were, abundant on
the coastal prairies, river floodplains, and m arshy areas; the density is now about one
animal in four hectares (extrapolated from data in Schmidly 1983). Bison are
abundantly documented for early historic times (e.g., West 1905:207,216; Folmer
1940:216, 219; Carroll 1983:21), and the archeological data available from the area,
and from southern Texas in general (e.g., Hester 1975; Huebner 1991; Ricklis
1990), indicate their presence after about A.D. 1250 to 1300, in accord with
Dillehay’s (1974) postulation of a significant Late Prehistoric influx of bison into
Texas.
Archeological Indications of Precontact
Karankawan Lifeways
Arecently completed program ofarcheological survey, testing, and excavation,
mainly in Nueces and San Patricio counties, has provided empirical data for a
reconstruction of basic spatial and seasonal patterns of the human ecosystem before
there was ongoing contact with Euroamericans. The pertinent information, which
is summarized here, comes from site components of the Late Prehistoric Rockport
phase, estimated to have begun about A.D. 1250/1300 (Story 1968; Ricklis 1990,
1992). Occasional finds of early historic European material in Rockport phase
contexts indicates that it persisted into early historic times, implying a direct linkage
with the region’s historically documented Karankawan peoples (Suhm et al. 1954;
Campbell 1960; Newcomb 1983).
A recurrent artifact assemblage identifies sites of the Rockport phase. Lithic
artifacts (Figure 2) consist predeminantly of Perdiz arrowpoints (see Turner and
Hester 1985:187), unifacial end scrapers, thin bifacial knives (sometimes alternately beveled), small chert drills, and a blade-core technology (see Hester and
Shafer 1975). Ceramic finds are dominated by several types of Rockport pottery
(Suhm and Jelks 1962; Ricklis 1990), a sandy paste ware often coated and/or

Ricklis ~ Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation

215

decorated with natural asphaltum (Figure 3). Most of the lithic material has
counterparts in Late Prehistoric assemblages in the larger Texas region, but the
highly distinctive ceramics are restricted to a narrow zone along the coast, from the
Matagorda Bay-Colorado River area on the north (Fritz 1975) to the northern shores
of Baffin Bay on the south (Hester 1969). Considering the stylistic redundancy of
ceramics in this area and the environmental correlate of the area’s five nearly
contiguous major bay systems, it is clear that the geographical extent of Rockport
pottery delineates a region of heightened internal interaction and information
exchange within a distinct environmental zone. This area is about the same as that
occupied during early historic times by the several Karankawan groups, leaving
little doubt that Rockport pottery is largely, if not exlusively, of Karankawan
manufacture.
Rockport Phase Archeological Sites as Nodal Points
of the Use of Seasonal Resources
Many Late Prehistoric sites are documented in this area; some (Figure 4) have
yielded key classes of data. A preliminary assessment of data from 26 Rockport
phase sites suggested a fundamental dichotomy, with two distinct kinds of sites
found largely in one or another of two kinds of environmental contexts (Ricklis
1988). Additional investigations (Ricklis 1990) have further supported this distinction. Group 1 sites are consistently large (several thousand square meters in area),
yield relatively large quantities of artifacts, and are characterized by large quantities
of fish and shellfish debris. Invariably, these sites are found in shoreline locations
on margins of bays or lagoons.
Group 2 sites (Ricklis 1988) present a marked contrast; they cover small areas
(usually only a few hundred square meters), yield only sparse cultural material, and
have faunal assemblages dominated mainly by bones of large game (bison, deer),
with few fish or shellfish remains. Most recorded Group 2 sites are on upland prairie
margins overlooking stream floodplains, though some are adjacent to the prairie
environment on inland bayshores (Figure 4).
Group I Sites
The author has carried out subsurface testing at four Group 1 sites (Ricklis
1990): 41SP120 and 41SP43 on the northeastern shore of Corpus Christi Bay, the
Kirchmeyer site (41NU11) on Oso Bay, and the Mustang Lake site (41CL3) on San
Antonio Bay (Figure 4). All are large sites, with high artifact yields and abundant
evidence for estuarine resource procurement.
At the Mustang Lake site, which covers at least 5,000 square meters, testing
revealed a dense shell (mostly oyster) midden more than 60 cm thick. Many fish
bones and otoliths were found throughout the deposit, which also contained
scattered deer bone fragments, a few fragments of bird long bones, canid bone, a
turtle carapace fragment, a cottontail mandible, black drum, marine catfish, redfish,
and speckled sea trout. The Rockport phase component, indicated by many

216

Texas Archeological Society

i
~11

A

D

’

E

I

F

13

J

K

N

O

Figure 2. Drawings: lithic artifacts of the Rockport phase: A-D, bifacial knives (A-C are
alternately beveled); E-I, unifacial end scrapers; J-M, Perdiz arrowpoints; N and O, trimmed
prismatic blades. Proveniences: A, 41NU1; B, 41NU193; C and G, 41SP167; D, E, F, H, I,
and J-O, 41SP120.

Ricklis ~ Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation

217

F
E

G

!
?

!

g
H

K
2

3,

cm

Figure 3. Asphaltum-painted Rockport Black-on-Gray potsherds. Proveniences: A and B,
41SP159; J, 41SP167; all others, 41SP120.

Rockport ware sherds, was restricted to the upper 15 cm of the deposit. Seasonality
analyses of fish otoliths, Rangia cuneata, and oysters from the Rockport level at
Mustang Lake yielded mutually supportive results that point to a predominantly
fall-through-late-winter to early spring occupation (see Ricklis 1990 for discussion
of methods of seasonality analysis).
At 41SP120 on Corpus Christi Bay, more extensive excavations yielded large
samples of artifacts and associated faunal remains. The findings indicate heavy

218

Texas Archeological Society

0

20

40

KILOMETERS

TEXAS

10

12

\
Figure 4. Map of the central Texas coast. Key to sites: 1.41CL3 (Mustang Lake); 2.41SP170;
3.41SP167; 4. 41SP160; 5.41SP159; 6. 41SP161; 7 and 8. 41SP43 and 41SP120; 9.
41NU193; 10.41NU240; 11.41NU22!; 12. 41NU255; 13.41NUll (Kirchmeyer); 14.
41NU46.

emphasis on exploitation of estuarine resources and predominantly fall-winter
seasonality. The Rockport phase component at this site consists of an extensive
midden 20 to 50 cm thick, which has produced many Perdiz arrowpoints, unifacial
end scrapers, small chert drills, bifacial knives, shell and bone tools and ornaments,
and several thousand Rockport ware sherds.
A profusion of fish bones and shell fragments was found at 41SP120; for
example, one excavation block of 8 square meters yielded 1,023 otoliths and 3,031
bivalve umbos and gastropod columellae, mostly in association with arrowpoints
and Rockport pottery. The important fish species, in order of estimated meat-weight
represented, were black drum, redfish, speckled sea trout, Atlantic croaker, and
marine catfish. Scattered fragments of deer and bison bone, as well as specimens of
bobcat, cottontail, and bird bone were also found. Analyses for minimum numbers

Ricklis M Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation

219

of individuals (MNI) indicate that fish were the primary source of meat weight
consumed at the site, followed by white-tailed deer and shellfish, in that order
(Ricklis 1990:198-218).
Analysis of seasonality of fish otoliths produced results similar to those from
Mustang Lake. A sample of 79 specimens broke down into seasonal categories: 19
percent fall, 63 percent winter, 5 percent spring, and 13 percent summer, indicating
a winter or fall-winter emphasis on fishing at the site.
Excavations at nearby 41 SP43 (the Ingleside Cove site), which had been tested
by Dee Ann Story (1968), yielded similar results for use and seasonality of
resources. Excavations in 1987 recovered several hundred Rockport potsherds in
association with Perdiz arrowpoints, as well as profuse fish and shellfish remains.
The most common fish species are black drum, redfish, speckled sea trout, and
Atlantic croaker. MNI analyses indicate that fish (mainly drum, redfish, and trout)
and white-tailed deer were of major economic significance and that the procurement
of shellfish played a supplemental role. Analysis of otolith seasonality indicates a
distinct fall-winter emphasis on fishing; the sample breaks down into seasonal
categories as follows: 25 percent fall, 60 percent winter, 4 percent spring, and 10
percent summer.
Intensive surface inspection and subsurface testing were carried out during the
summer of 1987 at the Kirchmeyer site (41NU11), on a clay dune on the western
shore ofOso Bay--a secondary bay connected to Corpus Christi Bay. This large site
(some 10,000 square meters) has been a source of surface-collected Rockport phase
materials since the early decades of this century, and a large sample of lithic,
ceramic, and shell artifacts from the site is housed at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory (TARL; see Headrick 1991). Particularly abundant are Perdiz
and triangular arrowpoints, small unifacial end scrapers, and sherds of Rockport
ware. Thomas R. Hester and James E. Corbin conducted subsurface testing at
Kirchmeyer in 1969, which revealed localized concentrations of cultural debris that
included fish, shellfish, and mammalian remains (field notes on file at TARL).
Workers at Kirchmeyer in 1987 recovered Rockport ware sherds, chert
debitage, shell fragments (oyster, scallop, and whelk), deer bone, and fish bones and
otoliths. The otoliths consisted of 27 drum, three croaker, two redfish, and two
speckled sea trout. Though only 11 specimens were large enough for reliable
seasonality readings, a distinct winter emphasis on fishing is strongly suggested.
The seasonality breakdown is 9 percent fa!l, 82 percent winter, and 9 percent spring.
Group 2 sites
Artifacts and faunal and seasonality samples have been analyzed for 11
Rockport phase components from twenty-nine Group 2 sites that have been
identified in the Corpus Christi and Copano Bay areas (Ricklis 1988, 1990). These
sites are treated as a group here, since there are close similarities in their salient
charactersitics (see Ricklis 1988, 1990).
As already noted, most Group 2 sites are on upland margins along stream
floodplains (Figure 4). Relative to Group 1 sites, the areas covered by these sites are

220

Texas Archeological Society

small, on the order of a few hundred square meters. Subsurface excavations at
several sites (41NU46, 41NU221, 41NU255, 41SP159, 41SP160, 41SP161,
41SP167, and 41SP170) confirm impressions gained during surface survey that
cultural debris is sparse and vertically restricted to narrow zones, usually somewhere between 10 and 25 cm below ground surface. Lithic and ceramic artifacts are
of the Rockport phase, and the overall assemblages of Group 2 and Group 1 sites
are essentially identical. Particularly significant is the persistent presence of the
technologically and stylistically unique Rockport pottery, which permits a confident distinction between Group 2 Rockport phase sites and sites referrable to the
contemporaneous Toyah phase or horizon of the coastal prairie. In fact, the
geographical distribution of sites yielding predominantly Rockport ware, as opposed to the bone-tempered plainware of the Toyah phase or horizon, makes it
possible to define a boundary between the two contemporaneous archeological
cultures at about 40 km from the outer mainland shoreline (Ricklis 1990:358-425).
Faunal samples from Group 2 sites are dominated by bones of bison and whitetailed deer, with occasional smaller animals such as turtle and rabbit. In contrast to
Group 1 sites, estuarine resources are only scantily represented and consist mainly
of the occasional fish bone or otolith and, usually, a light scatter ofRangia cuneata
clamshells. MNI analysis of relatively complete faunal samples from 41NU221 and
41SP167 indicate that, based on meat weight, bison and deer comprised, respectively, about 85 to 90 percent and 8 to 12 percen~ of the meat diet; fish and rangia
clams combined constituted less than 2 percent of the useable meat at each site
(Ricklis 1990:Table 17). The proportions of taxa represented at other Group 2 sites
are basically the same, clearly indicating that ungulate game, most notably bison,
was the primary source of meat for residents of these sites.
Seasonality at Group 2 has a consistent spring-summer pattern. Analyses of
Rangia cuneata samples from all 11 sites on the Nueces and Aransas rivers
produced seasonality histograms (see Aten 1981) that point to clam gathering
during these seasons. In the light of a recent assessment of the accuracy of rangia
seasonality (Carlson 1988), these can be expressed as ranges, with a margin of error
of+l.5 months. When so expressed, the seasonality ranges for the various Group
2 sites fall between March and August.
Importantly, the seasonality of the combined sample of fish otoliths from
Group 2 sites is in accordance with the aforementioned results of the rangia
analyses. The composite sample of 25 readable otoliths from several Group 2 sites
(41NU46, 41NU255, 41SP167, and 41SP170) breaks down into seasonal categories as follows: 8 percent fall, 0 percent winter, 20 percent spring and 72 percent
summer. Since this is exactly the reverse of the otolith seasonality at Group 1 sites
(Figure 5), it supports the theory that Group 2 sites do reflect actual spring-summer
occupations, rather than a merely seasonal emphasis on rangia clam-gathering.
Discussion
Though all sites were found within 40 km of the mainland shoreline, and all
pertain to the Rockport phase, Group 1 and Group 2 sites contrast basically in size,

Ricklis m Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation

221

lOO%
90
8o
70
6o

/
/

/’/

5o

\

\\
/

40
////////

3o
2o

\\\\\\\
/

i i’/

io
Fal I

Winter

Spring

Summer

Figure 5. Graph showing seasonality ranges of composite fish otolith samples from Group
1 (dashed line; N=123) and Group 2 (solid line; N=25) Rockport phase sites.

density of cultural debris, kinds of faunal remains, and season of occupation. Group
1 sites are large, yield much cultural material and large quantities of estuarine fish
and shellfish remains. Group 2 sites are much smaller, have thin and sparse deposits
of cultural material, and yield primarily bison and deer bone, with few fish or
shellfish remains. Group 1 sites show predominantly fall-winter seasonality; Group
2 sites consistently show spring-summer seasonality (Figure 6).
Significantly, the two groups of sites can be contrasted in terms of their
environmental locations. All Group 1 sites are on bay/lagoon shorelines, in keeping
with their major focus on estuarine resource procurement, whereas Group 2 sites are
mostly in the upland prairie environment near stream floodplains. Such locations
would have been well suited to wide-ranging procurement of deer and bison and to
the collection of a wide range of prairie and floodplain plant foods (e.g., greens,
mesquite pods, and prickly pear pads and tunas).
The data therefore point to a seasonally oscillating pattern of resource use and
residence. During the fall and winter months, subsistence was focused primarily on
the region’s abundant estuarine fish resources. Also readily available at this time of
year was an abundance of acorns from the dense oak motts growing on the sandy
soils developed on the Ingleside strandplain. Acorns, a documented food resource
of the historic Karankawans (see Carroll 1983:22) would have provided a high

222

Texas Archeological Society

J

i
L

.J

i,

!
!

--r

~m
~mg
Mira

S

O

N

D

J

F

M

A

M

J

J

A

I

Shoreline sites
u Riverine sites

Figure 6. Graph showing estimated seasonality ranges of Group 1 and Group 2 Rockport
phase sites, based variously on analyses of fish otoliths, Rangia cuneata clamshells, and
oyster shells.

carbohydrate supplement to theprotein-rich fish and shellfish diet at shoreline sites.
On the other hand, the seasonality data strongly suggest that by spring, the focus on
estuarine resources gave way to an emphasis on hunting large terrestrial game and
the shoreline camps were largely abandoned in favor of the prairie-riverine Group
2 sites.
Though they are difficult to quantify, the patterns of relative site size and
abundance indicate that the seasonal shift in subsistence and residential location
involved an attendant cycle of population aggregation and dispersal. Group 1
sites are large but relatively few in number compared with Group 2 sites. In the
Corpus Christi Bay area, six Group 1 sites have been documented, whereas along
the bay’s feeder streams--the Nueces River and Oso Creek 22 Group 2 sites
have been identified (Ricklis 1988, 1990). Since the Group 2 sites have low
archeological visibility, they are probably even more when abundant relative to
Group 1 sites.
These differences in site size and abundance by group suggest that Group 1
sites saw seasonally recurrent occupation by relatively large numbers of people, and
that Group 2 sites were occupied by more but smaller groups. Recurrent occupation
of Group 1 sites is also suggested by their relatively thick, dense midden deposits;
the thin debris scatters at Group 2 sites point to short-term, dispersed occupations
within the riverine-prairie zone. A seasonal pattern of groups coming together on

Ricklis w Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation

223

the shoreline during the fall to winter months and often dispersing during the spring
to summer months is apparent (Figure 7).

co
O

@

¯~ Fall-winter fishing camp
¯ Spring-summer camps
> Residence moves

Figure 7. Schematic diagram of Rockport phase settlement pattern. Large shoreline sites
(Group 1) represents fall-winter population aggregation supported by focus on fishing.
Smaller and more numerous prairie-riverine sites (Group 2) represent spring-summer
population dispersal and primary reliance on terrestrial resources.

This adaptive strategy made good ecological sense in view of the spatial and
seasonal patterns of resource availabilities in the region. The largest economically
useful fish--black drum and redfish--are most predictably available in large
concentrations in the bays and lagoons during their respective fall and winter-early
spring spawning seasons (Simmons and Breuer 1962; Parker et al. 1988; Wilson et
al. 1988; Texas Parks and Wildlife Department n.d.). At these times of the year, a
predictable and concentrated supply of fish could have supported relatively large
human groups at optimal shoreline locations with minimal risk of subsistence
failure.
In the spring, after the breakup of the spawning-related aggregations of the
largest fish species, groups tended to respond with dispersal of population. This

224

Texas Archeological Society

strategy of dispersal would have had distinct advantages in the hunting of dispersed
and/or highly mobile game animals such as deer and bison, many of which would
have become particularly desirable during the spring, when abundant food supplies
increased their body weight and fat content. Small, dispersed socioeconomic groups
probably were advantageous at this time of year; it would have been difficult in other
seasons to count on enough game at any one location to support large populations.
At the same time, a wide range of greens and, by summer, fruits, was available on
both floodplains and prairie uplands; these would have been readily obtainable from
camps along the upland prairie margins.
Such patterns of seasonal hunter-gatherer aggregation and dispersal, according to the predictability and spatial concentration/dispersal of key resources, are
both documented ethnographically and strongly indicated archeologically (e.g.,
Birdsell 1953; Lee and De Vore 1968; Harpending and Davis 1977; Hassan 1981;
Butzer 1982). Indeed, periodic population aggregates were necessary for maintenance of mating networks and as contexts for socially integrative ritual and
information exchange (e.g., Wobst 1974; Hassan 1981:180-186).
The spatial and seasonal patterns of the Rockport phase ecosystem modeled
here probably should not be viewed in rigid terms. Although the seasonality data
strongly suggest that much, if not most, of the population abandoned shoreline
locations during the spring, small numbers of spring or summer otoliths found on
Group 1 sites may reflect limited or occasional use of these locations during the
spring and summer months. Also, small Rockport phase sites such as 41SP103 on
Corpus Christi Bay (Ricklis 1988) and the Swan Lake site (41 AS 16) on Copano Bay
are on the shoreline (Prewitt and Paine 1988). These may be essentially Group 2
sites, despite their locations, since they are adjacent to prairie environments and
have yielded bison bone and relatively few fish or shellfish. On the other hand, they
could just as well have been hunting camps that functioned to supply red meat to
large populations at Group 1 fishing sites. Ongoing research is needed for better
definition of such details of Rockport phase settlement and subsistence patterns.
However, the consistency in the evidence reviewed here does point to a pattern of
seasonal residence and subsistence, in which resources were used according to the
sequential phases of greatest seasonal abundance.
CONTINUITY AND CHANGE DURING COLONIAL TIMES:
THE ETHNOHISTORICAL RECORD
Documentary Evidence for Native Settlement Patterns
Eyewitness accounts of Karankawan camp locations and group sizes agree
with the settlement and subsitence patterns previously inferred from archeological
findings (only actual eyewitness accounts of residential locations are deemed
reliable here, due to the Spaniards’ imprecise knowledge of coastal geography
during early historic times; see Ricklis 1990:482-483). The earliest first-hand
account was made by Cabeza de Vaca in the early sixteenth century. Though it is
uncertain that the coastal group among whom he spent a year was Karankawan,

Ricklis ~ Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation

225

Cabeza de Vaca described a seasonal pattern of use of resources and location of
camps that is remarkably close to that inferred archeologically for the Rockport
phase:
From October through February every year, which is the season these
Indians live on the Island, they subsist on the roots I have mentioned, which
the women get from under the water in November and December. Only in
these two months, too, do they take fish in the cane wiers. When the fish
is consumed, the roots furnish the staple. At the end of February, the
islanders go to other parts to seek sustenance, for the root is beginning to
grow and is not edible [Covey 1983:61].
Cabeza de Vaca was clearly describing a fall to winter emphasis on shoreline
fishing, supplemented by the gathering of roots that probably supplied a high-starch
complement to the protein-rich fish diet. He also noted that his islanders moved to
the mainland during the spring, where they consumed a mix of shellfish and
terrestrial fauna and flora. The fall to winter island camp probably involved a
sizeable number of people, since the Indians were able to field more than 100
warriors at short notice (Newcomb 1983). Applying a ratio of four persons per adult
male (as indicated by historic data for the Karankawa; see Ricklis 1990:504), a total
of about 400 people is suggested for Cabeza de Vaca’s islanders.
Later first-hand observations agree with those of Cabeza de Vaca, inasmuch as
all of the largest groups were in bay/lagoon shoreline locations during the fall or
winter. In Febraury 1685, the French expedition led by Rend-Robert Cavelier, Sieur
de La Salle, saw a large shoreline Karankawan encampment near Matagorda Bay
at the north end of Matagorda Island, where at least 400 persons occupied some 50
cabanes (Joutel 1713:77; Minet 1987:109). French navigator Jean Beranger made
a similar observation at Aransas pass near Corpus Christi Bay in late October 1720,
noting, "I was surprised, since I least expected to see in a moment a large market
town built of these kinds of houses [hide-covered huts] and five hundred persons,
at least, well sheltered" (Carroll 1983:22). Beranger stated that the dietary staples
at this camp were fish, oysters, and a breadlike food made from crushed acorns; red
meat was eaten, but "not plentiful" (ibid).
The next observation of shoreline occupation dates to 1768, when an Indian
"spy" for the Spaniards at Presidio La Bah fa noted that"very numerous" Karankawans
were camped at the north end of Matagorda Island, apparently in March (Tovar
1768). Later, in late October 1791, Fray Juan Garza and Captain Juan Cortes visited
a group of 111 Karankawans at a place referred to as Las Conchitas (Silva 1792,
cited in Oberste 1942:36-37). The place name suggests a shoreline location, and Las
Conchitas’s position 9 or 10 leagues (36-40 km) east of the mouth of the Guadalupe
River places the camp on or near the southeast shore of Matagorda Bay.
Available documentation indicates that there were other large Karankawan
camps on the shore of Guadalupe Bay, an arm of San Antonio Bay. Fray Juan Garza
reported a group of 186 Karankawans camped here in December 1791 (Garza
1791a), and a year later, in January 1793, Garza again reported a sizeable group of

226

Texas Archeological Society

161 Karankawans at the same location, occupying two closely spaced camps (Garza
1793). Garza also noted that just before he arrived at the camp, there had been as
many as 208 occupants, but that a group of 47 people had splintered off and left the
camp. Though, in Garza’s perception, these groups had congregated in anticipation
of the founding of Refugio Mission, the fact that the site was chosen by the
Karankawans themselves suggests that it was a favored locale; this is further
indicated by a large and apparently intensively occupied Rockport phase site,
41CL2, in this same area (see Weinstein 1992).
In marked contrast to the evidence for fall-winter occupation of bay/lagoon
shorelines by large groups are documentary indications of much smaller camps
during the spring-summer, mostly at riverine campsites. The earliest observation
comes from the De Lern expedition to Matagorda Bay in 1689 (West 1905). De
Le6n noted scattered rancherias of apparently coastal Indians along Garcitas Creek
in mid-April. These presumably were small encampments, since several were
scattered along the creek, and since De Le6n made no mention of the numbers of
occupants, as he had with the large camps in the interior. It is also significant that,
in exploring nearly the entire southern shoreline of Matagorda Bay, De Le6n
explicitly mentioned the complete absence of Indians, suggesting that by mid-April
the shoreline zone was abandoned. A similar observation had been made tin April
1687 by Enrique Barroto during six clays of reconnoitering of the Matagorda Bay
shoreline (Barroto 1987).
Later eighteenth century observations also place small spring-summer camps
in riverine areas, or in back-bay areas adjacent to the coastal prairie environment. Fr. Manuel de Silva noted a group of 86 Karankawans on the lower Lavaca
River in April 1791, and he was told of another rancheria of related people farther upstream (Silva 1791). Later in the month, a rancheria of 69 people was
visited on the inland shore of Copano Bay (ibid; see also discussion of the location in Ricklis 1990:487). In mid-June 1791, Fr. Garza reported visiting a group
of 41 Karankawans who, under the "chief" Frasada Pinta, were camped on San
Miguel Creek, which empties into Lavaca Bay (Oberste 1942:32). It is particularly noteworthy that by the following October, Frasada Pinta and his people
were camped on or near the shoreline of Matagorda Bay at the place called Las
Conchitas, mentioned above, and that the number of people involved had increased to 111 (Silva 1792, cited in Oberste 1942:36-37), suggesting that there
was a fall aggregation of smaller groups, the kind of seasonal pattern inferred
from the archeological record.
Another source of relevant information is the record left by Simars De
Bellisle, a Frenchman marooned on the Texas coast from 1719 to 1720. Though
De Bellisle’s observations probably pertain to Akokisan or Atakapan peoples
farther up the coast in the Galveston Bay area, they illustrate a pattern of seasonal settlement and subsistence remarkably similar to the one indicated for the
central coast. De Bellisle’s native people spent the summer on the coastal prairies hunting and gathering plants, then joined with a related group on the bay
shore during the winter.

Ricklis ~ Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation

227

I passed the entire summer with them in this country with them going
everywhere in search of food because they possess no cabins or fields. That
is why they travel in this manner the entire summer. The men kill a few deer
and a few buffaloes and the women search for wild potatoes.When the
beginning of winter came we all left to join a band of their people who were
waiting for us at the end of the bay [Folmer 1940:216-217].
These bits of historical information (Table 1) document a basic pattern of
seasonal subsistence and mobility that agrees essentially with the archeological
evidence. The time span represented--from initial contact with Europeans to the
end of the eighteenth century--suggests that there was a significant degree of
continuity in basic adpative patterns that were deeply rooted in prehistory, despite
the various pressures of European contact and colonization.
Table 1. Historically Documented Karankawan Encampments
with Size of Resident Group, Environmental Context,
and Season.
Size of
Group

Environment
Shore
Riverine

Source
(See text)

Season
SpringFallSummer
Winter

400

X

X

Cabeza de Vaca

400-500

X

X

Joutel/Minet

500

X

X

Beranger

"Numerous"

X

X

Tovar

186

X

X

Garza

111

X

X

Oberst/Silva

Small
Rancherias

X

X

De Le6n

86

X

X

Silva

X

Silva

X

Oberst/Garza

69
41

X

X

The Effects of European Contact and Colonization
More or less ongoing contact between Europeans and the Karankawans began
in 1685 with the French exploration and settlement in the Matagorda Bay area led

228

Texas Archeological Society

by La Salle. Subsequently, there were sporadic contacts with Europeans, and the
first Spanish mission on the coastal prairie, Nuestra Sefiora del Espfritu Santo,
together with Presido La Bahfa, was established in 1722 on the site of the old French
settlement. Archeological and documentary evidence places this location a few
kilometers inland from Matagorda Bay, on Garcitas Creek (Gilmore 1986).
At first, the Karankawans showed interest in the mission, but relations with the
Spaniards deteriorated, and Captain Diego Ram6n, impatient with the Indians,
ordered his soldiers to ambush them. In the ensuing fray, Ram6n was fatally
wounded, two Indians were killed, and the Karankawans fled the site (Bolton
1906:117; Castafieda 1936, Volume II: 182). This event initiated decades of reciprocal hostilities, as Fray Santa Ana wrote to the Viceroy of New Spain some years
later that
near the Bahfa del Espfritu Santo there have been some Indians called
Cujanes [the mid-eighteenth century generic term for the Karankawans],
those same who used to be associated with the mission of La Bahfa. The
past twenty years they have been living in heathendom and with mortal
hostilities between the Indians and the soldiers.
The Cujanes were reputed to be irreducible for some thirty years, and
this came to be (according to reports filed with the secretary of the
government) the primary hindrance to the Presidio of La Bah fa, preventing
further goals [Fray Santa Ana 1751, author’s translation].
In 1726, the mission and presidio were moved inland to the lower Guadalupe
River, and missionary attention was shifted to inland native groups such as the
Tamiques and Jaranames. The mission and presidio were moved to their final
locations on the San Antonio River at modern Goliad in 1749.
In the 1750s, the Spaniards made a fresh attempt to establish workable relations
with the Karankawans. In the spring of 1751, a group of Cujanes had approached
La Bahfa, showing considerable interest in entering the mission of Espfritu Santo
(Piszina 1751). However, the situation again did not work out amicably, and, by the
fall, all of the Indians had abandoned the mission, having found "strong new reasons
for their old war" (Altamira 1752, author’s translation).
Nontheless, the new mission of Nuestra Sefiora del Rosario was established in
1754, specifically for conversion of the coastal Indians (see Bolton 1906; Gilmore
1984). At the end of four years, however, only 21 souls had been baptized at Rosario,
and these were in articulo morris. Over the next three decades, the Karankawans
maintained only a tenuous and discontinous link with Rosario and the Spanish
colony at La Bahfa, and, by 1785, Rosario was completely abandoned (see Bolton
1906, 1915; Gilmore 1984).
By the 1780s, hostilities between Karankawans and Spaniards had become
chronic. Perhaps due in part to displacement of the native bison by introduced cattle
(Ricklis 1990:540-545), the Karankawans repeatedly raided the mission herds. The
situation was probably not unlike that described by Campbell for the northeastern
frontier of New Spain in general:

Ricklis ~ Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation

229

They [the Spaniards] brought livestock that competed with wild grazing
and browsing animals. Game animals were thinned or driven away by
Spanish hunters with firearms. The Indians turned to livestock as a
substitute for game animals, and loss of livestock brought punitive action
by Spaniards [Campbell 1988:42].
The Spaniards’ perception of the Karankawans during this period is apparently
represented by an assessment made by Fr. Agustin Morfi, who wrote that the
"Carancaguases or Carancagues nation [was] vile, cowardly, treacherous and very
cruel .... Many of them speak Spanish with great fluency, being, in many instances,
apostates from our missions" (Morfi 1935:79-80).
Exasperation with the situation is reflected in a letter of 1788, written by Don
Luis Cazorla, commander at La Bahfa, in which he writes,
I am of the opinion--modifying the opinion of our commandant [but]
without acting contrary to it in any manner whatsoever--that [we] could
receive them [the Indians] in peace and put them in missions, sending them
all the corresponding guarantees for this purpose. In this way, since at any
time they will create provocations, at the first which is committed [we]
could make a reprisal and expel them once and for all. With this, without
violating our treaties with them (for which I can see no justification in
humanity, hospitality or natural law), we would achieve their extermination. And though some would remain in the woods, their surrender would
be less difficult [to achieve].
This is the view which I have developed of the aforesaid coastal
Indians--with no other purpose than that of serving God and the King and
the public interest--based on experience which I have [in the matter]
[Cazorla 1788].
The End of Hostilities and Aeculturative Change
Cazorla’s fatalism was to prove unwarranted. In October 1789, the
Karankawans expressed the desire for a treaty of peace. For their part, the Spaniards, at the insistence of the provincial governor at San Antonio de Bejar, followed the Crown’s policy, with its demand for "gentleness and encouragement
that they [the Indians] should give up their heathen life" [Mufioz 1793, author’s
translation). Despite some tensions and sporadic instances of conflict, the overall trend during the 1790s was toward peaceful interaction, and the groundwork
was laid for a significant degree of Karankawan acculturation to Spanish colonial cultural patterns. A new mission, Nuestra Sefiora del Refugio, was founded
at the request of the Karankawa themselves (Oberste 1942:29). This mission
enjoyed a limited degree of success in converting and acculturating Karankawans.
By 1797, Juan Bautista Elquezabal, interim commander at La Bahfa, was able
to write an assessment of Karankawan character that was in marked contrast to
that of earlier statements.

230

Texas Archeological Society

From what I have seen of their manners and ways of doing things, there
does not appear to be any bad intention, or anything that one could find
suspicious, or any artfulness in their thinking [Elquezabal 1797, author’s
translation].
By 1806, Manuel Antonio Cordero, Governor of the Province of Tejas, was
able to state that
west of the Colorado River, roving along the coast, southward as far as the
San Antonio River, were the Karankawa. These fierce tribes had been
cannabalistic, but they are now civilized and report regularly to the
commander at La Bahfa and the missionary at Refugio everything that
occurs on the coast [Cordero 1806].
In his reminiscences, John Linn, an early Anglo-American settler, wrote that
Father Diaz, who was the last of the missionaries, gave me quite a history
of the different Texas missions. He stated that in the year 1808 the mission
of Refugio possessed fully five thousand head of livestock of various
kinds; the "flat" in front of the church was their cultivated field. Up to this
period they had all the necessaries.., and were making rapid progress in
the path of civilization, when the war of Mexican Independence came and
destroyed.., the work and fruits of many years of arduous toils... The
Carankua women, too, learned the use of the spinning wheel, and manufactured a very good article of cotton cloth, and also blankets of superior
quality [Linn 1883:334].
Despite the setback resulting from the Mexican War of Independence, the
lasting effect of the acculturative processes described by Fray Df~ is indicated by
the first-hand observations made by Jean Berlandier in the late 1820s.
The Carancahuases of today are less ferocious than those of the past
century. They can be considered as mission Indians, half-tamed. Transformed into mariners on the bays, they lead an itiophage [fishing] life,
hunting and more often fishing for their needs. Before the wars of
independence, when Mex ico was flourish i ng, alm ost all the Carancahuases
lived at their mission. Now living most of the time on the coast, they come
only occasionally to visit the presidio, where the authorities sometimes
give them small presents. Following the example of other indigines, they
have some horses, although their travels are much more frequently over the
bays than over the land .... Although vagabonds, all call themselves
Christians. Some wear a cross hung around their neck, and all their
newborn are carried with ceremony to the Franciscan father who leads
them, in order to receive the waters of baptism from him. I have questioned
several of them on the religion of their ancestors, but they never wished to
answer [Berlandier 1980:381-382].

Ricklis ~ Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation

231

The Role of Traditional Human Ecology in Adaptive Change
These passages indicate that rapid change in intercultural relations and
Karankawan attitudes took place after 1790. Peaceful relations, some degree of
Christianization, and even the practice of cottage industries such as weaving and
spinning, were underway by about 1800 or shortly thereafter. These new patterns
contrasted so with earlier relations that they were readily apparent to contemporary
non-Indian observers.
The immediate causes for change are difficult to identify precisely. The
Karankawans may have been weary of decades of conflict, and may have been
reluctant to engage in hostilities on two fronts, between both the Spaniards and the
intrusive Comanches, who were perceived as enemies and a serious threat by the late
eighteenth century (e.g., Elquezabal 1797; Berlandier 1980).
Also, by 1790 most of the interior native groups had been displaced or
drastically reduced in numbers by disease, and many of the survivors had entered
missions (Campbell 1988). In this context, the Karankawans may have felt that
important buffer groups had been removed and that it was in their best interests to
come to an understanding with the Spaniards.
Whatever the precise motivations for change, the fact that it did take place by
the end of the century should not be seen as the final option available to a desperate
or defeated people. Karankawan population had been more or less stable at around
2,500 since about 1750 (Ricklis 1990:499-522), and in 1790 it was at least twice that
of the combined Indian and Spanish population at La Bahfa (cf. Ricklis 1990; Tjarks
1974). Traditional economic patterns, and even patterns of group organization,
were still intact, though the latter probably persisted in modified form (Ricklis
1990:522-531). When threatened, the Karankawans could still lose themselves in
the maze of marshes and lagoons of the coastline, in accordance with their
traditional defensive strategy (Kress and Hatcher 1931:44; Elquezabal 1797;
Garavito 1798a). It is unlikely, therefore, that they were attracted to the missions as
a place of last refuge, as was the case with many interior groups, who in effect had
no other place to go when they were threatened by marauding Apaches and
Comanches (Campbell 1988:43). In the light of these factors, the change in attitudes
toward the Spaniards probably should be viewed as an adaptive strategy on the part
of a people who were adjusting to the pressures of fundamental changes in their
world.
Considering that this period of peaceful acculturation followed decades of
hostilities and conflict, it is rather remarkable that change took place so rapidly. In
view of their previously volatile relations with the Spaniards and their adherence to
traditional socioceonomic patterns, it is natural to ask how the Karankawans were
able to effect viable change within only a single decade.
Part of the answer appears to be that the Karankawans did not, at least
initially, passively conform to Spanish colonial culture as embodied in the
mission, but rather brought the mission-presido complex into the behavioral
sphere of their own traditional lifeway. As already discussed, the native adaptive

232

Texas Archeological Society

system included a seasonally shifting emphasis in resource use and settlement
pattern, with aggregations of large groups at optimal shoreline fishing stations
in the fall-winter, and dispersal of smaller groups during the spring-summer,
when subsistence shifted to an increased reliance on terrestrial resources. It is
not likely that it was mere coincidence, therefore, that the time of year when the
Karankawans most often showed interest in the missions was between March
and May, just the time when both archeology and ethnohistory point to a seasonal
shift in settlement and subsistence.
Documentary research has yielded a total of 16 recorded dates when
Karankawans came to the missions (Table 2). The greater part of these---11, or 69
percent--fall in the spring season. The dates of Karankawan mission arrivals tend
to cluster, therefore, at that time of year estimated on archeological grounds to
represent the initial occupation of the Group 2 sites of the prairie-riverine environmental zone (Figure 8). The apparently strong Karankawan interest in the missions
during the spring suggests that the mission was, in effect, perceived as a potential
ecological resource, in the sense that it could fulfill the subsistence needs traditionally met by procuring the native foods of the coastal prairies.
The mission provided subsistence items that were quite analogous to those
traditionally procured during the spring and summer months. Cattle, the mainstay
of the mission diet (e.g., Oberste 1942), would have substituted readily for the bison
that had been traditionally hunted on the coastal prairies during the spring and
summer (as repeatedly indicated by findings at Group 2 sites). Maize, a necessary
high-starch dietary supplement to the protein provided by beef, doubtless had
traditional counterparts in the plant foods available in the prairie-riverine environment (e.g., mesquite beans, or tubers such as the "wild potatoes" described by De
Bellisle [Folmer 1940:216]).
It is interesting to note, too, that whereas most of the instances of Karankawans
coming to the mission were in the spring, the next most frequent time of the year was
the fall (four, or 25 percent of the cases). According to the model of settlement/
subsistence mobility presented here, this was the time when groups would have
been returning to favored shoreline fishing stations from summers spent in the
prairie-riverine environment. The fall season, therefore, would have required
decisions concerning seasonal residential locations, as did the spring, and some
groups may have opted occasionally for spending the winter at the mission. As noted
earlier, a group of 47 people split off from the large winter camp on Guadalupe Bay
in January 1793, suggesting that shoreline locations did not invariably support all
of the population that might otherwise have congregated at a given fishing camp.
Some groups, perhaps anticipating this kind of situation--or possibly perceiving
other, less tangible problems such as social tensions--may have seen the mission
as an acceptable winter residence.
The Karankawan mission arrivals involved (a) leading individuals who came
to determine whether provisions were adequate to support their people, (b) family
groups, or (c) bands of as many as several dozen people. When provisions were
plentiful, the Indians entered the mission and stayed for indefinite periods of time.

Ricklis m Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation

233

Table 2. Data Pertaining to Documented Instances of Karankawans
Coming to Coastal Prairie Missions.
Year

Arrival
Time

1722

About
May4

1722

Number of People
and Circumstances

Source

Several Coco families come to
new site of Espfritu Santo, leave
soon after due to lack of food.

Castafieda
1936,
Vol. Ih 167.

Late May

Chiefs of Coco and Cujane nations
come to new Espfritu Santo
mission with their families, again
leave due to inadequate provisions.

Ibid.

1722

March 16

Many coastal Indians had arrived
at Espfritu Santo with their families,
stayed for indefinite period.

Ibid.:168

1751

End of
March

Group of 54 Cujanes arrive at Mission
Espfritu Santo, stay about 10 weeks.

Piszina
1751

1789

Oct./Nov.

Karankawans come to Rosario
Mission for indifinite stay.

Espada
1789

1791

April 7

Silva
1792

1791

April 20

Chief Frasada Pinta arrives at
Rosario with some of his people.
Chief Manuel Allegre and family
come to Rosario Mission.

1791

November

Five families come to Rosario Mission.

Jaudenes 1791

1793

March

Garza
1793

1793

April

Chief Frasada Pinta arrives at
Refugio Mission with eight Coco
men, representing 55 people. They
leave because of inadequate provisions.
Frasada Pinta returns to Refugio;
again leaves because of low provisions.

1793

Feb. 10

Frasada Pinta and five of his men
arrive at Refugio Mission, promise to bring their people "when
weather improves."

Oberste
1942:67

1794

April 28

Frasada Pinta and his people arrive
at Refugio Mission to receive
meat and maize.

Mufioz
1794

1795

September

Frasada Pinta arrives at Refugio
Mission.

1796

April 5

Combined group of Cocos and
Carancaguases arrive at Rosario.

Silva
1795
Castafieda
1942, Vol
V:191

1797

LamMarch

Combined groups of Cocos and
Carancaguases arrive at Rosario

Cortez
1797

Indians who had left Refugio in
March because of lack of provisions
return to Mission.

Moral
1798,
1799

17981799

Nov.Jan.

Silva
1791

Ibid.

234

Texas Archeological Society

TTV
TffT

T

T
I

I ....

!

t::iiii,:

1

t’

I
]

(’?"
i
!
l

mm
iw!
mR
wm

;
S

O

[

=
N

D

l

I
J

F

!
M

p

¯

A

M

=

J

I

J

=

A

m

Shoreline sites
Riverine sites
Documented date of Karankawans
coming to missions

Figure 8. Diagram showing documented dates of Karankawan arrivals at missions and their
relation to estimated seasonality of Group 1 and Group 2 Rockport phase sites.

When provisions ran out, they left to seek sustenance in their traditional manner
(e.g., Elquezabal 1798; Garavito 1798b).
In effect, the mission, when well stocked, would have served well as a substitute
for the traditional spring-summer hunting/plant-gathering camps. This was probably particularly true in the case of Refugio Mission, which the Karankawans
themselves indicated should be established within their traditional territory if it was
to succeed (Garza 179 lb, cited in Oberste, 1942:29). At the request of the Indians,
Refugio was thus originally located near the head of Guadalupe Bay, near the mouth
of the Guadalupe River. Though it was moved to the Mission River in 1795, the new
location was only 38 km from the mainland shoreline, still within the bounds of the
traditional operational area of the Karankawan groups as suggested by archeological and historical data ~icklis 1990). The Karankawans apparently were agreeable
to establishment of Refugio Mission only if it would be readily accessible, and

Ricklis ~ Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation

235

susceptible to integration within the framework of long-established adaptive
strategies.
The incorporation of the mission into the spatial and seasonal parameters of the
traditional human ecosystem facilitated its acceptance within the context of known
and accepted ways of doing things. With a relationship toward the mission that was
nondisruptive to traditional native culture, the stage was set for peaceful interaction,
and a context emerged that was conducive to the acculturation that followed in the
early nineteenth century.
CONCLUSIONS
The information reviewed here counters the long-held, popular assumption that
the Karankawans were a people incorrigibly resistant to change and lacking in the
adaptive flexibility necessary for sustained interaction with Euro-American culture.
Quite the contrary, they appear to have ultimately made a workable adjustment to
late Spanish colonial frontier culture, one that was proably based in large part upon
a synthesis of traditional behavioral patterns and foreign cultural elements. Once the
Karankawans clearly perceived the need for change in sociopolitical relations,
peaceful interaction and incipient acculturation quickly followed. Change, though
rapid, was not culturally disruptive, since foreign cultural patterns were to some
extent synthesized with traditional lifeways in a way that complemented, rather than
disrupted, established and long-accepted modes of behavior.
The Karankawan ability to reformulate the nature of intercultural relations was
doubtless also facilitated by the general Spanish colonial policy of acculturation and
religious conversion of aboriginal peoples, which contrasted markedly with an
Anglo-American predilection for expulsion of native groups (Butzer 1991). On the
one hand, the Karankawans appear to have synthesized tradition and novelty; on the
other, the Spanish colonial policy was sufficiently flexible to permit such a
synthesis to take place. Indeed, the late Colon ial period of Karankawan-Euroamerican
relations should be clearly separated from the period of initial Anglo-American
occupation of the coastal praries that began in the 1820s. Whereas New Spain
sought to maintain its northeastern frontier by gradually bringing native groups into
the sphere of colonial culture, the later Anglo-Americans were bent on permanent
settlement. Interaction with native groups was not on the agenda, and within three
decades of initial Anglo-American settlement, the Karankawans were either killed
off or forced to flee their traditional homeland, probably to merge with native
peoples living to the south in northeastern Mexico. Additional archival research in
Texas and Mexico may further elucidate and amplify the complex details of these
cultural-historical processes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Many individuals gave of their time and energy to help with the archeological
fieldwork summarized here. My thanks are extended especially to those people who
helped for extended periods of time: Kim Cox, Susan Pape, Nancy and Larry

236

Texas Archeological Society

Beaman, Jim and Marion Craft, Jerry Bauman, John French, John and Arlene
McGee, Le Anne Vaillette, and Gregg Willman. Special thanks are extended to Karl
W. Butzer, who pointed me in the direction of archival research as an important test
of, and/or complement to, archeological interpretation.

REFERENCES CITED
Altamira, Marques de
1752
Letter of E1 Marques de Altamira to the Viceroy, February 29, 1752. Archivo
General de la Naci6n (Mexico), Bolton Transcriptions, Vot. 287. Barker Texas
History Center, The University of Texas at Austin.
Aten, Lawrence E.
1981
Determining Seasonality of Rangia Cuneata from Gulf Coast Shell Middens.
Bulletin of the Texas ArcheologicaI Society 52:179-200.
Barroto, Enrique
1987
The Enrique Barroto Diary (Robert S. Weddle, translator). In: La SaUe, the
Mississippi and the Gulf, edited by Robert S. Weddle, pp. 149-171.Texas A&M
University Press, College Station.
Beckmann, D. W., A. L. Stanley, J. H. Render, and C. A. Wilson
1988
Age and Growth of Black Drum in Louisiana Gulf of Mexico Waters. Coastal
Fisheries Institute, Center for Wetland Resources, Louisiana State University,
Baton Rouge.
Beckman, D. W., C. A. Wilson, and A. L. Stanley
1988
Age and Growth Structure of Red Drum, Sciaenops oceUatus, From Offshore
Waters of the Northern Gulf of Mexico. Coastal Fisheries Institute, Center for
Wetland Resources, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge.
Berlandier, Jean L.
1980
Journey to Mexico During the Years 1826 to 1834.2 vols. Translated by S. M.
Ohlendorf, J. M. Bigelow, and M. M. Standifer. The Texas State Historical
Association and the Center for Studies in Texas History, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Birdsell, J. B.
1953
Some Environmental and Cultural Factors Influencing the Structuring of
Aboriginal Australian Populations. American Naturalist 87:171-207.
Bolton, Herbert E.
1906
The Founding of Mission Rosario: A Chapter in the History of the Gulf Coast.
Quarterly of the Texas State Historical Association 10(2):113-139.
1915

Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century: Studies in Spanbh Colonial History
and Administration. University of California Press, Berkeley.

Ricklis-- Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation

237

Brown, L. F., J. L. Brewton, J. H. McGowen, T. J. Evans, William L. Fisher, and Charles G.
Groat
1976
Environmental GeoIogic Atlas ofthe Texas Coast: Corpus Christi Area. Bureau
of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Butzer, Karl W.
1982
Archaeology as Human Ecology: Method and Theory for a Contextual Approach. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
1991

Spanish Colonization of the New World: Cultural Continuity and Change in
Mexico. Erdkunde. In press.

Campbell, Thomas N.
1960
Archeology of the Central and Southern Sections of the Texas Coast. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 29 (for 1958): 145-175.
1988

The Coahuiltecans and Their Neighbors. In: The Indians ofSouthern Texas and
Northeastern Mexico: Selected Writings ofThomas Nolan Campbell, pp. 39-60.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Carlson, David L.
1988

Rangia Cuneata as A Seasonal Indicator for Coastal Archeological Sites in
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 58 (for 1987):201-214.

Carroll, William (translator)
1983
Beranger’sDiscoveryof AransasPass.OccasionalPapersoftheCorpusChristi
Museum, Volume 8. Corpus Christi.
Castafieda, Carlos E.
1936
TheMissionEra:TheWinningofTexas, 1692-1731.OurCatholicHeritagein
Texas, 1519-1936, Vol. II. Von Boeckman-Jones Company, Austin.
1942

The Mission Era: The End of the Spanish Regime, 1780-1810. Our Catholic
tleritage in Texas, 1519-1936, Vol. V. Von Boeckman-Jones Co., Austin.

Cazorla, Luis
1788
Letter of Don Luis C~orla, commander of Presidio La Bahfa, to Governor Don
Raphael Martinez Pacheco, May 2, 1788. Bdxar Archives Translations, Series
I. Barker Texas History Center, The University of Texas at Austin.
Cordero, Manuel A.
1806
Letter of Manuel Antonio Cordero, Governor of the Province of Texas, to
Nemesio Salcedo, Commandant General of the Interior Provinces, June 16,
1806. Bdxar Archives, General Manuscript Series. Barker Texas History
Center, The University of Texas at Austin.
Cortes, Juan
1797

Letter of Juan Cortes to Manuel Munoz, March 24, 1797. Bdxar Archives,
General Manuscript Series. Barker Texas History Center, The University of
Texas at Austin.

238

Texas Archeological Society

Covey, Cyclone (editor)
Adventures in the Interior of America by Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca.
1983
University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

Dillehay, Tom D.
1974
Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains. Plains
Anthropologist 19:180-196.
ElquezabN, Juan Bautista
1797

Letter of Juan Bautista Elquezabal, Interim Commander at Presidio La Batffa,
to Governor Don Manuel Mufioz, Including Census of Indians at Mission
Nuestra Senora del Refugio, July 3, 1797. BdxarArchives, GeneralManuscript
Series. Barker Texas History Center, The University of Texas at Austin.

1798

Letter of Juan Bautista Elquezabal, interim commander at Presidio La Bahfa, to
Governor Don Manuel Munoz, January 17, 1798. Bdxar Archives, General
Manuscript Series. Barker Texas History Center, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Espadas, Manuel
1789

Letter of Manuel Espadas, commander at Presidio La Bahfa, to Governor
Martfnez Pacheco, December 29, 1789. Bdxar Archives, General Manuscript
Series. Barker Texas History Center, The University of Texas at Austin.

Folmer, Henry
1940
DeBellisleontheTexasCoast.Southwes’ternIIistoricalQuarterly44(2):204-231.
Fritz, Gayle
1975

Matagorda Bay Area, Texas: A Survey of the Archeological and Historical
Resources. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report No. 45. The University of Texas at Austin,

Garavito, Antonio
1798b

Letter of Fr. Antonio Garavito to Juan Elquezabal, interim commander at
Presidio La Bahfa, March 25, 1798.BdxarArchives, GeneralManuscriptSeries.
Barker Texas History Center, The University of Texas at Austin.

1798a

Letter of Fr. Antonio Garavito to Jose Moral, October13,1798.Bdxar Archives,
General Manuscript Series. Barker Texas History Center, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Garza, Juan
1791a

Letter of Fr. Juan Garza to Don Manuel Mufioz, Governor of the Province of
Tejas, June 13, 1791. Bdxar Archives, Barker Texas History Center, The
University of Texas at Austin.

1791b

Letter of Fr. Juan Garza to Don Manuel Mufioz, Governor of the Province of
Tejas, December 15, 1791. Bdxar Archives, Barker Texas History Center, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Ricklis ~ Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation
1793

239

Letter of Fr. Juan Garza to Don Manuel Mufioz, Governor of the Province of
Tejas, January 18, 1793. B~xar Archives, General Manuscript Series. Barker
Texas History Center, The University of Texas at Austin.

Gilmore, Kathleen
1984
The Indians of Mission Rosario. In: The Scope of Historical Archaeology:
Essays in Honor of John L. Cotter, edited by D. G. Orr and D. G. Corzier, pp.
163-191. Occasional Publications of the Department of Anthropology, Temple
University, Philadelphia.
1986

La Salle’s Fort St. Louis in Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
55:61-72.

Harpending, H. and H. Davis
1977
Some Implications for Hunter-Gatherer Ecology Derived from the Spatial
Structure of Resources. Worm Archaeology 8:275-286.
Hassan, Fekri A.
1981
Demographic Archaeology. Academic Press, New York.
Headrick, Pamela
1991
The Archaeology of 41NU11, the Kirchmeyer Site, Nueces County, Texas:
Long-Term Utilization of a Coastal Clay Dune. M.A. thesis, Department of
Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Hester, Thomas R.
1969
Archeological Investigations in Kenedy and Kleberg Counties, Texas, in
August 1967. Texas Historical Commission, @rice of the State Archeologist
Report 15. Austin.
1975

Late Prehistoric Cultural Patterns Along the Lower Rio Grande of Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 46:107-125.

1980

Changing Salinity in Baffin Bay, Texas, and its Possible Effects on Prehistoric
Occupation. In: Papers on the Archaeology of the Texas Coast, edited by L.
Highley and T. R. Hester, pp. 105-108. Center for Archaeological Research,
The University of Texas at San Antonio, Special Report 11.

Hester, Thomas R. and Harry J. Shafer
An Initial Study of Blade Technology on the Central and Southern Texas Coast.
1975
Plains AnthropoIgist 20(69): 175-185.
Huebner, Jeffrey A.
1991

Late Prehistoric Bison Populations in Central and Southern Texas. Plains
Anthropologist 36(137):343-358.

Jaudenes, Francisco
1791
Letter of Fr. Francisco Jaudenes to Manuel Mufioz, November 30, 1791. Bdxar
Archives, General Manuscript Series. Barker Texas History Center, The University of Texas at Austin.

240

Texas Archeological Society

Jones, Fred B.
1983

The Flora of the Texas Coastal Bend. Welder Wildlife Foundation, Sinton,
Texas.

Joutel, H.
1713

JournalHistorique d’ un Voyage de l’Amerique. M. Michel, Paris. On file, Rare
books collection, Corpus Christi State University Library, Corpus Christi.

Kilman, E.
1959
Cannibal Coast. The Naylor Co., San Antonio.
Kress, M. K and M. A. Hatcher (translators)
Diary of a Visit of Inspection of the Texas Missions made by Fray Gaspar Jose
1931
de Solis in the year 1767-68. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 35(1):28-76.
La Salle, M. W. and A. A. de la Cruz
1985
Common Rangia. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Biological Report No. 82,
Department of the Interior.
Lee, Richard B. and I. De Vote (editors)
1968

Man the Hunter. Aldine, Chicago.

Linn, John J.
1883

Reminiscences of Fifty years in Texas. Sadlier, New York.

McGowen, J. H., C. V. Procter, Jr., T. J. Evans, William L. Fisher, and Charles G. Groat
1976

Environmental Geologic Atlas of the Texas Coastal Zone: Port Lavaca Area.
Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.

Minet
1987

Journal of Our Voyage to the Gul f of Mexico. Translated by L. Bell, annotated
by Robert S. Weddle. In: La Salle, the Mississippi and the Gulf" Three Primary
Documents’, edited by Robert S. Weddle, pp. 83-126. Texas A&M University
Press, College Station.

Moral, Jose
1798
Letter of Jose Moral to Manuel Mufioz, November 21, 1798. B~xar Archives,
General Manuscript Series. Barker Texas History Center, The University of
Texas at Austin.
1799

Letter of Jose Moral to Manuel Mufioz, January 18, 1799. Bdxar Archives,
General Manuscript Series. Barker Texas History Center, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Morfi, Juan A.
History of Texas, 1673-1779. Translated by C. E. Castafieda. Quivira Society
1935
Publications No. 6. Albuquerque.

Ricklis ~ Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation

241

Mufioz, Manuel
1793

Letter of Don Manuel Mufioz, Governor of the Province of Tejas, to Captain
Juan Cortes, commander of Presidio La Bahfa, December 13, 1793. Bdxar
Archives, General Manuscript Series. Barker Texas History Center, The University of Texas at Austin.

1794

LetterofManuelMufioztoJuanCortes, June10,1794.BgxarArchives, General
Manuscript Series. Barker Texas History Center, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Newcomb, William W., Jr.
1983
Karankawa. In: Handbook of North American Indians, Southwest, Volume 10,
edited by A. Ortiz, pp. 359-367. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.
C.
Oberste, William H.
1942
ttistory of Refitgio Mission. Refugio Timely Remarks, Refugio, Texas.
Parker, R. M., D. L. Neiland, D. W. Beckman, and C. A. Wilson
1988
Reproductive Biology of Black Drum Pogonias cromis in the Northern Gulf of
Mexico. Coastal Fisheries Institute, Louisiana State University. Baton Rouge.
Piszina, Manuel R.
1751

Letter of Manuel Ramirez de la Piszina to the Viceroy, December 26, 1751.
Archivo General de la Nacidn, Vol. 287 (Bolton transcription). Barker Texas
History Center, The University of Texas at Austin.

Prewitt, Elton R. and J. G. Paine
1988

The Swan Lake Site (41AS16) on Copano Bay, Aransas County, Texas:
Settlement, Subsistence and Sea Level. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 58 (for 1987):147-174.

Ricklis, Robert A.
1988

ArcheologicalInvestigations at the McKinzie Site (41NU221), Nueces County,
Texas: Description and Contextual Interpretations. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 58 (for 1987): 1-76.

1990

A Historical Cultural Ecology of the Karankawan Indians of the Central Texas
Coast: A Case Study in the Roots of Adaptive Change. Ph.D. dissertation,
Department of Geography, The University of Texas at Austin.

1992

The Spread of a Late Prehistoric Bison Hunting Complex: Evidence from the
South-Central Coastal Prairie of Texas. Plains Anthropologist, in press.

Santa Ana, Benito
1751

Letter of Fr. Benito de Santa Ana to the Viceroy, written shortly prior to
December 20, 1751. Archivo General de la Nacidn (Bolton transcription), Vol.
287. Barker Texas History Center, The University of Texas at Austin.

242

Texas Archeological Society

Schmidly, D. J.
1983
Texas Mammals East of the Balcones Fault Zone. Texas A&M University Press,
College Station.
Silva, Manue!
1791
Letter of Fr. Manuel Silva to Governor Mufioz, April 26, 1791. BdxarArchives,
General Manuscript Series. Barker Texas History Center, The University of
Texas at Austin.
1792

Letter of Fr. Manuel Silva to the Viceroy, March 10, 1792. Archivo Generalde
Indias, DunnTrar~cripts 104-1 - 1. B arker Tex as History Center, The University
of Texas at Austin.

1795

Letter of Ft. Manuel de Silva to Manuel Mufioz, September 30, 1795. Bdxar
Archives, General Manuscript Series. Barker Texas History Center, The University of Texas at Austin.

Simmons, E. G. and J. P. Breuer
1962

A Study of Redfish, Sciaenops ocellata Linnaeus, and Black Drum, Pogonias
cromis Linnaeus. Contributions in Marine Science 8:184-211.

Steele, D. Gentry
1988
UtilizationofMarineMollusksbyInhabitantsoftheTexasCoast.Bulletinofthe
TexasArcheologicalSociety 58 (1987):215-248.
Story, Dee Ann
1968

Archeological Investigations at Two Central Gulf Coast Sites. State Building
Commission, Archeological Program, Report No. 13. Austin.

Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks
1962
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Archeological
Society Special Publication No. 1 and Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin No. 4.
Austin.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger and Edward B. Jelks
1954

An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the TexasArcheological Society 25.

Texas Parks and Wildlife Department
n.d.
Saltwater Fishes of Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department Bulletin No.
52. Austin.

Tjarks, A. V.
1974
Comparative Demographic Analysis of Texas 1777-1793. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 77:291-338.
Tovar, Francisco
1768
Letter of Captain Francisco Tovar, Commander at Presidio La Bahfa, to
Governor Don Hugo Oconor, June 6, 1768. BdxarArchives Translations, Series
L Barker Texas History Center, The University of Texas at Austin.

Ricklis ~ Aboriginal Karankawan Adaptation

243

Turner, Ellen Sue and Thomas R. Hester
1985
Stone Artifacts of the Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press, Austin.
Weinstein, Richard A.
1992
Archaeology and Paleogeography of the Lower Guadalupe R&er/San Antonio
Bay Region: Cultural Resources Investigations Along the Channel to Victoria,
Calhoun and Victoria Counties, Texas. Coastal Environments, Inc., Baton
Rouge, Louisiana.
West, E. H. (translator and annotator)
1905
DeLe6n’sExpeditionof1689, anAnnotatedTranslation.QuarterlyoftheTexas
State Historical Association 8(3):203-224.
Wilson, C. A., D. W. Beckman, D. L. Neiland, and L. A. Stanley
1988
Age, GrowthRateandReproductiveBiologyofRedDrumLandedinLouisiana.
Coastal Fisheries Institute, Center for Wetland Resources, Louisiana State
University. Baton Rouge.
Wobst, H. M.
Boundary Conditions for Paleolithic Social Systems: A Simulation Approach.
1974
American Antiquity 39(2): 147-178.

245

Reviews
First Encounters: Spanish Exploration in the Caribbean and the United States,
1492-1570, edited by Jerald T. Milanich and Susan Milbrath. Ripley P. Bullen
Monographs in Anthropology and History, Number 9. Florida Museum of
Natural History. University of Florida Press, Gainesville. 1989. 222 pp.,
figures and plates.
Reviewed by Maynard B. Cliff, Geo-Marine, Inc.
The year of the Columbian Quincentenary, while bringing with it mixed
reactions in the area of popular culture, has had at least one beneficial effect.
This is a renewed interest, both popular and academic, in the importance of the
role of Spain in the discovery and early settlement of the New World. In reaction to this popular interest, the Florida Museum of Natural History has put
together a traveling exhibit whose subject is the discovery and first century of
exploration and settlement in the Caribbean and the southeastern United States.
The volume under review here was written to accompany that exhibit, but
it is much more than simply a museum catalog. Instead, Milanich and Milbrath
have assembled a group of essays, both original and reprinted, dealing with many
aspects of this period in the history of the Caribbean and that part of the mainland of North America known to the Spaniards as "La Florida" and to us today
as the southeastern United States. For this reason, although it is intended to
supplement the exhibit, it stands as a scholarly contribution on its own merits.
Following an introductory and summary essay by the editors, the articles in
this volume can be grouped into three general sections: the first dealing with
Columbus’s voyage of exploration in 1492 and Spain’s initial efforts to colonize the Caribbean; the second dealing with Spain’s subsequent attempts to
explore and colonize the mainland of La Florida (specifically, the de Soto entrada
and what followed); and the third dealing with the final attempts to colonize La
Florida that resulted in the founding of St. Augustine in 1565.
The introductory article in this volume (Another World, by Milanich and
Milbrath) lays the historical foundation for the articles that follow and acts as a
summary for the entire volume. In this initial essay, the authors touch on all the
major historical events of the first century of Spanish activity in the Caribbean
and La Florida, and introduce readers to each of the subsequent articles.
The next four articles concern various aspects of Columbus’s early voyages
of exploration and discovery, and Spain’s early attempts to plant colonies in the
New World (i.e., Columbus’s 1492 Voyage and the Search for his Landfall, by
William Keegan, adapted from an earlier article; The Search for La Navidad,
Columbus’s 1492 Settlement, by Kathleen A. Deagan; Niha, Ship of Discovery,
by Eugene Lyon; and Puerto Real: Archaeology of an Early Spanish Town, by
Charles R. Ewen and Maurice W. Williams). Certainly, among the more exciting areas of recent research on the early Spanish presence in the New World are
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 63 (1992)

246

Texas Archeological Society

identification of the locations of Columbus’s first landfalls in the Caribbean,
and excavation at the first of Spain’s colonies. Keegan reviews earlier ideas
regarding the site of Columbus’s first landfall and then presents convincing
arguments in favor of San Salvador (or Watling Island), in contrast to the recent
findings of a National Geographic Society team. Keegan makes admirable use
of historical documents, physical data relating to winds and tides, and archeological evidence regarding the location of Protohistoric and Early Historic sites
in the Bahamas to support his conclusions. Lyon’s article on the Nifia is an
interesting companion to Keegan’s, dealing as it does with this most durable of
Columbus’s ships--the only one to make three trips to the New World.
The other two articles in this first group deal more with archeology than
history, although history obviously plays an important role. Deagan’s article is
concerned with the search for, and apparent location of, Columbus’s first settlement in the New World, the site of La Navidad on the island of Hispaniola (the
modern location of Haiti and the Dominican Republic), where he left a contingent of men when he returned to Spain after his first voyage. Unfortunately, the
settlement had been destroyed by the time he returned in 1493, and its location
has long been unknown. A careful search for the site by Dr. William Hodges, a
Haitian resident, located a likely candidate for the settlement on the northern
coast of Haiti at the archeological site of En Bas Saline. Excavation at the site
has shown it to be a late Tfiino village; it has yielded a small amount of material
of postcontact origin, including the remains of European pig and rat and late
fifteenth century Spanish pottery, glass, and metal fragments. Although Deagan
concludes with the caveat that the site of En Bas Saline cannot be proved to be
that of La Navidad, it does remain the strongest contender for the honor.
The same search that identified La Navidad also led Dr. Hodges to the location of another early Spanish site in Haiti, that of the settlement of Puerto
Real founded on the northern coast of Hispaniola in 1504 by Rodrigo de Mexfa.
Unlike La Navidad, Puerto Real became a relatively successful center for economic exploitation of the surrounding areas, but by 1578 the centers of Spanish
settlement in the New World had moved to the mainland, and the town was
abandoned. Excavations at the site within the last decade have revealed the remains of the sixteenth century Spanish town, complete with cathedral, cemetery,
town plaza, possible warehouses, and high-status residences. The data recovered from the site demonstrates that within the space of a single generation, Spain
had begun the successful colonization of the New World.
The next section contains several articles that deal with the initial period of
Spanish contact and exploration in La Florida itself (i.e., Hernando de Soto’s
Expedition Through the Southern United States, by Charles Hudson, Chester B.
DePratter, and Marvin T. Smith; Artifacts of Exploration: Archaeological Evidence from Florida, by Jeffrey M. Mitchem; Anhaica: Discovery of Hernando
de Soto’s 1539-1540 Winter Camp, by Charles R. Ewen; The Tristdn de Luna
Expedition, 1559-1561, by Charles Hudson, Marvin T. Smith, Chester B.
DePratter, and Emilia Kelley; and Indian Responses to European Contact: The

Reviews

247

Coosa Example, by Marvin T. Smith). The articles by Hudson and his colleagues
give excellent overviews of their reconstruction of the de Soto entrada’s route
through the southeastern United States and into Texas. Although their reconstruction is still the subject of some controversy among professionals, their
evidence is well presented and convincing, especially for the eastern part of the
route. In this connection, Hudson’s (1990) study of the Juan Pardo expedition
from the Georgia coast, and the work of Hudson and his colleagues with the
documents of the Tristfin de Luna expedition (summarized in this volume),
demonstrate in an excellent fashion the potential conjunction of multiple historical sources in resolving problems of ethnohistoric tribal location and reconstruction of early European routes of exploration.
One of the more interesting aspects of this series of articles relates to the
archeological evidence apparently left behind by the early Spanish entradas. In
this connection, Smith conducted an extensive study of the distribution of both
early European glass beads and early iron artifacts in the southeastern United
States, whereas Mitchem’s and Ewen’s articles specifically present the artifactual evidence for the de Soto route from Florida. Interestingly, the evidence from
these material remains, in general, differs somewhat from the evidence such as
chain mail, medieval weapons, and Spanish riding accouterments that has been
used to support claims for the de Soto route in Texas (James Bruseth [this volume] has recently written an excellent summary of the artifactual evidence of
the de Soto entrada in Texas). It could be argued that the expedition’s supply of
trade items, such as brass hawk-bells and glass beads, might have been exhausted
by the time the expedition reached Texas; it seems more likely that heavy mail
also would have been abandoned before the expedition reached Texas. Certainly,
it is clear that Texas could greatly benefit from artifactual studies similar to those
made by Smith in the Southeast.
Finally, in the last article in this section, Smith again discusses the evidence
for the de Soto entrada in Georgia, Alabama, and Tennessee, this time in regard
to how it affected one aboriginal political entity--the Chiefdom of Coosa in
Alabama and northwestern Georgia. Once again, in the light of recent suggestions
regarding the abandonment of parts of East Texas (specifically, the area of the
Titus phase), Smith’s work is extremely intriguing. He musters strong evidence
for both a demographic and sociopolitical collapse at Coosa in the years between
the de Soto contact (1540) and the de Luna expedition (in 1560), suggesting
that the introduction of European diseases may have been at the heart of this
process. He is wise enough not to suggest that any single disease, such as
smallpox (for which there is, interestingly, no mention in the de Soto chronicles)
was at fault, but instead suggests that a combination of diseases may have been
at work. Such a rapid collapse (only 20 years) tends to support this view, although
single-disease epidemics have been known to produce this effect under special
circumstances (the introduction of malaria to coastal Oregon in the 1830s
apparently brought with it an extraordinary 90 percent mortality rate, resulting
in the complete extinction of the coastal tribes within one generation). Whatever

248

Texas Archeological Society

the ultimate cause, Smith does document the demise of the chicfdom level of
political organization at Coosa (and presumably elsewhere in the southeast) and
its replacement with the system of conlEderacies familiar to us from the later
historical accounts. Once again, this work has serious implications for Texas
archeology in regard to the use of ethnographic models of Caddoan political
organization during the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries for
reconstruction of Prccolumbian patterns, especially when it is coupled with a
hypothesized model of demographic collapse. In this regard, Timothy K. Perttula,
in a paper presented at a 1990 symposium on the de Soto entrada at the University
of Arkansas, argued strongly for the introduction of European diseases into the
Caddoan area during the early sixteenth century, perhaps as early as 1520, and
it is possible that the survivors of the Narv~lez expedition, including Cabeza de
Vaca, introduced malaria and other European diseases to the Texas Gulf Coast
by 1528.
The final section of this volume consists of two articles dealing with the
Spanish efforts to establish permanent settlements in La Florida, efforts that
resulted in the founding of the first, permanently occupied European settlement
in North America--St. Augustine (Pedro Mendndez’s Plan for settling La
Florida, by Eugene Lyon, and St, Augustine and the La Florida Colony: New
Life-Styles in a New Land, by Edward Chancy and Kathleen A. Deagan). In his
article, Eugene Lyon presents the historical background of the most concerted
effort the Spanish put forward to settle La Florida. Acting under a Royal commission from Philip II, which made him adelantado of La Florida, Pedro
Men~ndez de Avil~s acted quickly in 1565, first, to establish a permanent settlement at St. Augustine, and then, to dispel the French, who had settled on the St.
John’s River in 1564, from the Florida peninsula. From then until his death in
1574, Men~ndez devoted himself to the success and expansion of his colonization efforts. He explored much of the Florida peninsula and founded settlements
in south Florida, among the Calusa, and among other aboriginal groups. Later,
he sailed up the south Atlantic coast and founded the settlement at Santa Elena
in present-day South Carolina. However, despite his best efforts, most of
Men~ndez’s endeavors failed and, except for St. Augustine itself, disappeared
from the map of the southeastern United States.
The factors that allowed the Spanish at St. Augustine to adapt successfully
to life in the New World are the subject of the essay by Chaney and Deagan.
They summarize the historical background of the colony, then discuss the archeological remains of the settlement, based on excavations that have been going
on since the 1950s. On the basis of this work, a fascinating view of Old World
adaptation to the New has begun to emerge. For instance, the ceramic assemblage in the settlement went from less than half local Indian-made wares in the
early period to more than half aboriginal ceramics in the late period. Furthermore, most of these later aboriginal ceramics were nonlocal imported wares,
apparently from Indian groups living along the Georgia coast. This pattern reflects an increasing level of interaction between Spaniard and Indian, involving

Reviews

249

trade and u’ibute with increasingly distant groups. The importance of aboriginal
pottery to the settlement may be taken as just one aspect of the mestization of
the community: i.e., the intermarriage of Spanish men and Indian women, a
process that apparently began as soon as the settlement was founded. The archeological evidence also indicates radical changes in the diet of the Spaniards,
including the replacement of major Old World food crops with indigenous maize,
beans, and squash. These are only a few of the adaptations that allowed the
Spaniards to adapt successfully to their new environment.
In the final essay in this volume Susan Milbrath (Old World Meets New:
Views across the Atlantic) discusses the effect of the "discovery" of the New
World on the art of the Old. Concentrating largely on graphic art, Milbrath points
out that the first attempts to illustrate the new lands and peoples found by the
first European voyages of discovery involved their incorporation into an existing Eurocentric model that showed remote parts of the world as inhabited by
monstrous nonhuman races, by primitive peoples similar to those of Europe’s
past, or by savages living in a state of primitive innocence (resembling sixteenthcentury depictions of Adam and Eve). The depiction of the Americas in terms
of monstrous races ended quickly, but the image of New World inhabitants as
savage cannibals lingered much longer, probably under the impetus of economics, since only cannibals and apostates could be legally enslaved by the Spanish
settlers. Milbrath notes that the earliest depictions of New World inhabitants
were invariably ethnographically inaccurate but that, after 1515, depictions of
aborigines were drawn increasingly from life, although probably from South
American models. Milbrath also discusses early European depictions of America
as allegorical images and how Mexican and South American jewelry affected
the Spanish and European jewelers of the sixteenth century.
Finally, the book itself is attractively designed and well illustrated, and,
although the reviewer wished there could have been more illustrations of artifacts from the exhibit, he cannot dispute the use of excavation photographs and
other high-quality graphics that were used; the book was not intended to be a
catalog of artifacts (and indeed, there are already many catalogs and special
studies of early Spanish artifacts). This volume is written in a popular format
and is intended to serve a wide audience, and it succeeds in doing so without
sacrificing either scholarship or accuracy. In sum, First Encounters: Spanish
Explorations in the Caribbean and the United States, 1492-1570 makes a valuable contribution to the study of early Spanish history and archeology in the
Caribbean and the southeastern United States.

REFERENCE CITED
Hudson, Charles M.
1990
TheJuanPardoExpeditions:SpanishExplorersandthelndiansoftheCarolinas
and Tennessee, 1566-1568. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

250

Texas Archeological Society
Spanish Borderlands Sourcebooks:

Ethnology of the Texaslndians (No. 7), edited by TtIOMAS R. HESTER, 1991, xxi +
413 pp.
Archaeology of the Spanish Missions of Texas (No. 21), edited by ANNE. A. Fox,
1991, xix + 377 pp.
Documentary Evidence for the Spanish Missions of Texas (No. 22), edited by
ARTInm R. G0~z, 1991, xxxi + 470 pp. Garland Publishing, Inc., New York
and London
Reviewed by Timothy K. Perttula, Texas Historical Commission
In 1990, Garland Publishing, Inc., under the general editorship of David
Hurst Thomas, began the publication of a thirty-volume set entitled Spanish
Borderlands Sourcebooks. The volumes are edited compendiums of published
articles and source materials designed to document cultural interactions between
Native Americans and Europeans in the Spanish Borderlands of the Americas.
Three of the volumes deal with Texas themes, and other volumes in the series
address Native American demography; Native American-Hispanic interaction
in the Southeast, the Caribbean, the Southwest, and California; the de Soto
expedition; the missions of California, Florida, the Southwest, and northern
Mexico; Spanish St. Augustine; Hispanic urban planning in North America; and
the idea of the Spanish Borderlands.
All of the Texas volumes are arranged identically, beginning with a list of
sources, then an introductory essay by the editor, followed by the reprinted articles. In some cases, particularly in the Archaeology of the Spanish Missions of
Texas, only sections are reprinted from lengthy monographs or technical reports.
Consequently, the references from the reprinted sources had to be added to the
edited volume. Because these are reprinted publications, many of the illustrations (especially the photographs) are poorly reproduced, so readers will need
to refer to the original publication to make full use of them (which, unfortunately, defeats one of the purposes of the sourcebooks).
The introductions by Hester, Fox, and G6mez summarize the contents of
the volumes rather succinctly, but they do provide sufficient historical and archeological background to enable readers to (a) understand how the edited selections contribute to our current understanding of the Spanish Borderlands in
Texas, and (b) illustrate the diversity of the published literature. For archeologists and ethnohistorians who are interested in the contact period in Texas, the
volume edited by G6mez is by far the most useful as a sourcebook because it
contains several 1930s publications of the Texas Catholic Historical Society on
seventeenth and eighteenth century Spanish expeditions in Texas that are not
readily accessible. On the other hand, many of the articles or monograph selections used as sources in the volumes edited by Hester and Fox are already in
this reviewer’s library. Nevertheless, it is likely that readers, depending upon
their interests, will find something of value in each of the volumes.

Reviews

251

As with any compendium of edited selections on diverse archeological and
historical topics, readers can question or quibble about the choices of articles
and monographs included in the three volumes, but, in the end, if each reader
were to compile such a volume, he would probably produce a similarly diverse
selection of articles. Certainly, there could be questions about why many of the
articles in Columbian Consequences, Vol. 1 that deal with Texas (Thomas
1989:191-299) are not included in the volume edited by Fox. This issue is secondary, however, to the broader purpose of these sourcebooks, to provide to
students of the Spanish Borderlands in handy volumes a useful set of archeological, historical, ethnological, and archival documents that serve to encourage
research into Native American-European interaction and Hispanic colonization
in Spanish Texas. This the three volumes certainly provide.
REFERENCES CITED
Thomas, David Hurst (editor)
1989
Columbian Consequences. Volume 1, Archaeological and Historical Perspectives on the Spanish Borderlands West. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Columbian Consequences. Volume 2, Archaeological and Historical Perspectives
on the Spanish Borderlands East. Edited by DAVID HtmST ThoMas, 1990.
Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C., xv + 586 pp., 36 figures.
Reviewed by Timothy K. Perttula, Texas Historical Commission
The second of three volumes on the consequences of Native AmericanHispanic interaction in the Americas, this excellent edited volume focuses on the
American Southeast and the Caribbean, referred to as the Spanish Borderlands East.
In Volume 1 of the series are discussions of the Spanish Borderlands West (from
Texas to the Pacific Ocean) (Thomas 1989), and in Volume 3, discussions of the
Spanish Borderlands from a Pan-American perspective (Thomas 1991).
The volume’s 35 chapters--by archeologists, borderlands historians,
ethnohistorians, and a Franciscan friar--are organized into three parts centered on
common themes: the Spanish entrada into the American Southeast, the impacts of
Hispanic colonization on the Southeast and Caribbean, and the missions of La
Florida. These thematic sections are introduced in separate chapters (by Jerald T.
Milanich, Kathleen Deagan, and David Hurst Thomas) that provide the contextual
perspective for the articles that follow, discuss the current state of archeological and
historical knowledge in the Spanish Borderlands East, and review the main research
tenets guiding ongoing work in the region. These overviews serve, of coarse, to
focus the diverse contributions, but they also stand on their own as lucid statements

252

Texas Archeological Society

on the consequences of European-Native American interaction in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries over a broad area of the Americas. To the reviewer, these three
chapters are the strongest aspects of the volume, and probably the most enduring,
because of their thematic perspective.
Milanich’s paper introducing Part 1 of the volume, entitled "The European
Entrada into La Florida: An Overview," sets the stage for the volume as a whole,
since he develops the geographical and cultural setting at the time of initial contacts
between Hispanic explorers and the Native Americans in the Southeast. He very
carefully and effectively brings out both the extraordinary nature of the Mississippian and Gulf Coastal societies who were living in La Florida in about 1540 and the
Spanish perception of them. From this, he discusses the current archeological and
historical evidence of initial Native American-European interaction, principally
including the Narvfiez, de Soto, and Pardo expeditions in the sixteenth century. In
this section, papers by Jeffrey M. Mitchem on West Florida, Charles R. Ewen on the
Apalachee, John F. Scarry on Choctawhatchee Bay, and Rochelle A. Marrinan,
John F. Scarry, and Rhonda L. Majors on the Narv~iez expedition, summarize the
more exciting recent research efforts on sixteenth century Native American sites in
the Spanish Borderlands East. The excavations by Mitchem at the Tatham Mound,
and Ewen at the Martin site (the location of the 1539 to 1540 winter camp of the de
Soto expedition, now in downtown Tallahassee, Florida), should be especially
interesting to students of the sixteenth century because of the recovery in wellexcavated contexts of substantial amounts of Spanish trade goods and artifacts in
direct association with Native American architectural and mortuary remains.
Also of research interest are the effects of the introduction of European acute
diseases (such as smallpox and measles) on the Native Americans in the region.
Although they are explored in more detail in Volume 3 of the series (Thomas
1991:501-586), papers by Ann F. Ramenofsky and Dale L. Hutchinson review
the archeological and biological consequences of European-introduced epidemics in La Florida. They appear to have been generally devastating to Native
Americans, with population losses of 50 to 70 percent or more, within one or
two generations of contact. Although much of the evidence for the impacts of
disease comes from indirect archeological measures (of settlement numbers,
cessation of mound-building, mass burials, and so on), since most epidemic
diseases leave little tell-tale biological evidence in skeletal remains, Hutchinson
also summarizes other types of mortuary site evidence--such as injury by metal
weapons, and significant demographic pattern changes--that dramatically highlight the severity of Hispanic contact.
The rest of the papers in Part 1 deal with various aspects of the route of the
1539 to 1543 de Soto expedition across the Southeast and into Texas. All agree
that the investigation of the de Soto route is of more interest than simply documenting times and places where the journey ventured. Rather, the reconstruction of the route, once linked with archeological information, can help to "build
a picture of the social geography of a significant part of the sixteenth-century
southeastern United States. This social geography will.., make it possible to

Reviews

253

begin making detailed comparisons of native societies, caught in an instant of
historical time, from Tampa Bay to east Texas" (Hudson et al., p. 115).
Charles Hudson, John E. Worth, and Chester DePratter follow the route
through Georgia and South Carolina; David J. Hally, Marvin T. Smith, and James
F. Langford discuss the Coosa province in eastern Tennessee, western Georgia,
and eastern Alabama. Janet E. Levy, J. Alan May, and David G. Moore summarize the archeology of the Catawba valley (North Carolina) at the time of de
Soto’s entrada; Keith J. Little and Caleb Curren examine de Soto’s forays through
Alabama, and Dan F. Morse and Phyllis A. Morse take de Soto (and Moscoso,
the entrada’s leader after de Soto died in 1542) through Arkansas and East Texas.
Morse and Morse rather quickly allude to the expedition into East Texas
among the Caddoan peoples there. Their discussion of the route (as well as its
cultural implications) in this part of the Caddo country would have benefited
from information about the recent investigations conducted by Texas archeologists into the route of the entrada and the locations of the various sixteenth
century Caddo provinces along the Red River and in East Texas (see Bruseth’s
article in this issue of the Bulletin). Morse and Morse suggest that "the lessdeveloped Caddo" were better able to readjust to the Spanish explorer’s policies
and actions than were the complex chiefdoms along the Mississippi River. That
may well be, but other examinations of the consequences of European contact
among the Caddo strongly suggest that the effects of introduced disease were
pervasive, that they included a rapid decline in socio-political complexity, and
that the readjustment was both varied and episodic (Perttula 1992).
The last paper in Part 1 is a provocative contribution on sixteenth century
Native American warfare in the Southeast at the time of the de Soto expedition.
According to David Dye, warfare was based on regional power struggles between chiefdoms, who used a variety of aggressive and nonaggressive tactics to
assert hegemony. The Spanish military presence swept these power struggles
aside in its brutality, although it was able to use these local political power relationships to subdue recalcitrant polities as it moved along on its route of plunder.
Kathleen Deagan’s paper on "Sixteenth-Century Spanish-American Colonization in the Southeastern United States and the Caribbean" introduces Part 2
of the volume. Important topics she and others discuss in this part are: the nature of the Spanish presence in the New World; colonial strategies of settlements
and resource exploitation; the earliest encounters between Native Americans and
Hispanics; the Native peoples (such as the T~iino, Arawak, Guale, and Timucua)
of the region; the first colonies and their expansion; the consequences of colonization; the archeology of resource depletion; and the emergence of a unique
Euro-American society in the New World.
The papers by Jos6 Maria Cruxent, Charles R. Ewen, and Manuel GarcfaArevalo examine the colonial presence in the Caribbean through discussions of the
archeology ofLa Isabela (established by Columbus in 1493 on Haiti), Puerto Real
(1504-1578), and a variety of Spanish and T~iino communities on Hispaniola.

254

Texas Archeological Society

Although many of the earliest Hispanic colonial efforts ended in tragic failure, those
that succeeded contributed to the long-term transformation and evolution of Native
American societies through cultural and biological assimilation, conquest and
subjugation, and through the lack of freedom of expression in religion, arts, and
iconography.
In the Southeast, the process and impact of Spanish colonization is discussed
first by Eugene Lyon. He concludes that the steps of early colonization in Spanish
Florida were much like that seen in the Spanish Indies because of its entrepreneurial
nature and "its aims of settlement and prosperity for Spaniards, and obedience and
Christianity for Native Americans." By the late 1570s, cultural interaction between
Native Americans and the Spanish, due in part to the isolation of the colony and the
developing economic symbiosis, contributed to some degree of mutual acculturation. Deagan’s other paper in Part 2 of the volume examines the issues of
acculturation, accommodation, and resistance, using the historical and archeological data available from the city of St. Augustine, first settled in 1565. Under her
direction, there has been an ongoing program of archeological, historical, and
ethnobiological research at St. Augustine to explore "the emergence and development of new world Euro-American society." That research has enabled her to show
clearly that the Spanish colonial strategies in the New World resulted through time
in the formation ofa multicultural society composed of Hispanic, Native American,
and Black African groups in La Florida.
Papers by Stanley South on Santa Elena (the first capital of Spanish Florida,
1566-1587), and by C. Margaret Scarry and Elizabeth J. Reitz on sixteenth century
Spanish subsistence strategies, look in more detail at key aspects of the colonization
process. South is concerned with exploring world cultural systems, evolutionary
energy theory, and the archeological record to investigate the relationship between
access to energy resources (plant, animal, mineral, and human) and status differences in colonial Hispanic society. He propounds a Status Artifact Index Model to
help understand changing social processes in a colonial setting. Scarry and Reitz’s
paper highlights the changes the Spaniards made to their diet to survive in La
Florida, principally the adoption for use of indigenous crops together with a
selection of Old World cultigens and domesticated animals. Their main source of
protein came from fish, shellfish, and local game, much as in the subsistence
strategies of the nearby Native Americans.
One of the more interesting papers in Part 2 is Jane Lander’s historical study
of the role played by African-Americans in Spain’s colonization of the Caribbean
and Southeastern Borderlands. Often overlooked, the African presence in the New
World in the sixteenth to eighteenth centuries is marked by a diversity of slavefreedmen lifeways. Many of the slaves brought to the New World by England for
its Carolina colony ended up as runaways---or from slave raids--in St. Augustine,
where the slave militia helped repulse English raids on the town. In 1738 the first
free black town in the United States--Gracia Real de Santa Teresa de Mose (17381763)--was established just north of St. Augustine. The site of Mose is being
investigated by Kathleen Deagan.

Rev&ws

255

Part 3 of this volume concerns the missions of La Florida, especially those
maintained by the Spaniards among the Guale, Timucua, and Apalachee in presentday Georgia and Florida. David Hurst Thomas’s overview describes the Native
American context, as well as the history of Spain’s involvement in the missionization
of the region, and the means used by the missionaries to convert the Native
American populations. Papers by John W. Griffin, David J. Weber, Michael V.
Gannon, Conrad Harkins, O.F.M., and Amy Turner Bushnell, discuss these issues
principally from a historical perspective. Weber’s essay, in particular, dissects the
viewpoint of the missionized versus unmissionized Indians in La Florida to
conclude that the Hispanic missionary program in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries was a frontier failure because "in large part... Indians did not wish it to
succeed."
Thomas also discussed the Hispanic designs for the missions of La Florida
as well as what the missions actually looked like. Unlike the missions in the
Spanish Borderlands West, where many still stand as architectural gems, the
knowledge concerning the physical appearance and layout of the Southeast
missions comes primarily from documentary evidence and more recently from
archeological investigations. B. Calvin Jones and Gary N. Shapiro, Gary N.
Shapiro and John H. Hann, and Rebecca Saunders summarize this archeological
and documentary data recently acquired from mission sites throughout the Southeast, but again particularly from Apalachee, Timucua, and Guale mission provinces.
Finally, three papers in Part 3 discuss the economic and biological realities
of Hispanic colonization in the Florida mission system. The outstanding essay
by Clark Spencer Larsen and associates on the biological adaptations of the
Native American populations as seen in human skeletal remains clearly demonstrates (1) the decline and eventual extinction of many groups from Europeanintroduced diseases and increased warfare, followed by (2) further systemic
decreases in the quality of life with the development of the mission system. This
is seen most notably in the increased workloads of the Native Americans in the
missions, as well as in reduced dietary diversity. This type of biocultural change
study is lacking for the skeletal samples from the mission sites in Texas, but is
virtually a prerequisite to a broad understanding of cultural contact and Native
American-European interaction in the Texas mission system.
In separate papers, Elizabeth J. Reitz and Donna L. Ruhl examine the
zooarcheological and paleoethnobotanical evidence from La Florida missions
to assess aboriginal and Spanish cultural change in the colonial period, as well
as the nature of their economic interactions through the mission system. Reitz’s
contribution notes that both Spanish and Indian subsistence strategies changed
through contact, resulting in new and variable systems of subsistence that incorporated a mixture of domestic animal use and locally available animal resources,
typically either deer or sharks or rays or fish. Ruhl’s analysis indicates a similar
complexity in the mutual use of local and exotic cultigens, with Old World crops
becoming important only in the seventeenth-century archeological record. Corn

was the mainstay for the Spanish settlers, military, and missionaries, but was
rather differentially cultivated by the Native Americans of La Florida.
In summary, Columbian Consequences, Volume 2 is a comprehensive, insightful, and expansive treatment of the consequences of Hispanic-Native American
interaction in La Florida. It contains the most current archeological and historical
information on the sixteenth-century Southeast and Caribbean (in conjunction with
Milanich and Milbrath [1989]), presented in a readable and accessible style, and
examines many of the theoretical and philosophical perspectives scholars today are
using to explain the past and bring it to light.
Although there is little mention of Texas as such in this volume, as Texas and
Northern Mexico was discussed in Volume 1 of the series (Thomas 1989:191-299),
this reviewer still highly recommends the volume to all readers who are interested
in the study of Native American-European culture contact in the Spanish Borderlands. Most of the issues and research problems currently being addressed in the
Spanish Borderlands East pertain directly to Texas, and with a sharing of perspectives as a redoubling of effort it is not unreasonable to conclude that an improved
understanding of the archeology and history of Texas after 1492 will be one of the
results.
REFERENCES CITED

Milanich, Jerald T., and Susan Milbrath (editors)
1989
First Encounters: Spanish Explorations in the Caribbean and the United States,
1492-1570. University of Florida Press, Gainesville.
Perttula, Timothy K.
1992
"TheCaddoNation" :ArchaeologicalandEthnohistoricPerspectives. Urfiversity of Texas Press, Austin.
Thomas, David Hurst (editor)
1989
Columbian Consequences. Volume 1, Archaeological and Historical Perspectives on the Spanish Borderlands West. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.
1991

Columbian Consequences. Volume 3, The Spanish Borderlands in PanAmerican Perspective. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

257

Authors
Jay C. Blaine is a retired postal supervisor. As an avocational archeologist his
many published contributions to research cover Paleoindian to Historic
Period topics. He is a Past President of the Dallas and Texas
Archeological Societies. Participation in recent field work and their
publication includes the investigations at Los Adaes (the capital of the
Province of Texas), and archeological survey of the Tunica-Biloxi
holdings at Marksville, Louisiana. Jay serves as a consultant and
archeological metals conservator for the Williamson Museum at
Northwestern State University, Natchitoches, Louisiana, and consults
for other museums. He is a graduate of San Jose State College in
California and has served as a book reviewer for the Society for
Historical Archeology and for Southern Studies. Jay was elected a
Fellow of the Texas Archeological Society in 1989.
James E. Bruseth is Deputy State Historic Preservation Officer with the Texas
Historical Commission in Austin. He is responsible for the management
of the Department of Antiquities Protection at the Commission. He
received his Ph.D. in 1987 from Southern Methodist University, and his
interests include Caddoan and Texas archeology, computer applications
in archeology, and paleoenvironmental reconstruction.
Maynard B. Cliff is a Senior Staff Archeologist with Geo-Marine, Inc., of Piano,
Texas. He holds a B.A. degree in Anthropology and Archeology from
Southern Methodist University, and in 1986 he received a Senior
Fulbright Fellowship for ceramic research in Honduras. He has
conducted fieldwork in Mexico, Belize, and Ecuador in Latin America,
and in many areas of North America, including Texas, Louisiana, and
Oklahoma. His interests include settlement patterns, ceramic analysis,
household-level economic organization, the evolution of ranked
sociopolitical systems, and ethnohistory. Address: Geo-Marine, Inc.,
550 East Fifteenth St., Piano, TX 75074.
Kathleen Gilmore received her doctorate in anthropology from Southern
Methodist University in 1973, and worked for many years at the
Institute of Applied Sciences at the University of North Texas. She has
been past Presidents of the Texas Archeological Society, the Council
for Texas Archeologists, and the Society for Historical Archaeology.
Her varied interests include Caddoan and Spanish Colonial archeology,
and ceramics, and currently she is compiling a bibliography of the
Archeology of the Spanish and Mexican Periods in Texas.

258

Texas Archeological Society

Cathryn A. Hoyt is a staff archeologist with the Office of the State Archeologist,
Texas Historical Commission. She formerly was with the Institute of
Maritime History and Archeology, Bermuda Maritime Museum, where
she was engaged in collecting and analyzing archival and marine
archeologieal data relating to the age of exploration. She has directed the
archeological investigation of two pre-eighteenth-century shipwrecks and
is the author of several articles dealing with the material culture of the
period of exploration. She recently served as co-editor with Helen Simons
of Hispanic Texas: A Historical Guide, which will t~ published by the
University of Texas Press in the Fall of 1992.
Elizabeth A. H. John. Independent historian Elizabeth A. H. John holds the Ph.D.
degree in history from the University of Oklahoma. Engaged in research,
writing, lecturing, and consultation, she is concerned primarily with
tracing tribal histories and analyzing the interplay between Indian and
European--particularly Hispanic--cultures in the Greater Southwest. An
ancillary interest in cartographic history has grown from that research.
Best known as the author of Storms Brewed in Other Men’s Worlds: The
Confrontation of Indians, Spanish, and French in the Southwest, 15401795 (Texas A&M Press, 1975; University of Nebraska Press 1981), John
has published numerous articles on Indian and Hispanic topics. Her most
recent book is Views from the Apache Frontier: Report on the Northern
Provinces of New Spain by Josd Cortds, Lieutenant in the Royal Corps of
Engineers, ! 799 (University of Oklahoma Press, 1989).
NancyAdele Kenmotsu is an archeologist at the Texas Historical Commission. She
has a long-time interest in the effects of European contact on Native
Americans, and has authored articles on gunflints and the route of the de
Soto expedition through Texas. She is currently working on a dissertation
concerning the early contact period in the Trans-Pecos.
TimothyK. Perttula is an archeologist with the Department of Antiquities Protection
at the Texas Historical Commission. He is the guest editor of this bulletin,
Editor-Elect of Publications of the Texas Archeological Society, and
editor of the Caddoan Archeology Newsletter. Timothy received his Ph.D.
in 1989 from the University of Washington, and his revised dissertation
will be published by the University of Texas Press in 1992 as "The Caddo
Nation" : Archaeological and Ethnohistoric Perspectives.
Diane Lee Rhodes is a historical archeologist and cultural resource specialist for the
National Park Service. She has a broad background of research in both
prehistoric and historic archeology and history. Before joining the National
Park Service Diane was employed in the reference departments of seven
university and public library systems, where she pursued research on a
broad spectrum of topics. Her topic for her M.A. thesis was drawn from

Authors

259

work on a prehistoric rock shelter in southeastern Colorado. Diane’s work
with the National Park Service includes projects in Alaska, Hawaii,
Arkansas, Maine, Arizona, California, Virginia, Pennsylvania, Louisiana,
and other states.
RobertA. Ricklis received his M.A. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Texas
at Austin, where his interdisciplinary study of the Karankawans of the
Texas coast earned the 1990-1991 Award for Outstanding Doctoral
Dissertation. A Fellow of the New York State Archaeological Association,
Ricklis has conducted research in the Northeast in addition to coastal and
Central Texas. He continues his active pursuit of archeological,
geoarcheological, and paleoecological research on the Texas coast. He
was a Research Associate at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
at The University of Texas at Austin from 1989 to 1992. He is President
of Coastal Archaeological S tudies, Inc., Corpus Christi, where he specializes
in archeological and paleoecological research.
Joseph P. Sdnchez is Director of the Spanish Colonial Research Center, National
Park Service, on the campus of the University of New Mexico in
Albuquerque.
Robert S. Weddle is an independent historian whose special interest is Spanish
colonial history of the Southwest and the Gulf Coast. With 11 books to his
credit, he has published two volumes (Spanish Sea and The French Thorn)
of a projected trilogy dealing with discovery and exploration in the Gulf
of Mexico. Formerly engaged in newspaper work and scholarly publishing,
Weddle has retired to his small ranch near Bonham, Texas, where he raises
purebred Angus cattle. He holds the Bachelor of Arts degree in journalism
from Texas Tech University.

