TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
The Society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and
scientific undertaking: the study of man’s past in Texas and contiguous areas.
The Bulletin offers an outlet for the publication of serious research on history,
prehistory and archeological theory. In line with the goals of the society, it encourages scientific collection, study and publication of archeological data.~"
The Bulletin is published annually for the distribution to the members of the
Society.

Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers and do not

necessarily represent the views of the Society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society 1971-1972
President: E. MoTr DAVIS (Austin)
President-elect: BOB BURLESON (Temple)
Secretary-Treasurer: KATHLEEN K. GILMORE (Dallas)

Newsletter Editor:

JERRYLEE

BLAINE (Dallas)

Directors (in addition to the above): CHARLES BANDY (Brownfield), R. MILTON
BELL (Mt. Pleasant), RICHARD M. BOWEN (Corpus Christi), JOHN W. GREEN (El
Paso), HARRY J. SHAFER (Austin), FRANCIS STICKNEY (Midland).

Regional Vice-Presidents: CLAUDE BROWN (Lubbock), C. K. CHANDLER
(Houston), ELDON E. COP3<ILL (Dallas), HIRAM GREGORY, JR. (Natchit0ches, La.),
RICHARD E. GINePdCH (Kerrville), R. K. HARRISON (Texarkana), T. C. HILL, JR.
(Crystal City), ROBERT L. TURNER (Fort Worth), NORMAN WEHRLI (Fort Stockton).

Membership and Publications
Membership

in

the

Society

is

for

the

calendar

year.

Dues

are

as

follows: Regular--S7.50; Chartered Societies and Institutional--S10.00; Contributing--$25.00; Life--S150.00. All members of the Society receive the
Bulletin, which is published annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that
is mailed out about four times a year. Back issues of the Bulletin, up to and including Volume No. 39, that are still in print may be obtained for $5.00 per
volume. Subsequent volumes are available at a cost of $7.50.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to SecretaryTreasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Southern Methodist University, Box
165, Dallas, Texas 75275.

Bulletin of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Volume 43/1972

David S. Dibble, Editor
Marsha F. Jackson, Assistant Editor

Marvin L. Jeffreys, Cover Design

PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY AT AUSTIN, TEXAS
1973

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Systematized Ethnohistory and Prehistoric Culture
Sequences of Texas
T. N. Campbell ................................................

1

Toward a Generalized Model of Hunting
and Gathering Societies
Parker Nunley

.................................................

13

Prehistoric Occupation at the Holdsworth and Stewart
Sites on the Rio Grande Plain of Texas
Thomas Roy Hester and T. C. Hill, Jr ............................ 33
Appendices by John Holdsworth and Delbert Gilbow

..............

65

The Devil’s Hollow Site, A Stratified Archaic
Campsite in Central Texas
Michael B. Collins ............................................ 77
Prehistoric Social Boundaries:
An Archeological Model and Test
J. Ned Woodall ................................................ 101
Prehistoric Settlement of the Upper Neches River
Keith M. Anderson ............................................

121

Book Review: The Harlan Site, CK 6, A Prehistoric
Mound Center in Cherokee County, Eastern
Oklahoma by Robert Bell
Joel L. Shiner ................................................. 199

SYSTEMATIZED ETHNOHISTORY
AND PREHISTORIC

CULTURE SEQUENCES IN TEXAS*
T. N. CAMPBELL

ABSTRACT
Archeologists and ethnohistorians have certain limited objectives in
common,

one of which is arranging the evidence of past human

populations

in

chronological

order.

Prehistoric

archeologists construct

models known as local or regional culture sequences and are interested in
correlating, whenever possible, their latest prehistoric culture units with
ethnic groups named and described by early Europeans in written records
that have been analyzecl by ethnohistorians. Archeologists sometimes feel
handicapped because ethnohistorians do not always present their data in a
systematized form that is readily available, intelligible, and practically
useful to the archeologist.
ethnohistorians

It now

seems reasonable to advocate that

pay more attention

to the needs of archeologists and

prepare an areal series of ethnohistory handbooks that will summarize and
synthesize what is known about every historic ethnic group, large or small,
with emphasis on environmental data and ecological patterns and also on
interaction with other peoples, both native and European. Such handbooks
should not be presented in the usual authoritarian manner, but should
evaluate evidence presented and identify residual problems.

No attempt is made here to present specific ethnohistoric data on
any part of Texas or adjoining areas. This paper is essentially a brief
critical appraisal of past and current ethnohistoric studies as aids to
prehistoric archeology in the Texas area, accompanied by
suggestions as to how these ethnohistoric studies may be made more
pertinent and useful to archeologists.
Today many archeologists profess to be interested in ecological
processes of the past, particularly those in which man is involved.
These archeologists are very much aware that for any given sample
of the earth’s landscape it is essential to identify and describe
specific human population units, determine the approximate boundaries of their environmental exploitation, and then arrange these
man-land associations in chronological order. With much effort, and
perhaps with a certain amount of good fortune, it is sometimes
possible to achieve such an ordering for a relatively small section of

*This is a slightly modified version of a paper with the same title presented
at the 74th Annual Meeting of the Texas Academy of Science, Nacogdoches,
Texas, March 12, 1971.

2

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the earth’s surface. This achievement is commonly referred to as a
local cultural sequence. Unfortunately, the human groups involved
can rarely be defined with precision, and it is equally difficult to
chart their former territorial ranges. However, these difficulties do
not seem to deter archeologists, who are sustained by the hope that
greater precision and refinement will eventually emerge from continued study and that this procedure may be extended to larger and
larger portions of the earth’s surface. It is generally believed that
these sequences provide a realistic setting for study of the various
processes that operate when groups of men develop sociocultural
extensions that permit them to live acceptably in their chosen landscape arenas and maintain themselves through time.
How does the specialty known as ethnohistory relate to this
limited objective of sequence recognition and the more distant objective of defining and explaining ecological processes? As I conceive it, ethnohistory is initially a set of operations that one performs on observational data recorded in written documents to
achieve definition, description, and chronological ordering of
specific man-land associations. It involves difficult feats of information retrieval, analysis of refractory and often incomplete
data, and eventually involves cross-examination of the ordered data
to arrive at interpretive and explanatory statements about the nature
of interactions between groups of men and between these human
groups and their respective natural environments.
Although prehistoric archeologists and ethnohistorians seem to
have common objectives concerning relations between man and
nature, it is unrealistic to ignore certain differences which tend to
inhibit communication between them. Archeologists who develop
cultural sequences are accustomed to dealing with residues of
human behavior from which they must make inferences about actual behavior. Ethnohistorians, on the other hand, are accustomed to
working with verbally recorded observations of human behavior
and, despite various kinds of bias that enter written records, are
somewhat closer to the phenomena being studied. Archeologists
deal with evidence of apparently slow behavioral change over very
long periods of time, whereas ethnohist0rians are more or less
boxed-in by a short span of time determined by availability of written documents, less than 500 years in the Texas area. Furthermore,
ethnohistorians must consider behavioral changes in a context of
massive and often rapid acculturation, evasive or enforced
migration, and frequent ethnic extinctions connected with intense
competition of European and aboriginal populations for living space
and exploitable resources.

SYSTEMATIZED ETHNOHISTORY

3

These disparities tend to reduce effective cooperation of
prehistoric archeologists and ethnohistorians to a short span of time
in any given area, namely, just before and shortly after the initial
entry of Europeans. This is dictated by the archeologist’s desire to
link his late prehistoric groups with named native groups recorded
by the earliest travelers and explorers before the native cultures
began to be extensively modified and also before post-European
population pressures induced habitat shifts. This focuses attention
on the truly aboriginal groups of any given area, meaning those who
were there before various kinds of chain reaction developed. The
ethnohistorian may be inclined to rebel against this restriction, for it
forces him to concentrate on his earliest and generally his least informative written documents. I regard this as a healthy situation
because ethnohistorians, like many archeologists, are attracted to
the richer bodies of data and tend to pass quickly over obscurities. If
the ethnohistorian is to meet this specific challenge, he must put far
more effort and analytical ingenuity into study of the earlier
documents. For example, in central, southern, and western Texas
the ethnohistorian finds himself faced by the complex problem of
identifying, locating, and describing innumerable obscure Indian
groups who were later swept away by multi-directional pressures
from aggressive Apaches, Comanches, and Spaniards. In such areas
it is small wonder that the archeologist is discouraged from making
greater use of ethnohistoric data for the purpose of extending his
prehistoric sequences into the historic period. As things now stand,
in these areas the archeologist is faced by an apparently
meaningless jumble of small ethnic groups, for which there is
minimal information on geographic range, on linguistic affiliation,
and on distinctive behavior patterns. Since he can find few satisfactory statements of what ethnic unit was where, when, and how
related to other units, he cannot be expected to show much enthusiasm about tracing cultural continuities into the historic period.
He might, however, force the ethnohistorian’s hand by finding and
excavating more settlements attributable to the Apache, Comanche,
and Spanish invaders. Specialists who share an interest in certain
problems tend to expect too much from each other, but mutual prodding often gets results and eventually leads to beneficial
cooperation.
It is only fair to make clear that my views about the relationships
of ethnohistory to prehistoric archeology have developed as the
result of unorthodox behavior. As an archeologist with an interest in

4

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Texas and adjacent areas, I have recently been doing a limited
amount of ethnohistoric research. It now seems to me that archeologists who deal with late prehistoric and early historic
materials tend to make minimal and often ineffective use of
ethnohistoric data mainly because those data have not been presented in a form that can be quickly found and readily used. What archeologists really want is more systematically organized
ethnohistoric information, and with more of it organized with archeological problems in mind. Perhaps one way to inject more archeological bias into ethnohistory is for more archeologists to try
their hands at ethnohistoric research and see what emerges. The
first objection that archeologists will voice is that the professional
archeologist is likely to be no more than an amateur ethnohistorian
at best, and this is a valid objection. I must admit that my experience thus far has not always been satisfying, mainly because my
archeological training failed to prepare me for even the most
elementary ethnohistoric research. But there is nothing inherently
mysterious or difficult about ethnohistoric research, any more than
there is about archeological research. I would say that any archeologist can do his own ethnohistoric research if he really wants
to and is willing to devote enough time to it.
Some of my archeological colleagues and students have
questioned the value of further ethnohistoric studies connected with
Texas and adjoining areas in both the United States and Mexico,
particularly for the early historic period. One question has to do
with the scope of the search for ethnohistoric data. Have historians
and cultural anthropologists found most of the extant documents
that are pertinent? The answer to this is an emphatic no. Thus far
the search has been confined largely to the massive and better
known archival collections, principally those in the great documentstorage centers of Spain, France, Mexico, and the United States. Ar" chival materials in many provincial capitals and lesser administrative centers for both church and state have been only spottily searched, and relatively little attention has been paid to
specialized institutional records, such as those of old families,
Christian missions, early mining companies and landed estates that
used Indian labor, and court records that pertain to land inheritance
and sale, marriages, and various kinds of crime.
The same question is sometimes phrased in another way. Is it
possible that the search thus far has revealed most of the basic information about former native populations and that further effort
will be merely a minor, mopping-up operation? My limited ex-

SYSTEMATIZED ETHNOHISTORY

5

perience thus far forces me to be cautious in trying to answer this
question. For some Indian populations we will never find much information simply because they were never actually seen by any
European who put something down on paper. These populations are
known only through hearsay from other Indians. But for other
groups that were frequently observed and recorded over a considerable span of time the possibility of data recovery increases in
proportion to the number of recorded observations retrieved. It all
boils down to the fact that we will never know just how much information exists until we search. The situation is not greatly different from that faced by an archeologist who begins an excavation
program in a poorly known area. He will never know what can be
learned until he has excavated. My stance here is that the
ethnohistorian should continue his search until he is satisfied that
he has exhausted the possibilites and appears to have reached a
point of rapidly diminishing returns. To this I would add my impression that much of the ethnohistoric research thus far done in the
greater Texas area has been a cream-skimming operation. The effort
has gone primarily into finding documents with high data yield, and
I suspect that a substantial number of these may have been found.
But I also believe that there has been general neglect of low-yield
documents, whose number is phenomenal. Here, I think, lies the
greatest opportunity. It is in these low-yield documents that one often finds critical information on population size, seasonal range of
hunting and gathering groups, migrations, intergroup economic
cooperation or conflict, earliest introduction of European trade
goods, and non-linguistic evidence of linguistic affiliation. This
potential is what makes me insist that what we most need now is a
painstaking, dragnet operation through the innumerable documents
that have never been examined for isolated detail or have been
passed over as insignificant. This of course is a major undertaking,
but I see no reason for anyone to be overawed by its magnitude.
Few archeologists seem to be overwhelmed by the amount of work
that must be done before their major objectives are achieved.
An imposing mass of information has been assembled and
published on various historic Indian peoples in Texas. Much of this
can be labeled as ethnohistory in a broad sense, but the Texas area
is incompletely covered and the smaller population units rarely
receive adequate individual attention. One has only to inspect a few
special studies, such as Gatschet (1891) on the Karankawans,
Ruecking on the Coahuiltecans (1953, 1954a, 1954b, 1955a, 1955b),
Sjoberg (1953a, 1953b) on the Lipan Apaches and Tonkawas,

6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Newcomb and Field (1967) on the Wichita groups, and Swanton
(1942) and Griffith (1954) on the Caddoans to appreciate the wide
range of approaches to the data as well as the variety in structured
presentations. Failure to focus attention on the smaller ethnic units
through both time and space sometimes results in misunderstanding, as in the case of the Ervipiame, always identified as a
Tonkawan group linguistically and culturally. However, it is easy to
demonstrate by documents that the Ervipiame migrated shortly after
1700 from northeastern Coahuila and vicinity to east-central Texas
and there became associated with Tonkawan groups. They seem to
represent assimilation of a Coahuiltecan group in a new social setting.
The first serious attempt to present ethnohistoric information on
all the known groups in Texas was connected with the preparation
of the Handbook of American Indians, edited by F. W. Hodge and
published between 1907 and 1910. Basically this is an encyclopedia,
consisting of a series of summarizing essays, one for each known
Indian group, arranged in alphabetic sequence by name. These
essays were written by the best qualified individuals of the time,
and the dominant contributor for the Texas area was an historian,
H. E. Bolton, who had specialized in colonial Spanish Texas and
had examined thousands of unpublished documents bearing on Indian populations. His brief essays cover hundreds of Texas groups,
particularly those noted for relative obscurity.
The most notable deficiency of the Handbook is that it is
inadequately structured for effective information retrieval. It is
name structured and difficult to use unless you begin with a known
Indian group name. It is not place or time structured in any convenient way, nor is it structured for categories of cultural information. For instance, if you want to find the names of all the Indian groups known to have lived in southern Texas during the 17th
century, or if you want to determine which groups had rabbit drives,
cultivated maize, or used peyote ceremonially, you must read or
scan some 2,000 double-column pages. This inadequacy could have
been minimized by including a detailed name and topic index, but
what the Handbook needed most was a series of integrative essays.
However, this early Handbook does grapple effectively with the
problem of name variants, one of the fundamental issues in
ethnohistory, and it presents useful bibliographies.
Later publications can sometimes be used to supplement the
Handbook. Swanton’s The Indian Tribes of North America (1952) is
place structured, but its scope is so broad that any particular sub-

SYSTEMATIZED ETHNOHISTORY

7

area receives only schematic treatment. More generalized syntheses,
such as Newcomb’s The Indians of Texas (1961), provide orientation
and perspective, but are of little help on the smallest identifiable
ethnic units.
What is needed today, and especially by archeologists, is a more
ambitious and better organized handbook. For maximum usefulness
all known ethnic groups, large or small, well-known or obscure,
should receive individual essay treatment and be arranged in
alphabetic order. Each essay should summarize what is presently
known about the Indian group in question. For groups with a wealth
of recorded observational detail, the essays will have to be compressed. The poorly known groups, however, should get special attention because of previous neglect. Each essay should be accompanied by an alphabetized list of all name variants and a
bibliography that will guide the user to all the truly informative
sources. I would insist that all ethnic name variants should be entered in alphabetic order along with the essays and that the name
variants be linked with essays by cross reference. This is the only
realistic approach, since the handbook user will always start with a
name, which may or may not be readily recognizable as equivalent
to a name which has been standardized by frequent usage in anthropological literature. Since some name variants are less demonstrable than others, the handbook user is entitled to know in each
case how good the evidence for equivalence actually is. If earlier
errors were made in name linkages, he is also entitled to know who
made the errors and the probable reasons for error. Hence all name
variants should be accompanied by specific bibliographic citations.
A properly systematized ethnohistoric handbook should have a
section that would permit one to begin with a specific landscape
unit, such as a general geographic area or a physiographic, biotic, or
archeological province, or even some smaller subdivision of these,
and readily find alphabetized lists of Indian groups associated with
these units during various phases of the historic period. This should
be designed to separate the apparent aboriginal groups from groups
known to have immigrated from adjoining or more distant areas.
There should also be a special section on Spanish missions that will
identify Indian groups known to have been represented there, with
dates of entry and departure, if known. The list might even be subdivided on the basis of the areas of population origin. For example,
the surviving records of Mission San Antonio de Valero (the Alamo)
of San Antonio indicate that individuals and families from over 100
Indian groups were represented there at some time or other. No one

8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

has yet systematized this long list in any meaningful way.
Another section should be devoted to the earliest European explorers and the Indian groups they encountered and reported by
name. Much more critical work needs to be done on the delineation
of routes because the correct placement of many Indian populations
depends upon the maximum precision in route determination. Thus
far too many routes have been traced with too little first-hand
knowledge of the terrain traversed and without making full use of
ecological data. Hence some of the older route studies now seem
naive or even ludicrous. Recent studies that have led to greater
precision include Krieger’s (1961) review of the route of Cabeza de
Vaca across southern Texas and northern Mexico, Schroeder’s
(1962) revision of the routes followed by Coronado and O~ate
across the southern High Plains, and Williams’s (1962) remarkable
paper on the route of Dominguez de Mendoza from E1 Paso eastward into the Edwards Plateau region of central Texas. The last, the
study by Williams, has radically altered Bolton’s (1916: 313-343)
widely accepted earlier interpretation by on-the-spot observation of
landmarks and unique ecological niches mentioned in Mendoza’s
itinerary. As a consequence of this route correction, it is now
possible to identify a considerable number of Indian groups who
ranged over a large part of the Edwards Plateau before being
displaced by southward movement of the Apaches. At last the archeologist can begin to find the answer to an old question: just who
were the aborigines of the Edwards Plateau?
For the archeologist a good ethnohistoric handbook should pay
more attention to European observations of the natural environment, particularly those that indicate environmental changes
during the past 400 years. My modest foray into the document jungle
has forced me to realize that some documents are rich in observational detail and give important cues to both archeologists and
cultural anthropologists. I suspect that we can learn as much about
the environment and its changes as we can learn about the
distribution of native groups and their behavior. An opportunity is
being neglected when ethnohistorians continue to ignore basic environmental information that is available for collation, analysis and
ecological interpretation. The richest sources, of course, are the
records of earlier travelers, which are far more numerous than the
publications by historians have led us to believe. Some European
travelers were remarkably close observers of the landscape and
sometimes took the trouble to record much detail on vegetation patterns and animal distributions. Occasionally they actually described

SYSTEMATIZED ETHNOHISTORY

9

specific ecological niches, and few failed to note vegetation
dominants in areas traversed. Since weather limited early travel,
European travelers often recorded excessive rainfall, massive
floods, hurricanes, tornadoes and sometimes even commented on
erosion and deposition in stream valleys. I believe that by
segregating certain kinds of information and noting changes recorded through time we can better document gradual changes in soils
and vegetative cover, such as, for instance, the early spread of
thorny brush vegetation in southern Texas and northeastern
Mexico. It may also be possible to document shifts in migratory
animal distribution, such as the variable southern margin of the
bison range during winter. It may also be possible to document
changes that affected the irregularly distributed resources of special
interest to man -- surface water (springs, ponds, lakes), firewood,
grass, salt, flint and other siliceous stones, and minerals used for
pigment.
This is probably enough to provide some idea of the potential of
systematized ethnohistoric data. In conclusion, I would like to comment on areas that are notably weak in ethnohistoric data. Certain
parts of Texas are poorly known because Europeans rarely went
there prior to 1800. This is particularly true of numerous small areas
in which archeologists become interested. As an example we may
cite the area around the mouth of the Pecos River, where so much
archeological research has been done during the past decade. When
you search the documents, published or unpublished, you find practically nothing about early Europeans actually encountering natives
in this area, which had no resources that attracted Europeans and
did not lie on routes to places of special interest. This does not
mean, however, that we can never learn anything about the earliest
historic inhabitants of~the area. The approach here must be indirect,
that is, one must search the records of the nearest Spanish settlements for information recorded by travelers who skirted the
lower Pecos area or who talked with Indians who had been there or
otherwise had some knowledge of the area. In this case, one learns
that missionaries based in Coahuila traveled northward in the
1670’s, crossed the Rio Grande, and penetrated the southwestern
part of the Edwards Plateau just east of the Pecos (Bolton 1916: 283309; Figueroa Tortes 1963). These missionaries identified a considerable number of hunting and gathering groups whose seasonal
range must at times have included the lower Pecos area. Similarly,
records at Parral in Chihuahua reveal several lists of Indian groups
reported as ranging north of the Rio Grande or along the Rio Grande

10

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

from present Presidio, Texas, to the mouth of the Pecos. One
document of 1693 (Griffen 1969: 93-94) clearly points to the lower
Pecos area as the winter-season, bison-hunting range of a considerable number of named groups who at other times of the year
ranged both sides of the Rio Grande upstream from the mouth of the
Pecos River. As a result of this indirect approach, it is possible to
say something specific about the attractiveness of the lower Pecos at
certain times of the year. It also tells us something about distances
which hunting and gathering peoples traveled to get at especially
abundant food resources. Thus by careful analysis it is possible to
identify a substantial number of native groups who with high
probability exploited the lower Pecos area.

REFERENCES CITED
Bolton, Herbert Eugene
1916
Spanish Exploration in the Southwest, 1542-1706. New York.
Figueroa Torres, J. Jesus
Fr. Juan Larios: Defensor de Los Indios y Fundador de Coahuila,
1963
1673-1676. Mexico
Gatschet, Albert S.
1891
The Karankawa Indians, the Coastal People of Texas. Archaeological and Ethnological Papers o[ the Peabody Museum, Harvard University, Vol. 1, No. 2.
Griffen, William B.
Culture Change and Shifting Populations in Central Northern
1969
Mexico. Anthropological Papers of the University of Arizona, No. 13.
Griffith, William Joyce
1954
The Hasinai Indians of East Texas as Seen by Europeans, 16871772. Tulane University, Philological and Documentary Studies, Vol.
2, No. 3.
Hodge, Frederick Webb, editor
1907, 1910
Handbook of American Indians North of Mexico, Bureau of
American Ethnology, Bulletin 30.
Krieger, Alex D.
1961
The Travels of Alvar Nu~ez Cab eza de Vaca in Texas and
Mexico, 1534-1536. Homenajp a Pablo Martinez del Rio en el XXV
Aniversario de la Edicidn de Los Origines Americanos, pp. 459-474.
Mexico.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961.
The Indians of Texas: From Prehistoric to Modern Times. Austin.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr. and W. T. Field
1967
An Ethnohistoric Investigation of the Wichita Indians in the
Southern Plains. In: Robert E. Bell, Edward B. Jelks, and W. W.
Newcomb, Jr., A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and
Ethnohistory. Final Report to the National Science Foundation, Grant
GS-964.
Ruecking, Frederick H., Jr.
1953
The Economic System of the Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern
Texas and Northeastern Mexico. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol.
5, No~ 4, pp. 480-497.

SYSTEMATIZED ETHNOHISTORY

11

1954a

Bands and Band-clusters of the Coahuiltecan Indians. Student
Papers in Anthropology, Department of Anthropology, The University
of Texas, Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 1-24.
1954b Ceremonies of the Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern Texas and
Northeastern Mexico. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 6, No. 3,
pp. 330-339.
1955a The Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern Texas and Northeastern
Mexico. Master’s Thesis, The University of Texas.
1955b The Social Organization of the Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern
Texas and Northeastern Mexico. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol.
7, No. 4, pp. 357-388.
Schroeder, Albert H.
A Re-analysis of the Routes of Coronado and O~ate into the Plains
1962
in 1541 and 1601. Plains Anthropologist, Vol. 7, No. 15, pp. 2-23.
Sjoberg, Andree F.
1953a Lipan Apache Culture in Historical Perspective. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 76-98.
1953b The Culture of the Tonkawa, A Texas Indian Tribe. The Texas
Journal of Science, Vol. 5, No. 3, pp. 76-98.
Swanton, John R.
1942
Source Material on the History and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 132.
1952
The Indian Tribes of North America. Bureau of American
Ethnology, Bulletin 145.
Williams, J. W.
1962
New Conclusions on the Route of Mendoza, 1683-84. West Texas
Historical Association Year Book, Vol. 38, pp. 111-134.
The University of Texas at Austin

TOWARD A GENERALIZED MODEL
OF HUNTING AND GATHERING SOCIETIES
PARKER NUNLEY

ABSTRACT
Although much is ethnographically known about various hunting and
gathering societies, all these groups had been affected to some degree by
food producing groups at the time they were reported. Archeology remains
the only viable source of data to test theories of the culture and society of
hunting and gathering peoples before contact with food producing
societies. The present paper represents an attempt to formulate
generalizations, stated in the form of expectations, about hunting and
gathering groups. The generalizations are inductively derived from
ethnographic data and are limited to some of those areas amenable to
verification by archeological investigation,
The utility of studies such as the present one lies, in part, in the
possibility that they will contribute further to the limited data on
variations in hunting and gathering cultures through time and
through a wide variety of environments. Although our
generalizations are by necessity limited ones, we agree with DeVore
when he writes that he is unwilling " . . . to abandon the search for
generalizations that seem to apply to most hunter-gatherers most of
the time" (DeVore 1968:339). The lack of complete data should not
discourage the formulation of careful generalizations, but should encourage caution in the use of such generalizations. The
generalizations presented here depend heavily on the work of Birdsell (1958) and Steward (1936, 1938). Unlike Birdsell’s and Steward’s
work however, the present work purposely excludes none of those
societies which depend on a hunting and gathering subsistence
base. Birdsell excluded societies such as the acorn gatherers of
California, tribes in the Northwest coastal area and the Coastal
Eskimo on the basis that they had access to "richer sources of
energy" that would "influence density, population structure, and
social and political organization in such a way that the
generalizations derived from the more stringent economies no
longer apply" (Birdsell 1958:189). Steward, on the other hand, was
primarily interested in primitive bands and excluded from consideration those hunting and gathering groups with more complex
social organization.
It now seems that exclusion of such groups artificially limits the
extent of variation possible among groups with a hunting and
gathering subsistence base (Freeman 1968). Dependence on the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

14

"classic cases" such as Netsilik Eskimos, the Arunta, and the !Kung
Bushmen may be misleading as Lee and DeVore point out:
... within a given region the ’classic cases’ may, in fact, be
precisely the opposite: namely, the most isolated peoples who
managed to avoid contact until the arrival of the ethnographers.
In order to understand hunters better it may be more profitable
to consider the few hunters in rich environments, since it is
likely that these peoples will be more representative of the
ecological conditions under which man evolved than are the
dramatic and unusual cases that illustrate extreme environmental pressure (Lee and DeVore 1968:5).
Since it is beyond the scope of this paper to derive a detailed
ethnology of societies with a hunting and gathering subsistence
base, the following discussion is limited to generalizations directly
useful to archeological verification. Topics covered include:
Territoriality, Settlement Pattern, Subsistence, and Social
Organization.

TERRITO RIALITY
It is by now apparent that all known hunting and gathering
groups have some sort of territorial concept. These concepts range
from a simple sense of a vague "life space" in which no territorial
rights are asserted, as among the Eastern Hadza (Woodburn 1968)
and the Western Shoshoni (Steward 1938) to specific land and water
use rights as among the Indians of the Northwest coast (Suttles
1968) and the Ainu (Watanabe 1968).
Stanner (1965) described territoriality among certain groups in
Australia. Although he was specifically referring to territory among
Australian Aborigines, he introduced three terms into the anthropo!ogical literature that have much wider usage that he gave
them:
The pattern of aboriginal territoriality should be looked at
from an ecological point of view. The evidence allows us to say
that each territorial group was associated with both an estate and
a range. The distinction is crucial. The estate was the traditionally
recognized locus

("country", "home", "ground", "dreaming

place") of some kind of patrilineal descent-group forming the
core or nucleus of the territorial group. It seems to have been a
’more or less continuous stretch. The range was the tract or orbit
over which the group, including its nucleus and adherents, or-

HUNTING/GATHERING SOCIETIES

15

dinarily hunted and foraged to maintain life. The range normally
included the estate . . . Estate and range together may be said to
have constituted a domain, which was an ecological lifespace . . . In good habitats range and estate might be virtually coextensive . . . At another extreme.., an estate for practical purposes of life might amount to only places on a track (Stanner
1965:2).

If we discount the reference to a "patrilineal descent group" as
the foundation of the territorial group, Stanner’s terms are applicable.to all hunting and gathering groups.
In all cases there exists some form of "boundary" dividing a
group’s domain from surrounding territories. Sometimes, as in the
case of the Eastern Hadza and Western Shoshoni, the boundaries
are similar to a "cline" in genetics in that interacting groups blend
into one another rather smoothly. As Woodburn describes the concept among the Eastern Hadza: " . . . all four regions resemble each
other in having no clear-cut boundary. To draw boundaries would
be quite artificial; the regions grade into each other" (Woodburn
1966:104). Steward (1936) reports a similar lack of clear-cut boundaries among the Western Shoshoni.
Other groups have very specific boundaries to their territory,
however. Among the Bushmen, for example,
... each group of them has a very specific territory which that
group alone may use, and they respect their boundaries rigidly.
Each group also knows its own territory very well; although it
may be several hundred square miles in area (Thomas 1958: 10).

Woodburn makes another important point about territoriality
among the Hadza: "Each of these areas contains sufficient sources
of food and water to maintain its inhabitants throughout the year
and many people, especially the elderly, restrict their nomadic
movements for years at a stretch largely to a single one of these four
areas" (Woodburn 1968:104).
If we consider this in more general aspects, Woodburn’s
statement is applicable to all extractive groups. That is, all domains
must supply the minimum needs of food and water in order that the
population may survive. Therefore, the more scarce these
necessities are in a given area, the larger must be the domain of a
given human population. Contrariwise, the more abundant these
resources, the smaller the domain necessary for a given population.
In a study designed to test this apparent relationship, Birdsell

16

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

(1953) assumed that mean annual rainfall is a reasonable correlate
with the amount of food and water available to extractive cultures in
Australia. Further assuming a tribal constant of five hundred individuals, he analyzed the relationship between rainfall and tribal
area. After reducing his initial sample of 409 tribes to a basic series
of 123 tribes on the "... grounds that either ecological factors
distorted the basic relationship between size of tribal area and
population density, or cultural variables produced undue deviations
in the size of the tribal population as compared to the assumed constant of 500 persons per tribe... " (Birdsell 1953:181), he was able
to conclude that "... there exists a very high degree of association
between the size of the tribal area in the basic series and the mean
annual rainfall occurring within its territory" (Birdsell 1953:183). If
Birdsell’s assumption that rainfall is a reliable indicator of
ecological viability is valid, his conclusions support the
generalization that the size of the domain of a group is inversely
related to the amount of available food and water. Birdsell
elsewhere points out that:
¯.. the qualitative descriptions in the literature strongly suggest
that other populations at comparable levels of culture show densities also primarily determined by environmental
variables . . . For each local group of populations the fuller array
of environmental factors must be analyzed ... the ability of each
human group to utilize these sources of energy will vary with
their extractive efficiency as determined by their technology
(Birdsell 1953:192).

SETTLEMENT PATTERN
We are here concerned with the distribution of hunting and
gathering groups Within their domain. Murdock’s classification of
settlement patterns is used to facilitate reference to his Ethnographic
Atlas (Murdock 1967) and Coult and Habenstein’s Cross-Tabulations
(1965).
Generally speaking, it has been widely held that the nomadic
band is the typical settlement pattern associated with hunting and
gathering groups. There is now good reason to question this belief.
Part of the new skepticism arises from the realization that our
ethnographic evidence is likely to be strongly biased in terms of
marginal hunters and gatherers. This bias must be taken into account when generalizing about hunting and gathering groups.
Another area of skepticism centers about the question of whether

17

HUNTING/GATHERING SOCIETIES

one should separate hunting and gathering groups from fishing
groups, and/or groups with storage facilities as Birdsell (1958) has
done. This division of extractive groups seems to be particularly
questionable in view of the high degree of association between huriting and gathering and fishing in groups with an extractive subsistence base. In the present paper all groups without food production are considered to be hunting and gathering groups.
With this broader definition of hunting and gathering groups,
there is a fairly wide range of settlement patterns that occur. Coult
and Habenstein (1965:318) show, for example, that out of 101
societies with an extractive subsistence base, thirty-three have fully
migratory bands; forty-four are semi-nomadic/semi-sedentary; one
is composed of a cluster of hamlets; and twenty-three are compact
villages. They show no hunting and gathering groups with either
compound settlements or neighborhoods of homesteads.
In terms of specific groups, settlement pattern among hunters and
gatherers ranges from the permanent year-round residence of the
Ainu (Watanabe 1968) and the semi-sedentary long houses of the
Nootka (Drucker 1951) through the semi-nomadic bands of the
!Kung and Gikwe (Thomas 1959), the Walbiri (Meggitt 1962) and the
Eastern Hadza (Woodburn 1968).
Although the range of settlement patterns for known extractive
societies is broad, the actual association between hunting and
gathering and sedentary settlement patterns is a strong positive"
association between a hunting and gathering subsistence base and
semi-nomadic settlement patterns. These associations are presented
by Coult and Habenstein (1965:318) and are summarized in Table 1.
TABLE 1
ASSOCIATION BETWEEN SETTLEMENT PATTERN
AND MODE OF SUBSISTENCE

Mode of Subsistence
Settlement Pattern

Bands
Semi-Nomadic

Extractive

Pastoralism

+ +

+ +

+

+

Plant Domestication

PermanentSemi-Permanent

--

+

++

Note: Strength of association: strong positive, + +; positive, +; not significant, O;
negative, -; strong negative, -. (After Coult and Habenstein 1965:318

18

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

If distinction is made between modes of subsistence within a
general extractive subsistence economy, an interesting pattern
emerges. As there is greater reliance on what may be termed a
"water economy" -- fishing, shellfishing, and taking large water
animals -- there is a tendency toward sedentary settlement patterns. Conversely, as the importance of a "water economy"
decreases, there is a marked tendency toward nomadic settlement
pattern. This tendency is suggested by comparison of Tables 2 and
3.
TABLE 2
ASSOCIATION BETWEEN SETTLEMENT PATTERN AND FISHING

Mode of Subsistence: Fishing
Settlement Pattern

Bands
Semi-Nomadic
PermanentSemi-Permanent

Dominant

Co-dominant

o

0

+

0

Unimportant or Absent

Note: Strength of association: strong positive, + +; positive, +; not significant, 0;
negative, -; strong negative, --. (After Coult and Habenstein 1965:207)

TABLE 3
ASSOCIATION BETWEEN SETTLEMENT PATTERN AND
HUNTING AND GATHERING

Mode of Subsistence: Hunting and Gathering
Settlement Pattern

Dominant

Co-dominant

Unimportant or Absent
--

Bands

+ +

0

Semi-Nomadic

+ +

+ +

Semi-Permanent

--

-+ +

Note: Strength of association: strong positive, + +; positive, +’, not significant, 0;
negative, -; strong negative, --. (After Coult and Habenstein 1965:254)

If we consider hunting and fishing as independent variables in
extractive societies, the positive association between fishing
societies and increasingly sedentary settlement patterns is quite
clear. Table 4 illustrates the direction and strength of this

19

HUNTING/GATHERING SOCIETIES

association. Data for this table were derived from Murdock (1967)
and include all those exclusively extractive cultures from America
north of Mexico.
TABLE 4
FREQUENCY OF VARIOUS SETTLEMENT PATTERNS WITH
REGARD TO SUBSISTENCE BASE
Settlement Pattern

Subsistence Mode

Hunting Dominant
n - 66

Semi-

Transhumanic

Permanent

Bands

Nomadic

Semi-Sedentary

Village

f

13

48

4

1

%

20

73

6

2

Hunting and
Fishing Codominant
n - 16
Fishing Dominant
n = 68

f

0

9

5

2

%

0

56

31

13

f

2

30

20

16

%

3

44

30

24

In Table 4 dominant means that the subsistence mode in question
was scored higher than its alternative. Thus, if hunting were rated 4
and fishing 3 for a’given society, that society would be tallied among
those with a dominantly hunting subsistence base. It should be
noted that the two societies with a dominant fishing base and band
settlement pattern, the Satudene and the Karankawa, are both
classed as only 10 percent more dependent on fishing than hunting
and are therefore not as far from the predicted pattern as their extreme position would seem to indicate.
Similarly, the single hunting-based society occupying a permanent village, the Nomlaki, is a borderline case. This group is
shown to be dominantly a food collecting society (56 to 35 percent)
and fishing (6 to 15 percent). Still, this group must be included to
satisfy the criteria of classification outlined above.
Chi-square was used to test the hypothesis that there is no
significant difference between the observed and the chance expected frequency settlement of pattern among societies with
dominant hunting subsistence as compared with societies with
dominant fishing subsistence. The result was a x2 value of 39.00
with 3 d.f. The null hypothesis that there is no significant difference
between the observed distribution and that expected by chance was
therefore rejected at better than the .001 level of confidence.
Although this distribution did not likely occur by chance, other

20

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

factors such as biased sampling, faulty data, improper weighting of
the classificatory criteria, etc., may account for some of the observed
variation. The point is, although the relationship between increasing
dependence on fishing and increasingly sedentary settlement patterns has not been proved, it remains a viable generalization.

SUBSISTENCE
There is a long-held myth about hunting and gathering societies
that is only recently being corrected (cf. Binford 1968). It says, in effect, that hunting and gathering societies are conservative because
the individuals in such societites have no leisure time to develop
"higher" culture. This lack of leisure is thought to be especially
restrictive in "marginal" areas since
¯ . . this type of habitat limits and narrows the cultural patterns
that are possible, once one method of survival has been worked
out, the possibility that another and strikingly different mode of
existence will be developed is remote. The people in such a
culture are constantly busy supplying minimum needs; they cannot hazard the experiment of trying to find a new way of life.
And in difficult habitats, such as the semideserts of south Texas,
external influences which might stimulate culture change are apt
to be minimal (Newcomb 1961:32).
In this passage the author makes two assertions which no longer
seem to be justified. As regards the first, concerning cultural conservatism in marginal areas, it has been shown that one of the most
striking cultural innovations yet, the domestication of plants and
animals, transpired repeatedly and independently in just such areas
as Newcomb’s Western Gulf culture area (cf. Ucko and Dimbleby
1969). Furthermore, among the earliest and most spectacular of the
"hydraulic" civilizations were some located on exotic streams
similar to the Rio Grande. Rather than seeking an environmental
reason for the apparent cultural conservatism in southwestern
Texas, one should perhaps look for explanation within the cultural
compulsives of the societies themselves or within the dynamics of
population pressures as suggested by Binford (1968).
As regards the assertion that the rigors of life in a hunting and
gathering society are such that the constituents "cannot hazard the
experiment of trying a new way of life," quite the opposite is now
widely documented from a number of widely different huntergatherer groups (Lee and DeVore 1968; Meggit 1962; Thomas 1959).

HUNTING/GATHERING SOCIETIES

21

The consensus now seems to be that hunting and gathering groups
tend, as a rule, to be among the most leisured human societies the
world has known.
By and large, the productivity of labor in hunting-gathering
societies must be very low because of such limited technology.
For this reason one might suppose that hunting and gathering activities must be nearly unremitting. It has frequently been
assumed, in fact, that the hunting and gathering bands are
restricted to a tow level of cultural development simply because
the people lack the leisure to refine or "build" their culture.
But self-evident though this judgment may seem, it is nevertheless false. For reasons having to do with the very simplicity of
the technology and the lack of control over the environment,
many hunting-gathering peoples

are quite literally the most

leisured peoples in the world (Service 1962:12-13).

An alternative to Newcomb’s hypothesis suggested by current
data on hunting and gathering societies could be similar to Caldwell’s (1958) "maximum forest efficiency." That is, rather than the
development of "another and strikingly different mode of
existence" being a remote possibility, just the opposite is true. One
is then faced with the problem of explaining cultural conservatism
in some other terms. It could be that change was impeded in such
areas simply because the changes available were not as functionally
adaptive as those cultural elements they would displace.
The point here is that societies with an extractive subsistence
base ordinarily maintain a "surplus" of food within their domain.
Surplus as used here refers to the fact that hunters and gatherers
typically maintain themselves considerably below the maximum
short term carrying capacity of their domain. Such maximum
carrying capacity is, of course, a function of extractive technology
and available resources. The general nature of this relationship was
pointed out by Steward:
The type of sociopolitical groups in the Basin-Plateau area was
conditioned to a definable extent by human ecology. Rainfall,
soils, topography, and climate determined the nature, quantity,
and distribution of plant and animal species which were
required for food. The hunting and gathering devices and transportation facilities known in the area allowed only a certain
quantity of these to be procured and consequently limited the
general population density. The subsistence habits required in
each region largely determined the size, nature, and permanency

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

22

of population aggregates. These, in turn, predetermined many,
though not all, features of social structures and political control
(Steward 1938:256-257).

Murdock (1967:46) describes the subsistence base of a given
society in terms of five major types of subsistence activity: gathering
of wild plants and small land fauna; hunting, including trapping
and fowling; fishing, including shellfishing and the pursuit of large
aquatic animals; animal husbandry; and agriculture. Of these five,
only the first three are of interest here.
An inspection of the description of 105 extractive societies from
America north of Mexico (Murdock 1967:102-111) reveals the
relative frequencies of occurrence of gathering, hunting, and fishing
among them. After deleting twelve Plains Indian societies which
were all dominated by a horse and buffalo economy and therefore
felt to be special cases, the subsistence base of the remaining 138
societies is shown in Table 5.
TABLE 5
ASSOCIATION OF SUBSISTENCE TYPES
Dominant Subsistence Types
Important

Subsistence Types

Gathering

Hunting

Fishing

Total

Gathering

--

9

Hunting

28

--

19
35

3

13

--

28
63
16

....

8

8

Fishing
Hunting

and

Gathering
Hunting

and
12

Fishing
Gathering

Fishing
Totals

....

12

and
--

4

--

4

43

26

62

131

Notes: 4 societies have Hunting and Fishing co-dominant; 2’ societies have Gathering
and Fishing co-dominant; 1 society has Hunting and Gathering co-dominant;

123 societies have all.three types; 8 societies have Hunting and Gathering only;
7 societies have Hunting and Fishing only; 0 societies have Fishing and
Gathering only.
In terms of Murdock’s typology, several things clearly stand out.
One of the most interesting of these is the fact that the term "hunting and gathering" is misleading when applied to general extractive
societies. Hunting and gathering societies, that is, societies that
depend either exclusively or mostly on hunting and gathering ac-

HUNTING/GATHERING SOCIETIES

23

tivities comprise only 33 percent of the total sample (46 of 138),
while societies that depend chiefly on hunting and fishing comprise
44 percent (61 of 138) of the sample. Even if the Plains Indians were
not excluded, the percentage of hunters and fishers would still be
greater than the percentage of hunters and gatherers. A more accurate term to describe non-food producing societies would simply
be the word "extractive". This assertion is supported by the observation that almost all of the societies in the sample (123 of 138)
availed themselves of all three subsistence modes. Of the remaining
fifteen, eight societies depended on hunting and fishing only, while
none depended on gathering and fishing only. Of these extreme
cases, most occur in a severe environment such as the Arctic in
which one of the three modes of subsistence is ordinarily
unavailable. In general it may be said that if the ecology of a domain
permits, all three modes -- gathering, hunting and fishing -- will be
used by an extractive society¯
Fishing appears as the dominant subsistence activity in about
sixty-two societies of the sample, gathering is dominant in fortythree societies, and hunting in only twenty-six. If we consider the
total number of societies in which an activity is of considerable importance (dominant, co-dominant, and important), hunting emerges
as the most frequent activity, fishing second most frequent, with
gathering third. These figures suggest that, although gathering is
present in most extractive societies, it is the least preferred of the
three modes of subsistence. This idea is borne out by field observations:
Very little of the vegetable food is eaten with much enthusiasm¯
But the advantage of vegetable food over meat (or honey), and
the basic reason why it constitutes the bulk of the diet of the
Hadza, is that it can be obtained quickly and, above all, predictably (Woodburn 1968:52-53).
¯ . . gathering of vegetable foods is fully as important a factor in
diet as is hunting. Although hunting is a more prestigious activity, gathering strategies play a large part in determining the
band’s daily and seasonal movement. Even in the direction of
their all-male spear hunt, the Ik take the distribution of vegetable
foods into consideration and women are called on for advice
(Turnbull 1968:135).

In short, it would seem that gathering serves as the economic
backbone for extractive societies and is increasingly relied upon
where other means fail. Conversely, gathering is avoided when

24

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

possible. The position gathering activities hold in extractive
societies is no doubt one of the variables that operates to keep such
a society near the long-term maximum carrying capacity of its
domain while operating well below the maximum short term
capacity. Gathering seems to be considered a way to supply supplementary foods even though, in fact, it may be the principle
economic base of an extractive society.
On the other hand, hunting and fishing tend to be seen as the
most important food producing activities even though they, in fact,
account for only a fraction of the food required by a society. Furthermore, fishing will tend to displace hunting in importance when
the environment allows equal access to both subsistence modes.

SOCIAL ORGANIZATION
Heeding Harris’s (1968) warning to archeologists, this section is
not concerned with those aspects of social organization that are
commonly lumped under the rubric of kinship. Rather, the interest
here is focused on the units into which hunting and gathering
groups are segmented, the kind and intensity of interaction that
takes place between and in those units, and the manner in which
they are integrated with one another.
Three different orders or social units are found in hunting and
gathering societies. Two of these, the nuclear family and the local
community, are so clearly found in extractive societies that Murdock has been led to comment:
Looking back on the 27 hunting societies covered in my conference paper, I come to the conclusion (leaving aside the
Australian ones for the moment) that there is a surprisingly
narrow range of variation in hunting and gathering cultures with
regard to social organization. The two universal human social
groupings -- nuclear family and local community -- stand out
clearly in all the hunter-gatherer societies (Murdock 1968:335).

In addition to these two universal social units, it now appears that
a third basic unit is common to extractive societies. This unit, which
has been noted in studies of hunting and gathering groups
throughout the world (Birdsell 1958:195; 1968:232), is today properly
termed the dialectal tribe instead of the previously used dialectic
tribe.
Since the nuclear family is conceded to be the basic social unit
among hunters and gatherers, just as it is among all other known

HUNTING/GATHERING SOCIETIES

25

societies, it will not be further discussed here. Instead, attention is
focused upon the local group and the dialectal tribe.
The local community is a social unit defined by Murdock
(1949:79) as composed of individuals who interact with one another
on a day-to-day basis. The community among hunters and gatherers
is typically in the form of a band or, in Cooper’s (1946) term, a
"local group". It is territorially based and usually, but not always,
composed primarily of affinally and consanguineously related persons.
In terms of interaction patterns, the local community is the chief
social unit of cooperative interaction among the families in a
society. It is this unit which is the most flexible, which expands in
size when ecological conditions demand or permit, and shrinks
again with further change in the ecology of the area.
This was the worst season of the year for the people. Before
this, during the winter, the large extended band.., was
separated into little family groups that were scattered through the
veld, living at little waterholes that did not keep their water all
year long. During the dry season the water in these waterholes
vanished, causing the small family bands to gather at the last
sure waterhole of the area (Thomas 1959:148).
The local community is held together primarily by a combination
of kinship, cooperation, compatibility and friendship. There is
typically no political force or informal rule that maintains such a
community. Even so, forms of integration range from the political
hierarchy of the chiefdoms of the Northwest coastal groups
(Drucker 1965) to the simple primary associations of the Shoshoni
(Steward 1938). The degree of political authority exercised within
the local community seems to be minimal while kinship remains
the major integrative force.
As described by Birdsell (1958:195), the dialectal tribe is the unit
that most nearly fits the minimal definition of society. It is selfsufficient in all aspects and forms a territorially identified and
defined cultural pattern of interaction as well as a Mendelian
population. In short, the dialectal tribe can be defined as a collection
of interacting groups of nuclear families and/or communities,
sharing a linguistic dialect and forming a territory-specific cultural
and genetic unit. The characteristics of specific dialectal tribes have
been described by Cooper (1946), Woodburn (1968), Meggitt (1962)
and Thomas (1959).
Cooper, for example, notes that the Yahgan divided themselves

26

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

into five regional dialect groups and that "Marriages with mates
from far distant localities, especially outside one’s own of the five
dialectic (sic) groups, were disliked and infrequent" (Cooper
1946:92). At the same time, however, marriage with blodd relatives
was taboo. Thus, an individual ordinarily sought a mate outside his
local group, since most individuals in such a community were likely
to be blood relatives, yet married within the dialectal tribe.
The dialectal tribe is not a tribe in the sense used by Service
(1962). Rather, the concept of tribe as used here refers to a more informal concept of relationships than Service had in mind. The
dialectal tribe is a collection of bands, of communities, that are integrated by sharing a common language dialect, a common domain,
and a common Weltanschauung or collective consciousness. Such a
dialectal tribe may incorporate well delineated forms of social differentiation, as among the Indians of the Northwest Coast, it may
approach an egalitarian society as among the Eastern Hadza, the
Bushmen, or the Yahgan, or it may be a combination of these with a
higher number of achieved status positions as among the Plains Indians.
The significant characteristic concerning the dialectal tribe is that
it appears in some form in all these kinds of societies with a hunting
and gathering subsistence base. Societies with other types of subsistence may or may not have such a social unit. Among hunting
and gathering groups, the dialectal tribe is thus the maximum social
unit in terms of interaction patterns.
The size of the dialectal tribe seems to vary about a central tendency of approximately five hundred individuals (Birdsell 1953;
1958; 1968). This figure represents an empirically observed value
derived from data on native Australians, Shoshoni, and Andamanese (Birdselt 1968) as well as the Eastern Hadza (Woodburn
1968), !Kung Bushmen (Thomas 1959), and Yahgan (Cooper 1946).
The dialectal tribe may comprise the entire society as among the
Eastern Hadza (Woodburn 1968), or it may be only a subdivision of
a larger political unit. As the number of local groups within a dialectal tribe increases, there is a marked increase in cultural
homogeneity between the units (Birdsell 1958).
Interaction between dialectal groups is described as relatively infrequent, although normally tranquil:
Social relations within and between the dialectic and local
groups appear to have been normally irenic, but violence and
bloodshed were not infrequent... The Yahgan resented and

HUNTING/GATHERING SOCIETIES

27

avenged exploitive trespass upon their tribal territory... So,
too, did members of any one of the five dialectic groups, of any
one of the numerous local groups, by nonmembers (Cooper
1946:95).
Much of the interaction as does take place between dialectal
tribes can be seen as a matter of cooperative sharing in emergencies:
Members of one dialectic or local group could, however,
exploit the territory of other groups to secure food in grave shortage, to feast on a stranded whale, and to gather firestones and
suitable canoe bark which were found only in certain parts of the
Yahgan territory (Cooper 1946:95).

The following quotation from Meggitt summarizes these three
social units very well:
From the point of view of the individual, the group at its
greatest was the community that comprised all his country and
included most of his closer relatives. At its least, the group was
his family of procreation or orientation. Between these extremes,
the unit might perhaps be termed a horde, but it was one whose
personnel were recruited on a number of different bases that
varied from one occasion to the next. These might reflect consanguineal links, affinal ties, bonds of ritual friendship or
obligation, the pull of temperamental compatibility -- or combinations of all of them (Meggitt 1962:51).

SUMMARY
It is recognized that this brief overview of ethnographic data cannot provide the basis for a definitive theory of the behavior of hunting-gathering groups. Instead, the purpose here is to provide a
theoretical, abstract model in terms of which archeological and
ethnographic data may be ordered and explained. The model is to
be considered a flexible one, subject to change as the data and
problems warrant. It is in this sense merely another conceptual tool
and can only be judged by its usefulness.
Such a model, by its very nature, is stark and, perhaps, vague in
its generality. It lacks the explicit detail that comes with the extraction of particular relationships from their context and in this
sense is typological in nature. It is a mistake, too often made, to apply such a general model to particular situations without due

28

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

allowance for the intricate contextual nuances that must be taken
into account in the particular.
Another caution in using such a model is that it not be allowed to
become the reality it was originally designed to represent. It must be
remembered that a model is merely a rather simple abstraction
which, in its better forms, more or less accurately represents a
theoretical, complex reality. Thus, the following model, presented in
the form of a series of statements, is to be considered to be a partial,
problem-oriented list of expectations concerning extractive
societies.
1. Extractive societies occupy a definite territory which is known
to group members and which is defended in varying degrees against
transgression by out-groups. The territory of such a group is often
bounded by geographically distinct features such as broad plains,
different watersheds, soil changes, etc.
2. This territory may be considered in terms of:
(a) An estate-- the "home ground" of a group or an individual;
(b) A range-- the tract over which a group ordinarily conducts
its activity;
A
domain -- the area containing both the estate and the
(c)
range; the ecological life-space of a group.
3. The domain must supply the minimum needs of food and
water to maintain the group on both a long-term and short-term
basis. Therefore, if population size and extractive technology are
held constant, there is an inverse relationship between availability
of food and water and size of domain. Correspondingly, areas with
little available food and water have relatively low population densities, while areas with an abundance of food and water tend to be
relatively densely populated.
4. Extractive societies tend to establish an equilibrium between
population density and available resources. The point of this
equilibrium normally lies near the maximum long-range carrying
capacity of a given domain, but is well below the typical short-term
carrying capacity. This results in considerable amount of leisure
time for hunting and gathering populations.
5. Extractive societies maintain themselves at an equilibrium with
their environment in part by exploiting the resources of their
domain in a preferential manner. Although hunting, fishing, and
gathering activities are all employed when possible, hunting and
fishing are preferred over gathering. Gathering activities normally
provide the bulk of foodstuffs in hunting and gathering societies
even though such activities are not preferred.

HUNTING/GATHERING SOCIETIES

29

6. The settlement pattern of extractive societies range from small,
fully nomadic bands to relatively large, sedentary villages. There is
a direct relationship between sedentary settlement patterns and
water economy, so that as an extractive society relies to a greater extent on a water economy, it grows increasingly sedentary. On the
other hand, extractive societies with little or no reliance on fishing
are typically highly nomadic.
7. The nuclear family, the local community, and the dialectal tribe
are social units that are typically found in extractive societies.
8. The nuclear family is the basic unit of social organization in extractive societies, just as it is in societies with other forms of subsistence. It is similarly the primary source of enculturation, identification and reference. Patterns of interaction are intense and
prolonged. The nuclear family is the only one of these three forms
of social organization that is wholly exogamous.
9. The local community is the major social unit in terms of interaction patterns among families in a society. It ranges in form
from ill-defined, temporary local bands to well defined long-lived,
relatively permanent groups. It is territorially based, and its cultural
patterns can be expected to differ significantly from similar
territorially based groups.
The local community is composed of one or more families and is
usually, though not always, exogamous. Interaction within the community is an intense, daily affair. Hence, the local community is
second only to the family as an instrument of enculturation and
provides the first opportunity to the individual for peer group and
other extra-familial sanctions. The culture of the local group is
typically quite distinctive, particularly in the more sedentary
societies in which flux of movement in and out of the local community is at a minimum.
10. The dialectal tribe is a totally self-sustaining social unit. It is
territorially based and is composed of a number of local communities. Interaction is largely within the tribe. This, plus the fact
that the tribe is endogamous, leads to the development and maintenance of a distinctive cultural pattern.
11. The dialectal tribe is ordinarily a relatively long-lived
sociocultural unit. Its duration should far exceed the time span of
any of its constituent members or communities.
12. There is a marked increase in cultural homogeneity within a
tribe as the number of local groups within the tribe increases. In
relatively favorable regimes, therefore, one could expect dialectal
tribes to be more culturally homogeneous than in relatively un-

30

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

favorable regimes.
13. Interaction of groups centrally located in the tribal domain is
more likely to be confined to intertribal contacts than interaction of
groups located near tribal boundaries. Therefore, centralized groups
are more likely to be culturally conservative in relation to outlying
groups. By the same token, and following the old culture area concept, centralized groups are more likely than outlying groups to interact with all other groups in the tribe.
14. Dialectal tribes vary greatly in size of population, but there is a
marked central tendency toward approximately five hundred as the
most frequently occurring size.

REFE~NCES CITED

Binford, L. R.
1968 Post-Pleistocene Adaptations. In: New Perspectives in Archeology. S.
R. Binford and L. R. Binford (eds.). Aldine Publishing Company.
Chicago.
Birdsell, J. B.
1953 Some Environmental and Cultural Factors Influencing the Structuring of Australian Aboriginal Populations. American Naturalist 87:
pp. 171-207.
1958 On Population Structure in Generalized Hunting and Collecting
Populations. Evolution 12: pp. 189-205.
1968 Some Predictions for the Pleistocene Based on Equilibrium Systems
Among Recent Hunter-Gatherers. In: Man the Hunter, R. B. Lee and
I. Devore (eds.). Aldine Publishing Company. Chicago.
Caldwell, J.
1958 Trend and Tradition in the Prehistory of the Eastern United States.
Memoirs of the American Anthropological Association, No. 88.
Cooper, J. M.
1946 The Yahgan. Handbook of South American Indians. Bureau of
American Ethnology, Bulletin No. 143.
Coult, A. D., and R. W. Habenstein
1965 Cross Tabulations of Murdoch’s World Ethnographic Sample. University of Missouri Press. Columbia.
Devore, I.
1968 Discussions, Part VII. In: Man the Hunter. Aldine Publishing Company. Chicago.
Drucker, P.
1951 The Northern and Central Nootkan Tribes. Bureau of American
Ethnology, Bulletin No. 144.
1965 Cultures of the North Pacific Coast. San Francisco.
Freeman, L. G.
1968 A Theoretical Framework for Interpreting Archeological Materials.
In: Man the Hunter, R. B. Lee and I. Devore (eds.). Aldine Publishing
Company. Chicago.

HUNTING/GATHERING SOCIETIES

31

Harris, M.
1968 Comments. In: New Perspectives in Archeology. Aldine Publishing
Company. Chicago.
Lee, R. B. and I. Devore (eds.)
1968 Man the Hunter. Aldine Publishing Company. Chicago.
Meggitt, M. J.
1962 Desert People: A Study of the Walbiri Aborigines of Central Australia.
Sydney. Angus & Robertson.
Murdock, G. P.
1949 Social Structure. The MacMillan Company. New York.
1967 Ethnographic Atlas. Pittsburgh.
1968 Are the Hunter-Gatherers a Cultural Type? In: Man the Hunter, R. B.
Lee and I. Devore (eds.). Aldine Publishing Company. Chicago.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961 The Indians of Texas: From Prehistoric to Modern Times. University of
Texas Press. Austin.
Radcliffe-Brown, A. R.
1933 The Andaman Islanders (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press.
Cambridge.
Service, E. R.
1962 Primitive Social Organization. Random House. New York.
1966 The Hunters. Prentice-Hall. Englewood Cliffs.
Stanner, W. E. H.
1965 Aboriginal Territorial Organization: Estate, Range, Domain, and
Regime. Oceania 36: pp. 1-26.
Steward, J. H.
1936 The Economic and Social Basis of Primitive Bands. In: Essays in Anthropology Presented to A. L. Kroeber. Berkeley.
1938 Basin-Plateau Aboriginal Sociopolitical Groups. Bureau of American
Ethnology, Bulletin 120.
Suttles, W.
1968 Coping with Abundance: Subsistence on the Northwest Coast. In:
Man the Hunter, R. B. Lee and I. Devore (eds.). Aldine Publishing
Company. Chicago.
Thomas, E. M.
1959 The Harmless People. Alfred A. Knopf. New York.
Turnbull, C. M.
1968 The Importance of Flux in Two Hunting Societies. In: Man the
Hunter, R. B. Lee and I. Devore (eds.). Aldine Publishing Company.
Chicago.
Ucko, P. J. and G. W. Dimbleby (eds.)
1969 The Domestication and Exploitation of Plants and Animals. Aldine
Publishing Company. Chicago.
Watanabe, H.
1968 Subsistence and Ecology of Northern Food Gatherers with Special
Reference to the Ainu. In: Man the Hunter, R. B. Lee and I. Devore
(eds.). Aldine Publishing Company. Chicago.
Woodburn, J.
1968 An Introduction to Hadza Ecology. In: Man the Hunter, R. B. Lee and
I. Devore (eds.). Aldine Publishing Company. Chicago.

Richland College
Dallas, Texas

PREHISTORIC OCCUPATION AT THE
HOLDSWORTH AND STEWART SITES
ON THE RIO GRANDE PLAIN OF TEXAS
THOMAS ROY HESTER AND T. C. HILL, JR.
WITH APPENDICES BY JOHN HOLDSWORTH AND DELBERT GILBOW

ABSTRACT
Archeological investigations were carried out in early 1971 at two
prehistoric occupational sites in Zavala County on the Rio Grande Plain of
Texas. The test excavations at these sites were designed to help solve
specific problems in the local prehistory. Cultural debris attributable to
Archaic and Late Prehistoric occupations were recovered. At Holdsworth,
an abundance of Late Prehistoric materials (including bone-tempered
ceramics) overlay ill-defined Archaic components. At the Stewarl Site,
only Archaic materials were found. Analysis of the faunal remains from
Late Prehistoric deposits at Holdsworth indicates an emphasis on rodents
in the subsistence system.

INTRODUCTION
In the past few years, there has been increased activity by both
professional and amateur archeologists on the Rio Grande Plain of
southern Texas (a summary of recent investigations has been
published by Hester and Hill 1971a). One area which has received
particular emphasis has been the counties of Dimmit and Zavala
(Nunley and Hester 1966; HilI and Hester 1971). In the summer of
1970, Hester initiated a long-range study of prehistoric settlement
and subsistence systems in the area. The first phase of this research,
which included a site-testing program, was carried out at
Chaparrosa Ranch, northwestern Zavala County. A preliminary
report on these investigations has been prepared (Hester 1970), but
a final summary must await completion of several special studies
and the analysis of the large body of data obtained during the work.
In early 1971, Hill carried out the testing and surface sampling of
sites in both the eastern and western parts of Zavala County. Two
major sites, Holdsworth and Stewart, were investigated. Although
Hill’s work contributed to the settlement-subsistence research mentioned above, the major objective of test excavations at these two
sites was an attempt to provide new data apposite to the solving of a

34

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

specific set of problems. First of all, it was hoped that information
on culture sequence could be acquired, since problem-oriented
research in the Rio Grande Plain region remains hampered by the
lack of a firm chronology. In addition, these hoped-for chronological
data could be used to supplement those obtained in Hester’s work at
Chaparrosa Ranch. A second problem involved the temporal
position of the local bone-tempered ceramics (Hester 1968; Hester
and Parker 1970; Hester and Hill 1971b). The Holdsworth Site had
yielded such pottery from the surface and from erosional faces, and
the site seemed an ideal spot to test our hypothesis that these
ceramics date from late prehistoric times (i.e., that they are not attributable to historic groups which operated in the area). Thirdly,
the work was oriented toward the collection of faunal remains to be
utilized in the study of subsistence activities and the seasonality of
site occupation. Erosion in some areas of the Holdsworth Site had
indicated that a variety of animal bones were preserved. Therefore,
all deposits excavated at that site were passed through 1/16 inch
mesh to permit a high recovery of faunal remains. These screening
procedures also allowed for the recovery of all lithic debris, the
analysis of which will be important to our understanding of the
stone-working technologies in this area (Hester 1971e).

ETHNOGRAPHICAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL NOTES
The Zavala County area was occupied at the time of historic contact by small groups of hunters and gatherers known collectively as
Coahuiltecans. Descriptions of their lifeway have been widely
published (e.g., Ruecking 1953; Krieger 1956; Newcomb 1961), and
the distribution of various groups in the area has been recorded by
Ruecking (1955) and Campbell (ms.). More recently, Nunley (1971)
has cast doubt on our knowledge of the Coahuiltecans. He believes
that our reconstructions have been generalized quite haphazardly
from widely scattered, and very meager, ethnographic data. It is his
contention that all of the varied groups in this region cannot be
lumped under the rubric "Coahuiltecan". While we do not wish to
discuss the pros or cons of Nunley’s arguments, we do believe that
there are broad aspects of the aboriginal lifeway which can be abstracted from the extant ethnographic data, and we use some of
these in our concluding section.
The environmental characteristics of the semiarid brushlands
known as the Rio Grande Plain have also been given broad treatment in the literature (Kroeber, 1939; Inglis 1964; Gould 1969; Hill

35

HOLDSWORTH/STEWART SITES

and Hester 1971). The region originally supported a grassland or
savannah type climax vegetation. Historic settlement and exploitation of the area led to ecological alterations which brought
about the current brushland conditions (Gould 1969: 12). The native
fauna are representative of the Tamaulipan Biotic Province (Blair
1950). We will present more precise descriptions of the vegetation
and fauna in our discussions of the microenvironments recognized
in the vicinity of the two sites.

THE HOLDSWORTH SITE
This site (designated as 41 ZV 14) is located on the Holdsworth
Ranch in southeastern Zavala County (Fig. 1). It is situated on the
east bank of the west fork of Tortugas Creek, a major tributary of
the Nueces River. The creek (including both the eastern and western
branches) is characterized by a dendritic drainage pattern.

N

ZAVALA

~ !f
jr"

~/ V14

f’J

/

COUNTY

miles

FIGURE 1. The Locations of Sites 41 ZV 14 (Holdsworth) and 41 ZV 121
(Stewart) in Zavala County, Texas. Inset shows location of the county
within the state.
The Holdsworth Site lies in a low area between the main channel
of the west fork and a former course of that stream (Fig. 2). It is
thickly vegetated (the heavy cover has made an accurate estimate of
site size impossible) and is subject to periodic flooding. Three
microenvironments can be discerned in the vicinity of the site (Fig.
2 ). The first, within which the site is located, can be termed the
channel microenvironment. It includes the channel of the west fork

36

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

F~-,..\
./

"\...

t#~ eroded
1.J

\

/
Tortugas
Creek-’~ i
WEST FORK
~-vertical
-cut

B!

TEST
PITS

e3

FLOODI
UPLANDS

I

CHANNEL

FLOODPLAIN

UPLANDS

PLAINI
I

[

8
ZV
14

.....

~

--

==
"E

FIGURE 2. The Holdsworth Site, 41 ZV 14. Upper, sketch map (not to
scale) showing location of test pits; Lower, schematic profile (looking
North) of Tortugas Creek stream valley, showing location of 41 ZV 14
and extent of microenvironments.

HOLDSWORTH/STEWART SITES

37

(and its former channels paralleling the present stream course);
there is heavy vegetation along the borders of the stream. A floodplain or "flats" microenvironment is also present. On the east side
of the site it extends for some 500 yards; scattered thorny brush and
much prickly pear (Opuntia) occur. This part of the floodplain is cut
by a small tributary of the west fork. On the west side of the creek,
the floodplain is narrow, only 30 to 50 yards in width. Several sites
have been recorded in the eastern part of the floodplain microenvironment; most appear to be occupation sites spanning the time
range from Late Paleo-Indian to Late Prehistoric.
The floodplain is flanked by hilly uplands, beginning 200 yards
from the creek on the west and 1/2 mile on the east. The fringes of
the uplands include ancient terrace remnants capped by lag gravels.
Evidence of aboriginal .use of the uplands zone is found in the form
of chipping stations, small temporary camps and isolated hearths,
and a few large occupation sites. One such large campsite is 41 ZV
27 (Holdsworth Highlands Site), about one mile east of 41 ZV 14. It
covers approximately 20 acres on a hillslope. There are numerous
intact hearths and large quantities of lithic debris. Commonly found
are heavy chopping and scraping tools, "Clear Fork" gouges, and
Paleo-Indian and Archaic (primarily Early Archaic) projectile point
types (e.g., Clovis, Angostura, Bulverde, Tortugas, "Early Barbed").
Additional data on the flora and fauna of these three microenvironments (channel, floodplain, and uplands) is found in Appendix I.
The Holdsworth Site (41 ZV 14) was originally recorded in early
1969. Surface collections were made at that time by Hill. One eroded
area in the northwestern section of the site yielded both Archaic and
Late Prehistoric artifacts (Frio and Tortugas dart points, Perdiz and
Scallorn arrow points, light and heavy scraping tools, and Leon Plain
potsherds). A few animal bones had also been exposed, including
those of whitetail deer, bison (?), cottontail rabbit, and alligator (?).
Mussel shells were observed and a cutting or scraping tool made
from a marine shell (Macrocallista nimbosa Solander) was found
(see Hester 1971a:87).
In August 1970, the authors visited the site briefly and made a vertical cut in the face of an erosional gully near the center of the site
(Fig. 2). The cut extended eight inches below the surface and
revealed a dark brown to gray midden deposit containing scattered
burned rocks, lumps of baked clay, snail shells, and an abundance
of wood charcoal. Since this particular spot had previously yielded a
Leon Plain potsherd, we felt that the midden was attributable to a

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

38

Late Prehistoric occupation. A charcoal sample was collected and
submitted to the radiocarbon dating laboratory at the University of
California at Los Angeles.*
The nature of the site suggested to us that extensive buried
deposits were present and were a potential source of answers to the
problems outlined earlier in this paper. Excavations were carried
out by Hill during the period of January through April, 1971.

EXCAVATION PROCEDURES AND STRATIGRAPHY
Four test pits were dug at the Holdsworth Site (Fig. 2). Their
horizontal dimensions were: Test 1, 3 x 4 feet; Test 2 and Test 4, 5 x
5 feet, and Test 3, 4 x 6 feet. In the excavation of Tests 1, 2 and 4,
vertical control was established according to natural stratigraphic
units. Zone 1 (surface to 10 inches below surface) is a dark, humusstained alluvium containing occupational debris attributable to the
Late Prehistoric period. In addition to artifactual material, the zone
contains scattered hearthstones (mostly sandstone, but with chert
and quartzite represented), baked clay nodules (Hester 1971b),
gastropods (Bulimulus sp. including B. dealbatus and B. sehiedeanus,
Polygyra texasiana, and Helisoma trivolis), mussel shell fragments
(Unio sp.), animal bones and wood charcoal. Zone 2 begins at 10 inches and continues to a depth which varies between 20 and 26 inches. The soil is lighter in color and contains clay, which increases
toward the bottom of the zone. There is a marked increase in the
frequency of Bulimulus shells with Polygyra and Helisoma also
represented; other debris includes mussel shell fragments, hearthstones, baked clay nodules, animal bones and small amounts of
charcoal. Zone 3, a sterile basal clay, blocky in texture and orangeyellow in color, extends to an unknown depth.
In recording artifact proveniences (Table 1), it was possible to
divide Zones 1 and 2 into equal upper and lower units in Test 1; in
Test 4, Zone 1 is similarly divided.
Test 3 represents the partial exploration of an intrasite feature.
During work at the site, Hill noted an ill-defined, ash-stained area
20 to 25 yards south of Test 2. A 4 x 6 foot unit was excavated in
which the upper one foot of deposit contained a variety of debris, including Late Prehistoric projectile points, bits of mussel shell,
Bulimulus shells, hearthstones and baked clay nodules. The deposit
*The sample was not analyzed until after completion of this manuscript and was
found to be "not older than 300 years" (ca. A.D. 1650; Rainer Berger, personal communication). The sample is from upper Zone 1 and probably represents protohistoric
occupation at the site.

HOLDSWORTH/STEWART SITES

39

correlates quite well with Zone 1 except for an abundance of ash
and a quantity of woody materials (twigs, limbs, etc., some of which
are up to 6 inches in diameter) occurring near the bottom of the
zone. We find it difficult to explain the presence of these wooden
remains. Perhaps they could be attributed to rather recent burning
and collapse of a large tree at the spot as some of the wood is burned, other charred, and some apparently unburned. We discount the
recent nature of the wooden remains since they appear to be sealed
by the Late Prehistoric midden. We have also wondered if the accumulation of wood might be flood-deposited drift; such a
deposition would have had to occur during or prior to the last Late
Prehistoric occupations. A third possibility is that the materials
represent a burned packrat nest, structures found abundantly in the
channel microenvironment today. However, Hill has recently taken
apart a number of modern packrat nests and finds that the components differ from the remains excavated in Test 3. A fourth, and
even more remote, possibility is that the materials are the partiallyburned remnants of a flimsy aboriginal jacal-type structure, such as
documented for the Coahuiltecans by Ruecking (1953: 484). We are
not satisfied by any of these four explanations; fortunately, some of
this ash-stained area remains intact and can be investigated further.
At a depth of one foot in Test 3, a hard clay surface was reached
which revealed charcoal stains when scraped. Lying on (or just
beneath) the surface were two Ensor projectile points, a few scattered hearthstones, and fragmentary faunal remains. Although the
full horizontal extent of this feature is unknown, we believe that it
may be a living surface (a hut floor or hearth area?) dating from Ensor times. It does not appear to be related to the wood accumulation
previously discussed.
The soils at the site (the characteristics of which were described
earlier) appear to be representative of the Maverick-MontellCatarina series (Pederson and McEntire 1966). The Montell and
Catarina components are clays and are of particular significance
because they are vertisols (Jack Stevens -- Soil Conservation Service soil scientist at Uvalde -- and Wayne Hamilton -- former SCS
agent -- personal communication; for a distribution map of vertisols
on the Rio Grande Plains, see Duffield 1970). Vertisols are dynamic
in nature and can cause the displacement of arche’ological materials
within the soils (Duffield 1970).

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

40

MATERIAL CULTURE

The artifacts from the Holdsworth Site are described here;
provenience data are given in Tables 1 and 2. Projectile point
typology follows that of Suhm, Krieger and Jelks (1954) and Suhm
and Jelks (1962). All measurements given are in millimeters and
weights in grams. The following abbreviations are employed: L,
length; W, maximum width; T, maximum thickness; SL, stem
length; SW, stem width; and WT, weight. Measurements of fragmentary specimens are enclosed in parentheses.
The format in which the descriptions are presented varies
somewhat from that used in most archeological studies in the Texas
area. We have grouped the artifact categories under three broad
"functional headings (modified from Winters 1969) as we believe
that these enable us to present a better view of the aboriginal tool
kit. (1) Hunting Tools/Weapons: equipment used in the
procurement of game, to which we can attribute the projectile
points; (2) Processing and Fabricating Tools: general utility implements used to process raw materials and to fabricate other types
of equipment; (3) Domestic Equipment: household equipment such
as ceramic vessels used for the preparing, storing and serving of
foodstuffs. Of course some of the items classed as Processing and
Fabricating Tools could be included here, but we see no way to
eliminate this overlap without changing our classification to one
based on the sexual division of labor (i.e., associating specific tool
forms with either males or females).
The residue from the manufacture of chipped stone items in the
tool kit is described under the heading of Tool Manufacturing
Debris.
HUNTING TOOLS /WEAPONS
Projectile Points
Here we have used more or less standard criteria in separating arrow and dart

points. Such distinctions are usually based on the size, technology, and weight of the
points. Arrow points are small and thin and made on light flakes, while dart points
are larger, thicker and made either on biface preforms or on large flakes. Fenenga
(1953:322) has suggested that points exceeding 3.5 grams in weight were used with the
dart and atlatl and those of less than 3.5 grams were used with the bow and arrow.
The projectile point groups at Holdsworth clearly show such a bimodal distribution.
However, a number of so-called "dart points" have been found in direct association
with arrow points at several sites on the Rio Grande Plain (Hill and Hester 1971;
Hester 1970). As the provenience chart in Table 1 shows, two of the ~dart points"
(both quite small) at Holdsworth occurred in Late Prehistoric contexts, though ad-

HOLDSWORTH/STEWART SITES

41

mittedly this may be due to mixing as a result of the dynamic soils present at the site.
Still, we feel that the data allow us to propose two hypotheses regarding the presence
of "dart points" in the Late Prehistoric of the Rio Grande Plain: (1) the atlatl survived
quite late in the area and was used along with the bow and arrow. The bow and
arrow must have totally replaced it prior to historic contact, as early Spanish accounts
make no mention of the atlatl’s use in the region (Ruecking 1955). The retention of the
atlatl might have been due to factors other than cultural conservatism; for example, in
the Valley of Mexico, aborigines of the Colonial period used the bow and arrow to
hunt deer, while the dart and atlatl were retained to hunt waterfowl and to spear fish
(Michels 1971:226). (2) it is also equally feasible that with the advent of the bow and
arrow in the region, small dart points were used along with the new arrow point
forms to tip arrow shafts. Greer (1968:190) has suggested that the Ensor type of TransPecos Texas may have functioned as an arrow point. The possibility of a functional
overlap between "dart" and "arrow" points in southeastern Texas has been suggested
by Aten (1967:17).
Arrow Points (Fig. 3,a-f)
Six arrow points were found in test excavations. Four are examples of the Perdiz
type

and are made from gray, tan, cream, and translucent cream cherts. Two ad-

ditional arrow points are corner-notched and can be typed as Scallorn; they are
fashioned from

dull brown and cream cherts. The lateral edges of one Scallorn

specimen are serrated.
Dimensions of arrow points are:
TYPE

L

W

T

SL

SW

WT.

Perdiz

29

25

4.5

8

9

2.9

3,a

Perdiz

34

15

3

11

6

1.3

3,b

Perdiz

34

15

2.5

10

4.5

1.2

3,c

Perdiz

32

21

3

13

8

2.0

3,d

Scallorn

(20)

13.5

3

4

11

(1.2)

3,e

Scallorn

(36)

14

2

*

*

(1.9)

3,f

FIG.

Dart Points (Fig. 3,g-l)
One of the six dart points found at the Holdsworth Site is similar to the Pedernales
type, a large, stemmed form common in central Texas (Suhm, Krieger and Jelks 1954).
It is of brown chert, crudely chipped, and has been burned. Another dart point has a
rectangular stem and is made of translucent brown chert. There is also an unstemmed
lanceolate dart point fragment (the tip is missing) made of translucent gray chert.
Three of the dart points have broad side notches and can be included in the Ensor
type. Two of the specimens were found on the hard clay surface uncovered during the
excavation of Test 3 and both of these points are fashioned from gray chert; the third
specimen is made of cream chert.
Dimensions of dart points are:
TYPE

L

W

T

SL

SW

Pedernales

67

27

7

17

21

12.0

3,g

Rectangular

38

18

5

11

12

4.2

3,h
3,i

WT.

FIG.

Stemmed
Lanceolate

(33)

20

5

(4.0)

Ensor

(27)

20

7

(4.8)

3,j

Ensor

39

21

7

6.0

3,k

Ensor

(40)

24

7

(6.5)

3,1

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

42

a

b

k

m

0

0
L

FIGURE 3. Artifacts of Chipped Stone from the Holdsworth Site, 41 ZV
14. a-d, Perdiz; e, f, Seallorn; g, Pedernales; h, rectangular stemmed; i,
lanceolate; j-l, Ensor (j, k, from Test 3); m, n, projectile points from deep
gullies, east-central part of site (n, Plainview); o, Plainview point from
41 ZV 7.

43

HOLDSWORTH/STEWART SITES

PROCESSING AND FABRICATING TOOLS
Bifaced Cobbles (Fig. 4,a-b)
Two cobbles with brown cortex (derived from terrace exposures in the site vicinity)
have been bifaced at one end. One (Fig. 4,b) is a large rectangular specimen, 90 ram.
long, 47 mm. wide, and 46 ram. thick weighing 282.0 grams. The other specimen (Fig.
4,a) is an oblong cobble 79 mm. long, 56 ram. wide and 48 ram. thick weighing 193.5
grams. The bifacial flake removals have created a rough cutting or chopping edge. On
the oblong specimen, this edge has a broad cylindrical band of very heavy dulling.
Witthoft (1955:20) has suggested that such use-wear could result from abrasion caused
by rubbing it against another stone. Perhaps this tool was used to process plant fibers,
skins, or some other thin material which was resting on a hard backing, such as a flat
stone anvil.

End Scrapers (Fig. 4,c-e)
One specimen (Fig. 4,c) is made on a blade of translucent cream chert. The blade
has a simple prepared (or single facet) striking platform and a salient bulb of percussion (a bulbar scar. is present). A convex scraping edge has been formed at the
distal end of the blade; \edge angle is 60°. There is no observable evidence of wear on
the working edge.
A second end scraper (Fig. 4,d) is made on a cortex flake of gray chert. ’?he
scraping edge is crudely chipped along the distal end of the flake, and there is
irregular trimming along one lateral edge. The scraping edge forms an angle varying
from 55°-60°; use-wear in the form of nibbling and crushing is present.
The third specimen (Fig. 4,e) can be best termed an "end-side" scraper, as one of
the lateral edges (as well as the distal end) shows careful trimming. Edge angles on
the distal edge range from 40°-80°, while on the trimmed lateral edge, the angle is 50°.
The specimen is fragmentary and made of light gray chert.
Dimensions of end-scrapers are:
L

W

T

WT.

50

23

8

8.7

(37)

37

8

43

30

10

Fig.
4,c
4,d

12.0

4,e

Although distinctive use-wear is absent from all three specimens, the edge angle
data indicate that they could have been used for a variety of tasks, including hideworking, plant processing, or heavy cutting. (Witmsen 1968:156-157).

Notches (Fig. 4,f,g)
One specimen is a flake fragment with a notch 11 mm. in length chipped into one
edge. The edge of the notch shows crushing resulting from use. The second specimen
is a fragment of a blade with a notch (12 mm. long) crudely chipped into one edge.
Dimensions are: L,(43),(30); W, 26,24; T, 13,4,5. Both could have served as implements
for shaving or smoothing the surface of cylindrical wooden shafts.

Graver (Fig. 4,h)
This is a small flake fragment with a carefully chipped graver beak. No evidence of
use was observed under microscopic examination, Length of the graver beak is 2 mm,
Other dimensions are: L, (16), W, 25; T, 2.

44

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

d

e

J

/

MM.

FIGURE 4. Artifacts of Chipped Stone from the Holdsworth Site, 41 ZV
14. a, b, bifaceted cobbles; c-e, end scrapers; f, g, notches; h, graver; i, j,
laterally-trimmed flakes; k, uniface fragment; 1, beveled biface
fragment; m, preform; n, polyhedral core; o, blade.

45

HOLDSWORTH/STEWART SITES

Laterally-trimmed Flakes (Fig. 4,i,j)
Two specimens
examples include
with trimming on
for casual cutting
20,35; T,6.4, 6.8.

are secondary cortex flakes trimmed along one edge. The other two
a flake fragment with trimming on one edge, and an interior flake
the ventral surface of one edge. These artifacts probably were used
or scraping activities. Dimensions are: L, 49,30,(27),(23); W,28,22,

Mano (not illustrated)
The specimen is a fragment of a bifaceted limestone mano.
Hammerstones (Fig. 5,a-e)
Three examples are made from purple quartzite pebbles, a favorlite material of
prehistoric flint-knappers in this area (Hester 1971e). Two are rounded and the third
is oblong. Two are battered at one end and the other at both ends.
Another rounded hammerstone is made of a dense sandstone and the fifth
specimen is made of a silicified limestone; both show battering at one end. The
primary function of these tools was probably the fabrication of chipped stone implements.
The dimensions are:
L

W

T

WT.

40

36

17

34.8

FIG.
5,a

39

19

15

16.0

5,b

31

26

24

26.5

5,c

(61)

50

34

(158.4).

5,d

35

31

27

39.9

5,e

Fragmentary Tools (Fig. 4,1)
Tools broken during use include both bifacial and unifacial forms. Bifaces include:
(a) 3 medial fragments; (b) fragment of a beveled-edge biface (possibly a knife); (c)
two burned fragments. Fragmentary unifacial specimens are: (a) a possible scraper
fragment; (b) medial fragment of a double edge side-scraper; (c) a uniface (scraper?)
edge apparently detached by an "overshot" flake (c[. Shiner 1969:227); (d) a large
scraper fragment on which the break has been used as a striking platform for the
removal of several small flakes.

DOMESTIC EQUIPMENT
Potsherd (not illustrated)
The specimen is a body sherd of a bone-tempered vessel. The material is a fine,
compact paste with many tiny bone fragments (some are up to 1 ram. in size). The exterior surface is smudged. The light pink interior retains smoothing striations. Wall
thickness is 6 mm.
This sherd is characteristic of bone-tempered plainware (Leon Plain) found at
numerous surface sitds in southern Texas (Hester 1968; Hester and Parker 1970;
Hester and Hill 1971b). However, this is the first specimen to be found in an excavated context.

46

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TOOL MANUFACTURING DEBRIS
The excavations at Holdsworth yielded a quantity of lithic materials and debris attributable to various stages in the tool manufacturing process. These include preforms
(tools under manufacture), cores, and various kinds of flakes.
Preforms (Fig. 4,m)
Five are crudely bifaced flakes which probably represent an initial stage in the
bifacing of tools. Another specimen is a subtriangular dart point or knife preform
(L,54; W,34; T,17; WT 25.8), and the sixth specimen is a preform medial section.
Cores (Fig. 4,n)
Two cores are intact. One is a semi-conical polyhedral flake core with one part of
its striking platform cortex-covered and the remainder faceted. The platform forms
angles of 750-80° with the sides. Height of the core is 38 mm., maximum platform
width is 60 mm., minimum width is 38 mm. and weight is 59.3 grams. The other core
is a rounded chert nodule from which flakes have been bifacially detached using one
edge of the nodule as a striking platform. L, 70; W, 69, T, 56; WT, 290.7.
One exhausted core was found and there are four core fragments. Three of the core
fragments have simple prepared platforms (i.e., single flake platforms), and the fourth
a multifaceted platform.
Flakes
All flakes from each test pit were collected and analyzed. The flakes have been
sorted into several categories which reflect the technological processes carried out in
tool manufacture. The definitions for each category are based largely on the work of
H. ]. Shafer, (1969) and subsequent modifications by Hester (1971c), Hill and Hester
(1971) and Skinner (1971). Primary cortex flakes have the dorsal surface covered with
cortex; they represent the initial decortication of a core. Secondary cortex flakes retain
some cortex on the dorsal surface, representing further shaping of a core. Interior
flakes have no cortex on the dorsal surface, indicating their removal from the interior
of a core. Biface thinning flakes ("lipped" flakes) result from the soft hammer
technique of biface reduction (Epstein 1964:164). They have lenticular mdltifaceted
platforms which overhang on the ventral surface. Occasional dulling of platform
edges was observed on the Holdsworth sample; such abrasion may result from platform preparation or perhaps from the resharpening of a dulled biface edge (a knife
edge). Flake fragments (the "chips" of Skinner 1971:159) are pieces which lack the
striking platform and bulb of percussion. Twenty percent of such fragments from the
Holdsworth site are burned.
A study of the platform types of all flakes suggest that cores with various types of
platform preparation were present in the chipped stone industry. Some cores were
developed from nodules with a flat striking surface (natural platform). Flakes
detached from such cores have cortex -covered striking platforms. As indicated by
studies at the Chaparrosa Ranch (Hester 1970), one popular type of core in the area
was formed by the halving of a cobble and use of the resultant broad fracture surface
as a striking platform. Thus, flakes detached from such surfaces will have a singlefacet platform. Sometimes these cores underwent extensive platform modification in
the form of faceting (Hester 1970); flakes removed from these cores often have
multiJbceted platforms, although flakes with single-facet platforms could also be
removed. One specialized type of multifaceted platform is termed a convergent plat-

HOLDSWORTH/STEWART SITES

Test 1
Zone I
U

L

Test 2

Zone2
U

47

Zone 1

Test 3

Zone2

Zone I

Test 4

Zone 2

L

TOTALS

Zone 1
U

L

1

--

Arrow points:
Perdiz

1

Sca/lorn

1

--

2

__

1

--

4
2

Dart points:
Pedernales

1

....

Rec.
stemmed

1

--

--

Lanceolate

--

--

1

1

--

--

Ensor

--

1

2

3

1

Bifaced
cobbles
End scrapers

2
1

Notches

--

--

2

3

1

--

1

2

--

1

1

Gravers
Trimmed
flakes

4

Mano

Hammerstones

1

1

--

--

1

1
--

D

1

--

2

1

Frag. tools:

Bifaces
Unifaces

--

1
1

Potsherd
Preforms

1
3

3
3

....
2

1

--

1

2

1

7

1

1

--

1

--

1

--.....

1

Cores:
Polyhedral

--

--

Bifacial

--

1

Exhausted

1

1

Fragmentary

1

Totals

7

1

2

1

1

1

1

10

5

13

-2

4
8

3

52

Table 1, Pravenience of Artifacts [rom the Holdsworth Site, U~upper half of zone;
L ~ lower half.

48

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

form. Striking platforms on these flakes are formed by convergent planes (Hester
1971c:106). Crushed or shattered platforms were also observed. Figure 8 lists frequencies of flake striking platform types at the Holdsworth Site.
Bulbs of percussion observed on primary and secondary cortex flakes, and on most
interior flakes, indicate their removal by hard hammer percussors. Diffuse bulbs
noted on biface thinning flakes suggest the use of softer-than-stone billets, perhaps of
wood or bone.
Raw materials were obtained in cobble form from terrace exposures near the site.
A variety of multicolored fine and coarse-grained cherts are represented in the flake
debris. Several flakes have the vitreous luster attributable to thermal alteration (Crabtree and Butler 1964; Purdy and Brooks 1971).
Ranges in flake size are indicated below:
L

W

T

Primary Cortex

11-40

13-39

7-17

Secondary Cortex

8-65

9-50

2-20

Interior

7-55

10-45

1.5-16

Biface Thinning

8-40

6-37

1-8

U
Primary

L

U

Zone 1

Test 4

Test 3

Test 2

Test 1
Zone 1 Zone 2

Zone 2

Zone 1

Zone 21

L

2

Zone 1
U

1

--

4

--

TOTALS

L
2

9

Secondary

10

9

--

7

21

20

34

-,--

16

18

135

Interior

19

18

1

4

48

21

57

--

19

32

219

7

7

12

3

19

38

12

--

7

11

116

30

55

44

10

173

116

140

--

56

147

771

Overshot

1

--

--

Blades

1

--

1

--

98

210

1262

Biface
thinning
Fragments
Uniface
resharpen

Chunks

--

2

"Potlids"

2

3

TOTALS

70

94

57

24

263

199

247

--

Table 2. Provenience o[ Flakes, Blades, Chunks and "Patlids" at the Holdsworth Site.
U ¢ upper half of zone; L :lower half.
1 no flake sample available for Test 3, Zone 2.

49

HOLDSWORTH/STEWART SITES

b

0

5O

L

d
FIGURE 5. Hammerstones from the Holdsworth Site, 41 ZV 14. Battered
areas indicated by stippling.

Miscellaneous Flakes and Chunks (Fig. 4,0)
Two flakes result from unifacial resharpening techniques (Shafer 1970). Both have
multifaceted platforms with one edge dulled (this was the scraper edge being
rejuvenated). L, 7,9; W9,11; T, 1.5, 2. There is also a single "overshot" flake (Shiner
1969:227) which is a fragment. Although several blade-like flakes are included in the
flake categories, only one true blade was found. It is 41 mm. long, 17 ram. wide and
h~s a triangular cross section 8 mm. in thickness. The platform is triangular and
single-faceted with a patch of cortex at the distal end. Five "potlids" were noted; these
are circular piano-convex pieces which are the product of the intense thermal fracture
of a chipped stone specimen.
Three specimens are classed as chunks; two are burned. Deacon (1969:155) defines
chunks as "... larger artifact waste predominantly of non-flake origin and graded on
a size basis as greater than 10 mm. in maximum dimension."

50

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

THE STEWART SITE
The Stewart Site (41 ZV 121) is located in western Zavala County
(Fig. 6) on the west side of the main channel of Chacon Creek. Occupational debris is buried in a natural levee (alluvial knoll)
paralleling the creek; on the surface, debris is scattered for 30 yards
north to south, varying from 10 to 15 yards in width. Three major
ecological subdivisions can be recognized; many of their characteristics have been previously listed by Hill and Hester (1971: 52-53)
in their report on the Honeymoon Site (41 ZV 34) located downstream from the Stewart Site. There is a channel microenvironment,
including the intermittent Chacon Creek and a narrow band of
vegetation (primarily live oaks and some brushy plants) paralleling
the creek. The floodplain microenvironment is thickly vegetated
with mesquite, prickly pear, and associated thorn brush. Soils are of
the Uvalde-Montell series (Agricultural Extension Service 1965),
and consist of dark grayish calcareous loams 10 to 20 inches thick,
overlying either pale brown calcareous clay loam (Uvalde) or gray
compact dense clay with CaCO3 concretions (Montell). To the east
of the site, the floodplain extends for approximately one mile until
it reaches a line of gravel ridges and hills. This upland formation is
composed of eroded remnants of ancient terrace systems; soils are
gravelly loams overlying deposits of caliche. Waterworn chert or
igneous gravels are exposed on the surface (Pederson and McEntire
1966); the surface often takes on a "desert pavement" appearance.
Climax vegetation includes a variety of native grasses, guajillo,
ceniza, black-brush, prickly pear, and mesquite. To the west of the
Stewart Site, the floodplain is about one-half mile in width and is
cut by a dendritic system of overflow channels of Chacon Creek.
These channels have deep spots ("holes") which can retain water
even during periods of sustained droughts (as observed by Hill
during a severe year-long drought in 1970-1971). A small natural
lake has been formed in one of these channels, ca. 100 to 150 yards
east of the site. The western floodplain is bordered by broad sandy
uplands, covered with native grasses and scattered thorny brush.
Though there has been no detailed study of the modern fauna in
the site vicinity, we suspect that the composition of the faunal
assemblage differs little from that recorded for the Holdsworth Site
environs (see Appendix I).
The initial survey of the site by Hill led to the collection of several
dart points and dart point fragments, indicative of Archaic occupations. These include a specimen with an expanding stem (Fig.
7,f) and a fragment with a bifurcated stem (Fig. 7,i). Two other

51

HOLDSWORTH/STEWART SITES

\
/

\
\

/
Controlled
Collection /__~_~
A reo .

C HACON

~

REEK

!
\

/

/

/
/
/
!

\
\

1

\~

[]

TEsT PITS \ \
~2

I

\

J

\
~3

I
I
I
I
!

I
!
!
i
\
.... J

ft.

FLOODPLAIN

UPLANDS

\

/

\

18
I

0

\

CHANNELI

/

/

FLOODPLAIN

I

small
tributaries
and gullbs

FIGURE 6. The Stewart Site, 41 ZV 121. Upper, sketch (scale indicated)
of site, with test pits and surface collection unit shown (dashed line indicates horizontal extent of cultural debris); Lower, schematic profile
(looking North) showing position of 41 ZV 121 and extent of microenvironmen ts.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

52

stemmed point fragments, two distal fragments, and a lanceolate
binace basal fragment were also collected. Further inspection of the
site indicated that buried deposits were present. Excavations were
carried out by Hill in January and February 1971, to secure information on the presumed Archaic occupation of the site.

EXCAVATION PROCEDURES AND STRATIGRAPHY
Three test pits (all 5-foot squares) were dug at the Stewart Site,
again according to stratigraphic units. Zone 1 extends from the
surface to a depth of approximately one foot. It is a very soft, light
brown soil, containing artifacts, hearthstones, Bulimulus shells, and
bits of mussel shell. Zone 2 begins at a depth of one foot, but its total
vertical extent is not known. It is a very hard, fine-grained, graybrown soil (with an abundance of clayey materials). Only the upper
six inches contain occupational debris. At a depth of 15 inches in
Test 3, a concentration of burned rocks was found. Among the
stones was a side-notched projectile point (Fig. 7,c). The nature of
the concentration is unknown.
The soils appear to correspond to the Uvalde-Montell series
(Agricultural Extension Service 1965).

CONTROLLED SURFACE SAMPLE
A concentration of lithic debris was observed on the site surface
(Fig. 6). A 12 x 12 foot square encompassing the concentration was
laid out. All lithic debris was collected and has been analyzed. Approximately 90 percent of all debris came from the northeast
quadrant of the unit where a cluster of flakes was observed in an
oval area 2 to 3 feet in diameter. In the southwest quadrant of the
unit, a concentration of burned rocks (perhaps remnants of a
hearth) was noted; as these were being removed, a Shumla projectile
point (Fig. 7,a) was found.

MATERIAL CULTURE
Terminology, abbreviations, and measurements used in the
description of the material culture from the Holdsworth Site are also
employed here.

53

HOLDSWORTH/STEWART SITES
HUNTING TOOLS /WEAPONS
Dart Points (Fig. 7,a-c)

One specimen is a basal fragment with large side notches and a concave base. It is
made of tan chert and was found among hearthstones in Test 3. The other two dart
points were recovered from the controlled collecting area. One of these is made of
gray chert, with corner notches, a concave base, and reworked distal tip. It is quite
reminiscent of "Early Corner Notch,d, Variety 2" excavated by Hester (1971c) at the
La ]ita Site. The second specimen is a very carefully chipped point with basal notches
and heavy barbs made of gray-pink chert. We feel that it can be included in the
Shumla type. The dimensions of these specimens are:
TYPE

L

W

T

SL

SW

WT

Shumla

52

32

5

10

12

6.6

7,a

Corner-notched

27

28

6

10

(23)

(4.2)

7,b

.(36)

30

6

(7.0)

7,c

Side-notched

FIG

PROCESSING AND FABRICATING TOOLS
Scraper (Fig. 7,j)
The specimen is a partially-bifaced pebble with a well-defined scraping edge
chipped along one lateral edge. The edge angle is 65°. L, 52; W, 51; T, 22, WT, 49.5.

Notch (Fig. 7,k)
A small intact flake has been notched on one edge. The notch is 9 mm. in length. L,
29; W, 30; T, 8; WT, 7.5.

Fragmentary Tools (Fig. 7,d)
Five specimens are bifaces. Two are medial sections of thinned bifaces (knives or
perhaps dart points), two others are end fragments, and one is an edge fragment. One
uniface is represented and is apparently a section of a scraper edge.

TOOL MANUFACTURING DEBRIS
Preforms, cores and flakes were collected from the Stewart Site and have been sorted according to the criteria used in the analysis of the Holdsworth Site debris.

Preforms (not illustrated)
Both specimens are fragmentary. One is a section of roughly bifaced petrified
wood, and the second is a fragment of a crudely-shaped biface.

Cores (Fig. 7,1)
There are three exhausted cores in the collection. Two of these are ovate remnants
of bifacially-flaked cores, and the third is an ovate.piece which may have seen secondary use as a scraper or chopper. L, 71, 50, 53; W, 51, 48, 44; T, 21, 20, 27. Three additional specimens in this category are core fragments’, one of these has been burned.

Chunks (not illustrated)
Four pieces of chert of non-flake origin are classified as chunks.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

54

!

I

d

b
C

a

\

h

\

g

e

I
o
I

,

50
I

MM.

F!CURE 7. Artifacts of Chipped Stone from the Stewart Site. a, Shumla;
b, corner-notched; c, side-notched; d, medial fragment; e-i, points and
fragments from surface random; j, scraper; k, notch; 1, exhausted core.

55

HOLDSWORTH/STEWART SITES

Flakes (not illustrated)
The flake debris was sorted in the same manner as that from the Holdsworth Site~
frequencies and provenience data are given in Table 4. All of the flake platform types
described for Holdsworth~ except the convergent type, occur in the Stewart sample
(Fig. 8). Dulling of the striking platform occurred among a small percentage of the excavated biface thinning flakes. However, among those from the controlled collecting
unit, 35% have dulled platforms.
Raw materials recognized in the flake analysis include fine- and coarse-grained
cherts of various colors, and small amounts of petrified wood and basalt. The major
source was no doubt the gravel-capped ridges bordering the eastern floodplain.
The ranges in flake size are given below. Thuse for primary cortex flakes should
probably be discounted because of the very small sample of that flake type, several of
which are fragmentary.
L

W

T

?-17

18-26

3-7

Secondary c~ortex

18-65

12-48

2-15

Interior

11-55

10-30

1.5-8

Biface thinning

11-30

14-23

2-4

Primary cortex

Test 3

12 x 12

Totals

Test 1

Test 2

Zone 1

Zone 1

Zone 1

Zone 2

surface

Side-notched

--

--

--

1

--

1

Corner-notched

....

1

1

Shumla

....

1

1

Scraper

....

1

1

Notch

....

1

1

--

5

....

1

1

....

2

2

Dart points:

Frag. tools:
Bifaces
Unifaces
Preforms

3

2

--

--

Cores:
Exhausted

1

2

--

--

--

3

Fragments

--

1

--

--

2

3

4

5

0

1

9

19

Totals

Table 3. Provenience of Artifacts from the Stewart Site.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

56

Primary cortex

Test 1

Test 2

Zone 1

Zone 1

Test 3
Zone 1

12 x 12

Zone 21

surface

--

Totals

6

3

--

3

--

Secondary cortex

13

5

7

--

19

44

Interior

15

8

9

--

39

71

Biface thinning

45

8

7

--

100

160

Flake fragments

190

41

40

--

242

513

3

--

--

--

1

4

269

62

66

--

401

798

Chunks
Totals

Table 4. Provenience o[ Flakes and Chunks at the Stewart Site.
1 no flakes were recovered from this partially-excavated zone.

100

N=443

SFP

MFP

C/S

COR

HOLDSVJORTH

N=112

CON

SFP

MFP

C/S

COR

STEWART

FIGURE 8. Frequencies (by percent) of Flake Striking Platform Types at
the Holdsworth and Stewart Sites. SFP, single faceted platform; MFP,
multifaceted platform; C/S, crushed or shattered; COI~, cortex; CON,
convergent.

HOLDSWORTH/STEWART SITES

57

DISCUSSION AND INTERPRETATION
We have thus far described the archeological investigations at the
Holdsworth and Stewart sites and the cultural remains obtained as a
result of the work.
One of our stated goals for excavation at the two sites was to
secure information on the local culture history. At the Holdsworth
Site, the stratigraphic data indicate the presence of Archaic occupational remains, although the nature and extent of this occupation cannot be presently defined. Zone 2, in which the Archaic
materials occur, contained a Pedernales dart point, two Ensor points,
a biface, a uniface, a mano, a bifacial preform, and two cores. Further investigation of this zone is required. We would like to point
out at this juncture that even earlier occupational debris may be
present within the site area. For example, recent erosion in the eastcentral part of the site has cut gullies of varying depth. The deepest
of these (ca. two feet) has yielded a fragmentary Plainview golondrina point (Fig. 3,n) and possibly associated materials including
flakes, tool fragments, and a triangular point with dulled lateral
edges (Fig. 3, m). Just downstream from Holdsworth at Site 41 ZV 7,
other Plainview golondrina specimens have been collected (an example is illustrated in Fig. 3,o). All of these presumed early points (cf.
Johnson 1964: 96; Sorrow 1968: 19) are basal fragments. Since they
show no evidence of stream-rolling or other artificial modes of
transport, we can assume that they represent fragments discarded at
a campsite when hunting equipment was being refurbished (Wendorf and Hester 1962:164). Therefore, it is our hypothesis that occupational components of this early period will eventually be
..recognized on the Tortugas Creek floodplain.
The most extensive cultural remains at Holdsworth are found in
Zone 1 and are attributable to the Late Prehistoric period of
southern Texas (Hester and Parker 1970; Hester 1971d ). Represented in the remains are small projectile points (including some examples which others might classify as "dart points"), a variety of tools
made on flakes (end scrapers, notches, gravers, laterally trimmed
pieces), ceramics, and tool manufacturing residue in large quantities. Both Perdiz and Scallorn point styles are present; we could not
separate them stratigraphically, although this may be due to both the
limited nature of the excavations and the small sample of points
recovered. In general terms, these late remains are comparable to
the Late Prehistoric manifestations of the central Texas sequence
(Shafer 1971). Although isolated Late Prehistoric components have
been recognized previously in southern Texas (Hill and Hester

58

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1971), we did not have the knowledge of associated tool types and
lithic technological data provided by the Holdsworth sample.
Although the Stewart Site occupies a quite similar environmental
position, it is contrasted with the Holdsworth Site by thepresence of
meager remains. There is absolutely no evidence of a Late
Prehistoric occupation at the site. All projectile points recovered
from the site appear to represent the Archaic period. The corner and
side notched examples are not, based on our present data, temporally diagnostic. On the other hand, one specimen is typologically
Shumla, and dated to the Middle Archaic period in the Trans-Pecos
(Johnson 1964). Other materials include a scraper, a notch, a
uniface, several bifaces, and tool manufacturing debris. We are
provided here with an example of an apparently uncontaminated
Archaic occupation site, a rarity thus far in Rio Grande Plain archeology. The variety of triangular dart points considered so typical
of the Archaic of this region are absent. This is not surprising since
stemmed and notched points are known to dominate the Archaic in
the northern portion of the Rio Grande Plain (Nunley and Hester
1966: 251). If the Stewart Site is typical of buried Archaic deposits in
this area, then much excavation will be required in order to define
the sequence within this period.
A second problem investigated in our work was the temporal
position of the local bone-tempered plainware ceramics. It has been
suggested elsewhere (Hester and Hill 1971b) that these ceramics
date to the Late Prehistoric period; this postulate was based largely
on similarities between the local ceramics and those of Late
Prehistoric central Texas. Excavations at Holdsworth revealed a
single sherd in Zone 1, in loose association with a Perdiz arrow
point. While this evidence is far from conclusive, it does add support to the postulate that the bone-tempered ware is a part of the
local Late Prehistoric cultural inventory.
We were also concerned in our investigations with the recovery of
faunal remains to aid in subsistence-settlement studies. A considerable amount of faunal material (relative to the small area excavated) was collected at Holdsworth, primarily through the use of
fine-mesh screens. Had we used the standard 1/4" mesh, the bulk of
the bones would have been lost. Appendix II by D. Gilbow contains
a brief description of the faunal materials. Lack of research funds
has thus far prevented a more rigorous analysis.
All animal bones were found in Zone 1 of the Holdsworth Site. It
is unfortunate that Zone 2 at Holdsworth, and the Archaic deposits
at Stewart, did not yield a faunal sample. At Holdsworth, the lack of

HOLDSWORTH/STEWART SITES

59

Archaic faunal remains may be due largely to our limited exposure
of Zone 2; at Stewart, the absence of faunal remains is attributed to
poor preservation.
The faunal list for the Holdsworth Site reveals the presence of
several species whose habitats today are the channel and floodplain
microenvironments. These include the desert cottontail
(Sylvilagus), cotton rat (Sigmodon) and plains pack rat or wood rat
(Neotoma). Jackrabbit (Lepus) and whitetail deer (Odocoileus) are
species which adapt to a wide range of environmental situations
and could be expected to occur in any of the three defined microenvironments. It might have been possible to kill deer during the time
they watered in the channel zone (Tortugas Creek). The tortoise
(Gopherus sp.) can also be found in a variety of environments. It is
therefore apparent that the local Late Prehistoric inhabitants could
have been exploiting all microenvironments, or just as easily, taking
all animal foods from a single zone. It is clear that all three microenvironments are close and easily accessible, thus lending themselves
to exploitative patterns which could cross cut all environmental
zones (cf. Flannery 1968). While deer may have constituted the bulk
of the meat diet (see Appendix II), there seems also to have been an
emphasis at this site on rodents. Local aboriginal groups were
known to include these small mammals in their subsistence
(Ruecking 1953:485). It remains to be seen if we shall be able to link
such preferences to seasonal hunting patterns as Flannery (1968)
has clone in Mexico.
One other aspect of the subsistence evidence at Holdsworth and
Stewart is the shell remains. Both mussels and land snails are
present at these sites. Mussels, of course, were obtained from the
channel microenvironment; snails could be gathered from any of
the mi~roenvironments. Some of the snails could be introduced to
the sites through natural means (cf. Holdsworth 1969:202 for an interesting example), although we consider most of them to represent
food items (Krieger 1956; Clark 1969). Snail species found in the archeological deposits are identical to those occurring in the area
today.
We have no way of accurately assessing the importance of plant
foods in the local subsistence, although we feel that it was considerable. As evidenced in Appendix I, there are a wide variety of
potential vegetal foods available in the Holdsworth Site area, particularly in the channel microenvironment and on the floodplain.
The ethnographic record for this area indicates the significance of
plant foods in the aboriginal economy (Ruecking 1953: 489). We

60

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

suspect that the exploitation of plant foods was the dominant concern in the prehistoric subsistence system. Plant foods are a reliable
food source and data reported by Lee (1968:33) indicate that they can
be collected with little expenditure of effort. The !Kung Bushmen of
the Kalahari Desert use vegetal foods for 60-80% of their diet, the
collection of which involves two to three days of work per woman
per week (Lee 1968:33). Our best archeological evidence in this area
for the processing of plant foods is the mano and metate. Of course,
other food processing or gathering equipment, such as digging
sticks, may not be preserved. For example, wooden pestles and
mortars are thought to have been used in the region (Beals 1932),
perhaps similar to the set reported by Collins and Hester (1968).
Future interpretations of local subsistence-settlement activities
will have to rely almost wholly on the archeological record~ as there
are scanty data for comparative models in the ethnographic
literature (cf. Nunley 1971). Much more light will be shed on subsistence in Zavala County when funds are secured for the analysis
of a sizable faunal sample (from several sites) only recently
acquired. Unless preserved faunal materials can be found in Archaic deposits, we will have to confine our empirical studies of subsistence to the Late Prehistoric period.
The flint-working technology at the two sites has been previously
discussed in the descriptive portion of this paper. The tool-making
industry appears to be based largely on the use of prepared cores
from which flakes intended for modification were removed. The use
of flakes for tool manufacture is especially evident in Late
Prehistoric times. The source of raw materials was an obvious one:
the gravel-capped ancient terraces which flank the Tortugas and
Chacon stream valleys. There are few primary cortex flakes at
either site, suggesting that the initial decortication of cores occurred
at terrace workshops (Hester 1971e). The occurrence of high percentages of thinning flakes in Zone 2 of Test 2 at Holdsworth and
Zone 1 of Test 1 at Stewart may indicate areas where biface thinning activities were carried out. Such a chipping locus was observed
on the surface at the Stewart Site. The presence of uniface resharpening flakes at Holdsworth indicates a tool rejuvenation technique
(cf. Sharer 1970).
Both sites have a full array of hunting, processing and fabricating
tools, and quantities of debris resulting from tool manufacture. It is
safe to assume that both are occupation sites and were the centers of
the various exploitative and procurement systems needed to maintain daily life. Data from the regional ethnography, and that ex-

HOLDSWORTH/STEWART SITES

61

trapolated from ethnographies of other hunter-gatherer groups (cf.
Nunley 1971), indicate that the local groups on the Rio Grande Plain
roamed over a broad territory, camping at preferred sites for a few
weeks at a time. Such a pattern would account for the presence of
large occupation sites with widely dispersed debris found in the
area (Hester, White and White 1969: 163). The relationship among
such sites, or between these sites, and those with other functions
(workshops, foraging camps, etc.) can be best studied through the
examination of the archeological remains within a broad, welldefined research area. Such work is being carried on by Hester at
Chaparrosa Ranch (Hester 1970). In addition, we need more data on
culture sequence in this area, ideally with corresponding faunal
materials. Hill is continuing this avenue of research in the Tortugas
Creek and Chacon Creek drainages. Skinner (1971:257) has recently
suggested that it is now time for the emphasis in central Texas archeology to shift from chronology to studies of subsistence and settlement. This is in line with the most recent advances in American
archaeology (Binford 1968; Struever 1971; Gumerman 1971). While
we are concerned with settlement and subsistence, it is obvious that
such data will mean little unless it can be fitted into a chronological
framework. We have made much progress now in defining the Late
Prehistoric period on the Rio Grande Plain, but much work remains
to be done before the Archaic and even earlier cultural manifestations can be defined.
In closing, we would like to offer our observations on the effect of
vertisols at the Holdsworth Site. Although these dynamic soils have
the potential to vertically displace buried archeological materials,
we are unable to see any direct evidence of this happening at the
site. It is most likely that a larger artifact sample is required in order
to accurately evaluate the actions of vertisols. Duffield (1970) has
published a map which shows vertisols quite widely distributed in
the northwest part of the Rio Grande Plain. However, it appears that
these soils are somewhat more restricted than Duffield’s map indicates (Wayne Hamilton, personal communication). Archeologists
working in this region should consult local soil conservation service
technicians regarding the identification and interpretation of the
soils in their research areas.

62

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We wish to express our thanks to Errol Jonnson (Crystal City, Texas) and to Ernest
and John Holdsworth (Crystal City) for permission to carry out archeological investigations at the Stewart and Holdsworth sites. We are also grateful to Jack Stevens
(Soil Conservation Service, Uvalde, Texas) and Wayne Hamilton (Business Manager,
Chaparrosa Ranch, La Pryor, Texas) for their expert comments on the nature and
distribution of vertisols on the Rio Grande Plain. Professor Robert F. Heizer (University of California, Berkeley) read the paper and provided very useful comments and
criticisms. A Special Career Fellowship held b~ the senior author at the University of
California, Berkeley, facilitated the completior~ of this report.
REFERENCES CITED

Agricultural Extension Service
General Soil Map of Dimmitt and Zavala Counties. Prepared by
1965
the Agricultural Extension Service, Texas A&M University.
Aten, L. E.
Excavations at the Jamison Site (41 LB 2), Liberty Co., Texas.
1967
Report No. 1, Houston Archeological Society.
Beals, R. L.
The Comparative Ethnology of Northern Mexico Before 1750.
1932
Ibero-Americana, No. 2.
Binford, L. R.
Archeological Perspectives. In New Perspectives in Archeology (S.
1968
and L. Binford, eds.), pp. 5-32. Aldine Publishing Co., Chicago.
Blair, W. F.
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 2, No.
1, pp. 93-115.
Campbell, T. N.
ms.
Unpublished notes on Texas Indian tribes.
Clark, J. W.
1969
Implications of Land and Fresh-Water Gastropods in Archeological Sites. Proceedings, Arkansas Academy of Science, Vol.
23, pp. 38-52.
Collins, M. B. and T. R. Hester
1968 A Wooden Mortar and Pestle from Val Verde County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 39, pp 1-8.
Crabtree, D. E. and B. R. Butler
Notes on Experiments in Flint Knapping. 1, Heat Treatment of
1964
Silica Minerals. Tebiwa, Vol. 7, No. 1, pp. 1-6.
Deacon, H. J.
1969
Melkhoutboom Cave, Alexandria District, Cape Province: A
Report on the 1967 Investigations. Annals, Cape Provincial
Museums, Natural History, Vol. 6, Pt. 13.
Duffield, L. F.
Vertisols and Their Implications for Archaeological Research.
1970
American Anthropologist, Vol. 72, pp. 1055-1062.
Epstein, J. F.
1964
Towards the Systematic Description of Chipped Stone. XXXVth
Congreso Internacional de Americanistas, 1962, Actas y Memorias,
No. 1, pp. 155-169.
Fenenga, F.
1953
The Weights of Chipped Stone Points: A Clue to their Functions.
Sout’hwestern Journal of Anthropology, Vol. 9, No. 3, pp. 309-323.

HOLDSWORTH/STEWART SITES

63

Flannery, K. V.
1968 Archaeological Systems Theory and Early Mesoamerica. Anthropological Archeology in the Americas (B. Meggers, ed.), pp. 6787. Anthropological Society of Washington.
Gould, F. W.
1969
Texas Plants: A Checklist and Ecological Summary. Texas A&M
University, Agricultural Experiment Station.
Greer, J. W.
Some Unusual Artifacts from Val Verde County, Texas. Texas
1968
Journal of Science, Vol. 20, No. 2, pp. 183-192.
Gumerman, G. J. (ed.)
The Distribution of Prehistoric Population Aggregates. Prescott
1971
College Anthropological Reports, No. 1.
Hester, T. R.
1968 Notes on Pottery-Bearing Sites in Southern Texas. Bull-Roarer,
University of Texas Anthropological Society, Vol. 3, No. 2, pp. 9-11.
1970 An Interim Statement on Archeological Research at Chaparrosa
Ranch, Texas. Report submitted to the Texas State Historical Survey Committee.
1971a Marine Shells from Archeological Sites in Southwest Texas. Texas
Journal of Science, Vol. 22, pp. 87-88.
1971b Notes on Baked Clay Objects from the Texas Coast. Notebook,
University of South Carolina, Vol. 3, No. 1, pp. 15-17.
1971c Archeological Investigations at the La Jita Site, Uvalde County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol, 42, pp. 51148.
1971d Hunters and Gatherers of the Rio Grande Plain and the Lower
Coast of Texas. Paper presented at 74th Annual Meeting, Texas
Academy of Science, March, 1971. Nacogdoches.
1971e Chipped Stone Industries on the Rio Grande Plain of Texas. Paper
presented at 36th Annual Meeting, Society for American Archaeology, May, 1971. Norman.
Hester, T. R. and T. C. Hill, Jr.
1971a Archeological Research in Southern Texas During 1970. Texas Archeology, Vol. 15, No. 1, pp. 4-5.
1971b An Initia! Study of a prehistoric Ceramic Tradition in Southern
Texas. Plains Anthropologist, Vol. 16, No. 53, pp. 195-203.
Hester, T. R. and R. C. Parker
1970 The Berclair Site: A Late Prehistoric Component in Goliad County,
Southern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 41,
pp. 1-24.
Hester, T. R., L. D. White and J. White
1969 Archeological Materials from the Oulline Site and Other Sites in
La Salle County, Texas. Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 21, pp. 130165.
Hill, T. C., Jr. and T. R. Hester
1971
Isolated Late Prehistoric and Archaic Components at the Honeymoon Site (41 ZV 34), Southern Texas. Plains Anthropologist, Vol.
15, No. 51, pp. 52-59.
Holdsworth, J. B.
1969
Nature Through a Knothole. Naylor Press, San Antonio.
Inglis, J. M.
1964 A History of Vegetation on the Rio Grande Plain. Texas Parks and
Wildlife Bulletin, No. 45.
Johnson, L., Jr.
1964 The Devil’s Mouth Site. Archaeology Series, No. 6, Department of
Anthropology, University of Texas.

64

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Krieger, A. D.
Food Habits of the Texas Coastal Indians in the Early 16th Cen1956
tury. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 27, pp. 47-58.
Kroeber, A. L.
1939
Cultural and Natural Areas of Native North America. University of
California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology, Vol.
38.
Lee, R. B.
1968 What Hunters do for a Living, or How to Make Out on Scarce
Resources. In Man, the Hunter (R. B. Lee and I. DeVore, eds.), pp.
30-48. Aldine Publishing Co., Chicago.
Michels, J. W.
1971
Colonial Obsidian Industry of the Valley of Mexico. In Science and
Archaeology (R. Brill, ed.), pp. 251-271. MIT Press. Cambridge.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961
The Indians of Texas. University of Texas Press. Austin.
Nunley, J. P.
1971
Socio-Cultural Units of the Southwestern Texas Archaic: An
Analytic Approach. PhD Thesis, Southern Methodist University.
Nunley, J. p. and T. R. Hester
1966
Preliminary Archeological Investigations in Dimmit County,
Texas. Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 18, pp. 233-253.
Pederson, R. J. and J. J. McEntire (compilers)
1966 Technicians Guide to Range Sites and Condition Classes. Rio
Grande Plain Land Resource Area, Soil Conservation Service.
Mimeographed, Crystal City.
Purdy, B. A. and H. K. Brooks
1971
Thermal Alteration of Silica Minerals: An Archeological Approach. Science, Vol. 173, pp. 322-325.
Ruecking, F., Jr.
1953
The Economic System of the Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern
Texas and Northeastern Mexico. Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 5,
pp. 480-497.
1955
The Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern Texas and Northeastern
Mexico. MA thesis, University of Texas at Austin.
Sharer, H. J.
1969
Archeological Investigations in the Robert Lee Reservoir Basin,
West Central Texas. Papers, Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No.
17.
Notes on Uniface Retouch Technology. American Antiquity, Vol.
1970
35, No. 4, pp. 480-487.
Late Prehistory of Central Texas. Paper presented, 74th Annual
1971
Meeting, Texas Academy of Science, March, 1971, Nacogdoches.
Shiner, J. L.
Component Analysis for Archaic Sites. Bulletin of the Texas Ar1969
cheological Society, Vol. 40, pp. 215-229.
Skinner, S, A.
1971
Prehistoric Settlement of the De Cordova Bend Reservoir, Central
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 42, pp. 149270.
Sorrow, W. M.
1968 The Devil’s Mouth Site: The Third Season-1967. Papers, Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No. 14.
Struever, S.
1971
Comments on Archaeological Data Requirements and Research
Strategy. American Antiquity Vol. 36, No. 1, pp. 9-19.

HOLDSWORTH/STEWART SITES

65

Suhm, D. A. and E. B. Jelks
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Ar1962
cheological Society and Texas Memorial Museum, Austin.
Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Wendorf, F. and J. J. Hester
Early Man’s Utilization of the Great Plains Environment.
1962
American Antiquity, Vol. 28, No. 2, pp. 159-171.
Wilmsen, E. N.
Functional Analysis of Flaked Stone Artifacts. American Antiquity,
1968
Vol. 33, pp. 156-161.
Winters, H.
1969 The Riverton Culture. Illinois State Museum, Report of Investigations,
No. 15.
Witthoft, J.
1955 Worn Stone Tools from Southeastern Pennsylvania. Pennsylvania
Archaeologist, Vol. 25, pp. 16-31.
Dept. of Anthropology
University uf California, Berkeley

Crystal City, Texas
Appendix I

A STUDY OF MODERN FLORA AND FAUNA IN THE
VICINITY OF THE HOLDSWORTH SITE

(41 ZV 14)
JOHN HOLDSWORTH

INTRODUCTION
A notable feature of Zavala County is its almost equal division by
the 100th meridian. By coincidence, this coordinate marks very
closely the eastward extent of the Great Plains, and therefore has
the effect of dividing of the United States into the east and west life
zones biologists generally recognize. While in Texas, the plains are
interrupted by the Balcones Fault, whose eroded face now constitutes, the Texas Hill Country. The Rio Grande Embayment or
Plains commence immediately below the fault zone, and though
some 1500 feet less in elevation, are essentially a continuation of the
steppe, or semiarid grassland, making up the higher plains areas.
The result is a considerable mixing of eastern and western species
of plants and animals. Climatological records also show alternating
periods of humid, subtropical conditions bringing about a more subtile exchange of species typical of the two climates.

66

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

There is, in addition, an overlapping of a number of species from
the tropics, sometimes persistent at other times casual, and still
others are more or less closely related to exotic forms. This mixing
from several directions creates in the area an altogether unusual
association of species (Blair 1950).

VEGETATIONAL PATTERNS
Effects of the coming of the Europeans have, of course, been
radical, the most immediate and conspicuous being the overgrazing
of the prairies. Even in 1777-78, Fr. Juan Agusti~ Morfi noted that
the vast herds of mustangs had depleted the range adjacent to the
waterings (Castafieda 1935). With later settlement, this was continued by cattle herds until certain species of grass were exterminated. Further, the lush growth of grass, which periodically
burned off, suppressed brush and tree seedlings. The thorn brush
chaparral has in this century spread from scattered thickets and
mottes, mainly along the watercourses, (see Fig. 9), until the former
grassland has been replaced in part by something resembling a
desert scrub condition (Gould 1969).
During historic times, Tortugas Creek has been an intermittent
stream, but there is some evidence it once had, in the vicinity of Site
41 ZV 14, a few seep springs that maintained a permanent
waterhole. A ledge of sandstone extending into the creek is of the
type associated with such springs elsewhere in south Texas. The
earlier Spanish travelers reported such a waterhole at a campsite
supposedly nearby (Inglis 1964:82). Large oaks of great age adjacent
to the creek may also support this theory.
Liveoaks of all sizes are found around the waterholes, along with
ash (Fraxinus berlandieriana), button bush (Cephalanthus occidentalis), cedar elm (Ulmus crassifolia) and occasionally the
mescal bean or frijolillo (Sophora secundiflora), whose seeds were
used by the Comanches as an emetic, "wild china" or soapberry
(Sapindus drummondii) and willow (Salix sp.). Until recent years the
small pepper called "chili piquin" (Capsicum baccatum) was plentiful in a few places. In overflows, small ponds and "hog wallows" a
coarse, tall grass called giant sacaton often forms a thick growth.
The cat-tail (Typha), now occurring in stock ponds nearby, may
have grown in these waterholes in earlier times. Water lilies were
known in a pond about a mile distant. The roots of these plants
could have been utilized as food.
In areas subject to overflow, where the soil is heavy and compact,

HOLDSWORTH/STEWART SITES

67

FIGURE 9. The Holdsworth Site, 41 ZV 14. View is of central part of
site, looking to the southwest. Note large trees and heavy vegetation on
right, paralleling Tortugas Creek. All excavation units were in
background, to right and left of standing figure.
the retama (Parkinsonia aculeata) may be dominant. The bean-like
seeds of this~small, slender tree related to the palo verde are said to
be edible. Broomweed (Xanthocephalum) occurs commonly in badly
eroded ground, as in washes along the creek.
Widespread in both the bottoms (channel and floodplain) and
uplands, the Mexican persimmon, mesquite and cat’s claw were
probably other sources of food to the early inhabitants. Seed pods of
mesquite (Prosopis glandulosa) are still used in Mexico to prepare a
nutritious paste known as mezquitamal containing about 30%
glucose (cf. Ruecking 1953:487). Acacia greggi, the long-flowered
cat’s claw, produces seed used by the Pimas and Papagos to make
pinole. The other species of Acacia, the round-flowered cat’s claw
(A. roemeriana), huisachilla (A. tortuosa), huajillo (A. berlandieri)
and blackbrush (A. amentacea) would likely have been similarly
useful. The last two species listed here are usually found at their
best on the uplands.

68

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

FIGURE 10. Typical Vegetation at the Holdsworth Site, 41 ZV 14.

Also very common, the granjeno (Celtis pallida) and various
species of buckthorn -- most importantly the brasil and the
squawbush -- of the genus Condalia produce quantities of small,
edible, sweet berries. On the uplands west of the creek in a more
alkaline soil, the ceniza (Leucophyllum texanum) is abundant, and
here also the creosote bush (Larrea) grows sparingly. Both shrubs
were thought to have medicinal value, and the creosote bush, here at
approximately its eastward limit, yielded a scale insect that was
made into a strong cement.
The extensive floodplain on the eastern side of the creek produces a number of cacti, principally the prickly pear (Opuntia
lindheimeri), the tasajillo (0. leptocaulis) and the petaya (Echinocereus
enneacanthus). The fruits of all these are held in rather high regard.
Two species of Echino-cactus and the pincushion cactus (Mammillaria) are also known in the area.

HOLDSWORTH/STEWART SITES

69

The guayacan (Porliera angustifolia), a lignum-vita, is plentiful
throughout this area and particularly on the floodplain where there
may also be found a scattering of all-thorns. The leaves of this
curious shrub are reduced to scales and their function taken over by
tough, green thorns and stems. The woods of these two are extremely hard. Another common shrub is thought to be "red berry"
(Schaefferia cuneffolia), whose small, numerous berries are edible.
Bee- or white-brush (Lippia lyciodes) grows sparingly here but in
some areas forms dense thickets. On sandy soils to the north a few
hundred yards, the lantana (Lantana horrida), supposedly poisonous,
may be found. Here, too, is the hog plum (Colubrina texensis). The
value of the black nutlets, if any, is not known, but, according to
local folklore, the bark was supposed to have some medicinal
property. The lighter soils are also favored by the two species of
Ephedra, one a climbing plant, the other a low, spreading shrub.
They are the sole representatives of the conifers in this area and are
known to live to a considerable age, possibly two centuries or more.
Though not seen in the immediate area, the coma (Bumelia
lyciodes) is common on the sandy uplands and gravelly terraces to
the east. This small tree of the Sapodilla family, resembling a
scrubby liveoak, produces a pea-sized berry with a sweet, rubbery
juice. In earlier times, children of Mexican extraction made
chewing gum from the berries, evidence of kinship with the tropical
Sapodilla which yields chicle.
Several plants with tuberous roots occur in the site area. These include the "flame flower" (Talinum lineare) which is small and inconspicuous above ground but has a large, edible tuber; the "four
o’clock" (Mirabilis) and the wild balsam (Ibervillea) both have
tuberous roots but it is not known if they are edible. The small wild
onion (Allium) is also thought to be present.
Other interesting plants of the general area are the leatherweed,
or "sangre de drago" (Jatropha spathulata), the chewing of the roots
of which was supposed to help gum disorders, the spanish dagger
(Yucca treculeana; see Fig. 10 for a view of Yucca sp. on the site),
provider of fiber as well as an edible flower and fruit, and the
maguey (Agave americana), whose various products are well known
(Castetter, Bell and Grove 1938).
From a sparse growth of buffalo grass (Buchlge) over the floodplain, the grass cover on the uplands improves to include various
bunch grasses (Trichloris, pink pappus grass, windmill grass, etc.),
curley mesquite (Hilaria), three-awn grass (Aristida), hairy grama
(Bouteloua), burr grass (Cenchrus) and others.

70

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
FAUNA

Land snails are common in the area, thriving particularly where
the soil is strongly alkaline. In the larger waterholes, the mussel of
the genus Unio may survive by estivation through periods of drouth.
Crayfish are found in backwaters and tributaries not reached by
fish.
About 4 miles downstream, a permanent lake (Woodward Lake)
of some size formed a reservoir of fish, which migrated upstream to
the site area during freshets lasting a week or two. Principal among
them were the catfishes, the black bass, sunfish (Lepomis), gar
(Lepisosteus) and the buffalo (Ictiobus). Bullfrogs (Rana catesbiana)
and leopard frogs (R. pipiens) are plentiful, as are common and
Fowler toads (Bufo sp.).
It is probable that a few alligators also occurred in the creek at
one time, as they have been reported even in recent years along the
Nueces River drainage. A variety of water turtles are still known.
The snapper and soft shell must be considered very rare but the
slider (Pseudemys) and mud turtle (Kinosternum) are numerous. On
land the gopher tortoise (Gopherus berlandieri) is plentiful, and the
western box turtle (Terrapene ornata) is seen at odd intervals. The
best known lizards, all small, are the horned lizard (Phrynosoma cornutum), the spiny swift (Sceloporus) and the racerunner
(Cnemidophorus). Best known of the larger snakes are the coachwhip
(Masticophis), the indigo snake (Drymarchon corals), which may
reach 8 feet in length, the bull snake (Pituophis melanoleucus),
measuring as much as 7 feet, the water snake (Natrix), and the
western diamondback rattlesnake (Crotalus atrox).
Any number of migratory waterfowl may be seen at some time in
the area (cf. Leopold 1959). Woodward Lake, mentioned above, was
considered in pioneer days to be an outstanding duck-shooting
location. Coots and gallinules are seen there today, along with a
variety of surface-feeding ducks, great blue herons, green herons
and other waders and shore birds. In the early days of Anglo settlement, the upland plover and curlew were favorite game birds,
though now they are not often seen. The once familiar wood stork
(Mycteria americana) no longer visits the area.
As the character of the land changed (from grassland to
brushland), it became less suitable for the bobwhite quail, while the
scaled quail (Callipela squamata), a bird of the typical southwestern
scrub, found itself better adapted to this region. Although the turkey
does not thrive as a rule in this type of country, the liveoak bottoms
(channel microenvironment) provide ample quantities of mast and
other forage to support a fair number of the birds. The Aguayo Ex-

HOLDSWORTH/STEWART SITES

71

pedition of 1722 reported many turkeys, "peacocks" (apparently
strutting gobblers), quail and rabbits on Tortugas Creek (Inglis 1964:
82). Other game birds include the mourning dove (Zenaidura) and
the white-winged dove (Zenaida), although the latter is now quite
rare. Meadowlarks are numerous in fall and winter.
Several hawks are known in the area, but only Harris’s hawk
(Parabuteo unicinctus), the red-tailed hawk (Buteo jamaicensis) and
Swainson’s hawk (B. swainsoni) are seen regularly. The golden eagle
and Audubon’s caracara (C. cheriway) are rare visitors. The two
species of vulture, the great horned owl and the barn owl are all
common. The burrowing owl (Speotyto), another victim of changing
conditions, is rarely seen nowadays. The barred owl (Strix varia)
may be heard occasionally in the more heavily wooded bottoms.
The roadrunner, a terrestrial cuckoo, maintains a reasonable
population.
During the early Anglo-Hispanic settlement of the region, the
nine-banded armadillo was a standard food item, and the fact this is
no longer the case (along with the reduction of predators), probably
accounts for its very noticeable increase in the last half century.
Raccoons are also, for similar reasons, now very common along the
creek. Skunks and badgers represent the weasel family, with infrequent reports of the long-tailed weasel (Mustela ffenata). Also
present is the Mexican opposum (D. marsupialis). The gray fox is
sighted occasionally and characteristically keeps to the wooded
strips of the channel microenvironment. The coyote persists in
some numbers, depending on the energy devoted to predator control
in this general area.
Up to about fifty years ago, the jaguar was known to wander
across the border at rare intervals and enter the Tortugas country,
while the ocelot and margay cat (and even bear) were seen
somewhat more often. The mountain lion has been reported more
recently, keeping to the wooded bottoms and sometimes crossing
from one stream to the other. It was never considered more than a
transient, however. The only native wild cat considered an
established resident is the bobcat, which is rather common.
Hoofed mammals now known in the area include only the whitetailed deer (Odocoileus texanus) and the white-collared peccary
(Pecari angulatus), another displaced exotic, which the early settlers
found very numerous. Whether the bison occurred here in recent
centuries is conjectural. The early Spaniards reported them at no
great distance, one sighting ~ictually being made within the county
(Inglis 1964:89), if it is possible to judge with any particular time.
Later explorers did not see them, and they were certainly gone by
the time of the first settlers. It appears, then, that the bison was
never common here in historical times. Probably the same conclusion may be reached for the pronghorn antelope (Inglis 1964:89).

72

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Rodents are numerous along Tortugas Creek, especially in the
channel microenvironment. Although the Mexican ground squirrel
(Citellus mexicanus) is the only species of gopher, and the fox
squirrel is rare, the southern plains wood rat (Neotoma micropus), a
robust animal measuring about 14 inches over all, is very plentiful,
several "houses" often visible at once in bushes or cacti. The
kangaroo rat (Dipodomys) leaves its curious footprints in the sand,
though seldom seen itself. Three species of small mice have been
reported, and the remains of the larger hispid pocket mouse
(Perognathus hispidus) has been found in the nests of hawks. The
cotton rat (Sigmodon hispidus) occurs in certain moist localities in
the channel microenvironment.
Two species of cottontail (Sylvilagus) are present along the Tortugas channel and on the floodplain. The hardy black-tailed jackrabbit (Lepus californicus) is ever-present, though seeming to go through
irregular population cycles not necessarily related to the food supply. It ranges through all microenvironments.

REFERENCES CITED

Blair, W. F.
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 2, No. 1,
pp. 85-91.
CastaKeda, Carlos E. (translator and annotator)
1935 History of Texas 1673-1779. Father Juan Agustin Morfi. The Quivira
Society, Albuquerque.
Castetter, E. F., W. H. Bell and A. R. Grove
1938 Ethnobiological Studies in the American Southwest VI. The Early
Utilization and the Distribution of Agave in the American Southwest. University of New Mexico Bulletin, Biological Series, 5, No. 4.
Coulter, J. M.
1894 Botany of Western Texas. U.S. Department of Agriculture. Washington.
Gould, F. W.
1969 Texas Plants, A Checklist and Ecological Summary. Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, Texas A & M University. College Station.
Inglis, J. M.
1964 A History of Vegetation on the Rio Grande Plain. Texas Parks and
Wildlife Bulletin, No. 45.

73

HOLDSWORTH/STEWART SITES

Leopold, A. S.
1959 Wildlife of Mexico: The Game Birds and Mammals. University of
California Press. Berkeley and Los Angeles.
Peterson, R. T.
1960 Field Guide to the Birds of Texas. Houghton-Mifflin. Boston.
Pratt, H. S.
1935 Vertebrate Animals of the United States. P. Blakiston’s Son & Co.
Philadelphia.
Ruecking, F., Jr.
1953 The Economic System of the Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern
Texas and Northeastern Mexico. Texas ]ourna! o[ Science, Vol. 5, No.
4, pp. 480-497.
Sargent, C. S.
1965 Manual of the Trees o[ North America. Dover. New York.
Schulz, E. D.
1928 Texas Wild Flowers. Laidlaw Bros. Chicago.
Whitehouse, E.
1962 Common Fall Flowers of the Coastal Bend of Texas. Welder Wildlife
Foundation. Sinton.
Crystal City, Texas

Appendix II

PRELIMINARY IDENTIFICATION OF
FAUNAL REMAINS FROM THE
HOLDSWORTH SITE (41 ZV 14)
DELBERT GILBOW

A preliminary study of a collection of faunal materials from the
Holdsworth Site (41 ZV 14) is presented here. A total of 334 pieces
were examined, 242 of which are unidentifiable (see Table 1). The

74

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

use of fine-mesh screens in the excavations permitted a high
recovery of small faunal materials. Preservation of the remains is
excellent, although most exhibit fracturing and charring/burning attributable to the use of the represented animals as food items.
Identification and distribution of faunal remains are given in
Table 1. Since interpretations have already been presented in the
main paper, I would just like to register my opinion that most of the
unidentifiable bones represent the whitetail deer. Most of these
fragments are thick splinters, indicating that deer bones at the site
were comminuted to obtain marrow. If this assumption is granted, it
is apparent that the major meat source for the prehistoric occupations was deer. The small mammals probably served as supplements to the meat diet unless, of course, the various species
represent seasonal preferences.
Identification of the faunal remains was facilitated through the
use of comparative collections of the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology
and those of the Archaeological Research Facility, Berkeley.

HOLDSWO RTH/STEWART SITES
EXCAVATION UNIT

SPECIES

75
NO. BONES

NO, OF
INDIVIDUALS
(estimated)

TEST 1
Zone I

Tortoise (Gopherus sp.)
Unidenlifiable

TEST 2
Zone 1

5
11

Sylvilagus (auduhoni?)
cottontail

Sigmodon hispidus
cotton rat
Unidentifiable
TEST 3
Zone 1

39

Odocoileus texanus
whitetail deer
Sigmodon hispidus
cotton rat

19

9

Neotoma micropus

21

10

plains pack rat
Tortoise (Gopherus sp)

TEST 4
Zone 1

Sylvilagus (auduboni?)
cottontail

16

Lepus californicas
jack rabbit
Sigmodon hispidus
cotton rat
Neotoma micropus
plains pack rat
Odocoileus texanus
whitetail deer
Tortoise (Gopherus sp.)

15

Unidentifiable
192
Table 1. bkmnal ttemains from the Holdsworth Site (41 ZV 14).

THE DEVIL’S HOLLOW SITE, A STRATIFIED
ARCHAIC CAMPSITE IN CENTRAL TEXAS
MICHAEL B. COLLINS

ABSTRACT
The Devil’s Hollow Site, excavated by the W.P.A. in 1939, contained a
small sample of projectile points and other artifacts of Early, Middle and
Late Archaic forms; these were stratified (respectively) below, in, and
above a small burned rock midden. The midden is of the general category,
"ring midden," and may have contained an earth oven not previously
reported at this time horizon. The dart points occurred in morphological
groups that

have important

implications

for Central Texas dart point

typology. Unfortunately, the site does not shed light on the nature of burned rock midden accumulation, however, as a possible earth oven, it raises
the question of communal cooking by a sizable group, The hypothesis is
put forward that seasonal coalescence of hunting-gathering bands may
have accompanied intensive but brief food-collecting activities.

INTRODUCTION
The Devil’s Hollow Site is a small buried midden of burned rock
excavated under sponsorship of the Works Projects Administration
through the agency of The University of Texas from November 3 to
16, 1939. Field supervision was by George R. Fox. The collection and
Fox’s excellent documentation are housed at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
The site was originally designated CT-67 and now bears the number
41 TV 38. Devil’s Hollow is now flooded by Lake Travis.
Data recovered by Fox indicate three important facts about the
site: (1) cultural material at the site is stratified; (2) the midden can
be placed in the Early Middle Archaic Period of the current Central
Texas Chronology; and (3) the midden possibly contained a large,
centrally-located, ash-filled cooking pit similar to that occurring in
"mescal pits" (see Greer 1965; 1967). Also, the projectile points as a
group have important typological implications.

FIELD METHODS
A crew of approximately eight unskilled laborers was employed
to excavate the Devil’s Hollow Site. It is clear from Fox’s notes that
the object of this excavation was to expose the midden, recover the
artifacts from it, and nothing more. Fill above and below the midden was removed with picks and shovels and thrown, without

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

78

SITE
41 TV 38
SITE

o

MAP

LOCATION MAP

I

~

,~’"°"

AREA

FIGURE 1. Devil’s Hollow Site, site location map.
screening, into the creek bottom. Evidently, trowels and brushes
were employed in excavating the midden, but is likely that picks
and shovels also were used. The midden fill was not screened. In
other words, specimens collected or counted were those noticed by
the workmen. Profiles, maps, and photographs were made in quantity and are of high quality.

THE SITE
Devil’s Hollow is a deep, narrow canyon tributary to the Colorado
River. The canyon averages a few hundred yards wide and heads
less than 3 miles northwest of its junction with the Colorado; this
junction is in northwestern Travis County approximately 16 miles
northwest of Austin, Texas (Fig. 1). The intermittent Devil’s Hollow
Creek has entrenched into colluvial deposits at the base of the
steeply sloping walls of the Hollow and has deposited limited
amounts of alluvium along its margins (Fig. 2).
The Devil’s Hollow midden was seen eroding from the left bank
of th~ creek approximately one-fourth of a mile above the Colorado
River: Roughly its southwestern half had been eroded away and the
resulting exposure was a northwest-southeast profile through the

DEVIL’S HOLLOW

79

center of the midden (Fig. 3, Profile I).
Exposed in the cut bank were, from the base upward, a stratum of
red clay at least 5 feet in thickness, the midden, a deposit of
weathered limestone colluvium ("gravel" in Fox’s notes) averaging
4 feet in thickness, and a dark-colored topsoil layer approximately 2
feet in thickness (Fig. 4). The surfaces of each of these strata dipped
downstream and toward the cut bank (that is, to the southeast). As
soil samples were not available for examination and the site is no
longer accessible, Fox’s stratigraphic descriptions must suffice; his
notes (pp. 9, 18-19) include the following:
(1) RED CLAY: red, sandy clay with a thin layer of occupational
debris near the top; otherwise, it contains no gravel, shell, or
stones.
(2) MIDDEN: described below.
(3) "GRAVEL": yellow gravel laid in successive layers, some
layers of stone separate strata of gravel; present were limited
amounts of cultural debris and many mussel shells.
(4) TOPSOIL: dark-colored humus soil, archeologically sterile.
To judge from profiles and photographs, the contact between the
red clay and the "gravel" involves some interbedding, perhaps
resulting from downslope movements. Similarly, a small lens of
midden deposit is buried in the red clay (Fig. 3, Profile II)

FIGURE 2. General view of the Devil’s Hollow Site during excavation;
the view is toward the southeast and shows the steeply sloping wall of
the Hollow.

80

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

DEVIl’S HOLLOW SITE
41TV38
PROFILE I

NW

SE

RED CLAY
MIDDEN

AaH
TOPSOIL

FIGURE 3. Devil’s Hollow Site, plan map of the excavations and
profiles I, II, and III.

suggesting either periodic deposition of midden debris with intervening accumulation of red clay or some form of mixing.
The midden was 26 feet in northwest-southeast diameter and 9
feet of its northeast-southwest diameter remained. Its upper surface
(Fig. 5) sloped slightly from upstream to downstream (northwest to
southeast) and included a shallow, ash-filled depression near the
center of the original eroded profile. This depression was approximately 8 feet in diameter and about 1.0 foot in depth. The center of the depression contained a nearly rock-free ash deposit 1.2
feet in diameter and 0.3 of a foot in thickness. As can be seen in
Fox’s photograph (Fig. 4) there are virtually no rocks in the profile
below this central depression, a strong indication that the rock-free
center of the midden extended down to the red clay. This condition
would suggest the presence of an earth oven (perhaps similar to, but
shallower than, those characteristic of the "mescal pit") rather than
a surface hearth from which fire-cracked rock had been thrown into
a circular heap ("midden circle"); unfortunately this can only be a
suggestion as no other observations were recorded or data collected
to refute or corroborate the photographic hint.
The intact ashy deposit in the central depression precludes the
possibility that some form of post-depositional disturbance caused
the depression in the center of this midden.
The midden surrounding the central depression was composed
principally of angular fragments of burned limestone rock and con-

DEVIL’S HOLLOW

81

tained considerable ash as well as a large number of freshwater
mussel shells.
Fox notes that the mussel shells were scattered throughout the
midden but that some tended to occur in concentrations. One concentration of more than 100 shells was 1.4 feet east of the ash-filled
pit and consisted of a "pile" of 0.4 of a foot thick (diameter not
recorded). Another such concentration occurred in Square B-4.
Mammalian remains included only a few small charred scraps of
long bone (deer?) and a fragmentary innominate (deer).
In summary, although this was clearly a ring midden, too few
details are recorded to determine the precise configuration of the
central depression, and it is impossible to assign the feature to
either the "midden circle" or "mescal pit" categories as they are
defined by Greer (1965, 1967).

FIGURE 4. Devil’s Hollow midden exposed. Note the stratigraphy as exposed in excavation walls, the depressed center of the ring midden surface, and the absence of rocks in the profile below the central
depression.

82

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

FIGURE 5. Detail of upper surface of the Devil’s Hollow Midden. The
rock-flee depression is to the right, and the ring midden configuration of
the burned rocks is clearly visible.

Excavations were not extended more than a few feet beyond the
margins of the midden (Fig. 3) so data are lacking on the nature of
the site adjacent to this feature. Artifacts were found in the upper
portion of the red clay, in the midden, and in the "gravel" above the
midden. These materials, particularly the projectile points, provided
additional data toward the refinement of the local chronology.

THE ARTIFACTS
Sixty-eight implements, all of stone, are described below; an additional 262 flakes are tabulated by vertical provenience, but these
were evidently discarded at the time of excavation. Dart point data

83

DEVIL’S HOLLOW

have been presented in more detail than those of the other artifact
classes. The projectile points are designated by specimen numbers
in the plates, in the descriptions, in the tabulations of metric data,
and in Table I. For the remaining artifact classes, individual data are
not presented, and provenience is reported by classes and by ver.tical provenience only (Table II). Measurements of chipped stone
artifacts are reported in millimeters; of ground stone artifacts, in
centimeters. An asterisk (*) denotes an estimated measurement.
CHIPPED STONE

Dart Points
Bulverde-like I (7 specimens, Fig. 6). Blades are triangular with slightly convex
edges; shoulders are prominent and lack barbs (except specimen 3 with one barb);
four (6,9,7, and 3) exhibit slight asymmetry; stems are parallel-sided or expand very
slightly; bases of 6 and 9 are straight and bases of 11, 7, 12, 14, and 3 are slightly concave; the stem of 11 is wedge-shaped in longitudinal section. Stems average one-third
of total length. Specimens are thin, bifacia!ly-flaked, and exhibit marginal retouching;
specimen 12 has longitudinal, bifacial thinning flakes extending up from the base. All
are of opaque flint in gray and gray-tan colors. These projectile points occupy a morphological position between the defined types Bulverde and Pedernales (Suhm and
]elks 1962:169,235).

6

9

11

7

12

14

3

maximum length

61

62

58*

72*

--

59

52

maximum width

32

27

28

28

28

30

31

7

7

7

7

7

7

specimen number

thickness

6.5

,

stem length

17

17

17

15

15

20

14

stem width

18

17

20

16

16

16

17

Bulverde-like II (2 specimens, Fig. 6). These two specimens exhibit long triangular
blades with slightly convex edges; shoulders are prominent but only one tends to be
barbed; stems expand very slightly and bases are slightly convex. Both are completely
bifacially thinned with bifacial marginal retouching; stems do not show wedgeshaped longitudinal section. One specimen is slightly beveled to the right along stem
edges. The specimens occupy a morphological position between the defined types
Bulverde and Nolan as defined by Suhm and ]elks (1962: 169,225) but lack the distinctive wedged stem of the former and strongly beveled stem of the latter.
specimen number

10

16

maximum length

62

72

maximum width

27

33

thickness

7

7.2

stem length

14

18

stem width

18

19

84

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

12

11
012345
t1111]
CM

14
19

10

18

16
15

17

20

FIGURE 6. Devil’s Hollow Site, dart points. 3,6,7,9,11,12, and 14,
Bulverde-like I; 10 and 16, Bulverde-like II; 15, Bulverde?; 18 and 19,
Montell; 1 and 4, Nolan; 5, Trctvis; 8,17, and 20, miscellaneous.

DEVIL’S HOLLOW

85

Bulverde ? (1 specimen, Fig. 6). This small, resharpened dart point exhibits a
short, triangular blade, prominent shoulders lacking barbs, and a parallel-sided stem
with

very

slightly concave

base.

It

is

bifacially

flaked

with

bifacial

marginal

retouching; base is not as strongly wedge-shaped in longitudinal section as most
Bulverde specimens.

specimen number

15

maximum length

35

maximum width

2i

thickness

7

stem length

15

stem width

18

Montell (2 specimens, Fig. 6). Each is fragmentary; however, the distinctive
basal notch is present. Blades appear to include one broad, thin example and one thin
specimen with moderately narrow blade; shoulders are prominent and barbed; stem
edges expand slightly; bases are convex with deep central notches. Materials are graytan, opaque flint. Each is thinned with broad, shallow thinning flakes and exhibits
bifacial marginal retouching.

specimen number:
maximum length

19
18
....

maximum width

35*

thickness

39

5

6

stem length

18

13

stem width

24

27

Nolan

(2

specimens,

Fig.

6)I

Blade

of more

c~)mplete

specimen

is

long,

triangular, with edges slightly convex; shoulders of both are moderate and rounded;
stems are approximately parallel-sided, bases straight’, stem of specimen 1 moderately
beveled to right, of specimen 4, steeply beveled to the right. One is of tan translucent,
the other of gray translucent, flint. Each is evenly bifacially thinned and exhibits
bifacial marginal retouching. Specimen 4 has two basal thinning flake scars on one
face resulting in a somewhat thinner base than that of specimen 1.

specimen number

1

4

maximum length

80*

--

maximum width

28

27*

thickness

8

8

stem length

19

19

stem width

20

19

Travis (1 specimen, Fig. 6). Blade is long and triangular with very slightly convex edges; shoulders moderate and not barbed; stem expands slightly, and base is
straight. Made of flint and exhibits biracial thinning and marginal retouching.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

86

5

specimen number:
maximum length

90

maximum width

24
8

thickness
stem length

20

stem width

19

Miscellaneous stemmed dart points (3 specimens, Fig. 6). Specimen 17 is a
large point with triangular blade; blade edges nearly straight, shoulders prominent
and slightly barbed, stem edges expanding and base convex. It is bifacially flaked and
exhibits bifacial marginal retouching. Specimen 20 is also large with slightly convex
blade edges and prominent shoulders with one strong and one slight barb; stem is
missing. It is bifacially thinned and marginally retouched. Specimen 8 is a basal
fragment of a thick, stemmed dart point; the stem is short and broad; shoulders and
blade are broken away.
specimen number:

17

maximum length

77*

20

8

maximum width

30

36

thickness

11

9

8

stem length

15

--

11

stem width

22

--

21

....
--

Other Bifaces
Large, thinned bffaces (3 specimens, Fig. 7). These are convex-edged, bifacially
thinned implements exhibiting marginal retouching; the base of the one complete lanceolate specimen (Fig. 7a) is cortex, and the basal fragment (Fig. 7c) exhibits a chipped convex base. Length of complete specimen, 107 mm; widths are 48, 40, and 45
mm.; thicknesses, 15, 9, and 12 ram.

Fragmentary bffaces (10 specimens).

These include 3 probable projectile point

tips, 6 fragments of small, thin, bifacially-flake "knives" and 1 thick bifacial fragment.
Thick, crude bffaces (9 specimens, Fig. 7). These are large, thick crudely-flaked
bifaces with very limited trimming of edges’, roughly lanceolate in outline to irregular,
the more irregular items are probably cores whereas the more regular ones may be
either implements or unfinished implements (preforms).

Miscellaneous Chipped Stone
Scrapers (4 specimens, Figs. 7 and 8). Three

specimens are convex-edged

side

scrapers, one is an irregular flake with edge-trimming on two intersecting edges. One
of the convex-edged specimens exhibits very heavy wear along a portion of the
scraping edge; this section of the scraper edge also exhibits bifacial chipping, apparently resulting from the heavy use (Fig. 7f).
Flakes (268 specimens). Flakes were not systematically saved by Fox’, however,
they were counted and their vertical distribution is summarized in Table II. The 6
flakes which were kept include 2 initial cortex flakes, 2 secondary cortex flakes, and 2
interior flakes.

DEVIL’S HOLLOW

87

i
t

0
I

I
I

2345
1,1 I I
CM

FIGURE 7. Devil’s Hollow Site, chipped stone artifacts, a-c, large thinned bifaces; d-e, thick, crude bifaces; f, scraper with enlarged view of
heavily worn edge.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

88

Choppers (3 specimens, Fig. 8). One is a large quartzite cobble with flakes
removed from both faces along two4hirds of its circumference; the remaining third
exhibits cortex. Opposite the cortex, approximately one-half of the chipped edge is
heavily battered (Fig. 8b). One smaller specimen (Fig. 8d) is a cortex~covered cobble
with flakes removed bifacially from one end. The other is similar but was made on a
large flake.

GROUND STONE
Manos
Biracial manos (9 specimens, Fig. 8). Of these 9 specimens, 8 are fragmentary.
Materials include fine-grained pink granite (5), dense limestone (1), sandstone (2),
and quartzite (1). Grinding surfaces vary: four specimens exhibit 2 convex facets; one
exhibits two flat facets; and four exhibit 1 flat and 1 convex facets. Thickness ranges
from 3.5 to 5.5 and averages 4.5 cm. The one complete specimen is oval and measures
11.5 x 7.5 x 4 cm.
Unffacial manos (3 specimens, Fig. 8). This group includes a circular sandstone
mano with a flat facet (10 x 9.2 x 4.8 cm.); a small ovoid mano of pink granite with a
small, oval flat facet (8 x 7.5 x 4.5 cm.); and a small oval quartzite mano with a small,
round flat facet (8 x 7.5 x 5 cm.).
Mano fragments (3 specimens). These are two sandstone and one pink granite
fragments exhibiting one or two grinding surfaces; none is sufficiently complete to indicate its original form.

Surface Collection
In addition to the specimens descrfbed above, several items of surface provenience
occur in the Devil’s Hollow Site collections; according to Fox’s notes, this surface
collection was made over an area of several acres and probably has little relevance to
the excavated material. The surface finds include basal fragments of one Montell, one
Travis, one Pedernales, and 2 unidentified stemmed dart points plus a triangular dart
point ("Taylor Thin-Base") and a small convex-based biface. Also present in the surface material are a quartzite unifacial mano, a quartzite hammerstone, 14 cores or
thick bifacial implements, a large burin spall, and 5 utilized flakes.
TABLE I. Devil’s Hollow Site, dart point
distributions by specimen numbers.
horizontal units
B-3

B-4

C-3

gravel

17

18

19, 20

4

midden

9

11, 10

12, 14, 15, 16

7

red clay

1, 3

4

5,6,7,8

7

4

4

10

18

vertical units

N
specimen numbers

N
0

topsoil

Nolan: 1,4
Travis: 5

Bulverde-like I: 3,6,7,9,11,12,14
Bulverde-like II: 10,16
Bulverde?: 15

Miscellaneous:

Montell: 18,19

8, 17, 20

DEVIL’S HOLLOW

89

SUMMARY

Bulverde

Nolan

TravJs

Montell

topsoil
gravel

2

midden

7

red clay

3

TABLE II. Devil’s Hollow Site, vertical distribution of
chipped and ground stone artifacts
other than projectile points.

RED CLAY

MIDDEN

GRAVEL

UNCERTAIN

TOTALS

CHIPPED STONE
large thin bifaces

2

fragmentary bifaces

1

thick, crude bifaces

1

scrapers

1
69

164

1

2

flakes
choppers

1

3

3

10

7

1

9

2

1

4

35

268

5

3

GROUND STONE
bifacial manos

1

unifacial manos
mano fragments
TOTALS

2

6

9

3
1

2

77

187

3
3
47

312

SYNTHESIS
Although better controls and documentation prevailed in the excavation of this site than in many of its contemporary excavations,
three basic kinds of information are lacking: descriptions of the
natural strata are inadequate; no excavations were conducted outside of the midden area; and many items (e.g. chipping debris) were
not saved. A sample of mussel shells was saved. And, apparently
the few existing mammalian faunal specimens represent all that
were found. Of course, it would not be realistic to expect in 1939 the
application of certain procedures which are today considered fairly
routine (e.g., collection of charcoal; systematic collection of flakes;
collection of soil and pollen samples; more refined provenience
controls, etc.) and Fox cannot be criticized for these deficiencies.
However, it is impossible to evaluate the prevailing ecological conditions during the various periods of occupation or even to determine the depositional environment (e.g., it is not known if the "red
clay" is water lain or if the term, "gravels," refers to actual gravels
or to colluvium as the photographs would suggest). Similarly, with
excavations restricted to the midden proper, nothing specific can be

90

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

012545
IIII1,,,I
CM

¯ F/GURE 8. Devil’s Hollow Site, chipped and ground stone artifacts, a,
scraper; b, large quartzite chopper; c, convex-edged side-scraper; d, small
chopper; e, biracial mano; f, unifacial mano.

DEVIL’S HOLLOW

91

said of the remainder of the site and no progress is made toward understanding burned rock middens in terms of their relationship to
associated cultural activities. Stone-chipping technology must be inferred from the more-or-less finished specimens collected, and the
nature and amount of chipping conducted at the site remains obscure.

On the other hand, the diagnostic specimens were recovered in a
stratigraphic relationship consistent with that from other sites in
Central Texas (Table I). In the red clay beneath the midden were
found projectile point types Nolan, Travis, and Bulverde-like I as well
as one miscellaneous form. These give an age indication estimated
at 3500 to 2000 B.C. and are assigned to the Early Archaic (Sorrow et
el. 1967:141-144; Johnson et al. 1962:118-124). The midden contained
Early Middle Archaic specimens -- types Bulverde-like I and II and
one possible Bulverde- probably dates from about 2000 B.C.
(Sorrow et al. 1967; Johnson et al. 1962). Although there is certainlya
considerable temporal overlap among types Travis, Nolan and
Bulverde (Sorrow et al. 1967; Shafer 1963; Weir 1967), there is reason
to believe that Bulverde may not have achieved popularity as early as
did Travis and Nolan and may have survived longer (Johnson et al.
1962) which is perhaps the case at Devil’s Hollow Site (Table I).
Ring midden dates from elsewhere range from about 600 B.C. to
A.D. 1500 (Greer 1968), considerably later than the evident dates for
Devil’s Hollow.
Above the midden are found Early Late Archaic Montell points
which seem to date between 900 and 400 B.C. (Sorrow 1968:46-47).
Other than the projectile points and manos, the relative vertical
distributions of artifact classes at Devil’s Hollow appear random,
although most classes show an increase in frequency within the
midden. Manos show a trend of increasing numbers through time
with bifacial forms becoming the most abundant implement in the
gravel stratum. Incidentally, as no metates were found at the site, it
is not entirely clear what the functions of manos may have been.
One is tempted to suggest that the trend of increasing manos may be
evidence of increased reliance on the gathering (and processing) of
plant foods. However, in the absence of metates it seems best not to
rule out the possibility that manos served in some capacity other
than plant-food grinding -- hide working, for example.
The collection of dart points from Devil’s Hollow midden is
small; however, the Bulverde specimens, particularly Bulverde-like I
and Bulverde-like II, form a very homogeneous group. The degree of
homogeneity may indicate a short interval of manufacture, although

92

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

this can only be speculation. Aside from their homogeneity, these
points are interesting in light of their morphological position between types Bulverde and Pedernales as well as an apparently intermediate stratigraphic position. The Devil’s Hollow Bulverde
points persist later in time than types Travis and Nolan, a condition
not found in Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir (Sorrow et al. 1967) or at
the Youngsport Site (Shafer 1963). At most stratified sites in Central
Texas, later Pedernales points replace earlier Bulverde, Travis and
Nolan points. Perhaps at Devil’s Hollow an incipient stage of Pealerhales development is isolated in the midden deposits.
In general, then, the Devil’s Hollow Site contained evidence of occupations from the Early Archaic to the Early Late Archaic and
tends either to confirm the slightly later peak of Bulverde popularity
seen at the Wunderlich and Oblate sites in Canyon Reservoir (Johnson et al. 1962) or to evidence an incipient stage in Pedernales
development.
Technological and subsistence data are meager. The fairly large
number of flakes in each of the three strata indicates that at least
some flint work was done at the site. This may be further indicated
by some of the artifacts here referred to as "thick, crude bifaces"
(e.g. Fig. 7e) which appear to be early stages in bifacial thinning and
by certain of the "large, thinned bifaces" (e.g. Fig. 7b) which appear
to be unfinished bifacial implements. The granite manos and quartzite chopper indicate direct or indirect acquisition of materials from
the Colorado River gravels or the Llano Uplift region whereas the
varietites of flint are probably all obtainable on the Edwards
Plateau. Lack of floral and adequate terrestrial faunal remains
preclude evaluation of these aspects of the subsistence base. Mussel
shells were present in the following numbers: red clay-620; midden1176; gravel-749. These figures indicate a continuing exploitation of
Colorado River resources throughout the occupations of the site as
well as corroborate the artifactual indication that the greatest
amount of cultural activity transpired at the site during the period of
midden accumulation. An inquiry into the possible nature of that
cultural activity is presented below.
Perhaps the most important single aspect of the Devil’s Hollow
Site is the possible presence of an earth oven. Had it been more
clearly documented, the large central depression in the upper surface of the midden might have been an important feature to be considered, not only in the technological repertoire of the Early Middle
Archaic peoples of Central Texas, but as an indicator of moderate
social complexity. Earth ovens require an expenditure of labor and

DEVIL’S HOLLOW

93

are efficient only for quantities of food consistent with fairly large
social groups. However, the depression is not certainly an earth
oven~ and the presence of such features at this early time horizon
must await confirmation at other sites.

Burned Rock Middens and Cultural Activity
Burned rock middens have been investigated for more than fifty
years in Central Texas (Pearce 1919), yet very little progress has
been made toward understanding their place in the total range of activities conducted at the sites in which they occur nor has it been
determined how they fit into the annual cycle of the cultures of
which they were a part.
Thus far, concern mainly has been with the content of burned
roc~ens, their temporal position, and their taxonomic
significance to the Midwestern system. However, the following
suggestions have been made concerning the activities which brought
about these distinct concentrations of midden debris:
(1) most authors agree that a range of activities is involved
but that repeated use of stone in fireplace preparation is of
major importance (Kelley and Campbell 1942; Johnson et
al. 1962; Weir 1967).
(2) the feeling that activity was concentrated on and very
near the midden area is implicit or explicit in most
discussions of burned rock middens (Suhm 1959; Jelks
1951; Weir 1967; Johnson et al. 1962; Kelley and Campbell
1942)
(3) it is suggested by some that burned rock middens are
central to a larger spread of activity areas (Sorrow 1969: 1,
46-51) or that they are the result of deliberate removal of
debris from an area of habitation to a central point of
disposal (Sorrow 1969; Hester 1970:247; Sorrow and Hester
personal communications).
The suggestions presented in number 3 above are based in part
upon investigations not yet published; however, each is inferred
from convincing evidence at different sites. My purpose in this
discussion is to suggest that certain technological and social consequences of seasonality must also be considered in evaluating
these proposals. This is deemed necessary in light of the widespread
opinion implied or explicitly stated in most discussion of burned
rock middens, that such middens are the result of activities (perhaps
intermittently) of small social groups over long periods of time.

94

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The archeological cultures of the Central Texas Archaic are
generally thought of as resulting from the activities of small
nomadic groups subsisting by hunting and gathering (cf. Suhm
1960:73). This inference is warranted by the evidence; however, it
requires a qualification. Ethnographic evidence suggests that with
very few -- mostly maritime -- exceptions, reliance upon wild flora
and faunal resources in temperate regions dictates that the exploitative groups must be small and nomadic with the exception of.
certain seasonal congregations into larger units. It has not been invalid
to interpret the archeological evidence from the Central Texas Archaic (which actually persists until at least A.D. 1250 and the first
consumption, though perhaps not production, of agricultural
products) as indicating reliance upon hunting and gathering. Nor
has it been invalid to further infer that this involved small, nomadic
groups. However, it is possible that it has been an oversight to
assume that only small units existed and, therefore, that the accumulation of a sufficient volume of material to be called a burned
rock midden indicates the elapse of considerable time.
Is it not possible that in the Central Texas Archaic small nomadic
groups did prevail through most of the year but coalesced annually
or seasonally? Ethnographically this pattern is not uncommon; for
example, the hunting-and-gathering Washo of California and
Nevada (d’Azevedo 1963) and the Southern Paiute of Utah and
Arizona (Kelly 1964; Steward 1934) are known to have assembled in
large groups in the early fall, but to have operated as small, dispersed bands during the remainder of the year. Similarly, the
Coahuiltecans of southwestern Texas and northeastern Mexico
congregated into large bands during the harvest of prickly pear tuna
in late summer (Newcomb 1961). This pattern of activity could
result in the accumulation of a midden the size of that at Devil’s
Hollow in a short period of time.
If we assume for the moment that half of the Devil’s Hollow midden had eroded away at the time that Fox excavated it, we may get
an idea of its total size by doubling Fox’s counts for various kinds of
debris. The resultant estimated quantities for the entire midden are
a.s follows: 38,906 burned rock, 136 stone implements, and 2352
mussel shells (burned rock and mussel shell counts from Fox’s
notes). I can think of no basis for calculating rates of accumulation
for burned rock and implements for various group sizes, however,
food remains and estimated rates of consumption allow some very
gross calculations of elapsed time of accumulation. These
calculations rest upon a number of assumptions, none of which is

DEVIL’S HOLLOW

95

demonstrably valid, and the
possibilities whose sole purpose
for further discussion. The first
and counted accurately all of the

results can be taken only as
is to provide a point of departure
assumption is that Fox collected
mussel shells in the midden. The

second assumption is that all cooking activities of the entire group
(of whatever size) transpired at the communal midden. The third
assumption is that no significant quantities of mussel shell were
discarded outside of the midden area. None of these assumptions
regarding the sample can be verified. Further assumptions are
necessary concerning the nature of human consumption of river
mussels; the variables here are not subject to specific verification
for the prehistoric Devil’s Hollow inhabitants, but reasonable ranges
of estimate within human limits can be verified in a general way.
Without detailed data on the identification and food value of the
mussels from the Devil’s Hollow midden, estimates through foodvalue figures and human requirements are not possible (see Ascher
1959, for an example of this method using marine mollusks), nor
would this be warranted given the nature of the sampling.
Fox’s count of 2352 single valves suggests the figure of approximately 1200 bivalve mollusks for the midden. Employing the
relationship,
No. mussels/person/day X No. persons X No. days - 1200
mussels, the following table may be constructed (see Figure 9 for a
graph of these relationships):
No. mussels/
person/day
(arbitrary
estimates)
5
5
5
5
5
20
20
20
20

No. persons
6
10
25
60
100
6
10
25
60

No. days

=

1200 mussels

40
24
9.5
4
2.5
10
6
2.5
1

Reading from the graph (Figure 9), a given number of people
eating five mussels per person per day or twenty mussels per person each day will require a certain number of days to accumulate
the 1200 or so mussels represented by the Devil’s Hollow remains.
The estimates possible from these figures range from six people

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

96
100"

Assumed
of

Rates

Consumption
- 5 mussels/person/day

60

persons
40"
\
20"

\

5

I

[

I

I

t

I

I

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

days
FIGURE 9. Graph of estimated lengths of occupation, Devil’s Hollow
Site, as functions of assumed rates of mussel consumption and
population size. Arbitrarily, limits of no fewer than six nor no more
than 100 persons are graphed as these seem to be effective minimums
and maximums among known hunter-gatherers. Similarly, fewer than
five or more than 20/mussels/person/day are arbitrarily assumed to be
unlikely.

requiring 40 days to consume 1200 mussels to 100 people requiring 2
or 3 days at the rate of five mussels per person per day. Eating 20
mussels per day per person, 6 people could accomplish the task in
10 days or 60 people in one day.
In short, even as minimum figures, these data indicate that the
amount of debris comprising this midden could have accumulated
in a matter of days or weeks, especially if a con~munal earth oven
were constructed where a fairly high number of stones were heated
in the preparation of one "meal."
The alternative to a large number of people for a short period of
time would be a small number of people for a long period of time.
Burned rock middens, in the latter case, then would result from the
prolonged, and probably intermittent, use of the same place for
small cooking fires (cf. Kelley and Campbell 1942). This is clearly
the case at many Central Texas burned rock middens; for example,
the Williams Site (Suhm 1959) was evidently repeatedly used for a
number of centuries.

DEVIL’S HOLLOW

97

The evidence now available suggest that certain middens, as well
as certain deposits within middens, may result from the brief activity
of a large group whereas other middens may have accumulated
slowly as a result of repeated occupation at the same locus by small
groups. An hypothesis worthy of testing would be that two seasons
in the annual cycle are represented by these two distinct kinds of
midden deposit. Support for the hypothesis would come from
significant differences in the maturational stages or seasonal assemblages of faunal and (if preserved) floral remains, including pollens.
In this connection, the very few bits of deer bone (probably from
one individual) found in the Devil’s Hollow midden would be consistent with the suggestion that the site was occupied briefly,
perhaps during a season of heavy plant-food or river mussel exploitation when deer were killed only opportunistically.
Artifactual evidence provides a far weaker source of inference;
however, sites such as
al. 1962), Midden G at
den at Devil’s Hollow
dart point forms. The

Midden B at the Wunderlich Site (Johnson et
the Greenhaw site (Weir 1967), and the midshow moderate to extreme homogeneity in
extreme homogeneity of the Devil’s Hollow

specimens 3,6,9,11,12,7, and 14 and their close similarity to
specimens 10,16, and even 15, may be evidence that a short interval
is represented. This is to say, individuals enculturated in the same
group would be more likely to produce a homogeneous array of
projectile points than individuals experiencing separate learning
environments (Hemmings 1970, has put forward a similar interpretation regarding the high degree of homogeneity among Clovis
points from the San Pedro Valley in southeastern Arizona). Less
marked than, but similar "to, the degree of homogeneity at Devil’s
Hollow is the homogeneity of the 11 Nolan points from Greenhaw
Midden G which were found with 18 other points of types Langtry,
Gastroville, Marshall, Pedernales, Travis, Zorra and unclassified forms
(Weir, 1967). Pedernales points account for almost 40% of the dart
points from the Wunderlich Midden B whereas the remaining 60%
is composed of 22 different forms (Johnson et al. 1962). On the other
hand, Greenhaw Midden C, Wunderlich Midden A and numerous
other sites contain very heterogeneous collections of dart point
forms and probably represent extended and repeated periods of occupation; but it is possible, particularly in the light of the spatial
segregation sometimes recognized in dart point forms within the
heterogeneous middens (cf. Jelks 1951), that these repeated activities
at least occasionally were by large groups for short periods of time.
In summary, data from the Devil’s Hollow Site form the basis for

98

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

three proposals amenable to testing in future investigations of burned rock midden sites in the Central Texas Archaic. First, in order to
test the suggestion that earth ovens may be present, careful scrutiny
of the midden configuration needs to be made. Second, two
suggestions concerning the significance of typology, especially of
projectile points, are made: perhaps recognition of homogeneous artifact forms will lead to further refinement of the local chronology;
also, the tenuous position has been taken that marked homogeneity
of projectile points indicates an abbreviated interval of manufacture
within a single social unit. Third, to test the proposal that social
groups of large size may be responsible for at least some middens, a
number of specific kinds of information are to be sought. In the
vicinity of the midden, the presence of reduplicative and contemporaneous clusters of remains indicative of separate households
would offer one positive test for large group occupancy. Biological
evidence should be sought and analyzed for seasonality. Means for
estimating population size from food remains might be developed as
well as an appreciation for the food potential of the Central Texas
flora and fauna under various environmental conditions, in different seasons, and under various extractive technologies.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Dr. Dee Ann Story, director of the Anthropological Laboratories, The University of

Texas at Austin, kindly made available to me the collection and records from the
Devil’s Hollow Site. Useful criticisms have come from W. A. Longacre of the University of Arizona, from Drs. Story and T. N. Campbell as well as from Harry I. Shafer
and William M. Sorrow of The University of Texas, from S. Alan Skinner of Southern
Methodist University, and from Thomas R. Hester of the University of California at
Berkeley. Mrs. Terri Lazicki of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory arranged
for the enlargements of the photographs used in Figures 2,4, and 5.
REFERENCES CITED

Ascher, Robert
1959 A Prehistoric Population Estimate Using Midden Analysis and Two
Population Models. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, Vol. 15, pp.
168-178.
d’Azevedo, Warren L. (ed.)
1963 The Washo Indians of California and Nevada. University of Utah Anthropological Papers, No. 67.
Greet, John W.
1965 A Typology of Midden Circles and Mescal Pits. Southwestern Lore,
Vol. 31, No. 3, pp. 41-55.
1967 Midden Circles Versus Mescal Pits. American Antiquity, Vol. 32:1,
pp. 108-109.

DEVIL’S HOLLOW

99

1968 Notes on Excavated Ring Midden Sites, 1963-1968. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 38, pp. 39-44.
Hemmings, E. Thomas
1970 Early Man in the San Pedro Valley, Arizona. PhD Thesis, Department of
Anthropology, University of Arizona.
Hester, Thomas R.
1970 Burned Rock Midden Sites on the Southwestern Edge of the Edwards
Plateau, Texas. Plains Anthropologist, Vol. 15, No. 51, Pt. 1, pp. 237-248.
Jelks, Edward B.
1951 Relationships between Foci of the Edwards Plateau Aspect: A
Distributional Analysis of Diagnostic Projectile Point Types from Archaeological Sites in the Marshall Ford Dam Reservoir, Travis County,
Texas. Master’s Thesis, The University of Texas.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr., Dee Ann Suhm, and Curtis D. Tunnell
1962 Salvage Archeology of Cayon Reservoir: The Wunderlich, Footbridge,
and Oblate Sites. Texas Memorial Museum, Bulletin No. 5.
Kelley, J. Charles and T. N. Campbell
1942 What are the Burnt Rock Mounds of Texas? American Antiquity, Vol.
7, No. 3, pp. 319-322.
Kelly, Isabel T.
1964 Southern Paiute Ethnography. University of Utah, Anthropological
Papers, No. 69.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961 The Indians of Texas: From Prehistoric to Modern Times. University of
Texas Press. Austin.
Pearce, J. E.
1919 Indian Mounds and Other Relics of Indian Life in Texas. American
Anthropologist (N.S.) Vol. 21, No. 3, pp. 228-234.
Shafer, Harry J.
1963 Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site: A Stratified Terrace Site in
Bell County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 34,
pp. 57-81.
Sorrow, William M.
1968 The Devil’s Mouth Site: The Third Season -- 1967. Papers of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, No. 14.
1969 Archeological Investigations at the John Ischy Site: a Burnt Rock Midden in Williamson County, Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, No. 18.
Sorrow, William M., Harry J. Shafer, and Richard E. Ross
1967 Excavations at Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No. 11.
Steward, Julian H.
1934 Ethnography of the Owens Valley Paiute. University of California
Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology, Vo!. 33, pp. 233350.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1959 The Williams Site and Central Texas Archeology. Texas Journal of
Science, Vol. 11, No. 2, pp. 218-250.
1960 A Review of Centrai Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 29, pp. 63-108.
Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Archeological Society, Special Publication No. 1 and Texas Memorial
Museum, Bulletin No. 4.

100

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Weir, Frank A.
1967 The Greenhaw Site: A Burned-Rock Midden Cluster of the Edwards
Plateau Aspect. Master’s Thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.
Department of Anthropology
University of Kentucky
Lexington

PREHISTORIC SOCIAL BOUNDARIES:
AN ARCHEOLOGICAL MODEL AND TEST
I. NED WOODALL

ABSTRACT
Using a series of late prehistoric Caddoan sites along the Neches River of
Texas, an attempt is made to detect the location of ancient social boundaries. The model assumes that there is less social interaction between
autonomous sociopolitical groups than within such groups. Thus
measurements of intersite ceramic variability through space will reveal a
disproportionate increase when such a boundary is crossed. The use of
Pearson product-moment statistic r, comparing geographic distance with
ceramic variability, suggests the presence of a boundary in the area under
study. This boundary probably marks the division between two tribes of
the Caddoan Hasinai confederacy.

INTRODUCTION

The definition of prehistoric sociocultural units comparable to
those of the ethnographer has been a difficult task for the archeologist. Recent studies by Hill (1967), Longacre (1964), Deetz
(1965) and others have focused on one aspect of this problem, pointing out archeological evidence for particular post-marital residence
patterns and the detection of kin groups, most notably extended
matrilocal families. This paper suggests a method for defining a
more inclusive sociopolitical unit, the tribe, through the analysis of
artifact attributes, their variation and distribution. More precisely, I
have attempted to determine the location of those emic boundaries
to social intercourse that allow the anthropologist to distinguish the
more or less distinct social and cultural units commonly referred to
as "tribes" (Service 1971).
The area under investigation lies in the upper Neches River basin
of northeast Texas, part of the much larger Caddoan region. The
Neches flows through territory occupied, in the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries, by the historic Hasinai confederacy, a loose
political and religious union composed of ten tribes (Swanton
1942:7-16). The late prehistoric occupation is marked by numerous
sites grouped into the Titus and Frankston’foci of the Fulton Aspect.
It is with these sites -- believed to date between A.D. 1200-1500 -that this analysis is concerned.
In 1957 construction of a small dam on the Neches to create Lake
Palestine prompted an archeological survey of the area (Johnson

102

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1961). Data obtained from this reconnaissance was used to determine if in the territory covered by the survey, measuring approximately 25 km. north-south and 10 km. east-west, there was to
be found the patterning of artifact attributes which satisfies the archeological model of tribal boundaries.

FORMULATION OF THE MODEL
In dealing with a tribal organization, such distinguishing or
defining measures as the extent of pan-tribal sodalities (e.g., clans
or age-grade societies) or linguistic differences cannot be detected
with present archeological methods. The use of endogamy as a
defining criterion for a social unit appears to be more useful from
the standpoint of the archeologist, however. The Deetz and Longacre
studies already mentioned have demonstrated the possibility of
finding residence and, inferentially, marriage patterns revealed in
the archeological record, and further expansion of this sort of
analysis is the basis of the present approach. For the purpose of
delineating the social limits of a particular tribe I shall use the
smallest endogamous group present in an area. The geographical size
of the area would vary with the economic system of the tribes
present; it would be much larger for the highly mobile Plains Indian
than for the largely sedentary eastern horticulturalists such as the
Caddo. Also, our criterion of endogamy will hold only for societies
at the tribal level of sociopolitical integration.
To find the smallest’endogamous unit in a band society would
lead to the inclusion of numerous groups having little or no political
commonality; also in a stratified society such as a chiefdom, the
smallest endogamous unit may be a class of individuals within the
society. Hence the definition proposed here is not designed to reveal
the presence or absence of tribal level society. Other means for this
are available, e.g., the presence of ascribed status in the archeological record (Binford 1962). What I am offering is a definition
which will allow the archeologist to divide a continuum of artifact
types and sites into meaningful social units when he already is
relatively certain he is dealing with tribal societies. In the absence
of any contrary evidence in the archeological record, and with the
positive indications supplied by the historical record, I believe this
assumption can be made for the late prehistoric Caddo in the
Neches basin. Once the archeologist working in the Caddoan area
moves back into the period of large-scale mound construction, mass
burials suggestive of retainer sacrifice, and sites on the size scale of

PREHISTORIC SOCIAL BOUNDARIES

103

George C. Davis or Spiro, then he will find it necessary to demonstrate that he is dealing with a particular level of sociocultural integration and alter his model accordingly.
To determine more precisely what to expect of a social group such
as a tribe in regard to its archeological evidence, consider some of
the implications of a matrilocal tribal society with a dispersed settlement pattern. First of all, if women are the potters, and a girl is
taught the craft by her female relatives, the archeologist would expect village microtraditions to develop. The presence of several
generations of potters would produce an intellectual inbreeding of
design motifs, vessel shapes and possibly other attributes which
work to distinguish wares of a particular lineage in comparison with
others. This phenomenon has been demonstrated for the Southwest
(Longacre 1964: Hill 1967).
In the case of small hamlets, Caddo males would be likely to
marry outside their own village of orientation in order to keep the
incest taboo. If the men learn flint-knapping from male relatives in
their youth, then any microtraditions in stone thus produced would
be expected to have a more dispersed pattern than those of the
women. Hence the smallest areal distribution of male-created
microtraditions would coincide with tribal boundaries, assuming
that the tribe represents a random breeding population, i.e., that any
male was likely to be selected as a mate as any other male. Unfortunately, stone tools and flakes are exceedingly rare in the collections used in the following analysis, but this part of the model can
be expected to have an expanded application once sufficient
amounts of these materials are systematically collected.
Although a single tribe can be expected to embrace several
ceramic microtraditions (the number being a factor of the number
of matrilineages present), the tribe as a whole will also circumscribe
a number of ceramic modes which, when plotted on a distribution
map, should conform to the social (i.e., endogamous) boundaries.
This is predicated on the assumption that the tribes comprising the
confederacy were formed in a situation of relative isolation, either
cultural or geographical, and that there was, and remained, more interaction on a social basis within the tribe than between tribes.
Longacre (1964:157-8) has suggested a correlation between levels of
ceramic analysis (type-variety-lineage style) and levels of
sociopolitical interaction (tribe-village-lineage). Hill (1966:21) has
inferred that social distance between residential areas within a
single site may be suggested by the "tightness" of clustering of
stylistic traits in each of the areas. That there is a clear-cut relation-

104

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ship between attribute combinations and social units in the Caddoan area is yet to be demonstrated; students in the area have long
been warned, wisely I believe/against attributing any social reality
to the McKern taxonomic units which are composed almost entirely
of pottery types. On the other hand, in at least one situation it has
been demonstrated that "social demography and social organization
are reflected in the material cultural system" (Longacre 1964:158).
Indeed, the anthropologist who believes that patterned behavior
must manifest itself in a patterning of the results of that behavior
(the artifacts), and that a particular behavior pattern is largely controlled by socially contracted norms, cannot avoid the implication
that such a social unit as a tribe will leave a record of its distinctiveness in the archeological record. This is true provided the norms
are sufficiently diverse from tribe to tribe so as to produce a
discernible artifact variation. From Spanish and French sources,
which state that there were religious and linguistic differences
within the Hasinai confederacy, this can be assumed.
For a cogent and objective analysis of microtraditions, both
within and between sites, certain statistical methods will be
necessary. Since this analysis is designed to detect social units
larger than the minimum residence groups (the family), betweensite comparisons will be of initial concern.
The first step requires a sherd-by-sherd examination during
which a table of the smallest analytical units, the modes (after Rouse
1965:92), will be composed. This table lists every mode present, the
sites at which it is found, and its percentile representation at that
site as well as its frequency.
Once the relative frequency (i.e., percentages) of each mode in a
site is known, all sites can be compared using the RobinsonBrainerd seriation technique (Robinson 1951). It must be understood
that while this technique was originally devised for chronological
ordering of deposits, actually it simply measures the degree of
similarity between artifact assemblages. Whether the measured differences are due to time, "social distance," or some other factor,
such as functional variation, must be determined another way. In
this instance all variation is assumed to be due to social distance,
since the sites are believed to be contemporaneous as judged by
their resident ceramic types.
Now, what sort of sociocultural implications can be derived from
the above measurements? If we are operating on the assumption of
differential social interaction within a confederacy, i.e., that there is
more interaction within a tribe than between tribes, then it follows

PREHISTORIC SOCIAL BOUNDARIES

105

that if pottery design is at least a crude index to this interaction, we
can expect less radical shift in the computed coefficient of similarity
between sites of a single tribe than between sites formed by
populations of two different tribes. The degree of this variation is
dependent on innumerable factors, among them geographical
distance, linguistic similarities, common cultural traditions, etc. All

¯ 15o

/
/

TRIBE

/

A

/
/

¯ ioo ’~

TRIBE

B

o

50

I0
Kilometers

0

5

I0

15
between

20

25

30

20

25

50

Sites (e)

15

- 150
E

4L SM .8~
c

..e~l sM-8~-_e4~ sM 90
\\
\
\

)

\\
4ICE 59

-50

//

\

41 SM 91

COOK

~

SNOW

FIGURE 1. a, Graphic Model of Ceramic Variability as a Function of
Distance and a Cultural Boundary. b, Ceramic Variability Between Lake
Prehistoric Caddoan Sites on the Neches River.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

106

of these factors, however, are assumed to operate to a lesser extent
within a tribe than between tribes, thereby accounting for the
assumption above, i.e., that there is less variation within a tribe than
between two tribes. (Fig. 1).
Moving now to the particular sites used (Fig. 2), seven were
chosen from the 40-odd found by Johnson’s survey of Lake Palestine
(Johnson 1961).

k

41 SM 8
41 SM 89

N

41 SM:82
41 HE 22
Smith Co.
Cherokee Co.

CE 59
~ender
AndersOn

CO.

Co.

Snow

OPPER NECHES
VALLEY : SELECTED
SITES
MI. 0
!
KM. 0
F/GURE 2. Map of Analyzed Caddoan Sites in Eastern Texas.

5
]
5

PREHISTORIC SOCIAL BOUNDARIES

107

In addition, two sites found by the WPA crews in the 1930’s in
this same area were included (Cook and Snow sites). Each site
collection displayed at least 100 occurrences of the selected ceramic
modes. The first part of the analysis was concerned with the method
of decoration, i.e., is there a discernible, significant variation in the
method of decoration within the area? In fact this analysis was intended to act as a pilot project which would suggest the feasibility or
possibility of success of a more detailed study. Toward this end 22
modes of ceramic decoration method were listed, these being
chosen by shuffling through all the sherds heaped together with no
regard at that point to individual site location. The 22 modes found
occurring within the combined samples are as follows:

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Wide-line engraving
Narrow-line engraving
Excising
Narrow-line incising
Medium-line incising
Wide-line incising
Incising over brushing
Direct punctation
by small tool
9. Direct punctation
by large tool
10. Oblique punctation
by small tool

11. Oblique punctation
by large tool
12. Mode 8 over brushing
13. Mode 9 over brushing
14. Mode 10 over brushing
15. Mode 11 over brushing
16. One-way brushing
17. Criss-cross brushing
18. Pinching
19. Applique
20. Ridging
21. Banding
22. Incising, overhanging lines

The qualifiers small, medium, and large or narrow and wide are not
as subjective as they might appear. The narrow lines found on incised sherds are deep slits, probably made with a flint flake. Often
these lines have been re-closed at spots as the potter manipulated
file still-wet vessel. The medium lines are those most commonly
found; apparently they were formed by dragging a small twig
through the wet clay, as often there is a brushed effect within the
line probably caused by fraying wood. The wide incised lines are
comparable in breadth to the "trailing" found on certain Caddoan
types. Little difficulty was experienced separating the incised
sherds into three categories. The same can be said for the punctated
sherds; in this case "large" refers to the tool used for punctation and
includes those larger than the diameter of an ordinary lead pencil.
Again there was little difficulty, most of the punctations being
decisively larger or smaller than the total number of modes from
that site. The sites used, and the mode totals, are as follows:

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

108

41
41
41
41
41

SM
SM
SM
SM
HE

91
90
89
87
22

41 CE 39 (122)
J.W. Snow (375)
Mrs. J. M. Cook (290)
41 SM 82 (103-)

(191)
(375)
(135)
(101)
(217)

Following the previously described steps, the resultant coefficients
of agreement were arranged in an ordered matrix as shown in Table
1. If one examines the above order, and then checks the site
distribution map (Fig. 2), he will find an apparent coincidence of
site association. More precisely, the ordering of the sites by
similarities in the method of decoration and by geographical
distance is shown in Table 2.
TABLE 1
COEFFICIENT AGREEMENT MATRIX, NECHES RIVER SITES
SNOW COOK

CE39

SM91

HE22

SM82

SM89

SM87

Snow

200

Cook

174

200

CE39

146

155

200

SM91

~*

154

163

200

HE22

138

148

163

200

SM82

131

~
150

164

175

177

200

SM89

90

106

123

129

138

145

200

SM87

86

104

123

125

137

179

2OO

SM90

93

108

117

123

132

~
144

157

168

*Negatively signed differences are underlined.

TABLE 2
ORDERING OF NECHES RIVER SITES

By artifact similarity

By geographical location
(North to South)

41 SM 90
41 SM 87
41 SM 89
41 SM 82
41 HE 22
41 SM 91
41 CE 39
1. M. Cook
]. W, Snow

41
41
41
41
41
41
41

SM
SM
SM
SM
SM
HE
CE

91
9O
87
89
82
22
39

1. W. Snow
]. M. Cook

SM90

200

PREHISTORIC SOCIAL BOUNDARIES

109

If we consider the foregoing arrangement of sites as an ordinal
scale in which each column ranks the sites -- the first by artifact
similarity and the other by distance from an imaginary point lying
south of the Cook Site -- the correlation between the two can be
measured by Kendall’s tau. This is a statistical measure of the
degree to which pairs in the proper order exceed in number those in
the reverse order (Blalock 1960:321). Assigning the values 1, 2, 3, etc.
respectively, to sites, proceeding from the southern to the northernmost, i.e., from Cook (Rank 1) to SM 91 (Rank 9), the following
computation of tau results:

tau

S
1/2N (N-l)

where S is a measure of differences in order occurring betwe.en the
two arrangements, and N is the number of cases. In this instance tau
is calculated as .67. A null hypothesis of independence between the
two rankings can be tested by

Z

S
"V/1/18 N (N-l)

or Z = 2.5,
(2N~5)

significant at the .01 level.
The closeness of the two arrangements tends to verify the earlier
assumption that the detected variation would be due to social
distance rather than time. If time were the main factor underlying
the variation, then there would be no explanation for the horizontal
seriation other than an unequal rate of diffusion, unlikely within
such a small area. Rather one would expect similar sites from both
the northern and southern ends of the area, and also dissimilar sites
at either end -- in other words, the distribution of similar sites
would be geographically random. Even more interesting than the
relative positioning of the sites in a rank-order scale is the
correlation between geographical distance intervening between
every possible site pair and their shared coefficient of agreement.
The Kendall’s tau test above shows only that a positive relationship
exists between these two values; the degree of correlation can be
indexed by another statistic, the Pearson product-moment
correlation coefficient r.
In order to prevent a negative correlation, the coefficient of
agreement will be converted so as to yield smaller numbers as the
similarity between

sites increases; this is done by simply

110

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

subtracting each of the indices in Table 1 from 200. Geographical
distance will be measured in airline kilometers between each of the
compared sites. The raw data of the calculations are shown in Table
3. The computed correlation coefficient r of .43 suggests a rather
strong relationship between geographical distance and ceramic
decoration methods. The r, converted to the F statistic for the
analysis of variance test yields the quantity 7.72, easily significant to
the .01 level. That is, less than one trial out of 100 would yield by
chance alone such a correlation between distance and changes in
decoration method, with no real correlation existing in the universe,
i.e., among all the late prehistoric sites now or ever present in the
area. If the aberrant Site 41 SM 91 is disregarded, the correlation
arises to an amazing .75, significant at the .001 level of significance.
In the preceding discussion I have equated social distance with
geographical distance, seemingly legitimate if we conceive of interacting social groups such as tribes to be spatially segregated from
similarly conceived units. Thus one would expect a correlation between social interaction (already assumed to be reflected in artifact
similarities) and geographical distance, but one would not expect
this correlation ever to be perfect. The reason can be explained by
the following example: imagine two segregated tribes making quite
different pottery but living in contiguous areas, each occupying 40
square kilometers of a territory, say, 4 km. wide and 20 km. long.
There would occur a positive correlation between distance and artifact similarity since one group lives in the southern half and the
other in the northern half of the territory. The correlation would
become very weak, however, in regard to those specific sites occurring near the mutual boundary, since these would be quite close
geographically but different in regard to ceramics. Assuming we
had an equal number of sites on either side of the boundary and the
sites within each of the two tribal territories were randomly
distributed we would not expect a correlation approaching 1.0.
Given such a case, the archeologist would re-examine his data,
especially the ordered matrix, to see if any sites seemed to cluster-i.e., ’whether there occurs a radical shift in the coefficients of
agreement that might indicate a social boundary had been crossed.
At this stage of analyzing the Neches River sites there is an intimation of such a cluster, namely sites SM 89, SM 87, and SM 90.
These three have coefficients of agreement of 157, 168, and 179; the
next most similar site, HE 22, is some 19 units below 157. There is
then a shift of some 19 units, while within this group of three sites,
and within the remaining group of six (Snow, Cook, CE 39, SM 82,

PREHISTORIC SOCIAL BOUNDARIES

111

TABLE 3
CALCULATION OF r FOR DISTANCE VS. ARTIFACT SIMILARITY

Sites

Km. between

X2

200-Coefficient

sites

of agreement

(x)

(y)

y2

Snow-Cook

10

100

26

676

Snow-CE 39

1

1

54

2916

Snow-SM 91

22

484

65

4225

Snow-HE 22

10

100

62

3844

Snow-SM 82

10.3

106.1

69

4761

Snow-SM 89

15.5

240.25

110

12100

Snow-SM 87

16.2

262.44

114

12996

Snow-SM 90

20

400

117

13689
2025

CE 39-Cook

11

121

45

CE 39-SM 91

21

441

37

1369

84.64

36

1296

CE 39-SM 82

9,2

CE 39-HE 22

9.5

90.25

52

2704

CE 39-SM 89

14.5

210.25

77

5929

CE 39-SM 87

15.5

240.25

77

5929

CE 39-SM 90

19

361

83

6889

SM 91-Cook

27.5

756.25

46

2116

SM 91-SM 82

11.7

136.89

25

625

SM 91-HE 22

14.3

204.49

37

1369

SM 91-SM 89

7

49

71

5041

SM 91-SM 87

6.4

40.96

75

5625

SM 91-SM 90

2.6

6.76

77

5929

13.5

182,25

41

1681

HE 22-SM 82

5.3

28.09

23

529

HE 22-SM 89

7.3

53.29

62

3844

64

HE 22-Cook

HE 22-SM 87

8

63

3969

HE 22-SM 90

11.5

132.25

68

4624

SM 89-Cook

20.7

428.49

94

8836

SM 89-SM 82

5.5

30.25

55

3025

SM 89-SM 87

1

SM 89-SM 90

4.5

SM 87-Cook

1

21

441

20.25

43

1849

21.5

462.25

96

9216

SM 87-SM 82

6.2

38.44

57

3249

SM 87-SM 90

3.5

12.25

32

1024

92

8464

56

3136

50

2500

SM 90-Cook
SM 90-SM 82

25
9,5

625
90.25

SM 82-Cook

17

Sum X-’434.2
N -- 36

Sum X2 =6893.59
Sum XY" 29302.7

289

Sum Y" 2208
r =.43

Sum y2= 158440

112

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

SM 91, and HE 22), there is a smoother continuum of change in
decoration methods from site to site.
It has been assumed that the higher degree of social interaction
taking place within a tribe would result in greater artifact
similarities. Social interaction is abetted by tribal endogamy, with
intra-tribal artifact variation occurring among women’s products
because of matrilocal microtraditions. If one takes then a synchronic view of a region encompassing two or more sedentary
tribes, beginning at a site farthest removed from the common
boundary between the two and moving toward it, one will expect
change in the artifacts increasing as does distance from the original
site (due at least in part to the matrilocal microtraditions). In
crossing the boundary, however, there will be a disproportionate increase in the continuum of change as measured by the coefficient of
agreement. After the boundary is crossed, the continuum will
decrease its slope, our concern being entirely with sites of the
second tribe. This model can be expressed diagrammatically as
Figure la. For a graphic presentation of this continuum of change
among the sites involved in the present study, see Figure lb and
compare the actual with the ideal.

TESTING THE MODEL: ANALYSIS OF DESIGN MOTIF
Because of the small size of the average individual potsherd it was
seldom possible to see a complete design motif or even a whole
element of that motif. In one sense this may have had a beneficial
influence on the study; it forced attention to miniscule variations
which may have been a result of unconscious adherence on the part
of the potter to modes of decoration learned early in her career.
These are presumably inviolate to change despite widespread diffusion of total design motifs and methods which comprise the archeologists’ types of Caddoan ceramics. Longacre, for a similar
reason, isolated certain design elements which he hoped would be
"nonconsciously selected based upon learning patterns within the
social frame" (1964:163).
Of course it was not known initially which, if any, of the observed
variations would be significant for the purpose at hand, i.e.,
delimiting the range and extent of social interaction. Consequently
the sherds were classified several times, each time with a different
criterion as the basis for the categories. Most of these classifications
ended with a random distribution -- the resultant categories coincided not at all with a geographical affinity of the contributing sites,

113

PREHISTORIC SOCIAL BOUNDARIES

or the specimens from several sites would be about equally divided
between the groups. However, there were a few classifications that
did yield a set of categories, the components of which were
segregated geographically as well as stylistically. As will be pointed
out in the following pages, the separation was largely in agreement
with that discovered in the analysis of modes of decoration method.
Each time the distribution of a particular design element was
analyzed, the contributing sites were re-arranged and gerrymandered in order to get the highest possible chi-square. In every case it
was found that the most marked variation coincided with the findings of the analysis of method of decoration, i.e., northern sites (SM
90, 87, and 89) vs. Southern (HE 22, SM 82, CE 39, Snow, Cook). Site
SM 91 consistently was more similar in design elements to the
northern sites and was included with them in the chi-square tables.

STRAIGHT PARALLEL LINES
An example of the classification based on mode of design
element involved sherds marked solely with straight parallel lines.
There are 63 such specimens, some engraved and some incised,
some "sloppy" and some neatly executed, and of a variety of
thicknesses. A separation of these on the basis of the space between
the lines was found to be most fruitful, however. Sherds which were
decorated with straight parallel lines spaced less than 6.0 mm. apart
were separated from those with more widely spaced lines; in the
case of sets of such lines it was the intervening space within the set

TABLE 4
DISTRIBUTION OF STRAIGHT PARALLEL LINES

Widely spaced
Northern
Sites
Southern
Sites
Totals

Narrowly spaced

o: 2’3

o: 10

e: 16.8

e: 16.2

o:

o: 21

9

e: 15.2

e: 14.8

32

31

Chi-square ; 9.8

Totals
33

30

63
Degrees of freedom = 1

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

114

rather than between sets that was the determinant. Of course any
two sherds which appeared to be of the same vessel were counted as
one. The resulting groups were tested for statistical significance by
chi-square as shown in Table 4. The computed chi-square is
significant at the .01 level -- we would expect such a distribution of
stylistic traits in question to occur by chance only once in every
hundred times the samples were drawn.
HACHURING
A prominent, easily recognized design is the use of sets of parallel
lines intersecting and crossing, creating a hachured or diamonds effect. Twenty-eight such sherds were present, and it was clear even
when the initial classification was in progress that this design was
over-represented in the northern sites. Again, both engraved and incised specimens were used, but are lumped together in the chisquare test (Table 5). The computed chi-square of 5.2 is significant
at the .05 level.
TABLE 5
DISTRIBUTION OF HACHURING

Hachuring

No hachuring

Northern
Sites

o: 20

o: 155

e: 14.2

e: 160.8

Southern

o:

o: 161

8

e: 13.8

Sites

28

Totals

Chi-square - 5.2

Totals
175

169

e: 155.2
316

344
Degrees of freedom= 1

FILLED AREAS
There are 36 sherds in the collection exhibiting zones of short
straight or curved lines circumscribed by either two parallel lines
(resulting in a ladder-like element) or two converging lines (the
filled triangle). Separating these specimens into ladder-like or
triangular elements gave the following contingency table (Table 6).
The computed chi-square value of 6.4 is significant at the .02 level.

115

PREHISTORIC SOCIAL BOUNDARIES

TABLE 6
THE DISTRIBUTION OF FILLED LADDERS AND TRIANGLES

Filled ladders

Filled triangles

Northern
Sites

o: 8

o: 11

e: 4.7

e: 14.3

Southern
Sites

o:

o: 16

1

e: 4.3

Totals

9

Totals
19

17

e: 12.7
27

36
Degrees of freedom - 1

Chi-square = 6.4

CONCENTRIC LINES
Twenty sherds show gently curving concentric lines spaced at
various widths and occasionally intersecting a second set of similar
lines. Within the category no significant differences between sites
could be detected, but the occurrence of the design element was
predominantly in the southern sites. If chi-square is calculated
using as the categories sherds with concentric lines and sherds
without such lines (as was done for hachured sherds), the results
are as shown in Table 7. The chi-square is significant at the .10
level.
TABLE 7
DISTRIBUTION OF CONCENTRIC LINES

With lines

Without lines

Northern
Sites

o:

5

o: 170

e:

9.1

e: 165.9

Southern

o: 15

o: 195

e: 10.9

e: 199.1

Sites
Totals

20
Chi-square r. 3.5

365

Totals
175

210

385
Degrees of freedom~ 1

116

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

SMOOTHING AND POLISHING
The separation of those sherds categorized as highly smoothed or
polished provides one of the most marked difference between the
northern and southern sites. The terms highly smoothed (low burnish) and polished (high burnish) are relative ones, relative only to
the remainder of sherds in the sample at hand. All except one, a
punctated-incised specimen, are decorated by engraving. When
examined under a magnifying glass, all the sherds revealed small
pits or depressions with a matte finish; these are spots unreached by
the polishing stone, and indicate that the sheen thus imparted was
not a natural result of using certain clays (Shepard 1954:122). Small
sherds did not always present such evidence, but were included in
the sample under the assumption that the evidence was missing due
to vagaries of breakage.
Making the analysis of this category less convincing than it might
be is the fact that sherds from two of the southern sites, Cook and
Snow, may have been buried until their recovery by the WPA field
crew -- the notes fail to clear this detail. If they were buried it is not
known how this will affect the preservation of the surface finish.
Because the high percentage of lustrous sherds at these two sites
might be due to differential preservation, two chi-square tests were
conducted, the first using the Cook and Snow artifacts, the second
excluding them. The results are shown in Tables 8 and 9. The chisquare of Table 8 is significant at the .01 level. Now excluding the
two sites Cook and Snow, the contingency table appears as shown
in Table 9. The value of chi-square is significant at the .33 level.
TABLE 8
DISTRIBUTION OF LUSTROUS SHERDS, WITH
COOK AND SNOW SITES INCLUDED

Lustrous

Non-lustrous

Northern
Sites

o: 13

o: 162

e: 20.9

e: 154.1

Southern
Sites

o: 28

o: 140

e: 20.1

e: 147.9

Totals

41
Chi-square = 6.9

302

Totals
175

168

343
Degrees of freedom = 1

PREHISTORIC SOCIAL BOUNDARIES

117

TABLE 9
DISTRIBUTION OF LUSTROUS SHERDS, WITH
COOK AND SNOW SITES EXCLUDED

Lustrous

Non-lustrous

Northern
Sites

o: 13

o: 162

e: 15.2

e: 159.8

Southern

o: 12

o: 101

e:

e: 103.2

Sites
Totals

9.8
25

Chi-square = 89

Totals
175

113

288

263

Degrees of freedom = 1

OTHER DECORATION MODES
A few of those modes of decoration which did not prove to have a
significantly distinct variation in their geographical distribution
should be mentioned. Using three such modes involving punctation,
three nonexclusive categories were set up and tested by chi-square:
free punctation, linear punctation, and zoned punctation. None of
these had a restricted occurrence, nor did the combination of any
two or all three categories. In fact this was not wholly unexpected
and served in one way to bolster the suggestion that differences
found significant in previous chi-square tests were products of
social distance. To explain, the use of punctation -- particularly
zoned punctation -- is generally conceded to be more typical of
early Caddoan sites (Gibson Aspect) than late sites. Such types as
Weches Fingernail Impressed, Pennington Punctated-Incised, and
Crockett Curvilinear Incised all exhibit zoned punctation, and are
considered indicative of the earlier part of the Caddoan time span. If
the punctated sherds in the present sample -- or even some few of
them -- belong to an earlier time period than that of the remaining
decorated sherds, one would not expect a distribution of
microtraditions congruent with the later wares.
Other modes investigated but deemed random in their
distribution include ticked lines, excised pendant triangles, and random incisions or "slashes". In all three of these at least part of the
difficulty is likely a result of the small sample size; as one’s

118

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

categories of microtraditions become more detailed, the size of each
diminishes proportionally. Hence an extremely large initial sample
would be required before any statistically viable conclusions could
be reached regarding the occurrence of, say, "large excised pendant
triangles." The absence of such a large sample was one of the
liabilities of this study, and hopefully will be borne in mind in
future reservoir survey work.

Site 41

SM

91

In the analysis of modes of decoration method it will be recalled
that SM 91 allied itself with the southern group of sites, even though
it lies on the northern edge of the area surveyed. On the other hand,
in regard to design modes it agreed nicely with the northern sites,
and attempts to include it among the southern group only reduced
the resultant chi-square values. A study of percentages of decoration
methods from each site reveals that SM 91 acquires its similarity to
the southern group by its high percentage of brushed sherds and
low percentages of medium line incised and narrow-line engraving.
Although one source of explanation would be an inter-group
marriage (and violation of the uxorilocal residence rules), this does
not account for the adoption of the "northern" design elements. In
other words, if SM 91 is different in the one regard, it should be different in both. The deviation of SM 91 from the regularities found
among the other sites explains the sharp downturn of the line
marking degree of artifact change in Figure lb. The most convenient
explanation is, of .course, sampling error, but in light of the
relatively large size of the SM 91 collection (191 specimens), it was
retained. Such anomalies can operate only as a stimulus and guide
for further research.

CONCLUSIONS
In the previous pages I have implied, and now make explicit, a
belief that at least two distinct social groups were present in the
area of Blackburn Crossing Reservoir. The nature of these groups
cannot, at this stage of research, be determined. According to the
various journals and other documents pertaining to early contact
with the Caddo, the groups which were most distinct to the
Europeans were the tribe and the confederacy. Certainly the two
groups detected archeologically are not confederacies, but they may

PI~HISTORIC SOCIAL BOUNDARIES

119

be tribes. They may also be extended matrilocal kin groups -- either
would yield the patterning of pottery modes described, although the
latter should be included within a larger aggregate, the tribe, the
boundaries of which might come to light with a more widespread
survey and analysis in the region involved. Until more detailed
analyses designed to reveal prehistoric social groups have been conducted on numerous sites throughout the Caddoan area, it is impossible to evaluate a single such analysis. Simply, one knows, or
strongly suspects, that the two groups of sites were different, but until a more complete pattern of such differences is revealed, the
isolated instance cannot be evaluated in terms of the usual
ethnographic units such as kin group or tribe. While it appears that
the area chosen for study includes a boundary of some sort, the size
and range of the two groups on either side remains unknown. This
is unfortunate because size -- i.e., geographical extent -- alone
would provide a clue as to the nature of the social group. Judging by
the occurrence of the southern series of sites, occupying an area at
least 20 km. in length, a single extended kin group seems much less
likely than a tribe.

REFERENCES CITED

Binford, Lewis R.
1962 Archaelogy as Anthropology. American Antiquity Vol. 28, No. 2, pp.
217-225.
Blalock, Hubert M.
1960 Social Statistics. McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc. New York.
Deetz, James
1965 The Dynamics of Stylistic Change in Arikara Ceramics. Illinois
Studies in Anthropology, No. 4. University of Illinois Press. Urbana.
Hill, James N.
1966 A Prehistoric Community in Eastern Arizona. Southwestern Journal
of Anthropology, Vol. 22, No. 1, pp. 9-30.
1967 Structure, Function and Change at Broken K Pueblo. In: "Chapters
in the Prehistory of Eastern Arizona, III" by Paul S. Martin,
William A. Longacre and James N. Hill. Fieldiana: Anthropology,
Vol. 57, pp. 158-167. Field Museum of Natural History.
Johnson, Le Roy, Jr.
1961 An Archeological Survey of Blackburn Crossing Reservoir on the
Upper Neches River. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol.
31~ pp. 213-238.
Longacre, William A.
1964 Sociological Implications of the Ceramic Analysis. In: "Chapters in
the Prehistory of Eastern Arizona II" by Paul S. Martin, et al.
Fieldiana: Anthropology, Vol. 55, pp. 155-170. Chicago Natural
History Museum.

120

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Robinson, W. S.
1951 A Method for Chronologically Ordering Archeological Deposits.
American Antiquity, Vol. 16, No. 4, pp. 293~301.
Rouse, Irving
1965 Caribbean Ceramics: A Study in Method and in Theory. In:
"Ceramics and Man," Frederick R. Matson (ed.), pp. 88-103. Viking
Fund Publications in Anthropology, No. 41. Aldine Publishing Co.
Chicago.
Service, Elman R.
1971 Primitive Social Organization, 2nd edition. Random House. New
York.
Shepard, Anna O.
1954 Ceramics for the Archeologist. Carnegie Institution of Washington
Publication 609. Fifth Printing (1967).
Swanton, John R.
1942 Source Material on the History and Ethnology of the Caddo Indian.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 132.

Wake Forest University
Winston-Salem, North Carolina

PREHISTORIC SETTLEMENT OF
THE UPPER NECHES RIVER
KEITH M. ANDERSON

ABSTRACT
During archeologicat survey in 1969 and

1970, 98 sites were located

along the upper Neches River in the area of Lake Palestine Reservoir. A
small

number of these are middle Archaic sites, interpreted as in-

termittently used hunting sites. Eighty-five sites have Caddoan ceramics.
One site cluster west of the river has Alto Focus pottery and is probably a
small village or hamlet belonging to the early Caddoan occupation of the
upper Neches. Remaining sites have Frankston Focus ceramics and include a number of settlements interpreted as permanent hamlet or village
localities. These are predominantly associated with streamside locations
near relatively fertile soils; the site situation described for the Hasinai,
who occupied the upper Neches historically. Other Caddoan sites are
suggested as equivalents of seasonally-uccupied localities in the Hasinai
settlement system.
Excavation is proposed to further test the settlement models suggested
for Archaic and Caddoan occupations, and the implications fur social interaction that derive from these mudels.

INTRODUCTION
This report focuses on patterns of site distribution in the upper
Neches River. Emphasis is placed on the structure and relationships
of late prehistoric Caddo communities. Preliminary attempts will be
made to formulate models to account for these settlement patterns
from which hypotheses can be derived for testing in excavation.
If the results of two surveys, the present one and an earlier one by
Johnson (1961) are reliable, the upper Neches River was inhabited
primarily by Caddo peoples. Little Archaic material has been found
and nothing earlier than "middle Archaic" is reported from the
reservoir area.
The Caddo occupation of the reservoir area may have been
relatively brief; it belongs primarily in the period of the Fulton
Aspect. This relatively brief occupation (perhaps A.D. 1100-1600) is
represented by a large number of small sites; a total of 122 have
been recorded in both surveys.
A general shift in settlement pattern typifies the Fulton Aspect
(Newell and Krieger 1949:194). This is a general dispersion of

122

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

population into small villages with loss of impressive mounds and
status burials of an earlier period (Gibson Aspect) which imply
nuclear centers of social control through ranked chieftains and
subordinates. It is the primary purpose of this report to provide a
background for systematic consideration of this trend, to describe
the archeological universe of the Upper Neches, and to isolate environmental, technological, economic and social variables which
give insight into elements of village life by which this state of Caddo
development can be characterized and compared with earlier settlements. The procedure followed is reflected in the organization of
the report follows these steps:
1. Determination of environmental resources, considered as an
ecological system relative to human occupation. This includes:
(1) association of natural resources with specific areas or zones
within the river drainage, (2) seasonal periods of maximum yield,
and (3) natural limitations such as climatic and soil productivity,
which affect their usefulness to man. This should result in a
statement of the environment as a set (or cyclical series of sets) of
boundary conditions which comprise fluctuating resources.
2. Abstracting from local and general ethnographic and archeological data the technological sequences, task group composition, residence units, and social group composition which may
be reflected in physical remains.
3. Analysis and presentation of
reference to the models and derive
cavation of specific sites within
procedure is to excavate sites not

site data from the survey, with
the problems to be solved by exthe reservoir. The aim of this
just because few sites of a par-

ticular period have been dug, and it is intuitively felt that more are
necessary, but because excavation will provide understanding of
cultural adaptation, adjustment, and development.

SURVEY CONDITIONS AND TECHNIQUE
The survey was carried out primarily during July and August of
1969 with additional recording during March, July, and August of
1970. This season has limitations since during the summer in east
Texas there is heavy plant cover which tends to obscure sites; it also
includes the driest and hottest part of the year. Consequently, the
sites were seen when conditions of flooding and water flow could
not be related directly to site distribution. However, the summer has
one distinct advantage in permitting observation of usable plant
resources in full leaf, though many nuts and fruits do not ripen

123

UPPER NECHES

LAKE
PALESTINE
RESERVOIR

FIGURE 1. Lake Palestine !~eservoir.

124

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

before fall.
The survey included both the proposed lake limits, the surrounding cleared zone following the 355 foot contour, and areas immediately outside the reservoir. A considerable amount of reservoirconnected construction and development threatens archeological
sites adjacent to the reservoir.
The survey was of an exploratory type, conducted primarily to inventory a maximum number of sites in a limited time. Total collection of surface artifacts was attempted at most sites; in many, the
surface artifacts were so few that limited controlled sampling would
have resulted in a very small collection. Most sites were collected as
a single unit, though sub-divisions were made in sites having obvious and discrete concentrations of artifacts correlating with
physical features of the site. Site dimensions were determined by
stepping off the site, or estimating the length and width of the area
marked by surface artifacts or the obviously limited landform with
which it was associated.

ENVIRONMENT
Descriptions of environmental features from the perspective of
human economy and settlement are presented here, focusing on:
(1) distribution of geological and biotic resources, (2) seasonal
cycles in the endemic biotic community, (3) contrastive elements of
topography, soils, and stream patterns, and (4) climatic fluctuation.
These elements form a series of environmental domains which
comprise resources and adaptive problems for indigenous human
populations. By deriving those problems in the perspective of
present environment and ethnographic and prehistoric data, models
can be developed which enable predictions of environmental
associations with specific cultural activities and settlements. These
should be reflected by survey and excavation data.
Components of the environment vary in spatial discreetness and
seasonal effect. However, at any given season at a particular
location, certain economic activities and human task groups are
more likely to have been found than others, and these groups may
be expected to be represented by a certain class of artifacts. The intent of this chapter is to abstract components of the natural environment with which we would expect particular human activities
to be associated.
The Lake Palestine enlargement includes the portion of the Upper

UPPER NECHES

125

Neches River between the towns of Cuney and Chandler, a distance
of slightly more than 17 airline miles. The enlargement, which will
ris to 345 feet msl., encompasses the river bottoms and slopes and
the lower drainages of the major tributary streams (Saline,
Kickapoo, Flat, and Ledbetter creeks). Variation in geology and
topography of the Neches valley are factors underlying localized
resources which effect human settlement. The following discussion
describes landforms, minerals, and soils and their usable resources.

TOPOGRAPHY AND GEOLOGY
The Neches River is a mature sluggish stream, meandering over a
floodplain with a maximum width of two miles, between rolling
convoluted uplands. The river is fed by a dendritic system of
tributary streams, some of which have developed their own broad
floodplains. This portion of the Neches flows across the Cenozoic
Gulf Coast Geosyncline, a thick succession of continental and
marine sediments with a low east-south-eastward dip (Sellards,
Adkins, and Plummer 1932:519-277). Consequently, the gentle dip
slope of the western uplands, deriving from the Queen City Formation, contrasts with the abrupt eastern escarpment slopes rising
60-80 feet above the river, and the river tends to hug the eastern
uplands. These eastern uplands are formed from the Neches member of the Mount Selman Formation which is capped by erosionresistant ferruginous beds (Mowery and Oakes 1959; Barnes 1964).
These outcrop as boulder fields and ledges and provide quarries of
sandstone of the same type used in tools found at archeological
sites. Topography in the east is more rugged than in the west, with
tributary streams forming relatively deep V-shaped valleys; in
stream valleys erosional remnants and terraces form a random
terrace structure.
Four Eocene formations -- Sparta, Weches, Queen City, and
Recklaw -- form the basic geologic resources of the upland soils adjacent to the Neches floodplain. The steep east terraces of the river
and some remnants west of the river are formed primarily of
Weches glauconitic sandstone and shale, upon which rests Sparta
sand (Mowery and Oakes 1959:45-47; Barnes 1964). Included in the
Weches Formation are limonitic and sideritic iron ore and hard
brown ferruginous sandstone which appears to have been a common resource for stone tools. The gentler slopes and terrace west of
the river are formed from Queen City micaceous sands, which in-

126

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

clude occasional ironstone concretions and ledges, and ferruginous
ledges and rubble (Barnes 1964). Other than the Brooks Salt Dome
in Saline Creek, which has been tapped in historic times by salt factories and is capped by Cretaceous layers of limestone, chalk, marl,
shale, and sand, there are no novel localized resources. Surrounding
geologic surface deposits are primarily sands and shales within a
radius of 30 to 80 miles.
Pleistocene terrace remnants, represented by exposures of sands,
silts, and gravel-bearing clays, are present on the west margins of
the floodplain, but in most cases they merge with the gentle upland
slopes and are topographicallynon-distinctive (Mowery and Oakes
1959:47). They are apparently the only local source of cryptocrystalline material suitable for chipped stone tools. These
deposits include pebbles and cobbles of flint, quartzite, and
petrified wood similar to some materials represented by debris and
tools found at archeological sites.
The floodplain has little relief, with subtle levees and shallow
backswamps. Occasional low erosional remnants, capped by sandy
soils similar to those of the uplands, rise above the bottomland floor.
These and the marginal slopes of the floodplains are the only bottomland locations where archeological sites were found. The
erosional remnants are least subject to seasonal flooding which occurs in April and May. In some locations, this flooding briefly extends aquatic fauna to the upland borders.
The meandering river channel varies from 50 to 100 feet in width.
At one point, it forms a small lake 200 feet long and 1-1/4 mile wide
(Big Eddy) which is heavily fished today by pole and trotline. Old
meanders (Flag Lake, ]ames Slough) and shallow floodplain basins
are filled by spring floods; during late July and August these sloughs
dry up, stranding large numbers of fish.

SOILS
The soils of the upper Neches drainage are of four basic types:
(1) sandy and clayey soils of the floodplains; (2) sandy and clayey
soils of the redlands; (3) soils with compact subsoils; and (4) sandy
soils with friable subsoils (Mowery and Oakes 1959:7).
Floodplain deposits -- recent alluvium -- include some fertile
soils but are not considered practical for present day farming since
they are frequently overflowed and poorly drained. Redland soils,
restricted to a few terraces on the eastern uplands, are the most fertile soils in the area; these are the areas having the most potential for

UPPER NECHES

127

m

g

g

i:~

°’"
o ¯

_

~:~

~

°°
~

!~

~-

~t~

a

r

~4

128

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

domestic crop yield and are associated with at least one large site
cluster along a small southeast tributary of Saline Creek
(X41SM15,21-25).
Soils with compact subsoils derive from the Recklaw Formation
and are infertile, shallow, draughty, compact, and hard to work.
They are commonly observed in uplands slopes (Mowery and
Oakes 1959). Soils with friable subsoils comprise the majority of
upland types and it is with this soil association that the majority of
archeological sites are found. Derived from Queen City and Sparta
sands, these fine sandy loams and loamy fine sands form a mosaic
pattern over the uplands. The best of these, such as Bowie fine
sandy loam, are low in fertility and very susceptible to leaching
though they are easily worked. Presently, much of farming in
special crops, field crops, and vegetables takes place in these soils
although heavy fertilization is necessary to produce high crop yields.
All soils, except those in the marshy bottoms, originally supported
hardwood and mixed pine-hardwood forest.
In summary, soils most suitable for farming in the present, and
probably in the prehistoric past, are the upland redland fine sandy
loams and the fine sandy loams of friable subsoils; the former is
most capable of supporting repeated cropping. Brown loamy sands
and sandy loams with friable subsoils would be exhausted quickly.
The Neches bottoms, partially cleared and flooded since completion of the dam in 1959, had little of the original plant cover at the
time of the 1969 survey and are presently cleared to the 355 foot contour which includes all the floodplain. Reconstruction of the river
valley flora is based on observations at the north and south borders
of the reservoir. Figure 2 shows the microenvironmental zones of
the upper Neches.
Zones 1 and 13, the uplands, include several topographic
variations, including headland slopes, erosional-remnant knolls,
terraces and terrace slopes, and ridges. The original mature forest is
inferred from pockets surviving among fields and young forest.
Dominant forms are red oak, post oak, shortleaf pine and loblolly
pine, mixed with hickory, blackjack and sand jack oaks, with a thin
undercover of broomsedge, small shrubs, bullnettle and grasses.
Fallow fields are quickly taken over by a dense cover of broomsedge, rosinweed, partridgepea, miscellaneous grasses, and
sassafras and persimmon bushes; red cedar occurs in open fields.
Understory growth in the upland forest includes a number of
vines and shrubs having edible fruits -- French mulberry (possibly
a recent introduction into the uplands), wild plum, chinquapin

UPPER NECHES

129

(dwarf chestnut) and several varieties of wild berries and grapes.
The upland complex extends downslope to the floodplain border
on both sides of the river and interdigitates with vegetation of the
drained bottoms. The western uplands are close to the western limit
of pines, lying 3 to 10 miles west of the Neches; major western
tributary streams (Kickapoo and Flat creeks) head up in oak-hickory
forest outside the reservoir, the eastern border of the Post-Oak
Savannah (Gould 1962).
In the better-drained bottoms, pin oak, water oak, pecan and
sweetgum form the upper story with some intrusions of post oak.
Giant reed is reported to have occurred in extensive canebrakes in
this zone; such pockets are now preserved only in watered upland
slopes.
Well-watered sloughs are bordered by dense marsh grasses and
reeds. In shallow backswamp areas, water hickory and water oaks
predominate. River and stream banks also have distinctive flora
dominated by black willow and willow oak.
Yield of edible fruits in the Neches forests begins in the late
spring (May-June) with a few species (Hawthorne, red mulberry
and wild plum) fruiting on uplands and stream broders. During
summer and early fall (July to September) more appear (elderberry,
muscadine, wild grape and bullnettle kernels). Autumn is the
period of greatest yield, primarily in nuts -- hickory, walnut, pecan,
chinquapin, ironwood and acorns; some of these trees hold their
nuts into winter. Berries and fruits available during the fall include
huckleberry, blackhaw, persimmons, hackberry, French mulberry
and buckthorn.

ANIMAL RESOURCES
Aquatic Fauna
The river is presently a plentiful source of fish, turtles, snakes,
and mussels. Species inhabiting the Neches River include: catfish
(channel, opelousas, blue); bullhead (black, brown, and yellow),
bream (green, bluegill, longear, common redear, spotted, goggle eye
sunfish), smallmouth buffalo, white perch, gar, mud pickerel,
bowfin, gizzard shad, common white sucker, redhorse sucker, and
golden shiner.
These fish vary in habits and amount of usable meat. Gar, gizzard
shad, suckers, and shiners are bony and have little food value. Other

130

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

common species run from 1/2 to 4 pounds, although the large catfish
(opelousas, blue) may attain weights of 50-60 and 20-25 pounds,
respectively (Zim 1963; Brown 1966). These large fish are found in
the deepest parts of the river like the Big Eddy.
An important potential source of aquatic fauna are sloughs formed in the backswamp and old meanders on the Neches bottoms.
These sloughs trap quantities of fish, snakes, and amphibians when
they dry up in late August. At James Slough, for instance, it is
possible to net or hand catch quantities of gizzard shad (the
predominant species), largemouth black bass, bullhead, all species
of sunfish except crappie and warmouth, carp, smallmouth buffalo,
bullfrogs, and crayfish (G. Garner, personal communication).
Predators attracted to these sloughs at this time -- also potential
game -- include watersnakes, turtles, and raccoons. These natural
fish traps are not confined to the bottoms; fish are similarly trapped
in pockets of intermittent streams.
In addition to fish, a number of other aquatic species are available
in the Neches drainage. In the original river and stream channels
mussels are plentiful. Soft shell and snapping turtles can be caught
by hand, set-hook or trotline. Slider turtles are wary and can only be
caught in traps. Crayfish inhabit sloughs, sluggish streams, and
shallow water. Frogs, (bullfrog, leopard frog, and green frog) are
ubiquitous water dwellers and hibernate during winter. Alligators
are also known to occur in deeper portions of the river.

Mammals
The whitetail deer is the largest (150-300 pounds) common mammal of the Lake Palestine region. Optimal range for the whitetail is
oak-hickory or pine-oak forest since hardwoods furnish acorns,
browse and cover (Teer 1963:29!. The American black bear is no
longer in the area but was seen in the last century. Bear denned in
canebreaks of giant reed of which only a few relict growths remain
that have not been grazed off by cattle. Eastern turkeys, another
species now extinct in the Lake Palestine area, survived in Smith
and Cherokee counties 50-60 years ago. They probably roosted in
the bottoms from October to February and appeared in the uplands
in the spring. Raccoon breed and feed along the river and its
tributary streams, but they range over the whole region.
Two indigenous species of rabbits occupy the Lake Palestine
region: the swamp rabbit (3-6 pounds) inhabits the bottoms, and the
eastern cottontail (2-4 pounds) lives in the uplands. Similarly, two

UPPER NECHES

131

species of squirrel live in the area. The smaller "cat" or gray
squirrel (ave. 14 oz.) is a high tree dweller of river and stream bottoms. The large fox squirrel (2 lbs.) is an upland dweller and is often found on the ground. The opossum (ave. 8 lbs.) inhabits both
uplands and bottoms and is the easiest land mammal to catch, particularly when he feeds on persimmons in the fall.
Birds
Waterfowl, migrating along the river and streams from October
through February include numerous species of ducks: mallard,
redhead, ruddy, masked, ring-necked, gadwall, American widgeon,
bufflehead, lesser scaup, pintail, blue-winged teal, green-winged
teal, American hooded merganser. The Canada goose passes
through during the winter and is found in the river. Coot and wood
duck inhabit the river and streams year-round. Of a variety of
upland game birds, snipe, woodcock, mourning dove and quail are
the best game birds and inhabit the region year-round.
CLIMATE
Climate of the Lake Palestine area is warm temperate, humid and
continental, modified by winds from the Gulf of Mexico (Mowery
and Oakes 1959:4). Summers are long and warm, and in 1969 in the
four counties surrounding the reservoir, the growing season was
recorded as ranging from 259 to 264 days with the last spring frost
occurring on May 7 to 11 and the first frost falling on November 7 to
November 11. Annual precipitation is slightly greater on the east
side of the river (Lindale, Smith County, 46.2", Rusk, Cherokee
County, 44.2") than at weather stations west of the river (Athens,
Henderson County, 40.~t"; Palestine, Anderson County, 40.7"). May
is the month of heaviest rainfall, followed by three dry months with
some increase in rainfall in November and December (Texas
Almanac: 1970:109-114):
In terms of environmental effects critical to human adaptation,
this climatic sequence is important for several reasons:
1. Other than amphibians and reptiles, animals do not hibernate
and are not hunted in dens. 2. Growing season is optimal, with the
summer lotlg enough for two corn crops although late summer
droughts can occur. 3. Dry summer months reduce water level
significantly making tributary streams poor sources of water; that is
the period when sloughs and shallow streams trap fish. 4. Early
spring rains and increased water flow produce spring floods which

132

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

for a short time extend the range of aquatic species and render the
river bottoms inaccessible.
ENVIRONMENTAL POTENTIAL FOR HUMAN OCCUPATION

Elements of the environment which are most specific and
discrete as factors influencing human settlement and movement in
the Neches are components of the river system -- the river,
tributary streams, and sloughs. Flood and high water table in the
bottoms limit sites that can be comfortably occupied year-round,
seasonally limit access into the bottoms, and render some soils impossible to farm. Shrinking sloughs and streams in late summer
create small distinct resources of trapped fish. Tributary streams are
frequent game runs; migratory waterfowl converge on the river and
sloughs in winter.
In biotic populations, there is a general contrast between drained
bottom, marsh, streamside, and upland, though bottoms and
uplands interdigitate and share a number of the same basic resource
types. Both support varied animal populations in addition to flora
yielding edible fruits and nuts. All species are available in a range
of 1/2 - 3 miles. In archeological sites it is to be expected that certain
species of animals will reflect different zones within the area -rabbits and squirrels occur in different species, differing between
uplands and stream and river bottoms.
Seasonal flux in resources and climate (Fig. 3) poses a number of
possible influences on human activities and movement. These shifts
are indicated: (1) fall dispersal into small parties for hunting and
nut collecting; (2) winter hunting requiring small hunting parties,
both for stalking deer and visiting specific river and slough
locations for waterfowl hunting; (3) spring fishing dispersed along
streams and rivers associated with collection of first fruits;
(4) farming from early spring to late summer, requiring work in
upland fields; (5) brief convergence on low streams and sloughs in
late summer to gather captured fish.

THE ETHNOGRAPHIC AND
ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
The following summary of Caddo culture is given as a basis for
abstracting technological series, economic activities and concommitant residence units, social groups, and principles of

UPPER

NECHES

133

organization for which we may expect to find evidence in the archeological sites in the upper Neches River. The ethnohistoric base
comprises, in order of increasing specificity, the total area of the
southeastern United States (Swanton 1946), the Caddo Indians
(Swanton 1942) and the Hasinai Confederacy (Griffith 1954;
Woodall 1969). The usefulness of this ethnographic data lies not
necessarily in a direct projection of cultural behavior into the
prehistoric past; doing so would negate the very real probability that
prehistoric cultures differed from the historic Caddo. Many classes
of data found in the archeological record are not recorded in
ethnohistoric sources; hence information and reconstructions from
excavation and survey comprise new data on the Caddo.
When survivors of the De Soto Expedition crossed the upper
Neches and Angelina rivers in the fall of 1542, the region was
inhabited by a group of 9 or 11 Caddo-speaking tribes loosely
associated in the Hasinai Confederacy. During the period 1687-1772,
a number of French and Spanish observers recorded the customs of
the Hasinai; their records have been summarized by Griffith (1954),
In using this data, it is necessary to bear in mind that this was a
period of rapid change for the Hasinai, largely due to the introduction of the horse by the Spanish in 1675. Accommodation to
the animal and its potential was rapid and by 1716 Griffith infers
that the Hasinai were "horse Indians". The mobility of horseback
travel, in conjunction with Hispano-French competition for the land
and its inhabitants, induced extensive culture change.
Griffith concludes’that this changed the Caddo residence pattern
from continuous occupation of forest hamlets to shifting camps in
response to seasonal movement of game (Griffith 1954:43, 144-149).
Archeologically, this period should be marked by the presence of
European crafts, fewer sites, and evidence that economic activities
and locations were part of a migratory hunting pattern.
Notwithstanding this rapid change, the records of early observers
give data on pre-horse culture which can be used to interpret late
prehistoric sites and make some extended inferences to the period
before white contact and influence.
ECONOMY

The domesticated staple of the Caddo was corn, with beans
second in importance. Two varieties of corn were grown: an early
short-stalked variety which Swanton compares to popcorn was
planted in late April and harvested at the end of May. Following this

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

134

SUMMER
WINTER /

Uplands~ bottom

Berries, fruits

Uplands ~ bottom

Nuts
Stream

River,

fish

Trapped

streams

Sloughs~
streams

fish

Intermit tent

Sloughs, streams

Frogs

River, stream shallows

Molluscs

Rivers ~ sloughs

Migratory
waterfowl
Local land birds

Uplands

Frost-free
season
Optimum corn
season

SInches of
rainfall
52-

F!GURE 3. Seasonal Fluctuation in Resources and Climate.

UPPER NECHES

135

harvest, the fields were immediately cleared and a slower maturing
flour corn was planted to be harvested at the end of July (Swanton
1942: 129-131). Tilling implements were "hoes" or dibbles tipped
with hickory or with blades made from buffalo scapulae or deer
mandibles (Griffith 1954: 109-110). Gourds, melons, and sunflowers
were cultivated as well as five or six kinds of beans some of which
ripened in the spring (Swant0n 1942: 127-128).
Land clearing was carried out by large work parties of men and
women, apparently drawn from the whole village, who cleared and
dug the fields of household units one after another beginning with
the field belong to the Xinesi, then the caddi, and then fields of the
remaining villagers (Swanton 1942: 128-129).
The degree to which the Caddo depended on wild plant foods is
not clear from the ethnohistoric sources; but a wide variety was harvested. Wild fruits gathered included wild grapes, persimmons,
plums, blackberries, white and black mulberries, and maypops.
These were harvested by women who also gathered large quantities
of nuts and acorns in the fall and early winter. These provided a
resource, along with shelled corn and beans, that could be stored
into the winter (Swanton 1942: 132-134; Griffith 1954: 121).
A number of animals were hunted, but records are vague concerning hunting group composition and organization. Elaborate
ritual preparation prior to deer hunting was customary, and deer
were apparently stalked and shot with bow and arrow by men using
disguising headdresses. Deer were brought back to the village to be
skinned and butchered. One chronicler, Casanas, indicates that deer
and prairie chicken were hunted only in winter time. Ducks and
geese were certainly hunted only during this period (Griffith 1954;
112-113; Swanton 1942: 134-137).
Fishing was a group occupation which began with warm spring
weather, apparently involving extended family units (referred to as
"families" in the literature). At this time, families moved for several
days to productive fishing spots and lived on their catch while
cooking quantities to carry back to the village (Swanton 1942: 138).
According to Griffith, fishing was especially important in late summer when drought-diminished streams trapped fish in shallow
pools (Griffith 1954: 113). Techniques of fishing are not described
specifically for the Caddo, except for a. reference to trotline fishing
by the Nachitoches (Swanton 1946: 340). However, a wide variety of
fishing techniques was used throughout the southeast, including
weirs, hook-and-line, nets, snares, arrows, spears, poison, drags,

136

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and "grabbling" (catching with the bare hands) (Swanton 1946: 332340), and it is presumed that the Caddo used these techniques.
From the above description, it is suggested that spring fishing
groups were likely to be small while late summer fish-catching involved or had the potential for larger units, probably drawn from
matrilocal households whose core members would be related
women.
Apparently buffalo were hunted year-round though major hunts
were planned for the winter season. The nearest buffalo plains were
said to be more than 40 leagues distant from east Texas and the best
hunting grounds were found only beyond the Brazos.
Materials Used in Technology
Plant and animal resources provided material for most native
technology. Plants -- reed, canes, and wood -- were the most common materials used in crafts followed by clay and animal materials.
Food preparat’ion, for instance, was accomplished with wooden
mortars, clay pots, reed screens, and baskets. Food was served in
pottery bowls and on woven platters, and pipe smoking was an after-meal ritual. References to stone artifacts are almost absent from
the record; arrowheads and cutting tools can be inferred but are not
described. No pottery vessels accompanied men on the hunt; their
food rested on the ground on leaves or on their own feet.

Division of Labor
Subsistence tasks: although initial land clearing was done by all
villagers, male and female, Hasinai women did most planting,
cultivating, harvesting, cleaning, and storing of crops. They
prepared game, gathered wild foods (including nuts and acorns in
the fall), ground meal in wooden mortars and cooked food. The only
subsistence tasks specifically named as male activities are hunting
and clearing and breaking soil for planting.
Crafts: early journals note that craft making was carried out
primarily in cold rainy periods in the village. Women made mats,
baskets, and 15ots; men made bows, arrows, moccacins, and farming
tools (Griffith 1954: 121; Swanton 1942: 162-163). Housebuilding was
a community activity in which men and woman of all households
were required to participate (Swanton 1942: 149-152).

Structures and Communities
The basic Hasinai settlement was a scattered series of house

UPPER NECHES

137

clustering into named hamlets. Depending on the importance of the
household head circular thatched houses varied in size up to 60 feet
in diameter. These dwellings had a central hearth, and beds lined
sections of the wall; other walls were taken up with shelves, pots,
and baskets where domestic utensils (mortars, pestles, cookware)
and food (corn, beans, nuts, and other foods) were stored (Swanton
1942: 148-153).
Apparently most houses were multi-family dwellings. Woodall
(1919: 20), reviewing historic and ethnographic literature, infers that
dwellings housed extended families and the dominant residence
pattern was uxorilocality (see also Griffith 1954: 101). House sites
were selected close to a location suitable for cropping and a stream
providing drinking and bathing water (Swanton 1942: 163-164).
Political Organization
Like much of Caddo culture, political organization is outlined
only sketchily by European observers. There is, however, indication
that social stratification existed. Gasanas, the first missionary to the
Hasinai, indicates a series of ranked statuses:
Xinesi - Pan-tribal religious leader
Caddi - Tribal leader
Canahas - Criers
War Captain
Chayas - Subordinates to the Canahas
Tammas - Work group supervisors
Both the Xinesi and the Caddi were inherited positions, and their
wives were designated by a special title (Swanton 1942: 170-171).
The basis of this inheritance may well be a system of ranked clans,
which was indicated to Swanton in about 1910 by an elderly informant. Five "clans" were named which were not consistently
exogamous; a male child belonged to either his father’s or his
mother’s clan, whichever was the "strongest" (Swanton 1931). Informant discussion of clans is inconsistent, but clans are mentioned
by several sources (Swanton 1942: 163-166), leaving little doubt that
they existed.
The interpretation of ranked status is difficult to solve; Woodall
views the Caddi as a "big-man" leader (Sahlins 1968: 86-95) who
retained his leadership through generosity and kinbased obligations.
This contrasts with a "chief" as Service has developed the type
whose re-distributive role invests him with political authority
(Service 1962: 170). Such a role can be easily imagined to apply to
the earlier Caddo sites with earthworks and status burials. At the

138

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

present state of knowledge, the status of the Hasinai Caddi is still
not entirely clear. As the succeeding section of the report indicates,
there may be status ranking indicated by burial patterns although of
a more attenuated form than in early Caddo sites.
Burial ritual, abstracted from several ethnographic sources, dating
from initial contact to Parson’s 1927 notes ($wanton 1942: 203-209)
shows a pattern which coincides closely with the archeological data.
Burials were interred singly near the house following a ritual whose
elaboration and duration depended on the status of the deceased.
Important "chiefs" (probably Caddi) took longer to bury; a Xinesi’s
burial required performance of ceremonies by all tribes. Burial
goods indicative of hierarchical status are not described; it is mentioned only that men are buried with bows, arrows, and other hunting implements and woman are buried with pottery vessels.
ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
The dominant type of settlement in the Palestine Reservoir area is
a small site or site-cluster attributable to Caddo populations.
General summaries of the Caddo sequence have been published in
several sources (cf. Davis 1970: 35-58; Orr 1952; Suhm 1954: 151-227;
and Webb 1960: 48-54). These describe a general trend contained in
the transition from the Gibson Aspect to the Fulton Aspect marked
by abandonment of large nuclear centers with special ceremonial
structures, loss of elaborate status burials, and dispersal of
populations into small scattered villages.
Prior to the present salvage project, research in the area of
Palestine Reservoir consisted of excavation of esoteric sites like a
"perpetual fire site" (Jackson 1936), amateur excavations of burials,
and Johnson’s survey (1961). From the 35 sites Johnson located, one
was designated an Archaic site ($41 He 35), and one (X41 $M 28) included multiple burials with Alto Focus pottery and six single interments with Frankston Focus vessels. Two other sites (X41 $M 16,
X41, $M 17) were tentatively designated as Alto Focus sites, and 28
of the remaining ceramic sites contained Frankston Focus pottery
types. To date, no historic sites with trade goods have been identified in this part of the upper Neches.
Previous excavations are primarily useful for indications of
ceremonial activities and status indicated in burial patterns. Jackson
in 1931 and 1935 excavated a large ash mound and a midden
overlying a large circular house pattern at the A. C. Saunders site,
approximately 3 miles west of Lake Palestine dam (Jackson 1936).
This site is still visible on a level upland field close to the western

UPPER NECHES

139

border of mixed pine-oak forest. Jackson made a careful comparison
of the archeological remains with the descriptions of Hasinai
ceremonial structures by Espinosa and Morfi and suggested that the
site was a temple.
Two burial sites were reported by Johnson, and the author has
visited the locations of two additional sites that had been removed
by bulldozing, local amateurs and pothunters. These give general
patterns of burial ritual from which some inference concerning
status and community type are suggested.
Excavations by amateurs ha~;e uncovered single and multiple interments for early and late periods within the reservoir. At X41 SM
28 (41 SM 73-UT), a low bench above Saline Creek, six single interments and a multiple burial with four individuals were excavated. All burials were apprently in shallow pits, ranging from 24
inches to 40 inches below level ground surface. Details of ceramic
vessels are not known, but the multiple burial is adjacent to the
single graves which were spaced in a north-south row indicating
that this was an established burial location. Rows of single interments are characteristic of a number of Frankston Focus interments excavated in the 1930’s near Poynor, Texas, east of Lake
Palestine (R. K. Harris, personal communication). Vessels found
with the multiple burial are identifiable as, or similar to, pots from
the T. M. Sanders Site (Sanders Focus) or the George C. Davis Site
(Alton Focus). No other artifacts were recorded.
At X41 SM 6 (41 SM 77-UT) two single graves were excavated
from a site approximately one mile up Saline Creek from X41 SM
28. One burial included a Ripley Engraved bottle, two Poynor
engraved bowls, two effigy vessels, eight Perdiz points, a small celt
and a large biface. The second grave contained two Poynor
Engraved bottles, one plain carinated bowl, one effigy bowl, a small
Poynor Engraved bowl, another undescribed vessel, and six Perdiz
points (Johnson 1961: 219-224; field notes from survey of Blackburn
Crossing Reservoir).
The author recently visited two burial locations destroyed in September, 1970, by construction on the banks of County Line Creek
and one of its small tributaries. The site on the main stream apparently had one multiple burial in a pit 12 feet wide, which contained three skeletons; a cluster of four burials lay 21 feet downslope from this. These were approximately 50 meters west of two
surface artifact concentrations associated with middens.
The four burials were reported to come from a single pit but,

140

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

since the area covered by the graves is 21 feet across, they may have
been single graves. Twenty-one pottery vessels of Frankston Focus
types, one celt, and a slender bifacial tool ("Jowell Knife") were included in the triple burial. Basket or matting impressions were also
reported. The items recovered from the four burials included pottery, projectile points and two pipes.
Two burials have been obliterated by constr~uction on a south
tributary of County Line Creek; a few details have been reported by
local informants. One burial contained one individual and six
Frankston Focus pottery vessels. Upslope from this was apparently
an Alto Focus multiple burial with three small clusters of pottery
associated with bone and tooth fragments.
The burial pattern clearly shows a preference for streamside
locations; in some cases graves lie on the periphery of prehistoric
settlements. Multiple burials are apparently most characteristic of
Alto Focus graves, and single interments predominate in Frankston
Focus sites. There is some suggestion that multiple interments persisted in the later period of occupation. Status implications depend
on data (sex, age, artifact associations) that have not been determined; however, if multiple burials persist into a later period of occupation, this may represent continuation of ranked status. Such a
situation, in which the death of a high-status individual occasioned
the burial of other individuals, has been recorded at late sites on the
Red River (Skinner et al. 19691.

SUMMARY
As the preceding outline indicates, the Caddo sites of the upper
Neches offer an opportunity for research centering on the
dichotomy between Alto Focus and Frankston Focus as culture
types and the shifts in economy and society which may be represented by these types. Knowledge of the internal structure of small sites
in each period is necessary to determine whether the occupation of
the Neches in these two periods represents two distinct adaptations
and social types. In burial patterns, single interments are generally
characteristic of Frankston Focus sites, but the presence of multiple
burials indicates that some status differentiation may be present
and status may not be qualitatively different from the Alto occupation. The interpretation of the A. C. Saunders Site as a
ceremonial structure is plausible, but requires comparison with
other archeological site types -- camps and dwellings -- for

UPPER NECHES

141

validation and satisfactory definition of prehistoric settlement components.
Economy of the Neches prehistoric Caddo is not known. Corn
was grown at the Davis Site, but its cultivation at Lake Palestine is
yet to be proved. The large number of small sites in the reservoir
may include a variety of activity -- specific camps as well as village
sites near which fields were cultivated.
Based on the ethnohistoric literature, environmental data, and archeological data from the upper Neches, a pattern of settlement is
inferred for the Hasinai and their prehistoric predecessors (Fig. 4).
It is quite possible that all these elements of the settlement system
are included in the reservoir. This representation excludes the winter buffalo hunting camp which would be considerably outside the
reservoir area.
Villages contained dwellings occupied by extended families.
There is evidence that matrilocatity was the principle under which
households were grouped. In or near dwellings a wide range of
economic tasks were accomplished, including butchering, cooking,
food-storage, food grinding, pottery making, basket weaving, and
arrow making. Caddi’s houses were likely to be the largest and were
the scene of visits from foreign emissaries; hence they should contain non-local artifacts.
These dwellings were apparently occupied year-round except for
early spring and late summer, when families moved to fishing spots,
and during winter buffalo hunts.
Of the hunting, gathering, and fishing activities in the immediate
reservoir area, only one -- fishing -- involves whole families and is
likely to Be represented by both men’s and women’s tools. The
records suggest that fishing spots were visited for relatively brief
periods during spring and summer and varied in location depending on the stage of flooding and condition of the river. These
localities, if they are detectable in the ethnographic record, should
be relatively small, show a marked percentage of fish bone and
aquatic species, and a relatively small range of ceramic attributes in
keeping with small kin-based groups.

THE SITES
Table 1 lists the 98 sites visited during 1969 and 1970. Those with
University of Texas at Austin designations were originally recorded
in 1957 by Johnson and were re-visited during the present survey.
Sites X41 AN 6-8 are not described, although they are shown on the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

142

FLOODPLAIN
UPLAND

F

"\,
\;,

b~r~ol,

~

A

000

.4

cultivated

fields

Fall buffalo
hunting

A
~,

Lale

summer

Spring

fishing camp

fishing,

fail waterfowl

hunting

FIGURE 4. Hasinai Settlement System.
site map, because they were recorded and surface materials were
collected by grids in 1970 while excavation was in progress at
nearby sites: They will be described in an excavation report.
Similarly, historic salt factories ($41 SM 1-4,35,36) are not described;
they are included in a separate publication (Skinner 1971).
Site area refers to the surface extent of artifacts unless marked by
an asterisk; these sites include dimentions of the landform on which
the site rests. Sites for which dimensions were not recorded are
marked "N.D.".
Microenvironmental units are those previously described and
shown in Figure 2. Site situations and settlement types are summarized and defined in the succeeding section on site distribution.

SITE DISTRIBUTION AND IMPLICATIONS
Review and comparison of the sites and their distribution in Lake
Palestine Reservoir are directed toward the following questions:

UPPER NECHES

148

4J
0

~ .,~

B

H
r~

I
=,-~
I
t~

43.,.-I

0o.

}.4,.-I/.1

~ ~

" 0

.

¢~

D~

B
r,

4~ 0 ~;

.~ ~.~
o

~

E~
~ ,’0 ,.el
43
I.-I

0
3:43
0

~ O~
0 0
=~
~

. ~ ~
~l.-~

0

0

~.
~

.~°

~

~o~g.

f~
lm
43

43

O
H

I-I

O
O
0
0

4J

Z
O
HA
E’ ,-]

0
0

M

X

o
0
,--4

o
t~

o
o’)

e0
o’1

X

×

o

¢q
o’1

~v
r~

N

X
O
o
,.q

>

o

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

144

D’I
4.J

4J

43

’13
C

~-

43

.~

ll14a

r.,o

~

~4J

~.I~

.,C

0

431.4

~

¢04.J
C9 ~
¯ 4a

~ ¢-~
~14J

U
¯

4J
4J
~

~I
p.~
N

.C
~

03
4a -l.J
m ,-.4
ej Q;

O)

t~

<
Z

o
<
I-4
u~

o

¢’"

O
,-4
43

X

~

~

N

X

~

~

X

0

Z

o

o

o

o

o

v

z
O

r0
~v

CO
.r.O

g

g

g

g
Ill

g

g

O)

~14.J
¯ O~

g
Ixl

145

UPPER NECHES

.,’4
O
-M

C;

-~

O "~

oO~

4~

O

--

~4 r~

.

0

-."4
~

4-)

~,
I

q~
..-4

0
~

~>

~1
0

4~
O >
I:l~O

n:J
m
O

m

~.~

~:~

¯ ¯

~4
r..)

-

~Q

,-40

.~-’ ,.U

I~o

(1/
¯

,"-4

~

0

.

4.J

...~

¯

O

~

,

co

o

o

U

o

0

r0

~og o.

¯

o

.

. ~
~.-~

°

o

o

,w,

O
,-4

N

×

×

×

×

N

N

o
o

o
0

O
.

c0

o
o
,-4

o
’,D

O
O

o

o

o

o

o

o

o

g

g

u~
L~

D
I
o o~

g.~

U

~v

N~

g

146

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

~
H
tO

~

.

o

,;

¯

"0

O

~
,

O

~g
¯

~
¯

~

~.~

~

¯

0 "~
P"- ~

0
0
O~

0
0

~ ~

~

X

~

~

~

.

¢~
03

~
0

m

~
0

0
~4

~
C

0
C

~

~0

o

~43
m r~

O
H

H

~.~
E~

O

0

43

X

X

~

I

o

o
0

o
O~

o

o
~0

I

~I’

o
I~

’0

~

,~

~
~v

D
I
e,l

0

CO

~i~

x

Ixl

~ ,~

I~V

~

1,4

Ixl

>4

147

UPPER NECHES

b~

r,
4J

o

~

4-~
0
09

O~

4J

to

N

0

0,-~

~
-~4

O~

010
~

0

4~

O

¯
r.J

4J

to-N

A

to

.~

o

qq
0
19
O
°
to,.~
O
O
4J

.
0

~0
0

O
"0

0
0

’0
q’~
~

19
O~
0

O

19

~ 0
.,a
%

o

to

¯

-~

0

19 to
~4
0 -

0

~

~

~

’U

4J

~

0~0
~ 0

~-~

~

¯

P.

0
0

~
19

0
0

~

0
~
to

0~

0

~

~

019

t~

~o~

~o

~.~

o

o

o
IN

o
c,l

×

×

×

×

×

o
r~

o

o

O

o
o
r~

u3
r~

u3

0

o

19

~
U

19 ~
~

~
O

-r’~ ~,t -,-t

to

¯

l:~g4

ul
~
19 4J

O e,l

m

~4J

19

~
,.q
o t14

to
19

,-40
~

4J

O

O

O

P4~
"~

rj

to ~
~4 ~4

×

×
o

~D

ffl

o
0~
.-4
~4

19
0

r~

o

×

,..,.t

0

r~

to

o

"0’0
0
0 0

4J

x

m

148

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

¯

o

o

N 0

I

u’~ -,4

..~

43

43

o

oo

o~

~

~4

X

0

0
~

°

,-4

,-I

~’~

0

O

¯

4a

¯

,.*4

,-4

o

~

0
I

I

Z
O

~v

D

I-t

~I~ ~o

~

~o

D~

gg

g

g

g

00

o~

o

¯~
N

~,

~,

N

N

~1~
N

UPPER NECHES

149

43

O~
~

43

0"~
~
-,.4

4~

"~4
¯

¯

¯

0

4:::0

4:::0

P.~O
¯

m
¯

4-~
Q;
~m

~,~
¯ ¯
P~m

~..~ ~
¯ ~
~m

~ ~
. 4-J
AM

043
¯ ¯
Hm

o
O
0

¯
:>

m
0

-

I

,q tn

0

o
43

0

r0
O

-

0
.,q

m

o~

~

1-400

O~

tO ~

043

~ 0
.,.q

~

01

.
~

~

~1

o

O~

Of~

0-~
Pfl
¯

×
~I~

u~

C~

~3

~3

~

0

m~4
.’~

×

r~

0 ",~

A~:

0

~-I
O

¯
oo

O~

o
¯

o

.

~

0-,-~
m
¯

0

43

o

0 0
~0

.
E~

~

0
0

.

o

o

X

×
0

~

×
0

×
0
b-

og

Sg

o

o

o

X

~

X

x

~

¯
~

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

150

43

4J

H

C3¯ 43

¯
H

H

4J

43

¯ ~

¯ o;

4a

.5
~g

,-"

~.

¯ ~ ~

43

.-P m ~

’ ¯

¢3m

QJ

~rj
43
-,4 ’U

o
,~

’/3

o
o

o
~0

>

4~ 0

,-IO

ro~

,--143

,-10

¯

u

O

,,..4

O
,-4

,.-I

o
r-4

o
,-4

O

Lr’, O

f~

A

o
N

×

O

Lm

N

X

~

v

O

X

o

N

~

N

X

o
r4

,.o

o

~

o

o

o

o

,~

~

~

co

r~v

/
o

H
r~

g
N

N

N

N

~

i

oo

O

o

O

N~

X

o

,’~

UPPER NECHES

151

4.1

4-I

4~

4~

0

,-4

4~ 0

o o

~

o
o ~

~.~
0
~_~0

u~
~N

.5

~ 0
~ 0

.
. ¯

~

~,~

0

~N 0 0

o~
0
m
"~

0

0

~
4J

0
0

~.~

~’~
~ 0

o~
u) 0

E-~ 0

,--,o
~o 00~

~l 0 ~

~

,"4

,",4

,’-4

,-4

,-4

~

o

o

~

o~

5

H

o

r~

¯

ooo

N

M

N

M

M

M

X

0

O

..O

O

O

O

O

O

o

o

o

o

o

o

o~

OD

OD

o~

o’)

OD

OD

OD

N

N

N

N

N

GO
O1

O

N

N

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

152

4a
¢’

¯ ,-I

~
-,’4

CO

¯

CO

¯

P-~CO
¯ ~ 43

~.~
.,4 4~

~
CO

1~143
¯ co
MUl

,~ 43
° ~
~m

m 43
, co
2~m

U m
, U
,~lm

rD m
° O
,~m

ul r~
, O
l:Em

D’~’~
~1 43
, CO
N~m

.~.
~.~
¢3
Z
<

o

-r-~ I-I
O -,4

(lJ

l-I -,’4

I-t

Z

o
,-4

o

CO

<8

v

Z
O
HA

0
~0

x

~

0
u~

0
~

Z

u~
u~

0
0

U%

×

×

~

d

o

o

o

~

o

o

d

0

~,

0~

~v

I

~O

~

~

[/3
~-I

5q
,--!

(~O
,-4

5’~
,-,I

CQ
,--4

*

*

X

~

h¢

Ul

~4V

~4

h¢

¯
43

UPPER NECHES

o

0

153

~

~

~

o
,-4

.--I

~

~

.~

~

o~3

b

b

~

S

’~
o’~

~:)
o"1

~
r,’)

b

b

CO
03

~1~

~

o

0

b

~CO
CO

N

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

154

’o
~q

Ill

to

0

,--4 ,1~

0 to
to ~

~

[D

o

"~.~

-,4

’~

- ~.~ o
to

,-"4

o

~

~

¯

~ ~¢,~

¯

~
0

L~

X

4~

~

~

,~

~~

~

0

to

:3

.

~.,.4

~4~

~
~

*0 ~ ~

’

~

~

~
~~ ~

~1

0

~O

"

~. g.~ ~

&
,’-4

14
O
to

d

AE

(D O
(DO
~’4
X
(DO
tOo
I I
<m

o
o~

o
o

CO

tO

CO

CO
eq

,-~

O~
eq

UPPER NECHES

155

O
°
to

"O

r0
19

19

~

0 4~

194/

o’~

to

19

~

19

~4

~ 4/

to

-~

to

.~4

to ~

~-~

~’~

~
n

.~

m
n

19

0 0
19.~

0.z~

m

0

o

o

o

0

0

0

m

o

o

~

o

0

~

0

0

t.Q

n

O~

t~

tD

’~

~1~

t,’3

’tJ

156

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

(1) Do artifact assemblages or sets which represent distinct activities correlate with components of the environment to suggest
functionally disparate units within a settlement system? (2) Do the
Caddoan sites within the reservoir conform to the Hasinai
ethnographic pattern?
Surveyed sites have been grouped into a series of activity-sets to
test whether these sets, designated in terms of components of a settlement system, show discernible patterns of environmental
association (Table 2).
In categorizing activity-sets, an attempt has been made to consider sites as integrated wholes in which site area and artifact concentration is considered, as well as the relative frequency of different activity-elements and the presence or absence of specific
traits. Site area and artifact concentrations are approximate, since
horizontal distribution of artifacts was not consistently recorded,
and surface cover varied from site to site. In a number of cases the
artifact sample is very small. However, if a number of such small
assemblages occurs repeatedly in particular environmental contexts
they achieve more reliability and indicate that a patterned activity is
represented.
Site assemblages are grouped into seven classes: chipping scatter,
hunting station, gathering station, hunting/gathering camp, sherd
scatter, camp/settlement and base settlement.
SITES OF TEMPORARY OCCUPATION
A. Chipping Scatter. These are suggested as brief stops by one
hunter or a small group of hunters during which tools were made or
finished. The only .artifacts are a few (3-13) pieces of stone debris, in
some cases with a finished projectile point or biface fragments. The
maximum site dimensions are 30 meters. Debris consists of secondary flakes at all-sites except X41 SM 11, which has one cortex flake.
B, C. Hunting Stations. Probably intermittently occupied sites at
which resource cobbles or blanks were made into finished tools,
and broken points were replaced. Most are extensive sites, from 90
to 200.yards in maximum dimensions. Large samples of chipped
stone debris and tools are the sole or predominant artifacts. The full
range of debris, from core to cortex flake to finished projectile
points, is represented and some projectile point stems occur. Two
sites have a single grinding tool (mano or basin), one has a pitted
stone, and some have a small number of sherds. Sites without
projectile point stems (B) are listed separately from those with
broken stems (C); the latter have heavier occupational debris and

UPPER NECHES

157

are more likely to have been repeatedly or intensively used.
D. "Gathering Station". Isolated pitted stones or grinding platforms, indicating one person or a small group grinding and
probably gathering wild plant food and nuts on a transient or
seasonal basis. These occur with or without a small number of
sherds (19 or less).
E,F,G. Hunting/Gathering Camps. Small lithic sites at which chipped stone tools were made, occasionally projectile points
replaced, and vegetable foods processed. Site extent varies from 1/4
acre to 100 meters in extent. One site (X41 He 35) shows two artifact
clusters differing in the occurrence of primary debris. At the cluster
having only secondary debris an anvil was collected. In addition to
lithic debris, these sites have unfinished points, occasional base
fragments, pitted stones and pitted manos. Four of the five sites
(category F) have the full sequence of lithic manufacture represented; one site (X41 Ce 16) has only secondary debris (category E).
One extensive site (category G) covers a bluff 400 wide x 900 meters
long. A full range of lithic debris was collected from this site
although primary elements are few. Unfinished chipped stone tools
and all categories of crushing and grinding tools are represented.
Two sections of the site have a relatively small number (18, 39) of
sherds. The presence of Archaic dart points suggests a pre-Caddoan
component. The extensive distribution of artifacts suggests that this
location has been frequently re-occupied by hunting and gathering
parties.
H. Sherd Scatter Stations. Sites at which only sherds were found;
the number varies from 1-32, and sites vary considerably in extent;
most cover less than 50 meters. Some of these may represent outposts at farmed fields. In the absence of hunting tools, tool manufacture, and ground stone tools, they are presumed not to have been
hunting and gathering camps or base settlements.

CAMP OR SETTLEMENTS OF MULTIPLE ACTIVITIES
Ceramics are predominant at these sites; pottery was probably
made at all locations. Stone tool production and vegetable food
processing is represented. These are the sites with the greatest number and largest variety of tools, indicating permanent occupations.
However, ceramic sites vary in size and activity; either seasonal
camps or base settlements may be represented. They are ordered in
several classes by variations in site scale and range of activities
present:
I. Small sites, up to 50 meters in maximum extent, which lack

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

158

TABLE 2
Site Types and Distribution

SITE SITUATION

Western Uplands

E,W

Eastern
Uplands

B

A

C

D

E

F

G

H

SITE TYPE

A.
B.
C.
D.

Chipping Station
Hunting Station
Hunting Station
Gathering Station

E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
I.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.

Hunting/Gathering Camp
Hunting/Gathering Camp
Hunting/Gathering Camp
Sherd Scatter
Camp/Settlement
Camp/Settlement
Base Settlement
Base Settlement
Base Settlement
Base Settlement
Base Settlement
Base Settlement

2
3
1

1
3

1
1

2
1
21

11

53

~_1

1
1

I

I
1

2
2
1

I
1
I
I

I

J

K

UPPER NECHES

159

crushing and grinding tools. Sherds are dominant (8-97); secondary
lithic debris, and occasional finished tools or point body fragments
are a minor part of the assemblage. Since crushing and grinding
tools are absent and hunting tool manufacture and use is minor,
some of these may be temporary camps.
J. A site (X41 HE 40) with a small number of sherds, a core, and
fragments of daub indicating a permanent structure. This may be a
permanent residence.
K. Small-to-medium sites with 5-98 sherds, crushing and grinding
tools, (pitted stones, pitted manos, grinding basins) and small quantities of secondary debris. Most are relatively small, though one is 90
meters in length. The range of activities represented suggest that
these may be small base settlements.
L. Small ceramic sites, less than 70 meters across with 32 to 82
sherds and small amounts of primary debris.
M. Extensive sites, probably base camps, up to 200 meters across
with a large sherd sample (100-381), very few primary or secondary
flakes or unfinished tools, and pitted stones.
N. Base settlements, usually 50 meters or less in extent, with a
small sample of unfinished tools and full lithic debris. A wide range
of crushing and grinding tools are present, including pitted stones,
manos, and grinding platforms. Sherd samples range from 51 to 596.
O. The largest and most intensively occupied sites; these are all
probably base settlements with several permanent residences. They
range up to 300 meters in maximum extent, have a relatively large
number of sherds (38-439), ceramic pipe fragments, full lithic
debris, finished chipped stone tools, and a variety of crushing and
grinding tools.
P. Small ceramic sites, of the same order and content as
categories I and F, with the addition of pipe fragments. These may
be either campsites or settlements; the presence of pipes is taken as
an indication of group ceremony, in the context of a smaller group
or more brief occupation than base settlements at which intervillage or tribal ceremonies presumably occurred. Site size is small,
no more than 50 meters in maximum dimensions, and sherd samples are usually small (13 to 18 sherds). Crushing and grinding
stones are absent except at X41 SM 23, which has one pitted stone.
One site (X41 HE 24) has 182 sherds and a small amount of primary
lithic debris. Remaining sites have no lithic material or minimal
debris (1 or 2 chips).
DISTRIBUTIONAL PATTERNS
Site locations in Table 2 are grouped according to their occurrence

160

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

east or west of the river, to test whether differences in site types
correlate with contrasts between east and west uplands in
topography, lithic resources, soil types, and proximity to the eastern
border of pine-oak forest. In addition, site locations in environmental zones 1 and 13, the interior uplands, are differentiated
by their occurrence on streamside bluffs, interior ridges or knolls or
upland flats, to determine if propinquity to streams governed settlement type.
As Table 2 shows, no sites were located on the river bottoms. All
sites are in zone 1-4 (western uplands, and floodplain borders) and
10-13 (eastern uplands). Hence all sites are potentially occupable
throughout the year without threat of flood. There is the possibility
that some sites may have been covered by alluvium although sites
were exposed on the alluvial slopes of the floodplain borders.
Chipping scatter sites show a slightly greater association with
streamside locations expected from hunting activities than isolated
interior sites, but they appear in other location. Hunting stations are
more restricted in distribution than other site localities; all are on
the western rim of the flood plain to which easy access is gained to
the floodplain or river. In several cases, in locations south of Cany
Creek, these sites are near Pleistocene terraces, and the usable stone
in terrace gravels was probably a determining factor in the choice of
sites. A relatively high proportion of local quartzite debris occurs at
these sites and is similar to material found on the terrace cobble
deposits. Three of the sites are close to good fishing localities: X41
AN 2 lies a short distance from the river, X41 HE 11 occupies a low
terrace a short distance from the Big Eddy, and X41 HE 35 is close to
a small slough and tributary stream. Other sites are not in close
proximity to fishing localities, but their location on the boundary
between floodplain and upland places them in an optimal location
for hunting both upland and bottomland species. Sites with stem
fragments (X41 TA 2, X41 HE 11, X41 HE 17) all have Archaic dart
points and represent early hunting stations; some of the same
locations have Caddoan ceramics, suggesting multiple occupations.
Gathering stations, isolated finds of pitted stone or grinding
basins, show a wide distribution with a preference for interior
upland localities. This distribution is what would be expected if
these sites involved wild nut-gathering, since nut-bearing hardwoods are ubiquitous.
Base camps or base settlements, as well as most ceramic campsettlement sites, are the most common and occur most frequently in
the situation expected from the ethnographic literature -- streamside flats with relatively fertile soils.

161

UPPER NECHES

Since artifacts preserved at these sites are not those analogous to
those used in Caddo horticulture, inference that base settlements
are farming villages must be based on indirect evidence. One of
these is association with fertile soils. According to ethnohistoric
reports, Hasinai settlements Were customarily located near streams
and land suitable for farming. If the Neches River Caddo were
established farmers, as they appear to have been at the George C.
Davis Site and at Hasinai villages, they can be assumed to have been
able to judge relative soil productivity. Lacking this pre-judgement,
relative crop yield would have demonstrated the better farming
locations. Hence, it is expected that probable village sites (base settlements) will be associated with good soils.
To rate soil productivity, soil types classified by the Soil Conservation Service were obtained for each site locality. These types
are ranked on the basis of fertility, depth of subsoil, slope, erosion
potential, and potential for flooding. Erosion potential and porosity
are of primary concern for present-day farmers who practice
repeated cropping with commerical fertilizer. We can assume that
Caddo swidden involved cropping a field until production dropped
below a certain level, and the field was let fallow. Hence, original
fertility would be the deciding factor in soil productivity. Soils
associated with archeological sites are categorized as low (L), low to
moderate (L-M), or moderate (M) in fertility (Mowrey and Oakes
1959).
Table 3 shows the relative fertility of soils with which all activitysets are associated. Base settlements are clearly associated with better soils. Furthermore, Caddo settlements (sets K, M-P) occur in one
location, the floodplain border’, which is shared by no other sites.
These sites, with the exception of those (K)
points, have complete tool kits, including
stones and some lithic debris. They are likely
tlements rather than camps. The alluvial soil

which lack projectile
crushing or grinding
to have been base setat the floodplain bor-

der, among the best in the upper Neches region, is sugggested as a
primary factor in choice of these sites.

SETTLEMENT SYSTEMS OF THE UPPER NECHES
On the basis of pottery types and projectile point types, three
periods of occupation are indicated represented by Archaic, Alto
Focus, and Frankston Focus types. However, a number of sites
lacking "index fossils" in the form of distinctive pottery or point
types cannot be ascribed to a particular period; these "timeless"

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

162

TABLE 3
Relative Fertility of Soils in Association with Archeological Sites
SOIL FERTILITY

Base settlements

Low

Low-Moderate

Moderate

4

3

25

Camp/Settlements
Hunting/gathering camp

Sherd scatter
Gathering station
Hunting station

Chipping scatter

sites include chipping sites and isolated pitted stones or grinding
stones.
Archaic base camps are restricted to the western side of the river;
the primary activities represented in technological remains are toolmaking and hunting. By their proximity to Pleistocene terraces and
riverine resources, it is suggested that fishing and stone cobble
collection were additional activities that took place at these sites.
These Archaic sites include gray flint projectile points but lack
cores and cortex flakes of this material. It occurs in secondary
debris, retouched flakes, biface blanks, scrapers and dart points. A
central Texas origin for this flint has been suggested. If this is true,
these sites may represent a seasonal round of small hunting and
gathering bands whose territory extended west beyond the upper
Neches drainage. This is suggested by the distribution of all Archaic
points~ which, in addition to their concentration in hunting camps
with primarily lithic components, are more common in all sites on
the western side of the river. Twelve sites lying west of the Neches
River have dart points. Only three sites are~on the east side of the
river. Furthermore, these eastern three sites include only Gary and
Ellis dart points; the use of these forms may have persisted after the
introduction of ceramics (Suhm et el. 1954: 188). Sites representing
other activities in the seasonal round of these archaic bands may lie
considerably west of the Neches drainage, possibly beyond the oakpine-hickory forest in the Post-Oak Savannah or Plains where buffalo was the principal large game.
Earliest Caddo sites in the reservoir area are limited to burials on

UPPER NECHES

163

the eastern side and small clusters of base camps or settlements
west of the river near the mouth of Caney Creek. These sites lie on
or near the fertile floodplain border soil with which no sites are
associated prior to Caddoan occupations. It has been suggested that
this part of the river bottom environment attracted permanent settlement because of the farming potential of this soil. This Alto Focus
Caddo population was much more sparse and scattered than in succeeding periods. The closest Alto Focus site observed by the writer
outside the reservoir is located on Caddo Creek, a western tributary
of the Neches six miles south of the Caney Creek cluster.
The primary occupation of the upper Neches is represented by
Frankston Focus sites which account for 81 of the 85 ceramic sites.
The largest are base settlement clusters on streamside flats with fertile soils in the eastern uplands. Other site types include scattered
sherds, gathering stations in which pitted stones are found with a
few sherds, and small campsites. The range of site types suggests
villages, small hamlets, and temporarily occupied activity-specific
sites separate from the permanent villages.
From the Caddoan literature, several elements of the settlement
system have been inferred for the historic Hasinai including farming hamlets, spring fishing stations, and late summer fishing
camps. These apparently consisted of matrilineal kin-affiliated task
or residence groups and are the elements of this sytem most likely
to be represented archeologically by camps or settlement sites.
Other activities in the seasonal round (winter waterfowl hunting,
deer hunting, and fall nut gathering) involved exclusively male or
female groups and would be expected to be represented by much
less archeological residue. Archeological sites representing these activities are probably chipping stations and gathering stations. The
site class most likely to represent a spring or late summer fishing
camp are streamside or floodplain camps or settlements (Class I).
There are slightly more of this site type in this locality than
elsewhere.
Base-settlement clusters vary in size and number of activity-sets;
this variation could be accounted for by specific activity or work
localities .within the hamlet. In addition, the density of occupation
apparently varies in direct proportion to the fertility of the soil.
A site cluster on Saline Creek, including sites X41 SM 15, 22-25
occupies an upland flat approximately 500 meters across at the junction of two streams. The soil is a fertile red sandy loam (Magnolia
Fine Sandy Loam). The sites include four base settlements ranging
in size from 50 x 100 meters to 120 x 160 meters, and one small

164

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

station with one chip, a grinding basin and four sherds. One base
settlement, X41 SM 22 includes a small scatter of sherds and debris
slightly apart from the major portion of the site, suggesting a
separate activity area. A cemetery (X41 SM 28) has been excavated
by amateurs approximately 1/2 mile downstream and a burial is
reported to have been removed from a stream bank at the end of one
site.
A cluster on a tributary of County Line Creek (sites X41 CE 1-5)
includes one extensive base settlement (X41 CE 1) and a smaller
camp or settlement on a moderately fertile sand flat (Bowie loamy
fine sand), at the head of a small stream. Three other sites -- a small
scatter of sherds, a small camp or settlement, and a grinding platform with 11 sherds -- occupy slopes and ridge crests overlooking
the flat.
A third cluster on Chimney Creek consists of three extensive base
settlement sites (X41 CE 10,11,16) along a 3/4 mile length of the
creek. Soil here is a fertile red sandy loam (Magnolia/Nacogdoches
fine sandy loam). Sites range from 100 x 350 meters to 100 x 300
meters in size. A small concentration of primary debris, four pitted
stones and one sherd in a 1/4 acre area is the fourth site on this
drainage.
The range in activity-sets at each of these sites suggests permanent village sites with associated activity-specific areas between
dwellings or at the village borders. Differences in scale between
these sites parallel differences in soil fertility. The County Line
Creek tributary cluster, with only one base settlement, is associated
with a soil of less fertility than the two clusters with three or four
base settlements. The latter clusters, on Saline Creek and Chimney
Creek, are the only sites associated with red fine sandy loams, the
most fertile soils of the uplands.

STONE TECHNOLOGY AND TOOLS
Stone technology is considered here as a preliminary reconstruction of the activities involved in the manufacture and use of
stone tools. This provides some evidence for relating sites to
economic activities, stages of manufacture, and environmental
associations. The aims of analysis are the determination of steps of
manufacture, quarry locations, and evidences of use.

UPPER NECHES

165

DEBRIS AND TOOL MANUFACTURE
Chipped stone elements and tools represent steps of tool production, modification or repair. These elements are:
1. Cores: nodules with one or more flakes struck off.
2. Primary cortex flakes: percussion flakes retaining the striking
platform with cortex covering the dorsal surface.
3. Secondary cortex flakes: percussion flakes with cortex partly
missing from the dorsal surface.
4. Interior flakes: percussion flake lacking cortex.
5. Flake tools: retouched flakes and scrapers (Fig. 5,a,d,e).
Retouched flakes are of gray flint, 3.1-3.6 cms. long. Scrapers
are tan or gray secondary or interior flakes (2.2-3.0 cms. x 1.22.1 cms. x .4-.8 cms) with abrupt retouch on the distal end,
lateral edge or both. Two specimens have visible wear on the
retouched surface. One large flake of gray silicified wood has
a notch 3 cm. wide and 7 cm. deep removed from one edge. It
was collected at X41 AN 2.
6. Small projectile points ("arrowpoints’), which contrast in size
to larger "dart" points and include Perdiz and Catahoula
types. These are made of small flakes of flint or fine-grain
quartzite (Fig. 5,f).
7. Lipped flakes: soft hammer flakes with a faceted lipped platform. Cortex is minimal or missing. This category includes
"biface thinning flakes".
8. Biface fragments: edges or mid-sections of bifacially worked
tools, presumably snapped off during manufacture.
9. Biface blanks: bifacially percussion flaked foliate bifaces
without a stem or pressure flake scars. Some have knots or
cortex remnants.
10. Discarded points: incomplete projectile points or point
fragments that are assumed to have been discarded before
use. This includes points with irregularities or "knots" and in~
completely thinned or unfinished tools ("preforms’) with the
stem or base formed to a pattern resembling completed points
(Fig. 5,g,i). Most of these can be related to one or two standard
morphological types.
11. Point fragments: fragments of thinned bifaces that are
recognizable as parts of completed or nearly-completed
projectile points. This category includes stems, bodies, or tips.
Stems and points with broken tips are tabulated separately
from whole points and body fragments, to test for differences
in distribution which indicate that broken points were

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

166

TABLE 4
Artifacts From All Sites

Hammerstone
Anvil
Sandstone Frags.
Core
Flakes
Cortex
Secondary
Interior
Lipped
Cortex Chip
Interior Chip
Retouched Flake
Scraper
Arrow Points
Preform
Body & Tip
Base
Whole
Biface Blank
Biface Frag.
Dart Points
Preform
Body
Base
Whole
Mano
Pitted Mano
Grinding
Platform
Grinding Basin
Pitted Stone (A)
Pitted Stone (B)
Pitted Basin
Gouge
Celt
Sherds
Pipe Fragments

.....

1
4
1
-

6
26
27
8

-

12

1
47

~
O

1

3
6
4

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
4
1
1
1
.......

_

1

1

-

1
-

1

-

2
28

-

~q

......

_

O

......

--

4J
O

--

o

4J

1

--

-

1

.....

--

5

......

-

-

--

--

-

-

~4

-

-

-

X.

-

1
-

2
4
1

"~
~
~
o

2
-

~

--

--

--

1
.....
1
1
......

.4

--

--

i

-4

.....
--

1

-

-

1

- 19 160
....

1

1

94 120
1
2

-

-

1

1

-

--

--

-

1 12
2 17 19 ll
....

UPPER NECHES

167

......

7

.......

.......

2

.......

3
1

......
1
....

1
4?

-

2
1

-

"i
4
-

12
19
19
i0

-

1

i0
91

1
-

2
-

-

-

I
15
13
4

.......
.......
1
1
1
4
1
....

67

u
~

-

1
ii

.....
1
1
-

-

5
18

i0
33

....

0
o

-

2

.....

1

-

-

....

0
m

.........

1

1

1
4
2

4J

........

0
~

.....

m

......

1

1
.....

,Q~
’0~
o
.c
~

.......
.....
1
1
1

1
1
1

.....
5
2
1
-

4?
-

6
1
1
-

1
1
1
1

-

1
1

....
8
-

8
2

~

.........
1
1
..........
ii
1
.....
1
3
1
.....

.....
33
2

1 356
1

......
....
1
1
-

47 116
1

-

2

12 439
2

........
79
-

-

19
-

18
1

3 310
5 18
....

168

Hammerstone
Anvil
Sandstone Frags.
Core
Flakes
Cortex
Secondary
Interior
Lipped

Cortex Chip
Interior Chip
Retouched Flake
Scraper
Arrow Points
Preform
Body & Tip
Base
Whole
Biface Blank
Biface Frag.
Dart Points
Preform
Body
Base
Whole
Mano
Pitted Mano
Grinding
Platform
Grinding Basin
Pitted Stone (A)
Pitted Stone (B)
Pitted Basin
Gouge
Celt
Sherds
Pipe Fragments

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

....
....
-

--

--

--

1

--

--

~

-

9
1
6
2
3

l0
6
29
39

3
2
1
43 29
1
8
- 36
139 51
2
.......
.........

21
79
3
1

.......
9
......
3
37
4
....
4
1
.....

o
~
o
o
~
o

-

4J
........

-

1

~4

o

-

4

1

3

.~

.......
....
1
-

2
-

~
~0

-

o

-

......

......

1

-

-

2

2
2

1
........
.......

-

1

-

-

-

-,-4

~
4~
.4
~
~

-

2
.......
,~,
~
1
........
o
~
.........
1
...........
..........
..........
6
- 58
1
1 18
2 39
...........

UPPER NECHES

169

.......

--

2

..........

-

-

-

2
3

.......
.......
2
- lO
2 12
4
3
- 12
-

17

--

1

-

-

1

2
6

2

38
58

-

2

1
8

19
32

--

2

1

14
I0

1

2
lO

15
16

-

-

-

6
3
6
2

1
2
1
2
....

3
13

2
13

1

1
1

1

4

1

2

-

.........

.........

.....

4

.....

....

3

....

-

-

2

.....

....

4

1

2

-

-

.....

-

-

3

........

-

=

2

1

1

-

9
-

- 126 230
2

1

-

1

-

-

.......

1

--

--

......

1

--

--

.....

-

-

1

1
1 36 ii 70 54
8
- 67 82 182
.........
1

3
-

-

1

-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

170

Hammerstone
Anvil
Sandstone Frags.
Core
Flakes
Cortex
Secondary
Interior
Lipped
Cortex Chip
Interior Chip
Retouched Flake
Scraper
Arrow Points
Preform
Body & Tip
Base
Whole
Biface Blank
Biface Frag.
Dart Points
Preform
Body
Base
Whole
Mano
Pitted Mano
Grinding
Platform
Grinding Basin
Pitted Stone (A)
Pitted Stone (B)
Pitted Basin
Gouge
Celt
Sherds
Pipe Fragments

......

1

-

.....

1

.....

......

-

4
1

-

5
1

-

-

1

1

-

5

-

-

1
1
1
2
2
....

1
1

4
-

9
1
-

i
-

3
2

....
1
6
6
-

1

1
2

6
6

......

1

....
1

....

1

1

....

...........

5

-

1

-

-

1

1

-

-

--

--

2

-

-

-

.....

.......

1

.....

....

1

12

9

26

24

1

122 120

9

-

-

-

-

-

UPPER NECHES

171

......

1

-

-

-

..........

2

2

2

1

....

2

-

1
15
24
16
8

2
5
....
......
2
7
....
1
....

1
1
13
4

....
-"
1
2
1
1
7

7

7
31
2

-

2 32
- 34
16 23
1 14
......

2

....

3

-

i

i

2
-

3

4
-

-

2

1 26
5 157
1

.......

1
2

2

1

-

1

-

-

1

1

-

2
].

1

........

......

1

--

--

.........

1

1

-

2

.......

.......

2

-

-

1

1

-

.......

1

.....

82

51

20

24

14

97

1

ii

-

32

21

1

1

-

23 i01 531

-

-

172

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

to

to

Hammerstone
Anvil
Sandstone Frags.
Core
Flakes
Cortex
Secondary
Interior
Lipped

........
........
.......
....
2
-

Cortex Chip
Interior Chip
Retouched Flake
Scraper
Arrow Points
Preform
Body & Tip
Base
Whole

.....
2
1
1
- i0
.....
-

Biface Blank
Biface Frag.
Dart Points
Preform
Body
Base
Whole

....
....
....
....

4
2
2
1

1
1

~
o
¯

2
1

~
o
.

-

o ;u

-

u

--

-

~
~
~

1

~

~

_
1

~
~
~

~4
~
~

2

1
_

-

~
o
¯
~
u
~
~
~
~

1

.......
......
....
2

_
-

-

~
~
~
~

-

-

-

1

-

_
-

~3

Mano
....
2
~
~
~
Pitted Mano
..... ~ .~
.~
~
~
Grinding
Platform
1
1
....
Grinding Basin
1
.....
x
Pitted Stone (A) 1
....
Pitted Stone (B) ...........
Pitted Basin
.......
1
.....
Gouge
Celt
.........
7
Sherds
13 79
4 32 72 596 26 32 30 37 18
Pipe Fragments
1
........

UPPER NECHES

--

--

173

I

........

i

..........

l

1
1

....
1
1

i

4J
o
.
,-4

1

.......
.........
.......
.....
....
2
....
--

1

_

....

0

o

4J
0

m
4J
~
~0

4J
0
£~
0)

1

1

3

-

3
7
2
1

-

_

......

~

_

_

.......

¯

2

-

2

-

....

....

1

l?

-

1

vO

-

-

-

--

--

--

4-1

X

--

3

-

-

-

x

-

-

-

-

x

--

1

32 ll4 195 381

68

4

3

15

41

31

7

174

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

b

FIGURE 5. Chipped Stone Debris and Tools. a, end scraper; b,c, small
flint cores; d, side scraper; e, retouched flake; f, Perdiz point; g, Gary
preform; h, Gary point; i, Pelrliz preform; j, Morrill point, probably
broken from impact; k, Carrollton point, probably broken from impact.

UPPER NECHES

175

replaced at specific locations or site situations in the reservoir
area.
12. Cortex chips: small spells or shatter fragments lacking the
striking platform. Cortex is present on the dorsal surface.
These could have occurred as shatter from any step in percussion flaking while cortex remained on the parent rock.
13. Interior chip: small spells or shatter fragments lacking the
striking platform and having no cortex.
14. Dart points: large stemmed projectile points (Fig. 5,j,k). Types
collected in descending order of frequency are: Gary, Bulverde,
Yarbrough, Edgewood, Morrill, Dad, Ellis, Wells, and Trinity. The
distribution of lithic tools and debris is shown in Table 4.

SOURCE MATERIALS
Distribution of tools suggests that quarrying and tool production
were accomplished during the Caddoan period of occupation within
a more restricted area than during the Archaic period. One type of
stone, gray flint, appears to be non-local in origin and it is suggested
that this was used primarily in the Archaic period of occupation of
the reservoir, which suggests a larger sphere of economic activity
than during the Caddoan period.
Artifacts are of two general categories of stone: (1) course-grained
rock with irregular fracture (ferruginous sandstone, course quartzite) which can be ground or pecked to produce numerous forms
and surfaces, and (2) cryptocrystallines having conchoidal fracture
capable of producing edged tools (flint, fine-grained quartzite,
silicified wood). Coarse quartzite is found in Pleistocene gravels
along the west border of the river; this material occurs in the form
of hammerstones and manos. Sandstone outcrops are most
frequently seen in the ferruginous beds of the eastern uplands,
although some ledges are exposed by erosion on the western borders. Tools of this material include pitted stones, manos, grinding
platforms and anvils.
Several types of stone have conchoidal fracture and occur in
varying frequency in tools and in resource localities in the upper
Neches environment. Spotty gray to black flint occurs in the form of
dart points, bifaces, retouched flakes and chipping debris which
does not include cortex-backed flakes or cores. This is among the
finest-grain lithic material and occurs in the largest flakes and chipped stone tools. A few interior flakes and flake tools exceed 5 cms.
in length.

176

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Gray-tan to tan flint, also fine-grained, occures in all stages of
chipping debris and tool forms; a few cores of this material have
been found in site collections. Fine-grained quartzite varies in
quality of fracture; fine-grained flakes permit flaking of thin, small
points; coarser-grained quartzite is found in less symmetrical or
larger tools. Banded red, yellow, and brown petrified wood tends to
fracture along a plane and appears in few finished projectile points.
Gray granular silicified wood, which fractures in a coarse conchoidal pattern, occurs in large cores, bifaces, and unifaces.
Table 5 shows the distribution of all debris and tools by material
on both sides of the river. Although tan flint is clearly the
predominant material on both sides of the river, there is a larger
percentage of quartzite and gray flint elements on the west side of
the river.
It is suggested that these differences reflect quarrying from
several localities. Quartzite, banded silicified wood, and some tan
flint occur in the Pleistocene terrace gravels on low slopes east of
the river. No sources of gray, blue-gray, or spotted flint have been
found locally, so it may be non-local in origin, possibly from
limestones or gravels in central Texas (R. K. Harris, personal communication). Raw material at sites is limited to pebbles and small
cobbles of quartzite, flint pebbles 4 to 10 cms. in diameter, and a
few heavy quartzite and gray silicified wood cores. The significance
of these differences in distribution in terms of quarrying and tool
manufacture are indicated in Tables 6 to 9 which show specific
steps in tool manufacture for different materials.
From differences in frequency of occurrence of different steps of
manufacture in specific materials, several patterns in lithic resource
utilization are suggested. Cores and initial cortex flakes of gray flint
are absent from all sites, which supports the identification of this
material as non-local.
Tan flint is predominant on both sides of the river. However,
comparison of steps of production occurring at eastern and western
sites in Tables 7 and 8 shows a significantly higher proportion of
early-stage flakes (cortex and secondary) on the eastern side of the
river, suggesting that the source of this material may lie east of the
river.
Quartzite cores are markedly more frequent on the west side of
the river, evidence of quarrying at Pleistocene gravels, and indicate
that cobbles were carried to sites where stoneworking was begun.
Silicified wood debris occurs in very small numbers and does not
include lipped flakes. This is probably due to the refractory quality

UPPER NECHES

177

TABLE 5
Distribution of all chipped stone elements by material

WEST

EAST

No.

%

No.

%

Gray flint

231

15.7

72

10.6

Tan flint

784

53.5

560

76.3

Quartzite

378

25.8

72

10.6

Banded/silicified
wood

74
1467

5.0

17

2.5

99.0

681

100.o

TABLE 6
Distribution of Cores
WEST

EAST

Gray flint

0

0

Tan flint

2

2

37

7

1

0

Quartzite
Silicified wood

TABLE 7
Number of Stone Flakes at Sites West of the Neches River
Cortex"

Secondary

Interior

Lipped

Flakes

Flakes

Flakes

Flakes

0

5

44

15

64

Tan flint

16

35

114

27

192

Quartzite

9

7

3

10

29

12

14

2

0

28

Gray flint

Silicified wood

Total

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

178

TABLE 8
Number of Stone Flakes at Sites East of the Neches River
Cortex

Secondary

Interior

Lipped

Flakes

Flakes

Flakes

Flakes

0

11

15

3

29

Tan flint

23

46

46

27

142

Quartzite

11

17

9

2

39

2

7

0

0

9

Gray flint

Silicified wood

Total

TABLE 9
Stages of LithicManufacture
Represented in Flakes of Tan Flint
Cortex

Secondary

Interior

Flakes

Flakes

Flakes

W.
8.3%

E.
16.2%

Lipped
Flakes,

W.

E.

W.

E.

W.

E.

18.2%

32.4%

58.5%

32.4%

14.2%

19.0%

of this material which flakes irregularly and appears in very crude
projectile points and preforms.
That gray flint was used more frequently during the Archaic occupation than in later periods is suggested by the debris and tools.
Table 10 shows the material from hunting stations with Archaic
components. Site X41 HE 11 is a lithic site with Archaic points
predominant; X41 AN 2 and X41 HE 17 are predominantly lithic,
with Archaic projectile points and few sherds.
Together, these three sites total over 15% of the chipped stone
elements collected from all 98 sites. This disproportionate amount
can be attributed to two factors: (1) they are sites with extensive occupation debris, and (2) they were exposed by land clearing and
construction. In spite of the fact that all percentages are thus
exaggerated, the proportion of gray flint, quartzite, and silicified
wood debris exceeds normal expectations and indicates that the
local Pleistocene terraces and distant gray flint sources were
primary origins of lithic material which was worked at Archaic
sites.

179

UPPER NECHES

TABLE 10
Debris from Archaic Sites
Percent of
Total Survey
Collection

Gray flint

Total Elements
At Site
87

Tan flint

215

7%

Quartzite

127

28%

29

32%

Silicified wood

29%

That gray flint was not utilized for tools in the Caddoan period is
suggested in Table 11; there are no arrowpoints of this material. Furthermore, there is a contrast between east and west in materials
predominant in arrowpoints, which parallels the difference shown
in manufacturing stages in Tables 6-8. Only quartzite arrowpoints
appear on the west side of the river; tan flint arrowpoints
predominate on the east side.

TABLE 11
Distribution of Projectile Points by Materials Used
EAST

WE S,,T,
Arrow
Gray flint

Silicified wood

Arrow

9

Tan flint
Quartzite

Dart

7

TOTAL
Dart

Arrow

Dart
16

7

11

19

1

19

12

13

4

6

11

19

2

3

5

It is suggested from these distributional differences that the Caddoan period of occupation was marked by a decreased geographical
range of stone resource utilization in contrast to that of the Archaic
population.

180

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

PROJECTILE POINT MORPHOLOGY
The dart point forms found at Lake Palestine sites (Table 12) fall
within the range of types associated with Middle or Transitional Archaic periods, with an age range of 2000 B.C. to A.D. 1000 (Bell 1958,
1960; Suhm and Jelks 1962).

TABLE 12
Distribution of Projectile Point Types

ARROWS

DARTS
Contracting Stem

Straight Stem

X41AN2

--

X41CE1

.....

--

1

--

--

X41HE2

--

1

--

X41HE3N

--

--

X41HE7

--

--

X41HE11

--

X41HE17

--

X41HE18

--

--

--

--

--

1

--

1

--

--

2

--

2

--

--

3

3

1

1

--

--

Expanding Stem

1
7

1
1

1

X41HE27

1

X41HE35

--

....
--

--

1

--

X41HE37

--

--

--

1

--

X41HE38

--

1

--

--

--

X41HE39

--

--

--

2

--

X41SM9

--

--

--

1

--

X41SM17

.....

1

X41SM22

--

--

--

2

--

8

X41SM28

--

--

--

1

--

2

1

UPPER NECHES

181

TOOLS OF GRANULAR STONE
The following artifacts are described and grouped by categories
reflecting tool form and the Process by which it was modified. Hammerstones and anvils are assumed to have been used in crushing
and hammering. Pitted stones may have been used for holding nuts
to be crushed and are similar to objects from southeastern sites
which are occasionally referred to as "nutting stones". Manos, grinding slabs, and grinding basins all show abrasive wear possibly
from grinding vegetable foods.
Hammerstones and Anvils
These tools show crushed and pecked surfaces; hammerstones
(Fig. 6a) are end-battered cobbles or cores, 5.0-10.0 cms. long and
4.0-6.0 cms. wide. Sandstone or quartzite platforms with pecked surfaces or pockmarked depressions are termed "anvils", since the
wear pattern appears to be the result of direct hammering (Fig. 6b).
Most anvils are fragments of ferruginous sandstone, unmodified except for hammering on one surface. They are 13 to 19 cms. long, 10
to 17 cms. wide, and 4.5 to 8 cms. thick. One specimen is a broken,
waterworn quartzite cobble, 8.5 cms. long, 8.5 cms. wide and 4.5
cms. thick.
Pitted Stones
Small concave pits, averaging 4.5 cms. deep and 2.8 cms. wide are
found in one or both faces of tabular pieces of ferruginous sandstone. The most common (Class A) is a pecked concavity in an
otherwise unworked slab of sandstone, 6.5-18.0 x 5.5-14.5 x 2.5-8.0
cms. (Fig. 6c). Others (Class B) have one or both faces surrounding
the pit worn smooth, though not necessarily flat; dimension range of
these is 8.5-11.5 x 4.5-8.5 x 2.5-5.5 cms. (Fig. 6d). Pits in the unmodified slabs are deeper than in those with smooth surfaces, and
in the smoothed stones the pits are also usually smoothed. None was
observed to have pecking that indicated that they were platforms for
bipolar flaking.
Pits also occur in the center of basins, 8.0-17.0 cms. wide and .6 to
1.7 cms. deep, in sandstone slabs; both basin and pit are unsmoothed (Fig. 6e).
By ethnographic example, these tools are tentati~’ely interpreted
as "nut stones". Various observers of southeastern tribes observed
stones being used for crushing nuts, and these are the only objects
analogous to pitted stones. Two stones were used in crushing nuts;
references do not describe them explicitly but refer to them as large

182

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

f

9

FIGURE 6. Pecked and Ground Stone Tools. a, hammerstone; b, anvil; c,
pitted stone (A); d, pitted stone (B); e, pitted basin; f, mano; g, pitted
mano; h, grinding platform; i, grinding basin.

UPPER

NECHES

183

and heavy. One observer states that a round stone was used to crush
nuts in a "thick and hollowed" stone (Swanton 1946: 364-366). Consequently, hammerstones, manos, and some of the concavely
ground basins described below, particularly those with pitted centers, may have been also used for tools in crushing nuts.
Ground Platforms and Basins
Some ferruginous sandstone slabs and basins have surfaces worn
from grinding. Platforms are irregularly shaped tablets up to 6.5
cms. thick with evenly ground surfaces of 12 cms. to 18 cms. and a
maximum depth of 1.7 cms. (Fig. 6h). Basins have circular concave
ground surfaces (Fig. 6i). These objects may include some of the
"thick and hollowed" stones used in grinding nuts.
Manos and Grinding Platforms
Small bifacially ground tablets, "manos", are usually made of
ferruginous sandstone (Fig. 6f); four are quartzite cobbles. These are
likely to have been used for grinding wild plant foods rather than
corn. Ethnohistoric accounts describe wooden mortars for
pulverizing grain (Swanton 1942: 131) but give no references to
hand-held grinding stones. Grinding surfaces on one or both faces
are flat to slightly laterally convex, indicating reciprocal motion. A
few have rounded surfaces and were probably used in rotary
grinding. Outline is variable and most are not carefully finished or
formed; they range from rectanguloid to ovoid. Length is 7.0 to 11.5
cms., width ranges from 5.0 to 8.5 cms., and thickness varies from
2.5 to 5.0 cms. Frequently manos have a small pit in one or both
grinding surfaces or in the unworked face (Fig. 6g). Pits in the
ground faces of pitted manos are shallow, narrower, and less
variable in size than those in pitted slabs, indicating that pits were
reduced with grinding.
Sandstone Fragments
Occasionally unmodified tabular sandstone fragments occur at
Caddoan settlements. These are 3.0 to 4.4 cms. thick and possibly
are fragments of grinding platforms, pitted stones, or spalls from the
manufacture of these tools.
Gouges
These two specimens ("Clear Fork Gouges") are bifacially
worked from ferruginous sandstone tablets, assymetrically lenticular in cross section with a tapering round base. The blunt distal

184

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

end is steeply flaked. Some cortex is retained on the flat dorsal surface and one specimen is obviously smoothed from wear on this
surface, from the abruptly retouched end to the middle of the tool.
Dimensions are: 6.0-6.7 x 4.7-5.1 x 1.9-2.2 cms.
Celt Fragment
One end of a ground stone tool, probably a celt, occurred at X41
CE 7. This is a smoothed rod of conglomerate (7.7 x 3.3-3.7 cms.)
which is oval in cross section.

POTTERY
Pottery listed in Table 4 is included as evidence of cooking or
storage vessels which provide an index of these domestic activities
at each site. The purpose of this .section is to consider attributes appropriate for determining stylistic microtraditions and to suggest the
approximate range of time represented by ceramic sites.
The pottery types and categories of decoration listed in Table 13
occur throughout the upper Neches, indicating widespread exchange in decorative styles. Frankston Focus types (Poynor
Engraved, Maydelle Incised, Bullard Brushed) are predominant. Basic
technological features are also similar throughout the reservoir. Few
sherds are highly polished; 10 to 60% are brushed, and the remainder are smoothed to a matte finish. Decorative treatment is by
engraving, incising, punctating, pinching, or neckbanding. Paste and
core color ranges from gray to buff. Orange spots and fire-clouding
on the surface indicate poorly controlled firing. Jars with brushed
bodies and rims decorated while the clay was still plastic (Maydelle
Incised, Bullard Brushed) have smudged exteriors more commonly
than other types, suggesting that these were used for cooking.
Of approximately 4,800 sherds, 215 have bone temper and 23 have
shell temper; the rest, about 95%, are grog-tempered. Bonetempering occurs in 35 out of 98 sites but is present in no more than
10% of sherds from any site. These are distributed over the entire
reservoir area and do not correlate with any settlement type or environment. A few bone-tempered sherds have incised designs
which indicate that the forms Canton Incised, Kiam Incised may be
restricted to bowls and jars. The majority are plain body sherds
which cannot be associated with specific vessel forms or use.
One technological feature, shell temper, shows a restricted
distribution. Shell tempering occurs in five sites, four of which (X41

UPPER NECHES

185

CE 1, X41 CE 17, X41 SM 10 and X41 SM 21) are located in the
eastern uplands. The fifth, X41 HE 33 is in the western uplands at
the northern end of the reservoir. Shell tempering is common in late
Caddoan sites on the Red River (Suhm, et al. 1954: 199-215) which
lies on the north and east of the Neches. There is a possibility that
this distribution represents contact with Red River Caddo although
these sherds lack decoration and cannot be identified with
decorative styles of that area.
Chronology
The establishment of a Caddoan archeological chronology in this
region has been based primarily on the basis of regional comparisons and derivation of horizon markers for periods which have
been assigned approximate dates (cf. Krieger 1946, Davis 1970). In
the Neches drainage, C-14 dates recently obtained at the George C.
Davis Site span the period of approximately A.D. 800 to A.D. 1150
(Dee Ann Story, paper presented at the 1970 Caddo Conference,
Magnolia, Arkansas). Probably the Alto Focus sites in the Lake
Palestine area date close to this period. At the historic level, types of
the Allen Focus (usually identified by the type Patton Engraved) are
dated from A.D. 1600 to A.D. 1800, by association with European
trade goods (Suhm, et al. 1954: 221). Stylistic continuity between the
pottery in these historic burials and Frankston Focus types (Poynor
and Hume Engraved) is fairly clear; a recent trial seriation of burial
vessels demonstrates close resemblances between the two (Shafer
1967). On the basis of these comparisons, it is suggested that Caddoan occupation in the Lake Palestine reservoir falls approximately
in the span from A.D. 1000 to A.D. 1600.
Ceramic Pipes
Most pipe fragments are from elbow pipes decorated by punctate
or engraved designs, similar to those at Jackson’s "Perpetual Fire
Site" (Jackson 1936: Plate 28). Those at Alto Focus sites, X41 AN 16
and X41 AN 24, are undecorated pieces.
Ethnohistoric accounts do not tell who made pipes or the material
from which they were made. However, smoking in several ritual
contests is recorded. These included: (1) formal feasts at chief’s
residences and dwellings of men with lesser status; (2) greeting
ceremonies, performed in a special "very large arbor" at which
peace was pledged by chiefs to missionaries; (3) feasts at the chief’s
residence after a successful raid with display of scalps taken in battle suggesting validation of warrior status; (4) initiation of novice

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

186

TABLE 13
Pottery From All Sites

Incised

Engraved

m

AN2
AN3
AN5
CEI
CE2
CE3
CE4
CE5
CE6
CE7
CE8
CE9
CEI0
CEll
CEI2
CEI5
CEI6
CEI7
CEI9
CE20
CE21
HE1
HE2
HE3N
HE3E
HE 3W
HE5
HE6
HE9
HE10
HE13
HEI6N
HEI6S
HE17
HE18

2
-

o

,-q

(-:

0

0

2
-

2
1
1
1 4
1
....
3
1 8
2
.....
- 1
5
ll
1
4
13
Not Classified ....
1
1
2
....
1
.....
1
Not Classified ....
........

6

-

2

-

-

1
-

3
1
1

1
.....
.....

5
2
-

2
1

6

--

7

-

-

1

-

i
-

......
3
1
1
-

1

6
1
4
-

ii
7
4
4

1
-

1
-

1

4

-

2

4
1
2
-

1
1

-

--

--

--

--

--

4

1

8

-

i0

-

-

......

9
3
2

-

-

1

2
i0
....
1
1

1

3
-

1

-

UPPER NECHES

4J
~0

187

o

q~

4~
f0

01

~
H

~

O-~

~o

~O
O

~0 ~o

¯

~

0

~

~

~0
"4

"M

~

O

0

, i

I

~

0

i

l

--

--

--

-

-

2

1

-

-

1

18

9

4

i
34

52
31
351

-

1

4

--

--

9

-

-

l

1
1
-

1
-

3
13
1
56
4
15
7
243
35
6
6
1
70
2
9

4

2

-

4

-

-

-

3

7

-

-

-

2

-

-

2

-

-

2

-

-

-

3

6

2

-

2
4

1
-

15
5
13

-

1

-

4
6

9
-

-

-

16
2

-

-

-

L

2
1

5
13
14
9
36

12
96
52
136
12
6
8
6
14
63
6
84
3
170
41
5
8
2
182
3
8
2
21
1
12
38
1
1
174
89
40
24

19
160
94
595
2
17
19
ll
1
12
33
1
130
ii
116
12
439
79
19
18
3
294
5
18
2
39
1
18
58
1
6
230
126
81
70

188

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Engraved

0

0

.,4
i

HE19
HE20
HE22
HE23
HE24
HE25
HE26
HE27
HE28
HE29
HE30
HE32
HE33
HE34
HE37
HE39
HE40
HE41
HE42
HE43
HE46
HE47
SM6
SM7
SM8
SM9
SMI0
SMI2
SMI3
SMI5
SMI6
SMI8
SMI9
SM20
SM21

9
....
1
1
1
1
1
6
1
....
.....
1
2
......
......
4
1
1
4
.....
2
3
1
1
=
.....
2
4
8
......
1
1
3
.....
13
16
8
1
.....
3
2
2
Not Classified ......
......
1
1
1
1

1

4

5
3
6

1
1
2

4
1

2
1
2

4

19

6
6
1
6
1

2
2
1
3

1

1
1

1
2

20

2
7
19

2

4

-

2
l
1
1

18g

UPPER NECHES

to

,-.~

,-4

to

to

>1

0

~

~

~

0

-,-4

i

2

4

-

-

-

i

12
1

-

1

1

58

3
7
2

41

73
150
1
1
7
6
19
20
67

52

55

37
24

29
19
13
16

6

2
1

30
7

7

1

1

1

1

-

-

4
8
4

2

-

-

24

51

3
ii
6
13

6
9
14
b

io

82
208

8
1

-

2

-

-

30

ii

2

2

7

168
13

1
1
[

-

60

2O

_

1
16
43

3
3
26

3

8
12

54
8
67
82
182
3
1
12
9
26
24
122
120
9
82
49
20
24
14
97
1
ii
24
21
23
i01
530
1
32
114
2
23
7
15
41

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

190

Engraved

m

SM22
SM23
SM24
SM25
SM26
SM27
SM28
SM29
SM30
SM31
SM32
SM34

o

o
1

--

2
1

3

-

5

1

1

2
1

1

4

1
1
1

1

-

1

2
1

--

2

3

i

-

UPPER

NECHES

191

R

o
H

r,

r¯
u 43
i

4= m

¯ ~4
,i

m4::
~ ~

~4 0
l

i

1

~4 0
I

2
1

19
7
38
2

1

1

1

1
1

19
43
24
29
16

18

3
2
1

.~

8

13
4
33
2
9
48
47
23
19
17
lO
4

37
13
79
4
32
72
98
58
50
37
18
7

192

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

shamans; and (5) smoking by elders, "captains", shamans and other
officials (unspecified) on the evening of the September harvest
ceremony, apparently at the chief’s residence (Swanton 1942: 158227).
Social correlates of pipe smoking can be summarized as follows:
(1). pipes were smoked by adult males; (2) smoking was part of a
validating ritual signifying acquisition or perpetuation of status -chief, religious practitioner, or warrior; (3) the practice was part of
commensality and ritual effecting a bond between villages, tribes,
or European representatives; (4) smoking took place in the presence
of congregations of varying sizes but within a permanent village
with established ritual localities; and (5) associated feasts required
a relatively large supply of available food.
From this we should expect pipes to occur in permanent village
sites or ceremonial locations in association with village sites at
which permanent continuous residence is indicated by a concentration and variety of activities.

CONCLUSIONS AND RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
The data gathered in this survey have been used to isolate patterns of settlement and relate these patterns to the environment of
the upper Neches River. While new data have been gathered during
the survey, and distribution of sites tends to support some interpretations of prehistoric settlement systems, this report is intended to serve as a foundation for further research.
The purpose of excavation will be to test a series of hypotheses
concerning settlement in the upper Neches which have been implicitly or explicity posed in the survey report.
1. In the earliest period of occupation of the upper Neches it was
visited intermittently by small hunting parties whose total exploitive territory is not included in the reservoir. Two sites with Archaic components have been selected for excavation to further
define the activities of these early occupations. It is expected that
midden deposits will be lacking as will concentrated and localized
deposits indicating camp floors. Tools other than those associated
with hunting and tool manufacture will be absent or minimal. Nonlocal flint is expected to appear in greater frequency in the Archaic
components than in Caddoan components and sites.
2. Caddoan occupation of the upper Neches represents a shift in
settlement to small economically self-sufficient swidden villages
whose extent of social interaction was markedly more limited than

UPPER NECHES

193

that of early Caddo nuclear centers.
Earliest Caddoan occupation of the upper Neches consists of
small widely-scattered sites, possibly economically independent,
but probably with social ties to distant settlements. Settlements to
which the small Alto Focus cluster may have been related include
settlements across the river with which the multiple burials are
presumed to have been associated: a mound site on Caddo Creek, 6
miles south; the Pace McDonald Site, 25 miles south; or the George
C. Davis Site, 50 miles south. The first objective of salvage excavation is to determine if Alto Focus sites in the reservoir
represent permanent or seasonal occupation.
3. Excavated Frankston Focus sites are expected to provide
evidence for assigning sites to one of the elements of the settlement
system abstracted from Hasinai data. Sites selected include base settlements, camps or settlements and hunting/gathering stations.
Ethnographic equ!valents are hamlets, fishing camps or hunting
camps. Strategy for excavation and analysis of these sites is to be
based on the contrasting models summarized below’:
Hamlets

Seasonal Camps

Direct or indirect evidence of
structures.

No evidence of structures.

Concentrated and multiactivity debris and artifacts, including midden, chipped stone
tool debris, stone tools, tool
repair, cooking and storage.

Thinly spread debris, from intermittent occupation, with
chipped stone tools and tool
manufacture debris the
primary stone artifacts. Pottery
limited in numbers.

Faunal remains representing
year-round hunting, mussel
collecting and fishing.

Variety of forms in all tools
with artifacts representing
variety in activity-group cornposition. Evidence of sex age

Limited faunal remains, biased
toward spring and summer
fishing or fall and winter hunting.
Limited variety in tools and
tool forms, indicating restricted task group.

group aggregations in ritual.
4. If Caddoan hamlets and villages

can be defined ar-

194

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

cheologically, a corresponding community of related and
cooperating females can be determined as micro-traditions in pottery decoration. This does not require that strict matrilocality is
assumed, only that a stable and cooperating task group of related
females is characteristic of the base settlement.
Recent work in the Midwest (Deetz 1965) and the Southwest
(Longacre 1970) has pioneered the use of ceramic attributes as a
means of identifying matrilocal segments of a single community.
Although Caddoan villages present a different type of community
structure, a similar approach is applicable in the study of settlement
change in the upper Neches. Such ceramic studies should help
clarify the change in community structure accompanying the Gibson-Fulton transition.
Woodall (1969) has recently designated two prehistoric tribes in
the upper Neches on the basis of ceramic similarities between sites
in two areas of the river valley. The division between these two
tribes lies a short distance north of Saline Creek. Pottery collected
during survey has not been analyzed by attributes which permit
evaluation of Woodall’s model, and relatively few sites have been
located in the area of his northern tribe. "Attribute analysis for excavated sites is proposed for a test of the hypothesis that underlies
Woodall’s work -- that social distance correlates with geographical
distance as an expression of community autonomy among the
prehistoric Caddo.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This is the initial report of archeological investigations at Lake Palestine, conducted
by Southern Methodist Universlty to salvage sites threatened by enlargement of the
reservoir from 317 feet msl. to 345 feet msl. The research has been supported by Contract 14-10-7:931-37 between Southern Methodist University and the National Park
Service.
As in any archeological report, this is the product of cooperation and work of a
number of people who deserve as much credit as the author. The 1969 season’s work
in Lake Palestine was directed by S. Alan Skinner, research archeologist at Southern
Methodist University. Alan and his assistant, James Baker, directed most of the survey
and test excavation. During the 1970 season, the author was assisted in additional survey by E. Pierre Morenon, graduate student in anthropology at Southern Methodist
University.
The amount of work that was accomplished could not have been done without the
willingness and enthusiasm of the crew. I particularly want to thank George Cooper,
Ricky Clements, Eddy Kelly, Bruce Walker, Terry Thedford and Cecil Tate. Special
credit is due Glenn Garner. His energy and interest made him an invaluable excavation hand, laboratory assistant and informant on local ecology.

UPPER NECHES

195

The author had the benefit of the knowledge of several local specialists on the Lake
Palestine environment. Soil Conservation Service District Conservationists Floyd Sanders (Tyler) and B. L. McClaophlin (Athens) were especially helpful in providing information about local soils. Tom Browning and Robert Sinclair of the Texas Parks and
Wildlife Department were similarly generous in sharing their knowledge of local
fauna.
The organization and content of this report benefited from the methodological
suggestions and editing by ]ames V. Sciscenti, Director, River Basin Salvage Program
at Southern Methodist University and Principal Investigator of the Lake Palestine contract. Illustrations were drawn by Nancy Sciscenti. Rex L. Wilson, Chief of Archeological Research at the Southwest Archeological Cenler, has helped continuously
in planning and expeditin8 the project.
Finally, I am grateful to the residents of the Lake Palestine area for help in many
ways. Red McFarland provided useful information on amateur excavations. Particular
thanks are due to Mr. and Mrs. D. ]. Clements for their hospitality and generous help.

REFERENCES CITED

Barnes, Virgil E., Project Director
1964 Geologic Atlas of Texas, Tyler Sheet. Army Map Service, Corps of
Engineers, U.S. Army, Washington, D.C.
Bell, Robert E.
1958 Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile
Points. Special Bulletin No. 1 of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society,
Oklahoma City.
1960 Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile
Points. Special Bulletin No. 2 of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society,
Oklahoma City.
Brown, William H.
1966 The Fresh-water Catfishes of Texas and How to Know Them. Texas
Parks and Wildlife Department Bulletin 39. Austin.
Carneiro, Robert L.
°-1960 Slash-and-Burn Agriculture: A Closer Look at Its Implications for
Settlement Patterns, pps. 229-234. In: Men and Cultures, Anthony F.
C. Wallace, editor. University of Pennsylvania Press. Philadelphia.
Davis E. Mott
1970 Texas. In: Archeological and Historical Resources of the Red River
Basin, Hester Davis, editor. Arkansas Archeological Survey Research
Series No. 1. Fayetteville.
Deetz, James D. F.
1965 The Dynamics of Stylistic Change in Arikara Ceramics. Illinois
Studies in Anthropology, No. 4. University of Illinois Press, Urbana.
Dumond, D. E.
1961 Swidden Agriculture and the Rise of Maya Civilization. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, Vol. 17, No. 4., pp. 301-316.
¯ Friedrich, Margaret H.
1970 Design Structure and Social Interaction: Archaeological Implications of An Ethnographic Analysis, American Antiquity, Vol.
35, No. 3, pp. 332-343.
Gould F. W.
1962 Texas Plants -- A Checklist and Ecological Summary. The
Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas, Texas Agricultural
Experiment Station. College Station.

196

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Griffith, William J.
1954 The Hasinai Indians of East Texas as Seen by Europeans, 16871772. Publicatiou No. 12, Middle American Research Institute, Tulane
University, New Orleans.
Jackson, A. T.
1936 A Perpetual Fire Site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society. Vol. 8, pp. 134-173.
Johnson, Leroy Jr.
1961 An Archeological Survey of Blackburn Crossing Reservoir on the
Upper Neches River. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol.
31 pp. 213-238.
Longacre, William A.
1970 Archaeology as Anthropology: A Case. Study. Anthropological Papers
of the University of Arizona, No. 17. Tucson.
Mowery, Irwin, C. and Harvey Oakes
1959 Soil Survey of Cherokee County, Texas. USDA, Government Printing Office. Washing_ton, D.C.
Newell, H. Perry and Alex D. Krieger
1949 The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoirs for the
Society’ of American Archaeology, Number 5.
Orr, Kenneth G.
1952 Survey of Caddoan Area Archeology. In: Archology of Eastern United
States, James B. Griffin, editor. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.
Sahlins, Marshall D.
1968 Tribesmen. Prentice Hall Inc. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins and F. B. Plummer
1932 The Geology of Texas. Vol. 1, Stratigraphy. University of Texas
Bulletin No. 3232. Austin.
Service, Elman R.
1962 Primitive Social Organization. Random House. New York.
Shafer, Harry ].
1967 Toward an Application of the Modified Wheat-Gifford-Wasley
Taxonomony to Fulton Aspect, Frankston and Allen Focus Pottery.
Unpublished ms. on file Texas Archeological Research Laboratory.
Austin.
Shiner, Joel L.
1969 Component Analysis for Archaic Sites. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society. Vol. 40, pp. 215-230. Dallas.
Skinner, S. Alan
1970 Historic Archeology of the Neches Saline, Smith County, Texas. Archeological Report Texas Historical Survey Committee, Number 21.
Skinner, S. Alan, R. King Harris, Keith M. Anderson
1969 Archaeological Investigations at the Sam Kaufman Site, Red River
County, Texas. Southern Methodist University Contributions in Anthropology No. 5. Dallas.
Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks (eds.)
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Archeological Society, Special Publication No. 1, Texas Memorial
Museum, Bulletin Number 4.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger and Edward B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Swanton, John R.
1931 The Caddo Social Organization and Its Possible Historical
Significance. Journal of the Washington Academy of Sciences, Vol. 21,
No. 9., pp. 203-206.

UPPER NECHES

197

1942 Source Material on the History and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 132.
1946 The Indians of the Southeastern United States. Bureau o[ American
Ethnology Bulletin 137.
Teer, James G.
1963 Texas Deer Herd Management. Texas Game and Fish Commission
Bulletin No. 44. Austin.
1970 Texas Almanac. Dallas Morning News. Dallas.
Webb, Clarence H.
1960 Review of Northeast Texas Archeology. In: A Review of Texas Archeology, Part One (E. B. Jelks. E. M. Davis and H. Sturgis, editors),
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 29 (For 1958), pp. 3562.
Woodall, J. Ned
1969 Cultural Ecology of the Caddo. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation,
Southern Methodist University. Dallas.
Zim, Herbert S. and Hurst H. Shoemaker
1963 Fishes. Golden Press, New York.

Southern Methodist University
Dallas, Texas

BOOK REVIEW

The Harlan Site, CK-6, A Prehistoric Mound Center in Cherokee County,
Eastern Oklahoma. Robert E. Bell. Oklahoma Anthropological
Society, Memoir No. 2, January, 1972. 266 pp., 57 plates, 17 figures,
15 tables.
The Harlan Site was a major ceremonial center and settlement of
the Caddo Indians, principally between A.D. 950 and A.D. 1250.
With an area of twenty to twenty-two acres, several mounds, several
houses and hundreds of burials, the site is very complex. Seven
mounds were excavated. Among them there were three burial
groups, one series of superimposed houses, one single house and
one ceremonial mound. In addition, single houses were cleared in
three other, non-mound situations and other areas were explored. In
spite of the number of houses, debris from tool making and general
living is scarce.
Excavations began in 1949 as a salvage project of the Fort Gibson
Reservoir and were completed in 1958. Only those who have directed large salvage programs can appreciate the tribulations of large
quantities of field data together with insufficient funding. The usual
out is to publish a sloppy report. Dr. Bell has certainly not done that.
Indeed, I find the format and editing to be most excellent.
Bell reports the site in terms of activity units. These are areas in
which the Indians, not just the archeologists, were busy. In other
words, a unit is a mound or a house and represents a universe. In
each of these (mounds, houses, or burial areas) he discusses the
stratigraphy, the artifacts and the burials when present. There are
some forty Carbon 14 dates from the site. These seem to be an
adequate sample and to have internal consistency.
Shortcomings of the effort are in the poverty of data on physical
anthropology and diet, both due to pooi" preservation of bone
material in the soil. Because Harlan was primarily a ceremonial
center, there is not a great amount of information on domestic affairs, but what emerges is good solid material on architecture, stone
tools and ceramics.
The Harlan Site is the only published report, to my knowledge,
that has a reasonable balance of data on mound construction,
domestic structures, artifacts and culture change. Bell does a
thorough job on temporal change at the site using his stratigraphic
interpretation together with radiocarbon dating. Because of this

200

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

balance, it will be the descriptive monograph on the Gibson Aspect,
if not all of the northern prehistoric Caddoans.
The Harlan Site is not a trip with the new archeology; but who was
doing new archeology between 1949 and 1958? There are, however,
some thoughtful conclusions. Among them the reader will find a
gentle reminder that changing the terminology of time-space
divisions does not solve the problem of cultural classifications
based on social groupings.
In summary, this is a fine report, well presented and well
illustrated. If it does not settle Caddoan problems, it does present
data and context with which to build a better understanding.
Joel L. Shiner
Southern Methodist University

Information for Contributors
The Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society publishes original papers in the field
of American archeology. Emphasis is placed on Texas and adjoining areas in the
United States and Mexico, but papers on other areas will also be considered. Articles
concerning archeological technique, method, or theory are encouraged.
Manuscripts must be typed, double-spaced, on 8-1/2 x 11 white paper. Footnotes
should be avoided or kept to a minimum. Reference to published literature, by author,
date, and page or figure number should be placed within parentheses in the body of
the text, with full bibliographic citations at the end. See this issue of the Bulletin for
examples.
The proportions of full-page illustrations (picture or drawing plus caption) should
be suitable for reduction to the effective page size of the Bulletin of 4-1/4 x 7 inches.
Plates may be printed either horizontally or vertically, but allowance for the caption
to be printed the same direction must be made. Captions for illustrations should be
listed in numerical order and placed behind the list of references cited.
A complete manuscript is one with: a title page, an abstract, main body, references
cited, appendices (if necessary), figure captions, and completed photographic and
drafted plates. Only complete manuscripts will be considered.
Papers published in the Bulletin are abstracted and indexed in ABSTRACTS IN AN~
THROPOLOGY.
Contributions should be addressed to: David S. Dibble, Editor, Texas Archeological
Society, Balcones Research Center, Route 4, Box 189, Austin, Texas 78757.

