BULLETIN
OF THE

Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society

Volume Three

SEPTEMBER
1931

Published
by the
Society at
Abilene,
Texas

The Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society
OFFICERS
CYRUS N. RAY, President
JULIUS OLSEN, Vice President
E. B. SAYLES, Secretary-Treasurer
EARL INGERSON, Secretary

DIRECTORS
CYRUS N. RAY, D. O.
W. C. HOLDEN, Ph. D.
JULIUS OLSEN, Ph. D., Sc. D.
OTTO O. WATTS, Ph. D.
E. B. SAYLES
RUPERT N. RICHARDSON, Ph. D
EARL INGERSON, M. A.

REGIONAL VICE PRESIDENTS
GEORGE C. MARTIN, Rockport
H. T. FLETCHER, Alpine
FLOYD V. STUDER, Amarillo

COL. M. L. CRIMMINS, El Paso
DR. JOHN C. GRANBERY, Lubbock
DR. J. E. PIERCE, Austin

HONORARY MEMBERS
DR. JOHN A. UDDEN, Austin,
ALBERT G. INGALLS, New York
HAROLD J. COOK, Agate, Nebraska

TRUSTEES
DR. JOHN C. GRANBERY
DR. STEWART COOPER
W. A. RINEY
C. A. HOWARD

O. O. WATTS
W. R. ELY
ERNEST W. WILSON
FRED COCKRELL

EDITED BY:
DR. CYRUS N. RAY and E.B. SAYLES

The editors acknowledge with
thanks the cooperation of the
ABILENE PRINTING & STATIONERY
COMPANY in printing this Bulletin
of the Society.

BULLETIN
of the

Texas Archaeological and
Paleontological Society
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
SOME TYPES OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES IN TRANS-PECOS TEXAS,
by Henry T. Fletcher ....................................................................................................................... 7
SOME FLINT SOURCES IN CENTRAL WEST TEXAS,
by E. B. Sayles .............................................................................................................................. 14
THE PICTOGRAPHS AT THE HUECO TANKS,
by Colonel M. L. Crimmins ........................................................................................................... 18
THE QUATERNARY MAMMALS OF TEXAS,
by C. A. Howard ........................................................................................................................... 21
TEXAS TECH ARCHAEOLOGICAL EXPEDITION SUMMER 1930,
by W. C. Holden ............................................................................................................................ 28
TEXAS COASTAL POTTERY,
by George C. Martin...................................................................................................................... 33
POTTERY OF THE EL PASO REGION,
by Eileen E. Alves......................................................................................................................... 35
ARCHAEOLOGICAL NOTES OF THE BIG BEND REGION,
by Victor J. Smith .......................................................................................................................... 38
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE NORTH PANHANDLE OF TEXAS,
by Floyd V. Studer ......................................................................................................................... 45
RECENT ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESEARCHES IN THE ABILENE SECTION,
by Dr. Cyrus N. Ray ...................................................................................................................... 50
FIELD WORK OF MEMBERS ...................................................................................................................... 60
SECRETARY AND TREASURER REPORTS ....................................................................................................... 63

Original Price $3.00
Abilene, Texas

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

Plate 1.
Plate 2.
Plate 3.
Plate 4.
Plate 5.
Plate 6.
Plate 7.
Plate 8.
Plate 9.
Plate 10.
Plate 11.
Plate 12.
Plate 13.
Plate 14.
Plate 15.
Plate 16.
Plate 17.

Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
Figure 6.
Figure 7.

Page
Trans-Pecos Sites......................................................................................................... 10
Trans-Pecos Sites......................................................................................................... 11
Flint Quarry.................................................................................................................. 17
Columbia Mammoth, found about three miles south of Dallas ..................................... 25
Pottery Sites and Pottery of El Paso District ................................................................ 35
Pottery of El Paso District ........................................................................................... 36
Big Bend Area.............................................................................................................. 39
Pictographs and Petroglyphs, Big Bend Area ............................................................... 43
Typical Post Basket Maker Sites, North Panhandle of Texas ....................................... 45
Post Basket Maker Sites............................................................................................... 46
North Panhandle of Texas Artifacts .............................................................................. 49
Stone Grave Burial in Waterless campsite ................................................................... 51
Stone Grave Skulls....................................................................................................... 52
Egg-shaped Skull and Curved Femora ......................................................................... 53
Site Near Loraine, Texas.............................................................................................. 55
Seven Wells Site .......................................................................................................... 56
Burned Rock Midden; Hematite Objects; Double Bitted Stone Axe............................. 61

Flint Quarry and Vicinity .............................................................................................. 14
Flint Quarry .................................................................................................................. 15
Sketch Map of Flint Quarry and Camp Site .................................................................. 16
Pictographs, Hueco Tanks, Anthropomorphic .............................................................. 18
Pictographs, Hueco Tanks, Animalistic ........................................................................ 19
Pictographs, Symbolic ................................................................................................. 20
Map of Texas, Showing Quaternary Deposits, and Fossil Mammal Bone
Locations...................................................................................................................... 21
Figure 8. Tecolote Ruin, Distribution of Mounds ........................................................................ 29
Figure 9. Tecolote Ruin, Excavations in Mound A ...................................................................... 30
Figure 10. Tecolote Ruin, Segment of Wall ................................................................................... 31

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

7

SOME TYPES OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL
SITES IN TRANS-PECOS TEXAS
BY HENRY T. FLETCHER
Archeological sites are found at more or less
close intervals throughout the Trans-Pecos region
of Texas. These sites are of various types depending
upon the uses made of them by their aboriginal
builders who utilized the limited facilities at hand
in their efforts to live. Their chief needs were water,
protection, game and plants that provided food. The
type and distribution of sites reflect conditions as
they obtained at the time of their occupation.

Some miles to the northwest, a thick bed of red
conglomerate, in weathering, yields nodules of flint,
chert and novaculite. A nearby lava flow carries
numerous geodes of agate and chalcedony. At a
number of points in this area workshops are found,
the ground being covered with numerous flakes and
chips, together with nodules from which they were
chipped. Celts, fragments of knives and points, and
rude hammer stones are still not uncommon, though
these sites have been visited repeatedly.

The West Texas Historical and Scientific Society
has mapped some two hundred sites, mostly within
Hearths
a hundred mile radius of Alpine, where its museum
is located. Many other sites, known to members of
Several small hearths are found at a Site five
the Society and reported by reliable persons, have miles due west of the 02 Ranch Headquarters, forty
not as yet been mapped.
miles south of Alpine. This site is situated in a flat
now cut by numerous shallow gullies. The hearths
are circular or oval in shape and are all more or
Workshops
less disturbed by erosion. Several metates and
While most camp sites have workshops in
manos were found near them. A large camp site
connection with them, sites often occur where rock
may have once been located here but the burned
was worked and no burned rock, ashes, or other
rock mounds and ashy earth, if ever present, have
evidences of a camp are found. At these sites the
been covered by alluvium or washed away.
ground is usually covered with flakes, chips,
fragments of completed points and hammer stones.
A large camp site lies around Diff Spring. The
Occasionally, the materials are wholly from nearby writer knows of no large hearth unless some of the
ledges, though usually they are mostly foreign to burned rock mounds at some of the camp sites are
the locality.
hearths.
Flint Sources

Mounds

The Edward’s Limestone includes several strata
characteristically rich in flint nodules reaching the
size of a base ball. The nodules range in color from
black, through blue and gray, to pink. An outcropping
of Edward’s Limestone, in the form of a high bluff,
along the south side of Buck and Chalk Draws,
about sixty miles southeast of Alpine, contains
several dry shelter camps of various sizes. At
several points, independent of camp sites, scattered
chips and fragments of flint, many with flaked edges,
indicate the site of work shops. It is quite probable
that the flints were quarried from the nearby bluff.

Mounds of several types are found. Most of them
are composed of rather well sorted rocks, usually
two or three inches in diameter. Charcoal and soil,
having the appearance of having been burned, are
generally present.
One type of mounds is found along trails
ascending talus slopes from valleys to hills.
Sometimes, only one mound is present but several
usually occur at intervals from the bottom to near
the top of the trail. On one trail ascending the
Mitchell Mesa, ten miles northwest of the 02 Ranch,
there are seven such mounds. They are roughly

8

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

circular in outline, some ten feet in diameter, and
three or four feet high. The topsoil under the mound,
lowest on the trail, yielded charcoal. No artifacts
were found at or near any of them. Their uses are
problematical. They may have been trail markers;
pointers to water; caches; or burials, though the
latter is hardly likely as the soil under the mound
examined apparently had not been disturbed.

was made as a ceremonial. The larger part of this
collection is in the Museum of the West Texas
Historical & Scientific Society.

Between Leoncito Spring and Hovey, about
twenty-five miles northeast of Alpine, is a snake or
serpentine mound of earth. It is three yards wide,
two to three feet high, and about one thousand yards
long. It winds through the brush, having some plants
growing on it. A corral is situated near the head
and any peculiar shape it might have had has been
obliterated by the activities of working cattle over
a long period of time. The tail describes a circle
which nearly closes. A few flints were found at
several points. Several large camp sites occur near
Leoncito Spring, a few miles away.

usually shallow and are indicated by low mounds
of rather large stones placed with some care. The
mounds are round or oval, the bodies often being
buried in a flexed position.

Burials

Burial sites are of several types: in dry shelters
and caves; on talus slopes and on open high points.
The cave and shelter burials are rather common in
Another type of mound is found in valleys, the Davis Mountains and Big Bend. Mr. E. F. Coffin,
usually just above the high water mark. They are of the Museum of the American Indian, Heye
circular in outline and level on top. They are of Foundation, found burials in Bee Cave Canyon and
burned rocks mixed with ashy earth, and sometimes nearby caves, about seventy miles southeast of
charcoal. A common size is ten to fifteen feet in Alpine. In one case a skeleton was wrapped in a
diameter and two to three feet high. One at Live woven skin basket. In another, the body had been
Oak Well, on the 02 Ranch, is well preserved and flexed and tied with fiber cords. The Museum of
has large bushes growing on it. A few artifacts, the West Texas Historical & Scientific Society has
including several metates and manos, were found, a burial of an infant taken from a cave near Langtry.
all typical of the camp sites of the region. At another It was placed in a woven sack which was folded
mound, near Whirlwind Spring, also on the 02 over and sewed.
Ranch, several well made scrapers were found.
The talus slope and open country burials are

On a flat-top point east of Terlingua Creek, about
eighty miles south of Alpine, is a site with a group
of eight mounds. They are placed irregularly, the
point now being covered with a growth of ocotillo
and other shrubs. They have not been explored but
are thought to be Indian graves.
Sotol Pits

Peculiar, circular, burned rock mounds are found
throughout that part of Trans-Pecos Texas where
Monument sites are found on a number of the sotol, Dasylerion sp., is an indigenous plant.
prominent points in the Davis Mountains. The rocks The writer noted one of these mounds at the entrance
in the monuments are laid without mortar but with to the Carlsbad Caverns in New Mexico. Mr. E. W.
some order. Some of them are evidently markers Wilson describes the sotol mounds of the Edward’s
pointing to water as exploration disclosed nothing Plateau in Bul. 2, Texas Archeological &
under them. One, on Mount Livermore, the highest Paleontological Society.
peak in the Davis Mountains and second highest
In Trans-Pecos Texas the occurrence of sotol is
point in Texas, was used as a cache. Mrs. Susan M.
Janes, with a party, found 1250 small arrow points, determined by physiographic conditions rather than
beautifully made and most of them perfect, mixed the type of the soil. It grows almost invariably on
with the soil under a cairn of rocks several feet debris covered mountain slopes or rolling or hilly
high. Mrs. Janes and others think that this cache areas representing the cutting of plateaus. Hence,
Monuments

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
we find it growing in locales of volcanic rocks as
well as those of limestone. This gives us types of
sotol pits, the main difference being in the kind of
rock of which they are built. In this region they are
circular and average ten or twelve feet in diameter.
As found today, they are as a rule lower in the center
and composed of rocks of rather uniform size. They
are generally located some distance from camp
sites, often one half mile or more, and near the foot
of the hills where the sotol grows. Two miles east
of Diff Spring a single sotol pit is on the top of a
long point, there being a light stand of sotol at
present growing on the slopes nearby. This mound
is hidden by a thicket of sumac, that grows in the
ashy soil of the pit. The few artifacts found near
sotol mounds include metates and manos.
E. W. Wilson, in the work above cited, has
described the method of cooking sotol. He quotes
F. M. Buckelew, an early traveler, as saying that
meal was made from the cooked sotol. This would
account for the presence of grinding implements.
Another method of eating is indicated by the
numerous chewed quids of sotol leaves found in
the dry shelters of this region.
Rock Walls
Rock walls were used for shelter in this region.
At a number of points in the Davis Mountains walls
of rough masonry are found. At one place in Green
Valley a room about seven feet in diameter is found
having walls two feet high except for a rude opening
on one side.
In some places rocks are used to chink or stop
openings between large boulders to afford
protection against north winds. Remnants of walls
are found in many shelters and semi-shelters,
indicating the outlines of small rooms, usually
circular in shape. In the exploration of the Bee Cave
Canyon Shelter, by Mr. Coffin, small circular rooms,
with walls of crude masonry laid without mortar,
were found practically the whole length of 768 feet.

9

remains of a system of irrigation ditches are found.
They are in the form of connected low ridges, two
or three yards wide, covering several hundred acres
of land that slopes southward to Alamo Cesario
Creek. The site is too high above the creek to have
received its water supply from that source unless it
was diverted some distance above and brought
down in a ditch skirting the hills on the north side
of the draw. It is more probable that the water came
from a spring, in the canyon north of the field, now
dry or plugged, as some have suggested. There is
no suggestion of ditch on the tops of the ridges today,
but the two series of parallel ridges, at right angles
to each other, preclude the idea that they might
indicate natural drainage channels.
When Fort Davis was established in 1854, C.
G. Raht, in The Romance of the Davis Mountains,
says the soldiers reported seeing the Indians
irrigating crops by ditches which took water from
Limpio Creek nearby. I do not know whether any
sign of these ditches are to be seen today.
Mortar Holes
While mortar holes are found at most camp sites,
especially those occurring in shelters or on hilly
terrain, sites are often found where they are the only
sign of previous occupation now to be seen. At a
number of sites mortar holes are found singly or in
groups: sometimes on rocks at the foot of talus
slopes, and sometimes on ledges near gullies or
creeks. The kitchen midden mounds that were once
probably located nearby have disappeared. Usually
no artifacts are found though occasionally a mano
or flint fragments are noted.
Trails

Early maps of the region show several Indian
trails that were said to have been well marked when
first noted by the early travellers west of the Pecos.
Parts of these trails are still preserved where they
ascend bluffs or traverse rocky terrain. One of these
sites is in Middle Canyon passing out of Green
Valley to the westward. Near the head of the canyon
Irrigation Ditches
is a rocky water hole and the site of a camp that has
At the old Indian Farm, about seventy miles south
yielded a number of relics. This trail contains
of Alpine and just north of Agua Fria Mountain, the
several of the rock mounds mentioned above. Near

10

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

San Esteben, twelve miles south of Marfa,
the trace of a well traveled trail is seen.
Here, the travel of countless years has cut
deep into the lava in some ten parallel
paths, some of them more than a foot deep.
This trail was said to have been used by
the Commanches in their forays into
Mexico.
Battlefield
Five miles east of the 02 Ranch, running
east and west, a hill rises some two
hundred feet above the Alpine road. The
highest point of this hill is called
Cottonwood Mesa from Cottonwood
Spring in a canyon behind it to the
northward. Cottonwood Canyon emerges
east of the mesa and contains within its
mouth a large camp site. In smaller
canyons to the west are sites of smaller
camps.
On an area of several hundred acres,
lying about a mile southwest of
Cottonwood Mesa, many arrow points
have been picked up, usually one at a time.
No other class of artifact or signs of a camp
site have been noted. From the fact that so
many weapon points have been found in
so small an area, it is believed that a battle
was fought here between enemy groups.
The inhabitants of the Cottonwood Canyon
camps were, probably the defenders.

Plate 1
TRANS-PECOS SITES

Dry Shelters
1. Mortar holes; eroded stone. 02 Ranch.
Most dry shelters are accompanied by
either characteristics of camp sites, as
pictographs, mortar holes, and burned rock
and ash heaps on the slopes outside.
However, many small shelters occur at distances
Camps
from other sites. They may have been used as
Camp sites are, roughly, of four types: sand flat,
temporary winter quarters for hunting parties. Some
are often so small that not more than two persons valley, hill and dry shelter; the differences
could find shelter in them and usually have depending mainly upon topography. We will
blackened walls and often beds of ashes mixed with describe each type briefly.
wind blown sand. There are numbers of these sites
in the Green Valley section.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

11

Sand Flat Camps
Sand flat camp sites are not uncommon in the
salt basin region east of El Paso. They were
commonly on the shores of the shallow lakes that
were often dry. The gradual drying up of the lakes
has left many sites some distance from the present
shore lines. The shifting of the sands by wind action
has partially or wholly covered other sites.

Hill Camp Sites
Hill camp sites are of three sub-types: those
utilizing a south facing bluff for protection; those
having tepee sites marked by circles of boulders;
and those built on talus slopes. In each the kitchen
mounds are on the south slope of the hill or at the
foot of the bluff.

Valley Camp Sites
Valley camp sites are usually found
just above the danger of high water and
near a rocky point. Sometimes, however,
they occur in the middle of wide draws
where they must have been subject to
overflows. Possibly, they were occupied
only in seasons of the year when rains
would not be expected. These sites are
marked with large mounds of burned
rock, mixed with soil that has been
blackened with ashes. Artifacts usually
occurring include: metates, manos,
knives, weapon points, hammer stones,
scrapers and numerous chips and
rejects. In the Green Valley region an
anvil rock of red lava is usually found,
especially where ledges of rock are not
near. Small hearths occur at many camp
sites.
Mounds
The 02 Ranch is situated on a branch
of Terlingua Creek, which for several
miles is a small running stream of fine
water. At close intervals are mounds of
burned rock, some oblong in outline and
as much as one hundred feet long. These
mounds have been flattened out as the
draw was subject to overflows until the
creek was washed out to near its present
dimensions. The mounds commonly bear
a more vigorous growth of lote bush,
mesquite or creosote bush than the
surrounding soil. Two arrow shaft
polishers were found near one of these
mounds.

Plate 2
TRANS-PECOS SITES
1. Tepee site, outlined with boulders, 02 Ranch.
2. Small dry shelter near Santiago Peak. In Edward’s
Limestone.
3. Circular flat top, burned rock mound. Live Oak Well.

12

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

On a bench at the east side of the mouth of
Cottonwood Canyon is a site with six tepees
outlined by red gritty boulders from the ledge
forming the hill. There are many mortar holes along
the edge of the low bluff making the bench and a
great mound of burned rock under the bluff on the
south. At one point the bluff forms a semi-shelter
several feet deep. Boulders form the outlines of
several rooms, probably having been used to weigh
down tepee walls. Many artifacts common to camp
sites were found.
On the opposite bench is a similar site except
that only two or three tepee sites are present. Here,
several thin metates were found. The rock from
which they were fashioned occurs in thin beds under
the gritty conglomerate which forms the bench. Two
types of metates are often found at camp sites. One,
a thin plaque type of light material, the other often
a foot thick and of lava or sandstone. The latter
was probably used in situ while the thinner type
may have been carried from place to place. In Green
Valley the metates were hollowed on only one face.
At a camp site three miles south of Alpine, in an
oak grove near a small spring, metates were found
that were hollowed on both faces.
The mouth of Cottonwood Canyon between the
camp sites is dry today, the nearest natural water
being at Cottonwood Spring a mile above. Early
maps showed a large water hole at this point which
was called Ojo de San Aparicio.
Mortar Holes
Three miles north of the 02 Ranch, at the point
of a low flat topped hill near the mouth of Diff
Canyon, is a mortar hole camp site with hundreds
of mortar holes made in the great slabs of volcanic
tuffs that have rolled down from the low bluff at
the top of the mesa. A small shelter in this bluff has
several pictographs, one a perfect, life size, left
hand done in cinnabar red. Several mounds of
burned rock occur at the foot of the slope and a
workshop at the north edge of the camp. Many of
the typical camp site artifacts have been picked up
here.

Metal Artifacts
The writer found a steel knife blade, four inches
long, badly oxidized and with the point broken. It
had lugs on each side for fastening to the handle.
With a reading glass it was possible to decipher
the words PIERRE RAVOLIER. This blade appears
to have been hand forged, the name, no doubt, being
that of the maker. It probably reached the Big Bend
through the connection of Commanche Indians with
French traders on the Arkansas or Missouri rivers.
A camp site two miles to the west yielded a flat
wrought iron spike, seven inches long, that had been
worked to make a rude chisel. At another site nearby
a slender steel knife blade was found. It was about
eight inches long and was branded with a small
anchor.
Dry Shelter
The dry shelter sites vary in size from those
providing shelter for not more than two persons to
the Bee Cave Canyon shelter, measured by Mr.
Coffin, which is 768 feet long and 108 feet in
maximum depth. Vol. 6, No. 4, Indian Notes
describes the exploration of that shelter. The dry
shelters of this region have also been described by
V. J. Smith, in Vol. 29, No. 2, The American
Anthropologist.
Many shelters occur near Alpine, some of them
yielding burials besides the wooden and fiber
articles and stone artifacts usually found. Many of
them contain pictographs and a few sherds have
been picked up.
In the limestone areas of Trans-Pecos many caves
occur. Most of them show some signs of occupancy,
though only the area near the mouths were occupied.
The cave sites often contain burials. Some forty
feet back in a cave, six miles southwest of Santiago
Peak, two burials were found. The bodies were in
baskets laid on poles over a natural vertical shaft
that descended from the floor of the cave. The
bottom of the shaft yielded nothing of interest.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
Pueblos
Very near the Texas-New Mexico line, some
thirty miles northeast of El Paso, are the ruins of
several large pueblos. The foundation walls of
masonry, laid in a brittle gray mortar, are partly or
wholly covered by drifting sand.
Water and shelter seem to have been determining
factors in the location and type of sites. The larger
camp sites are found near permanent water and their
occurrence would indicate that a constant supply
of water has existed over a long period. Other large
camp sites, where no water is now found, indicate
that springs have become dry or streams have
changed their courses since they were inhabited.

13

in the lower part of the Big Bend. A ball of red
paint, four inches in diameter, was found in a shelter
in Sunny Glen, west of Alpine, by Ross Smith, son
of V. J. Smith. It is now in the Museum of the West
Texas Historical & Scientific Society.
Plants

Certain plants make more vigorous growths in
the ashy soil of the burned rock mounds of this
region. Camp sites, sotol pits, hearths and other
sites may often be located by watching for groups
of plants larger in size and richer in color than the
plants around them. Shelters and talus slope sites
may often be located in the same manner, as shrubs,
usually found growing in draws or flat terrain, are
often found to have adapted themselves to the
Paint
hillside slopes, because of the changed condition
No quarries, of materials for weapons or pipes, of the soil. It is probable that potash from the ashes,
or paint mines have been found. A single paint ball mixed in the soil, causes the increased growth of
was found in the Bee Cave shelter. It was red and the flora on the sites.
probably derived from cinnabar ore which occurs

14

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

SOME FLINT SOURCES IN CENTRAL WEST TEXAS
BY E. B. SAYLES
Edwards Limestone
The source of flint of the
aboriginal inhabitants of Central
West Texas was principally from
the limestones of the Edwards
Plateau. The flint occurs about
the middle of the Lower
Cretaceous series and varies in
color from a lead or blue slate
to nearly black, while some is
grey, specked or mottled with
lighter or darker colors.
Other strata of this formation
carry much cherty material, a
great deal of which has eroded
out and has been deposited with
the flint nodules upon the high
gravel hills along streams in this
section. This re-deposited
material
was
worked
extensively, but apparently was
not wholly satisfactory as there
are thousands of rejects.

Figure 1
FLINT QUARRY AND VICINITY
1. Gravel deposits carrying flint
artifacts.
1a.
2. 3.
2a. Artifacts on surface in soil.
4. 5. 6. 7. Hearths; worked flint.
A. Rock circles; camp site.
Two mortar holes in limestone
ledge at Creek.
B. Quarry, following outcrop of
limestone bearing flint.

Where the flint has recently
eroded out of its limestone bed,
many localities show worked
material. But this material
appears to be hardly more
satisfactory than that which was
deposited upon the plains, for the
rejects are numerous.
The most satisfactory
material for working appears to
have been that which was taken
out of its limestone bed by the users. Evidence of
such a quarry exists upon the head of Elm Creek in
Taylor County. Through the courtesy of the owner
of the land, Mr. K. Stoker, this site has been
investigated with the help of Carl Chelf, and a
number of interesting things were found.

Flint Quarry
First in interest are the flint quarries. For 2450
feet the hillside has been dug up, following the
outcrop of the flint bearing stratum, so deeply that
even now some of these trenches are three feet deep.
A test trench placed across the old ditches showed
that the flint bearing stratum was 8 feet deep where

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

15

Figure 2
FLINT QUARRY

the digging was abandoned. Much of the diggings
may have been just as deep.

Flint Quarry Used by Pottery Makers

Two potsherds of the same buff colored ware
The removal of the overlying dirt probably was that is found elsewhere in this section were found
done by the use of large heavy axe-like flint blades in the camp site close to the quarry. Also other
and scrapers, a number of which were found on the artifacts were found here of forms typical of the
surface and nearby, and some in the old ditch where pottery sites, and it is likely that this flint was being
sought by the pottery users of this area.
the test trench was dug.
The material from this quarry was taken out in
large nodules after the embedding limestone had
been broken off by the use of stone boulders. Some
of the used hammerstones were found in the old
diggings and these were as large as a man’s head,
and were battered over the entire surface. Then the
flint apparently was broken into more or less thin
sections, if the great quantity of similar material
that lies upon the ground correctly tells the story.
Some of this work was done at the quarry site, but
more of it at the camps nearby. From these thinner
sections, the flint was further worked into large leaf
blades. Tons of flakes, and hammerstones, scrapers,
hearths and other evidences of occupation nearby
extend continuously for at least three miles along
Elm Creek. Few other specialized implements have
been found on the surface. From the number of
fragments of large leaf blades found, it seems that
this was as far as the work was carried in the vicinity
of the quarry. The same type of artifact is found
along Elm Creek for fifteen miles to the east, and to
the southeast some thirty miles away, where the
same kind of dark flint appears in abundance in the
camp sites, together with completed implements of
similar material.

Long Use of Quarry
This flint must have been used during a long
period of time. Many of the worked fragments are
heavily patinated, and at different places along the
course of Elm Creek below, artifacts are found in
the gravel deposits. Worked flint in place is found
at depths ranging from two to five and a half feet
below the present ground level. Yet in some of the
camp sites the flint is actually on top of the grass,
as though it might have been worked but yesterday.
Rock Circles and Rectangles.
In the campsite nearest the quarry is a series of
stone circles and rectangles that evidently formed
a part of the camp there. The smaller circles of
stone are twelve to sixteen feet in diameter, and the
rectangles are of similar area. One large circle is
about 150 feet in diameter. So far as is known, no
other prehistoric remains like them are found in
this immediate section.
A similar circle of stones, approximately 300
feet in diameter is found on the eastern extension of
the area occupied, and about three miles from the

16

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

quarry. This has all the appearance of having once
been a low stone wall, such as sheep herders use
in building temporary corrals. But from a careful
search of the surface and from several test holes,
there is no evidence of white occupation or even
contact, and so far as it has been possible to verify,
no early cattle camps were located in this immediate
vicinity.

nearest the quarry, a test hole shows them to extend
for nearly three feet below the present surface.
Burial

Across the Creek from the circle of stones to
the east, a recent burial covered with stones, was
found in a rock crevice. Hair still clung to the skin,
and there was a fragment of some utensil of wood.
At this site the soil is filled with flint flakes, this might represent a Mexican rather than an Indian
down to a depth of 18 inches, while at the site burial, however. The cranium was found by the
discoverer of the burial but
unfortunately it disappeared before
Figure 3
an examination could be made.
SKETCH MAP OF FLINT QUARRY AND CAMP SITE
(Note: Map shows relative positions only, Sites A and B
drawn to different scale).
Mortar Holes.
In a ledge of limestone
immediately adjacent to the Creek
at the camp site nearest the quarry
are two round mortar holes.
Probably further investigation of
the quarry site will show other
points of interest.
Other Sources of Flint
The majority of the flint artifacts
found in this section (with the
exception of those found in the Sand
Dune sites) appear to have been
made from the nodules coming from
the Edwards limestone. But
numerous flint artifacts are found
near Abilene that are made of flint
that is not known to exist in place
here. These are the reds, banded and
brightly mottled materials, which
occur farther to the northwest. Yet it
is possible that the material for many
of these implements might have been
found upon the surface in the same
washed deposits, where so much of
the flint from the Edwards limestone
has been deposited. Here unworked
nodules of flint dissimilar to that
found in place in the Edwards
Limestone occur.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
Sand Dune Flint
The material that was used by the Sand Dune
people, did not come from any locally known
stratum in the Edwards limestone. This material is
either of a translucent grey agate, a light grey, or
most frequently of a rich light cream colored flint.
Nodules of the same kind of flint are frequently
found within the camp sites in the dune sand, but it

17

is not known whether they occur there naturally, or
have been carried there by the occupants of these
sites.
It may be that this material was brought in from
the southeast of Abilene where all of the flint
artifacts that have been examined by the writer are
of similar material.

Plate 3
FLINT QUARRY
1. Test trench: Depth from present ground surface to limestone ledge is 8 feet. Fill above flintbearing
stratum contains many flakes of worked flint and some artifacts.
The flint, in large flat nodules, is found between the two layers of limestone.
3. Campsite north of Quarry. Small circle of large flat limestone rocks. Flint flakes and some artifacts
are found in this site; also hearth stones, and tones of partly worked flint from the Quarries.
4. Type of blade used in removing overcover of soil and clay from the flint-bearing stratum. Implement
on right is 4" by 8", 2" thick. The other is fashioned similarly to a common type of scraper found in
this section, that is, one side had been left unworked.

18

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

THE PICTOGRAPHS AT THE HUECO TANKS
BY COLONEL M. L. CRIMMINS
There is a giant pile of granite known as the Hueco
Tanks thirty miles east-northeast of El Paso. These
tanks were a landmark for the emigrants to California
from 1849 on, and before that they had been used for
many centuries by various tribes of Indians.
Captain Randolph Marcy, 5th U. S. Infantry, in
laying out a new route from El Paso to Fort Smith,
Figure 4
PICTOGRAPHS, HUECO TANKS.

Arkansas, camped as this place in September 1849.
He remarked about the great natural beauty of the
place and many Indian rock pictures decorating the
walls of the caves.
John Russell Bartlett, the chief of the AmericanMexican boundary commission, passed there the
following year and was much impressed with their
unusual geologic formations. He copied
many of the pictographs as shown in his
Personal Narratives, U. S. Mexican
Boundary Commission 1850-54.
Geology of the Area
This groups of rocks is an igneous
intrusion, forced up through the earth’s
surface many millions of years ago, which
accounts for their appearance in an upright
position. This happened long before the
Rocky Mountains appeared above the level
of the sea, and when a large part of the
present United States was covered with
water, from the Hueco Tanks to the
Labrador Shelf on the east. Therefore no
cretaceous animal life is found below these
rocks. These rocks form a great natural
amphitheatre, with huge rocks thrown upright in wild confusion, extending about a
mile in length, half a mile in width, and form
one hundred to one hundred and fifty feet in
height. Much of the granite is in place, while
huge boulders are piled up like pebbles on
the sides of the summit.
Favored Location
These tanks cover an area of about five
hundred acres, and the rocks are in three
groups forming a natural amphitheatre.
Water is usually found in some rock water
holes. This place has been a favorite resort
of the Indians since the earliest prehistoric

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

19

Human Figures
days. This is evidenced by the large circular mortar
Under an overhanging rock is a large tank measuring
holes worn in the solid granite from twelve to fifteen
inches deep. In these holes they ground and crushed about thirty by eight feet and in it there is a permanent
water supply. This tank contains as much as four feet
their corn, grain, seeds, and acorns.
of water at times and has for thousands of years been
These rocks are surrounded by a barren desert
a popular camping place. The granite has been worn
and the nearest permanent water is the Rio Grande
so smooth, that you cannot walk over the slopes in
about thirty miles away. Consequently these Tanks
leather soled shoes, without slipping and falling.
were of great value to the hunters of this region, who
The walls near the tank are covered with many white
would lie there in concealment and kill game as it came
to the water holes. It was important that proper shelter rock pictures, showing human figures dancing. One
should be available for the protection of the hunters’ shows the rabbit dance which took place before their
families, and therefore it is probable that these caves big rabbit drives, which was a prayer for success in
were marked with the sign of ownership, just
Figure 5
as we brand cattle. This may have been the
PICTOGRAPHS,
HUECO
TANKS. ANIMALISTIC.
origin of many of the pictographs, especially
the animalistic types. It seems to have been
the custom of most of the primitive races of
America to take the names of animals singly
or in combination.
Pictographs
Many of the caves near the mortar holes
are decorated with pictographs. They are
usually of the following colors: Black, red,
white, yellow, and one green. The black
pictures are the most common and are made
from a paint composed of grease and
charcoal. The red pictures are from hematite
or cinnabar and the yellow ones are made
from an ochreous sandstone. The white was
made from either kaolin, gypsum, or lime.
The green pictures are characteristic of the
Navajo Indians of northern New Mexico
and Arizona, and their paint was made from
a copper oxide.
The groups of figures have been divided
into the symbolic, the meaning of most of
this is unknown; the animalistic in which the
animal is usually recognized, and the
anthropomorphic in which the human element
is shown. Many of the caves have the same
figure repeated and they may be totemic
signatures of the owners of the caves.

20

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

their hunt. Another is a huge red sun with a white snake
projecting upwards from it. There was one picture
found in this group of the human hand. This picture is
usually associated with the Basket Maker culture of
more than three thousand years ago. We also find some
pictures not unlike those of the Mayas of Yucatan of
about two thousand years ago. We have a picture
painted in red of a god-like figure wearing plumes on
his head. Others show circular numerals similar to those
of the Mayas and Aztecs.

“Council Chamber”

There is a cave near the mouth of the amphitheatre
which has a large flat table-like rock that has been
worn smooth on top. It is the largest cave thereabouts,
and is called “The Council Chamber Cave.” It has
two large white snakes painted on the wall and each is
over fifty feet long and about a foot wide. Bartlett
reports that the Indians held councils in the great
amphitheatre. On one occasion after the Indians had
committed depredations and murders around El Paso
they were trailed by the Mexicans to this amphitheatre.
They were driven to the far end
and then built a wall of rocks from
Figure 6
one perpendicular rock to the
PICTOGRAPHS, HUECO TANKS, SYMBOLIC.
other. Here they were besieged
and being cut off from food and
water, they were eventually
overcome and one hundred and
fifty were killed.
A Site Worthy of Preservation
There are about two thousand
Indian rock pictures at the Hueco
Tanks. Many of these pictures
have been destroyed and defaced
by vandals, during the past eighty
years. Even Bartlett in his
“Personal Narrative,” Vol. I,
pages 172 and 173 wrote as
follows in reference to the Indian
rock pictures:
“Over them are figures of
late travelers and emigrants”
who have taken this means to
immortalize their names and
let posterity know that they
were on their way to
California.”
There are few places in the
world where such an interesting
collection of pictographs can be
found in such an easily accessible
location. The State of Texas
should follow the example of other
States in preserving their
archeological sites for the study
of present and future generations.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

21

THE QUATERNARY MAMMALS OF TEXAS
BY C. A. HOWARD
The Upper Tertiary or Pliocene Age closes with a Undifferentiated alluvial sand, gravel, and clay deposits
world rich in life, a world replete with Asiatic and of the intermontane areas of Trans-Pecos, Texas.
African influence. This age is followed by the
In many other parts of Texas there are deposits of
Quaternary. This latter age is the one to which this
Pleistocene Age. These consist of three kinds: 1. The
paper is confined.
The cenozoic age, which
includes the Quaternary, is also
called the age of mammals
because of their predominance
and importance from the beginning
of the era to and including the
present. As will be noted the era
is divided into two periods,
Tertiary and Quaternary, the first
lasting until the appearance of the
great ice sheets and the second
from that time to the present. They
were of very unequal duration, the
former being several millions of
years long, the latter perhaps less
than one million.
While the Tertiary period does
not come under our subject, it is
well to make this brief mention of
it to better show its specific place
in Cenozoic time. The Pleistocene
age is nearly always referred to
as the Glacial period. While
glaciation is an important factor in
this age, the ice sheet did not
Figure 7
advance as far south as Texas; the
MAP OF TEXAS SHOWING QUATERNARY DEPOSITS,
southernmost boundary being
AND FOSSIL MAMMAL BONE LOCATIONS.
that of the north borderland of
Kansas, although the great North
American ice sheet covered four million square miles.
Lafayette Sands, Clays and Gravels forming the
The map shows where the Quaternary formations cappings of the upland surfaces over much of Texas
of Texas are found. A brief description of these and also forming the deposits of the higher stream
formations are as follows: Lafayette, Lizzie, Uvalde terraces in the Edwards Plateau; 2. The second
and Reynosa gravels and sands of Gulf Coastal Plain, bottoms or terraces of Texas streams, generally known
Port Hudson, Beaumont or Coast Clays, and as the Columbia deposits; 3. The clays and sands of
Columbia stream terrace deposits of Gulf Coastal Plain, the Gulf Coast Country, as already mentioned.

22

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

Professor Osborn points out that the mammals of
the Quaternary have by no means progressed as far in
America as in Europe. It will be many years before
the succession can be worked out with precision.
According to Osborn’s arrangement there are three
successive Pleistocene faunas, two of which appear
to have coincided with interglacial stages, and the third
with the last re-establishment of glacial conditions on
a grand scale. The Mammalian fauna of the Quaternary
is almost wholly peculiar. It differs greatly from the
Tertiary fauna preceding it and the present succeeding
fauna. The species are, moreover, very numerous and
many of them are of extraordinary size, for it is the
culmination of the Mammalian age.

Lizzie, Wharton County, a well preserved skull of a
fossil horse was taken from a bed of sand and small
pebbles cemented together in places with lime. The
skull was the species Equus francisci, Hay.
The remains of a mastodon have been taken from
the banks of Caleta Creek, eight miles West-Southwest
of Victoria.

From beds on Taranchua Creek, a branch of San
Diego Creek, vertebrate fossils of Pleistocene age were
collected by Wm. Taylor and G. W. Marnock and
identified by Cope. The species include Elephas
primigenius Blum, Canis sp., Glyptodon petaliferus
Cope, Equus tan Cope, Equus semiplicatus Cope,
Equus excelsus Leidy, Equus occidentalis Leidy and
We shall now see what mammals the Quaternary
Equus crenidens Cope. The beds in which the fossils
formations of Texas have produced. In listing the
occur consist of limy sand and gravel.
various animals we shall also describe the formation in
which the fossils were found and also give the county
In terrace No. 2 along the Brazos River forty to
and specific location when possible.
fifty-five feet above the bed of the river the deposit
consists largely of red sandy clay but has more or less
In the Lizzie gravel, Wharton County, previously
gravel in its basal part. A considerable vertebrate fauna
described by Kennedy as the Columbia sands, are
has been collected from this terrace by Dr. Mark Francis
found the Equus beds, so named from bones of the
of the Texas A. & M. College at Munson Shoals, five
ancient horse.
miles Southeast of Stone City. The specimens were
In the Gulf Coast area West of the Guadalupe River found from twenty to forty feet above the stream. The
the formation includes beds of white limestone, lime forms identified by O. P. Hay include Equus,
conglomerate in which limestone and flint pebbles are Megatherium, Mastodon, Gomphotherium, Elephas
cemented with lime, and gray and ash colored sand, Columbi, and Testudo Crassiscutata. Terrace No. 2
silt and clay, which are in places calcareous, in general is well shown at Waco, Valley Junction, Stone City,
having a strong resemblance to those of the Reynosa near Clay, Hidalgo Bluff, San Felipe, Simonton, Arcola
formation. Here are found many vertebrate fossils of and Brazoria.
early Pleistocene age, such as Equus Complicatus,
A number of fossils have been found in the materials
Equus Francisci Hay, Trucifelis Fatalis, Elephas
covering the terraces along the Colorado River. Thus
Imperator, Bison Latifrons, and Glyptodon. Outcrops
in terrace No. 2 at Austin the tooth of a mammouth
of the formation appear in Victoria, Jackson, Lavaca,
and a fossil turtle (Terrapene Whitneyi) have been
Colorado, Wharton, Austin, Fort Bend, Goliad, Bee,
found and in the same terrace at Stones Ford the tooth
San Patricio, Duval, and Jim Wells. Nueces and Brooks
of a Mastodon. About two miles East of the State
Counties. It forms the Alice terrace. The formation
insane Asylum at Austin a molar of Equus excelsus
extends eastward into Eastern Texas and Louisiana.
Leidy, a very early Pleistocene species was found in
Early Pleistocene vertebrates were collected more terrace No. 6 at Ridge Top. At Hemphill Bend, near
than seventy-five years ago by William Hough of San Goodman, the skeleton of a Modern Buffalo was found
Felipe, Austin County, from certain beds in the banks about 10 feet below the top of terrace No. 1. Five
of the Brazos River and were described by Dr. Wm. miles upstream from Bay City a tooth of Elephas
Carpenter. The species included Mastodon, Elephas Columbi was found.
Columbi, a tapir, Bison latifrons, Mylodon and Elephas
Dr. E. W. Shuler has described in a very interesting
Imperator. At a depth of twenty-five feet in a well at
manner the occurrence of several fossil Pleistocene

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
mammals that have been taken from sand and gravel
beds in and around Dallas. The terraces on either side
of the Trinity River are remnants of ancient flood plains.
The highest of these is found in Oak Cliff as seen
Northeast and Southwest of Cliff Park. The gravel
and clay of these deposits has a reddish color. The
gravel contains considerable clay and broken fragments
of chalk rock. In the various sand beds that have been
opened there have been found numerous fossils.
Fossil skulls, more or less complete, of thirteen
elephants have been found in these sand and gravel
pits around the City of Dallas since the first specimen
was noted in 1887. With each skull has been found
bones from other parts of the skeleton. Three fine
specimens of the skulls have been preserved in
Northern universities. One occupies a place of honor
in the Peabody Museum of Yale University. One of
the largest specimens is to be seen only partially
mounted in the Hyer Hall of Science at Dallas. Besides
the bones of the Imperial Elephant have been found
the bones of Equus Scotti, the Texas horse, an ancient
Bison, species undetermined, bones of smaller animals,
as yet undetermined and bony scutes of the giant sloth.

23

*Equus cf fraternus Leidy, cannon bone humerus.
Order Proboscidea.
Family Elephantidae.
Subfamily mammatinae.
*Elephas Columbi Falconer.
Professor Lull further describes the fossils:
*Smilodon cf. Fatalis (Leidy).
A finely preserved occiput of a large sabre-tooth
cat is present. Its affinities with Smilodon are clearly
shown by the relatively great vertical extent of the
mastoid processes, together with their being directed
downward and forward so that the auricular fossa is
nearly closed below, whereas in Felis it is wide open
and the vertical extent of the Mastoids is relatively slight.
The occipital condyles are also Smilodon-like and show
a greater habitual range of vertical movement than in
Felis. All this is correlated with the great development
of the sternomastoid muscle in Smilodon for use in
striking its prey and is highly diagnostic of the genus.
*Odocoileus Sp.

Two specimens—One is a single spike-like antler
Dr. Shuler in a letter to Professor R. S. Lull of Yale,
which had apparently been shed by its owner and the
March 1921, lists a few Mammalian fossils found in
other the distal end of a left humerus. They pertain to a
one of the principal sand beds. They are as follows:
deer somewhat smaller than the black-tailed deer of
today, the antler, of course, being that shed by a yearling
Class Mammalia.
buck. It is complete, except on the tip, and shows no
Order Carnivora.
sign of branching. The humerus is essentially
Family Felidae.
indistinguishable from that of odocoileus, except for
Subfamily Machaerodontinae.
proportions and size.
*Smilodon fatalis (Leidy) Cranium.
Order Artiodactyla.
*Camelops Huerfanensis Dallasi, Subsq. Nov.
Family Cervidae.
The material consists of a broken but well
*Odocoileus sp. Humerus, antler.
preserved
skull, a cervical and a dorsal vertebra, right
Family Antilocapridae.
ulno-radius, astragalus, and metatarsal, the last
*Tetrameryx shuleri, gen et sp Nov. cranium,
incomplete. The remains indicate an animal about the
maxillary.
stature of a modern Arabian Camel or Dromedary.
Family BovSldae.
*Bison alleni Marsh. Left mandible.
Family Camelidae.
Camel, Gen, Et Sp. Indet.
*Camelops huerfanensis dallasi, suosp, Nov,
An almost perfect rear cannon-bone represents a
skull, etc.
considerably smaller camel than that last named and
Camel, gen et sp indet, cannon bone.
the ratios from measurements indicate a very shortOrder Perissodactyla.
footed camel for its bulk.
Family Equidae.

24

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

Quaternary deposits occupy the greater part of the
El Paso quadrangle. The bases of the mountains are
buried by accumulations of debris and the Hulco
Bolson is underlain by unconsolidated material. The
Rio Grande Valley is covered with river alluvium.
Pleistocene fossils have been found in the upper part
of the balson deposits. These deposits consist chiefly
of gravel, sand and clay derived from the disintegration
of the rocks of the highlands.

Texas seems to have been especially blessed with
at least three Quaternary mammals that we think may
merit special description, due to the fact that their fossil
remains have been reported from such a wide range
over the State. They are *Equus, the horse,
*Mammoth, the elephants, and the Mastodon.
Equus.

Although reported from many Texas Counties, the
Several fossil bones were found in 1906 in Rous’ principal locality seems to be in the Panhandle in
gravel pit at the head of North Virginia Street, El Paso. Donley County, where at least seven different species
They were obtained at two horizons in cross-bedded have come to light and perhaps at least two more to
sand and gravel, thirty and sixty feet below the top of be suspected. From the Rock Creek beds already
an erosion of the balson plain at the base of the Franklin mentioned comes the E. Semiplicatus, which in certain
Mountains. The bones include the teeth of a Mammoth cranial characters, as well as in the size and proportions
and of a horse and the jawbones and teeth of a tapir, of its teeth, seems to present a close relationship to
which have been determined by Dr. J. W. Gidley of the Ass (E. Asinus). On the staked plains of central
the National Museum to represent *Elephas Columbi, Texas has been found E. scotti, intermediate in size
Equus Complicatus, and Tapirus Haysii.
between E. complicatus and E. pacificus, with a long
face, relatively large head, long body, short neck,
In beds extensively exposed along the South side
resembling in its proportions the quagga (E. burchelli).
of Rock Creek or Tule Canyon which runs in a
From Southwestern Texas comes also E. giganteus,
Northeasterly direction diagonally across the Southeast
the largest species of horse hitherto recorded, the teeth
part of Deaf Smith County and toward the east into
exceeding those of the largest modern draught horses
Randall County where it joins Paloduro Creek, are
by more than one third of the diameter of the latter.
found many fossils of Pleistocene age, a division of the
Quaternary. The formation represents a period of river
The Mammoth and Mastodon (after Prof. H. F.
or flood-plain formation laying down broad bands of Osborn’s Mammoths and Mastodons of Nortb
fluidtile, of alluvial and aeolian origin, composed of America).
cross-bedded sands, gravels and clays. The mammals
represented consist wholly of land forms and some of
The Mammoth
the bones show weather-checking. They contain the
Today nearly everyone knows that the Mammoth
characteristic lower Pleistocene forms: the horse
was a sort of big, hairy elephant, now extinct. It may
(*Equus), the elephant (*Elephas imperator), the great
be said in passing that the Mastodon i9 only a second
sloth (*Mylodon sodalis), two camels or cameloids
or third cousin of the Mammoth, but that the existing
(*Halomeniscus sulcatus H. Macrocephalus), two
elephant of Asia is a very near relative. Popularly, the
large land tortoises and a peccary (*Platygonus).
Mammoth is supposed to have been a colossus, but
Only a few days ago Dr. E. W. Shuler, Head of the his actual height was not as great as generally
Department of Geology and Paleontology in Southern supposed. Somewhere near thirteen feet in height seems
Methodist University, called the writer’s attention to a to be a good average to place on the Mammoth.
fine group of fossils sent to him by an experienced
This great beast seems to have very early in its life
collector from Donley County. There were in the group
been stricken with the “Wanderlust” as have the various
about seven different species of horse (the fossils
races of man. Not only to overcome changes of
consisted chiefly of teeth and jaw bones containing
environment, but also to gratify their intelligent curiosity
teeth). Also a few small foot bones of a sabre-tooth
ever to explore fresh fields, they have gone to the very
cat, and many other mammal bones as yet unidentified.
ends of the earth and have far surpassed man in

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

25

adapting their clothing and teeth to all
possible conditions of life. Thus the
romances of elephant migration and
conquest are second only to the romances
of human migration and conquest. Variety
is the spice of elephant life as it is of human
life. The reaching out in every direction
for every kind of food, every kind of
habitat, is in itself the cause of divergent
evolution and adaptation. So strong was
the migratory impulse that only six out of
sixteen races of Mastodons and elephants
failed to reach America.
Texas abounds in Mammoth remains.
Bones or teeth have been reported from
nearly every part of the State. Indeed, few
Counties are without Mammoth relics of
some kind.
The Mastodon
The Mastodon must have appeared
very much like any other elephant, though
a little shorter in the legs and somewhat
more heavily built than either of the living
species, while the head was a trifle flatter
and the jaw much longer. The tusks vary,
sometimes bowing outwards, sometimes
upwards to form a half circle. They were
never as long as the largest Mammoth
tusks, but to make up for this they were a
shade stronger for their length. The size
of the Mastodon has often been overestimated. Some say they did not attain
the height of a full grown African elephant.
In great contrast to the Mammoth were
the teeth of Mastodons. The crown or
grinding face of the tooth is formed by
more or less regular cone-shaped or
pyramidal-shaped projections, covered
with enamel. (See Plate 26 opposite Page
86, Volume 2, Bulletin 1930 Texas A. 8~
P. Soc., showing difference in Mammoth
and Mastodon teeth). The range of the
Mastodon in Texas while not as wide as
the Mammoth covered a considerable
area.

Plate 4
COLUMBIAN MAMMOTH, FOUND ABOUT
THREE MILES SOUTH OF DALLAS
1. Pelvic bones, upside down.
2. Large leg bones in foreground; side of pelvic bone,
and skull with tusks in back ground.

26

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

Serrate-Toothed Mastodon *( Serridentinus
Productus) Tree Browsing
The fossil remains of this species of elephant are
found in much older deposits than the Quaternary and,
therefore, it does not come under our assignment of
“Quaternary Mammals.” However, due to the fact that
the animal is a remarkable one whose history is equally
remarkable and better still, whose remains have been
found in Texas and only at one other place in North
America, the temptation is too great to pass up a brief
mention of such an animal, especially when ~such a
wonderful description is given by one of the greatest
authorities on fossil and living elephants, Prof. H. F.
Osborn. The Serridentines, or serrate-toothed
Mastodons have only recently, as a result of
investigation, become distinguished from the longjawed Mastodons on the basis of the structure of the
relatively few teeth found in other parts of the world.

proboscis, aided by a lower jaw with tusks of medium
length, a jaw more elongate than in the true Mastodons
but less elongate than in the extremely long-jawed
forms. The species, while very bulky, is by no means
as massive as the ordinary Mastodons nor as high.

From ancient river alluvium, sands and gravels in
terraces along the banks of the Colorado River in
Bastrop County, and the Trinity River in Liberty
County, comes fossil bones, skulls, horn cores of the
great Bison (Bison latifrons). The early and gigantic
form B. latifrons reflects the favorable conditions of
life during the age contemporary with the Mammoth
and Mastodon in Texas and elsewhere where their
bones have been found. The horn cores are so long
and thick that they exceed by two feet on each side
those of the existing old and new world bison. Horns
in one Northern museum measure six feet and six
inches along the curve from tip to tip. Another
They form a race of their own, to which the generic specimen measures six feet across from tip to tip and
name Serridentinus has been given. Enroute to America eight feet and six inches along the curve. This appears
one member of this race succumbed and left a fossil to be the record in size; although the complete skeleton
jaw on one of the ancient rivers of Mongolia and here is unknown we may judge from the size of the skull
two teeth were unearthed by an American Expedition. that this great Bison far exceeds any of its living
Eight thousand miles eastward and southward of this relatives.
spot, which is in the desert of Gobi, the Americanized
Texas offers a great field for Paleontological
descendants are found in the marls near Santa Fe, New research. Few other places are so rich. Some species
Mexico, and in the ancient river sands near Clarendon, of fossil mammal remains have been found here that
Texas, in a formation of Lower Pliocene Age. A so far have not been found at any other place.
beautiful restoration has been made and is now in the Fragments of other fossil mammals have been found
American Museum of Natural History, New York, from that give us only a vague idea of what the animal looked
a nearly complete skeleton of a Serridentine found in like and only future exploration will ultimately give us
Northern Texas. A photo shows the Mastodon to be this much needed information, as well as the possibility
a tree browser, and is reaching for foliage with its of still bringing to light other forms that are still unknown
in this part of the country.
TABLE OF COMPARATIVE HEIGHT OF CERTAIN
ELEPHANTS AND MASTODONS IN GENERAL
Common Name
Imperial Mammoth
African Elephant
Indian Elephant
American Mastodon
TEXAS SERRIDENTINE
Young Congo Elephant
Fayiim Moerithere

Scientific Name
Archidiskodon imperator
Loxodonta africana
Elephas indicus
Mastodon Americanus
Serridentinus productus
Loxodonta African Pumilio
Moeritherium andrewsi

Height
13
11
10
9
5
4
2

feet
”
”
”
”
”
”

6 inches
4 ”
6
8
5
1

”
”
”
”

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

BIBLIOGRAPHY
PRINCIPAL WORKS CONSULTED IN THE PREPARATION
OF THIS PAPER:

27

7. Scott, W. B. —A History of Land Mammals in
the Western Hemisphere.
8. Lucas, F. A. —Animals of the Past.

1. Deussen, Alexander—Geology of the Coastal Plain
of Texas west of the Brazos River. U. S. G. S.
Professional Paper No. 126.

9. Dana, J. D. —Manual of Geology.

2. Geologic Atlas of the U.S. (El Paso Folio No. 166).

11. Shuler, E. W. —The Geology of Dallas County.

3. Texas Archeological & Paleontological Society
Bulletin No. 2.

12. Udden, J. A., Baker & Bose. —Review of the
Geology of Texas.

4. Osborn, H. F. —The Age of Mammals.

13. Lull, R. S. —Fauna of the Dallas Sand Pits.

5. Osborn, H. F. —Cenozoic Mammal Horizons of
Western North America.

14. Dumble, E. T. —The Cenozoic Deposits of
Texas.

6. Osborn, H. F. —Mastodons and Mammoths of
North America.

15. Gidley, J. W. —A new species of Pleistocene
Horse from the Staked Plains of Texas.

10. LeConte, Jos. —Elements of Geology.

28

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

TEXAS TECH ARCHAEOLOGICAL EXPEDITION SUMMER 1930
BY W. C. HOLDEN
The archeological activities of Texas
Technological College during the past year have
centered around the attempt to explain the
relationship between the slab-stone house culture
along the Canadian River in the Panhandle of Texas
and the Pueblo culture of the Southwest.
Prior to this past summer no slab-stone ruins of
the Panhandle type had been reported on the Canadian
River west of Tucumcari, New Mexico. It seemed to
be a reasonable theory that if the Panhandle slabstone culture were related to the Pueblo culture there
should be some indications of such a connection
between Tucumcari and the Pecos valley. The most
eastern pueblo ruins reported on until the summer of
1929 were those on the Tecolote River about a mile
below the village of Tecolote on the Las Vegas-Santa
Fe highway. During the summer of 1929 Dr. J. Alden
Mason and party from the Museum of the University
of Pennsylvania reported the finding of a ruin near the
town of Watrous, N. M., located at the confluence of
the Mora River and Sapello Creek. In his report Dr.
Mason said in part: “In architecture the site somewhat
resembles that on the Canadian (in the Panhandle),
the underground walls and floors being made of adobe
mud, but smooth and finished. However, instead of
enclosing single rooms, the walls were partitions
between rooms, and the group on the ground
excavated consisted of a dozen or more. The same
superposition of floors was noted and the same
charred beams and lumps of fire-baked clay with the
impressions of poles or reeds. The latter were
unusually frequent, and charred beams rare. In
contradistinction to the Texas site, potsherds were
common and flaked implements very rare; the country
evidently did not produce much flint. The pottery was
of unmistakable Pueblo type, mainly black corrugated
ware but with a fair quantity of painted black on white
and a few pieces of black on red.*
The discovery of a ruin almost mid-way between
the Pecos valley and Tucumcari resembling the

Canadian ruins in architecture and containing
unmistakable Pueblo potsherds made the possibility
of establishing a relationship between the Panhandle
and Pueblo cultures seem a little bit nearer at hand. It
seemed clear that the most vital region to work, in
attempting to solve this problem of relationships was
between the Tecolote River west of Las Vegas and
Tucumcari. It was decided to explore minutely the
intervening region for more ruins; then to begin with
known Pueblo and pre-Pueblo ruins on the Tecolote
and excavate typical ruins towards the east to known
Canadian ruins of the Panhandle type, noting where
and how the transition from the Pueblo to Panhandle
culture took place.
Tecolote Ruin
With a program like this in view the first camp for
the field school conducted by the College in July-August
1930 was made at San Geronimo Ranger Station on
the Tecolote River some eighteen miles west of Las
Vegas. From this place exploring expeditions were sent
out along the Gallinas and Tecolote Rivers, affluents
of the Pecos, and along Sapello Creek and Mora River,
tributaries of the Canadian. A number of slab-stone
ruins of the single room Panhandle type were found,
some within ten miles of Las Vegas. Mr. William Elfield
of that place was instrumental in locating these. Time
did not permit of the excavation of any of this type of
ruin in the Las Vegas vicinity.
Excavations at Tecolote
The second week of August was spent excavating
in a pre-Pueblo ruin on the Tecolote. There are three
known groups of ruins on the Tecolote River. The group
where we worked is located on the south bank of the
river about a mile below the Mexican village of
Tecolote. The ruins consist of ten mounds varying in
size from 24 feet to 180 feet and in height from 2 to 7
feet, and scattered over an area approximately 900
feet long and 430 feet wide.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

29

Figure 8
TECOLOTE RUIN, DISTRIBUTION OF MOUNDS
Our work was confined to Mound A. The north
part of this mound has been carried away by the
river’s washing the bank away beneath it. Here and
there along the perpendicular cliff can be seen cross
sections of walls of horizontal rock masonry.
Because of the fact that it is in immediate danger of
being carried away by the cutting back of the river,
we selected this mound for our excavations. A series
of three rooms on the west side of the mound and
adjacent to the river bank had already been
excavated by two ladies from Pennsylvania during
the summer of 1929. We were unable to learn their
names or whether or not their results have been
published. The walls are still exposed as they were
left. Rooms (a) and (b) are approximately 10 feet
square. Room (c) is approximately 7 by 10 feet.
The north wall of room (c) is still in place; the
north wall of (b) is partially gone and all of the
north wall of (a) has fallen into the river. The walls
of the rooms still standing are between 36 and 40

inches high and 10 inches thick, and made of
brownish sandstone. The most interesting thing
about these rooms is that they are built over an older
and more massive ruin. Cutting diagonally across
and running underneath room (c) about three feet
high, 12 inches thick and of the same material as
the upper walls is a wall but of far superior
workmanship. See wall x, y, z, in Figure 9.
Some 16 feet east of room (c) is room (d) which
was excavated by our party. This room is 15 feet in
diameter and semi-circular. The north part of the
wall has fallen into the river. A segment is gone out
of the part of the wall still standing. (The missing
segment is indicated by a dotted line on Figure 9).
The floor level in (d) was found at a depth of about
30 inches. Something like a half bushel of potsherds
were found on or near the floor level. Among them
there seem to be fragments of three whole pots
which probably can be restored. The sherds for the

30

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

most part are black on white and charred corrugated
ware with an occasional black on red. The floor
was made of small flat rocks covered with adobe.
The major part of our excavations consisted in
digging a longitudinal trench along the crest of the
mound beginning at the river bank and running 52
feet south, and a traverse trench 28 feet long cutting
the longitudinal trench about the center. For
convenience will hereafter refer to k o, l o, m o and
n o, on Figure 9 respectively as north trench, east
trench, south trench, and west trench.

Four boxes of potsherds and artifacts were taken
from the trenches. The material is now in our
workshop awaiting study regarding stratification.
Potsherds were plentiful and of the following kinds;
black on white, incised, and crude grey, coiled
cooking ware, fire blackened. It seems that the
amount of black on white becomes more scarce
towards the bottom.
Artifacts

Aside from potsherds the north trench contained
an
excellent stone hammer, found just below the
Contrary to our expectations, we encountered
but few walls. Three inches below the surface in surface; numerous broken bones of buffalo, deer,
the east trench a wall was found running in a north antelope, turkey and small rodents; three manos
and south direction. On tracing the wall out to the were found at depths of 6, 8, and 40 inches, four
south it was found to end abruptly six feet from the arrow points were found at 12, 20, and 40 inches,
East Trench. On following it to the north it veered a scattering of charcoal and bits of wood, several
northeastwardly to the bank. Four feet from the bank ash beds and a thin ash stratum, a bone needle was
another wall branched off to the east for 14 feet, found at 42 inches; and a turquoise pendant was
and then it turned southeast for 16 feet where it found at a depth of 40 inches. The pendant is almost
ended. The purpose of both these walls is not easy one half inch square and has a hole in one corner.
to explain as they do not seem to be connected with The East trench yielded at a depth of two inches a
a house in any way (see walls f g and f h in Figure well-shaped polished celt, five and one-fourth
9). Trench k m (north and south trenches combined) inches long and two inches wide at the butt end;
was dug through an old dump heap to undisturbed three arrowheads, at depths of 7, 16, and 48 inches.
soil. The original ground level is three and one half A bone awl was found at 40 inches, a shell ornament
feet below the present surface on the north end of at 24 inches, several ash beds, and potsherds were
the trench at the river bank and seven feet below distributed as in the north trench.
the present surface on the south end of
the trench. This indicates that the
original ground level sloped rather
sharply from where the river bank is at
the present toward the south. Judging
from the position of what is left of the
ruins and from the thickness of the dump
heap to the south, it is highly probable
that the main body of the ruins has been
carried away by the river, and that only
the most southern walls remain. Wall f
h was built a long time after the place
was first inhabited, as is evidenced by
the fact that its base at the south end
rests on three and one half feet of dump
heap. Since the wall was built another
three and one half feet of dump heap
Figure 9
was accumulated.
TECOLOTE RUIN, EXCAVATIONS IN MOUND A.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
The South trench, aside from potsherds,
contained a metate at a depth of 16 inches, a mano
at 12 inches, two broken pots at 16 inches, one
black on white and the other a plain, blackened,
cooking bowl. A stone ax was found at 24 inches, a
bone needle at 32 inches, a bone awl at 42 inches,
a fragment of human skull at 40 inches, burnt corn
cobs at 50 inches, an arrowhead at 52 inches, a
burial at 64 inches, a flint knife at 72 inches, and
scattered broken bones and ash deposits. The burial
was in a small oval vault
of flat rocks. The
skeleton
was
in
embryonic position with
the head towards the
southeast. The bones had
deteriorated so badly
that only a few fragments
of skull and four teeth
could be taken out.

31

in diameter and eight inches deep. It was lying on
its side and had been crushed by the large flat stone
covering the 6keleton. Both pots contained bones
of small animals.
Terrace Floor

A peculiar thing about mound A was a layer of
small flat stones about 16 inches below the surface.
The stones were one and a half to two inches thick,
two to twelve inches in
diameter and placed as
one would pave a floor.
The
layer
was
encountered in all the
trenches and could be
traced for fifty or sixty
feet
along
the
perpendicular river
bank. As the layer
occurred outside the
The west trench was
rooms no one was able
the most interesting of all
to advance a plausible
from the standpoint of
theory as to its purpose.
artifacts. Aside from an
It may have been that the
abundance of potsherds,
yard around the pueblo
charcoal, ashes, and
was paved at one time.
Figure
10
animal bones, it
Another feature worth
TECOLOTE
RUIN,
SEGMENT
OF
WALL
contained an arrowhead
noting was that hard
at a depth of 12 inches,
chunks of adobe were
a mano at 24 inches and four bone awls at 24, 26, found here and there in the trenches.
28, and 34 inches. Burnt corn cobs were found at
A great deal more work will have to be done on
24 inches, an arrow shaft polishing stone at 16
the Tecolote ruins before any conclusions can be
inches, a pot handle at 18 inches, a shell pendant at
drawn.
32 inches, and a shell necklace at 40 inches.
Burial
A perfect pre-Pueblo burial was found at 40
inches. The skeleton was lying in embryonic
position on its left side with its head toward the
south and facing west. It was in fair condition but
the skull cracked badly when exposed to the air.
With the skeleton were two mortuary pots. One was
black on white, about 8 inches in diameter and 4
inches deep, with a conventionalized terrapin
design in the bottom, and in perfect condition. The
other was a corrugated cooking pot about five inches

The Tierra Blanca Ruin
On August 14 our party left Tecolote and went
to Hereford, Texas, where we spent four days
excavating. The ruins are located on a place owned
by Mr. Tom Ivy, eight miles east of Hereford on
Tierra Blanca Creek. These ruins were first
reported February 23, 1925 by Mr. Jobe H. Green,
amateur archeologist of Hereford. Mr. Green sent
Dr. H. P. Mera, at present, staff archeologist of the
Laboratory of Anthropology at Santa Fe, a
description of the ruins together with specimens of
potsherds of the true glazed type. Dr. Mera has since

32

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

insisted that Texas Technological College make a
more intensive investigation of the Tierra Blanca
Ruins. In view of the fact that decorated pottery of
true Pueblo type was found in typical slab-stone
ruins, it seemed probable that these ruins might
prove to be the “key” that we have been searching
for to show the real relationship of the Panhandle
culture to the Pueblo culture. Accordingly we made
out plans to work a few days at Hereford. The
Tierra Blanca is a beautiful stream fed by springs.

Artifacts
The first layer of six inches contained four
potsherds, a few flint flakes, several fragments of
mussel shells, a few flakes of obsidian, and a
considerable quantity of broken buffalo bones. Of
the potsherds, three were glazed polychrome and
one was dark grey, plain cooking ware, fireblackened.

The second layer contained sixteen sherds; one
perfect arrow point, one and one fourth inches long;
The ruins are located on a point of the south three scrapers; several flint flakes; two pieces of
bank—on the general plains level—commanding a charcoal; and broken animal bones. Of the potsherds,
view for miles up and down the valley. At this place one was red ware, one white, and fourteen
the creek channel meanders close to the south bank polychrome.
within a hundred yards of the ruins. A strong spring
The third layer reached to the old floor level. It
in the south bank of the creek channel insured fresh
contained nine potsherds, some mussel shells, a flake
water for the ancient inhabitants of the ruins. There
of obsidian, several flint flakes, one reamer, and a small
are about a dozen of the ruins, more or less circular
quantity of broken bones. Of the nine potsherds, six
in shape, varying from six to thirty feet in diameter,
were red and polychrome of the Pueblo type and three
and scattered over about four acres of ground. The
were plain, crude grey of the Canadian type.
buildings were originally laid out in an irregular
fashion with apparently no thought whatever of
Among the potsherds of the Pueblo type mentioned
defense, aside from the fact that they commanded a above, Glazes II, IV, and V have been identified.
splendid view. In appearance and construction,
these ruins are of the true Panhandle type. They are
Conclusion
not nearly so imposing as those on the Tarbox or
Evidence is rather too scant as yet to hazard a
Antelope Creeks, but very similar to hundreds of
conclusion in respect to the finding of Pueblo pottery
ruins to be found in the Canadian valley.
in ruins of typical Canadian architecture. The present
Due to the hardness of the ground we concentrated indications however do not establish any relationship
our work on one ruin, the most promising of the group. between the slab-stone culture of the Panhandle and
It was approximately 23 feet in diameter north and the Pueblo Culture of New Mexico. It is our opinion
south, and 27 feet east and west. The floor level was that Pueblo Indians much later made temporary camps
from 16 to 18 inches below the surface, most of which at these old slab-stone ruins on the Tierra Blanca for
we almost completely uncovered. For convenience we the purpose of hunting buffalo. Conditions were ideal
divided the room into six sections like a round pie cut there for such a camp. It is probable that their selection
in six parts. Section I was toward the southwest, section of this site was due to its fine water supply, the
II towards the south, and so on around. We took the proximity to buffalo hunting grounds and the fact that
soil out in 6 inch layers.
these houses of an earlier people afforded them some
shelter. If this be correct, we are as far from explaining
the Canadian and Pueblo relationship as we were
before.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

33

TEXAS COASTAL POTTERY
BY GEORGE C. MARTIN
The surfaces of many campsites in the coastal
section of Texas lying between Matagorda and Baffin
bays are littered with lumps of hard-baked and burned
clay. The pieces are irregular in size and shape, and
when found on the surface are usually much weathered.
Some show actual contact with fire and soot, others
being merely baked with heat.
In my early investigations of these campsites the
clay lumps were accounted for as the result of
campfires built directly on clay surfaces, but I began
to find them in places where they could not have been
created in such a manner. They were numerous in the
shifting sand-hills south of Falfurias and plentiful on
the sandy campsites on the north end of Padre island,
on the Live Oak Peninsula, and at Ingleside. They were
found on the surface and in the topsoil of blackland
campsites on Copano bay, and on Oso and Petronella
creeks. Occasionally they were found in shell-heaps.
In many cases they were in sand five, ten, even fifteen
feet above any clay strata, and on Padre island were a
mile or more from any clay. They contain no tempering
shell as do the sherds from pottery and were not residue
lumps of the paste from which pottery was
manufactured. Even when found on clay surfaces their
content of sand appears to be far greater than that of
the clay on which they rested.
Some might be accounted for as the remains of
clay coatings of fish cooked under the coals of fires,
such method of preparation being witnessed, and the
fish partaken of, by Mr. Sam Allardyce at a small Indian
encampment in the vicinity of Matagorda Bay in the
early eighteen-seventies, but it is doubtful if such
coatings would have been baked to such an extent
that they would not have long since disintegrated in
the moisture to which they have been subjected.
Manufacture of Pottery
Altogether, the lumps were very puzzling and the
reason for their existence did not begin to dawn upon
me until a freshly eroded bank on Oso creek, Nueces

county, yielded numerous unweathered baked and
burned lumps many of which had one smooth side.
Some of these surfaces were convex, others concave.
Several fitted roughly together and had certainly
formed part of a cast of the inside of a pot. Evidently
they had something to do with the manufacture of
pottery, but, there was still not enough evidence to
indicate the why and wherefor of them. Conclusive
evidence of the method of their creation and the reason
therefor was yielded by a site on a small island in the
Playa Lodosa, Aransas county (Site 81, Martin and
Potter “Preliminary Archaelogical Survey”). A heavy
downpour had deeply eroded the banks just previous
to one of my visits to the site and in one spot I found a
bed of baked clay-lumps in place. Other lumps and
numerous sherds were scattered over the newly
exposed surface. Where the lumps were bedded in
place they showed that they had once formed one solid
bed that had been crumbled by heat, and in the center
thereof were three hemi-spherical depressions wherein
the bases of clay vessels had once stood. Many of the
scattered loose pieces showed the convex and concave
surfaces previously noted on specimens from the bank
of Oso creek. Beyond question I had found a place
where pottery had been fired by Karankawan Indians
or by some coastal tribe which made pottery
corresponding exactly with that found on known
Karankawan sites.
Process of Firing Pottery
Close study of the refuse permits me to describe
the process of firing which was as follows:—After the
vessels had been shaped and dried, a shallow hole
was dug into the soil and the bottom of it thickly
covered with a specially prepared mixture of
dampened sand and clay put together in such
proportions that it could be readily crumbled after it
was baked. The pots which were to be fired were set
into this flooring and more of the mixed clay and sand
was introduced into the hole and packed around, in,
and over the vessels. The entire mass was then

34

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

permitted to dry and fires were built over it and
kept burning until the desired result was attained.
After cooling the mass was picked to pieces, the
pots were taken out and the sandy clay removed
from their interiors in small lumps. The burned and
sooty specimens were those which had come into
direct contact with the fires on the surface, those
merely baked being from the interior of the mass
and the insides of the pots.
Confirmatory evidence that this was the actual
method of firing was found in the form of potsherds
from this same site which were given to Mr. Samuel
Woolford, connected with the Witte Museum, San
Antonio, for examination. Mr. Woolford succeeded in
fitting together and reconstructing about one-fifth of a
bowl and was surprised to find that the upper portion
was of a deep red color shading three to four inches
below the edge into dark brown. No better proof that
the heat had been applied from above the vessel could
possibly be desired. Some of the local clays contain
much oxide of iron and when pastes are made of such
the vessels attain a deep red color where the heat is
greatest, shading into dark and light brown where less
heat has been applied. Evidence that the practice of
filling vessels with packed sandy clay before burning
obtained as far inland as San Antonio was also found
by Mr. Woolford in the form of a cast of the interior of
the neck of a water-bottle of burned clay. This cast
was found in the soil in Brackenridge Park, in the
confines of the city.
Earthenware Handles
Gatschet states, in his work on the Karankawa
Indians, that pots with handles were unknown to this
tribe. This is incorrect. Earthen handles were rare, but
are occasionally found on campsites known to have
been occupied by Indians classified as Karankawan.
Specimens are included in the George C. Martin

Texas Coastal Collection in the Witte Museum, San
Antonio. Of this type of handle the four known
existing specimens show that they were attached
vertically. They were made by rolling the paste
between the hands until it attained the desired length
and thickness. Holes were made in the walls of the
vessel to which the handles were to be attached
and the two ends thrust through these to the interior
whereupon the ends were expanded by pressure
and merged into the walls of the pot with moistened
fingers. The final process was to mold the materials
of the handles and of the outside of the vessel
together by moistening and rubbing. Actually the
handles were riveted to the pot.
Handles of Fiber or Hide
The common type of handle used in the coastal
section of Texas was made of fiber or hide and run
through holes bored in the sides of the vessel and
twisted. Occasionally the holes were made in the walls
before the material had dried, pushed through with a
twig or fishbone, but the common method was drilling
after the vessels had been fired. Sherds show these
holes were made commonly about one half inch from
the edge. Sometimes only one hole was made on each
side of the vessel, sometimes two holes to the side,
these one-half to one inch apart. Cooking pots were
used in direct contact with the fire and when suspended
the fiber or hide handles were thickly covered with
clay which prevented burning. Such coverings of
handles were of a temporary nature as they did not
usually come closely enough into contact with the heat
to become permanently baked, but one specimen
about four inches in length and showing the impression
of a twisted cord having passed through it was found
by the writer on a Copano bay site in Aransas county.
Edges of potsherds that have been drilled for suspension
are quite common on coastal sites.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

35

POTTERY OF THE EL PASO REGION
BY EILEEN E. ALVES
The pottery found in the vicinity of El Paso,
Texas, presents an amazing number of different
types. A collection of sherds made from one of the
wind swept, water washed village sites, about half
a mile long by a quarter of a mile wide, situated
within fifty miles of El Paso, will include a
representation of types known in Arizona, New
Mexico, and Old Mexico, as well as
types less widely scattered.
The sherds described in this article
are surface finds only, no known
stratigraphic work of any importance
having been done in this locality. Very
few refuse piles, or remains of buildings
suitable for stratigraphic work, have
been found in the ruins near here.
This paper is a mere statement of
pottery found, and does not pretend to
do more than report the many types of
pottery scattered on mesa and plain
within a fifty miles radius of El Paso.
Red and Black on Brown
A red and black on brown pottery is
found here in the greatest abundance,
Plate 5
POTTERY SITES, AND POTTERY
OF EL PASO DISTRICT
1. Campsite San Adreas Mountains,
Jornada del Muerto Range Reserve.
2. Excavations at Hot Wells, Texas.
3. Mimbres pottery.
4. Chihuahua Pottery.
5. Chihuahua Pottery, polychrome.
6. Chuperdero Black and White
Pottery
Jug,
Three
Rivers, New Mexico.
7. Stone bowl, and animal effigy.
8. Bowl.

sharing with Chuperdero as being the dominant type
of pottery in this region. It is called El Paso Black
and Red on Brown, or El Paso Polychrome.
A whole bowl found near Newman, New
Mexico, contained several beads, twelve
beautifully made arrow points, pieces of asbestos,

36

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

and two lumps of some other mineral. The black
and red geometrical figures on this coarse brown
bowl make a rough but handsome appearance.
This pottery is found in great quantities as far
south as Casas Grande in Mexico, but seems to fade
out towards Three Rivers, New Mexico.
Plate 6
POTTERY OF EL PASO DISTRICT

Chuperdero
Another common example here is the black on
white pottery called Chuperdero; very different
from the beautiful black on white Mimbres. This
Chuperdero pottery is a familiar type of sherd on
our old village sites. The square base, the grey color
and the rough striated interiors as if done by a coarse
brush, and the rather crude decorations
are among its characteristics.

1. El Paso Red and Black on Brown.
2. Top: Chihuahua.
Middle: Chuperdero.
Bottom: Mimbres.
3. Top: Corrugated and coiled ware.
Bottom, left: Middle Gila Polychrome, variation.
Bottom, right: Little Colorado, variation.
4. Miscellaneous; handles, coarse, brown, and buff ware.

A few sherds, apparently of this
same ware, found at Hot Wells Ranch
had a very delicate pink wash over the
interior. Otherwise it resembled the
same black on white Chuperdero. Most
likely it was simply an individual idea
of the potter making it, without any
significance.
Little Colorado and Middle Gila
Polychrome.
These two kinds of pottery or very
close relations are found in sufficient
quantities to put them out of the stray or
intrusive class. They are usually
represented in every village site
although in very small quantities.
Mimbres and Casas Grande
Polychrome
Mimbres is ordinarily found at
every site, which is true in a much
lesser degree with Casas Grande or
Chihuahua polychrome. It is generally
conceded that Mimbres is the older of
the two. The clear cut designs of black
on white, the smooth interior, and the
naturalistic or geometric figures are of
extreme beauty.
Three fourths of a wonderful bowl
was found along the Ruidoso River in
the White Mountains. It had a
naturalistic design of a mountain sheep
filled in with a very complicated
geometric pattern. This may tend to
carry Mimbres culture rather further

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

37

east than was at first suspected. Perfect pieces of
In line, color and material Chihuahua stands
this pottery are found in great numbers near Deming, easily first, but Mimbres runs it a very close second.
New Mexico, the center of this culture. There are
several fine collections here gathered from the
Miscellaneous
immediate vicinity of Deming—one of which
Corrugated and red ware are also found as well
contains a fine example of Mimbres polychrome
as many incised pieces. Painted birds are reported,
which is very rare.
and also several pottery animals. At the Hueco
Tanks a small clay arm was found with a bracelet
Chihuahua, or Casas Grande Polychrome
around it, very similar to some from San Juan de
Of Chihuahua pottery, the sherds mostly found Teotihucan far to the south, near the City of Mexico.
are the polychrome painted ware, beautifully made
Recent acquisitions to our collection are four
of fine clay, and very artistically decorated. This
food bowls in red and black, and a red on terracotta
ware is generally conceded to have reached the
bowl, all from our district—and apparently rather
high water mark in prehistoric ceramics.
rare.

38

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

ARCHAEOLOGICAL NOTES OF THE BIG BEND REGION
BY VICTOR J. SMITH
During the past few years, studies and surveys
conducted by the University of Texas and several
Texas scientific societies have established the fact
that Texas is an area containing a great variety of
cultural evidence, destined to become outstanding
in its contributions of knowledge concerning
prehistoric man in North America. Texas has within
its boundaries climatic conditions that range from
almost tropical to conditions in many respects equal
to the northern portion of the temperate zone. This
paper deals with the Big Bend area, that section of
the State lying west of the Pecos River
The importance of the Big Bend, or Trans-Pecos
section, as an archeological field may readily be
visualized if a map is consulted and its relationship
with districts to the east and north determined,
together with the fact that it either borders on, or is
a part of, the Southwestern Division.
Climatic conditions in the Big Bend are more
nearly like those of the Southwestern states than
other parts of Texas to the east. Naturally such semiarid conditions have been favorable to the
preservation of specimens which, in many sections
would have long ago perished. Such dry weather
conditions, together with a rugged topography, offer
numerous sites where fragile materials have been
preserved in a bone dry state for many years.
Mountains in the vicinity range from 300 to 3,000
feet above the adjoining plains or valleys with their
peaks from 5,000 to 9,000 feet above sea level.
The rock shelters found in these mountains will be
mentioned in a later paragraph. The many caves in
limestone or “lava” rock, however, offered unusual
opportunities for shelter; the mountains provided
conditions of refuge not usual to a level country;
game abounded in the section; and springs and
mountain streams, always provided a much more
sure supply of water to the Indian than a casual
observance of the country today would lead one to
believe.

So far as possible accurate records have been
made covering sites in this section of the State. It
is important that complete ones be secured before
the damage or entire loss of materials make
investigations impossible. For example,
pictographs in certain localities are being rapidly
obliterated by vandals, and treasure hunters are
digging into much valuable scientific material with
no thought of the havoc being wrought to
anthropological research. The records referred to
include field notes, maps, drawings, photographs,
and museum specimens. Sites from which such
evidence has been gathered number 168 and range
in size or importance from small open camps to
extensive sites indicating habitation for possibly
thousands of years.
Open Camps
In a discussion of open camp sites, it should be
said that the Big Bend is known as an Apache
country and that the Mescalero branch of the tribe
is supposed to have occupied the section as far back
as authentic history can trace. The very geographic
location of the area, however, has always made it
subject to forays, migrations, and hunting
expeditions. History records the fact that the
Comanches from east of the Pecos river made
inroads into the Apache territory. As Texas became
more settled, these inroads became more frequent
until finally the Davis and Chisos Mountains
became the scene of the last stand of the Indian in
Texas, the last group of any numerical importance
being driven out of the Big Bend in 1870.
Many of the open camp sites show evidence of
scant use, therefore, these may have been occupied
by the Comanches, who were unused to the rock
shelters and preferred tents with other forms of
prairie living. There can be little doubt that the
Comanches, when traveling quickly as they often
did used the caves for temporary occupation. Types

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

39

Plate 7
BIG BEND AREA
1. A typical dry rock shelter. The rock in the mouth of this cave is almost completely covered with
“V” shaped lines.
2. Pictographs. Aqua Frio Bluff, Brewster County, Texas. These interesting figures all in red.
Small figures about 7" in height. With the exception of the horse and rider here shown, only one
additional site has yielded evidences of white influence among the pictographs of the Big Bend.
This illustration also shows the man with inverted bow which occurs in many widely scattered
localities.
3. A mortar with fragments of pestles found near. This hole is eight inches in diameter and
eighteen inches deep. It is the most perfect specimen known to the writer. “Volcano Village Site,”
Jeff Davis County.
4. Mortars at Molino Cliff, Brewster County. These represent two of the sixteen on the elevated
shelf of rock. The marks of the human body are still clearly visible.

40

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

of artifacts yielded by the open camps are: metates,
manos, scrapers, arrowheads, and some rocks with
lines or inscriptions. Rock circles still mark the
location of tepees. Burnt rock mounds are found in
abundance but as a rule there is no evidence of
extensive camping in the immediate vicinity.

in all of the larger caves and the bones of deer,
bear, and antelope are rather common. Implements
made from bone are restricted to the awl type.

The rock shelters which have been mentioned
are found in canyons, at the faces of bluffs, or at the
top of the talus. The most important of these sites
take the form of long open shelters with overhanging
rocks which afford protection, or they are caves
extending back into the rock. All of the caves, save
a few with irregular rock floors, are covered with
litter from six inches to six feet in depth. The last
mentioned type of shelter varies from ten to thirty
feet in width at the mouth and from ten to fifty feet
in depth. Such shelters, of course, afford unusually
good protection from the weather (many of them
face south). Indians often added to the comfort and
safety of these shelters by building walls in front
or by closing undesirable openings with rough
masonry or rock piling.

The characteristic pestle is circular in cross
section (usually broken when found) and generally
from eleven to fourteen inches long when
undamaged. The point or nose is the distinguishing
part, being round, and slightly pointed with an
evident worn surface. At one location where the
rock was rather hard red sandstone, the smooth,
almost polished, surface of the rock indicated
clearly long contact with the human body just as
may be observed at the mouth of narrow caves.
This glossy surface indicated that the squaw sat
flat with legs on each side of the mortar hole while
she did the laborious work at the mill.

Grinding Devices

These are the mortar and pestle, and the metate
Practically all camps, regardless of type, are and mano. Measurements of hundreds of mortar
situated within a mile of a water supply.
holes made in living rocks indicate that the average
diameter is seven and one-half inches and the
average depth is fourteen inches. Often there is a
Rock Shelters
Swallows have nested, and both wild and “side rest” of shallow depth. The cross section
domestic animals have lived in the shelters and shape of the typical mortar hole is like that of a
caves for ages, thus contributing much to the cave conical projectile. It is our conclusion that, once a
deposits. Also rocks have fallen from the roof in depth of fourteen or more inches was reached,
many instances; and there are large accumulations another such grinding hole was developed, starting
of ashes which treasure hunters have often “stirred,” at some gas hole or depression in the rock. This
all of which produced a” condition making accurate change was made necessary because of the
investigation difficult. Large masses of bulky difficulty in securing rock pounding stones or
materials must be moved as well as an exceedingly pestles of sufficient length. It is probably true also
fine dry dust constantly to be contended with. But that stones tied to stick handles may have been used
the very condition that has just been described has in some of the seventeen to twenty inch holes. The
made possible the preservation of some very size range o£ these grinding “mills” vary from the
unusual and fragile types of specimens—available smallest smooth pocket to a maximum of 12” in
only because of the exceeding dryness and possible diameter by 24” deep.
chemical assistance secured by the presence of
In these mortars such food as mesquite beans,
ashes.
acorns, corn, and similar materials were pulverized.

Rock Shelter Artifacts
The bones of animals, as might be expected, are
found in great profusion—split bones being found

Metates and Manos
Almost as common as the mortar and pestle are
the many metates and mano stones to be found in
all types of camps and among excavated specimens.
A typical metate is about twelve or fourteen inches

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
wide, sixteen to eighteen inches long, has a concave
surface dished about 1 1/2” to 2” deep, and weighs
from 25 to 175 pounds, according to thickness. The
texture varies from a very coarse lava formation to
a very smooth surface and exceptions to the
preceding range to huge specimens in living rock,
deep basins going entirely through the stone, and
exceedingly heavy artifacts.

41

place for dressing and working upon the skins of
animals.
Artifacts of Wood

We have believed that the collection of wooden
artifacts is much more important than that of stone,
even though the effort involved is greater and the
results achieved are always much less extensive
The typical mano, or grinding stone, is an oval and showy.
stone which fits a large hand well and has the
A brief tabulation of such articles of wood
general shape of a cake of soap.
follows:
(a) Fire sticks. These are of soft punky wood,
about 3/8” in diameter with the characteristic holes
Other stone artifacts include a variety of
allowing air. Much fine bark and vegetable matter
weapons. Almost 90% of the arrowheads or points
accompany the cave finds.
found in the open are of rough material and
represent rather unskilled or hasty workmanship.
(b) A “wooden knife” or shaft straightener.
No flint mines of importance have been found and This is a single specimen which might formerly
it is assumed that this shortage of material accounts have been an atl-atl converted into another
for the type of craftsmanship. A number of very implement because of damage. The size, material
finely wrought flints, however, have been found, (polished post oak), shape, and characteristic
notably those from the “Santiago Peak Grave” and carving leads to the above conclusion. The diagonal
the “Livermore Cache.” At this latter place 1250 hole in this specimen is about one inch in diameter
museum specimens were unearthed, most of which and is highly polished from constant rubbing.
are small points representing good material and
(c) Sharpened sticks. The diameter varies from
workmanship.
l/2” to 3/8” and they are a foot or more long.
A few spearheads indicate nothing unusual as Possibly they were used as forks or skewers.
to type and but a single axe or stone hatchet
(d) Sticks wrapped about with fiber string. One
probably represent an imported specimen. I should
of these specimens was wrapped with fiber bristles
mention, however, a single specimen of unusual
indicating its use as a crude brush.
interest. This is a small hafted hatchet, still set into
an agave stalk of 2” diameter; the handle was burned
(e) Large sticks placed for the protection of
off a short distance from the blade, which was of burials or caches. Sometimes bent and tied at the
good quality flint.
top. Larger pieces were used for firewood.
Other Artifacts

Scrapers and Knives

(f) Shafts. Possibly used with the atl-atl.

(g) Throwing sticks (atl-atl). Typical size, 5We may close this brief discussion of stone
8” thick, 1” wide, and 14” long.
implements by mentioning the knife and scraper.
The former is found in exceedingly crude form and
Artifacts of Fiber
the latter is usually of the turtle back type and
exhibits a variety of sizes and degrees of
Almost of equal importance with the above are
workmanship. It is believed that the scrapers and the materials made from the fiber of desert plants.
knives were used in the preparation of skins. Quite
(a) Baskets are largely of coiled bowl shaped
often a large rock surface over a large area will be
types and without decoration. The largest sizes are
found smooth and glossy, indicating a probable
nine inches high and twenty inches in diameter.

42

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

As this is being written additional types of smaller
baskets have been placed in the Museum but, as
yet, neither classified nor studied.
(b) Sacks, nets, storage sacks, and containers.
A variety of woven articles evidently used to carry
children, store or carry food, or for the burial of
infants. Similar in weave to the mats but of finer
texture and sometimes openwork resembling a
coarse fish net.

Ornaments
Another important phase of ethnological study
is that of the ornament, since it represents the most
advanced progress made by Neolithic man.
Possibly beads form the most important group in a
study of ornaments as they relate to the section under
discussion. The specimens collected range from a
single piece to as many as 70 found in one grave.
These beads fall, according to size, shape, and
material, into the following groups:

(c) Mats. Several types of weave and edging.
(d) Sandals. With thongs, vary in sizes from
child to man. Most of these specimens are badly
worn but a variety of weaving methods may be
observed. No leather footgear was found.
(e) String and rope work. Hundreds of short
pieces of string have been found in the caves. These
range in size from 1-16” in diameter to ½”. Two
types of manufacturing include a three strand spiral
twisted string and a three strand plait of smaller
string.

1. Tubular, cylindrical—thigh bone of fowl.
2. Short cylindrical bone—quite smooth and
sometimes polished.
3. Discoidal beads—bones.
4. Round and Oval beads—turquoise.
5. Seed beads—elliptical shape—holes size
of pin.

In some cases beads are found strung on a cord
but usually the string has long since rotted away.
One of the tubular bone ornaments is marked with
A large number of chewed fiber “cuds” often a tabulation consisting of nineteen small marks or
showing the marks of human teeth, seems to scores. Turquoise is found near Valentine, Texas.
indicate that the fiber was softened in this manner
Pendants
before being twisted into string.
Large numbers of specimens include more
roughly made materials used for tying. While there
is no fishing in the district away from the Rio
Grande, some of the finer materials suggests a net,
possibly for catching rabbits.
Other Cave Artifacts
Other items in a typical list of cave finds include
charcoal, ochre, crude salt, paint balls, gourds (one
18” high and decorated, evidently a grain storage),
small corn cobs, firewood, cactus hulls, ashes,
acorns, Spanish walnut shells, flint chippings, rocks
used about the camp fire, crayon, and coils of fiber.
These coils, sometimes with strings holding the
material in place, resemble pot rests or basket rests
but may have been merely materials held in storage.
The very limited pottery finds indicate late
imported specimens or only the crudest beginnings
of pottery work.

Closely associated with beads as ornaments are
pendants, two classes of which have been observed.
The largest group in size is typically of a triangular
shape wrought from a rather soft white stone. Next
in size are the ovate type varying from ¾” to 1½”
in length and about 3-32” thick. These are usually
made from materials resembling shell but they do
not reflect colors like mother-of- pearl.
Charms
Another group of specimens border upon a
classification between ornaments and pictographs.
These are charms, pocket pieces, and problematical
articles. Among them are found a stone article about
the shape of a small doughnut; the shoulder blade
of a deer inscribed with tiny black figures of snakes,
animals, and conventional lines; a hemispherical
stone carved with lines indicating the eyes, nose,
and mouth of a man; flat oval stone objects with
painted figures; and polished pebbles.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

43

Plate 8
PICTOGRAPHS AND PETROGLYPHS, BIG BEND AREA
1. Pictographs at Painted Springs near Dryden. Ancient hand prints are shown dimly as compared
with more recent drawings.
2. Pictographs at Painted Springs near Dryden. Sun symbol, men, animals, conventional symbols,
and an eagle with outstretched wings and body in various colors of concentric circles.
3. Lobo Petroglyphs near Valentine. This huge rock (note two foot rule) is covered with
conventional symbols which continue around the edge and over the top.
4. Pictographs in Nation’s Canyon, Jeff Davis County. The tall snake figures are in red and the
stripes to the left are in white orange, and red. At the base of the cliff a shoulder blade of a deer
was found, upon which had been painted tiny pictures representing snakes, a mountain goat, and
conventional figures
5. Lobo Petroglyphs near Valentine. This is said to be a snake dance figure.
6. Lobo Petroglyphs near Valentine. The drawings have no pigment but secure their tone by the
freshness of the rock removed as compared with the older surface. No chalk or other material was
used to bring out the contrast in taking these photographs.

44

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
Pictographs

The paintings more commonly found are
pictographs. It should be said the Big Bend is a
fertile field for the study of pictographs. Their
abundance is probably due to an excellent supply
of cinnabar and other pigments and partly because
of sheltered rock surfaces which have preserved
the drawings. Twenty-three sites have been
recorded which have pictographs in varying
numbers. Most of the pigments are red (cinnabar).
Other colors, in order of numbers and importance,
are: Orange, white, yellow and black. In many cases
crayons were used to apply the color, in others a
brush. Handprints were sometimes sprayed from
the mouth or the hand dipped for the process.
Two great divisions include the types of
drawings used. These are the geometric forms in
one group and the figures of men and animals in
another. In the former are found dots, circles,
rectangular shapes, lines, arcs, spirals, triangular
shapes, and many elaborate combinations, possibly
representing maps or conventionalized forms
conveying messages to those familiar with their key.
Animals, sometimes most realistic in their
expression of action, form a large group and the
human figure another. Hunting scenes in which both
appear are frequently observed but weapons of the
hunt are primitive and not those of European
influence. In fact, with the exception of but two
locations, one of these quite minor, there is to be
found no white influence among the pictographs
messages left by ancient man. Speculation as to the
age of the pictographs is fruitless but evidence

indicates that they reach back to basket maker times.
Some locations reveal old painting superimposed
upon one or two layers still more ancient.
Petroglyphs
Of still greater age are the petroglyphs,
laboriously pecked upon the rock by hand, which
are often so old that the once fresh lines are so
dimmed with age that they are traced with difficulty.
Only two petroglyph locations are important, but
these are extensive and present valuable fields for
study.
Pottery
It may be said with some certainty that the Big
Bend Indians did not make or use pottery to any
extent.
Basket Makers
This brings us to our most important conclusion,
namely, that there is constantly accumulating
evidence in the deeper finds representing a culture
so closely resembling Basket Maker that
anthropologists are warranted in considering a
major portion of the Big Bend well within the area
admitted as basket maker territory. Space forbids a
detailed tabulation of evidence bearing upon this
point but future investigations will show the same
evidences over an area extending to the east as far
as the Devil’s River and the Pecos Valley.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

45

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF
THE NORTH PANHANDLE OF TEXAS
BY FLOYD V. STUDER
This report briefly lists the results of the
Plate 9
archeological researches of the writer in the Texas
TYPICAL POST BASKET MAKER SITES,
Panhandle region during the past twenty-four years.
NORTH PANHANDLE OF TEXAS
During this period 110 major ruins have been 1. Large rectangular room in center, outlined by
located and platted. A careful record of the minor
projecting stones showing outside walls.
artifacts has also been kept.
2. Group of rooms. Several walls outlined by
projecting stones,
The section of the State covered by this report
3.
Small group of rooms on rim of flat topped hill
is characterized by high level plains which are cut
overlooking Canadian river.
by east and west drainages of the Canadian and
other streams on which sandstone,
limestone and other materials
outcrop, all of which were used
extensively by the pre-historic
inhabitants. While the Plains are
generally bare of trees, the river
courses are usually lined with
cottonwood, hackberry, willow and
chinaberry trees; with an
abundance of mesquite trees on the
Plains along the various tributaries
of the larger rivers. Wild animal
life and game are abundant in this
area, and the bones of these are
found in practically every site.
The prehistoric ruins are
characterized by a type of location
which apparently was chosen
primarily for protection from
warring tribes and the elements.
Even a convenient water supply
was sacrificed, though most of the
streams carry water throughout the
year and numerous springs are
found.
The general characteristics of
each type of site in this section will
be given, with accompanying
artifacts, rather than a specific
description of any particular site.

46

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
Post Basket Maker

Many Post Basket Maker sites
recorded show later occupation by
the Plains tribes. Many of the Post
Basket Maker sites are entirely
covered, their presence being
indicated by sherds, flint, etc.,
carried to the surface by rodents.
The Post Basket Maker sites are
characterized by masonry and
pottery. Some of the sites consist
of only three rooms; one site is
known to have 55 rooms and the
rooms in all of the sites will vary
from six or seven feet across to
twenty or thirty feet, and are usually
square or rectangular in shape.
Typical Post Basket Maker
pottery is coarse, heavy ware,
tempered usually with mica, but
sand and shell were also used as
temper. All of it is of the “basket”
type, showing the basket weave
impressions. Occasionally, thin
types are found.
The inside of the pottery is
smooth and is covered both inside
and out with a slip which is most
frequently either of a dull greenish
grey or black, and less frequently
of a light red. The majority of the
sherds are heavily blackened with
soot from use.
In only two of these sites has
typical pueblo pottery, as identified
Plate 10
POST BASKET MAKER SITES
1. Floor in Post Basket Maker site. Shows fireplace adjoining ash pit, and post holes.
2. Small cist adjoining Post Basket Maker site. Three feet in diameter and 20" deep. Resting on a
layer of stones the size of one’s fist, and immediately below the stones showing on the surface,
were two sections of antlers, approximately 7" long. Beneath these, was fill consisting of loose
soil. 3. Round mortar holes in stone ledge.
4. Four superimposed floors in Post Basket Maker site. In each instance, the floor of packed and
smoothed clay was laid on top of debris filled with ash and charcoal, bones, and artifacts.
5. Wall of Post Basket Maker site. Two rows of vertically laid stones.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

47

by Dr. A. V. Kidder and Dr. Warren K. Moorehead, is 110 miles Southwest of Amarillo, and outside
been found. At one of these sites, No. 63, four of the Canadian river area.
superimposed floor levels have been found.
The site covers several acres, and the large
The masonry of the Post Basket Maker sites is hearths and heavy debris, suggest long occupation.
generally of the vertically laid wall type, consisting
Black on white pottery, and coiled and finger
of two parallel rows of stone slabs set on edge with
decorated types occur; also a red slip, all distinctly
the centers filled with adobe and stones. The
pueblo and not Post Basket Maker.
outside stones are from three to eight inches thick,
and sometimes measure as much as thirty-six by
Obsidian objects, one copper point, and a copper
forty-eight inches. Some of the walls are only 12 ring, buffalo bones, and a complete buffalo skull
inches thick, and others are 40, the average being were found.
30 inches.
Here, an unusually large number of scrapers
The roofs were evidently of thatch covered with smaller than those appearing at the typical Post
adobe, as indicated by frequently found remains Basket Maker sites were found, and incidentally,
of burned clay which 6how distinct marks of reeds the largest scraper known in this part of the State.
and small twigs.
Plains Sites
The floors of the rooms are of clay, with fire
pits of either plaster or adobe, or of small flat stones
The Plains sites are of historical occurrence, and
in the form of hearths. Cists and post holes are also frequently are located at old Post Basket Maker
frequently found in the floors.
sites, where the foundation stones were used for
hearths and rings of stones show where they held
The artifacts accompanying this type of site are:
down tepee edges.
Metates and manos, beveled projectile points and
knives and double beveled knives; notched knives;
Pottery found at the Plains sites is a smooth
scrapers; drills; and in one site, a tubular pipe.
coarse ware, rather thin without decoration and
usually tempered with coarse clean sand.
Bone, flakes of flint, charcoal and ashes, all
appear in abundance. Obsidian flakes are frequent.
At a Plains site four miles from Post Basket
Maker Site No. 5-G. C. at the head of a spring,
Pottery; bone implements; incised bones;
many artifacts and fragments of flint, hearths,
basketry; corn, mussel shell, hammer stones of flint
buffalo bones and charcoal were found. Most
and quartzite, and abrading stones of “rottenstone,”
significant of all, ashes, flint, charcoal, and buffalo
are also found.
bones occur in a high embankment adjoining a
At one Post Basket Maker site there is horizontal small stream fourteen feet below the soil surface.
masonry, consisting of a wall four feet high in the
The typical Plains sites artifacts are:
corner of a room. The other masonry at this site,
which is near the New Mexico line, is vertical. At
Plains pottery (not found at all of the sites);
another site, No. 28, one room shows horizontal metates, of thinner slabs of stone than the Post
masonry over vertical masonry. There are four Basket Maker, but of the same material. All
layers of horizontal stones in evidence.
projectile points, knives, and scrapers are heavier
and coarser than the typical Post Basket Maker
types.
Sand Dune Site
One site unusual to the Panhandle section is
Small hearths, bone, and large scrapers are
located in a large drifting sand dune, the dune is characteristic of the Plains sites.
about 20 feet high and is close to shallow water. It

48

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
Rock Shelters

Rock Circles

The rock shelters in this area, so far as known
Other types of burials were surrounded by small
have not been used for habitations, but in them circles of vertically set stones. Artifacts are only
pictographs and petroglyphs appear. Also the burial found in some of these, while in others there are
described in this paper.
no skeletal remains.
However, a rock ledge facing south, 8 to 15 feet
high and extending for several hundred feet, in the
immediate vicinity of the shelter in which the burial
was found, has been extensively used. This ledge
shows a heavy accumulation of debris along its
entire base and there is evidence of a Post Basket
Maker site in connection with it, as well as a Plains
site.
A fine supply of water near at hand was probably
the main at traction, as well as the protection the
site provided.
Cliff Dwelling
At the Post Basket Maker site in the vicinity of
the location just described, a part of the ledge has
been utilized as a room wall, similar to the cliff
dwelling sites to the west of this section.
Burials
Three or four types of burial occur within this
area.
Post Basket Maker
Some of these are found within the abandoned
rooms of ruins, as at the Handley ruins. Other
similar burials are within close proximity to the
various Post Basket Maker sites.
Rock Shelter
A few rock shelter burials are found, that near
Post Basket Maker Site No. 15 was completely
sealed with horizontal masonry. Pack rat holes had
caused water to run into this burial, but several bone
fragments were found and there were quite a
number of pieces of typical Post Basket Maker
pottery.

Rock Mounds
Some burials occur with the skeletal remains
entirely covered with a small mound of loose
stones.
Recent
One burial accompanied by metal artifacts and
glass beads was found in soil, along a small water
course. There were no stones about the grave.
A similar burial was also found accompanied
by metal artifacts and glass beads, but entirely
enclosed with small stones and resting on stone.
Pictographs and Petroglyphs
Both incised and beautifully painted rock
pictures are found in this area, a great number of
them occurring at the rock shelter site described in
this paper.
Flint Mine
Flint mines have been located at two places in
this section.
Site No. 58 is an unusually large agatized
dolomite quarry. Most of the flint is in brilliant
colors. Evidence indicates that thousands of tons
of this material have been taken out. A bird’s eye
view from a distance shows the top and sides of
the mesa to be pock-marked with large excavations,
which extend for six tenths of a mile. Many
workshops adjoin the site for a distance of a mile
or more.
Such mines are not very plentiful in Northwest
Texas, although there are several outcroppings of
agatized dolomite on the north aide of the Canadian
river, but none of them were worked so extensively
as this one. This prehistoric quarry is located within
a mile and a half of the large Post Basket Maker

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

49

Site No. 28. There are also many Plains sites spear heads are found made from this material.
adjoining the quarry.
Various types of scrapers, knives, hammer stones,
axes, awls, hoes, and lances made from the same
There is another primitive mine of some
material occur throughout this section. But there
consequence between Silverton and Clarendon.
are also found artifacts made from other materials.
This agatized dolomite appears to be easily worked
as many projectiles from small points to the largest
Plate 11
NORTH PANHANDLE OF TEXAS ARTIFACTS
1. Typical Metate from Post Basket Maker site
2. Moccasin Last.
a. Side view.
b. View from above.
c. Sole.
3. Typical Post Basket Maker projectile points.
4. Typical knives, Post Basket Maker sites.

50

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

RECENT ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESEARCHES
IN THE ABILENE SECTION
BY DR. CYRUS N. RAY
PREHISTORIC TEXAS BURIALS
SANDSTONE RECORDS OF ANCIENT MEN AND ANIMALS
The Stone Grave People

Another Stone Grave

Late in 1930 Mr. W. J. Van London and the
writer were kindly granted permission to make
archeological examination of the De La Fosse ranch
by the owner, Mr. George De La Fosse. At this
place Hubbard Creek turns north and crosses the
paved highway between the towns of Albany and
Breckenridge, Texas at a place ten miles west of
Breckenridge. On the west side of the bridge and
on the south side of the road the ground rises
gradually at first, and then steeply to a high rocky
ridge which parallels the east and west course of
the creek at this place for a mile or more. All along
the foot of the hill are gullies and where these cut
through the rather high north banks of the creek
are exposed outcrops of a stratum of camp site
debris which lies buried under ten inches of soil. It
consists of burnt rocks, numerous mussel shells,
flint flakes, hammerstones, manos, metates,
scrapers, and a few heavily patinated broken
projectile points. These artifacts have a thick white
shell of patina on the outside with blue flint centers.

About a half mile farther up the same side of the
creek in a high bank the writer, on a later trip,
observed small portions of the edges of three flat
stones projecting from the soil slope. Upon digging
these out another oval enclosure of flat stones set
on edge was found and again the center was filled
with long flat stones set horizontally and below
these also rested a skeleton lying in the flexed or
embryonic position which also had the head to the
west and facing the south and the hands on either
side of the face. There were no artifacts in the grave
although as before there were many flakes of rotten
mussel shells and considerable charcoal mixed in
the soil, however there were no signs of fire on
either bones or stones.

While we were examining this site the writer
noticed about an inch of what appeared to be the
rounded edge of a metate projecting out of the
ground. Upon digging this out, it was found to
consist of one half of a broken metate setting on
edge which was one of a small oval enclosure of
buried flat stones set on edge. The center was found
to be filled in with more flat stones laid horizontally.
When these were removed to a depth of two feet a
skeleton was exposed which was lying on its right
side with the head to the west and facing south.
The knees were flexed and the thighs flexed on the
body. The arms were flexed and the hands rested
on each side of the head.
The broken metate set at the head was the only
artifact found although many rotten shell flakes may
have been remains of shell ornaments.

Stone Grave Skeleton Exposed by Erosion
Mr. L. A. Beyer living four miles northwest of
Abilene has a valley field which was crossed by the
meanderings of a small creek branch which was
usually dry. A few years ago he dug a ditch four
feet deep through the valley to straighten the stream.
After a heavy rain a skeleton in good condition
washed out of the bottom. Mr. Beyer realizing that
the bones might be of scientific interest excavated
them carefully and brought them to town. The
writer secured these bones and visited the site with
Mr. Beyer. This skeleton from all accounts lay in
no special order, nor was it in a stone grave. Stream
erosion had washed it out of the bottom of the ditch
at a depth from the surface of four feet. It came
from an old valley floor level which has since been
covered with that depth of soil. At this four foot
level at several other places along the same ditch
erosion had exposed small hearth rings composed
of burnt stones three or four inches in diameter and
flint flakes. Also a few portions of broken flint
artifacts had eroded out. This skeleton had all the

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

51

peculiar anatomical features of the other
Stone Grave skeletons. Its absence from
the typical grave is unexplained;
however, the frontal bone on each side
just above the outer ends of the orbits
shows six long deep scratches in the
bone, three over each eye as though they
had been made by some cat like animal
in trying to scratch out the eyes. The
wounds must have been quite severe.
Burial in Waterless Camp Site
Ten miles south of Merkel, Texas is a
small dry creek branch of Mulberry
Creek which carries no water except
immediately after rains, however this
creek branch has a quite extensive old
camp site on both of its banks. The larger
part of the camp debris lies on a neck of
high ground left between two creeks
where another smaller creek joins
Mulberry creek. From all evidences this
camp site has been covered with
considerable soil since its abandonment
but the reverse process is now under way
and its margins are being gullied and
washed away. The site shows several
burnt rock mounds of smaller size, and
erosion has exposed an almost
continuous layer containing burnt rocks,
mussel shells, flint chips, manos,
metates, scrapers, hammerstones, knives
and many of the larger sized so-called
arrow heads (they may have been atl atl
heads).
The site bears every indication of
having been the permanent camp site of
a populous village over a considerable
period of time. There is now no spring,
water hole, nor permanent water supply
within many miles of this site. During
the greater part of the year this site
presents an appearance as dry as that of
any part of this section. Either the site
must have existed when climatic
conditions were more moist and such

Plate 12
STONE GRAVE BURIAL IN WATERLESS CAMPSITE
1. View after top soil has been removed from over grave
stones.
2. View of gravestones after the dirt had been removed from
between them. The oval ring of stones in this grave had
evidently fallen inward. In the usual stone grave, the outside
ring of stones sets on edge sometimes vertically and
sometimes leaning slightly outward at the tops.
3. View showing skeleton in place after removal of grave
stones. Mussel shell in foreground beside ribs.

52

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

small branches contained permanent water, or a
spring on the site has vanished. It is certain that no
primitive camp site could be maintained there now.
This burial also was under a stone grave made very
similarly to the others. The skeleton also lay in the
flexed position with the head to the west but in this
case the face was turned to the north. The bones

were small and contained all of the peculiar features
of the type.
Lying against the ribs on the right side were the
remains of a tortoise shell and beside them and also
in contact with the ribs was nearly all of one side of
a large mussel shell; this shell was polished
somewhat on the outside and the hinge projection
had been sawed off even with the inside
rim of the shell and polished smooth. This
shell probably had been in use as a spoon.
The skeleton lay about two feet deep,
covered by the rocks which were almost
entirely covered with soil, and the general
appearance seemed to indicate that soil
accretion had covered almost all of the
grave stones since the burial so that there
was little on the surface to indicate its
location. The level on which the skeleton
lay appeared to have been an old
occupied floor level and was full of flint
flakes. At a distance of eighteen inches
north of the skeleton and on the same
level a crude patinated flint drill or awl
was found.
The Bones of Peculiar Type

Plate 13
STONE GRAVE SKULLS
1. Skull from De La Fosse Ranch, Shackelford
County. Top.
1a. Facial aspect; note heavy brow ridges.
1b. Lower jaw.
2. Skull from Beyer farm, found four miles from
Abilene. Top.
2a. Facial aspect.
2b. Lower jaw.
3. Skull from dry campsite, Taylor County. Top.
3a. Facial aspect.
3b. Lower jaw.

The four skeletons from the sites
described above are so similar that the
same description will fit all of them.
While found in three different places
separated many miles apart the racial
anatomical peculiarities in these four
skeletons show more agreement in
characters than one could reasonably
expect in the nearest relatives.
The first skeletons found in this region
having anything like comparable features
were the two very primitive skeletons
found under six and one-half feet of
horizontally laid undisturbed clay strata
on the Clear Fork of the Brazos River
near Albany, Texas and described in The
Scientific American of May 1929 issue.
The skeletons then found were
incomplete in that parts of the ends of

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
some of the long bones were gone; however in each
case the other end of the other bone was usually
intact. By comparisons the shape of the whole shaft
could be found.

53

were very wide spreading. The lower molar teeth
of some jaws were worn down very much from
the outside edges in a peculiar manner.

These skeletons were buried in stone
graves and were lying in flexed position
facing south and with the hands lying on
either side of the face.
The striking features of these
skeletons were as follows: the skulls were
long and narrow and the eye brow ridges
extremely heavy, the shin bones or tibiae
were nearly flat on cross section, the thigh
bones or femora were curved or bowed
from front to back similar to neanderthal
femora, the forearm bones or radii were
curved and the lower jaws were massive,
with heavy much worn teeth. These two
skeletons were of people of good size and
height and were heavily constructed in
all of their parts.
Similar to Clear Fork People
The method of burial of the Clear Fork
people was the same as that of the
diminutive Stone Grave People. The
peculiarities of the Clear Fork People
were all present in the Stone Grave
People in modified or lessened degree
except that while the Clear Fork People
were large, heavy and tall, the Stone
Grave People were very small.
The Stone Grave People all had
unusually heavy eyebrow ridges but theirs
were not as extremely developed as those
of the Clear Fork People. All had antero
postero curvature of the femora, all had
flattened tibiae, all had short thick lower
jaws with much worn teeth, and all had
low foreheads and long narrow skulls.
The writer would not describe the chins
as being as prominent as those of the
modern Indians but still they had chins.
The ascending rami of the lower jaws of
all were unusually wide and short. The
lower jaws while short from front to back

Plate 14
EGG-SHAPED SKULL, AND CURVED FEMORA
1. Facial aspect of egg-shaped skull.
2. Top of egg-shaped skull.
3. Lower jaw of egg-shaped skull
4. Beyer skeleton curved femora on right. Modern
straight femora on left. An iron knife was found with
the skeleton showing the straight femora.
5. Articulated knee joint of the Beyer skeleton.

54

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Probably Descendants of Clear Fork People
We have thus seen that the four Stone Grave
People have the same anatomical characteristics in
somewhat lessened degree as the Clear Fork People
and also used the same type of burial customs. The
difference in the earth levels or strata in which they
lived would indicate that this type of man lived in
the Abilene region throughout a long period of time
before being superseded by the more modern type.
Long enough indeed to become both very much
smaller in size and less brutal in appearance.
However the Stone Graves themselves and
associated camp sites are well covered with soil
except where erosion has exposed them. The
associated flints when broken show a blue flint
center and a thick shell of white patina going into
the stone rather deeply. Thus we not only have
extreme patina but in one case a total disappearance
of a water supply adequate for a large village, which
facts would seem to indicate that even the Stone
Grave People lived very long ago.
Fortunately whole femora and tibiae and nearly
whole skulls were found of this race. The femora
and tibiae of both legs of the skeleton found on the
Beyer place were in good condition.

bird or blow gun points had been found above it
prior to its exposure by the sand being blown off of
it.
Another skeleton was excavated in the bottom
of a sand blow out in Callahan County where the
sand had blown off down deep enough so that the
skull was smashed by the farmer’s plow. On digging
below the skull fragments the skeleton was found
sitting upright but also arranged in the flexed
position described previously.
Sand Dune Skeletons Also Peculiar
It appears that bones are not preserved in as good
condition in the sand as are those in clay soils,
however the writer has examined skulls and long
bones from four Sand Dune Burials and is able to
state that in each of the cases examined the skulls
were long and narrow with heavy lower jaws and
much worn teeth. The eyebrow ridges were
unusually prominent and there was a marked antero
postero curvature of the thigh bones. The articular
ends however were usually too much decayed to
make any comparisons of the joints.
Peculiar Egg Shaped Skull

In the 1929 issue of the Bulletin the writer
described the finding of a skeleton having a small
When an attempt is made to fit together the thigh low narrow egg shaped skull which also had curved
and shin bones at the knees and to extend them in thigh bones. This skull was dissimilar to all others
the position assumed by the knee joint in modern found near here in having no palpable eye brow
man when the leg is straight or extended the bones ridges. However this skull was exceedingly low and
are found not to fit together. The only position in unusually narrow in the frontal region. When
which these bones appear to have functioned is with viewed from above it had an egg shaped outline
a marked bend at the knee.
with the small end in front, with this skeleton were
two petrified beads. One was made of a Gulf of
Sand Dune Burials
Mexico sea shell of which the spiral had been
Two burials in Sand Dune Culture Camp sites removed and small holes bored in each end. The
have been excavated by the writer and the sites other was bored longitudinally and was made from
where portions of two additional ones were found the center of a conch shell. Both were somewhat
over an inch in length.
have been visited and the bones examined.
People With Bent Knees

A Sand Dune skeleton was found by the writer
exposed in the bottom of a sand blowout near
Hawley, Texas. This skeleton lay in the usual flexed
position with the head to the north and facing east.
No artifacts were found with it but numerous small

Femoral Curvature Common in Texas
The writer has some much curved femora sent
him from near Rockport, Texas (on the Texas coast)
by Mr. George C. Martin. The writer also has in his

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

55

collection a markedly curved femur found in a stone
covered grave by a farmer at a site four miles
northeast of Abilene. The skull was given to some
country doctor and the writer never was able to
trace it or get a description of it.

a report on this unusual site was printed in the 1930
issue of the Society Bulletin. The eighty-five oval
or boat shaped mortar holes found were not only
of an unusual shape not previously described, in so
far as the writer knows, but a majority showed
evidences of such extreme erosion of hard stone
that one is justified in believing them to be very
Peculiar Features Not Accidental
old. It was then noted that a few of the mortar holes
Thus we see from the numerous instances cited
which were situated near the centers of the large
that the peculiar anatomical features described
above were not instances of disease
or of accidental or monstrous
deformation but were instead racial
features of wide territorial
distribution which probably existed
during a long period of prehistoric
time.
Since stone age hearth site strata
of prehistoric man have been found
by the writer extending from
present soil levels down to depths
as great as twenty-four to twentyseven feet below the present soil
surface, along streams of the same
region, we should expect to some
time find the remains of a kind of
man of an even more brutal type
than any yet found.
Sandstone Records of Ancient
Men and Animals
Among the most convincing
evidences of ancient man in Texas
are the records he left in the hard
sandstone ledges near his ancient
camp sites. The deep erosion
shown by hard sandstone ledges
filled with mortar holes which were
so situated that nothing but natural
rainfall and wind erosion could have
operated on them is very
interesting.
Two years ago the writer
investigated a site on the Douthit
Ranch located thirty-five miles
southwest of Colorado, Texas and

Plate 15
SITE NEAR LORAINE, TEXAS
1. Shows a view of the oval mortar hole near Loraine, Texas.
Mr. Van London in center.
2. Shows one good round mortar hole at right side of picture
and the shallow remnants of three ancient mortar holes to left
3. Shows two mortar holes with raised edges.
4. Shows remnants of bottoms of three eroded mortar holes
5. Shows an oval eroded mortar hole with raised margins
6. Shows two eroded oval mortar holes with raised edges.
7. Two eroded oval mortar holes.
8. Round mortar hole in foreground. Three eroded bottoms of
oval mortar holes in upper corners of picture.

56

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
stones had evidently been filled at an early
date with wind blown soil in which a grass
sod had grown which had protected them.
These were from sixteen to seventeen
inches deep and from fifteen to seventeen
inches long and eight inches wide at the
centers. The sides sloped to points at the
ends. Their general shape was similar to
the inside of a canoe. However those nearer
the sloping edges of the ledge had eroded
away in varying degrees down to some
which only showed the bottoms of holes
which were only one and a half inches in
depth.

Plate 16
SEVEN WELLS SITE
l. Shows where bison ascended sandstone ledge from
water hole.
2. Shows individual bison tracks in foreground and trench
full of tracks in background.
3. Shows five distinct tracks where trail crosses convex
stone in path.
4. Shows tracks where the bison ascended a steep ledge
and in lifting their hoofs up from one track to the other,
their cloven hoofs cut twin grooves in the stone.
5. One of the five tracks on the convex stone.

Recently Mr. W. J. Van London stated
that he believed that he had found three
other oval mortar hole sites of the same
type in the same County. While on the way
to these three sites yet another oval mortar
hole site was found by the writer and Mr.
Van London on two low sandstone ledges
just above Champion Creek, situated on
each side of a dirt road which parallels the
Bankhead Highway a mile south and three
miles west of Loraine, Texas. On the north
side of the road two oval mortar holes were
visible on the exposed pert of a ledge which
was mostly covered with soil and it is
probable that more holes are covered up
there. Across the creek on the south side
of the road is a ledge in which sixty-five
oval and five round mortar holes were
counted. Most of the oval mortar holes in
this site were eroded badly and exhibited
indications of extreme age and erosion
similar to those of the Douthit Ranch. A
new feature was the presence of the five
round holes. It is probable that the round
holes are the work of people of a later
period as they are in a much better state of
preservation wherever found, than those of
oval type.
A peculiar thing noticed at this site was
that the edges of many of the eroded oval
mortar holes remained considerably higher
than the surrounding rock surfaces as

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
though the substance which had been ground in
them had gone into the walls of the holes and caused
them to become harder than the surrounding
sandstone so that the stone between them had
eroded more rapidly. A white substance still adhered
to the insides of some of the holes.
The Seven Wells Site
We then visited a site situated on Champion
Creek seven miles southeast of Colorado, Texas.
Here a smaller creek joins Champion Creek and
both have channels through steep vertical walls of
sandstone. In the stone bed of Champion Creek
there are several large deep well like holes from
which there is a spring flow of water in even the
dryest of seasons. The writer had often heard of
the existence of buffalo tracks or trails worn into
the solid rocks leading down to the water at this
place but was not prepared for the sight which
confronted him. It appears that there were three
places in the steep banks where the bison could go
down to water. Converging on these were five well
marked bison trails which evidently had been made
by thousands of buffaloes following each other in
single file down to water, each carefully stepping
into the others tracks.1 This had gone on throughout
ages of time until the hard stone was worn away by
the countless hoof beats into deep individual tracks
showing the shape of the buffaloes hoofs in the
rocks. Even the two parallel grooves worn in the
ends of the holes, as the cloven hoofs were
withdrawn from the holes, remain plainly showing.
In most places the stone has been worn down into
trenches or trails with the holes in the bottoms but
at one or two places there are rocks in the trail
which show no trenches but the tracks go across
these and connect at each end with the track filled
trenches. One of these stones with a raised slightly
convex sloping surface has five evenly spaced tracks
on it. These track holes are from six to eight inches
deep. No buffaloes have existed in the region since
the seventies, yet the foot track holes are as
symmetrical and rounded as though just made. One
of the track trails was sixty yards long, one was
forty yards, one was twenty-six, one fifteen, and
another ten yards long.

57

This must have been a place of considerable
interest to primitive man, there is a camp site on
the higher land above it which contains much flint
debris. Just below the Indian camp site and on a
slightly higher level of the ledge just east of the
animal track holes, are a large group of oval mortar
holes made in bed rock. At this and several other
smaller groups nearby, eighty-five oval, and three
round mortar holes were counted. At this site also
the oval mortar holes showed the same indications
of extreme age and erosion as those previously
reported. The three round holes at this place were
also in good condition. One peculiarity of the two
types of mortar holes noticed by the writer was
that he never has seen oval mortar holes except in
large groupings. On the contrary he never has seen
a group of round mortar holes exceeding seven in
number. The usual number is four or five and this is
true whether found alone or in association with a
large group of oval holes.
There not only were numerous mortar holes to
be found in the bed rock ledges at the Seven Wells
Site but also several typical portable shallow
sandstone slab metates of the type so common near
Abilene were seen in local collections. The manos
were also of similar forms. It is possible that this
form of portable milling stone represents a third
period of occupation by peoples using grinding tools
besides the round and boat shaped mortar hole
peoples. Where this phase comes in is not nearly so
evident as the relative ages of the two types of
mortar holes.
Colorado River Site
From this place we proceeded to a stone quarry
on top of a high hill above the Colorado River. This
is situated one half mile west of Colorado, Texas.
Here there was a smaller oval mortar hole site on
the ledge on top of the hill. The holes were on the
opposite side of the top of the hill from the River.
This seems peculiar when there were accessible
ledges on the River side of the hill top.
Many of the mortar holes at this place have been
destroyed by road building quarry operations but
some still remain.

58

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

This was evidently the grave of a recent Indian,
probably of the period of the last Indian occupation
Four miles west of Colorado, Texas, the paved of Texas. Its nearness to the mortar holes had no
highway crosses a small creek known as Morgan’s significance except that both were beside a water
Creek. The valley of this creek and the low hills hole which had attracted man throughout a long
near it on the north side of the road are strewn at period of time.
irregular intervals with very large abrupt sandstone
ledge outcrops which are usually slightly sloping
Mortar Hole Camp Site
or flat on top. Many of these ledges are covered
On the other side of the creek is a low rocky
with oval mortar holes. Quite a number were ridge which shows much flint chips and rotten
inspected and Mr. Van London stated that they were mussel shell fragments where gully erosion has
to be found for a considerable distance along this exposed the old land surface. This camp site yielded
creek. Just after crossing the bridge going west and few artifacts for two reasons. It has been hunted
ascending a little hill on the highway we stopped over by local arrow head collectors for a long time
and walked to the creek only a short distance below. and also for the reason that most of the camp site
Here were two large stone outcrops. The south surface is still covered with soil.
mass had many ancient oval mortar holes in the
However at this site some mano stones and one
middle of the top portion. Across the west and south
small
metate were found. The manos differ
edges and in rows across the center were some
deep, straight, round, bored holes of a diameter of somewhat from the flat type most commonly found
two and one-half to three inches. These holes were near Abilene in being more rounded and much
located about three feet apart and were a foot or thicker.
more deep. For what purpose they had been drilled
and at what time there was no indication. They may
Grooved Hammers Found
have been test holes made by early prospectors
One distinctive culture feature of the Colorado,
attracted by the mortar holes or may have been Texas, region is the presence of large quartzite
made to hold poles to support a brush arbor built grooved hammers. They were made from smooth
by Indians of the last century. It is unlikely that they water worn quartzite boulders in which a ring was
are very old.
pecked about the middle to fit a handle. Of only
Morgan’s Creek Site

Indian Grave
In the northwest wall of the sandstone mass lying
close by on the north, is an opening extending back
several feet which is about three feet high. In the
bottom of this Mr. Van London found about eight
inches of hard packed sand. On sifting it some very
small human bone fragments, and hundreds of small
blue and white glass beads of the size which modern
Indians used in decorating moccasins were found.
A few larger red, white and blue beads were found,
and a small round brass bell shaped like a sleigh
bell, a brass arrow head, and a smooth brass button
with the makers name in English printed on its back
were found.

four stone hammers in the two large Abilene
collections three were found close to Colorado,
Texas.
It is understood that such hammers are
frequently found in that region. In so far as the writer
knows none have ever been found within fifty miles
of Abilene despite its abundant camp sites at
different levels going back to a remote period. The
problem of what were used as pestles in the oval
mortar holes is yet unsolved, they may have been
made of wood.
Study of the associated artifacts and of the
territorial distribution of each type of mortar holes
should shed much light on the distribution of ancient
Texas cultures.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
San Saba County Mortar Holes
On a trip with Mr. J. F. Morrison one hundred
and fifty miles southeast of Abilene four relatively
well preserved round mortar holes were found on
Mr. William Motes’ place located eleven miles north
of San Saba, Texas. These holes were in a flat ledge
of limestone in the bed of a small creek branch.
Immediately above them on a slight rise of ground
was a typical Texas burnt rock mound thirty-five
feet across.
On a later trip to the place with Mr. Henry Dixon
a hole was dug in the center down to the original
white lime soil. The mound was forty inches thick
and contained small burnt lime stones, much
powdery coal black earth and occasional mussel
shells. No artifacts and few flint flakes were found.
Whether it was built by the round mortar hole
people or not cannot yet be determined but the
evidence is suggestive. On another similar ledge
located about a hundred yards farther up the Creek
are the remaining bottoms of two typical boatshaped mortar holes. What is left of these holes are
now only one and three-fourths inches deep. If these
holes were originally fifteen to seventeen inches
deep like some well protected holes on the Douthit
Ranch it must have taken a tremendous lapse of
time for the infrequent flow of water of this usually
dry creek branch to have worn the whole surface
of this hard limestone ledge down to that extent.

59

top and tubular on cross section. The average hole
is ten or twelve inches deep and seven or eight
inches in diameter at the top.
At Paint Rock, Texas, situated seventy miles
south of Abilene and in the burnt rock mound area,
are four round mortar holes located on a ledge of
rock on the west side of the north end of the River
bridge. Near Paint Rock is a notable collection of
Indian rock paintings which press reports say are
soon to be destroyed.
It is a sad commentary on our state of culture
when prehistoric remains of such great scientific
value are permitted to be destroyed in quarry
operations when usually such regions are full of
unpainted limestone of no scientific value. It is
probable that some of the paintings at Paint Rock
are rather ancient. A gully immediately below them
has exposed hearths fifty-three inches below the
surface.

Round mortar holes have been reported from
the Alpine region hundreds of miles southwest of
Abilene by both Mr. Victor J. Smith and Mr. Henry
J. Fletcher. Mortar holes of undetermined type have
been reported from the Pecos River region. Dr. J.
Alden Mason stated to the writer that he had
observed some oval type mortar holes in New
Mexico near a shelter. Mr. E. B. Sayles has reported
oval mortar holes on Mulberry Creek south of
Merkel, Texas, on Oak Creek in Coke County near
a rock shelter, and near Breckenridge, Texas, and
Mortar Holes Widely Distributed in Texas
round holes south of Merkel in Taylor County. Oval
On a ledge of limestone in the edge of Christoval,
mortar holes have also been reported from near
Texas, which is situated in the burnt rock mound
Stephenville, Texas.
area one hundred and twenty miles southwest of
Abilene, is another group containing seven well
preserved round mortar holes. This type of mortar
1. Natives of the region state that a few old men still living in
hole is usually perfectly circular in outline at the the region shot bison in these trails in the 1860’s and 70’s.

60

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

FIELD WORK OF MEMBERS
Mrs. R. B. Alves, of El Paso, reports that the
activities of herself and some other members of
the El Paso Archeological Society have been
mainly devoted, during the past year, to the
gathering and recording of potsherds in her district.
Archeological evidence in many of the sites in that
area is rapidly disappearing through present use of
the land. Approximately forty sites have been
located which contain pottery.

his investigations along the Texas Coast in the
vicinity of Corpus Christi.

Sam Chamberlain, of Refugio, is carrying on a
survey of the Coast from the mouth of the Colorado
River to the Rio Grande.

Mrs. Annie Moran, of Weatherford, reports that
many sites are to be found in Parker and adjoining
counties, but little research has been made in this
part of the State. Metates and manos, and mortars
and pestles are found; the projectiles are finely
made. One stone object, highly polished, was
found, drilled with two holes, one from each side.
The positions of these holes does not suggest that
the artifact was an ornament, and Mrs. Moran
believes it was part of a fire-making implement.

Colonel M. L. Crimmins, of El Paso, has devoted
most of his time during the past year, to giving
lectures on archeological and historical subjects.
Pictographs of the Hueco Tanks, Chronicles of the
Aztecs, Zuni Folk Tales, and History of the Messila
Valley are some of the topics covered by Colonel
Crimmins in lectures, and talks over the radio.

Dr. J. E. Pearce and A. T. Jackson, of the
Department of Anthropology, University of Texas,
have had an expedition in east Texas throughout
the summer. It is hoped that the results of Dr.
Pearce’s investigations will be made public at an
early date as he has been carrying on researches in
different parts of the State for a number of years.

Henry E. Elrod, of Houston, reports a survey
made in Uvalde County. Between thirty and forty
middens were examined, without excavation. No
pottery or bone was found. The middens consisted
of burnt stone, ashes, and charcoal and many were
quite extensive. One covered an area between three
and four acres and was about 6 feet high. Curiosity
seekers had hunted for arrow heads, but had left
the principal artifacts, consisting of scrapers,
knives, hammer-stones, etc.

During 1931 Dr. Cyrus N. Ray has made one
trip to San Saba County and three trips to Colorado,
Texas, for the study of mortar hole sites.

The common type of artifact found was a type
of scraper made from a thin flake of flint and
roughly shaped with the cutting edge retouched in
a symmetrical arc.
The territory covered extended over both
branches of the Frio River from Concan up Frio
Canyon to the head waters thereof.
George C. Martin, of Rockport, and Mr. S. W.
Woolford, of San Antonio, have headed a small
expedition to the Big Bend, section for the Witte
Museum at San Antonio. Mr. Martin has continued

In Taylor County, a covered site has been found
in the highest and oldest terrace of a stream. Far
above the present flood water level of the adjoining
stream, and five feet below the present ground level
is a hearth of burned rock, charcoal and ashes,
overlaid with horizontally deposited beds of clay
and gravel. A new stream bed and terrace have been
formed below the terrace in which the hearth is
located.
Two additional sites in which mammoth bones
occur have been found.
Many additional surface archeological sites have
been located, three of which contained pottery
sherds.
On a trip to Sagerton, Texas, some campsites
located by Mr. P. L. Summers were visited. On the
Clark farm near an old spring is a surface pottery

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

61

site containing unpatinated flint artifacts
and bone.
Remains of several much older sites on
the Double Mountain Fork of the Brazos
River at different levels from the surface
down to a depth of about eight feet were
found. There seems to be little flint in this
area and many artifacts have been made
from quartzite. Manos and metates are
found.
E. B. Sayles, of Abilene, reports that
during the past year his work has been
largely exploratory. He has located and
plotted thirteen new sites in this section.
The principal of these are: A large campsite
occupied by pottery users, covering
approximately fifteen acres, and showing
evidence of longer occupation than other
similar sites recorded by this observer.
Two small rock shelters have been found,
and a dual burial in a rock mound grave
located on a high point. One of the burials
had been almost entirely destroyed by
cremation, and many of the bones of the
other likewise charred. A new site at which
numerous mammoth bones are eroding out,
has been located, and from the condition
of these bones it appears that this is an
original deposit and not a redeposit as is
frequently the case with similar bones found
in gravel.
Field trips have been made in the
Abilene section with Dr. Cyrus N. Ray for
the purpose of photographing several of his
sites.
An exploratory trip was made to the sand
dune area to the northwest of Odessa where
a number of sites discovered by T. J. Kellis
of Wickett were visited. Here black on white
pottery was found.
Several days were spent at Amarillo
looking over some of the numerous sites
located in that section by Floyd V. Studer.

Plate 17
1. Burned rock midden on Frio River in Uvalde
County. Located on survey by Henry E. Elrod.
2. Hematite objects. Small polished hematite of iron
celts are occasionally found in Jones, Taylor, and
Shackelford Counties. The double bitted hematite
celt on the right is an unusual form. The three
artifacts on the left are chipped and unpolished
hematite; the lower one is a scraper.
The three middle artifacts are the usual form of
polished hematite celts.
3. Double bitted stone axe from Castron County,
New Mexico. Collection of El Paso Archeological
Society.
Length 6 21-32 inches; width 2 1-8 inches;
greatest thickness, 5-8 inch.
Polished with irregularly beveled corners.

62

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

Victor J. Smith, of Alpine, reports that during
the past year additional notes, photographs,
specimens from representative sites, occupied by
Indians, in the whole Big Bend area have been
added to the Museum collections at Alpine as a
result of the work in the field.
Eight new locations have been discovered,
making a total of 165 now plotted in this area. On
some of the old sites, intensive work has been
carried on, including the recording of pictographs.

teeth and caudal vertebrae of a small dinosaur in
the Triassic beds were found; also two new turtle
beds.
At a site found by Mr. Studer, Dr. Case of the
University of Michigan excavated the armor plate
and vertebrae in place of a phytosaur.

Hundreds of specimens represented by teeth and
individual bones of horse, camel, rhinoceros, dog,
and other forms of mammals of the Pleistocene
and Pliocene were collected during the past year
Floyd V. Studer, of Amarillo, reports that a total from local sites.
of 115 archeological sites have now been located
Mrs. Maud D. Sullivan, of El Paso, reporting
and platted by him in the Panhandle area.
for the El Paso Archeological Society, writes that
At some of the Post Basket Maker sites circular during the past year members of this organization
rooms have been observed for a number of years, have made field trips in the vicinity of El Paso and
but only recently has it appeared that these have have collected a number of specimens. These have
any special significance. Only proper and complete been added to the Society’s Museum.
excavation will determine, however, if such circular
Of unusual interest among the finds made by
rooms are akin to the Kiva.
members, is a double bitted axe found by Mr.
Significant among the finds made during the Ellwood C. Erdis. Such specimens are not
past year were charred corn cobs and pieces of commonly found.
compressed clay showing impressions of corn cobs
A number of village sites have been located in
found at two widely separated Post Basket sites.
the El Paso district. These occupy either the Rio
Work is now being done at three sites with the Grande bottom lands, the edges of low mesas, the
view of completely excavating them as quickly as high mesa, or the prairie. Mimbres, Pueblo, Black
time and proper work will warrant.
and Brown Hueco Tanks, and Chihuahua pottery
are the common types found on the sites.
In paleontology, three new Triassic reptile beds
have been located together with several Pleistocene
Metates, manos, mortar holes, and obsidian
deposits. The skull containing the tusks of a artifacts are all characteristic. Kitchen middens
mastodon was found a short distance from have not been located in this section, the artifacts
Amarillo, and this was excavated for the Panhandle and camp debris being scattered. Hearth stones
Plains Historical Society museum at Canyon, have been observed, as well as the adobe
where it will be mounted for exhibit. A number of foundations of houses.

63

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

SECRETARY AND TREASURER REPORTS
Audited Statement for period ending October 25, 1930:
RECIEPTS:
Balance, October 25, 1929 ........................................................................... $17.29
Cash, meeting, October, 1929......................................................................... 23.00
Sales of Bulletin No. 1 .................................................................................... 75.00
Memberships paid ........................................................................................ 249.00
DISBURSEMENTS: .................................................................................... 206.52

$364.29

Balance, cash on hand ................................................................................ $157.77
Statement by Secretary-Treasurer to October 6, 1931:
RECIEPTS:
Balance, October 25, 1930 ......................................................................... $157.77
Meeting, cash, October 1930 .......................................................................... 33.25
Sales of Bulletins No. 1 and 2 ........................................................................ 52.05
Membership paid .......................................................................................... 216.00

$459.07

DISBURSEMENTS ....................................................................................................... 302.13
Balance, cash on hand .................................................................................................. $156.94
E. B. SAYLES, Secretary-Treasurer

The Second Annual meeting of the Society was held at Abilene on October 25, 1930.
During the morning sessions, following the President’s address, papers were read by: Dr. W. C.
Holden, Explorations in Northwest Texas; Col. M. L. Crimmins, The Hueco Tanks Pictographs; Prof.
Victor J. Smith, an Introduction to the Archaeology of the Big Bend Section; Floyd V. Studer, Exploring
the Texas Panhandle; Dr. J. E. Pearce, Central and East Texas Archaeological Surveys; Roscoe P.
Conkling, The Remains of Extinct Animal Life in Connection with Human Artifacts in Caves near El
Paso.
Pottery, slides, drawings and photographs were shown in connection with the papers read.
All officers were re-elected for the period ending October 1931, Earl Ingerson to replace Prof. Otto
O. Watts as Recording Secretary.
Committees were named to take steps for the protection of pictographs and petroglyphs in Texas,
and to further closer relationship between various societies in Texas whose members are interested in
allied subjects.
Dues for the period ending October 1931 were assessed at $3.00.
During the past year three program meetings have been held in Abilene.
EARL INGERSON, Recording Secretary

