Texas Archeoiog~cal ~oe~e~y
Southern methodist University
Box Z65

BULLETIN
OF THE
/

VOLUME TWENTY-EIGHT
1957

Published by
the Society at
Austin, Texas

BULLETIN
OF

THE

ArC ologiCal
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)

VOLUME

TWENTY-EIGHT
1957

Published by

Editor:

the Society at

E. Mott Davis

Austin, Texas

THE TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

(FORMERLY THE TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL
AND

PALEONTOLOGICAL

SOCIETY)

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
BY
VON BOECKMANN-JONES COMPANY
AUSTIN. TEXAS

odrt
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas,
and Associated Faunal Material
By Wilson W. Crook, Jr., and R. K. Harris .............
Excavations at La Venta, 1955
By Robert F. Heizer ................................

98

Post-Olmec Occupations at La Venta, Tabasco
By Robert J. Squier ................................ 111
Report on an Unknown Type of Implement
By Robert E. Forrester, Jr ........................... 122
More Cruciforms and Some Problematical Objects
By Carl B. Compton ................................ 127
A Report on Williamson County Mound Material
By Mardith K. Schuetz .............................. 135
Three Archaic Sites in East Texas
By E. W. Hayner .................................. 169
Navacoyan: A Preliminary Survey
By Agnes McClain Howard ......................... 181
The Cahinnio-Caddo: a Contact Unit in
the Eastern Margin of the "Caddo Area"
By Mrs. T. L. Hodges ............................... 190
The Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas
By Buddy C. Jones ................................. 198
An Unusual Historic Jndian House Site in
Washing±on County, Texas
By Robert A. Hasskarl, Jr ........................... 232
The McCarter Site, A Late Archaic Occupation
at Muskogee, Oklahoma
By James B. Shaeffer ............................... 240
Time and Types in Archeological Analysis:
the Brainerd-Robinson Technique
By Rudolph C. Troike ............................... 269

Notes:
Clear Fork Gouges Found in Oklahoma
by Robert E. Bell ................................ 285
A Carbon-14 Date from Trans-Pecos Texas
by Mardith K. Schuetz ........................... 288
Book Reviews :
Wormington, Ancient Man in North America (4th Ed.)
by T. N. Campbell ................................ 290
Bibby, The Testimony of the Spade
by LeRoy Johnson, Jr ............................. 290
Swift Eagle and others, The Pueblo Indians
in Story, Song, and Dance
by Nancy Troike ...............................

291

Fundaburk and Foreman, Sun Circles and Human Hands
by E. M. D ..................................
293
Mewhinney, A Manual for Neanderthals
by E. M. D ..................................

294

The 1957 Annual Meeting ...........................

296

Report of the Secretary-Treasurer ..................

298

Report of the Editor ..............................

305

Membership List, 1957 ...........................

308

Volume 28, 1957--Price, $5.00
Address orders for publications and membership applications to
Texas Archeological Society, Witte Memorial Museum,
Brackenridge Park, San Antonio 9, Texas

IMPORTANT NOTICE
At the 1955 annual meeting of the Society, several new policies were adopted, as listed on pages 281-284 of Volume 26. Among them are:
1. All volumes of this Bulletin now cost $5.00 each, except Volume 25,
which costs $7.50. Prices include postage. Volumes 1 to 21 had previously
sold for $3.00 each.
2. Any member who obtains three new members in one year will receive,
as a gift, a volume of the Bulletin which is to be chosen by the SecretaryTreasurer. Another volume will be given for every three additional new
members.
3. In addition to Active Memberships (which include library subscriptions),
the Society now offers Contributing Annual Memberships at $25.00 and
Life Memberships at $100.00.

The society was organized and chartered in
pursuit of a literary and scientific undertaking;
for the study of the history, pre-history and the
major artifacts of man and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the
encouragement of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils in museums
and their study and classification and the publication of the results of the researches incident
thereto.
The BULLETIN is published annually for distribution to members of the society. Opinions
expressed herein are those of the writers, and do
not necesarily represent views of the society or
the editorial staff.

OFFICERS, 1957
R. K. Harris, President (Dallas)
Cyrus N. Ray, President Emeritus (Abilene)
Fred Wendorf, Active Vice-President (Lubbock)
Henry F. Sturgis, Secretary-Treasurer (Austin)
E. Mort Davis, Editor of Publications (Austin)
DIRECTORS
In Addition to the Above
Robert E. Bell, Norman, Okla.

Wilson W. Crook, Jr., Dallas

Clarence H. Webb, Shreveport, La.

REGIONAL VICE-PRESIDENTS
W. S. Fitzpatrick, Corpus Christi Erik K. Reed, Santa Fe, N.M.
Jack T. Hughes, Canyon

E.H. Sellards, Austin

Richard E. Johnson, Fort Worth

J.B. Sollberger, Dallas

Mrs. Glen E. Moore, E1 Paso

R.B. Worthington, Houston

TRUSTEES
Albert Field, Lampasas

O. L. Sims, San Angelo

W. C. Holden, Lubbock

Floyd V. Studer, Amarillo

Rex Housewright, Wylie

Frank H. Watt, Waco

Edward B. Jelks, Austin

Harry E. Weaver, San Angelo

FELLOWS
Cyrus N. Ray

Alex D. Krieger

HEARTHS AND ARTIFACTS OF EARLY
MAN NEAR LEWISVILLE, TEXAS,
AND ASSOCIATED FAUNAL
MATERIAL
By

WILSON W. CROOK, ,la.

and R. K.

HARRIS

Note: The names of many authors should head this paper, as it represents
a compendium of the work and efforts of many different persons and institutions. Without any one of these valuable contributions, much vital
information and many interpretations would have been neglected. If the
list of acknowledgements appears long, so also is the list of important
contributors. The effort and detail expended may appear excessive in view
of the small number of artifacts actually recovered, but in the case of the
Lewisville site it is the supplementary material and its description and
evaluation that is of paramount importance. This is the first Clovis camping
station to be discovered; it is the first Clovi3 site down off the Plains, in
place, in a recognized river terrace formation; it has produced perhaps the
most extensive faunal association for Early Man in America to date; and
it has provided the first material of Clovis age and provenience for radiocarbon dating. As to the sequence of the writers’ names, this is purely
alphabetical. No junior or senior authorship is implied, the writers working
as full and equal partners in the project. W.W.C., Jr. & R.K.H.

INTRODUCTION AND HISTORY
The Lewisville site, an Early Man camp site consisting of 21
hearths with associated artifacts and faunal remains, was discovered and partially excavated near Lewisville, Denton County,
Texas, between the years 1951 and 1957. The site lay in an alluvial terrace 70 feet above the Elm Fork of the Trinity River.
It was exposed by the excavation of a huge borrow pit for fill
in construction of the Lewisville Dam, an operation which removed more than 20 feet of overburden from the terrace. Evidence of occupation by Early Man occurred in the verst bottom
of this pit.
This terrace has been geologically correlated with an interstadial or interglacial period of the Late Pleistocene, possibly
within, or just preceding, the Wisconsin stage, depending upon
the eventual definition and evaluation of this stage. Extinct

Texa~ Archeological Society

faunal-remains of this general age have been identified from
the site.
A Clovis-type projectile point was recovered actually in place
in one of the hearths, apparently identifying the occupation.
Charred vegetable material in close association with the Clovis
point in one hearth, and wood charcoal from another hearth at
the same geo!ogic level, have provided two separate radiocarbon
datings. These dates are in agreement in being beyond the effective range of the carbon dioxide type counters, expressed as
being "more than 37,000 years old."
In addition, six other artifacts were recovered from the site,
plus a very extensive faunal collection. Most of the faunal remains were found actually burned within the hearths; others
were closely adjacent on the same buried surfaces. The probability is that all of them were food items of the occupation;
but whether this is so or not, all were certainly geologically
contemporaneous with Early Man at Lewisville. It is particularly of note that the terrace, and within the terrace the specific sub-formation in which the site occurs, are identical with
the terrace and sub-formation which yielded the partial skeleton of the Lagow Sand Pit Man of 1921, some 25 miles downstream on the Trinity River at Dallas. Other evidences of human occupation in this same geological stratum are also known
from the immediate area and stream system.
Theodore E. White, then of the River Basin Surveys and
now with the National Park Service at Dinosaur National
Monument, Jensen, Utah, is the original discoverer of the site.
As paleontologist doing salvage work during construction of the
Garza-Little Elm Reservoir (which is impounded by the Lewisville Dam), he located the site and excavated it as a bone
quarry. Attracted by what appeared to be burned areas in the
vicinity, White tested one such "hearth" in company with Glen
L. Evans, then geologist with Texas Memorial Museum, and
Edward B. Jelks of the River Basin Surveys archeological project at the reservoir (Stephenson, 1949). This was in late 1951,
and according to a personal communication from White, the
test produced burned deer bones, a horse vertebra, packrat
bones, and charred hackberry seeds. Here was evidence that

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas

9

rather strongly pointed to the occurence of man at the site in
Pleistocene times.
White and ;[elks introduced the writers to the site in hopes
that local archeologists would maintain vigil and perhaps develop the tantalizing possibilities of the locality.
This was done, and thanks to the rapid erosion of the pit
walls and floor by the rains of the following five years, the discoveries described in this report were made. As a matter of
fact, enough evidence of the probable presence of Early Man
had accumulated by the Fall of 1952 for the annual meeting of
the Texas Archeological Society, held that year at Southern
Methodist University in Dallas, to be led on a field trip to the
site.
But it was in late February, 1956, that rains finally revealed a
large hearththe existence of which had previously been unsuspected with typical burned bone fragments upon its surface. This hearth is identified as "Hearth 1" in ensuing sections
of this report. In early March, Alex D. Krieger, then research
archeologist for the University of Texas and currently Director
of the Riverside Municipal Museum in California, visited the
site by invitation and confirmed the fact that the hearths unquestionably appeared to be of human origin. Krieger also made
specific suggestions for systematic excavations to prove the
hearth occurrences.
As a result, a "group dig" by the Dallas Archeological Society
was scheduled for the weekend of March 25-26. Clearing of the
dig-site and testing on March 22, in preparation for staking
out five-foot squares and a cross-section trench of Hearth 1,
resulted in the exciting discovery of a Clovis point in situ in
the upper zone of the red-burned hearth area, plus a "pocket"
of dark-black burned material, at first thought to be a segment
of charred log, some three inches in diameter and seven inches
long, only 20 inches from the point, in the same red-burned
hearth clay. This carbon sample eventually produced the first
of the radiocarbon dates for the site and was identified as
being "fibrous vegetable material," rather than wood charcoal
as originally thought. The writers, with Mrs. R. K. Harris,
made this initial discovery.

10

Texas Archeological Society

Telegrams were sent to all archeologists within 500 miles
of the site, inviting participation in the weekend "dig" which
now appeared so promising. Only Sack T. Hughes, Curator of
Archeology at the Panhandle-Plains Museum, Canyon, Texas,
was able to join the weekend project, especially contributing
to the excavation and the jacketing of a humerus of Camelops.
Members of the Dallas Society, besides the writers, who assisted
in this and subsequent excavations, are: Joan Ablon; Herschel
N. Cobb and Mrs. Cobb; Lloyd Harper and Mrs. Harper;
Henry Hanna; Linda Harris; Robert C. Hatzenbuhler and Mrs.
Hatzenbuhler; J. B. Merritt; John Perkins and Mrs. Perkins;
E. J. Ruhland; J. B. Sollberger; Lester Wilson and Mrs. Wilson.
In addition, Richard E. Johnson, President of the Tarrant
County Archeological Society, aided in the first and ensuing
excavations. Almost the entire membership of the Tarrant
Society, including Mr. and Mrs. Tom Dawson, R. E. Forrester,
Mr. and Mrs. John J. Henlein, and Mr. and Mrs. C. W. Worthington, joined the later excavations of Hearths 14, 15, and 16.
Parker Willingham of Denton, Texas, was another steady digger and, especially, an important contributor to the faunal collections.
Professiona! visitors, in addition to Krieger and Hughes, included E. H. Sellards, Director of the Texas Memorial Museum;
F. W. Miller, Curator of the Dallas Museum of Natural History; E. S. Barghoorn of Harvard University and paleobotanical consultant to Humble Oil & Refining Co. ; Weldon Whitaker
of Humble’s Houston Research Center, who so painstakingly
prepared the radiocarbon samples; Charley Steen of the National Park Service, Santa Fe, New Mexico; and J. L. Mahon,
Secretary of the Alabama Archeological Society.
Special thanks are due to the Humble Co. for the services
of their radiocarbon laboratory in determining dates; this
dating was under the personal direction of H. N. Fisk, C. R.
Hocutt, H. Dayton Wilde, and Milton Williams.
Morris F. Skinner of the Frick Laboratory, American Museum of Natural History, New York, is mainly responsible for
the vertebrate identifications. Fred W. Wendorf, then of the

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man NeaT" Lewisville, Texas

11

Museum of New Mexico in Santa Fe and now with Texas
Technological College in Lubbock, Texas, arranged these identifications.
Thomas M. Oelrich and Claude W. Hibbard of the University
of Michigan have provided the definitive identifications of the
land turtle fauna and many of the smaller mammals.
Elmer P. Cheatum of Southern Methodist University, in collaboration with Henry van der Shalie of the University of
Michigan, has handled the identification of the invertebrates.

®
DENTON

~$

COUNTY
t~
DENTOW~.~

TAR~ AI~JT
Fig. 1.

lineated.

]

DALLAS

A, Texas and Trinity River system, with Denton County
B, Denton County, Texas, with Lewisville site indicated.

de-

12

Texas Archeological Society

The U. S. Corps of Engineers, in the person of Ray H. Runder, head of the Fort Worth District, furnished permission to
excavate and provided an invaluable contour map of the site
vicinity. Hence Griffith, commercial photographer and amateur
acheologist, is mainly responsible for the photographic record.
Some excavation photos are by the writers, Cobb, and Johnson.
Mrs. Forrest Kirkland furnished the drawings in Fig. 4.
It had been intended that all of the hearths would be exca~
vated before the time the site was due to be inundated by the
Garza-Little Elm Reservoir. However, Nature planned otherwise. The unprecedented rains of March, April, and May, 1957,
caused a 70-foot rise in the level of the reservoir, filling it to
capacity in a few weeks’ time. A number of unexcavated hearths
were lost to the lake as a result. The site will remain under 15
feet of water even at conservation pool level. The Lewisville
site has thus been destroyed.
The location of the site is shown in Fig. 1.
SUMMARY OF HEARTHS
AND RELATED FAUNAL FINDS
Twenty-one red-burned clay hearths in the form of oval,
shallow, basin-shaped fire-pits constituted the main occupational features at the Lewisville site. Associated with them
were seven artifacts, which are described in the next section,
and a great variety of fossil bones. The general circumstances
of the hearths and paleontological finds are summarized in the
present section. More detailed descriptions are presented in
later sections of the report.
The hearths occurred on the surface of four of the seven
superimposed depositional strata, called "layers" in this report,
which make up the Upper Shule~ formation, as discussed in a
later section. The general stratigraphic situation is shown in
Fig. 2. Three hearths occurred on the surface of the lowest
layer, Layer 1; 13 occurred on the Layer 2 surface; one was on
the Layer 3 surface; and four were on the Layer 5 surface.
All the hearths appear to have been shallow basins scooped
out, burned, and filled with refuse and later flooding sediments.

Hearths and A~’tifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas

13

The average size of the great majority is about 30 inches in
diameter, and they are definitely fire-burned to a depth of between eight and 12 inches. Hearth 1, an exception, measured
some eight feet by 10 feet, and was burned to a depth of 18
inches; this must represent a major bonfire site, repeatedly
re-used. Hearth 4 seems to represent a series of three successive fire-pits dug at approximately, but not quite exactly, the
same location; its combined area is some four feet in diameter,
and the maximum depth of the several pits is more than 30
inches of fire-burned clay. It may be instructive that the use
of snails and hackberry seeds--undoubtedly marginal fare--is
least pronounced in the larger hearths, and heaviest in the
smaller fire pits. In general, the frequency of remains of large
game animals is the opposite of this pattern, favoring the
larger hearths.
Paleontological remains weathered out from the same surfaces
as the hearths, so closely adjacent to the hearths that there can
be little doubt they represent camp refuse connected with the
use of the fire-pits. As with the hearths, the great majority
derived from the old Layer 2 surface. It is highly significant

N

LF’WISVI LLE DAM
FORMER

T-2 8URFACF
///////////
,.:.? .

LEWI~I LLE.. SITE
BORROW

LD CATION.%

LEWISVILLE

.

PIT
)¥.~r ~ . "1

X- HEARTH

, ;."

r-~RTPIT2-..+

"~

~

",

¯

"~

"I

....

.’,.,:..+.+ . ..: ... :++..’..., :.:

"::.+..:,: ,:..: ::-.":. ::. ¯ +--..,:., .. ¯ ..

SITE SECTION

Fig. 2. Stratigraphic section of Lewisville site and borrow pit; vertical
scale exaggerated to show relationship of levels. Hearths 1 and 8 provided
the two C-14 datings.

14

Texas A ~-cheological Society

that while the borrow pit for the dam fill extends nearly half
a mile in length, exposing the same geologic strata throughout,
fossil bones were almost exclusively concentrated in the hearth
area at the east end; here, bone scrap littered the gullies and
surfaces.
Hearth locations and associated paleontological finds
shown in Fig. 3, B.

are

Two specimens of mammoth bone came from opposite ends of
the occupation area--a femur head from the west end at Layer
2, and an immature tusk from the east end at Layer 1.
White’s excavated bison skull, with four cervical vertebrae,
came from Layer 2 between Hearth 8 and Hearth 13, in what
later turned out to be an interesting grouping. A large camel
skull was later discovered by the writers only 15 feet northeast of the bison. This specimen was photographed and viewed
in place by Krieger, Hughes, and many other visitors to the
site, but was destroyed by looters before it could be jacketed
and removed. Ten feet due east of White’s bison, later erosion
also exposed large deer antler fragments which were recovered.
Thus, within a restricted area, head fragments of three large
game animals occurred, without any sign of other skeletal parts
of the bodies.
Only 20 feet northeast of Hearth 8, a perfectly preserved
coyote jaw also occurred. Again no bones below the neck have
been found. As with the other instances, and Hearths 8 and 13,
this was from the Layer 2 surface.
Bones of horse, one of the more common animals represented,
were found at various spots over the site. White reported a
horse jaw, presumably from Layer 2, in what is now the general
site area. The writers recovered the following: a partial jaw,
with three teeth, of a large horse some 100 feet northwest of
Hearth 1 on Layer 2; two horse vertebrae at Layer 2, 40 feet
north-northeast of Hearth 1; a distal end of a medium-sized
horse metapodial, broken off for marrow almost identically to
the one in Hearth 1 but in this case unburned, also some 40
feet north-northeast of Hearth 1; and a horse vertebra from
Layer 1 some 30 feet west of Hearth 2 in the deep gully. Ran-

)

N

CONTOUR | NTI~RVAL
Io FEF-T

®

N

!

Fig. 3. A, Lewisville Dam locality, showing stream systems, elevation
contours, and area of Lewisville site and borrow pit. B, Lewisville site
plat. Important hearths and levels, faunal remains, and human artifacts
shown as found. (Hearths 18, 19, 20, and 21, destroyed by the lake before
they could be excavated, are not shown.)

16

Texas Archeological Society

dom horse teeth, from the Layer 5 level, have been found in the
vicinity of Hearths 11 and 12.
Approximately 50 feet due east of Hearth 1 on the Layer 2
surface, 40 feet east of Hearth 7 and some 30 feet west of
Hearth 6, the remains of a semi-articulated fore-limb of an
immature camel were excavated and preserved.
Fragments of bison teeth were recovered from 30 feet southwest of Hearth 1, and from 40 feet due west of Hearth 1, both
on the Layey 2 surface.
White recorded bony scutes of glyptodon from the general
Layer 2 smfface of the site; these are now in the custody of the
U. S. National Museum, and the writers did not match the discovery in their collections.
An area badly dissected by shallow gullies came to be named
"Rodent Hollow" by the writers during their early years of collecting at Lewisville, due to the large numbers of fossil bones
recovered regularly there, mainly of rodents. Subsequent excavations revealed the source of these finds five hearths, Nos.
4, 14, 15, 16 and 17 all at the Layer 2 surface in the immediate
area.
From a 50-foot-square zone, encompassing all five hearths
and all paleontological finds at "Rodent Hollow," came the following assemblage: lower canine of bear; teeth of peccary;
jaw of a small deer; hoof of fore-foot of medium-sized deer;
semi-articulated hind-limb of small-sized deer; lower molar and
jaw fragment of skunk; burned jaw-tooth of raccoon; four jaws
and assorted limb bones, scapula, and pelvis of rabbits; live
jaws and one maxilla of prairie dog; occipital portion of rat
skull; limb bone of mole. In addition, a quartzite chopper (described in the next section) occurred only five feet from the bear
canine mentioned above.
Bones of rabbit and prairie dog occurred generally throughout the site. In addition to the specimens already enumerated
in and adjacent to hearths, seven additional rabbit jaws and
two prairie dog jaws were recovered, all from the Layer 2 surface.

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas

17

Terrapin and tortoise remains were undoubtedly the most
common vertebrate fossils at the site, in or out of the hearths.
Their occurrence was so common that no accurate record was
maintained. Specimens were donated to visitors and to Boy
Scout groups as mementoes; others were submitted for chemical testing, such as by the nascent uranium daughter products
age determination method. Without exaggeration, it is safe to
say that these were the most numerous fossils in every 10-foot
square of the general hearth area, at every layer level. The
writers conservatively estimate that such land turtle remains,
outside of the recorded hearth occurrences, must have represented no less than 20 individuals. Again, these were most common at Layer 2 (the layer most widely exposed, both by excavation and erosion, at the site), but were also plentiful at
Layers 1, 3, 4, and 5 as well.
Outside of the hearths, the most noteworthy land turtle occurrences include: (1) a carapace fragment (Layer 2) of a
giant Testudo species; (2) White’s report of "a large Gopherus
type land turtle (Layer 2?); (3) a. well-preserved "nesting"
of carapace, plastron, and limb bones of Terrapene canaliculata
of very large size (Layer 3). This last example of T. canaIiculata is most interesting in that its structural detail differs
imperceptibly from that of the living T. carolina, except that
the Lewisville specimen is some 21/2 times the size of any existing example. On the basis of the sample identifications submitted of the turtle material, the writers estimate that at least
90% of the fossil turtles at Lewisville belong to the extinct
Terrapene group, while only about 10~~ pertain to the extinct
Testudo family. None belong to living species in the region.
A description of the very large example of T. canaliculata is
worthwhile, since it rather definitely suggests the presence of
man at the Layer 3 surface, stratigraphically between the
Layer 2 and Layer 5 hearths. As found, the specimen was
"nested" with the two parts of the plastron at the bottom; the
posterior plate of the plastron was inverted, with the humerus
cemented to the ventral side, although this side was found facing
upwards. The essentially complete carapace was immediately
above the plastron, also inverted, but with another of the limb

18

Texas Archeological Society

bones cemented by caliche to its under side in this case the
original dorsal surface of the carapace. No flood or work of
nature can have affected such a "nesting" of the parts of a
single individual. The evidence strongly suggests the work of
man at a terrapin "lunch," with the cleaned and discarded hard
parts neatly stacked to one side, perhaps in a shallow gully of
the time.
Just two feet south of Hearth 13 on the Layer 2 surface,
tome 40 vertebrae of a Colubrid snake were recovered. These
belong to the posterior half of a small snake, and may wel!
have been associated with the food activities cf Hearth 13.
Previously, a geology student from Southern Metho:~ist University recovered the skull and anterior portion of a small
grass snake from the general hearth area. The latter occurrence is considered to be derived from the Layer 2 surface.
No fragments of mussel shell or eviden2es of hackberry seeds
were recovered or observed outside of the hearths. This is interpreted as testimony that their occurrences were undoubtedly the result of importation by man.
DESCRIPTION OF THE ARTIFACTS
Despite the numerous evidences of human occupation at the
Lewisville site, the actual number of artifacts found is relatively limited. Their detailed description is warranted in order
that they may be compared with previous Early Man assemblages and with possible future discoveries.
Foremost among the artifact assemblage is of course, the
Clovis projectile point. In addition, a flake scraper, a chopper,
a hammer stone, and three flakes, complete the collection. These
are illustrated in Fig. 4, all actual size.
The Clovis point (Figs. 4,A,B; 6,A,B) was found in Hearth
1. It was some four inches beneath the red-burned clay surface
of the hearth, and 13 inches inside the north edge of the burned
area. Some 20 inches due south, with its top at the same level as
the point, was the pocket of charred vegetable material which
yielded the first C-14 date for the site. The point lay flat in a
horizontal plane, with the partially-fluted side down. A block

@
®
-y

®
Fig. 4. Lewisville site artifacts, actual size. A, B, dorsal and ventral
views of Clovis projectile point as excavated. C, section of point at X-~£.
D, hammerstone. E, Dorsal and sectional view of flake-scraper. F, G, front
and side views of quartzite chopper; note original cobble crust for handgrip.

20

Texas Archeological Society

of the hearth clay was removed, treated, and jacketed in Plaster
of Paris, preserving intact the projectile point impression.
Upon this block the point is now displayed in its original finding situation.
Of an opaque white flint, the Clovis point measures 82 mm.
in length, despite obvious previous shattering and repointing
on the tip end; width measures 33 mm. ; thickness at mid-point
8.5 mm. This compares very favorably with the dimensions of
the published illustrations of all other excavated Clovis4aoints.
As recorded, published illustrations for 20 Clovis points found
at Angus, Dent, Miami, Clovis, McLean, and Naco, average
83.7 mm. long and 26.8 ram. wide; the range of variation is
116-36 mm. in length, and 33-16 mm. in width (Cotter, 1938;
Bryan and Ray, 1940; Wormington, 1949; Sellards, 1952;
Haury et al., 1953). Thus the Lewisville specimen is seen to
fall well within the range of variation; slightly less than the
average length, and above the average width. Because the tip
has been shattered and repointed, the point’s original length
can be construed to have been well beyond the average of all
illustrated Clovis points, although probably still within the range.
The width, as already noted, is above average, but within the
range. Hence the Lewisville specimen can be interpreted as
being, and having been originally, a large Clovis point.
The thickness of the mid-section, 8.5 mm., compares with an
average of the known determinable specimens--six of the 20
points illustratedof 7.8 mm. Again, the Lewisville specimen
appears large, though within the 5-10 mm. range of previously
described points.
There is a flute 29 mm. long on the partially-fluted under side
(as the point lay when found), and a broken, half-flute, of 32
mm. on the upper side. From observation it is suggested that
fluting was attempted on the upper side, but faulty fracture to
the right prevented a true flute and a second attempt was tried,
resulting in a hinge fracture which produced only a distinctly
thinned base some 9 ram. long and 14 mm. wide, superimposed
upon the earlier attempt. Ground edges are present across the
base and 40 mm. up one side, 32 mm. up the opposite side.

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas

21

A thin coat of caliche encrustation covered the point, particularly on the under side as found. This has since been removed, after observation and recording, by cleaning solutiom~.
The flake scraper is fashioned from a broken flake of opaque
white flint, distinctly retouched with pressure-flaked bewds
on both side edges (Fig. 4,E). This artifact was found some 50
feet northwest of Hearth 1 in a shallow, eight-inch erosion
gully, at the same level as Hearth 1.
A crude chopper (Fig. 4, F, G) made from a quartzite cobble
with its lower end crudely flaked into a cutting bit and the
upper, nodular, crust preserved for a hand-hold, was excavated
as found freshly eroding in a six-inch gully some 80 feet northeast of Hearth 1, and only 15 feet from the four hearths excavated in "Rodent Hollow" at the site. Of gray quartzite, the
original nodule undoubtedly originated in a cobble field exposed
a half mile west of the site at an altitude of more than 5,30
feet, a remnant of the badly eroded T-5 (Buckner Ho~eHackberry Creek) terrace of much earlier date. This field is
also probably the source of at least two of the flakes found in
the site.
Heavily battered at both ends, the crystalline quartzite cobble (Fig. 4, D) constitutes the hammer stone found freshly
eroded in a 12-inch gully just 10 feet south of White’s bison
excavation. Its source is likewise very probably the cobble field
described above.
Three flakes complete the artifact assemblage. One, of opaque
white flint, occurred on the eroded surface just 15 feet southwest of Hearth 1. The other two, of quartzite, occurred upon the
eroded surface between Hearth 1 and the horse teeth to the
northwest. All artifacts described appear to be derived from
the common, most popular, Layer 2 former surface of the site.
EXCAVATIONS OF THE HEARTHS
Controlled excavations at the Lewisville site were somewhat
limited in extent and were mostly of a salvage nature, due to
a number of factors. Therefore it was most fortunate that the
amount and specific nature of the finds recovered were so in-

22

Texas Archeological Society

formative. Before describing the hearths, we will review the
factors affecting the investigations.
To begin with, the massive excavation for dam fill material
removed a tremendous overburden to expose the site; that this
excavation stopped just about at the level of the most intensely
occupied former surface, was pure luck. The pronounced erosion
since that excavation, resulting in both sheet-wash and strong
gully erosion, further exposed the site materials and reduced the
necessity o3 heavy archeological digging.
Secondly, the hearths, animal bones, and artifacts were very
slowly and progressively revealed over a six-year period of
erosion, and for the first five years of this time the presence
of Early Man was considered to be only a possibility, though
highly likely. As a result there was no incentive to devote any
intensive effort at the site until evidences of human occupation,
at an obviously early geologic level, became positive.
In addition, at the time of the conclusive discoveries, the
River Basin Surveys work in the reservoir area had long since
been completed, and only local money and labor furnished by
the Dallas Archeological Society, the neighboring Tarrant
County Archeological Society, and interested friends and
visitors, were available. This situation caused a concentration
of effort at only the most promising localities in the general
site area.
Finally, geologic studies revealed that the Lewisville occupation successively utilized the series of layer surfaces in the
Upper Shuler formation as it was progressively deposited, and
excavations and testing showed that all finds were essentially
confined to the immediate, local, layer surface adjacent to each
hearth or other paleontological-archeological find. Thus, deep
excavations were not justified; if a promising find warranted
excavation, once the layer surface of its location was laid l~are
no digging was found to be productive more than a foot or so
beneath this surface, unless it involved the excavation of an
actual hearth pit. All materials found were closely associated
with the layer surface upon which they were deposited.
Thus, due to the scanty remains of an apparently ephemeral,

®

15

20

10

5

Z3

N

HEARTH 1
5

EXCAVATIONS
s QUAR ES

FOOT

[] NOT EXCAVATED

F’~ EXCAVATED

(35o sQ. ~T.)

(=75 aQ. FT. )
.J

i
[~
1

~

,,J

_ ~:.,

le

--~

[!1

1117

,~1 ~,~

X

.11i!1 I I

,

’

-J,

~ i’iEARTH 1
VERTICAL
Fig. 5.

EY,£AVATIOM
VIEW

(~ HEAR’i’H ~. SECTION CUT
HORIZONTAL

VIEV~{

A, Excavation of Hearth ! in five-foot squares by Dallas ,Arche-

ological Society, March 26, 1956. B, Plan of Hearth 1 with finds as in,]icared. C, Section of Hearth 1 along east face of section trench, with ~.elative position of finds shown in B.

24

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

seasonal, sporadic occupation over a continuing period, there
was no appreciable depth to any feature of the site such as is
found in true midden accumulations of later date. Nevertheless,
were it not for the dam excavations, the site would have been
a very deeply buried one, requiring very extensive and expensive digging.
White’s hearth. (Test excavation described in personal communication.) This hearth is presumed, in the light of more recent work and stratigraphic knowledge, to have been at the
Layer 2 surface. It was in the general vicinity of White’s bison
excavation. Associated with the hearth were found a charred
vertebra of horse, burned deer bones, burned packrat bones, and
charred hackberry seeds. Apparently this was one of the typical
small hearths so often encountered in the writers’ excavations
described below.
Hearth 1. Lying at the surface of Layer 2, this was the largest
and most promising of all man-made features found at the site.
After Krieger’s personal inspection and his verdict that the
hearth seemed unquestionably to be of human origin, the most
elaborate excavation plans commensurate with the abilities of
the Dallas Archeological Society were initiated. When preliminary testing on March 22, 1956, revealed the pocket of "charcoal" (later Barghoorn’s "fibrous vegetable material" which
provided the first C-14 date of "more than 37,000 years") and
the Clovis projectile point, a weekend "group dig" of the entire
Society was arranged for March 24-25, 1956 (Fig. 6, A, B, D,
E).
Twenty-five five-foot squares were staked out, completely encompassing the elliptical, eight-foot by ten-foot hearth area
Fig. 6. Views at the Lewisville site during excavations. A, R. K. Harris
with Clovis projectile point exposed at beginning of Hearth i excavations;
note black "pocket" of charred material which yielded first C-14 date.
B, close-up of Clovis projectile point in place. C, excavation of Hearth 2
in progress, with burned terrapin carapace fragments visible. D, early
stage of Hearth 1 excavations by members of Dallas Archeological Society,
Lewisville Dam in background. E, section trench and five-foot squares at
Hearth 1. F, close-up of Hearth 8 in process of excavation, showing large
quantities of excellent charcoal from which second C-14 date was secured.

26

Texa~ Archeological Society

(Fig. 5). Following Krieger’s suggestions, a trench two feet
deep was cut first, exposing a cross-section of the hearth. Thereafter, the individual five-foot squares were excavated by handtrowel in two-inch levels, the contents of each level being collected in a paper bag labeled by square and level. Extensive
plotting and photography of each discovery in place accompanied the record of digging. When it became apparent that the
non-red-burned area outside the actual hearth was almost completely sterile some six inches below the surface of Layer 2,
excavation was carried deeper only within the red-burned
hearth itself, to its base.
Thus the records show that Square 13 includes mostly the
hearth area, with both the Clovis point and the material which
provided the first C-14 date. Square 12 is at least two-thirds
within the hearth area. Squares 17 and 18 include about onethird each of the hearth ; and Squares 7, 8, and 14 include minor
portions of the productive hearth itself. In all, excavations at
Hearth 1 covered some 300 square feet of surface around the
hearth (Squares 1 through 5, 6, 10, 11, and 21 through 25 were
left unexcavated). Nothing of significance was found more than
six inches below the original Layer 2 surface, although the redburned clay of the hearth area extended to 18 inches below that
surface.
The cross-section trench had its vertical east face along the
west borders of Squares 11 through 15. This north-south line
of stakes was laid out by compass, transecting the west onethird of the hearth. As can be observed in Fig. 5, C, the hearth
profile displayed a large, roughly basin-shaped, fire pit. Maximum depth of the hard, red-burned clay was 18 inches below
the Layer 2 surface; this varied along the cross-section exposure. At both the north and south edges of the pit, the bottom
of the basin rose rather abruptly to the Layer 2 surface, suggesting that the hearth was intentionally dug rather than occupying a chance depression. In common with all other hearths
excavated at this site, no evidence of burned root holes or other
indications of a possible burned tree stump were observed; as
seen in the trench wall, the hearth was an eight-foot-long basin.
What appeared to be the caliche-filled hole of a subsequent ver-

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas

27

tical root or crayfish penetration of the hearth from a higher
level occurred at the south end of the cross-section trench.
Recorded finds from the excavation of Hearth 1 and their
respective proveniences are:
Square 7. A long, narrow extension of red-burned clay extended from the central hearth area into this square, appearing
to be the result of a fire log laid into the hearth and burning
back eventually beyond the confines of the actual hearth. A piece
of burned sandstone at a depth of three inches below the former
Layer 2 surface, and a small piece of unidentifiable burned bone
at four inches, were the only finds.
Square 8. Only a small corner of the hearth area was included
in this square. Two fragments of burned terrapin carapace, presumably T. canaliculata to judge from their thickness and size,
were found three inches below the Layer 2 surface.
Square 12. Approximately two-thirds of this square was prime
hearth area. This area probably included the zone of maximum
fire heat of the hearth, as a medium-sized ash bed and two areas
of exceptionally hard-burned red hearth clay were encountered.
Inside the red-burned zone, a fragment of burned terrapin
carapace (T. canaliculata?) occurred three inches below the
Layer 2 surface; charred hackberry seeds were found at a depth
of four inches; and an unburned terrapin carapace fragment
occurred three inches deep outside of the hearth area.
Square 13. All but a few square inches of the northeast corner
of this square was hearth area. The charred, fibrous vegetable
material for the first C-14 date came from a "pocket" in the
southwest quarter, extending at an angle from near the Layer 2
surface to a depth of some five inches in the red-burned hearth
clay. The Clovis projectile point lay in the northwest quarter at
a depth of four inches. Other materials and objects encountered
in this square, and their depths, are as follows: prairie dog jaw,
three inches; split and burned bones of deer, two to three
inches; burned terrapin carapace fragments, two to three inches;
split and burned bones of deer, four inches; burned and broken
distal end of horse metapodial, four inches; burned leg bones

28

Texas Archeologica! Society

of small bird, four inches; burned wolf claw, four inches; and
burned fragments of terrapin carapace, four inches.
Square 14. Only the edge of the hearth area was included in
this square. Finds included only several fragments of burned
terrapin carapace at depths of from two to four inches.
Square 17. The edge of the hearth extended only into the
northeast corner of this square. Materials found were: burned
fragments of terrapin carapace, three inches deep; burned leg
bones of small bird, three inches deep; and a small piece of
unburned sandstone, four inches deep.
Square 18. An edge of the hearth area extended into the
southeast corner of this square. Several fragments of burned
terrapin carapace occurred at a depth of three inches; one small
mussel shell (Fusconaia cf. undata [Barnes] ), heavily burned,
was three inches deep; and what was apparently the matching
mussel shell also occurred at a three-inch depth, but unburned
and outside the hearth.
Numerous caliche-filled crotovinas and root-fillings were observed and plotted, but no post-holes or other recognizable manmade features were recognized. No artifacts other than the
Clovis point were recovered from Hearth 1, but a flint flake was
found on the eroded Layer 2 surface only 15 feet southwest of
Square 21.
Hearth 2. Exposed at the base of a gully, 36 inches below the
level of Hearth 1 and at the former Layer 1 surface, Hearth 2
was a small, basin-shaped, hearth pit which measured 35 inches
long by 23 inches wide, and only six inches deep (Fig. 6, C).
This hearth seemed typical of most of the Lewisville examples, irrespective of which of the five different layer surfaces
they pertained to. It gave the impression of a one-fire hearth
of a transitory nature, utilized by small numbers of people. This
hearth and Hearths 5, 18, and 21 (which were unexcavated and
lost due to the filling of the lake) are geologically earlier than
any others described at the site.
Materials found in the excavation of Hearth 2 include: a
burned and broken distal end of the humerus of Odocoileus vir-

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas

29

ginianus; a burned cheek-tooth of the same species of deer; an
unburned hoof of the same species of deer; burned and unburned carapace fragments of Testudo species of land-tortoise.
of two sizes (large and small), plus burned and unburned foot
and toe bones of both tortoises; a burned jaw fragment of Sylvilagus floridanus (cottontail rabbit) ; a burned mussel shell of
Quadrula frustulosa (Lea) ; a burned snail shell of Polygyra cf.
texasiana (Moricand); charred hackberry seeds; and a fireburned nest of the mud-dauber wasp. Two charred fossil pupae
of the mud-dauber wasp were found in the red-burned clay nest.
At the same level (Layer 1 surface), some 10 feet upstream
in the gully wall, was found an unburned horse vertebra.
Hearth 3. Almost directly across the gully from Hearth 2,
but above it at the Layer 2 surface, occurred another typical
small hearth. Its basin was an ellipse, some 35 inches long, 20
inches wide, and red-burned to a depth of seven inches. Charred,
broken fragments of what appeared to be the le~ bones of a
large animal (the size of horse, bison, or camel), a heavily
burned maxilla of Sylvilagus floridanus, burned fragments of
terrapin carapace (from their size, probably T. canaliculata),
and a few charred hackberry seeds, comprised the finds.
At the same level as Hearth 3, some 76 inches northeast,
occurred an unburned horse vertebra. Across the gully at the
same level, within 10 feet of Hearth 3 and between it and
Hearth 1, occurred a series of three horse vertebrae. Five feet
west of the series of vertebrae, again at the Layer 2 surface,
was a broken distal end of a horse metapodial, remarkably like
the one found in ~Hearth 1; in this case, however, it was unburned. Both appear to have been the result of intentional
breakage to extract marrow from the long bones.
Approximately 10 feet further west occurred a well-worked
white flint flake-scraper, also at the Layer 2 surface. Roughly
40 feet northwest of the scraper on the Layer 2 surface a portion of a horse jaw with three teeth, unburned, was found.
Hearth 4. This was one of the most interesting features at
the site. Apparently three different fire pits were dug at almost,

30

Texas Archeological Society

but not quite, the same location. As a result, "Hearth 4" is in
reality a nest of three hearths closely overlapping.
Two deep pits, one with red-burned clay to a depth of 33
inches below the Layer 2 surface, and the other to a depth of
28 inches, demonstrate an overlap of approximately two-thirds.
It is very probable that the deeper pit followed and obscured
the other one, as the 33-inch-deep pit contained a six-inch straturn of unburned yellow sandy clay at a depth of 17 inches below
the Layer 2 surface, seemingly undisturbed. As this unburned
fill still left the hearth as a depression 17 inches deep, it is interpreted as being evidence of human snuffing of a fire rather
than a succeeding flood deposit. This assumption is borne out
by the fact that the third and latest hearth at the spot appears
also to have originated from the same Layer 2 surface, rather
than from a higher position which a flood deposit might have
occasioned.
The third fire at the hearth burned the clay red four inches
thick immediately above the fill, seemingly occupying the partially f!lled depression left from the earlier fires. On top of this
an unburned yellow sandy clay fill occupied the uppermost 13
inches of the hearth basin. In this case it was impossible to
determine the cause of the yellow fill, whether human agency or
a succeeding flood deposit.
The three pits composing the composite Hearth 4 will be considered as Hearths 4-A, 4-B, and 4-C, in the order of their presumed occurrence. Together, their combined area was~a rough
circle, 67 inches north and south, 59 inches east and west, and
with varying depth17 inches, 28 inches, and 33 inches.
Found in the excavation of Hearth 4 were the following: a
large quantity of good charcoal, mainly at the base of Hearth
4-B in small log size; charred mouse teeth and leg-bones, at a
depth of 20 inches; burned leg-bone fragments of a large animal
(possibly the size of horse, bison, or camel) associated with
Hearth 4-C at the surface and at depths of one to 10 inches;
burned egg-shell fragments of a large bird (possibly the size of
turnkey or goose), associated with Hearth 4-C at a depth of
eight inches; burned snail shells of Anguispira altern~ta, gen-

Hearths and A~’tifacts of Early Man Near LewisviIle, Texas

31

erally associated with Hearth 4-B at depths of 17 to 25 inches;
and a few charred hackberry seeds, from both Hearths 4-A and
4-B at depths of 20 to 30 inches.
Hearth 4 lies at the eastern edge of what has been colloquially
called "Rodent Hollow" at the site, due to the large collection of
small mammal remains, mostly unburned but some welt charred,
found in the immediate area, all from erosion of the original
Layer 2 surface. These items, found in an area some 50 feet
square in the years before the multiple hearths were exposed,
include the following: five jaws of prairie dog; three jaws and
assorted skeletal parts of cotton tails and a form of jackrabbit;
a limb-bone of mole; a cheek-tooth of raccoon; a portion of jaw
and jaw-tooth of skunk; the occipital portion of a wood-rat
(packrat) skull; jaw and teeth of a ground squirrel; numerous
terrapin carapace fragments (all seemingly of T. canaliculata) ;
an articulated hind limb of a small Odocoileus virginianus; a
complete ramus and a hoof-bone of the same small species of
deer; a lower canine of black bear; several snail shells of the
Stenotrema monodon aliciae variety; and the teeth of an extinct
peccary, Platygonus allemani. Within 10 feet of the bear canine,
eroding from the same Layer 2 surface, was found the quartzite
chopper, discussed earlier.
These finds can not be assigned to particular hearth areas,
since the presence of hearths in the "Rodent Hollow" area was
not known until after these specimens were collected. Subsequent
erosion exposed not only Hearth 4, but also Hearths 14, 15, 16,
and 17, in the immediate vicinity. The presence of these hearths
explains the concentration of fragmentary fossil remains in
"Rodent Hollow."
Hearth 5. (Not excavated.) Between the partial skeleton of
Camelops and Hearth 7, at the level of Layer 1; a small hearth.
Hearth 6. Exposed on a peninsula between two converging
gully cuts, Hearth 6 appeared to be the remains of another
Layer 2 small hearth, about 38 inches in diameter, and redburned to a depth of nine inches. Due to the presence of great
numbers of charred hackberry seeds, this hearth and the adjacent area was totally excavated in hopes of obtaining a sample

32

Texas Archeological Society

which could be dated by the C-14 method. Finds resulting from
this work include: an unburned and almost complete right
maxilla, palate, and dentition of raccoon; a burned molar of
cottontail; a charred molar of prairie dog; a burned jaw and
teeth of wood-rat (packrat) ; three burned jaws of field-mouse
(Peromyscus sp.) ; three charred cheek teeth of meadow-mouse
(Microtus sp.); burned fragments of terrapin carapace (presumably-from their size T. canaliculata); charred and uncharred vertebrae of a large and a small snake of the Colubrid
family; burned and unburned fragments of egg-shell of a large
bird (possibly the size of turkey or goose) ; an unburned vertebra of a small fish; burned leg-bones of either a frog or a
lizard; charred and uncharred shells of both Anguispira alternata and Polygyra cf. texasiana snails; and multitudinous
burned hackberry seeds. A jar full of these seeds was submitted
to Humble for C-14 dating, but upon their being bathed in acid
it was found that all were essentially carbonate "casts," rather
than being true organic remains.
About half-way between Hearth 6 and Hearth 4, an unburned
lower jaw of raccoon was found. This was at the Layer 2
surface.
Hearth 7. Only 20 feet southeast of Hearth 1 on the Layer 2
surface was Hearth 7. The burned clay basin measured roughly
30 incr~es in diameter, with a depth of five inches at the center.
Most prominent w.ere two large ash beds containing some charcoal which was rather pulverized and intermixed with the clay.
The clay was more lightly fired than in most of the other
hearths, suggesting that the hearth was perhaps used only once.
Burned carapace fragments of terrapin (T. canaliculata?),
charred mouse bones, large numbers of charred snails (both
Anguispira alternata and Mesomphix sp.), and burned hackberry seeds were found.
Hearth 8. Some 60 feet northeast of White’s bison excavation
and nearly 300 feet northeast of Hearth 1, Hearth 8 was another small basin derived from the Layer 2 surface. It measured
roughly 28 inches in diameter and seven inches deep at the
center.

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas

33

This hearth was of major importance because it contained
four charred logs at the very bottom of the red-burned clay pit
(Fig. 6, F). These little logs were of various thicknesses and
lay scattered, pointing in all directions. It is from this excellent
charcoal sample that the second radiocarbon date was run as a
check on the date from Hearth 1, again yielding a date of "more
than 37,000 years." Barghoorn classified the carbon specimen
as definitely wood charcoal, but stated that the cellular structure had so deteriorated with age as to be unidentifiable.
The usual Lewisville site hearth finds -burned fragments of
terrapin carapace (T. canaliculata?), burned jaws and bones
of mice and rat, charred snail shells of Mesomphix sp., and
burned hackberry seeds--were found in Hearth 8.
Hearths 9, 10, 11, 12. These four were all of the small hearth
variety, exposed at the Layer 5 level in the wall of the borrow
pit above the general area of White’s bison excavation and
Hearth 8. Three were destroyed by erosion and the fourth was
looted by unknown visitors to the site. Nevertheless, certain
information as to their contents is available due to finds remaining even after the erosion and looting.
Hearth 9 apparently contained burned terrapin carapace fragments, burned split bones (probably deer), and charred hackberry seeds. Hearth 10 had at least burned fragments of a large
mussel shell. Hearth 11, looted, still contained part of a molar
tooth of a large-sized horse. Hearth 12 had burned fragments
of terrapin carapace.
Hearth 13. Eight feet west of White’s bison excavation occurred Hearth 13, an ellipse 27 inches long and 20 inches wide,
red-burned to a depth of four inches. A good-sized ash bed
occurred in the center, with very fine pieces of charcoal. Two
badly deteriorated snail shells (Polygyra cf. texasiana) were the
only contents of the basin, but 28 inches to the south, at the
same level, 39 vertebrae of a Colubrid snake were found. The
vertebrae were unburned and essentially articulated, representing the caudal end of the vertebral column.
Hearths 14, 15, 16, 17. These four hearths, which were near
Hearth 4 described earlier, occupied a zone less than 30 feet

34

Texas Areheologica[ Society

square in the center of what has been referred to as "Rodent
Hollow." After sheet-wash exposed the five hearths, the reason
for the concentration of so much small animal bone material
was quite evident. All the hearths lay at the Layer 2 surface.
Hearth 17 lay six feet west of Hearth 4; Hearth 16 was five
feet west of Hearth 17; Hearth 14 was 12 feet southwest of
Hearth 16; and Hearth 15 was five feet, three inches, south of
Hearth 14. In addition, Hearth 14 was four feet, five inches,
south of the quartzite chopper found in place.
Hearth 14 measured 57 inches long, 40 inches wide, and six
inches deep. Finds included: burned and split bones, probably
of deer; burned and unburned hackberry seeds in quantity; a
burned cheek tooth of raccoon; snails of both Anguispira and
Meso~nphix genera; burned rat bones; and burned fragments of
terrapin carapace (T. canaliculata?).
Hearth 15 was a large ellipse, 70 inches long and 42 inches
wide. Its northwestern two-thirds averaged about eight inches
in depth, but the southeastern one-third was a deep red-burned
pit with its bottom 22 inches below the Layer 2 surface. Included in the hearth were an unburned rabbit jaw, charred
fragments of terrapin carapace (T. canaliculata ?), burned bones
and teeth of mice and rats, three heavily burned shells of large
mussel (Arnblema pticata) low in the deep end of the basin,
charred snails of Anguispira type, and charred hackberry seeds.
Hearth 16 was 54 inches long, 32 inches wide, and four inches
deep. Burned fragments of terrapin carapace (T. canaliculata ?),
burned fragments of mussel shell, charred snails of Meso~phix
type, and a few charred hackberry seeds, constituted the con-

tents.
Hearth 17 was a very shallow basin, measuring 33 inches
long, 25 inches wide, and only three inches deep. It contained
only split bone (probably deer) and burned fragments of terrapin carapace.
Hearth 18. Unexcavated and lost to the rising lake. It was at
the Layer 1 surface in the bottom of a gully some 15 feet from
the semi-articulated remains of the young camel at Layer 2
above, in the immediate vicinity of Hearths 7 and 1.

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas

35

Hearth 19. Unexcavated and lost to the lake. On the Layer 2
surface; very similar in appearance to Hearth 13 and only 10
feet north of it, near the location of the large deer antler and
about 20 feet east of White’s bison excavation.
Hearth 20. Unexcavated and lost to the lake. At the Layer 5
level in the same borrow pit wall that contained hearths, 9, 10,
11, and 12, and within eight feet of Hearth 11.
Hearth 21. Unexcavated and lost to the lake. Exposed on the
Layer 1 surface in the gully floor just upstream from Hearth
2 on the same level. Erosion by the heavy rains responsible for
the lake rise disclosed this location just a few days before it
was inundated. Apparently it was a medium-sized hearth. Evident in its surface were burned fragments of land turtle and
burned limb bone fragments of a large animal the size of bison,
horse, or camel.
GEOLOGIC ANALYSIS OF THE TRINITY RIVER
ALLUVIAL TERRACES AND THE LEWISVILLE
ARCHEOLOGICAL SITE
Shuler (1935) has described the Trinity River as a consequent stream upon the upland plain of Cretaceous rocks between the Brazos drainage to the west, the Red River to the
north, and the eastward flowing streams of East Texas.
More than three-quarters of the entire Trinity system, including the area discussed in this paper, lie in the Gulf Coastal
Plain physiographic province. Only the headward reaches of
several branches and tributaries penetrate westward into the
North Central Plains region beyond a line extending roughly
from Red River through Fort Worth, Waco, and Austin. As a
result, a very low gradient is characteristic of the Trinity. From
Bridgeport in Wise County, to Trinidad in Henderson County,
a distance of 216 river miles, the Trinity falls at an average
rate of only 12 inches per mile. This part of its course includes
all localities under discussion in this report. From Trinidad to
the Gulf of Mexico, some 400 river miles, the gradient reduces
to only eight inches per mile. Westward, on the upper reaches,
the gradient markedly increases above Bridgeport.

36

Texas Areheological Society

The western headwarters originate in Pennsylvanian and Permian surface outcrops. In the region under discussion, known
locally as "the forks of the Trinity," where the West, Elm, and
East Forks converge to form the main stream, essentially within
Dallas County (Fig. 9), the river crosses progressive outcrops
of Cretaceous strata. Primarily these are, from northwest to
southeast, the Woodbine Sands, the Eagle Ford Shale, the Austin Chalk, and the Taylor Marl. Thence, southeastward, the
stream crosses the Tertiary sequence and ultimately, near the
coast, a belt of Quaternary sediments.
At Dallas, where the West and Elm Forks join inside the city
limits, the main Trinity has cut a notch through the cuesta of
the resistant Austin chalk. The Elm Fork, from the Lewisville
site area in Denton County to the juncture, flows along the contact line between the Eagle Ford Shale to the west and the
Austin Chalk. One of these two Cretaceous formations comprises the country bedrock at all localities to be described, with
the Eagle Ford lying beneath the Lewisville site itself on the
west side of Ehn Fork near the mouth of Hickory Creek.
Apparently the history of the Trinity system is as follows:
the Laramide Revolution at the close of the Cretaceous uplifted
the region above Trinidad from the sea, possibly tilting the
Cretaceous formations, in part at least, at that time. The area
remained as a low-lying coastal plain throughout the Tertiary,
as the strand-line gradually moved southeast and south during
this long era of deposition. Ancient Trinity River may have
originated during this period as a sluggish, short, low-gradient
stream comparable to many Gulf Coast bayous of today. Certainly some stream pattern must have existed prior to the Pliocene-Pleistocene continental uplift for the notch in the present
Austin Chalk cuesta to have been subsequently trenched.
Then, at the close of the Tertiary--and perhaps responsible
for the phenomena of the Pleistocene--a continental batholithic
uplift occurred in Western North America, the subsequent erosion of which has produced today’s Rocky Mountains. This major event may have completed the present tilting of the Cretaceous formations, and is unquestionably responsible for their
present elevation above sea-level; its periodic cycles may well

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas

37

have produced the alluvial terrace sequence observable in stream
valleys of Pleistocene age, and it is undoubtedly the ultimate
cause of the present erosional topography and relief.
No Tertiary deposits have been observed in the general region
under discussion; hence the conclusion that throughout this long
period the area was exposed to continental erosion, but was of a
very low elevation not conducive to any notable terrestrial deposition. The local blackland soils of the surviving uplands,
deeply weathered from the underlying Cretaceous outcrops,
strengthen this conclusion. Extensive Pleistocene deposits occur
only in the stream valleys as alluvial terraces, apparently the
result of cyclical stream rejuvenation over a period of general
land rise.
Trinity Alluvial Terraces
The sequence and composition of the Trinity River alluvial
terraces has been described partially by a series of writers and
students. A major revision and description, drawing upon their
experience and tempered by the findings of the present writers,
is in manuscript form. Excerpts from this forthcoming publication will be extensively utilized in the following pages in assessing the geology of the Lewisville site.
Shuler (1935), writing on the terraces of the main Trinity
near Dallas, and Pattillo (1940), writing on the terraces of the
Elm Fork near Carroltton (10 miles below Lewisville), are the
major sources. Briefly, their finds (correlated by Pattillo) and
recent studies indicate the following sequence (see Fig. 7; dual
nomenclature, except for the floodplain, indicates correlated type
localities of the main Trinity and Elm Fork sequences) :
Stream Grade. At Dallas today, the Trinity flows at an elevation of about 365 feet above sea-level.
The Floodplain Terrace (T-O) surface lies at a general elevation of 20 feet above stream grade. Approximately 10 feet of
this is composed of locally-derived alluvium from the adjacent
blackland uplands, while 10 feet is trenched into the underlying
Cretaceous bedrock as a channel cut. A purely modern fauna is
included, with Neo-Indian (pottery, agriculture, and arrow

Texas Archeological Society

38

points) materials at the base of the alluvium, and Anglo-European materials in the uppermost six inches and upon the
surface.
Union Terminal-Carrollton Terrace (T-l). Represented by
"rises" in the main stream floodplain and by "veneers" upon
the eroded slopes of the next higher terrace near stream valleys.
As much as 30 feet above the present floodplain, or some 50 feet
above stream grade. Approximately 15 feet in thickness. Basal
gravels, 5 feet; red sandy clay (often with pebbles), 5 feet;
gray, unstratified sand, 5 feet. No known fauna from gravels
or red sandy clay; only modern species of bison, deer, and turkey, and a keel-vaulted Homo sapiens, from gray sands. Archaic
Stage human artifacts and site indications in situ in red sandy
clay and gray sands; Neo-Indian artifacts from surface of gray
sands. (New distinction of terrace materials and inclusions.)
Pemberton Hill-Lewisville Terrace (T-2). Stands some 50 feet
above present floodplain or 70 feet above present stream grade.
(New terrace distinction, from former Union Terminal-Carrollton.)

SCHEMATIC

LEWtSVI LLE SITE

Fig. 7.

Composite and schematic section of Upper Trinity River ter-

races near Lewisville site; vertical scale exaggerated.

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas

39

Approximate 35-foot section as follows, from base to top:
Basal gravels, 10 feet. Uppermost foot often cemented into
conglomerate. Contains highly mineralized, stream-abraded,
fragmentary faunal remains of general Middle and Upper Pleistocene derivation, some of which are quite possibly redeposited
from erosion of older formations. These remains include representatives of Elephas imperator, Mastodon ?americanus (very
rare), Bison alleni, Equus cf. fraternus, Equus scotti, Camelops
sp., Smilodon cf. fatalis, OdocoiIeus virginianus, ground sloth,
and a huge specimen of Testudo sp. These basal gravels constitute the "Hil! formation" at the Lewisville site. (Local stratigraphy at the Lewisville site is discussed later in this section.)
Laminated yellow sands, five feet. Well bedded, with whitish
calcareous "zones" and platelets, from which calcareous rootfillings often depend. Ferruginous concretions around included
fossils. Fossil wood of deciduous type, occasional. Elephas imperator from contact line with gravels below, in semi-articulated
skeletons; Elephas columbi above, within the formation. Also
large bison, camel, horse, saber-tooth, ground sloth, large Testudo, fox, and deer, none identified as to species. Scales of the
alligator gar fish occur at one locality. This is the "Lower Shuler
formation" at Lewisville.
Yellow sandy clay, 15 feet. Sub-divided into at least seven
successive "layers," each separated from the next by minor erosional surfaces. Whitish calcareous "zones" throughout; massive
development of caliche nodular concretions particularly at each
layer surface, increasing in size from lowest to highest; calcareous root and crotovina fillings from layer surfaces. Many
articulated and semi-articulated faunal remains, including Elephas columbi, Camelops hue~’fanensis dallasi, Tetrameryx shuleri, Equus scotti, Equus cf. fraternus, Odocoileus sp., and Homo
sapiens (Lagow Sand Pit Man, discussed in a later section of
this report), identified previous to the Lewisville studies of this
formation. To these forms must be added the extensive fauna
from Lewisville, listed in the Paleontological Section of this
paper, including the addition of the following large forms not
already listed above: Bison ?taylori, Equus (large sp.), Equus
(medium-sized sp.), Platygonus ?alemanii, Odocoileus virginia-

40

Texas Archeological Society

nus (large sp. and small sp.), Glyptodon sp., Euarctos sp., a
large wolf and coyote, both of Canis sp., and a large land turtle
of Testudo sp. A host of smaller forms also occur, in addition to
artifacts of human manufacture, including a Clovis projectile
point. This is the vital "Upper Shuler Formation" at Lewisville.
Dark gray alluvium, five feet. Contains multitudinous tiny
nodular caliche concretions, and no observed faunal inclusions.
This is the "Richards formation" at the Lewisville site.
Travis School-Farmers Branch Terrace (T-3). Approximately
70 feet above floodplain and 90 feet above stream grade. Section 25 feet thick, composed of: basal gravels and sands, five
feet, with uppermost sands lightly cemented into soft sandstone;
yellow sandy clay with vague whitish "zones" of caliche and
many medium-sized caliche nodular concretions, 15 feet; dark
gray alluvium with tiny caliche nodular concretions, very dry
in appearance, five feet. A proboscidean leg bone from the lowest gravels, a horse toe-bone from the cemented sands, and a
number of semi-articulated skeletons of Mastodon americanus
from the yellow sandy clay, are the only known faunal in-

clusions.
Love Field-Bethel Terrace (T-4). Stands 100 feet above floodplain, some 120 feet above stream grade. Section 30 feet thick,
composed of: basal yellow laminated sands, 20 feet, becoming
impregnated with more and more clay near the top of the formation; dark gray alluvium, 10 feet, dry and notably jointed,
with basal four feet heavily charged with whitish calcareous
"zones" and upper six feet containing tiny caliche nodular concretions. No known fauna.
Buckner Home-Hackberry Creek Terrace (T-5). Stands 145
feet above floodplain, some 165 feet above stream grade. Occurs
only as remnants capping much-dissected high ground at similar
elevations upstream and downstream; upstream examples somewhat higher, indicating downstream gradient of ancient terrace.
Fields of cobbles and boulders of quartzite, petrified wood, ferruginous sandstone, and some flints, with original matrix sluiced
away except near Mesquite in east Dallas County where a fourfoot section remains showing cobbles imbedded in rusty, sandy

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas

41

formation. Some earth movement discernible since deposition of
terrace, as several mid-stream examples lie at higher elevations
than others both above and below. No faunal remains. (New
terrace identified.)
Cretaceous uplands. Gently rolling erosional topography, beginning at about 175 feet above floodplain, or 195 feet above
present stream grade, and with a general elevation at, or above,
215 feet above floodplain or 235 feet above present grade. Isolated erosional remnants as high as 425 feet above present
stream grade.
Tributary creeks in the region seldom, if ever, evidence the
entire sequence just described, and being locally derived from
the Cretaceous formations of the immediate vicinity, their terrace materials are of a somewhat different nature than those of
the through-flowing Trinity with its distant upstream sources.
Nevertheless, correlation is possible.
These lesser tributaries have not participated in the apparently late cycle of the main stream’s dark alluvial floodplain
deposit; all are deeply trenched at present and seem still to possess sufficient gradient for cutting into the bedrock. Therefore,
their T-O corresponds to the Trinity T-l, with a comparable
triple formation sequence: basal white rock gravels and yellowish-tan clay, four feet; light tan clay with tiny caliche nodules,
six feet; and gray alluvium, four feet. This 14-foot section, in
addition to a cut into the underlying bedrock, often provides a
present channel-cut of as much as 20 feet into the small-stream
floodplain.
At the contact line between the middle and upper fills, corresponding to the disconformity between the light tan clay and
overlying gray alluvium, occur evidences of human occupation
here and there. At one locality, Dixon’s Branch, a Carrollton
Focus Archaic site has been identified; on nearby Ash Creek,
indications are present of another Archaic occupation zone at
this level, including one small hearth. From both sites, the bones
of Bison bison have been tentatively identified, in close association with flint flakes and artifacts and bearing marks of cutting
and butchering. Bones of Odocoileus virginianus also occurred

42

Texas Archeological Society

in lesser numbers in the small hearth, as well as burned mussel
shells and snails.
On the surface of the gray alluvium at several localities occur
sparse occupational sites of relatively late pottery cultures,
though none has as yet demonstrated any evidence of historic
contact materials.
In like manner, the T-1 of the small streams correlates with
the T-2 of the Trinity. This terrace stands some 30 feet above
the floodplain and 45 to 50 feet above stream grade. A 24-foot
section contains: basal white rock gravel, five feet; gray powdery limestone detritus, much like fine sand and often laminated
and sometimes cemented, five feet; gray to light yellow-buff
clay, with vague whitish caliche "zones," 10 feet; and a dark
gray alluvium with tiny caliche nodular concretions, four feet.
Known faunal remains come from the contact line of the gravels
and overlying "sands," including Elephas columbi in semi-articulated condition, Equus sp., and Camelops sp. Well upstream
on several creeks, Archaic occupation sites occur upon the surface of the capping alluvium formation.
A vague indication of even earlier and higher activity of the
tributary streams is given by channel fills preserved in a number of high erosional "divides" of the Cretaceous bedrock. These
contain a reddish clay with caliche nodular concretions, but
their identification with any of the higher main Trinity terrace
events is not yet demonstrated.
Correlation with Louisiana Terrace Sequence
There is little difficulty in correlating the Trinity terrace
system with the classic work of Fisk (1938, 1940) and others,
on the Red River and the Mississippi in Louisiana. In the following comparisons, the work of Fisk in Grant and LaSalle
Parishes (1938) and Avoyelles and Rapides Parishes (1940) is
combined with that of his successors in the Louisiana Geological
Survey. Murray (1948) in DeSoto and Red River Parishes, and
Martin, Hough, Raggio, and Sandberg in Webster Parish (Martin et al., 1954), followed Fisk’s basic tenets and extended their
interpretations up Red River to the Arkansas border.

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas

43

The entire state of Louisiana falls within the same Gulf
Coastal Plain physiographic province as does the lower threequarters of the Trinity drainage. However, in Louisiana no
formations older than Tertiary and Quaternary outcrop; the
northern two-thirds of the state are Tertiary, with Pleistocene
and Recent deposits ill the alluvial valleys, while the southern
third is Pleistocene and Recent. Thus the course of the Red
River in Louisiana is comparable with that of the Trinity below
Trinidad, with similar elevations and country bedrock.
Only 150 miles separate the Trinity at Dallas and the Red at
Shreveport. This upper region of the Red presents the greatest
similarity in terrace relationships to the Lewisville-Daltas region of the Trinity. On the Trinity, in this area, the present
gradient is approximately 12 inches per mile; downstream, below Trinidad, it is some eight inches per mile. On the Red River
in north Louisiana it is "less than one foot per mile"; as far
south as Avoyelles and Rapides Parishes, the present gradient
of the Red is roughly five inches per mile. While not identical,
the two drainages are, for practical purposes, highly similar
for geologic terrace studies.
In Louisiana, along Red River, four pronounced terrace formations have been described and evaluated, in addition to a
complex floodplain deposit. From highest to lowest, they are:
Williana Terrace. Standing some 180 feet above the present
floodplain (200 feet above stream grade?), this terrace seems
to correlate closely with the Buckner Home-Hackberry Creek
Terrace (T-5) of the Trinity, which stands at some 145-175
feet above the floodplain near Dallas. The description of Williana remnants in Webster Parish is strikingly reminiscent of
the Buckner Home-Hackberry Creek; "... Williana terrace
deposits . . . are confined to small, remnant patches of basal
sands and gravels capping the highest hills in the area, the
original terrace surface having been eroded away."
Bentley Terrace. Approximately 120 feet above floodplain,
the Bentley in Louisiana seems to represent the Love FieldBethel (T-4) at Dallas which stands 100-110 feet above floodplain. It is very similar in being considerably dissected, with
large remnants here and there remaining untouched.

44

Texas Archeoiogical Society

Montgomery Terrace. Stands roughly 70 feet above floodplain, as does the corresponding Travis School-Farmers Branch
(T-3) of the Trinity. Composition lithologically is quite similar
in presenting the first strongly indicated presence of caliche
nodular concretions in the sequence.
Prairie Terrace. Some 40 feet above floodplain, whereas the
equivalent Pemberton Hill-Lewisville (T-2) of the Trinity lies
at about 50 feet above floodplain. This difference is possibly
accentuated by the narrow gap through the Austin Chalk at
Dallas. The lithologic sequence of the Prairie Terrace, from
basal gravels upward through calcareous clays, is quite comparable to that of the Pemberton Hill-Lewisville terrace.
Floodplain deposits. Here lies the basic, but not critical, difference between the two sequences. The floodplain of the Red
River in Louisiana discloses a deep trench almost totally refilled
today. Borings in this floodplain suggest two different bottom
levels at approximately
35 feet and
70 feet, perhaps indicaring two buried stream-channel periods.
The existence of a buried trench so much deeper than that of
the Trinity at Dallas can be rather easily explained by the relative hardness of the underlying Austin Chalk at Dallas, in contrast to the softer Tertiary sandstone and clay siltstones in
Louisiana which allowed a deeper cut in the same period of
time. In addition, it has been pointed out that the Louisiana
sequence, particularly in the extreme north, compares best with
that of the Trinity below Trinidad, in Tertiary sediments in
Texas. Whereas at Dallas the present floodplain is composed of
only 10 feet of alluvium on top of the Austin Chalk, the floodplain at Trindad and below is considerably deeper and composed
of the sequence gravel-red sandy clay-gray sand, which is seen
only as remnant "rises" in the valley at Dallas.
Thus on the Trinity it can be seen that the Dallas T-l, preserved in floodplain "rises" and in higher terrace "veneers,"
constitutes what is probably the T-0 at Trinidad and downstream. Therefore, the Trinity T-1 at Dallas, as described earlier, probably correlates with the deeper floodplain fill on the
Red River in Louisiana.

Hearths c~nd Artifacts of Early Ma~ Near Lewisville, Texas

45

The very recent alluvial fill of the floodplain on the Trinity at
Dallas rather surely correlates with the more shallow cut-andfill on Red River which, today, constitutes the surface of the
T-0 and has been shown to overlap even late Neo-Indian pottery
culture occupation sites, just as at Dallas.
Thus, even on the upper Trinity, despite a slightly higher
actual elevation and a difference in underlying bedrock, there
is dual evidence of rather late floodplain fills. These fills are
expressed in somewhat different form from those on Red River
in Louisiana, but must, inevitably, represent the same sequence
of events.
Confirming this conclusion is the observation that the most
recent alluvial fill in the Trinity floodplain is of local, redeposited origin from the adjacent Cretaceous uplands. In Louisiana,
the recent fill is described as being "Recent alluvium . . . confined to the floodplain of present-day streams . . . Alluvial deposits consist of material derived from the surrounding Tertiary and Pleistocene deposits . . ." (italics ours).
The absence of identified faunal remains in the Louisiana
terrace sequence, plus the relatively unexplored status of correlated human occupational remains, makes exact correlation
with the Trinity sequence tenuous, but the apparent physical
relationship is almost undeniable. Therefore the following correlations are proposed:
Stage

Red River
Tertiary Uplands
Williana Terrace
Bentley Terrace
Montgomery Terrace
Prairie Terrace
Deep Floodplain Fill
Shallow Floodplain Fill

X
T-5
T-4
T-3
T-2
T-1
T-O

Trinity River
Cretaceous Uplands
Buckner Home-Hackberry Creek
Love Field-Bethel
Travis School-Farmers Branch
Pemberton Hill-Lewisville
Union Terminal-Carrollton
Floodplain

Glacial-Interglacial Theories
Fisk was perhaps the first to correlate alluvial terraces of
coastal plains streams--far-removed from direct glacial effects

46

Texas Archeological Society

--with eustatic changes in sea-level connected with glacial manifestations. Since neither continental glacial advances nor alpine
glacial maxima ever physically reached such regions, his theories are exceedingly valuable in correlation procedures.
In considering the Red River terrace sequence in Grant and
LaSalle Parishes, Fisk states, "The explanation of conditions
under which the Central Louisiana terrace materials were deposited must take into consideration an agency capable of alternating periods of down-cutting, with periods of alluvial drowning. Nothing in the Tertiary history of the Gulf Coast suggests
such an alternation. The glacial epoch, however, seems to offer
precisely the conditions required. It is now quite generally recognized that ice on the land must form from water withdrawn
from the sea; the glacial stages, therefore, were represented by
a lowering of sea-level and by erosion along stream systems.
With retreat of the glaciers, the ocean basins were replenished,
baselevel of streams was raised, and the streams filled the valleys with floodplain materials."
"The depositional stages of the terrace sequence appear to be
correlated with interglacial stages; the valley cutting stages
with glacial advance . . ." (italic ours.)
In like manner Antevs (1955) described downstream activities along the middle courses of river systems in the Southwest.
Speaking of the Middle Colorado near Austin, Texas, he says,
"... Here aggradation of the stream bed takes place mainly
during dry-age, upstream, arroyo-cutting because the large debris masses transported by big arroyo runs are dropped as the
water volume and the stream gradient decrease. Stream entrenchment takes place during relatively moist ages, when the
plant cover is good on the upper reaches, and as a consequence
the water volume in the middle sections is large and the water
relatively clear. A possible result is stream terraces. A good example of a relevant, middle-stream section, is the Texas Colorado River near Austin . . ." (italics ours).
Zeuner (1950) provides a graphic description of "thalassostatic river terraces": "Returning now to the terraces of the
rivers, it has been said that in the lower course, near the sea,

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas

47

the fluctuations of the sea-level prevail over the climatic rhythm.
Hence, river terraces formed under the influence of the changing sea-level may be called thalassostatic terraces. Since the sealevel was high in the interglacials (and relatively high, it may
be assumed, in the interstadials), we find that the mild phases
are characterized by compensatory aggradation, the river building up its bed as the sea-level gradually rises. The gravel sheets
deposited in this manner, therefore, contain predominantly
warm faunas .... On the other hand, when, during a glacial
phase, the sea-level was low, the gradient of the lower course
of the river was much increased, and the resulting erosion cut
a narrow valley, and sometimes a gorge, graded to the low sealevel of that time."
Zeuner appears to believe that this effect is fairly well restricted to the tidal reaches of lower river courses, but it should
be obvious that the alternation of such aggradational and erosional cycles would extend upstream through the entire coastal
plain. The recession of sea-leve! during the Pleistocene has been
estimated reliably as of a nature of some 300 to 600 feet; thus,
a stream such as the Trinity, as far as Dallas, could easily have
had its present relative elevation of 365 feet more than doubled,
with a consequent marked effect upon its present-day gradient.
Conversely, if all existing ice were to melt today, it is estimated
that sea-level might rise an additional 100 feet or more; this in
turn would definitely reduce further the present low gradient
of the Trinity at Dallas.
Flint (1957) expresses a somewhat similar theory near the
close of his chapter on the "Fluctuation of Sealevel": "...
Along considerable stretches of some rivers the general effect
of these slow fluctuations would have been twofold: (1) filling
of valleys with sediment by slackened streams, and (2) erosion
of valleys by accelerated streams..."
Therefore it would appear that the Trinity terrace sequence,
including the T-2 containing the Lewisville site, would be the
result of periods of an interglacial nature, and the intervening
valley cuts would be the result of glacial advances. The fauna
described in the Paleontological Section of this report supports

48

Texas Archeological Society

this conclusion, as it appears to indicate a climate certainly no
cooler than the present (interglacial?) and possibly somewhat
warmer than today.
General Pleistocene Correlations
Fisk found himself inconvenienced by his five definite cutting
cycles in correlating his terrace sequence with the accepted
Pleistocene series of four main glaciations. His answer was to
break the Wisconsin, or Fourth Glaciation, into two major
phases, an "Early Wisconsin" and a "Late Wisconsin," separated by a major interstadial to which he attributed the formation of the Prairie terrace. Recalling the long-standing controversy regarding the inclusion of the Iowan sub-stage in the
Wisconsin, as opposed to considering it a separate glaciation,
and in view of the fact that in either event it was separated
from the next sub-stage by a definite interstadial named the
"Peorian," it was logical for Fisk to indicate that his late terrace-building interstadial was the Peorian. In the light of the
current state of flux of the Late Pleistocene sequence, such a
name may or may not be useful or specifically correct at this
time.
Fisk’s correlation chart is herewith reproduced in part:
Post-Glacial ...................... Recent Alluvium
Late Wisconsin .................
Erosion interval
Peorian ........................... Prairie member
Early Wisconsin ...............
Erosion interval
Sangamon ..................
Montgomery member
Illinoian .......................... Erosion interval
Yarmouth ........................ Bentley member
Kansan .......................... Erosion interval
Aftonian
...................... Williana member
Nebraskan ......................
Erosion interval
The Prairie member, which Fisk in this chart assigns to the
Peorian, is correlated in the present paper with the Pemberton
Hill-Lewisville terrace of the Trinity, as has already been discussed.

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas

49

In any event, Fisk differentiated between an Early Wisconsin
and a Late Wisconsin, separated by a major interstadial to
which he attributed the Prairie terrace. It is perhaps remarkable that an interstadial could produce a terrace of a magnitude
comparable with those deposited in previous interglacials, but
such may be the case. Disregarding for the present the unestablished theory of five Pleistocene glaciations, with four intervening interglacials, it is certain that the Prairie and Pemberton
Hill-Lewisville terraces were deposited as floodplains prior to
the last major glacial event of the Pleistocene, whether called
"Late Wisconsin" or something else. On the Trinity, the general
fauna from the many exposures of the Pemberton Hill-Lewisville terrace (including the Lewisville site itself) is unquestionably Upper Pleistocene, with an abundance of extinct forms to
support any of these several possibilities.
All in all, a series of five glacial stages, with four intervening interglacials, plus a Post-Glacial period of deposition, would
best fit the terrace situation on the Trinity and Red Rivers. In
particular this scheme would provide an additional interglacial
later than the .Sangamon, to which the Prairie terrace stage
could be assigned. Until some such scheme develops, however,
Fisk’s correlation, reproduced above, must stand. The Pemberton Hill-Lewisville terrace (T-2) of the Trinity, at the Lewisville site and elsewhere, is here correlated with Fisk’s Prairie
member.
Should a fifth glacial stage be differentiated, then the Lewisville site terrace would fall in the sequence as follows:
Post-Glacial .... Floodplain and Union Terminal-Carrollton
Wisconsin ............................ Erosion interval
"New Interglacial". ........... Pemberton Hill-Lewisville
"New Glacial". ........................ Erosion interval
Sangamon ................ Travis School-Farmers Branch
Illinoian .............................. Erosion interval
Etc., etc.
In any case, the terrace containing the Lewisville site rather
definitely appears to represent a mild, warm interstadial or
interglacial period in the Late Pleistocene. This situation is in

5O

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

contrast to that of most Early Man sites in America, which are
associated with pluvials and cold-moist periods normally accompanying a glacial sub-stage maximum, or early in its decline.
In addition, while moist extremes are recorded in the Trinity
T-2 terrace at Lewisville apparently exceeding today’s precipitation, numerous alternations to the opposite, dry, extreme are
also evident, repeated times when caliche formed in a region
where caliche formation is out of the question today.
The terrace can scarcely be ascribed to the Recent because of
the extinct fauna included in it and the magnitude of the subsequent alluvial history.
Local Stratigraphy at the Lewisville Site
Fig. 8 illustrates the section of the Pemberton Hill-Lewisville
terrace (T-2) at the Lewisville site itself. The diagram is most
representative of the center area of the site, as to the east the
Lower Shuler laminated yellow sands were preserved in thicker
section. The erosional surface between the Lower Shuter sands
and the Upper Shuler clays sloped definitely down towards the
west, evidence of a channel-cut in this direction at that period.
In addition, the depth of the basal Hill gravels could not be
ascertained as none of the deepest gully cuts penetrated to bedrock. Only about three feet, at most, of the top of the gravels
were exposed anywhere at the site.
The local stratigraphy at the Lewisville site is as follows:
Bedrock. Presumably the Cretaceous Eagle Ford Shale, to
judge from numerous exposures immediately upstream and
downstream from the site, and also on the west side of Elm
Fork valley. Not exposed at the site itself, but revealed in the
recent Santa Fe Railroad cut just south of the dam, where an
identical section is displayed in an as yet uneroded condition.
Hill formation. Basal gravels of the Pemberton Hill-Lewisville terrace (T-2) of the Trinity River. Depth unknown at the
site, as only the topmost three feet were penetrated by the deepest gullies. Typical lithological content, displaying iron cementation in topmost levels into a tough conglomerate layer, including

Hearths and A~’tifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas

51

at Lewisville a cemented sandstone lens of some eight inches.
Highly mineralized fossil bone fragments, particularly proboscidean leg bones, horse teeth (large), and fragments of carapace
of very large land turtle (Testudo sp.), all thoroughly mineralized, as usual in this formation.
Lower Shuler formation. Laminated yellow sands, generally
stained by limonite but banded in areas with manganese-stained
layers. Calcareous zones and plates, with calcareous root-fillings
dependent. Varies in thickness at the site from a maximum of

LF_..WISVILLE 51TE ,.SECTION

UPPER

8HULER

FOR MATION

(WLLOW S^N V c Avs )

?
EAGLE

FORD 5HALE

BtEDROCK )

/

?

Fig. 8. Typical geologic section of T-2 terrace at Lewisville site. Hearth
levels indicated. Contact between Hill gravels and underlying bedrock not
visible at site, but observable in immediately adjacent exposures.

52

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

about 10 feet in the east wall of the pit, tapering to some three
feet at the center of the site, and to a total pinch-out in the
western area of the pit where the Upper Shuler rests disconformably directly upon the Hill gravels. This situation strongly
suggests channel-cutting of some nature to the west of the main
Lewisville site area in late Lower Shuler, or immediately postLower Shuler, time. No fossils have been observed in the Lower
Shuler formation at the site.
Upper Shuler formation. Sandy yellow clays, apparently the
result of successive layers of deposition of similar material
over a continuing period of time. At least seven distinct layers
are recognized, each representing individual flooding periods
with temporary surfaces established at the conclusion of each,
and with minor erosion and channel-filling evident. Layer 1 is
approximately two feet thick; Layer 2 is about three feet thick
on the average; Layers 3, 4, 5, and 6 vary from six inches to
as much as one and one-half feet thick; Layer 7, at the top, is
about five feet thick. Each layer is characterized by formation
of nodular caliche concretions at its surface, increasing progressively in size from bottom to top. Vague, whitish, "soft
caliche" zones are found throughout; calcareous fillings of holes
of rodents, crayfish, and roots are also present, especially in the
lower layers. Human occupation fire-hearths occurred at layer
surfaces: three atop Layer 1; 13 on the Layer 2 surface; one on
the Layer 3 surface; and four on the Layer 5 surface. Burned
bones occurred within the hearths, and unburned bones were
adjacent to the hearths on layer surfaces nearby. The fossils
are partially mineralized and caliche-encrusted. Artifacts were
found within and outside of the hearths. The hearths and associated fossils and artifacts are described in detail elsewhere in
this report.
Richards formation. Dark gray, very dry alluvium. Contains
tiny nodular caliche concretions throughout. No observed faunal
remains. Total of five-foot thickness. Obvious channel-fills into
surface of underlying Upper Shuler in places.
Disregarding local variations in thickness of the formations,
individual inclusions, and differing upstream lithologic provenience, the pattern of this particular terrace and its sub-forma-

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Nea.r Lewisville, Texas

53

tions can be duplicated and easily correlated on other stream
systems in the region. For example, this local Trinity River
expression can be matched with comparable exposures on the
Red River to the north, the Sabine and Sulphur systems to the
east and northeast, the Brazos at Waco to the south, and the
Leon even farther south and southwest. Along the Trinity and
its forks and tributaries, the sequence varies somewhat in thickness and lithologic origin, but the correlation is obvious.
In comparing and correlating the terraces of the Trinity with
those of the Red River as described by Fisk and others, it should
be pointed out that Fisk and his students have followed the
geologic technique of observing the terrace formations from a
macro-view, whereas the writers, as archeologists, have studied
the sub-formations of the Trinity terraces from a micro-view,
placing much greater emphasis on individual sub-formations
which, even though only a few inches thick, may represent an
important interval of a thousand years or more in the archeo~
logical sequence. With this consideration in mind, the published
descriptions can be seen to bear a satisfactory similarity to the
sequence described in this report.
Even as Gulf Coastal Plain stream terraces seem representative of the effects of interglacials and interstadials, and valleycuts tend to be correlated with glacial advances (or sub-stage
halts and readvances), so also is there a tempting possibility of
matching terrace sub-formation depositions and intervening
minor erosional disconformities with sub-stage waxing and
waning of the Pleistocene ice sheets. It is here that a word of
caution needs to be entered.
It should be apparent that in continental glaciations, alpine
glaciations, and even in non-glaciated regions where pluvial lake
beaches or sea-level beaches are concerned, in the practical
sense only the late, relatively minor (and progressively more
so) oscillations are preserved for interpretation, following the
maximum effect produced by the geologic phenomenon. Thus,
while glacial retreat "X" may have had five sub-stages (each
of which may include advances, halts, retreats, and readvances)
in its history, if Sub-stage No. 2 represented its maximum extent, then no more than the last three sub-stages of its retreat

54

Texas Archeological Society

are preserved for present geological study. Therefore, only the
glacial drifts or tills, the pluvial lake beach lines, the terrace
sub-formations, and the ocean beach-strands associated with its
progressive retreat stages, after the maximum, can be expected
to be preserved for a geological study.
Even so, the deposition of alluvial terrace fills, such as the
Hill gravels, must have begun shortly after the commencement
of retreat of the glaciations, following their maximum extension. This being the case, alluvial terrace formations of nonglaciated coastal regions, as at Lewisville, can be expected to
represent the period of degtaciation immediately following glacial maxima, plus the first half or more of the ensuing interglacial or interstadial period. The evidence at the Lewisville site
indicates that a progressive retreat series of some four episodes
of retreat-halt-readvance must have occurred in the deglacial
and the ensuing interglacial (or interstadial), following the
valley cut which preceded the T-2 terrace deposition. This cut is
correlated at the latest with "Early Wisconsin."
IDENTIFICATION OF PALEONTOLOGICAL REMAINS
Faunal material was relatively abundant at the Lewisville
site, although generally quite fragmentary and usually in the
form of bone scrap. Some floral materia! was also present. These
materials were concentrated in, and in the immediate vicinity
of, the numerous hearths. Collections of known provenience
over the past six years, and their several identifications, are
described in the following paragraphs.
1. River Basin Surveys. White (personal communication) lists
the following from his original paleontological salvage work:
Bison sp.
Equus sp.
Glyptodon sp.
deer
packrat
"large land turtle of Gopherus type"
hackberry seeds

He~rths and Arti/acts Of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas

55

The bison specimen consisted of a skull and four cervical
vertebrae, which today are in the U. S. National Museum. Unfortunately they have not yet been unpacked and identified as
to species. According to some observers at the time of excavation, the size and straightness of the horn cores suggested affiliation with the Bison antiquus taylori type, but this is not yet
scientifically confirmed.
White’s test excavation of one of the hearths yielded a horse
vertebra, split deer bones, bones of packrat, and hackberry
seeds, all burned. In addition, he recovered from the general
site area a horse jaw, glyptodon scutes, and carapace fragments
of his "Gopherus type" land turtle.
After considerable communication with White on the matter,
the authors feel that all of his finds were probably derived from
what is now referred to as the Layer 2 surface. His excavation
pit for the bison was still to be observed upon this surface until
the rising lake destroyed the site.
2. Frick Laboratory, American Museum of Natural History.
Representative material collected by the writers has been most
generously studied and identified by Morris F. Skinner. His
summary is as follows:
Scientific Name
Canis sp. (large)
Canis sp. (small)
Euarctos sp. (small)
Platygonus ?alemanii
Procyon ?lotor
Mephitis sp.
Equus sp. (large) caballine group
Equus sp. (medium) caballine
?Bison
Odocoileus virgmianus A (small)
Odocoileus virginianus B (large)
Camelops
Proboscidean
Cynomys ?ludovicianus

Vernacular
Name
wolf
coyote
bear
peccary
raccoon
skunk
horse
horse
bison
deer
deer
camel
mammoth
prairie dog

Extinct Living
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

56

Texas Archeological Society

Sciurus
Citellus
Sylvilagus sp.
Lepus sp.
Neotoma sp.
Peromyscus sp.
Microtus sp.
Scalopus ?aquaticus
Testudo (large)
Terrapene (large)
Colubrid group A
Colubrid group B
Amphibian or Reptile
Pisces
Ayes

squirrel
ground squirrel
cottontail
jack rabbit
packrat
white-footed mouse
meadow mouse
mole
X
tortoise
box turtle, large X
snake, small
snake, large
frog or lizard
small fish
bird

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

Several of the identifications were uncertain due to the nature of the material furnished Skinner. ?Bison is based upon a
fragmentary tooth; bison teeth are not diagnostic for specific
identification. "Proboscidean" is based upon a femur-head and
one tusk; without teeth or more of the skeleton, identification
of the species of mammoth is not possible. Nine jaws and one
maxilla of rabbit presented a difficult problem of identification
upon which Skinner suggested further study. The Colubrid
snakes are represented only by vertebrae, and the "amphibian
or reptile" only by small, fragmentary limb bones. The Pisces
specimen is comprised of only two vertebrae. The Aves determination is based only upon fragments of a large egg shell.
3. University of Michigan. At Skinner’s suggestion that the
turtle fauna was worthy of a specialist’s attention, these materials were referred to Thomas M. 0elrich. Oelrich’s report
on Skinner’s "Testudo (large)" and "Terrapene (large)" is as
follows:
Testudo sp.
Terrapene canaliculata Hay
Oelrich confirmed that both types were extinct, but because
of the fragmentary nature of the Testudo carapace remains,
specific identification of this material was not possible.

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas

57

4. University of Michigan. Through the good offices of Skinner
and Oelrich, Claude W. Hibbard agreed to examine those of
the small mammal forms which presented special identification
problems. The following are his assessments:
Mephitis mephitis ............ stripe& skunk
Proeyon lotor ............... raccoon
Cynomys ludovicianus ........ prairie dog
Scalopus aquaticus ........... eastern mole
Sciurus niger ................ fox squirrel
Microtus sp .................. meadow vole
Peromyscus gossipinus ....... cotton mouse
Peromyscus leucopus or
maniculatus ............... white-footed or deer mouse
Sylvilagus floridanus ......... eastern cottontail rabbit
Lepus (new species?) ......... jack rabbit family
5. Smithsonian Institution. John W. Harrington of Southern
Methodist University arranged to have W. F. Foshag identify
the articulated skull, jaws, and vertebrae of a snake, found by
a student on a geological field trip to the Lewisville site borrow
pit (Harrington, 1953). Foshag’s identification is as follows:
Family Colubridae, marked similarity to genus
Drymarchon.
This grass snake was reported to have been found in the
vicinity of White’s finds, and hence must have come from the
general site area.
6. Southern Methodist University. The snail and mussel faunas, recovered almost exclusively from within the hearths themselves, have been identified by Elmer P. Cheatum. Collaboration
was furnished by Henry van der Shalie of the University of
Michigan.
Gastropoda:
Stenotrema monodon (Rockett)
Stenotrema monodon aliciae (Pils)
Anguispira alternata (Say)
Polygyra cf, texasiana (Moricand)
Mesomphix sp.

58

Texas Archeological Society

Pelecypoda :
Fusconaia cf. undata (Barnes)
Quadrula frustulosa (Lea)
Amblema plicata
7. Miscellaneous. A burned nest of the mud-dauber wasp was
recovered from Hearth 2. The presence of crayfish is indicated
both by caliche-filted crotovinas suggestive of crayfish holes
(distinguished from larger ones suggestive of holes of the
prairie dog, both types of holes being distinguishable from
irregular root holes which were also present) and by the pres~
ence of raccoon, whose diet is normally made up in large measure of crayfish. Finally, a paleobotanical identification: the
writers collected large numbers of hackberry seeds of the general Celtis family, which occurred without exception in the
hearths.
Comments on identifications. White’s bison is very probably of
an extinct type, although this cannot be stated with absolute
surety. Skinner’s bison identification has been conservatively
referred to the "living" classification on the basis of the fragmentary tooth specimen, completely non-diagnostic in itself. It
is worthy of note that no identification of the living form, Bison
bison, has ever been made from the Upper Shuler geologic formarion along the Trinity River system. With the large number
of extinct Pleistocene forms, including extinct bison, identified
elsewhere in the immediate area from this same formation, it
would be most surprising for the bison from the Lewisville site
.to be anything but an extinct type.
As for the mammoth remains, identified only as "Proboscidean," it should be noted that mammoth bones are common in
the Upper Shuler formation along the Trinity. To date, all identified specimens have been referred to Elephas columbi, and thus
it would be unique for the two occurrences at Lewisville (one
from Layer 1 and one from Layer 2) to be anything else. To
eliminate another possibility, there is no known record of
Mastodon from the Upper Shuler.
While rabbits have changed remarkably little since the Pliocene, the numerous rabbit occurrences at Lewisville are still

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas

59

informative in nature. The ordinary cottontail, Sylvilagus floridarius, is present in large numbers in the area today. The modern representative of the jack rabbit, Lepus californicus, is
likewise common, though in distinctly smaller numbers than the
cottontail. At the time of the Lewisville site occupation, however, the Lepus family representative does not seem to have
been the same as the existing jack rabbit. This may indicate
that enough time has passed since then for a sub-specific change
to have taken place in the evolution of this widely distributed
prairie animal.
Not included in the faunal specimens submitted for identification was a large camel skull found near White’s bison excavation. Before this unquestionable example of Camelops could be
properly removed and preserved, unknown persons looted and
destroyed the specimen. Since Skinner’s Camelops identification
was based upon the limb bones of an immature individual, the
last specimen almost certainly represented a second, adult, occurrence of the type in the site.
The two sizes of deer identified raise interesting questions.
The smaller Odocoileus virginianus A is markedly suggestive
of the small Sonoran type found today in North Mexico adjacent
to the Texas border, considerably south of the Lewisville region.
The larger version, Odocoileus virginianus B, is today more
comparable with specimens found far to the north in the Eastern United States, for instance in Michigan. Neither sub-species
seems typical of the white-tail deer found today in Texas. It
may have been that climatic differences occasioned the occurrence of the smaller type this far north in Lewisville times,
while lack of modern "trophy-hunting" pressure may have
allowed, in those early days, the survival of larger, and older,
bucks of the typically modern Texas deer.
In the identified snail fauna, it is most significant that the
two species most common today in the area are not represented
by a single specimen in the Lewisville collections. Conversely,
of all the Lewisville snails recorded from the hearths, only
Polygyra cf. texasiana is found today in the immediate region,
and then only rarely. As these organisms are highly specialized
in climatic adaptation, and have remained relatively static, in

60

Texas Archeological Society

terms of evolutionary change, over vast periods of geologic time,
they indicate a climate different from that of today.
If we combine the several vertebrate identifications, add
White’s glyptodon finds, and rule in favor of an extinct form of
bison as discussed previously, some nine of the 30 possible forms
of vertebrates at Lewisville appear to be extinct, and in addition there may be a new variety of jack rabbit. It is well known
that, almost without exception, the smaller vertebrate forms,
as well as the mollusks, have not evolved new species in such
a short and recent a period as the Pleistocene. As a result, it
seems most probable that the entire assemblage at Lewisville
is Late Pleistocene, rather than Recent, in date.
Numerical occurrence. Beyond the specific identifications, a
review of the numerical occurrence of animal forms at Lewisville brings out significant facts.
Overwhelmingly, either inside or outside the hearths, land
turtles are the most common vertebrate form. At least 24 individuals have been recorded by the writers, including three of
Testudo and 21 of Terrapene canalicuIata. In addition, there is
White’s possible Gopherus specimen, as yet not officially identified. Testudo and Terrapene canaliculata are known to be extinct; the Gopherus specimen is still uncertain as to its evolutionary status. Land turtles are relatively low in the animal
scale and are not considered prime examples of rapid evolution
and adaptation; therefore, the fact that extinct forms are the
most numerous item at the site, to the practical exclusion of
living types, suggests that a considerable period of time has
elapsed or that there has been a major faunal change due to
climate shifts.
The next most common vertebrates are the rabbits, with 13
examples. The majority, as today, represent the living cottontail. It is also not unusual that the minority (also as today in
the region) are of the Lepus or jack rabbit group; but the
Lewisville specimens probably represent a new species, which
is possibly now extinct--and is certainly extinct in this area.
The specimens of the two sizes of Odocoileus virginianus rep-

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas

61

resent probably nine individuals. Both sizes of this species of
deer are living forms today.
Mice represent some nine individuals, all of living forms.
Eight seemingly are Peromyscus, while one is Microtus. Zoologists consider Microtus recently extinct in Texas, the last recorded occurrence being in the early 1900’s in extreme Southeast Texas.
Combined, the specimens of the two sizes of horse are believed
to total eight individuals. Two are of the large type and six
represent the medium-sized Equus. Both forms are extinct.
Eight examples of the living prairie dog occur in the site. In
historic times, this animal approached the Lewisville region no
closer than Archer County, Texas, some 100 miles to the west.
Its presence in some numbers at the Lewisville site suggests
more arid conditions than today, as indicated also by the caliche
formation in the Upper Shuler formation.
Next in numerical importance are raccoon with 5 individuals,
and woodrat (packrat) with four, both forms living in the area
today.
Of the remaining scattered occurrences, the extinct forms are
as follows: mammoth, two; bison (presumed extinct), two;
camel, two; peccary, one; and glyptodon, one.
The remaining living forms are: Colubrid snakes, five; skunk,
two; fox squirrel and ground squirrel, two; birds, two; bear,
one; wolf, one; coyote, one; mole, one; frog or lizard, one; and
fish, one.
Of the three species of mussel recovered, all are living forms
throughout the vast Mississippi drainage. Only Amblema plicata, from Hearth 15, is useful in interpretation as it is known
to prefer sluggish waters, ooze and muck best of all. This suggests a possible cut-off ox-bow of the ancient Elm Fork near
the Lewisville site at the time of occupation, a circumstance that
in turn postulates a choked stream bed with a meandering
channel, the gradient having been reduced until it was quite low.
The mud-dauber wasp, the presumed crayfish, and the hackberry trees presumed to be in the vicinity, tell us little about

62

Texas Archeological Society

the environment of the site at the time of occupation other than
by the fact that in modern distribution they are neither arctic
nor tropical.
INFERRED CLIMATE OF THE OCCUPATION
A number of considerations indicate that the climate prevailing in the Lewisville region at the time of occupation must
not have been greatly different from that of today; certainly
no cooler, and quite possibly somewhat warmer, at least in the
winters. In the alternation of precipitation cycles, it does appear
that the moist and dry extremes may both have exceeded present-day records, but within the framework, and against the
background, of a temperature average as warm as, or warmer
than, that observed today. At either extreme, it is suggested by
the evidence that the present conditions of timbered streamdraws running through grassy, upland prairies, were merely
accentuated or reduced, from time to time.
Climatic conditions of the past several thousand years are
those of an interglacial or major interstadial, if they do not
indeed signal the end of the Pleistocene and the beginning of
an entirely new epoch. Many articles dealing with the weather
in the past few years have pointed out the current definitely
warmer trend.
Therefore, the evidence strongly indicates that the climate of
the Lewisville site occupation was that of an interglacial or
major interstadial interval comparable to the present. The presence of extinct fauna rules out a Recent date. Considered as a
whole, the terrace--including the older forms from the gravels
below the occupational strata--could date from the last interglacial or any of the succeeding Wisconsin interstadials; in any
case, it is certainly Late Pleistocene in date. The geology of the
alluvial sequence points to an interglacial or to a major interstadial between two pronounced cycles of glacial activity within
the Wisconsin, or Fourth, Glaciation.
Most of the flora and fauna found at the site demonstrate
today a wide range of habitat within the temperate zone. This
conclusion is based on observation of the environment of iden-

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas

63

tical modern species, and upon living forms which are related
to Lewisville species and are assumed to have possessed similar
environmental adaptations.
Such generalized temperate zone forms indicate that, much as
today, neither a severe boreal nor a strong tropica! displacement
of climatic zones was in effect during the time of occupation.
Certain individual species suggest a somewhat warmer climate
than today, and a number attest to extremes of both more moist
and dryer climate than at present. The total absence of any representative of a "cold fauna" may not be considered unduly
significant this far south, but the presence of types more common now in warmer regions--in a few cases, actually confined
to warmer climatic zones--is noteworthy, as today’s climate is
considered to be definitely that of an interglacial, or at least
an interstadiah
The Lewisville site falls in the southern half of the area
between 40° and 50°F. January isotherms (McNally, 1956).
Denton County, in which Lewisvil!e is located, has a January
norm of 44.5°F., based on the last 34 years’ record maintained
by the U. S. Weather Bureau. Minimum temperature recorded
in this period is --3°F. ; average dates for first and last killing
frosts are, respectively, November 10 and March 27 (McGregor,
1955). While mild by most Northern Hemisphere standards, the
climate today in Denton County: even in the present-day interglacial or interstadial, is not friendly to sub-tropical flora and
fauna. The average 132-day killing frost period each Winter
would discourage almost any truly "warm" assemblage, and
the recorded maximum low of --3°F.--even if sporadic in occurrence-would complete the job..
Therefore, it is most significant that a number of forms which
normally prefer a warmer climate today than that in Denton
County, should be recorded at the Lewisville site.. This is interpreted as definite evidence of interglacial or interstadial conditions at the time of occupation. It is well established that most,
if not a!l, of the interglacials--and a number of the interstadials
--produced a higher average temperature in the Northern Hemisphere than exists at present.

64

Texas Archeological Society

The remains of the lower orders of animals are perhaps most
instructive, since they are the least adaptive to environmental
changes.
Undoubtedly the most common vertebrate fossils at the site
are the land turtlesterrapins and tortoises. Of these, Terrapene canaliculata comprises probably 90% or more, being represented by charred, fragmentary specimens in 12 of the 18
hearths investigated, plus numerous unburned examples adjacent to, or on the same stratigraphic level with, the general
hearth-site area. The large Testudo species are represented by
the minor proportion of turtle remains, definitely burned specimens being found only in Hearth 2, and unburned specimens
being in the form of only a few fragments of carapace found
elsewhere throughout the site.
T. canaliculata is considered to be indistinguishable in all
characteristics, except its distinctly larger size, from T. carolina,
living today. It is unquestionably the ancestor of the living
form. The known and studied Late Pleistocene localities of T.
canaliculata are--in addition to Lewisville--Florida, San Patricio County in Coastal South Texas, and Friesenhahn Cavern
in Bexar County, Texas (Milstead, 1956). All of these locations,
except Lewisville, fall well south of the 50°F. January isotherm
today, and thereby suggest a Pleistocene climate warmer than
that of today at Lewisville. A very closely related species, T.
llanensis, described from Southwest Kansas, have been interpreted as evidence of an interglacial period there (Hibbard,
1955). It is also informative that the group represented today
by T. carolina, favors a wooded habitat more common to the
Southeastern United States, suggesting more moist conditions
than those now prevailing at Lewisville.
Today, the existing species of Testudo are confined to the
tropics of North and South America (Williams, 1950). Even
the living Nearctic branch of the Gopherus family, restricted as
it is to the southern Gulf States and Atlantic Coastal States,
South Texas, and Southern California, inhabits the warmest
regions of the United States. Therefore, a large, extinct example of Testudo at Lewisville is very definitely considered to be
evidence of an interglacial or interstadial climate, warmer by

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas

65

some degree than that of today. The presence of Testudo also
indicates a more humid environment.
Among the five species of land snails identified in charred
condition in 12 of the 18 Lewisville hearths investigated, it is
highly significant that neither of the two most common snail
species of the region today is represented by a single specimen.
On the other hand, four of the five species at Lewisville can
scarcely be found in the Lewisville region today; the fifth, Polygyra cf. texasiana, can be collected in the area, but not easily.
The first four, Stenotrema monodon, Stenotrema ~nonodon aliciae, Mesomphix species, and Anguispira alternata, are more
typical of present-day, better-watered, humid environments. Today, the Stenotrema types are to be found in the vicinity of the
springs around San Marcos, in South Central Texas. The Anguispira specimens are to be collected in the "Big Thicket"-a sub-tropical remnant in Polk, Tyler, and Hardin Counties, in
the extreme Southeast Texas region. Both areas are distinctly
warmer and more moist (because of the Balcones Fault springs
in the San Marcos area, and because of heavier annual rainfall
in the "Big Thicket") than the Lewisville area today. Mesomphix
is to be found today in the better-watered forest regions from
Louisiana to Michigan. Polygyra has a variable habitat, ranging
from deep woodland to heavy turf on grassy prairie.
Glyptodon, present at Lewisville, is recorded only from the
southern United States, even in interglacials. Without doubt
this is a South American immigrant, its range restricted to
warm climatic conditions. The living relative, the armadillo, has
been until recently restricted to South Texas and portions of
Southwest Arizona. Very recent expansion--perhaps in part via
tourist transplantation and in part because of modern climatic
warming changes--has moved the northern edge of its range
into Northeast Texas, Southern Oklahoma, and even Arkansas
and North Louisiana. In any event, the range of the living member of the family, and the range indicated by the recorded
occurrences of the extinct Glyptodon, is largely restricted to the
present sub-tropical regions of the United States. Rare as its
fossil records are, Glyptodon at Lewisville is not an indicator
of killing frosts or sub-zero weather at the time of occupation.

66

Texas Archeological Society

The living peccary (Pecari angulatus) probably extended over
most of Texas, the southwest corner of Arkansas, and parts of
Southern Arizona in very recent historical and prehistoric times.
The presence of its presumed ancestor, Platygonus alemanii, at
Lewisville suggests a climate certainly no more rigorous than
that of today. That this extinct form is also recorded as far
north as Kentucky in fossil form may possibly be attributed to
interglacial northward extension of range in excess even of
recent times. Today, the living peccary--or "javelina" is restricted to extreme Southwest Texas (below San Antonio) and
Southern Arizona, southward through Central and South America as far as Patagonia.
Although living peccaries run in packs, they never exist in
such numbers to be a major part of a faunal population in any
given area. They constitute a rare fossil, indeed, in known sites
of Early Man. Likewise: fossils of Glyptodon are rarely associated with Early Man sites. That both occur at Lewisville is
therefore a remarkable coincidence, very possibly suggesting
their relative abundance in the region, although stil! in small
total numbers. This circumstance would, in turn, strengthen
the theory that the climate at the time of the Lewisville occupation was somewhat warmer than today.
The occurrence of Microtus (meadow mouse) at Lewisville
is interesting. The recorded modern occurrences in Texas are
limited to two, both reported about 50 years ago: one from the
Guadalupe Mountains in the far west (in an Alpine biotic zone),
and one in extreme Southeast Texas near Beaumont. Since the
time of these reports, exhaustive search by naturalists has failed
to produce another example, leading to the conclusion that
Microtus no longer occurs in the region. The meadow mouse is
considered to belong in more moist areas, and its occurrence at
Lewisville is in agreement with some of the other faunal occurrences there which we have already reviewed.
Cynomys ludovicianus, the prairie dog, almost equals the
horses and deer in frequency of occurrence at Lewisville. This
form is unquestionably representative of semi-arid grasslands,
and is indicative of dryer conditions than today at the site.

Hearths and Artifact~ of Early Ma~ Near Lei~isville, Texas

67

Historically, the eastern edge of the range of the prairie dog
was in Archer County, Texas, 100 miles west of Lewisville. The
average annual precipitation in Archer County is 24.6 inches,
in contrast to 35.0 inches in Denton County. Obviously the occurrence of this species, in considerable numbers, suggests the
dry extremes of the climatic fluctuations during the span of
occupation at the Lewisville site. Even in the present environraent of timbered stream valleys and grassy uplands, there are
no prairie dogs on the uplands; yet at the time of Lewisville
this form must have been relatively abundant in the area.
Formation of caliche, both in nodular concretion form and in
vague, "soft caliche" zones, at each of the successive levels in
the Upper Shuler formation at Lewisville, is most significant.
By accepted standards, this circumstance requires a reduction
in annual rainfall to less than 14 inches per year--a marked
change from the present, and similarly different from the humid
climate indicated by the numerous evidences interpreted and
described above. That this dry oscillation occurred often and
regularly during the Lewisville occupation is amply recorded in
the caliche formation at each successive layer surface in the
Upper Shuler formation. Red-burned caliche nodules and unburned nodules in the hearths conclusively illustrate that the
human occupation occurred both before and after some of the
dry periods. The presence in the hearths of faunal remains
pertaining to both moist and dry conditions confirms this conclusion.
It may well be that "wet" and "dry" are relative terms as
regards the formation of caliche. In reality, "net precipitation,"
the quantity of moisture actually available to plants and animals, may be the determining factor. Higher temperatures in a
time of moderate rainfall may so increase the evaporation that
the "net precipitation" may only be equal to that of a "dry"
period. While not provable geologically, this is an attractive
and plausible theory, strongly supported by a comparison of
rainfall records in Nebraska and the Texas Panhandle country.
Both areas experience similar rainfall, but the evaporation differences make for more moist conditions in Nebraska than exist
400 miles due south in the Texas Panhandle region.

68

Texas Archeological Society

Most authorities do not feel that evidence of a dry climate in
non-glaciated regions is suggestive of a time of glacial advance.
This opinion is in accord with the proposed interglacial or major
interstadial interpretation of the geology and paleontology at
Lewisville. That both dry and wet cycles alternate is, again, in
favor of the interglacial-interstadial theory. That both grasslands and forest types of fauna occur together at Lewisville is
strongly indicative of the mixed condition of timbered draws in
an area of upland grasslands, such as exists at Lewisville today.
The human occupation, although covering a considerable span
of time, is considered to be more closely associated with the
wetter phases. Everything seems to suggest a period warmer
than today, perhaps at times more moist, and most probably
representative of an interglacial or major interstadial epoch.
As a final consideration in this discussion of inferred past
climate, we note that it is possible to argue that extinct faunal
types may not necessarily have had the same climatic adaptations as their living relatives. In this vein, paleontologic finds
both north and south of present ranges may be quoted. But
until such geographical displacements can be unquestionably
interpreted in the light of recognizable periods of glacial advance or of interglacial recession, such "variable adaptation"
theories are meaningless. In other words, unless a member of
a present-day tropical family can be shown to have existed in
the north during a period of glacial advance, or a cold-climate
form can be shown to have lived in the south during an interstadial, an occurrence does not perforce indicate a different
adaptation from that of living representatives of the same
group. It may simply demonstrate interglacial extension of
warm faunas or glacial extension of cold forms.
RADIOCARBON DATINGS
Through the generosity and cooperation of the Humble Oil &
Refining Company, Production Research Division, Houston,
Texas, the Lewisville site materials have yielded two different
radiocarbon age determinations. These were the first to be associated with the Clovis projectile point type and, thereby, possibly with the Llano Complex (Sellards, 1952).

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas

69

Primarily concerned with dating geologic formations of Recent alluvium and sediments, the Humble laboratory has also
handled a considerable number of archeological samples. The
first group of these has recently been published (Brannon et al.,
1957), including those from Lewisville.
Special thanks and appreciation are due to H. N. Fisk, director; C. R. Horcutt, assistant director; H. Dayton Wilde; Milton
Williams; and Weldon Whitaker, for many courtesies and invaluable services. Williams provided most of the contact work
and Whitaker personally processed the samples.
Five different carbon samples were submitted, of which the
first and fifth yielded datings.
Lewisville Sample No. 1 (Humble 0-235) occurred in place
in Square 13 of the Hearth 1 excavations as a rich pocket of
carbonized material, roughly three inches in diameter and seven
inches long, in the heavily red-burned hearth clay (Fig. 3).
This was only 20 inches from the Clovis point, likewise imbedded in the red-burned hearth clay of Square 13. Both the
charred material and the projectile point occurred at the same
level, with some of the charred matter extending a few inches
deeper into the hearth due to the angular inclination of the
pocket. E. S. Barghoorn, consulting paleobotanist for Humble,
identified the carbonized material of the sample as "fibrous
vegetable material." The date determined for this sample is
expressed as being "more than 37,000 years B.P."
Lewisville Sample No. 5 (Humble 0-248) came from the
charred remains of four small logs in Hearth 8. After the
surprising result of the first dating, Barghoorn and Whitaker
were flown to the site to select a sample of different provenience
for purposes of checking the first date. According to Barghoorn,
the charred logs were unquestionably "wood charcoal" and of
such purity that only hand-sorting and routine processing were
required for dating. Geologically, Hearth 8 should have been
contemporary with Hearth 1, as it occurred upon the same
stratigraphic surface level approximately 300 feet northeast.
A relatively continuous series of hearths and adjacent faunal
remains connected the two over the intervening area, and

70

Texas Archeological Society

Hearth 8 itself lay among several other hearths and faunal
occurrences, including White’s bison excavation, the camel skull,
the large deer antler, and the coyote jaw. The date for this
sample is likewise expressed as being" "more than 37,000 years
B.P."
The agreement of two different dating runs, based upon two
different carbon samples of different materials, from two different hearths in the site, is considered to be significant.
Essentially, both samples were beyond the effective range of
the counting apparatus, as the recorded radiations from the
samples were less than the probable error of the background
count of the machine. Hence the terminology of simply being
"more than 37,000." The "dates" are minimum expressions.
The carbon dioxide gas-counting technique is employed by
the Humble Radiocarbon Laboratory, possessing the several
advantages of increased range, smaller sample necessary, elimination of radioactive contamination, and routine removal of
carbonates by the acid bath.
Discussion of the current controversies, some supporting and
others suggesting the invalidation of the entire technique of
radiocarbon dating, is beyond the scope of this paper. A final
and conclusive settlement of the matter may be years in the
offing. In the meantime, it is well to record that large quantities
of additional charcoal from these two particular tests, plus that
from other hearths excavated later at the Lewisville site, have
been sealed and preserved for possible future cross-dating with
other laboratories. This material will be available when, and if,
advances in the technique may extend the range or improve the
method of dating.
OTHER EVIDENCES OF EARLY MAN IN THE
LEWISVILLE REGION
Sites and finds of Early Man at several places in the region
in which the Lewisville site lies suggest the presence of man at
the same geologic level and with very similar paleontological
associations. These occurrences, inconclusive as each may be in

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas

71

its own right, serve to demonstrate that the Lewisville Site is
not an isolated instance floating in a geographica! vacuum.
Lagow Sand Pit (Fig. 9, No. 2)
The "Lagow Sand Pit Man" is a fossilized partial human
skeleton recovered by Ellis W. Shuler, of the Southern Methodist University Department of Geology, in 1920. These remains
occurred in a large sand pit, the Lagow Sand Pit, just east of
the present State Fair Grounds in Dallas. The pit has since
been refilled, and is today occupied by the locomotive roundhouse of the Texas & Pacific Railroad. The early date of the
find, in terms of the development of American archeology, is

UPPER

TRINITY

RIVER

EARLY MAN ~ITES

3- PE.MBERTOM HILL.
Fig. 9. Occurrence of Early Man localities along Upper Trinity River
drainage system. (1) and (4) in Denton County; (2), (3), and (5) within
Dallas city limits, Dallas County; (6) i~ .~Iend~on County.

72

Texas Archeological Society

undoubtedly responsible for the undeserved obscurity of this
important discovery.
O{ great importance for this paper is the geologic assessment
of Lagow. As described by Shuler (1923), the Lagow Sand Pit
was excavated into the Trinity River terrace that stands some
70 feet above present stream-grade. This fact can be proved
by reference to the present-day Dallas City Plan Commission
maps, which have accurate five-foot contour control. The terrace
is thereby identified as the Pemberton Hill-Lewisville (T-2)
terrace discussed in the geologic section of this report. To further demonstrate this correlation, Lagow lies on the west bank
of White Rock creek above its confluence with the main Trinity
and its present, refilled location, is located between the 445 and
450 contour lines; while the present elevation of Pemberton Hill
itself the type location of the T-2 terrace--is 446 feet, on the
opposite (east) side of White Rock creek and only a mile downstream.
Further, the terrace of Elm Fork which includes the Lewisville site has been cited as the Pemberton Hill equivalent of the
T-2 on this major tributary. Thus the Trinity system T-2 is
today called the Pemberton Hill-Lewisville terrace.
Again referring to the work of Shuler, the section at Lagow
matches those of both Pemberton Hill and Lewisville, with the
provenience of the human remains seemingly in the Upper
Shuler formation of the terrace sequence, precisely as the occurrence of the Early Man evidences at the Lewisvitle site. Shuler’s
description of the formation at Lagow bearing the human remains is as follows: "... sandy clay with light calcareous segregations [nodules?] and streaks [soft caliche?]. Texture . . .
varies. Color yellow." The writers have personally studied the
residual exposures at the Lagow locality, and confirm the presence of a typical Upper Shuler sequence, including an unmistakable Upper Shuler yellow sandy clay. In addition, the Lagow
Man bones today, apparently having never been thoroughly
cleaned, still exhibit yellow sandy clay in hollows and crevices,
indistinguishable from materials on similar uncleaned animal
bones from the Upper Shuler at both Lewisville and Pemberton
Hill.

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas

73

The obvious fossilization of the Lagow Man bones is quite
comparable to that exhibited in animal specimens from both
Lewisville and Pemberton Hill. No human remains of later geologic provenience in the region demonstrate such a degree of
fossilization. This is yet another confirmation of Shuler’s observations. An example of the degree of fossilization is the
chemical analysis of the human bones in relation to those of
C¢melops, from the same stratum, that Shuler supervised in
1923 :
Human :
P.,O~ ................. 30.0%
CaO

................
32.3%
{ 57.8%
Camel :
P.~O~ ................. 31.5%
CaO

................

31.0%
{ 55.4%
George Grant MacCurdy examined the specimens and reported as follows: "The human bones from Dallas comprise
segments of the right and left femur, right and left tibia, and
right fibula; also the left horizontal ramus of the lower jaw
and several fragments of the calotte. All presumably belong to
one individual, a large adult male of the modern type. This is
about all one could say without having in hand more of the
skeleton." The skeletal material is illustrated here in Fig. I0.
No artifacts accompanied the Lagow find, so far as is known.
Alfred S. Lull (1921) identified the following fauna from the
same stratum (i.e., the Upper Shuler formation): antelope
(Tetrameryx shuleri); mammoth (Elephas columbi) ; camel
(Camelops huerfanensis dallasi); bison (large, but non-specific) ; and deer (Odocoileus species). Al! are general Late Pleistocene forms in the area, of which only Tetrameryx does not
also occur at Lewisville.
With the positive geologic correlation here proposed for Lewisville and Lagow, the radiocarbon datings at Lewisville assume
an added significance, if valid. The dates should also equate, approximately, with the Lagow skeleton; if this is true, the "Lagow Sand Pit Man" may well be one of the very earliest exam-

Fig. 10. Bones of the "Lagow Sand Pit Man," with the exception of
animal bone at extreme upper left. For location of find, see Fig. 9, No. 2;
occurred in same geologic stratum as Lewisville site.

Hearths and A~’tifacts of Ec~rly Man Near Lewisville, Texas

75

ples of human remains in the Western Hemisphere. Whether
or not Lagow man also made Clovis points, as at Lewisville, is
a moot question, scientifically unprovable at present. However,
the presence of ~wo different types of man at so early a date,
only 30 miles apart, and geologically contemporaneous, would
be rather remarkable in view of the otherwise sparse evidence
of Early Man at such a level.
Pemberton Hill (Fig. 9, No. 3)
Located at the corner of Loop 12 highway and Pemberton
Hill road in southeast Dallas, Pemberton Hill lies on the east
side of White Rock creek near its confluence with the valley of
the main Trinity. This is approximately one mile downstream
from Lagow and some 30 miles from Lewisville.
In the section on geology and the immediately foregoing discussion of Lagow Sand Pit, it has been demonstrated that Pemberton Hill is directly correlated with both Lewisville and Lagow
in terms of such factors as geologic section, terrace identification, and height above stream grade. A product of extensive
gravel and sand working over many years, with consequent
erosion of the pit walls and slopes, the site presents a striking
appearance comparable in every particular to the Lewisville site.
Aside from its important geologic interest, Pemberton Hill
has attracted the attention of the writers for the past five years
because of the large numbers of fossil animal bones eroding
from the Upper Shuler formation at the site. Mammoth, horse,
and large bison are unquestionably present, although the collections have not been submitted for final identification.
tn November, 1956, a broken center-section of a spear point
or knife blade (Fig. 11, B) was discovered definitely in place
at the site, in an Upper Shuler formation fil! of a channel-cut
in the underlying Lower Shuler sands. Despite the commercial
removal of much of the overlying deposits, the artifact was still
some six feet below the present, disturbed surface, and solidly
imbedded in Upper Shuler material, rather obviously in its
lowest layer since the cut containing the Upper Shuler was intrusive into the underlying Lower Shuler sands. The writers

76

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

also observed tiny flecks of charcoal in the immediate vicinity
of the find at the time of discovery.
Of an opaque white flint, the center-section could well have
been from a Clovis type projectile point, but above the short
fluting, as no indication of fluting is present in the fragment.
Certainly the chipping, edges, and cross-section do not belie this
possibility. It is also quite possible that it is a center-section
from a knife blade, rather well made.
In January, 1957, two amateur paleontologists of Dallas, Bob
H. Slaughter, Jr., and Laith Starrett, found a second artifact
at Pemberton Hill. These two investigators had been attracted
to the site by the fossil bone occurrences and were shown the
location of the center-section find, with cautions to watch for
any other human evidences. Their discovery was a large, rather
boldly flaked, flint blade (Fig. 11, C) just exposed in the base
of a small gully. This was higher in the Upper Shuler formation at the site than the find-spot of the specimen found by the
writers. It was on the eroded slopes of an undisturbed remnant
of the original terrace, near the spot where the somewhat disarticulated remains of a horse had previously been excavated
by the writers. Nevertheless, the artifact was found within 18
inches of the head of the gully, and hence could not possibly
have washed down from a greater distance. It was still fourfifths buried when discovered and may well have been exposed
actually in place.
At this location, the blade was found at a depth of 10 feet
below the contact line of the Upper Shuler and the overlying
Richards formation. At Lewisville this would be at about the
level of Layer 5. But at Lewisville the Lower Shuler was preserved in much greater thickness to the east of the site, with a
definite erosional slope to the west, and with a consequently
reduced thickness of Upper Shuler to the east and increased
section to the west. In like manner, at Pemberton Hill, the
Lower Shuler is preserved in greater thickness in the area of
the Slaughter-Starrett find, sloping off towards the location of
the center-section discovery; as a matter of fact, the Lower
Shuler is only a few inches beneath the Slaughter-Starrett find
location, suggesting that here, again, the human evidence is

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas

77

essentially near the base of the Upper Shuler deposition. All
this is in close agreement with the conditions at Lewisville.
The artifact is apparently a combination scraper and fleshing
knife. At the top, as illustrated, is what appears to be an intentionally-fashioned angular cutting edge. The specimen is
made from a fossiliferous gray flint commonly encountered in
the Edwards Plateau region of Texas, especially along the Brazos River.
Thus, two artifacts of human manufacture--and there seems
to be no possibility whatsoever, in the particular case of Pemberton Hill, of confusion with later occupations at the site, since
none have been found--occur in the same geologic situation and
with paleontological associations very similar to those at Lewisville and Lagow Sand Pit. Unlike Lewisville, however, no evidence of a fire-burned hearth has yet been observed, although a
few charcoal flecks accompanied the center-section artifact. In
addition, three flint flakes have been recovered in place in the
Upper Shuler at Pemberton Hill.
Hickory Creek Below Denton (Fig. 9, No. 4)
Some 10 miles upstream from Lewisville, on the north side
of Hickory Creek in Denton County, a short distance downstream from the U. S. Highway 377 bridge, is yet another Early
Man location of simi]ar date.
Here again is a typical T-2 (Pemberton Hill-Lewisville) terrace, penetrated by gravel pits, that has yielded an extensive
fossil fauna, as well as evidences of man, all eroding from an
unquestionable Upper Shuler formation exposure.
We can avoid unnecessary detail by saying that the geologic
and paleontological situation is identical with that at Lewisville.
In 1951-52, North Texas State College of Denton, Texas, excavated an articulated skeleton of Elephas columbi in the base
of a five-foot gully cut into the Upper Shuler at the site. Since
then, the writers have recovered evidence of a large bison,
camel, land turtle (probably Testudo species), and a gastropod
of Anguispira affiliation, from the site. All seem identical to
specimens from Lewisville.

78

Texas Archeological Society

Most important, between the locations of the camel and bison
finds, the writers have also recovered three quartzite flakes,
definitely of human manufacture, plus burned bone fragments,

©
®

®
Fig. 11. A, Clovis projectile point from fill-dirt delivered in Oak Cliff
(see Fig. 9, No. 5). B, Dorsal and section views of broken center fragment
of possible projectile point or knife blade found in place at Pemberton Hill
site (see Fig. 9, No. 3), same geologic stratum as Lewisville. C, Bladescraper-knife(?) also found at Pemberton Hill in same stratum as
LewisvilIe.

ii~~

i

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Nea,r Lewisville, Texas

79

as yet not identified. This combination of occurrences again
demonstrates the undoubted presence of man during Upper
Shuler times on the Upper Trinity drainage system.
Oak Cliff Clovis Point (Fig. 9, No. 5)
Late in 1955, E. S. Moore, of the Oak Cliff section of Dallas,
telephoned the writers that he had found an "interesting arrowhead" in some fill-dirt delivered commercially. Upon investigation, the "arrowhead" turned out to be a skillfully chipped Clovis projectile point (Fig. 11, A).
While it is indeed unfortunate that, despite a search, the exact
gravel pit which yielded this Clovis point could not be located,
it is still most suggestive that such an artifact was delivered
locally in Dallas. Based upon the writers’ experience, it is highly
likely that the pit of provenience is within 20 miles of the find,
undoubtedly in Dallas County. Because of commercial factors, a
further distance is not probable. However, the pit is unknown,
and no exact analysis of the find location is possible. Nevertheless, the occurrence seems again to prove the presence of "Clovis
man" in the area.
The point is of a semi-transluscent yellow flint. It is a true
Clovis point of the finest, thinnest workmanship and fluting.
Henderson County Stone Heads (Fig. 9, No. 6)
Sellards’ three remarkable stone heads from gravel pits near
Malakoff, Henderson County, Texas (Sellards, 1952), add to the
Early Man evidences on the Upper Trinity. Occurring in the
same T-2 terrace of the main Trinity River, some 80 miles
downstream, these three carved sandstone concretions were
found at the disconformity separating the Hill gravels and the
Lower Shuler sands. Whether they pertain to the final stage of
the Hill gravel deposition, the minor erosional hiatus intervening, or the base of the overlying Lower Shuler sands--all
three equally possible in a geological sense--is immaterial. In
any of these cases they seem to record the presence of man in
the stream system at a very early period, even earlier than

80

Texas Archeological Society

Lewisville, and at a cultural level capable at least of primitive
sculpture. That three different stone heads occurred, in two
different gravel pits, makes the finds all the more remarkable.
CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION
Small groups of people, perhaps no more than single family
units, apparently visited the Lewisville site area from time to
time over an undetermined number of years during the active
period of occupation. From the evidence of the Clovis type projectile point, these groups may represent the people responsible
for the Llano Complex of Sellards (1952). If not, they certainly
must have been contemporaries of the Llano Complex people to
have acquired such a point at so early a time.
In general, the hearths are small and scattered, with only two
(Nos. 1 and 4) possessing any real size and displaying unmistakable indications of re-use for repeated fires. This fact, coupled with the scanty flint-work recovered, suggests brief itinerant camping, with possibly only one or two fires built at a
time, rather than continued occupation by a sizable group. If
the site had been occupied for any length of time or by larger
numbers of people, more cultural debris could be expected. Additionally, with hearths occcurring upon four different levels in
the Upper Shuler formation, it is possible to visualize the site
as representing a series of such sporadic visits over a number
of years. Obviously the most popular period was when Layer 2
existed as the site surface, since most of the hearths and material derive from this zone; but the site was also definitely
occupied both before and after this period.
How long a span of time this occupation covered is impossible
to state. Enough time did elapse for floods to deposit four layers
of the Upper Shuler formation, varying in thickness from six
inches to four feet, with sufficient dry time between floodings
to form caliche nodules of considerable size beneath each of the
successive surfaces. Certainly the time of occupation must be
reckoned in terms of hundreds of years, if not thousands.
Perhaps the site was a favored hunting station in the Fall
months, briefly visited year after year. The large quantities of

Hearths and Artifacts of Eo~rly Man Near Lewisville, Texas

81

burned hackberry seeds, encountered in practically all hearths
at all levels, suggest a seasonal occupation in the Fall. These
seeds do not mature in the area today until late August. The
first good "norther" of the Fall, a strong north wind usually
occurring in the October 15-November 15 period, blows the
seeds to the ground, whereupon hordes of grackles and starlings
descend upon the area for a few weeks and noisily clean up the
crop. That men frequented the area most probably in the earlier
portion of "prime hackberry season" is suggested by the number of immature seed hulls found, though by far the majority
are mature specimens.
Such an August or September timing agrees well with the
early historic records of buffalo hunting in this region. The East
Texas Caddo maintained a custom, later adopted by the first
white settlers, of going west in the Fall (usually September)
to the Elm Fork of the Trinity to hunt buffalo and lay in a
winter supply of meat. This was occasioned by the annual migrations of the great buffalo herds on the plains, which in the
early Fall brought large numbers of bison this far south and
east. The region seems always to have been more or less at the
dividing point between the prairies to the west and the forested
country to the east, hence similar game conditions may have
prevailed long ago.
However, there also is an indication that the Lewisville site
was visited in the Spring as well, as testified by the burned
bird egg shells in both Hearths 4 and 6.
With a climate as warm as, or warmer than, today, the countryside must have presented a view of rolling, grassy prairies
on the uplands and with timber growth along the stream valleys, much as today. The valley of the Elm Fork of the Trinity
could not possibly have had its present’relief, for the floodplain
was silted up and stood some 70 feet above today’s stream grade.
The valley must have been wide and shallow, stretching from
one to three miles across. Much of this broad floodplain may
have been timbered, including, at least, goodly numbers of hackberry trees.

82

Texas Archeological Society

Deer, black bear, probably wolves, cottontail rabbits, raccoons,
and other forest forms inhabited the timbered bottoms. On the
adjacent prairies the American horse, camel, bison, mammoth,
coyote, prairie dogs, and other plains types were present. The
actual stream channel was operating at low gradient, as evidenced by the choked floodplain. The quiet water of cut-off
oxbows is suggested by one type of river mussel found in the
site.
In the more moist periods, associated with the intermittent
floods that continued to deposit layers of the Upper Shuler yellow sandy silt, the area covered by the timber growth of the
bottoms probably expanded, and the forest animals harbored
therein increased. In the dry times, the timber probably retreated toward the very banks of the stream channel, and generally withdrew downstream, while prairie conditions and fauna
encroached upon the floodplain. If caliche could form in quantity in the floodplain itself from time to time, the vegetation
cover on the upland prairies must have been sparse indeed
during the dry extremes. This would have had the effect of concentrating the animal life of the region along the stream valleys.
From the food evidences, Lewisville man must have pursued
an economy very similar to that of the African Bushman today
he ate anything and everything he could get his hands on!
The great diversity in the large game species found at the site
shows no noteworthy specialization towards preferring any
single type of animal. Although the horses and deer are the
most numerous of the large forms, they do not dominate the
fauna and their numbers may mean only that they were easier
to capture. The wide variety of large food animals possibly suggests that no species was present in the region ~in true herd
numbers at the time of occupation, so that the hunters were
content with a camel here, a horse there, and so on, as encountered by chance.
The great numbers of terrapins, and the small animals, also
suggest that large game was not readily available. On the other
hand, this collection may simply be the result of women and
children foraging about the campsite while the hunters were off
for several days after bigger game.

Hearths and Artifacts of E¢rly M¢n Near Lewisville, Texas

83

Certainly the hackberry seed was a much-utilized item of diet.
The use of this seed as food has a long history with mankind,
extending back to Peking Man in the caves at Chou-kou-tien,
and having also been found in abundance in the Frontier Cu!ture Complex in Nebraska (Holder and Wike, 1949). When
more occupational campsites (in contrast to the common "kill"
sites) of Early 5~[an in North America are found, the hackberry
seed can very probably be expected as a companion.
The artifact assemblage of spear point, crude chopper, hammerstone, and flake-scraper, does not suggest an impressive or
highly developed cultural level. All of these implements could
be, and probably were, associated with the acquisition of food
and its preparation, as well as being involved in the manufacture of a few tools, mainly weapons. This circumstance is in
accord with the narrow variety of implements recorded from all
other Clovis sites. Of course, one does not see the perishable
items, but bone objects would be expected to have survived in
the light of the large amount of refuse bone preserved by the
caliche-charged soil. That no bone artifacts were found is of
note, in view of the finding of bone points and tools in the Clovis
level at Blackwater Draw. However, no other Clovis site has
yet yielded any bone work, so perhaps Lewisville is not unduly
exceptional in this respect.
The radiocarbon datings are most interesting. If valid, they
strongly reinforce the geologic assignment of the occupational
period to at least a major interstadial of the Wisconsin prior
to the last cycle of glacial advances. "More than 37,000 years
old" is certainly a surprising date; but then, no Clovis site had
been dated by C-14 previous to the work at Lewisville. Even
disregarding the datings, a considerable antiquity for the site is
still to be supposed in view of the evidence of the geology, fauna,
and the Clovis point.
The radiocarbon dates seem to imply a long period of little
cultural change in America--a not impossible circumstance if
one views the living Australian Blackfellow and South African
Bushman as examples of cultural conservatism among primitive
peoples. Their patterns of existence can be but little different
from those of their ancestors of 20,000-40,000 years ago.

84

Texas Archeologica.l Society

In the 1955 Seminar on "Functional and Evolutionary Implications of Community Patterning" (Beardsley et al., 1956),
certain rather apt descriptions of the Lewisville situation occur
in the earliest category, Free Wandering. The writers have
lifted from context and italicized to provide emphasis to key
statements :
"Ethnographic criteria: . . . divided into small family units
that move about continuously and without any territorial considerations .... Material equipment is minimal . . . made as
needed and discarded after use. There is no social organization
beyond the family, and families come together only on rare and
brief occasions .... "
"Archeological criteria: Ideally, Free Wandering should be
attested by a very wide distribution of artifact types that are
simple in nature and limited in variety. In general, such remains
should represent the initial occupation of any given region ....
Since camps were moved frequently, evidence of occupation may
be undetectable or at best scanty, consisting of ash or charcoal,
split or burned animal bones, and a few artifacts."
"Archeological examples: . . . In the New World, the distribution of Clovis points over the greater part of North America
may provide a comparable example .... "
Lewisville seems to fit this definition rather well. The successive revisitation of the site, suggestive of the next stage, Restricted Wandering, does not vitiate against the comparison if
climatic and ecologic conditions remained relatively stable, as
could be expected in an interstadial period.
Comparisons
Because of geological provenience and other considerations,
only the Clovis finds at Dent, Colorado, and at Blackwater Draw,
New Mexico, seem readily comparable to Lewisville.
At Dent, the prime factors seem to be the occurrence of Clovis
points two formations deep into the Kersey terrace (T-2),
whereas Folsom points occur at plow-depth upon the surface of
this terrace downstream (Wormington, 1949). In like manner,

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Mc~n Near Lewisville, Texas

85

the Lewisville Clovis point occurs deep within the second formation, while a Plainview point has occurred at Seagoville,
downstream from Lewisville, seemingly in place at spade-depth
on the surface of the same T-2 or Pemberton Hill-Lewisville
terrace (elsewhere Plainview is dated by radiocarbon at no more
than 1,000 years younger than Folsom). It is obvious that the
terraces of the South Platte in Colorado result directly from
alpine glaciers, whereas those of the Upper Trinity derive from
eustatic fluctuation of sea-level; but the two features must be
essentially contemporaneous with deglaciations. Melt-water from
a receding alpine glacier eventually bursts through the impounding terminal moraine and floods downstream, dropping its
silt load as a floodplain deposit, later to be entrenched and left
as terraces. Likewise a non-glaciated Coastal Plain stream such
as the Trinity would silt up its floodplain in a period of deglaciation as the ice melted and sea-leve! rose; this would in turn
be trenched and remnants left as terraces in any succeeding
ice-advance with consequent lowered sea-level and thereby increased gradient.
Blackwater Draw presents an unimpeachable stratigraphic
sequence with Clovis points occurring below Folsom points and
even higher Plainview-like "Yuma" forms (Sellards, 1952).
Here the major separation consists of an apparent eolian erosional disconformity which partially or totally removed the
"brown sand wedge," depending upon the specific location, and
may even have cut down the Clovis-bearing "speckled sand"
member. If caliche formed as far east as Lewisville, eolian erosion is entirely possible at Blackwater Draw at the same time
period. That Clovis points are associated at Blackwater Draw
with mammoth, horse, and large bison--whereas the later occupations are seemingly associated solely with large bison--and
that the Lewisville site also provides a Clovis point associated
with mammoth, horse, large bison, camel and other species, is
very probably significant.
Questions and Discussion
So much for what appear to the writers to be the most reasonable and logical conclusions about the Lewisville site as af-

86

Texas Archeological Society

forded by the several lines of evidence. Alternative interpretations are of course always possible, but those presented here
appear most probai)le.
There are two important questions which remain to be discussed. First, does the Clovis point really pertain to the site?
Second, are the radiocarbon datings valid?
Had there been no C-14 date; had any such date been more on
the expected order of 12,000-20,000 years; or had the writers
repudiated the dating results, possibly suggesting some means
of contamination, there probably would be little question about
the point itself. While the artifact assemblage is sparse, a single
Clovis point would still be rather generally accepted as identifying the occupation. After all, five of the eight Clovis sites (Angus, Dent, Miami, McLean, and Lewisvi!le) yielded a total of
but eight points, an average of less than two per site.
Similarly, if more Clovis points accompanied the find say,
perhaps, three or more there would also be no question of
identifying the occupation.
A number of possibilities present themselves. Perhaps the
point was introduced into the site in some manner at a later
date than the occupation of the hearths, and thus does not actually pertain to that occupation. Or the site may not be a "site"
at all, but a result of some natural phenomenon, into which a
Clovis point was accidentally intruded. This latter possibility
might also explain the unexpected C-14 datings, since they then
would represent some ancient natural occurrence and not date
any human occupation.
To begin with, Clovis points are extremely rare along the
Upper Trinity, making any manner of intrusion a remarkable
coincidence. The Dallas Archeological Society maintains a collection of more than 175,000 cataloged specimens from the region, of which but eight (including the specimen from Lewisville) are Clovis projectile points. This circumstance does not,
in itself, rule out the possibility of intrusion at Lewisville, but
does indicate what an unusual coincidence an intrusion of a
Clovis point would have to be.

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas

87

The site was revealed in 1950 by the removal of some 20 feet
of overburden by bulldozers. The erosion of the exposed pit floor
and walls in the succeeding seven years materially altered the
surfaces, cutting both small and deep gullies, and removing a
good deal of the flat surface deposits by sheet wash. The writers
estimate that perhaps as much as a foot of earth had been so
removed above Hearth 1 where the Clovis point was found. No
spoil dumps are in evidence about the pit, as this was a borrow
pit, excavated to secure fill dirt that was hauled away for the
dam, unlike the procedure in gravel operations. The presence
of the hearth itself was unsuspected by the writers until February, 1956, following a rain. As the writers had actually walked
across the spot only a month before, without noticing the least
indication of a hearth, and as the hearth was found within three
days of the only rain during the intervening period (it being
customary to search the site for fresh erosion on weekends after
each rain), Hearth 1 can only have shown the faint reddish
tinges then apparent for some three days previous to its discovery. So little was showing that it was quite a surprise upon
excavation to find that it measured eight feet across.
At the time of discovery no visible disturbance could be noted.
However, the six years of rainwash, since the bulldozer work,
might have obliterated minor surface disturbance from such a
source.

Two powerful arguments against the possibility of disturbance by the bulldozers are the facts that the point lay imbedded
in the red-burned clay of the hearth, and was encrusted with
caliche. Even after cleaning, the red clay color can still be discerned in the tiny flake fractures on both sides of the point.
Thus the bulldozer would have to acquire a Clovis point, an
unusual accident in itself in the region, and then by fortuitous
circumstance move it, without breaking or chipping (no fresh
scars are apparent), exactly to the location of Hearth 1 and
there implant it; and all this would have to occur at the very
close of the pit excavation so as to leave the specimen in the
floor of the borrow pit.
Even so, the bulldozer would have had to acquire the point
from somewhere in the immediate vicinity, actually within the

88

Texas Archeological Society

pit itself; this necessity is heightened by the catiche encrustation
on the point. Caliche is rare this far east in the Southwest, and
along the Upper Trinity it occurs in no formation later than
the Upper Shuler and Richards Formations of the Lewisville
terrace. These two formations are exactly what constitute the
some 20 feet of overburden removed at the site. Both Krieger
and Sellards viewed the point before the caliche was removed
in cleaning.
Thus the possibility of intrusion through bulldozer excavation
is exceedingly faint.
Burrowing rodents are another well known means of intrusion of artifacts into older strata. Evidence of these animals
about the site occurs in the form of two different sizes of crotovinas, each filled with a cast of caliche. The large crotovinas,
coupled with the prairie dog remains (both burned, in the
hearths, and unburned about the fireplaces) suggest prairie dog
holes. The small ones, coupled with the presence of raccoon
(again both in and out of the hearths) suggest crayfish holes
during the more moist cycles. Raccoons depend heavily upon
crayfish in their diet.
In the excavation of Hearth 1 and the adjacent five-foot
squares, a number of such caliche-filled holes were encountered,
quite distinct in their whitish calcareous color as contrasted to
the surrounding red-burned clay of the hearth and the yellow
clay of the adjacent surfaces. These holes were plotted on the
excavation graph, as the diggers were especially looking for
possible post hole evidences. None of the caliche-filled holes were
near the projectile point, except for a small filling barely an
inch in diameter, some six inches away. This hole, by its very
size, was either a crayfish or root hole, rather than a prairie
dog hole. The point would have had difficulty moving through
it, even in vertical position. Furthermore, the point was six
inches away in apparently undisturbed red-burned clay, and
lying horizontal, flat upon its side. There seems little chance
that it reached its final position via the small hole.
In addition, the various crotovinas and!or root hole fillings
were not observed to extend through any of the observed "lay-

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Ma,n Near Lewisville, Texas

89

er" surfaces of the Upper Shuler yellow sandy clay. None of
these multiple temporary surfaces is farther from the next
above or below than about four feet. Hence even if rodent transportation were involved, it could scarcely derive from farther
than the next layer surface, in the same general formation.
Again, the rodents would encounter the difficulty already
mentioned, of acquiring a Clovis point at all in the region, and
would be the unconscious agents of a remarkable coincidence if
they put it into a human occupation hearth.
Possible "planting" of the point by parties unknown, to perpetrate a hoax, seems unreasonable as matters stand. No one
even knew the hearth existed until February, 1956; only four
people had seen the location prior to excavation, so far as the
writers know, and general knowledge even of the site itself did
not spread unti! the actual finding of the point in the excavation.
It will be recalled that no visible disturbance was evident prior
to excavation. If, miraculously, someone did manage to insert
the point without leaving visible evidence of disturbance, he
would also have needed to know, somehow, where the hearth
was, and then would have to be an astute enough student of the
area to have rubbed red-burned clay into the flake fracture and
to have possessed or faked convincingly the caliche encrustation.
The caliche crust almost removes the matter of intentional intrusion from the realm of possibility, as few people other than
the writers even know such material exists in the region. Only
a year or so ago a prominent local geologist stated to a visiting
one in the writers’ presence that "caliche doesn’t exist this far
east."
Frankly, the only parties with sufficient knowledge of the site
prior to excavation, with enough background information on
the archeology and geology of the area, and with the opportunity to convincingly pull off such a hoax, are the writers themselves. In this respect let it be quickly stated that had they done
so, in the light of the controversial developments since the announcement of the unexpected radiocarbon dates, at least a
second Clovis point would have been arranged to be "found" in
one of the additional hearths! Much hard digging was done in

90

Texas Archeological Society

107-degree weather the following summer in an honest attempt
to alleviate the paucity of artifacts.
In short, intrusion appears a highly remote possibility and
the point must have been in place as found.
The possibility that the burned hearth areas were created by
natural agencies -forest fires, burning tree stumps, lightningstrikes, and so forthrather than by man can be disposed of
without even considering the Clovis point. The heterogeneous
fauna found burned in the hearths includes plains types
camel, horse, bison, prairie dog, etc. ; forest forms--deer, wolf,
raccoon, cottontail rabbit, "deep woodland" snails, etc.; and
actual stream denizens--river mussels, fish, and lizard or amphibian. None of the possible natural phenomena named above
could easily combine such diverse groups into such small, specific locations as the individual hearths. No traces of anything
resembling a burned root hole have been observed, and rather
than looking like stump holes, the hearths are in the form of
more or less bowl-shaped pits, some deeper than others. A forest
fire could scarcely be expected to burn yellow clay a dark red 22
inches deep at Hearth 1 and 36 inches deep at Hearth 4, and
not even scorch the intervening surface between, all at the same
level.
Moreover, such a phenomenon would have had to occur repeatedly within a small, limited area such as the site encloses,
upon each successive layer surface as the deposition of the
Upper Shuler continued. Otherwise, how is one to explain three
hearths at the Layer 1 surface, 13 at the Layer 2 surface, a
single hearth on the Layer 3 surface, and four more at the Layer
5 surface? Natural causes seem beyond reasonable credulity.
Regarding the validity of the radiocarbon datings, the writers
are not in a position to discuss alternatives, not being specialists
and not even having good backgrounds in nuclear physics and
chemistry. However, certain observations from the circumstances
at the site itself, and from the literature, can be offered as bearing upon the problem.
Justified questions concerning the datings divide quickly into
specific questions about the site samples themselves, and into

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas

91

general questions about the whole method of radiocarbon age
determination.
Admittedly the datings were a surprise both to the Humble
Laboratory and to the writers themselves. However, prior to
Lewisville, geologic estimates had been the only guides in thinking, and it is well proven that an erosional hiatus or disconformity can represent an indeterminate length of time. In addition, the carbon dioxide technique, employed by Humble, has
nearly doubled the range of radiocarbon dating over the earlier,
solid-carbon method; thus a number of previous datings, particularly those of a geological nature, are now obsolete and
merely indicative of having fallen beyond the effective, accurate
range of the earlier technique. And finally, the datings on Santa
Rosa Island, off Southern California, from human occupation
hearths have also recently demonstrated that man of some nature was present in North America as long ago as "more than
37,000 years," similar to the dates for Lewisville (Krieger,
1956, and personal communication).
On the other hand, many radiocarbon dates have been disproven as having been mis-identified, mis-labeled, contaminated
in one way or another, or the implications incorrectly interpreted. The technique is still in its relative infancy, with much
improvement yet to be expected.
In the specific case of the Lewisville samples, little doubt can
be honestly expressed as to the applicability and handling of the
two samples dated by Humble. The first, from Hearth 1, was
from "charred, fibrous vegetable material" only 20 inches from,
and in "tight" association with, the Clovis point. Realizing full
well that they were playing with scientific dynamite, after the
first shocking date, Humble flew Barghoorn and Whitaker to
Dallas to select carefully a second samplefrom another source
and another materialto check the first run. When the "wood
charcoal" from Hearth 8, some 300 feet away but on exactly the
same level as Hearth 1, produced the same result as the first
sample, Wilde declared the evidence to be "overwhelming" and
released the dates. Very special pains were taken with this
second sample.

92

Texas Archeological Society

If, indeed, the hearths are the result of human occupation,
a matter discussed above, then only questions about the general
method remain.
Critics of the technique, who do not deny its overall potential
but debate certain individual datings, usually point up possible
mis-identification or correlation, and contamination of the sample in some manner. While some might doubt the geologic correlations at Lewisville, and a few might still suspect the Clovis
point occurrence, the main focus of thinking will probably be
towards the possible "contamination" theory of the carbon
samples.
An important point deserves reiteration here: it is far easier
to contaminate so as to make the date younger than it is to
make it older; thus the very age suggested by the Lewisvitle
samples appears to argue for their validity. For example, in
experiments of the Lamont Geological Laboratory it was found
that the artificial addition of only 5% of modern carbon would
reduce the apparent C-14 age of a 30,000 year-old sample by as
much as nearly 8,000 years (Broecker and Kulp, 1956). Conversely, the artificial addition of dead carbon in the amount of
50% to any sample would only increase its apparent C-14 age
by a constant error of plus-5,200 years. Referring to Broecker
and Kulp (ibid.), Figure 4, this would suggest that for the
Lewisville dates to have been contaminated "older," from the expected age to the observed results, the samples must have been
replaced by dead carbon to the extent of nearly 95 %.
Considerable recent discussion has centered upon the possible
ion-exchange of organic C-14 with dead carbon in CaCO~ in
groundwater solution. Broecker and Kulp rather discount this
possibility in specimens after the CO~ cycle is interrupted by the
death of the organism, citing particularly examples of the Copenhagen Laboratory’s results from three samples taken from
the same Allerhd horizon in one site. As cited, the three datings
overlap each other in complete compatibility, and agree with
other European datings for the Allerhd interval. Most importantly, the organic C-14 of the wood and lake mud samples
agrees nicely with the CaCO:~ content of the lake marl, suggest-

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas

93

ing that little, if any, interchange has occurred, in the last
10,000 years.
These authorities also observe that "low-growing plants in a
caliche or heavily carbonate soil"--which Lewisville undoubtedly possessed may be deficient in C-14 to the extent of even
20 %, giving an undue age determination of a constant nature
of plus 1,800 years. This is immaterial on a specimen of extreme
age.
Therefore, in the light of present knowledge limitations, the
Lewisville dates apparently survive all tests. Certainly, in the
carbon dioxide method, all existing carbonates are removed by
the initial acid bath; this was graphically demonstrated when
another Lewisville sample, of charred hackberry seeds, literally
disappeared in the acid, after laborious hours of collecting.
Obviously, the seeds were mainly CaCQ casts, whereas the
dated samples of charcoal were able to survive the bath.
No one will deny the presence of a heavy concentration of
caliche in the Upper Shuler formation at Lewisville. Whether
or not this evidence of groundwater migration of CaCQ is significant in the matter of affecting radiocarbon samples is a moot
question at present. Broecker and Kulp appear to feel that this
factor is not significant.
The recent C-14 date of some 20,000 years ago obtained by
Wendorf at the Midland site (Wendorf, personal communication) is also pertinent to the problem. Midland has been demonstrated as being stratigraphicatty lower than the Folsom
horizon at the site (Wendorf et al., 1955), yet the discoverers
believe (personal communication) that it is not as old as Clovis.
If, then, Folsom is on the order of 10,000 years in age, Midland
is 20,000, and is older than Folsom as expected, Clovis must be
of an even greater antiquity than 20,000. Following this line of
thought, Midland might seem to help partially fill the tremendous gap between Lewisville and Folsom. However, this latest
C-14 date from Midland, which is presumed to be most reliable
since it was provided from more than ample carbon samples in
contrast to the ealier attempts to date the organic remnants in
partially fossilized bone, is subject to the same carbonate con-

94

Texas Archeological Society

tamination questions discussed for Lewisville. At Midland, the
20,000-year-old sample was extracted from carbonized organic
animal grease drippings which had been sealed inside the caliche
rock hearthstones.
As for a complete repudiation of the entire radiocarbon method, for many reasons a discussion of this matter is completely
beyond the capabilities of the writers. It may be mentioned that
most, if not all, of the proofs so far advanced for the C-14
technique appear to be generally acceptable.
The Lewisville site is far more important for its implications,
interpretations, and associated and derived data, than for its
actual artifact finds. The faunal record is perhaps the most
complete ever reported from an Early Man site in North America, and gives a greatly extended insight into the food habits
and economy of the people who lived at the site. The radiocarbon
dates, based upon abundant charcoal (in sharp contrast to the
common situation at many Early Man sites, where either there is
no datable material at all, or else there must be a desperate
gleaning of a dating sample from meager sources) are most
challenging in the apparently great age they assign to the site.
Lastly, and most important, Lewisville provides an early site, of
previously recognized type, down off the High Plains in a geologic situation that makes possible many comparative conclusions. In the course of future archeological research, this last
fact may well turn out to be its most important contribution to
the study of the early human occupation of North America.
REFERENCES CITED
Antevs, Ernst
1955. Geologic-Climatic Dating in the West. American An.tiquity, Vol. 20, No. 4, pp. 317-335.
Beardsley, Richard K., and others
1956. Functional and Evolutionary Implications of Community Planning. In: Robert Wauchope et al., eds., Sereinars in Archaeology: 1955. Memoirs of the Society for
American Archaeology, No. 11, pp. 129-157.

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Nea~" LewisviIle, Texas

95

Brannon, H. R., Jr., A. C. Daughtry, D. Perry, L. H. Simons,
W. W. Whitaker, and Milton Williams
1957. Humble Oil Company Radiocarbon Dates I. Science,
Vol. 125, pp. 147-150.
Broecker, W. S., and J. L. Kulp
1956. The Radiocarbon Method of Age Determination.
American Antiquity, Vol. 22, No. 1, pp. 1-11.
Bryan, Kirk, and C. N. Ray
1938. Long Channelled Point Found in Alluvium Beside
Bones of Elephas columbi. Bulletin, Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 10, pp. 263-268.
Cotter, John L.
1937. The Occurrence of Flints and Extinct Animals in
Pluvial Deposits Near Clovis, New Mexico. Proceedings,
Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, Vol. 89, pp.
1-16.
Fisk, H. N.
1938. Geology of Grant and LaSalle Parishes. Geological
Bulletin, Department of Conservation, Louisiana Geological
Survey, No. 10, pp. 149-181.
1940. Geology of Avoyelles and Rapides Parishes. Ibid., No.
18, pp. 53-113.
Flint, Richard F.
1957. Glacial and Pleistocene Geology. John Wiley and Sons,
New York. Pp. 258-264, 301, 457-465.
Haury, Emil W., Ernst Antevs, and John F. Lance
1953. Artifacts with Mammoth Remains, Naco, Arizona.
American Antiquity, Vol. 19, No. 1, pp. 1-24.
Harrington, John W.
1953. A Fossil Pleistocene Snake from Denton County,
Texas. Field and Laboratory, Southern Methodist University, Vol. 21, p. 20.
Hibbard, Claude W.
1955. The Jinglebob Interglacial (Sangamon?) Fauna From
Kansas And Its Climatic Significance. Contributions from

96

Texas Archeological Society

the Museum of Paleontology, University of Michigan, Vol.
12, No. 10, pp. 179-228.
Holder, Preston, and Joyce Wike
1949. The Frontier Culture Complex: A Preliminary Report on a Prehistoric Hunters’ Camp in Southwestern Nebraska. American Antiquity, Vol. 14, No. 4, pp. 260-266.
Krieger, Alex D., assembler
1956. Notes and News: Early Man. American Antiquity,
Vol. 22, No. 1, pp. 105-106.
Lull, A. S.
1921. Fauna of the Dallas Sand Pits. American Journal of
Science, 5th Series, Vol. 2, pp. 159-176.
Martin, James L., Leo W. Hough, David L. Raggio, and Adolph
E. Sandberg
1954. Geology of Webster Parish. Geological Bulletin, Department of Conservation, Louisiana Geological Survey,
No. 29, pp. 12-22, 103-106.
McGregor, Stuart, ed.
1955. Texas Almanac 1956-1957. A. H. Belo Corp., Dallas.
Pp. 182, 188-192.
McNally, Andrew, III, ed.
1956. Rand-McNally Cosmopolitan World Atlas. Rand-McNally and Co., New York. Pp. XXVIII, XIX, XXXI.
Milstead, William W.
1956. Fossil Turtles of Friesenhahn Cave, Texas, with the
Description of a New Species of Testudo. Copeia, No. 3,
pp. 162-171.
Murray, Grover E.
1948. Geology of DeSoto and Red River Parishes. Geological
Bulletin, Department of Conservation, Louisiana Geological
Survey, No. 25, pp. 8-41, 140-145.
Pattillo, L. Gray, Jr.
1940. River Terraces in the Carrollton Area, Dallas County, Texas. Field and Laboratory, Southern Methodist University, Vol. 8, pp. 27-32.

Hearths and Artifacts of Early Ma,~ Near Lewisville, Texas

97

Sellards, E. H.
1952. Early Man in America. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
Shuler, Ellis W.
1923. Occurrence of Human Remains with Pleistocene Fossils, Lagow Sand Pit, Dallas, Texas. Science, Vol. 57, pp.
333-334.
1935. Terraces of the Trinity River, Dallas County, Texas.
Field and Laboratory, Southern Methodist University, Vol.
3, pp. 44-53.
Stephenson, Robert L.
1949. Archeological Survey of the Garza-Little Elm Reservoir. River Basin Surveys-Smithsonian Institution. Austin.
(Mimeographed.)

Wendorf, Fred, Alex D. Krieger, Claude C. Albritton, Jr., and
T. D. Stewart
1955. The Midland Discovery. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
Williams, Ernest
1950. Testudo cubensis and the Evolution of the Western
Hemisphere Tortoises. Bulletin, American Museum of Natural History, Vol. 95, Article 1.
Wormington, H. M.
1949. Ancient Man in North America. Popular Series No. 4,
Denver Museum of Natural History. 3rd ed., pp. 37-45 and
185-190.
Zeuner, Frederick E.
1952. Dating the Past. Methuen and Co., London. 3rd ed.,
pp. 129-130.
The Dallas Archeological Society
Dallas, Texas

EXCAVATIONS AT LA VENTA, 19551
By

ROBERT F. HEIZER

Between February 1, and June 1, 1955, Philip Drucker of the
Smithsonian Institution and I, representing the University of
California, carried out extensive excavation at the Olmec site
of La Venta in northern Tabasco. The major financing was
provided by the National Geographic Society and to this organization must go the major credit for the party’s success. We
were assisted in the field by Sr. Eduardo Contreras of the Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia, Mexico, and Robert
J. Squier, graduate student from Berkeley.
Vaillant in 1932 first used the term "Ohnec" to refer to the
distinctive jaguar and baby-face carvings from the VeracruzTabasco gulf coast lowland region, but not until 1938 did serious
investigation start with the first of M. W. Stirling’s Geographic
Society-Smithsonian expeditions to the Olmec area when the site
of Tres Zapotes was dug. In 1940 and 1942 the La Venta site
was tested and ceramic stratipits were dug by Drucker in the
vicinity. In 1943 Stirling and Wedel cleared the site, dug along
the main centerline where they recovered many jade offerings
and monuments, and exposed, at a depth of fifteen feet below
the surface in a pit dug inside a stone-columned enclosure, a
large stone mosaic mask of the Olmec jaguar god. The 1940,
1942, and 1943 findings form the basis of Drucker’s monograph
on La Venta (Drucker, 1952). After the war Stirling and
Drucker exposed colossal heads and dug ceramic column tests
at a nearby Olmec site, San Lorenzo Tenochtitlan. These collections, which probably refer to the same period as the La Venta
site, will be analyzed and published by Robert Squier.
Slowly the picture of the distribution and development of
Olmec culture is becoming known. Sites attributable to this pattern were shown by Drucker’s 1953 survey to be restricted to
the Gulf coastal area from the Papaloapan River in the north to
1Notes, indicated by superscript numerals, are at the end of the article.
--ED.

0
o
J
<I:
{D
J
<I:
0
o

ToNALA

ii
0

¯ ~: ~!~ .~ ~: ~ :i~

:i~ ,~:~ ~ ~ ? 13

~¯ ! ¯ ~/~¸ ¸¸’ ¯/i

~:: ~¯i: ~; ¯; ~

Texas Archeological Society

the Tonal6 and Blasillo Rivers on the south (Fig. 12). Strong
cultural connections, usually distinguishable on the basis of the
distinctive art style in carved stone, occur as far south as E1
Salvador (Boggs, 1950) and Guatemala (Thompson, 1943).
Chalcatzingo in Morelos (Pifia Chan, 1955a) and Tlatilco near
Mexico City (Porter, 1953; Pifia Chan, 1952, 1955b) show such
strong Olmec influence that it has been suggested that these
may have been highland outposts or colonies2 One central fact
is also clear, and this is the non-Maya origin of Olmec culture.
Olmec is one of several major Mesoamerican cultures which presumably derive from one or more ancestral patterns. These
derived growths are in the main localized and the product of
essentially self-contained developments. Inter-influencing be-

COPYRIGHT NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC SOCIETY

Fig. 13. Surface of Southwestern Platform with upper drift sand cleared
away to expose rectangle of basalt columns. Workmen at rear are working
surface drift sands.

tween regional culture types did occur, and it is these connections and relationships from which will ultimately be extracted
the key synchronisms so necessary for the establishment of a
sound comparative chronology of Mesoamerican cultures.
The Island of La Venta, which is formed by the main course
and sloughs of the Tonal6 River, comprises only 2.1 square
miles of dry surface land (see Fig. 24 in the following paper
by Squier). There are at least three separate mound groups on
the island, the largest of which is named for the island and
runs for about a half-mile in a north-south line on the top of a
clay and sand ridge. The central feature of the site is a rectangular truncated earth pyramid rising 103 feet high and measuring 450 by 330 feet at the base. To the south of the pyramid

COPYRIGHT NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC SOCIETY

Fig. 14. Southwestern Platform showing upper brickwork and clay fill
overlying mosaic jaguar mask. Central wall is for stratigraphic control.

Texas Archeological Society

102

are a number of stone altars and monuments, and to the north
of the pyramid is a series of precisely positioned low mounds
and a stone column enclosed rectangular court measuring 135
by 187 feet. A barely perceptible mound whose perimeter just
touched the line of columns at the north edge of the Court
yielded, in 1942, a tomb structure made of stone columns used
like logs; and one of two 21 by 27 foot columned rectangles
sitting astride the southern line of the court yielded, in 1943,
a jaguar mosiac mask. As of 1955, none of the excavations at
La Venta had, with absolute certainty, reached the subsoil of
the site, and although it was determined that there were numerous sand and clay fill layers and flooring levels, no clear or com-

COPYRIGHT NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC SOCIETY

Fig. 15.

Jaguar mask of dressed serpentine blocks.

Excaw~ons at La Venta, 1955

103

plete picture of internal stratigraphy or tying together of the
relative chronology of the major features of the site had been
accomplished. Our main tasks in 1955 were, therefore, to carry
out extensive stratigraphic excavations in order to trace the
constructional history of La Venta, to make an accurate map
survey of the whole site complex, and to add as much as possible
to the corpus of cultural data illustrating the activities of the
occupants of the site.
The 1955 digging started with the exploration of the second
21 by 27 foot stone columned rectangle (Fig. 13). The columns
were set around the edge of a sloping-sided unfired adobe brick
platform eight feet thick. Beneath this platform was a clay fill
seven feet thick resting upon the jaguar mosaic mask which
measured 15 feet square and was made of about 450 beautifully
dressed serpentine blocks (Figs. 14, 15, 16).~ Below the mask

COPYRIGHT NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC SOCIETY

Fig. 16.
man’s head.

The mosaic mask cleared. Note base of brickwork at level of

104

Texas Archeological Society

was a feature which can be described but defies explanation. A
rectangular construction measuring 29 by 40 feet and 20 feet
thick, consisting of 28 layers of closely laid rough quarry blocks
of green serpentine set in clay mortar had been laid in as a base
for the mask (Fig. 17). The entire structure, from columns on
top to bottom layer of rough stone fill was built in a 40 by 50
foot pit dug to a depth of 35 feet. What is most remarkable
about this whole feature is that it was a one-shot job--once
begun it was carried straight through without interruption to
its conclusion.
Low fiat-topped platforms within the enclosure yielded a number of lots of well-executed jade objects and pottery. These, and
similar finds elsewhere in the site, we interpret as ritual offerings. One outstanding offering took the form of 16 small serpentine and jadeite figurines of purest Olmec style arranged
upright in such fashion as to strongly suggest the re-enactment
of some ritual ceremony (Fig. 22). Near the center of the court
we encountered a square pit 70 feet on a side which was dug to
a depth of over 25 feet from the surface. On the bottom of this
pit were six superimposed layers of closely fitted squared serpentine blocks covering an area 63 by 66 feet (Figs. 18, 19).
The cubic content of this single pit is over 60,000 cubic feet.
This extensive project again was a single-phase job which had
been carried straight through to its completion once it had
begun.
To the north of the deeply buried six-layer pavement-like
offering was a similar but smaller one measuring 44 by 16 feet
and consisting of a single layer of large well-dressed and closelyfitted serpentine blocks laid in a clay mortar.
The developmental history of the court area is divisible into
four building phases. To these we have assigned numbers: I,
earliest, to IV, latest. The evidence shows that each major construction phase began with the placing of one of the deeply
buried stone pavement-offerings. There is strongly suggested
by the fact of a major ritual marking the beginning of each
renovation, some regular periodicity, though whether these periods marked completion of calendric cycles is not known. Stela
C from Tres Zapotes which bears the date 291 B.C. (Spinden

Excavations at La Venta, 1955

105

correlation) is of Olmec authorship, but no clear evidence of
calendrical glyphs or numbers has been found at La Venta. The
La Venta site was laid out with great exactness with reference
to a centerline running now 8 degrees west of true north. It
seems possible that originally the centerline may have been
oriented to Polaris or true north and if so, this would indicate
some knowledge and application of simple astronomy. Thus the
common Mesoamerican features of pyramid-mound-plaza ceremonial center plan, erection of monumental stone carvings or
stelae, astronomically aligned site layouts and cyclical renovation of structures are present at La Venta.
The magnitude of the site itself, the massiveness of clay constructions such as the Ceremonial Court, mounds and pyramids,

COPYRIGHT NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC SOCIETY

Fig. 17. Progress in excavating the 29-layer "foundation" of rough
quarry blocks of serpentine below the mosaic mask. This mask lay at level
marked by top of stratigraphic control wall running from front to back
in center of picture.

106

Texas Archeological Society

and the sheer bulk of imported stone columns, altars, stetae and
colossal heads undoubtedly required the labor of great numbers
of persons. The earlier proposal by Drucker that the island was
too small to support sufficient permanent population to build
the site is fully supported by the 1955 findings. For certain
constructions we have made calculations of probable time and
number of laborers involved, and these indicate labor forces of
several hundred persons working at long periods.
La Venta was a major ceremonial center which was built and
maintained for the several centuries of its life by labor recruiteo
from rancherias some distance away. The impressive size of the
site features, distant sources of the multi-ton stone columns and

COPYRIGHT NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC SOCIETY

Fig. 18. Surface of six-layer serpentine block "pavement" offering in
center of Ceremonial Court, at depth of more than 20 feet below present
surface. Note batter of trench walls to prevent slumping.

Fig. 19. Dissection of six-layer
"pavement" offering’.
Fig. 20. One of the colossal
heads at the south end of the
great pyramid at La Venta.
Fig. 21. Sculpture of plumed
serpent with priest (?) sitting inside body curve holding in right
hand a bag (of copal?).
Fig. 22. The offering of 16 jade
and serpentine figurines found on
the edge of the Northeastern Offering Platform buried under the
floor of the Ceremonial Court.
Fig. 23. Offering of 56 jade
celts found along the centerline of
the site in the Ceremonial Court.
Photos copyright National Geographical Society

108

Texas Archeological Society

monuments, problems of logistics for a labor force involved in
such getting and making activities, and maintenance of the
center for several centuries argues forcefully for a smoothly
functioning class society with priests, who may have also been
temporal leaders, at the top, supported by the peasant population which contributed its energies in return for the benefits
received from the religion which functioned for the society as
a whole.

Eight radiocarbon dates for the La Venta site~ range from
3110 ÷ 300 to 2130 ÷ 300 years old. Phase I is dated by five
samples which have an average age of 2770 ÷ 134 years or
814 B.C. ÷ 134 years. Phase II is dated by a single sample at
804 B.C. There are no radiocarbon dates for Phases III and IV,
but two post-Phase IV dates average 2265 years old or 309 B.C.
From these last two dates we estimate the end of Phase IV at
somewhere between 450 and 325 B.C. The La Venta site, therefore, was built and used during the four centuries 800 to 400
B.C. As a group these radiocarbon dates form a homogeneous
block, and for this reason acquire a reliability which would no~
obtain if we had only one or two radiocarbon dates (Drucker,
Heizer and Squier, 1957). Accepting them as accurate, we may
note that the La Venta site fits into the Formative or Pre-Classic
period, and that the chronological position to which it is assigned
by Pifia Chan (1952, 1955a, 1955b) is correct. Further, Stela C
at Tres Zapotes, which bears a calendrical date read in the
Goodman-Martinez-Thompson scheme as 31 B.C., or 291 B.C.
in the Spinden correlation, can hardly now be said to be too
early, as Morley and Thompson have claimed (Morley, 1946,
pp. 40 ft. ; Thompson, 1941), but rather is too late, as Wauchope
anticipated (Wauchope, 1954, pp. 29-30; see also Drucker, 1952,
p. 208, and Coe, 1957). Stela C from Tres Zapotes is not firmly
associated with any stratigraphic level or ceramic horizon
(Drucker, 1943, p. 118; Stirling, 1940, p. 5) and its inscribed
date cannot by itself, therefore, date any part of the site.
The final report on the 1955 findings at La Venta is completed
and will appear as Bulletin No. 170 of the Bureau of );merican
Ethnology.

Excavations at La. Venta, 1955

109

NOTES
1. Paper re~t at the annual meeting of the American Anthropological Association, Santa
Monica, December 30, 1955. Published wlth permission of the National Geographic Society.
A popular account of the 1955 La Yenta expedition has been published (Drucker ~<nd
Helzer, 1956).
2. Opinions differ on this point. Pifia Chan (1955b, p. 106) has advanced the proposal
that the Olmec culture is of highland origin and that its home probably is in the area of
the junction of the states of Guerrero, Puebla and Morelos. The radiocarbon dates for the
La Venta site indicate this theory to be not necessarily correct. The lowland (VeracruzTabasco) sites of the Olmec culture do not look like secondary florescences but rather llke
local peak developments in the hearth area. That formative Olmec culture remains unknown
is a result of limited archeology and lack of data, but the indications are clear that the
culture is of lowland origin and development. Otmec traits at Chalcatzingo and Tlatilco
appear to be additions to local Pre-classic highland cultures and derived, presumably, from
local Olmec settlements or outposts (cf. Drucker, 1952, pp. 227-229).
3. The jaguar god is the strongest element in the Olmec art complex (Drucker, 1952, see
"Jaguar," pp. 252-253). Although Drucker (Ibld., p. 219) notes the absence of the plumed
serpent in Olmec art, the 1955 expedition to La Venta recovered a beautifully sculptured
monument showing this motif.
4. These dates were determined by the Memorial-Phoenix Project Radiocarbon Laboratory
at the University of Michigan. The National Geographic Society furnished the funds for
the dating. Dr. James B. Griffin acted as intermediary, and the actual dating was performed
under the direction of Dr. H. R. Crane.

REFERENCES CITED
Boggs, S.
1950. "Ohnec" Pictographs in the Las Victorias Group,
Chalchuapa Archaeological Zone, E1 Salvador. Carnegie
Inst. of Washington, Div. of Hist. Research, Notes on Middle American Archaeology and Ethnology, No. 99.
Coe, M. D.
1957. Cycle 7 Monuments in Middle America: a Reconsideration. American Anthropologist, Vol. 59, pp. 597-611.
Drucker, P.
1943. Ceramic Sequences at Tres Zapotes, Veracruz, Mexico. Bur. Amer. Ethnol., Bulletin 140.
1952. La Venta, Tabasco; a Study of Olmec Ceramics and
Art. Bur. Amer. Ethnol., Bulletin 153.
Drucker, P., and R. Heizer
1956. Gifts for the Jaguar God. National Geographic Magazine, Vol. 110, No. 3, pp. 366-375.
Drucker, P., R. F. Heizer and R. J. Squier
1957. Radiocarbon Dates from La Venta, Tabasco. Science,
VoI. 126, pp. 72-73.
Morley, S. G.
1946. The Ancient Maya. Stanford University Press, Palo
Alto, Calif.

ii0

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

Pifia Chan, R.
1952. Tlatilco y la Cultura Preclasica del Valle de M~xico.
Anales del Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia,
Vol. 4, pp. 34-43.
1955a. Chalcatzingo, Moretos. Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia, Informes No. 4. Mexico City.
1955b. Las Culturas Preclasicas de la Cuenca de M~xico.
Fondo de Cultura Economica, M~xico.
Porter, M.
1953. Tlatilco and the Pre-Classic Cultures of the New
World. Viking Fund Publs. in Anthropology, No. 19.
Stifling, M. W.
1940. An Initial Series from Tres Zapotes, Vera Cruz, Mexico. National Geographic Society, Contributed Technical
Papers, Mexican Archaeology Series, Vot. 1, No. 1.
Thompson, J. E. S.
1941. Dating of Certain Inscriptions of non-Maya Origin.
Carnegie Inst. of Washington, Div. of Hist. Research, Theoretical Approaches to Problems, No. 1.
1943. Some Sculptures from Southeastern Quetzaltenango,
Guatemala. Carnegie Inst. of Washington, Div. of Hist.
Research, Notes on Middle American Archaeology and Ethnology, No. 17.
Wauchope, R.
1954. Implications of Radiocarbon Dates from Middle and
South America. Tulane Univ., Middle American Research
Records, Vol. 2, No. 2.
Department of Anthropology,
University of California,
Berkeley, California

POST-OLMEC OCCUPATIONS AT
LA VENTA, TABASCOi
By

ROBERT J. SQUIER

The materials which will be described here came to light principally during the excavations of 1955 at La Venta. Although
these excavations were confined to the Olmec ceremonial area,
some materials were collected from post-Olmec sites on the
island of La Venta which should contribute in a small way to
our meager understanding of the later archeological events in
this region. The companion paper by Robert F. Heizer in this
journal presents a series of radiocarbon dates of the major
Olmec and early post-Olmec occupations of La Venta.
The term "post-Otmec" as used here is a designation which
we employed in the field to refer to cultural manifestations at
La Venta which differ in pattern and are separated in time
from the classic or florescent phase of Olmec culture as defined
by Drucker (1952) in his La Venta site report. It does not exclude the possibility that at least some of the classic Olmec elements persisted into later times; we know in fact that some
did. My use of the term is perhaps therefore a misnomer. It is,
however, a convenient label and I shall employ it with the restricted meaning just given.
The initial explorations of Stirling in 1940 and the three
subsequent seasons of excavations at La Venta--in 1942, 1943,
and 1955 were devoted primarily to working out the art styles,
ceramic patterns and architectural features of the principal
Olmec occupation. Beginning with Stirling’s brief visit (Stirling,
1943, pp. 48-60) and continuing thereafter, numerous evidences
1This paper was read on December 30, 1956, at the fifty-fifth annual
meeting of the American Anthropological Association at Santa Monica,
California. The materials described were found during the National Geographic Society--Smithsonian Institution--University of California (Berkeley) excavations at the site of La Venta conducted from January to June,
1955. These materials will be more fully described in the final report of
the 1955 excavations which will appear as a Bulletin of the Bureau of
American Ethnology. Permission to present these data in preliminary form
was graciously given by the National Geographic Society.

CERRO

ENCANTO
0~
fAirstrip
PVMNT:.

~

Pyramid

o,

,:

\o
Ja%

i
%:

N

f

,l//~
Yards
0

500

\
,t//..

Fig. 24. Map of the island of La Venta showing localities discussed in
paper. "Complex A" is the Olmec ceremonial court area. Post-Olmec sites
are indicated by an X. Black dots show locations of some Olmec stone
monuments.

Post-Olmec Occt~pations a~ L¢ Venta, Tabasco

113

of what were undoubtedly post-Olmec activities in and around
the main ceremonial area have been observed. The first signs of
such activity noted were in the mutilation of the stone monuments and the displacement of these from their original positions. To date, 24 examples of such mutilation or relocation
have been recorded. Nearly all of these monuments were, until
their recent discovery, completely covered by the thick layer of
drift sand which blankets the site. The damage or shifting about
which they have sustained must therefore have occurred in
antiquity; how early in each case we of course cannot say.
Another interesting type of post-Olmec activity was the burial
of groups of pottery vessels in the drift sands in locations such
as to suggest deliberate placement as offerings. Several occurrences of this were observed by Wedel in 1943 (Drucker, 1952,
p. 38) along the centerline which bisects the large pyramid and
ceremonial court area described by Heizer elsewhere in this
journal. In 1955 we discovered five more such offerings buried
in the drift sand immediately south of the column-enclosed platform beneath which was found the jaguar mosaic mask. Two of
these pottery offerings consisted of more than 20 vessels each.
The pottery is a crude reddish-buff ware, finger-smoothed and
unslipped and so poorly fired as to suggest strongly that it was
a hastily-made ware intended solely for offerings. One vessel,
found buried by itself in the drift sand, is of a coarse red ware,
much better fired than the others, bearing a post-firing incised
design consisting of panels in which are represented what may
be a thatch-roofed house or possibly a temple (Fig. 25). The
border elements of this panelled design are very similar to those
on a vessel found by Valenzuela (1945b, p. 87, figure 16) at the
site of Pollinapan in the Tuxtlas district of southern Veracruz.
This vessel is attributed by Valenzuela to Classic Maya influence.
A third type of post-Olmec activity in the main ceremonial
court area was the piracy of Olmec building materials, or rather
ornamental materials. During the excavation of the ceremonial
court we found several piles of dressed serpentine blocks much
like the ones used in the jaguar mosaic masks and in the larger
of the two deeply buried pavement-like offerings. These occurred

Texas Archeological Society

114

at different levels in the lower half of the layer of drift sand
covering the court, indicating that they were placed there at
different times. Occasionally such blocks were found singly in
the drift sand layer. These dressed blocks apparently were originally used as ornamental facings on the clay structures in the
ceremonial court and were "borrowed" by post-Olmec inhabitants of La Venta. One occurrence of the use of such materials
by a later occupation will be described shortly.
Other materials definitely referable to the post-Olmec period
have been found in the main ceremonial area at La Venta.

5

o

cm.

Fig. 25.

Post-Olmec vessel from drift sands overlying ceremonial court

at La Venta.

Post-Olmec Occ~pations at Lob Ve~ta, Tabasco

115

Enough have already been mentioned to indicate that at least
one fairly intensive occupation of the island occurred following
the major Olmec abandonment of the site. The problem remains
as to the identity and cultural affiliations of these later people.
Drucker, in his 1942 stratigraphic excavations in the Olmec
habitation areas of La Venta, was alert to the problem of later
occupations but failed to find ceramic or other evidence indicative of their identity. The thick jungle growth which then covered the island made the finding even of large mound groups
extremely difScult.
In recent years considerable change has been wrought in the
surface of the island. While we were excavating there in 1955,
an airstrip was cut out of the jungle for use in the oil exploitation operations now being conducted in this region. This construction barely missed the corner of the Olmec ceremonial
court. A narrow drainage ditch which was run off from the airstrip exposed in cross section a prepared clay base upon which
lay a structure consisting of dressed serpentine blocks identical
to those mentioned above which occurred in the drift sand layer
covering the Olmec ceremonial area. The pavement, if such it
was, ran along the wall of the ditch for about 20 feet. This iraportant find was made too late for us to divert labor for its
investigation from the closing stages of our excavations.
The small collection which we were able to make from this
"North Pavement" locality (Fig. 24) was picked from the sideWall of the ditch and from its backdirt. The materials consist
of a few sherds and figurine fragments and a serpentine pendant
with an incised human head. The figurine fragments and some
of the vessel fragments fal! into the range of the La Venta
Olmec materials as described by Drucker (1952). The use of
volcanic tempers was noted in three fine-paste sherds; this also
is in line with the Otmec fine-paste ware from La Venta. Hollow
vessel supports, two of which were found in this area, were not
recorded for the classic Olmec phase on the island, nor was
polychrome pottery, one sherd of which was recovered from
the sidewall of the drainage ditch. The incised head on the
serpentine pendant (Fig. 26) found here bears close stylistic
resemblances to certain of the Danzante figures at Monte Alban

Texas Archeological Society

116

Cm.
Fig. 26. Incised serpentine pendant from post-florescent phase Olmec
site at La Venta (enlarged to 1~ times natural size).

Post-Olmec Occupation,s at La- Venta, Tabasco

117

(Kelemen, 1943, vol. 2, plates 57a, 91b) and the treatment of
the mouth and nose is identical to that of a face engraved on a
jade earplug flare from the Esperanza phase at Kaminaljuyu
in highland Guatemala (Kidder, Jennings and Shook, 1946,
figure 143b).
It seems entirely possible to us that these remains represent
a re-occupation of La Venta in early Classic times by a people
of Olmec cultural affinity who had undergone a certain degree
of cultural reorientation as a result of external influences during
the interval following the classic Olmec abandonment of the
island. To these later people probably may be attributed some
of the despoliation of the Otmec ceremonial center and perhaps
also some of the offerings of pottery in the drift sand covering
the earlier Olmec structures.
Evidence of two other occupations on a later time level was
encountered during the 1955 season. In the vicinity of the Cerro
del Encanto mound group in the northwestern part of the island
(Fig. 24) a sherd-bearing area was exposed during the removal
of earth for road fi!!. We collected a number of painted sherds
from this locality. No figurines or fragments were seen. The
pottery differs from that of the main Olmec occupation and
also from that collected from the airstrip drainage ditch just
described. Some of the sherds appear to be generally similar in
slip treatment and decoration to part of the Upper Tres Zapotes
painted ware (Drucker, 1943a, pp. 36-47), but most of our collection is of coarser paste than was usual at Tres Zapotes. A
general similarity in decoration to some of the materials excavated by Valenzuela (1945a, pp. 93-94, 16m. III) at Matacapan
in the Tuxtlas district is also apparent. A fragmentary moldmade spindle whorl with black paint encircling the central perforation is included in our small collection. This by itself would
indicate that the Cerro del Encanto site dates from a late horizon. Whether the Cerro del Encanto mound group itself may be
assigned entirely to this late horizon we cannot say in the absence of stratigraphic evidence.
Our 1955 field camp was located a few hundred feet off the
southwest end of the airstrip at La Venta (Fig. 24). In clearing

118

Texas Archeological Society

away the forest for the airstrip approach the bulldozer destroyed a surface occupation site adjacent to our camp. Polychrome pottery occurred in this site and a collection of sherds
of this and of plain wares and a few figurine fragments was
made. The painted sherds differ from any of the other materials
thus far known from La Venta. Similarities seem to be greatest
with the painted pottery from the site of Cerro de las Mesas,
particularly with the ware which Drucker (1943b, pp. 48-49)
has termed "Complicated Polychrome," from the Upper I horizon of that site. The wares are not identical in decoration or
paste composition, but the highland influence seems to be as
unmistakable in this late La Venta site as it was at Cerro de
las Mesas. Certain anomalies are apparent, however. Mold-made
figurines, mold-made spindle whorls and hollow vessel supports
were not found. Incised decoration on the painted wares must
be extremely rare; it was present on only one of the sherds
collected. On the other hand, severa! hand-made figurine fragments were recovered, all of which fit very well into Drucker’s
figurine typology (1952, pp. 132-141) for the classic Olmec
occupation of La Venta. Another anomalous feature is the presence of strap handles, several examples of which were found.
These of course are present late in the central Veracruz sequence, but they are accompanied there by features not noted
in our late La Venta site. We may note that strap handles did
occur, though rarely, in the Olmec habitation areas excavated
at La Venta by Drucker. What we may have at this site is a
mixture of early and late traits brought about by the disturbance of the uppermost layers of the deposit by the bulldozer.
We cannot at this time, on the other hand, ignore the possibility
that the site may represent an occupation, perhaps in late Classic
or early Post-Classic times, by a culture which had retained
certain early features in preference to their later equivalents.
The persistence of Olmec-style figurines at some sites in this
region is attested to by Sanders (1956), who found classic babyface figurines associated with Late Classic Maya figurines in a
site in the upper Tonal6 drainage. It is possible that other early
ceramic traits may likewise have been retained at our site. Excavation in an undisturbed site of this La Venta complex is
obviously needed to settle the point.

Post-Olmec Occ~qgations at La Venta, Tabasco

119

A conspicuous absence in the La Venta ceramic picture as
now known is that of Fine Orange ware. Sites of Classic and
Post-Classic Lowland Maya affinity, in which Fine Orange is
relatively abundant, have been excavated or surveyed recently
by Berlin (1953, 1956) less than 150 kilometers to the east of
La Venta. Similarly with Plumbate ware, only one sherd of
which has been found at La Venta. This occurred in the upper
level of the drift sand covering the Olmec ceremonial court. We
have seen nothing from La Venta which indicates that relations
with the Maya-influenced areas to the east and southeast were
of more than superficial nature. This is the more surprising
when it is realized that the site of San Miguel, which lies only
some 50 kilometers up the Blasillo River from La Venta, does
show a fairly strong degree of Maya influence on the later
horizons.
Our knowledge of the post-Olmec period at La Venta is still
lamentably small. The few data we now have suggest a number
of what probably should at the present time be regarded only
as possibilities. These may be stated here by way of summarizing what has been said above: The post-Olmec history of La
Venta has been marked by several re-occupations of the island.
Some of these may have been of fairly long duration, accounting
for the several small mound groups which have not yet been
excavated and for at least some of the depredations of the Olmec
ceremonial center, but none appears to have been of a magnitude comparable to that of the classic Ohnec occupation. The
suggested period covered by these later occupations is from
shortly after the major Olmec abandonment to the Late Classic
or Early Post-Classic of the Mexican Highlands. Major external
influences seem to have come from the highlands of Mexico,
perhaps predominantly by way of southern Veracruz but probably also by way of the upper tributaries of the Tonal6 River.
Contact with the Lowland Maya appears to have been of a surprisingly restricted nature, if our limited inventory of postOlmec sites and artifacts can be taken as representative. Much
more work will have to be done before we can speak with any
certainty of this matter; future excavations may radically alter
the present picture of virtual absence of diffusion from the Lowland Maya area. Although the materials discussed in this paper

120

Texas Archeological Society

have been referred to as "post-Olmec," we may have evidence
of a very long persistence of certain Olmec cultural traits at
La Venta. This suggests the interesting possibility that Olmec
culture may have maintained its essential identity and perhaps
to some extent its territoriality in the Olmec heartland throughout the Classic horizon. Whether or not this was a factor limiting further westward expansion of the Lowland Maya cannot
be determined at this time. In general, the La Venta materials
appear to reinforce Drucker’s conclusion (1952, p. 230) that
following its classic florescence, Otmec culture became the recipient of foreign influences on a large scale and rapidly lost its
distinctive character.
REFERENCES CITED
Berlin, Heinrich
1953. Archaeological reconnaissance in Tabasco. Carnegie
Inst. of Washington, Dept. of Archaeology, Current Reports, No. 7.
1956. Late pottery horizons of Tabasco, Mexico. Carnegie
Inst. of Washington, Publs., No. 606, pp. 95-153. Contribs.
to Amer. Anthrop. and Hist., No. 59.
Drucker, Philip
1943a. Ceramic sequences at Tres Zapotes, Veracruz, Mexico. Bur. Amer. Ethnol., Bulletin 140.
1943b. Ceramic stratigraphy at Cerro de las Mesas, Veracruz. Bur. Amer. Ethnol., Bulletin 141.
1952. La Venta, Tabasco; a Study of Olmec Ceramics and
Art. Bur. Amer. Ethnol., Bulletin 153.
Kelemen, P61
1943. Medieval American Art. 2 vols. The MacMillan Co.,
New York.
Kidder, A. V., J. D. Jennings, and E. M. Shook
1946. Excavations at Kaminaljuyd, Guatemala. Carnegie
Inst. of Washington, Publs., No. 561.

Post-Ohnec Occupations at La Venta, Tabasco

121

Sanders, William T.
1956. Review of Philip Drucker, La Venta, Tabasco; a
Study of Olmec Ceramics and Art. Amer. Antiquity, Vol.
21, No. 4, pp. 436-437.
Stirting, Matthew W.
I943, Stone Monuments of Southern Mexico. Bur. Amer.
Ethnot., Bulletin 138.
Valenzuela, Juan
1945a. Las Exploraciones Efectuadas en los Tuxtlas, Veracruz. Museo Nacional de M~xico, Anales, ~poca V, Vol. 3,
pp. 83-107.
1945b. La Segunda Temporada de Exploraciones en la
Region de las Tuxtlas, Estado de Veracruz. Inst. Nacional
de Antrop. e Hist., Anales, ~poca VI, Vol. 1, pp. 81-94.
Department of Anthropology,
University of California,
Berkeley, California

REPORT ON AN UNKNOWN TYPE
OF IMPLEMENT
By ROBERT E. FORRESTER, JR.

Since beginning active collecting in 1936, the writer has
found several whole and broken implements of a type apparently not mentioned in the literature. These implements have
been found in sufficient numbers and sufficiently dispersed
areally to rule out the probability of their being either "sports"
or eccentric pieces, or a highly localized product. The pieces
covered under this report are primarily from Stephens and
Shackelford counties in north-west central Texas, with one
(Fig. 28: H-B) from eastern Comanche County and two fragments from burnt-rock middens in Bell County. A complete
piece of this type is reported to be in the Witte Museum in San
Antonio, Texas, and another has been reported as being from
a site on the Red River north of Wichita Falls, Texas. The
writer has seen neither.
These items represent an accumulation of 15 years of fairly
active collecting from surface sites and burnt-rock middens,
always in non-pottery areas. They further represent all the
broken and unbroken specimens found with approximately 40,000 broken and unbroken artifacts of all types. This is only
7/100 of 1% of all artifacts found.
Their true place in time and space may not be examined
too deeply here, as the writer’s collecting has largely been confined to collecting in the above mentioned counties, which leaves
a vast area of Texas with no reports. The impression is gained
that they date from the Archaic period, at least in origin if
not in final classic form, but there is yet insufficient evidence
to be positive. The full area of their distribution and relative
numbers need to be determined by reports of members from
other areas. It is hoped that readers will examine their co!lections for examples of this type, and send reports with illustrations to the Department of Anthropology, University of Texas,
Austin, Texas, in order to properly evaluate them.

o6

’~

C’-I

o

x

124

Texas Archeological Society

This implement on superficial examination appears to be a
spoke-shave type of scraper worked into the edge of a slim
triangular knife. This item may best be described by having a
standard for viewing in which the point is down, with the surface showing the strongest beveled edge facing the observer.
The widest portion (or base) is thus the uppermost end. There
is one relatively straight side with the opposing edge having a
scraper-form concavity, lending a lop-sided appearance to the
piece. There is invariably one projection or "spur" at the base
end overhanging the concavity. Approximately 80% have the
spur on the right side, with the remaining 20% to the left.
This would roughly correlate with the Texas figures (from the
writer’s collection only) of approximately 90% "right" beveled
stemmed dartheads and 90% "left" beveled triangular dartheads, which probably reflects the proportion of left-handed
Indian craftsmen, which in our present population is said to be
one person in nine.
Approximately one-half (46%) possess a second beveled edge
on the same face, opposite the edge with the strongest bevel
and the spur, resulting in a flat underside with a rounding upper face (Fig. 28: 379, D, E, & H). Thirty-three per cent have
the opposing edge on the underside beveled, but not so strongly
as the primary bevel. This results in a lozenge-shaped crosssection as is seen in reamers, double-pointed four-edged
"knives," etc. (Fig. 28: A, B, N, P). The remaining 21% show
no beveling other than the strong primary bevel, resulting in a
knife-like edge opposite the beveled edge (Fig. 28: H-B, K-4,
C, & F). In all cases, when handling them, one can easily determine a flat and an opposite "round" face to the blade.
Base edges, when worked at all, usually appear carelessly
finished or battered.
Lengths range from seven to fifteen centimeters, averaging
ten centimeters. The maximum widths vary from 2.2 centimeters to 4.5 centimeters, averaging 2.9 centimeters. The narrowest portion of the blade, usually at mid-point, ranges from
0.9 centimeters to 2.8 centimeters, averaging 1.4 centimeters.

Report of an Unknown Type of Implement

125

These pieces have a length: maximum width ratio averaging
3.1:1, and a length: minimum width ratio averaging 5.3:1. The
maximum: minimum width ratio is 2.3:1.
When a piece is found broken, the distance from base edge
to the break averages 4.2 cm. This break-distance: maximum
width ratio is 1.5:1. This ratio applied against unbroken items
would show a theoretical break point at 58 % of the length from
the point. This would leave 42% of the large end remaining.
In simpler terms, the breaks actually occurred at approximately
the center of the piece.
72% appear to have been made on a previously finished triangular blade; the remaining 28% appear to have been made
with only this implement in mind (Fig. 28: G, H, K, S, T).
Eighty-two per cent have the base worked; the remaining 18%
(Fig. 28: G, H, I4) show no appreciable base working.
Only two items in this group were not surface finds. Both of
these (Fig. 28: G, Q) were dug from Archaic levels (?) of
Central Texas burnt-rock middens. Item Q. has been eroded at
each end by fire action.
Sixty-six per cent of the specimens have straight bases, 22%
have concave bases, and 16% have convex bases. The points in
all cases show abrasion and wear. The tips are not finely pointed,
and appear to have been deliberately made blunt in some cases
(Fig. 28: K-4, O, T). The strongly beveled edge in most cases
shows considerable wear and use, as in scraping.
The primary item of interest is that these tools were used as
prying instruments in addition to scraping, and probably this
prying was of greater use than the scraping function, to judge
from the type of breakage from lever action.
1. In all save one instance, the breaks are at right angles to
the long axes of the blades, rather than at a diagona! as is seen
in most broken drills, reamers, etc.
2. The point being polished, worn and even battered seems to
indicate that the point was introduced with difficulty into a
small, abrasive opening.

126

Texas A~’cheological Society

3. Experiments with broken flint tools which the writer
clamped in a vise, and slowly forced past their breaking points,
indicate that in all cases there are certain consistent characteristics to the break to show on which face the force was exerted.
These characteristics when applied to the tools in question show
that 80% had the force applied to the round surface of the
blade. Thus, if the point were immobilized in a narrow aperture
with the round face uppermost, the pressure was downward.
Conversely, if the fiat side were uppermost, the pressure was
from underneath pulling up. The first is the simplest and commonest type of lever.
This high ratio of breaks from pressure exerted on the same
side suggests a specific use, probably highly specialized. The
lack of symmetry, eccentric shape, blunt point, and specialized
type of break rules out several possibilities for use, including
drills, reamers, borers, knives, and spoke-shave scrapers (as a
primary function). It does not rule out such possibilities as
wood-groovers (trough-makers), sotol-peelers (if such were
needed), marrow-extractors and bone scrapers, and musselopeners. In every case, sites producing these pieces also produced numerous mussel shells, most having one end battered off
or a small hole punched through the wall. The writer is of the
opinion that these tools could have served very well to pry open
a mussel which previously had been broached by battering or
punching, and suggests the name of "mussel-opener" in lieu of
a more logical term.
6229 Malvey Avenue
Fort Worth 16, Texas

MORE CRUCIFORMS AND SOME
PROBLEMATICAL OBJECTS
By CARL B. COMPTON

Cruciform artifacts have recently been reported both by
Research Associates of the Instituto Interamericano (Howard,
1954; Fay, 1956) and by others (Hughes, 1956). Since the
most recent of these reports numerous other examples have
come to our attention, as well as some other objects vaguely
similar to the cruciforms but which can only be described as
"reel-shaped" objects. In one case, to be cited more specifically
below, the form is virtually identical with "reel-shaped" objects
from the eastern United States (Griffin, 1952), although of
different material and found far west of that region.
"Reel-shaped" objects indistinguishable in form from those
we wil! discuss were found in considerable number in Kern
County, California (Fig. 30, E, F, G; Wedel, 1941). Wedel discusses some rather far-fetched possibilities as to the use or
purpose of these objects and finally concludes that they are
"problematical" (Ibid., p. 57). Another "reel-shaped" object
was found in Pickwick Basin on the Tennessee River (Webb
and DeJarnette, 1942). This example (Fig. 30, D) is notable
for not having been pierced for use as a gorget, as nearly all
of the Eastern United States "reels" are. Only one of the
Sonora-Arizona "reels" or cruciforms reported in the present
paper is pierced (Fig. 29, B), and this was probably done by
some latter-day Indian antiquarian.
The use or purpose of the cruciform artifacts has not been
determined as yet. The campesinos of Mexico call them "stars"
when they find them. They bear a strong resemblance to the
petroglyph and pictograph forms in the Southwest which also
are assumed to represent stars. The Seri represent their gods
and goddesses as having crosses at the sides and top of the
head (Coolidge and Coolidge, 1939, p. 96). A sherd from near
Durango, Mexico, in the collection of Mrs. Howard of that city,
shows what seems to be a shaman with a cross in one hand
(Fig. 30, C).

128

Texas Archeological Society

While fully realizing that hearsay evidence is of little value,
we should like to mention two occurrences which are sufficiently
well vouched for to be taken seriously. They may contribute
something toward an eventual understanding of the purposes
of the cruciforms. Federico Schroeder R. of Durango, a Research Associate of the Instituto Interamericano, states that
a rancher near Mezquital found an "idol" on his ranch with a
cruciform buried or embedded in the stomach. The rancher
broke the "idol" and took the cruciform home as a plaything
for his children and it was, of course, soon lost. This same
rancher, while engaged in the popular pastime of treasurehunting in the caves of the nearby mountains, found a skeleton
in dorsally extended position with five cruciforms on it from
the throat to the pelvis. These objects suffered the same fate
as did that of the "idol." However, attention is called to the
similarity between this "burial"--actually the corpse was not
interred and that of Cuicuilco reported by Hughes (1956).
Though the cross motif is very common in many parts of the
the world, and particularly in the Americas, stone cruciforms
apparently do not have such wide distribution. Though we have
been told of a cruciform from the U. S. East Coast and of a
number found in the Ohio River drainage near Cincinnati, we
have not seen these specimens and if they have been reported
in print we cannot locate the paper. There seem to be certain
concentrations of them. Many are found in Durango, and now
in this paper we are able to report a concentration in Sonora,
Mexico, and lower Arizona.
Summarizing all of the evidence thus far reviewed, we might
conclude, without any undue strain on logical process, that the
cruciforms are sacred or ceremonial objects. About some of
the gods of the Serf, Coolidge and Coolidge (1939, p. 101) say,
"Ahnt Kai is the goddess of women and children and the four
crosses show that she is holy." We have been told of a burial
at Tiburon Island of a woman with a cruciform at each side
of the head, but this statement cannot be satisfactorily corroborated. In the case of the "reel-shaped" objects, we still have
no shred of real evidence as to their use or purpose.
Over a period of years, several persons in southern Arizona

More Cruciforms and Some Problematical Objects

129

have from time to time encountered cruciforms of various materials as well as "reel-shaped" objects and problematic objects.
It is these specimens which are now reported here. In addition,
William J. Schaldach, who made most of the drawings in Figs.
29 and 30, has seen and examined some fifteen other cruciforms
from the same area, but these specimens are not available at
the present time for examination.
The Cruciforms of Fig. 29:
A. Pitchstone. Carefully ground; smooth finish; ridges run
from corners or points to center; slightly rounded central platform. From Otero Ranch 25 miles north of Sasabe, Arizona.
B. Mudstone. Brick red; slightly pebbled surface; rather
crude workmanship; same thickness throughout with rounded
edges; shows signs of erosion. The suspension was probably put
in by a later Indian antiquarian as no other such forms with
holes are reported from the region. From the Gill Ranch 2
miles east of Sasabe, Arizona.
C. Grey chert. Well made; shallow table at center; rounded
edges. From 2 miles west of Jaynes Station just north of
Tucson, Arizona.
D. Light grey chert. Apparently roughed out by chipping
and then ground somewhat. Workmanship rather crude ; slightly
polished; one prong broken. From La Playa, Sonora, Mexico.
E. Grey quartzite. Crude workmanship; entirely chipped,
not ground; rather fiat on one face. From San Jos~ de Guaymas, Sonora, Mexico.
F. Grey-pink chert. Well-made; good craftsmanship; wel!
polished; similar to C and found near C.
G. Variegated chert. Light grey background with dark grey
and terra cotta mottling. Edges narrow and flat, not rounded.
From Arivaca, Arizona.
H. Quartzite.

Very crude; chipped. Provenience same as G.

I. Quartzite.

Problematica! as a cruciform but appears to

F...
C l’,.,x

\

\

~..
Ct~

i

More Crucif orms and Some Problematical Objects

131

be a very crudely chipped one; one prong missing. Same provenience as G.
J. Dark grey shale or slate. Rather crudely chipped. From
Old Village of La Ventana, Magdalena River, Sonora, Mexico.
K. Dark grey basalt (?). Very symmetrical; dull polish
with just a trace of shine; edges flat, not rounded, and ends of
arms or prongs are squared; the whole surface is gently rounded. From La Playa, Sonora, Mexico.
L. Obsidian. Matte surface; definite ridges lead to center
with no table left. Provenience same as K.
M. Brick red argillite with dark brown mottlings. Very
similar to L and same provenience.
N. Yellow ochre sandstone. Well made but eroded. From
Federico Ranch, Los Molinos, Sonora, Mexico.
O. "Sugar quartz"; off-white. Crudely chipped with no sign
of grinding. From Garcia Ranch about 2 miles east of Sasabe,
Arizona.
The Objects in. Fig. 30:
A. Obsidian. Well made; matte surface; completely smooth.
From about 10 miles east of E1 Paso, Texas.
B. Flint. A problematical object; probably coincidentally
cruciform; may have been a flint drill, the long point having
been broken off. From the East Fork of the Huron River, Ohio.
C. Figure from a potsherd from Durango, Mexico.
D. Limestone. "Reel-shaped" object from the Pickwick Basin. (Webb and DeJarnette, 1942.)
E, F, G. Stone objects from Kern County, California. (Wedel,
1941.)
H. Obsidian.

From Empalme, Sonora, Mexico.

I. Pitchstone. Very well ground and polished; ridged toward
center; variant of cruciform (?). Provenience same as H.

,il

%

G

.

z

A

cM

t,-,.

C~4

K
I

N

©
c~
Fig. 30.

c\~

More Cruciforms and Some P~’oblematical Objects

133

J. Obsidian. Crude and shows generally poor craftsmanship.
Provenience same as H.
K. Obsidian. Very well chipped. From San Jos~ de Guaymas, Sonora, Mexico.
L. Obsidian.
M. Obsidian.
N.

Well chipped. From Empalme, Sonora, Mexico.
Good workmanship. Provenience same as L.

Same as M.

O. Obsidian. Another problematical object. May have been
a drill or variant cruciform. From Molinos, Sonora, Mexico.
P. Obsidian. Still another problematical object. Could have
been intended as a cruciform; very crudely chipped. From San
Jos~ de Guaymas, Sonora, Mexico.
Collectors of fhe Objects Shown:
Fig. 29: A, B, D, Mrs. Walter Freeman; C, F, Mrs. Carll
Winn; E, Walter Freeman; G, H, I, Carll Winn; J, Mrs. Carlos
Escalante; K, L, William J. Schaldach; M, Mrs. Jo Schaldach;
N, Mrs. John Murchison; O, John Murchison.
Fig. 30: A, Dr. Raymond H. Tull, Jr.; B, A. G. Smith; C,
Agnes McClain Howard; D, William S. Webb; E, F, G, Waldo
R. Wedel; H, I, J, Walter Freeman; K, P, Carll Winn; L, Mrs.
Jo Schaldach; M, N, O, William S. Schaldach.

REFERENCES CITED
Coolidge, Dane, and Mary R. Coolidge
1939. The Last of the Seris. A. P. Dutton, New York.
Fay, George E.
1956. Another Cruciform Artifact from Sonora. Amer.
Antiquity, Vol. 21, No. 4, pp. 410-411.
Griffin, James B., ed.
1952. Archeology of Eastern United States. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.

134

Texas Archeological Society

Howard, Agnes McClain
1954. Cruciform Artifacts of the Sierra Occidental. Amer.
Antiquity, Vol. 20, No. 2, pp. 174-175.
Hughes, Jack T.
1956. Stone Crosses with a Cuicuilco Burial. Amer. Antiquity, Vol. 22, No. 1, pp. 80-82.
Webb, William S., and David L. DeJarnette
1942. An Archeological Survey of Pickwick Basin in the
Adjacent Portions of the States of Alabama, Mississippi,
and Tennessee. Bur. Amer. Ethnoh, Bull. 129.
Wedel, Waldo R.
1941. Archeological Investigations at Buena Vista Lake,
Kern County, California. Bur. Amer. Ethnol., Bull. 130.
Instituto Interamericano
5133 NT, Denton, Texas

A REPORT ON WILLIAMSON COUNTY
MOUND MATERIAL*
By

MARDITH K. SCHUETZ

In 1937 and 1938 Mr. Erich Pohl excavated several mounds
in Williamson County, beginning his work on the Cedar Park
Mound after the field party from the University of Texas had
finished work on the site. Cedar Park Mound is located on the
north side of South Brushy Creek, 400 yards south of Cedar
Park. According to records kept at the University of Texas,
the mound originally covered more than an acre and was seven
feet high in the center.
Work was next done at San Gabriel Mound three miles
Northwest of Leander on the South Fork of the San Gabriel
River where the stream flows under the railroad.
Mr. Pohl then proceeded to the Hughes Mound located between Leander and Georgetown on the Hughes Ranch on the
South Branch of the San Gabriel River and a quarter-mile
distant from the site of the "Webster Massacre." Correspondence to the Witte Museum at the time reports that the mound
was topped by three feet of gravel washed in over the original
mound making excavation slow and "non-productive."
The Lake Locke Mound near Jarrell was worked next and it
was reported that in five days time more artifacts had been
found than two months’ excavation had produced at Hughes
Mound.
Mr. Pohl finished his work in Williamson County at the
Cobb’s Spring Mound located eight or nine miles from the turneff to Florence north of Georgetown.
Mr. Pohl was looking for only perfect and unusual artifacts
since his interest was commercial. When the Witte Museum
learned of Mr. Pohl’s activities at Cedar Park Mound, arrangements were made to salvage the broken material that was to
*The writer wishes
artifacts.

to

thank

Gibbs

Milliken

for

photographing

the

136

Texas Archeological Society

be discarded. Mr. Pohl reports that he employed a three foot
grid system on the Cedar Park Mound, but kept notes only on
the positions in which unusual specimens were found (Private
conversation, July, 1957). Mr. Pohl also states that the perfect
material recovered from these mounds is still in his possession.
The author has not had the privilege of seeing this material
since it is in storage.
Since none of the material is identified except by mound
origin we can treat it only as we would surface material. A
statistical comparison does bring to light interesting variations among the mounds and future controlled excavation in
the county should clarify the data presented here.
One point of confusion needs to be brought out before proceeding. Boxes from Cedar Park, San Gabriel, and Hughes
Mounds were labeled as such. Other boxes were improperly
labeled "Koch Mound," a site which does not exist. From an
examination of the correspondence between Mr. Pohl and the
Witte Museum and the similarity between the names Koch
and Locke, it is probably safe to assume that these labels refer to Lake Locke material. The last two boxes of material
examined were labeled "the broken crate, Williamson Co." This
material, herein referred to as "unidentified mound" is probably
from Cobb’s Spring although the evidence is not sufficient to
refer to it by the site name.
PROJECTILE POINTS
The following table shows the count of points in terms of
by Suhm,

established projectile point types as described
Krieger, and Jelks (T. A. S. Bull., Vol. 25, 1954).
Cedar
Park
Pedernales ..........
Castroville ..........
Montell .............
Travis .............
Ensor ..............
Edgewood ..........
Abasolo ............

418
306
88
100
100
50
80

San
Gabriel
298
270
147
124
117
92
89

Hughes
715
516
124
63
28
52

Lake
Locke

Unknown

517
456
229
19
70
40
173

51
34
16
8
1
21

A Report on Willia~son Coz,nty Mound Material

Cedar"
Pa.rk
Marcos .............
78
Darl ...............
91
Marshall ...........
65
Lang’e .............. I01
Bulverde ........... 126
Fairland ...........
63
Frio ...............
60
Nolan .............. 110
Williams ...........
35
Pandora ............
33
Refugio ............
35
Kinney .............
23
Martindale .........
15
Uvalde .............
64
Catan ..............
33
Tortugas ...........
36
Scallorn ? ...........
6
Gary ...............
9
Palmillas ...........
Lerma .............
Shumla ............
2
Fresno .............
29
Wells ..............
Matamoros .........
11
Young .............
Perdiz .............
Cliffton ? ...........
Desmuke ...........
1
Almagre ............
2
Ellis? ..............
Alba ? ..............
1
Hayes ? .............
2
Pogo ? ..............
Plainview ..........
12
Meserve ............
5
Angostura ..........
9
Scottsbluff ..........
!

San
Gabriel
71
70
68
63
65
60
44
41
44
35
28
25
24
24
23
12
II
9
9
7
5
5
4
4
3
3
1
2
2
1

2

Hughes
43
14
195
26
38
45
19
3
15
11
5
19
4
8
8
21
4
I0
1
2
2
5

137

Lake
Locke

Unknown

73
58
168
63
46
24
33
16
20
36
19
22
9
15
26
33
1
II
2
3
2
I0
3
4

4
1
5
2
2
5
1
4
4
8
6
2
3

1

4
4
1
1
1

I0
2
2
4

2
1
2

138

Texas Archeological Society

With such a large sampling of the Pedernales type it seemed
feasible to examine the series in detail, since this type exhibits
such a wide range of variation.
Cedar
Park
Indented base .....
Concave base .....
Contracting stem
.
Expanding stem ....
Parallel stem ........
Squared shoulders
Barbed shoulders
Concave blade ......
Convex blade ......
Straight blade .......
Recurved blade ......

326
100
126
83
218
178
201
8
128
160

San
Gabriel
244
56
35
70
193
143
146
23
112
131

Hughes
561
154
108
124
483
216
452
29
352
256
23

Lake
Locke

Unknown

401
116
51
108
358
314
178
29
309
118
11

40
11
12
11
28
17
33
1
23
22

On occasion a Pedernales point exhibits a beveled blade.
Of the series from San Gabriel Mound four points which have
concave blades also exhibit beveling, two on the right sides of
both faces and two on the left. They are not sufficiently slimmed
to have been reworked into awls. The unidentified mound produced a similar point with concave blade and slight beveling
on the left sides of both faces. In addition, one straight blade is
beveled on the left sides of both faces. One concave-bladed
point from Cedar park Mound is beveled on the right sides of
both faces. Points listed as having "barbed shoulders" are
those whose shoulders are oriented towards the base although
varying from small in proportion to massive. Conversely,
"squared shoulders" are sometimes massive, but without the
downward projection, or are so slight as to be almost nonexistent.
Points listed as Abasolo are thus identified in the broadest
possible sense. All fall within the size range of the Abasolo,
but all are unbeveled. These might just as readily be called
convex-based knives as are their larger counterparts.
A similar discrepancy is encountered with the Tortugas
category. They, too, for the most part, are unbeveled. Among

A Repo~’t on Williamson Co~nty Mound Material

139

the 36 from Cedar Park Mound five are beveled on the right
sides of both faces. One is beveled (more a case of steep chipping than true beveling) on the left sides of both faces. Two
points display steep chipping along the right side of one face;
one point displays steep chipping along the left side of one
face; one point displays steep chipping along both the right
and left sides of one face. From Hughes Mound three points
have suggested bevels and four have the appearance of having
been reworked. The edges are rechipped into concave blades and
beveled. Only five of the 29 Tortugas points from Lake Locke
are beveled: four on the right edges of both faces and one on
the left. One has the addition of a small basal notch near the
corner. The single Tortugas from the unidentified mound is
beveled.
The Darl points from Williamson County indicate what
might be a regional variation of the type, lacking the typical
beveled blade and being somewhat wider than the described
type. Of those found in Cedar Park only two points have
beveled blades although some exhibit slightly steeper chipping
suggesting a bevel. Four blades are twisted like Pandale points.
Four blades are serrated. Thirty-eight points are between 1.6
and 1.7 cm. wide; twenty-four are from 1.8 to 2.1 cm. wide.
The series of 70 points from San Gabriel Mound produced no
beveled blades although 11 are twisted by steep chipping from
the center to the blade edge on opposite sides of the blade.
Twelve blades have finely serrated edges. Thirty-two are from
1.6 to 1.7 cm. in width; 26 are from 1.8 to 2.1 cm. in width. The
13 Darl points h’om Hughes Mound show three with slight
beveling on the right sides of both faces. Eight have serrated
blades. Only two points fall within the 1.5 cm. width of the
described type. Five points are 1.6 to 1.7 cm. wide; three are
between 1.8 and 2.1 cm. wide. Two have broken blades and
cannot be measured for width. Fifty-eight Darl points came
from the Lake Locke site. One point has a beveled blade on
both faces along the right sides. Another has suggested beveling along the right side of one face. Four specimens have
twisted blades. One other specimen has a stem beveled on the
right sides. Ten blades have serrated edges. Four points are
within the described widths for the type. Twenty-three of the

140

Texas Archeological Society

points have a width of 1.7 cm. Eighteen measure 1.8 to 2.1 cm.
The single Darl point from the unidentified mound is unbeveled but has a ground stem.
A few other variations of Edwards Plateau types should be
mentioned. Eleven Edgewood points from the Hughes Mound
are exceptionally large, ranging from 5.5 cm. to almost 7 cm.
for one specimen. Two Fairland points from the same site appear to have been about 8 cm. long. These outsized points would
seem to be an idiosyncrasy of the Hughes site. A Castroville
point, also from Hughes Mound, is made of a bright orange
flint, obviously intrusive, though the origin of such flint is unknown to the writer. A possible Desmuke point is 5.8 cm. long
and quite thick, measuring 1.3 cm. A Kinney point from the
same site has a deeply recurred base that could have doubled
as a spokeshave.
A Wells point from San Gabriel Mound measures 9 cm. in
length with a shoulder width of 2.7 cm. and a stem length of
3 cm.
A Kinney point from Cedar Park has serrated blade edges.
Eight Lange points from the same location fall under the minimum length of 5 cm., varying from 4 cm. to 4.5 cm. One Martindale point measures approximately 9 cm., the missing distal
end making a positive measurement impossible. Like those
from Hughes Mound, three Edgewood points are over the 5 cm.
maximum length, varying from 5 to 5.5 cm. The blade of one
is serrated. One Almagre point from the same locale measures
only 4.3 cm. The stem may be broken, but crudeness and outline suggest the type.
One possible Travis point from Lake Locke has a stem
beveled on the right side of each face and a blade beveled on
the left side of one face but only at the tip on the opposite side.
Another Travis point is made of inferior chert and is probably
intrusive. A questionable Refugio point from Lake Locke is
11.2 cm. long and 3.5 cm. wide.
Of the Matamoros points from the Williamson County
mounds, only two from Cedar Park are beveled and only one

A Report on Willia~nson Co~nty Mo~nd Material

141

from Lake Locke has any evidence of beveling. Another from
Lake Locke has a beveled base.
Arrow points from all the mounds would seem to have been
exceedingly scarce, judging from the table. Such was not the
case, however, for a letter from Mr. Pohl written at the time
of his excavation of Cedar Park Mound states, "we are finding
an exceptionally great number of bird points." We can only
conclude that most of the material representing the Central
Texas Aspect, assigned to the Neo-American Stage, was in perfect condition. A few arrow points are too fragmentary for
identification. Three points from Cedar Park are unidentified.
Two points from Hughes Mound are like miniature Shumla and
Lang points.
Fig. 31 shows the "Early Man" points from Cedar Park
Mound. Angostura-like points are on the top row (A-G). Plainview points are represented from H through R. Examples 0
and P are characterized by fine diagonal chipping. S through
W are Meserve points, S and T representing reworked Plainview points without beveled blades, U through W have beveled
blades and the blades of V and W are fm’ther modified by serration. Lines indicate the extent of stem grinding. Example
H lacks smoothing. Of much more interest than the Plainview,
Angostura, and Meserve types, which frequently appear with
Archaic material in the Edwards Plateau Aspect, is the Scottsbluff point numbered X which appears but rarely in such association (the author is grateful to E. Mort Davis of the University of Texas for identification of the Scottsbluff point). It
is a flat, finely worked point of grey flint exhibiting matched
flake scars meeting in a central ridge. Blade and stem edges are
finely retouched. There is no stem smoothing. Not shown is the
mid-section of a Plainview point and the mid-sections of what
appear to be beveled Angostura blades.
On Fig. 32 are "Early Man" points from San Gabriel Mound.
Angostura-like points are lettered A through F. B is a reworked point. E has the appearance of having been reworked
as an awl. Not shown are five questionable Angosturas. Plainview points are from G to S and a few of these specimens display beautiful workmanship. H is made fyom a very thin flake

J

vJ

b,

Fig. 31.

"Early Man"

points,

Cedar

Park

Mound.

A-G,

Angostura.

H-R, Plainview. S-W, Meserve. X, Scottsbluff.
NOTE: For dimensions of specimens in Figs. 31o through 41, see text.

i

¯

Fig. 32.

"Early Man" points,

G-S, Plainview. T, Meserve.

San

Gabriel

Mound.

A-F, Angostura.

J

Fig. 33. A-C, Angostura, Lake Locke. D, unidentified, Lake Locke. E,
Meserve, Lake Locke. F, G, Plainview, Lake Locke. H, I, Angostura, Unidentified Mound. J, Plainview, Unidentified Mound. K, slate pendant, San
Gabriel. L, rim of soapstone bowl, San Gabriel. M, atlatl weight (?), Lake
Locke. N, quartzite sinker, Lake Locke.

A Repor~ o~ T~VilIiamson County Mound Material

145

of brown flint and is made like the Scottsbluff point described
above that is, with matched flake scars running from a central ridge to the blade edges. The blade edges are further refined by the finest possible chipping. Examples M and P are
characterized by fine diagonal ripple flaking. Both specimens
are quite thin. An additional Plainview point is not shown as
it is badly damaged by fire and weathering. T is the only entire
Meserve found and has a beveled blade. The distal ends of
what were probably Meserve points also came from this mound.
In addition to beveling, two of the blades are serrated.
Fig. 34, M is a unique point from San Gabriel Mound which
has all the appearance and "feel" of an "Early Man" point.
It bears a very close resemblance to the Scottsbluff type, is of
a heavily patinated flint and is quite worn. The technique of
manufacture is similar to Scottsbluff and the stem edges and
base are slightly smoothed by grinding. The coupling of an
expanded stem with a slightly concave base and slightly barbed
shoulders do not allow for a Scottsbluff identification at this
time, but this might eventually prove to be a variant of the
type. The point measures approximately 10 cm. in length, 2.7
cm. in width at the base, and approximately 3 cm. in width at
the shoulders.
"Early Man" points from Lake Locke are seen in Fig. 33,
A-G. A, B, and C are Angostura-like points. D is difficult to
identify. It may be either an Angostura with a beveled blade
or a 1Keserve with a narrower stem than usual. Workmanship
of the base is closer akin to the former type. The blade edges
are also serrated. E is a Meserve with beveled blade. F and G
are Plainview points.
The unidentified mound produced the three points on the bottom row of Fig. 33. H and I are Angostura. J is a Plainview
point.
The "Early Man" points from Hughes Mound are not shown.
The Meserve point has a beveled blade. One Plainview point
must have measured 10 cm. in length and another has longitudinal flaking at the base much like a Clovis point.

146

Texas Archeological Society

Unidentified Projectile Points
Unidentified points from the Lake Locke site are shown on
Fig. 34. A is made of a brown flint and measures approximately 5.5 cm. in length and 2 cm. at the shoulders. The point
is crudely worked and it is difficult to determine whether the
stem has been broken. The point could be a Palmillas.
B appears to be made of an intrusive flint whose origin may
be North Central or East Texas. The flint is a speckled, light
brownish-grey color. The point is similar to a Lange but lacks
the heavy shoulders of the type. It measures 4.5 cm. in length
and 1.6 cm. in shoulder width.
Example C, like A, might be a Palmillas, the stem being
rounded. The flint is a light brownish-grey. The point measures
approximately 5.3 cm. in length and 3 cm. in breadth at the
shoulders.
Judging from the red clay stain, D is an intrusive point from
East Texas. The blade is slightly convex and well barbed. It is
parallel stemmed and measures 5 cm. in length and about 2.5
cm. in breadth at the shoulders.
E is characterized by fairly deep side notches resulting in a
flaring stem with a slightly concave base. The blade is too broken
to tell much about it. The flint is a light buff color. The point
measures about 5 or 5.1 cm. in length and about 2.2 cm. in
shoulder width.
Specimen H is an intrusive point of rose quartzite. Workmanship is crude. The point has weak shoulders, an expanding
stem, and a crudely rounded base. Length is about 3.7 cm.
Width at the shoulders is about 1.8 cm.
I is a fairly fine point of buff colored flint measuring 4.1 cm.
in length and 2 cm. in shoulder width. The blade is triangular.
The stem expands and has a slightly convex base.
J is an unusual point of the same buff flint. The blade is unusually broad, being 2.4 cm. wide at the shoulders compared to
3.5 cm. in length. Wide corner notches result in a Langetype stem-shoulder form. The base is slightly convex.

\

Fig. 34.

Untyped points. A-E, H-K, Lake Locke. F, M-P, R-T,

Gabriel. G, L, Q, Cedar Park.

San

Fig. 35.

Untyped points. A-C, San Gabriel. D, Lake Locke. E, knife~

Lake Locke. F, knife, San Gabriel. G, I-I, Cedar Park. I-L, San Gabriel.

A Report on Williamson County Mo~nd Material

149

Example K is probably another intrusive point, resembling
the crudely worked chert from East Texas. The blade was probably recurved originally with small barbs. The stem expands
slightly and the base is slightly convex. The point originally
measured about 3.8 cm. in length and 2.1 cm. in shoulder width.
A unique point from the San Gabriel mound is example F on
Fig. 34. It is similar to example I but is not as fine a point. It is
of grey flint and measures 4.7 cm. in length and 2.5 cm. in
breadth at the shoulders.
G is a unique point from Cedar Park Mound and is similar
in appearance to B pictured directly above it. G, however, is
made of indigenous flint, light grey in color. Like B it has weak
shoulders, an expanding stem, and convex base. It is about 4.9
cm. long and 2.1 cm. wide.
Another unique point from Cedar Park Mound is Fig. 34, L.
It is made of a brown flint with a sharply contracting stem and
a straight base. It must have measured around 9.5 cm. in length
and is 3 cm. wide at the shoulders. Stem length is 2.4 cm.
The bottom row (N-T) of Fig. 34 shows a group of closely
related points from San Gabriel and Cedar Park Mounds. (N-P,
R-T, San Gabriel; Q, Cedar Park.) The points are similar to
the Pandale type in having twisted blades. But, unlike the Pandale type, the stems are not beveled and the blades are not
obviously twisted--that is, only when the stem is held between
the fingers is it noticeable that the blade lies in a plane diagonal
to the stem. Lengths vary from 5.8 cm. to about 6.7 cm. and
shoulder widths from 2.5 cm. to 3.8 cm. Two additional points
from Cedar Park fit this description.
Fig. 35 shows a group of large points from the Williamson
County Mounds. A, from San Gabriel Mound, is of a light grey
flint. It must have been about 8 cm. in length and may be a
large Bulverde. One side of the stem is almost flat so that it
does have a wedge-shaped cross-section.
B, also from San Gabriel, is made of brown flint. It is a nondescript point with convex blade, a stem which contracts on

150

Texas A~’cheological Society

one side and expands on the other, and a straight base. It is
7 cm. long and 2.9 cm. wide.
C, from San Gabriel Mound, is pretty well described by example A above, and although cruder in workmanship than most
Bulverde points, may be a variant of the type. It measures
about 7 cm. in length and 3.5 cm. in width.
D comes from the Lake Locke site and is similar to a Lange
but for the long stem and shoulder width. The point was probably about 8.5 cm. long and is 4.3 cm. wide at the shoulders.
The stem is proportionately narrow with a width of only 1.5
cm. The stem is 2 cm. long and ends in a slightly convex base.
G is a crudely worked point from Cedar Park. It is made of
striped buff flint. The stem is parallel edged and the base appears to have been straight. Length is 9.3 cm. and width is
3.3 cm.
H is made of light grey flint and comes from Cedar Park. The
blade is barbed and recurved, the stem slightly bowed, and
the base slightly concave. It is about 7.9 cm. long and 3.3 cm.
wide at the shoulders.
San Gabriel Mound produced the next two points, I and J,
both of which are similar to G described above. Again, the
blades are recurved and the blade of J is serrated. The stem of
I expands slightly; that of J appears to have been parallel
edged. Bases of both appear to have been straight. I is 9.7 cm.
long and 4 cm. wide at the shoulders. J is 7.3 cm. long and 2.8
cm. wide at the shoulders. I is made of buff flint, J of brown
flint.
K and L are related points from San Gabriel. Both are fairly
flat and made of light grey and buff flint, respectively. They
are characterized by short contracting stems, flat bases, and
slightly convex blades. They resemble example L of Fig. 34, but
L has a much longer stem and is a thicker point. K and L may
be knife blades. K measures approximately 11 cm. in length and
L approximately 10 era. K is 3.4 cm. wide at the shoulders; L
is 3 cm. wide at the shoulders.
Some of the larger, heavier points on Fig. 35 are probably

Fig. 36. East Texas int~sive specimens, Hughes Mound. A, J-N, unidentified artifacts. B, C, I, unidentified points. D, gouge. E-H, Gary points.

%

Fig. 37.

San Gabriel Points, San Gabriel Mound.

Texas Archeolegical Soole%~
Southern Methodist Universi~
Box 165
Dallas~ 9exas 75££Z
A Report on Williamson County Mound Material

153

spear points, particularly D through J, and may be Pogo points,
a type which allows for a great deal of variation. (Note in the
above table other points tentatively assigned to the Pogo point

type.)
The Hughes Mound produced an appreciable amount of intrusive material. Fig. 36 shows this material. B is a small, thin
point of buff colored flint with a trace of red clay stain. The
flake is unworked on one side except for retouching on the
blade edge. The stem appears to have been parallel edged with
a straight base. The point is 3.7 cm. in length and 2.1 cm. in
shoulder width.
C is made of white flint, little worked on one side with but
crude shaping on the other. The outline is the same as B described above. It is 3.4 cm. long and 2 cm. wide at the shoulders.
E through H are extremely crude Gary points made of chert.
E is made from mottled rose and green-grey chert, F from red
chert, G from a lead colored chert, and H from an orange-buff
chert.
I probably represents the same "type" as B and C, being the
chert-made counterpart. This piece of chert is banded: black
bands alternating with white and speckled brown bands. Length
measures 4.9 cm., width 2.4 cm.
On Fig. 37 are a group of points from San Gabriel Mound
which seem to represent a type, as there were 46 of them from
Cedar Park Mound, 83 from San Gabriel, 10 from Hughes, 21
from Lake Locke, and one from the unidentified mound site,
making a total of 160 points. The points bear resemblances to
several different Central Texas types, but in spite of such
gradient resemblances they display a consistent grouping of
their own which seems to warrant description as a type. Blades
are triangular with edges usually straight to slightly convex
although sometimes slightly recurved (U). Shoulders are
slight (H) to prominent (Q). Stems are genarally parallel
edged but may expand or contract slightly. Bases are generally
straight but may be slightly concave (G, H, I) or convex (A,
O, P, T, U). Length varies from 3.9 cm. (0) to about 8 cm.
(U), with most falling between 5 and 6.5 cm. Shoulder width

154

Texas Archeological Society

varies from 2 to 3.5 cm., most falling between 1.5 and 3 cm.
Those points having a contracting stem (G, N, Q, W) resemble
Bulverde points, but lack the thinning of the stem. Those with
expanding stems (A, C, D) resemble Lange points, but do not
have the heavy shoulders and the usually short stem of that
type. Those with weak shoulders (H, V) resemble Travis
points, but are not as crude as Travis and the shoulders are
better defined. All of these have a strong resemblance to the
Yarbrough type of East Texas, but are cruder points and never
have the beveled blade or ground stem edges often seen on the
Yarbrough. I propose the name of San Gabriel points for this
type since the mound of that name, so far as is known, seems
to have been the center of the type.
Another sizeable group of points turned up which may
eventually prove to be another type, although there is as yet
insufficient evidence to name it. Fig. 38 shows this group of 18
points. The group is recognizable by its long blade and stem
and absence of well-defined shoulders. The blade is usually
parallel edged for much of its length, or may be convex giving
it more of a leaf shape (L, O, P, Q). Any indication of shoulders
is ordinarily lacking, but they may be slightly defined (K, P).
Bases are usually straight but may be slightly concave (F, N, R)
or convex (0). Some of the points exhibit the symmetry of
"Early Man" points (particularly P), but none exhibit the
fine flaking technique or smoothing indicative of a respectable
age.
One last group of untyped points remains to be described.
Fig. 39 shows a group of single-notched points. C and D are
basally notched points measuring respectively about 3.7 cm. in
length and 2.3 cm. in width, and 4.1 cm. in length and 1.9 cm. in
width. E, F, G, and J have their single notches removed at
the sides. E is 5.9 cm. long and 2.8 cm. wide. F must have been
about 8 cm. long and is 3.7 cm. wide. G is about 5.5 cm. long
and is 2.7 cm. wide. J is about 7 cm. long and is 3.3 cm. wide.
K has its single notch removed at the corner. It was approximately 7 cm. long and is 3.2 cm. wide. H and I have single
notches removed from the center of the base. H originally
measured about 7 cm. and is 3.1 cm. wide. I measures 5.5 cm.

vJ

Fig. 38.

Untyped group. A-F, I-L, San Gabriel. G, Unidentified Mound.

H, Lake Locke. M-R, Cedar Park.

ii

s"

!

I
|

!
I

Fig. 39. A, B, beveled knives, Lake Locke. C-G, single-notched points,
Cedar Park. H, J, K, single-notched points, Lake Locke. I, single-notched
point, San Gabriel. L, knife blade, Cedar Park.

157

A Report on WiUiamson County Mound Material

long and 4.2 cm. wide. Both of these single-notched variations,
those with single notches removed from the corner area and
those with single notches removed from the center of the base,
should probably be set up as described types. Both variations
are known to the author as occurring from Val Verde County
in the Trans-Pecos area down the Rio Grande through the
Southwest area of Texas where they seem to be found with
greater frequency Collections throughout the state need to be
searched to establish the distribution and frequency of these
points.
OTHER LITHIC MATERIAL
The following table provides the count of lithic specimens
other than dart points.
Cedar
San
Park Gabriel
Heavy Blades ....... 160
Choppers ...........
1
3
Hatchets, hand axes ..
Hammerstones-milling stones .....
48
Convex-based knives . 129
Straight-based knives. 101
13
Concave-based knives.
Flake knives ........
Specialized knives ...
4
Side scrapers .......
15
End scrapers ........
12
Turtleback scrapers ~
7
Flake scrapers ......
8
Gouges .............
12
23
Drills ..............
Drills reworked
from points ......
16
Drills reworked
from knives .......
2
2
Gravers ............
Spokeshaves ........

Hughes

108
10

203
19

23
20

382
147
15

Lake
Locke

U~know~

477
55

65
13

5
1
13
4
1
12
1
12

2
42
46
5
28
10
20

4
812
251
23
28
5
70
55
8
59
12
21

38

29

12

2

1
1
4

85
53
1
1
10
5
3
2
1
3

158

Texas Archeological Society

Knives
Some of the knife blades listed by base shape in the table
above should perhaps be called adze blades. It had been the
writer’s intention to suggest a dividing line between the two
classifications: the point at which a blade became too large
and unwieldy to be used efficiently as a knife. The task proved
impossible due to the great percentage of broken specimens.
These large blades, however, are well-thinned and chipped, unlike the crude "heavy blade," and include the blades which have
often been called "ceremonial blades" in Texas. Some of the
knife blades in this collection must have measured up to 15
cm. in length and some, because of their greater" thickness and
weight, suggest a function other than cutting. Since the function of an adze was suggested for the "ceremonial blades" at
the 1956 meeting of the Texas Archeologica! Society in Waco,
the term is used in this paragraph.
Two convex-based knives from Lake Locke are made of
chalcedony.
As indicated in the table, several specialized knives were
found. Cedar Park produced example L of Fig. 39. This stemmed
knife measures 13.4 cm. in length and 6.3 cm. in breadth across
the middle of the blade. It is of buff-colored flint with a convex blade, short, slightly expanding stem and convex base.
B on Fig. 40 is another knife from Cedar Park which must
have been about 15.5 cm. in length. It is made of grey flint with
heavy barbs which probably extended to the base line.
From Cedar Park came a broken corner-tang knife and the
crescent-shaped knife seen in Fig. 41, A. It is worked on both
sides from the edges to a central ridge. It is made of light
grey flint. An additional set of six artifacts could be called
knives or scrapers. Some of them are seen in Fig. 41, B-D. B
and D are piano-convex but, like the others, have fine pressure
retouching on both sides. Another series of six piano-convex
artifacts questionable as to function came from the Lake Locke
site. These specimens range in length from 2.7 cm. to 8.2 cm.
All exhibit a crescent or semicircular shape and the largest two
are also rather thick, measuring 1.5 cm.

I
I

Fig. 40. A, hammerstone-milling stone, Cedar Park. B, knife, Cedar
Park. C, hatchet, Hughes Mound. D-F, heavy tools, Cedar Park.

Fig. 41. A-E, knives, Cedar Park. F, side scraper, Hughes Mound. G,
turtleback scraper, Cedar Park. H, side scraper, Lake Locke. I, J, gouges,
Cedar Park.

A Repo~’t on Williamson County Mound Mateo’ial

161

Two corner-tang knives are E and F of Fig. 35, the former
from Lake Locke, the latter from San Gabriel. E is made of
grey flint and measures 6.3 cm. F is made of brown flint and
measures 6 cm. Another corner-tang knife came from Hughes
Mound, but was cruder in workmanship.
Two beveled knives from Lake Locke are seen in A and B
of Fig. 39. A has only the stem beveled on the right sides of
both faces. It originally measured about 11.3 cm. in length.
B is more typical of the double pointed knife with alternate
beveling of the four sides. It was about 9.3 cm. long. The blade
of another beveled knife came from the unidentified mound.
A straight based knife with a single basal notch in the middle came from Lake Locke. It measures 8.5 cm. in length.
Heavy Tools
Heavy tools are classified by the shape and/or degree of
crudeness. A "heavy blade" is seen in Fig. 40, E. These tools
range from a length of 5.2 cm. to something over 13 cm. on one
specimen with a missing distal end. Width ranges from about
3 cm. to 7.5 cm. All are crude, characterized by only primary
percussion chipping.
Choppers are crude, little modified core tools, mostly circular
in shape.
Hatchets and hand axes are separated from the "heavy
blade" classification because they are better made. Two hatchets
are seen on Fig. 40, D and F, both from Cedar Park. F has
some evidence of halting with chipped areas at the sides. Example C on Fig. 40 shows another blade from Hughes Mound
with evidence of halting. Several other blades from the mounds
were similarly treated, making the possibility of accidental
chipping somewhat remote. Only one hand-axe with the nodule
encrustation left at the top for grasping was found in the
museum material, that one being from Cedar Park.
The quartzite stones from Cedar’ Park are listed as both milling stones and hammerstones as they appear to have functioned
as both. Of the 48 stones from that mound, 21 had been utilized

162

Texas A~’cheological Society

for milling on one face. Twenty-seven stones had been utilized for
milling on two faces. Twenty-four of the number had battered
edges, apparently having been used as percussion tools. Six stones
had been used only for hammering. Five sandstones had possibly been used as hammerstones as well. Four streamworn
pebbles were unmodified by use. The "grinding faces" are convex, suggesting that a rocking motion was employed. Al! are
one-handed implements. An example with cross-section is seen
on Fig. 40, A.
Gouges
Of the 12 gouges from Cedar Park Mound, four are pianoconvex. The others are bifacially worked. Three gouges have
slightly convex bit ends. Four have slightly concave bit ends,
and four have straight bit ends. The twelfth has the bit end
missing. Six of these have convex bits; five have concave bits.
One specimen differs from the others in that the underside is
worked flat rather than having been flattened by a single blow.
The variation occurs in the bit end where it is beveled on the
underside. One other gouge exhibits the reverse bit (Fig. 36, D).
It is from Hughes Mound and is described below. The crosssection should clarify this description. Fig. 41, I and J are two
Cedar Park gouges.
The gouge listed from San Gabriel is only tentatively identifled, so will not be described.
Ten gouges came from the Hughes Mound. The first is made
of East Texas flint, bifacially worked with a convex bit end
and a concave bit. Of those made from indigenous flint, two
are piano-convex with convex bit ends and convex bits. Three
others are bifiacially worked with convex bit ends, two with
convex bits, the other with a concave bit. Another is a planoconvex artifact and appears to be the middle part of a gouge.
The edges are convex. The bit end is missing. The eighth gouge
has a slightly concave bit end, the bit itself being convex. The
ninth gouge shown in Fig. 36, D is a tiny piano-convex specimen 4.1 cm. in length utilizing a fractured plane of the flint
as the bit. This is the specimen with the "reverse bit" mentioned
above. A similar specimen has a slightly convex bit end--convex on top and concave underneath.

A Report on Williamson County Mound Material

163

There are twelve gouges from Lake Locke of which six are
piano-convex and triangular in shape. They range in length
from 6.3 cm. to 11.5 cm. and in width from 4 cm. to 6 cm. Of
these there are three piano-convex gouges with straight bit
ends, two with concave bits and one with a convex bit. One
gouge has both a concave bit end and a concave bit. Two gouges
have convex bit ends and convex bits. Bifacially worked specimens show three with convex bit ends and convex bits and
three with convex bit ends and concave bits.
Drills and Gravers
Drills which were not reworked from points had varied
handles: rectangular, T-shaped, triangular, and semi-circular.
Many drills are stemmed, having been reworked from dart
points. Cedar Park produced two drills which had been reworked from knives or heavy blades and San Gabriel produced
two reworked from knives. Drill shafts are not counted in the
table. One double dril! came from Hughes Mound. It was reworked from a Castroville point with the distal end thinned to
a drill in the usual manner and one shoulder also converted to
a drill.
Nothing unusual was noted about the gravers, except that
one from Lake Locke is on a Fresno point.
Scrapers
Three of the 15 side scrapers from Cedar Park Mound are
unmodified split stones. Three of the seven turtleback scrapers
are of the long, piano-convex variety common to South Central Texas with thick ridges up to 3 cm. in thickness. These are
commonly called "buffalo scrapers." One is shown in Fig. 41, G.
Five of the 12 end scrapers are refined by pressure retouching,
resulting in convex bits.
Hughes produced 25 flake scrapers only six of which are
modified by retouching. Three of the turtleback scrapers from
Hughes are piano-convex. Twenty-two of the side scrapers are
biracial, characterized by crude primary chipping only. Twelve
others are modified by pressure retouching’. One scraper could

164

Texas Archeological Society

have employed four sides, being lozenge-shaped. Another utilized a large piano-convex spall with a naturally concave curve.
In addition to the concave side, two others have been thinned
down by rough chipping to make scraping edges. This scraper
is pictured in Fig. 41, F. End scrapers show 15 which are
crude, showing only primary chipping. Thirteen others have
been retouched by pressure flaking. Two are remade from large
blades and six are unmodified split stones.
Lake Locke produced a series of 32 flake scrapers and/or
knives. Ten appear shaped more for use as knives showing retouching by fine pressure flaking. Eight of these are planoconvex and unmodified on the flat sides. One has what may be
an attempt at a corner tang. Of the 22 others, only four have
what appears to be intentional modification by pressure flaking.
Most of these are piano-convex flakes. Seven are quite angular
in cross-section, having been shaped by the extraction of long
flakes running the length of the implements, thus having three
or four planes on the convex surfaces. Lengths of the series
vary from 2.7 cm. to 6.5 cm. Thirteen of the end scrapers are
also refined by retouching. All have convex bits. Twenty-four
of the side scrapers are piano-convex. One is pictured in Fig.
41, H. Thirteen are double-edged. Nine have definitely retouched edges, the others being modified probably through
use. Seventeen are made from large spalls, smooth on one side
and modified on the other. One concave scraper is a crescentshaped, unmodified spall. One of the two piano-convex turtleback scrapers is of the lineal "buffalo scraper" type described
above. The other six turtleback scrapers are bifacially worked.
MISCELLANEOUS
Several interesting items of miscellaneous material are found
in this collection. The first is the middle section of a slate
pendant from San Gabriel Mound (Fig. 33, K). It is made of
dark brown slate and the edges of both sides are thinned in
attempted bevels. The hole has been drilled from both sides.
The length is 5.2 cm. Width at the base is 5.9 cm.
Example L of Fig. 33 is a sherd from a soapstone bowl, also
from San Gabriel Mound. The rim is rounded and striation

A Report on WiUiamson County Mound Material

165

marks appear on both the outside and the inside, the latter
perhaps only from use as they are not as deep. The sherd is
.6 cm. thick.
Fig. 33, M is a loaf-shaped piece of petrified wood, well polished on the two cut sides and the ends. It is 3.4 cm. long, 1.5 cm.
wide, and 1 cm. thick. Judging from the shape, it may have
served as an atlatl weight. It is from Lake Locke.
A quartzite net sinker (Fig. 33, N) also came from Lake
Locke Mound. It is identical to those prevalent around Waco
in McLennan County. It is oval in cross-section with notches
ground out at either end. It measures 4 cm. in length, 2.8 cm.
in width, and 2 cm. in thickness.
Hughes Mound produced three sherds of Leon Plain pottery.
These represent the only evidence of pottery in the museum
collection and the small count in only one mound is an intriguing mystery, to be solved, it is hoped, through future excavation.
Other Miscellaneous items are as follows:
Cedar Park Mound: fossil Cretaceous Brachiopod and Ammonite; a walnut; and bone, probably bison.
San Gabriel Mound: seven pieces of petrified wood; two
pieces of quartz; one sandstone abrader; one smoothstone; one
piece of charred bone.
Hughes Mound: fossil Cretaceous Gastropods, Pelecypods,
Echinoderms; two Cretaceous rocks with holes drilled by water
action; two pieces of cave material--one a piece of calcite and
one a piece o£ rock showing compressed and folded strata and
modified by underground water action; petrified wood; quartz;
bone material representing deer, bison, and bird; red ochre;
piece of lime-encrusted flint with incising; three rubbing stones;
piece of pure lead 2.5 cm. long, folded over to form a cylinder
and crimped together with pliers.
Lake Locke Mound: two steel washers, one apparently damaged by a fired bullet; piece of heavily patinated amber glass;
six smoothing stones; a metamorphic split stone that is plano-

166

Texas A~’cheological Society

convex and celt-shaped with a small flat surface worn on the
end as though it had been used as a pestle; red ochre; hematite
ball; bone and antler material representing bison, deer, and
carnivore; Cretaceous fossil Ammonite, Pelecypod; snail shells;
stream-worn pebbles; petrified wood; quartz; shell scraper
made from fresh water musse!.
Unidentified Mound: quartz; smooth red granite pebble probably used as a rubbing stone.
OTHER MATERIAL
A last group of artifacts remains to be described. Hughes
and Lake Locke Mounds produced large amounts of crudely
worked materia!. Most of the material is intrusive : metamorphic
material whose origin must necessarily be from the ArbuckleWichita outcroppings to the west and cherts whose provenience
could be North Central or East Texas. Other materials used are
quartzites which are found throughout the Edwards Plateau
area. Six-hundred ninety-one pieces of this material were found
in the Hughes Mound and 70 pieces in the Lake Locke site.
Some of the Gary and unidentified points made of this material
from Hughes have been described above. Sixty-four other pieces
are shaped with some semblance of a stem for halting and are
probably Gary points though three bear more resemblance to
Lange or Bulverde points. One drill, one side scraper, and one
gouge or end scraper can be identified. A T-shaped broken piece
may also have been a drill. Seventy-one artifacts are thinned at
the rounded basal ends. However, the majority of these crudely
made artifacts defy identification as to function. Fig. 36 shows
the variety of shapes and sizes. A is a triangular piece of chert
measuring 3.8 cm. in length and 3 cm. in base width. J is one
of the few larger pieces. It is a pinkish-grey granite measuring
6 cm. in length, 4.3 cm. in width, and 2.5 cm. in thickness. K is
a larger chert version of A being 5.6 cm. long and 4 cm. wide.
L might be described as a crude Abasolo point made of chert.
It is 5.8 cm. long, 3 cm. wide, and 1.1 cm. thick. Most of the
intrusive artifacts are like M: small, circular, and made of
chert. M. measures 3.6 cm. along its longest axis and 2.8 cm.
along its shortest. N is more oval in shape measuring 4.5 cm.

A Report on Williamson County Mo~nd Material

167

in length and 2.4 cm. in width. It is also a thicker specimen
than M. Five-hundred five specimens fall within this described
range of artifacts.
The crude material from Lake Locke can be broken down
into: 20 Gary points (four additional ones the size of Almagre
points); four points with crude attempts at stems not of the
Gary type; one point which resembles a Travis point; eight unbeveled Cat6n-Abasolo type implements; twelve chert counterparts of "heavy blades"; two pieces thinned down to convex
based "knives"; 25 implements shaped like the unidentified
artifacts described from the Hughes site; and a unique point
with slightly concave blade edges beveled on the right side of
one face and with a serrated blade on the other, and a slightly
contracting stem. The base of this point is broken. Its origina!
length was about 4 cm.
Limitations of the rock used readily explains the crudeness
of all this material, but the question remains whether the
rock was brought in and the implements made in Williamson
County or whether they were brought into the area already
manufactured. Further, why would these have been used in an
area rich in fine flint which is easily worked and makes a far
superior tool? Overall crudeness of the material caused the
author to lump all this material together, but it must be kept
in mind that the rocks and minerals used come from different areas: west, north and/or east, and possibly south.
SUMMARY
One must understand that the artifact count given in this
paper cannot present an accurate picture since only the imperfect and broken material is accounted for. Records from
the University of Texas, Witte Museum correspondence, and
conversation with Mr. Pohl contribute additional information.
According to the University of Texas files, Pearce’s excavation
at Cedar Park Mound disclosed burials in the center of the
mound. Mr. Pohl states that the skeletal material he found
was given to the University of Texas. He also reports that he
gave some metates from the site to the University (private
conversation, July, 1957).

168

Texas Archeological Society

Notes on the Hughes Mound in the Witte Museum disclose
that "besides the usual run of implements such as arrows
[points?], spears, drills, knives, scrapers, etc. several rare corner tang artifacts, slate ceremonials [pendants?l, two effigy
arrows[?], and bone awls have been found up to date." The
report further states that ash pits containing an abundance of
split bones had been uncovered; that no burials were encountered at the mound; that a 3" bead of conch shell had been excavated along with shells from the coast; and that animal bones
had been tentatively identified as buffalo, deer, javelina, fox,
coon, squirrel, and wild turkey. Two levels of culture were recognized in Hughes Mound. We can obtain an idea of the
mound’s size from the information that at the time the report
was written the "ditch" was 100 feet wide and had progressed
to the 90 foot mark. Depth varied from 24 to 42 inches.
Correspondence also tells us that a "big pot" was dug out of
Cobb’s Spring Mound. As far as the author can determine, this
was the only piece of pottery found other than the three sherds
from Hughes Mound.
Another unique find was a "solid copper hammer" from "one
of the mounds close to Leander." Whether this site is represented at all in the Museum collection cannot be said.
The presence of the steel washers and the lead piece can
most logically be explained as originating in Mr. Pohl’s camp.
The heavily patinated amber glass was probably scooped up
from the surface with the discarded broken artifacts. In the
absence of artifacts of European manufacture representing
an historic zone of occupation this would seem to be the best
explanation possible under the circumstances.
Witte Memorial Museum
San Antonio, Texas

THREE ARCHAIC SITES IN EAST TEXAS
By E. W. HAYNER
Like Walter W. Taylor, who gave us a good article on a
cave in Coahuila (Taylor, 1956), I am not looking for old age
in the sites and artifacts which I find, nor am I looking for
an argument about their age. Yet, when we deal with the
Archaic Aspect, the question of age comes up at once. Therefore we must deal with the problem of age by using all methods
available.
In East Texas there are several factors which tend to confuse the person who makes an investigation of the Archaic
Aspect. First, we do not have any completed publications to use
as references. Second, we have to deal with the Pleistocene
Epoch and the Recent deposits. Third, a real problem, we have
materials from most of the loci of the Gibson and Fulton Aspects piled on top of most of the Archaic sites.
During the time period of the Archaic Aspect, all of East
Texas was occupied. We find remnants of Archaic components
in every part of the area, and it is a fact that nearly every good
campsite location in the area will show some evidence of the
Archaic occupation. As the Neo-American people moved into the
area, or as the Archaic people developed into the Neo-American
the same camp sites were used by the Neo-American people as
had been used by the Archaic people.
Sam Houston made the statement that when he crossed this
country and rode at night, he was never out of sight of a Caddo
campfire. This being the case, Archaic sites which are pure are
rare, and when we find a component within the Archaic which
we can type as a distinct focus, then we have a prize indeed.
This article is not an attempt to deal with the East Texas
Archaic Aspect; but since I have been fortunate enough to find
several pure components within the Aspect, I shall present such
facts as are at hand.
Caddo Lake, with its sandbars, islands, and surrounding
shore line, is a distinct archeological area. At no other place in

Texas A~’cheological Society

170

Texas or the Southwest will be found such a merging of aspects
and loci.
When we deal with the Archaic Aspect here, we must also
deal with the age of Caddo Lake and the Pleistocene Epoch. The
lake itself shows three very distinct stages of water level. One
is the present-day stage, which is held almost constant by the
dam below Mooringsport, Louisiana. Then there was a low water
stage of which we have evidence in the form of many oak snags
and stumps, better known as "buckhorns," which are to be
seen wherever the lake is shallow enough to see bottom. There
is also an old high water stage. Along the south shore from
Bird Island to Buzzard Bay there is an old shore line about
12 feet above the present water level, revealed as a ledge along
the sides and brows of the post oak ridges which abut on the
lake along this shore. At the base of this ledge is a shore line
which yields wave-washed gravel and sand. The post oak ridges
themselves are formed by an outcropping of the Rockdale formation, which is a member of the Wilcox group. The west end of
this Rockdale outcrop can be seen at old Port Caddo Landing
on Cypress Bayou and it can be followed from that point down
the bayou and along the south side of the lake.
i.

THE PIPELINE SITE

About one mile west of the Texas-Louisiana state line, which
crosses the lake, is an oil pipeline running straight across the
lake. At the point on the south side where the pipeline comes
ashore and climbs the post oak ridge, there is an Archaic campsite, which I call the Pipeline Site. It sits on the top of a post
oak ridge which lies parallel to the lake and is about 200 yards
from the lake shore. Just a short distance from the site is the
beginning of the old Pleistocene shore line.
The site is crossed by the pipeline and a road, and there are
also two wash-outs where the soil is eroded down to the Rockdale formation, which is a red silty clay with some small concretions. The top-soil of the ridge is clearly of the Recent Epoch,
and is of organic nature, which means that it was formed where
it is located.

Tl~ree Archaic Sites in East Texas

171

The size of the area covered by the site is not known. The
materials recovered have come from an area about 125 feet in
diameter. There are some remains of burned rock, a few small
pieces of petrified wood, and some evidence of charcoal.
The first artifact to be found at this site, in 1954, was a rubbing stone or mano (Fig. 42, A). During the three years since
then, five points (Fig. 42, B-F) have been recovered. Two of
these points are made from a brown novaculite, one from a
dark brown flint, one from a tan flint banded with red, and one
from a tan flint. All of these points have a contracting stem
which is rounded on the end. They could be typed as Gary; but
as of now, and unti! more ~esearch is done on them and on the
site, I feel it best not to place them in any certain type.
This is a very difficult site to work. When the weather is dry,
the soil is hard and will not pulverize or go through a screen.
When the soil is wet, it is sticky and can be neither dug nor
screened. As this site is so hard to work, I let the rains do the
excavating for me. After every rain I go over the site, and have
done so many dozens of times.
About 400 yards down the lake from this site is the Jones
No. 1 site (Hayner, 1957, pp. 6-7), which sits on the presentday shore line, with the ridge and ancient shore line behind it.
Jones No. 1 has produced.Archaic, Gibson Aspect, and Titus
Focus artifacts. In the Archaic horizon of this site, spear-sized
points of the Gary type have been found, as well as specimens
of other Archaic types and one Angostura Point.
I am not in a position to build a strong case for the antiquity
of the Pipeline Site, but will present the facts. We have here
two sites--Pipeline and Jones No. 1--both Archaic, yet completely different both in type of location and in type of points
produced. In the Pipeline site we have only small points which
some people would type as Gary, whereas in the Jones No. 1
Archaic zone are Gary and other Archaic types.
It can be stated categorically that all the specimens from
the Pipeline site, shown in Fig. 42, A-F, came from within the
top, or from on the top, of the red silty clay, the Rockdale formation. Two of these points (Fig. 42, B, E) were found in the

172

Texas Archeological Society

roadway, one in the center of the road, one in the outside edge
of a rut. They were very definitely in the red formation and had
to be cut out. The other three points (Fig. 42, C, D, F) were
found in the wash-outs, in place in their original beds, not
dislodged and moved by rain.
In the site area and on the upper side of one of the washouts
is a large area of the organic topsoil, washed clean. In this clean
area there is no evidence of occupation. At no place in the road
or pipeline is there any occupation evidence except in or on
the red Rockdale.
At the beginning of this paper, I stated that when we deal
with the East Texas Archaic, we have to deal with the Pleistocene Epoch. Here in the Pipeline site we have such a case. The
organic topsoil is clearly of the Recent Epoch, and the underlying Rockdale is clearly older. Although not a geologist, I am
acquainted with Texas geology, and I have described the circumstances of the Pipeline site to a qualified oilfield geologist.
It would not be fair to quote him directly here, since he has
not examined the site himself; but on the basis of my description he suggested a date of about 6000 B.C. for the site.
This gives us about an 8000 year age for these early Archaic
points. Of course, this date may seem too early for some people
to accept; but it is not out of line when we take into account all
the factors that bear on the site. Let us briefly review some of
them. Caddo Lake is a Pleistocene lake. In this lake are two
kinds of deposits. One is Pleistocene, manifested as several
islands composed of an intermix of red and blue buckshot clay.
The other is a Recent deposit which is composed of sandbars.
The lake has a Pleistocene shore line, above which is the Pipeline site. The close of the Pleistocene Epoch was about 10,000
years ago. Eight thousand years ago there would surely not have
been much, if any, soil on this site, since in 1957 only from three
to four inches of soil was found in any of the three pits dug.
The preceding material by no means represents a complete
analysis of the Pipeline site, but it will give the reader some
idea of the problems to be encountered when an attempt is
made to deal with the Archaic Aspect in East Texas.

Three Archaic Sites in East Texas

2.

173

THE GREY AND HICKEY SITE

In this site I have been fortunate enough to find a component
of a pure type or focus within the Archaic Aspect. The Grey
and Hickey site is located on a post oak ridge which lies parallel
to Caddo Lake on the south side, about three-quarters of a mile
eastward down the lake from the Pipeline site. The site is partly
on the lot which is at present the location of my camp on the
lake. The artifacts are found where a deeply eroded road forks,
with one fork going into my camp and the other into an adjoining camp.
At this site we have the Rockdale as a base, but above it is
a Recent deposit which is different from that at the Pipeline
site. A test pit was dug here on July 2, 1957. The Recent deposit is 17 inches in depth and is of two parts, the top seven
inches being a gray topsoil and the lower 10 inches a yellow
intermix between the gray topsoil and the red Rockdale. However, the yellow deposit is of organic origin and not Pleistoeerie.
This site has been under almost daily observation for three
years and has produced a considerable group of artifacts (Fig.
42, G-M). The recovery area for the artifacts is less than 100
feet in diameter. Two points and one gouge were found within
a two-foot area. All of the artifacts have been exposed by rain
action, and all have been removed from their original bed by
myself. Also, all of the artifacts have been exposed in the washouts in the camp roads.
The first artifact found at this site was a mano or rubbing
stone (Fig. 42, G). This stone is not a true mano; it appears
to be stream formed and later used by man until it acquired a
high degree of polish.
In addition, the site has produced many flint chips or microflakes, some burned rock, some chips of petrified wood, some
charcoal, a few bits of hematite, two gouges, and four points.
In the points (Fig. 42, H-K) I have the material by means of
which I can type the site. These points appear to be of the
Palmillas type but I will not definitely type them as such at the
present time. They are all of the same material, a tan colored

bl

~

X

m

Tl~ree Archaic Sites in East Texas

175

chert. Points of this same material occur in abundance in the
collection of Mr. J. F. Lentz, from the Lentz site, the Lickskillet Farm in Harrison County (Hayner, 1955, p. 242). In
the Lentz collection we have no way of knowing from what
aspect the points were derived, but here in the Grey and
Hickey site we have proof of where the points of this type
originated--in the Archaic Aspect. This is also a good example
of what can be accomplished with years of investigation.
The distinctive feature of the gouges (Fig. 42, L, M) is the
materia! from which they are made. Both appear to be of
chalcedony. Fig. 42, L, is from a flake knocked from the outside
of a cobble, and M is from a dark semi-transparent material
which has some type of fossil as an inclusion.
The location of the Grey and Hickey site is very similar to
that of the Pipeline site. It sits on a ridge above the shelf of the
ancient shore line of the lake, which indicates an occupation
at a time when the lake stood at a much higher stage than it
does today. Also the horizon of recovery of the artifacts is very
distinctive. Every artifact recovered has come out of the yellow
soil, and some of them from well within the yellow. There is no
evidence of occupation in the gray topsoil.
I have discussed the circumstances of the Grey and Hickey
site with the geologist mentioned earlier, and on the basis of
this conversation I estimate that the Palmillas-like points from
this site, coming from the yellow soil on top of the Rockdale,
could have an age of 5000 years or perhaps more.
This site is well suited to controlled excavation, as the soil
both works and screens well. There is also a good possibility that
the site would yield material for a Carbon-14 date.
At Grey and Hickey I am fortunate in having a site which,
through comparisons, gives me much information in regard to
other sites in the area. For one thing, this is a pure Archaic
site which can be used as a check against local pottery-bearing
sites, some of which contain Archaic types of specimens. Two

Fig. 42.

A-F, Pipeline Site. G-M, Grey and Hickey Site.

176

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

sites in the area are worth mentioning here, the Akin No. 1
Archaic site and the Jones No. 2 site, to show, by comparison,
the significance of the Grey and Hickey site.
About one mile south of the Grey and Hickey site and directly away from the lake, is another site of exactly the same complex or focus. This site, which I call the Akin No. I Archaic
site, occupies the same soil horizon as the Grey and Hickey site.
Here we also have the Rockdale formation at a depth of about
18 inches. Above that is a yellow soil about 10 inches thick, and
at the top a gray topsoil about eight inches thick. A ~’oad goes
over the brow of the ridge on which the site is located, and there
is also a cut bank on this ridge, caused by erosion resulting from
cultivation. I have recovered two points, one mano of petrified
wood, some flint chips, and some burned rock at this site.
Two facts at this Akin site are very striking. First, the points
are of the same type and the same material as those from the
Grey and Hickey site. Second, all artifacts here come from the
yellow soil, which is completely below the plow zone.
The Grey and Hickey site, as has been stated, sits on the eastern brow of a ridge which lies parallel with the lake. The ridge
has a western brow where a spring-fed branch cuts through oll
its way to the lake. On this western brow and at a distance of
about 250 yards from the Grey and Hickey site is a pottery site,
the Jones No. 2 site (Hayner, 1957, p. 6). This site has produced both Gibson and Fulton Aspect pottery. Six test pits have
been dug at Jones No. 2, several of them down to the red Rockdale. All artifacts are found in the gray topsoil, and there is no
evidence of occupation in the yellow soil or on the red base. The
interesting feature here is that the soil formations are exactly
the same at ~ones No. 2 as at Grey and Hickey, yet there is a
marked difference in the stratigraphic positions of the occupation zones.
Here, then, within a distance of one mile, are three different
types of occupation in terms of both artifacts and time. The
soil formations are very nearly the same, yet the occupation
zones are different. First, at the Pipeline site we have a type
of point similar to the Gary, which lies directly upon, and

Three Archaic Sites in East Texas

177

perhaps within, the top of the Rockdale formation, possibly
8000 years old. Second, at Grey and Hickey and Akin No. 1
Archaic, we have a type of point similar to Palmillas, which
is well within the yellow intermix above the Rock’dale. This type
of point may be about 5000 years old, perhaps older. Third, at
Jones No. 2 we have a Neo-American site which occupies only
the gray topsoil, and is probably from 500 to 900 years old.
Yes, in East Texas Indian archeology is very interesting.
3.

THE RUDD SITE

Now to deal with the last site in this series. The Rudd site is a
real puzzle. I have tried to get help from a number of archeologists in dealing with this site, but without much success. The site
is located near Latex on the Louisiana-Texas state line, about five
miles south of Caddo Lake. It sits on top of a wide flat-topped
ridge, which has a spring branch flowing on each side of it. The
site is composed of 21 mounds and covers an area that is triangular in shape, about 50 yards wide at one end, 200 yards at the
other, and 300 yards in length. The majority of the mounds are
in the smal! end of the triangle. The mounds are small, from
six to 20 ft. in diameter and from a few inches to about two
feet high. The largest in diameter are not the greatest in height.
The first mound which I excavated in this group was about
six feet in diameter by two feet in height. It produced some
charcoal, bits of burned wood, and one small object which I felt
sure was crude pottery. This object was sent to Dr. James Griffin of the University of Michigan, and he stated that it was a
sand concretion. I am not yet entirely satisfied about the hature of this object.
The second mound to be tested produced a pit stone (Fig. 43,
A). Another pit stone (Fig. 43, B) was found at the base of
the mound. This mound was one of a pair that were joined together. Each of these mounds is about 12 feet in diameter
and 18 inches high.
Mound No. 3 was small, about eight feet in diameter and 20
inches high. When a pit was dug into this mound it produced
only chips and flakes of petrified wood. The artifact shown in

i

Fig. 43.

Specimens from the Rudd Site.

Three Archaic Sites in East Texas

179

Fig. 43, C, was recovered from this mound. It seems to be an
arrow-shaft sizer. Another specimen very similar to this one
was also found.
Mound No. 4 is one of the largest in the group, about 20 feet
in diameter and about 20 inches in height. At a depth of about
eight inches was found the artifact shown in Fig. 43, D. As can
be seen, this is a large pit-type grinder. It has a large pit in
each side and each pit extends over the edge of the stone, with
the pits being opposite each other. Fig. 43, E, was found on
¯ the surface of the soil about 30 feet from the base of this mound.
It could be the mano which was used with the grinder. Stones
of this kind do not occur on the surface in East Texas. Both of
these stones are of a gray granite and appear glacier-formed.
One other mound was tested. It produced some charcoal and
a few bits of burned wood.
About 18 months ago I conducted a group of Boy Scouts from
Shreveport, Louisiana, on an expedition to these mounds. We
were accompanied by Robert Fulton and J. Ashley Sibley, Jr.
We covered the whole of the mound area and found only a few
flint chips, along with the blade part of a spear point.
All of this mound area has at one time been in cultivation.
Some of the mounds have been plowed down and some have
been plowed over. The site is noted for its paucity of artifacts,
but it did yield points when it was in cultivation. The man who
first showed me the site is a good friend of mine who had the
place under lease as a pasture. He stated that a farm hand on
the place had found and sold to a man in Dallas nearly a gallon
syrup bucket full of large spear~ points from this site. Some
day I shall find this collection of points or others from this site.
Today, only one place in the area produces chips and points,
where a small ravine is being eroded down the east slope of the
ridge. A’ll of the chips recovered here are of either a white chalcedony or a white quartzite, except for one very large flake
of jasper. In East Texas we have five types of points that are
made mostly of a white material, usually a chert, a chalcedony,
or a quartzite. The point types are Ellis, Edgewood, Wells,

180

Texas Archeological Society

Bulverde, and Lange. Possibly these are the point types which
will eventually be found at the Rudd site.
The Rudd site as described here is another component within
the Archaic Aspect. The large grinder does suggest the use
of corn as a food, but without the proven use of the bow and
arrow or of pottery, this site is still in the Archaic Aspect.
Yet it could border on the Neo-American and as such it could
be of major importance.
These three sites have been treated briefly, as was the stated
intention in the beginning. The Archaic Aspect in East Texas
is certainly a challenge, and more information on the subject
is a must. Some work is being done, but very little is being recorded. Let us hope for a clear treatment of the East Texas
Archaic in the near future.
REFERENCES CITED
Hayner, E. W.
1955. Research in East Texas projectile points. Bulletin,
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 26, pp. 235-243.
1957. Some pottery bearing camp-sites in and around
Caddo Lake. Newsletter, Oklahoma Anthropological Society,
Vot. 5, No. 8, pp. 4-8.
Taylor, Walter W.
1956. Some implications of the Carbon-14 dates from a
cave in Coahuila, Mexico. Bulletin, Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 27, pp. 215-234.
Box 152
Karnack, Texas

NAVACOYAN: A PRELIMINARY SURVEY
By AGNES MCCLAIN HOWARD

The Navacoyan site is on a hill situated about eight kilometers (five miles) east of the City of Durango, Mexico. It is
covered with nopal cactus and small vegetation--in fact, "Navacoyan" means no,gal. The hill stands alone and commands a
view of the entire Valley of Durango which is some miles in
extent. The Rio Tunal runs along the eastern slope and there
are permanent springs on the northern slope, one of which is
hot. There are two villages at the base of the hill, Conteras and
Navacoyan. The latter was the site of a huge hacienda in former
times and so the name has been chosen for the archeological
site as well. This hacienda was so large that the Howard ranch,
sixty miles away, was once a part of it. Foundations of structures are to be found on all sides of the hilt and archeological
materials may be found in the stone fences which surround the
present-day houses of the villagers.
An idea of the richness of the site may be formed by considering the fact that the writer has more than 650 axe-heads
--whole or broken--from the site. Spindle-whorls of all sorts
from the crudest, poorly-fired, undecorated sort to highlypolished, elaborately decorated ones may be found. Predominant
are those of the polished black engraved type.
Beads and pendants are probably of the greatest intel"est and
are very numerous. The pendants range from anthropomorphic
and zoomorphic examples to abstract triangular, circular,
square, and irregular forms. Many are skillfully carved from
stone, shell, bone, jasper, quartz, chert, turquoise, obsidian, and
even coral. Whether by intention or coincidence, most of the
turtle effigies are carved from greenstone.
One pendant (Fig. 44, F, left) depicts a long-nosed hunchback. This is of special interest in view of a recent report (Lainbert, 1957) of a hunchback figure from the Schroeder site in
Durango which is only about five miles from Navacoyan. In
this connection the statement by Parsons (1939, p. 1008) that

0¸¸¸¸¸/¸i¸ i ii:!(

Fig. 44.

il il¸

Pendants and figurines from the Navacoyan site.

centimeters.)

(Scale in

Navacoyan : A Preliminary Survey

183

"of all extant Uto-Aztecan peoples, the Cora-Huichol tribes of
the Nayarit sierra in Ja!isco are closest in culture to the Pueblo" is of interest as Navacoyan is well within the area of CoraHuichol culture. We will discuss some other possible relationships to the U. S. Southwest later.
A tiny human figurine (Fig. 44, F, right) is perfect in every
anatomical detail, though it is only about three-quarters of an
inch, or two centimeters, in length. It is apparently not intended
as a bead or pendant, as there is no hole for stringing or suspension.
It is probably unnecessary to point out the similarities in
style, and even in the basic materials used, between these
objects from Navacoyan and many from the Hohokam area. If
we add to the objects already mentioned such items as the copper
bells, projectile point types, and ceramic styles and motifs found
at Navacoyan and compare them with Hohokam and other
Southwestern United States materials, the conclusion is forced
upon us that there must have been some rather important relationships between the areas. Copper bells found at Navacoyan
appear identical with one illustrated by McGregor (1941, Fig.
59) which he notes as being "almost identical with bells found
in Mexico." However, there are still other evidences of extensive
trade between Navacoyan and other areas in Mexico and perhaps in the United States which will be noted later.
There are many figurines in stone, shell, bone, and pottery
(Figs. 44; 45, B). Many of these are beads or pendants as a!ready mentioned. These show marked differences in appearance.
Some (Fig. 44, B, C, D, E) have resemblances to U. S. Southwestern figurines and to Pima figurines (DiPeso, 1956, Fig. 11) ;
others are not unlike West Coast (Sinaloa) materials; and still
others are quite similar to some from the so-called "Tarascan"
area. In this latter connection, Carl B. Compton reports (personal communication) that the figurine shown in Fig. 45, B,
third from left, is almost identical in appearance with one which
he collected at Cerro del Chivo, a site near the city of Acambaro,
Guanajuato, Mexico. This site, incidentally, has a material culture quite aberrant from the "Chupicuaro" culture of the su~rounding area.

Texas A~’cheological Society

Spindle-whorls, already mentioned, are also of uncertain
affiliations. Some are definitely of Chalchihuites type; others
show West Coast influence. Some are quite likely of spontaneous local manufacture or, in other words, strictly utilitarian
objects made with little thought for design aside from the
purely functional design imposed by the dynamics of threadmaking. It might be remarked that the a, alacate, or spindlewhorl, was a very important object in precolumbian Mexico
and many of them are objects of considerable beauty. They
must have required great artistic ability to make as well as
painstaking craftsmanship.
Pipes are found in considerable abundance and vary widely
in form. The two shown (Fig. 45, C) are not unlike some from
the Tarascan Tsintsuntsan area, but others appear to be from
the West Coast area and are of highly polished red, black, and
white engraved ware. One example, not shown, has a squashform which is virtually identical with the squash-form vessels
of Veracruz. Even the paste seems to be similar, though thus
far no tests have been made to determine this. Still other pipes
are bird-effigy in form. Some of the pipes appear to be incipient
"platform" pipes, but this may very well have been unintentional; no actual pipes of "platform" type have been found at
Navacoyan.
Stamps made of baked clay as well as many carved from soft
stone are found in both cylinder and "block" or fiat form. One
cylinder stamp has a female figurine motif. This identical
motif was also found at Navacoyan as a design on a pottery
sherd, but this design was painted on and was definitely not
made by means of a stamp. It is probably impossible to print
a design on pottery with a clay stamp excepting in the case
of the "stamp impressed" type of pottery where the design is
pressed into the clay with a ceramic stamp. Others of the stamps
have animal motifs and some are so stylized as to be nonrepresentational in appearance. In general, the cylinder and
flat stamps have about the same motifs. These Navacoyan
stamps are practically the same, if not entirely the same, in
motif and appearance as those which are common all over the
Mesoamerican area, though of course specific motifs are not
duplicated.

Navacoyan : A Preliminary Survey

185

Pottery at Navacoyan is chiefly white-on-red (Fig. 45, C)
but Chalchihuites types are found as well as the Coastal black,
white, and red incised or engraved. The Chalchihuites pottery
is highly polished black or brown. There is some red-on-cream
pottery and an occasional polished-red sherd suggestive of the
polished-red of the "Tarascan" Chupicuaro region. Some of
the spindle-whorls are apparently of "paint-cloisonn@’ but this
pottery is relatively rare at Navacoyan, though found in sites
not far distant. Some pottery which appears to be similar to
certain Nayarit styles is found.
A considerable number of stone balls have been found at
Navacoyan. Most prehistoric peoples collect such naturally
formed spheres when they are found. People of our own culture often prize them highly as curiosities. The Museum of
Michoac6n in Morelia has many of them in the patio and General Cardenas used them as "newel posts" at his home in Patzcuaro. They have been found in huge size in the Maya area and
as small objects in Eastern United States Archaic, Hopewell,
Californian, and many other sites. For the most part, they are
either volcanic in origin or were formed in pot-holes in swiftly
running streams, though some may have been man-made. There
is nothing to indicate that these examples from Navacoyan are
man-made. They may have been used in some sort of game,
as Wedel (1941, p. 68) thought they might have been in California, or merely prized as curious objects because of their
near-perfect spherical shape.
Among the other objects of material culture are many trough
metates, two-hand manos, one-hand manos, full and three-quarter grooved axes, paint mullers, and palettes (Howard, 1955).
Polishers of onyx, basalt, jasper, and other stones are numerous and are of all sizes from one to six inches in length. A fine
obsidian cruciform also came from Navacoyan. Others have
been found in this region (Howard, 1954). [See also the article
by Car] B. Compton in the present volume.--Ed.] Polished
ceramic beads made on a straw which burned out in the firing
process are common, as are bone heads of various sorts as mentioned above.
The projectile joints (Fig. 45, A) present some interesting

Fig. 45. Specimens from the Navacoyan site. A, points and a pendant.
B, figurines and spindle whorls. C, Pipes and white-on-red vessel.

Navacoyan: A Po’elimina~’y Survey

187

problems. By far the most numerous are small, even tiny, arrow points. A very few large points are to be found--a representative large one is three inches in length--but some points
are less than one centimeter in length.
All, or nearly all, of these points are side-notched but otherwise present rather wide variation. Many of the points are
quite similar to Hohokam Colonial and Sedentary points (McGregor, 1941, Figs. 48, 58) as well as to Upper Pima (DiPeso,
1956, P1. 130, c). As an assemblage these points resemble to a
remarkable degree those called Harrell Points in Texas (Suhm
et al., 1954, p. 500, P1. 129), which also are found generally
from Canada through the Southwest and eastward to the Mississippi River. It was apparently a highly satisfactory form.
The very small serrated and rather crude points are quite
frequent among the Hohokam and among the points of West
Central and Trans-Pecos Texas where they are known as Toyah
Points (Suhm et al., 1954, p. 508, P1. 133, D, E). Similar points
are found in North Texas and in Oklahoma and elsewhere. The
Navacoyan examples are made of almost any available material
such as quartz, jasper, obsidian, and chert.
SUMMARY
The Navacoyan site is one of the richest in the entire Chalchihuites area of Mexico if we may judge from surface materials.
It seems to have been an important "crossroads" in precolumbian times. As one well-known archeologist remarked after
seeing the site and the collected material: "This must have
been a summer resort for al! Mexico."
Without stratigraphy, dating is, of course, only speculation.
However, in the light of certain pottery type-periods recently
established, at least tentatively, for the nearby Schroeder site
(Kelley, 1957) we may make certain cross-references and assumptions. From the materials collected thus far we would assume that at least the most intensive development at the site
about 1000 A.D. and later. However, and again with crossreference to the Schroeder site, we may reasonably assume that
there were earlier occupations of the site, possibly from earliest
Formative times.

188

Texas A~’cheological Society

Navacoyan is admirably situated from every point of view.
As mentioned, it even had hot and cold running water in the
form of springs. The locality commands a view of the entire
valley of Durango and would have been easily defended. The
valley is rich and ordinarily well-watered--an excellent agricultural area. The springs and the Rio Tunal would provide
ample water for irrigation if that were desired. All in all,
Navacoyan may well have been a precolumbian land of plenty
and ease.
REFERENCES CITED
DiPeso, Charles C.
1956. The Upper Pima of San Cayetano of Tumacacorf.
Amerind Foundation, Dragoon, Arizona.
Howard, Agnes McClain
1954. Cruciform artifacts of the Sierra Occidental. American Antiquity, Vol. 20, No. 2, pp. 174-175.
1955. A paint palette and muller from Durango, Mexico.
Newsletter, Missouri Archaeological Society, No. 88, February 15.
Kelley, J. Charles
1957. Excavation and Reconnaissance in Durango, Mexico. Paper given at the 22nd Annual Meeting of the Society
for American Archaeology, Madison, Wisconsin, May 2.
Lambert, Marjorie F.
1957. A rare stone humpbacked figurine from Pecos
Pueblo, New Mexico. E! Palacio, Vol. 64, Nos. 3-4, pp.
93-109.
McGregor, John C.
1941. Southwestern Archaeology. John Wiley and Sons,
New York.
Parsons, Elsie Clews
1949. Pueblo Indian Religion. 2 vols. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Navacoyan : A Preli’minary Survey

189

Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas archeology.
Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Wedel, Waldo R.
1941. Archeological investigations at Buena Vista Lake,
Kern County, California. Bur. Amer. Ethnol., Bull. 130.
Instituto Interamericano
Durango, Dgo., Mexico

THE CAHINNIO-CADDO: A CONTACT
UNIT IN THE EASTERN MARGIN
OF THE "CADDO AREA"
By MRS. T. L. HODGES
Caddo archeology is now defined. Caddo identity is today
justified by certain homogeneous traits exhibited by the artifacts of the aboriginal residents in the great area which combines eastern Texas, northern Louisiana, southern Arkansas,
and southeastern Oklahoma. This "Caddo Area" comprises
the southern branch of the linguistically related Caddoan tribes.
Within the mid-Ouachita River basin of Arkansas and Louisiana, far in the northeastern corner of this region, lies the
area of the Mid-Ouachita Focus, the archeological unit apparently identified with the historic Cahinnio tribe. The Cahinnio
were affiliates of the Caddo Confederacy and were encountered
in this territory in 1687 by the survivors of the last ill-fated
LaSalle expedition.
Besides having traits identifying them as Caddoan, the Cahinnio are distinguished by known localized characteristics.
Their Watermelon Island seed jar, a resident ceramic type,
finds no counterpart in other Caddo units. The loop-ended conical clay pipe associated with Cahinnio pottery seems localized. The use of native novaculite (quarried near Hot Springs,
Arkansas, in the Ouachita Mountains) in arrowpoint manufacture originates in this outlying, marginal province of the
Caddoans. These characteristic developments help distinguish
the Cahinnio artifacts from the general mass of Caddo material and help define the traits of the Mid-Ouachita Focus. However, the Mid-Ouachita specimens manifest also a blending of
borrowed trait elements, a condition which might logica!ly be
anticipated in peoples of a contact state.
Just before 1700 the Cahinnio were adjacent to, and in contact with, a number of different peoples and cultures. Their
eastern neighbors were peoples of the late Mississippi Valley
culture. To the south were the cultures of the Lower Mississippi.

The Cahinnio-Caddo

191

The Ozark Mountain aborigines bordered them on the north,
and to the southwest were the the other units of the Caddo
Confederacy. Along the general "Caddo Area" border to the
south and west were lands of the Plains Indians, the Pueblos,
and the Mexican aborigines.
There are a number of traits which identify the Cahinnio as
Caddoan :
1. The major ceramic trait is the use of engraved decoration,
often filled in with ~ed ochre, on drab brown to drab black highly polished pottery.
2. Agricultural, hunting, and gathering implements are present.
3. Burials are extended, single, with many grave furnishings, and are commonly located in flat interment grounds.
4. There are many sites, usually located in the vicinity of a
large mound.
5. The houses are of split-cane and thatch construction, and
are round in the late historic period.
6. The primary Caddoan linguistic alignment and the "empire" building tendency are two additional traits provided by
ethnohistoric sources.
Although Caddo affiliates, the Cahinnio are reported to have
spoken a "different" language. In fact, they manifested many
unique features resulting in part from their strategic position
which undoubtedly helped p~omote interchange of cultural trait
elements on two borders and the distant periphery of the Caddo
Confederacy. The most striking of these distinguishing Cahinnio-Caddo features is the superior beauty and workmanship of
their ceramic wares. Certain resident types have been declared
as ranking alongside the best ceramic products. An outstanding attribute also, is the great quantity of pottery, all originally
utilitarian, found in the Mid-Ouachita burials. As pointed out
above, the Central American technique of rubbing red ochre
into delicately engraved decorations is here widespread. The
bottle form is very numerous. Tripod bottles are not uncommOil.

192

Texas Archeological Society

The many zoomorphic forms in Cahinnio pottery suggest a
remote resemblance to Central American pottery elements. The
Cahinnio effigies include the human head (Fig. 46, C) and the
unique full-body effigy seed jar (Fig. 46, A). All are simplified
in representation and hint of an attenuation of cult symbols.
Both the tripod bottle (Fig. 46, D) and zoomorphic forms are
found also in the adjacent contemporaneous Mississippi culture pottery, but there the effigies are often eccentrically ornate and occur in relatively greater preponderance. Also the
respective decorative treatments and pottery quality are entirely different. The frog of the Mississippi clay vessels is
non-existent in the Cahinnio complex and is supplanted by the
turtle. Mid-Ouachita ceramic components include three-sided
and rarely two-sided boat effigies and stirrup bottles. Cahinnio
animal forms include the hard- and soft-shelled turtle, the
bear, beaver, fish, deer, quail, duck, and turkey (Fig. 46, E).
This common animal-effigy element, developed in the traditional
styles (but not necessarily techniques) of adjacent peoples, may
reflect a slow diffusion, originating either in the distant Mexico-"Caddo Area" periphery to the southwest or directly from
the coeval Middle Mississippi cultures to the east.
A contemporaneity of the Cahinno and late Mississippi cultures is suggested by intrusive specimens exhibiting a curious

Fig. 46. Certain Caddo pottery of the Mid-Ouachita Focus. A, effigy
seed jar. B, polychrome bottle; in front, loop pipe. C, Hodges Engraved
head effigy bottle. D, Blakely Engraved tripod bottle. E, turkey effigy
bowl. F, Keno Trailed bottle with interlocking four-unit curvilinear design
suggestive of a swastika. (Dr. and Mrs. Thomas L. Hodges Collection,
Bismarck, Arkansas.)

The Cahinnio-Caddo

193

mixture of established culture techniques and styles. One such
relic is a variant of a polychrome (painted) bottle (Fig. 46, B)
found in a Cahinnio grave. On this specimen the red bands
of the concentric circle motif are outlined by trailed lines, resulting in a variation of polychrome ware probably produced
by Caddo workmanship. Another such bottle was reported by
Moore from the Foster Place on Red River in Lafayette County, Arkansas. Still another notable example is an exquisitely
engraved "head-pot" made in the typical black, highly polished
Caddoan pottery (Fig. 46, C). While the decoration style is
distinctly that of Hodges Engraved, a Caddo type, the form
and symbols of this rare head effigy vessel resemble the specialized type uniquely localized at Pecan Point, Arkansas, a
Middle Mississippi site. Again an alien indoctrination certainly
influenced this indigenous artist-potter. Still another, a unique
seed jar (Fig. 46, A), features a seated human in Caddo drab
black artistry combined with the Buddha-like face-and-arm
design of the Middle Mississippi human effigy decoration element. Clarence Moore found a similar Caddo vessel in a grave
from a Middle Mississippi pattern site near the Menard Mounds
on the lower Arkansas River.
Further evidence for contemporary Middle Mississippi and
Cahinnio-Caddo contacts may be summarized:
1. Novaculite arrowpoints of mid-Ouachita origin were found
near LaGrue Bayou in the Arkansas Post vicinity.
2. Pottery of the Menard site, on the lower Arkansas River
manifests trait elements of the mid-Ouachita complex and some
Glendora Focus pottery.
3. Joutel’s party of LaSalle survivors in 1687 first encountered the calumet ceremony at a village of Cahinnio but had
not observed the ceremony among Texas Caddo. However, on
the lower Arkansas, the Quapaw tribe knew the ceremony. The
Cahinnio archeological material contains many pipes of clay.
4. Joutel records trade relations of the Cahinnio with the
Quapaw, the Tunica, and the Red River Caddo. The Cahinnio
carried Tunica salt cakes for trade with the Quapaw. Aboriginal salt-making artifacts, such as large, thick, flat, heavily shell-

194

Texas Archeological Society

tempered salt pans of pottery, occur in the Mid-Ouachita Focus
near the regional salt springs and salt "licks."
5. Joutel further tells of Cahinnio trade affiliations with
the Red River Kadohadacho. He says that they exchanged bows
and arrows for Osage orange (bois d’arc) bow wood, and also
traded bows and arrows with the Quapaw. Large arrowpoint
workshop sites exist on the Ouachita River both at Friendship and near Hot Springs, Arkansas. Also novaculite quarries
or "workings" are located in the Ouachita Mountains around
Hot Springs, Arkansas. Most of the regional arrowpoints are
of novaculite. This region also abounds in salt "licks" and has
salt springs.
Another interesting exchange of trait elements between the
Cahinnio and their historic neighbors or affiliates is suggested
in the seeming simplification of the trailed or red-filled engraved
swastika motif into an interlocking four-unit curvilinear representation in deep trailed lines, on the Keno Trailed type of
Cahinnio bottles (Fig. 46, F). The swastika motif is a decoration element prevalent in Louisiana and Arkansas components
of the Glendora Focus, a historic Caddoan archeological unit to
the southwest of the Cahinnio area. However, the apparently
related Cahinnio simplification occurs abundantly in many midOuachita sites and is a resident ceramic type of the MidOuachita Focus. This situation suggests possible acculturation
within the Caddo nation.
Contemporaneous remotely peripherial influences, besides the
Central American relationship, presumably left little impression on the well established Cahinnio-Caddo. Few Puebloans,
after the revolt of 1680, reached the western confines of the
"Caddo Area." Corn had been introduced into the mid-Ouachita
country probably from Mexico via the Gilmore Corridor, and
not by the southwestern Pueblos. The shallow excavated milling stones and manos suggest the southwestern technique of
maize cracking, but in the main the Cahinnio used the Caddoan
hoe-mortar-pestle system in their corn economy. To date there
are insufficient data on Caddo milling stones, but Mid-Ouachita
flat fieldstone metates and stone pestles attest to the pounding
type of milling.

The Cahinnio-Caddo

195

Concerning Central American relationships: specialists in
Mexican archeology have been amazed at resemblances between Mexican aboriginal artifacts and the Cahinnio complex
and associated specimens. They have noted especially examples
of black, shiny pottery; also the motifs on vases with outflaring edge. The loop-pipe (Fig. 46, B, in front of bottle) looks
familiar to Mexicanists. So do cross-hatched triangle engravings below bowl rims, common also to the Texarkana Focus. The
tripod Blakely Engraved bottles (Fig. 46, D) are astonishingly
like forms occurring in red pottery in Mexico. There are also
non-ceramic features of pre-Fulton Aspect Caddo foci (not
otherwise mentioned in this paper) which are held in common
with Mexico. These features include quartz crystals in burials,
mass burials, and galena in middens.
Significant is the finding of two three-legged basalt metates
of Mexican origin, in the Cahinnio area. They were dug out of
Ouachita River bank sites independently in Garland and Hot
Spring Counties, Arkansas. The finds were isolated ones and associated artifacts were overlooked. For the present, these Mexican metates remain mute evidences of brief Mexican contact of
unknown dating.
The Cahinnio of the mid-Ouachita basin were obviously subjected to many external stimuli from peoples both adjacent and
remote. They were the proto-historic bearers of Caddo traits
modified both by intricate pre-Caddo heritage and by contemporaneous influences. They hold a uniquely important "melting
pot" status in the "Caddo Area." Their artifacts bear out the
dynamics of a developing contact or borderline people. We hope
future research may clarify borderline impacts from all directions-warlike or peaceful--upon the Cahinnio, the people of
the Mid-Ouachita Focus of the Fulton Aspect of the Caddo
Horizon.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
American State Papers, Indian Affairs, Vol. I.
DuPratz, M. LePage
1763. The History of Louisiana. 2 vols., translated from
the French. London.

196

Texas A~’cheological Society

Du Solier, Wilfrido, Alex D. Krieger, and James B. Griffin
1947. The archeological zone of Buena Vista, Huaxcama,
San Luis Potosi, Mexico. American Antiquity, Vol. 13,
No. 1, pp. 15-32.
Glover, Wm. B.
1935. A history of the Caddo Indians. Louisiana Historical
Quarterly, Vol. 18, pp. 872-946.
Harrington, M. R.
1920. Certain Caddo sites in Arkansas. Indian Notes and
Monographs, Misc. Series No. 10.
Hodge, F. W., ed.
1907, 1910. Handbook of American Indians North of Mexico. Bur. Amer. Ethnot., Bull. 30, pts. 1 and 2.
Hodges, Dr. T. L. and Mrs. T. L. Hodges
1945. Suggestions for identification of certain Mid-Ouachita Pottery as Cahinnio Caddo. Bulletin, Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 15, pp. 98-116.
Jones, Volney H.
1949. Maize from the Davis Site: Its nature and interpretation. In Newell and Krieger, 1949, pp. 241-249.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern
Texas. Publications, The University of Texas, No. 4640.
1948. Importance of the "Gilmore Corridor" in culture
contacts between Middle America and the Eastern United
States. Bulletin, Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society, Vol. 19, pp. 155-178.
Margry, Pierre
1875-1886. D~couvertes et ~stablissements des Francais
dans l’oueste et dans le sud de l’Am~rique Septentrionale
(1614-1754). Tomes 3 and 5. Paris.
Moore, Clarence B.
1908. Certain mounds of Arkansas and Mississippi. Philadelphia.
Newell, H. Perry, and Alex D. Krieger
1949. The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas.
Memoirs, Society for American Archaeology, No. 5.

The Cahinnio-Caddo

197

Orr, Kenneth G.
1946. The archaeological situation at Spiro, Oklahoma;
a preliminary report. American Antiquity, Vol. 11, No. 4,
pp. 228-256.
Phillips, Philip
1940. The Menard Site of the Lower Arkansas. Special report to the National Park Service on behalf of the Central
Mississippi Valley Archeological Survey.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An introductory handbook of Texas archeology. Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vot. 25.
Swanton, John R.
1942. Source material on the history and ethnology of the
Caddo Indians. Bur. Amer. Ethnol., Bull. 132.
Troike, Rudolph C.
1955. Anthropological theory and Plains archeology. Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 26, pp. 113-143.
Webb, Clarence H.
1940. House types among the Caddo Indians. Bulletin,
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 12,
pp. 49-75.
OTHER SOURCES
Drs. Pedro Armillas and Alex D. Krieger, on visit to the Dr.
T. L. Hodges Collection, 1946.
Drs. Wilfrido Du Solier, Pedro Armillas, and Eduardo Noguera, discussion at First Caddo Symposium, Norman, Oklahoma, 1946.
Collections :
Lt. Col. Hal Conner, Hot Springs, Arkansas.
Dr. and Mrs. T. L. Hodges, Bismarck, Arkansas.
Proctor Collection, Museum of Henderson State Teachers
College, Arkadelphia, Arkansas.
Bismarck, Arkansas

THE GRACE CREEK SITES,
GREGG COUNTY, TEXAS
By BUDDY C. JONES
East Texas is an area of wooded, hilly country, drained by a
number of major rivers. In the north, Sulphur River and Cypress
Bayou flow eastward into Red River, whereas further south the
Sabine, Angelina, and Neches Rivers flow southeastward into
the Gulf of Mexico.

Along the course of the Sabine River lies Gregg County
(Fig. 47), a small county known for its oil industries. The
Gregg County area has an average elevation of 350 ft., an average temperature of 65.8 degrees, a growing season of 252 days
a year, and an average annual rainfall of 42.28 inches. The soil
contains deposits of lignite and varieties of clay (Webb and
Carroll, 1952).
Little is known of Gregg County archeologieally. It is an important area, however, because it contains early cultural materials which are related both to East Texas and to Louisiana,
and which may provide "missing links" between complexes in
those two areas. Thus the information from Gregg County may
have an important effect upon our knowledge of Texas archeology in general.
The purpose of this report is to present information on two
sites in Gregg County studied by the author, and to promote
interest in further archeological study of the East Texas area.
LOCATION AND DESCRIPTION
The Grace Creek sites are located in Gregg County about three
miles south of Longview on the property of R. G. LeTourneau,
Inc. The local topography is composed of a hilly upland which,
about two miles south of Longview, drops off southward to a
low overflow bottom which extends about one mile to the Sabine
River. On the south side of the Sabine the upland is relatively
close to the river.

The Grace C~’eek Sites, Gregg County, Texas

199

The Sabine bottom lands are covered with hackberry, birch,
willow, hickory, pin oak, holly, black cherry, sassafras, pawpaw,
black walnut, persimmon, and matted growths of vines. On the
hilly uplands one finds shortleaf pine, hickory, sweet gum, hackberry, black walnut, and varieties of oak. Natural clearings
often occur along the edge of the uplands providing good site
locations for the early people in the area.
Game animals such as deer, racoon, rabbit, opossom, wild
fowl, squirrel, and other small game were no doubt available
to the early inhabitants.
The sites lie on the eastern side of Grace Creek, which flows
into the Sabine River from the north. Site I is about one-fourth
mile north of the mouth of the creek, and Site 2 is about one

Fig. 47.

Map

of

part of East Texas.

.....

Fig. 48.

7

The Grace Creek sites. A, Site 1, November, 1954. B, Site 2,

March, 1955.

The Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas

201

mile north of Site 1. The surrounding land is low bottom land
that is usually flooded each year.
Site I (Figs. 48, A; 49) is usually above flood waters because
of its location on a natural rise adjoining Muddy Lake and
Grace Creek. Muddy Lake is apparently located on an old river
channel, and Grace Creek probably once flowed into the river
at the west end of the present Muddy Lake.
The subsoil at Site 1 is a sterile red clay. The natural rise on
which the site lies is made up of two to four feet of dark sandy
loam which contains village refuse and which overlies the red
clay. A zone of mixed clay and sand intervenes between the
midden deposit and the clay.
Site 2 (Figs. 48, B; 50) is on a high sandy upland from which
a low ridge extends westward towards Grace Greek. The soil
here is similar to that of Site 1, the underlying sterile red clay
being capped with a zone of mixed clay and sand which in turn
is overlain by three to four feet of dark sandy loam. The topsoil
at Site 2, however, differs from that at Site 1 in being less dark
in color and in not containing any bones, probably because very
little occupational debris was left there during the time of the
pottery-making people.
DESTRUCTION AND EXCAVATION OF SITES
During the early summer months of 1954, the LeTourneau
Company cleared an area of bottom land on Grace Creek and
the Sabine River, and built a large earthen dike around it to
keep the water out and to serve as a road around the freshly
cleared land. Site 1, because of its location on a natural rise,
was chosen as a place to obtain dirt for construction of the
dike. Unfortunately it was not apparent to the engineers that
the site contained archeological remains, and as a consequence
much of the richest village area was abruptly graded away to
serve as dike fill. After moderate rains, many projectile points
and other artifacts were recovered from the freshly graded
soil.
At Site 1, erosion over the years, chiefly by floods, made it

N

Fig. 49.

Map and cross section of Grace Creek Site No. 1.

The Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas

203

difficult to distinguish any significant stratigraphic changes in
the soil or to determine correct depths of certain artifacts.
At Site 2, the soil representing the richest village area was
also graded away in 1954, and used to build the dike. Fortunately, while the work was going on a stratigraphic change was
noticed in the soil and recorded as well as possible in the limited
time available. There is no doubt, however, that much archeological information was destroyed without record. Soon after
the construction of the dike, further archeological work was
hindered by the construction of State Farm-to-Market Road
1845 through the west end of the site.
From 1954 to 1956 the author carried on minor excavations
at both sites whenever any unusual characteristics appeared in
the soil. These small excavations are shown in Figs. 49 and 50.
All of these excavations yielded artifacts corresponding in form
to those found in the graded and surrounding areas, and were
therefore of great value in determining the correct stratigraphic
origin of many of the artifacts that were found in the graded
earth. Comparison of the sites would not have been accurate,
and perhaps not even possible, without the information gathered
from these excavations.
FEATURES--SITE 1
Burial. Only one burial was discovered during the study of
the Grace Creek sites. It was found and excavated in the Fall
of 1954 in Area B of Site 1 (Fig. 49). The burial consisted of a
single flexed individual with the head eastward, in a pit hollowed out in the sterile red clay at an unknown depth. Due to
poor preservation of the bones, only fragmentary portions of
the cranium and the long bones were found. No burial offerings
were found in the hollowed-out grave; but two dart points, one
a Gary point and the other an Ellis point, were found in the
midden soil possibly associated with the burial. Since the burial
was also in midden soil, there is some question concerning the
true association of the points with the burial.
The near-absence of burials at the Grace Creek sites is not
surprising to the author, since it is common for Alto Focus

Fig. 50.

Map and cross section of Grace Creek Site No. 2,

The Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas

205

sites to lack data on burial method and nature of mortuary
offerings (Suhm et al., 1954). The Alto Focus people doubtless
disposed of their dead in some manner as yet not known in the
East Texas area. If they practised inhumation, it is logical to
assume that some of the burials would have been discovered by
this time at one of the many Alto Focus sites in East Texas.
Pits. A fire pit, Pit A (Fig. 49), was located in June of 1954
while Site 1 was being graded away, and was excavated after
permission was secured from the dike engineers. The investigation was necessarily hurried. The pit extended down to the
top of the sterile clay. It contained bone fragments, pottery
fragments of plain Alto type, flint chips, traces of charcoal, and
two Alba type arrow points.
A small pit, Feature 3 (Fig. 49), extending to a depth of six
inches above the clay near Pit A, was observed and excavated
during June of 1954. It was filled with fresh water clam shells
(Unio elegans) which were probably stored for future use after
their contents had been eaten.
Post molds. Three post molds forming a right angle pattern
were observed during minor excavations in December, 1955.
They were eight inches apart and each was four inches in
diameter. No other indications of structures were noted at
Site 1, but it is believed that further excavations in Area C
(Fig. 49) may reveal important information on houses.
FEATURES--SITE 2
Pit. A very interesting fire pit, Pit B, was discovered in
September, 1955, before it was completely graded away, and
was excavated (Fig. 50). It was found to be oval in shape and
to extend downward to a depth of three inches below the top
of the clay. It contained bone fragments, a small amount of
charcoal, flint chips, a complete Plainview point (Fig. 54, C),
and a broken knife-like point.
No other features were observed at Site 2. They were doubtless graded away without being noted.

206

Texas Archeological Society,

POTTERY--SITE 1
A total of 593 pottery sherds representing the Alto Focus
pottery complex were recovered from the graded areas and
minor excavations in Site 1 by the author. The sherds are of
interest because of their unusual type and their relation to
the rest of the Gregg County area.
The disturbed soil and the high percentage of plain pottery
made classification difficult. However, typological analysis was
attempted and was to some degree successful, since the sherd
classes from the site corresponded almost exclusively with the
known pottery types of the Alto Focus (Suhm et al., 1954).
Davis Incised.
(Fig. 51, B, C, I, O, R). Pottery of this type
was found to lead all other decorated types in frequency, with
a total of 49 sherds, 8.4% of the total, representing an estimated 35 vessels. The sherds were collected from both the
graded surfaces and the minor excavations.
According to Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954, p. 266), Davis
Incised sherds vary in color, showing shades of yellowish-brown,
red (not filmed), reddish-brown, and occasionally gray-brown
to black, the core having the same paste color as the surface.
The temper is usually abundant coarse clay-grit, the texture
coarse, the surface smooth but not often polished, the lips
rounded or flat but not thickened and varying from 4 to 12 ram.
in thickness, and the vessels are carinated or barrel-shaped (as
well as of other forms), with a design of horizontal lines encircling the body. The sherds from Site 1 at Grace Creek fit
this description well, although they do not show such a wide
range of color, most sherds being gray-brown to black in color.
It should be further stated that this pottery was classified as
Davis Incised because of its distinctive characteristics and its
relation to other pottery types found at the site. Thus there
is actually little doubt that this pottery is related only to the
Alto Focus. Its relation to Coles Creek Incised, Greenhouse
Incised, and Hardy Incised of the Coles Creek and Troyvi!le
Complexes in Louisiana (Ford, 1951) is still questionable.
Dunkin Incised (Fig. 51, F, G, H, N). This type is represented by 19 sherds, 3.5% of the total, from an estimated 14 ves-

Tl~e Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas

207

sels. These sherds correspond in description to the Dunkin
Incised type as defined by Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954,
p. 268), but tend toward later Dunkin variant types (Newell
and Krieger, 1949) in that they usually lack the "sets of parallel lines in a wide variety of straight-line patterns . . . in triangles, diamonds, and hachures" (Suhm et al., 1954, p. 268)
that are so distinctive of early Dunkin types. There is definitely
an absence of bone tempering in sherds of this type, but it is
best not to specify traits other than those already mentioned,
since the sample of the type at this site is so small.
Alto Focus types other than Davis Incised and Dunkin Incised were present in very small numbers, a circumstance that
was surprising and puzzling to the author. The little information gained from them is as follows:
Crockett Curvilinear Incised (Fig. 51, M, P). Represented
by four’ sherds, 0.6% of the total, from an estimated four
vessels. They were gray-brown and lacked bone temper.
Hickory Fine Engraved. Represented by two sherds, 0.3%
of the total, from an estimated two vessels. The sherds were
gray in color and lacked bone temper.
Holly Fine Engraved (Fig. 51, L). Represented by only one
sherd. This was a black sherd with engraved lines originally
containing red pigment. This sherd is apparently a portion of
a Holly type water bottle.
Pennington Punctated-Incised (Fig. 51, J). Represented by
one sherd. The sherd is light brown in color and seems to be
that of a carinated Pennington type vessel (Suhm et al., 1954,
p. 340). It has a design of crossed diagonal lines with a single
punctate located in the center of each diagonal.
Weches Fingernail I~pressed (Fig. 51, E, K). Represented
by four sherds, 0.6% of the total, varying from light brown to
dark gray color. The sherds seem to indicate a cylindrical or
barrel-shaped vessel.
Plain sherds (Fig. 51, A, D). Plain sherds were most numerous in the collection from Site 1, there being 448 sherds or

Fig. 51. Pottery sherds from the Grace Creek sites. A, D, plain sherds.
B, C, I, O, R, Davis Incised. E, K, Weches Fingernail Impressed. F, G, H, N,
Dunkin Incised. J, Pennington Punctated-Incised. L, Holly Fine Engraved.
M, P, Crockett Curvilinear Incised. Q, "Molar Incised."

The Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas

209

83.5% of the total. They vary from 2 to 10 ram. in thickness
and in color from light brown to gray. The relationship of this
plain type of pottery to the Alto sherds presents an interesting
question that cannot be adequately answered, because of the
mixed and disturbed condition of the soil of the site. However, all the minor excavations proved this plain pottery to be
in close association with the sherds of the different Alto Focus
types.
Sherds of the plain pottery usually have light exterior surfaces and dark interior surfaces, but many sherds show an even
color from inner to outer surface. Most sherds are light brown
to black in color, many having reddish or orange exterior surfaces. In some cases the orange cover may be seen on both surfaces. Others are made entirely from the native clay.
These plain sherds are believed to represent rounded- to
flat-lipped jars with vertical rims, barrel or cylindrical shape,
with a tendency to curve inward. Sherds of this incurving
type characteristically have colors of brown, gray, or black,
with a fair to good polish. They are always composed of compact clay with only a slight degree of sand added to the paste,
and a complete absence of bone tempering. Only three of the
plain sherds suggest bottle shapes.
Non-Alto pottery. Other pottery sherds believed not to be
directly associated with the Alto types were found in small
quantities at Site 1 as follows.
There were 10 brushed sherds, 4 to 6 ram. thick, with light
brown interior and exterior surfaces and black cores. They
cannot be typed with any accuracy since no lip portions were
found.
Three sherds, representing an estimated two vessels, were
found which apparently had been decorated by impressing some
small object alternately over the surface of the original vessel
(Fig. 51, Q). These impressions seem to have been made by
the use of a human or animal molar tooth. Because of this
characteristic, the writer will refer to this type as "Molar Incised." These sherds were approximately 4 ram. in thickness
and were composed of a mixture of native orange clays.

210

Texas Archeological Society

One grooved sherd corresponds to the type found at the
Davis site (Newell and Krieger, 1949, p. 123). It was of solid
black paste and probably belonged to a small jar.
The Killough Pinched type was represented by three sherds
from an estimated two vessels.
There were three sherds which are believed to belong to the
Ripley Engraved type of the Titus Focus. They seem to have
been from three carinated vessels.
No trade sherds from the area to the east and northeast of
Texas were found at Site 1. For a site of this type, this circumstance is definitely unusual.
It should be noted that all the facts presented here concerning
pottery types and their associations at the site are based only
on the characteristics of the sherds themselves, and not from
any other information such as stratigraphic distribution. For
this reason, a completely detailed analysis of the pottery from
such a site cannot be made accurately and should not be given
too much emphasis.
POTTERY-- SITE 2
Site 2 had a very small pottery sample, and the few sherds
corresponded in type to those from Site 1. Very little information
can be gained from such a small sample. The scarcity of speciments from this site, compared to Site 1, may be due to the
greater degree of destruction of Site 2 which had taken place
when the author began the study. However, it seems likely
that Site 2 had relatively few occupational materials even in
its original condition. It is probable that this site was occupied
only by one or two families for a brief period.
Weches Fingernail IMpressed was represented by two sherds.
One was of gray clay with an orange cover on both interior and
exterior surfaces. It had a design of fingernail punctates in
vertical rows around the original vessel. The other sherd was
of solid brown paste with a typical Weches design of fingernail
punctates placed in horizontal rows around the vessel. The two
vessels were apparently globular in shape, with short rims.

The Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas

211

Dunki.n Incised. One Dunkin Incised sherd was found, which
be!onged to a vessel with a more or less globular body, tall
rim, and flat but not widened lip. It shows a design of closely
spaced, unevenly incised lines.
Davis Incised. Surprisingly, only one Davis Incised sherd
was found. It was of a solid gray paste and represented the
flat lip of a globular vessel. The thickness was uniform from
lip to body. It should be noted that this is the only deeply concave rim sherd of the Davis Incised type found in either of the
Grace Creek sites. It has the same shape as many of the plain
sherds from Site 1.
Hicko~j Engraved. One rim sherd from a Hickory Engraved
bottle was found. It showed a flat, even lip and polished surface.
Plain sherds. Three plain sherds, like those found at Site 1,
constitute the remainder of the pottery found at Site 2. As at
Site 1, they have dark cores and native orange exterior and interior surfaces. They vary from 4 ram. to 6 ram. in thickness.
One of these sherds is unusual because it has a slanted-inward
carinated shape and a widened lip, and because it is the only
bone-tempered sherd found at Site 2.
MISCELLANEOUS CLAY OBJECTS
Only three types of clay objects, all from Site 1, were found
during the study of the Grace Creek sites.
Balls. Several baked clay balls or lumps were found. Judging
from their rough shape and small size, they were probably used
for vessel supports during the firing of pottery.
Spoon. Another clay object is in all probability a fragment
of a pottery spoon. This specimen, 2.5 cm. long, seems to be
the section of the spoon where the handle joins the bowl.
Pipe. The remaining clay object is a 3-cm. section of a longstemmed polished and fired pottery pipe (Fig. 54, R), of the
type characteristic of the Alto pottery complex (Newell and
Krieger, 1949, pp. 147-148).

212

Texas A~’cheological Society

Table 1.

Arrowpoints

Site i
Known types:
Alba .................. 76
Bonham ............... 1
Other:
Type A ...............

6

Site 2

Fig.

1
--

52, I, J
--

--

52, K

Totals ..................... 83
ARROWPOINTS
A total of 83 arrowpoints were recovered from the soil of
Site 1. They weee collected from the upper levels of the midden,
the levels that contained pottery sherds and other clay artifacts.
Their association with the upper part of the Archaic level at
the site the mixed clay and sand--cannot be stated positively,
but there is evidence that the arrowpoint made its appearance
near the end of the Archaic period at the site and continued
through the pottery period.
At Site 2, only one point, an Alba point, was found. The
following discussion, then, refers entirely to specimens from
Site 1.
Alba (Fig. 52, I, J). Arrowpoints of the Alba type are represented by 76 specimens composed of native and foreign cherts.
They vary from 0.8 to 2 cm. in length, and have a more or less
Alba or "fir tree" shape. Compared with the Alba type as defined by Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954, p. 494), they are
~ather small and vary considerably in shape. For this reason
there is some question concerning the relationship of these
points to the Alba type as now defined in the literature.
Bonk~m. One point distinctly of the Bonham type was recovered. It is 4 cm. long and is made of local tan chert. There is
little resemblance between this point and other points found at
Site 1.
Type A (Fig. 52, K). Six specimens are no doubt closely related to the Alba type, but are nevertheless distinct and are

The Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas

213

therefore classed separately here under the heading "Type A."
They are from 1 to 2 cm. long and have a shape somewhat like
Alba points, but the shoulders are inverted, turning toward the
distal end of the point. Many specimens of this type have knotty
serrations along the blade edges. The author has noticed that
points of this type commonly occur at pottery sites along the
Sabine River in Smith, Gregg, and Harrison Counties. Unfor=
tunately this form of point has not been studied to the extent
that definite conclusions can be reached concerning its relationships to the Alto Focus and other complexes. As far as can be
seen now, it is associated with late Alto and Bossier Focus materials, principally along the Sabine River basin.
Table 2.
Known types:
Gary ...............
Ellis ................
Yarbrough ..........
Wells ...............
Kent ................
Bulverde ............
San Patrice ..........
Meserve .............
Ensor ...............
Carrollton ...........
Morrill ..............
Lange ..............
Pogo . ..............
Angostura ...........
Elam ...............
Paisano .............
Palmillas ............
Plainview ...........
Scottsbluff ...........
Darl ................
Edgewood ...........
Taylor Thinned Base .
Trinity ..............
Fairland (?) .........

Dart Points
Site 1

Site 2

211
93
32
24
13
12
10
9
8
7
6
5
5
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
1

53
29
25
3
2
9
1
1
2
--

Fig.
53,
52,
52,
52,

C-E
E-H
0
C, D

52, A,B
54, E, F
54, G,H
52, R-T

5
2
2
1
1
1
1
2
2

52,

P,Q

54, C,D
54, A,B

53, F
52, U,V

214

Texas Archeological Society

Table 2, concluded
Known types:
Frio(?) .............
Folsom (?) ..........
Matamoros (?) .......

Site 1

Fig.

Site 2

1
1
1

54, I

Other:
Almagre (?) ......... 24
Type B ..............
5
6
Type C ..............
Type D ..............
3
Type E ..............
8
Type F ..............
4
Unclassified ......... 25

11

Totals .................... 540

159

2
1
1
2

53,
52,
53,
53,
54,

A, B
L-N
H-J
G
J-L

DART POINTS--SITE 1
At Site 1, 540 dart points were collected. They have been
typed according to the classification set up by Suhm, Krieger,
and Jelks. The points from this site provide a good representation of the complex group of dart point types found at Archaic
sites throughout East Texas. The numbers of points found
within each category are presented in Table 2.
Gary, Ellis (Figs. 53, C-E; 52, E-H). The points most frequently found at Site 1 were Gary and Ellis points. This is the
usual circumstance in East Texas. The Gary points are made
chiefly of local chert or petrified wood and are distinguished
from points of the Pogo and Almagre types only by their size.
The Ellis points are more frequently made of foreign flint than
is the case with the Gary points.
Yc~rbrough, Wells, Kent (Fig. 52, O, C, D). Points of these
types were made chiefly of red and yellow cherts which are
found commonly in this a~’ea.
Elam (Fig. 52, P, Q). Elam points were present only in smal!
numbers. However, this circumstance could have arisen in the

Fig. 52. Dart points and arrowpoints from the Grace Creek sites.
A, B, Bulverde points. C, D, Wells points. E-H, Ellis points. I, J, Alba
points. K, Type A point. L-N, Type B point. O, ¥arbrough point. P, Q,
Elam points. R-T, Carrollton points. U, V, Trinity points.

0

Fig. 53.

Dart points and other chipped artifacts ~rom the Grace Creek

sites. A, B, Almagre(?) points. C-E, Gary points. F, Taylor Thinned Base
point. G, Type D point. I-I-J, Type C points. K, L, knife blades. M, N,
picks or gouges. O, P, small thumbnail end scrapers. Q, S, small gravers.
R, small drill.

f

T]~e Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas

217

sorting due to typological overlapping with the Ellis point
category.
Darl. This type is represented only by a few small specimens
that are distinct from associated points.
Fairla~d (?). One point that seems to be a Fairland point is
made of light-colored chert. Because of its differences from the
Fairland type it may well fit into the San Patrice category.
Bulverde (Fig. 52, A, B). Bulverde points were well represented at the site, with little confusion existing between them
and other types of points. Most of them are made of materials
foreign to the East Texas area.
Pogo. There are only a few specimens which are classed as
Pogo points, this assignment being made because their length
exceeds that of Gary points. Because of their fine workmanship,
they probably have little relationship to the South Texas A1magre point type.
Carrollton, Trinity (Fig. 52, R-V). These two types are
represented only by a few distinct specimens, most of which are
made of native chert and petrified wood.
Lange. Five reddish chert points are classed as Lange points,
but because of their resemblance to other point types found in
this area, it is not certain that they fit in the Lange type as
defined by Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks.
Taylor Thinned Base, Frio, Matamoros. One specimen of each
of these types was found. The Taylor Thinned Base specimen
(Fig. 53, F) might be classed with the Tortugas type (Suhm
et al., 1954, p. 482; Newell and Krieger, 1949, pp. 168-170).
Points of these three types are rarely found in East Texas.
Palmillas. Three specimens were believed to represent this
type, which is not common in this area. They were of local
flint.
Paisano, San Patrice (Fig. 54, E, F). Three specimens are
assigned to the Paisano type. In appearance these specimens
closely resemble San Patrice points, and the two types probably

|

!

C

B

H

I

D

j

E

F

K

L

¯

Fig. 54. Dart points and other artifacts from the Grace Creek sites.
A, B, Scottsbluff points. C, D, Plainview points. E, F, San Patrice points.
G, H, Meserve points. I, Folsom(?) point. J-L, Type E points. M, N,
chipped and polished celts. O, worked shell. P, polished stone turtle-back.
Q, pecked stone ball (throwing stone?). R, pipestem, Alto type.

The Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas

219

overlap in this case. San Patrice points (Webb, 1946) are represented by 10 specimens at the site, all made of native red
and yellow cherts. They were associated with both the pottery
yielding and the Archaic levels.
Meserve (Fig. 54, G, H). There are nine points of this type,
most of them made of flint characteristic of the Edwards Plateau area. All of them appear to be reworked Plainview or
Clovis points, and were found associated with the Archaic
levels.
Paleo-American Points
Ten points were found at Site 1 that represent Paleo points
of four different types. There were three instances in which the
specimens were found in the deepest Archaic levels, embedded
in the hard mixed clay directly above the sterile red clay subsoil. They were found in the course of the minor excavations.
The other Paleo points were found eroded out of the soil along
the dike or in other graded areas. It is unfortunate that these
points were not found in undisturbed soil, in order that more
information might have been obtained concerning their primary
associations.
Angostura. Three points possessing the characteristics of the
Angostura type were found at the site. Two of them are made
of native chert; while the other is of foreign white material.
Unfortunately all three points are represented only by the
basal half. All have slightly-ground to well-ground shafts. They
range from 1.5 cm. to 2 cm. in width at the basal end. Since
there are no complete specimens, a more accurate and definitive
description is not possible.
Sco.ttsblu[f (Fig. 54, A, B). Three points were found which
may well fit into the East Texas type of Scottsbluff point. One
of them was found in the mixed clay zone. In length these specimens range from 5 cm. to 8 cm., and the width at the base
ranges from 2.5 to 3 cm. The stem constitutes a considerable
part of the total length of the point. A good descriptive term
for them would be the "squatty" type of Scottsbluff. This type
is more often found in East Texas than elsewhere in the state.
However, its distribution and its relationship to the distinct

220

Texas Archeological Society

longer type of Scottsbluff point in East Texas has as yet not
been studied.
Plainview (Fig. 54, C, D). This type is represented by three
specimens, made of foreign dark or gray flints which may well
be trade material from the Edwards Plateau region. Only one is
complete, but the other two are complete enough to enable
reasonable classification. In width these points range from
2.5 cm. to 3 cm., and in length from 5 to 8 cm. All three specimens have roughly matched chipping scars on the blade, and
well-ground bases. These points are strikingly like the typical
Plainview points from the Plainview site (Sellards, Evans, and
Meade, 1947). Fortunately, one of the specimens (Fig. 54, C)
was recovered from the deepest Archaic level corresponding
to the depth of the Scottsbluff point already mentioned, in the
compact mixed clay located immediately above the sterile
clay (Fig. 49). One of the other specimens was found eroded
from the mixed clay level along the north bank of graded area
A (Fig. 49). The remaining Plainview specimen was found in
the graded soil forming the dike.
Folsom (?). The last point believed to be affiliated with the
Paleo-American horizon was of particular interest because of
its unusual characteristics (Fig. 54, I). It possesses features of
the Folsom type. It is 2 cm. in width and 3.5 cm. long, and is
made of a pale yellow flint. One face has a central flute running
the entire length of the point, while the opposite face has not
been fluted and instead has fairly neat, matched chipping scars.
This point was excavated from an unexcavated part of area A,
near the lake (Fig. 49), from the mixed clay level corresponding
to that in which the Plainview and Scottsbluff points were
found. There is some question concerning the relationship of
this point to the original Folsom type; there is a possibility
that the flute was caused accidentally, as could have happened
if the distal end of the point struck a solid object.
Points Not of Established Types
During the typological analysis of the dart points, several
classes were distinguished which did not fit the established
typology. Some of them closely resemble Almagre points; the

The Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas

221

others have been divided into classes to which letter designations have been given.
A[magre (?). A large rough type of point resembling Almagre
points was well represented by 24 specimens at the site. Naturally one cannot definitely class these points as being of the
South Texas AImagre point type; but there is every possibility
that they were made near the time of that type. This possibility
depends on the relationship between the two types in the two
areas, a matter as yet not studied. The specimens from Site 1
(Fig. 53, A, B) range in length from 5.5 to 8.5 cm. and have
a minimum width of 2.5 cm. and a thickness usually exceeding
1.5 cm. They are believed to have little relationship to the
Pogo or Gary points found at th~s site.
Type B (Fig. 52, L, M, N). There are five specimens in this
class, which is distinct from other categories from the site. They
range in length from 4 to 5 cm. and in width from 1.5 to 2 cm.
Characteristically they are slender, with convex base, a stem
constituting almost half the length of the point, and almost no
shoulders. This type of point could have developed from points
resembling Morrill or Yarbrough points.
Type C (Fig. 53, H-J). This is also a distinctive type at Site
1. Specimens of this type range in length from 3 cm. to 4.5 cm.
and in shoulder width from 2 to 3 cm. The stem is contracting
and the base concave. Most of the specimens are made of well
worked flint. This type has shape characteristics similar to
those of the Langtry point, but there may be little relationship
implied in this resemblance.
Type D (Fig. 53, G) seems distinct from other types found at
the site. it may well be a type of knife or other cutting implement, but because of its unusual ground base the author feels
that it represents a type of projectile point. There may be a
relationship between this type and the Meserve point. Specimens
of this type from Site 1 range in length from 4.5 to 6 cm., and
in width from 1.5 to 2.25 cm. Most of them are made of petrifled wood.
Type E (Fig. 54, J, K, L) is an interesting roughly worked
type of point, represented by eight specimens. Most specimens

[:]:£ik~i;
222

:’¢, ~:.

= ~ i.ii] F~i’]

Texas Archeologieal Society

are from 3 to 4 cm. long and 1.5 to 2 cm. in width. Points of
this type are thicker than most of those found at the site. Most
of them are made of native chert. The type is distinguished by
a single pair of notches on the blade. These points are probably
relatively early, and may be related to the similar notched
points found in Louisiana (Webb, 1948).
Type F is defined on the basis of material rather than of form.
Points of this type are made of a type of soft gray slate. There
is relatively small range in size, most specimens being about
4 cm. long and 2 cm. wide with a roughly expanded base and
moderate shoulders. This type is not only found at Site 1, but
has also been found here and there throughout Gregg County.
Many of these slate points ~esemble San Patrice points. It
should be emphasized that these slate specimens are too fragile
for actual use as projectile points.
Unclassified. There were 27 projectile points which, in the
author’s judgment, did not fit into any distinct categories. It
is probably possible to put many of these into existing classes,
but to do so would be to force the typology and to deviate from
the true categories--that is, those presumed to have existed in
the minds of the makers of the specimens--to a degree such
as to render the resulting classification meaningless.
DART POINTS--SITE 2
The classification of the dart points from Site 2 (Table 2)
resulted only in types found also at Site 1. However, many
types found at Site 1 were not present at Site 2, doubtless because Site 1 seems to have been occupied for a longer period
of time. Since a number of types are found at both sites, comparative study is possible. This comparative study is pursued
later, in the Discussion section.
OTHER CHIPPEDI STONE ARTIFACTS
From Site 1, 296 chipped stone artifacts other than points
were recovered. They include knives, picks, gouges, cores, choppers, spoke-shaves, scrapers, gravers, and drills. From Site 2,
a total of 92 specimens of corresponding categories were re-

Texas ircheo!og£e~T
Southern Methodist Universi~~
Bo~ 165
Dallss~ 9exas ?5£££
The Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas

223

covered. However, these totals do not represent the full actual
number of such artifacts at the sites, because the author collected only those specimens which were evidently worked. Thus
the ratio of these artifacts to the total artifact collection is
not as great as it could have been. Also, it should be emphasized that many of these types of artifacts overlap one another,
so much so that the totals within each category, as given below,
must be considered as only approximate.
Knives, picks, gouges, cores, choppers. Approximately 93
rough knives were found at Site 1, and 31 at Site 2. Almost
all of them are composed of native ferruginous chert, although
some are made of petrified wood (Fig. 53, K, L). There is considerable overlapping between knives, picks, gouges, and cores.
Picks and gouges (Fig. 53, M, N) number 43 from Site 1 and
nine from Site 2. Cores and choppers from both sites are 123
in number.

Spokeshaves were of small size, numbering 17 at Site 1 and
seven at Site 2.
Scrapers. There are two simple types of scrapers, pianoconvex or snubnose end scrapers (Fig. 53, O, P) and side
scrapers. Because of their small size the piano-convex scrapers
are of the kind often called "thumbnail" scrapers. Most of these
thumbnail scrapers are made of native stone, whereas most of
the side scrapers are made of foreign white or gray flints. The
side scrapers vary considerably in size, but are for the most
part larger than the thumbnail scrapers. There are 24 thumbnai! scrapers and 32 side scrapers from Site 1. From Site 2
there are 10 thumbnail scrapers and 19 side scrapers.
Gravers (Fig. 53, Q, S). There are five small gravers from
Site I and three from Site 2.
Drills (Fig. 53, R). Four small drills were recovered from
Site 1. The largest was 2.5 cm. long.
GROUND STONE ARTIFACTS
A considerable number of ground and polished artifacts were
recovered from the Grace Creek sites. Most of these specimens

224

Texas A~’cheological Society

are of Archaic types and presumably were associated with the
Archaic horizons represented at the two sites. No doubt they
indicate~ trade relationships with neighboring areas of East
Texas.
Axes, tomahawks (Fig. 55, A, B). There were 11 ground
and polished axes and tomahawks from the two sites, five from
Site 1 and six from Site 2. The only distinction between the
axes and the tomahawks is that the axes are larger. All specimens have halting grooves. From Site 1 there are two axes and
three tomahawks. From tomahawks to axes, sizes range from
7 cm. long and 5 cm. wide to 15 cm. long, 12 cm. wide, and 4
cm. thick. One axe is unusual because it is made of flint, whereas
all the others are made of soft hematite. At Site 2 only one
specimen was considered to be an axe; it has most unusual
grooving (Fig. 55, A). One of the tomahawks from Site 2 was
unusual in having a double groove (Fig. 55, B).

B

C.

0
F.

G.
I

CM.
Fig. 55. Ground and polished stone from the Grace Creek sites. A,
"T-grooved" axe, hematite. B, double-grooved tomahawk, hematite. C,
polished pitted stone ("fire stone"). D, rough pitted stone ("nut-cracking
stone"). E, ground adze, Ouachita sandstone. F, G, pendants or gorgers,
Ouachita sandstone. H, sinker(?) (atlatl weight?), hematite. I, banner
stone, Ouachita sandstone.

The Grace C~’eek Sites, G~egg County, Texas

225

Adze (Fig. 55, E). Only one complete ground or polished adze
was found. It is 14 cm. long, 6 cm. wide, and 2 cm. thick, and is
made of dark green Ouachita Sandstone.
Chipped and ground adzes, celts, or hoes (Fig. 54, M, N).
Nine of these specimens, made of native sandstone, were found
at Site 1, and 11 at Site 2. These specimens have been chipped
to a rough shape usually 6-8 cm. long, 4-5 cm. wide, and 2-3 cm.
thick. They have been polished along the edges and on one
face. The other face has been left rough.
Pendants (Fig. 55, F, G). Two fragments representing two
pendants were found in the graded area of Site 2. Both appear
to have been made from trade material from Arkansas or Northern Louisiana.
Sinker (?) (Fig. 55, H). One interesting specimen found
at Site 1 is without doubt related to the "Waco sinker," and
may be an atlatl weight. It is made of hematite, has been pecked
and slightly ground to produce a moderately smooth finish. It is
7.5 cm. long and 3.5 cm. in cross section between the two
ground, notched ends.
Banner Stone (Fig. 55, I). Approximately one-half of a green
Ouachita Sandstone "Banner Stone," commonly called "Plumb
Bob," was found at Site 2. It is well polished and apparently
represents a fine trade specimen.
Polished pitted stones (Fig. 55, C). Polished hematite pieces
about "hand" size, with one or more g~ound-out polished holes
usually 2.5 cm. in diameter and not exceeding 1 cm. in depth on
one or more surfaces, were found at both sites. There are 21
from Site 1 and 13 from Site 2. These specimens have been referred to as "Fire Stones," but it is not known whether they
were used for this or some other purpose.
Rough pitted stones (Fig. 55, D). A similar type of specimen
found commonly at both sites is much more variable in size
and has one or more rough pitted holes on one or more surfaces. There are 43 specimens from Site I and 12 from Site 2.
These are often called "nut-cracking stones." In weight these
specimens range from 8 oz. to 80 lbs., a greater range than is

226

Texas Archeological Society

found in the polished pitted stones. They are made out of native
sandstone, and are sometimes combination "nut-cracking
stones" and milling stones. Nineteen of the 43 specimens from
Site I manifest this combination of functions, whereas only
four of the 12 from Site 2 are of the combined type. The rest
could have served as manos.
Polishing stones and balls. At Site 1 a large number of native gravel or chert stones were found which could have served
as pottery polishing stones. However, only seven seem certainly
to have served this purpose. No certain specimens were found
at Site 2.
Three specimens that may fit into this class, if it were not
for their pecked shape, were recovered from Site 1 (Fig. 54,
Q). They are about 2.5 cm. in diameter and have been pecked
to a spherical shape. They were probably used as throwing
balls.
Hones. Three specimens definitely recognized as hones of
native stone were found at Site 1. None were found at Site 2.
Turtle-back (Fig. 54, P). One small black specimen of the
form usually called a "turtle-back" was found at Site 1.
TRADE MATERIALS
Besides Ouachita Sandstone, only two materials were specifically recognized as significant trade materials at the two
sites. They are represented by a few lumps of unworked kaolin
and one quartz crystal. A few chips of quartz crystal were
also found at Site 1.
BONE AND SHELL MATERIAL
The only bone and shell specimens found at the sites are
from Site 1. They are one deer ulna found in Pit A, a half-shell
scraper or knife (Fig. 54, 0), and the shells in the cache pit
of Feature 3. However, fine traces of bone were often noticed
at Site 1, in the graded and excavated areas. These were no
doubt the remains of animals used as food. Minute traces of
bone were found in Pit B of Site 2, but no other indications of
bones were encountered at that site.

The Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas

227

DISCUSSION
Grace Creek Sites 1 and 2 are in the same area, on the
same waterway, and their occupations were no doubt closely
associated. However, there are some differences in the occupations, since at Site 1 the pottery period is well represented
whereas Site 2 has only slight indications of a pottery period.
Because of these considerations, the author felt that making a
comparison between the two sites and the George C. Davis site
(Newell and Krieger, 1949) would reveal significant information on artifact relationships between these sites and the different occupational periods of the early prehistoric cultures of
Gregg County and the Sabine River Basin.
Possible Paleo-American occupation. The 12 Paleo-American
points recovered from the sites are certainly significant. As
noted in Table 2, 10 of the 12 points were found at Site I and
the remaining two were from Site 2. Two points at Site I and
one at Site 2 were recovered from excavations. In view of the
presence of these points, it is intriguing to examine the possibility that Paleo-Americans were actually associated with the
sites before the Archaic people arrived. Several alternatives,
applicable to both sites, present themselves:
(1) The Paleo-Americans could have come into the area and
occupied the sites near the end of the Paleo-American period
and could have evolved into Archaic peoples, as is possibly indicated by the presence of Angostura and Meserve points.
(2) The Paleo-Americans could have come into the area at
an earlier time, eventually dying off or leaving. After an interval
they could have been succeeded by the people of the Archaic
period, who picked up a few of the points lost by the earlier people, used them, and worked them over for use.
(3) The Paleo points could have been picked up in some other
area by nomadic bands of hunters of Archaic or even later
time who used them and left them at these sites. However, this
suggestion seems less logical than the others, because the number of Paleo points found at these two sites suggests that they
were not brought in incidentally from elsewhere.

228

Texas A~’cheological Society

The Archaic occupation. Some of the differences in numbers
of dart points listed in Table 2 reflect the possibility that during the Archaic period Site 1 was occupied for a longer time
than Site 2. Certain dart point types were found in Site I but
not Site 2. These are the Carrollton, Morrill, Fairland, Frio,
Matamoros, and Trinity types, and Types D and F. As far as
the information from these sites is concerned, some of these
types were probably associated with the Archaic occupation and
others with the pottery occupation. However, of these types
only the Morrill has previously been found associated with
Alto Focus pottery (Newell and Krieger, 1949). It appears,
then, that most of these points refer to an occupation of Site 1
when Site 2 was not occupied. If this is so, it seems probable
that the Archaic occupation of Site 1 began before that of Site
2. It is further to be observed that this earlier Archaic occupation complex of Site 1, as represented by the point types just
listed, has affiliations with the Central Texas Archaic. Thus we
have here an indication of the possible origin, or of contributions to the origin, of the East Texas Aspect of the Archaic
Stage.
Other artifacts believed to refer to the Archaic occupation
are the chipped celts. The author has often collected specimens
like these from Archaic sites in Gregg County and vicinity.
Most of the other ground and polished artifacts from the
sites may well be related to the Archaic period also.
The Alto Focus occupation. In the Sabine River Basin, the
Alto Focus is the earliest pottery bearing culture, to our present knowledge. The situation at the Grace Creek sites, with
Archaic materials directly underlying Alto Focus materials,
appears to express accurately the general sequence of periods
in the Sabine Basin as a whole.
The ceramic material from the Grace Creek sites cannot be
accurately correlated with any definite phase of the Davis
Mound sites in Cherokee County, Texas, the type site of the
Alto Focus (Newell and Krieger, 1949), because of lack of
house information, lack of identifiable trade sherds, poor

The Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas

229

stratification, and variation of types from those found at the
Davis site. This difficulty of correlation is made even greater
by the great preponderance of plain sherds over all other types
found at the Grace Creek sites.
However, since Davis Incised was the second most numerous
type, and since the Holly, Hickory, Pennington, and Crockett
types were also present, it can be suggested that the ceramic
occupation of Grace Creek Site 1 dates from somewhat before
the time of Phase I at the Davis site, or from the time of
Phase I. Thus, Site 1 represents a development in the Gregg
County area, parallel to that represented farther southwest by
Phase I of the Davis site, which continued for a short while
and involved making types of pottery modified from, or at any
rate similar to, those from Phase I at the Davis site. The author
is most inclined to this conclusion because at the Davis site the
complex in Phase I shows, with only two exceptions, an almost
complete preoccupation with straight line designs.
Further, Phases II and III at the Davis site have appreciably
greater percentages of decorated pottery and of trade pottery
than is the case at the Grace Creek sites (Newell and Krieger,
1949, Tables). If the Grace Creek sites were related to either
Phase II or Phase III it would be logical to expect that they
would contain comparable proportions of decorated and trade
pottery; but they do not.
If the cultural assignment presented here is true, then the
sherds from the Grace Creek sites which represent the Titus
and Frankston Foci either are trade sherds from early components of those foci, or are sherds lost by later Titus and
Frankston people in the area.
The small representation of pottery types at Site 2 probably
indicates that it was occupied only briefly and perhaps by people
who originated at Site 1.
All the arrow-points found at Site 1 are believed to be associated with the pottery occupation. However, there is evidence
that the arrow-point was introduced in the very late Archaic
period and continued thereafter through pottery times.

230

Texas Archeological Society

The one Alba type point found at Site 2 probably belongs to
the brief pottery occupation there. The "mill" stone and the
combination mano and "nut-cracking" stone are characteristic
of this period.
CONCLUSIONS
1. The Grace Creek sites are believed to have been near a
Paleo-American site, or else Site 1 was itself a Paleo-American
site, since ten Paleo points were found there.
2. Both sites were occupied during the Archaic Period. At
Site 1 the Archaic occupation began earlier and continued for a
longer period of time than at Site 2. Site 1 in the early part of
its Archaic occupation apparently had some relationships with
the Central Texas Archaic. Later, both sites apparently had
affiliations with the Eastern Archaic.
3. Both sites were occupied during pottery times. A group
of people represented by a component of the Alto Focus, related
to that of Phase I at the George C. Davis site in Cherokee
County, occupied Site 1 almost immediately following the
Archaic period. From the Site 1 people a small group branched
and lived at Site 2 for a short time.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
For permission and co-operation during the study of the
Grace Creek sites, I express my most sincere appreciation to
the R. G. LeTourneau Corporation of Longview, Texas.
To my friends, Henry Allen, Jr., of Tyler, Texas, for his
outstanding photographic work, and Dr. Alex D. Krieger of
Riverside, California, for his personal inspiration, I express
my most sincere appreciation for help that made this report
possible.
REFERENCES CITED
Ford, James A.
1951. Greenhouse: A Troyville-Coles Creek Period site in
Avoyelles Parish, Louisiana. Anthrop. Papers, American
Museum of Natural History, Vol. 44, Part 1.

The Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas

Newell, H. Perry, and Alex D. Krieger
1949. The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas.
Society for American Archaeology, Memoir No. 5.
Sellards, E. H., Glen L. Evans, and Grayson E. Meade
1947. Fossil Bison and associated artifacts from Plainview, Texas, with description of the artifacts by Alex D.
Krieger. Bulletin, Geological Society of America, Vol. 58,
No. 10, pp. 927-954.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Webb, Clarence H.
1946. Two unusual types of chipped stone artifacts from
northwest Louisiana. Bulletin, Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 17, pp. 9-17.
1948. Caddoan Prehistory: The Bossier Focus. Bulletin,
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, V01. 19,
pp. 100-147.
Webb, Walter P., and H. Bailey Carroll, eds.
1952. The Handbook of Texas. The Texas State Historical
Association, Austin.
Route 4
Longview, Texas

AN UNUSUAL HISTORIC INDIAN
HOUSE SITE IN WASHINGTON
COUNTY, TEXAS
By

ROBERT

A.

HASSKARL, JR.

The Landua Site (53C6-1) is situated at Long. 96° 36’ and
Lat. 30° 15’. It is 2.8 miles north of farm-to-market road number
390 and 3.5 miles north of Burton, Washington County, Texas.
The writer would like to acknowledge the help and co-operation of Mrs. Louis Landua, Kiel Landua for his help in the
excavation, and Dr. T. N. Campbell of The University of Texas,
Department of Anthropology.
Information concerning this report is from material from the
excavation and from people of the area who were contemporary
with the Indians who occupied the house. All direct quotations
in this report were given to the writer by Mrs. Louis Landua.
Mrs. Landua was a small girl when these Indians lived on their
farm, and she remembers some incidents about them. Other
ethnographic information about them was supplied by her older
sister.
The site was located by Kiel Landua and the writer in August,
1955. Evidence of occupation was easily recognized by the presence of a low mound, rectangular in shape. A controlled excavation of the entire mound was then done.
The Indians who occupied this house came to the area in 1845,
and remained there until 1884. It is known that they came from
the "west." They were "Texas Indians, Comanches." The family
consisted of a man, his wife, and a son, reported as "not walking yet," when they moved to the Landua farm. No data is available about the son after 1865.
Site Description. The house remains are located on a white,
sandy ridge overlooking the junction of three unnamed creeks,
whose waters eventually flow into Kerr creek. The ridge at the
time of its occupation by the Indians was covered by a medium

B

/

/

/

/
/

/
/
/

/
/
/
/
/

/

O
A
Fig. 56.

Plan of historic Indian house at the Landua Site.

~5
L,O

0
¢H
0

o
Q;
0

0

Z

An Unusual Histo~’ic Indian House Site

235

growth of timber, mostly cedars and oaks. Convenience to water
and game seem to have been primary factors in its selection.
House Type (Figs. 56, 57). The house was rectangular, the
sides being oriented approximately toward the cardinal directions, and the entrance was on the east. The house was a singleroom structure, 22~ feet by 16 feet. A wall approximately 15
inches high was around the base of the entire structure. This
wall was constructed of native odd-shaped stones held together
by an adobe-like mortar. Mrs. Landua states that "they dug
deep into the ground and got red clay, mixed it with creek water,
weeds, and small rocks; then put it on the stones in the heat of
the day to dry."
The only intact section of the original wall was found on the
east side, and this section had a length of 7 feet. The base line
of the north wall still exists. The top rocks have eroded away
and have been scattered. Only fragments remain of the west
and south walls.
The post molds in the floor indicate that the house had a
large center pole, approximately one foot in diameter at the
base. There were four small corner posts. Post mold diameters
were 6 inches or less. The Indians asked permission to cut timber
for these posts. This was granted "because they wanted only
small trees."
The roof and four walls above the rock wall were covered with
bison skins which the Indians had brought with them. The hides
were spread over the poles and were packed with a mixture of
wet clay and weeds. It is not clear whether some sort of latticing
supported the bison hides. "The house did not leak and it looked
like a small hill." The door was oval in shape and covered with
a hide flap. The base of the door was on top of the stone wall.
There was no smoke hole nor any storage bins. The floor was
hard-packed, natural soil and was below surface level.
Livelihood and Culture. Dependence was on hunting and food
gathering. The man had a "very strong bow" and "several
spears." The Indians had no firearms of any type. Animals
hunted were rabbits, squirrels, and small birds. They ate various

236

Texas Archeological Society

nuts, berries, and herbs. The Indians never worked on anyone’s
farm, but the man did occasionally help Mrs. Rosenbaum during
the Civil War while Mr. Rosenbaum was in the service. His help
was confined to work in her corn field. The Indian was paid in
bread. On many occasions the Landuas gave the Indians corn,
which the wife "chopped with a steel knife and made into a
corn meal bread, which was very good." Many times milk was
obtained from the Landuas for the baby. It was carried in cans
and was diluted before giving to the small child. The wife also
asked for and received a blanket for the baby.
The Indians, during their entire stay, burned a tallow candle
in their house every night, all night. No apparent reason for
this act is known to the writer.
Both adults spoke only a few words of English. They were
described as being "not afraid of white men, but were very
polite. They never stole anything; they would always ask for
everything, not just take it." From all indications they desired
to be left alone.
The interior of their house was described as "fairly clean."
All members of the family slept on the ground. The wife and
the baby slept on the south side and the husband on the north
side of the house. Their beds were made of dry weeds. The
baby’s bed was covered with a bison skin, and other kinds of
skins covered the adults’ beds. The man kept his bow and spears
by his bed. He is also reported to have had "two stone headed
axes with wooden handles."
All cooking was done out-of-doors, over an open fire. The only
cooking utensil owned was a large, heavy iron skillet that was
used for all their cooking. The fireplace was located approximately six yards east of the house door. Excavation revealed
that this fireplace was circular (3 feet, 9 inches in diameter)
and lined with native, odd-shaped hearth stones. No artifacts
were associated with the hearth.
Clothing. The child wore no clothes. The woman wore a
straight dress of ankle-length with cut-out neck and arm holes.
The dress was made of rough, tan cloth. She wore a braided

An Unusual Historic Indian House Site

237

belt made of grasses. The man wore a sleeveless shirt, breechcloth, and leggings that were tied to the breech-cloth. The breechcloth and leggings were made of tanned skin. The shirt was
made of the same rough, tan cloth as the woman’s dress. Both
adults wore home-made shoes. The soles were made from a single
piece of wood, to which cords of grass were tacked for tying to
the foot.
The adults are described as having worn their "long, black
hair braided down the back. Both adults wore feathers at all
times in their hair, but neither used paint on their bodies at
any time."
In winter the adults covered themselves with "large, black
robes." These possibly were bison skins. The Indians never wore
any type of head covering.
Artifacts (Fig. 58). All artifacts were found in the loose earth
in the center of the floor of the house. One Harrell arrow point
was excavated (Fig. 58, C). This is the second point of this type
found in this area, the other being found at 53C5-1 in Lee
County, Texas, approximately 6 miles Northwest of the Landua
site.
One Marcos point was excavated ( Fig. 58, A). This is a
common dart point, and has a wide distribution in this county.
Also one unnamed dart point was located, which is possibly a
re-chipped point (Fig. 58, B). These three projectile points vary
in workmanship, but all are fairly well chipped points. One
T-shaped drill was excavated which was very well worked and
made of white quartz (Fig. 58, D).
One bolas weight was found (Fig. 58, F). It is made of white
quartz with a groove cut around the center. The quartz of
which it is made is not native to this region. This is the first
bolas weight known to be found in Washington County. Three
sherds of pottery were excavated (Fig. "58, E). The pottery is
plain, wheelmade crockery of recent date with an external glaze.
Ten specimens of iron nails were found throughout the excavation. Several were bent, and all were badly rusted. They were
possibly used in the house construction.

Fig. 58. Artifacts from the Landua Site. A, Marcos point, B, Unnamed
point. C, Harrell point. D, drill. E, potsherd. F, Bolas weight.

An Unusual Historic Indian House Site

239

Summary and Conclusions. In 1884 the two adults (taking
down their house) left this site at night. With the exception of
their iron skillet, all possessions were moved. Since they owned
no horses or dogs, it must be assumed that all goods were
carried by themselves. "Their reason for leaving was not known,
nor did anyone know their anticipated destination."
The artifacts of this site range from Archaic to Historic. It
is entirely reasonable that the Indians that occupied this house
did not make any of these artifacts, but the Indians probably
collected the artifacts either before their arrival at the Landua
farm or during their stay there.
Due to the presence of cattle in the field in which the house
is located, the excavation was carefully covered. Nothing was
removed or destroyed in regard to the structure. The writer
does not believe that there is sufficient evidence to definitely
establish that the Indians who occupied this house were Comanches. It is safe to assume that they were the last semi-permanent Indians in Washington County; however, other Indians
are known to have been in Washington County at this time.
"A late hour last night five Comanche Indians disguised as ’cowboys’ rode up Sandy Street yelling in regular Indian war whoop
style and waking up sleeping citizens. Perpetrators of this outrage could be caught and should be fined $25 and costs, each
might then be induced to keep quiet in the future." (Brenham
Daily Banner, Brenham, Texas, September 9, 1879) "A band
of Indians are encamped near town trafficking and fortune telling with the negroes" (Ibid., August 23, 1884).
This historic site is unique because there is ethnographic
information to accompany the archaeological work done here.
The site represents a fairly complete picture of the culture of
these Indians who were in the process of acculturation, and
who were very strongly affected by the diffusion of two cultures
--their own and that of the white man.
P. O. Box 696
Brenham, Texas

THE McCARTER SITE, A LATE ARCHAIC
OCCUPATION AT MUSKOGEE,
OKLAHOMA
By JAMES B. SHAEFFER

During October, 1956, Mr. and Mrs. Knowles Montgomery of
Muskogee, Oklahoma, brought to the attention of Prof. Robert
E. Bell and the writer the fact that impending industrial construction on the outskirts of Muskogee would shortly destroy
some sites well known to collectors. As a result the site was
visited and negotiations begun with Callery Chemical Co. and
the Department of the Navy for permission to excavate. By
February a right of entry permit was secured and at the same
time funds were made available by the National Park Service
for the salvage operation.
Appreciation is expressed to the institutions and agencies
mentioned above for their co-operation which made this work
possible, and to the individuals involved, especially Dr. John
M. Corbett, Dr. Erik K. Reed, and Mr. Charlie R. Steen of the
National Park Service, Lt. Cmdr. L. W. Graves, U. S. N., Mr.
R. G. Schmidt of the Callery Chemical Co., as well as to Mr.
and Mrs. Montgomery for their hospitality and interest.
LOCATION
About six miles west of Muskogee, U. S. Highway 62 crosses
the Arkansas River. For several miles north and south of this
highway bridge there is almost continuous surface evidence of
prehistoric occupation along the west bank of the river. Because
of the sporadic occurrence of sherds it was thought that this
area might represent outlying villages of the Hughes Mound
and other mounds located just north of Muskogee on the Arkansas and Grand rivers, and it was with this thought in mind that
the excavations reported here were begun. It now appears that
the greater part of the evidence represents an earlier pre-pottery group and that the occupation of the ceramic horizon was
more scattered and superficial, at least along this section of the
Arkansas River.

The McCarter Site, ~ Late Archaic Occupation

241

The area of this Archaic or pre-pottery occupation, though
rather extensive on its north-south axis along the river, does
not extend back from the bank much over fifty yards. This is
due in great part to a shift in the course of the Arkansas River
against its high western bank. This change has undermined the
bank and swept away the greater part of many of the sites. It
might be added that prehistorically as now the western bank
was well above water, being at present probably a hundred feet
above the stream, while the even higher eastern bank is four
to eight miles away, being formed by a series of low hills. Between these two banks is a wide flat first terrace cut by the
present and former channels of the Arkansas which has shifted
intermittently within these broad confines. The exact channel
of the river at the time of the Archaic occupancy is problematical. At present the sites command a major bend of the river
to the south and prehistorically might have been situated on a
point commanding both the northern and southern approaches
of the river for a distance of several miles.
THE SITES
The four areas with which this report is concerned actually
present an almost continuous area of occupation beginning
about a mile south of the highway bridge to which reference
has been made. The area under excavation was separated into
two sites (sites Ms15 and Ms16) based upon the presence
of Indian pottery as well as pioneer pottery and crockery in
the northern two thirds, and their absence in the southern
third. Subsequent excavation substantiated this original division
but established further that the lithic culture extended over
the entire area while the ceramic horizons were only superficially present in the northern section.
EXCAVATION
The writer began excavation on February 16 and worked
until the Navy construction deadline of March 7. Excavation
was hampered by poor weather throughout this period and a
number of days of digging were lost because of combinations
of fog, wind, rain and cold. The writer was assisted in the excavation by Mr. A. L. Roberts who worked throughout the

z~

244

Texas Archeological Society

period and by Mr. Ira Williams who dug during the final
week. Volunteer assistance was given by Mr. Albert Gorman
who is responsible for the finding and excavation of a charcoal
log from Area A which has been accepted by the Humble Oil
and Refining Company for radiocarbon dating.
FIELD PROCEDURES
After reconnaissance, five areas were chosen for testing
(Fig. 59). These, designated as Areas A, B, C, D, and E, were
staked off into 50 foot blocks. Work was begun at the north end
of the site in Area A. Here two trenches five feet wide
were begun at one corner and extended at right angles to each
other for twenty feet. Two additional trenches at right angles
enclosed a square. This preliminary trenching established the
stratigraphy, the general paucity of the ceramic horizon and
the source of the scattered stone which had been found previously on the surface of the site. This stone was found to be
concentrated just above a sarid layer overlying the native red
clay and just below the dark occupational debris underneath
the surface. However, the stone layer at this location was
about two and a half feet below the surface and it was soon
realized that it would be more profitable because of the limitations of time and money to find a shallower area so that a
larger area could be uncovered. Work was therefore shifted to
Area E at the opposite end of the site. Here Houses A and B
were uncovered within an excavated area 22 x 30 feet under
an average overburden of 15 to 18 inches. The major excavation
effort was made here to establish the living area and the house
type, and it was from this area that the majority of artifacts
came. Upon the excavation of the house units, Area E was
tested by means of five foot square test pits carried down to
native soil, as indicated on the area plan (Fig. 59). Area D
was then briefly tested, only one pit showing evidence of the
rocks which had come to be associated with the living area.
Finally, a test in Area C disclosed House C which was entirely
excavated by the writer while the other workers returned to
Areas A and B for final testing to determine if possible the
location of the ceramic occupation and the extent of the Archaic
village.

The McCarter Site, a Late Archaic Occupation

245

STRATIGRAPHY
It was found that the entire site had identical stratigraphy,
varying only in the relative thickness of the four characteristic strata (Figs. 60, 61). The upper stratum, 5 to 8 inches
thick, was a light brown soil disturbed by cultivation over all
areas except E which was in pasture. Below this cultivated
stratum was the dark soil of occupational debris containing
charcoal flakes, flint chips, and occasional sherds in Area A, and
pioneer glass, metal, and crockery in Area C. Below this zone
were occasional concentrations of small sandstone rocks which
were for the most part flat, irregular in shape, from one to two
inches in thickness, and five to eight inches at their greatest
measurement. This rock layer, or in its absence the occupational debris, rested on a yellowish sand 4 to 8 inches in depth.
This sand was compacted and discolored on top, becoming more
sandy and yellowish as it reached the native clay beneath. The
latter upon exposure was yellow-orange but gradually darkened
to a distinct red. It might be added that this change upon exposure applied as well to the top of the yellow soil. Troweling
often revealed post and rodent holes which, after an hour or
less, darkened and disappeared until retroweled.
In general the test pits showed that while the native clay
sloped slightly toward the west and away from the river, the
black overburden was considerably higher along the river bank.
Seventy-five yards from the river bank the occupational debris
was two to three inches thick or less, indicating a considerable
spreading out of the occupational debris from a higher area of
occupation which has since disappeared into the river.
WHITE OCCUPATION
An old cistern represented by a tree-rimmed depression in
the ground was located in Area C. It was here that the so-called
pioneer culture was concentrated. During the test pitting 13
pieces of china and crockery, 4 pieces of glass, and 9 pieces of
metal were recovered. This material probably dates from the
end of the 19th or beginning of the 20th century.

I

N

o

%

..... -JO

%

_____@_

Fig. 60.

Plan of Houses A and B in Area E. House B

~°~

Profile
House A

e
o

o

soil

5"

]

~Overburde
.~

5~

~ Occupation

J
:/)ahdg~’6i,

6~

II11 lllUw ~!!~ ll~J

[

/

i
]

¯~*.

Post

molds

Post

holes

~’~ Hearth

~

’~

~

$

/

S cattered
Stone

flagging

concentrations

~’/B lackened area
r’7
L..!
Excavated area

I

__

~

$
Scale

0
,

I
5

top one-third of excavation, north of row ot’ post holes.

10 ft.

lewl

248

Texas Archeological Society

In addition one clay marble was recovered within five inches
of the surface in Area D. One sherd of an 18th to 19th century
clay trade pipe was found on the surface of Area A.
HOUSES A AND B, AREA E
During the initial excavation at Area A it soon became apparent that the numerous stones encountered were localized
in a thin layer between the sand stratum and the overlying
charcoal flecked black soil above. In Area E it was therefore
decided to attempt to excavate a sufficiently large area to determine whether or not there was a pattern in the distribution
of these sandstone fragments or whether they extended as a
carpet over the entire site (Figs. 60; 62, B, C, D). It had been
surmised at first that these stones on the surface represented
the remains of hearths but excavation during the initial period
seemed to indicate that the great majority of them were flat
stones in a horizontal position, which seemed unusual for
scattered hearth material. A rock concentration 30 x 21 feet in
Area E was isolated on three sides and apparently continued to
the north. Since all artifacts recovered were either just above,
just below, or in these rock concentrations, it was felt that
the rocks represented a general habitation area and level and
that they had served to outline hearths, to flag work areas, to
reinforce soft spots in floors, and to serve as underpinning for
auxiliary roof supports. A circular structure made of boulder
type rocks found in this area appeared to be the hearth despite
the absence of ash. The separation of the general rock area into
two house units was based upon the dearth of stone between
the areas. Whether this represents the true state of affairs or
whether the whole area was part of a much larger structure
could not be determined because of time limitations. However,
the nature of the habitation was established to the extent that
it can be said to have been a pole structure with possibly some
sort of extended entryway, floored with irregular flagged areas
and probably containing a hearth. The irregular post pattern
represents the molds of the major supports which were revealed at clay level and it is entirely possible that all poles did
not penetrate to this same depth.
While the results of this effort to establish a house type were

The McCarter Site, a Late Archaic Occ~pation

249

disappointing, it can be attributed in part to the facts that no
Archaic house type as yet has been reported in Oklahoma and
that the flagging was rather indefinite. In conferring with
Robert Bell on this point it was learned that several years ago
a large irregular flagged area was found under a low mound at
the Harlan site in east central Oklahoma. The report on this
work is in preparation. The flagging in this case, while not coyering the entire floor of the rectangular structure of which it
was a part, was nevertheless quite definite. It apparently was
made of larger stones, and the structure itself was large enough
(40 x 60 feet) to be considered of ceremonial or communal
nature. The Harlan site is part of the early ceramic Gibson
Aspect and is dated circa 600 A. D.
The only other reference to flagging which has been located
in the literature of the immediate area is the description by
Cyrus Ray (1934, p. 197) of a rock pavement covering an area
27 x 25 feet on a mesa near Abilene, Texas. This flagging, exposed at ground level, differed from the McCarter and Harlan examples in being a definite rectangle and about a foot thick. Approximately a foot and a half below it was a somewhat similar
pavement made of flat stone only one layer in thickness. No
artifacts or other associated materials were reported other
than an extended burial two feet below the lower stone layer.
The burial was thought to be associated with the Clear Fork
Complex of the Edwards Plateau Archaic.
The occurrences cited perhaps suggest that flagging as a
house building trait begins in the late archaic period and persists into the early ceramic horizon. It is possible that the
irregular and rather fragmental remains at the McCarter and
Harlan sites may represent the results of "robbing" for structural material for later houses while the Abilene example represents a complete and later form.
HOUSE C, AREA C
The outline of the house posts surrounding the flagged area
was obtained by troweling off the top of the sand stratum
just below the rock level (Figs. 61; 62, A). The discoloration
of some, but not all, of the post molds continued to the native

......

i

i

0

I
’ 0
.!

0

Io

o

0

0

0

o

0
o

N

©
0

0

©

Fig. 61.

Pla:

0

©

0
0

o

©
o

o

0

©
0

°

0
o

o

o

0

0

0

©

0

i
i

Scale

use C in Area C.

ft,

0

~Flagged area
~’:~;:
"6/~:.~? Scat t er ed stones
r-n
[-.A Excavation area

Oo

Post molds
Hearth

~

Storage

cyst

252

Texas Archeological Society

soil. The unit here, of course, represents a small house with the
same general construction as Houses A and B but having more
flagging in proportion to the floor space. While in Houses A
and B the relation of the hearths to the interior walls is not
too definite, the fireplace in House C is definitely within the
walls. It might be noted here that the three house areas are contemporaneous, judging by the presence of Plainview-like points
on the floors of Houses B and C and the presence of Gary-like
points in all three house areas.
The house in this case is quite small compared with houses
reported for the Fort Coffee, Spiro, McCurtain, and Bryan
Foci. The only rectangular house of comparable size (10 x 12
feet) in the literature appears to be one from the Sanders Focus
in northeast Texas, a late ceramic focus of the Gibson Aspect.
This Sanders house does not provide a satisfactory comparison
with House C at McCarter. It might be noted that in general,
the rectangular house plan is characteristic of eastern Oklahoma during the Gibson Aspect while the circular and oval
houses are found in northeastern Texas (Bell and Baerreis,
1951, p. 60). It is only in the later Fulton Aspect, in the Fort
Coffee Focus and in the McCurtain Focus, that the circular
house appears occasionally in Oklahoma, while in the northeast
Texas area the rectangular house appears in the Sanders focus
of the late Gibson Aspect (Suhm et al., 1954, p. 178). In the
case of the iKcCarter site this suggests northern rather than
southern basic affiliations for House C during the late Archaic.
PITS
This site was characterized by a lack of deep pits. None were
found during the rather extensive test pitting of the area.
Whatever cache pits existed must have been shallow depressions
between the sand layer and the native clay, a depth of usually
less than a foot. One such stone-rimmed pit occurred beside
the fireplace in House C. Absence of cache pits is a negative
characteristic shared with the Archaic culture of northeastern
Oklahoma (Baerreis, 1951).

The McCarter Site, ~ Late Archaic Occz~patio.~

253

REFUSE
Characteristic, likewise, was the general absence of animal
bone and shell refuse scattered in the fill. A few shells were
noted in Area C on the surface but none were encountered in
excavation. Stone chips were lacking in the shallower parts
of the site except in proximity to stone concentrations (i. e.

Fig. 62. A, House C; post hole positions indicated by sticks. B, Houses
A (foreground) and B (background), showing stone concentrations. C,
hearthstones in House B. D, hearth in House A.

254

Texas A~’cheological Society

habitation areas). There were exceptions, of course, where
ploughing had occurred.
HEARTHS
Hearths were distinguished from other structural concentrations of stone by the use of river boulders as opposed to the
fiat horizontal stones. Three such areas were encountered and
are designated as hearths in the site plans (Figs. 60, 61).
Charcoal concentrations were found in one location in Area A.
It is believed that all three occurrences are contemporaneous,
representing the roof timbers from one structure.
ARTIFACT TYPOLOGY AND DISTRIBUTION
Descriptive and distributional data on the artifacts from
the McCarter site are presented in the table and Appendix,
pp. 261-266.
DISCUSSION
Economy
The Table of Artifact Distribution by Areas (p. 261) raises
some questions concerning the type of economy followed at
the McCarter site. The data from this single site are insufficient
to answer these questions definitely. However, it is apparent, if
Area E is assumed to represent an earlier phase than Area A,
that there was a shift of emphasis in the economy during occupancy of the site.
If Area E, which lacked evidence of pottery and small points,
is taken to represent an earlier phase, the outstanding fact in
comparing it with Area A is the relatively numerous fragments
of handstones found in Area E and the dearth of them in Area
A. It should be emphasized that the handstones in Area E are
not, for the most part, well formed. In fact the abraded stone
complex is so amorphous in shape as to suggest something in
its beginning. This is especially true if these handstones are
compared with those of the later phases of the Grove Focus.
The lack of defined grinding planes and the depressions found
on some of the surfaces suggest pounding and crushing operations connected with the preparation of roots, fruits, nuts, and
seeds rather than the true milling of cultivated grains.

The McCarter Site, a Late Archaic Occzqgation

255

In chipped stone likewise, Area E yields tool types which are
not found or which occur infrequently in Area A, notably the
flint blades, planes and choppers. Quite probably these had more
to do with the preparation of plant foods and with skin preparation, since the occurrence of points in both areas is roughly the
same although the types differ. The small points correlate with
the pottery bearing areas. There is nothing significant in this
distribution except that it suggests a continuity in the hunting
aspect together with a change in the gathering aspect, which
was presumably increasingly supplemented by agricultural
products, although this particular excavation does not establish
this interpretation.
In summary, it would appear from the rudimentary nature of
the sandstone tool complex found in Area E, especially the
handstones and slabs for grinding seeds, that they had been
added to a well-established flint-working complex. The presence
of the choppers, planes and blades which are fairly well made
and not too advanced technically from the finish of the flint
points suggests that a gathering-hunting economy had been
established for some time. The sandstone abraders may, on the
other hand, represent an increment due to gradual climatic
changes affecting the environment generally or subsequent
direct or indirect contact with groups having a developed grinding complex.
COMPARISONS
Grove Focus of Northeastern Oklahoma
There are some general similarities between the McCarter
site and those of the Grove Focus (Baerreis, 1951; Hall, 1954).
Among the more obvious are absence of cache pits and bone
and shell fragments together with the occurrence of large and
small flint scrapers, grinding stones, choppers and certain types
of points in both areas. Both are open sites of fairly large size.
Differences are seen for the most part in a number of traits
which are present in the north and lacking or infrequent at
the McCarter site, such as axes, drills, mortars and large numbers of scrapers. Conversely, traits not present in the Grove
Focus but present at Muskogee are high backed pebble planes,
large choppers or hand axes and spuds as well as definite
differences in the major types of projectile points.

Texas Archeological Society

256

The greatest correlation between the two areas is to be found
in the general technological similarity of form in the chipped
stone industry. However, even here the two industries are distinguishable on the basis of material, the Grove Focus material being lighter in color because of association with limestone deposits while the Muskogee material is darker chert
with more sheen, known generically as Boone chert. Further
distinction in finish can be detected in the large patinated surfaces which are retained on the Muskogee flint material as
opposed to the almost total removal of patinated surfaces on
the Delaware specimens.
The greatest differences between the industries of the two
areas lie in (1) the frequency of projectile points in comparison
to the other types of artifacts, (2) different dominance of
projectile point types, and (3) the relative numbers of scrapers,
grinding stones, knives and projectile points. Projectile points
outnumber all other classes of artifacts in the Grove Focus.
This situation is not found at the McCarter site. Of the 14
major projectile point types listed for the Grove Focus only four
were recovered in situ at the McCarter site though other types
have been found on the surface by collectors. In the table below
these four types are listed in order of frequency and compared
with the frequency table for the Grove sites:
Point Popularities (Based on Baerreis, 1951, Table VIII)
Grove Focus Sites and Phases

MeCarter Site
Baerreis’
Types

Type
Type
Type
Type

A
B
H
E

1
2
3
4

’Phase A
EvlII

Phase B
EvIII

CaI

McVIII

3
2
4
1

3
1
4
2

1
2
4
3

2
1
4
3

Phase C
CaI McVII

2
1
4
3

2
1
4
3

As a further correlation of the chipped stone work between
the two areas a comparison can be made with the classes of
artifacts on which Baerreis based his temporal differentiation
of the Grove material into the three phases A, B, and C. Of
these six classes only four are present in the McCarter material
and are listed as follows:

The McCarter Site, a Late Archaic Occupation

McCarter Site

257

Grove Focus Sites and Phases

r

Baerreis’

Phase A
EvIII

Types

Knives
Grinding
Stones
Scrapers
Choppers

Phase B
EvIII

CaI

McVIII

Phase C
CaI McVII

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

2
3
4

4
2
3

3
4
2

2
3
4

2
3
4

2
3
4

1
3
4

From the tables of relative frequency listed above it is apparent that the McCarter chipped stone falls in temporal position either between Grove Phases B and C or at the beginning
of Phase C.
Fourche Maline Focus
Superficially there appear to be resemblances in form between the illustrated material from the Scott site (Bell, 1953,
Fig. 98) and that from the McCarter site. Examination of the
specimens, however, shows that they differ in proportions, size,
and thickness as well as material. For instance, while the Gary
type point predominates in both areas, the Fourche Maline type
is for the most part of a dark quartzite and in size is smaller,
slenderer, and thinner. This typical and distinctive quartzite
material is absent from the McCarter site, even in the form
of chips. At the same time, the characteristic flint from the
McCarter site, Boone chert, is recognizable in fragments from
the Dlev site in the Grove Focus material.
This combination of generalized typological resemblance with
some small correspondence in secondary material (notably a
few fragments of the black flint at the McCarter site which is
also found at the Scott site) suggests a cultural relationship,
not contemporaneity. Considering that the Fourche Maline
River is but 60 miles away, some intrusive material and closer
typological resemblances would be expected if the Fourche
Maline Focus were contemporaneous with the McCarter site.
The fact that this is not so and that the McCarter material
is present to some extent in Delaware County suggests that
Fourche Maline is later. This assumption would seem to be
strengthened by the fact that the chipped stone work decreases
in size, as noted above, a characteristic trend of technological
maturity in stone work.

258

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

On the other hand, contemporaneity with Fourche Maline is
expressed by the presence of a few Williams Plain pottery
sherds, Williams Plain being the typical pottery of the upper
levels of that focus. It could be that (1) these sherds are intrusive, being derived from a part of the site which has washed
into the river; (2) the sample at the McCarter site was insufficient to reveal basic correlations in stonework with the Fourche
Maline focus; (3) the Williams Plain designation includes
plainwares derived from more than one source or tradition;
(4) Williams Plain was derived from an unidentified source
other than Fourche Maline; or (5) the Williams Plain type of
east central Oklahoma was derived from the Early Woodland
types of northeastern Oklahoma which as it diffused southward became more abundant and developed a smoother finish.
In this last regard, the finish of the McCarter site Williams
Plain sherds is not as smooth under magnification as that on
specimens from the Scott site and is intermediate between the
former and the sandy surfaces of the Woodland types.
At any rate there appears to be a contradiction which awaits
clarification in the presence of Williams Plain, so typical of the
Fourche Maline Focus, and the total absence of quartzite which
is the equally typical stone material of the Fourche Maline
chipped stone industry. In fact, so different are the general
characteristics of the sites in the almost complete absence of
bone and shell at the McCarter site and their abundance on the
Fourche h{aline sites that, except for the anamoly of the sherds,
either a later time level for Fourche Maline or more numerous
signs of culture contact in other traits and activities could be
expected. It is therefore likely that the Williams Plain sherds
were not contemporaneous with the excavated portions of the
site.
The Webber Falls-Arkansas Slate Industry
Several traits, the spud or digging tool and the rectangular
hoe, are made of an argillaceous slate, and neither the material nor the tools appear to be derived from any of the sources
discussed. The U. S. Geological Survey has stated that the only
local outcroppings of this material are to be found in eastern
Arkansas and near Webber Falls, Oklahoma, about 20 miles
southeast of the McCarter site (personal communication from

The McCarter Site, ~ Late Archaic Occ~pation

259

Mr. Cecil Cleavenger, Fort Smith, Arkansas). Northeast of
Fort Smith in Arkansas there is a group of sites which appear
to equate roughly with the Fourche Maline sites in the abundance of shell and bone debris, the number of sandstone fragments and the scattering of grit tempered pottery. The slate
tools, however, differ typologically in being rather large, coarse,
and somewhat thick, the characteristic form being a bulbous
digging tool with a narrow half reminiscent in outline of the
McCarter spud. It is, however, considerably smaller and not
as well defined or carefully worked. No close relationship with
either of these areas is recognized. Again, as in the case of the
pottery, the slate tools at the McCarter site may represent a
late, indirect or intermittent contact.
Middle Archaic Survival
A further orientation of some of the material from the McCarter site appears to be toward the south and possibly to the
west. The striking aspect of the stone industry at the McCarter
site, when compared with material from the Grove Focus, is
the large proportion and higher percentage of crust remaining
on the flint tools. This is especially noticeable in the category
designated as planes. These are simply flint river boulders of
fist size with an end knocked off and secondarily chipped on one
side of the steeper end. The complex suggests a pebble industry
rather than a true core industry. While no exact similarities
have been noted in the literature, the nearest parallel is to be
seen in the gouge-planer of the Edwards Plateau (Kelley, 1947)
and Trinity (Crook and Harris, 1952) Aspects of the Balcones
Phase of north and north-central Texas. There also seem to
be generic similarities with the Cochise planes from the southeastern part of Arizona (Sayles and Antevs, 1941).
In Oklahoma on the basis of an initial surface survey (Lawton, 1957) and a preliminary study (Shaeffer, 1956) this type
of tool has been noted as part of a crude quartzite pebble or
core industry apparently centering in central Oklahoma. The
Muskogee planes differ from the central Oklahoma types in material and in having more definite form. Presumably, if derived
from this source, they are more advanced and later than their
prototypes to the west and south.

260

Texas A~’cheological Society

CONCLUSIONS
The McCarter site appears to be basically a peripheral manifestation of the Grove Focus of northeastern Oklahoma, equating with its Phases B and C. It differs in the greater emphasis
on gathering activities as evidenced by the greater occurrence
of handstones, choppers and planes, the source of which is believed to be a middle Archaic level of culture diffusing from the
area to the southwest. The lesser emphasis on hunting was possibly a local adjustment to a new and/or changing environment.

The McCarter Site, a Late Archaic Occupation

261

TABLE OF ARTIFACT DISTRIBUTION BY AREAS
( ) indicates on or immediately above house floor.

ThickArtifact

Type

A

frag.

1

B

C

D

1

1

E

Total

Length

Width

hess

BONE
Animal

"

2

5

2

2

POTTERY
Sherds

A

STONE, ABRADED
Handstoncs

B

7

A

2

7

I

15(2)

21

B

(1)

1

8.0-10.0
9.0

Milling stone

A

(1)

1

31.5

Palette, Proto (?)

frag.

3

5.0-7.0 3.3-5.5
6.3-7.3 6.3-6.6
17-19

5.6-8.0

3

1.5-1.6

3

3

5

8

1I

1

5.0-8.5 4.0-5.0 1.4-2.0
5.0-8.5 4.~5.0 1.4-2.0
5.0-8,5 4.0-5.0 1.4-2.0

STONE, CHIPPED
Blades

A
B

2

fCrag.

5

(1)
(1)

(8)115

Chopper (hand-ax)

Disk
Points

1

1

B

1

(1)

C

1

A

D

1

E

Planes

(2)

3

7.6-11.5

5.2-6.5

(1

1

11.5

2.5~.5

(1)

3

12.5-13

(1)

2

4.9

2.4

(2)

4

8.0

3.0

(1)

2

frag.

2.0-2.5

(1)

2

frag.

2.4

1

2.5

1.1

3

base

only

4.0-8.C 3.5-6.0
4.0-8.C 3.5-6.0
6.8-8,5 3.6-8.8

1

F

3

frag.

3

1
1

A

1

3(1)

6

9.0-11

2(1)

3

c [

9.0-11

1(1)

2

7.6-9.7

1

Scrapers

A
B
C
D

WATTLE
Burned

frag.
TOTALS

(1)

2
1
38

3

1

9
81

9

.5
.8
.3
.6
.2

4

B

Spud

9.6-13.5 1.4-1.7

10

1

1

16.0

1

11.3

2

6.4

1

4.8

50

92

2.0

1

10

111

212

9.5

1.5

!4.0
1.0
2.5
.6
1.5-1.7
.4- .6
7.5

3.0

Texas Archeological Society

262

APPENDIX: ARTIFACT TYPOLOGY
For location and number of specimens, see Table, p. 261.
Bone
Unidentifiable fragments only.
Pottery
Type A:

Williams Plain as described;
marks.

one sherd shows wiping

Type B:

Woodward Plain, Leached Variant, surface color orange
with no core discoloration; uniform oxidation; surface
soft and powdery; fracture crumbly; surface--angular
leaching pits under magnification; probably shell-tempered and subjected to very hot fire; fine sandy clay,
surface smoothed but not polished. Undoubtedly, a late
intrusive. Not associated with culture reported here.
Stone, Abraded

Handstones
Type A:

Natural river boulders, round to squarish with some
flat planes showing rubbing; surfaces and edges pitted,
some specimens show definite pitting;, soft, light to
very heavy homogeneous sandstone.

Type B:

Sandstone river boulder shaped at end to squarish form;
top and bottom lightly rounded and worn smooth; considerable pecking and pitting on all edges; deep
scratches on flat surfaces; a heavy stone probably used
as a hammer, crusher, grinder and pestle.

Milling Stone

A block of unfinished, hard sandstone of stratum thickness, one end slightly thicker than the other forming a
slight slope; natural surface irregularity. One side
shows pronounced flattening and wear of higher surfaces surrounding depressed areas; the other side shows
slight flattening. Wear confined to upper half of block.
Worn area contains minute holes and scratches as if
something sharp had been crushed or pulverized on surface.

Palette, Proto(?) Fragments of flat sandstone river rocks too thin for
handstones; some of the surfaces looked stained.
Stone, Chipped
Blades

Choppers
Type A:

Percussion chipping of river pebbles; biracial; in several
cases all traces of exterior patination removed; three
general shapes--elongated, leaf, and discoidal; considerable variety of flint used; possibly a later introduction
from a more advanced technological tradition as evidenced by all-over, bifacial chipping and material variation.
Wedge shape; thick side for grip tapering to half-moon
shaped cutting edge; House B material--black slate;

B

2

D

F

Fig. 63. A, scrapers: 1, Type B; 2, Type E; 3, Type D.
B, points: 1, Type D; 2, Type C; 3, Type E; 4, Type F; 5, Type A;
6, Type B; 7, scraper (reworked Gary point).
C, Planes: 1, Type B; 2, Type C; 3, Type A.
D, Blades: 1, discoidal form; 2, elongated; 3, leaf shaped.
E, Enlargement of characteristic McCarter site plane.
F, Enlargement of scraper, Type A.

B

D

E

G

Fig. 64. A, Hoe fragment; B, Disk knife; C, Spud; D, Chopper, Type A;
E, Milling stone; F, Handstone, Type A; G, Handstone, Type B.

The McCarter Site, a Late Archaic Occupation

265

Area A specimen of soft sandstone with edge rounded;
some red stain on surface; both formed by rough, unifacial, percussion flaking.
Type B :

Flat, natural, river rock; formed as above but larger
and thinner; material--hard limestone.

Disk (Knife)

Thin circular shape, flat across top; appears to be
shaped from standstone stratum; use unknown but
repetition of shape in three specimens suggests specific
tool function.

Hoe

Rectangular fragment of thin, porous slate; chipped on
three edges; high area on both surfaces worked to
smooth finish; slate badly pitted by erosion of natural
inclusions.

Points
Type A:

Area D specimen side notched with straight base chipped
along sides and over point only; both sides of central
area unworked; shoulder almost straight, one being
more prominent than the other; material--white flint;
general effect crude or careless work. Area B specimen
same general form as above but larger stem, square
base and slightly contracting stem; side notches eliminated; biracial secondary chipping on sides and across
point on both faces; material--yellow-grey flint.

Type B:

Area A specimen is base fragment; secondary chipping
on edges and on all surfaces; secondary chipping is
irregular as though straightened by. rubbing rather than
pressure. Area D whole specimen is a flake; stemless;
flaring at shoulders; secondary chipping on edges and
over point; little chipping on central areas; material-dark grey flint, not Boone chert.

Type C:

Diagonal transverse percussion flaking with slightly serrated edge; in form it is an elongated triangle with
concave base; surface chipped all over; material--pinkish white flint.

Type D:

Fishtail shape; the side is notched into straight shoulder
and the stem has parallel sides, base deeply concave;
transverse diagonal flaking; no secondary pressure flaking; material--Area A light grey flint with small inclusions, Area C light pink and white; both show poor
fracture.

Type E:

Triangular shape, straight base; side notched above
straight-sided base; triangular part above stem; primary flaking on one side of flake only; secondary chipping along edges.

Type F:

Deeply side notched with expanding stem having convex
base; sides also tend to be convex above stem; some
secondary chipping from use or rubbing as flakes are
very irregular resulting in slight serration.

Planes
Type A:

Small, heavy flint river boulders with one end knocked
off and rounded by unifacial percussion flaking; char-

266

Texas Archeological Society
acteristic end is concave, rounded and slightly longer on
one side than the other, has a high, steep side; some
secondary flaking along the edge with moderate serration; favorite material at this site for this tool is brown,
iron patinated "Boone Chert."

Type B:

As above but made from cores rather than natural
shapes; other characteristics the same with unifacial
percussion flaking.

Type C:

Modification of a natural form but material is a flatter
block of black slate; function may have been that of a
chopper; a general al~ea of percussion tends to result
in a more ovoid form to fit the pahn; the under side
is a flat plane with a rough natural surface while the
upper surface is rounded; chopping edge tends to be
convex while the top or grasping end is the natural
flat smfface of the stratum; the angle of percussion of
the chopping edge is steep; percussion is unifacial.

Spud

Spatulate shaped tool; a stem with parallel sides below
a blade in the shape of a half moon; material--hard,
black slate river rock; chipped along edges and sporadically on both faces; carefully made and fairly symmetrical. Stem or handle flares into head like a large
Gary point. Might have been form of digging tool
though surfaces show no use-polishing.

Scrapers
Type A:

An unusual form of core scraper
longitudinally split boulder or flint
worked edges--one edge being on
the other on a concave edge on the

made from a large,
block; has unifacial
the convex surface,
opposite side.

Type B:

A triangular shaped flake; roughly percussion flaked
with unifacial flaking on alternate faces producing an
alternate bevel; some secondary chipping over the point
area. Could be classified as a point if the shape were
more definite or as a blade if thicker.

Type C:

Reworked faulty Gary point with scraper edge on convex side of point; percussion chipped with secondary
chipping on edge and high centered face.

Type D:

Flint flakes and chips slightly worked or showing use;
used as multiple purpose tools in scraping, sawing and
cutting.

Type E:

Thumbnail end scraper from Area A of Boone Chert;
Triangular shape, straight base side notched above
symmetrical in shape; specimen from Area D of irregularly surfaced chip, unifacial, secondary chipping
on end only--forming steep angle, sides unworked, also
made from Boone Chert.

The McCarter Site, ~ Late Archaic Occ~q~ation

267

REFERENCES CITED
Baerreis, David A.
1951. The Preceramic Horizons of Northeastern Oklahoma. Anthrop. Papers, Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, No. 6.
Bell, Robert E.
1953. The Scott Site, Le Flore County, Oklahoma. American Antiquity, Vol. 18, No. 4, pp. 314-331.
Bel!, Robert E., and David A. Baerreis
1951. A Survey of Oklahoma Archeology. Bulletin, Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 22, pp. 7100.
Crook, Wilson W., Jr., and R. K. Harris
1952. Trinity Aspect of the Archaic Horizon: the Carrollton and Elam Foci. Bulletin, Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 23, pp. 7-38.
Hall, Roland Scott
1954. Ck-44: a Bluff Shelter Site from Northeastern Oklahoma. Bulletin, Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. 2,
pp. 49-68.
Kelley, J. Charles
1947. The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Position of the Clear Fork Focus. American Antiquity, Vol. 13,
No. 2, pp. 97-109.
Lawton, Sherman P.
1957. A Possible Archaic Quartzite Industry from Central
Oklahoma. Paper given at the Annua! Meeting of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, April.
Ray, Cyrus N.
1937. More Evidence Concerning Abilene Man. Bulletin,
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 9,
pp. 193-217.

268

Texas Archeological Society

Sayles, E. B., and Ernst Antevs
1941. The Cochise Culture. Medallion Papers, No. 29, Gila
Pueblo, Globe, Arizona.
Shaeffer, James B.
1957. A Quartzite Industry from Central Oklahoma. MS,
statement at Fourth Caddoan Conference, Shreveport, La.,
April.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
University of Oklahoma
Norman, Oklahoma

TIME AND TYPES IN ARCHEOLOGICAL
ANALYSIS: THE BRAINERDROBINSON TECHNIQUE
By

RUDOLPH

C. TROIKE

It is the special province of the archeologist to document
and interpret the culture history of man, as reflected in the
material artifacts of daily life which man leaves wherever he
lives. The first important step in this task is the chronological
ordering of archeological deposits. Until this has been done,
the archeologist is unable to speak intelligently about the culture history of a single site, much less about the time-space
framework of an entire area. Despite recent criticisms of overemphasis on chronology in archeologica! studies, there is a
great need for more, rather than less, attention to this aspect
of culture history. It is therefore important that more precision and refinement be sought in techniques for the chronological ordering of archeological deposits.
Seriation offers one of the most sensitive possible measures
of temporal change in an archeological sequence. This is due
to the fact that it relies on internal changes in the artifacts
themselves rather than on external evidence such as stratigraphy. Seriation is made possible by the nature of cultural
change. The members of a culture living at a single time and
place tend to behave alike, and the artifacts which they produce likewise tend to be similar. Individual differences in successive acts by each person in the group gradually bring about
changes in the culture of the group. This is reflected archeologically by changing frequencies of artifact classes or of such
features as the material, techniques, decoration, or forms employed in the manufacture of artifacts. Artifact classes or features tend to have a frequency distribution in time which may
be represented graphically in the form of a lens. It is this
characteristic lens-like cycle which makes it possible to order
related artifact collections chronologically.

270

Texas Archeological Society

If time is the major factor responsible for the differences
among a series of artifact collections, a graph of the elements
chosen for seriation should show profiles of continuous increasing or decreasing frequency. When the collections are
placed in their correct chronological order and the percentages
of constituent artifact classes or features are computed and
graphed, a picture such as that in Fig. 65 should result. To
obtain a sequence when the chronology is not known, the procedure is reversed and the graphs of the collections are shuffled
about until the elements approximate the desired lenticular
profiles. (This technique has been extensively developed and employed by James A. Ford in several publications; see Ford and
Willey, 1949, for a more detailed discussion.)
Although this technique of seriation suffices when the number of collections and distinctive analytical units is small, it
becomes quite cumbersome when dealing with large quantities
of materials. For this purpose, George W. Brainerd (1951) and
Artifact Features
A

B

C

m

I

to

o
0
0

0
o

7

I
o lO

50

!

I~

t

i0o
f

Percentage Scale
Fig. 65. Bar graph technique of seriation. Note that the outline of
each feature history tends to have a lens-like shape.

Ti~e and Types in Archeological Analysis

271

W. S. Robinson (1951) developed and described a statistical
technique for seriation which offers many practical advantages
for the manipulation of large masses of data. In addition, it
holds considerable promise of being a valuable tool in the
interpretation of archeological sequences. The original presentation by Brainerd and Robinson has been amplified and clarified
in two subsequent articles by Belous (1953) and Dixon (1956).
The present discussion will be devoted to the methodological
aspects of the application of the Brainerd-Robinson technique.
II
Although the archeologist may deal exclusively with the histories of individual artifact features in his analysis, such a
procedure becomes very complex when the cultural inventory is
very rich. It is an empirical observation that these features are
not distributed at random among various kinds of artifacts
in a collection, but rather that certain combinations of features
repeatedly occur in individual artifacts¯ As a matter of convenience for analysis, and because the repetition of artifacts
presenting the same unified attributes appears to reflect cultural reality, the archeologist classifies his material into units
known as types. A type comprises a group of artifacts all of
which share a number of distinctive features; these shared
attributes are taken to define the type.
An artifact type, if correctly formulated, should also reveal a
lens-like history. The Brainerd-Robinson technique of seriation
¯ . . is based on the concept that each type originates at a given time
at a given place, is made in gradually increasing numbers as time
goes on, then decreases in popularity until it becomes forgotten, never
to recur in an identical form (Brainerd, 1951, p. 304).

Since seriation can only be as accurate and sensitive as the
typology upon which it is based, certain methodological assumptions implicit in the Brainerd-Robinson technique should be
mentioned before proceeding to a discussion of the technique
itself.
When the materials from a site excavation or from a number
of site collections have been catalogued and are to be sorted
into types, in order to reduce bias in the typology it is desirable

272

Texas Archeological Society

to mix all of the materials in a single pile before sorting begins.
This permits more objective classification and reduces the unconscious tendency to unequal sorting in different collections
(see Dixon, 1956, pp. 20-26, 29). Before a type is formally
defined, an adequate sample from one or more sites (if possible)
should be available, in order to avoid the inclusion of individual
or local variations in the type definition. Traits chosen for defining the type should be as numerous, complex, and distinctive
as possible, to preclude overlapping of types; types should contrast with one another (Brainerd, 1951, p. 304). All artifacts
classified as of a single type must, without exception, present
all of the characteristics chosen to define the type. This rigid
requirement will leave a number of unique and untyped artifacts, which should be described but which are irrelevant for
purposes of seriation (Brainerd, 1951, pp. 303, 305). Finally,
all types should show roughly lens-shaped histories, when the
collections have been seriated. If several similar types show
parallel frequency distributions through time, they should
probably be combined into a single type. A tentative type which
does not show a lenticular profile will adversely affect the seriation, and should be re-analyzed or excluded (see Dixon, 1956,
pp. 10, 17, for a discussion of Gila Plain Ware as an invalid
type in the Snaketown ceramic sequence).
III
Although the Brainerd-Robinson technique of seriation involves statistical procedures, they are very simple and do not
require any knowledge of statistics to follow. The empirical
basis for seriation lies in the fact that collections from deposits
close together in time wilt (barring accidents of nature, excavation, or analysis) show greater similarity in relative frequencies
of shared artifact types or traits than will collections further
removed from one another in time. Brainerd and Robinson developed a simple numerical index to express this degree of
similarity, and then used this index to allign the collections in a
chronological sequence.
The principal steps in the Brainerd-Robinson seriational
technique may first be summarized, and then discussed by the
aid of examples. Although other traits than types may be seri-

Time and Types in Archeological Analysis

273

ated, it is assumed for purposes of the present discussion that
types are to be used, and that the artifacts have been adequately
typed. The unit employed in seriation is the collection, which is
defined as "a group of artifacts which were found together"
(Brainerd, 1951, p. 304), whether in a level of an excavation
unit or on the surface of a site. Only those collections and types
for which there is an adequate sample are included in the calculations.
.

.

3~

.

.

.

.

The percentage of each type in each collection is computed
and tabulated.
Each collection is compared in turn with all other collections in respect to the percentages of each type included in the seriation. The smaller percentage, regardless
of which collection it belongs to, is ahvays subtracted
from the larger.
The remainders (those figures obtained by subtracting)
are then added together to give the total difference between each two collections.
This total is subtracted from the figure 200. The resulting
number represents the index of similarity between the two
collections.
The similarity indices are then plotted on a table, or
matrix, in which all collections are listed by column and
row, and the indices placed at the intersections.
The columns and rows are then shifted about until they
most closely approximate a situation with the highest
index figures along the diagonal and a continuous decrease
in the magnitude of the numbers away from the diagonal
in both directions. A mechanical device to aid in this stage
of the work, the "ordering board," is described by Dixon
(1956, pp. 11-12).
The resulting sequence of collections should then be accurate, if time is the major dimension operative in the
the differences between the collections.

If it is impossible to obtain a satisfactory ordering, two factors may be responsible. First, the typological procedures may
have been inadequate; also, the profiles of suspicious types

274

Texas Archeological Society

should be checked (see Dixon, 1956, pp. 17, 20ff., on both these
problems). If the types fulfill specifications, it is possible that
factors other than time, such as distance (in the case of several
sites) or social stratification, may be influencing the sequence.
In this case, the only solution is to seek the best possible ordering under the circumstances. Brainerd (1951, pp. 307-308)
has discussed some of the inferences which can be drawn from
the examination of even chaotic matrices. This can be done
because the present technique, besides ordering collections
chronologically, also provides valuable insights into the nature
of certain processes of culture change.
If the materials seriated are from a stratigraphic excavation, the internal ordering can be checked against the external
evidence of deposition. Brainerd (1951, p. 311) has discussed
how analysis of the ordered matrix may suggest the direction
of the sequence from early to late without the need of stratigraphic data. This possibility at present remains somewhat
experimental.
Several hypothetical examples will be presented to explain
the operation of the Brainerd-Robinson seriation technique.
EXAMPLE 1. There are two collections of ceramics which
share no types in common. Collection I has only Type A, while
Collection II is composed entirely of Type B. This may be expressed in terms of percentages:
I
II

A
100%
0%

B
0%
100%

100%

100%

By subtracting the smaller percentage of each type from the
greater, there results a difference of 100% in Type A and
100% in Type B between Collections I and II. These figures
may be added together to give the total difference between Collections I and II, which is 200%. In other words, when two
collections have no types in common, they are 200% different.
This figure expresses maximum dissimilarity in the collections.
When the total percentage of difference between two collections
is subtracted from the figure of maximum difference, 200, a

Time and Types in Archeological Analysis

275

figure is obtained which expresses the degree of similarity in
the two collections. This will be demonstrated in the second
example.
EXAMPLE 2. There are three collections in which four
types of ceramics are found. Types C and F occur only in Collections III and IV, while Types D and E are changing frequency in opposite directions. The first step is to tabulate
what percentage of each collection is formed by each type.
Types :
C
20
0
0

III
IV
V

Collections :

D

E

F

20
50
60

60
50
20

0
0
20

Next, the collections are compared with one another and the
differences between all percentages for each pair of collections
is determined.
C
D
E
F
Total
III 20
20
60
0
IV
0
50
50
0

III
V

IV
V

20

30

10

0

20
0

20
60

60
20

0
20

2O

40

4O

20

0
0

50
60

50
20

0
20

0

10

30

20

6O

120

60

The totals of differences are then subtracted from 200 to give
the measure of similarity between each pair of collections, as
follows :
III: IV,
III : V,
IV : V,

140
80
140

Texas Archeological Society

276

The indices of similarity are then plotted in a matrix form, as
shown here.
III
IV
V

III (200)
IV
V

140
80

140
(200)
140

80
140
(200)

The arrangement of the indices on the matrix is the most
important step in the whole procedure of seriation, so some
attention to this step is desirable. It will be noted that when a
collection is compared with itself, there is no difference and
the resulting index of similarity is 200. It is therefore unnecessary to fill in the diagonal line. In the ideal matrix arrangement, when all of the collections are in their correct chronological order, the highest figure of similarity should fall along
the diagona!, with a steady decrease away from the diagonal
in both directions. This is understandable since the diagonal
represents the line of highest possible similarity, which is
identity. If all collections are arranged in correct order, there
should be a consistently high agreement between each two adjacent collections, while similarities with further separated collections should decline as the separation increases. Since the
squares of the matrix furthest from the diagonal should contain the index of those collections most removed from one
another in time, these numbers should therefore be the smallest.
EXAMPLE 3. This example is employed to demonstrate
how the matrix is used to order collections. In this case, the
numbering of collections does not refer to stratigraphic position but is entirely arbitrary. It is here assumed that all the
previous necessary tabulations and calculations have been made.
VI
VI
VII
VIII
IX
X
XI

190
145
162
128
176

VII

VIII

IX

X

XI

190

145
154

162
167
192

128
140
185
180

176
178
165
183
147

15~
167
140
178

192
185
165

FIRST ORDERING:

180
183

147

INCORRECT

Time and Types in Archeological Analysis ’

VI
VI
VII
XI
IX
VIII
X

190
176
162
145
128

277

VII

XI

IX

VIII

X

190

176
178

162
167
183

145
154
165
192

128
140
147
180
185

178
167
154
140

183
165
147

SECOND ORDERING:

192
180

185

CORRECT

In the first table above is given the initial ordering, which
fails in a number of instances to approximate the ideal pattern. Rather than decreasing evenly from the diagonal towards
the edges of the table, the numbers are irregularly distributed.
In order to arrive at the best possible seriation, the columns
and rows need to be shuffled until the numbers approximate the
ideal pattern as closely as can be achieved. In this, it is helpful
to circle those numbers which deviate from the desired pattern, and continue shifting columns and rows until the fewest
circled numbers result. The second table shows the correct
seriation of the collections, arrived at after some experimental
shifting of the columns.

IV
The Brainerd-Robinson seriation technique may now be applied to an actual archeological case, to show a complete instance of the technique carried out step by step. A convenient
example for this purpose is the report by Drucker (1952) on
the site of La Venta, in the state of Tabasco, Mexico. [This refers to an earlier project at La Venta than that reported in the
papers by Heizer and Squier in this volume.--ED.]
At La Venta, two stratigraphic trenches were excavated in
different parts of the site. Therefore, although the stratigraphy
was known for each trench, there was no direct way to correlate the two trenches. In addition, "The same wares occur
in both trenches, and moreover, the same wares appear as
major components of the ceramic pattern (i. e., the wares of
higher frequency), and the same ones.., are of low frequency

Texas A~’cheological Society

278

in both stratigraphic sections" (Drucker, 1952, p. 129). Thus
on the basis of the presence or absence of any ceramic type, it
would only be possible to say that the two occupations are
evidently contemporaneous. However, an examination of the
changing percentages of each type in the two trenches shows
that this case furnishes an excellent subject for seriation, since
only on this "internal" basis can the two trenches be related
in time.
For purposes of seriation, each level in each trench wilt be
treated as a collection. Since only the major wares, which are
common enough to give dependable frequencies and to show
changes in percentage, are to be used, it will first be necessary
to calculate the percentages of each from the figures which
Drucker (1952, pp. 127-128) gives (Table I). After this, the
similarity index for each pair of collections may be calculated
(Table II). The final step is to plot the similarity indices on a
matrix form, and shuffle the rows and columns about as much
as necessary to arrive at the desired pattern (Table III).
TABLE I

Frequencies and Revised Percentages of Major Wares, La
Venta
Wares :

Brown

Buff

Fine Paste

Totals

Levels

No.

%

No.

%

No.

%

No.

%

A
B
C
D
E

51
66
668
848
417

23
21
22
18
19

77
97
1017
1678
943

35
31
33
34
42

89
148
1356
2330
871

41
47
45
48
39

217
311
3041
4856
2231

99
99
100
100
100

1
2
3
4
5

395
921
924
1275
376

35
37
29
27
23

488
1110
1687
2936
1188

43
45
53
63
74

248
442
580
478
41

22
18
18
10
3

1131
2473
3191
4689
1605

100
100
100
100
100

Time and Types in Archeological Analysis

279

TABLE II
Comparison of Major Ware Frequencies by Levels.
I and III, La Venta.
Buff
A
A
A
A
B
B
B
C
C
D
A
A
A
A
A
B
B
B
B
B
C
C
C
C
C
D
D
D
D
D
E
E
E
E
E

:B
:C
:D
:E
:C
:D
: E
:D
:E
:E
: 1
: 2
: 3
: 4
: 5
: 1
: 2
: 3
: 4
: 5
: 1
: 2
: 3
: 4
: 5
: 1
: 2
: 3
: 4
: 5
: 1
: 2
: 3
: 4
: 5

2
1
5
4
1
3
2
4
3
1
12
14
6
4
0
14
16
8
6
2
13
15
7
5
1
17
19
11
9
5
16
18
10
8
4

Brown
4
2
1
7
2
3
11
1
9
8
8
10
18
28
39
12
14
22
32
43
10
12
20
30
41
9
11
19
29
40
1
3
11
21
32

Fine Paste
6
4
7
2
2
1
8
3
6
9
19
23
23
31
38
25
29
29
37
44
23
27
27
35
42
26
30
30
38
45
17
21
21
29
36

Trenches

Total Similarity Index
12
7
13
13
5
7
21
8
18
18
39
47
47
63
77
51
59
59
75
89
46
54
54
70
84
52
60
60
76
90
34
42
42
58
72

188
193
187
187
195
193
179
192
182
182
161
153
153
137
123
149
141
141
125
111
154
146
146
130
116
148
140
140
124
110
166
158
158
142
128

Texas A~’cheological Society

280

Brown

Buff
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
3
3
4

:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:

2
3
4
5
3
4
5
4
5
5

Fine Paste

2
10
20
31
8
18
29
10
21
11

2
6
8
12
8
10
14
2
6
4

Total Similarity Index
192
180
160
138
184
164
142
180
158
178

8
20
40
62
16
36
58
20
42
22

4
4
12
19
0
8
15
8
15
7
TABLE III

Ordered Matrix for Trenches I and III, La Venta
A
A
B
C
D
E
1
2
3
4
5

B
188

188
193
187
187
161
153
153
137
123

195
193
179
149
141
141
125
111

C

D

E

1

2

3

4

5

193
195

187
193
192

187
179
182
182

161
149
154
148
166

153
141
146
140
158
192

153
141
146
140
158
180
184

137
125
130
124
142
160
164
180

123
111
116
110
128
138
142
158
178

192
182
154
146
146
130
123

182
148
140
140
124
110

166
158
158
142
128

192
180
160
138

184
164
142

180
158

178

It is seen from the matrix (Table III) that Collection A of
Trench I deviates in almost every instance from the ideal pattern, and that the indices are scattered irregularly in the
column and row pertaining to this collection. For this reason
the collection is regarded as suspicious and excluded from consideration. This is confirmed by Drucker (1952, pp. 127-128) :
"It is apparent that the two uppermost levels have a greater
probable error, which we may interpret here as including the
effect of destructive soil action, as well as error of sampling .... "
The highest index of similarity between the two trenches is
between Collection E of Trench I and Collection 1 of Trench III.
From the stratigraphy it is known that Collection E is the bot-

Time and Types in Archeological Analysis

281

tom level and Collection 1 the top level of their respective
trenches, hence it may be concluded that Trench III represents
an earlier occupation than Trench I.
Several other conclusions may be drawn from an examination
of the matrix. The similarity index between the adjacent levels
of the two trenches is the lowest figure along the diagonal, suggesting a lapse of time between the final occupation at Trench
III and the first occupation at Trench I. Although it is not possible to determine the length of time between the two occupations, it may be noted that the similarity index for Collections
E : 1 is about the same magnitude as the indices for Collections 2 : 4 or 3 : 5 within Trench III. From this fact it may
be suggested that the equivalent of only one or two occupation
levels is missing between the two trenches. As Drucker has
noted (1952, pp. 129-132), the presence of the same ceramics
throughout both trenches definitely points to a single culture
which gradually underwent small internal changes. It is significant to point out that the success of the seriation demonstrafes the validity of Drucker’s ceramic typology.
An additional inference may be drawn from the matrix. It
is evident that the similarity between the levels in Trench I
is higher than in Trench III. This suggests that the occupation
represented in Trench I was of shorter duration but of greater
intensity, or underwent considerably slower change than the
occupation found in Trench III.
The conclusions reached on the basis of the Brainerd-Robinson technique of seriation may now be compared with Drucker’s results. Rather than relying on internal evidence, he turns
to a comparison with the sequence at the Tres Zapotes site, in
the state of Veracruz, Mexico, as a basis for his conclusions.
In order to determine the sequence of the trenches, "On the
basis of the sherds alone, this would be very problematical,
were it not for the evidence of the nature of the trends of
ceramic changes at the related site of Tres Zapotes" (Drucker,
1952, p. 131). If Trench I is considered later than Trench III,
then the increase of Fine Paste wares from early to late matches
the trend at Tres Zapotes in the Middle Period. Furthermore,
"It seems possible that an unconformity exists between our two
sections as they now stand" (Drucker, 1952, p. 131).

Texas Archeological Society

282

Virtually all of Drucker’s conclusions are confirmed independently through the application of the Brainerd-Robinson
seriation technique, a point of no small importance to archeological theory. It is especially significant that the chronological
sequence of Trenches III and I was determined by this seriational technique, without recourse to comparative evidence. This
underscores the methodological point that internal evidence is
more dependable and important, and should be exploited as the
first line of investigation, before turning to tenuous comparatire correlations. In the present case, for instance, there is no
way as yet to verify the hypothesis that two different sites
such as La Venta and Tres Zapotes underwent parallel developments, so that Drucker’s basis for the relative chronology
of the two trenches is indeed a shaky one. In other words, internal chronology should be developed first where this is possible, as a basis for external comparisons, rather than vice
versa. In this way the investigator will be on much firmer
ground when he undertakes the reconstruction of culture sequences.
V
Some of the advantages of the Brainerd-Robinson statistical
technique of seriation may now be briefly summarized.
.

It is easy to use and provides a convenient means for
handling large quantfties of data. In his unpublished
work on northern Yucatan, Mexico, Brainerd seriated by
this technique some 345 different ceramic types, features,
and other associated artifacts.

2.

It permits the archeologist to establish a very sensitive
and finely-scaled internal chronology in his materials, and
permits more accurate assignment of a collection within
a sequence than would otherwise be possible.

3.

It can serve as a check on stratigraphy, which at times
may be difficult to establish within an excavation or between two excavations. It would be particularly useful for
tracing cultural developments within natural strata which
were subdivided into artificial levels during excavation.

4.

It serves as a test of the artifact typology developed by
the investigator. Once the deposits have been seriated, the

Ti~e and Types in Archeological Analysis

283

lens-like history of each type may be extracted as a byproduct.
°

Finally, as demonstrated in the analysis of the La Venta
sequence, the technique can often be made to yield very
vaIuable insights into the nature of culture change within
a site.

As the work of both Brainerd and Dixon has shown, there
are many promising avenues of investigation in the use of this
technique which need to be explored. The potentialities of the
technique have as yet only been partially developed, and much
remains to be done. It is hoped that the presentation in this
paper will contribute to the more general understanding of the
technique and perhaps stimulate its more extensive use. Only
thereby can the results of the technique receive their needed
testing, and growth take place in the body of interpretative
knowledge, both of which are necessary for the more significant
application of the technique. As Brainerd concluded (1951, p.
312), "Techniques for the utilization of the numerical data
produced by the procedure are the present need and these must
be evolved by archeologists."

REFERENCES CITED
Betous, R. D.
1953. The Central California Chronological Sequence Reexamined. American Antiquity, Vol. 18, No. 4, pp. 341-353.
Brainerd, George W.
1951. The Place of Chronological Ordering in Archaeological Analysis. American Antiquity, Vol. 16, No. 4, pp.
301-333.
Dixon, Keith A.
1956. Archaeological Objectives and Artifact Sorting
Techniques: a Re-examination of the Snaketown Sequence.
Western Anthropology, No. 3, pp. 1-33.
Drucker, Philip
1952. La Venta, Tabasco: A Study of Olmec Ceramics and
Art. Bur. Amer. Ethnol., Bull. 153.

Texas Archeological Society

Ford, James A., and Gordon R. Willey
1949. Surface Survey of the Viru Valley, Peru. Anthrop.
Papers, American Museum of Natural History, Vol. 43,
Part 1.
Robinson, W. S.
1951. A Method for Chronologically Ordering Archaeological Deposits. American Antiquity, Vol. 16, No. 4, pp.
293-301.
Escuela Nacional de
Antropologia e Historia
M~xico, D. F., M~xico

NOTES
CLEAR FORK GOUGES FOUND IN OKLAHOMA

One distinctive and common artifact found throughout many
areas in Texas is known as the Clear Fork gouge. It has been
studied and described by Cyrus N. Ray, who named it after
the Clear Fork River near Abilene, Texas, where he had collected a large number of specimens (Ray, 1941). In our survey
of Oklahoma archeology (Bell and Baerreis, 1951), this artifact was not recognized as being found in Oklahoma. Since that
date, however, several examples have been collected, and it is
now evident that the Clear Fork gouge does occur in some
sections of the state.
Examples of the Clear Fork gouge have been collected by
James Mayfield of Norman, Oklahoma, at several sites along
the north shore of Lake Texoma in Marshall County. Three
specimens have also been noted from sites close to Lake Murray
in Love County, Oklahoma. Mr. Elmer Craft of Eldorado,
Oklahoma, has collected several specimens from certain sites in
Greer County, southwestern Oklahoma. No specimens have thus
far been noted from the eastern or northern sections of the
state. From our present knowledge, the Clear Fork gouge appears to have a distribution throughout the southern part of the
state, extending from the central area westward as far as Greer
County.
Fig. 66 illustrates examples of the Clear Fork gouge found
in Oklahoma. All of the specimens have been collected on the
surface, and the associated assemblage cannot now be demonstrated. Most of the specimens are made from some variety
of quartzite, usually fairly fine grained, and they exhibit relatively coarse workmanship. Some specimens have a worn cutting edge and one (Fig. 66, I) has grinding on the back or
flattened surface. Medium sized specimens (Fig. 66, E) are the
most commonly represented.
Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954) report the presence of Clear
Fork gouges in the following complexes throughout Texas:

¯ ! ~ ~ ~ ~ ~: ili~ ~i¸ ~i~ ~:~ ’,~p~:’ ~~:¸,,~........
~ ~:~.......:
~ : ~’ !i~ ~ :.~ i~!

Fig. 66. Examples of the Clear Fork gouge found in Oklahoma. A-G,
K, Greer County; H, I, J, Marshall County.

Texas Archeological Society
Southern Methodist University
Box 165
Dallas~ Texas 75222
Notes

287

Carrollton Focus, Elam Focus, Edwards Plateau Aspect, Falcon
Focus and the East Texas Aspect. Thus, in Texas the gouge
appears to be distributed throughout most of central Texas
from the Rio Grande in the south to the Red River in the north.
The finds in Oklahoma extend this area northward beyond the
Red River.
The age of the Clear Fork gouge is not clearly established.
The estimated age based upon the associated complex as suggested by Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954) would give a long
time span from around 4000 or 5000 B. C. to about 1000 A. D.
Certainly the gouge is more characteristic of the early hunting
and gathering peoples designated as Archaic than the later
more sedentary, pottery manufacturing cultures. The scattered
finds made in Oklahoma do not aid materially in answering
questions concerning chronology. The Clear Fork gouge, however, is not an integral part of any Oklahoma complex that has
been described up to this date. From other surface materials,
such as large projectile points, heavy scrapers, choppers, rough
knives, etc., found on sites containing the gouge, one would suspect it to be associated with some sort of a non-pottery Archaic
complex resembling those found in Texas.
The finding of Clear Fork gouges in Oklahoma adds to
knowledge of artifact distribution in the southern Plains
points toward cultural relationships within that area. In
dition, their existence directs attention to undefined and
studied complexes of the region.

our
and
adun-

References Cited
Bell, Robert E., and David A. Baerreis
1951. A Survey of Oklahoma Archeology. Bulletin, Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vot. 22, pp.
7-100.
Crook, Wilson W., Jr., and R. K. Harris
1952. Trinity Aspect of the Archaic Horizon: The Carrollton and Elam Foci. Bulletin, Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 23, pp. 7-38.

288

Texas Archeological Society

Ray, Cyrus N.
1941. The Various Types of the Clear Fork Gouge. Bulletin, Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
Vol. 13, pp. 152-162.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Robert E. Bell
Department of Anthropology
University of Oklahoma
Norman, Oklahoma
A CARBON-14 DATE FROM TRANS-PECOS TEXAS
During a study of Val Verde County cave material made last
year (Schuetz, 1956), a box of charcoal labeled "Zone B" of
Eagle Cave was found. With radiocarbon readings having been
obtained on a comparable culture in Coahuila, Mexico, a dating
from Trans-Pecos Texas was needed to act as a focal point for
future work. The Exploration Department of Humble Oil and
Refining Company graciously consented to run the test and in
May of this year the results were sent to us. The sample (Run
No. 317) indicated an age of 4550_+_130 years. This date corresponds favorably with those obtained from Frightful Cave,
Coahuila (Taylor, 1956) and would fall somewhere between
Taylor’s Coahuila Complex beginning at 6170+--300 and his
upper level of culture beginning at 3620+350.
The close age datings and the seemingly related cultural components so far described from the two areas help substantiate
the theory of a widespread "Desert Culture." It should be noted
that the sandal fragments found in Eagle Cave were constructed by the same techniques as those described from the Shumla
Caves (Schuetz, 1956). The sandals illustrated from the Coahuila Complex (Taylor, 1956) appear to be identical to those
of the Pecos River Focus. Furthermore, the sandals found in
Eagle Cave were from the two uppermost zones, A and B,
closely correlating age and sandal distribution of the Coahuila
and Pecos River Foci.

Notes

289

Work to be done in the Trans-Pecos area in the near future
should establish the relationship to the Coahuila complexes
more thoroughly.
References Cited
Schuetz, Mardith K.
1956. An analysis of Vat Verde County Cave Material.
Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 27, pp. 129-160.
Taylor, Walter W.
1956. Some Implications of the Carbon-14 Dates from a
Cave in Coahuita, Mexico. Bulletin, Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 27, pp. 215-234.
Mardith K. Schuetz
Witte Museum
San Antonio, Texas

BOOK REVIEWS
Ancient Man in North America, by H. M. Wormington. Denver Museum
of Natural History, Popular Series No. 4, 4th ed., fully revised. Denver,
Colorado, 1957. 322 pp., 72 figs. $3.50 paper bound, $5.00 cloth bound.
This is the fourth edition of Wormington’s well-known book, which has
been out of print for several years. Since knowledge of the earliest human
occupation of North America has increased rapidly since 1949, the publication date of the third edition, the new edition has been extensively
revised and much enlarged. The comprehensiveness and high quality of
previous editions have been maintained. The more recent early man discoveries are summarized and critically evaluated, and all pertinent radiocarbon age determinations are included. The illustrations are more numerous than in previous editions, and they are also much better. The
bibliography, which includes publications in the early man field through
1956, has now grown to nearly 600 items.
In this edition the archeological materials are treated as representing
three early cultural traditions, which are designated Paleo-eastern, Paleowestern, and Paleo-northern. The Paleo-eastern tradition includes the industries of the big-game hunting groups east of the Rocky Mountains, and
the Paleo-western those of foraging groups west of the Rockies. The
Paleo-northern tradition covers the earliest known industries of Alaska
and northern Canada.
Members of the Texas Archeological Society will find in this book
useful summaries of the more significant early man sites in Texas--Bee
County, Lewisville, Lipscomb Bison Quarry, Lone Wolf Creek, Lubbock,
Miami, Plainview, and Scharbauer (locus of the Midland man discovery),
as well as references to a number of the lesser sites. Society members
will also find useful a special section describing and illustrating the various types of early projectile points. Each type, however, is illustrated by
only one specimen, which unfortunately tells nothing about the range of
variation accepted for each type; but numerous illustrations elsewhere in
the book help to correct this deficiency. Attention should be called to one
regrettable error. The specimens used to illustrate the Angostura point
(see Figs. 45 and 71) are indistinguishable frmn Plainview points. As
Wormington’s book will be widely read and used, this slip is likely to result in considerable confusion.
Wormington’s new edition is clearly written, authoritative, and very
up-to-date. It is excellent in every respect and is an absolute mu.st for all
students of North American archeology.
T. N. Campbell
The University of Texas
The Testimony of the Spade, by Geoffrey Bibby. Alfred A. Knopf, New
York, 1956. xviii+414 pp., index, 32 plates, 61 drawings, 11 maps. $6.75.
A complaint that one frequently hears in archeological circles is that
there exist comparatively few comprehensive yet simplified summaries
of the archeology of the various areas of the world. When one wishes to
acquire merely an introductory or general acquaintance with the archeology of some particular region and with the investigators who have
worked there, he must devote many hours in poring over numerous books
and dusty journals which, as often as not, are quite difficult to obtain.
Many people, particularly amateurs, find it very difficult to devote this

Book, Reviews

291

much time to such research, but would nevertheless like to be able to gain
a knowledge of the archeology of regions beside their own, particularly of
prehistoric Europe, the land in which modern archeological research was
initiated.
The .Testi~wny of the Spade, a recen~ publication by Geoffrey Bibby of
Prehistoric Museum, Aarhus, Denmark, is an attempt to present in an
interesting manner and readable style a condensation of the current
European archeological picture through brief sketches of the investigators, past and present, whose labors have led to the formation of the
chronology, methodology, and theory of the area.
The book is divided into four parts which cerrespond to the four distinct
European chronological and cultural sequences: (1) life before and during the ice ages, (2) life during the time in which hunters spread north
to the lands left bare by the retreating glaciers, (3) the coming of agriculturists and a settled way of life, and (4) life during the period of
Eastern influence marked by the introduction of the art of metallurgy.
Step by step throughout the four sections Bibby tracks the development
of method and idea by means of describing the accomplishments of men
like Thomsen, De Perthes, Pengelly, De Mortillet, Worsaae, and many
others. Of particular interest to the American reader is the fascinating
insight which the book provides in*~o relatively recent European research
and investigation, including pollen analysis, varve chronology, and other
methods for dating which have received little attention in America. Also
of interest are the results of recent research such as the work done by
Alfred Rust on the Ahrensburgian and Hamburgian cultures of Germany,
and by Zdzislaw Rajewski at the Polish Iron Age settlement of Biskupin,
to cite only two cases.
Perhaps the greatest merit of the book is that it presents for the reader
certain of the problems with which each individual investigator has been
confronted, and describes in some detail the methods and procedures employed by that individual in attempting to solve these problems. By a
scrutiny of the trials and tribulations of these great researchers the reader is presented with certain comparative information on archeological
problem solving’, both in regard to theory and method, which can be advantageously used in his own particular situation and area. If for no
other reason than this, The T’esti~wny of the Spade is a valuable work
for amateur and professional alike.
Perhaps due to the great time span and areal expanse which the book
attempts to cover, a certain disunity in the material presented can be
noted and the reader is sometimes not quite certain of the temporal
position or cultural affinity of certain sites or finds being described by
the author. Nevertheless, the work has succeeded, through a utilization
of the historic-descriptive approach, in giving a general summary of the
very broad subject of European prehistory, at the same time retaining
a simplicity in presentation which greatly aids in understanding the
material.
LeRoy Johnson, Jr.
The University of Texas

The Pueblo Indians in Story, Song, and Dance. Stories, songs, and
dances by Swift Eagle; text by Charles Gallenkamp; illustrations by
Yeffe Kimball. Book-Records, Inc., 680 Fifth Ave., New York, 1955. 24
unnumbered pages and one 10-inch 33~ r.p.m, record or two extended-play
45 r.p.m, records. $5.00.

292

Texas A~’cheological Society

"This, the fourth in a series of Soundbooks, is again an effort to integrate the several dimensions of an important subject. It is an attempt
through word, color and sound to create for us a sense of presence m
the world of the Pueblo Indian." Editor Sidney Reisberg has been very
successful in attaining his objective. Each of the three diverse media
which form the book has an important share in its total achievement,
with Swift Eagle’s recorded stories and songs as the principal focal point.
For the book’s text and paintings Dr. Reisberg has selected an anthropologist and an artist who are able to present Pueblo Indian life in an interesting and entertaining manner; their talents have been capably eraployed as a complement to the performance of Swift Eagle.
The long history of the Pueblo Indians, both as they themselves tell it
and as archeology shows it to have happened, is presented clearly and
succintly in the text by Mr. Gallenkamp. Beginning with the settlement
of wandering Indian groups in the canyon country of the southern Rockies,
the story moves rapidly to the discovery of corn and the flowering of culture in the cliff cities, and then to the settlement of the Rio Grande
area. The account is more than mere history, however. The basic values
of Pueblo Indian life are developed and presented in the story as the
outgrowth of an agricultural people’s exceptionally close contact with
their environment. "Long ago the gods had spoken to their ancestors and
told them that everything on earth had within it a living spirit. No one
could live without these spirits to help them .... So the Indians learned
to respect nature, and to worship the gods." An account is given of the
various events in the agricultural cycle of a typical Rio Grande village,
culminating in the Green Corn Dance which honors the Corn Mother.
Delightful full-color illustrations by Yeffe Kimball decorate the cover
of the book and are scattered throughout the text. Her paintings flow
freely across the pages, unhindered by frames or borders, to show Pueblo
houses, kivas, and people in fascinating and accurate detail. Perhaps the
best of all the paintings is that of the Green Corn Dance in which details
like these should be noted: the Navajo-type clothing and hair-style of
the chorus and drummer; the l~astotcoma carried by the leading dancer;
the tablitas and ~a’ntas of the girl dancers; the Koshari on the rooftop
of a nearby house.
On the high fidelity record which accompanies this Soundbook, Swift
Eagle can be heard chanting, singing, and dancing as he tells four stories.
Interesting and informative background details on each tale are given
in the last few pages of the book, but the texts of the recorded selections
are not printed because they are "meant for listening, not for reading."
The longest, and in many ways the most interesting, story is that of
"Kuo-Haya, the Bear Boy," which occupies one entire side of the ten-inch
33~ r.p.m, record. This tale concerns a young boy whose father has failed
to care for him adequately. Little Kuo-Haya runs off into the woods, where
bears find him and take him to their cave. When the village people discover the reason for the boy’s disappearance, they refuse to speak to the
father, and the medicine man orders him to bring" the boy back to the
village. Ashamed of himself and realizing" now that he must do right, the
father twice tries but fails to get Kuo-Haya away from the animals.
Finally the medicine man intercedes with the bears and the boy is rescued.
The story is especially interesting because the attitudes and actions of
the people involved reflect many of the values of Pueblo Indian culture.
To cite only one example, the procedure of social ostracism which the
village people use to shame the father and to force him to go in search
of his son illustrates the Pueblo principal of social control through peaceful coercion.

Book Reviews

293

Shorter tales are those of "Hunting the Fox," "The Laughing Horse,"
and "The Buffalo Dance." Swift Eagle gives a few brief introductory remarks for each, then dances and sings (in his own language, not in
English) the song which accompanies the story; in "The Buffalo Dance"
his six-year-old son is also heard. It is interesting to note that of these
three songs, the latter two reflect considerable Plains influence. Swift
Eagle also chants (again in his own language) three songs of which only
fragments were heard during the telling of the story of Kuo-Haya: "The
Story-.Teller Song," "The Medicine-Man Chant," and "The Green Corn
Dance." It is regrettable that the editor mentions neither the Pueblo Indian village which Swift Eagle is from, nor the language he speaks. Such
information might help to explain the strong Plains influence to be noted
in some of the songs and ceremonies.
This Soundbook is not aimed at any particular age group and it has
much to offer both children and adults. Small children will enjoy the simple tales, colorful pictures, and rhythmic songs for their own sake. Older
readers will find an interesting and authentic glimpse into a life-way
very different from their own. Specialists in folk-lore, linguistics, and
music will discover a valuable source of original material in the recording,
and those interested in cultural dynamics or psychology will find data for
study in Swift Eagle’s stories. It is cerLainly to be hoped that the BookRecord company will issue Soundbooks on other American Indian groups
which will be as well done, interesting, and full of authentic details as
this one.
Nancy Troike
The University of Texas

Sun Circles and Human Hands: The Southeastern Indians--Art and
Indus~:ry, edited by Emma Lila Fundaburk and Mary Douglass Fundaburk
Foreman. Published by Emma Lila Fundaburk, Luverne, Alabama. 232
pp., including 160 plates, text, acknowledgements, bibliography, index.

$7.50.
This unusual book is a storehouse of pictorial information on the arts
and crafts of the Indians of the southeastern United States, presented in
proper context of time and culture. It is packed with excellent illustrations of specimens, and the accompanying textual material is in large
measure quoted from authoritative published sources in the fields of
archeology and ethnohistory. Miss Fundaburk is responsible for the research and wl’iting’, while the design and layout are the work of Mrs.
Foreman. They may rightfully be proud of the job they have done and
the contribution they have made toward the study of Southeastern antiquities.
The material is arranged in nine chapters. Chapter 1, by Miss Fundaburk, is a competent eight-page summary of the native history of the
Southeast, oriented around the development of arts and industries and
thus setting the culture-historical stage for the material to be presented
later in the book. Chapter 2, "Native Trade," is largely quoted from
Myer and from Swanton, with some accompanying illustrative material.
Chapter 3, "Ceremonial Complex," is derived from the famous paper on
the Southern Cult by Waring and Holder in the American Anthropologis~
(1945). In these three chapters, text predominates over illustrations.
Thereafter, however, pictorial material completely dominates the book,
and Chapters 4 through 9 consist mostly of page after page filled with
pictures, each "plate" actually being made up of several illustrations with
accompanying text. For the most part, each chapter is devoted to artifacts
of a particular kind of material--stone, pottery, wood, and so forth.

294

Texas Archeological Society

The assembling of this great bulk of material into coherent form under
one cover represents a monumental task. This is a new venture for the
editors, but their inexperience is visible only in matters of style, which
in no way detract from the merit of the book as a reference work. Perhaps the only major criticism that might be leveled at the volume is
that it should have been made two or three times as big, so that the
wealth of material might have been included without the crowding necessary in the 200-odd pages of this volume. But on the other hand we should
be grateful that the material was crowded in as it is, since it permits the
book to be sold at a considerably lower price than is usually to be expected in publications of this sort.
The reader must not expect this to be a textbook of Southeastern
archeology, although a great deal of information on the subject may be
gained from it. Neither is it an art volume of the sort produced by
d’Harnoncourt, Kelemen, and others, since this book is not itself primarily a work of art as those are--although many of the illustrations
are real esthetic delights. And certainly the reader will not find this to
be a "relic book," filled with prehistoric objects presented for their supposed rarity and romantic import, and for the prestige of the collectors
who own them. No, this book is, without pretension, a thoroughly annorated and thoroughly impressive reference work; a picture book on the
arts and industries of the Indians east of the Plains and south of the
Ohio. The typography is attractive, the photographs are excellent, the
index is exhaustive, and in current terms the price of $7.50 makes the
volume a bargain.
People primarily interested in Texas archeology will be disappointed
that the Caddoan archeological area is scarcely represented except by
the famous Spiro site in eastern Oklahoma. Nevertheless, as a general
presentation of Southeastern antiquities, this book will probably have an
important place on the reference shelves of most students interested in
the prehistory of eastern North America.
E. M. D.

A M~nual for Neanderthals, by H. Mewhinney. University of Texas
Press, Austin, 1957. 122 pp., 20 illus. $3.50.
Here is an informative book and a thoroughly delightful one. Mr. MeWhinney, a columnist for the Houston Post and a T.A.S. member, has
been working flint for the fun of it, and his mind has been far from idle
while his hands were at work. Here he sets down his observations an the
art of flint working as an entertaining and rewarding hobby, a handicraft
which also provides a few insights into the way prehistoric men behaved
and thought.
It would not be accurate to call this a textbook, because it is net as
exhaustive--nor as dull--as a textbook nmst be. But still it is something
of a text. Actually the book achieves two ends. First, it presents simple
and practical lessons in the principles of chipping flint. Second, it presents a series of sparkling short essays on various matters associated
with flint-working.
There are seventeen chapters, most of them only five or six pages long.
After introductory remarks about why the flaking of flint can be a fascinating subject, there is a brief and clear synopsis of the Stone Age, explained in human terms while still retaining accuracy. Mr. Mewhinney
apparently could not be cold-blooded if he had to be, and this chapter
typifies the book in exuding warmth and humanity on every page, as well
as informed good-humor and enthusiasm.

Book Revie~vs

295

Subsequent chapters touch on a variety of subjects, of which a few
examples must suffice: the nature of flint; how percussion and pressure
flaking are accomplished; the hammer-and-punch combination in flaking;
"Fire and Wet Straw," a chapter exploding the myth of the heat-and-adrop-of-water technique of flaking flint; the hammerstone and the cutting
edge as the foundations of the tool equipment of mankind; the craftsmanship involved in making Clovis and Folsom fluted points; a skeptical
look at "Some Beautiful Hypotheses;" observations on fakes and how
to detect some of them; and, finally, "Remembering Boucher de Perthes"
--a tribute to the spirit of the minor French customs officer who, more
than a century ago, discovered the evidence fbr the existence of Paleolithic
Man and hammered away at entrenched scholarly dogma for some twenty
years before finally convincing the "experts" that his evidence in the
earth was stronger than their evidence in books. "I take some comfort,"
says Mr. !Yiewhinney in closing, "in the memory of Boucher de Perthes.
He stands forth as an example to all men in his wiilingness to look at
the evidence with the naked eye and to trust in nothing but the evidence,
doubting all traditional opinion. I hope that [those] who chance to read
this book will refuse to believe anything I have told them about the nature
of flint. Take my word for nothing. Try it yourself. Go get out a chunk
of flint and see how it works." Here speaks a scholarly and scientific
mind.
A useful reading list is included at the back of the book, and there is
an index. Perhaps the major inadequacy, in this reviewer’s mind, is in
the matter of illustrations: there are twenty of them in the book, and
they are very good, but there should have been many, many more. And
it is not explained just which of the illustrated artifacts were made by
the author (we presume most of them were) and which were aboriginal.
$3.50 is a lot to pay for a 122-page book; but it is not often that one
is written with such down-to-earth force, clarity, good humor, and command over the English language. Archeologists (armchair and otherwise), do-it-yourself arrowpoint makers, and lovers of good English prose
will enjoy it. It speaks with some authority; it is scholarly without being
pedantic; it reads well and re-reads well. As an expression of the inquiring mind in action, the kind of mind that makes the distinction between
"scientist" and "layman" relatively meaningless, A Ma~7.ual for Neander’thals is a real gem.
E. M. D.

THE 1957 ANNUAL MEETING
The 28th Annual Meeting of the Texas Archeological Society
was held at the Children’s Museum in Fort Worth on November
8, 9, and 10, 1957, with the Children’s Museum and the Tarrant
County Archeological Society acting as hosts. There were 90
persons registered.
Business Meeting
,!

The Business Meeting was called to order by President R. K.
Harris at 8:30 P.M. in the Museum. In the absence of the Secretary, Jack T. Hughes was appointed Secretary Pro Tern.
The report of the Editor, E. Mort Davis, who was unable to
attend because of illness, was read by Edward B. Jelks and was
discussed and approved. The report of the Secretary-Treasurer,
Henry F. Sturgis, who was absent because of business obligations, was read by T. N. Campbell and was discussed and approved. (These reports are presented on later pages.) A motion
to direct the Editor to publish the newsletter, Texas Archeology,
as often as finances permit at the discretion of the Editor and
Secretary-Treasurer, was carried after some discussion. A motion to re-issue the Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology in a revised and expanded form as an issue of the Bulletin,
was discussed at length and was tabled. It was moved to have
the President appoint a finance commitee to make recommendations to the group at a second meeting on Nov. 9. The President
appointed W. W. Crook, Jr., Edward B. Jelks, and Fred Wendorf to the Finance Committee. Richard E. Johnson and Fred
Wendorf discussed the State Archeological Commission Bill
which passed the Senate in the last legislative session but did
not reach the floor of the House. The meeting adjourned at
10 P.M.
The Business Meeting re-convened at 1:50 P.M. November 9.
Richard E. Johnson presided. Fred Wendorf, Chairman of the
Nominating Committee, offered the following slate of officers
for 1958, who were elected by acclamation:
President : Richard E. Johnson (Dallas).

The 1957 Annucd Meeting

297

President Emeritus: Cyrus N. Ray (Abilene).
Active Vice-President : Jack T. Hughes (Canyon).
Secretary-Treasurer: Mardith K. Schuetz (San Antonio)
Editor: E. Mort Davis (Austin).
Directors: T. N. Campbell (Austin) ; R. K. Harris (Dallas) ;
W. C. Holden (Lubbock).
Regional Vice-Presidents: C. E. Bissell (Midland); John A.
Corley (Hobbs, N. M.); W. L. Everett (Conroe); Alex D.
Krieger (Riverside, Calif.); Robert L. Stephenson (Lincoln,
Nebraska); Henry F. Sturgis (Austin) ; Joe Ben Wheat (Boulder, Colo.) ; Sam Whiteside (Tyler).
Trustees: Robert E. Bell (Norman, Okla.) ; W. W. Crook, Jr.
(Dallas); O. L. Sims (San Angelo) ; Charlie R. Steen (Santa
Fe, N. M.); Floyd V. Studer (Amarillo); Frank H. Watt
(Waco) ; Clarence H. Webb (Shreveport, La.); R. B. Worthington (Houston).
The report of the Finance Committee was read by W. W.
Crook, Jr., and general discussion followed. The following actions were taken. (1) The Secretary-Treasurer was authorized
to spend a maximum of $600 at her discretion. (2) Approximately $100 was appropriated for miscellaneous office expenses.
(3) Approximately $1800 was authorized for Volume 28 of
the Bulletin. (4) Approximately $1500 was authorized for a
Field and Laboratory Manual to take the place of the Bulletin
in the year published. (5) It was voted to have a nominal registration fee to help defray financial expenses of the Annua!
Meeting, beginning in 1958. (6) The Society extended its
thanks to the Children’s Museum of Fort Worth and the Tarrant County Archeologica! Society for their hospitality. The
Business Meeting was adjourned at about 3 P.M.
Formal Session
The formal session of the Annual Meeting was held in the
morning and afternoon of Saturday, November 9. The following
papers were given:
"Recent Archeology of the Dallas Area," by W. W. Crook, Jr.,
and R. K. Harris.

298

Texas A~’cheological Society

"Progress Report on Work at the Ferrells Bridge ReserYoir,
East Texas," by E. Mott Davis (read by E. B. Jelks).
"A Transitional Caddo Burial Site, Upshur County, Texas,"
by Buddy C. Jones.
"Hamm Creek: An Archaic Site in Johnson County, Texas,"
by R. E. Forrester.
"Excavation of Cantonment Burgwin, New Mexico," by Fred
Wendorf.
"Field Identification of Cherts and flints," by Oren F. Evans.
"Progress Report on Work at the McGee Bend Reservoir,
East Texas," by Edward B. Jelks.
’(A Burial Near Aledo, Parker County, Texas," by Roy Padgett.
"Some Problems and Suggestions in the Field of American
Archeology," by Carl B. Compton.
Other Activities
On Sunday morning, November 10, there was a field trip
to the Harem Creek site, with 50 people participating. Also on
Sunday morning a symposium on projectile point typology was
held at the Museum. (A report on this symposium by Robert
E. Bell, including recommendations for procedure in adopting
new types, has been published in the Society newsletter, Texas
Archeology, Vol. 2, No. 1, March, 1958; and also in the Oklahoma Anthropological Society Newsletter, Vol. 6, No. 6, De~
cember, 1957.)
REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-TREASURER TO THE
ANNUAL MEETING OF THE SOCIETY,
NOVEMBER 8, 1957
This is your secretary-treasurer’s report. It begins with a
lament because it was not possible for me to be here to give it
in person. Because I cannot be with you today to discuss certain items that I believe to be important to the Society, I have
chosen to include my personal views on these items in this reportlthus making it a bit longer than normally would be the
case.

Report of the Secretary-Treasurer

299

First, I would like to thank all Society members for their
splendid cooperation throughout the year. The correspondence,
as well as business and financial affairs, of a group such as this
are appreciable, as you might expect, involving last year approximately 2,500 incoming letters and 1000 checks. At the
same time there were issued about 2,400 letters, 1,200 Newsletters and almost 850 Bulletins. Throughout all of this activity there have been only a scant half-dozen or so instances where
questions arose and those few cases were resolved with a
minimum of confusion and, I believe, to the satisfaction of those
involved. This certainly speaks well for the disposition, understanding and patience of all Society members, and confirms
the belief that archeologists are nice people.
In this same vein I would like to extend my own and the
Society’s thanks to Dr. T. N. Campbell, Head of the University
of Texas Department of Anthropology, Dr. E. Mort Davis, our
Editor and Research Archeologist at the University and Mr.
Edward B. Jelks, River Basin Surveys Archeologist for the
National Park Service. All were unstinting in their help in
answering your technical questions and in providing secretarial help in typing all the correspondence. To the Anthropology Department of the University also goes our thanks for providing office space and furniture, storage cabinets, file cases, and
many other varied instances of help and courtesy. In fact, the
handling of the affairs of this office would have been impossible
without their continued assistance.
And now for the future: During the past few years the Society membership has grown from about 350 in 1955, to 400
in 1956 and to a present enrollment of about 500. This growth
is of course commendable, and its continuance is sought after
and needed. However, the clerical work associated with a group
of even our present size is greater than can be handled sarisfactorily on a gratis basis as has been the custom to date.
Instead, it is my opinion that the time has come for the Society
to employ a paid stenographer to assist the secretary-treasurer.
It is believed that the Society must be prepared to pay about
$500 per year for the service it needs. This outlay will impose
something of a burden on the Society; however, it will at the
same time permit much more efficient handling of the work.

300

Texas A ~’cheological Society

This is a much needed step if the Society is to grow and increase its activities.
This year your editor, Dr. Mort Davis, has started a new
feature in the newsletter, Texas Archeology. Only two trial issues have been made so far, to sound out your reaction to the
idea. I can report that the reception has been favorable. The
Society should consider therefore the regular issuance of the
newsletters on a more frequent basis, perhaps every other
month. The cost of these issues is about $25-$30 each, most of
which is taken up by postage. A publication of this type is in
my opinion a very desirable thing offering a means for disseminating news, issuing announcements and discussing Society
affairs. It also offers the member who has the desire to write
for publication, but who has had no experience, a chance to
try his hand at something less formal than the annual Bulletin. It is my hope that the Society will see fit to continue this
publication and soon be able to afford the Newsletter as a
monthly organ.
A project of particular interest to me is the formation of a
lending library for the Society. Practically nothing concrete
has yet been done on this project, principally because of the
expense involved. It is brought up now for your consideration
so that, if approved, sufficient funds will be made available to
purchase books and get the project started. Probably $150 would
be enough to purchase 25-30 books during the first year. After
that perhaps $50 per year would be sufficient to keep it supplied
with new books. Charges for the loan of books could be scaled to
make the library self-sustaining, except for the purchase of the
new books. If this library meets with your approval, permission
should be granted the secretary-treasurer to appoint a librarian
to take over the resulting duties. I might add that a number
of members have inquired about a service such as this. It appears to me to be an admirable opportunity to render a group
service with very modest drain of Society funds.
A project of major importance has been started this year
by Mr. Jelks which, it is hoped, will result in another handbook. No doubt Mr. Jelks will discuss this with you in some
detail so I will not attempt a description here, other than to

Report of the Secretary-Treasurer

301

mention the subject which will be "field and laboratory techniques." There will be reference made later to our present Introductory Handbook with which you are all familiar, so to
avoid confusfon, I shall use the term "work book" hereafter
when referring to this new work of Mr. Jelks. We do not know
the cost of this project but at present something in the neighborhood of $1500 is visualized.
As you can see, your staff has not been idle in developing
ideas for broadening the activities of the Society. The rest is
largely up to you. If you approve of these plans then back
them up with all the help you can give. The very least, but
necessary, response all must make is to pay your dues. Those of
you with special abilities and training, especially those with
professional standing in archeology, should contribute as much
as possible of your knowledge through instructional articles.
And everyone is urged to back the Society by making an extended effort to increase the membership list. In that direction
---of increased membership--lies the greatest opportunity. The
addition of the next 250 members will increase the funds available for extra services by about $800 per year. This is the
equivalent of issuing a special bulletin every two years, or the
addition of a library of moving picture films, or underwriting
the publication of some important, but neglected, reports, or
any one of a dozen new activities.
All of this leads us naturally to the treasurer’s report--which
can be summarized by saying "fine." Actually, we started the
fiscal year with a bank balance of $1603 and ended with $2830.
(Our fiscal year ends September 30.) In addition the sum of
$1810 was paid out to retire the note taken out to finance our
1954 l~andbook. I’m sure this is good news for everyone. The
Handbook has been a highly successful venture; directly, by
returning a profit to the Society, and indirectly but more meaningfully, by introducing the Society to a wide and appreciative
audience. The increase in membership in recent years appears
to be almost entirely due to the Handbook. I think the members owe a vote of thanks to the authors and those unsung
heroes, the backers of our note. Of course we all know the
authors, Suhm, Krieger and Jelks; but let’s also remember
those members who were willing to back the venture in a very

302

Texas Archeological Society

real way, the co-signers--Floyd V. Studer of Amarillo, President of the Panhandle-Plains Historical Society; Wilson W.
Crook, Jr., President of the Crook Advertising agency in Dallas and long-time friend and member of T. A. S. ; W. C. Holden,
Director of the Museum at Texas Technological College; and
Alex D. Krieger, now Director of the Riverside Municipal Museum, California. A vote of appreciation is due these members
for a job well done.
As was mentioned, our bank balance as of September 30, 1957
was $2830. Since that time we have taken in an additional sum
of almost $1000 so that our present balance is approximately
$3800. Since only about 150 members have paid their 1957
dues to date, we may expect about 350 payments to be made
through the first half of 1958 for an additional $1750. We
therefore estimate our assets, by about July 1958, to be about
$5550 (3800+1750).
Let us now examine the program proposed earlier in the
light of these anticipated assets. The proposal included:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Paid Stenographer ....... $ 500
Library .................
150
Newsletter (6 issues) .....
180
New Workbook ........... 1500
$2330

To this must be added the cost of issuing this year’s Bulletin, Volume 28, estimated to be about $1800, as well as the
office running expenses for the first half of 1958, of about $100.
This brings our total outlay to $4230, leaving assets after paying for the entire program, of $1320 (5550-4230). This residue
plus the ’58 dues, which will be paid by the end of next year
should be more than adequate to meet the 1958 printing costs.
The picture could hardly be brighter--except for one item.
We have sold all copies of the Introductory Handbook and the
question must be settled whether or not to reissue it. Our editor, Dr. Davis, can give us the full story concerning the reissue, but it will suffice here to say that we can get 500 copies,
duplicating our present volume for approximately $3000. This

Report of the Secretary-Treasu~’er

303

is more money than we will have available--if the previous program is carried out. It is nay personal opinion, however, that
the Handbook is a valuable asset of the Society and should be
reissued. If this also becomes your wish, the following realignmerit of our program is suggested:
New Secretary ............. $ 500
Library ...................
150
Newsletters ................
180
Bulletin, Vol. 28 ............. 1800
Office Expenses .............
100
Handbook reissue ........... 3000
$5730
This is $180 (5730-5550) more than our anticipated assets
of $5550. It is not a hopeless situation however, it simply means
about 36 new members are needed. Of course, the cost of the
new workbook has not been included in this total. It is suggested therefore that when this volume becomes ready for
issue that it be financed through a loan--as was the case for
the first Handbook. In this case, however, the amount is expected to be much less than that needed for the Handbook,
probably about $1500.
These are some of the problems for your consideration at
this meeting. One generally frowns when receiving problems.
These particular ones however, come as the result of the growth
of the Society and as such should be received as the badge of
Success.

One final item and this report is finished. You will elect new
officers at this meeting and I would like to interject my views
concerning certain qualifications for two of these officers. First,
your Editor: Of course the person you choose for this job must
have a flair for editorial work, itself a rare thing. But more
than that, he should be technically able to judge and correct
articles submitted for publication in the Bulletin. In my opinion
this man should be a trained archeologist. Second, I most strongly recommend that you select for your Secretary-Treasurer
some one from the same locality as that of the Editor. There is
frequent need for personal meeting and discussion between

304

Texas Archeological Society

these officers and, since both must have recourse to the same
files, a common home base is, in my opinion, a must.
This closes your Secretary-Treasurer’s report for 1957. It
was a pleasure meeting you all through our correspondence,
and an honor to serve you throughout the year.
Here’s to a greater T.A.S. for 1958.
Respectfully submitted,
HENRY F. STURGIS
Secretary-Treasurer

TREASURER’S REPORT FOR THE TWENTY-NINTH
YEAR, FROM SEPTEMBER 30, 1956 TO
SEPTEMBER 30, 1957
Balance on deposit, Austin National Bank, Austin,
September 30, 1956 .............. : ........................ $
Balance on deposit, First Federal Savings and Loan Association,
Austin, September 30, 1956 .................................

897.32
705.82

TOTAL ASSETS AS OF SEPTEMBER 30, 1956 ................. $1,603.14

RECEIPTS
Dues 1956, 445 @ $5.00 each ................................... $2,225.00
Dues 1957, 46 @ $5.00 each ....................................
230.00
Dues 1958, 3 @ $5.00 each .....................................
15.00
Sale of Bulletins
102 @ $5.00 ..............................................
510.00
270 @ $7.50 .............................................. 2,025.00
Sale of Non-Society books .....................................
7.50
Sale of Reprints .............................................
202.54
Sale of Indexes, 4 @ $2.00 each ................................
8.00
Chai~er Fees, 3 @ $10.00 each .................................
30.00
Interest accrued to savings account, First Federal Savings and
Loan Association, Austin ..................................
29.11

il

$5,282.15

DISBURSEMENTS
Texas State Bank, interest and principle to retire note to
finance Volume 25 ........................................ $1,810.29
Cost of printing 500 copies of Volume 27 ....................... 1,533.74
Cost of reprints ..............................................
245.00
Freight .....................................................
66.75
Secretaria! Services ..........................................
110.00
Office Supplies and Stationary .................................
140.21
Postage .....................................................
130.80

Report of the Editor

305

Insurance

10.88

Austin National Bank, debit to account .......................... 73
$4,055.90
Balance on deposit, Austin National Bank, Austin,
September 30, 1957 .......................................
161.20
Balance on deposit, First Federal Savings and Loan Association,
Austin, September 30, 1957 ............................... 2,668.19
TOTAL ASSETS AS OF SEPTEMBER 30, 1957 .................

$2,829.39

HENRY F. STURGIS
Secretary-Treasurer

REPORT OF THE EDITOR TO THE ANNUAL MEETING
OF THE SOCIETY, NOVEMBER 8, 1957
The publication program of the Texas Archeological Society
is being stepped up, on the assumption that the Society should
give its members the maximum service possible within the
limits of our expanding budget. The activities along this line
will be reported under five headings: first, the status of the
current Bulletin, Volume 28; second, future bulletins and our
plans to get them out in better time; third, a proposal for the
newsletter, Texas Archeology; fourth, the problem of re-issuing
the Handbook; fifth, general observations.
I. Volume 28 of the Bulletin is being fed to the printer. It
is late, for a number of unavoidable reasons. The articles are
numerous and varied, and I hope that you will feel that this
issue maintains the standards of the earlier ones.
Because of the responsibilities for field work which my primary job--that of Research Archeologist at the University of
Texas--involves, it has become evident that the Bulletin will be
most difficult to edit and put out unless printed by a firm close
at hand, that is in Austin, with whom I can work directly rather
than by mail. Accordingly, Volume 28 is to be printed by Von
Boeckmann-Jones Co. of Austin.
Almost every year since its inception, the Bulletin has been
printed most competently by the Abilene Printing and Stationery Company of Abilene, and both the quality of the work and
the price have been much to the advantage of the Society. For
this reason it was with real regret that I had to face facts and

306

Texas A~’cheological Society

shift our printing arrangements to Austin, in order that I
might have some hope of getting the Bulletin out within a
reasonable time. I have indicated to the Abilene Printing and
Stationery Company our gratitude for their excellent work, and
our regret at not being able to continue our business with them.
The Von Boeckmann-Jones people have given us a good price,
and the shift is if anything in our favor in that respect.
II. One of the major difficulties besetting the SecretaryTreasurer in recent years has been the fact that members pay
their dues for, say, 1957, but do not get the 1957 bulletin until
the end of the year. This situation has ted to a great deal of
confusion. The only proper solution seems to be to put the
Bulletin out early in the year, rather than late. In other words,
we need to catch up on our Bulletins. We have plans to do so.
Volume 29, for 1958, is to be a manual of archeotogical field
techniques for Texas, edited by Edward B. Jelks and Henry F.
Sturgis. It should be out by the fall of 1958. Then Volume 30,
for 1959, can come out early in the year of its issue.
III. A Society newsletter, called Texas Archeology, has been
inaugurated. Two issues have been put out, in April and October,
and have had a most favorable reception. The primary purpose of Texas Archeology has been to provide a more steady and
informal contact between the Society and its members. These
two issues have cost the Society only the postage, thanks to the
co-operation of the Department of Anthropology of the University of Texas, and the Jefferson Chemical Company of Austin. If future numbers are to be issued, it can be expected that
we will have to sustain more of the cost. It should be anticipared that each issue will cost the Society between $20 and $45,
the latter figure representing approximate total cost including
mailing. I recommend that Texas Archeology be made a regular
journal, issued either quarterly or every other month depending on the budget the Society thinks best to allot to it. My own
recommendation is that it be issued quarterly during the coming year, in order that the problem of catching up on the Bulletins may be properly handled with the budget at hand.
IV. Volume 25 of the Bulletin, the Introductory Handbook
of Texas Archeology, is now out of print, but the demand for it

Report of the Editor

307

continues. We have obtained bids for re-printing it by offset and
by letterpress. By offset that is, by photographing the present
pages--the cost would be about $2,600. This is a cheap and
efficient way of having the book reproduced, but the results
are inferior to letterpress. By letterpress, we have a figure of
about $2900. If done by this method, minor revisions and corrections could be made in the original copy, and the finished
product would be first class. The Handbook is our show window
to the world, and I recommend the letterpress method. In either
case, however, it would seem wisest that the re-issuing of the
Handbook be financed by a loan, as the original printing was,
in order that our regular program of publication may go ahead.
V. In general, it seems that the Society is going through a
stage of growing pains, in which we must see to it that we provide our members with as many services as possible without
going overboard in the matter of expense. For the present, the
major services that we can provide are publications, as already
discussed, and identifications and advice. If we can make it more
and more worth while to belong to the Society, we can expect
continued enthusiasm and continued growth, and a larger and
larger budget, which will in turn lead to more and better services to members. For the present, the core of this chain-reaction
process seems to be our program of publications.
Respectfully submitted,
E. MOTT DAVIS
Editor of Publications

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
MEMBERSHIP LIST AS OF SEPTEMBER 30, 1957
FELLOWS
Alex D. Krieger, Director, Riverside Municipal Museum
............................................. Riverside, California
Cyrus N. Ray, 609 Orange St ............................ Abilene, Texas

HONORARY MEMBERS
J. S. Bridwell, Bridwell Oil Company ................ Wichita Falls,
Ernest Wallace, Texas Technological College .............. Lubbock,
Otto O. Watts, Hardin-Simmons University ............... Abilene,
William C. Watts, 2111 23rd St .......................... Lubbock,

Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas

MEMBERS
Ablon, Joan, 2706 Laclede ................................. Dallas, Texas
Adams, E. T ..................................... Glen Rose, Texas
Aldridge, James M., 1534 Thoraine Blvd ............... San Antonio, Texas
Allen, A. B., 1107 South 10th ............................ Merkel, Texas
Allen, Lynn A., P. O. Box 5158 ...................... San Antonio, Texas
Allen, Henry, Jr., Box 973 ................................. Tyler, Texas
Allen, Roger S., 1111 Sunnyvale Dr ..................... Arlington, Texas
Allison, F. E., 5324 Stanley Ave ....................... Fort Worth, Texas
Allison, Wayne, Box 1007 ............................. Cleveland, Texas
American Museum of Natural History .................. New York, N. Y.
American Philosophical Society ........................ Philadelphia, Pa.
Amerson, Price, Route 2 ............................. Abernathy, Texas
Amyx, Mrs. Charles, ’906 Country Club Drive ............. Mission, Texas
Andretta, Antonio, P. O. Box 973 .......................... Tyler, Texas
Andretta, Donna S., P. O. Box 973 ......................... Tyler, Texas
Andretta, N. A., 1909 Hilltop Drive ......................... Tyler, Texas
Andretta, Mrs. N. A., 1909 Hilltop Drive .................... Tyler, Texas
Armistead, M. W., Box 624 ......................... Fort Stockton, Texas
Armstrong, John R., Box 225 ............................ Farwell, Texas
Arthur, John M., 904 West 5th St ....................... Lampasas, Texas
Atlee, L. W., 2812 Dutton Ave ............................. Waco, Texas
Atwood, W. L., 501 Ruth St ............................. Baytown, Texas
Baerreis, David, Dept. of Sociology and Anthropology,
University of Wisconsin ...................... Madison 6, Wisconsin
Bain, Barry, 201 Central St .............................. Del Rio, Texas
Baker, H. A., 1417 North Peak ............................ Dallas, Texas
Barnett, P. M., Box 572 ................................. Palacios, Texas
Barziza, H. D., 1031 Highland ........................... Houston, Texas
Bassham, H. T., 812 N. 13th St ......................... Corsicana, Texas
Baum, Glenn, 8104 N. May ......................... Oklahoma City, Okla.
Baylor University, The Library ............................ Waco, Texas
Beard, J. M., 1307 N. Rodeo Road .................... Gladewater, Texas
Beck, D. W., 214 First Natl. Bk. Bldg .................... Amarillo, Texas

Membership List, 1957

309

Beck, Johny, 410 N. Barrett .............................
Denison, Texas
Beckman, Michael W., 619 Erie ......................... Shreveport, La.
Bedgood, Norman G., 600 E. Lake St ....................... Tyler, Texas
Bell, Robert, 317 Haynes ............................. Fort Worth, Texas
Bell, Robert E., Dept. of Anthropology,
University of Oklahoma ............................. Norman, Okla.
Belote, Thomas, 1416 Walnut ......................... San Angelo, Texas
Benson, George C., Box 7 ...............................
Whitney, Texas
Bentley, Gene G., Box 128 .............................
Josephine, Texas
Bentley, Kenneth J., 3811 Everman Drive.
Dallas 15, Texas
Benton, Joe ¯
...............
¯ : ........................................ Nocona, Texas
Berger, W. F., l~ox 1085 .................................
Sonora, Texas
Bishop, K. A., T~oute 3 .............. ...............
Port Lavaca, Texas
Bissell, C. E., P. 0. Box 2698 ............................
Midland, Texas
Bissell, William M., Texas Technological College ..........
Lubbock, Texas
Boldt, Kyrle, 3005 Ballas Road.
....................... St. Louis 22, Mo.
Bollic:h, Charles N., Route 1, Box 426 .................... Bossier City, La.
Bonnet, Jack, Jr., 202 Bayridge Dr ...............
Corpus Christi, Texas
Boyett, B. I., Brazosport Ind. School Dist.,
c/o Resource Center Drawer 2 ...................... Freeport, Texas
Brady, Bill, P. O. Box 272, Sul Ross College ................
Alpine, Texas
Bramblett, Claud, Box 364
Carrizo Springs, Texas
Brennan, W. P., 620 W. NuecesSt:. ..................
..............
Crystal City, Texas
Bronaugh, Richmond L., Dept. of Geology, Baylor University..Waco, Texas
Brooks, Clifton B., 1506 Grierson St .................. San Angelo, Texas
Brooks, E. H., 18 East Concho St ......................
San Angelo, Texas
Brown, Mrs. Ethyl M., 1413 Isabella St..
................. Houston, Texas
Brown, Lowell, Amarillo Globe-News ....................
Amarillo, Texas
Brown, Ted V., 230 Bunker Hill .........................
Houston, Texas
Brues, Alice M., 801 NE 13th St .................... Oklahoma City, Okla.
Butchee, D. E., 710 Parkside .............................
Ontario, Calif.
Butler, B. C., c/o Carter Oil Co., Drawer 1739 ............ Shreveport, La.
Cain, K. C., 1012 Thomason St .........................
Huntsville, Texas
Caldwell, C. M. .......................................... Abilene, Texas
Calhoun, Cecil A., Route 2, Box 160 .................. Port Lavaca, Texas
Campbell, Robert E., 217 Randolf ......................
Lone Star, Texas
Campbell, T. N., Dept. of Anthropology, University
of Texas, Austin .................................... Austin, Texas
Campbell, Mrs. William H., Route 2, Box 871-a .............
Tucson, Ariz.
Carmack, Mrs. George, 3209 Reba Drive ..................
Houston, Texas
Carr, Graham, Rt. 1, Box 392.
.Idabel, Okla.
Caver, Harold, Route I
............................
................................. Atlanta, Texas
Cerventa, W. V., 2605 San Antonio St .................. San Angelo, Texas
Chamberlain, Sam, P. 0. Box 593 ........................ Refugio, Texas
Chandler, E. F., 3117 Storey Lane .........................
Dallas, Texas
Chandler, Mrs. E. H., Box 837 ............................ Ozona, Texas
Chapman, Dr. J. S., 3606 Lovers Lane .....................
Dallas, Texas
Chicago Natural History Museum, Roosevelt Road and
Lake Shore Drive .................................... Chicago 5, Ill.
Clardy, Richard D., 215 N. Broadway ....................
McAllen, Texas
Clark, Mrs. J. Tate, 2010 Fannin St ..................... Amarillo, Texas
Clarkson, Mrs. W. G., Jr., 1405 Mogford ..................
Midland, Texas
Clegg, Bill, Box 951 ...................................... Ozona, Texas
Cleveland Public Library ................................
Cleveland, Ohio
Cobb, George A.
Temple, Texas
Cobb, Herschel N., .......................................
3644 Gasper Drive ...................... Dallas, Texas
Collins, Michael E., 1505 W. Storey ......................
Midland, Texas

310

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

Collins, W. B., P. O. Box 271 ............................ Midland, Texas
Colmnbia University; Libraries,
535 W. ll4th Street ............................ New York 27, N. Y.
Compton, Carl Benton, Box 5133, North Texas State College.. Denton, Texas
Conder, A. L., P. O. Box 6001 ........................... Amarillo, Texas
Conner, Louis P., Box 2852 .............................. Odessa, Texas
Orla, Texas
Cooksey, Mrs. Jimmie ....................................
Corbett, John M., 616 Fern Lane ....................... Falls Church, Va.
Corley, John A., 316 W. Palace ...................... Hobbs, New Mexico
Corpus Christi Public Library ..................... Corpus Christi, Texas
Cowan, John P., No. 5 Carolane Trail ................. Houston 24, Texas
Cox, Clarence, Apt. 55D Air Base ......................... Pecos, Texas
Cox, Frank, Apt. 42-A Air Base... ........................ Pecos, Texas
Cox, Theodore I., Box 343 .............................. Palacios, Texas
Craft, Elmer C., Jr., R. F. No. 2 ............. : .......... Eldorado, Texas
Cramer, J. L., 152 S. Fairfax ........................... Denver, Colorado
Hooks, Texas
Cranfill, Julian A ............ ..........................
Cranz, Gus E., Meacham Bldg., Box 705 ............. Fort Worth 2, Texas
Crook, Wilson W., Jr., 3208 Caruth .................... Dallas 25, Texas
Crossley, Claude R., P. O. Box 127 ................ Maljamar, New Mexico
Cruse, Dr. Ray, 203 Barton St ........................... Hearne, Texas
Cumby, John H., Republic National Bank .................. Dallas, Texas
Dallam County Public Library ........................... Dalhart, Texas
Dallas Public Library .................................... Dallas, Texas
Dalton, G. C., 604 E. 20th St ........................ San Angelo, Texas
Darr, Gerald W., P. O. Box 8098 ..................... Fort Worth, Texas
Darr, Walter, P. O. Box 8098 ........................ Fort Worth, Texas
Davis, Mrs. Dayne, P. O. Box 34 ......................... Junction, Texas
Davis, Ila Mac, Box 564 ................................ Menard, Texas
Davis, E. Mott, Department of Anthropology,
University of Texas ................................. Austin, Texas
Davis, Ted, 4623 Wildwood Road .......................... Dallas, Texas
Davis, W. A., P. 0. Box 6033 ............................. Jasper, Texas
Daws, John William, Box 473 ........................... Woodson, Texas
Dawson, Matt, Box 536 ................................ Corsieana, Texas
Dawson, T. L., 5600 Meandering Road ............. Fort Worth 14, Texas
Deich, Robert V., Box 2463 ............................. Odessa, Texas
DeLee, Stuart, M. D., 1513 Line Ave ...................... Shreveport, La.
Dennis, Ray, 216 Nettle Drive ............................. Tyler, Texas
Deutsch, Gordon, 1610 W. 6th ........................... Freeport, Texas
DeVote, Irven, 6500 Llano St .............................. Dallas, Texas
Diamond, James R., U. S. Hwy. 80, Rt. 1 .................. Millsap, Texas
Dickson, Don A., 726 Crestway Drive ...................... Tyler, Texas
Dieckman, John J., 5310 Edith. ........................... Bellaire, Texas
Dingman, Mrs. Ira Roberts, R. I. Box X6A ............... Midland, Texas
Dobie, Dudley R., Drawer 480 ........................ Fort Worth, Texas
Doggett, V. L., Box 508 ............................. Goldthwaite, Texas
Doss, Emmett, P. O. Box 126 ............................. Ingrain, Texas
Doss, John C., 500 SE 21st St ....................... Mineral Wells, Texas
Drennan, C. O., 107½ Sanger St ...................... HIobbs, New Mexico
Dugger, L. J., 3203 Morningside Dr., NE ............. Albuquerque, N. M.
Duke, Alan R., 1706 Oaks Drive ........................ Pasadena, Texas
Dullnig, Dorothy B., Box 5111 ............................ Sonora, Texas
Duncan, A. L., Box 330 ................................. Decatur, Texas
Dunn, Mrs. George L ........................... Lacy’s Spring, Alabama
Dunning, Glen T., 236 Ist St ............................. Evanston, Wyo.
Dyer, Lloyd N., P. O. Box 351 ............................ Boerne, Texas

Membership List, 1957

311

Eagleton, N. Ethie .................................... McCamey,
Early, Brooke, Route 2 .................................. Haskell,
East Texas Archeological Society, Box 937 .................. Tyler,
Ector County Library, 622 N. Lee St ....................... Odessa,
Edgar, C. L., P. O. Box ]188 ............................ Beeville,
E1 Paso Public Library .................................. E1 Paso,
Erekson, R. L., Box 861 ................................ Palacios,
Eubank, Bransford, Box 89 ............................ Cross Cut,
Evans, Oren F., Geology Department,
University of Oklahoma ............................. Norman,
Evans, R. T., 1119 Mistletoe Drive .................... Fort Worth,
Everett, W. L., 501 Carlton .............................. Conroe,
Exley, Dale, Box 8015 University Station .................. Austin,

Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas
Okla.
Texas
Texas
Texas

Farquhar, Jimmy, 321 East Hoffman ................... Kingsville, Texas
Field, Albert, P. O. Box 323 ............................ Lampasas, Texas
Field, Richard ....................................... Lampasas, Texas
Fields, Mrs. R. B., Jr., 2701 Franklin St ................... Midland, Texas
Fisher, A. L., P. O. Box 6 .......................... Douglassville, Texas
Fitzpatrick, W. S., Fitzpatrick Drilling Co .......... Corpus Christi, Texas
Flanagan, R. L .......................................... Burnet, Texas
Fleming, James R., Box 2307 .......................... Longview, Texas
Foote, M. F., 2407 Rice Blvd ........................... Houston 5, Texas
Forbis, James W., 2009 Travis Heights .................... Austin, Texas
Forrester, R. E., Jr., 6229 Malvey Ave .............. Fort Worth 16, Texas
Fort Worth Children’s Museum, 1501 Montgomery St... Fort Worth 7, Texas
Fort Worth Public Library .......................... Fort Worth, Texas
Fowler, W. G., Box 118, Rt. 5 .............................. Waco, Texas
Fulton, Gary, 812 Lawson ...............................
Midland, Texas
Fulton, G. E., 514 E. Sears .............................. Denison, Texas
Fulton, Robert L., 420 Forrest .......................... Shreveport, La.
Fulton, W. S ......................................... Dragoon, Arizona
Garrett, R. J., 333 Dolphin ........................ Corpus Christi,
Gebhardt, Ben L. Jr ................................ Denver City,
George, Clem E., 1602 West Kansas ...................... Midland,
Ginn, Earl, Rt. 9 ......................................... Tyler,
Given, Richard Dale, 1409 So. Missouri Ave ............... Mercedes,
Gladwin, Harold S., 534 Valley Road ................ Santa Barbara,
Glass, Samuel, 4306 Middleton Road .................... Dallas 29,
Glasscock, Keith, 411 N. Yeager ........................ Pampa,
Glenn, Daniel L., 210 Wigwam ......................... Palestine,
Gollnick, Robert L., 11838 Bayhurst Drive ............... Houston,
Goss, Tom Jay, II, Drawer 991 ..................... Colorado City,
Graham, John Allen, 701 South Main ..................... Del Rio,
Grove, Lloyd L., 3800 Parkwood ............................ Waco,

Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas
Calif.
Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas

Hadlock, Mrs. Harry L., 709 South Ave. D ................. Kermit,
Hall, Roland Scott, 122 S. St. Mary .................... Albert Lee,
Hamil, M. W., P. O. Box 973 .............................. Tyler,
Hanby, Dana, Box 436 .............................. League City,
Hardin-Simmons University Library ...................... Abilene,
Harlan, Thomas ....................................... Harper,
Harper, Lloyd, 2533 Elm St ............................... Dallas,
Harral, Mrs. Carolyn H., Cactus Hotel ................ San Angelo,
Harrelt, Robert P., Box 186 .......................... Denver City,
Harris, R. K., 9024 San Fernando Way ................. Dallas 18,
Harris, Ted., 1901 Rosemont Drive .................... San A~gelo,

Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas
Tex~s
Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas

312

Texas Archeological Society

Hart, Charles R., How. Co. 2nd. Bn. 14th A/C, APO 800... New York, N. Y.
Hart, R. B., 1705 E. 12th St ............................... Odessa, Texas
Harwood, C. V., 22!8 W. Beauregard ................. San Angelo, Texas
Hasskarl, Robert A., Jr., P. O. Box 696 .................. Brenham, Texas
Hatzenbuehler, Robert C., 7230 E. Grand Ave ............ Dallas 14, Texas
Hayner, E. W., Route 3, Box 117 ......................... Kilgore, Texas
Haynes, C. J., 6445 Belmont ............................. Houston, Texas
Haynes, C. V., Jr., P. O. Box 5 ......................... Golden, Colorado
Head, Robert E., 2515 Genessee ......................... Houston, Texas
Headstream, J. W ...................................... Dermott, Texas
Heartfield, G. A., t913 Avenue N ...................... Huntsville, Texas
Heartfield, Lorraine, 1385 23rd St ....................... Beaumont, Texas
Heflin, Allen A., Gutenberg 47 ............................ Mexico, D. F.
Helm, Elbert D., 1804 Province ....................... Fort Worth, Texas
Hemming, James A., Route 2 ............................. Apache, Okla.
Hempkins, Brent, 327 W. Monterey ....................... Denison, Texas
Henlein, John J., Route 1, Box 606-P .................. Fort Worth, Texas
Henry, Arthur L., 519 W. Morgan ........................ Denison, Texas
Heroy, Wm. B., 6441 Llano St ............................. Dallas, Texas
Hibben, Frank, 3000 Campus Blvd .................... Albuquerque, N. M.
Hickman, R. W., 1201 Lawndale Ave ..................... Victoria, Texas
Hilgers, A. O., 1007 Fair Avenue .................. San Antonio 10, Texas
Hodges, Robert, Pan American College .................. Edinburg, Texas
Hodges, Mrs. T. L ...................................... Bismarck, Ark.
Hoffman, George A., 106 S. Main ................... Fort Stockton, Texas
Holden, W. C., Texas Technological College ............... Lubbock, Texas
House, Glenn C., 2439 Stanmore Dr ...................... Houston, Texas
Housewright, Rex A ....................................... Wylie, Texas
Houston Public Library ................................. Houston, Texas
Howard, Mrs. Agnes M., Apartado Postal No. 49 ......... Durango, Mexico
Hudson, G. B., c/o Boston Furniture Store ............ New Boston, Texas
Huff, John Arleigh, P. 0. Box 13 .......................... Boerne, Texas
Huggins, N. R., 2768 Dena .......................... San Angelo, Texas
Hughes, Jack T., Panhandle-Plains Museum ............... Canyon, Texas
Hume, Mrs. Howard F., 426 N. Miles .................... Hereford, Texas
Huntington Free Library and Reading Room,
9 Westchester Square ...................... New York 16, New York
Illinois State Museum ................................... Springfield, Ill.
Ingham, B. B., Jr., Box 746 ............................... Ozona, Texas
Innerarity, Loyd E., P. O. Box 2276 ...................... Midland, Texas
Jackson, A. T., 508 E. 46th St ............................. Austin, Texas
Jackson, Edgar, P. O. Box 18 .......................... Benbrook, Texas
Jelks, Edward B., Department of Anthropology,
University of Texas ................................. Austin, Texas
Jennings, J. D., Department of Anthropology,
University of Utah ............................ Salt Lake City, Utah
Johns Hopkins University Library ..................... Baltimore 18, Md.
Johnson, Arthur E., 804 Wayside Drive .................... Austin, Texas
Johnson, Harold, 2610 Travis St ......................... Amarillo, Texas
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr., 2518 26th .......................... Lubbock, Texas
Johnson, Richard E., P. O. Box 7343 .................. Fort Worth, Texas
Joint University Libraries ............................ Nashville 4, Tenn.
Jones, Billy Clyde, P. O. Box 423 ....................... Seminole, Texas
Jones, Buddy, Route 4 ................................. Longview, Texas
Joyner, Roy, Oilfield Route ............................. Big Lake, Texas

Membership List, 1957

Kashata, Mrs. Bette, 2914 L. Donnybrook ................... Tyler,
Kelley, James F., Box 692 ......................... Colorado City,
Kennedy, Carson, 106 Oliver St ....................... Gladewater,
Kilmer, Jim, P. O. Box 522 ............................ Greenville,
Klett, Earl H., Star Rt. No. 2 ............................ Beeville,
Kramer, William, Route 1, Box 14 .................... Eagle Lake,
Kramer, Mrs. William, Route 1, Box 14 ............... Eagle Lake,
Kreuger, George F., P. O. Box 327 ...................... Hawkins,
Krieble, Don U., 4120 31st St ............................ Lubbock,

313

Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas

Laake, M. C., P. O. Box 44 .............................. Junction, Texas
Lane, Roberta P., 115 W. Rio Grande ..................... E1 Paso, Texas
Langford, C. M., Jr., Route 1 ...................... Mt. Enterprise, Texas
Larned, Dorothy B., Montgomery Co. Hospital ............. Conroe, Texas
Latham, John Milburn, 4810 Shoalwood .................. Austin 5, Texas
Lawson, O. G., Box 607 .................................... Cisco, Texas
Leeper, Alan B., 2311 Princeton .......................... Midland, Texas
Ligon, L. A., 2008 Rio Grande ....................... San Angelo, Texas
Lilly, Eli, 5807 Sunset Lane .......................... Indianapolis, Ind.
Lobdell, Isabelle R., P. O. Box 10245 ................. Fort Worth, Texas
Long, Joseph K. III, Southern Methodist University ........ Dallas, Texas
Long, Raymond, Route 1 ................................ Ranger, Texas
Louisiana State University General Library ............ Baton Rouge, La.
Lowe, Dick F., 3019 Templeton Ave ..................... Greenville, Texas
Lowrey, E. J., 1926 27th St .... ........................ Lubbock, Texas
Lowthorp, W. T., 217 S. Peach ............................. Tyler, Texas
MacDonald, Adam, 73rd Ord. Bn. USAMC ............. Fort Hood, Texas
Magers, Richard H., 127 Tipperary Avenue ........ San Antonio 10, Texas
Mann, Bart W., 1227 Paso De Vaca .................. San Angelo, Texas
Manning, Stormy, 816 South Oak ....................... Kermit, Texas
Mansell, Calvin E., 1917 Alamo Natl. Bank ........... San Antonio, Texas
Marsh, C. C., 342 Main Street ........................... Liberty, Texas
Marshall, Byron C., 204 Central Ave ......... Hot Springs Natl. Park, Ark.
Martin, Joe Jr., R. R. 2
................................ Itasca, Texas
Martinez Del Rio, Pablo, Berlin 39 ........................ Mexico, D. F.
Mayne, Mrs. R. H., Route 8, Box 167 ................... Dallas 11, Texas
McBeth, J. L., Route 3
.............................. Gatesville, Texas
McCann, Michael, Box 422 ............................. E1 Campo, Texas
McCluney, Eugene B., University of New Mexico ...... Albuquerque, N. M.
McClure, Col. George W., Route 4 ........................ Blanco, Texas
McDaniel, Allen J., Jr., 642 EN 16th ..................... Abilene, Texas
McDannald, A. T., Box 2972 ............................ Houston, Texas
McFarland, A. V., P. O. Box 672 ....................... Childress, Texas
McKasdale, Claude, 607 E. Dallas Street ................ Midland, Texas
McKeever, Warren N., Jr., 3861 Bellaire Circle ........ Fort Worth, Texas
McKinney, Ralph R., Box 93 .............................. Hosston, La.
McLean, Mrs. Charley, Box 451 ...................... Goldthwaite, Texas
McLean, M. T., Jr., 4842 Nesbitt ................... Corpus Christi, Texas
McLemore, Douglas, Odessa Senior High School .......... Odessa, Texas
McManus, A. T., P. O. Box 811 ........................ Brownsboro, Texas
McMillan, Frank N., Jr., 312 Hackberry ................... Kenedy, Texas
McRee, Dr. E. C., 205 Medical Bldg ................... Port Arthur, Texas
McVay, Mrs. Shad, Route ! ............................... Brady, Texas
Medlin, Eugene, P. O. Box 3912 .......................... Odessa, Texas
Menger, Rudolph W., P. O. Box 1509 ................. San Antonio, Texas
Metropolitan Museum of Arts Library, 5th Avenue and
82nd St .................................... New York 28, New York

314

Texas Archeological Society

Mewhinney, H., Houston Post ............................ Houston, Texas
Meyer, George S., 343 Springwood Lane ............ San Antonio !, Texas
Meyer, Walter W., 3101 Bonnie ........................... Austin, Texas
Michigan, University of, Library ...................... Ann Arbor, Mich.
Middleton, Mrs. J. E., 2706 Delano ....................... Midland, Texas
Midland Artifact Club, 1901 W. Kentucky St .............. Midland, Texas
Miles, Theo L., 1037 Park Ave .............................. Monroe, La.
Miles, V. G., 308 Winters S% .......................... Fort Worth, Texas
Miller, E. O., Box 417 ................................... Moody, Texas
Miller, Fred L., Box 277 ................................ Sabinal, Texas
Mills, Frank, 1417 W. Harrison ........................ Harlingen, Texas
Mitchell, Robert L., 310 Meldo Park Drive .......... Corpus Christi, Texas
Moore, Corky, 1002 W. Kentucky ........................ Midland, Texas
Moore, Mrs. Glen E., 3610 Fort Blvd ...................... E1 Paso, Texas
Moore, John I., Box 753 ................................ Midland, Texas
Moore, Russell R., P. O. 264 ......................... ...Childress, Texas
Moorman, Edward ..................................... Meridian, Texas
Morgan, Arthur, 1021 Gillian St ........................... Waco, Texas
Morgan, F. L., 220 So. 2nd ........................... Brownfield, Texas
Morgan, Louis S., 3002 Sennett Street .................. Wichita, Kansas
Morris, Caryle, 7005 Union Avenue .................... Cleveland 5, Ohio
Morrison, Cecil G., 5012 E. Pine ....................... Wichita 6, Kansas
Morrison, Don R., P. O. Box 385 ....................... Deer Park, Texas
Muelles, Norman C., 2320 N. Yale .................... Wichita 15, Kansas
Mugford, Edward G., Jr., 3300 Tom Green, Apt. 5 .......... Austin, Texas
Mulligan, John, Box 780 .................................. Tyler, Texas
Munnerlyn, T. A., Jr., P. O. Box 110 ...................... Del Rio, Texas
Museum of American Indian, Heye Foundation .......... New York, N. Y.
National Museum of Canada Library ............. Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
Neal, Henry L ......................................... Wanette, Okla.
Newberry Library, 60 W. Walton Place .................. Chicago, Illinois
Newkumet, Phil J., 729 Ehmvood ......................... Norman, Okla.
Newman, W. R., 1319 W. 3rd Street, Apt. 1 ................. Tyler, Texas
Newton, Milton B., Jr., P. O. Box 204, Mesa Vista Hall,
University of New Mexico ....................... Albuquerque, N. M.
New York Public Library, 5th Ave. and 42nd St ....... New York 18, N. Y.
Neyland, Wayne B., 4621 Keystone .................... Houston 21, Texas
Nicholas, Ralph R., Box 63 ......................... Daingerfield, Texas
Noelke, B. B., 1620 Paseo De Vaca .................. San Angelo, Texas
Norment, Robert L., 4912 Fairfax ..................... Fort Worth, Texas
Norris, Ira, P. O. Box 208 .............................. Kerrville, Texas
Northwestern University Library ........................ Evanston, Ill.
Nunn, W. C., 2713 Forest Park Blvd ................... Fort Worth, Texas
Ochsner, Eugene E., P. O. Box 176 ........................ Wurtland, Ky.
Oettermann, Gus, Rt. 2, Box 50 ...................... San Antonio, Texas
Ogden, W. H., 341 E. Houston .............................. Paris, Texas
Ohio University Library ................................... Athens, Ohio
Orchard, C. D., 803 West Lymvood Ave ............... San Antonio, Texas
Padgett, Roy E., 3715 E. Lancaster ................... Fort Worth,
Parker, Mrs. O. S., 6802 Langdon Lane ................... Bellaire,
Parks, Oral E., Texas Technological College .............. Lubbock,
Peabody Museum of Archeology and Ethnology,
Harvard University .............................. Cambridge,
Payne, Bobby Eugene, 728 West Kleberg ................ Kingsville,
Pearson, Mrs. Agnes, Lost Valley Resort Ranch .......... Bandera,

Texas
Texas
Texas
Mass.
Texas
Texas

Membership List, 1957

315

Perkins, Frank S., 2609 Guadalupe St .................. San Angelo, Texas
Perkins, J. L., 8515 Elam Road ............................ Dallas, Texas
Permian Basin Archeological Society, 922 N. Tom Green .... Odessa, Texas
Perusek, Cyril J., 2405 W. Cuthbert St ................... Midland, Texas
Phillips Academy, Dept of Archeology ................... Andover, Mass.
Phillips, Philip, Peabody Museum of Archeology and
Ethnology, Harvard University .................... Cambridge, Mass.
Pierce, Eddy, Box 575 .................................... Marfa, Texas
Plants, Robert W., Hosston Jr. High School ................. Hosston, La.
Powell, Mrs. J. Ellsworth, 1816 N. Sam Houston St ......... Odessa, Texas
Powellson, Robt., Jr., Route 9, Box 228 ................ Fort Worth, Texas
Price, I. B., Jr., P. O. Box 413 ............................ Atlanta, Texas
Price, Lynn C., 313 W. Palace ............................. Hobbs, N. M.
Proctor, Jeanelle I., 1920 Robertson St ....................... Tyler, Texas
Quinn, Mrs. Jean W., 1741 Grace ....................... Arlington, Texas
Ramirez, Capt. Efren E., Bergstrom Air Force Base ........ Austin, Texas
Rasco, James R., Box 731 ................................. Crane, Texas
Rawalt, L. E., 4026 Willow Drive .................. Corpus Christi, Texas
Ray, J. Henry, 2130 Fannin Street ........................ Vernon, Texas
Ray, Mack, 221 E. Fulton ................................. Sinton, Texas
Reading, R. S., 1312 Ficklin Avenue .................... Corsicana, Texas
Reed, Erik K., 238 Griffin Street ........................ Santa Fe, N. M.
Reed, Joseph, 3531 Fairmont .............................. Dallas, Texas
Reimund, Dean, 414 W. 3rd Street .................. Breckenridge, Texas
Rhoads, Herman, P. O. Box 998 ........................ Corsicana, Texas
Rhoades, Paul G., 3100 Windsor Drive ..................... Odessa, Texas
Rhoton, Charles Jr., Box 152 ............................... Keyes, Okla.
Rice Institute Library .................................. Houston, Texas
Rice, P. M., Box 388 ................................... Hamilton, Texas
Richardson, Miles, 200 Wettermark .................. Nacogdoches, Texas
Richardson, R. N., Hardin-Simmons University ............ Abilene, Texas
Riley, Lt. Robert, Williams Air Force Base ...................... Arizona
Ring, Raymond, 1238 Commerce Bldg ..................... Houston, Texas
Rivers, William H., Box 203 ............................ Canadian, Texas
Robbins, Philip, Box 544 ........................... Fort Stockton, Texas
Roberts, Thomas E., 2758 Jeanette St ...................... Abilene, Texas
Roby, Wayne, P. O. Box 517 ....................... Fort Stockton, Texas
Rodgers, Rex, 101 1st Street ............................... Tulia, Texas
Roe, James C., 301 Childress Street ................... San Angelo, Texas
Rogers, Wallace, 412 Cathel;ine ....................... Fort Worth, Texas
Rose, Robert 0., Box 127 .......................... North Cowden, Texas
Rosenberg Library ................................... Galveston, Texas
Rosick, Don, 600 Clairmont Avenue ................... Fort Worth, Texas
Ruhland, E. J., 6260 McComas ...... .................... Dallas 14, Texas
Russell, Gerald W., 1601 Briarwood Blvd ...............
Arlington, Texas
Rutherford, C. L., Route 2 ........................... Big Spring, Texas
San Antonio Public Library ......................... San Antonio, Texas
San Diego Scientific Library, Balboa Park ............... San Diego, Calif.
Sanders, Darrell, 716 Crestway Drive ....................... Tyler, Texas
Sandhills Museum, Monahans Sandhills State Park ...... Monahans, Texas
Sayles, E. B., Arizona State Museum .................... Tucson, Arizona
Scherer, Fred D., 430 S. Center St ........................ Orange, Calif.
Schmitt, Mrs. Iva, Dept. of Anthropology,
University of Oklahoma ............................. Norman, Okla.
Schrader, Henry ........................................ Boerne, Texas

316

i

¯

Texas Archeological Society

Schrader, Robert C., 1014 Shofner Street ................. Killeen, Texas
Schreiner Institute Archeology Group, Schreiner Institute..Kerrville, Texas
Schrier, Thelma, 315 So. 14th ............................ Junction, Texas
Schultz, Bob, 901 N. 9th ................................ McAllen, Texas
Seahorn, Mrs. W. P ...................................... Ozona, Texas
Seay, Walter L ........................................ Copeville, Texas
Sellards, E. H., Texas Memorial Museum .................. Austin, Texas
Sewell, John B., Box 54 .............................. Jacksboro, Texas
Seybold, James T., 9563 Lakemont ...................... Dallas, Texas
Seymour, A. T., 6121 Locke Street .................... Fort Worth, Texas
Shafer, Harry, 1118 South 28th Street .................... Temple, Texas
Shay, Oscar, 323 W. 17th Street ......................... Portales, Texas
Shearer, Robert, 9606 Athlone Drive ...................... Dallas, Texas
Shephard, George V., 3407 Perry Lane .................... Austin, Texas
Shorter, H. L. Box 37 .................................. Welch, Okla.
Sibley, J. Ashley, Jr., 521 Barksdale .................... Bossier City, La.
Teml~le, Texas
Slaughter, Bob, 6215 St. Moritz .......................
Slawson, V. G., 513 Margaret Street ................ Grand Prairie, Texas
Sloan, Fred W., 3505 Frazier Street ................... Fort Worth, Texas
Sloan, Frank R., 2727 Millmar Drive ...................... Dallas, Texas
Smelley, D. J., Jr., RFD No. 2 ............................ Talco, Texas
Smith, Calvin B., Box 2324 ................................ Hobbs, N. M.
Austin, Texas
Smith, Douglas, 1701 ’Vista Lane .....................
Smith, James D., 2911 Barton Street ................. San Angelo, Texas
Smith, J. 0., Jr., 6560 Kenwood ........................... Dallas, Texas
Soday, F. J., 310 Walnut Street, NE ....................... Decatur, Ala.
Dallas, Texas
Sollberg, J. B., 8515 Forrest Hills Blvd ..............
Son, Mrs. James A., Route 2, Box 282A ............ New Braunfels, Texas
South Central Texas Archeological Society,
Witte Memorial Museum ........................ San Antonio, Texas
Speed, Bert L ........................................... Adrian, Texas
Spencer, Dan, 210 W. Main ............................. Denison, Texas
Standish, John R., 2023 Santa Rosa Street ............... Houston, Texas
Standlee, Allen, 1119 W. 10th ........................... Freepo!% Texas
Steadman, Foy B., General Delivery .................. ¯ ..... Trent, Texas
Steen, Charlie R., 570 E. Garcia ......................... Santa Fe, N. M.
Stegner, Robert E., P. O. Box 3587 ..................... Odessa, Texas
Stephen F. Austin State Teachers College Library .... Nacogdoches, Texas
Lometa, Texas
Stephens, Lucius M ...................................
Lincoln, Nebraska
Stephenson, Robt. L., 1517 "O" St ...................
Stoker, Wilburn, 401 NW 9th St .................... Mineral Wells, Texas
Studer, Floyd V., 636 Amarillo Bldg .................... Amarillo, Texas
Sturgis, Henry F., 4208 Wilshire Parkway ................ Austin, Texas
Suhm, Dee Ann, Dept. of Anthropology and Sociology,
University of California ....................... Los Angeles 24, Calif.
Alpine, Texas
Sul Ross State College Library ..........................
Sultemeier, A. T., Box 112 .......................... East Vaughn, N. M.
Tadlock, U. M., Jr., 3100 Blossom Lane .................... Odessa,
Tarrant County Archeological Society,
P. O. Box 7343 ................................ Fort Worth,
Taylor, Floyd, Box 136 ............................ Copperas Cove,
Taylor, Mrs. Howard, 608 Baylor Street ................. Austin 3,
Taylor, Walter W., Jr., 5 de Febrero No. 42 ....... Coyoacan, Mexico,
Teal Wing Dancers, P. O. Box 9254 ....................... Dallas,
Terry, Don, 313 Azalea Street ...................... Lake Jackson,
Texas Agricultural and Mechanical College
Library ...................................... College Station,

Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas
D. F.
Texas
Texas
Texas

Membership List, 1957

317

Texas State Library, Capitol Bldg ......................... Austin, Texas
Texas Technological College Library ..................... Lubbock, Texas
Texas Western College Library .......................... E1 Paso, Texas
Thomas Gilcrease Foundation, Box 2419 ...................... Tulsa, Okla.
Thomas, J. O., Jr., 3736 Somerset ..................... Fort Worth, Texas
Thomas, L. H., 2001 SE 5th Avenue ................ Mineral Wells, Texas
Thompson, J. King, c/o Indian Museum .................. Waelder, Texas
Tredway, Dallas A., 403 SE 15~h Street ............. Mineral Wells, Texas
Troike, Rudolph C., Department of Anthropology,
University of Texas .................................. Austin, Texas
Tuck, Darrell, Box 630 ................................. Baytown, Texas
Tull, Raymond H., Jr., 1301 Cedar Street ................. Abilene, Texas
Tunnell, John W., Box 927 .................................. Taft, Texas
Tunnell, Mrs. J. L., Box 393 ........................... Kingsville, Texas
Turbyfill, E. W., 711 N. Perry St ........................ Palestine, Texas
Turner, Robert, Jr., 102 Pecan Blvd ...................... Pittsburg, Texas
Tyrrell Public Library ................................ Beaumont, Texas
U. S. Bureau of Indian Affairs, Dept. of Interior,
Interior Bldg. 4228 ............................... Washington, D. C.
U. S. Dept. of the Interior, National Park Service,
Region Three Office, P. 0. Box 1728 .................. Santa Fe, N. M.
U. S. Library of Congress .......................... Washington 25, D. C.
University of Arizona Library ............................. Tucson, Ariz.
University of Arkansas Library ....................... Fayetteville, Ark.
University of California, General Library .............. Berkeley 4, Calif.
University of California Library, 405 Hilgard ...... Los Angeles 24, Calif.
University of Chicago Library ........................... Chicago 37, Ill.
University of Colorado Libraries .......................... Boulder, Colo.
University of Denver, Mary Reed Library,
University Park ..................................... Denver, Colo.
University of Georgia Libraries ........................... Athens,, Ga.
University of Houston Library ......................... Houston, Texas
University of Illinois Library ............................... Urbana, III.
University of Kansas Library ........................ Lawrence, Kansas
University of Kentucky, Library ........................ Lexington, Ky.
University of Michigan Library ....................... Ann Arbor, Mich.
University of Nebraska Library .......................... Lincoln, Neb.
University of New Mexico Library ................... Albuquerque, N. M.
University of Oklahoma Library ........................ Norman, Okla.
University of Pennsylvania Library .................. Philadelphia 4, Pa.
Unfversity of Texas Library .......................... Austin 12, Texas
University of Utah Library ....................... Salt Lake City, Utah
University of Washington Library ........................ Seattle, Wash
Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico,
Cuidad Universitaria ............................. Mexico 20, D.F.
Upton County Public Library .......................... McCamey, Texas
Val Verde County Library ....................... : ....... Del Rio, Texas
Van Damme, A. M., 3711 Winthrop ................... Fort Worth, Texas
Vanderpool, Ray, Box 360 ................................. Tyler, Texas
Waco Public Library ...................................... Waco,
Waggoner, Odes A., 1825 Coleman .................... San Angelo,
Wagner, James R., Box 631 .......................... Cross Plains,
Walker, Don, 1114 Gillespie Place ......................... Austin,
Walker, Ganahl, Jr., 219 W. Hathaway Dr ............. San Antonio,
Wallace, L. A., Jr., 1010 Bellaire Dr ......................... Tyler,

Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas
Texas

318

Texas A~’cheological Society

Wal]ey, F. Raymond, 145 Oak Drive ................. Lake Jackson, Texas
Walper, Jack L., 2410 Keating Lane ....................... Austin, Texas
Walser, P. H., 1102 N. 1st Street ......................... Temple, Texas
Ward, Bernard Jr., 1202 Annapolis Dr .............. Corpus Christi, Texas
Warnica, James, 909 W. 17th Lane ....................... Portales, N. M.
Washington State College Library ....................... Pullman, Wash.
Watt, Frank H., Box 1176 ................................. Waco, Texas
Weaver, Harry E., P. O. Box 1601 .................... San Angelo, Texas
Webb, C. H, 1560 Line Avenue .......................... Shreveport, La.
Weir, Frank A., 311 So. Main ........................... McAllen, Texas
Weir, Sam, 311 S. Main ................................ Seminole, Texas
Wendorf, Fred, Texas Tech Museum ..................... Lubbock, Texas
Wheat, Joe Ben, University of Colorado .................... Boulder, Colo.
White, Francis M., 305 Casa Grande ....................... Odessa, Texas
White, James N., 206 E. Harris ....................... San Angelo, Texas
Whiteside, Sam, Route 1 ................................... Tyler, Texas
Wichita Gem and Mineral Society, 242 Young ............ Wichita 13, Kan.
Wilcox, James D ......................................... Elkhart, Kan.
Williams, W. C., P. O. Box 1211 ......................... Wharton, Texas
Williams, W. S., P. O. Box 216 ........................... Guymon, Okla.
Willingham, Parker, 1303 Johnson ........................ Denton, Texas
Willman, Stanley W., 2804 Wooldridge ..................... Austin, Texas
Willis, Roland R., Box 128 .............................. Stanton, Texas
Wilson, Lester L., Box 502 ................................ Wylie, Texas
Wilson, Mrs. Roy A., 1209 W. 20th St ...................... Odessa, Texas
Wilson, Wayman V., P. 0. Box 2108 ............... Hughes Springs, Texas
Winfield, Nathan L., Jr ............................... Chapel Hill, Texas
Winkler County Free Library ........................... Kermit, Texas
Withers, Mary Katz, Box 25 ...........................
Encinal, Texas
Witte, A. H., Route B ................................ Henrietta, Texas
Witte Museum, Brackenridge Park ................... San Antonio, Texas
Wittenburg, Mrs. Naomi ................................. Lometa, Texas
Witty, Joseph S., 611 Alexander Street .................... Ennis, Texas
Wolff, J. A., Box 633 ................................. Pleasanton, Texas
Wolff, Weston, 1111 Garnet .............................. Odessa, Texas
Wood, Richard G., 805 Lawson ........................... Midland, Texas
Woodall, James R., Box 472 ............................... Belton, Texas
Wooldridge, Sidney, 3613 Fiset ............................ Austin, Texas
Worthington, Mrs. C. W., Route 9, Box 217 ............ Fort Worth, Texas
Worthington, R. B., 4216 Walker Avenue ................ Houston 2, Texas
Wright, Darby, Route 2 ............................... Lampasas, Texas
"fates, Fayette, Box 1083 ................................. Marfa, Texas
Zaborski, Jerzy, 51 Barton Avenue ...................... Toronto, Ontario
Zimmerman, Roger, Route I, Box 300 .................. Kingsville, Texas

