TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
The Society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking: the study of man's past in Texas and contiguous areas. The Bulletin
offers an outlet for the publication of serious research on history, prehistory and
archeological theory. In line with the goals of the society, it encourages scientific
collection, study and publication of archeological data.
The Bulletin is published annually for the distribution to the members of the
Society. Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers and do not necessarily
represent the views of the Society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1970 - 1971
President: JAY C. BLAINE (Dallas)
President-Elect: DR. E. Morr DAVIS (Austin)
Secretary-Treasurer: PAUL P. STEED (Dallas)
Editor: DR. JoEL L. SHINER (Dallas)
Editor-Elect: DAVID S. DmBLE (Austin)
Immediate Past-President: DR. DEE ANN STORY (Austin)
Directors (in addition to the above): ANNE Fox (San Antonio), WILLIAM L.
FULLEN (Deer Park), CHARLEs BANDY (Brownfield), JoHN W. GREEN (El
Paso), FRANCIS STICKNEY (Midland), HARRY SHAFER (Austin) .
Regional Vice Presidents: JAMES H. WoRD (Floydada), RoBERT ADAMS (Ft.
Worth), HuBERT AcHoR (Dallas), R. MILTON BELL (Mt. Pleasant), C. K.
CHANDLER ( Houston), RicHARD M. BoWEN (Corpus Christi), DR. REX GERALD (El Paso), MILEs P. LoCKE (Waco), HIRAM GREGORY (Natchitoches,
La.).

Membership and Publications
Membership in the Society is for the calendar year. Dues are as follows: Student
-$5.00; Regular-$7.50; Chartered Societies and lnstitutional-$10.00; Contributing-$25.00; Life-$150.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which
is published annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is mailed out about
four times a year. Back issues of the Bulletin, up to and including Volume #39,
that are still in print may be obtained for $5.00 per volume. Volumes #40 and
#41 are $7.50.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to SecretaryTreasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Southern Methodist University, Box 165,
Dallas, Texas 75222.

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST , 1991

Bulletin of the
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Volume 42, 1971

Editor: JOEL L. SHINER
Associate Edito1·: MAXINE SHINER
Assistant Editor: HUBERT ACHOR

Cover designed by HUBERT ACHOR

PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY AT DALLAS, TEXAS 1971

Printed by
SOUTHERN METHODIST UNIVERSITY PRINTING DEPARTMENT
DALLAS, TEXAS

TABLE OF CONTENTS

page
The John Pearce Site ( l6CD56): A San Patrice Site in Caddo
Parish, Louisiana.
by Clarence H . Webb, Joel L. Shiner and E Wayne Roberts

l

Archeological Investigations at the La Jita Site
Uvalde County, Texas.
by Thomas Roy Hester . .

51

Prehistoric Settlement of the De Cordova Bend Reservoir,
Central Texas.
by S. Alan Skinner . .

. 149

The Dunlap Complex in Western Central Crockett County,
Texas.
by James H. Word. . . . . . . . .

. 271

Notes on the Archeology of the Happy Patch Site, San Saba
County, Texas.
by L. M. Green . . . . . . . . . . . .

319

The Fullen Site, 41 HR 82
by Michael O'Brien, appendix by Robert Lankford.

335

An "Eolith" from Lower Pleistocene D eposits of Southern
Texas.
by Thomas Roy Hester . . . . . . . .

.

367

Book Reviews
Lithic Analysis and Cultural Inference: A Paleo-Indian
Case. Edwin H. Wilmsen.
by S. Alan Skinner . . . . . . . . .

.

373

A Comparison of Formative Cultures in the Americas,
Diffusion or the Psychic Unity of Man. James A Ford.
by Jon Gibson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 377
Letter to the Editor
from J. Ashley Sibley, Jr ..

. . . . . . . . . . . . 383

The John Pearce Site (16CD56):
A San Patrice Site in Caddo Parish, Louisiana
CLARENCE H. WEBB, JoEL L. SHINER and E. WAYNE RoBERTS
ABSTRACT
The John Pearce Site offers the first opportunity to study two lithic assemblages from a non-pottery site that has a preponderant representation of the
San Patrice projectile point type, with only minor representation of stemmed
Archaic points. Especial value is attached to the deeper zones in two excavated areas of the site in which there is a tight association of San Patrice
points, tools and chipping debris with no evidence of later Archaic admixture.

DESCRIPTION OF THE SITE AND AREA
The John Pearce Site ( 16CD56) is situated on the crest and slopes
of a spur which projects southward from a terrace formation into
the valley of Cypress Bayou (Fig. 1). The site is 15 miles SSW of
Shreveport and 2 miles south of the town of Keithville; the location
is SW7~ of NW74 of Section 8, Township 15N, Range 14W, Caddo
Parish, Louisiana. At this point the valley of Cypress Bayou, between hill crests, is one mile wide and the valley floor is 0.6 miles
in width. Active streams course near the valley margins, Cypress
Bayou-which forms the boundary between Caddo and DeSoto Parishes (Counties )-near the southern valley limit and Cypress Creek
immediately below the spur on which the site lies. These streams
unite east of the site and How northeastward to join Boggy, Gilmer
and Brush Bayous to form Wallace Lake (Fig. 1 B).
Atop the spur and along its eastern slope (Fig. 1 A) is a clearing
and cultivated field of approximately 5 acres, with the home of
the owner, John Pearce (now deceased) and his family. North of
the homestead are other fields and pasture lands; the uncultivated
slopes are heavily wooded. The crest of the spur is ovate in outline;
the east slope is gentle, the west slope rather steep to a gully in
which are evidences of a former spring. Southward there is a steep
drop from the crest to the valley, interrupted by a formerly cultivated
shoulder; the crest is about 25 feet above the valley floor. When we
first visited the site a relict cone of the eroded plateau, near the
stream, had artifacts on its slopes but during the excavations this
cone was removed for highway construction fill. Scattered artifacts
were found on the surface of the entire field and along an old road

2

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

that paralleled the lower margins between the spur and the stream.
The crest of the spur and its western slope are sand covered but
the eastern and n01thern slopes are denuded to compact red clay.
Excavation showed the red clay to underlie the sandy topsoil on the
crest. This combination of a light gray sandy topsoil underlain by
red or orange-red clay is frequent in the uplands of northwestern

JOHN
PEARCE
SITE
16-CD-56
W IT H

Fig. 1. The John Pearce Site. A: topography of the site and location of
the excavated areas. B: Caddo Parish with portions of Bossier and DeSoto
Parishes; note river valley, uplands and sites. C: general location.

JOHN PEARCE SITE

3

Louisiana and East Texas. A similar orange-red clay at the Wolfshead Site was identified (Duffield 1963) as Amite type and a riverine
deposit.
At the latitude of the John Pearce site the alluvial valley of Red
River (Fig. 1 B), eight miles northeastward, is at an elevation of
approximately 150 feet above sea level. The western valley margin
is marked by an abrupt escarpment of a relatively Hat formation
which averages 200 feet in elevation, except in eroded areas. This
Hat to mildly rolling terrace is attributed by R. J. LeBlanc (Baton
Rouge, La., 1948, unpublished data) to the Midway group of Paleocene formations in the Tertiary System, with Pleistocene (Quaternary) terrace formations along the valley contact zones. The undulating upland extends from Cross Lake, at the Shreveport level,
southward into DeSoto Parish, a distance of approximately 30 miles.
From the western margin of Red River valley it rises gradually to
the top of the watershed between the Red and Sabine River drainages, about 15 miles west of the Red. The watershed in the western
part of Caddo Parish, slanting into DeSoto Parish, is 250 to 300 feet
above sea level.
At the time of European contact this upland had extensive grasslands and was described by the Caddo Indians as one of their
"prairies." A similar but slightly higher formation is north of Shreveport, between Cross and Caddo Lakes (Fig. 1 B). The river valley,
clogged by the Great Raft, was deserted in late prehistoric and early
historic times, the people living along the lateral streams and in the
uplands. The upland country was farmed during the 19th century
but has been used more extensively during the present century for
cattle grazing, with limited farming. The topsoil is generally a gray
sand with thin humus; the narrow stream valleys have a more fertile
humus. The rolling nature of the upland is produced by the erosion
of many small dissecting streams which How eastward into the shallow marginal lakes bordering Red River valley. Growths of pines
preempt the higher elevations, while oaks and hickories have encroached on the grasslands and are heavy along the streams. There
are scattered gums, hawthorns, walnuts, persimmons, sassafras, hackberry, ash and elms, the usual upland assemblage of the Gulf Coastal
Plain (Webb et al., 1969:6). Bois d'arc (Osage orange) and many
shrubs are present and native fruits include wild plums, grapes,
berries, haws, persimmons and a variety of nuts.
Native small animal, bird and aquatic life has been abundant
during the past century. The Red River valley 'is a flyway for ducks
and geese and the shallow waters of the lateral lakes afford feeding

4

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

places for these migratmy fowl. The middens of prehistoric sites
with occupations during the past two millenia show numerous deer
bones and some bear; bison is missing. There have been occasional
finds of mastodon tusks and bones in the valley clays.
A respectable population during San Patrice times is indicated
by the occurrence of these points at 24 sites in Caddo Parish (Fig.
1 B) and some in adjoining parishes; at six sites more than single
finds are recorded. These are always in the uplands, along the small
streams or around the margins of the lakes or the valley.
EXCAVATION OF THE SITE
Initial exploration of the site and surface collections were conducted by Roberts during the summer of 1966. In September of
that year a joint visit by Roberts and Webb confirmed the previous
indication that this was predominantly a San Patrice Site. The decision was made to initiate excavations in the cultivated field, on
the crest of the spur. A line of 5 foot squares was staked along an
established axis to transect the sandy crest (Figs. 1 A, 2). A N-S
axis was established along the eastern edge of the sand, using magnetic nmth for the survey; a metal post was sunk at the intersection
of the axes for a permanent marker. The initial procedure was to
remove and sift the loose topsoil from the cultivation rows, then
excavate with trowels by six-inch levels. All dirt throughout the
excavations was sifted through one-half inch wire mesh. Unaltered
small fragments of ferruginous sandstone, hematite and petrified
wood, which occur naturally in this forn1ation, also recent debris,
were discarded; all other materials were sacked and labeled.
After the first two squares showed three natural soil zones, excavation by artificial layers was discarded in favor of the natural zones.
Most of the excavating was done by Roberts, with assistance when
possible by Webb. William LeGrande helped with the excavations
of Area A during the winter of 1968-9. Hosea Pearce, son of the
owner, was hired for sifting and worked in this capacity through
most of the excavation period; he also made surface collections
when conditions were favorable. Roberts kept a daily log, recording
possible features and disturbances. A record was also kept of those
objects found in disturbed soil, animal bmTows and other questionable proveniences. Relative depths of soil zones were recorded for
each square and profiles were taken intermittently by Webb.
Sixteen squares were removed across the ridge crest along the
E-W axis, W13 to E3. The profiles thus established (Fig. 2 B) showed
a surface layer (Zone 1) of sand to 6-8 inches in depth at the crest,

A:

w

SYMBOLS

1----------

®:DISTURBANCES
H:SAN "PATRICE VA'R. HOPE
J:5AN 'PATRICE YAR.5T.JOHNS
G: SAN "PATRICE VAR. GOODWIN
L: OTHER LANCEOLATE
K: SIDE NOTCHED POINTS
A: ARcHAIC PoiNTS

I

I

o

I()

1

1 1

n

I~ @
IK I I
IH

I" I I I

~

t11

>
!:l:i

C'l
M

CLAY-SAND
.
0

"'3

"'...,
H

1

I I IJAA

r •H I"

1

IJ I IK

A

I~

IJ

IH

lA

:.

H
0

"',.-

JHL IJG-

a

~

1 AR
11

~

1

3"
~

f

N

t

-

SfO

·so FT.

60

lA
@

K

H

~

I®

1 1 1A

OF
C •• »CRD55·5£CTION
££P D 15TU'RBJliiiC£
SfO

lo
1
"

OFT.

s ,10

~-

~__B' ~

IJ

~ ~~

2 REll
-~~
CLAY
A - .3 .b<..l.-"-"'-"-""'-"..l<.-"'-'0""->"""-"-"

5,80

4o-

S!tND
Oc: ORANGE
RC:RED BASAL CLRY

h

Wz

5,'10

~

t11

IJ

€1~

~@~

~

a

.--

J

1 L ~~ I

5

2-0

5:

iJ

~~

IK

0

VERTICRL SCRL! 2-X HO~/ZONTA L

~c

IH

HJJ

<....;

PROFILE ON W-E A)(/S

w~

K
H

HJ

B:

Sto

sro

s~o

SfO

E
'?

a-

-a

~

N,lo

Fig. 2. Excavations, Area A and B. B, C, D: profiles.

N,ZIJ

NfO

N~D

N 50
1

N?O

~

6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

diminishing to 5-6 inches at the western margin of the trench and
dwindling more rapidly on the eastern slope, to disappear at E3.
Zone l was disturbed by cultivation, with plow furrows gouging
into the underlying clay. Zone 2 was an orange-colored clay with
some sand admixture, 6 to 9 inches in thickness and undisturbed
by plowing under the crest. It showed cracks and pockets into which
sand had filtered, and was interrupted by burned stump holes and
numerous burrows of pocket gophers, other animals and insects.
Artifacts were found on the surface of this zone and distributed
throughout its depth; they were in smaller numbers in the sand of
Zone l. The basal dense red clay of Zone 3 showed less numerous
disturbances and contained few artifacts, except at its contact with
Zone 2. Several pits were dug into Zone 3 to a depth of three feet
from the surface and no change in its color or consistency was found.
Subsequent excavations were therefore carried into Zone 3 only
to a depth of 3 to 6 inches, well below evidences of soil change or
aboriginal artifacts.
Over the next year's time 189 squares were completed in the
cultivated field (Fig. 2, Area B). The excavated block extended
from S30 to the N55 lines; all except 9 were west of the N-S axis.
East of this line, south of S20 and north of N50 lines there were
few artifacts found. We decided to terminate excavations in the
field and to investigate the uncultivated area south of the field, on
the brow of the spur. Much of this is wooded but one clearing,
marked by a clump of oleander shrubs, probably was the yard of
a fonner dwelling. We had found late 19th century glass, crockery,
clay pipe fragments and metal objects in the sandy topsoil over
the southern pa1t of the field.
The N-S survey line was extended southward and Area A (Fig. 2)
was staked in 5-foot squares. Excavations were immediately productive and were continued intermittently until the end of February,
1969. They were limited southward and eastward by the steep drop,
which was found to be sterile, and westward by the heavy cover
of pines.
In Area A, the sand topsoil of Zone 1 had very few artifacts, even
:Bakes, in comparison with Zone 1 of the cultivated field. Most objects were found in the orange clay-sand of Zone 2, except in two
features (Fig. 2). The artifacts seemed to have been disturbed very
little, often lying :Bat on top of Zone 2 or within its upper 3 inches.
This suggests that many of the artifacts of Zone 1 in the field (Area
B) had been moved by cultivation.

JOHN PEARCE SITE

7

FEATURES
A large feature in Area A, thought to be aboriginal, centered at
the intersection of lines W15 and S75 and involved four squares.
It was cleared of the topsoil and excavated as a unit. In Zone 2 it
showed as a darker mixture of sand and clay, contrasting with the
orange clay of this zone; it was irregular in outline and approximately five feet in diameter. Penetrating into the red clay of Zone 3, the
pit ended 14 inches below the Zone 2-3 junction (Fig. 2 C). Several
artifacts were found in the mixed soil of the pit and a number of
end and side scrapers, used and unused Hakes, a core of red chert
and two San Patrice points were found in Zone 2 around the margins of the pit. Two lanceolate points, one certainly and one possibly
of Clovis type (Fig. 7 d, e), were found lying flat on the smooth
bottom of the pit.
The second feature centered at the intersection of lines W5 and
S70. It was 36 inches in diameter, was first noted in the orange clay
of Zone 2 and extended into the red clay of Zone 3 for a total depth
of 16 inches. It was filled with a mixture of sand and clay, lighter
in color and softer in consistency than the surrounding clay; tiny
fragments of char were noted in the adjacent clay of Zone 2 but none
in the pit. Twenty-four used and unused flakes, a number of pebbles, many small sandstone fragments and one point of San Patrice
type were found in the mixed soil of the feature. The orange clay
of Zone 2 surrounding the feature also showed a heavy concentration
of flakes, flake tools, partially flaked chert cores, sandstone fragments and three projectile points, two of San Patrice and one of side
notched types. Altogether, this was the heaviest concentration of
aboriginal objects found at the site.
It is conceivable that either or both of these features could represent aboriginal pits; the evidence is uncertain. The numerous interruptions in Area B (Fig. 2), in the cultivated field, are almost certainly post-occupation. Most of them show char resultant from forest
clearing and burning of stumps; this is definite for the larger disturbances in Squares N4W4-5 and S3W8, even though both have
surrounding concentrations of artifacts. Wood char and ashes were
found in both, extending downward in typical root distribution.
Nowhere were there evidences of firepits or hearths; no bone, shell
or antler were found, and all of the charcoal found was suspected,
unfortunately, of being recent in origin. A few circular dark molds
in the clay could have been small tree molds or post molds, and none
of them showed patterning.

8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

MATERIAL REMAINS
Many site reports, after description of the techniques and results
of exploration, will present the total body of material remains almost
as a unitary group of associated objects, then attempt a separation
into assemblages. The concept of assemblages that the reader may
acquire depends on the success of the exploration in achieving a
separation of the habitation units, the clarity of the author's presentation, and-too often-the reader's own industry in wading through
a mass of detail to formulate his judgments.
The authors prefer to shift the methodology of reporting herewith
to place primary emphasis on the separate total assemblages afforded
by the excavations, presenting them as units. Clarke ( 1968:2:10) has
defined an archeological assemblage: "Archeological usage has established an archeological assemblage as ... an associated set of contemporary artifact types. The important aspects of an artifact assemblage under this definition are that the artifacts may belong to
more than one type and that they occur together in definite contemporary association with one another."
The above statement at least partially defines our perspective and
foreshadows one of the hypotheses that will be made, namely that
each of the two assemblages at the site represents the surviving
material manifestations of a settlement. Each settlement presumably
was representative of a cultmal system, probably a dialectal tribe.
There are two discrete groupings of artifacts at the John Pearce
Site, represented by the objects from Area A and the objects from
the deeper (clay) levels of Area B (Table I). To the best of om
knowledge, there are no phenomena discernible in the stratigraphy
(sequence of geological and cultural events) that suggest anything
other than two separate encampments. Thus, there are available
for analysis two collections of artifacts each of which appears to
represent a component of a prehistoric culture.
TABLE I
Distribution of Artifacts
Debris
Debitage
Use retouch
Tools
Total

Area A

Area B

196 - 55%
7 - 2%

321 - 57%
8 - 1%

39 - 11%

41 - 7%

113 - 32%

196 - 35%

355 -100%

566 -100%

9

JOHN PEARCE SITE

Distribution of Debris
Area A

Area B

Chips
Cortex
Cores

93 - 47%

157 - 49%

55 - 28%
27 - 14%

107 - 33%

Biface thinning flakes

21 - 11%

Total

196 -100%

30 27 -

9%
8%

321 - 99%

Objects from the disturbed sand level of Area B and from the
surface of the site will only be enumerated, virtually as an appendix, to give some idea of subsequent occupations of the site and the
presence elsewhere on the site of items similar to or identical with
those from the excavated assemblages. These will not be treated
as an assemblage or subjected to analysis because of the uncertainty
of temporal or cultural associations and the fact that they cannot
be conceived of as constituting any cultural component.
The material remains have been studied independently and jointly
by Shiner and Webb, but the exhaustive typological studies of manufacturing techniques and usage marks were done by Shiner in the
Southern Methodist University laboratories, as were the correlative
analyses. In this report Shiner has assumed responsibility for description of all objects other than projectile points, which is done by
Webb. Studies of raw materials were carried out independently and
later correlated.
The authors are indebted to the following persons who have given
opinions about various objects or aspects of the study: H. M. Wormington, M/Sgt. James Grady, Don E. Crabtree, Carl H. Chapman,
Walter E. Klippel, J. B. Sollberger, Fred Wendorf, R. King Harris,
Dee Ann Story, Jay C. Blaine and Hiram Gregory. We are especially
grateful to Hubert Achor for the painstaking photography.
Historical classes seem to be applicable to the projectile points
but not to other tools. The San Patrice point varieties are separable
by co-variance of attributes, even if no explanation of the variation
is forthcoming in this report.
Unifacial tools which include the scrapers, notched pieces, gravers,
and the like, are presented according to a morphological typology
that incorporates shape plus manufacturing process. Superimposed on
the morphology but not a part of it was a "functional" analysis of
the edged and pointed tools. This analysis demonstrates a high level
of coincidence between tool classes and wear pa_ttems. For example,
end-scrapers show wear polish only on the end, regardless of re-

10

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

touched edges elsewhere, gravers show polish on the tip and preforms show no wear at all.
On edged tools the edge angles were measured to determine whether there were consistent parameters for tool classes, and there were.
These angles do nothing toward establishing the nature of the activity
for which the objects were designed, showing only that form and
function appear to coincide.
A separate system of analysis was employed on the chipping debris.
Cores, chips, cortex flakes, biface thinning flakes and debitage are
viewed as remains of probable steps in the manufacture of tools.
However, the relative frequencies of these categories may be useful
in comparing or contrasting cultural components.
Areas A and B show significant and consistant similarities in typological categories, technological attributes, apparent motor habits of
tool use, and employment of raw materials. We are dealing with
discrete, noncontiguous areas, a large number of variables, and apparently adequate samples from each of the areas.
The full description of the tools, informal tools and debris, together with technological observations, is presented below. First, each
assemblage is treated separately, then the two assemblages are compared, and finally an explanation is sought for the resemblance.
AREA A
The material remains from Area A total 355 objects (Table I) , of
which 113 ( 32%) are chipped stone tools, 39 ( 11%) are use retouch
specimens and 203 (57%) are debris and debitage. Table II lists
the chipped stone tools as major tool classes; in this tabulation and
that of Table IV the presumed projectile points and fragments thereof
are included among the chipped stone tools.
TABLE II
Chipped Stone Tools, Area A
San Patrice points
Side notched points
Lanceolate points
Point fragments
End-scrapers
Side-scrapers
Side notched scrapers
Raclettes
Denticulates
Notched flakes
Gravers, borers

19
6
5
9
12
7
2
12
3
2
13

-

16.7%
5.3%
4.4%
8.0%
10.6%
6.2%
1.8%
10.6%
2.7%
1.8%
11.5%

11

JOHN PEARCE SITE

Drills
Bifaces
Bur ins
Scaled pieces
Retouched Hakes
Varia
Total

1 - 0.9%
13 - 11.5%
2 - 1.8%

5 -

4.4%

1 1 -

0.9%
0.9%

113 -100.0%

CHIPPED STONE TOOLS, AREA A
SAN PATRICE POINTS

Nineteen points from Area A that are classified as San Patrice
type include 12 of variety hope and 7 of variety st. fohns, as defined
by Duffield ( 1963). Those of variety hope (Fig. 3) are stubby fluted
points with comparatively wide basal segments that have smoothed
lateral and basal concavities, and a short triangular body.
Measurements of San Patrice variety hope from Area A, in millimeters, are: length, average 32.3, range 23 to 43; width at shoulder,
average 25.2, range 22 to 32; width at base, average 21.3, range 18.5
to 24; maximum thickness, average 6.2, range 5 to 8; thickness across
shoulder, average 5.9, range 4.7 to 7.3; height of basal concavity,
average 3.5, range 2.5 to 6; width of lateral notch, average 15.2, range
12 to 20. The length/width ratio averages 1.28/l.
The bases have arcuate concavities, with edges ground smooth,
rarely showing residues of fluting platforms, but often having traces
of minimal unifacial fine retouch. They were thinned by bifacial
removal of one to three channel flakes to produce a fluting that
extends to mid-point or beyond. The length of fluting scars averages
14.4 mm. One-fourth of the major flutes terminate in a hinge fracture.
The thinning scars involve most of the basal width, leaving narrow,
steep ridges laterally. The surface from the lateral margins to these
ridges was steepened by fine retouch before grinding.
The distal body segment, typically an almost equilateral triangle,
appears to have been sharpened by bilateral, bifacial pressure retouch which left narrow parallel scars from the edge to the flute
margin, perpendicular to the edge and therefore diagonal to the long
axis of the point. The thickest part of the point is usually just distal
to the flute channel and the thickness was often reduced by steep
beveling, placed on the left margin of one or both faces. Beveling
is noted on two-thirds of variety hope, on the right edge in only one
instance.
Examination of the points under magnification shows, wherever one
can be certain, that lateral flaking was done after the fluting spalls

12

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

Fig. 3. San Patrice variety hope projectile points, John Pearce Site. Specimens i and 1 termed variety goodwin by Duffield . Specimen n, large variety
hope. Full size.

JOHN PEARCE SITE

13

had been thrown. The following steps seem to be indicated in manufacture of San Patrice points: initial stages of roughing out and
primary thinning as described under "Preforms;" preparation of the
base and basal platforms by pressure flaking; detaching the longitudinal fluting spalls from each face, occasionally a single wide flake
but more often one on each side of the midline and, quite often on
San Patrice variety hope, a final long central spall (in this instance
the lateral flakes seem to have been preparatory to the final); shaping of the lateral margins of the base by pressure retouch; grinding
of the basal and lateral margins (this could have preceded or followed sharpening of the distal body); and finally the thinning, beveling, and sharpening of the distal body.
The distal edges are slightly sinuous when viewed tangentially
but are not serrated. The tips are usually sharp but occasionally are
obtuse. In two instances resharpening is suggested by the accentuation of the shoulders and concavity of the lateral edge just above
the shoulder, but beveling and retouch of the lateral edges seem
generally to be part of the initial manufacturing process. Smoothing
of the flake ridges and distinct patination are frequent.
San Patrice variety st. fohns (Fig. 4) is chiefly distinguished from
variety hope by the presence of short, low concavities produced by
side or corner notching, ground smooth. The st. fohns points are consistently more slender and thin, hence are lighter and more delicate
than variety hope.
Measurements in millimeters of the seven specimens of st. fohns
variety from Area A are: length ( 6 specimens), average 31.6, range
20-39; width at shoulder, average 19.9, range 18 to 22; width at
base ( 5 specimens), average 16.4, range 10.5 to 21; maximum thickness, average 4.46, range 4.1 to 4.8; thickness across shoulder, average
3.6, range 3.1 to 4.2; height of basal concavity ( 5 specimens), average
2.6, range 2 to 3.5; width of lateral notch ( 6 specimens), average
. 7.4, range 7 to 8. The. length/width ratio averages 1.55/1.
The bases have concavities that are narrower and shallower than
in variety hope; they may be arcuate or V-shaped. Fluting is hifacial and three flute scars are less frequent than one or two. Platform residues are rare and nne pressure retouch of the base is infrequent; most often the thin base was simply ground smooth after
fluting was completed. The average thickness between troughs of the
flutes at shoulder level is only 2.8 mm. , indicating the effectiveness
of the thinning maneuvers.
The basal notches vary in placement and execution ( Fig. 4) . Some
are shallow concavities similar to those of variety hope but narrower

14

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

b

c
d

e

h

Fig. 4. San Patrice variety st. johns projectile points; a-d, variant sizes and
forms; e-1, typical outlines, notches and flutes. Full size.

and relatively deeper; others are more distinct notches directed inward from the lower body edge or diagonally upward from the corner. In this respect San Patrice variety st. johns is intermediate between variety hope and the side notched points in this assemblage.
The notches were effected by 3 to 6 tiny bifacial pressure B.akings;
sometimes a single curving Hake was removed from one face to

JOHN PEARCE SITE

15

produce the center. Notch edges are ground. The width of notches
averages half that of the hope variety.
The distal body is also more varied than on variety hope; long or
short triangles and leaf shapes are seen. Edges are straight or convex
in almost equal numbers, rarely concave. The long narrow thinning
flakes, perpendicular to the edge, are less distinctly diagonal than in
variety hope. Edges are generally sharp, mildly sinuous but not serrated, and the tips tend to be keen. Resharpening seems probable
on some points but edge beveling is less frequent and less noticeable
than in variety hope, due to the thinness of the bodies. When present,
beveling is on the left edge.
SIDE NOTCHED POINTS

The six side notched points from Area A do not fit any named type.
On the basis of noted attributes two varieties are established.
Variety A, four specimens (Fig. 5). These objects have: (1) low
side or corner notches, ( 2) straight or slightly concave bases that
equal or are slightly less than the maximum body width, ( 3) convex
and serrated body edges and ( 4) small size, similar to those of San
Patrice, with thicknesses greater than variety st johns but less than
variety hope. They lack the high basal concavity and the long thinning flutes of San Patrice points.
Measurements of the four specimens, in millimeters: length, average 35.2, range 25 to 44; maximum width, average 22.5, range 18 to
27; width at base, average 17.8, range 17 to 18; maximum thickness,
average 5.5, range 5 to 5.7; width of notch, average 6.75, range 6 to 8.
The body outlines (Fig. 5 c, f-h) are trianguloid in three instances,
spade-shaped in one. The bases are relatively wide, equaling the
maximum body width in two instances, narrower in two; two of the
bases are mildly concave, one is questionable and one is straight. The
bases are thinned by tiny retouch flaking and, in two instances, by
unilateral short ( 10 mm.) central flutes; all bases are ground. The
notches are narrower and slightly deeper than those of San Patrice
variety st. johns but are made as described for that type variety; some
notches are ground, others not. The faces tend to be flat or mildly
rounded, not ridged, and were formed by irregular baton flaking, then
sharpening of the edges by pressure retouch that is less regular than
on San Patrice points but is closely placed and alternating, thus producing serration as well as sinuosity. Tips are only fair on three specimens but one (Fig. 5 h) shows slight recurve of the distal edges to
form a keen tip. Three of the specimens have beveling, left bifacial
on two and right on one.

16

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c
a

d

b

e

f

Fig. 5. Side notched points, variety A, from John Pearce Site. Full size.

Variety B, two specimens (Fig. 6 a) . These objects are characterized by ( 1) a triangular outline, ( 2) low shallow side notches,
( 3) concave bases that are wider than the bodies, ( 4) absence of edge
serration and ( 5) small size but with thicknesses that exceed San
Patrice and variety A side notched points.
Measurements: One object is 32 mm. long, 20 mm. wide at the
shoulder and 23 at the base, and 7.3 mm. thick. The other is 26 mm. in

17

JOHN PEARCE SITE

length, 17 mm. in shoulder and 20 in basal widths, and 7.5 mm. thick.
One of these objects is rather crude but the other is more graceful
in appearance; neither has the quality of workmanship that is usually
seen on San Patrice type. The smaller object is broken at the base and
does not have the concavity and grinding seen on the other (Fig. 6 a).
Each has grinding of only one notch; both show thinning of the base
by short channel flakes, up to 10 mm. in length. The chipping technique is much as described for Variety A and left beveling is present.
LANCEOLATE POINTS

Two of the five lanceolate points were found together at the bottom
of the darker sand and clay which appeared as a pit in Area A. The
larger point (Fig. 7 d) is of white-speckled honey colored quartzite
or chalcedony. It is ovate in outline with concave base and lenticular
cross-section. The length is 50 mm., the midpoint width 25 mm, the
basal width 21 mm., and the maximal thickness is 6.4 mm. The faces
are not ridged but are rounded by the shallow primary flaking. The
edges are sharpened over the distal halves by fine retouch; the proximal halves are ground smooth. The concave base is thinned by bifacial

c

e

g

Fig. 6. Side notched points, variety B. Note wide bases. Full size.

d

18

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

fluting. On one face two channel scars are 17 and 23 mm. in length;
on the opposite face there are lateral remains of two preparatory flakings, then a deeper central flute which is 6-8 mm. wide and 17 mm.
long. A naiTow platform remnant was removed from the basal center
by a tiny pressure flake; the basal concavity, 4 mm. deep, is ground
smooth. The senior author considered it to be of Clovis type and
H. M. Wormington (personal communication 1969) says of it "the
whole fluted point is a good Clovis, very similar to some from the
Murray Springs site in Arizona and other Southwestern sites- even the
material would fit in." Shiner and Fred Wendorf (personal communi-

a

c

e

Fig. 7. Lanceolate points from John Pearce Site; a, b, Pelican points; c,
Meserve point; d, e, Clovis points. Full size.

JOHN PEARCE SITE

19

cation, 1970) have some reservations and prefer to regard it as an
untyped lanceolate.
The second point from the pit is a small lanceolate ( Fig. 7 e) made
of white-speckled gray chert, thought to be of central Texas origin.
The length is 42.5 mm., the maximum width 16 and the basal width
15 mm., with a maximum thickness of 5 mm. The edges are parallel
on the proximal half, outcurving at the distal third, then rounding in
to an obtuse tip. The basal half of each edge and the mildly concave
base are ground. The base is beveled on one face by three narrow
flake scars· on each side and a larger central scar that thins the base
for 4 mm. upward; the opposite face shows two longer flake channels
that meet at the center and thin the base for 8 mm. upward. The body
faces are convex with shallow flaking over the center and narrow
ripple flaking around the margins; the cross section is lenticular. Sharp
and slightly sinuous edges result. If this point were doubled in size it
would duplicate most Clovis points found in northwestern Louisiana
(Webb 1948, Fig. 45 ). Gagliano and Gregory (1965, Fig. 3 e) illustrate a similarly tiny Clovis point.
The remaining three lanceolate points are less well made. One of
banded white, gray and pink chert, presumably of Central Texas
origin, is broken transversely at about midpoint. There is shallow
percussion flaking but no edge retouch and no basal or edge grinding.
The base is concave and three conventional flutings are on one face
but the opposite has only two abortive lateral attempts with no central flute, possibly because of the gnarled character of the flint. It is
possible that this specimen was broken in manufacture. The other two
specimens are ovate lanceolates made of local tan chert. One is 42 mm.
long, 25 mm. in maximal width and 4.9 mm. thick. It has excellent
primary flaking and a few small pressure flakings at the base and tip.
The base has a shallow concavity and is partially ground; one face
shows thinning by two short transverse flake scars, while the converse
has diagonal scars. The final specimen is 49 mm. long, 27 mm. wide
and 6.2 mm. thick. It was made from a thin pebble and flat cortex is
in the center of one face; the opposite face is flattened by large shallow
flake scars. The edges are sharpened by large and small flake scars.
The narrow, straight base is unfluted.
POINT FRAGMENTS

There are 9 fragments of projectile points from Area A, broken in
ways which prevent classification. Materials from which these were
made are included in Table III.

20

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

END-SCRAPERS

The class is defined as consisting of unifacially flaked tools with
steep retouch at the end of the Hake or blade opposite the platform.
The steep retouch is stepped and the retouched area is convex in plan.
There are 12 of this class in Area A.
The average length ( 10 complete specimens) is 23.4 mm., measured
along the axis of the Hake. Average width is 19.2 mm., measured at
the bit ( Movius et al. 1968: ll). The average edge angle is about 77
degrees, with difficulties in measurements making it impractical to be
more precise.
There are other attributes of the end-scrapers that are of particular
interest in that they appear on these objects and at other sites. They
concern deliberately chipped sharp comers and comer spurs (Irwin
and Wormington 1970:28). Seven specimens from Area A have simple
rounded bits (Fig. 8 a, b). Two specimens have "square" sharp corners, two have single retouched beaks or spurs (Fig. 8 c), and one
end-scraper has a retouched beak on both lateral edges.
SIDE-SCRAPERS

These tools are infrequent, only seven occurring in Area A, and they
are also heterogeneous and varied. They are made on Hakes as well as
Hat pebbles, and have convex as well as straight edges. Thus they fail
to meet any kind of rigid morphological typology except for the
presence of regular, stepped "cutting" edges with angles near 70 degrees. The range is from 62 to 83 degrees. The lengths cluster around
38 mm. and widths around 27 mm. Side-scrapers are on thick sturdy
edges in contrast to the raclettes. Some retouch on opposite edges
may be considered backing ( 3 specimens).
SIDE NOTCHED SCRAPERS

A ve1y special side-scraper appears in both Areas A and B of the
John Pearce Site. It is unifacial, side notched like a projectile point,
and is made on thin tabular pebbles of tan chert. This form has been
reported in the past (Webb 1946, Duffield 1963) as Albany spokeshave.
Duffield ( 1963:113) reports two specimens "apparently made on reworked projectile points." Webb ( 1946:10 plate 1) prefened the term
Albany scraper but also used the alternate term "spokeshave." We
prefer to term these objects side notched scrapers because the bevel
angle is similar to those of other scrapers. Some of the objects have
convex or straight edges, and there is no evidence of a functional use
as a "spokeshave." It is conceivable that the presence or depth of concavity of the beveled edge may depend on resharpening.

21

JOHN PEARCE SITE

b

c

a.

d

g

h

e

CM

m
Fig. 8. Various Stone Tools, John Pearce Site: a, b end-scrapers; c, d endscrapers with corner spurs; e, f raclettes; g notch; h denticulate; graver,
multiple; j scaled piece; k side-scraper; 1 drill; m burin.

22

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

RACLETTES

Thin edges, light retouch covering only part of an edge, and considerable variation in length-width ratios characterize this class (Fig.
8 e, f), which numbers 12 in Area A. The above attributes, however,
are comparative rather than definitive.
Metrically, the raclettes range from 4 mm. down to 2 mm. in thickness of bits, with an average of less than 3 mm., whereas the sidescrapers range in thickness from 4 mm. to 10 mm., with an average of
6 mm. Edge angles on all side-scrapers are over 60 degrees, while on
raclettes all but one specimen have angles under 57 degrees. The
single exception is only 2 mm. thick. Thus, the distinctive attributes of
raclettes are edge angles close to 52 degrees and thicknesses of bits
( Movius et al. 1968:11) close to 3 mm. On the specimens that are
difficult to classify, we have resorted to the flake or blade thickness.
The minimum thickness for flakes made into side-scrapers is 7 mm.
and the maximum thickness for flakes made into raclettes is 6 mm.
Nine specimens have a single working edge while three are worked
on both lateral edges.
DENTICULATES AND NOTCHED FLAKES

Several contiguous notches on a flake or blade produce a serrated
edge. We do not know the function of the denticulate tools (Fig. 8 h)
and the sample, 3 specimens, is too small for much speculation on
sizes and shapes. Pieces with single or non-contiguous notches (Fig.
8 g) do not provide clues to their function in the form of wear patterns.
GRAVERS AND BORERS

These tools are linked as a class because of the similarity of shape
and process of manufacture. There are 12 gravers (Fig. 8 i) from Area
A. They are unifacially chipped to a delicate point or beak. The single
borer is formed by chipping one edge of the bit from the dorsal surface and one edge from the ventral. This gives a "twist" to the tool.
DRILLS

The single specimen (Fig. 8 I) is classical in that it has all of the
attributes usually assigned to "drills." The bit is bifacially flaked to a
thick lenticular cross-section. The base is expanding, oval and flaked
all over. There is a slight taper along the bit, although the greater part
of it might be described as parallel edged. Wear on both edges is as
heavy at 4 em. away from the tip as it is at a distance of 1 em. It is
difficult to see how drilling could produce this kind of wear.
BIF ACE "PREFORMS"

A complete range of variation is included among these 13 objects,

JOHN PEARCE SITE

23

from the earliest stage of "roughing out" to the last stage of pressure
flaking before completion. (These are similar to specimens illush·ated
from Area B, Fig. 10 g, h, i). Evidence to support the following postulation is presented in various parts of this paper but may be summed
up by stating that we believe that projectile points were produced in
three or four major stages. First, thin tabular pebbles or possibly large
flakes were roughed out with hard percussors. The second stage thinned the bifaces by percussion, leaving the distal end thicker than the
proximal or basal. A third stage removed flutes from those points, like
San Patrice, that were fluted, presumably by pressure. The last stage
applied pressure retouch to even out the edges, thin the distal segment
and point the objects, after which grinding smoothed the bases and
notches. In nearly every case it is obvious why the preforms were
abandoned. Most were broken, some developed knots or bulges because of hinged thinning flakes, and some were discarded because the
material was flawed. There is no evidence of wear on the edges or tips
and it is our opinion that none of this group is a :finished tool; no good
purpose seems to be served to describe the forms, many of which
relate to the raw materials.
BUlliNS

Burins have been described in numerous publications. The two represented in Area A are: burin-on-truncation and burin-on-snapped
piece (Fig. 8 m). Both have spalls removed from the distal end and
directed parallel to the main flake axis.
SCALED PIECES

Four examples are of the local chert. These are thin flakes, altered
by removing flat flakes from all directions on both faces, to produce
an irregularly rectangular outline. The result resembles a bipolar core
that has been rotated and then turned over for fmther flaking. Since
these pieces are as small as the smallest :finished tools in the assemblage, it is difficult to visualize them as cores. Any flakes removed
from then would be smaller than any of the tools.
RETOUCHED FLAKES

A single retouched flake from Area A is chipped along part of one
edge in the manner of a raclette. It is not as formal a tool as the
raclette, but the retouch is deliberate.
VARIA

One example, an end-scraper made on a former lanceolate point, is
the only member of this class. It is 30 mm. long, 25 mm. wide, and has
an edge angle of about 60 degrees.

24

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
UsE REToucH

Thirty-nine objects from Area A were classified as showing use retouch, which is primarily of a sort that might be expected if the flake
or blade edges had been used in scraping and slicing motions. Two or
three corners are polished as if they had been used as gravers. This
group forms 11 percent of all artifacts in Area A.
It is always difficult to sort these artifacts with a high degree of
confidence. Our approach has been to examine all flakes and blades
before making decisions. Bag or trowel retouch is highly irregular in
position, direction and intensity, and includes V-shaped notches. Deliberate retouch has often been defined as patterned and regular, but
it should consist of chipping too forceful to be the result of mere use.
Replicative experiments were employed as a suggestion of the amount
of force used in producing chipped and worn edges; these included
scraping, hacking and sawing on wood, green bone and horn. The
kind of retouch resultant from these actions determined the attributes
of the class of "use retouch".
CHIPPING DEBRIS

The sample of chipping debris and debitage totals 203 objects among
the entire total of 355 artifacts from Area A, or 57 percent. Included
are the categories of chips, cortex flakes, debitage, cores and biface
thinning flakes. For a breakdown of the frequency of these classes see
Table I.
The sample of debris is smaller than it should be, since the excavated dirt was passed through a half-inch screen. A number of small
chips may have been overlooked, but the same standards of collecting
were imposed everywhere (Shiner 1970:30-32). Frequencies for various categories are therefore not affected in contrasting Areas A and
B, but the extra-site comparisons will be distorted in the classes of
technological attributes, if different methods were used.
Debris is indicative of specific chipping activity. Both areas show
evidence of considerable cortex removal, especially involving local
raw materials. Both areas show that biface foliates were thinned there
in significant numbers. Cores for the production of flakes are numerous,
as might be expected in view of the large number of small flake tools.
TECHNOLOGICAL 0BSERVA TIONS
BLADE-TOOL INDEX

Projectile points and point fragments were not considered since
there are no remaining clues as to whether they were made on flakes
or blades. Of the 74 other tools in Area A, 3 are made on blades, an
index of 4 percent. This is extremely low and in no way indicative of

25

JOHN PEARCE SITE

the deliberate production of blades. In addition to the tools, useretouch is present on 4 blades.
RAW MATERIAL

The selection of raw materials from which things are made constitutes a cultural choice only when there is more than one source. From
the excavations at the John Pearce Site we find both local and exotic
stone. The local rolled pebbles are chert and range in color from light
yellow, buff or tan through brown to black. All shades may appear
within a single pebble. Local uplands are strewn with tabular cleavages of petrified wood which is mostly granular but is sometimes
capable of conchoidal fracture. Only the finer grained petrified wood
can be studied morphologically because chipping of the granular
material looks the same as natural exfoliation.
Exotic materials include gray or gray-green flint, gray-white fossiliferous chert, white or gray novaculite, and gray, pink or banded
quartzites.
Table III illustrates the frequencies of kinds of materials used in the
several artifact classes and also compares the raw materials of Areas
A and B.
TABLE III
Raw Materials, Areas A and B
Non Tools
Local chert
Petrified wood
Exotic Hint/chert
Quartzite
Other
Total

Area A
131
49
36
22
4

- 54%
- 20%
- 15%
- 9%
- 2%

Area B
239
58
38
15
20

- 65%
- 16%
- 10%
- 4%
- 5%

242 -100%

370 -100%

Tools (except points)
Local chert
Petrified wood
Exotic Hint/chert
Quartzite
Other

49 - 66%
6- 8%
16 - 22%
2 - 3%
1 - 1%

104 - 68%
11 - 7%
23 - 15%
8 - 5%
10 - 6%

Total

74 -100%

156 -101%

Pro;ectile points and fragments
Local chert
Petrified wood
Exotic Hint/chert
Quartzite
Other
Total
Grand Total

30
1
7
1

- 77.0%
- 2.5%
- 18.0%
- 2.5%

0 - 0
39 -100.0%
355

28
1
9
1
1

- 70.0%
- 2.5%
- 22.5%
- 2.5%
- 2.5%

40 -100.0%
566

26

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Three-fourths of the projectile points and point fragments from
Area A are of local chert, and half are of local tan-buff chert. Lesser
frequencies of the other tools are of local chert, probably because
petrified wood was satisfactory for some of the less formal classes.
EDGE ANGLES

Tools with unifacial retouch are assumed to be all sorts of things by
different researchers, often by analogy or, possibly, intuition. The
scrapers and raclettes at John Pearce Site were classified according to
shape and process of manufacture. The classes were then tested by
examining edge angles and, later, wear patterns.
Scrapers had been divided into end, side, transverse and raclette
classes. All scraper edge angles were measured more or less by the
technique published by Wilmsen ( 1970), except that we found a
goniometer easier to handle than coordinate graph paper.
End-scrapers range from over 60 degrees to just over 85 degrees,
with an average of 77 degrees. Side-scrapers were not recovered in
sufficient numbers to permit a significant statement about angles, but
they average around 70 degrees. Raclettes show very different edge
angles, with an average of 52 degrees and a range from about 40 to
65 degrees.
WEAR PATTERNS

Clear wear patterns were observable on end and side-scrapers,
gravers and borers; less definite facets were found on raclettes and
notched pieces.
Although lateral edges on end-scrapers are often chipped, the wear
is always on the cortex end opposite the bulb and platform. Endscrapers were pulled toward the user with the ventral side facing him,
and there is no wear visible on the ventral face. On side-scrapers, the
direction of use is similar, but the attributes of form and size suggest
that several functions may have been filled. On other tools, gravers
show wear only at their tips, borers show rotary wear and denticulates
show polish on their "teeth."
There is good consonance, therefore, among the morphological,
technological and functional attributes of the various groups of objects
toward validating the established classes.
AREAB
There is a total of 566 objects from the clay levels of Area B, of
which 196 ( 35 percent) are chipped stone tools, 41 ( 7 percent) are
use ret~uch objects, and 329 (58 percent) are debris and debitage.
All references to Area B hereafter concerns this assemblage of objects
from the clay levels.

27

JOHN PEARCE SITE

The list of chipped stone tools in Table IV was compiled using the
same attributes that were considered for Area A.
TABLE IV
Chipped Stone Tools, Area B
San Patrice points
Side notched points
Lanceolate points
Stemmed points
Point fragments
End-scrapers
Side-scrapers
Side notched scrapers
Raclettes
Denticulates
Notched Hakes
Gravers, borers
Drills
Bifaces (unfinished)
Burins
Scaled pieces
Retouched Hakes
Varia
Total
CmPPED STONE

20
4
3
1
12
31
12
3
16
6

5
24
0
27
3
5
21
3

- 10.2%
- 2.1%
- 1.5%
- 0.5%
- 6.1%
- 15.8%
- 6.1%
- 1.5%
- 8.2%
- 3.1%
- 2.6%
- 12.2%
- 0 .0%
- 13.8%
- 1.5%
- 2.6%
- 10.7%
- 1.5%

196 100.0%

TooLs, AREA B

SAN PATRICE POINTS

The 20 San Patrice points from Area B include 13 of variety hope
and 7 of variety st johns.
The points of San Patrice variety hope (Fig. 3) include three larger
specimens that might be incorporated in Duffield's ( 1963) San Patrice
variety goodwin (Fig. 3, i, 1). This variety was established on the
basis of only one specimen at the Wolfshead Site and the statement
that such points have been found at a site in Jasper County, Texas.
The specimens from the John Pearce Site appear to fall within the
range of typology of San Patrice variety hope, differing only in large
size and high basal concavity. Until more convincing evidence of
typological and temporal differences are presented we prefer to consider these objects as large examples of variety hope.
Measurements in millimeters of San Patrice variety hope from Area
B: length ( 10 specimens), average 34.6, range 26 to 46; width at
shoulder ( 12 specimens) , average 23.8, range 22 to 26; width at base
( 10 specimens), average 21.5, range 18 to 24.5; maximum thickness,
average 6.6, range 4.4 to 7.4; thickness across shoulder, average 6,

28

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

range 3.4 to 7; height of basal concavity, average 4.4, range 2 to 7;
width of lateral notch, average 14.8, range 10 to 20. The length/width
ratio of 10 whole specimens is 1.45/ 1.
The chief differences in measurements between the specimens of
this variety in Area B from those described from Area A are in greater
length, greater height of basal concavity and larger length/width
ratios. The two latter attributes are probably resultant from the extra
length, which is reflected both in average and range of lengths. The
average and range of all other measurements are very similar from
the two areas. It is to be noted, with respect to size, that the most
massive (relatively) of all variety hope points is a specimen (Fig. 3
n) from Area A.
Apart from these differences in measurements, the points of this
variety from Area B differ little from the descriptions from Area A.
One of the larger points from Area B (Fig. 3 I) has a V-shaped instead of arcuate basal concavity, and the body edges are recurved
(possibly from resharpening). Another (Fig. 3 i) has convex body
edges and a more slender outline than is usual for San Patrice variety
hope. The materials (Table III), techniques of manufacture and general appearance show good correspondence. The number, width,
length and technical attributes of fluting scars show no appreciable
variation; grinding of bases and lateral concavities is universal. Seven
of the 13 specimens from Area B have bifacial left edge beveling, one
has right edge beveling and five objects lack this attribute.
The 7 San Patrice variety st. fohns points from Area B show even
closer concordance with those from Area A. Measurements in millimeters are: length ( 5 specimens), average 32.3, range 21.5 to 40;
width at shoulder ( 6 specimens) , average 21.1, range 18 to 24; width
at base ( 6 specimens), average 18, range 13 to 20; maximum thickness, average 4.5, range 3.5 to 5.6; thickness across shoulder, average
3.43, range 3 to 4; height of basal concavity, average 3.6, range 1.8 to
5.5; width of lateral notch, average 8.1, range 7 to 10. The length/
width ratio of 5 whole specimens is 1.57/1.
These measurements show a slightly larger size, but the differences
are statistically insignificant. Similarly, there are no significant differences in materials (Table III), techniques of manufacture or appearance from those described for Area A. Fluting, lateral retouch and
grinding of bases and notches are present on all specimens. Beveling
is left bifacial on three specimens, left unifacial on two, right bifacial
on one and inapparent on one.
SIDE NOTCHED POINTS

Three of the side notched points from Area B are of variety A, one

JOHN PEARCE SITE

29

of variety B. Those of variety A ( Fig. 5 b, e, i) differ little from the
descriptions of this variety from Area A. All have low side notches
and mildly concave bases that are ground. Only one base has a flute
scar, unilateral and only 10 mm. in length. The convex body edges of
all three specimens are serrated and all show distal edge recurving to
narrow the tips. All have left bifacial beveling.
Measurements in millimeters of side notched variety A from Area
B: length 31 to 34; maximum width 21 to 23; basal width 16 to 19;
maximum thickness 5.3 to 5.7; width of side notches 6 to 8.
The variety B point (Fig. 6 h) is small, made of native tan chert,
with poor technology and damage at one corner of the base. The base
is straight and not ground or fluted. The body edges are irregular and
slightly concave. The specimen is 28 mm. in length, 17 mm. in width
at base and shoulder, and is 5.4 mm. thick.
LANCEOLATE POINTS

Three lanceolate specimens from Area B are untyped. One, of
mottled gray flint which may originate from Central Texas, is small;
measurements are: length 36.5 mm., width 29 mm. maximum and
20 mm. at the base, and thickness 5.3 mm. The faces are ridged distally and show long parallel flaking from the edges, producing sharp
edges and tip. The base is deeply concave. A central flute on one face
ends in a hinge fracture 13 mm. from the base. On the converse face
a lateral preparatory fluting attempt was almost disash·ous, extending
deeply to the upper edge to alter its symmetry; the central flute ends
in a hinge fracture 11 mm. from the base. There is no basal grinding
but the lateral edges are smoothed over the proximal 8-9 mm.
The second small object, of glossy black chert, has edge, tip and
basal corner breaks that evidence rough usage. It is 35 mm. long, 24
mm. wide and 5.3 mm. thick. The edges and base are not ground but
the base is deeply ( 5.5 mm.) concave. It is thinned by removal of a
16 mm. flute from one face and 9 mm. from the opposite.
The third lanceolate object, of gray-brown chert-possibly local-is
small and complete. It is 36 mm. long, 21 mm. wide at mid-body and
16 at the base, and is only 4.8 mm. thick. There is wide, shallow central flaking of each face, narrow retouch on one edge and deep or
serrated flaking of the opposite edge. The proximal portions of the
edges are recurved, with minimal smoothing. The base is straight,
unground and thinned by single bifacial flutes, 18 and 21 mm. in
lengths, each ending in a hinge fracture.
STEMMED PROJECTILE POINT

A single specimen from the orange clay level of square N7W6, Area

30

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

B, is similar to the Fairland type, which is ascribed ( Suhm and Jelks
1962:191) to the Archaic stage of the Edwards Plateau area, in Central Texas.
This is a moderately large point of tan chert, 52 mm. in length,
25 mm. in width at the shoulder and 26 mm. at the base, with a maximum thickness of 9 mm. The body is a long triangle, the shoulders
distinct, the side notches long and shallow, and the stem expands to a
greater width than the body. Primary and retouch flaking are good,
with faint serration of one edge. The concave base is thinned by a
series of small flakings; the basal concavity as well as the side notchings are ground smooth. The distal body and tip are dark, suggesting
possible heat treatment of the stone before manufacture.
This point appears morphologically foreign to the others from Areas
A and B, and seems to fit better with the stemmed and presumably
Archaic points found on the surface of the site and in the sand layers
of Area B. The excavation record of its position is clear, however, and
records no recognized disturbance in the vicinity. We would like to
think that it was introduced into the clay layer during occupation subsequent to San Patrice times, in a way that was not recognized during
excavation, but, there are no honest reasons for doing this.
PROJECTILE POINT FRAGMENTS

Twelve objects from the clay levels of Area B appear to be fragments of projectile points, too small or broken in such a way as to
prevent classification. Materials are included in Table III.
END-SCRAPERS

There are more varieties of this class than there were in the assemblage from Area A. Normal convex end-scrapers are 17 in number
(Fig. 9 e, f, g). An additional 5 specimens have chipped beaks on one
or both corners of the bit (Fig. 8 d, Fig. 9 b , i, j). Another specimen
has square, sharp corners (Fig. 9 h) instead of beaks and a final specimen has a bit at both ends.
There are 5 examples of transverse scrapers (bit is wider than tool
is long) in the assemblage. Three of these have broad convex bits
and two have square, sharp corners, but there are no beaks.
Two specimens are end-scrapers with side notches and appear to
have been made on former side notched points (Fig. 9 k). They only
superficially resemble the side notched side-scrapers.
SIDE NOTCHED SIDE-SCRAPERS

All three of these objects (Fig. 10 d, f) are made on thin tabular
pebbles flaked unifacially except for the notches and a single row of
flat chips removed from both faces of the base. One of these scrapers

31

JOHN PEARCE SITE

c

b

a

d

f
h

g

e

k

I

n

cM I

0

Fig. 9. Chipped Stone Tools, Area B: a, c gravers; b, 1, J end-scrapers with
corner spurs; d borer; e-h end-scrapers; k side notched end-scraper; 1 scaled
piece; m, n raclettes; o retouched flake; p burin.

32

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

b

c

a

e

d
f

g

1cm 1

h
Fig. 10. Chipped Stone Tools, Area B: a side -scraper; b concave side -scraper;
c raclette; d, f side notched side-scrapers; e notch; g-i biface "preforms."

33

JOHN PEARCE SITE

has a ground base and all three are ground inside the notches. One
specimen would be viewed as a concave scraper (Albany type). Another has a convex edge but is otherwise nearly identical. The third
is broken and shows only the basal portion and too little of the bit to
determine its shape.
SIDE-SCRAPERS

As was noted in the description from Area A, these objects vary
considerably in size, shape and edge attributes. Seven specimens are
straight to slightly convex (Fig. 8 k, and Fig. 10 a) , three are concave
(Fig. 10 b), and two are double-convex.
RACLETTES

Twelve specimens have single "scraping" edges (Fig. 9 m, n and
Fig. 10 c). Four are chipped on both lateral edges.
BURINS

All three examples were struck on truncations (Fig. 9 p). Two
spalls were removed parallel to the main axis of the flake and one is
transverse.
VARIA

This heterogeneous category includes one steeply truncated flake,
one tabular flake with battered edges (not a scaled piece), and a combination scraper-denticulate.
All other tool categories are so similar in their ranges of variation
that the descriptions and remarks made about them in Area A apply
equally to Area B.
UsE RETOUCH

The forty-one flakes and blades with wear patterns constitute 7.4
percent of all objects recovered in Area B. The users of these artifacts
took advantage of thin edges and sharp comers, apparently for scraping, slicing and graving vmious materials, as described under Area A.
CHIPPING DEBRIS

The chipping debris and debitage from Area B forms 58 percent of
the total sample, 329 pieces out of 566. Table I shows the number of
various kinds of debris, also demonstrates that almost no differences
can be found from that of Area A.
TECHNOLOGICAL 0BSERVA TIONS
BLADE-TOOL INDEX

Eleven of the 156 tools, excepting points, from Area B are on blades.
The index of 7 percent is higher than that for Area A ( 4 percent) but

34

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

still far below what would be considered to be a blade industry. A
few blades with use-retouch, 5 in number, were also recovered.
RAW MATERIAL

The raw material of the artifacts in Area B is similar in kind to
those of Area A. Table III shows that some frequencies differ but that
these differences are not great.
EDGE ANGLES

The edge angles on end-scrapers from Area B have an average of
about 76 degrees, with a range of 63 to 87 degrees, as measured on 24
specimens. Only 7 side-scrapers were available, an inadequate sample. The average angle of 70 degrees is close to that of side-scrapers
from Area A.
Raclettes, with 16 specimens, ranged in edge angle from 38 to 63
degrees, with an average of about 54 degrees.
WEAR PATTERNS

The wear patterns are exactly what might have been expected after
the examination of scrapers, raclettes, gravers, and other tools from
Area A, with no detected difference between the two areas.
CoMPARISONS OF AREAS A AND

B

In order that we may examine the theoretical (anthropological) implications of the two assemblages, it is necessary to demonstrate how
much similarity exists between the two. Several modalities will be used.
TYPOLOGICAL COMPARISONS

The tool lists from Area A and B were reduced by those classes that
were represented by less than five specimens in each area. A standard
Chi-square test was applied to the contingency table of nine classes
and two columns.
TABLE V
Tools Used for Chi-square Test
CLASS
End-scrapers
Side-scrapers
Raclettes
Gravers - borers
San Patrice points
Point fragments
Bifaces (unfinished)
Scaled pieces
Denticulates - notches
0

Area A

Area B

Nt~.mber

Nt~.mber

Total

12
7
12
13
19
9
13
5
5

24"
12
16
24
20
12
27
5

36
19
28
37
39
21
40
10
16

-

11

Total
95
151
This number does not include transverse scrapers.

246

35

JOHN PEARCE SITE

In each determination 0 is the observed number of specimens in each
class for that area. E is calculated as the total in the class (both areas)
multiplied by the number in the area, and divided by the total number of specimens. This is standard, book procedure for Chi-square
(Alder and Roessler, 1968:205).
The formula X2 = (0, - E,) 2 was calculated with a degree of

E,
freedom of 8 (dictated by having nine classes and two columns), and
X2 = 4.206. The critical value for a .05 level test of significance, according to Chi-square distribution tables is 15.51. Since this greatly
exceeds our result of 4.206, the hypothesis that the two collections
might be different is £rmly rejected.
PROJECTILE POINT COMPARISONS

Projectile points from each of the two areas include both varieties
of San Patrice type, both varieties of side notched points and examples
of untyped lanceolate points. Reference has been made to the similarities of technology in the manufacture of the several types and varieties, as well as the close similarity of materials out of which they
were made (Table III). A further test is in the comparative measurements. Table VI shows the major measurements of the two varieties
of San Patrice points and the side notched points from the two areas:
average length, width at shoulder and maximum thickness. There is
close conformity in the measurements of variety sf,. johns from the two
areas, less close in variety hope and the side notched points. The numbers of the latter are small, however. If we remove from the computations the four unusually large variety hope points, one from Area A
and three from Area B (two of which would be called variety goodwin
by Duffield's typology), the remaining hope points show closer conformity. The measurements would be, for Area A and B respectively:
lengths 31.2 and 30.3 mm., widths 24.5 and 24.1 mm., and thicknesses
6.13 and 6.04 mm.
TABLE VI
Comparative Measurements of Projectile Points
Measurement
Type and Variety
Area A N" Area B N"
San Patrice, hope
San Patrice, hope
San Patrice, hope

Average length
Average width
Average thickness

32.3mm. ( ll) 34.6mm. (10)
25.2mm. ( ll) 23.8mm. (10)
6.2mm. (11) 6.6mm. (10)

San Patrice, st. iohns
San Patrice, st. iohns
San Patrice, st. fohns
<> N=number in sample

Average length
Average width
Average thickness

31.6mm. (6)
19.9mm. (6)
4.5mm. (6)

32.3mm. (5)
2l.lmm. (5)
4.5mm. (5)

36

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

33.8mm. ( 6)
21.3mm. ( 6)
6.1mm. (6)

Average length
Average width
Average thickness

Side notched points
Side notched points
Side notched points

31.4mm. ( 4)
20.5mm. ( 4)
5.5mm. (4)

CHIPPING DEBRIS

The debris of manufacture at the camp sites represented by the two
areas gives some indication of the similarity of artifact production
( Table VII ).
TABLE VII
Comparisons of the Various Items of Debitage and Debris
Obiects
Chips
Cortex
Debitage
Cores
Biface thinning flakes
Total

Ama A
93 - 45.8%
55 - 27.1%
7 - 3.5%
27 - 13.3%
21 - 10.3%

Area B
157 - 47.7%
107 - 32.5%
8 - 2.4%
30 - 9.1%
27 - 8.2%

203 -100.0%

329 - 99.9%

---

The close similarity in relative proportions of these items of debris,
in addition to the close resemblance of the materials and the techniques of reduction from original materials to finished products, already detailed, indicates a near-identity of manufacturing processes
in Areas A and B.
SIZE AND EDGE ANGLES OF SCRAPER FORMS

The study of size and edge angles of end-scrapers, side-scrapers
and raclettes is detailed in the descriptions previously presented under
scraper and raclette headings. In Table VIII these three groups or
classes from the two areas are compared.
TABLE VIII
Comparisons of Edge Angles
Obiects or classes
Edge angles of end-scrapers
Edge angle of side-scrapers
Edge angle of raclettes

Area A
77 degrees
70 degrees
52 degrees

Area B
76 degrees
70 degrees
54 degrees

Average length of end-scrapers
Average width of end-scrapers

23.4 mm.
20 mm.

24 mm.
19.4 mm.

Average length of side-scrapers
Average width of side-scrapers

38 mm.
27 mm.

42 mm.
23 mm.

Average length of raclettes
Average width of raclettes

31 mm.
22 mm.

34 mm.
19 mm.

37

JOHN PEARCE SITE

Edge angles of all three scraper forms are duplicated in Area A
and B. Length and width averages are duplicated in end-scrapers, but
va1y in the raclettes and side-scrapers. This is not unexpected because
of the wide variations in size and shape among these tools. At the risk
of being repetitious we believe that in these two classes the edge angle
is the major concern, even though we did not define the classes by
edge angle alone.
It appears that the inhabitants, in manufacturing end-scrapers, chose
size, shape and edge angles carefully, apparently as carefully as these
attributes were selected in projectile points. Each of these two classes
conforms to narrow limits set by the makers, not only within one assemblage, but across both assemblages (Fig. 11).
SPECULATION ON SIMILARITIES

Significant resemblances have been observed, measured and described for the two assemblages. They are particularly close in typological tools, both in kind and frequency. The technological attributes,
seen as manufacturing stages, are practically identical as are lengths,
widths and edge angles of cutting tools. Raw materials chosen do not
appear to differ significantly, although this cannot be tested easily.
We are able to detect a large series of choices made by the inhabitants at each of the two camps. Certain raw materials were selected;
these were cleared of cortex and reduced by chipping according to
set, culturally determined motor habits. Choices were exercised in the
production of certain proportions of highly stylized types (the several
varieties of points and notched scrapers) and the more ubiquitous
tool forms. Further options were made in the selection of certain
dimensions and ratios, both in flake sizes and shape alterations. Finally, certain cultural decisions were expressed by the manner in which
these tools were utilized, as observed through wear patterns.
When two sites or occupation areas are significantly different, the
explanation can only be sought in tem1s of the several possible combinations of: ( 1) ethnic, ( 2) temporal and ( 3) activity differences.
Conversely, absolute identity between two assemblages can only mean
that members of the same society were engaged in the same activities.
The latter also requires that the time must be so close that no significant evolution or acculturation processes have occurred.
Areas A and B are extremely similar. We believe that similarities in
one cultural category, as interpreted through material remains, can
have a number of explanations. Thus, stylistic attributes in projectile
points do not necessarily define the economic or the ideological subsystems of an archeological "culture." On the other hand, close similar-

38

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

• •

0
0

50

•
40

0

•

oo

..

0

0

0

oeo•
o•
0
0

30
:I:

.....

•

(!)

20 zLLI

•

•o

0

...J

10
WIDTH

10

20

30

40

50

DIMENSIONS OF RACLETTES (mm.)
AREA A=
AREA

e

8 =0

40

30

0 0

c11r/t:)e

o o

:I:

•.p.
·~0
•

.....
(!)

20

z

LLI
...J

•

0

0

10
WIDTH

10

20

30

40

DIMENSIONS OF END-SCRAPERS (mm.)
AREA A=

e

AREA 8 = 0
Fig. 11. Distribution of size proportions of end-scrapers and raclettes.

39

JOHN PEARCE SITE

ities between two assemblages in processural stages of production, in
style of products, and in motor habits of tool use, all of which show
the exercise of culturally controlled behavior, must be treated as
homologous.
SURFACE MATERIAL REMAINS
Objects that were found on the general surface of the site, chiefly
on the cultivated east slope but secondarily on the south slope and
knoll next to the stream, also from the sand levels of the excavated
areas (confined largely to Area B), are combined in Table IX. We
have stated that these objects clearly do not constitute an assemblage;
rather, the material is to be looked on as a collection of remains from
a number of occupations. We therefore have made no attempt to subject it to analysis.
TABLE IX
Material Remains From Sand Levels And Surface
A. Major Categories of Objects
Chipped stone tools
Use retouch objects
Ground stone objects
D ebris
Total
B. Chipped Stone Tools
San Patrice points
Side notched points
Lanceolate points
Stemmed points
Projectile point fragments
End-scrapers
Side-scrapers
Side notched side-sera pers
Raclettes, end
Raclettes, side
Denticulates
Notched Hakes
Gravers - borers
Drills
Bifaces ( U n£nished)
Burins
Scaled pieces
Retouched Hakes
Varia
Total

289
64
3
444

- 36.1%
- 8.0%
- 0.4%
- 55.5%
-800 -100.0%

-

23
15
14
28
26
21
9
3
5
30
12
13
18
2
24
1
12
28
5

- 8.0%
- 5.2%
- 4.8%
- 9.7%
- 9.0%
- 7.3%
- 3.1%
- 1.0%
- 1.7%
- 10.4%
- 4.2%
- 4.5%
- 6.2%
- 0.7%
- 8.3%
- 0.3%
- 4.2%
- 9.7%
- 1.7%

--

289 -100.0%

40

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

C. Ground Stone Objects
Pitted stones
Grooved hematite pendant, tiny
D. Debris and Debitage
Chips
Cortex
Core fragments
Biface thinning flakes
Debitage
Total

2 - 66.7%
1 - 33.3%

221 - 49.7%
124 - 27.9%
51 - 11.5%

39 -

9 -

8.8%
2.0%

444 - 99.9%

Some of this material belongs, typologically, with the buried in situ
levels of Area A and B. Included in this category are San Patrice and
side notched points, the majority of the lanceolate points, end-scrapers
with beaks or spurs, side notched side-scrapers (Albany), and scaled
pieces.
One of the lanceolate points is classified as Meserve type, another
as Clovis ( unifacially fluted and broken transversely, probably in
manufacture; typed by Webb and Wormington), and four are Pelican
type (Gagliano and Gregory, 1965). The remainder are ovate with
concave bases, of local mate1ials, and consistent with most of the
lanceolates from Areas A and B.
Significant numbers of tools from the sand and surface might belong
to the lower level assemblage or they could just as easily be from later
occupations. These tools include many raclettes, gravers, end and
side-scrapers, notches and denticulates, as well as a group of unfinished objects ( bifacials). Also in this category of uncertainty are chipping debris and use retouched flakes or blades.
Finally, there are artifacts that appear to be typologically unrelated
or incompatible with the lower levels. Stemmed points classified as
Gary, Ellis, Yarbrough, Bulverde, Marshall and Edgewood have variously been reported as associated with periods later than that of the
San Patrice points and tools, as also have the pitted stones and notched
hematite pendant. One infers intermittent occupation of this spur by
a number of Archaic bands, prior to the advent of anow projectiles
and pottery.
SUMMARY OF SAN PATRICE TOOL COMPLEX
In each of the John Pearce components, Areas A and B, the major
projectile point type is San Patrice, with an adequate representation
of hope and st. fohns varieties to assure that each is a valid form of the
assemblage and that hope is the dominant form. Side notched points

JOHN PEARCE SITE

41

are part of each assemblage, with variety A the more frequent. It also
appears that the San Patrice complex includes untyped lanceolate
forms that vary in such attributes as fluting, concavity of bases and
grinding of the bases and edges.
The reluctance to accept five distinct varieties of points in a single
assemblage led us to explore two possibilities: ( 1) that all five fit into
a spectrum of variation in a single "type" or ( 2) that sufficient time is
involved in the occupation to allow for a multiplicity of varieties, each
associated with a different group of people. The near identity of the
types and varieties in Areas A and B and the similar proportions in the
two areas mitigate against these propositions. Technologically we
cannot demonstrate a spectrum, the varieties are discrete in both areas.
Finally, the physical position of the objects in the clay zones was carefully reviewed. The chief excavator did not indicate the exact position
of every artifact but he did record the finding of each point, noting
whether it was on the surface of the clay layer of Zone 2 or within the
clay. He noted the depth in a number of instances. Nineteen points
of variety hope were recorded as within the clay and the measured
depth below the clay surface was between one and three inches in 4
instances, at 8 and 12 inches in two others. Twelve of the 14 variety
st. fohns were below the clay surface, with measured depths of two
to three inches for 3 specimens. Five side notched points were below
the clay smface, with one recorded depth of 10 inches. Apart from the
two lanceolate points in the pit, fom were recorded within the clay,
two at measmed depths of one and three inches. We therefore conclude that, at John Pearce Site, all five varieties of points are members
of the San Patrice complex.
Among the tools several kinds of end-scrapers, side-scrapers, raclettes, gravers-borers and bifaces (incomplete) are in sufficiently large
numbers in each area to leave no doubt of their being part of the
complex. Side notched (Albany) side-scrapers, notched flakes, denticulates, burins, scaled pieces and retouched flakes are in lesser numbers but derive from both areas and seem to be valid constituents. The
several varia appear to be technologically consistent. Objects showing
use retouch and the various categories of debris are unquestioned but
not distinctive.
There is doubt, because of isolated occurrence and technological
qualities, whether the two Clovis-like points found together in the
dark stained pit of Area A, the expanded base drill from Area A, and
the stemmed Fairland type point from Area B should be included in
the San Patrice tool complex.
Several general observations may be made about the tool complex.

42

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

( 1) It is a small tool complex. The great majority of points and other
tools are less than 40 mm. in length and most of the tools are made
from comparatively thin flakes. ( 2) It is a chipped stone complex. No
ground or polished stone objects were found in either area. ( 3) Apart
from projectile points, this is preponderantly a unifacially worked tool
complex. ( 4) This is a tool complex made from local materials, indicating adjustment to the area and its resources.
COMPARISONS AND DISCUSSION
The results of these two habitation studies, so nearly identical as to
suggest members of the same society within a narrow time span, permit few conclusions and only limited speculations about such important
cultural concepts as settlement patterns, subsistence systems, population estimates and social structures. All of the non-lithic cultural items
have disappeared and much of the evidence is negative. Nevertheless,
we now have two assemblages that will stand as cultural entities. Tool
frequencies are statistically reliable, and debris categories are internally usable in terms of the ~ inch minimum size.
The inference from the limited occupation areas and density of
artifacts is of small bands, possibly extended family groups, in a
(base?) camp situation. The absence of evidence of substantial structures or deep midden deposits or even definite hearths is against fixed
habitations. The absence of large cutting or chopping tools- axes,
celts, adzes-from which one might infer forest clearing or tree-log
manipulation in the construction of dwellings or dugouts weighs
against (but does not disprove) these activities.
From the tools one infers hunting, dismemberment of game, hide
preparation and various scraping, cutting and boring activities, presumably of bone, antler and wood. There is an absence of milling and
grinding tools which are usually interpreted as evidence of seed or
grain preparation. None of the artifacts-or absences-gives us any real
clue to the amount of food gathering in the economy, which must
have been considerable in this environment.
The opportunity to visualize areal culture patterns is also severely
limited by lack of comparable excavations. To the extent that one can
judge by surface collections, the occurrence of San Patrice, side
notched and lanceolate points at a considerable number of other sites,
the characteristics of which are poorly known, indicates more than a
casual occupation of the area. It has been noted that San Patrice points
have been found at 24 other sites in Caddo Parish and there is a likelihood of a similar frequency in all of the northwestern Louisiana
parishes bordering on Red and Sabine Rivers. Sufficient numbers of

JOHN PEARCE SITE

43

the typical points and other tools have been gathered from six sites to
assure respectable occupations during this period.
The Spring Ridge Site (Fig. 1 B, 2) is on a tributary of Cypress
Bayou about 10 miles west of John Pearce Site. Surface collections and
limited excavations by James H. Long and Charles C. Clark of
Shreveport yielded artifacts characteristic of ceramic, Archaic and
Paleo-Indian pe1iods. Included in their collections from the site, reviewed by Webb and Roberts in 1968, are: 40 San Patrice points showing a preponderance of st. johns over hope variety, 33 side notched
points of varieties A and B, 19 lanceolate points which include 8
Meserve, 3 Pelican and 2 Scottsbluff types, a number of end-scrapers,
side-scrapers and bifaces, 6 side notched side-scrapers (Albany), and
two each of gravers and expanded base drills.
The Linwood High School Site (Fig. 1 B, 3), eight miles north of
the John Pearce Site and within the city limits of Shreveport, was explored by a youth in the neighborhood before the school was constructed. His surface collections, seen by Roberts, included 15 points
of San Patrice type; no other tools were collected.
Surface collections were made from the Albany Landing Site (Fig.
1 B, 4) by Webb, Roberts, Clark and others. The site is 7 miles north
of Shreveport, situated on the terrace crest overlooking Red River
valley and immediately above a relict channel of this river. The collections include: 18 San Patrice points of both varieties, 12 side
notched points, undifferentiated, 14 lanceolate points (including one
Scottsbluff, two Meserve and one Pelican types), 2 end-scrapers, 21
side-scrapers, 11 side notched (Albany) side-scrapers, 65 bifaces, 5
drills ( 2 with expanded base, 3 straight quadrilateral), and one graver.
The major occupation is Archaic, with nearly 1,000 stemmed points in
the collections.
The Swanson's Landing Site is on Caddo Lake, about 18 miles
northwest of Shreveport (Fig. 1 B, 5). It is a multicomponent site
with the major occupations during the Archaic and ceramic periods.
Included in the senior author's collection, however, are 9 San Patrice
points, 9 side notched points, one untyped lanceolate, 9 end-scrapers,
11 side-scrapers, 4 side notched (Albany) side-scrapers, and many
bifaces.
The Litton Site (Fig. 1 B, 6) is situated on a remnant outrider of
the terrace near Kelly Bayou, a lateral valley tributary of Red River,
about 25 miles north of Shreveport. It is a non-ceramic site with
Archaic and Paleo-Indian artifacts. Surface collections and limited
test excavations by Webb and Ralph McKinney, Hosston, Louisiana,
produced 10 San Patrice points, one side notched point, one untyped

44

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

lanceolate, one end-scraper made from a stemmed point, 5 sidescrapers, 5 side notched (Albany) side-scrapers and 5 bifaces (incomplete).
In DeSoto Parish the San Patrice type site is near the town of
Pelican, 33 miles (air) from the John Pearce Site. Surface collections
of a local resident, Mike Wellborn, were studied and the site was
visited by the senior author. There is a small Caddoan ceramic component, many Archaic stemmed points and a lesser number of PaleoIndian artifacts. The collections include: 19 San Patrice points of both
varieties, 25 side notched points (undifferentiated but including varieties A and B), 11 lanceolate points (one Meserve, two Scottsbluff,
one Eden types) , 1 small end-scraper, 6 side notched end-scrapers,
4 side-scrapers, 7 side notched side-scrapers ( 4 Albany, 3 reworked
projectile points), 8 drills of expanded base, straight quadrilateral
and reworked projectile point varieties, 1 graver and 22 bifaces.
Sites containing San Patrice points are in two natural settings: ( 1)
on the margins of the upland terraces, overlooking the river valley or
the large lakes and lateral streams that flow into the valley, and therefore offering a combination of upland and lacustrine-riverine biosysterm; ( 2) on small streams that dissect the uplands, well away from
the valley or lakes. We have inadequate information to say whether
the two kinds of sites vary in tool complexes or other patterns.
It is difficult, also, to compare the San Patrice assemblages at John
Pearce and the Wolfshead Site (Duffield 1963) in East Texas, because of the cultural mixture evident at the latter site and the failure
(using artificial instead of natural levels of excavation) to separate
an assemblage of tools directly associated with San Patrice points.
San Patrice variety st. fohns was nearly three times more numerous
than variety hope at the vVolfshead Site. Concave base lanceolate
points were assigned in the analysis to the early horizon wilh San
Patrice points, but side notched points, also side notched, end and
side-scrapers were assigned to the subsequent early Archaic horizon.
It was suggested that objects associated with San Patrice and lanceolate points were: small 'snub-nose" end-scrapers, cortex, D-shaped and
multi-edged scrapers, bifaces and grinding slabs. One questions the
assignment of grinding slabs to this assemblage, in view of the fact
that only one specimen was found and this in the fourth of five levels
with a mixed assortment of objects. All other ground and polished
stone objects were assigned to the Archaic assemblage. A comparison
of technology at the two sites is difficult because many of the Wolfshead tools were made of petrified wood, and debris was not tabulated.
Gagliano and Gregory ( 1965) and the senior author have estab-

JOHN PEARCE SITE

45

lished the occurrence of San Patrice points in all parts of Louisiana
except the coastal areas and the river floodplains. This type is reported from eastern Oklahoma by Wyckoff ( 1967:44, 48) and from a
number of sites in southern and central Arkansas (Frank E. Chowning
personal communication 1967). In East Texas, in addition to Wolfshead site, San Patrice points have been reported from the Yarbrough
(Johnson 1962), Jake Martin (Davis and Davis 1960) and Wood Pit
( R. K. Ranis, personal communication, 1967) sites. At the latter site
San Patrice and Plainview points were found in addition to Archaic
materials. A radiocarbon date on mussel shells found near the base
of the deposit was reported (Campbell, 1959) at 3980 B.C. ± 200
years.
San Patrice and Pelican points (one each made of tan chert
and one or two each of flint) were recovered at the Obshner Site near
Dallas, and at a site near Terrell, Texas, ( R. K. Harris, personal communication); neither site produced side notched side-scrapers or
scaled pieces.
A single San Pah·ice, but no side notched side-scrapers or scaled
pieces, was found at the Acton Site, Hood County, Texas, (Blaine,
et al, 1968).
At the Horn Number 2 Site, also on the Brazos in Bosque County,
Texas, three or four stylistic San Patrice points were excavated. None
of the accompanying tools particularly resembled those from the John
Pearce Site (Albeit Redder, personal communication).
Gregory Perino (personal communication, 1967) has found San
Patrice points in small numbers in eastern Arkansas, especially in the
Western Lowlands near Forrest City. He reports single specimens from
St. Louis and W~rren Counties in Missouri. Hence, the range of occurrence of San Patrice type is from the Brazos River in Texas to the
Mississippi, and from Lake Pontchartrain nmthward to Missouri. This
lies between and partly overlaps the ranges of the typologically related Meserve type to the west and Dalton type to the east. The latter
type, centering in Missouri and Arkansas, has been reported from
Alabama (DeJarnette, Kurjack and Cambron, 1962) and South Carolina (James L. Michie, personal communication 1970). Michie describes the Van Lott point from South Carolina as typologically closer
to San Patrice than is Dalton. He also describes a side notched sidescraper (Edgefield type) that is typologically very similar to those
from the John Pearce Site; it is found at Paleo-Indian sites of South
Carolina and Georgia.
A comparison of the John Pearce mate1ials to the general "PaleoIndian tool types in the Great Plains" shows very significant similarities.

46

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Irwin and Wormington ( 1970) describe and partially illustrate many
varieties with cutting, scraping and boring classes of tools. Most of
these can be found in the John Pearce assemblages, duplicating several combinations of attributes. Most significant, we believe, are the
several variations on end-scrapers, these with and without beaks and
spurs and some with inverse retouch at the corners of the bits. Beaks
and spurs on flakes, burins, drills and numerous other tools common
to Paleo-Indian sites in the Plains also appear at John Pearce. Most of
these tools are either scarce or else unreported at "Archaic" sites in
the Southeast.
Edge angles on end and side-scrapers from John Pearce are in some
small variance from those of Wilms en ( 1970), but these are probably
due to measuring techniques. Our figures show, as did Wilmsen's,
that end-scrapers consistently have larger average angles than sidescrapers, and that the differences are often in the range of eight or
ten degrees.
These technological observations do not prove a real relationship to
Plains Paleo-Indian material, but indicate that the John Pearce technology is closer to what has been reported by Irwin and Wormington,
and by Wilmsen, than it is to the material that has been reported for
the "Archie" of East Texas and the Southeast.
Through the middle portions of the country and the Southeast the
assemblages of late Paleo-Indian and early Archaic times are best
known from excavations of caves and rock shelters, specifically Graham Cave (Logan, 1952) in central Missouri, Modoc Rock Shelter
(Fowler, 1959) in southern Illinois, and Stanfield-Worley Shelter (DeJarnette, Kurjack and Cambron, 1962) and Russell Cave (Miller, 1956,
1957) in northern Alabama. These established the association of
lanceolate points, predominantly Dalton type, side notched points like
the Big Sandy type, and a variety of unifacially chipped small tools:
end and side-scrapers, notches, denticulates, gravers and borers, made
on flakes and blades. Bifaces, ''knives", and drills are included and
bone tools (chiefly awls) were found. Radiocarbon dates from several
of the sites place these assemblages between 8,000 and 6,000 B. C.
Opinions have been expressed (Winters, 1959:7, Griffin, 1967:178)
that the fluted point tradition, as reflected in Meserve-Dalton types,
came to a close by 6,000 B.C. Subsequent Archaic cultures exhibit a
greater variety of stone tools, especially of ground and polished milling, "nutting", cutting and problematical objects.
CONCLUSIONS
John Pearce is a non-pottery site with its most significant occupa-

47

JOHN PEARCE SITE

lion by people who made San Patrice points and other culturally distinctive tools. Two discrete assemblages were isolated from the lower
levels of the stratilled deposit, and they represent homologous cultural
entities. They comprise an association of San Patrice, side notched and
lanceolate points with other tools that are small, unifacial, and made
preferentially of local stone. The latter include a diversity of endscrapers, side-scrapers, side notched scrapers, gravers, borers, notched
flakes, denticulates, burins, scaled pieces, retouched flakes and varia,
made from thin flakes and, occasionally, blades.
The absence in the lower levels of ground and polished tools, the
virtual absence of stemmed points, and the stratigraphic evidence
indicate that the San Patrice complex antedates the complexes of this
area that are usually termed Archaic.
Indications of manufacturing and use technology are offered as a
result of studies of the debris, debitage and use marks on the tools.
There are clear indications of the use of projectiles, of scraping ( probably hides) and of other activities including slicing, making grooves
and boring holes. Other tools can not be assigned specillc functions.
In terms of a multiplicity of behavioral traits, the material culture
content and activities of this group appear to have been defined more
successfully than has generally been achieved for pre-pottery cultures.
The technology of the San Patrice socio-cultural unit as reflected
at this site is closer metrically and morphologically to that reported
for the Paleo-Indian complexes of the Plains than to the Archaic of
East Texas and the Southeastern United States. There is one piece of
evidence that this industiy existed prior to 4,000 B.C. and it seems
probable, from extraneous comparisons, that it was not later than
6,000 B.C. A range of occupation over a considerable area of the
western portion of the Southeast, centering in northwestern Louisiana,
is suggested. It remains to be demonstrated what parts of this range
incorporate the association of tools similar to those found at the John
Pearce Site with the stylistic San Patrice points.
REFERENCES CITED
Alder, Henry L. and Edward B. Roessler
1968 Introduction to Probability and Statistics. Fourth Edition, W. H. Freeman and Co., San Francisco.
Blaine, Jay C., R. K. Harris, Wilson W. Crook and Joel L . Shiner
1968 The Acton Site: Hood County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 39.
Campbell, T. N.
1959 A List of Radiocarbon Dates from Archeological Sites in Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 30.

48

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Clarke, D avid L.
1968 Analytical ATchaeology. London, Distributed in U.S.A. by Barnes and
Noble, Inc.
Davis, W. A. and E. Mott D avis
1960 The Jake Martin Site, an Archaic Site in the Ferrell's Bridge Reservoir Area, Northeastern Texas. ATcheology Series, No. 3, Deparbnent
of Anthropology, University of Texas
D eJarnette, David L., Edward B. Kurjack and James W. Cambron
1962 Stanfield-Worley Bluff Shelter Excavations. j ournal of Alabama Archeology, Vol. 8, Nos. 1 and 2, University, Alabama.
Duffield, La the!
1963 The \Volfshead Site: an Archaic-Neo-American Site in San Augustine
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas ATcheological Society, Vol. 34.
Fowler, Melvin L.
1959 Modoc Rock Shelter: an Early Archaic Site in Southern Illinois.
American Antiquity, Vol. 24, No. 3.
Gagliano, Sherwood M. and Hiram F. Gregory
1965 A Preliminary Survey of Paleo-Indian Points from Louisiana. Louisiana Studies, Vol. 4, No. 1, Louisiana Studies Institute, Northwestern
State College, Natchitoches.
Griffin, James B.
1967 Eastern North American Archeology: a Summary. Science, Vol. 156,
No. 3772.
Irwin, Henry T. and H . M. Wom1ington
1970 Paleo-Indian Tool Types in the Great Plains. American Antiquity,
Vol. 35, No. 1.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1962 The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeastern Texas, with a Preliminary Definition of the LaHarpe Aspect. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 32.
LeBlanc, R. J.
1948 Geological Map of Louisiana, unpublished data secured through
Coastal Studies Institute, Louisiana State University.
Logan, W. D.
1952 Graham Cave, an Archaic Site in Montgomery County, Missouri. Missouri Archeological Society, Memoir No. 2. Columbia.
Miller, Carl
1956 Life 8000 Years Ago Uncovered in an Alabama Cave. National Geographic Magazine, Vol. llO, No. 4.
1957 Radiocarbon Dates from an Early Archaic Deposit in Russell Cave,
Alabama. American Antiquity, Vol. 23, No. 1.
Movius, Hallam L. Jr., Nicholas C. David, Harvey M. Bricker, and R. Berle Clay
1968 The Analysis of Certain Major Classes of Upper Paleolithic Tools.
American School of Prehistoric Research, Bulletin No. 26, Peabody
Museum, Harvard University.
Shiner, Joel L.
1970 Activity Analysis of a Prehistoric Site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 41, Dallas, Texas.
Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type D escrip tions. Texas Memorial
Museum Bulletin No. 4 and Texas ATcheological Society Special Publication No. 1. Austin.
Webb, C. H.
1946 Two Unusual Types of Chipped Stone Artifacts from Northwest
Louisiana. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society, Vol. 17.

JOHN PEARCE SITE

49

Evidences of Pre-Pottery Cultures in Louisiana. American Antiquity,
Vol. 13, No. 3.
Webb, Clarence H., Forrest E. Murphey, Wesley G. Ellis and H. Roland Green
1969 The Resch Site, 41HS16, Harrison County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 40.
Wilmsen, Edwin N.
1970 Lithic Analysis and Cultural Inference: A Paleo-Indian Case. University of Arizona Press, Tucson, Arizona.
Winters, Howard D.
1959 The Paleo-Indian Period. Illinois Archeology, Illinois Archeological
Survey, Bulletin 1, Urbana.
Wyckoff, Don. G.
1967 The Archeological Sequence in the Broken Bow Reservoir Area, McCurtain County, Oklahoma. Oklahoma River Basin Survey Proiect,
The Stovall Museum of Natural History and the University of Oklahoma Research Institute, Norman.
Shreveport, Louisiana
Dallas, Texas
1948

Archeological Investigations at the La Jita Site
Uvalde County, Texas
THOMAS RoY HESTER
WrTH APPENDICES BY DAVID H. RrsKIND AND T. R. HESTER
ABSTRACT
During the early summer of 1967, archeological excavations were made at
the La Jita site ( 41 UV 21) in northeastern Uvalde County, Texas. The site
is located in a wooded area on a low terrace of the Sabinal River. Three
closely-grouped burned rock middens are present and are surrounded by
large amounts of occupational debris buried in terrace fill. Data obtained
from the analysis of the excavated artifact assemblage indicate that the La
Jita site was occupied throughout the Archaic period and into late prehistoric times. Radiocarbon dates are available for the latter part of the occupational span. The burned rock middens at the site are attributable to
Middle Archaic activities, and a hypothesis is proposed regarding the accumulation of these cultural features. Additional information on aboriginal
activities at the site is provided by a Rake analysis. Studies of the faunal and
shell remains from the site are also presented.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
There are many to whom I am grateful, both for aid at the site and
for advice and criticism during the preparation of this paper. The
Bexar County Council of the Girl Scouts of America provided funds
for the work, aided by Mr. John F. Camp, Sr., of San Antonio. Officers
of the council, particularly Mrs. John F. Camp, Sr. and Mrs. Etta
Ward, were of great assistance. Mr. Glen Evans of Midland assisted in
setting up the project. At the site, Mrs. Jean Griffith helped during the
field school. The 14 young ladies who participated in the field school
worked long and hard, and I thank them for enduring (with good
humor) the heat, dust and ticks. The staff at the La Jita camp during
the summer of 1967, including Mrs. D. Bailey Calvin (director) and
Mrs. Louise Ward, were of much help. Mr. W. W. Stout and his family
also assisted us to a great extent. Before and after the field school, Dan
Fox and Damon Kasper helped with the excavations, as did Ronnie
Bownds and Louis Long of Utopia. Volunteer labor and other assistance were provided at times by Mr. J. W. House and members of
the Carrizo Springs High School Archeological Society and by Mr.
John W. Greer.
In Austin, I am grateful to Drs. T. N. Campbell and Dee Ann Story
for their aid. Dr. E. Mott Davis and S. Valastro, Jr. facilitated the

52

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

analysis of radiocarbon samples from the site. Other staff members at
The University of Texas who were of much help include: M. B. Collins, James E. Corbin, Harry J. Shafer and William Sorrow. Joy
Stevenson, Jackie Foster and Van Fowler assisted in the laboratory.
Dr. Joel Shiner, Southern Methodist University and Editor of the
Texas Archeological Society, offered helpful criticisms. T. C. Hill, Jr.,
of Crystal City, Texas, made available notes, photographs and artifacts from his investigations at 41 UV 29 in Uvalde County.
I wish also to express my thanks to Dr. Robert F. Heizer, University
of California, Berkeley, for reading and commenting on this paper.
Special gratitude is extended to my wife Lynda for the many hours
she spent working at the site and in the laboratory.
INTRODUCTION
In June and July, 1967, archeological investigations were carried
out at the La Jita site ( designated by The University of Texas as site
41 UV 21) in the Sabinal Canyon of northeastern Uvalde County,
Texas (Fig. 1 ). The site is located on the La Jita Girl Scout Ranch,
about 3 miles south of the village of Utopia. The excavations at the
site were directed by the author. For 2 weeks, an archeological field
school for advanced Girl Scouts was held at the site. During that
period, and throughout the remainder of the time spent at the site,
work was supported by the Bexar County Council of Girl Scouts, with
the generous aid of Mr. John F. Camp, Sr., of San Antonio.
- - - - - - - - · - - - - - - - -·--:-_,1------

l

\

r

'-......, +

Utop~

'-\.J4o'

')

1,

\.,

}

\~

I

1

!
I

II

~-~
+

41UV21

~{lAJITA.)

\ L.-..... \(

1874'

.

.

I

!
I
~~-~~

l
i

i

i
i

NORTHEASTERN
AND· THE

UVAlDE

LA JITA SITE

i
i

COUNTY

LOCA liON OF THE

miles

'P

15
I

i
i

FIG. 1 Northeastern Uvalde County and the Location of the La Jita Site.
Inset shows the location of Uvalde County within the state. Elevations
shown on map are above sea level.

53

LA JITA SITE

A major goal of the La Jita work was to test extensively the terrace
areas sunounding the burned rock middens at the site. Excavations in
the midden accumulations were also canied out. Most previous excavations in central Texas bmned rock middens had concentrated on
the middens themselves, while little attention had been paid to adjoining occupation areas.
ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
The archeology of the central Texas region has been summarized by
Suhm ( 1960), and should be consulted by the reader for an overall
perspective of the prehistory of this area. Archeological work began
in the Uvalde County area, and in the southwestern Edwards Plateau,
in the 1930's when a number of sites were visited and briefly tested
by A. T. Jackson and others from The University of Texas. The results
of these investigations were not reported, although Jackson's work at
the Gil dart site has been published by Hester ( 1970a). In the same
period, Huskey ( 1935) published a biief paper dealing with the sites
and archeological mateiials in the Nueces Canyon of Uvalde and Real
Counties. The only previous major excavation in Uvalde County was
at Kincaid rockshelter, on the Sabinal River about 20 miles downstream
from La Jita. A full report on these investigations has not yet appeared (see Suhm, 1960). In more recent years, sites have been visited
and recorded by students from The University of Texas (notes on file
at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory) , and Hester ( 1968a;
1970a) has reported the vandalism of 3 burned rock middens in northwestern Uvalde County.
Little has been published pertinent to the archeology of the immediately smrounding region of Medina, Bandera, Bell, Edwards and
Kinney Counties. In these counties, too, excavation and reconnaisance
were conducted by W.P.A. crews from The University of Texas, but
the results of most of the work remain unpublished. Campbell ( 1957)
has repmted the excavations at Fields rockshelter in Edwards County,
and Hester ( 1963; 1966) has recorded data from the Lackey site in
Real County.
The Paleo-Indian peiiod in the southwestern Edwards Plateau is
represented primaiily by random finds of Late Paleo-Indian projectile
points (such as Angostura, Meserve and Plainview), as well as occasional fluted points (a Clovis fragment is illustrated by Hester,
1970a). However, at Kincaid rockshelter, several Folsom points have
been found, though not in context (see Sellards, 1952, and Wormington, 1957).
Archaic cultural remains are very common, and there are numerous

54

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

burned rock middens and open camp sites atbibutable to this period
(see Suhm, 1960). Though the southwestern Edwards Plateau adjoins
the south Texas and Trans-Pecos regions, the Archaic materials show
a sb·ong affinity to those of cenb'al Texas. The typical artifact forms
of the Archaic of this area are reflected by the materials described
from the La Jita site.
Late Prehistoric (or Neo-American) occupations are typically found
on open camp sites and burned rock middens, overlying Archaic materials. The Late Prehistoric artifacts from La Jita are characteristic
of the region though at most sites ceramics are not as abundant. There
may have been increased occupation of rockshelters during this period,
since relic-collectors report quantities of Late Prehistoric cultural remains from their uncontrolled excavations in these sites on the Sabinal,
Frio and Nueces Rivers. An archeological program should be designed
for the investigation of these rockshelter sites before all are desb'oyed
by relic-collecting. Pictographs occur in some of the shelters (see
Jackson, 1938) , though the cultural affiliation of most are uncertain.
THE SETTING
The site is situated just east of the narrow, spring-fed Sabinal River,
on the north bank of an old channel of that stream (see Fig. 2). The

old channel

old channel

Sabinal
gravel
bar

River

Iorge
cypress

II

(with

trees)

(

grovel

<~~~;~red>

FrG. 2. Cross Section in Area of the La Jita Site. This rough east-west section
shows the position of the site, and its relationship to the present Sabinal
River and two of its former channels.

55

LA JITA SITE

site area is characterized by a heavy vegetation cover, especially during moist periods. Trees on the site proper include fairly large live
oak (Quercus virginiana), a number of Texas persimmon (Diospyros
texana), as well as representatives of common hackberry (Celtis
reticulata), sugar hackberry (C. laevigata), elm ( Ulmus sp., probably U. crassifolia), and bitternut hickory (Cary a c01'difo1·mis). Mesquite ( Prosopia juliflora) is present in the immediate vicinity on the
floodplain and on the uplands. It may be a rather late introduction in
the region, though it was observed in the area as early as 1691 (see

,.._,

AII£A

H

t.__j!Ui l

l.A JITA SLTE
!o41 UVll )

'~~·~"
h.

}

l.

~-•oo::,\~t~rval

FIG. 3. The La Jita Site. Topographic map showing the plan of excavations.
Excavation areas are also indicated. Contour interval is . 5 feet.

56

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Inglis, 1964:69). Just west of the site, huge cypress ( Taxodium sp.)
up to 35 feet in circumference line the banks of the present Sabinal
channel. Other trees in the vicinity of the site are pecan, redbud
( C ercis sp. ) , buckeye ( Aesculus arguta) and Mimosa ( Sellards and
Chelf, n.d.). Plants in the area include Spanish dagger, bear grass,
several vmieties of cactus, especially prickly pear ( Opuntia lindheimeri) and devil's pincushion. In addition, there are many types of
native grasses and wildflowers, as well as wild grapes and dewbenies.
The site is located within the Sabinal Canyon. The canyon is about
20 miles in length, beginning in Bandera County and extending southward into Uvalde County; the width of the canyon varies from 1.5 to
6 miles. The floodplain of the river is usually rather narrow and there
are a sedes of low terraces in various parts of the stream valley, but
these have yet to be studied. Rimming the valley on both sides are
eroded limestone hills, rising 200-250 feet above the valley floor; these
hills are covered with cedar and other sparse vegetation. The site is
on the southern edge of the Edwards Plateau, a mgged area of dissected Comanchean Cretaceous limestone. About 8 miles to the south
of the site, the Coastal Plains begin. The site also lies on the southern
edge of the Balconian Biotic Province (Blair, 1950:112-115). The
climate is semi-arid, and mesothermal, with rainfall averaging about
22 inches annually. The fauna of this province are quite vmied, with
Blair ( 1950:113-114) recording 57 species of mammals, 1 species of
land turtle, 16 lizard species, 36 species of snakes, 15 species of anurans and 7 species of urodele fauna. He also notes ( p. 113) that "...
the most characteristic plant association of the Balconian is a scmb
forest of Mexican cedar (Juniperus mexicana), Texas oak ( Querqus
texana) , stunted live oak ( Q. virginiana) and various other less numerous species". Such an association can be noted on the uplands
flanking the Sabinal River. He goes on to add (Ibid.): " . . .the floodplains of the streams are occupied by a mesic forest of large live oaks,
elms, hackberries and pecans".
The position of La Jita within the Sabinal Canyon indicates that it
was favorably located for the exploitation of the local resources by its
prehistoric occupants. It is near the perennial Sabinal River, and the
varied flora and fauna within its environs constitute a relative abundance of available food items. The site is also near the edge of the
uplands (low terraces) which extend eastward across the valley toward the hills.
THE SITE
The La Jita site (located at 29°34' N Lat., 99°31' W Long.) is com-

57

LA JITA SITE

A

8
FIG. 4. A, The Western Edge of the Sabinal Canyon, Near the La Jita Site;
B, The Sabinal River, Near the La Jita Site. Note the large cypress trees
bordering the west bank of the stream.

58

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

posed of 3 burned rock middens and surrounding terrace deposits.
The area of occupation extends about 150 feet north to south and is
over 300 feet in width. An irrigation ditch dug in 1866 runs roughly
east-west through the southern 1/3 of the site area (see Fig. 3). The
site is bounded on the south by an old channel of the Sabinal River,
and on the east by a tributary of that channel. The site area slopes
gently to the south.
The burned rock middens were designated as Areas B,F, and I. The
Area B midden extends for about 60 feet (north to south) and is approximately 45 feet wide, and roughly ovoid in outline. The horizontal
dimensions of Areas F and I were impossible to determine, since most
of both appeared to be buried in the terrace, with only portions exposed. Area F is situated about 90 feet southeast of Area B, and Area
I is about 40-55 feet north of F and 100 feet east of B. In addition to
the bumed rock middens, there were small concentrations and scatters of burned rock exposed in other areas of the site, especially in
the extreme southeast part, along the channel bank. The bulk of the
occupation was concentrated on the terrace around the 3 burned rock
middens. Prior to excavation, however, there was little surface indication of occupational debris, due to a heavy vegetation cover and
lack of erosion.
THE EXCAVATIONS
Standard archeological procedures were employed during the investigations at La Jita. Prior to excavation, the site was cleared of
underbrush and a contour map was made with the use of a telescopic
alidade and plane table. A grid of 5-foot squares (oriented on the
cardinal directions; horizontal datum indicated in Fig. 3) provided
horizontal control. Each square was designated by the coordinates of
its southeast corner stake. In addition, a series of 7 test pits ( 5-foot
squares) were scattered in various parts of the site to insure some
sampling of all areas; these were not oriented on the grid. Two exploratory trenches were also dug.
All vertical measurements were taken in relation to a datum plane
with an assumed elevation of 100 feet. This datum was established
near the bottom of a large liveoak in Area B. Excavations proceeded
using half-foot arbitrary levels. In 2 units of Area C, .25-foot levels
were used in excavating the upper part of the deposit. Profiles were
drawn of most unit walls.
All excavated materials were passed through 1/4-inch mesh and
were bagged according to level. In addition to the artifacts, as much
flint debris as possible was saved and all bones and mussel shells

LA ]ITA SITE

FrG. 5. A, Area B. Prior to Excavation; B, Excavations m Area B.

59

60

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

B
FIG. 6. A, Excavations in Area A, Looking South. B, Excavations in Area C,
Looking West.

61

LA JITA SITE

A

B
FrG. 7. A, Profile of N45 E5 (Area B), West Wall, At Depth of 4 Feet;
B, Profile of N30 E5 (Area B), West Wall, At Depth of 4 Feet.

62

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

were collected. Samples of land snails were collected from each level.
Several charcoal samples suitable for radiocarbon dating were obtained.
Nine excavation areas were established. A total of 28 units were
excavated and are indicated in Fig. 3. These were dish·ibuted as follows: Area A ( 9), Area B ( 5), Area C ( 3), Area D ( 2), Area E ( 2),
Area F ( 1 ) , Area G ( 2), Area H ( 1 ) , Area I ( 2) and Miscellaneous
( 1).
INTERNAL STRUGrURE

In the terrace deposits (see Profiles 1 and 2; tested primarily in
Areas A and C), an A-B-C soil profile appears to be present. The
deepest, Zone 5, is a basal caliche. Zone 4, which overlies Zone 5, is
a reddish-brown clay filled with caliche gravels and is culturally sterile; it seems to be a IIC soil zone. Zone 3 overlies it and is composed
of a hard, compact clay (a IC soil zone) varying in color from yellowish-tan in Area A to brownish-red in Area C. It contains scattered
burned rock and other archeological remains. Zone 2 (a B soil zone)
is a light gray soil containing some clay material. It is fine-grained in
texture and contains abundant occupational debris. The top zone
(Zone 1, and A soil zone) averages about 2 feet in thickness and is a
N35
:ZONE

11---.:a:--o:=-------.oO"<c---------~-o----;oo>o~O-----~Nl3

=

0
0

:::::

0"'<::::,.

Q

•

0

0

~ -~ ~----~~~~~~~~0~ ~;-;-~ ~~-~ ~~= ~~~-~-----~:~0~-~-:-~--=--:-~;-~-;="----~
_-_

ZONE A

PROFILE ALONG

AREA

E40

A

tocks@

'L.__._]

"·

gravelojs

PROFILE 1. Area A. Profile along E40.
WAO

wss

-.

~

0

0

00

()
"a

------ .... _

0

0

---- ·e:;·----

0

D

0
<!@;,

ZONE 1

0

0

~H2

~

urrow

o-- -- ----

\
PROFILE ALONG N25

AREA

C

rockso\)

PRoFILE 2. Area C. Profile along N2 5.

0

""

ZONE 2

CJ

c

ZONE 3

63

LA JITA SITE

granular gray-brown soil, both humus and midden-stained. Large
amounts of cultural material were recovered from this zone. The upper
zones shown in Profiles 1 and 2 become considerably thicker near the
old river channel at the southern edge of the site.
Profiles 3 and 4 show the stratigraphy encountered in the excava-

PROFILE AlONG ES

b~rned rotk :~~'t

AREA

B

rod100
graYel ~:•

PROFILE 3. Area B. Profile along E5.

zone 1

zone 2

zone3

zone4

E. PROFILE TEST 7
AREA F
_, y ....,

burned rock~~Q

0

gravel 0o00
D
PRoFILE 4. Area F. East profile of Test 7.

64

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tions in 2 of the burned rock midden areas, B and F. In Area B (Profile 3), Zone 4 (noted in the terrace also as Zone 4) is a caliche-filled
reddish brown clay. Overlying it are 2 zones ( 3 and 2) which are
basically clay in their composition, with the brownish-tan Zone 3
grading into the yellow-tan Zone 2. A few burned rocks occur in Zone
2, along with a number of artifacts, specks of charcoal and numerous
land snails. Zone 3 contains a little flint near the top of the zone, but
snails and burned rock are absent. The uppermost zone (Zone 1) is
a thickly-packed burned rock midden, with sparse amounts of a very
fine, loose ashy-gray soil. A subzone ( 1a) was noted in 2 places in
the profile; within the subzone, the soil is much more compact and
somewhat lighter in color. Zone 1 varies from 1.3 to 2.7 feet in thickness. In Profile 5, the eastern edge of the Area B burned rock midden
(Zone 1) is noted. In that profile, Zone 1 of the terrace deposits (see
Profiles 1 and 2) overlies the burned rock zone. Underlying the burned
rock (shown in Profile 5 as Zone 2) are 4 other strata, 1 of which was
not noted elsewhere. That particular zone (Zone 3) is an ashy, tan to
dark gray soil with no burned rock but containing other cultural
debris. Zone 4 is a light gray soil with scattered burned rock and may

zone

0
c)

C)

0

CJ

0

d

C)

0

N. PROFILE

burned rock ~{~!.::
rock 0
· !;ravel goJ>
PROFILE

0

0

()

0

N35 E25

0

5. Unit N35 E5, North profile.

0

3

zone 4

65

LA JITA SITE

correspond to Zone 2 of the terrace areas. Zone 5 is a hard compact
tannish clay (Zone 3 of the terrace) which overlies Zone 6, a calichefilled tannish clay (corresponding to Zone 4 of the terrace).
Profile 4 shows the 4 zones evident in Area F. Zone 4 is the calichefilled clay previously noted in the terrace areas. Zone 3 is the tannish
clay also noted as Zone 3 in the terrace. Zone 2 correlates very well
with the similarly-designated zone in the terrace. Zone 1 is a burned
rock midden, about 2 feet thick, composed of tightly-packed burned
rock and loose ashy soil.
Near the northern edge of the site, Unit N95 E40 was excavated
and the north wall of that unit is shown in Profile 6. In that area, the
deposit is very thin and is represented by Zone 1, a dark brown granular soil containing Hint, pebbles, some burned rock and numerous
snails. This top zone rests on Zone 2, a light brown clay, full of
caliche gravels.
Another profile of interest was recorded in Test 3 (Profile 7) . Zone
1 is a homogeneous granular soil, gray to light tan in color, and appearing to change very slightly from darker near the surface to somewhat lighter at the bottom (note the dotted line on the profile).
Underlying it is a light tan clay (designated as Zone 2) with some
scattered burned rock near the contact with Zone 1, and what seems
to be part of a buried burned rock midden near the bottom (shown
on profile as Zone 2a).
HEARTHS

In Level 3 ( 94.45' elevation ) of Unit N20 W 40 (Area C), a fire
hearth was uncovered and designated as Hearth 1. It appeared as a

()

zone

0

a

1

0
N. PROFILE
rocks
gravel

N95 E40

9

CV
aoo0
PROFILE

6. Unit N95 £40, North profile.

ft.

66

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ooc:J<Z?l?
- _----- -- 5'- - -- -- ZONE 1

ZONE 2

ZONE 2A

E. PROFILE TEST 3
AREAG
rocks

1b

PROFILE

0
7. Area G. East profile of Test 3.

rough oval, about 1 foot in diameter with an area of white ash covering reddish fire-baked earth. Just to the east of the hearth a group of
7 burned rocks was found. It seems probable that these stones were
once components of the hearth and were later, for some reason, removed.
Less than a foot north of Hearth 1, an edge of Hearth 2 was noted,
and though it was not completely excavated, it is shm'lll in cross section in Profile 2. It seems to have been similar in composition to Hea1th
1.
Hearth 3 was found in Level 2 ( 96.49-96.43' elevation) of Unit N15
E35 (Area A). It was a circular area with a maximum diameter of
1.5 feet, and was characterized by an ashy-gray appearance. The following materials were in place within or adjacent to this feature: 2
burned and 8 unburned flint flake fragments, 2 interior flakes, 1 secondary cortex flake, 4 lipped flakes ( 2 burned), a fragment of a thinned biface, 22 Bulimulus schiedeanus shells, 10 H elicina sp. shells, 1
turtle carapace fragment, 6 fragments of split deer long bone, 1 deer
tooth, 2 small pieces of burned bone and 11 miscellaneous bone fragments. In addition, small pieces of charcoal and 4 small burned

67

LA JITA SITE

limestone rocks were present within the hearth. A radiocarbon date
(on charcoal) of AD 1290±70 ( Tx-687) was obtained for this level.
THE ARTIFACTS
The excavations at La Jita resulted in the recovery of 845 artifacts.
The following broad categories were established through the analysis
of the specimens: Chipped Stone Artifacts (including Projectile Points,
Other Bifacial Tools, Unifacial Tools, and Miscellaneous Chipped
Stone), Ground Stone Artifacts, Bone and Antler Artifacts, and Ceramics. In the following section, the various classes of artifacts under
each of these categories will be briefly described. Projectile points
were generally sorted according to the typology of Suhm, Krieger and
Jelks ( 1954). In addition, 2 new projectile point types are tentatively
proposed. All measurements are in millimeters with the dimensions
indicated by the following abbreviations: L: length; MW: maximum
width; MT: maximum thickness; SL: stem length; and, SW: stem
width. Vertical and horizontal provenience data are presented in Tables 6-9.
CHIPPED STONE ARTIFACTS
PRO JECriLE POINTS
ARROW POINTS
A total of 104 arrow points were found, including the Cliffton, Edwards, Perdiz, Sabinal and Scallom types. Other arrow points are a
series of triangular specimens, as well as miscellaneous unclassified
or damaged specimens.
CLIFFTON ( 3 specimens; Fig. 8, a, b). They show crude workmanship
and have short stems and strong barbs. L: 19.5-20; MW:14-16; MT:
3-4.
EDWARDS ( 19 specimens; Fig. 8, c-j). This type was initially defined by
Sollberger ( 1967:12-22). The La Jita specimens have triangular blades
with straight or slightly convex edges. Deep, narrow comer notches
(or in 2 cases, side notches) have produced flaring stems with broadly
concave to recurved basal edges. As Sollberger has observed, they
resemble diminutive Frio dart points in many respects. At La Jita, they
are the earliest arrow point form to appear (see Hester, 1970b:18).
They are also known from the Montell rockshelter in western Uvalde
County (Texas Archeological Research Laboratory collections). L:
27-31; MW: 14-21; MT: 2-4.5; SL: 7-9.
PERDIZ ( 20 specimens; Fig. 8, k-s). These specimens fit well within

a

e

c

d

f

b
g

h

k
m

n

s
q

p

0

r

y

w

a'

y

u

FIG.

X

z

8. Arrow Points. a, b, Cliffton; c-j, Edwards; k-s, Perdiz, t-b', Scallorn.

LA JITA SITE

69

the Perdiz type as described by Suhm, Krieger and Jelks ( 1954). On
9 specimens, the blade is unifacially chipped. On all specimens, stems
are bifacial. Most have heavy barbs, and 13 have serrated lateral edges.
L: 21.5-39; MW: 15-24; MT: 2-4; SL: 7-13.
(tentative new type; 7 specimens; Fig. 9, a-f). This series of
arrow points is proposed as a new local type and is therefore described
in some detail. The specimens have long, narrow h·iangular blades,
with the lateral edges often deeply convex to recurved. They have
heavy barbs (often bulbous at the ends) which flare outward and
curve up. The barbs often extend down to, and even with, the basal
edge. The stems were produced by long, narrow basal notches and
expand moderately, with sh'aight to slightly concave bases. L: 18-39.5;
MW: 16-21; MT: 3-4.5; SL: 4.5-6.5; SW: 6-7.5. The type seems to be
present throughout the late occupation of the site. Other specimens of
the type have been observed in private artifact collections in the
Utopia area of northeastern Uvalde County. Several are present in the
collection from the J. W. Sparks site (Real County; T.A.R.L. collections) , and a single specimen is known from the Mantell rockshelter
( T.A.R.L. collections).
SABINAL

SCALLORN ( 13 specimens; Fig. 8, t-b'). The type representatives here
have been divided into 3 previously-recognized varieties (Jelks, 1962).
Six specimens are of the sattler variant, 4 are of the coryell variety,
and 3 are of the eddy variety (Ibid.: 28-31). Overall dimensions are:
L: 20-32; MW: 15-22; MT: 2.5-4; SL: 5-7.

(24 specimens; Fig. 9, k-e'). These specimens have been grouped into 3 forms. These briefly are: Form 1 (8),
with crude workmanship and straight to slightly convex sides; Form
2 ( 11) has a wide size range with both thin, well-made specimens,
and crude, thick ones; and Form 3 ( 6) with convex to rounded bases
and very crude workmanship. Form 3 is reminiscent of the Young type
(Suhm, Krieger and Jelks, 1954 : 510). Dimensions of these 3 forms
are: Form 1, L: 40-43; MW: 19.5-27; MT: 4.5-7; Form 2, L: 20-32;
MW: 14.5-22; MT: 3-7; Form 3, L: 31-43; MW: 16-24; MT: 4-5.5.
TRIANGULAR ARROW POINTS

(15 specimens; Fig. 9, t-e'). A number
of arrow points could not be placed within existing types. Two specimens are similar to the Edwards type. Another is lanceolate in outline and has been made on a flake blade, primalily through unifacial
chipping. It is 39 mm. long, with a maximum width of 16 mm., and a
maximum thickness of 4 mm. (Fig. 8, e). It and 11 other specimens
are shown as Forms 1-12 in Fig. 9, t-e'.
MISCELLANEOUS ARROW POINTS

d

b

f

e

c
a

k

h

9

0

s

r

q

p
n

y

u

z

a'

X

w

b'

c'

d'

y

e'

•.,, lllljllll( lllllllll[lllljlllljlllllll ll !llflllllll'lflllllll

i

2

3

4

5

6

FIG. 9. Arrow Points. a-f, Sabinal; g-j , Triangular Form I; k-n, Triangular
Form 2; o-s, Triangular Form 3; t-e', Misc. arrow points, Forms 1-12.

LA JITA SITE

71

OTHER STEMMED ARROW POINTS ( 7 specimens; not illustrated). This
residual category includes damaged specimens, most of which may
represent the Edwards and/or Scallorn types.
DART POINTS.

310 dart points were found. There are a variety of types, as well as
some groups of untyped specimens (described as "forms") and a number of miscellaneous and damaged examples.
1 specimen; Fig. 10, a). The specimen is complete and has
a subtriangular outline with a rounded base and straight lateral edges.
L: 53; MW: 24; MT: 8.

ABASOLO (

ALMAGRE ( 4 specimens; Fig. 10, b, c). All are fragmentary, and are
characterized by contracting stems with rounded bases and crnde
workmanship. Shoulders are strong on 2, and short barbs are present
on another. L: (too fragmentary); MW: 43-51; MT: 7-10.5.

1 specimen; Fig. 10, d). It is a fragment, with long rectangular stem and a straight base. Barbs were present, but are now
broken. The blade was trianguloid, but it has been notched from the
distal end downward through the middle of the blade. L: 55 ( fragment); MW: 39; MT: 7.5.

BULVERDE (

CASTROVILLE ( 11 specimens; Fig. 10, e-g ). Most of the specimens are
complete. All have broad, thin triangular blades and expanded stems,
with convex, straight or slightly concave bases. Heavy barbs are present. Bases are thinned by the removal of 1 or 2 broad vertical flakes.
L: 45-58.5; MW: 33-47; MT: 6-8.5.
"EARLY CORNER NOTCHED" ( 22

specimens; Fig. 10, h-u). The term applied to this patticular group of dart points is a purely descriptive
one, and should not be considered as a "type" designation by others.
The term refers to dart points at the La Jita site which were found
stratigraphically below diagnostic Early Archaic forms. The specimens
have been separated into 3 varieties. Often, specimens of 2 or more
varieties were found together in the same level.
VARIETY 1 ( 10 specimens, Fig. 10, h-1). Most are fragmentary; the
complete specimens have triangular blades with straight (or just
slightly convex) lateral edges. Deep, narrow corner notches have produced expanded stems. Bases are concave, usually in the shape of a
wide V, or recurved. Slight barbs are present, though on 1 specimen,
they are wide and heavy. Workmanship is good; 1 specimen is thermalfractured. L: 33-75 (estimated); MW: 29-38; MT: 4.5-7; SL: 9.5-12.5;
SW: 16-29.

a

e
d

c

b

k
h

g

m

n

q

p

0

·w

X

y

v

e'

d'

a'

g'

k'

FIG. 10. Dart Points. a, Abasolo; b, c, Almagre; d, Bulverde; e-g, Castroville; h-1, "Early Corner Notched", Variety 1; m-s, "Early Corner Notched",
Variety 2; t, u, "Early Corner Notched", Variety 3; v, w, Edgewood; x,
Ensor, Variety 1; y-b' , Ensor, Variety 2; c', Ensor, Variety 3; d', Ensor,
Variety 4; e', f', Frio, Variety 1; g', h', Frio, Variety 2; i', k', Kinney.

LA JITA SITE

73

Most specimens in this group are reminiscent of the Martindale
type ( Suhm, Krieger and Jelks, 1954:446). But in recent years, morphologically-similar dart points have been found in what appear to be
Early Archaic contexts. At the Landslide site in Bell County, Sorrow,
Shafer and Ross ( 1967 ) found similar specimens near the bottom of
the site, well below Travis, Nolan and Bulverde types. At Baker Cave
( Val Verde County), James H . Word (personal communication) has
found Martindale-like points just above a Plainview-bearing zone. The
Jetta Court site ( 41 TV 151) in Travis County has produced a number
of corner-notched points in what seems to be an Early Archaic context (field notes by the author, on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory). A similar situation exists at the J. W. Edwards
site ( 41 BN 1 ) in Bandera County, as well as at Kincaid rockshelter
( 41 UV 1: Uvalde County). At Kincaid, 18 specimens very sin1ilar to
Vmiety 1 ·were obtained from disturbed backfill from Zones 5 and 6.
Radiocarbon dates are available for these 2 zones, but the dates are
badly mixed (Stipp and others, 1962).
VARIETY 2 ( 10 specimens; Fig. 10, m-s ) . Blades are triangular (with
straight to slightly convex edges), and are barbed to strong-shouldered.
Wide, shallow corner notches have formed slightly expanded stems;
bases are U-shaped on 7 and only slightly concave on the others.
Workmanship is poorer than in Variety 1; 4 are thermal-fractured.
L : 37-45; MW: 20-34; MT: 5-8; SL: 12-19; SW: 14-20.
Three specimens similar to Variety 2 were found at Kincaid rockshelter, and 1 specimen is known from 41 UV 29, upstream from La
Jita (T. C. Hill, Jr., personal communication).
VARIETY 3 ( 2 specimens; Fig. 10, t, u). They are much different from
Varieties 1 and 2. These have broad, trian gular blades with wide,
shallow comer notches and wide expanded stems. Bases are concave.
Workmanship is fair, with 1 specimen made of a purple river gravel,
possibly originating from a source further to the west. L:58 ( 1 specimen only) ; MW: 31-33; MT: 6.5-7; SL: 11-15; SW: 22-30.
EDGEWOOD ( 3

specin1ens; Fig. 10, v, w). All have b·iangular blades
(distal tip of 1 is reworked ) with slightly convex edges. Stems are
expanded with concave bases. L: 28-43; MW: 21-28.5; MT: 5.5-8.

ENSOR ( 11 specimens; Fig. 10, x-d'). The type has been divided into
4 varieties, briefly described below:
VARIETY 1 (3 specimens; Fig. 10, x). They have triangular blades,
broad side notches and straight bases. The tip on 1 specimen is alternately-beveled. L: 35-37.5; MW: 22-24; MT: 4.5-5.5.

74

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

VARIETY 2 ( 6 specimens; Fig. 10, y-b'). These fit Tunnell's Variety
C ( 1962:87,88). They are distinguished by a centrally-placed basal
notch, usually U-shaped. Two specimens have reworked tips, while
another has a burin-like facet along 1 side of the lateral edge. L: 2953 (estimated); MW: 22-26; MT: 4.5-6.
VARIETY 3 ( 1 specimen; Fig. 10, c'). This specimen is much larger
than Varieties 1 or 2. It has deep narrow side notches and a slightly
concave base. L: 53; MW: 31 (estimated); MT: 6.
VARIETY 4 ( 1 specimen; Fig. 10, d'). It has a triangular blade with
straight sides. The base is straight, and the expanded stem is formed
by side notches. L: 71; MW: 33; MT: ? (in Stout Collection).

14 specimens; Fig. 10, e'-h'). The type has been sorted into 2
varieties, described below:

FRIO (

VARIETY 1 ( 2 specimens; Fig. 10, e', f'). They are much larger than
Variety 2, and have h·iangular blades, corner-notches, and deeply concave bases. L: 47-56; MW: 33-38; MT: 6.5-7.
VARIETY 2 ( 12 specimens; Fig. 10, g', h'). This series is rather uniform in size but only 1 specimen is complete. All have triangular
blades, but bases vary greatly, as follows: broad and deeply concave
(2); concave but shallow (3); U-to-V shaped notches (6); and, small,
narrow notch ( 1). L: 43-53; MW: 21-31; MT: 6-7.5.
KINNEY ( 4 specimens; Fig. 10, i', k'). All are triangular in outline, with
concave bases and convex lateral edges. Basal thinning was accomplished on 1 by the removal of a series of short vertical flakes, and on
the others by short arc-shaped flakes. One specimen is unifacially
beveled along 1 lateral edge. L: 42-79.5; MW: 23-39; MT: 7-10.
LA JITA (tentative new type; 7 specimens; Fig. 11, a-e). A new type
is proposed for this group of specimens, characterized by the following traits: ( 1) expanded, round stems ( 3 of which are alternatelybeveled to the right) witl1 convex or slightly concave bases; (2) triangular blades with straight to convex edges; and ( 3) fair workmanship. None are complete and 1 is badly thern1al-fractured. The bases
are generally thinned by the removal of 2 or 3 long, broad flakes from
both faces of the stem. L: 40-75; MW: 25-31; MT: 5.5-8; SL: 15-17;
SW: (on 6 specimens) 23-24, on another, 29.
Though vertical dish·ibution for the type is somewhat mixed, it is
probably Middle Archaic in age. Other specimens are known from the
D. W. Hudson site in Real County and the J. W. Edwards site ( 41 BN

b

a

c

e

d

g

k

h

m

s
n

p

0

u

.v
X

y

w

b'

c'
e'

FIG. 11. Dart Points. a-e, La Jita; f-h, Lanceolate; 1, j, Lange; k, Langtry;
1, m, Marshall; n, Matamoros; o-r, Montell; s-v, Nolan; w, Pandale; x-z,
Rectangular Stemmed; a', b', Travis; c', Uvalde; d', e', Williams.

76

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1 ) in Bandera County ( Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
Collections).
specimens; Fig. 11, f-h ). These specimens
have lanceolate outlines, with concave ( 2) or straight ( 2) bases. One
specimen (A; Fig. 11, h ) fits within the Angostura type ( as described
by Suhm, Krieger and Jelks, 1954:402). It has parallel flaking and
smoothed lateral edges. Another specimen ( B; Fig. 11, g) is similar in
outline to Angostura; a third specimen ( C; Fig. 11, f ) is somewhat
asymmehical, and the fourth ( D; not illustrated) is a basal fragment.
Specimen B was found at the base of the terrace deposits and is the
deepest projectile point from the site. The Angostura-like specimen
(A) was apparently out of context in Level 5 of Area E. The measurements of each are: L: A, 70; B, 54; C, 64.5; D , ?; MW: A, 20.5; B,
22; C, 20; D , 22.5; MT : A, 7.5; B, 6; C, 8.5; D , 6.
LANCEOLATE DART P OINTS ( 4

LANGE ( 2 specimens; Fig. 11, i, j). Both are broken ( 1 is tllermalfractured ). Stems are expanded (formed by deep corner notches ),
with sh·aight and convex bases. Both specimens are barbed. L: 59-?;
MW: 32-39; MT: 7-9.
( 1 specimen; Fig. 11, k). It has a triangular blade with
straight sides and strong barbs. The stem is contracted and has a
straight base. L : 50; MW: 37 (estimated ); MT: ? ( Stout Collection ) .

LANGTRY

MARSHALL ( 5

specimens; Fig. 11, 1, m). Three are fragments and 2
are thermal-fractured. Stems are form ed by basal notches and expand
slightly; bases are convex. Thinning of the bases was accomplished by
removal of 2 or more vertical flakes from both sides of the stem. The
distal tip of 1 has been reworked unifacially to a convex edge. L: 4970; MW: 34.5-40.5; MT: 6-7.
MATAMOROS ( 1 specimen; Fig. 11, n). It has a triangular outline, with
straight edges. The base has been thinned by several vertical flakes
on both faces. Morphologically, it is quite similar to southern Texas
specimens examined by the author. L: 34; MW: 29; MT: 5.

MONTELL ( 15 specimens; Fig. 11, o-r ) . Only 3 are complete; some are
burned. Blades are broad with straight or slightly convex edges. They
are comer-notched and have broad expanding stems which have been
notched near the center of the base. All are barbed. The blade on 1
specimen is unifacially chipped. L: 51 to 85 (estimated); MW : 3247; MT: 5-8 (most are 7-7.5).
NOLAN ( 12 specimens; Fig. 11, s-v). These conform rather closely to
the type as described by Suhm, Krieger and Jelks ( 1954:458 ) . The

LA JITA SITE

77

stems are rectangular with sb·aight to convex bases; alternately-beveled stems occur as follows: on the right ( 8), and on the left ( 1). In
addition, 2 specimens are beveled unifacially on the stem, and 1 is not
beveled at all. One specimen (a basal fragment) has a transverselybroken blade with a burin present on 1 edge. Two specimens have
reworked blades, and a single specimen is thermal-fractured. L: 5270 (estimated); MW: 24.5-37; MT: 5.5-8.
PANDALE ( 1

blade
verse
Jelks,
MW:

specimen; Fig. 11, w). The specimen has a lanceolate
(tip missing), an expanded stem and a convex base. The transcross section is characteristically nvisted ( Suhm, Krieger and
1954:464). The stem is unifacially beveled. L: 77 (estimated);
26.5; MT: 9.5.

101 specimens; Fig. 12, a-e). By far the predominant
projectile point type at La Jita, these specimens show a wide range of
morphological diversity. Blades vary from broad to narrow usually
with convex or nearly straight edges (only 5 have concave edges).
Barbs are present on less than half, and strong barbs are present in
only 3 or 4 cases. Stems usually make up about 1/3 of the total length,
and are rectanguloid to slightly expanded. Bases are mostly deeply
concave to U-shaped, but V-shaped basal edges (as well as those
which are only slightly concave) also occur.
Attempts were made to sort the specimens morphologically, using
stem shape as a basic criterion. This proved meaningless. Eventually,
they were sorted by arbitrary levels (by provenience), and this showed
that the morphological groupings were valid in only 2 cases (see below). Generally, most forms were scattered throughout the levels. A
group of 3 long, narrow specimens, with narrow parallel-edged stems
and deep narrow basal notches were confined to Level 4. Another
group of 3, characterized by concave blade edges and narrow, needlelike tips, were also restricted to that level.
In Level 5, there are 4 examples of unfinished Pedernales points.
One seems to have been formed from a roughly-chipped preform, and
the stem is ill-defined. A second specimen also appears to have been
made on a preform, but apparently broke when attempts were made
to thin 1 lateral edge. The third unfinished specimen is made on a
large Bake. The stem is present as is a portion of the blade; however,
on 1 edge, a broad vertical break is present. This perhaps could have
served as a striking platform to facilitate thinning of that edge, but
this was never accomplished. In Level 4, there is a fourth incomplete
specimen, also made on a Bake; the stem has been roughed out, and
the blade is only slightly modified.
PERDERNALES (

a

c

g

d

k

h

m

u

z

a'
e'

Frc. 12. Dart Points. All of the Pedernales type. a-h, Levels 1-3; 1-n, Level
4; o-s, Level 5; t-y, Level 6; z-d', Level 7; e', Level 8.

LA JITA SITE

79

Basal thinning of the Pedernales specimens consists most often of a
single channel Bake removed from the center of the base on both faces
of the stem. These Bake scars are sometimes arc-shaped.
In general, workmanship varies from crude to good. Seven specimens
have been thermal-fractured. The tips of several have been reworked,
and heavy reworking is evident along 1 lateral edge of another specimen.
The dimensions of the complete specimens are: L: 45-100; MW:
23-53; MT: 6-11; SL: 13.5-27; SW: 15-29.
The greatest popularity of the type was during the Middle and Late
Archaic (Levels 4, 5, and 6) , though it occurs throughout the deposits. Additional comments on the occurrence of the type are found
in a following section.

(2 specimens; Fig. 11, a', b'). The distal tips are missing from
both. Blades are lanceolate, and shoulders are absent on 1 and weak
on the other. Stems are rectanguloid, with slightly convex bases. Stems
are unifacially beveled on both edges. L: 73-82 (estimated); MW:
23-24.5; MT: 9-9.5.
TRAVIS

uvALDE ( 1 specimen; Fig. 11, c') . The specimen is complete, but has
been bumed. The blade is triangular with straight edges and short,
Baring barbs. The stem is expanded and has a U-shaped base. L: 50;
MW: 26; MT: 8.
wn.LIAMS ( 4

specimens; Fig. 11, d', e'). Three are fragmentary, with
convex bases and expanded stems. One of these appears to have had a
blade which far exceeded the range given in the type description by
Suhm, Krieger and Jelks (1954:259). The fourth specimen is complete with a broad ovate blade, a slightly expanded stem and a straight
base. L: 59-?; MW: 34.5-46; MT: 8-9.5.

Described below are 2 groups of b·iangular dart points, along with 13 dart point "forms", individual unclassilled dart points, miscellaneous damaged dart points, and unfinished projectile points.
MISCELLANEOUS DART POINTS .

"EARLY TRIANGULAR" ( 7 specimens; Fig. 14, a-g). This is a series of
triangular dart points found in a probable Early Archaic context at
La Jita (see provenience tables). Two (A, B) are alternately beveled
along the right blade edge, and would seem to fit within the Tortugas
classification (as defined by Suhm, Krieger and Jelks, 1954:482). Three
others ( C, D , E) could also be placed in that type. However, 1 specimen fits better into Kelley's "Taylor Thinned Base" category, and the
other 2 resemble what he termed "Baird Beveled Blade" (Kelley,

80

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1959: Fig. 2). A sixth specimen is more crudely made than the others
and is concavo-convex in longitudinal cross section. Four of the specimens have basal thinning characterized by short vertical flakes removed from both sides of the base. One specimen is badly thermal
fractured .
The dimensions of each specimen are given below:
Specimen
A (Fig.
B (Fig.
c (Fig.
D (Fig.
E (Fig.
F (Fig.
G (Fig.

14,
14,
14,
14,
14,
14,
14,

a)
d)
e)
c)
b)
g)
f)

L

MW

MT

40
41
41
65
64
69 (est.)

31
31 (est.)
38
42
38
32
35

5
6
6
6.5
8
7.5
6.5

71

"LATE TRIANGULAR" (5 specimens; Fig. 14, h-1). These are triangular
dart points (?) found in Middle to Late Archaic contexts. They vary
considerably, especially in workmanship (from vmy crude to good).
Two are characterized by a series of vertical thinning flakes along both
sides of the base. Another specimen, very crude, has a V-shaped basal
edge which has been thinned by removal of a single broad flake from
both faces. The other 2 specimens have been thinned on 1 side of the
base by a large flute-like flake, while short vertical flakes are present
on the opposite face. L: 44-68 (estimated); MW: 28-35; MT: 6.5-10.
RECTANGULAR STEMMED DART POINTS ( 3

specimens; Fig. 11, X- Z). All
are characterized by rectangular stems with straight bases. Blades are
triangular with slightly convex edges; 2 have oblique shoulders while
the third has slight barbs. They are reminiscent of the Langtry type.
A cortex striking platform remains at the base of 1 specimen. L: 65-67
(estimated); MW: 28-36; MT: 5.5-7.5.

MISCELLANEOUS DART POINT FORMS. Forty-one dart points which do not
fall within the existing taxonomy are described below as "forms":
FORM 1 ( 3 specimens; Fig. 13, a, b). They have expanded stems
with concave bases and are reminiscent of the Marshall type. All are
too fragmentary for measurement.
FORM 2 ( 4 specimens; Fig. 13, c, d). These are Frio-like specimens
with corner notches, expanded stems and deeply concave bases. They
were found in Late Archaic contexts. L: 39-48; MW: 21-25; MT: 5-6.
FORM 3 ( 3 specimens; Fig. 13, e-g). Stems are rectangular to expanded, with convex bases. The blades are triangular and have slight
to heavy barbs. L: 37-46 (estimated); MW: 25-35; MT: 5-7.5.

LA JITA SITE

81

FORM 4 (2 specimens; Fig. 13, h, i). Both are fragmentary, with
broad contracting stems and very slightly concave bases. Slight barbs
are present. Blades are triangular with straight edges. L: 55-78 ( estimated); MW: 30-35; MT: 7 (both) .
FORM 5 ( 2 specimens; Fig. 13, j, k). Both are complete and have
triangular blades with convex edges, contracted stems (with convex
to rounded bases) and oblique shoulders. L: 49-61.5; MW: 22-31;
MT: 6-7.
FORM 6 ( 4 specimens; Fig. 13, 1-n). Only 1 is complete. It has a
triangular blade with convex edges, a long contracting stem and a
slightly convex base. The others are similar, with shoulders on all oblique. L: 57 (complete); MW: 22-27; MT: 5-8.
FORM 7 ( 6 specimens; Fig. 13, o, p). All are complete and are very
cmde, witl1 triangular outlines and convex bases. L: 37-56; MW: 2629; MT: 8-9.5. These specimens have varied proveniences and were
separated from the other triangular dart points on the basis of the extreme crudity of their workmanship.
FORM 8 ( 2 specimens; Fig. 13, q, r). In outline, they are broadly
lanceolate with concave bases. They are suggestive of the Kinney type
but greatly exceed the size range given by Suhm, Krieger and Jelks
( 1954:434). They may have functioned as knives rather than dart
points, but there is no physical evidence of this. L: 90-93 (estimated);
MW: 35-39; MT: 7.5-10.
FORM 9 ( 4 specimens; Fig. 13, s, t). This series of fragmentary dart
points is characterized by triangular blades with moderate to heavy
barbs, and expanded stems (produced by basal notching) and straight
to concave bases. They are similar to the Lange type (which does not
have heavy barbs), while the blades and barbs resemble those on
Castroville specimens. L: around 70 (estimated); MW: 37-43.5; MT:
6-9.5.
FORM 10 ( 2 specimens; Fig. 13, u, v). They have long, narrow triangular outlines, 1 with a straight base, the other with a concave base.
Workmanship is very cmde and for this reason (coupled with their
size), they were separated from the other previously-described triangular dart points. L: 82-84; MW: 30-31 ; MT: ll-13.5.
FORM ll ( 2 specimens; Fig. 13, w, x). Both are complete, with long,
narrow lanceolate outlines. Toward the base there is a slight contraction fanning a slightly expanded stem with a convex basal edge. Both

a
c

g

e

d

b

n

m

h

0

k

p

s

y
X

v

w

FIG. 13. Dart Points. Miscellaneous forms are shown. a, b, Form 1; c, d,
Form 2; e-g, Form 3; h, i, Form 4; j, k, Form 5; 1-n, Form 6; o, p, Form
7; q, r, Form 8; s, t, Form 9; u, v, Form 10; w, x, Form 11; y, Form 12;
z, Form 13.

LA JITA SITE

83

are well-made and are somewhat similar to Weir's proposed Buda type
( 1967:39-40). L: 60-112; MW: 20.5-23; MT: 6-8.
FORM 12 ( 2 specimens; Fig. 13, y). Both are fragments , with rectangular stems with straight and convex bases. Barbs are present on 1
but broken on the other. On 1 shoulder of the latter specimen, a burin
facet is present, while another is present at 1 corner of the transversely
broken blade. L: (too fragmentary) ; MW: ca. 34 on both; MT: 6-6.5.
FORM 13 ( 1 specimen; Fig. 13, z). This specimen is made of basalt
( the only such artifact of this material at La Jita) and shows rough
workmanship. The basalt could have been obtained either from Rio
Grande gravels far to the west, or perhaps from basalt intrusions on
the nearby Frio River (see Dues sen, 1924 ). The distal l/3 of the specimen is missing and the stem appears to have been broken and then
reworked, leaving a very short remnant. Short broad barbs are present
and 1 edge of the blade has been reworked and steeply beveled. L:
(too fragm entary); MW: 53; MT: 7; SL: 3; SW: 23.

This is a group of 13 stemmed
and unstemmed dart points which do not fit into any currently-defined
type. They are illustrated in Fig. 13 (m-y).

INDIVIDUAL UNCLASSIFIED DART POINTS.

These are 22 dart points On
which the stems are too damaged to allo"v sorting or classification. Of
these, 8 may have been Pedernales and 2 may have b een Montell.

MISCELLANEOUS DAMAGED DART POINTS.

These are 3 dart points at different
stages in the manufacturing process; none appear to have been finished.
Several unfinished Pedernales specimens were previously noted. The
first specimen ( Fig. 15, e) is an ovate biface with a rough outline of
a stem present at 1 end. L: 77; MW: 40; MT: 14. The second (Fig.
15, c, d) has a well-defined stem with deep basal notches and heavy
barbs. The blade is globular with a very thick distal tip. There is a
flaw in the material near the tip, and there is evidence of repeated attempts to remove it, but these failed. The specimen resembles the
Marshall type. L: 62; MW: 57; MT: 12. The third specimen is a ve1y
large trianguloid flake. One face bears only a few flake scars and the
bulb of percussion has been removed. On the opposite face , a great
deal of cortex remains, though a few flakes have been removed along
1 edge. A slightly expanded, straight-based stem has b een formed by
deep basal notches. Little modification of the stem has occurred. Both
faces are illustrated (Fig. 15, a, b).

UNFINISHED PROJECTILE POINTS.

a
b

c

e

9

m

n

p

0

II

s

q

w

X

y

z

b'

c'

FIG. 14. Dart Points and Unifacial Artifacts. a-g, "Early Triangular"; h-1,
"Late Triangular"; m-y, Individual Unclassified Dart Points, Specimens 1-13
(see text); z-c', pointed flakes; d', e', notched flakes; f', retouched blade.

c

a

d

e

b
.,,lliiiJIIII{IIliJIIIlillliJliii{IIIIJIIII{IiiiJliii{IIIIJIIIIJ

1

2

a

4

s

6

FIG. 15. Unfinished Projectile Points.

86

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

OTHER BIFACIAL ARTIFACTS
GOUGE-SCRAPER ( 1 specimen; Fig. 16, g). It has a triangular outline
with a plano-convex cross section, and 1 end (distal) is steeply beveled. Portions of the beveled edge are dulled from use. L: 46.5; MW:
44; MT:9.
"FIST AXES" ( 2

specimens; Fig. 16, a, b). Both are subtriangular in outline, with thinned bifacial blades (with straight to convex edges) and
a thick proximal end (poll) retaining the nodular cortex. Botl1 are
fashioned from cobbles. One specimen is extremely well made and the
distal tip has a glaze polish (see Witthoft, 1967:383-388). This polish
suggests that this specimen was used as a cutting implement, rather
than functioning as an "axe". Because 1 of his specimens from the
Nopal Terrace site (Val Verde County) exhibited similar polish at the
tip, Sorrow ( 1968:21) has termed these specimens "butted knives".
The second La Jita specimen is rather crude, with the blade rough and
thick, with sinuous edges. In short, this specimen seems likely to have
been used as an "axe" or chopper. This possibility is strengthened by
the fact that short flakes radiate out vertically from the tip, probably
due to impact resulting from use in a chopping activity. L: 88.5 and
87.5; MW: 79.5 and 82; MT (at proximal end): 33 and 44.5.
9 specimens; Fig. 16, c, d). This term is applied to a
series of rough bifacial artifacts which could have functioned as heavy
chopping tools and/or cores. At 1 end of each cobble, a number of
broad flakes have been removed bifacially forming a sinuous convex
edge. Opposite the convex edge, the proximal end is covered with
cortex. The worked edges of 5 show battering. L: 70-123; MW: 62-105;
MT : 30-47.

CORE-CHOPPERS (

MISCELLANEOUS CHOPPERS ( 4 specimens; Fig. 21, f-j). All are heavy
flint cobbles which have been roughly modified along 1 edge. These
edges show battering and other evidence of use which suggests that
the tools were used as chopping implements. L: 99-135; MW: 67-111;
MT: 23-37.

(2 specimens; Fig. 16, e, f). Both specimens are made
on small flint cobbles. Cortex remains at 1 end (proximal) while the
opposite end and much of both faces have been bifacially flaked. One
specimen shows considerable battering. L: 57 and 65; MW: 56.5 and
65; MT: 32 and 34.

PEBBLE CHOPPERS

(9 specimens; Fig. 16, h-k). Three have rounded ovate
bases with long shafts (or bits). The base of 1 is very crude and still
covered with cortex on 1 face . A third specimen is an ovate flake with

PERFORATORS

87

LA JITA SITE

b

a

c
d

g
e

k

FIG. 16. Bifacial Artifacts. a, b, "fist axes"; c, d, core-choppers; e, f, pebble
choppers; g, gouge-scraper; h-k, perforators.

88

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

a short shaft protruding from 1 side. Four specimens are distal tips of
perforator shafts. The tip of the shaft on 1 complete specimen is
dulled, while the others show no apparent wear. L (complete specimens): 45-71; MW (base): 25-58; MT: 6-18.5; L. of shaft: 6-33.
OTHER THINNED BIFACES. This category includes a number of thin hifacially chipped artifacts, excluding projectile points, whose precise
functions are not known. Many of the specimens may have been used
as knives (indeed, many reports in the Central Texas area have described them as such). Others may represent unfinished artifacts or
some may be preforms. Eleven groups are briefly described below:
GROUP 1 ( 7 specimens; Fig. 17, a, b). Triangular with straight or
slightly convex bases; crudely chipped; sinuous lateral edges; no evidence of use. L: 50-58; MW: 35-44; MT: 9-15.
GROUP 2 ( 2 specimens; Fig. 17, c, d). Asymmetrical, with convex
bases and 1 convex and 1 concave blade edge. One is thin, made on a
Rake; the other is thick and crude. L: 61-82; MW: 44-45; MT: 8-10.
GROUP 3 (5 specimens; Fig. 17, e, f). Fragmentary; seem to have had
lanceolate outlines with concave bases; crude; no definable working
edges. L: ? ; MW: 41-51; MT: 8.5-12.
GROUP 4 ( 4 specimens; Fig. 17, g, h). Also lanceolate in outline, but
with straight bases; smaller than Group 3; very crude; fragmentary.
L:?; MW: 29-47; MT: 9-12.5.
GROUP 5 ( 8 specimens; Fig. 17, i, j). Triangular; straight to convex
lateral edges, and straight to slightly convex bases; thin, good workmanship; most show varying degrees of lateral edge retouch, suggesting use as knives; 1 is thermal-fractured. L: 68-72; MW: 37-57; MT:
7-11.
GROUP 6 ( 3 specimens; Fig. 17, k, 1). Subtriangular with markedly
convex bases; rather thin, but crude; no evidence of use. L: 73 (complete specimen); MW: 39-44; MT: 7-11.
GROUP 7 ( 4 specimens; Fig. 17, m, n). All are basal fragments; probably had broad lanceolate outlines; slightly convex bases; crude. L: ?;
MW: 43-52; MT: 6-11.
GROUP 8 ( 3 specimens; Fig. 17, o). Ovate, with convex bases; base
of 1 retains sh·iking platform; along 1 lateral edge of another, there is
a black, soot-like residue as if that edge had been burned, and a portion of this edge has been beveled near the tip and shows wear; crude
workmanship. L: 78 (complete specimen); MW: 47-56; MT: 10-12.

b

d

e
c

g

h

k

p

0

s

FrG. 17. Other Thinned Bifaces. a, b, Group 1; c, d, Group 2; e, f, Group
3; g, h, Group 4; i, j, Group 5; k, l, Group 6; m, n, Group 7; o, Group 8;

r, s, Group 9; p, q, t, Group 10; u, v, Group 11.

90

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

GROUP 9 ( 4 specimens; Fig. 17, r-s). All are basal fragments with
rounded bases and convex lateral edges; 1 is thermal-fractured, and
another seems to have been broken during manufacture. L: ?; MW:
38-46; MT: 9.5-14.
GROUP 10 ( 9 specimens; Fig. 17, p, q, t) . Small, triangular to roughly
lanceolate bifaces; crude; some or all may have functioned as projectile points or knives. L: 50-73; MW: 23-31; MT: 6.5-9 (except 1,
which is 14.5).
GROUP 11 ( 2 specimens; Fig. 17, u, v) . This residual category includes 2 well-made specimens. One (A; Fig. 17, u) is bipointed, with
convex lateral edges. It is made from a variegated tan-yellow-gray
flint not noted elsewhere in the La Jita artifact or debitage sample. It
may have functioned as a knife. Jelks ( 1962:89) has listed "doublepointed knives" as appearing "... to be exclusively a Toyah Focus
trait in the Central T exas Aspect". The other ( B; Fig. 17, v) is a fragment of a large and extremely well-made biface. It exhibits fine parallel-flaking and was apparently lanceolate in outline; it is made from a
fine-grained gray flint. The presumed proximal end is straight. L: A,
97; B, 158.5; MW: A, 43; B, 42; MT: A, 9; B, 10.5.

Twelve groups of heavy, thick percussionchipped bifaces are briefly described:

THICK PERCUSSION BIFACES.

GROUP 1 ( 3 specimens; Fig. 18, a, b). Large, triangular, with convex
edges and bases; fair to crude workmanship, with no evidence of use.
L: 87-101; MW: 48-54; MT: 16-18.5.
GROUP 2 ( 5 specimens; Fig. 18, c). Similar to Group 1, though smaller
with narrower blades; bases are slightly convex, and all are crude. L:
74-83; MW: 40-51; MT: 12-16.
GROUP 3 ( 3 specimens; Fig. 18, d, e) . Long, narrow leaf-shaped outlines; 1 is bipointed, while the other 2 have 1 pointed and 1 rounded
end. All are thick and crude. L: 75-91; MW: 34-27; MT: 16-21.
GROUP 4 ( 2 specimens; Fig. 18, f, g) . Lanceolate outlines; 1 has a
convex base, the other, a slightly concave base. L: 84.5-87; MW: 4145; MT: 19-21.
GROUP 5 (not illustrated; 4 specimens). Ovate outlines; extremely
crude with large flake scars and no definable working edge; 1 has
been burned.
GROUP

6 ( 2 specimens; Fig. 18, h, i). Similar to Group 5, but are

a

c

d

e

FIG. 18. Thick Percussion Bifaces. a, b, Group 1; c, Group 2; d, e, Group 3;
f, g, Group 4; h, i, Group 6; j, k, Group 7; 1, Group 8; m, Group 9; n,

Group 10; o, p, Group 11; q, r, Group 12.

92

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

even more crude; much cortex remains on both faces of each. L: 90101; MW: 57-63; MT: 21-25.
GROUP 7 ( 6 specimens; Fig. 18, j, k). Extremely crude; thick, ovate
outlines with sh·aight to slightly convex ends; patches of cortex retained on 4; only 1 shows evidence of having b een used in cutting/
scraping activities (a portion of 1 lateral edge has been retouched and
dulled). L: 84-101; MW: 46-59; MT: 9-31.
GROUP 8 ( 4 specimens; Fig. 18, l). Subtriangular outlines with
rounded bases and convex lateral edges; crude, thick, with patches of
cortex retained on 2; 1 specimen has heavy battering along 1 lateral
edge, apparently from attempts to thin the blade. These specimens are
probably preforms. L: 72-96.5; MW: 55.5-64; MT: 18-29.5.
GROUP 9 ( 5 specimens; Fig. 18, m). Large, and ovoid in outline with
sinuous lateral edges; cortex remnants on all specimens; large flakes
removed from both faces, and it is possible that these may have been
cores. L: 111-123; MW: 70-77; MT: 33-48.
GROUP 10 ( 5 specimens; Fig. 18, n). Very rough and crude; sinuous
lateral edges; outlines vary from rectanguloid to subtriangular; large
percussion flakes removed from both faces. L: 80-93; MW: 45-65; MT:
16-26.
GROUP 11 ( 3 specimens; Fig. 18, o, p ). Small, ovate and crude; 2
have no definable working edges, and may be reworked from larger
biface fragments; a third exhibits fine retouch along the lateral edges.
L: 52-65; MW: 40-51; MT: 12-16.
GROUP 12 ( 5 specimens; Fig. 18, q, r ) . This is a residual category
composed of miscellaneous crude bifaces; outlines include ovoid, hiangular and asymmetrical. MT: 11-20.

Under this heading, 5 core categories are d esc1ibed:
1 specimen; Fig. 19, a). This specimen appears
to have been made from half of a split river cobble. The face of 1
split half was used as a platfonn and flakes / blades were then detached
around the entire circumference. Judging from the flake scars, flakes
up to 42 mm. in length were removed; other attempts resulted in hinge
fractures. The platform is oval in outline, with the cross section of the
core resembling a h·uncated cone. L: (across platfonn) : 66; MW: 50;
MT (proximal-distal distance) : 42.
CORES.

POLYHEDRAL CORE (

MISCELLANEOUS PREPARED PLATFORM CORES ( 6 specimens; Fig. 19, b,
c). Two appear to represent halves of split cobbles. At 1 end of both

c

d

Frc. 19 . Cores. a, polyhedral core (cross section shown) ; b, c, miscellaneous
prepared platform cores; d-h, miscellaneous bifacial cores; i, j, core nuclei;
k-m, natural platform cores (note change in scale from other illustrated
specimens), k, 1, plaftorm view; m, frontal view; arrows indicate direction
of flake removals.

94

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

specimens, a flake or flakes were removed transverse to the long axis
of the cobble. Flakes were then removed from the cortex side of both
split cobbles by striking along the cortex side of the prepared platform. On 1 specimen, long blade-like flakes (up to 55 mm.) have been
detached. The other specimen also exhibits blade-like scars (however,
on it a number of flakes were removed parallel to the prepared platform). A third core is a large cobble, at 1 end of which a broad flake
was removed across the face. Flakes were then struck off along the
edges of the platform. A fourth large cobble had several flakes removed bifacially at random. It was then truncated at 1 end and a
number of flakes were removed along 1 edge of the truncation; a couple appear to have been blades. The :fifth and sixth are small cobble
fragments with broad truncations ( sb·iking platforms) at 1 end. Flakes
have been removed along 1 end on 1 face, while the opposite face
remains mostly covered with cortex. L: 47-113; MW: 38-91; MT: 24.554.
NATURAL PLATFORM CORES (3 specimens; Fig. 19, k-m). Two are
river cobbles from which a number of flakes have been removed at
1 end by striking the natural (cortex) surface of the nodule. A third
is smaller, and flakes have been struck from 2 cortex surfaces of the
cobble. L: 73-117; MW: 50-86; MT: 42-72.
MISCELLANEOUS BIFACIAL CORES ( 11 specimens; Fig. 19, d-h). These
cores have the following characteristics: (a) thick ovoid to subb·iangular outlines; (b) usually made on river cobbles; (c) flakes removed bifacially at random; (d) patches of cortex often remain on 1
or both faces. L: 65-137; MW: 55-111; MT: 31-54.
CORE NUCLEI ( 4 specimens; Fig. 19, i, j). All appear to be discarded
nuclei of exhausted cores, from which flakes had been removed hifacially at random. L: 51-65. MW: 34-47; MT: 20-41.
UNIFACIAL ARTIFACTS
( 6 specimens; Fig. 14, z-c'). These are thin flakes
which have been trimmed unifacially (and in 2 cases bifacially). The
slight trimming occurs along the edges of the flake, and has produced
a point at 1 end. In 2 cases, the striking platform remains opposite the
pointed end. Two of the specimens may have been knives and were
retouched after being dulled; 1 of these is steeply-beveled along a portion of 1 edge. Three flakes may have been designed to be projectile
points; all 3 are made on blade-like flakes with a steep medial ridge
on the dorsal face. A sixth specimen may have been used as a graver.
L: 30-55; MW: 9-28; MT: 4-7.

POINTED FLAKES

LA JITA SITE

95

NOTCHED FLAKES (2 specimens; Fig. 14, d', e'). One specimen is a thin,
broad interior hinge flake, with a series of small notches on 2 edges. L:
38; MW: 37; MT: 4. The other is a very thick secondary cortex flake,
rectanguloid in outline. A notch has been chipped in 1 lateral edge,
but no other modification is present. L: 56; MW: 42; MT: 17; L. of
notch: 14.

1 specimen; Fig. 14, f'). This artifact is a blade with
parallel edges, retaining a prominent bulb of percussion on the ventral face, and a medial ridge on the dorsal. The lateral edges of the
blade have been finely retouched unifacially; some large flakes are
also present on the dorsal surface. The ventral face is umnodified. L:
56; MW: 25; MT: 7.5.

RETOUCHED BLADE (

37 specimens classed as scrapers are described below. Though
the vast majority are unifacial, a few bifacial specimens are included.
When possible, the specimens were sorted according to the position
of the scraping edge in relation to the bulb of percussion, with the
bulb oriented downward.

SCRAPERS.

SIDE-SCRAPER, 1 edge ( 10 specimens; Fig. 20, a-c). This is a varied
group, each specimen with 1 distinct retouched scraping edge. Tlu·ee
are quite large and apparently represent scrapers made on cores. The
others are much smaller and are all made on flakes. On 4 specimens,
the retouched edge is on the dorsal surface, while 1 specimen is retouched ventrally. Outlines include trianguloid ( 1), ovoid ( 4) and
lanceolate ( 4). L: 40-108; MW: 42-72; MT: 10-38; L. of scraping
edge: 52-98.
SIDE-SCRAPER, 2 edge ( 5 specimens; Fig. 20, d-f). All are made on
flakes, and all have tlianguloid outlines and 2 retouched working edges
(usually straight to convex). Three are pointed. All of the scraping
edges have been formed on the dorsal face. The bulb of percussion
(along with the striking platform) is retained on 3 specimens, but has
been removed on the others. L: 55-97; MW: 31-60; MT: 9-18; L. of
scraping edge: 36-73.
END-SCRAPERS ( 10 specimens; Fig. 20, g-k). They are subtriangular
to ovate in outline with plano-convex cross sections. These specimens
are characterized by a steeply beveled scraping edge opposite the
bulb of percussion. The bulb has been removed from 1 specimen but
is retained on 8 others. Six specimens have retouched lateral edges.
Wear in the form of dulling and/or "nibbling" (short, vertical flakes
resulting from use) is present on most. Patches of cortex remains on
the dorsal faces of 6 specimens. L: 45-67.5; MW: 31-51; MT: 9-18.

a
c
b

g

e

- ~j
k

h

m

FrG. 20. Scrapers and Other Unifaces. a-c, side-scrapers, 1 edge; d-f, sidescrapers, 2 edge; g-k, end-scrapers; 1, end-side scraper; m, oval scraper; n,
miscellaneous unifacial tools, Group 1.

LA JITA SITE

97

END-SIDE SCRAPERS ( 2 specimens; Fig. 20, 1). In the description of
the end-scrapers (above), mention was made of retouched lateral
edges. However, the edges on those specimens seem not to have been
used, but were merely the result of shaping the end-scraper. The 2
specimens described here are a heavy biface and a heavy uniface, with
rectanguloid outlines and plano-convex cross sections. One specimen
has a steep scraping edge at the distal end, with another steep scraping
edge along 1 lateral side. Also present is a pronounced scraping edge
at the proximal (bulb) end. The second specimen has a steep scraping
edge at the distal end, with a sinuous scraping edge along 1 lateral
side. Some cortex is present on the dorsal smface. L: 81-84; MW: 6974; MT: 21-25.
OVAL SCRAPER ( 1 specimen; Fig 20, m). The specimen is an oval
uniface with a plano-convex cross section. There is a distinct scraping
edge along most of the circumference. L: 56; MW: 48; MT: 11.
MISCELLANEOUS SCRAPERS ( 8 specimens; not illustrated). These are
briefly described, though dimensions are not given:

A.
B.

pointed flake; retouch on edges near tip.
badly burned uniface, with pronounced scraping edge on
lateral sides, converging to a point opposite the bulb of percussion.
C.
crude uniface, which can be classified as a double-end
scraper; scraping edges at both the distal and proximal ends.
D, E. plano-convex unifaces ( 1 is badly burned), with slight
scraping edges.
thick flake; b'iangular; pronounced scraping edge along 40
F.
mm. of 1 lateral side; possible wear noted on other edges.
G.
large split cobble, possibly once a core; rectanguloid; scraping edge at 1 end; possible wear along other end and both
lateral edges.
H.
oval secondary cortex flake with scraping edges on 2 sides,
1 edge on the dorsal face, the other on the ventral face;
burned.
I.
mostly unifacial; thick cortex flake with large bulb of percussion; well-defined scraping edge along 35 mm. of 1lateral
side.
Four groups are described below:
1 ( 1 specimen; Fig. 20, n). Broad lanceolate outline, pointed
at 1 end, rounded at the other; longitudinal cross section is concavoconvex; large patches of cortex remain on dorsal face; function of
MISCELLANEOUS UNIFACIAL TOOLS.
GROUP

98

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

specimen uncertain, though portions of lateral edges may show wear.
L: 118; MW: 55; MT: 28.
GROUP 2 ( 3 specimens; Fig. 21, a, b). Roughly ovoid outlines; rough
percussion flaking on 1 face; 2 show no evidence of use, though the
third has an area along 25 mm. of 1 edge which is lightly dulled. L:
63-90; MW: 60-80; MT: 21-25.
GROUP 3 ( 2 specimens; Fig. 21, c, d). Oval outlines with planoconvex cross sections; bulb of percussion retained on ventral face of
both; along 18 mm. area of the circumference of 1 specimen, there is
light retouch; dorsal faces of both are characterized by rough pressure
flaking. L: 62-68; MW: 55-61; MT: 15-18.
GROUP 4 ( 2 specimens; Fig. 21, e) . One is a thick oval cortex flake
with crude flaking along portions of the dorsal face; bulb is retained.
The second is also a thick cortex flake, with bulb retained; on 1 edge
of this specimen there is a 20 mm.-long protrusion which possibly
functioned as a perforator. L: 77-84; MW: 58-63; MT: 16-27.
MISCELLANEOUS CHIPPED STONE

100 specimens Were noted, most of which
seem to be from dart points, though arrow point tips are present.

BIFACIAL DISTAL FRAGMENTS:

MEDIAL FRAGMENTS OF THINNED BIF ACES:

15 specimens are present,

mostly from dart points.
OTHER BIFACE FRAGMENTS: There are 32 specimens, most of which are
pieces of large percussion bifaces. They are often thermal-fractured.
GROUND STONE ARTIFACTS
GORGET ( 1 specimen; Fig. 22, g). The specimen is fragmentary, representing approximately 1/2 of a long, ovate gorget, made from calcareous siltstone. Both faces have been ground and smoothed, and
numerous longitudinal striations remain. Two biconical perforations
are present; both have maximum diameters of 9 mm. and are spaced
about 9 mm. apart. On 1 face, a shallow pit is located between the 2
holes, probably representing an initial attempt at perforation. L (of
fragment): 58.5; MW: 37; MT: 6.5.

1 specimen; Fig. 22, f). This unusual artifact has
a long, narrow lanceolate outline, with nearly-parallel sides. It is pointed at 1 end and slanted at the other. Transverse cross section is triangular. The distal end appears to have been ground to a point and
thinned. A larger specimen, though very similar in outline, was found
at the Landslide site (Sorrow, Shafer and Ross, 1967:39). Another
LIMESTONE OBJECT (

c

a

b

~~

%t

J

FIG. 21. Unifacial and Bifacial Tools. a, b, miscellaneous unifacial tools,
Group 2; c d, miscellaneous unifacial tools, Group 3; e, miscellaneous unifacial tools, Group 4; f-j, miscellaneous bifacial cores and core-choppers.

f..

b

a

d

/

9

e
h

FIG. 22. Ground Stone Artifacts. a, quartzite mano; b-d, limestone manos;

e, hammerstone; f, limestone object; g, gorget; h, metate (see text for dimensions).

LA JITA SITE

101

shaped limestone object has been found at the Gildart site ( 41 UV 37)
and is conical in form (Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
collections). The measurements of the La Jita specimen are: L: 88;
MW: 15; MT: 10.
MANOS ( 9 specimens; Fig. 22, a-d). Three are fragmentary. Eight are
of limestone and 1 is made of quartzite. The limestone specimens vary
from ovate to rectanguloid in outline, and all but 1 have wear facets
on both faces, with some pecking around the edges. The quartzite
mano is the largest; it is loaf-shaped and very well made, smoothed
over the entire surface of both faces, as well as around the sides.
L: 95-131; MW: 73-106.5; MT: 40-67.5.

1 specimen; Fig. 22, h). This limestone metate, or grinding
slab, was found partially exposed on the surface in Area A. It is about
43 em. long, with a maximum width of approximately 23 em. Two
broad, shallow grinding facets are present on 1 face; the opposite face
is unmodified.
METATE (

( 1 specimen; Fig. 22, e). This is a round biconvex
cobble of hard, dense limestone which shows heavy battering around
its circumference. It is possible that the battering results from attempts
to shape the stone, and it could have had some other function (besides
that of a hammerstone), perhaps as a bolas-stone. L: 55.5; MW: 53;
MT: 37.5.

HAMMERSTONE

BONE AND ANTLER ARTIFACTS
BONE BEAD ( 1 specimen; Fig. 23, h). It is made from a shaft segment
of small mammal bone and is tubular. L: 19; MW: 10.
MODIFIED DEER ULNAE ( 2 specimens; Fig. 23, a, b). On 1 specimen, the
distal end of the ulna has been cut off, and the remaining portion of
the shaft has been ground to a slightly convex edge. The edge is
slightly beveled on both faces. The artifact's function is uncertain, but
perhaps it was used as a Raking tool. The second is much like the first,
though the remaining shaft was fashioned to a point. L: 90 and 85;
MT: (shaft) : 7 and 6; L (shaft) 22 and 30.5.

(5 specimens; Fig. 23, d, e). All are made from
splinters of mammal long bone (deer?). Only 1 is fairly complete, and
it is pointed at 1 end, and both surfaces show vestiges of polish. L:
131. Two other specimens are articular end fragments. The shaft portions show clear evidence of having been shaped and 1 specimen is
rather highly polished. The fourth and fifth specimens are tip fragments.
BONE SPLINTER AWLS

,A

I • ' .

~i

'\'

'

.~.

>I
•!

~

'.,.J

'!

J1

1

.,

I

1
I

.

'

t.!

;

a

t'

.

I

• ..,. "!

b

'f. r

c

'' ' f.
(

' '

-1. i?

~{1
d

,· 1

h

'

'

1

g
f
...,jlllljlllltlljiiii~IIIJIIII~IIIjlll~llljllll~lll[llll~

,,
I '

....

' I,

,-,
' '.

'\
\

I

I ,

k

I

J-.._,..

FIG. 23. Bone and Antler Artifacts and Ceramics. a, b, modified deer ulnae;
c, spatulate object; d, e, bone splinter awls; f, antler object; g, miscellaneous
bone object; h, bone bead; i, rim sherd (profile shown); j, k, miscellaneous
body sherds; 1, loop handle fragment.

LA JITA SITE

103

1 specimen; Fig. 23, c ) . It is fragmentary and
seems to have b een made from a long bone splinter. One end is rounded and the other is damaged.

SPATULATE OBJECT (

1 specimen; Fig. 23, g ). This appears to
be a tip fragment of a bone awl. It is highly polished and has an oval
cross section.
MISCELLA ' EOUS BONE OBJ E CT (

ANTLE R OBJECT ( 1 specimen; Fig. 23, f ) . The specimen is an antler tine
fragment which has b een heavily charred. Its status as an artifact is
dubious, though what seems to b e areas of polish resulting from use
are present on the blunted tip. L: 44.
CERAMICS

Seventy-two potsherds ( Fig. 23, i-1 ) were recovered from the upper
levels at La Jita. Most are small body sherds, with a few rimsherds and
1 handle fragm ent. Generally, the sherds are from well-made, highly
fired vessels, with hard and highly smoothed to burnished surfaces.
All sherds are bone-tempered, with the bone occasionally burned. At
least 3 or 4 vessels are represented. Unsmoothed coil junctures can b e
seen on the interior of several sherds.
Surface colors are light gray, grayish-brown, dark gray and pink to
reddish-yellow. Those sherds in the pink ( Munsell 7.5 YR : 7 I 4 ) to
reddish-yellow ( Munsell 7.5 YR : 7/ 6 ) range are predominant.
Other traits of the ceramics at La Jita are:
1) paste: compact; often granular, though sometimes laminated.
2 ) core color : mostly dark gray to brownish gray; one sherd has
a reddish-yellow core.
3 ) hardness: on Moh's scale, 2.5-3.0.
4 ) thickness : 4-10 mm.
5) rim shape : 1 is rounded, thinned from the interior and flares
outward with slight hint of an overlap along exterior part of
lip just b elow the rim. Another is also thinned from the interior, flares outward slightly and has a rather flattened lip.
6 ) surface treatment: as mentioned above, exterior surfaces are
well-smoothed to burnished ; interiors are usually rough, and
only poorly-smoothed.
7) handle : loop shaped; circular in transverse cross section;
roughly smoothed ; maximum diameter is 14 mm.; length ( vertical ) : 30 mm.
Pottery is known at several other sites in the immediate area. A few
miles south of La Jita, sherds were collected from the Kincaid rockshelter. About 40 body sherds at that site closely resemble the La Jita

104

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

specimens, especially in surface finish, hardness and color. Also in the
Kincaid sherd sample is a thick, grit-tempered sherd, a cmdely made
bone-tempered brownish-gray ware with a coarse paste ( 6 sherds),
and a single sherd with a black, sandy-grit paste and a deeply scored
exterior. Near Kincaid, another site has yielded a group of 17 sherds.
All are bone-tempered. Surface colors are light gray, pinkish yellow,
light brown and gray. Though they are from well-made vessels with
hard surfaces, the surface finish is not as fine as on the La Jita examples.
To the southwest of La Jita, still in Uvalde County, 6 sherds were
collected at the E. Stockley Ranch site, near Laguna. Only 2 are now
available for study. One has a hard ( 3.5 Moh's) , highly burnished,
reddish exterior, with a fine, hard paste, tempered with fine particles
of bone and grit. The other has grayish surfaces with a coarse paste,
and is bone-tempered. Five other sherds were examined from the E. E.
Nelson site near Concan. All are bone-tempered with light brown to
gray surfaces. Portions of asphaltum decorations are present on the
exteriors of 2.
In Real County, sherds are known from the Grantland and Boles
sites. At the Boles site, 2 thin sherds, representing a single vessel, were
found. They have very pale brown exteriors, light red interiors and a
fine, hard bone-tempered paste. The exterior surfaces are smoothed,
but the interiors are rough. At Grantland ( sherds not now available
for study) , A. T. Jackson (ms.) reports a rim sherd "... encrusted on
both interior and exterior with grease and soot. Sand tempered and
excessively fired". Also at the site were 3 sherds "... of reddish-yellow
ware and heavily tempered with calcareous material" (note: probably
bone).
In adjoining Edwards County, 2 sherds are present from a site on
the Walter Craig Ranch. Exterior surfaces are light red to light yellowish-brown. The 2 sherds seem to represent different vessels. One has
a coarse, contorted paste, with burned and unburned bone temper.
The tempering agents are up to 2 mm. in length and the core color is
light brown. The second has a very hard, laminated paste with unburned bone temper, and the core color is gray. Both sherds range
from 6 to 7 mm. in thickness. At the Grooms Ranch (also in Edwards
County) 2 thin sherds ( 4.5 mm. average) were found, apparently from
a single vessel. Surface colors are light red to reddish-yellow. The
sherds have a very fine paste, tempered with finely crushed bone.
Bone-tempered pottery, much of it similar to the La Tita materials,
has been found in fairly large quantities at a number of sites in Dimmit, Zavala and other south Texas counties (Hester, 1968b: 9-11; Hester

105

LA JITA SITE

and Hill, ms.). For the distribution of pottery-bearing sites in the
southwestern part of the Edwards Plateau, see Fig. 24.
FLAKE STUDY

An analysis of a selected sample of flint Hakes and other lithic
detritus was carried out. The following units were used: in Area A,
NlO E40, Nl5 E40; in Area C, N20 W40, N20 W45; in Area B, N35
E5, N40 E5; and, in Area F, Test 7. A total of 15,047 pieces from these

EDWARDS

K

I

POTTERY BEARING SITES.
SOUTHWEST

EDWARDS

PLATEAU

20

0
mi.

FIG. 24. Pottery-Bearing Sites on the Southwestern Edwards Plateau. 1, La
Jita; 2, Kincaid rockshelter; 3, E. E. Nelson; 4, E. Stockley; 5, Boles; 6,
Grantland; 7, Craig Ranch.

I06

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

7 units was examined. The purpose of the study was to analyze the
Hakes from 2 of the tenace areas along with a similar sample from 2 of
the burned rock middens. I hoped for several results, one of which was
to detern1ine if the Hake debris would indicate that different kinds of
Hint-working activities were carried out in the terrace as opposed to
the burned rock midden areas. Secondly, it was hoped that Hake analysis in the terrace areas might reveal some patterns, resulting in the
recognition of specific Hint-working areas and/or procedures. To
achieve this second goal, it would have been ideal to have examined
all of the Hake debris from all units in the terrace, but the overwhelming quantities of Hakes (the total number of Hakes excavated at the
site is estimated at 50,000-60,000) prevented such an analysis. The results of the Hakc study are shown in Tables I-5.
Below are listed Hake and detritus categories established to facilitate
the sorting. Categories a,b,c,e, and f are based primarily on definitions
by Shafer ( I969) :
(a) INITIAL CORTEX FLAKES result from the removal of the cortex
from the nodule. The dorsal sudace is covered with cortex.
(b) SECONDARY CORTEX FLAKES are characterized by the dorsal face
being partially covered with cortex, but also exhibiting I or more
Hake removals.
(c) INTERIOR FLAKES have no cortex on either surface, since they
have been removed from the interior of the core. Platforms are generally large and the vast majority of the Hakes appear to have been
struck from simple prepared platforms (i.e., they have a Hat Hake
surface; a very small percentage have cortex platforms).
(d) INTERIOR FLAKES WITH MULTI-FACETED PLATFORMS were also
recognized in the La Jita sample. These are interior Hakes on which
the platforms are formed by convergent planes. The Hakes appear
to have been struck at the peak formed by the convergent planes.
(e) LIPPED FLAKES are characterized by a diffuse bulb of percussion and an overlapping, or "lipped", multifaceted striking platform.
Generally, these seem to be the result of biface thinning activities.
Only rarely does cortex occur on the dorsal surface and then only
in small patches; however, this surface is always multifaceted.
(f) FLAKE BLADES are narrow, parallel-sided Hakes, usually twice
as long as they are wide. All have either I or 2 median ridges on the
dorsal surface. Platforms are always prepared, often large and lozenge-shaped in outline. In this category, I have largely followed the
definition put forth by Shafer ( I969 :4).
(g) UTILIZED FLAKES were included in the study to help detennine

t'"'

TAllLE

>

1.

'-<

:::1

>

Flake and Detritus Analysis in Area C (in percentages).

"':::1
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

No. of Flakes

986

562

944

489

1146

625

268

No. Classifiable

285

209

301

184

405

231

103

1

1

2

2

1

4

4

Secondary Cortex

25

32

30

29

17

23

30

Interior

36

43

36

38

43

36

28

Interior (multifaceted platfonn)

10

2

3

2

1

4

3

Lipped

24

16

24

25

31

27

32

Core Fragments

3

5

3

3

5

4

3

Flake Blades

1

1

0

0

0

2

0

Utilized Flakes

1

0

1

1

1

1

0

101

100

99

100

99

101

100

LEVEL

Initial Cortex

Total (%)

1:'1

f-'

0
---1

108

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

how frequently flakes were used as tools. These flakes are distinguished by light retouch along 1 or 2 lateral edges; most are fragmentary and composed only a minor part of the sample.
(h) coRE FRAGMENTS are chunks of flint which exhibit numerous
flake scars and obviously represent pieces of cores. Core nuclei are
not included. Some of these pieces probably result from core-trimming or reworking activities. Cores described earlier are not included.
( i) FLAKE FRAGMENTS are pieces on which the bulb of percussion
and striking platform are missing, making it impossible to sort them
accurately.
A major fact pointed out by the flake analysis was the low density
of flakes and detritus occurring in the burned rock midden areas. As
shown in Table 4, the unit examined in the burned rock midden in
Area F contained only 82 flakes. The 2 units in Area B contained 1,264
flakes, yet the level immediately below the burned rock zone in this
area alone contained 1,054 flakes. In marked conh·ast to the flake
counts in Area F and B, the 2 Area A units yielded 5,536 flakes, and
the 2 in Area C contained 5,020. In a later section of this paper, I assign the burned rock middens at La Jita to a Middle Archaic occupation ( s). If we examine corresponding Middle Archaic levels in the
terrace (levels 5 and 6), we find that there are 1,474 pieces in Area A
and 1,771 in Area C (contrasting with 82 in Area F and 1,264 in Area
B ) . The occurrence of 1,264 pieces in the Area B burned rock zone
seems rather high, given the minute amount in the burned rock zone
of Area F. However, this is the result of a concentration of flake debris in Levels 3, 5 and 6 of unit N35 E5 of Area B. These 3 levels account for 666 (or 53% ) of the flakes from the area; it is difficult to
account for this phenomenon, but it is possible that those concentrations reflect flint-working loci.
Let us now examine the flake categories in each area studied. In
Area A, the percentage of the various flake types remain remarkably
consistent throughout the occupation there. It appears that all steps in
the stone tool manufacturing process did take place within the area.
In Area C, a very similar situation exists, though as in Area A, lipped
flakes gradually increase in Archaic levels. Initial cortex flakes also increase near the bottom of the deposit, though not significantly. In level
1, there is a high percentage of interior multi-faceted platform flakes.
In Area B, there is a great decrease in the percentages of initial
cortex flakes. Secondary cortex and interior flake frequencies remain
rather static. Lipped flake percentages do not vary radically, though

TABLE

~

2.

'-I

Flake and Detritus Analysis in Area A (in percentages).

!:l
:>

LEVEL

(/)
.....

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

No. of Flakes

733

901

1306

498 1

950

480

524

144

No. Classifiable

224

291

354

178

331

184

167

45

2

3

1

0

1

1

3

0

Secondary Cortex

24

21

25

15

16

19

16

13

Interior

36

42

37

40

40

35

34

33

2

5

2

3

4

3

7

11

25

25

33

38

38

38

34

33

Core Fragments

4

3

1

3

1

3

3

7

Flake Blades

2

1

0

2

1

0

1

2

Utilized Flakes

5

0

1

0

0

0

1

0

100

100

100

101

101

99

99

99

Initial Cortex

Interior (multifaceted platfonn)
Lipped

Total %

>-l
M

'Flake count on Unit N10 E40 only; corresponding materials from N15 E40 could not be located, apparently having been lost
in storage.

1-'

0
CD

llO

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

there is a 50% occurrence in level 3 ( see Table 3 ), one of the levels
which contributed so heavily to the overall flake total from Area B
discussed earlier. It seems that such a high frequency of lipped flakes
in that level might suggest the presence of a flint-working locus, in
this case 01iented toward the thinning of bifaces. It should also be
pointed out that utilized flakes are at their lowest in this area, being
completely absent from the burned rock zone.
In Area F , there is a great deal of fluctuation among the levels, probably attributable to the very small flake sample. Initial cortex flakes
are completely absent. Secondary cortex flakes increase greatly below
the burned rock midden ( i.e., beneath level 4; see Table 4 ), though
interior flakes p eak in the burned rock midden zone and then gradually decline. Lipped flakes are most prevalent beneath the burned
rock midden zone. Flake blades make up a high p ercentage of the
flakes in level 3, but only 9 flakes were classifiable from that level. As
in Area B, utilized flakes are absent from the burned rock midden,
though they are present in terrace deposits below it.
In the Middle Archaic levels of the terrace and burned rock midden
areas, the occurrence of burned detritus was recorded, in an attempt
to see if burned flakes might correlate with one suggested function for
the burned rock midden, that of a h earth area ( Kelley and Campbell,
1942:322 ) . The results are shown in Table 5. In summary, the burned
rock middens contained an average of 21 % burned flakes, while the
terrace areas averaged about 24 % . Thus, there is not a great d eal of
difference between the two locations. This in itself may b e significant.
As stated above, one of the suggested explanations for the burned rock
midden phenomenon is that it represents an area of superimposed
hearths. However, these percentages show that there was as much or
even more burning ( atb·ibutable to hearth areas ) going on in the terrace areas during the Middle Archaic, when I believe the burned rock
middens accumulated. The implications of this are discussed further
in the Summary and Conclusions sections of this paper.
This flake and detritus analysis pern1its the formulation of several
statements having direct bearing on the prehist01ic occupations at La
}ita:
( 1) The greatest concentration of flint flakes and d etritus is in the
t errace. The mass of bone, charcoal, snails and artifacts in the terrace deposits, coupled with the quantity of fl akes, suggest that Areas
A and C were the principal living ( or occupational) areas at the
site. The flake analysis has shown that all steps in the stone tool
manufacturing process are represented in these areas. Specific flintworking loci were not recognized.

t"'
TABLE

>

3.

'--<

::1
>

Flake a nd Detritus Analysis in Area F ( in percentages ).
The burned rock midden zone ends in the middle of level 6.

rn
H

>-l
1:'1

LEVEL

1

2

3

4'

5

6

7

8

9

No. of Flakes

15

27

13

27

14

21

54

41

36

23

9

14

9

16

7

13

27

28

21

8

No. Classiliable
Initial Cortex

10

2

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Secondary Cortex

22

28

0

0

0

46

44

39

28

12

Interior

44

43

11

62

57

31

29

35

38

25

0

0

0

12

0

0

4

0

5

25

Lipped

11

28

0

25

43

15

22

14

0

25

Cme Fmgments

23

0

0

0

0

0

0

7

5

0

Interior (multiface ted platfonn)

Flake Blades

0

0

89

0

0

0

0

0

5

0

Utilized Flakes

0

0

0

0

0

7

0

4

19

12

100

99

100

99

100

99

99

99

100

99

Total (%)
1

Burned rock midden zone ends at the bottom of Level 4.

2

Only half of the unit was excavated.

f-'
f-'
f-'

f-'
f-'

1:-0

TABLE

4.

Flake and Detritus Analysis in Area B (in percentages).

LEVEL
No. of Flakes
No. Classifiable
Initial Cortex
Secondary Cortex
Interior
Interior (multifa ceted platform)
Lipped
Core Fragments
Flake Blades
Utilized Flakes

7

8

1054
283

13891
391

513 2
113

1
19
46

1
16
33

.5
14
33

0
17
45

2
30
1
0
0

3
46
1
0
1

3
48
.5
.5
1

2
34
2
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

122
45

122
32

230
76

212
80

183
57

395
106

2
22
29

0
28
33

0
13
32

0
14
37

0
28
32

4
40
2
0
0

3
35
2
0
0

4
50
0
1
0

3
44
3
0
0

7
33
0
0
0

6 (ttppeT)

6 (lower)

>-l

M
~

>
>
::0
[J)

g
M

Total (%)

99

101

100

101

100

99

101

100

100

0
t-'
0
C'J

....

'Of the total of 1389 flakes, 1072 came from Unit N40 E5.
2

&:t-'
[J)

Materials from Level 8, N35 E5 could not be located ; these percentages are calculated on flakes from N40 E5.

0

s
>-l

><

113

LA JITA SITE
TABLE

5.

Percentages of burned flakes in Middle Archaic levels at La }ita.

AREA
LEVEL
1
2
3
4
5
6

B
23%
22
9
25
25
18 (upper)

AREA
F

AREA
A

AREA

c

26%
38
15
8
17%
28

25%
25

( 2) The high percentages of flakes in levels 3, 5, and 6 in Area B
suggest flint-working loci, and one level where 50 % of the flakes
were lipped may represent a locus devoted primarily to biface thinning.
( 3) The flake analysis revealed the presence of flake blades in
most areas of the site (see Tables 1-4) suggesting that a specialized
technique oriented toward the production of such flakes was practiced by the occupants during most periods of the site occupation.
The polyhedral core described earlier tends to substantiate these
findings.
( 4) Aside from the specialized technique suggested by the presence of the flake blades and a polyhedral core, the flint-working
technology at the site appears to have remained without significant
change throughout the history of the site. However, a slight decrease in lipped flakes was noted in the upper levels of Areas A and
F (see Tables 1 and 4).
( 5) The similarities between burned flake frequencies in the Middle Archaic burned rock middens and the Middle Archaic levels in
the terrace indicate that the burned rock middens do not represent
loci in which all hearth activity was confined. There must have also
been hearths in the teiTace and it is possible that the burned rock
middens were not hearth areas at all.
RADIOCARBON DATES

A number of charcoal samples were collected during the course of
the excavations. These were submitted to the Radiocarbon Dating
Laboratory at The University of Texas, and the results of the analyses
conducted there are contained in a forthcoming paper by Valastro and
Davis ( 1970).
The dated samples (and accompanying comments) are listed below

114

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

in possible stratigraphic order (top to bottom) based on artifact associations.
Tx-687 (La Jita 49)
A.D. 1290 ( 660 ±70 )
N15/E35, Level 2. Scallorn and other side-notched arrow points
( Scallorn variants?) and a large bipointed biface (Group 11) were
found in this level. The date seems late for Scallorn (see Jelks, 1962),
but perhaps it represents the time of transition before the appearance
of Perdiz points and ceramics at the site.
Tx-684 (La Jita 176)
A.D. 1150 ( 810+50)
N25/E40, Level 3. This level contained mixed Late Prehistoric
and Archaic materials, including Sabinal arrow points, a Pedernales
point, and a "Late Triangular" dart point. The sample was split and
both parts prepared and counted separately (yielding BP dates of
800±60 and 810±90). I feel that the date most probably represents
the Late Prehistoric materials and may be applicable to the proposed
Sabinal arrow point type. The "Late Triangular" biface is one of a
series of Middle to Late Archaic forms which may have functioned as
dart points or perhaps as knives.
Tx-664 ( La Jita 86)
A.D. 1240 ( 710 ±70 )
Test Pit 5, Level 1. Mixed Archaic and Late Prehistoric artifacts
were found in this level, which was excavated near the northern edge
of the site where the deposits are rather thin. Thus it is not surprising
that these materials are mixed. Artifacts include Perdiz arrow points,
an Ensor-like dart point and a dart point similar to Marshall. I feel
that the date is most applicable to Perdiz, and it is in agreement with
dates on that type from central Texas (Jelks, 1962). This date and
Tx-687 probably mark the transitional period, after which Perdiz and
pottery were inb·oduced.
Tx-665 (La Jita 29)
A.D. 1040 ( 910 ±80)
N10/E40, Level 2. The level contained mixed Late Archaic materials ( Montell dmt point ) and early Late Prehistoric artifacts, especially Edwards arrow points. This date, along with Tx-681 and Tx685 are fairly consistent and apparently represent the transition from
Late Archaic to Late Prehistoric at La Jita. It is an intriguing possibility that Montell survived this late, since dates on the type in the
Amistad area to the west are around 490-460 B.C. (Dibble, 1967:30),
and possibly earlier (Sorrow, 1968:46-47). These 3 dates (Tx-665, 681,
and 685 ) provide us with the first indication of the age of the Edwards

LA JITA SITE

115

arrow point type, and suggest that it was the earliest arrow point form
to appear in the southwestern Edwards Plateau (see Hester, 1970 b).
Tx-681 (La Jita 137)
A.D. 960 (990±60)
N15/E35, Level 3. The level included arrowpoint fragments,
Edwards arrow points, and a Frio dart point, and dates the period of
transition from Late Archaic to Late Prehistoric.
Tx-685 (La Jita 72)
A.D. 930 ( 1020+70)
N20/W50, Level 3. This sample was collected from a level containing Edwards arrow points, and Pedernales dart points. In general,
it is in agreement with Tx-665 and Tx-681. There are a number of
ways in which the presence of Pedernales dmt points at this late date
could be explained, but the possibility should be left open that the
type was still in use (see Tx-684, Tx-682, and Tx-683).
Tx-686 (La Jita 147)
A.D. 490 (1460±80)
N60/E40, Level 2. I feel that this date is applicable to the Late
Archaic at La Jita; Frio dmt points occmTed in the level. Middle Archaic forms ( Casb·oville) occur in the level below.
Tx-692 (La Jita 32)
A.D. 100 (1850±180)
N10/E40, Level 4. This date represents Late Archaic or late Middle Archaic. The level contained Montell and Pedernales dart points,
and a fragment of a specimen reminiscent of Marshall. The date would
suggest that Montell may have been introduced at La Jita at this time
or earlier, and survived until around 1000 A.D.
Tx-682 (La Jita 55)
A.D. 1030 (920±90)
N15/E35, Level 4. The level should represent late Middle Archaic
occupations, though the only diagnostic dart point found was a Pedernales specimen. I would have expected the date to be earlier, more in
line with Tx-692.
Tx-683 (La Jita 160)
A.D. 1350 (600±80)
N20/E35, Level 2. Unlike Tx-682, this sample was obtained from
a level which is basically Late Prehistoric in age over the entire site.
However, only Pedernales and other dart point fragments were found,
suggesting a possible Middle Archaic affiliation. Since the situation in
this level appears very confused, I do not feel that the date can be applied to the mate1ials found within the level.

116

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

GENERAL CoMMENTS: These are the first radiocarbon dates to be reported from an open camp site in the southwestern part of the Edwards
Plateau. The dates for the Late Prehistmic period at La Jita correspond rather well with those from central Texas (Jelks, 1962), although Scallorn may have been in use until much later. The earliest
arrow point form in the area was Edwards, appearing between 900
and 1000 A.D. Ceramics are introduced at the site around or after
1300 A.D. (see Tx-687 and Tx-664). If the La Jita dates are conect,
the Late Archaic did not end in the area until about that time, thereby
indicating that it continued much later here than in adjoining areas.
Unfortunately, no dates were obtained for Middle or Early Archaic
materials, though Tx-692 may be applicable to the Middle Archaic.
DISTRIBUTION SUMMARY
In this section, I have briefly summarized the vertical and horizontal
distributions of the archeological materials recovered at La Jita, and
have attempted to order these data chronologically. None of the periods
discussed below are clear-cut, but rather are based on b·ends provided by the stratigraphic positions of the materials, and certain of the
radiocarbon dates. Sequences defined in other parts of cenb·al Texas
(Johnson, Suhm and Tunnell, 1962; Sonow, Shafer and Ross, 1967)
have been used for correlative purposes, particularly in the application
of data these sources provide concerning temporally-diagnostic projectile point styles.
LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD.
The Late Prehistoric occupations (note: the term "Late Prehistoric"
is employed here because I feel that it lacks some of the connotations
inherent in the term "Neo-American", as defined by Suhm, Krieger
and Jelks, 1954:20) at La Jita were primarily confined to Areas A and
C in the terrace. Scattered Late Prehistoric materials were found in
Areas B, D, E, G, H, and I. These late occupations are distinguished
by the presence of arrow points, pottery, and associated lithic and
bone tools.
Anow points were confined to the upper 4 levels at the site, but were
especially prevalent in the upper 3, and it is these levels ( 1-3) that
are assigned to the Late Prehistoric occupations. Of the 86 arrow points
with stratigraphic provenience, 75% were from levels 1 and 2, 16%
from level 3, and 9% from level 4. Though there is considerable mixing
in these upper levels, some b·ends in the arrow point sequence are
apparent. Edwards is the earliest type, dominating levels 2 and 3;
other forms such as Cliffton, sabinal, Scallorn and Triangular are

LA JITA SITE

117

scattered rather evenly throughout the rest of the late occupations.
Perdiz, however, clearly is dominant in level 1, perhaps representing
the last (or one of the last) occupations of the site in Late Prehistoric
times.
Horizontally, the Cliffton type is restricted to Area A, while Edwards,
Sabinal, Scallorn and Triangular are fotmd mainly in Areas A and C.
Only Perdiz is well-distributed over much of the site, though it, too, is
most common in Areas A and C. Only 2 arrow points were found in
the burned rock middens (Areas B and I) and both were Scallorn, and
seemed to postdate the midden construction. In summary, 88.8% of
the arrow points were recovered from Areas A and C.
Tool forms and other mate1ials present in the Late Prehistoric deposits consist of the following (those forms resuicted to the Late Prehistoric levels are indicated with an asterisk): gouge-scraper", corechoppers, miscellaneous choppers, perforators, thinned bifaces (groups
1-4, 7-9, 11, 12), thick percussion bifaces (groups 1-4, 7-9, 11, 12),
cores (miscellaneous bifacial, nuclei), pointed flakes, notched flakes",
retouched blade", scrapers (l-edge side, 2-edge side, end, oval", miscellaneous), miscellaneous unifaces (group 2), miscellaneous chipped
stone ( biface distal and medial, other), limestone object", manos,
ceramics", splinter awls, modified ulnae", and antler object"'.
In addition to the arrow points and the non-projectile point items
discussed above, there were a number of dart points found in the Late
Prehistoric levels. Their presence can mainly be attributed to mixing,
and several of the specimens were recovered from the upper levels of
the burned rock midden areas where Late Prehistoric occupations are
totally absent. Those dart points which may be of significance in the
Late Prehistoric occupations are Ensor and Frio, as well as Montell
and Miscellaneous Forms 2,7, and 9. These dart points apparently
represent u·ansitional forms. Since several Pedernales points were also
found in Late Prehistoric levels in the terrace, it seems possible (though
highly unlikely) that they may have remained in use until a ve1y late
time at La Jita.
ARCHAIC PERIOD.

Based on my analyses of the Archaic materials, I have separated
them as follows: Late Archaic (level 4, terrace only); Middle Archaic
(Levels 5 and 6, in the terrace; levels 1-6 (upper ) in Area B; levels
1-4 in Area F; and, levels 1-5, Area I ); and Early Archaic (levels 7-10
in the terrace, and below tl1e burned rock middens ) . In each of these
3 divisions within the Archaic at La Jita are certain projectile point
types which can be correlated with adjoining regions (Johnson, Suhm,

118

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and Tunnell, 1962; Johnson, 1964; Sorrow, Shafer and Ross, 1967) thus
facilitating (and somewhat substantiating) the formulation of these
units.
LATE ARCHAIC.

At La Jita, this is characterized by the appearance of Ensor, Frio
and Montell dart points, all of which seem to continue into the early
part of the Late Prehistoric. Pedernales still remains prominent. The
presence of 2 Nolan specimens and a single "Early Corner Notched,
Variety l" in the Late Archaic may be due to mixing. Other dart points
present include Miscellaneous Forms l, 5-7, and 9-10. Associated with
the projectile points are these materials: "fist axes", perforators, thinned bifaces (groups 3-6, 8, 9) , thick percussion bifaces (groups 3, 5,
7, 10) , cores (miscellaneous prepared platform), scrapers (end, miscellaneous), miscellaneous chipped stone ( biface distal and medial,
other), a gorget, and a mano. No bone artifacts were found.
MIDDLE ARCHAIC.

It is impossible to distinguish any clear vertical separation of projectile point types in the Middle Archaic. The major type is Pedernales,
constituting 42.5% of the total dart point sample in the Middle Archaic. There is a great variety of other forms, including Almagre,
"Early Corner Notched, Vaiiety l and 2", Kinney, La Jita, Marshall,
Nolan, "Early and Late Triangular", Abasolo, Edgewood, Lanceolate,
Montell, Pandale, Travis, Williams, and Miscellaneous Forms 3, 4,
6, 8, and 10-13. Other items in the Middle Archaic inventory are : "fist
axes", core choppers, miscellaneous choppers, perforators, thinned hifaces (groups l , 3-5, 8-10 ), thick percussion bifaces (groups l-7, 9,
10), cores (polyhedral, natural platform, miscellaneous bifacial),
pointed flakes, scrapers (l-edge side, 2-edge side, end-side, miscellaneous) , miscellaneous unifaces (groups 2 and 3), miscellaneous
chipped stone ( biface distal and medial, other). Manos were found,
and bone artifacts were represented by a splinter awl and a miscellaneous bone object.
EARLY ARCHAIC.

This peiiod appears to be represented by the artifacts found in levels
7-10 (although no diagnostic datt points were found in level 10). The
major projectile point form is the "Early Corner Notched" series. The
3 varieties of this style comprise 35.8 % of the dart points from the 4
levels, and are especially concentrated in level 7. Similar corner
notched dart points have been found in early contexts at Baker Cave,
Val Verde County (J. H. Word, personal communication) and in the
Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir basin of central Texas (Sorrow, Shafer

LA JITA SITE

119

and Ross, 1967:142 ) . The Pedernales type may have begun in the latter
part of this pmiod (it constitutes 17.9% of the dart points) , reaching
its maximum popularity in the succeeding Middle Archaic period.
Other projectile point forms in the Early Archaic at La Jita are: Bulverde, Kinney, La Jita, Lanceolate, Nolan, Travis, and "Early Triangular". Miscellaneous Forms 6 and 12 were found , as was a single unclassified dart point. Associated with the projectile points were: corechoppers, miscellaneous choppers, pebble choppers, perforators, thinned bifaces (groups 2, 3, 6, 7, 9, 11B) , thick percussion bifaces (groups
2, 8, 9-12) , miscellaneous prepared platform cores, core nuclei scrapers ( l-edge side, end, miscellaneous ), miscellaneous unifaces (group
1), and miscellaneous chipped stone ( biface medial and distal, and
other) . No ground stone or bone artifacts were found.
Though the evidence at La Jita is not clear-cut, it is possible (based
on data from Baker Cave, Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir basin, and some
unpublished central Texas sites) that the "Early Corner Notched"
series and other corner notched dart point forms are pre-Early Archaic
in age. Recent data from central and Trans-Pecos Texas sites needs to
be summarized and evaluated before we can deal further with this
problem.
The living areas (here defined as multi-activity areas, the scenes of
day-to-day living, and not to be confused with the excavation "Areas")
during the Archaic pmiod were located as follows: Late Archaic concentrated in Areas A and C, with scattered materials in Areas D , E , G;
Middle Archaic living areas primarily in Area A, with Areas B, F , I
(burned rock middens) as specific activity loci attributable to this
period; Early Archaic concenb·ated almost totally in Area A, and to a
much lesser extent in Area F ( pre-burned rock midden) , and thinly
scattered in Areas B, C, E and I.
Some Archaic dart point forms have restricted horizontal distributions (such as Abasolo, Bulverde, "Early Corner Notched, Variety 3",
Lange, Matamoros, Pandale, Travis, Uvalde, Miscellaneous Forms 6,
8, 10 and 11; see provenience section), but these data are meaningless since, in most cases, these are represented by single specimens.
An examination of the horizontal distributions of both Late Prehistoric and Archaic non-projectile point materials fail ed to point out any
significant clusterings which might reflect specific activity loci. In fact,
the data indicate that most of the varied manufacturing, maintenance,
and processing activities were going on within the confines of the
living areas. As pointed out earlier, flake analyses suggest that all
stages in the stone tool manufacturing process were being conducted
within the living areas, and do not appear to have even been restricted

120

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

to certain spots within those areas. It is possible that if more of the
site area could be exposed hmizontally, some discrete activity loci
might be pinpointed.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Archeological investigations were conducted at the La Jita site,
Uvalde County, Texas, in the early summer of 1967. The excavations
revealed abundant cultural remains attributable to Archaic and Late
Prehistoric occupations. A couple of dart points suggestive of the Late
Paleo-Indian period were found, but corresponding occupational remains were absent, or at least not recognizable.
The Archaic occupations at La Jita have been divided into 3 parts:
Early, Middle and Late. The Early Archaic is characterized by "Early
Corner Notched" dart points, as well as Early Archaic dart points
recognized in other central Texas sequences (Nolan, Travis, Bulverde,
etc.). Early Archaic occupations were almost entirely restricted to
Area A. The Pedernales point type began late in the Early Archaic at
La Jita, dominated the Middle Archaic, and continued into the Late
Archaic, and possibly the Late Prehistoric. There were a variety of
other dart point styles and non-projectile point tools in the Middle
Archaic at La Jita. The main living area was in Area A, though scattered occupational debris is noted in other parts of the site. The burned
rock middens (Areas B, F, and I) are Middle Archaic in age. Ensor,
Frio and Mantell dart points appear to be diagnostic of the Late Archaic occupations, with Mantell beginning during the Middle Archaic.
The Late Archaic materials are concentrated in Areas A and C and are
scattered in other areas. There seems to be no significant associations
of non-projectile point tools with that of the 3 Archaic divisions.
The Late Prehistoric period is charactmized by the presence of
numerous anow points, plain bone-tempered pottery, modified Bake
tools, and tools of bone. The Late Prehistoric occupations were not
clearly defined, and thus no attempt has been made to link them with
previously established cultural units in central Texas ( Suhm, 1960;
Jelks, 1962). Chronologically, Edwards appears to be the earliest anow
point forn1. Other types include Scallorn, Sabinal (a proposed new
type), Cliffton, and a triangular series. Perdiz is common, and along
with the pottery seems to be indicative of the final aboriginal occupations of the site.
Radiocarbon dates for the La Jita occupations are somewhat mixed,
but the following ranges are suggested (see the section on radiocarbon
dates for details): Early Archaic: no dates; prior to 100 A.D. ( Tx-692);
Middle Archaic: dates are con£icting, but Tx-692 seems most plausible

LA JITA SITE

121

for the latter part; Late Archaic: several dates; ca. A.D. 400 through
A.D. 950 ( Tx-681, Tx-685, Tx-686 most applicable); Late Prehistoric:
again, several dates; probably began 950-1000 A.D., with the advent
of Edwards; latest applicable date being 1290±70 (Tx-687). A date
of A.D. 1350+80 (Tx-683) was obtained, but on Archaic materials,
and is obviously in error.
An analysis of flake debris from the site was carried out. The analyzed sample ( 15,047 pieces) pointed out several significant facts:
(a) the mass of flake debris was in the living areas, thus indicating
most manufacturing processes were conducted there; (b) the flintworking technology did not change markedly during the history of the
site, though the presence of flake blades and a polyhedral blade core
suggest that a specialized technique (oriented toward the production
of such flakes ) was present.
The faunal analysis by Riskind (see Appendix I), coupled with the
analysis of the other cultural debris certainly suggests that the peoples
occupying the La Jita site (both during the Archaic and the Late Prehistoric) were hunters and gatherers. They relied quite heavily on
bison and deer and other upland fauna (including antelope which is
now absent in the region). There was little or no exploitation of
riverine resources. Only a few fragments of mussel shell were found
(see Appendix II) and there appears to be a total absence of fish remains. The presence of large numbers of adult land snails at the site
(see Appendix II) indicate that they were a major item in the foodcollecting activities. Of course, we are unable to assess the importance
of plant-gathering in their subsistence pattern, since such perishables
would not survive in an open camp site. The wooded environs in the
site area provided ample opportunity for the gathering of nuts, berries,
roots, and other plant resources. Some of these plant foods, such as
hackberry, prickly pear fruit, and pecan would be available on a seasonal basis. The presence of manos and a metate suggest the processing
and preparation of vegetal materials.
The site is situated along an old Sabinal River channel. Between it
and the present channel, there is yet another old river-bed (see Fig.
2). Perhaps the channel adjacent to the site was the main channel during most of the occupation, but this is very uncertain. Even if the river
was in or near its present course, water would have been readily available to the inhabitants. The snails (Appendix II) recovered in the
excavations indicate an ecological situation similar to that of the present existed at La Jita during its aboriginal occupation. None of these
snails, however, would probably be sensitive to minor variations in the
climate which might have affected the site at times.

122

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The size of the site, the presence of a variety of archeological debris,
at least 2 major living (occupation) areas, and 3 burned rock middens
all suggest that La Jita was a favorable camping location and was
utilized extensively for thousands of years. It may have been visited
by several different groups during their semi-nomadic travels up and
down the Sabinal Canyon. During some periods, it may have been a
camp site occupied primarily by a single group during seasonal foodgathering visits to the area. However, I feel that the present data do
not allow speculation of greater magnitude on this matter.
It is difficult to compare the archeological sequence at La Jita with
other sites in the area due to the lack of scientilic investigations in this
part of Texas. Huskey ( 1935) devised an "Early, Middle and Late"
sequence for the Nueces Canyon area to the west; in some respects, it
is similar to the La Jita Archaic sequence. Unfortunately, his data are
too poor for detailed comparisons. T. C. Hill (personal communication) has reported site 41 UV 29, upstream from La Jita (see Appendix III). In general, the artifacts are similar to those from La Jita,
and the topographical position of the site is comparable. Points similar
to the "Early Comer Notched" series of La Jita are present, along with
abundant Archaic and Late Prehistoric materials. Other nearby sites
in the Sabinal Canyon also provide evidence of Archaic and Late Prehistoric occupations; superncial tests at 41 UV 25 revealed Late Prehistoric and Late Archaic artifacts and sequence similar to those at
La Jita.
Twenty miles downstream on the Sabinal River, the Texas Memorial
Museum and The University of Texas have conducted excavations at
Kincaid Rockshelter (see Suhm, 1960). I have cursorily examined the
materials from the site and while the projectile point styles are somewhat similar (especially the presence of numerous specimens similar
to the La Jita "Early Comer Notched" forms), the sequence has not
yet been published. Pottery is also present there and at nearby sites.
But, the non-projectile point tools at Kincaid are quite different from
those at La Jita. At Kincaid, there are large numbers of bifacial and
unifacial gouges ("Clear Fork"), as well as many "Guadalupe" gouges.
These are completely absent at La Jita (there is one small gougescraper in the Late Prehistoric materials). Kincaid is situated in a
transitional zone between the south Texas coastal plain and the Edwards Plateau. The gouges found at the site are characteristic of archeological complexes present in the northern part of the south Texas
area (Hester, 1968c; Hester, White and White, 1969). It seems likely
that Kincaid is on a cultural, as well as a geographical, boundary, and
that some of the south Texas groups may have lived in it at times. But

LA JITA SITE

123

the differences in tool forms between Kincaid and La Jita might also
reflect a difference of some sort in site function. Once more, the data
are inadequate.
Before moving on to a final subject, I would like to comment on the
settlement patterns in the Sabinal Canyon. Most of the considered sites
are described in Appendix III. At most sites, one or more burned rock
middens are present. These middens are, almost without exception,
situated at the edge of the lowest terrace, overlooking the Sabinal channel. Site size varies considerably, from small isolated burned rock
middens 35 feet in diameter (as at 41 UV 27) to a multi-unit site of 2
or more acres ( 41 UV 26). In brief survey work which I have conducted in the vicinity of the La Jita site, most of the occupational remains seem to be concentrated on the east terraces of the river. Much
of the west side of the Sabinal in the La Jita area is dominated by
steep bluffs, which would make access to the river difficult. Rockshelters are present in the area (Kincaid to the south; in the La Jita
vicinity, I have heard of rockshelters with Late Prehistoric artifacts
and burials). Open sites are also present along tributaries of the Sabinal, but I have not examined these.
I would like to discuss a major problem in concluding this paper,
that of the origin and function of the burned rock midden. At La Jita,
these middens were accumulations of fire -cracked limestone, with intermingled loose ashy soil and are attributed to Middle Archaic peoples. Artifacts within the middens were very rare, as was bone. These
items, along with snails and flake debris, were found to be most abundant in the adjoining living areas on the terrace. The flake analysis
revealed that there was a higher percentage of burned flakes in the
terrace deposits than in the burned rock middens.
Kelley and Campbell ( 1942), Suhm ( 1959; 1960), Huskey ( 1935)
and others have proposed that bumed rock middens were favored
hearth areas, accumulating because limestone hearths were (for some
unknown reason) repeatedly constructed in one spot. Kelley and
Campbell seem to have good evidence for their hypothesis in the terraces of the Colorado River of central Texas. It is unfortunate that the
data on those sites have never been fully published. It may well be
that every burned rock midden is attributable to the phenomenon
mentioned above, but I think that the La Jita site points out that other
factors may have been at work.
First of all, it would seem that if the burned rock middens at La Jita
were favored hearth areas, then there should be more debris mixed in
among the hearth stones; there should be more signs of human activities. It would seem that the hearth would have been somewhat of a

124

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

focal point of various activities, resulting in the accumulation of chipping, butchering, and other residues around it (for example, see the
description of Hearth 3 in an earlier section of this paper). If there
were hearths present, why is there so little burned bone in the burned
rock midden "hearth area", though it is fairly abundant in the terrace
living areas? When excavators have been fortunate enough to find
several hearths at a site (Jackson, 1938; Sorrow, Shafer and Ross,
1967), some hearths have little debris around them, while others have
bones, mussel shell, flakes and other materials mixed in among the
hearth stones. Surely the numerous hearths that would have been required to build middens like those at La Jita would have resulted in
greater amounts of cultural debris in the middens than was found. If
the burned rock middens at La Jita were "cooking areas" (areas intermittently being heated to high temperatures) , should not the flint
flakes mixed in among the stones show a high percentage of burning?
Yet the flake analysis shows that there is a much higher percentage of
burned flakes in the Middle Archaic levels in the terrace than in the
corresponding Middle Archaic burned rock middens. Nearly all of the
bone deblis (charred bone, butchered bone, bone smashed for marrow
extraction) is in the living areas on the tenace; very little was found in
the burned rock middens.
But, we did not locate a single undisturbed hea1th in the terrace attributable to Middle Archaic occupations, though there was some scattered burned rock. There were disturbed hearths above, in Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric contexts. Since most of the burned flakes,
burned and broken bone, charcoal flecks , ash, etc. are in the terrace,
where are the hearths? I think that perhaps they were being built on
the terrace during Middle Archaic times, but that when the components
of tl1e hearth were no longer serviceable (i.e., when they broke up into
fist-sized angular fragments) , they were gathered up and dumped elsewhere. Then a new hearth was constructed and the process repeated.
Such continual dumping of discarded hearth stones in a specific area
would naturally lead to an accumulation of burned rock and ash.
Occasionally, some projectile points, flakes and other debris would
have been gathered up when an old hearth was cleaned up and
dumped. The Area B burned rock midden would have been wellsituated for a dump area, since it is between living areas A and C. The
other burned rock middens at the site could have been dumps for yet
unexcavated living areas. T. C. Hill, Jr., (personal communication)
has uncovered hearths at nearby 41 UV 29. They were situated outside
of a burned rock midden at that site. The hearths are ovate, and are
formed with several flat limestone slabs, averaging 6-10 inches in max-

LA JITA SITE

125

imum diameter. These rounded limestone slabs had been burned and
showed signs of beginning to break up. Similar hearths may exist at
La Jita, but we were not fortunate enough to find them.
If the burned rock middens at La }ita were primarily dumps of
hearth rubble, it is conceivable that the occupants of the site (both
Middle Archaic and later) could have used them for other activities.
An example would be what seems to be a chipping locus in the Area
B midden. Perhaps at times, hearths were actually built on the burned
rock middens, but I feel that most of the hearth activity went on in
the living areas on the terrace. The rocks in the La Jita burned rock
midden are small and angular, much unlike the flat rounded slabs in
Hill's hearths at 41 UV 29.
Kelley and Campbell ( 1942:322) have stated that the burned rock
middens are not a culture trait per se of central Texas Middle Archaic
peoples, since they apparently represent hearth areas "... not purposefully constructed". I submit, however, that it may have been a trait of
these Middle Archaic peoples to clear their hearths of broken-up
hearth stones and then to dump the debris on a conveniently-located
pile of rubble.
As I suggested earlier, there may be several factors to consider in
the burned rock midden enigma. I realize that the La Jita site does not
convincingly demonstrate the rubble dump concept, primarily because
we did not locate former hearth areas in the Middle Archaic levels in
the terrace from which the rubble should have come. Most will be
quick to point out that the burned rock middens at La Jita differ somewhat from some other types of central Texas burned rock middens.
Some of the burned rock middens in the region cover a large area and
contain abundant bone and chipped flint debris. This would suggest
that the peoples were living and working directly on the midden. At
other sites, there are later occupations on and above the burned rock
middens, postdating the Middle Archaic occupations. This is probably
attributable to the fact that burned rock middens were often situated
in favorable camping areas. Burned rock middens like those reported
by Woolsey ( 1938) were large and shallow with numerous artifacts
and other debris. Kelly ( 1961) excavated two thin burned rock middens, both with abundant cultural remains within them. We can contrast these sites with burned rock middens like the one in Area A at
the Evoe Terrace Site (Sorrow, Shafer and Ross, 1967) which contained very few artifacts (mostly Pedernales points), though there
were large quantities of artifacts both below and above the burned
rock zone. But then in the same reservoir, a burned rock zone at the
Landslide site contained much cultural material. At the Wunderlich

126

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

site (Johnson, 1962 ), two burned rock middens 140 feet apmt both
contained numerous artifacts, and Johnson termed them "occupations"
( pp. 15-17). Conversely, Suhm ( 1959 ) reports the Williams site, in
which the greatest abundance of artifacts and debris are in what seems
to be a living area adjacent to the large burned rock midden at the
site (it is significant to note that about an equal amount of excavation
was carried out in both the midden and the living area). Jackson
( 1938: Fig. 12, p. 44 ) reports burned rock middens in the Fall Creek
area with very little cultural debris in them. Sturgis ( 1956 ) has reported the Panorama site, with several burned rock middens and adjoining living areas (see his Fig. 13 ). His burned rock middens were
quite thin and he noted that 75% of the artifacts and most mussel and
snail shells were at the bottom of the burned rock midden. Since the
lower 6 inches or less of the burned rock middens contained Early
Archaic dart points, most of the debris that he found in his middens
might be attributable to pre-midden occupations. In summary, there
are a variety of situations encountered in central Texas burned rock
middens, and by selecting among the various sites, one could prove
just about any theory concerning burned rock midden origin and
function.
Closer to La Jita is the Gildart site ( 41 UV 37 ), a burned rock midden site on the Nueces River. It has one very large burned rock midden (and adjoining piles of rubble) which is centrally located among
9 much smaller middens (Hester, 1970 a). Jackson tested the central
midden in 1934, noting that the midden contained very few artifacts
or bone and snail shells; below it, however, were abundant archeological remains in a terrace deposit. He noted the presence of 2 adjoining piles of burned rock, one of which he described as a long continuous heap of burned rock nearly 200 feet in length. Unfortunately,
he did not test this heap, nor did he test any of the smaller subsidiary
middens or the areas between them. It is possible that these middens
are dump m·eas, as at La Jita (the large midden certainly seems to be ),
or the smaller ones may simply be hearth areas, since most are between
12 and 25 feet in diameter and a foot or less in thickness . Another
large burned rock midden was extensively excavated on the Nueces
River in Edwards County (Laxson, 1964) but yielded only 32 artifacts.
H ester ( 1966) has described excavations at another burned rock midd en just downstream from Laxson's site. This site ( 41 RE 1) had a
centrally located heap of burned rock rubble with extremely few cultural remains, though abundant artifacts and scattered burned rock
surrounded it.
The major hindrance to more meaningful discussions of the rubble

127

LA JITA SITE

heap or dump hypothesis is the almost total lack of excavations that
have been conducted in the areas surrounding a bmned rock midden
(recent work has been done by William Sorrow in the North Fork
Reservoir of central Texas). For some reason, archeologists for the past
several decades have usually contented themselves to digging only in
the burned rock midden proper. It is only with more extensive testing
both in and outside of the burned rock middens that the final solution
to the burned rock midden problem will be obtained. There may be
several factors involved in burned rock midden origin and function
(see Castetter, Bell and Grove, 1938; Collier, Hudson and Ford, 1942:
37-38; Greer, 1965; 1967), but these will not be discerned without
much more problem-oriented research.
REFERENCES CITED

Blair, W. Frank
1950. The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas ]ottmal of Science, Vol. 2, No. 1:
93-117.
Campbell, T. N.
1957. The Fields Shelter: An Archeological Site in Edwards County, Texas.
Texas ]attrnal of Science, Vol. 9, No. 1: 7-25.
Castetter, E. F., W. H. Bell, and A. R. Grove
1938. Ethnobiological Studies in the American Southwest, VI: The Early
Utilization and the Distribution of Agave in the American Southwest.
University of New Mexico Bulletin, Biology Series, Vol. 5, No. 4.
Collier, D., A. E. Hudson, and A. Ford
1942. Archaeology of the Upper Columbia Region. University of Washington
Publications in Anthropology, Vol. 9.
Dibble, David S.
1967. Excavations at Arenosa Shelter, 1965-66. Report submitted to the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, Austin.
Duessen, Alexander
1924. Geology of the Coastal Plain of Texas West of Brazos River. United
States Geological Survey Professional Papers, No. 126.
Greer, John W.
1965. A Typology of Midden Circles and Mescal Pits. Southwestern Lore, Vol.
31, No. 3: 41-55.
1967. Midden Circles Versus Mescal Pits. American Antiquity, Vol. 32, No. 1:
108-109.
Hester, Thomas Roy
1963. The Lackey Site. Special Report of the Carrizo Springs (Texas) High
School Archeological Society, No. 1.
1966. Excavations at the Lackey Site: A Burned Rock Midden in Real County,
Texas. Manuscript on file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
Austin.
1968a. Destruction of Archeological Sites in Uvalde County, Texas. Texas
Archeology, Vol. 12, No. 1: 13-15.

128

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1968b. Notes on Pottety-Bearing Sites in Southern Texas. The Bull-Roarer, Vol.
3, No. 2: 9-11.
1968c. Paleo-Indian Artifacts from Sites Along San Miguel Creek: Atascosa,
Frio and McMullen Counties, Texas. Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 39: 147-161.
1970a. Burned Rock Midden Sites on the Southwestern Edge of the Edwards
Plateau, Texas. Plains Anthropologist, in press.
1970b. Notes on the Edwards Arrow Point Type. The Record, Vol. 26, No. 2:
17-18.
Hester, Thomas Roy and T. C. Hill, Jr.
ms.
An Initial Study of a Prehistoric Ceramic Tradition in Southern Texas.
Manuscript accep ted for publication, Plains Anthropologist.
Hester, Thomas Roy, L. D. White and Joy White
1969. Archeological Materials from the Oulline Site ( 41 LS 3) and Other Sites
in La Salle County, Southwest Texas. T exas j ournal of Science, Vol. 21,
No. 2: 131-166.
Huskey, Vane
1935. An Archeological Survey of the Nueces Canyon of Texas. Bulletin, Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 7: 105-114.
Inglis, Jack M.
1964. A History of Vegetation on the Rio Grande Plain. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Bulletin 45.
Jackson, A. T.
1938. The Fall Creek Sites. University of Texas Publications, No. 3802.
ms.
Notes Pertaining to Central Texas Pottery as of December 16, 1938.
Manuscript on file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory.
Jelks, Edward B.
1962. The Kyle Site, A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County,
Texas. Archaeology Series, No. 5, The University of Texas.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1962. Wunderlich: A Burned-Rock Midden Site. In: Salvage Archeology of
Canyon Reservoir. Bulletin No. 5, Texas Memorial Museum: 13-48.
1964. The Devil's Mouth Site, A Stratified Campsite at Amistad Reservoir, Val
Verde County, Texas. Archaeology Se·ries, No. 6, The University of
Texas.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr., Dee Ann Suhm and Curtis D . Tunnell
1962. Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir: The Wunderlich, Footbridge
and Oblate Sites. Bulletin No. 5, Texas Memorial Museum.
Kelley, J. Charles
1959. The Desert Culture and the Balcones Phase: Archaic Manifestations in
the Southwest and Texas. American Antiquity, Vol. 24, No. 3: 276-288.
Kelley, J. C. and T. N. Campbell
1942. What the the Burned Rock Mounds of Texas? American Antiquity, Vol.
7, No. 3: 319-322.
Kelly, Thomas C.
1961. The Crumley Site: A Stratified Burnt Rock Midden, Travis County,
Texas. Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 31: 239-272.
Laxson, Bay
1964. The Lackey Site No. 2. Special Report, Carrizo Springs High School
Archeological Society.

LA JITA SITE

129

Sellards, E. H.
1952. Early Man in America: A Study in Prehistory. University of Texas Press.
Sellards, E. H. and Carl Chelf (compilers)
La ]ita. Bexar County Council of Girl Scouts.
n.d.
Shafer, Harry J.
1969. Archeological Investigations in the Robert Lee Reservoir Basin, West
Central Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No. 17.
Sollberger, J. B.
1967. A New Type of Arrow Point with Speculations as to its Origins. The
Record, Vol. 23, No. 3: 16-22.
Sorrow, William M.
1968. The Devil's Mouth Site : The Third Season-1967. Papers of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, No. 14.
Sorrow, W. M., H. J. Shafer, and R. E. Ross
1967. Excavations at Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No. 11.
Stipp, J. J., E. M. Davis, J. E. Noakes, and T. E. Hoover
1962. University of Texas Radiocarbon Dates I. Radiocarbon, Vol. 4.
Sturgis, H. F.
1956. A Burnt-rock Midden Site in Travis County. Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 27: 111-128.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1959. The Williams Site and Central Texas Archeology. Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 11, No. 2 : 218-250.
1960. A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin, Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 29: 63-108.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger and E. B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Valastro, S., Jr. and E. Matt Davis
1970. University of Texas at Austin Radiocarbon Dates, No. VIII. Radiocarbon, Vol. 12, No. 2: 634-635.
Weir, Frank Alfred
1967. The Greenhaw Site: A Burned Rock Midden Cluster of the Edwards
Plateau Aspect. Unpublished M.A. Thesis, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Witthoft, John
1967. Glazed Polish on Flint Tools. American Antiquity, Vol. 32, No. 3: 383388.
Woolsey, Arthur M.
1938. Additional Buchanan Lake Sites. University of Texas Publications, No.
3802.
Wormington, H. M.
1957. Ancient Man in North America. Denver Museum of Natural History,
Popular Series No. 4.
Department of Anthropology
University of California,
94720
Berkeley

130

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
ARTIFACT PROVENIENCE

In this section of the paper, provenience data for specimens collected at La Jita are presented. Tables 6-9 list the artifact proveniences
for Areas A, B, C and F , the major excavation areas at the site. Because of necessary space restrictions, the artifact distributions for the
other areas (Areas D, E, G, H, I and Miscellaneous) are not presented
in table form. However, these data are briefly summarized following
Table 9.
Detailed artifact provenience records are £led at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Austin.
TABLE

6.

Provenience of specimens, Area A.
The area is composed of units N10 E40, N15 E40, N20 E40, N25 E40, N30
E40, N15 E35, N20 E35, Test Pit 1, Test Pit 1-A.

LEVELS
PROJECTILE POINTS
Arrow Points
Cliffton
Edwards
Perdiz
Sabinal
Scali om
Var. 1
Var. 2
Triangular
Form 1
Form 2
Form 3
Miscellaneous
Other Stemmed
Dart Points
Almagre
Bulverde
Castroville
Early Corner
Notched
Var. 1
Var. 2
Var. 3
Edgewood
Ensor
Var. 2
Frio
Var. 1

1

2

3

4

1
1
3

1
5
1

1
3
1

1

2

1

2

5

6

7

8

Surface Totals

3
10
6

1

5

2
1

1

1
4
2
3

3
2
1
3
4

2
2

5

1
2
1

1

1

1

1

2

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

1

1

1
(Continued on following page)

1
3

4

7

6

9
2
2

2
1

8
3
8
4

3
1

131

LA JITA SITE

6 (Continued)

TABLE

2

3

Var. 2
1
Kinney
1
La Jita
Lanceolate
Marshall
Matamoros
Montell
1
Nolan
Pandale
Pedernales
3
3
Rect. Stemmed
Travis
Uvalde
Williams
"Early Triangular"
"Late Triangular
Dart Points (continued)
Misc. Forms
1
2
1
4
5
7
1
1
8
9
10
11
12
13
Unci. Individual
1
3
5
8
1
9
11
OTHER BIF ACIAL ARTIFACTS

2

LEVELS

1

5

6

1

1
1

8
1

8

Stt1'face Totals
1

1
1
1
4

7

2
1
22

1
1
11

1

1

1

3

2

1

9

1

1

1

7
8
1
58
1
2
1
2
6
2

1

1
1

1
2

4

1

1

2

1

1
1
1
2
1

1
1

1
1
1

1
1

1
1
1
1

1

2

1
1

2
4
4
2
6

1

2

1

1

3
2
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

1

1

2

4
2
3
3
1
1

1

Gouge -s cr~p er

"Fist axes
Core-choppers
Misc. choppers
Pebble choppers
Perforators
Other thinned bifaces
Group 1

4

1
1
2

2

1
1
(Continued on foll owing page)

1

3

132

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
TABLE

LEVELS

1

2

6 (Continued)
3

3
5
6

7
8
9
10
llA
llB
Thick percussion
bifaces
Group 2
3

1

7

1

1
1

1

2
1

8

Surface Totals
2

4
1
2
2
3
5
1
1

3
1

1
1

2

1
1

1
1

1

1

1
2

1
1

7
8

4

6

1
1

4

Cores
Polyhedral
Misc. Prep. Platfom1
Natural Platfom1
Misc. bifacial
Nuclei
UNIFACIAL ARTIFACTS
Pointed flakes
Notched flakes
Retouched blade
Scrapers
l-edge side
2-edge side
end
oval
miscellaneous
Misc. unifacials
Group 1
2
3

5

1

5
6

10
11
12

4

2

1

1

1
1

1

1

1

1
1
1
1

1
1
2
3
2

2
1

1
1

1
1
1

1
1

1

1

2
2
1
3
1
5
1
2
2
1

4

1

1
1

4
3
1
1

1
1
1

1

1

1

5
3
6
1

1
2

1
1
1
1
1

4

1

1
3
2
1

1
1

MISCELLANEOUS CHIPPED
STONE
7 7 7 13
Biface distal
4
5
4
(Continued on following page)

3

3

53

133

LA JITA SITE

6 (Continued)

TABLE

LEVELS

1

2

Biface medial
2
1
1
Other
3
GROUND STONE ARTIFACTS
Manos
Metate
BONE ARTIFACTS
Modified ulnae
1
Splinter awls
1
2
Misc. bone object
Antler object
1
CERAMICS
49
4
TOTALS

96

68

3

4

5

6

7

1
1

1

4
1

2

3

8

Surface Totals

10
10

1
1

1

2
1
1

3
1

1

1

1
51

TABLE

61

57

47

51

9

3

57

15

455

7.

Provenience of specimens, Area B.
This area includes units N30 E5, N35 E5, N40 E5, N45 E5, and N35 E25 ..
Levels 1 through upper 5 are burned rock midden deposits.
LEVELS

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

PROJECTILE POI1 TS
Arrow Points
Scali om
Var. 3
1
Dart Points
Castroville
1
1
Kinney
1
La Jita
1
Marshall
2
1
1
Nolan
1
1
Pedemales
1
2
4
6
4
Rect. Stemmed
1
"Late Triangular"
Misc. Forms
1
1
9
1
Uncl. Individual
2
1
13
1
Unfinished
1
OTHER BIFACIAL ARTIFACTS
Core-choppers
1
Misc. choppers
Other thinned bifaces
( Continued on following page )

8

Swjace Totals

1

2
1
1

4
2
16
1

1

1

1

2

1

1
1
1
1

1

1

134

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
TABLE

LEVELS
Group 1
3
4
5

7. (Continued)

1

2

1

1

3

5

4

6

7

1

2
1
2
1
1
1
1

1
1

6

1
1
1

1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2

1
1
1

6

1

7

1

8
9
12

1

1
2

1
Cores
Misc. prep. platfonn
Misc. bifacial
1
UNIFACIAL ARTIFACTS
Scrapers
Misc.
MISCELLANEOUS CHIPPED
STONE
Biface distal
1
Biface medial
Other
GROUND STO:\fE ARTIFACTS
Manos
BONE ARTIFACTS
Splinter awl
TOTALS

Surface Totals

1

7
9
Thick percussion
bifaces
Group 1
2
3

8

7

1
1

1

1
1
1

4

1
1

1

1
1

1

3

1

2

9
2

2

2

1

7

2

2

1

1

14

9

TABLE

8.

12

19

9

2

6

82

Provenience of specimens, Area C.
This area is made up of units N20 W40, N20 W45, N20 W50.

LEVELS
PROJECTILE POINTS
Arrow Points
Edwards
Perdiz

1

2

3

4

5

2
1
1
3
3
4
(Continued on followin g page)

6

7

Swjace Totals

10
4

135

LA JITA SITE

8 ( Continued)

TABLE

LEVELS

1

Sabinal
Scallorn
Var. 1
Var. 2
Triangular
Form 1
Form 2
Fonn 3
Miscellaneous
Other Stemmed
Dart Points
Almagre
Ensor
Var. 1
Var. 2
Frio
Kinney
Montell
Ped ernales
"E arly Triangular"
"Late Triangular"
Misc. Forms
2
3
4
6

2

3

4

5

6

7

1

1
2
1

1

4
2

1
1

1
2
3
6
3

1
2
1
2

1
3
1

1
1
2

1

1
1

1
1

1
1

1

1

1
4

1
1

5

2

1
1
1
1

7

Surface Totals

1
2

1
1

1

1

2
1
3
1
2
12
1
1
1
1
1
4
2

Un cl. Individual

7

1
1

1
1

9
OTHER BIFACIAL ARTIFACTS
Core-choppers
Other thinned bifaces
1
Group 1
4

1

1
1
1
1
1

1
1

1
1
1

5
9

1

1

8
9
10
Thick percussion
bifaces
Group 1
4

1

1
(Continued on following page )

1

1
1
1
2

136

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
TABLE 8 (Continued)

LEVELS

1

2

Cores
Misc. prep. platform
Misc. bifacial
UNIFACIAL ARTIFACTS
Pointed flakes
Scrapers
l-edge side
2-edge side
end
1
end-side
misc.
Misc. unifacials
Group 4
MISCELLANEOUS CHIPPED
STONE
Biface distal
9
Biface medial
Other
GROUND STONE ARTIFACTS
Limestone object
BONE ARTIFACTS
Modified ulnae
1
Splinter awls
TOTALS

27

3
1

4

5

1

1

2

6

7

8

Surface Totals

1

4
3

1

1

1

1

1

2
1
2
1
1

1
1

1
1

1

1

3

3
1

3

3

5

3

1
1

27
2
4

1

1

1

1
1

1

20

22

22

25

12

7

0

135

AREA D. This area consisted of Test Pit 6 and Exploratory Trench 1;
only 10 artifacts were recovered. Level 1: Perdiz ( 1), Frio, Variety 2
( 1) , Williams ( 1); Level 2: Triangular arrow points, Form 2 ( 1);
miscellaneous dart point, Form 2 ( 1 ), mano (1); Levels 3, 4 and 5:
no artifacts; Level 6: Pedernales ( 1); Level 7: no artifacts; Surface
( Area D ) : Castroville ( 1 ) .
AREA E. Thirty-four artifacts were found in this area, which included
Units N60 E40 and N95 E40. Levell: Perdiz (2); miscellaneous dart
points, Form 7 ( 1); biface distal fragments ( 2); ceramics ( 1 sherd).
Level 2: Lange ( 1); Pedernales ( 1); biface distal fragment ( 1);
ceramics ( 1 sherd). Level 3: Almagre ( 1 ); Castroville ( 1); Frio, Variety 2 ( 3); La Jita ( 1 ); Lange ( 1); Montell ( 3); miscellaneous dart
points, Form 9 ( 1); unclassified individual dart points, specimen 4
( 1); core-chopper ( 1); thinned bifaces, group 5 ( 2) ; thick percussion
bifaces, group 2 ( 1); biface distal fragments ( 1). Level 4: miscellaneous dart points, Form 5 ( 1); unfinished dart points ( 1); perforators

TABLE

9.

t"

;..

Provenience of specimens, Area F.
This area consists of Test 7. Burned rock midden deposits, leve ls 1-4.
LEVELS

1

PROJECTILE POINTS
Dart Points
Early Corner Notched
Var. 1
Var. 2
Pedernales
Miscellaneous Form
12
OTHER BIFACIAL ARTIFACTS
Cores
Misc. bifacial
Perforators
Other thinned bifaces
Group 2
3

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

:::1

10

Surface

Totals

>

"'>-<>-1
t'1

1
1

2
1
1

1

l

1

1

1

1
1

1
1

1

2
1
1
1

1

5
6
Thick percussion bifaces
Group 12
MISCELLANEOUS CHIPPED
STONE
Biface distal
Other
GROUND STONE ARTIFACTS
Gorget
TOTALS ( %)

2

'--<

1
1
1

1

1
1

0

2

1
4

1

2

2

0

0

5

2

5

0

3

2

5

0

1
21

,.....
w

-1

138

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

( 1); miscellaneous scrapers ( 1); biface distal fragments (1). Level 5:
lanceolate dart point ( 1); Level 6: miscellaneous dart points, Form 3
( 1).

AREA G. Test Pits 3 and 5 were excavated in this area, and yielded 14
artifacts. Level 1: Perdiz ( 1); Frio, Variety 1 ( 1); biface distal fragments (1). Level 2: no artifacts. Level 3: Ensor, Variety 3 (1); miscellaneous chipped stone, other ( 1 ) ; Level 4: Pedernales ( 3); thinned
bifaces, group 4 ( 1); biface distal fragments ( 1); miscellaneous chipped stone, other ( 1). Level 5: Abasolo ( 1). Level 6: biface distal fragments (1). Level 7: "Early Corner Notched", Variety 1 (1).
AREA H. Test Pit 2 was the only unit excavated in this area. A total of
31 artifacts was recovered. Level 1: Perdiz ( 1), Sabinal ( 1), ceramics
( 9 sherds ) . Level 2: Pedernales ( 1 ) . Level 3: miscellaneous arrow
point ( 1); rectangular stemmed dart point ( 1); thinned biface, group
7 ( 1); ceramics ( 1 sherd). Level 4: miscellaneous scrapers ( 2). Level
5: Montell ( 1); Pedernales ( 2); unfinished dart point ( 1); thick percussion bifaces, groups 1 and 10 ( 1 each); miscellaneous chipped
stone, other ( 2). Level 6: Almagre ( 1); Pedernales ( 1); thick percussion bifaces, group 1 ( 1). Level 7: thick p ercussion bifaces, groups 8
and 10 ( 1 each).
AREA 1. Seventeen artifacts were obtained from Unit N65 Ell5 in this
area. Level 1: Scallorn, Variety 3 (1); Montell (1). Level 2: Edgewood ( 1); Frio, Variety 2 ( 1). Level 3: Ensor, Variety 3 ( 1); miscellaneous bifacial core ( 1). Level 4: no artifacts. Level 5: Castroville
( 2); La Jita ( 1); Nolan ( 2); "Late Triangular" ( 5). Level 6: La Jita
( 1). Levels 1 through 5 of this unit were burned rock midden deposits.
MISCELLANEous. Fo1ty-six artifacts in the collection were obtained from
the surface, Exploratory Trench 2, Test Pit 4, and the W. W. Stout
collection. These materials include: Arrow points: Perdiz ( 4; one of
which was found in Level 1 of Test Pit 4), Triangular Fon11 1 ( 2),
Miscellaneous ( 1); Dart points: Castroville ( 1); Ensor, Variety 1 ( 1);
Ensor, Variety 4 ( 1); Langtry ( 1); Pedernales ( 5); Williams ( 1); unclassified ( 1). Other bifacial artifacts: core-choppers ( 2); thinned bifaces, group 1 ( 1); thick percussion bifaces, groups 9, 11, 12 ( 1 each);
cores (miscellaneous prepared platform, miscellaneous bifacial, nucleus: 1 each). U nifacial artifacts: pointed flakes ( 1 ) ; notched flakes
( 1); end-scrapers ( 2); end-side scrapers ( 1). Miscellaneous chipped
stone: biface distal and medial ( 1 each); other ( 1). Ground stone artifacts: manos ( 3); hammers tone ( 1). Bone artifacts: bead ( 1); spatulate object ( 1). Ceramics: sherds ( 4).

139

LA JITA SITE

Appendix I
AN ANALYSIS OF THE FAUNAL REMAINS FROM
THE LA JITA SITE
DAVID

H. RrsKIND

The principal objective of this study is to determine the spectmm of
fauna exploited by the aboriginal inhabitants of the La Jita Site. A
concomitant topic is the analysis of the nature and condition of the
faunal remains, and as well to suggest culturally linked activities which
may be inferred by the nature of the remains. The total collection submitted for analysis consisted of 2,078 bones and bone fragments, 167
( 8% ) of which could be identified to the genus/species level (Table
1).
All remains were analyzed by levels as sorted initially by Hester and
crew. Each bag of remains was emptied and all recognizable skeletal
elements were separated according to Order. Fragments were categorized as far as was feasible, however, they were not individually
recorded; rather, they were lumped into categories such as mammalian,
reptilian, avian, etc. Mammals were further divided into small (e. g.
Rodentia), medium (e. g. Canidae, Mustelidae), and large (e. g.
Suidae, Cervidae, and Bovidae).
Each recognizable element was then specifically identified; however, the highly fragmented and umecognizable pieces were merely
recorded as fragments of either small, medium, or large mammals or
reptiles , etc. In a few instances identification of bone fragments was
TABLE 1
Distribution of Identifiable Bone by Species
Sample: 167 pieces
Chelydra ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 1
Terrapine ------------------------------------------------------------------------ --------- 2
Trionyx ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 1
Sylvilagus --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 9
Sigmodon" ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 1
Canidae ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ------- 5
Procyon ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 1
Odocoileus ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------118
Antilocapra --------------------------------------------------------------------------- 1
Bison ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 28
"not considered a food item.

made on the basis of size in conjunction with bone morphology. For
example, a fragment whose thickness (from marrow cavity to periosteal

140

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

surface) is ca. 5mm and whose surface morphology indicates a bone
of large volume, was tentatively identi£ed as Bison. With the exception
of a few complete phalanges, three teeth, and one proximal end of a
femur, all Bison bone fragments were identi£ed only by consideration
of size and morphology.
The reptiles (three turtles ) were identi£ed from plastron and/ or
carapace fragments and in the case of Chelydra from a complete
humerus.
REsuLTS

As would be expected the bone from La Jita (an open site in alkaline soils in an area with 20'' mmual rainfall) was not ideally preserved. All exposed surfaces of the bone are solution pitted-a function
of the wet/alkaline soil conditions. In addition, soils such as these
harbor many types of fungal spores which would attack any buried
organic refuse.
All but a few of the more compact skeletal elements (phalanges,
carpals, tarsals, metacarpals and tarsals, and the dentition) were in a
highly fragmented condition. Few of the fragments exceeded 5 em . in
their greatest dimension. The breaks on the bone compare favorably
with those that have been produced through intentional percussion or
snapping as recreated under experimental conditions, thus diminishing
the possibility that the bones were fragmented through the physical

+

TABLE 2
Distribution of Recognizable Skele tal Elements
for Deer at the La Jita site, 41 UV 21
Sample : 118 pieces
Cranial fragments ----------------------------------------------------------------------10
Mandible -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 4
Teeth ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------14
Vertebrae ----------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------- Rib------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ Pelvis -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Scapula -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 2
Upper limbs ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 48
Metapodial --------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------22
Carpals, tarsals, metacarpals,
metatarsals, phalanges ------------------------------------------------------------18

behavior of the soils in which they were buried. Human agents are
then most likely responsible for the fragmented nature of the La Jita
faunal remains.
Elements represented by the fragments were predominantly long
bones but also present were round bones (carpals, tarsals, etc.) , teeth,

LA JITA SITE

141

and cranial fragments respectively, in descending order of frequency
(Table 2). In addition the unidentifiable fragments appeared to be
predominantly the remains of deer long bones.
Approximately 11% of all bone fragments counted were either
chatred or calcined. Signs of obvious tool or butchering marks on any
of the bones were not observed (probably due in part to preservation
factors ) , and in addition there was no evidence of rodent gnawing on
any of the faunal remains: perhaps suggesting rapid accumulation of
the deposits in the site.
Assigning an age to such fragmentary remains is necessarily hazardous, nevertheless, the great majority of the elements examined appeared to belong to mature individuals.
The following is a taxonomically arranged list of the fauna identified from the submitted skeletal remains:
REPTILIA

Chelonia
Chelydridae
Chelydra serpentina (snapping turtle)
Testudinidae
Terrapine ornata (ornate box turtle)
Trionychidae
Trionyx sp. (soft shell turtle)
MAMMALIA

Lagomorpha
Leporidae
Sylvilagus floridanus/ auduboni (cottontail)
Rodentia
Cricetidae
Sigrnodon hispidus 0 ( hispid cotton rat)
Carnivora
Canidae (e. g. dog, fox, coyote)
Procyonidae
Procyon lotor (raccoon)
Artiodactyla
Cervidae
Odocoileus virginianus (white-tail deer)
Antilocapridae
Antilocapra americana? (pronghorn antelope)
Bovidae
Bison sp. (bison)
0
Not considered a food item

142

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Antilocapra ( Pronghom antelope) is questionably included because
certain of the fragmentary phalanges (mature) analyzed appeared to
be considerably more gracile than comparative Odocoileus samplessuggesting either a small deer or more likely Pronghom antelope, a
species known to range into this region of Texas to the present day
(Davis, 1966).
DISCUSSION

The most outstanding aspects of this collection are ( 1) the homogeneous nature of the faunal assemblage and ( 2) the physical state of
the remains themselves.
The faunal data suggests that the aboriginals occupying the La Jita
Site were geared primarily to a savannah/grassland hunting economy
(or to areas bordering the indigenous juniper/oak woodlands) with little or no emphasis on the exploitation of either lacustrine or riverine
environments. No fish bones whatever were encountered in the analysis
and only two species of water dwelling reptiles ( Chelydra and Trionyx) were observed to be present. Similarly no avifauna were encountered. Although preservation in the site was not excellent, I do not
feel that the absence of either fish or bird remains could be the result
of dilierential preservation.
Preponderance of deer, and to a much lesser extent bison remains
suggests that these nvo mammals provided the bulk of the game food
for the aboriginal inhabitants of the site. The fragmentary nature of
the remains precludes any accurate (or realistic) quantification of the
deer and/or bison taken by the La Jita inhabitants. From the data at
hand, however, it would appear clear to me that deer constituted a
staple in the diet of the site's inhabitants while the bison represented
only a fortuitous dietary supplement.
Several culturally linked phenomenon may be inferred from the
nature of the remains and from the skeletal elements represented in
the sample. As mentioned above, virtually all skeletal elements of the
principal game animal (deer) were tabulated in the faunal analysis.
This remains true with minor modification- neither pelves nor vertebrae and their respective pairs of articulating ribs were encountered
in the remains. These data and the fact that fragmenta1y limb bones
and scapulae, as well as tarsals, carpals, metacarpals, metatarsals, and
phalanges, etc., were encountered in the skeletal refuse suggests that
the game was partially butchered in the field some distance from the
habitation site and was then transported back to the site for further
processing. Had the deer been killed very near the site and then
butchered (probably only gutted) all skeletal elements would be rep-

143

LA JITA SITE

resented; conversely, if the deer were killed at a considerable distance
from the site fewer skeletal elements would be represented, primarily
the larger long bones.
In the case of the La Jita material, the deer were apparently butchered by the removal of all appendages, the head or portions thereof,
and of course such cuts as the tenderloins and the backstraps. Easily
accessible meat (e. g. neck cuts) would have undoubtedly been
stripped from the carcass. Left behind would have been the vertebrae
and 1ibs, and the pelvic girdle-two areas of negligible meat yield.
Similar correlations between skeletal elements present at the habitation site vs. distance from the kill to the site have been hypothesized
and substantiated by White ( 1952, 1953, 1954, 1955), Kehoe and
Kehoe ( 1960), and Wood ( 1962) for sites on the Great Plains and by
Perkins and Daly ( 1968) for a Mesolithic site at Suberde in Turkey.
Although primarily for bison, these data have been demonstrated for
many large mammals known to have been hunted by man.
The highly fragmented nature of the bones, as well as the frequency
of charred bone suggests that the debris is a result of the smashing of
the bones for the exb·action of the manow and of the subsequent
rendering of grease from the bones. These food procuring techniques
would produce detritus comparable to that found in the La Jita Site.
The dearth of any evidence indicating that the nonartifactual bone
was in any way worked or modified lessens the possibility that this
bone debris constitutes workshop refuse. Evidence at hand overwhelmingly suggests it is entirely refuse from the butchered and processed
fauna.
SuMMARY

Analysis of the highly fragmented faunal debris from the La Jita
Site yielded several significant considerations:
1) The aboriginal inhabitants apparently exploited only a narrow
specb·um of the animal foods available to them within the environment (see Hester, Summary and Conclusions).
2) Skeletal elements represented in the refuse suggest that the principal food animal (deer) was killed some distance from the campsite,
partially butchered, and then brought back into camp. Left behind
would have been the vertebrae, pelvic girdle, and ribs. These elements
were not represented in tl1e faunal remains.
3) Fragmented and charred remains were apparently produced by
human agents. The smashing of bones to obtain marrow and the subsequent rende1ing to produce bone grease would have yielded debris
comprised of fragmented charred bone.

144

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
REFERENCES CITED

Davis, William B.
1966. The Mammals of Texas, Texas Parks and Wildlife Deparbnent, Bulletin
41, Austin.
Kehoe, R. F., and A. B. Kehoe
1960. Observations on the Butchering Techniques at a Prehistoric Bison Kill
in Montana. American Antiquity, Vol. 25, No. 3: 420-22.
Perkins, Dexter, Jr. and Patricia Daly
1968. The Potential of Faunal Analysis: An Investigation of the Faunal Remains from Suberde, Turkey. Scientific American, Vol. 219, No. 5: 96106.
White, Theodore E.
1952. Observations on the Butchering Techniques of Some Aboriginal Peoples. No. 1. American Antiquity, Vol. 17, No.4: 337-338.
1953. Observations on the Butchering Techniques of Some Aboriginal Peoples. No. 2. American Antiquity, Vol. 19, No. 2: 160-164.
1954. Observations on the Butchering Techniques of Some Aboriginal Peoples. No. 4. American Antiquity, Vol. 19, No. 3: 254-264.
1955. Observations on the Butchering Techniques of Some Aboriginal Peoples. No. 9. American Antiquity, Vol. 21, No. 2: 170-178.
Wood, W. Raymond
1962. Notes on the Bison Bone from the Paul Brave, Huff, and Demery Sites.
Plains Anthropologist, Vol. 7, No. 17: 201-204.
Deparbnent of Anthropology
The University of Texas
at Austin.

Appendix II
NOTES ON THE SHELL REMAINS FROM THE LA JITA SITE
THOMAS RoY HESTER
The following is the result of a superficial examination of the shell
remains from the La Jita Site. These materials are stored at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, Austin.
RIVER MUSSEL. Examples of river mussel ( Unio sp.) were very rare in
the deposits at La Jita, and so fragmented that species identification
was not attempted. About 1/2 of the specimens came from Area A,
with scattered fragments in Areas C, I and G. No modification was
noted on any of the fragments.
LAND SNAILS. Large quantities of land snails were found at the site, so
many in fact, that only samples were collected from each level. The
snails were especially concentrated in the living areas (A and C) , and
were notably less common in the burned rock middens. A detailed

145

LA JITA SITE

study of the land snails from the site has not been conducted at present and the following data should be considered preliminary. Identifications and habitat data are based on Allen and Cheatum ( 1961:
291-316).
FAMILY BULIMULIDAE

Bulimulus altematus mariae
Bulimulus schiedeanus
Comments: Both species are present in large numbers, and both
are characteristic of semiarid southcentral and west Texas. Specimens from 153 lots were cursorily examined. In almost all instances, they are large adults. Though as scavengers they may
have been attracted to the debris in the midden areas, it seems
more likely that they were gathered as food items (Allen and
Cheatum, 1961; Krieger, 1956).
FAMILY HELICINIDAE

H elicina 01·biculata tropica
Comments: They often occurred in association with the Bulimulus,
though in much smaller quantities. Due to their small size, they
were probably not utilized as a food source. They are generally
associated with woodland conditions, much like those which exist
today at La Jita.
FAMILY OLEACINIDAE

Euglandia texasiana
Comments: These were extremely rare, with only 2 or 3 specimens
recovered. These thin-walled snails are attracted to well-protected
areas where abundant moisture occurs.
FAMILY ACHATINIDAE

Rumina decollata
Comments: They were found primarily in upper levels, usually
Levels 1 or 2. This species was introduced through commerce
early in the Historic period from the Mediterranean area (Allen
and Cheatum, 1961:310).
FAMILY POLYGYRIDAE

Polygyra texasiana
Comments: These small snails occurred in only 3 or 4 levels at the
site, primarily in its southern portion. This species is found primarily in open fields and woodlands.
DISCUSSION

This cursory analysis of the snails and other shell remains from La

146

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Jita shows that the land snail species found in the archeological deposits are characteristic of wooded environs occurring within a semiarid climate. The same species of land snails still occur at La Jita today, thus suggesting that the site environment and the general climatic
conditions have changed little, if any, since the site's prehistoric occupation.
The scarcity of mussel shell in the archeological deposits would
seem to indicate that this 1iverine resource was a minor item in the
abmiginal diet.

REFERENCES CITED
Allen, D. C. and E. P. Cheatum
1961. Ecological Implications of Fresh-Water and Land Gastropods in Texas
Archeological Sites . Bulletin, T exas ATcheological Society, Vol. 31: 291316.
Krieger, Alex D.
1956. Food Habits of the Texas Coastal Indians in the Early SLxteenth Century. Bulletin, T exas ATcheological Soc-iety, Vol. 27: 47-58 .

Appendix III
OTHER SITES IN THE VICINITY OF THE LA JITA SITE
THOMAS RoY HESTER
During the course of the work at the La Jita Site, several other sites
were recorded along the Sabinal River. These sites and their materials
are briefly described below. Detailed documentation is on file at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory.
41 UV 24. The site is a small burned-rock midden situated along the
edge of a 50-60 foot bluff on the west side of the Sabinal River, about
1.5 miles downstream from La Jita. A flat area with no burned rock,
but with large quantities of flint debris is adjacent to the northern edge
of the burned rock midden.
Material collected from the surface includes cores and core nuclei,
secondary cortex flakes, interior flakes , l-edge side scrapers, biface
fragments, and a small crude biface. Miscellaneous scrapers and retouched flakes were also picked up. The site has been heavily surfacecollected in the past.
41 UV 25. This site is located a few hundred yards southwest of La
Jita along the old Sabinal channel, at a point where a small tributary
enters from the north. Scattered bmned rock and flint are found for
about 150 feet along the channel bank and for about 50 feet away from
it. The occupational deposits are at least 2 feet thick. Two test pits

LA JITA SITE

147

were dug at the site while work was in progress at La Jita. The results
of these exploratory excavations are summarized below:
Test 1 (a shovel test; surface to 26 inches below). Zone 1 is a gray
black loam with much burned rock, changing to a tannish brown soil
(Zone 2) with little burned rock. Artifacts include: 3 stemmed arrow
point fragments (including the Edwards and SeaBorn types), 3 F1io
points, a Pedernales point (from Zone 2), a basal fragment of a large
thin triangular biface, a biface distal fragment, and large numbers of
interior, secondary cortex and lipped flakes. Core fragments were also
found as well as about 200 flake fragments ( 30% of which were
burned).
Test 2 (a 5-foot square; 4 half-foot levels were excavated; stratigraphy the same as in Test 1). Materials recovered from this test are
briefly listed:
Level 1 ( 0-6'') : Perdiz, Edwards, Fairland, arrow point distal
fragment; initial cortex, secondary cortex, inte1ior and lipped flakes;
flake fragments ; bone; snails.
Level 2 ( 6-12") : Edwards, Scali om c01·yell, and triangular arrow
points; triangular bifaces; biface fragments; secondary cortex, interior and lipped flakes; flake fragments; snails; some charcoal; bone.
Level 3 ( 12-18") : crude Perdiz, Frio ( ? ) ; secondary cmtex and
lipped flakes; flake fragments (half of which are burned).
Level 4 ( 18-24"): Ensor; secondary cortex, interior and lipped
flakes; flake fragments; snails; charcoal; bone.
The surface of site 41 UV 25 yielded a rough polyhedral core, 2 bifacial cores, secondary cortex and interior flakes , a crude biface fragment, a convex-base biface, and several flake fragments.
41 UV 26. About 1 mile south of Utopia, a site was located along a
terrace on the east side of the Sabinal River. The site has been cultivated and plowing has revealed burned rock and lithic debris in an
area of about 2 acres. The following lithic materials have been found
at the site: pedorator shaft fragment, expanded-stem dmt point,
Pedernales dart point, lanceolate dmt point with a convex base, 2
stemmed dart point fragments, 4 biface fragments, a core fragment,
3 Ciude ovate bifaces, an end-scraper, a subtriangular biface, 5 secondmy cortex flakes, a retouched flake (burned), and a small endscraper made on an interior flake.
41 UV 27. This site is situated about 1 mile northwest of Utopia on
the east side of the Sabinal River. The site is a small bmned rock
midden, 35 feet in diameter and rising 2 to 3 feet above the surrounding ground surface. It is on the edge of the lowest terrace. Burned rock
and other debris are scattered down the tenace slope. Ronnie Bownds

148

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

made available his collection from the site. Dart point types represented are Pedernales, Bulverde, Nolan, Langtry-like, Mantell, Tortugas, and Castroville. Triangular bifaces and biface fragments are
also present.
41 UV 28. Approximately 100 yards west of the Sabinal River (on
the lowest terrace) and about 1 mile downsb·eam from La Jita, a small
burned rock midden is present. The midden is 40 feet in diameter, and
is surrounded by scattered burned rocks and other occupational debris. A few small potholes are present. Archaic dart points have been
collected, including Martindale-like, Abasolo ( 2) , Pedernales ( 2) ,
Marshall, a Miscellaneous Form 6 dart point (see La Jita descriptions) ,
and a crude, reworked specimen, resembling Mmtindale. Also collected were 12 biface distal fragments, 1 crude b"iangular biface, 1
subb"iangular biface (convex-base), 1 lanceolate biface, and lipped,
secondary cortex and interior flakes.
41 UV 29. T. C. Hill, Jr. (personal communication) has reported
this site, situated on the east side of the Sabinal River, just below
Utopia. Occupational remains (including intact hearths) are concentrated in the terrace deposits at the site, in a situation reminiscent of
that at La Jita. Hill has found the following materials at this site:
Montell, Langtry, Frio (several varieties), Fairland, Travis, Pedernales, Ensor, Martindale-like, Plainview, and triangular dart points; a
dart point similar to the "Early Corner Notched, Variety 1" of La
Jita; Scallorn and Edwards arrow points; triangular and ovate bifaces
(some of which are large aud thin); manos and metates; and, large
quantities of flake debris.

Prehistoric Settlement of the
De Cordova Bend Reservoir, Central Texas

s.

ALAN SKINNER

ABSTRACT
An archaeological survey of the De Cordova Bend Reservoir area in Central Texas recorded 51 prehistoric sites which represented occupations of
hunting/gathering adapted peoples during the period 500 B.C. to A.D. 1500.
Sites were located in 3 of the 5 recognized microenvironments and it is
suggested that site activity is related to the site situation and the natural
resources available at each location. Anaylsis of lithic debris suggests that
stone tool manufacture involves 3 distinguishable technological steps, cobble
collection/primary cortex removal, rough biface shaping/trimming, tool shaping/finishing, and that the spatial distribution of the steps corresponds to
different site types. On the basis of the survey data, 3 site types, base camp,
seasonal hunting/gathering camp and chipping station, are recognized.
One base camp, 2 seasonal hunting/gathering camps and 2 chipping stations were excavated and are described. The sites illustrate the variations
in situation, internal site arrangement and composition, artifact assemblage
and site activities. It is suggested that a full maintenance cycle, probably
an annual cycle, is represented by the range of activities exemplified at the
excavated sites. The concept of Central Based Wanderer as defined by
Beardsley and others (1956) is employed to explain the prehistoric settlement pattern described at De Cordova Bend Reservoir. It is also suggested
that this model of seasonal dispersal and regrouping be employed to explain
the intersite variations recorded by previous archaeological work in central
Texas.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Archaeological investigations were carried out in the De Cordova
Bend Reservoir during the spring and fall of 1968 under two contracts
between the National Park Service and Southern Methodist University. A total of one hundred and seventy-five man days were used
at sites X41HD5 and H41HD26 during March and April under the
terms of National Park Service contract 14-10-7:931-6. Excavation at
sites X41HD24, X41HD36, X41HD39, and X41HD54 and additional
testing at X41HD26 was done during October, November and December of 1968 under the agreements of National Park Service contract
14-10-7:931-30; four hundred and sixty-five man days were used.
This report is the result of these investigations and has been prepared
in partial fulfillment of the terms of Memorandum of Agreement
14-10-7:931-6 and 14-10-7:931-30. The field notes, artifacts and pho-

150

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tographs are on file at the Anthropology Research Center, Southern
Methodist University, Dallas, Texas. This report constitutes Southern
Methodist University Conb·ibutions in Anthropology No. 7.
A number of individuals assisted in the field and analysis phases
of the project. A large number of Granbury High School (Pirates)
students and recent graduates served as the labor force. Mike Durant
and Douglas Gray, in particular, provided invaluable assistance dming
the work. The help of the school faculty, especially Mr. Best and
Mr. Crossland, is appreciated. The land owners, Mr. Zweifel, Mr.
Aiken and Mr. Lowden, allowed access tlu-ough their land and cooperated dming excavation. Local amateurs were helpful in locating
sites and land owners and in familiarizing the writer with the archaeology of the area. These include Richard Bennett, Randall Rash, Jack
Riley, Lecil Meyer, Johnny Luton and Weldon Campbell.
The preliminary results of om work were disseminated to the local
residents through meetings of the Hood County Histmical Association and in articles published in the Hood County News through
the courtesy of the editor, Mrs. Crawford. The above mentioned
people and many unmentioned residents of Granbury aided in all
the various aspects of the work and I wish to express my thanks to all.
Jeanne Jasper, Linda Graham and Barbara Hickman assisted with
the laboratory analysis and R. K. Harris aided with the taxonomic
identification of projectile points. Ronald Richie and David Gillette
of the Shuler Museum of Paleontology, Southern Methodist University, identified faunal materials from the Bluebonnet and Aiken sites.
Dr. Elmer Cheatum, Biology Department, Southern Methodist University, identified the shell remains and Fekri Hassan helped \vith
the identification of lithic materials. Nancy Sciscenti and Robert D.
Hyatt prepared the graphic illustrations, and Gerald Humphreys is
responsible for the artifact photography. The manuscript has been
typed and retyped by Hazel Gilboe.
Parts of the manuscript were reviewed by C. Reid Ferring, Anthony
Marks and Joel L. Shiner of the Anthropology Department at Southern
Methodist University. Many of the ideas on Texas archaeology expressed in the report were discussed with Harry J. Shafer of the
Texas Archeological Salvage Project at the University of Texas, Austin.
Many of the theoretical concepts and the directions of this report
were developed during methodological discussions with James V.
Sciscenti, Director of the River Basin Salvage Program at Southern
Methodist University, and Principal Investigator on the De Cordova
Bend Reservoir contracts.

151

DE CORDOVA BEND

I wish to thank the Brazos River Authority for their cooperation
in supplying information about reservoir construction and the National
Park Service for providing the funds to carry out the research upon
which this report is based. Rex L. Wilson and Chester A. Thomas
of the National Park Service, Southwest Archeological Center were
helpful in all phases of the work.
INTRODUCTION
The purpose of archaeological investigations in the area of the
De Cordova Bend Reservoir was to define the prehistoric utilization
of a part of central Texas within the Brazos River drainage. The
first section of the report summarizes the findings of the survey and
explains the basis for the selection of certain sites for excavation. The
results of site excavations and material analysis are presented in the
second section. A summary of the settlement patterns and interpretations as to the way of life of the prehistoric inhabitants and hypotheses
for future testing are presented in the concluding section.
The De Cordova Bend Reservoir is a water conservation project
of the Brazos River Authority, located on the main channel of the
Brazos River in Hood County, Texas (Fig. 1). The reservoir, 33.5
river miles in length, is confined to the narrow limits of the Brazos
River channel and floodplain. Consequently, the reservoir is not over
two miles in maximum width. One hundred and three miles of shore
line will result when the reservoir has reached its 155,000 acre feet
storage capacity limit. Construction of the dam began on December
15, 1966 and filling of the reservoir was completed on August 30, 1969.
NATURAL ENVIRONMENT
Hood County is in the physiographic region known as the Grand
Prairie (Carter 1931: 68-70) or the West Cross Timbers (Gould 1962:
10), and is a region characterized as ". . . a high rolling and hilly,
deeply dissected limestone area crossed by a number of deep valleys
through which rivers flow in narrow strips of bottomland (Carter
1931: 68) ." The prominent geological stratum in the area is known
as the Glen Rose formation, a part of the Trinity group, Comanche
series of Cretaceous age. The Glen Rose typically consists of thin to
medium-bedded hard continuous limestone strata alternating with
marl or marly limestone and weathering in stream cuts to steep canyons (Sellards, Adkins and Plummer 1932: 315-320). The Brazos
River, the main drainage through this area, has cut through the limestone formation leaving a meandering pattern. Narrow strips of bot-

152

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tomland border the steep banks of the deeply entrenched river. There
are no major tributaries in the area and the few minor tributaries
are generally dry during part of the year. Rainfall ranges from thirty
to thirty-five inches ammally; April and May are the months of high
rainfall. The annual temperature range is from 34-96° with a growing
season 232 days long (Belo Corporation 1970: lll).

- - _- - ______

I

-~~6oERC;.<L_

________ _

Acton

0

/

(

Lim it of

DE

CORDOVA

BEND RESERVOIR

SURVEYED

SITES

miles

FrG. 1. Map of the De Cordova Bend Reservoir showing distribution of
archaeological sites.

153

DE CORDOVA BEND

MICROENVIRONMENTS
The broad environmental description is presented to enable a
reader to visualize the general area. Several subdivisions, microenvironments or ecological niches ( Coe and Flannery 1964), are present
within the general environment; these are delineated in order to see
if human activity loci are directly conelated with specific environmental resources. Five microenvironments (Fig. 2) are recognized
within the reservoir limits on the basis of surficial topography and
the Bora and fauna recorded in these areas. The divisions are: The
Brazos River and adjacent Hood plain, the alluvial tenace, the tributary stream, the bluff slope and the limestone bluff. Although these
units have been described here, it must be pointed out that they
are intergrading units, not necessarily identical on opposite sides of
the river at any one location.
1). Brazos River and Adjacent Flood Plain.
The Brazos River, crossing Hood County in a southeasterly direction, is the main through-Bowing p em1anent stream. The stream is in
a mature stage of development, and has cut through the limestone
bedrock leaving an incised meandering pattern ( Sh·icklin 1961) and
depositing alluvium in the meanders. The river is sloping at the rate
of one foot per mile (Mason, Johnston and Associates 1963: 3). The
Hood plain is narrow throughout most of the stream length and the
meanders have not been cut off nor do they allow easy cross-Hooding
even at high water. The soil in the :floodplain has a high silt content.
The first terrace ( T -0) is about twenty feet above the normal river
level and is in the :floodplain (Crook in Blaine, Harris, Crook and
Shiner 1969).
No cultural debris was found in this area due to constant Hooding
of the area. This is not to suggest that the area was unused by the
prehistoric inhabitants. The fact that the river has a characteristic
M I XED

LJM~STONE
BLUFF

I

LIMESTONE

SLOPE

ALLUVIAL

TERRACE

MESOUI TE,
JUNIPER

DECIDUOUS

BRAZOa~dRIVER

I

FLOOD PLAIN

I ALLUVIAL

TERRACE

I

TRIBUTARY
STREAM

LIMESTONE
SLOPEBLUFF

I

FIG. 2. Schematic profile of microenvironments in and adjacent to the De
Cordova Bend Reservoir.

154

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

fauna including fresh-water mussels, fish, frogs, snakes, and turtles
suggests its potential.
2). Alluvial Terrace.
The alluvial terrace ( T-1 ) has resulted from the cutting of the
Brazos River which has produced ingrown meanders by lateral cutting
of the cliffs on the outside of the curves. These meanders have continuously enlarged themselves ( H endricks 1957: 48-49), and have
subsequently been filled with Quaternary alluvium. The slipoff slopes
within the meanders are covered with alluvium and two clearly defined sets of terraces are evident. The first is in the floodplain; the
second is fmty feet above the normal river level. The terraces are
covered with a fine sand containing minor amounts of clay ( Hendricks 1957: 44 and Map ). Alluvial soils are dark in color and support a
heterogeneous plant assemblage including elm, cottonwood, walnut,
salt cedar, oak, pecan, and hackberry. Moreover, the terraces provide
an avenue for the western movement of animals from the Austroriparian region of Texas ( Blair 1950: 101 ) . A permanent source of
water is available in the Brazos River, in springs along the river and
in a few permanent tributaries. At the entrance and exit of the meanders, the river is funneled through a narrow passageway between the
limestone cliffs. The terraces have been cultivated for the past century,
obscurring the terrace system and damaging some of the archaeological sites.
3). Tributary Stream.
The tributaries add little to the river flow, and provide a limited
source of water and a habitat for aquatic and land animals during
the spring and summer. These areas are characterized b y a thin red
sandy-clay soil based on the limestone. Limestone fragments are
common in the soil which tends to be hard and more consolidated
than the alluvium in the river terraces.
Grass is thick in the valleys which pierce into this rough land
(Carter 1931: 75 ). The dominant large flora is juniper and mesquite;
some oaks and walnut advance up the sb·eams from the alluvial
terrace, but their growth is inhibited by the thin soil layer.
4). Limestone Slope.
This microenvironment is the steeply sloping face of the limestone
bluff which borders on the river and backs the alluvial terrace within
the meanders. The Glen Rose formation does not weather in a way
to form overhangs, and consequently rock shelters do not occur.
The limestone slope has a thin and patchy soil cover which supports
low but thick stands of oak and juniper ( Carter 1931 : 69-70). Water

DE COI\DOVA BEND

155

is available only after rains when it stands in natural basins for a
brief period of time.
5). Limestone Bluff.
The bluff borders the river and is slightly rolling in vertical relief.
A thin layer of tan soil formed from the decomposition of the underlying limestone supports a flora of grasses and a thick cover of juniper
and oak in those areas where they have not been removed. The
surface cover includes thistle, prickly pear cactus, and yucca in the
open areas. A loosely consolidated layer of conglomerate containing
quartzite, flint and an occasional piece of petrified wood is exposed
in many areas and provides a source of knappable stone.
ENVIRONMENTAL SUMMARY
The described environmental subdivisions present a sharp contrast
in the topography, soils, water, vegetation and fauna of this area.
Movement between the zones is easy and resources of all zones are
readily accessible. On the basis of the characteristics of the microenvironments, it is suggested that:
a) No single microenvironment would provide ample resources for
a total seasonal round. While chippable stone is only available in
Zone 5, a permanent water source is available only in Zones 1 and 2.
Aquatic plants and animals are primarily present in Zone 1; edible
nuts and benies occur in Zones 2 and 3. Large game animals move
down to the river at night but stay in the tributaries and outside
of the reservoir area during the day.
b) All microenvironments, except the alluvial terrace, would thus
be utilized in a task-specific or seasonal manner. Certain resources
are localized and can only be obtained in one zone or another, while
certain plants and animals are only present during a specific season
of the year. The alluvial terrace occupies a central position and these
various activities could be based from this location.
c) Habitation of any duration will occur on the alluvial terrace.
This location is well-drained, protected from winds, has a pem1anent
water source, is centrally located and has the largest amount of
flora and fauna resources of any zone. None of the other zones have
all these specifications and thus could not serve for this purpose.
SETTLEMENT PATTERNS
Fifty-one prehistoric sites were located during the three surveys
conducted within the reservoir area (Jelks 1954; Lorrain 1967; Skinner 1968). All are open sites located within the alluvial terrace, tiibu-

156

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tary stream and limestone bluff microenvironmental zone. Rockshelters
or caves are not present due to the composition of the limestone.
Artifacts exposed on the present ground surface at most sites facilitated delimitation of the horizontal extent of a site. This exposure also
allowed the collection of a large sample of artifacts, over one hundred,
where possible, which were considered representative of activity ( s)
at the site, this latter hypothesis was tested by excavation. E ach site
was treated as the location of a set of activities that were constant
throughout the length of occupation, although surface collections
frequently included a few tools which on a formal basis have been
assigned to speci£c time periods ( horizons ) in adjacent areas. The
tools, particularly projectiles, are formally similar to som e ascribed in
the time range of from about AD l-AD 1500 (Johnson 1967; Johnson, Suhm, and Tunnell 1962 ) but they could not b e associated with
other components of a distinctive assemblage at any site. Consequently, tl1ey were used primarily to bracket the maximum p eriod of
utilization of a site location. The speci£c activities associated with
the occupation ( s ) represented by these temporally useful horizon
markers were tested for b y excavation. Combinations of site size,
artifact assemblage characteristics and microenviromnental zones are
correlated and three types of settlements have been defined.
Sites on the alluvial terrace are situated on level sand covered
areas adjacent to a permanent water source. This area is b eing farmed
today and plowing has exposed cultural materials in areas of well
over several acres in extent. Although plowing has disturbed the prehistoric deposits, cultural materials cluster in localized concentrations;
there is little evidence of horizontal movement of artifacts as noted
in recent work in Turkey ( Redman and Watson 1970 ) which has
shown that repeated plowing causes little horizontal movement of
artifacts. The artifact assemblages from sites on the alluvial terrace
include flakes, cores, intentionally retouched pieces, hammerstones,
g1inding tools, ( manos and basin metates), some fresh-water mussel
shells, fire-cracked limestone and typological tools (see Fig. 3). The
latter category includes projectile points, scrapers, gravers, bifaces,
and other tools frequently given taxonomic prefixes. Projectile points
are reportedly common at these sites although few were found during
the survey b ecause of previous selective collecting. Bone is rarely
preserved in the alluvial sand along the Brazos River ( R. L. Forrester, personal communication) and its absense in the disturbed midd ens is not surprising. Alluvial terrace sites cover the largest area
of the sites recorded and have a distinct and varied assemblage.
F ew sites are located adjacent to intermittent tributaries of the

DE CORDOVA BEND

157

Brazos River. This may be due in part to the limited area of the
microenvironment. The tributaries carry a regular flow of water
during the spring and summer but are dry during the remainder of
the year. Erosion has exposed cultural material in areas not over
an acre in maximum extent and, except for erosion, surfaces have not
been disturbed. The assemblages include flakes, cores, retouched
pieces, hammerstones, few typological tools, fire-cracked limestone
and numerous fresh-water mussel shells. Projectile points and grinding tools are uncommon.
Sites on the limestone bluff are located in the vicinity of a deflated
or exposed outcrop of conglomerate. The largest number of sites
is recorded in this location, but the sites themselves are smaller and
shallower in extent than others elsewhere within the reservoir. Cultural material is exposed in scattered concentrations of up to ten
meters in diameter over the surface of these sites. Retouched pieces
are the most common tool form and typological tools , particularly
notches and gravers, are abundant.
Exceptions to these general patterns were recorded at several sites
within and outside the reservoir limits. The assemblage from site
X41HD43 is similar to those of sites on the limestone bluff. The site
is located on the alluvial terrace adjacent to a permanent tributary
of the Brazos River. A layer of conglomerate has been exposed in
the vertical cut of the stream. A similar assemblage was recovered
at the Zweifel site ( X41HD39) which is located in the tributary
stream microenvironment. Site X41HD48 is located on the limestone
bluff but the tool kit is similar to that of sites on the alluvial terrace.
Several sites, notably the Bennett ( X41HD33) and Meyer ( X41HD35)
sites are near permanent springs on the upper reaches of intermittent
tributaries of the Brazos at some distance from the river (Fig. 1).
These locations are well drained, sand covered, and gently rolling
in vertical relief. Artifacts from these sites include large numbers of
projectile points as well as grinding tools. Based on the environmental
situation and on the artifact assemblages, the sites appear to be
functionally similar to sites on the alluvial terrace.
It is suggested that three classes of sites are present within the
limits of the De Cordova Bend Reservoir and that different activities
were conducted at each. These are:
1) Alluvial terrace sites have tool kits dominated by projectile
points which may be indicative of hunting and by grinding tools,
hammerstones and some mussel shell which may be indicative of
food gathering and food preparation. The natural plant and animal
resources of this zone allow for long term occupation. The size and

158

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

depth of deposit indicate that the sites were occupied and reoccupied
by groups of people for a stratigraphically long pmiod of time, as
evidenced by large area of occupation debris and the overlapping
and intermixture of the remains.
2) Tributary stream sites were occupied for the prime purpose of
collecting fresh-water mussels. This activity was done by smaller
groups on a seasonal basis during that part of the year when water
was available in the tributary. At the same time, tool preforms were
roughed out for later completion.
3) Sites on the limestone bluff appear, on the basis of flint debris
and available stone, to have been occupied for the primary purpose
of collecting knappable stone. Concommitant with the quarrying
activity was another activity which involved the use of notches,
gravers and retouched pieces. The nature of this activity is uncertain.
The size and scattered appearance of the deposits may indicate that
small groups or single individuals were responsible for each of the
lithic concentrations. Occupation of this locale was probably on a
sporadic basis and for a short period of time as there is no evidence
of food collecting, preparation or consumption at these sites.
LITHIC DEBRIS

Chipped stone debris in the form of flakes and cores is the largest
class of artifacts collected from all sites during the survey. Chipped
stone tools are the result of the reduction of a material mass (core)
(Nunley 1969) and unutilized flakes are the necessary result of this
reduction. Since flakes are the residue of tool making, they should
reflect the technical process involved in the making of a tool. By
isolating steps in the process, the specific technological aspects conducted at any single location can be isolated; this was tested by
excavation.
Nodules of a fine-grained cryptocrystaline quartz herein referred
to as flint are contained within layers of conglomerate within the
Glen Rose formation. This material is generally exposed on the surface of the limestone bluff (Zone 5). The flint nodules (cobbles)
occur in sub-rectangular to spherical shapes. Tan is the most common
color but black, red and white colored flints were also recovered.
The outer surface of the cobbles is covered with a natural weathered
surface referred to as cortex.
The initial reduction of a cobble involves the removal of a flake
from the core. The outer surface (dorsal surface ) of the flake is
covered with cortex. Flakes which have cortex over 100% of the
dorsal surface are referred to as PRIMARY FLAKES. This class of

DE CORDOVA BEND

159

flake is the first of a series to be removed from a location on a core.
Such flakes were struck by a hard percussion tool, possibly a stone
hammerstone.
Subsequent flakes tend to overlap previous flake scars and consequently the dorsal surface does not have cortex over its entirety.
Flakes which have some cortex on the dorsal surface are referred
to as SECONDARY FLAKES. Flakes which have no cortex on the
dorsal surface are referred to as INTERIOR FLAKES. The majority
of the secondary and interior flakes were removed by the use of heavy
percussion tool as indicated by a thick and pronounced bulb of
percussion. A lesser number can be referred to as LIPPED FLAKES
(Shafer 1969: 4), having a faceted striking platform and an arched
appearance. These lipped flakes are probably all biface thinning
flakes which were struck with a bone or wooden batton (Shiner
1969: 225). The term "lipped flake" is used herein as a descriptive
category which, if the result of biface thinning, should be shown to
co-vary with bifaces at that stage of manufacture. This can be illustrated through the use of flake scatter diagrams.
The weight of complete flakes correlates with the flake category.
Primary flakes are the heaviest and interior flakes the lightest, however, this variable has not been quantified. Interior flakes are the
result of the last step of the tool making process which involves the
removal of retouch flakes.
With the survey material, flint debris was treated as flakes. In subsequent analysis of excavation materials, chips were separated from
flakes. CHIPS are flake fragments which lack the striking platform
and whose precise appearance and method of detachment could not
be determined.
Flakes from each site were sorted into these three categories, primary, secondary, and interior to see if all tool making stages were
present at all sites or if particular stages tended to be isolated by
site. The result of this analysis (Fig. 3) was the recognition of three
distinct flake assemblages interpreted as representative of steps in
tool making. The first manufacturing step involves the collection of
material and the initial steps of cortex removal. Assemblages from
these sites are composed of 5 to 15% primary, 60 to 70% secondary,
and 20 to 40% interior flakes and chips. The second step involves
further cortex removal and reduction of cores; finer reduction and
trimming is represented by an increase in the amount of interior
flakes. The assemblages include about 5% primary, 55% secondary and
40% interior flakes. The third step is represented by about 5% primary
flakes and by about the same percentage of secondary as interior

160

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Bakes. Lipped Bakes are more common here than elsewhere and the
Bakes themselves are thinner and finer than at other sites. The three
steps as outlined correspond roughly with the limestone bluff ( Step
1) , tributary stream (Step 2) and alluvial terrace (Step 3) microenvironments. Consequently, it was concluded that tool making involves a set of steps which are conducted at different locations by
the prehistoric occupants of the survey area.
SUMMARY

Archaeological survey of the area of the De Cordova Bend Reservoir resulted in the recording of fifty-one prehistoric sites. The purpose of the survey was to d etermine the prehistoric settlement of
the area and the relationship of the activity( s) carried out at these
sites to the way of life of the people represented. Three variables,
microenvironment, settlement pattern and lithic debris were focused

MICROENVIRONMENT

ARTIFACT
ASSEMBLAG E

FLAKE

DI STRIBUTION

TYPE

70%

FLAKES

ALLUVIAL TERRACE
LOWDEN SITE

7/\0

844

;;,i~

CORES/ 8 1FACES
~5
RET. PIECES
1.8
TYP O. TOOLS
1.4
HAMMERSTONES
GRINDING TOOLS
SHELL
Present
F IREC RACKED
Common

I .\

7.8
2.1

ROCK

.

I
.I

50%

~

__ _.

48%

_li 47% -

FLAKES

TRIB UTARY STREAM
BLUEBONNET SITE

CORES/ BI FACES
R:::T. PIECES
TYPO. TOO L S
HAMMERSTONES
SHELL

F IRECRAC KED
ROCK

I. g I l- \
.
o/
\
~

92 .7

3.0
1.9

0 .6

"

1.5
Co mmon

Present

ff

30 %

I

I

I

37 "/o

II

\

~

/ r

\

I~

FLA KES

LIMESTONE BLUFF
PIRATE S ITE

CORES/BIFACES
RET. PIEC ES
TYPO. TOOLS

HAMMERSTONES

73.0

7.2

14.0

4 .3
1.5

\

/ j3
• I
I

16%

14%

y

10%

/

~ 0/o

PRIMARY

SECONDARY

FLAKE

INTERIOR

TYPE

3. Diagram showing the artifact assemblage and flake type distribution
associated with the alluvial terrace, tributary stream and limestone bluff
microenvironments.

FIG.

DE CORDOVA BEND

161

upon as a means of outlining available material resources and the
uses of and places of use of these resources. On the basis of the
patterns already discussed, three types of settlements were recognized.
The three are chipping station, seasonal hunting/gathering camp
and base camp. In the following, the archaeological and natural
characteristics of each type of site is presented with suggestions which
arose in regard to this type of site. The excavation recommendations
are presented in the conclusion section.
Chipping station sites are located on the limestone bluff where
flint is available in exposed or deflated conglomerate layers from
within the Glen Rose formation. Discarded chipped stone is exposed
in small, shallow concentrations over the site's surface. Gravers,
notches and retouched pieces are the only common chipped stone
tools. Primary flakes make up five to fifteen percent of the flake
category while secondary flakes range from sixty to seventy p ercent.
W ater is unavailable in this zone and food resources are limited.
It is suggested that:
a) Flint was collected at or near these locations and initial cobble
reduction, cortex removal as indicated by presence of primary and
secondary flakes was carried out here. Further tool completion was
done elsewhere.
b) A secondary activity conducted at these sites involved the
use of gravers, notches and retouched pieces.
c) Small groups or single individuals (probably men) chipped
flint at one place at any single time. Quarry visits were short-term
excursions.
d ) Quarrying trips were carried out from a camp where food
was available, and such trips were primarily for one purpose.
Seasonal hunting/ gathering camps are located along intermittent
tributaries of the Brazos River. Small game animals, aquatic freshwater animals, various nuts and other plants are available on a seasonal basis due to the annual presence of water. Flint resources are
available nearby. Site areas are larger than that of chipping sites
and the cultural materials are more diverse. Fresh-water mussel shells
are common and fire-cracked limestone is present. Chipped stone
tools, particularly projectile points, are uncommon as are grinding
tools. Although secondary flakes predominate, interior flakes comprise 40% of each assemblage. On the basis of these data, it is suggested that:
a) Tributary stream sites were occupied for the collection of
seasonally available food resources, particularly fresh-water mussels.

162

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

b) Occupation was during the spring and summer when water
was available in the adjacent stream.
c) Initially trimmed flint was carried here and tools were roughed
out but generally not finished.
d) Occupation was by small groups of men and women (extended
family?) for short periods of the year.
Base camps are located on alluvial terraces adjacent to permanent
water sources. This location is well-drained and protected from the
extremes of the weather. Moreover, the central location puts natural
resources within reasonable distances. Cultural materials occur over
large areas as distinct concentrations. Grinding tools and projectile
points are common artifacts. Burned mussel shell and fire-cracked
limestone are evidence of food preparation. Secondary and interior
flakes are about equally represented. Therefore, it is suggested that:
a) Base camps were the loci for more diverse and intense activity
by the group of people who occupied the camp for the better part of
each year and likely expresses the maximum degree of permanency
represented with the reservoir.
b) A base camp was occupied by a corporate group which included the members of smaller work groups who separately occupied
seasonal camps. This was the largest group of people gathered together at one time of the year within the reservoir limits.
c) Chipped stone tools were completed here and were used
in hunting. Hunting was an important activity carried out from base
camps.
d) Gathered plant foods were collected, prepared and consumed
and were an important part of the base camp diet.
The importance of these three site types and their relation to
the annual seasonal cycle of the prehistoric occupants of the De Cordova Bend Reservoir is uncertain. The activities represented at the
sites reported may include the complete annual round, however, since
base camps are also located at the headwaters of several tributaries,
the relationship of these sites to sites within the reservoir has not
been studied. All that can be said in summary, is that the complete
range of activities for a complete annual round appears to be reflected in the archaeological remains in sites located within the
De Cordova Bend Reservoir.
SuRVEY REcoMMENDATIONS

In planning an excavation program to test the model derived from
the survey, two objectives were considered : first, the excavation

DE CORDOVA BEND

163

sites representative of the various site types, and secondly, the excavation of as many of those sites to be flooded and destroyed by
reservoir construction. Other factors considered include the present
state of preservation, the accessibility and the size of sites. Several
sites were desh·oyed between the first and second excavation seasons
and replacements for those originally selected were made. Excavation
was planned for sites X41HD 12 (base camp), X41HD22 (base camp),
X41HD28 (chipping site) and X41HD30 (seasonal hunting/ gathering
camp), but time was unavailable to conduct work at these sites.
The sites described below were excavated and the reasons for their
selection are provided.
The Lowden site ( X41HD5) is a base camp. Plowing had exposed
a large artifact concentration; a local collector reported that over
a hundred dart points had been collected dming 1967 after the field
was deep (chisel) plowed. The site was to be desh·oyed by land
movement operations in conjunction with the reservoir, and in fact,
was destroyed early in the fall of 1968.
The Bluebonnet site ( X41HD26) is a seasonal hunting/ gathering
camp located adjacent to Eden Branch. An old road along the base
of the bluff crossed the stream at the site and had exposed a large
collection of cultmal materials. The site was otherwise undistmbed
except that juniper had been chained off about fifteen years ago.
The Aiken site ( X41HD24) is located adjacent to Rucker Creek
in a present-day pecan orchard. The area of the site had once been
cultivated for a short period of time and was overgrown in weeds.
Cultmal material was almost absent in 1968, although a concentration of lithic debris had been noted the previous year (Humphreys
1967 field notes). Therefore, the artifact sample was small. Moreover, the U.S.G. quadrangle indicates that Rucker Creek is a pennanent stream. Based on these factors, it was suggested that this might
be a seasonal camp or a base camp and that it should be excavated
to determine its relationship to the model.
The Zweifel site ( X41HD39) is situated in the tributary stream
microenvironment but had an assemblage similar to those of chipping
sites. The surface of the site was undisturbed and materials were
concentrated in a small area.
The Pirate site ( X41HD36, 54) is a chipping site located on the
limestone bluff. Several isolated concentrations were recognized and
a large artifact sample had been collected during the survey. The
site was selected to check the reliability of the survey sample and
to excavate a representative chipping site.

164

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

EXCAVATIONS
The five prehistoric sites (Fig. 4) which were excavated in conjunction with the D e Cordova Bend Salvage program are described
in the following section of the report. Each of the sites is described
separately. A description of the site and the rationale b ehind excavation is discussed and a summary of the excavation procedures pro-

·-

·-

PARKER

COUNTY

· Hooo · couNTy- · - - · - · -

·-

·-

2

0
Miles

SITE

DE

FIG .

CORDOVA BEND RESERVOIR

4. Map of reservoir showing location of excavated sites.

·-

·

165

DE CORDOVA BEND

vided. Architectural features are presented individually and a summary of the apparent settlement pattern at the site discussed, based
on architecture and artifact distribution. A section dealing with the
artifact assemblage follows the archaeological sections and particular
attention focuses upon the composition of the assemblage. A summary
of activities represented by artifactual materials and the probable
site dating concludes the artifact assemblage section. The architectural and distributional data is combined with artifact assemblege
information in the summary of each site report.
The report on the Lowden site is followed by reports on the Bluebonnet, Aiken, Zweifel and Pirate sites. This sequence is used to provide a broad base which b egins with the varied assemblage at the
Lowden site and progresses to smaller and less diversified sites exe mplified at seasonal hunting/ gathering camps and eventually, at
chipping stations.
Throughout the report, quantitative data on artifact dimensions
are presented within the text and in tables. Linear dimensions are
in centimeters; weights are in grams. Abbreviations used include:
L = length, W = width, T=thickness, SW =stem width, Wt=weight,
+=measurement of a fragmentary specimen.
LOWDEN SITE ( X41HD5)
INTRODUCTION

The Lowden site is located in a sandy p eanut fi eld 500 feet north
of the Brazos River and just west of an unnamed spring-fed creek
which drains into the river. Water in the creek varies from a large
to small flow but does provide a year round source for water ( Fig. 5 ).
The creek has cut through the twenty-five foot thick man tle of Quaternay alluvium and exposed the underlying limestone bedrock. Bedrock
is exposed along the creek drainage to the north and a quarrying
site ( X41HD43) is located about half a mile upstream where a layer
of conglomerate has been exposed. The location of the Lowden site
is within the zone refeiTed to previously as the alluvial terrace.
Occupational debris from the prehistoric occupation of the area is
scattered over the area outlined in Figure 5 and concentrated in the
area indicated. There was little evidence of recognizable spatial
clusters of debris within the main cluster described d espite the fact
that the field has been plowed repeatedly with the subsequent deflation of the surface and the piling up of sand along fences at the field
borders. It was reported that numerous dart points h ad been collected
from all over the surface of the fi eld during the past fifty years and
that deep plowing the previous year had exposed many dart points.

166

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

@

Chipping station

•

Bose camp

D Excavated area

~0

?'~

LOWDEN SITE
AREA

0

t

20QO

feel

FrG. 5. Lowden site and vicinity showing nearby sites and lay of the land.

In addition to points, the surface assemblage included manos, metates,
hammerstones, fire-cracked limeston e rock, burned mussel shell, cores,
bifaces and debris. The Hake category p ercentages are 5.3% primary,
46.5% secondary and 48.2% interior. Based on the data available, it
was originally suggested that the Lowden site w as a base camp.
ExcAvATION PRoCEDURE

The primary artifact cluster measured roughly 70 by 30 meters in
size, was oval in shape and oriented north-south. The artifact concentration decreased to the west and south and may have decreased
to the north and east, but these areas were covered by sand along
the row of trees and fence in these two directions and no information
was available prior to excavation.
A 70 meter long north-south base line was established along the
western edge of the cluster and 10 meter wide strips were laid out
perpendicular to this base line. These strips, which are referred to
as Collection Areas and are lettered A to G from north to south,
extended to a maximum of 40 meters to the east, although cultural

167

DE CORDOVA BEND

material was almost non-existant beyond 30 meters. All cultural
material was collected from each of these areas prior to excavation.
It should be noted that smaller collecting areas would have provided
tighter control.
Exploratory trenches (Fig. 6) were used to test the depth of the
deposit and to locate sub-smface architectural features. Test trenches
were excavated in 20 centimeter levels. Artifacts from the trenches
are included within the sample from the respective collection area
except where they could be related to an architectural feature.
Trenches were cleared using a shovel-scrape technique and fill was
screened only in the area of recognized features.
The cultmal deposit extends to a depth of over 1.2 meters; water
was struck below 1.2 meters and excavation was discontinued. Cultural materials were not found concentrated in any of the test
trenches; therefore, a temporal sequence based on the vertical stratigraphy is not proposed.
The relationship of the excavated concentration to the east of the
site is uncertain due to the limited amount of testing possible and
the present state of exposme at the site. Within the concentration,
artifacts are clustered within two areas, an area comprised of Collecion Areas C, D, E and a second area, constituted by Collection Area G

X41HD5

LOWDEN

SITE

10

meter s

I
I

11'

I :; I
I .•'.··:. I
L

I
II

I

:;;i A...L__!!_l_

1f
;,:

I

I

I

I
I

I
I

£.l _

__Q_

Heart h I

_ _E_

I
I
t

!'~)·

J
I

__F__

I
I

~~· _G_j

Fig. 6. Plan map of Lowden site showing situation of collecting areas, test
trenches and architectural features.

168

TEXAS ARCH E OLOGICAL SOCIE TY

( see Table 1 for details ) . These two concentrations have artifact assemblages which appear to represent similar activities. Evidence of
localized occupation was uncovered in the form of two living areas,
both located in Collection Area D . The living area to the east is less
disturbed than the one in the center of the field. It is suggested that
repeated plowing has d estroyed the majority of the living areas which
were located in this part of the site and that the disturbed materials
were deflated onto the present ground surface.
ARCHITECTURAL

F E ATURES

As noted earlier, only two architectural features, living areas denoted by centrally located hearths containing burned limestone, were
recorded. To a large part, the absence of occupational features is
attributed to the extensive plowing of the field. The effect of plowing
can b e seen in the present state of preservation exhibited in the two
features described b elow.
1
A small concentration of burned limestone constitutes this feature
which is located near the southwest comer of Collection Area D.
There was no surface evidence of the h earth in the form of burned
stone or other artifacts localized in the area.
The hearth stones are concentrated in an oval-shaped area 75 centimeters north-south by 125 centimeters east-west. The hearth stones
w ere scattered over a level surface about 25 centimeters b elow the
present ground surface. Although disturbed by plowing, charcoal
stained sand was intermixed between the stones. The hearth stones
were 5 to 15 centimeters in maximum length . Additional burned
limestone was not found on the same level adjacent to the hearth and
no a1tifacts were found associated with the hearth.
The extent of the living area represented by this hearth is undetermined as are the period of occupation and the activities carried
out there.

HEARTH

OCCUPATION AREA

A small lens-shaped midden d eposit w as bisected by a test trench
along the south edge of Collection Area D about 40 meters east of
the base line. This location is toward the edge of the field where the
midden had been protected from plowing by the overlying sand. The
midden was excavated in arbitrary 20 centimeter levels ( Level
1 = 0-20 em., Level 2 = 20- 40 em., etc. ) in rectangular units and
fill was screened through quarter inch hardware cloth. Artifact dis-

169

DE CORDOVA BEND

tribution within the midden did not show any horizontal clustering
and the vertical stratigraphic levels are discussed below.
The midden is circular in plan (Fig. 7), approximately 7 meters in
diameter, 38.5 square meters in area. The top of the midden is plowmarked and was delimited below 20 centimeters by a dark brown
charcoal-stained sand which was 35 centimeters thick in the center

.....___...I

0

METERS

B

A

LOWDEN SITE • X 41HD5

FrG. 7. Plan and profile of occupation area.

170

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of the midden. The midden lenses out toward the edges, the bottom
of the midden becomes lighter in color and eventually grades into
the underlying red sand. Postholes were not found within or at the
edge of the midden. There was no recognizable stratification within
the midden nor was there a living surface recognizable as either a
hard walked-upon surface upon which artifacts were found or as a
stratigraphic level in which artifacts were recorded. Such a recent
level may have been destroyed by plowing which penetrated the
top of the midden.
An oval-shaped concentration of fire-blackened and burned limestone marks the location of a hearth in about the center of the midden.
The stones are piled together in a concentration 20 centimeters thick.
They did not form part of a basin-shaped or flat hearth nor were
rocks scattered about within the midden at the same level with the
hearth stones. The oval arrangement may represent a heating Rre
or an earth oven.
Cultural material is abundant within the £II and adjacent to the
occupation area. Although the artifacts with the upper 20 centimeters
(Level 1) (Table 1) have been disturbed by plowing, they remained
concentrated above the midden and are attributed to the occupation
represented by the midden as are cultural materials within levels
2 and 3, i.e., 20-60 centimeters. Materials thin out by the base of
level 3, 60 centimeters. The artifact sample below 60 centimeters is
of insufficient size to demonstrate a stratified deposit which might then
have been compared to similar deposits elsewhere in central Texas.
Artifacts within the midden include chipped stone tools and tool
making debris, hammerstones, grinding tools, fire-cracked limestone
as well as broken and burned fragments of fresh-water mussel shell.
The making of chipped stone tools is represented by flakes and chips
which were discarded in manufacture. This activity is further supported by the broken and unRnished arrow preforms. In addition to unfinished tools, the finished chipped stone tools include a dart point, 10
arrowpoints, 2 gravers, 3 scrapers and numerous retouched pieces. The
hammerstones may represent hard hammer percussion tools; soft hammer or pressure tools were not found. Fire-cracked rock was scattered
within the deposit as were burned fragments of fresh-water mussels.
Limited excavation and controlled surface collection has shown
that most of the cultural remains at the Lowden site have been disturbed by recent plowing.
The discovery of the occupation area discussed above presents an
example of a living area located within a base camp. This is the

171

DE CORDOVA BEND

first report of such an area that I am aware of from central Texas.
The appearance, circular shape and lenticular profile, and artifactual
contents suggest that activities arrtibutable to both men and women
are represented. Male-oriented activities include flint knapping and
tool making, both of which were carried out in the area of the midden
based on the presence of flakes, chips, cores, arrow preforms, etc.
Female activities would include the preparation of foodstuffs, as
evidenced by grinding tools, mussel shells and the hearth. All these
artifacts cluster in the vicinity of the hearth and it is suggested that
all activities were carried out at a time when the hearth marked the
location of a living area used by a single social unit (family).
ARTIFACT AssEMBLAGE

The assemblage (Fig. 8) consists of chipped stone tools, chipping
residue, pecked and ground stone tools, fire-cracked rock and burned
shell.
Chipped stone residue constitutes 95.7% of the assemblage, cores/hifaces, 0.8%, tools 2.7%, and fire-cracked stone 0.8%. Previous surface
collecting may have skewed the amounts of tools and bifaces recovered but it is suggested that these percentages are a relative indication of the activities carried out here, i.e., chipped stone tool making
and domestic tasks including wild food collection and preparation.
It should be noted that the materials from levels 1-3 of the occupation
area comprise nearly 75% of the total sample. Therefore, the conclusions made from this discussion will have particular relevance to
the activities carried out in this area.

PRIMARY
CHIPS
0.5%
PRIMARY

------~

0.8 %

F'LAKES

CORES I BIFACES

0.8

%--~

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~d
%---=--

CHIPPED STONE TOOLS
1.3%
HAMMERSTONES
1.1
GRINDING TOOLS
0.3 % - - _ _ /
FIRECRACKED
LIPPED

ROCK

FLAKES

0.8%

2. 7 % - - - J

n =

13,979

Fig. 8. Diagram of artifact assemblage composition, Lowden site.

ARTIFACT DISTRIBUTION AT LOWDEN SITE (X41HD5).

TABLE l.

Flakes
Primary
Secondary
Interior
Lipped
Chips
Primary
Secondary
Interior
Cores
Biface Stages
A
B

c

D

B

6
36
22
10

----

23
6
6

5
66
60
20

16
126
81
45

4
57
22
21

3
33
42
3

4
24
32
2

22
45
62
8

12
187
281
11

6
49
98
3

1
----

2
-------

E
F
Dart Points
Arrow Preforms
Arrow Points
Drill
Gravers
Borers
Serrated Flake
Scrapers
Chopper
Retouched Pieces
Hammers tones
Manos
Metates
Firecracked Rock
Shell
TOTAL

COLLECTION AREAS
D
E
c

A

----

----

----

-------

---2

----

----

-------

---1

1

----

----

-------

1

----

----

----

---1

2
17
188

----

----

1

l
----

----

2

2
5

1
1
11
22
5
2
25

9
19
2
10
5
---143

X

X

327

830

7
18

1
----

11
16
2
4
5
301

5

6

9
50
33
9

2
30
9
4

2
13
6
1

114
1049
827
375

3
425
761
5

1
231
271
----

80
107
1

2
28
27
1

74
4368
6581
61

----

----

1
2
1
2
1
1
4

1
2
----

----

----

---1

----

3

---------2
1
----

----

----

----

----

----

3
3
8
6
7
17
4
12
8
1
2
2
1
8
1
158
146
18
22
111

L-1

5
38
22
10

8
87
61
29

27
339
293
112

19
111
144
79

11
73
68
29

4
---33
6

9
166
283
9

2
2065
2923
6

6
1035
1661
6

----

----

----

----

1

----

----

1
---1
----

l

1
1
4
1
----------

------8
22
------9
159

1
1
1
6
6
7
1

-------

-------

5
6

----

---1
-------

-------

1

1
1

-------

OCCUPATION AREA
2
3
4

G

F

----

----

1

---------1
1

----

1

1

----

1

----

----

----

20
10

7
1
2
----

8

1
9

6

X

X

X

X

X

5856

311.5

1400

625

237

----

22
25
1
1
16

47
6
4

----

1

----

------10
1
2
---5

----

726

----

TOTAL

1

----------

----

1
81

13979

-1
""'
t:O

...,
t'1

~

"'>
~

g
t'1

0
t""
0

C'l
>-<

n

>
t""

"'0
~
~

DE CORDOVA BEND

173

Chipped stone tools were made from locally available flint which
occurs in the form of flint nodules in gravel deposits which cap the
limestone bedrock and are exposed upstream at site X41HD43.
The cobbles range in color from dark gray to tan and include a
granular as well as a glossy form of flint. Artifact provenience is
detailed in Table 1.
FLAKES AND CHIPS

This category is the most common artifact form found ( 13,388
specimens) and represents the discards of tool manufacturing and
reflects the stages of manufacturing carried out at the site. Primary
flakes and chips make up 1.3% of the total artifact sample. They are
relatively more common in the surface sample than from the levels
1-3 in the occupation area. This discrepancy is probably due to the
fact that initial cortex removal from cores and bifaces was done
before the biface was worked within the confines of the occupation
area. Secondary and interior chips are numerically greater than their
respective flake categories within levels 1-3 of the occupation area.
This indicates that final biface trimming was completed within the
occupation area and that the secondary and interior chips and flakes
which fell on the living surface were not gathered up and discarded
elsewhere. The ratios of flakes to chips between the sum of the collecting areas and the occupation area are divergent. It is suggested
that the ratio from the occupation area is more representative of
breakage patterns than that collected from the surface since surface
materials were collected by hand, not screened. It is further suggested
that the occupation area materials are from a primary archaeological
context rather than a disturbed and deflated one.
CORES

Cores are represented by 61 flint cobbles which range in weight
from 75 to 1431 grams. The majority fall within the range of 75 to 400
grams. Due to the removal of some flakes from each specimen, a
meaningful average of selected size is undeterminable without recourse to the original resource areas. Cores were struck by a hard
hammer technique probably to determine if the flint was useable.
This resulted in the unpatterned removal of primary (cortex) flakes
from the core and such a pattern is not interpreted as initial biface
preparation. The cores do not represent flake cores except that flakes
are a by-product in the making of core tools.
BIFACES

The bifacially flaked cobbles represent the steps or stages involved
in the manufacturing of bifacial core tools, particularly, dart points.

174

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

This process involves the reduction of a cobble to a useable nucleus
as a point preform. This discussion considers that those artifacts
frequently described as knives, bifaces, or blades can b e viewed in
a processual manner in order to arrive at the way in which bifacial
tools were made. A similar analysis was carried out by Hoffrichter with
materials from the Drowned H ead Site at Pat Mayse Heservoir
( Lorrain and Hoffrichter 1968 ). The steps described below as Stages
A-F have been separated for descriptive convenience; the prehistoric
flint knapper was not involved in producing these stages b ecause
the sample is composed of rejects, artifacts which, due to the nature
of the stone, the craftman's time or ability, breakage or other factors ,
did not become tools. The stages serve to illustrate the problems
involved in this manufactming process. Figure 9 shows an illustrated
description of the stages which supplements the text.
Selection of resource material prior to flaking probably involved
such factors as size and shape of available cobbles, available type of
stone, the tools and techniques known to the knapper, as well as his
experience with working stone, particularly in the area of study.
Those aspects which are reflected in the chipped stone rem ains can be
d etected but such things as the available materials cannot be discussed
without knowing the resource area since the materials found in any
site have already b een selected by man. The discussion b elow focuses
upon the technological skills used, the successful result of any stage
based on the unsuccessful rejected biface and upon the chip and flake
residue of each step. Stages overlap due to the fact that a continuum
has b een split up for tllis discussion. Nevertheless, this division allows
for a more complete description of the technological processes involved.
STAGE A ( Fig. 9 a) The first step in biface preparation after the
selection of a cobble was the removal of the cortex. This was done
using a hard hammer p ercussion technique and in most cases a natural
flat cortex surface as a platform. This first step of cortex removal
prepared flake scars which can serve as platforms later. The end
product of Stage A is a biface from which some of the exterior cortex
has b een removed , although not in a patterned manner. The cobble
shape has not been modified nor has it been appreciably thinned
in cross section.
The by-product of Stage A is the rejected biface as in Figure 9 a
and a number of primary and secondary flakes and chips. The biface
was discarded due to the inability to control the depth of the flakes
which cut too deeply into the surface and to remove flakes which
would have taken off the cortex. Hard hammer percussion has crushed

a

c
b

f

e
d
2

0
em,

g

h

Fig, 9, Bifaces illustrating the stages, a, Stage A; b, Stage B; c, Stage C; d,
StageD; e, £, g, Stage E; h, i, j, Stage F.

176

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the edge of the natural platform. Most of the Rakes removed from the
core were primary Rakes although several secondary Rakes as well
as a number of chips were also produced.
STAGE B (Fig. 9 b) Patterned and overlapping cortex removal typified the second step. Both prepared and natural platforms were used
in a systematic removal of Rakes from both faces of the cobble. This
was done in an alternating manner on one face then the other and
so on around the periphery or circumference of the biface using a
hard hammer. In most cases, the Rake scars overlap evenly and the
bulbar region of Rakes is present on the biface surface although the
actual platform may be absent. Cortex removal is the object of this
step.
A biface such as in Fig. 9 b is the uncompleted result of this step.
Attempted cortex removal on the right side did not span a small granular area and the biface was discarded. Overlapping scar patterns on
the left side of the biface are evident. Primary and secondary Rakes
with both cortex and unfaceted platforms were removed as well as a
number of chips.
STAGE c (Fig. 9 c) The final removal of cortex and the preliminary
thinning of the biface occur during this stage. Hard hammer percussion was continued and the removal of additional secondary and
interior Rakes resulted in the presence of isolated sections of older
Rake scars. Rough form shaping is begun but thinning is of particular
importance.
Unthinnable bifaces with little cortex present, represent the rejects
of this stage. Thinning resulted in a hinge fracture on the left side
of the biface and there was no way to effectively remove the hump
which is present. Secondary and interior Rakes primarily with prepared platforms are discarded as are chips of the same categories.
STAGE D (Fig. 9 d) Stage D involved the final step of biface production in which a hard hammer percussion technique is used; subsequent techniques are soft hammer and pressure. The use of a hard
hammer produced crushing of the platfonns around the circumference of the biface and also resulted in deep bulbar scars and Rakes
about as long as they are wide. Flakes generally have prepared unfaceted platforms which show hammer crushing. The end product
of this stage is a roughly oval or triangular biface which has a sinuous
edge around the circumference.
A thinned biface with deep Rake scars and crushed platforms
around the circumference is the discarded result of this stage. Hard
hammer percussion Rakes, secondary and interior, with prepared

DE CORDOVA BEND

177

platforms were discarded. Numerous interior chips also result.
STAGE E (Fig. 9 e, f, g) Soft hammer percussion was begun in this
stage using unfaceted platforms prepared around the circumference
of the biface. Flakes span the biface in order to thin it, however, this
often causes breakage due to over shotting (Fig. 9 f) or shatter
(Fig. 9 g). A biface thinned by percussion and more finely shaped
into an oval or triangular fonn is the end result of this stage.
The by-products of Stage E are overshot thinning flakes, parts of
bifaces shattered by the force of the percussion, lipped flakes and
numerous inte1ior chips. No complete specimens of this stage are
represented from the site.
STAGE F (Fig. 9 h, i, j) The use of both soft hammer and pressure
flaking occurred during this stage. Pressure is used to prepare flake
platforms and to remove ridges resulting from previous flakes . Due
to the overlapping of flake scars, it is hard to determine the type
of flake removal used. The final biface is a finished triangular or
leaf-shaped form which is thinned and has relatively straight edges as
opposed to the previously sinuous edges on bifaces.
Bifaces frequently break at this stage (Fig. 9 i) and in some cases,
could have been used as tools without further modification (Fig. 9 j);
of the 16 examples from the site, only 3 are complete. In others
(Fig. 9 h, i) , pressure flaking ends in hinge fractures near the edge
of the biface and further finishing is not done. Interior flakes and
chips predominate at this step, but are frequently not recovered due
to their small size.
Stage F is not necessarily the end of the technological sequence
as many Stage F bifaces were further modified into dart points of
various forms. A preform stage generally occurs between these two
steps but due to the low recovery of dart points and dart point
preforms, this process is not discussed here. However, some of the
Stage F bifaces certainly were not modified into dart points but
surely were used as cutting tools, i.e., knives. Recognition of cutting
tools requires microscopic analysis which was not carried out during
this study.
The description of biface stages presented here has been used consistently throughout the site reports and will not be repeated for
each site. The same or similar technological aspects are uniform for
core tool production within the area of the reservoir. Utilization of
these categories in the following descriptions allows the comparison
of sites with respect to the steps involved and their localization within
the reservoir. The localization of biface manufacture has been correlated with the available environmental resources, subsistence activities,

178

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and lengths of time spent at different sites. Raw material in the form
of flint cobbles was gathered at sources located on the limestone
bluff and cortex was removed at these locations. Further trimming
was carried out at short-term hunting/gathering camps located adjacent to tributary streams and in some cases, dart points were made
and used there. In general, bifaces were finished and made into dart
points at such base camps as the Lowden site.
DART POINTS

Parts of 4 large points are described under this heading. One is
typological and stratigraphically earlier than the others. Each of these
specimens weighed more than 4 grams when complete. It appears
that all 4 are core tools. On the basis of their over-all size, their
weights and the assumed technology, it is suggested that they are
distinct from tools herein referred to as arrowpoints. This is consistent
with current useage in the New World and it has been demonstrated
elsewhere ( Fenenga 1953) that the weight distribution of the projectile points sampled forms a bimodal distribution pattern with a break
at 3.5 grams.
A point with a broken tip (Fig. 10 b) has been identified as a
Trinity (Bell 1958: 96). The broken point is triangular in plan and
has broad side notches adjacent to the base. The notches and base
have been ground smooth. Subsequent to breakage, an attempt was
made to thin the point by using a soft hammer. This resulted in
crushing the edges of the body and in leaving deep but short flake
scars on both faces. The Trinity point is from level 6 in the occupation
area. Dimensions are: L-4.0+, W-1.8, \Vt-7.5+, T-0.8.
Two slightly expanding stemmed points are represented by a base
(Fig. 10 c) from the fill of the occupation area and a reworked or
unfinished point from the surface of collection Area F (Fig. 10 a).
The base is from a finished point which had been alternately beveled
on the body edges. The stem edges were ground but not the base.
Dimensions are: L-2.2+, W-2.5, T-0.5, Wt-3.5+. Breakage
may have occurred during the process of beveling or through use. If
the latter, we might infer that this is evidence of the re-utilization of
the projecile shaft. The other point is also alternately beveled and
beveling resulted in a knot of stone on the face which could not be
retouched off, its dimensions are: L-4.0, W-2.0, T -0.6, Wt-5.0.
The basal edges are not ground and there is no secondary retouch on
the edges of the body. Therefore, it is suggested that the point was
never finished, and was discarded before finishing. These might be
identified as Yarbrough points.

a

d

c

b

e

f

g

h

k

0

m

2
em.

n

Fig. I 0. Lowden site tools. a-c, dart points; d, serrated flake; e,l, end-scrapers; f, borer; g, h, gravers ; i, notch; j, side-scraper; k, denticulate; m, chopper; n, concave scraper.

180

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The fourth specimen is m1ssmg the tip and most of the base. It
is slightly barbed and appears to be corner notched. It is wider and
shorter in length than the Yarbrough points. Its dimensions are:
L-3.2+, W-2.4, T-0.4, Wt-3.5+.
ARROWPOINTS

This category contrasts with the dart point sample previously
described in three respects, first, these are flake tools as opposed to
core tools, secondly, the sample from the occupation area includes
specimens which are representative of the manufacturing stages, and
thirdly, the weight range for whole specimens is 0.8 to 1.5 grams.
The manufacturing steps are described below and illustrated in
Fig. 11.
The following discussion is a specific description of the making of
corner notched triangular shaped projectile points, Scallorn. These
materials are from one provenience unit and are basically similar
except for part of a Perdiz point (Fig. 11 g) from the same location.
Manufacturing involved the procurement of a useable flake , removal
of the bulb of percusison, general shaping, trimming and preparation
of the body, corner notching and final retouch of the finished tool.
These steps may not be represented in some collections, but this
method of analysis allows the separation of preforms from finished
tools and an explanation of the lithic debris recovered.
The first step is the removal of a useable flake from a core and the
trimming off of the bulb of percussion in order to have a flake of
uniform thickness to d eal with. Useable flakes are larger than they
are wide, have little or no twisting, have a smooth ventral surface,
tend to be wider near the bulb of percussion than at the distal end
and therefore are roughly triangular in plan. Most of these flakes
would b e classed as interior flakes but the type of platform is not
known since in all cases they have been retouched off. The uniformity
of this group is illustrated in Figure 11.
The second step involved the general shaping of the flake into a
triangular shape and concomitant with this operation is the preparation/ thinning of the body. Shaping and thinning is a pressure operation which when completed results in long triangular preforms. Due
to the relative smoothness of the ventral surface, little retouching and
edge sharpening is needed there. Rejects occur due to several factors ,
in the case of Fig. 11 c, they were unable to thin these examples, d,
was rejected when it broke and e was discarded after thinning resulted
in a line of hinge fractures near the right edge of the dorsal surface.
The pressure flakes which would have resulted from this operation

181

DE CORDOVA BEND

would pass through quarter inch screen and should b e recovered by
flotation of midden samples or use of finer mechanical screens.
The third and final step involved the pressure retouch of corner
notches near the base of the triangular preform. The corner notch
scars overlap retouching on the lateral edges and there are scars on
both faces of the flake which provides for the depth of the notch.
Corner notching frequently resulted in breakage of the barb (Fig.
11 b , i ) . The example in Fig. 11 f is an unretouched flake which has
had a corner notch prepared. Breakage may have occurred before or

b

c

d

a

f

g

h

e
2

0

em

k
Fig. 11. Arrowpoints showing steps in manufacture.

m

182

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

after the notch was made, but the specimen is not typical in that
Rakes this thin are rarely used.
Specimens illustrated in Fig. 11 j, m, are examples from the occupation area. The remaining specimens are a tip and a comer notched
point without a base. A Perdiz point (Fig. 11 g) is from the same
provenience but no Perdiz preforms were recovered.
The question of arrowpoint preforms has been discussed by Suhm
( 1957) and Long ( 1961: 231) with regards to preforms for Perdiz.
They suggest that they are "... crudely chipped, often modified only
on one face, or on one face more than the other" ( Suhm and Jelks
1962: 269). A similar situation is exemplified by the preforms illustrated in Fig. 11 b, c, which might be identified as Young points (Suhm
and Jelks 1962: 295) or Granbury points bono variety (Jelks 1962:
35-36). It is suggested that on the basis of the published description
of Young and Granbury bono and technological information from this
site, that they constitute unfinished preforms of Scallorn points rather
than finished points and should not be ascribed to a type position.
DRILL

The mid-section of a drill made on a core has an off-center biconvex
cross section, 0.6 centimeters thick and 1.2 centimeters wide. Bifacial
pressure flaking on both edges created a sinuous edge which resulted
from an attempt to resharpen the drill. There is no evidence of
smoothing or other wear on the edges or the faces.
SERRATED FLAKE

The lateral edge of a partial primary flake (Fig. 10 d) have been
serrated. Serration is in the form of obverse (ventral to dorsal surface) retouch which extends for about 1.8 centimeters down the
edges on either side of the bulb of percussion. Serration did not
extend beyond the end of the broken flake.
GRAVERS-BORERS

All four specimens are on secondary flakes, probably resulting
during cortex removal. Two gravers are on large secondary flakes
which have the graving point on the distal edge of the flake and
formed as a projection left remaining between two adjacent notches.
The notches were made by obverse retouch on a thick edge of the
flake (Fig. 10 g, h).
The two borers are on secondary flakes which have cortex platforms and have a ridge running across the flake and ending in a
natural projection. These projections are naturally strong and the
thin edges have been obversely retouched away to create a solid
but narrow point (Fig. 10 f).

DE CORDOVA BEND

183

CHOPPER

This specimen (Fig. 10 m) is a rectangular flint cobble battered
on one edge, prepared by the removal of cortex from one face. Cortex
removal was done with a hard hammer using the natural cortex as the
platform. Crushing has dulled the edge and has broken small flakes
from both faces of the edge. There is no evidence of an attempt to
resharpen the tool after it became dulled. The cobble measures
7.3 x 6.1 x 2.7 centimeters and weighs 170 grams.
SCRAPERS

Tools within this category include end-scrapers ( 3), side-scrapers
( 1) , concave scrapers ( 1), notch ( 1) , denticulate ( 1), and truncation
( 2) and in all but one case, these tools are made on flakes. The uncertain case is the bit of an end-scraper which is too fragmentary for
determination. All flakes have cortex where they are preserved and
all but 2 are secondary flakes. One exception is the fragmentary endscraper bit, the other is an end-scraper on a primary flake. Two weight
clusters reflect the general size and massiveness of the tools. The
heavier category ranges from 20.5 to 57.0 grams and includes those
tools except one from outside of the occupation area. The lighter
category includes 2 specimens weighing 4.7 to 6.0 grams and the
fragmentary end-scraper bit for which the weight is meaningless.
A truncation from level 3 of the occupation area weighs 36.0 grams
and may not be associated with the occupation of the area.
Three end-scrapers on flakes represent three different scraper treatments. The first (Fig. 10 I) is on a primary flake, weighs 47.5 grams
and measures 5.0 x 4.5 x 1.7 centimeters. Steep retouch occurs on
the convex bit which has been resharpened resulting in shallow hinge
fracturing on the bit. The second (Fig. 10 e) weighs 6.0 grams and
measures 3.7 x 2.1 x 0.7 centimeters. Retouch was used to sharpen
the thin bit and there is no evidence of resharpening. The third
example is the fragment referred to previously.
The side-scraper (Fig. 10 j) is on the left side of a flake ( 5.6 x 3.2
x 1.0 centimeters, 20.5 grams) and was produced by obverse retouching of a previous flake scar. The edge is not well prepared although
the retouch is overlapping.
A concave scraper (Fig. 10 n) is distinguished from a notch (Fig.
10 i) on the basis that an entire edge of the flake has been retouched
in a concave form. In this case, a natural concavity was retouched to
sharpen the edge. The retouch was insufficient to sharpen up the
concavity. The scraper is 5.7 x 1.6 centimeters and weighs 57.0 grams.
In contrast, the notch (Fig. 10 i) has a single concavity ( 1.1 centi-

184

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

meter wide) retouched on one lateral edge of the Hake. Retouch is
obverse and resulted in a notch 2 mm. deep. The Hake measures
2.3 x 1.8 x 0.5 centimeters and weighs 4.7 grams. The denticulate
(Fig. 10 k) is similar in that it has more than one notch associated
along a single edge. Weight is 47.5 grams; measurement is 5.1 x 4.9 x
1.6 centimeters. A hard hammer blow caused the central scar and
the lateral scars are due to retouch. Retouch is also present on the
opposite edge.
The truncations are Hakes which have had a straight edge retouched
in an area that was previously curved when the flake was removed
from the core. Retouch is shallow on the specimen from Area D;
dimensions are L-5.4, W-3.8, T-1.4, Wt-34.0. The specimen from
level 3 of the occupation area is steeply retouched on the right edge
of the flake. Its dimensions are: L-3.6, W-4.8, T-1.8, Wt-36.0.
RETOUCHED PIECES

Secondary ( 87) and interior ( 71) flakes and chips of various sizes
and shapes have been retouched. Most of the retouch is obverse,
that is, from ventral to dorsal surface, and 39% of the pieces have
retouch located on the distal edge of the flake . Fifteen percent and
19% are retouched on left and right sides respectively while 12% are
bilaterally retouched and 15% are retouched around the circumference
of the piece.
HAMMERSTONES

Oval to rectangular shaped cobbles of quartzite (74%), flint (18%)
and sandstone ( 7%) were used as hammerstones. Inclusion within
this class is based on the presence of crushing on prominences or
other parts of the cobbles. One hundred and twenty of the 145 individual hammerstones are complete while the remainder are broken
fragments. A prominent corner, or other natural projections are the
most common location for pecking to have occurred. Pecking also
occurs on a flat surface adjacent to a projection as well as scattered
around the circumference of a cobble and occasionally as an isolated
occurrence elsewhere on the cobble. Pecking occurs at only one location on some tools while at several locations on others. Pecking ranges
from very light, indicated by a few percussion cones, to heavy, indicated by complete crushing of a prominence.
Cobbles range from 41 to 1,119 grams in weight; the majority falls
within the range of 41 to 538 grams. Thirteen of the complete hammerstones from levels 1-3 of the occupation area fall within the range
of 73 to 292 grams. The remainder weigh 394, 414, 496 and 933
grams. It seems unlikely that tools having this range of weight served

DE CORDOVA BEND

185

in a single function, i.e., flint chipping, food preparing, or whatever,
therefore it is suggested that hammerstones were selected for specific
purposes which involved pounding and that by isolating these tools
within structures or in sites, that we will be able to infer specific
useage.
MANOS

Water worn sandstone cobbles were made into manos. The cobbles were pecked into a roughly rectangular shape and there is no
evidence of the removal of large trimming flakes. The pecked surfaces,
particularly corners and edges, were rarely ground smooth and therefore the pitted surface is still present. All but one specimen are
fragmentary and of the identifiable specimens, 12 are unifacially
ground and 5 are bifacially ground. The resulting cross sections are
respectively convex/flat and biconvex and indicative of back and forth
grinding motion. The majority of manos were probably two-handed,
based on their size and estimated weight. Specimens range from 23
to 6.4 centimeters in thickness and from 7.5 to 9.3 centimeters in
width. Due to the fragmentary nature, length is not estimated but
the complete specimen is 16.0 centimeters long. Several of the fragments from the collecting areas are burned and may have been a
part of a previously destroyed hearth thus suggesting their reuse
after breakage occurred.
METATES

Twenty-two metate fragments of sandstone were collected, 21 from
the surface of the site. The size and shape of complete metates are
uncertain but two of the examples are from bifacially ground metates
while the remainder are from unifacial examples. The outside edge
is present in 10 specimens and appears to represent a basin metate.
Six of the fragments are fire-cracked and may have been part of a
destroyed hearth after they had been broken.
FIRE-CRACKED ROCK

Cobbles of fine and coarse grained quartzite make up 80% of this
category while sandstone makes up 17% and flint and quartz comprise
the remainder. Cobbles from 100 to 750 grams in weight and no
clustering of weight, i.e., size, was observed. Fire-cracked rock was
collected both from the surface of the site as well as scattered within
the fill of the occupation area.
MUSSEL SHELL

The majority of the shell is badly fragmented due to burning and
thus is unidentifiable. Burning has caused spalling of shell layers, has

186

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

softened the shell and in some cases oxidized it. All identifiable specimens are Quadrula sp. except for one example identified possibly as
Proctera. Both genera occur in the Brazos River today. On the basis
of the burning, it is suggested that these represent one part of the
subsistence base and that the mussels were cooked in the shell.
The artifact sample from the Lowden site consists primarily of
chipping debris, but includes a tool sample which constitutes 2.7% of
the assemblage. The completion of core tools and of Rake tools is
represented within the debris. A complete biface sequence from
Stage A-F is represented in the collection but shaped dart point preforms are lacking, as are dart points, in general. This absence may
be due to previous collection of surface materials or may be due to
the completion of this activity elsewhere in the site. The latter seems
unlikely in regards to the high incidence of small interior Rakes and
chips which indicates tool completion. Flake tool manufacture is
represented by unfinished preforms which generally are from an inplace context which had not previously been disturbed.
Hammerstones are a tool which is very abundant in the surface
collection. All of these stones were brought to the site to serve a
purpose but we have no data on the specific activity ( s) for which
this tool is used, although it seems likely that they were used for
Rake detachment.
Dating of the artifacts described herein relies solely upon crossdating of morphologically similar projectile points dated by carbon-14
elsewhere within Texas. Trinity dart points are dated 2000-1000 B.C.
(Crook and Harris 1952: 12) and Yarbrough is dated 500 B.C.-1000
A.D. ( Suhm and Jelks 1962: 261). One Trinity point was found, and
although stratigraphically early (Level 6 in the occupation area), no
occupational materials were directly associated with it. Scallorn arrowpoints are dated during "some part of the span 500-1200 A.D . ( Suhm
and Jelks 1962: 285)"; while Perdiz is dated 1000-1500 A.D. (Suhm
and Jelks 1962: 283). Due to the date overlaps, and the association
of Scallorn points with a Perdiz in the occupation area, it is suggested
that the occupation area was utilized sometime between A.D. 10001200.
SUMMARY

Limited excavation of the Lowden site has shown that although
the surface was littered with artifacts, "in situ" midden deposit and
architectural features were generally destroyed. Nevertheless, the
exposure of an intact occupation area located near the edge of the

187

DE CORDOVA BEND

field provides information on the activities conducted within the
limits of the living area.
The occupation area is a little over 400 square feet in area and it
contained about 75% of the artifact assemblage from the site. Although
we did not recognize horizontally separated work areas, the artifacts
from the midden deposit represent several different kinds of activities
which appear to have been conducted within the limits of the area.
Tool making, as represented by lithic debris including flakes and
chips, biface stages E and F, arrow preforms and tools, arrowpoints,
and possibly hammerstones, is the most prominent activity. Not only
is there evidence for arrowpoint making as discussed earlier, there
is evidence to suggest that core tools, as represented by biface stages
E and F and lipped flakes from similar bifaces, were being made
in the same area presumably at the same time. Thus, it is suggested
that core tools, both dart points and "knives" should be expected in
an assemblage from this time period (Jelks 1962: 86).
Borers, scrapers, and retouched pieces are the other classes of
chipped stone tools collected from within the occupation area. Hammerstones may have been used in the process of flint working, but
may also have served as pounding tools for use in food preparation,
or other maintenance activities. The manos and metate are considered
to represent food processing, while the burned mussel shell is the
remains of food consumed by the occupants of the area.
The central location of the hearth is considered the focal point
around which activities were conducted and based on the floor area
and activities represented, it is suggested that the occupants of the
area included both men and women. Moreover, based on the amount
of materials, the types and variety of materials, and the concentrated
midden which surrounds the hearth, it is suggested that occupation
was of a continuous long term nature by a group of people who were
concerned primarily with a wide range of maintenance and exploitative activities.
BLUEBONNET SITE (X41HD26)
INTRODUCTION

The Bluebonnet site (Fig. 4) is situated on the west bank of Eden
Branch at the mouth of the valley through which this intermittent
tributary drains before it flows across the alluvial terrace and empties
into the Brazos River. The site is located about a quarter of a mile
from the 1iver. Eden Branch flows regularly in the spring and summer
but dries up during the fall and winter. The valley is less than 1000
feet wide at the mouth and narrows abruptly to the north. Scattered

188

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

clumps of grass cover the ground and a luxurient growth of bluebonnets ( Lupinus subcarnosus) covered the surface of the site during
the spring. Juniper and mesquite are the dominant trees although
there are a few live oaks. Limestone is exposed in the stream bed
and is overlain by a layer of sterile red clay. The sandy zone which
overlies the red clay varies in depth from less than one meter near
the eastern edge of the site to over 3 meters near the western edge.
An old road crosses the eastern part of the site and numerous
flakes, cores and fresh water mussel shells are exposed in the roadway.
The cultural material covers an area the width of the road and
extending approximately 100 meters north-south. During the survey
there was no evidence of occupation at the western end of the site
and it was b elieved that occupation was limited to the area exposed
along the road. The artifact coll ection from the survey included flakes ,
cores, hammerstones, retouched pieces, and a large number of fresh
water mussel shells. Analysis of the lithic debris showed that secondary flakes constituted the largest amount (58%) while 37 percent
of the debris was interior and 5 percent was primary flakes. This
distribution (see Fig. 3) was b etween that of alluvial terrace sites
and that of bluff sites. Therefore, it was suggested that the chipping
conducted here was intermediate between the other two site locations.
In addition, the high quantity of mussel shells, the absence of projectile points and grinding tools, and the distinctiveness of the microenvironment led to the conclusion that this represented a seasonal
collecting site at which bifaces were trimmed but not further modified , thus suggesting that hunting was not a primary activity.
ExcAVATION PRoCEDURE

A north-south baseline (Fig. 12 ) was established through the eastern part of the site and excavation was conducted to de termine the
depth and extent of the cultural zone and to isolate prehistoric living
areas. Trenching was done by hand and fill was screened through
quarter-inch mesh in those areas where architectural features were
exposed and in certain other areas. Excavation revealed that the occup ation zone was from 30 to 40 centimeters thick. Concomitant with
excavation in the eastern part of the site, test holes (excavated with
a posthole digger ) were placed adjacent to the cleared areas in order
to determine the depth and extent of the cultural zone as well as
the location of the underlying strata. A row of test holes, spaced
5 meters apart, was placed in an east-west direction perpendicular to
the baseline and extended 60 meters west of the excavation adjacent
to the old road . A midden deposit more than two meters in depth

til

~

(')

.o
~.~
TEST

~0

=

.-0.

~
~

---

zti

WESTERN

SQ:A~/

AR EA

,o
,o
EASTERN
AREA

~··'

--

X4/HD26

BLUEBONNET

~
m~ttrs

SITE

c=JE~ccvated

Con!O<If

inttn~l

50<m

---~

.. ~-

.
.
----

~//

,

J

//

/

~uu ~~
/.
-------~
'" -- ...
______
~/·- ..---:/" /
~./

.

--------------~----=-</'(r~

/

//

/

•"

FIG. 12. Base map of the Bluebonnet site showing excavation in the eastern and western parts of the site.

,......
00
(.!)

190

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

was exposed in the two western-most holes. Subsequently, five 2 x 2
meter test squares were excavated to determine the depth of the
deposit and to recover a stratified sample of artifacts. The squares
were excavated in 20 em. levels and all fill was screened through
quarter-inch hardware cloth. The midden deposit was more than
three meters deep.
EASTERN AREA

As noted earlier, the culture bearing zone on the eastern edge of
the site is shallow and there was little chance of superimposed living
areas. Four hearths and their adjacent living surfaces were exposed
in the excavated area. The living areas are located on or just above
the top of the red clay zone. A contiguous but not overlapping arrangement of hearths is represented by the four hearths. This may
be due either to contemporaneous utilization of the healihs which
were spatially separated to provide an associated work area or to
repeated occupation of a stable ground surface and the construction
of new hearths.

1 AND LIVING AREA
A horizontal layer of limestone rocks was bisected by a test trench
near the northern edge of the excavated area. This was the first
architectural feature recorded at the site and was partly removed
during excavation. Rectangular-shaped areas on either side of the
trench were cleared and an area of limestone rock and other occupational materials were recorded on the surface adjacent to the stone.
The stone lens represented a hearth around which stones were scattered on the associated use surface.
The hearth covered a circular area about 160 centimeters in
diameter although the southern half of the hearth had been removed
by excavation. About 35 centimeters of fill overlaid the hearth. The
stones were laid upon the surface of the ground in a shallow basin
in a layer only a stone thick. Although there was a faint black stain
on stones in the center of the hearth, no charcoal was recovered.
Three small clusters of limestone were located adjacent to the hearth
on the northwest, northeast and south sides. Two flint cobble cores,
a broken fragment of a hammerstone, parts of two mussel shells and
a small amount of flint debris were found on the same level as the
hearth and within an area of about 2 meters of the hearth center.
HEARTH 2
A small concentration of limestone constitutes this feature which
is located in the center of the excavated section of the site. The stones
make up a small hearth.
HEARTH

DE CORDOVA BEND

191

The hearth is a small basin of approximately 30 fragments which
cover an oval shaped area 45 centimeters north-south by 50 centimeters east-west. No charcoal was present in the hearth nor were
any chipped stone artifacts associated with it. A collection of limestone fragments was situated to the northeast. The extent of the
living area represented by the hearth is uncertain as is the period
of occupation and the activities carried out here.

3 AND LIVING AREA (Fig. 13, 14)
A basin-shaped arrangement of burned limestone slabs and chunks
was found near the center of the excavated portion of the site. Limestone fragments and a small amount of cultural material were uncovered just above the upper surface of the red clay zone adjacent to
the hearth.
The hearth is circular in plan, 150 centimeters in diameter, and
basin-shaped in cross-section. The fill was stained black but charcoal
was not present. A large fresh-water mussel shell was found on the
hearth. The hearth was built by excavating a shallow basin which
was then lined with a single layer of limestone slabs.
On the adjoining living surface, numerous concentrations of limestone chunks, as well as a mussel shell and a core, were recovered.
Limestone chunks nearly encircle the hearth, there was no concentration of food or manufacturing wastes associated.

HEARTH

Fig. 13. View of Hearth 3 with limestone chunks on the adjacent living
surface, looking southwest.

192

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

4 AND LIVING AREA (Fig. 15)
The central hearth and the southwest quarter of the adjacent
living area were cleared. Fragments of limestone were uncovered
on the adjacent surface and a large amount of lithic material was
found in the dark brown zone above the hearth. However, this
material is not directly attributable to the occupation of the hearth
and living area.
The hearth is roughly circular in plan, approximately 80 centimeters
in diameter and is in a shallow basin which is lined with a layer of
limestone. A flint core was found adjacent to the hearth and concentrations of limestone chunks were uncovered southwest of the
hearth. No limestone was exposed in test trenches to the east and
north. A Scallorn arrow point was found in the fill adjacent to the
hearth.
HEARTH

----B

X

~

CORE

(

~

MUSS EL

SH ELL

X4/H026

BLUEBONNET SITE- HEARTH 3

Pre. 14. Plan and profile of Hearth 3.

z

==

193

DE CORDOVA BEND
WESTERN AREA

During the spring of 1968, three 2 x 2 meter test squares, squares
1, 2, and 4 were excavated in the western area to determine the depth
of the deposit and to collect a vertically stratilied sample. Layers of
limestone were noted during the excavation but time was not sufficient to record the hearths and/ or sections of the living surfaces
represented. Squares 3 and 5 were cleared in the fall of 1968. The
features which were uncovered, and are described below, include
parts of four living surfaces and/or hearths. All squares were excavated in 20 centimeter levels and fill was screened through quarterinch mesh. Cultural material was generally not recovered in levels
1 and 2 due to the presence of more recently d eposited alluvial
material. Depth of the various squares are listed below:

FIG. 1 5. Hearth 4 in background with limestone fragments on use surface,
view to northeast.

194

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Test Squa1'e
1
2
3
4
5

Maximum Depth
200
160
220
240

em.
em.
em.
em.
300 em.

STRATIFICATION

Three zones were recognized in each of the squares and although
they vary in thickness between squares, they are otherwise similar.
They differ in color, texture and composition and are described below
using the present ground surface for reference.
ZONE 1: A mantle of light tan sand varies from 40 to 60 centimeters
in depth. The sand is unconsolidated and water and grass roots
penetrate the zone easily (See Fig. 16). A thin layer of yellow alluvial deposited sand as well as other laminated layers parallel the
present ground surface and it is suggested that the deposit was
water deposited. Very little cultural material was found in this zone.
zoNE 2: A layer of consolidated brown sand occurs from 60 to about
150 centimeters below the surface. The top of the zone is represented
by a color/texture unconformity between the overlying light tan/
unconsolidated sand and the brown/ consolidated sand of this zone.

FIG. 16. Square 3, looking east, showing the depth of Zone 1 indicated by
the soil change located just above the top of Hearth 1.

DE CORDOVA BEND

195

This unconformity may b e due in part to the effective d epth of water
p enetration. Cultural materials including hearths, shell, flint and
some mammal bone were concentrated in this zone. The brownness
of the zone may be due in part to the ash and charcoal represented
in the deposit. This zone is darkest in square 2 and grades to light
brown in the southern squares and thins out to the north and east
of square 2.
3: The brown sand is intermixed with red clay b elow 150 em.
and this reddish sandy clay zone extends to the maximum depth of
excavation at three meters in square 5. Cultural material continues
to the full depth of excavation but decreases quickly from level 8
downward . The zone is consolidated and appears to b e an alluvial
deposit. Cracks in the red layer which appear to b e drying cracks
and w ere filled with brown sand presumably washed into the cracks
during deposition of the deposit.

ZON E

FEATURES

Parts of hearths or living surfaces were uncovered in each of the
five squares but due to the size limits of the squares and the depth
of overburden it was impossibl e to expose the entire living surface
upon which the hearth was situated. Limestone which appeared to
indicate the location of an occupation zone was exposed in levels
4 and 5 of square 1, level 4 of square 1 and level 8 of square 4. A
hearth was also exposed in level 7 of square 4.
Hearths and living surfaces exposed in squares 3 and 5 w ere recorded in place before being removed during excavation and are
described individually below. Due to the consistency of the soil and
to the continuous deposition represented , it was difficult to isolate
a walked upon surface as separate from the adjacent fill. Consequently
very few artifacts were attributed to a particular architectural feature.
HEARTH 1 ( Square 3 ) : The top of an area of limestone was exposed
in the bottom of level 3. At this point, the upper limit of zone
2 was exposed and a hearth ( Fig. 16 ) was noted. No use surface was
noted and artifacts were not recovered from the fill of the hearth.
The heatth ( Fig. 17) is a shallow basin which was lined with
limestone slabs. More than half of the hearth, which measured
50 em . east-west by 130 em. north-south, was uncovered within the
square. Charcoal was not present.
2 ( Square 3): Part of another hearth was exposed in the
northeast corner of the square at 140 em. b elow the surface. As
indicated ( Fig 18 ) this is not below Hearth 1 and as before, a use

HEARTH

196

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

surface was not exposed. However, a few artifacts were recovered
from the hearth fill.
The size and shape of the hearths are undetermined but the stones
appear to line the floor of a wide basin. In contrast to other h earths,
there is a pile of stone represented, rather than the usual pit floor
lining. Charcoal was not recovered and only 24 unutilized flakes and
chips were found.
( Square 5 ): Part of an occupation surface is
represented by the artifacts exposed at the base of level 5. Artifacts
included at this level are mussel shells, burned limestone fragments
and two pieces of flint.
The limestone is concentrated in an area near the northwest corner
of the square although a few pieces are scattered elsewhere within
occuPATION SURFACE

FrG. 17. Hearth I in Square 3 exposed near the base of level 3. Arrow points

north.

DE CORDOVA BEND

197

the square. Based on the small amount of material to the east of the
concentration and on the general pattern noted in other hearths which
were completely cleared, it is suggested that the hearth attributed
to this surface is located to the west. As noted, this level is about 40
em. b elow the top of zone 2.
(Square 5): A portion of a hearth was exposed in the southeast corner of the square at the depth of 200 em. A concentration
and scattered pieces of limestone were found at the same level as
the hearth along the eastern wall of the square.
The hearth appears to be a shallow basin lined with limeston e
slabs. Additional stones overlay the lining but the size and shape
of the hearth is uncertain. A concentration of more than 26 limestone
fragm en ts were clustered about 50 em. from the hearth edge. A
HEARTH

FIG. 18. Hearth 2 in Square 3, looking east. Note location of Hearth 1 indicated in the wall profile.

198

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

few scattered stones were found beyond the concentration. A single
piece of flint was the only artifact recovered.
Excavations in two separate parts of the Bluebonnet site exposed
different situations in which similar activities were carried out. Occupation of the eastern area was recognized by the horizontally scattered situation of 4 living areas represented by the limestone hearths.
Due to the small amounts of occupational debris directly associated
with the hearths, it is suggested that the living areas were used for
short periods of time and at different times.
The occupation of the western area contrasts with the east in that
living areas were located on a "floating ground surface." A floating
surface is one that gradually rises as water carries soil down the talus
slope into the living area" ( Struever 1968: 144). A succession of
hearths and living surfaces were recorded in Squares 1-5. The size
and nature of hearths is similar to those in the eastern area and both
areas seem to have been occupied during the same time period.
ARTIFACT AssEMBLAGE

The assemblage (Fig. 19) consists of chipped stone debris (cores,
bifaces, flakes, chips), chipped stone tools, ground and pecked stone
tools and fresh water mussel shells and mammal bones. Provenience
is listed in Table 2.
Chipped stone debris makes up 97.0% of the assemblage and of
this category cores/bifaces constitute 0.9% and flakes/chips 96.1%.

PRIMARY CHIPS
PRIMARY

FLAKES

2 .9

-,o---....

CORES/ 81 FACES

1.4"/o-----

CHIPPED TOOLS

~fg~~D4~~~~ND0

2%----

FAUNAL REMAINS

n

1.4%

=27,237
LIPPED

FLAKES

FIG. 19. Diagram of artifact assemblage composition. Bluebonnet site.

TABLE 2. ARTIFACT PROVENIENCE AT THE BLUEBONNET SITE (X41HD26)
EASTERN AREA
GENERAL
HEARTH
EXCAVATION
1
3
4

FLAKES
Prima1y
Secondary
Interior
Lipped
CHIPS
Primary
Secondary
Interior
CORES
CORE FRAGS.
BIFACE STAGE
A
B

c

D
E
DART POINTS
ARROWPOINTS
RETOUCHED PIECES
END SCRAPERS
DRILLS
NOTCHES
GRAVERS
CHOPPERS
HAMMERSTONES
MANOS
GROOVED COBBLE
HEMATITE
SHELL
BONE
TOTAL

1

WESTERN AREA
SQUARE
2
3
4

t;j

ttl

5

TOTAL

()

0

§
269
790
330
97

2
8
1
4

5
25
6

74
3588
3817
58
36

1
28
26
2
----

1
27
30
1
1

----

----

----

----

3
8
5
10
18
6
1
153
2
----

1
3

1

----

·---

-------

------1
----

----------

----

----

----

1

---1
-------

----

---3
----

74

144
390
169
37

129
250
113
34

73
173
68
26

81
141
78
44

807
1959
886
276

55
1426
1664
4
3

40
2586
2681
7
9

56
1334
1271
5
4

35
895
932
5
3

15
884
783
9
2

277
10768
11204
91
58

---1

2
3
7
5
6
8
2
113
----

2
1

5
2

---1
3
2
3
1

3

32

7
16
16
18
37
20
9
338
2
1
2
3
1
56
5
1
1
375

·------

----

39
1
1
---91
---9401

-------

104
182
121
34

100

------- ------------------

---1

1
2
33
---1

2
----

-------

9
----

1
4
3

----

----

-------

1
1
----

----

28
----

3661

86
p

6305

3
3
5
4

----

1

----

----

56

---1
---------59

-------

1
52

p

p

p

3272

2312

2108

0

~

t:xl

ttl

zt;j

f-'

CD
CD

27234

200

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Chipped stone tools constitute 1.4%, while pecked and ground tools
are less well represented ( 0.2%) . Food remains (shell and bone ) are
minimally represented in the assemblage 1.4%.
DEBRIS

A total of 26,177 Rakes and chips were collected at the site. Flakes
make up 15% of this number and chips constitute the remaining 85%.
A little over one third ( 34.9%) of the Rakes/ chips are from the eastern
area and the remainder is from Squares 1-5 in the western area.
Comparison of the samples shows that the percentages of the Rake/
chip categories are nearly identical. Primary debris (Rakes/ chips)
makes up 3.9% of the ass emblage, secondary debris 46.8%, interior
debris 44.4% and biface thinning debris, 1.0%.
CORES AND BIF ACES

All the cores are Rint cobbles which range in weight from 17-413
grams and have a mean weight of 107.4 grams. About two-thirds of
the cores and core fragments collected are from the eastern area.
This contrasts with the reverse p attern of Rakes and chips from the
two areas of the site. This pattern might be indicative of differential
use, however, the cores do not show any major typological or technologically differences and the apparent contrast seems to indicate
differential erosion as more than a quarter of the cores from the
eastern area are surface finds .
Fifty-eight core fragments and 91 recognizable cores were collected .
Cortex platform cores are the most common and include single platform cores ( 32 examples ), multiple unpatterned platform cores ( 22
examples) and circumferential platform cores ( 18 ). Among the remaining 20 cores are 6 single prepared platform cores, 3 multipleprepared platform cores, 6 cores with multiple cortex/ prepared platform s, 3 with circumferential cortex/prepared platforms and 1 undetermin ed type core.
The biface sample includes 94 specimens which represent stages
A-E. Thirty of the examples are complete and the remainder are
fragments. Biface stages ( Fig. 20 ) are represented by the followin g
number of broken/complete examples :
Stage A-0/7, Stage B-4/ 12, Stage C-10/ 6, Stage D-16/ 2 and Stage
E-34/3. Unfinished but complete rejects dominate stages A and B
while broken examples of Stages C-E dominate these categories. No
examples of Stage F were noted.
On the basis of the kinds and amounts of chipping debris, it is
suggested that Rint knapping was one of the primary activities carried out at the site. Biface Stages D and E are most common and

a

c

b

f

e

d

2

0
em.

h
FIG. 20. Bluebonnet site biface sample. a-c, Stage B; d-f, Stage C; g-h,

Stage D; i-j, Stage E.

202

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

were broken during manufacture. The biface pattern and the relatively equal amounts of secondary and interior debris suggest that
bifaces were trimmed at the site but were not made into shaped
preforms or completed projectiles.
DART POINTS

Twenty dart points are represented by the complete and fragmentary specimens listed in Table 2. One preform (Fig. 21 m) is
of a straight stemmed concave projectile made on a flake. A blow
to the left edge snapped the body in half and removed a "burin
spall" from the left lateral edge of the preform body. All three
dart point tips represent fragments of finished points and do not
appear to be manufacturing breaks. The other is a mid-section and
base of an expanding stemmed dart point which was roughly shaped
but not secondarily retouched.
Dart point bases include specimens represented by broken projectiles (Fig. 21 h, j, k) and by smaller fragments including the
barbs and stem or only the stem. No recognizable types were assigned to the smaller fragments ( 5 examples), although they include
2 straight and expanding stem fragments. The broken specimens
include a Yarbrough (Fig. 21 h) with a snapped off tip, a roughly
resharpened Morrill point (Fig 21 1) which had a knot on the distal
end and two unidentified points with impact snaps. Impact broke
the tip and a burin spall off the left side of one unidentified point
(Fig. 21 j), as well as crushing the tip end of the point. Weights
of these four partial points are 3.0+, 3.4+, 3.5+ and 9.3+ grams.
A Morrill point (Fig. 21 o) is from the eastern area. The stem
edges are ground to facilitate hafting and the body is alternately
beveled on the left side in order to resharpen the projectile. Edges
of the resharpened body are worn or ground smooth and there is no
evidence that the edges were retouched after the rough alternateside beveling occurred.
Two Godley points (Fig. 21 i) are each from level 8 in Squares
2 and 3. They conform to the type description (Jelks 1962: 40) although both specimens have a low body to stem length ratio compared to the examples illustrated from the Kyle Site. Both excavated
examples represent projectile points which were broken and then
resharpened by shortening and narrowing the body.
Three unidentified projectile points are illustrated in Fig. 21. Alternate beveling was attempted on the left side of the first specimen
but flaking resulted in shore hinges on either lateral edge. Basal
grinding is present on the stem of the second point (Fig. 21 p).
A fire spall broke out of the right edge of the third point (Fig. 21 n).

g

h

m

f

e

d

c

b

k

n

0

q

p

em.

s
Fig. 21. Bluebonnet site tools. a, graver; b, end-scraper; c-g, arrowpoints;
h-q, dart points; r, chopper; s, end-scraper.

204

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Dimensions of the complete
L
Morrill
6.3
Godley
3.4
Godley
3.4
Unidentifiable
5.0
Unidentifiable
5.9
Unidentifiable
5.8

projectile points are:
w
T
sw
2.2
0.8
1.9
0.5
0.9
2.3+
2.4
0.5
1.1
2.6
0.7
1.2
2.5
0.8
1.9
0.8
1.6
2.0+

Wt
11.2
3.6+
3.3
10.3
13.0
10.5+

ARROWPOINTS

Parts of two contracting stemmed preforms (Fig. 21 c, d ), 1 triangular preform, the bases of 2 Perdiz points (Fig. 21 e, f) , and parts
of 2 fragmentary untypeable arrowpoints were recovered from the
western area. A Scallorn point (Fig 21 g) ) was found near Hearth 4
in the eastern area and a fragmentary preform was collected from
the surface. All the arrowpoints were made on interior flakes which
had the bulb of percussion removed during preparation.
Two preforms might be classified as Cliffton arrowpoints on a
strictly formal basis, however, they are both roughly chipped and
there has been no secondary retouch prior to breakage. They are
situated in Level 6 of Square 5 and a Perdiz point (Fig. 21 e) is
from Level 5 of the same square; this association, plus the comments
of others (see Lowden site) and the unfinished technological condition of the two specimens suggests that they were not finished
products and should not be called alTowpoints.
The two fragmentary preforms (Granbury) are roughly shaped to
a triangular form by percussion flaking but were never secondarily
retouched. Because these specimens are not finished tools, they are
not classed as arrowpoints, although they do fall within the range
of Granbmy (Jelks 1962: 35-36).
Dimensions are given below:
L

Preform
Preform
Scallorn
Preform
Preform
Perdiz
Perdiz

(Granbury ) 2.0+
( Granbury) 2.3
2.1
( Cliffton)
2.0+
( Cliffton)
1.8+
2.4+
1.8+

w
1.2
1.5
1.7
2.1+
2.3
1.7+
2.1

T
0.4
0.4
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.3
0.2

SW

0.7

0.5

Wt
1.7+
1.7
1.0 gr
1.4+
1.8+
1.4
LO+

RETOUCHED PIECES

Flakes and chips of various sizes and shapes have been retouched,

DE CORDOVA BEND

205

primarily in an obverse mam1er. The number and p ercentages of
Rake/chip categories are : Primary Rakes-17 ( 5.1%) , secondary Rakes135 ( 40%), chips-59 ( 17.5%), interior Rakes-39 ( 11.6%), chips-51
( 15.1%), and lipped Rakes-35 ( 10.7%).
Flakes ( 67.4%) of the pieces were selected to be retouched and
secondary flakes constitutes the largest category of retouched Rakes.
Interior and biface thinning Rakes were also selected for retouching.
Primary chips were not found and secondary and interior chips which
constitute the largest debris categories accounted for less than one
third the retouched pieces.
E ND-SCRAPERS

Two end-scrapers, both on flint flakes were recovered in the eastern area. One ( Fig. 21 s ) is a steep end-scraper on a primary cortex
flake. The scraping edge has b een resharpened but this resulted in
short flakes which hinged less than a quarter of the way up the face.
Its dimensions are : L-4.6, W-4.5, T-2.1, Wt-55.6. The distal end
of a secondary Rake ( Fig 21 b ) was retouched in order to prepare
the scraping end. Dimensions are : L-3.2, W-1.5, T-0.4, Wt-2.9.
DRILL

The base of a drill made on a cortex flake of flint was recovered in
Square 2. The flake was removed from the core after a prepared platform w as made. Cortex remains on part of the dorsal surface but
the bulb of percussion has b een retouched off the ventral surface
b y using the Rake's striking platform as a platform. The attempted
thinning h as removed the bulb but ended in abrupt hinge scars on
the body. The body is roughly triangular and the evidence of the
broken drill bit protrudes from the apex of the triangle. Dimensions
are L-3.2+ , W-3.0, T-0.6, Wt- 8.2+.
N OTCHES

Two secondary cortex flakes, both flint, were made into notches.
One notch is located on the distal edge and has removed the bulb
of p ercussion. Retouch is obverse on both and notch depths are 0.2 em.
Notch widths are 1.3 and 1.1 em. respectively, and corresponding
weights are 14.8 and 18.1 grams.
GRAVERS

One secondary cortex Rake, an interior Rake and an interior chip
have gravers retouched on a lateral edge. In all three cases, the
graver is 1 mm. long and is located in about the center of the edge.
The secondary Rake has the graver located on the left edge and inversely retouched . A graver is obversely retouched. A graver is

206

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

obversely retouched on the left side of the interior flake and on the
right side of the chip. Weight of the gravers is 18.1, 3.4 and 1.1 grams
respectively.
( Fig. 21 r )
A thin ( 1.5 em. maximum ) flat slab of highly silicified limestone
was roughly flaked around three quarters of its p erimeter. The slab
is a rounded rectangular shape, 11.2 x 9.1 em. and weighs 246.2 grams.
The flaking consists of large percussion flakes which were all removed in an obverse manner. A natural hole pierces the slab but
has not been modified. There is no evidence of wear on the flake
scars nor evidence of hafting. Similar artifacts which evidence scraping wear have been reported from near Dallas ( Gwin 1941 ).
CHOPPER

HAMMERS TONES

Flint ( 8) and quartzite ( 48 ) cobbles were used for battering as
evidence by crushing located at various places on the cobble surfaces.
Flint cobble hammerstones range in weight from 56 to 360 grams
and average weight is 163.25 grams. Quartzite cobble hammerstone
weights range from 44 to 787 grams with a mean weight of 217.08
grams. Mean weight of the combined quartzite and flint cobble
sample is 208.96 grams.
PECKED AND GROUND STONE TOOLS

Fragments of five manos, made of sandstone include almost all of
a mano from the eastern area, part of a ma no from Square 1, and
three fragments from Square 3. The nearly complete specimen is
roughly circular in plan ( 8.5 x 6.0+ x 3.4 em.), is unifacially ground
and appears to have been made of a sandstone slab which only required the edges to b e pecked to shape it. Two of the mano fragments are bifacially ground and only one grinding surface is present
on the other two fragments. Grinding wear patterns suggest back and
forth grinding.
Half of a grooved quartzite cobble was recovered on the surface
of the eastern part of the site. Half of the cobble is present, but its
original shape appears to have been roughly rectangular ( 6.3 x 4.7
em.) and flat ( 2.6 em. thick ) . The circumference of the cobble has
b een crushed and battered. There is one groove on either face of
the cobble and these appear to b e the result of pecking and subsequent grinding. Both grooves are deepest and widest at the cobble
and blend into the original cobble surface 3-3.5 em. from the edge.
The grooves do not suggest shaft abraders or smoothers nor are they
patterned in such a way to have served for hafting, i.e., Waco sinkers
or atlatl weights.

+

207

DE CORDOVA BEND

A roughly spherical ( 2.5 em. thick) nodule of hematite was found
in Square 5. The interior color is red which was once covered by a
thin layer of yellow hematite. Irregular striated facets which show
evidence of grinding cover the surface at various angles. The nodule
weighs 21.2 gr.
MUSSEL AND SNAIL SHELL

A sample of at least 43 snails and 169 fresh water mussels is represented by the shells collected from the excavation. The vast majority
of mussels is represented by hinges or fragmentary shells. Quadrula
is the most common genus but examples of Lampsilis and Proptera
were also found. Many of the shells had been burned (Cheatum, p.c.).
Shells were scattered throughout the deposit but were not found in
any concentration. A few examples of land gastropods, Bulimulus and
Polygyra were found, especially in the Squares 2, 3, and 5. Snails
may have served as a food resource (Cheatum, p.c.), but were not
as commonly a used resource as were fresh-water mussels.
MAMMAL BONE

Fragments of large mammal bones were found in Squares 2, 3, 4
and 5 from level 3 to level 14. Most of the fragments are badly eroded
due to the acidity of the soil and this, plus their fragmentary nature
yields them unidentifiable. The majority are fragments of large mammal (presumably deer) long bones, although a vertebra and two
phalanges from a deer were found. Other bones include the plate
from the head of a drum fish and fragments of a herbivore tooth.
Artifacts from the Bluebonnet site show evidence of a large amount
of flint knapping and mussel collection, of some hunting, but little of
food preparation by grinding or other activities represented by
chipped stone tools. Biface thinning is represented by a number of
broken bifaces and the flint debris. There is no evidence that these
bifaces were being shaped into projectile points at the site.
Retouched pieces constitute the largest chipped stone tool class
and they are not associated with any other tool types. The use of
these artifacts is uncertain but they constitute a tool kit of their
own. Therefore, they must have been taken elsewhere to be completed. A time period of 1000 B.C. to A.D. 1500 includes the dates
attributed to the projectile points found ( Suhm and Jelks 1962).
SuMMARY

The excavation of the Bluebonnet site uncovered two areas of
occupation and localized living areas within both. Small limestone

208

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

h earths mark the center of each living area and there is a limited
amount of occupational debris including fire-cracked rock on the
associated living floors. Utilization of the living areas was probably
by a small group of people and the horizontal scattering of hearths
probably represents revisits to the site. Re-use of the site is also
suggested for the western area, where over 2 meters of midden
deposit contains superimposed hearths. Data on the season( s) of
occupation are not available, but it is likely that occupation occurred
during the spring and summer when water was available in Eden
Branch.
Preparation of trimmed bifaces was carried out at the site, although
dart points were apparently not made at the site. In contrast, arrowpoints and arrowpoint preforms were recovered from the western
area and these tools were b eing used at the site. Other activities
carried out at the site included hunting, based on projectile points
and mammal bones and the ga thering and cooking of fresh-water
mussels. Retouched pieces constitute a tool kit but no activity is
positively attributed to these tools, although it has b een suggested
that they may represent shaft preparation.
The Bluebonnet site is considered to represent a seasonal campsite
which was occupied on an intermittent basis during the p eriod of
1000 B.C.-A.D. 1500. Occupation was on a short-term basis and activities included hunting, mussel gathering and biface preparation.
AIKEN SITE ( X41HD24 )
INTRODUCTION

The Aiken site is located on the east bank of Rucker Creek approximately half a mile from its confluence with the Brazos River
( Fig. 4 ) . Rucker Creek has cut a channel ca. 5 meters deep and
exposed an alluvial d eposit in the cut bank. Water washed gravels
are present in the creek bed and are exposed during the fall and
winter when the creek is dry. The site is situated on the terrace midway b etween the b ase of the limestone bluff and the creek. The terrace was farmed for a few years but presently is used as a pecan
orchard. The soil is primarily clay with some sand mixed in.
Plowing of the terrace has exposed remains of prehistoric occupation in two locations, 90 meters apart, on either side of a gully
which drains into the creek. Few artifacts were present in either
location, both of which are about 100 meters from the creek. Based
on the location of the site, it was suggested that this might be a
seasonal site or a base camp.

209

DE CORDOVA BEND
ExcAVATION PROCEDURE

Excavations were concentrated in the northern artifact exposure
with trenching begun in sterile areas upslope from the exposure
(Fig. 22). A shovel-scrape technique was utilized and collections
were in 20 centimeter levels. In the major area of excavation, the
occupation zone varied from between 20 and 30 centimeters in thickness and corresponded with excavation level 2. Once this was determined, materials from the occupation zone were collected as a
unit. Trenches 1 meter wide and 2, 3, and 5 meters long were used
to explore the extent of the deposit. Fill was screened through quarterinch mesh in areas of artifact concentration. The small size of the
excavation units allows the replacement of artifacts within a limited
horizontal area.
Prehistoric occupation is situated along the edge of a bank which
drops off to the creek bottom. Three hearths mark the locations of
living areas. Cultural materials were recovered from the slope of
the prehistoric bank. A concentration of fresh-water mussel shells
overlay one of the hearths and a trash dump was situated near the
bank edge. The prehistoric occupation was scattered and was not
intense within the excavated areas.
STRATIFICATION

A sterile red clay zone (Fig. 23) underlies the excavated area to an
undetermined depth. It extends from the eastern edge of the site,
just below the plow zone, and slopes down gradually to just west
of the dump where it is about a meter below the surface. The zone
continues in a downward slope for 7 meters at which point the red
clay dips below the level of excavation. A layer of dark brown clay,
ranging from 20 to 30 centimeters in thickness, overlies the red clay.
The dark brown clay is absent on the eastern edge of the site and
is a maximum of 80 centimeters thick in the backhoe trench west
of the major excavated area. This zone contained all cultural mate1ials
recovered and had been disturbed by plowing, thus exposing some
materials on the surface. The dark brown clay zone dips down to
the west as it follows the top of the red clay zone.
Overlying the dark brown zone and west of the occupation area
is an alluvial deposit which ranges up to 3 meters thick. The alluvial
deposit is composed of numerous h01izontally oriented water laid
lenses of brown, and tan clays with a few layers of red and blue clay.
The alluvial deposit extends over the western edge of the living areas
(particularly hearth 3). Cultural materials were recovered within the
black zone where it was exposed in a stratigraphic test square west

210

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

~\

211

DE CORDOVA BEND

w

0

'

~

X41 HD24- AIKEN SITE
East -West

Backhoe Trench Profile

Fig. 2 3. Stratigraphic profile along east-west backhoe trench, Aiken site.

of hearth 3. A 25 centimeter thick plow zone is present over the entire
surface of the site. The zone is a red-brown clay and is devoid of
cultural materials except where plowing has cut into the dark brown
clay zone. This distmbed top soil zone consists primmily of red clay
derived from the underlying red clay zone upslope from the excavated area.
ARCHITECTURE FEATURES
Two limestone hearths and a fire pit mark the locations of three
separate occupation areas (Fig. 22). A concentration of fresh-water
mussel shells was located above one hearth and appeared to be a trash
deposit which post-dated the use of the hearth. A trash dump which
contained over 8,000 mussel shell valves and some 3,500 flint flakes
was located near the western edge of the site.
HEARTH 1 LIVI ' C AREA (Fig. 24, 25)
A basin-shaped arrangement of burned limestone slabs and chunks
was found near the eastern edge of the site. Fragments of limestone
and artifacts were on the occupation surface adjacent to the hearth.
The hearth is circular in plan, basin-shaped in cross-secion and
about 1.15 meters in diameter. Ash staining occms in the center of
the hemih but no charcoal was present. The hearth had been constructed by lining the bottom and edges of a shallow excavated basin
with limestone slabs. The hearth contained 53 limestone chunks,

212

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Frc. 24. Hearth 1 looking westward prior to completion of excavation .

Hearth in the center foreground is surrounded by small clusters of limestone chunks.

left in place when the hearth was abandoned. These ranged from
3.0 to 252.0 grams in weight and averaged 100.5 grams.
On the adjoining dark brown clay surface, numerous concentrations
of limestone chunks, two concentrations of lithic d ebris, several tools
and discarded mussel shells were recovered. The tools, tool debris
and food remains are located on the north and northwest sides of the
hearth. Cultural material is virtually non-existant more than 2.5
meters from the center of the hearth. Tools found on the living surface
include a cohhle hammerstone, a mano, 2 cores and 4 retouched
pieces to the west, a graver to the south, 3 hammerstones to the
southwest and fragments of Stage E bifaces to the north, west and
east. There was not cultural material to the southeast and little to
the east, south or southwest.
Chipping activity appears to have been located on the north side
of the hearth and food remains are scattered in the same area. Based
on the proximity of artifacts, it is suggested that activities associated
with the hearth were conducted in this area. The presence of limestone concentrations and the absence of artifacts south of the hearth
tend to substantiate this suggestion. It is further suggested that at
least two different sets of activities, tool making and food preparation
are represented.

213

DE CORDOVA BEND

~
limilsofexcovotion

~

0

r-

r

0
0

8o

D

o" o

a~
0

ff1

./'"" "___ / .

WI!/;l/"/"/"/If!#I/#;7#I#I

~

W!!/;//!IM!IIM
X4/HD24

AIKEN SITE - HEARTH I

Ostone
e Hammerstone
0

Shell

rOJJ;)Mono
I

M ~ t e rs

~

Direct ion of dip

~

FIG. 2 5. Plan and profile of Hearth 1, Aiken site.

2 LIVIN G AREA
A circular arrangement of limes tone rocks was exposed in a cleared
area of 2 x 5 meters located near the center of the site. The stones
were covered by a thin layer of fresh-water mussel shells which was
concentrated over the stone and to the east.

HEARTH

214

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1 AND LIVING SURF ACE
The east-west backhoe trench sectioned a fire pit and ash concentration which lay on the upper smface of the dark brown clay zone.
These features were overlain by about a meter of the alluvial deposit
which covers the black zone west of the site area.
The fire pit is oval in plan and had b een excavated into the dark
brown clay zone. The pit was not over 10 centimeters deep, 50 centimeters in length and 25 centimeters in width. It contained gray
wood ash. A circular ash concentration was located on the surface
of the dark brown clay 20 centimeters east of the fire pit.
Cultural materials were not found in the fire pit fill or the ashes,
nor were "in situ" materials found on the adjacent surface. Material
from the excavated area include 7 mussel valves, half a deer mandible,
and a fragment of a large mammal long bone.
FIREPIT

(Fig. 26)
A concentration of artifacts was exposed near the western edge of
the excavation, adjacent to where the dark brown clay zone begins
to dip sharply to the west. Artifacts consisted of fresh-water mussel
shell valves, flint flakes , and chips, cores, hammerstones , grinding
tools and unmodified mammal bones.
The concentration covered an area 9 meters east-west by 7 meters
north-south and is lens-shaped in cross-section, about 20 centimeters
thick in the center. Cultural material decreases to the north and south
edges of the excavation as well as downslope (Table 3) to the west
and upslope to the east. The cultural material was situated in the
dark brown clay.
Material in the dump is thought to have been intentionally deposited over a short period of time. Mussel shell and flint debris
were the dominant artifacts and were scattered throughout the deposit. Articulated shells were rare; all shells had been heated. Heating may b e due to cooking or as a means to open the shells. Perforation of the shell and fracturing techniques used to open the shells
in order to get at the meat occur, as well.
It is suggested that actual flint tool making was not carried out
in the area of the dump; rather that the flint debris ( including cores
and bifaces) was gathered from knapping areas and intentionally
discarded here. This is based on the fact that shatter chips and
pressure retouch flakes were not present although flakes and chips
were. A sample of midden soil was screened through quarter inch
hardware cloth and then washed through a fine screen to test for
the presence of the smaller pieces of flint which result during tool

TRASH DUMP

215

DE CORDOVA BEND

making and which would be hard to gather up after they had fallen
to the ground. Parts of a single deer were present in the deposit;
their occunence throughout the deposit suggests that the occupation
lasted no longer than was necessary to gather and consume the foods
at a single period of time; that is, that the site is not a permanent
camp.
The presence of broken grinding tools ( 4 manos, 1 metate) in the

•

D

0

•

FrG. 26. Plan and profile of trash dump, Aiken site.

216

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

deposit suggests that these tools were used elsewhere and discarded
after breakage. In contrast, both broken ( 9) and complete ( 9) dart
points were recovered in the deposit. The broken dart points are
represented by nine bases which are interpreted as evidence of rehafting activity. The presence of 9 complete points rather than 1 or 2
points suggests a patterned occurrence rather than an accidental loss.
Occupation at the Aiken site is situated on the smface of a westerly
dipping clay level adjacent to a steep drop-off of the clay zone. The
removal of fill over a part of the site disclosed the location of 3 separate living areas and a trash dump. It is suggested that the materials
in the dump represent a short-term occupation. This interpretation is
supported by the scanty amount of cultural remains associated with
the 3 living areas and by the transient appearance of the hearths
and firepit. The Aiken site appears to b e an example of a short-term
and repeatedly visited campsite where hunting and mussel gathering
were carried out.
ARTIFACT AssEMBLAGE

The assemblage ( Fig. 27 ) consists of chipped stone debris (cores,
bifaces, flakes, chips), chipped stone tools, pecked and ground stone
tools, fresh-water mussel shells and mammal bones. Provenience is
listed in Table 3.
Chipped stone flakes /chips constitute 39.2% of the assemblage,
cores/bifaces 0.5%, chipped stone tools 0.2%, p ecked and ground tools
0.3%, fresh-water mussel shells 54.5% and animal bone 4.7%. The promi-

MUSSEL SH ELL
54.5%

n

= 14,683
CORES/BI FA CES

0.5%

FIG. 27. Diagram of artifact assemblage composition, Aiken site.

TABLE 3.

ARTIFACT PROVENIENCE, AIKEN SITE (X41HD24)

SURFACE GEN. EXCAV.

HEART I-IS
2
1

TRASH DUMP

DOWNSLOPE

UPSLOPE

TOTAL

t:1
M
(')

FLAKES
Primary
Secondary
Interior
Lipped
CHIPS
Primary
Secondary
Interior
CORES
CORE FRAGS.
BIFACE STAGE
B

c

D
E
F
DART POINTS
Yarbrough
Dar!
Godley
Misc.
ARHOWPOINTS
GRAVERS
RETOUCHED PIECES
HAMMERSTONES
MET ATE
MANO
PITTED STONE
WORKED BONE
BONE
SHELL
TOTAL

0

15
77
37
4

22
157
70
22

20
95
46
18

14
74
33
12

80
521
211
137

1
38
44

13
198
184
3
4

10
222
293
2

5
139
122
1
1

31
1209
1341

----

2
2
2
23
3

1

----

4
1
----

2
2
----------

40
221

7
130

12
2
1
7
4
4
95
44
1
6
1
1
668
8008

338

313

14683

----------

-------

2
1
2
6
---2

3
4
-------------

---223

----

2

1

1
1
----

----

----------

16
203

1
1247

1803

937

1659

9410

----

----

---------7
1
----

---4
4
----

1
----

----

159
975
424
210

22
10

2
56
45

62
1884
2039
18
7

1

2

12
9
---1
------120
970

---2
3

-------

7
30
21
8

11

9
2
1
5
1
4
63
23
1
3
1
1
484
5237

----------

----

1
21
6
9

---1
1

----

---1
----------------

1

:!:1
t:1

0

~
C:l
M

zt:1

5
3
8
32
3

to
,.....
--1

218

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

nence of food remains (shell and bone) is unusual in light of the
archaeological evidences from other sites reported herein. This is
due in part to the situation of the site in a location where bone is
preserved and because of this preservation, it is suggested that the
archaeological remains at the Aiken site better represent the activities
carried out by the prehistoric occupants of the site.
DEBRIS

A total of 5,753 flakes and chips were collected at the site. Flakes
make up about 31% of this number and chips comprise the remainder.
Lipped flakes constitute 3.7% of the assemblage. Secondary debris
(flakes/chips) makes up 49.7% of the assemblage, interior debris
42.8% and primary debris 3.8%. Sixty-two percent of the debris collected is from the trash dump. The percentage of interior flakes / chips
is slightly higher than expected in a tributary stream site and may
be due to the finishing of projectile points.
Eighteen cores and 7 core fragments were collected from the site.
These include 12 multiple or single cortex platform cores, 2 multiple
platform cores having prepared and cortex platforms and 4 single
prepared platform cores. In all instances, the circumference or a
flat surface was used as the initial platform. Flint core weights range
from 45 to 119 and have a mean weight of 83.2 grams. A single
core of chert weighs 219 grams.
The biface sample (Fig. 28) contains 51 specimens of which 9 are
complete, 18 are represented by bases, 18 by tips and 6 by medial
fragments. Stages B-F are represented by the following number of
examples: Stage B-5 ( 9.18%), Stage C-3 ( 5.8%), Stage D-8 ( 15.6%),
Stage E-32 (62.7%) and Stage F-3 (5.8%) . Breakage and unremovable
knots were the two major causes for biface discard. Fragments (Fig.
28 c, e, h) constitute 83% of the bifaces represented and 3% of the
9 complete specimens were broken but have been restored. These 3
are illustrated (Fig. 28 d, f, j ) and represent Stages B, D , and E.
Inability to be thinned is illustrated ( Fig. 28 b, d) and unremovable
knots or prominences of stone are illustrated (Fig. 28 g, i).
(Table 4)
(Fig. 29): Eight complete, and the bases of four broken
projectile points which conform to the description of Yarbrough
( Suhm an d Jelks 1962: 261 ) were recovered. Basal g1inding occurs
on 11 of the specimens and alternative edge beveling is present on 4.
Two size classes are represented ; large and small. The large class is
represented by six complete and two fragmentary projectile points
which have a weight range of 5.4 to 8.1 grams. This group is longer
DAHT POINTS
YARBROUGH

219

DE COHDOVA BEND

c
b

a

e

f

d

0

2
em

g

h

FIG. 28. Aiken site biface sample. a-d, Stage B; e-f, Stage D; g-i, Stage E.

220

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

a

c

b

g

d

e

k

h

n

m

0

s

r

q

p

u

0

2
em .

v

w

X

y

FIG. 29. Aiken site tools. a-d, arrowpoints; e-u, dart points; v-y, gravers.

221

DE CORDOVA BEND

and wider than the second group and tends to have a wider stem.
The second group is shorter in length and narrower in width and
there are 2 complete and 2 broken examples. Weights are 2.8 and 3.0
grams and stem width is 1.1 centimeter. Although the samples are
small, it is suggested that the size differences as noted by weight,
linear dimensions and stem width reflect purposeful selection of two
point sizes, large and small.
DARL: Two specimens (Fig. 29 o, q) conform to this description of
this type ( Suhm and Jelks 1962: 179 ). Steep alternate beveling has
narrowed and twisted the form of the body of one specimen. The
tip was broken by impact and the projectile point was not resharpened. Both specimens have the edges of the base ground smooth.
GODLEY: The base of one point, (Fig. 29 k) conforms to the description of Godley (Jelks 1962: 40). Alternative beveling occurs on both
edges of the body and the right edge of the base is ground smooth.
TABLE 4
Dimensions of Dart Points, Aiken Site
Fig.

29
29
29
29
29

r
t
u
s
p

L
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.8
5.2
4.6

29 I
29 g
29
29
29
29

j
i
e
f

29 0
29 q

3.4
3.3

5.2

29 k
29 Ill
29 n
29 h

4.0
3.9

T
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.6
0.5
0.6
0.5

sw

2.2
2.3
2.5
2.5
2.5
2.1
2.3

w

1.3
1.2
l.l
1.5
1.3
1.4
1.3
1.3

5.4 gr.
6.3
6.7
8.1
7.6
7.0
4.5+
3.4+

I

1.7
1.9
2.1

0.5
0.4
0.5

l.l
l.l
1.2
1.2

2.8
3.0
2.5+
2.5+

l

2.1
1.8

0.6
0.4

l.l
1.2

7.7+
5.4

2.8

0.6

1.4

6.5+

Godley

2.0
2.3
2.5

0.5
0.7
0.6

1.5
1.5
1.3

5.1
6.7
3.8+

X Unidentified

Wt

Type

I
Large
Yarbrough

J

l
I

r

Small
Yarbrough

Darl

OTHER: Two unidentified projectile points (Fig. 29 m, n), three unidentifiable bases (Fig. 29 h) and two tip fragments were collected.
Both of the complete projectile points are little more than a variation
of Yarbrough. The second (Fig. 29 n) is thick (0.7 centimeters) for
its size and appears to be the remains of a larger projectile point

222

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

which was reduced to its present size after breakage.
Seventeen of the 22 dart points are from the trash dump and
these include both bases and finished "perfect" examples. The presence of bases probably represents rehafting of shafts after point
breakage; the complete points may represent a similar activity.
AHROWPOINTS

A finished Scallom point was recovered from the trash dump and
3 preforms, 2 of them Scallorn, were recovered from general excavation. All four specimens are triangular in shape; 3 are corner-notched
and are classified as Scallorn points. The 3 preforms were discarded
or broken prior to pressure retouch of the lateral edges of the body.
Dimensions are given in Table 5.
TABLE 5
Dimensions of Arrowpoints, Aiken site
Fig.
29 a
29 b
29 c
29 d

L
2.5
2.5

w
1.2
1.1
1.4
1.5

T
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.4

sw
0.6
0.7
0.7

Wt
1.0
1.1
1.3+

Type
Scallom
Scallom
Scaliom

(dump)

?

GRAVERS

Three secondary chips and an interior flake, all flint, were made
into gravers. Two of the gravers were made on natural corners
located at the distal end of the respective flakes. Two adjacent notches
defined the 2 mm. long graver on one of these natural corner gravers.
A single pointed graver was retouched on the center of the distal
edge by two notches. The graver point is 1 mm. long. Two graver
points ( 1 and 2 mm. long respectively) were retouched on the left
lateral edge of a secondary chip. The points are 8 mm. apart.
RETOUCHED PIECES

Secondary flakes ( 36) and chips ( 11) , interior flakes ( 25) and
chips ( 12) and lipped flakes ( 11) of various sizes and shapes were
retouched. Most of the retouch is obverse and there was no apparent
location patterning noted. There appears to have been some selection
for lipped flakes to be retouched although secondary debris is the
most commonly used material. This pattern agrees with the pattern
of unaltered debris recovered.
HAMMERSTONES

Flint and quartzite cobbles ( 44) were used for battering; crushing
is evident at various places on the cobbles. The cobble weights

DE CORDOVA BEND

223

range from 77 to 336 grams with a mean w eight of 182 grams. Mean
weight approximates the modal tendency of the hammerstone weights
which are evenly distributed on either side of mode. Therefore, it
is suggested that there is no obvious selection of cobbles for special
purposes which were related to the weight of the tool.
Quartzite cobbles constitute 36% of the sample while the remainder is :Hint cobbles ( 64%) . The cobbles range from circular to rectangular in shape. Approximately 50% of both the flint and qumtzite
cobble hammerstones are represented by broken fragments. The
weight range of quartzite hammerstones is similar to that of flint
hammerstones.
Battering is common at the ends or on pointed prominences on the
cobbles and varies from heavy (resulting in extensive crushing) to
light (a few scattered pecking marks). There is no apparent correlation between amount of crushing and either location on a cobble or
of cobble material.
Based on these data, the hammerstones appear to represent a uniform class within which selection for materials does not seem to
relate to specinc use as reflected by breakage, battering or weight.
METATE

About a quarter of a unifacial basin metate was found in the trash
dump. The metate was made of a sandstone slab, roughly chipped
to an oval plan shape and then pecked to prepare the grinding surface.
The grinding surface was polished from grinding. The cause of breakage is uncertain but may be due to pecking in order to prepare
the grinding surface. This is seen in pecking marks on the g1inding
surface which have not been ground down.
(Fig. 30 b-d)
Six specimens, made of sandstone, are represented by one complete
mano ( ll.8 x 7.7 x 2.1 centimeter), parts of 3 rectangular manos
and spalls from the grinding surface of two other manos. Grinding
wear patterns suggest back and forth grinding; all but the complete
specimen are unifacially ground. They are roughly rectangular in
plan and are rectangular in transverse cross-section. Width measurements range from 8.0 to 5.0 centimeters and thickness from 2.1 to 4.0.
The complete specimen is from the dump.
MANOS

(Fig. 30 a)
A flat oval quartzite cobble has a circular depression pecked in
the center of each face. Only half of the cobble is present and is
broken across the short axis of the cobble through the middle of the

PITTED STONE

224

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

a
b
0

2
em .

c

d

Frc. 30. Aiken site ground stone tools. a, pitted stone; b-d, manos.

two depressions. The depressions were about 2.0 and 2.5 centimeters
in diameter and 0.2 and 0.3 centimeters deep respectively and are
off center. Pecking is concentrated at three spots on the distal circumference and a blow on the lateral edge of the cobble caused
the breakage. The cobble is 2.5 centimeters thick, 5.3 centimeters
wide and 5.5 centimeters long.

DE CORDOVA BEND

225

( Fig. 31)
Shells range in size from 15 to 65 mm. and 78% of the measurable
specimens ( 13% of total sample) fall within the 26 to 45 mm. size
range; 16% are b etween 15-25 mm. and 6% are b etween 46-65 mm. in
size. The measurement is computed as a line drawn p erpendicular
to the hinge. Based on the number of hinges present, 51% of the
shells are right valves, the remainder are left valves. Eighty-eight
p ercent of the shells are unaltered or were too fragm entary to determine any mechanical alteration. Alteration was evidenced by
p erforation ( 2%) and fracturing ( 10%). These two forms of modification served as ways in which shells were opened. Performations
were always from the outside and were circular holes ranging from
1 to 5 mm. in diameter. The perforation tool is uncertain. Facturing
was done by breaking or crushing the thin wall of the valve near
the hinge. Fractures and perforations of the right valve were always
on the left half of the valve adjacent to the hinge and just the opposite for left valves. It is suggested that the purpose of this modification
was to enable the Indian to expose the hinge mussel in order to cut it.
Mussels are available in the Brazos River at any time during a
year ( Cheatum, p.c.) and are not useful for seasonal specification
based either on availability or upon maturation as noted by shell size.

FRESH-WATER MUSSEL SHELLS

ANIMAL BONE

Bone was well preserved at the Aiken site and over 72% of the
bone was recovered from the dump area. The numbers listed in
Table 3 under bone represent pieces of bone, many of which were
unidentifiable medial fragm ents of large mammal long bones are
the most common class of bone. Analysis of the complete bones shows
that the bones attributed to large mammals are those of white tail
deer ( Odocoileus virginianus) and that the only other identifiable
animals include one raccoon ( Procyon lot or), a box turtle ( T errapene) and a fish.
The proximal section of a deer(? ) metatarsal has grinding on the
postelior side of the bone. Grinding runs parallel to the bone and
has removed about half of the bone; thus resulting in a V-shaped
cross-section. This may have been an awl but the fragmentary condition does not allow the application of a formal descriptive name.
The artifact sample from the Aiken site is composed of 2 large
artifact groups plus other smaller classes. Faunal remains, fresh-water
mussel shell and mammal bone is the largest artifact group. Preserved bone allows the recognition of the kinds of animals hunted ;

226

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

0

b

c
d

e

Q_ --~~2~~3--~4--~5
C IA .

h

Fig. 31. Aiken site mussel shells. a, c, e, g, left valves; b, d, f, h, right
valves; a-b, e-f, limited edge fracturing of large and small shells; c-d, fracturing from the umbo and around the periphery; g-h, perforation of the
shell wall adjacent to the umbo.

227

DE CORDOVA BEND

such material is generally not preserved in sites at De Cordova Bend.
Tool making is the other activity represented in the collection. This
activity included the collection of raw materials, reduction of cores
to useable bifaces and the preparation of new tools to replace those
broken during hunting.
The time range A.D. 500-1000 includes the estimated dates for
the named projectile points found. Darl is dated A.D. 1-1000 and
Scallorn is dated A.D. 500-1200 ( Suhm and Jelks 1962). Godley is
attiibuted to the Austin Focus which is dated at the same time
period (Jelks 1962: 98). Based on the association of dart points
and a Scallorn point in the trash dump, it is suggested that this
occupation was during the early part of this time period.
SUMMARY

Excavation of a part of the Aiken site exposed 3 spatially separated
living areas and a trash dump, all of which were located near the
bank of a creek drainage. This location on a clay base zone allowed
for the preservation of animal bone which had been left by the
prehistoric occupants. Moreover, the thin layer of the occupational
zone allowed the isolation of activity areas within the area of excavation.
Hearth 1 represents the best example of a living area. Adjacent to
the hearth are two lithic concentrations where flint was being worked;
a few other tools and several mussel shells were found in the same
area. Activities were concentrated on the north side of the hearth
and the total area of occupation, based on tool scatter, is less than
20 square meters. Smaller use areas are suggested for the other 2
living areas. Based on the area size and amount of materials associated
in them, it is suggested that they represent short-tenn occupations.
Each hearth probably represents separate occupations, possibly revisits.
ZWEIFEL SITE (X41HD39)
INTRODUGriON

The Zweifel site is situated in the tributary stream microenvironment on a westerly sloping surface covered with scattered grass,
juniper and oak (Fig. 32). The limestone slope and bluff occur to
the north and west and Eden Branch is located a quarter of a mile
downslope to the east. Surface evidence consisted of a localized
scattering of chipped stone debris covering an overall area of fifty
meters (N-S) by thirty meters (E-W) and recognizably concentrated
in an area approximately twenty meters in diameter. The artifact

228

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

meters

X4/HD39

ZWEIFEL

SITE

FIG. 32. Plan map of Zweifel site.

assemblage included hammerstones, flint deb1is , and a large number
of cores and bifaces. The percentage of primary ( 8.1%) and secondary
( 75.0%) flakes is higher than similar categories at the Bluebonnet
site ( X41HD26), a nearby site located within the same microenvironment. At the conclusion of the survey it was suggested that the
Zweifel site was a chipping station. The situation of a chipping station
in this zone does not conform to the general location of such sites.
Therefore, excavation was conducted to determine the activities
represented at the site and to provide data for comparison with
other sites.
ExcAVATION

A north-south oriented grid system was imposed on the surface
of the site. A two meter square was the unit of excavation, except for
squares 11 and 25. The deposit was excavated in twenty centimeter
levels and all fill was screened through quarter-inch mesh to allow
the recovery of a large artifact sample.
Excavation revealed that the deposit extended to a maximum depth
of twenty centimeters, generally not deeper than ten centimeters.
Architectural features were not found. The cultural deposit was too
shallow and uniform to allow for the separation of artifacts by recog-

229

DE CORDOVA BEND

nizable vertical levels. Due to the lack of vertical stratigraphy, the
occupation ( s) represented had to b e horizontally separated in order
to determine the area ( s ) and period ( s) of occupation. Horizontal
separation required the recognition and isolation of varying tool kits
(functional or temporal) or artifact assemblages on the basis of
morphological and/or technological characteristics.
SITE ARRANGEMENT

Evidence of the prehistoric occupation at the Zweifel site consists
solely of stone artifacts concentrated in an area about 100 meters
square. The north, east and southern edges of the area have b een

28

71

58

63

117

237

70

146

41

55

46

43'0

148

76

CJ

65

167

164

242

0

68

0 1 08
29

19

10

7

a.

[]

181
324

40
21

150

0 206

87
9

280

10

FLAKES

b.

26

90

14

7

30

20

CHIPS

II

D

D

• FLAKE

x BIFACE

c. BIFACES, ·-~1 PPED FLAKES

d.

CORES

FrG. 3 3. Horizontal distribution of lithic debris . a, flake distribution; b, chip
distribution; c, biface-lipped flake distribution; d, core distribution.

230

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

X4/HD39

SITE

ZWEIFEL
0

2
meters

FIG.

()

SCRAPER

-v-

NOTCH I DENTICULATE

b..

POINT

0

HAMMERSTONE

1\

GRAVER

X

RETOUCHED

•

CHOPPER

D

~

PIECE

OVER 200 PIECES OF DEBRIS
UNEXCAVATED

34. Horizontal distribution of tools and lithic debris.

defined and the western limits are uncertain. The horizontal distribution of lithic debris is plotted in Figures 33 and 34. As indicated
in the figures , two overlapping concentrations of lithic materials are
outlined, one centered in squares 22 and 33 and the second centered
in square 4. Cores (Fig. 33 d) cluster in the center of the north
concentration (squares 13, 22, 33) and otherwise are scattered through
out the excavated area. Bifaces (Fig. 33 c) cluster in two areas
(squares 16, 31, 22 and squares 14, 9, 4) ) which do not exactly
correspond to areas of lipped flakes (squares 28, 31, 33 on the north
and square 3 on the south). Tools cluster (Fig. 34) near the northern
edge of the site (squares 8, 28, 33) in the vicinity of the core con-

DE CORDOVA BEND

231

centration and otherwise are scattered about in the deposit. On the
basis of the horizontal distribution, two areas of intense activity are
outlined; the northern one represents either more activity at one
time or through time than the southern one. Based on the absence
of hearths and other domestic remains, it is suggested that the site
was occupied primarily for the purpose of cobble cortex removal
as indicated by the high percentage of primary and secondary flakes
and the numbers of cores, of initially trimmed and discarded bifaces,
and the small number of tools. The intensity of occupation as measured by the size of the work group ( s) and the length of occupation
periods was not determined by excavation.
ARTIF Acr AssEMBLAGE
The assemblage consists entirely of stone artifacts. Provenience is
listed in Table 6. Tools make up less than one percent of the assemblage while cores and bifaces comprise about four percent. Unutilized
flakes and chips constitute the remainder and dominant part of the
artifact assemblage. It is suggested that the assemblage composition
which is dominated by cortex flakes and chips is indicative of preparation of roughly shaped bifaces. Moreover, the composition of the
assemblage is representative of the importance of this activity at
the site.
DEBRIS
A total of 5,110 flakes and chips of flint were collected at the site
(Fig. 35). Flakes make up 28% of this number and chips comprise
the remainder. Four percent of the flake category are lipped flakes
of which one percent is secondary and the remainder, interior flakes.
All other flakes are hard hammer percussion flakes. Approximately 2%
of the debris is burned. Burning appears to have occurred after the
flakes "vere detached from a core; the scattered occurrence throughout
the deposit shows that these materials are not localized in any area.
Two hundred and seven cores and bifaces were recovered. Cores
are the first attempt at the reduction of cobbles for the production
of core based bifacial tools. Cores and biface stages A and B represent the first steps of cobble reduction in which a hard hammer
percussion technique is used to remove the cobble cortex and these
steps are well represented. A decreasing number of Stage C-F specimens occur. The smaller number might be due to the removal of
completely trimmed bifaces or roughly trimmed bifaces for completion elsewhere.
On the basis of flake category composition (see Fig. 35), the

0

TABLE 6.

.,

FLAKES
p s
I
L

Surface
Square

16 50
1 2 6
2 7 9
3 5 19
4 17 44
2 4
5
6 8 16
7 ---1
1
8 ---9 10 26
10
1 10
11 14 63
12 ---1
13 12 46
14 12 26
15
5
16 14 24
17
1
18
2 4

to
w
to

DISTRIBUTION OF ARTIFACTS AT THE ZWEIFEL SITE (X41HD39).

9 ---2
3 ---5 4
26
2
3 ---3 ----------

10
1
44

2
----

2

----

12
17
20
1
1

3
2
----

p

"'i:l:;~

CI-IIPS

s

I

7 38 22
2
16
2
2 24
4
31
5 54
7 204 113
29
3
---1 48
21
1
---- ---1
---3 115 63
2 35
34
2 237 156
3
2
---144 62
29
8 31
3
11
1
1 147 89
3
7
----

lJ

BIF ACE STAGES
A
B
D
E

42

8

0

c

9
----

1
2
2
2
3

----

----

----

---2

4
----

----

----

~

5

1

----

----

----

----

----

1

----

----

----

-------

----

----

------1

----

----

-------

----

----

----

----

----

----

1
1

1
------1

----

----

----

-------

11
2
1
2

----

3

----

2

----

-------

----

----

1

-------

1

----

----

----

----

----

1
----

1

----

----

----

----

----

"" ~"""

"'
(j

----

----

1

-~

----------

----

----

~
~

1
----

----------------

1

"'
-~ ""S~
1:: .2

.,...
"'
..."'

----

----

----

"0

----

----

----

1

...."'"'a

...:::

~

~

----

----

.,

"'"'

---1

----

2

----

2

.,...
""
..."'

...."'

----------

Q

----

-------

----

----

-------------

----

1

-------

----

----

---1
1
1
----

"'

~
~

a
...:::
lJ

---------1
----

----

----

"'
·a..."'
"""
----------

----

----

---1
----

----

----

1

2
----

----

----

----

"'
~
::t::"'

----

----

----

----

"'
:::

....a"'

-------

-------------------

-------

"'
:;:;

~

----

----

----

...

----

----

----------

----

----

----

----

----

----

----

----

----

----

----

T.

215
31
50
126
419
43
102
2
2
234
83
524
6
289
132
22
304
5
14

;l

:-:
>
>
:0

Vl

('}

:r:M

0
t-<
0

C'l

H

('}

>
t-<
Vl

0

('}

H

M

"'
~

t:j

I9
20
2I
22
23
Square

TOTALS:

5 20 I6 ---1 2 ------4 I2 5 I
14 75 28
3
4 17 14 5

24 8 20
25 18 39
26
3 2
27
1 7
28 IO 41
29
2
30
3
31 13 27
32 3 25
33 30 82
34 8 7
35 4 4
36
1 3
37
1
38 10 15
39 8 25

9
2
4
3
2

15
I 13
19 8 17
1 ---2
1
20 I4 11
1
23
5
36
7
2
1
1
3
7

266 784 364

5
---8
-------

-------

48
5
I4
I 55
87

9I
80
5
24
72
7
1
4
3 90
22
---9 150
6
62
2
5
5
---5
6
40
4 68

26
3
8
84
51
41
53
7
11

84
3
----

71

13
I21
39
4
2
3
I9
36

3

----

----

----

----

----

----

6

I
2

I

----

----

1
I
I

IS
I
1
11

3
I
2
3
2
2
8

1
1

I

---------1
----

---1
----------

----

I

----

----

1

----

----

----

----

----

I

----

1
1

----

4
1

-------

----

----

6

2

2

60 I35 2178 1323 142

----

----------------

----

-------

21

I3

I

----

----

----

----

---------I

1

----

----

----------

-------

----

----

----

----

----

----

---1

----

----

----------

1

----

8

6

----

2
---------------3

----

-------

---------1
2
---------1

-------

----

----

1

----

----

----

-------

----

----

----

---1

----

---------I

1

15

2

----

----

----

----

1

----

-------

1
----------

-------

----

7

----

I28
I3
56
383
I83

ttl
(")

0

:ct:j

0

<

>
IJj

ttl

---1

----

1
------1

----

----

----

----------------

----

----

----

----

----

----

----

-------

1

---------1

---17

----

----

-------

---1

-------

----

1

----

2

19I
249
23
47
257
14
I2
237
72
448
131
26
13
IO
103
I 52

zt:j

3 5351

t3
w

234

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

PRIMARY

FLAKES

TOOLS

0.6

°/"------

CORES I BIFACES
LIPPED

FLAKES

n = 5351.

INTERIOR

FLAKES

6.8

Fig. 3 5. Diagram of artifact assemblage composition, Zweifel site.

predominance of cortex Hakes (primary and secondary) and the
small amount of lipped Hakes which derive from biface thinning, it
is suggested that few bifaces were completely thinned at the Zweifel
site. Rather, roughly trimmed bifaces were prepared and then removed to some other location for £nal completion.
NOTCHES

Notches (7) and denticulates ( l) make up the largest tool class.
The denticulate and four notches were made on secondary Hakes
by obverse retouch on one side of the flake. The notch on the other
three specimens was created by a single hard blow to the edge of
the flake. One of the single blow notches is on a primary Hake; the
other two are on secondary Hakes. Notches fall into two weight
classes; heavy (includes weights 50.5 and 67.5 grams) and light
(weights 4.0, 4.8, 5.5, 7.0 and 15.5 grams).
SCRAPERS

The scraper category consists of three specimens. The £rst is an
end and side scraper on an interior Hake (Fig. 36 b) from square 4.
A sinuous scraper on a secondary Hake (Fig. 36 f) is from square 33.
Obverse retouch is steep along the left edge of the Hake; the Hake
was shaped prior to removal from a core. A side scraper on a twisted
secondary Hake (Fig. 36 a) is from squares 33 and 25. The distal
end is broken off. The bulb of percussion was retouched off the
ventral surface and there is additional inverse retouch on the distal

235

DE CORDOVA BEND

half of the right edge. Obverse retouch occurs along the right and
left edges of the flake.
GRAVERS

Two gravers are made on secondary flakes by retouching a naturally
pointed corner.
CHOPPER

The chopper (Fig 36 g) is on a flint cobble which weighs 173.0

c

d

b

a
2

0
em

e

g

h

Fig. 36. Zweifel site tools. a, side-scraper; b, end and side-scraper; c-d, fragmentary projectiles; e, denticulate; f, side-scraper; g, chopper; h-i, notches.

236

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

grams. Half of the cobble perimeter has been roughly bifacially
Raked and a sinuous edge resulted. Battering on this prepared edge
resulted in the removal of small chips from both faces and the subsequent dulling of the edge.
PROJECTILE POINTS

Parts of two points made on Rint Rakes were recovered from squares
22 and 25. The first (Fig. 36 c) has been roughly shaped to the
barbed, parallel convex based shape, but was not retouched due to
breakage. The second point is represented by the tip of a previously
completed point.
RETOUCHED PIECES

Flakes ( 12) and chips ( 3) were intentionally retouched. Two are
primary and two are interior Rakes; the remainder are secondary
Rakes and chips. Obverse retouch is located laterally and distally
on the retouched pieces. Specimens fall into two categories; heavy
( 5.0 to 24.5 grams) and light ( 1.5 to 3.5 grams).
HAMMERSTONES

Two quartzite hammerstones have battering localized at the narrow
end of the oval shaped cobbles. The larger specimen ( 539 grams)
was discarded after a Rake broke off the pecked end. A quartzite
Rake represents the third specimen. The Rake was removed or broke
off after battering rendered the striking area too broad for directed
blows.
The sample of tools from the Zweifel site is small and there are
no localized clusters of any particular tool or of a tool kit within
any single square. Notches, retouched pieces and scrapers are located
in adjacent squares (see Fig. 34) within the excavated area and
may constitute a tool kit used at this site for the collection and
preparation of wooden shafts or handles. The absence of larger numbers of hammerstones seems surprising with regards to the primary
activity, cobble reduction, represented at the site.
The two points are typologically dated to the period A.D. 1 to 1200
( Suhm and Jelks 1962: 263) and the end and side scraper is typologically late in the prehistoric sequence. These specimens are located
in adjacent squares 22, 33 and 25 and are attributed to an occupation
in the northern part of the site. On a technological basis, these materials are made on Rakes while the lithic debris from the site is aimed
at the production of core tools rather than Rake tools. These two
technologies reflect different periods of occupation or contemporaneous occupation for different purposes.

237

DE CORDOVA BEND
SUMMARY

Excavation of the Zweifel site has provided information on the activity at the site, the localization of this activity within the site and
on the utilization of the site by peoples with two technologically distinct ways of working stone.
Roughing out of flint cobbles to make crude bifaces was the primary
activity carried out at the site. Cobbles were not quarried at this
location as unmodified materials are not present, therefore, the materials present were gathered elsewhere for further modification.
Another activity at the site may have been the collection and
preparation of wooden shafts as inferred from the scraper-notchretouched piece tool kit. As these tools cluster within the limits of
the excavated area, it is suggested that this activity was carried out
concomitant with cobble reduction.
As mentioned earlier, the typologically late points and scrapers
are technologically distinct from the remainder of the deposit. These
materials are located at the same spot as the largest amount of lithic
debris and may represent a brief utilization of previously discarded
materials. This is further substantiated by the broken but uncompleted
point and the broken and discarded point tip.
The horizontal extent of the cultural deposit was delimited on the
north, east and south sides and is absent just to the west of the
excavated area. Thus, the deposit covers an area of not more than
500 square meters. Two occupation areas were distinguished within
this area on the basis of the location of lithic debris. The areas are
not spatially or technologically separated and therefore it cannot
be determined whether they were used contemporaneously. If they
were contemporaneous, it would be suggested that the work group
consisted of two people who were carrying out the same activity in
adjacent areas. There may also be other smaller but overlapping
concentrations within the excavated area which were not isolated.
Based on the limited area and the num her of discarded cores and
bifaces, it is suggested that the site may have been repeatedly revisited.
PIRATE SITE ( X41HD36, 54)
INTRODUCTION

The Pirate site is situated in the limestone bluff microenvironment
on the east side of the Brazos River less than half a mile north of
Eden Branch (Fig. 4). The bluff drops off gradually to the south
and east and rises to the north. A steep slope on the western edge
of the site drops off to the river some 90 feet below. The surface

238

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of the limestone is covered with a shallow layer of soil, held in place
by scattered clumps of grass located in the open areas between the
dense juniper cover.
Clusters of chipped stone debris were scattered over the bluff
in areas which ranged in size from about 10 to 70 square meters in
area. A selected sample of artifacts was collected from four of the
clusters (A, B, C, H) prior to excavation. The samples from Areas
A, B, and C were collected as single units which were assumed to
be representative of the activity in the area. Area H ( X41HD54) however, was collected as two separate areas (east and west) as there
appeared to be two clusters represented. Collections were not made
from Areas D-G as they appeared to be smaller and the collection
of surface materials might have destroyed the associational patterns
present. The artifact assemblage from the site included hammerstones, flint debris, unfinished bifaces and chipped stone tools. A
sandstone mano and fresh water mussel shells were also collected
from Area C.
Due to the presence of recognizable concentrations of chipped
stone debris, absence of downslope erosion and the equal exposure
of the surface of the bluff, it was assumed that these clusters represented essentially undisturbed areas of prehistoric activity. Based
on the survey, it was suggested that the Pirate site was a chipping
station typical of this class of sites. Therefore, excavation was carried out to determine the formal arrangement of the site and activities
conducted therein. In addition, excavation would provide data for
intersite comparison.
ExcAVATION PROCEDURE

A north-south base line was established along the eastern edge
of the site and excavation units of 2 x 2, 2 x 3 and 3 x 3 meters were
imposed upon the surface of the concentrations depending upon the
size, exposure and access to the areas. Surface material was collected
from within each square and the fill was screened through quarterinch mesh. Depth of fill ranged from zero to a maximum of twenty
centimeters and this was excavated as a single level. Architectural
features were not found. The varying sizes of excavation units makes
square to square comparison of artifact density difficult. Consequently,
the artifact concentration, which is composed of two or more excavation squares, is used as the unit for intra-site comparison. These
units are described below as Areas A to H. The total excavated area
is 303 square meters distributed as follows:

239

DE CORDOVA BEND

Area
Area
Area
Area

A = 51
B = 36
C = 68
D = 12

square
square
square
square

meters
meters
meters
meters

Area
Area
Area
Area

E = 12
F = 40
G = 20
H = 64

square
square
square
square

meters
meters
meters
meters

In addition to the horizontal distribution of debris, the size of a
concentration and the number of tool classes collected therein were
expected to yield information on the type and intensity of activity
carried on within any single concentration. The concentrations are
described individually below and are compared on the basis of the
total pattern of each concentration.
ExcAVATION UNITS

Area A covers an excavated area 51 meters square (Fig. 37) and
was one of the three areas collected from during the survey, at that
time, 342 pieces of lithic debris, 30 cores, 19 hammerstones, 8 bifaces,
7 notches , 3 gravers, 45 retouched pieces, and 3 scrapers were collected. The horizontal distribution of excavated lithic debris, cores
and bifaces is plotted in Fig. 38 a and the tool distribution is illustrated in Fig. 38 b.
The major clustering of artifacts including flake debris, cores, hifaces and tools is in the northwest quarter of the excavated area.
Notches, the most common tool type, are scattered throughout the
deposit.
The horizontal distribution of lithic debris and tools for Area B
is plotted in Figures 39 a, b. Survey collections from the area include
443 pieces of flake debris, 26 cores, 16 bifaces, 23 notches , 5 gravers,
2 scrapers, 114 retouched pieces and 1 hammerstone.
One major cluster of tools is located in the southern two-thirds of
the excavated area; this generally coincides with the concentration
of lithic debris including cores and bifaces. Notches and gravers
occur together in the same squares although notches are more frequent. On the basis of the horizontal distribution of artifacts, one
primary activity area is suggested.
Area C is located on the southern edge of this site on a relatively
level shelf of the bluff about 3.5 meters below the level of Areas
A and B. The initial survey collection includes 149 pieces of debris,
80 retouched pieces, 50 cores, 8 bifaces, 9 hammerstones, 8 gravers,
7 notches, 2 dart points, 1 arrowpoint preform, 1 mano and shells
from 3 fresh water mussels.
The horizontal distribution of artifacts (Fig. 40 a, b) shows that
tools and cores/bifaces do not cluster in the same area as the largest

240

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Em
50 em

contour

AREA F

~o~~REA ~G

X 41 HD36

interval

PIRATE
0

SITE
8

meters

FrG. 37. Overall plan map of the Pirate site. Outlined areas are excavation
units which denote concentrations of flint debris prior to excavation.

amount of chipped stone debris. The excavated area covers 86 square
meters but the amount of lithic debris is more widely scattered and
not as abundant as in Areas A and B. In contrast, the number of

241

DE CORDOVA BEND

• 208

• 219

• 86

X X X

X X X X

1\

DO

* 2/

:«24

• 148

•133

*"

DODD

* /5

*5

• 104

• 162
X

* •9

*(j

a.

X

= cORE

1\ =

0

= 81 FACE

-v = NOTCH

*

=

RETOUCHED
PI ECES

~ =

•

=

Ll THIC .
0 EBRIS

~=

GRAVER

ARROW
PREFORM

125+
DEBRIS

b.

AREA A

FIG. 3 8. Area A, horizontal distribution of lithic debris and tools.

•17

•66

X

*4

*'
•221
X

1\

• 59

X
X

X

DO

X

*'4
•141
X

-¥14

•

•154

0

X

X

x·

DO

'<dO

*'4
a.

-...r

=

•

HAMMERSTONE

1\

GRAVER

'V'

NOTCH

!::::.

ARROW POINT

BIFACE

X

*

-v-

LITHIC
DEBRIS

CORE

=

RETOUCHED
PIECES

AREA B

0= 125

+

DEBRIS

b.

Fig. 39. Area B, horizontal distribution of lithic debris and tools.

cores is greater than in either of these two areas. Notches are the
most common tool form and are foun d scattered throughout the
deposit. Although chipping activity in the area was not as intense
as in Areas A and B, it was more evenly spread and it is suggested
that activity here was more continuous and involved other activities,
food preparation or consumption, than in Areas A and B.
Area D is located near the center of the site and covers an area

242

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

• 23

• 70

• 42

A

-v-v-

0

=

=

CORE

-v-

=
=
=
=

NOTCH

1\

•

~

*' ~~~~

'* 10

-v-

-v-

*4

BIFACE

X

•68

-v-

"

*3

*4

~-~~~
D,

• 56

I'D

• 91

• 88

XXX
D

0

0

-v-

-v-

*7

X

-v-

X

•

•

RETOUCHED
LITHIC

*'

• 60

/\0/\
-v-

'*-2

*4
. .. 33
X
-v-

AREA c

PIECES

"

-v-

*6
• 10

D

X

•

0

-v-

ARROW PREFORM

~= 125+ DEBRIS

*• ==

• 6

X

*3
• 34

HAMMERSTONE

• 61

0
-v-

':;,34

GRAVER

D

~-v-\

*3

DEBRIS

FIG. 40. Area C, horizontal distribution of lithic debris and tools.

of 12 square meters. Surface materials were not collected from the
area prior to excavation.
This excavated area is a single concentration (Fig. 41 a, b) which
has a larger amount of flint debris, including flakes, chips, cores and
bifaces, as well as a higher number of notches.
Area E is located west of Area D and is of an identical size. Surface
materials were not collected here and excavated artifacts (Fig. 42 a,
b) are representative of the localized activity.
Area E varies from Area D in having fewer bifaces and cores

• 361
X X X X
X X X X
X X X X
X 0 X

•

_ LITHIC
- DEBRIS

X

= CORE
= a!FACE

0

*

*16

DART POINT

4

ARROW

/::,.

ARROW POINT

PREFORM

1\

GRAVE R

DOD

-v-

NOTCH

0

~=

125+ DEBRIS

• 312

_ :RETOUCHED
-PIECES

0

0

*18

a.

b.
AREA D

Fig. 41. Area D, horizontal distribution of lithic debris and tools.

243

DE CORDOVA BEND

LITHIC

X

CORE

0

BIFACE

...

DEBRIS

•333
X

X

0

RETOUCHED
PIECES

*
•

•377
X XX
X
X

1\

0

*25

ARROW PREFORM
GRAVER
HAMMERSTONE

-..r = NOTCH

*21

~~=

a.

125+ DEBRIS

b.

AREA E

FIG. 42. Area E, horizontal distribution of lithic debris and tools.

present but has about the same number of flakes. Gravers and notches
are also present within both squares.
Area F is located adjacent to the bluff edge in the north west
corner of the site. The area covers 40 square meters and upon initial
inspection, appeared as a distinct cluster with a few artifacts observed
on the surface and in the thin soil cover.
The numbers and distribution (Fig. 43 a, b) of lithic debris provide
no delineation of a concentration except for the obvious increase in
materials to the south. This may represent a disturbed deposit or
may be at the edge of a concentration that is located to the south.
There was, however, no evidence of this, rather the excavation area
appears to be the main area of the deposit.
Area G covers 20 square meters and is located at the northern
limits of the site. The concentration appeared to be small but distinct
on the surface and materials had not been disturbed by previous
collecting.
Lithic debris is uniformly distributed (Fig. 44 a, b) throughout
Area G and the distribution of cores is of little aid in isolating an
area of intense activity. A single notch and 8 retouched pieces likewise are scattered and based on the evidence, it is suggested that
little knapping went on within the excavated area.
Area H ( X41HD54) covers an excavated area 64 meters square
....-:--AREA

F

•

*2
2

D

7

I

D

0

LITHIC

*'
II

15

18

*4
32

4

20
X

X

D

D
*5

a.

0
*4

DEBRIS

BIFACE

D

..

RETOUCHED

1\

GRAVER

•

-v-

1\

CORE

X

•

PIECES

HAMMERSTONE

=

NOTCH

-v-

b.

FIG. 43. Area F, horizontal distribution of lithic debris and tools.

•

244

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGI CAL SOCIETY

•25
*.2

• =

•31
X

=
=

X

D

•29

LITHIC
DEBRIS

-v- = NOTCH
-v-

RETOUCHED

*

CORE

P I ECES

81 FACE

X

*2

• 41

•8

0

D

X

>~<3

*I

a.

b.
AREA G
FIG. 44. Area G, horizontal distribution of lithic debris and tools.

(Fig. 45 ) and surface collections were made in two units. The west
area includes squares 12-15, the eastern area includes squares 1-9;
cultural material was not exposed in the area of squares 10 and 11.
This area is located at the southeastern corner of the Pirate site and
at about the same level as Area C. The survey collection from the
eastern area included 82 pieces of debris, 7 cores, 9 bifaces, 1 graver,
4

•12

AREA H

5

•41
X

~·141 .\
:-

•9

,"•172"
X

D

iff
15

•100

X '\

*'

•195

XX XXX

~~~ ·~*3"'~ ~:"~~~
13

1\

0

/\

12

•

~

*

0

•33

0

II

=

-D'

X X X· X X

...,

2

•59

DODO

'V/>2."'

•320 "

f:,.

£,

X.

D

D

•112

\. •259 ,

X :':

\ *-; ~

6

9

10

D

X

-v14

3

•39

X

X

-v-

*2
•68

•43

D
-v-

*.2
8

liTHIC DEBRIS
RETOUCHED PIECES

7

X

X

0

D

-.r

I

*'

*

1\

ARROW PREFORM
GRAVER
HAMMERSTONE

X

CORE

e

0

BIFACE

~=

i25 + DEBRIS

-v-

NOTCH

n--n:

D

DR.ILL

BROKEN
SCRAPER

16

FIG. 4 5. Area H, horizon tal distribution of lithic debris and tools.

245

DE CORDOVA BEND

1 retouched piece and 1 hammerstone; the collection from the west
included 60 pieces of debris, 2 cores, 2 bifaces, 1 dart point and 1
arrowpoint tip.
The horizontal distribution (Fig. 45) of tools (points, scrapers,
notches, retouched pieces, hammerstones, etc.) shows that tools cluster in squares 9, ll-14 which corresponds to the area which contains
the main concentration of lithic debris . Cores and bifaces occur
predominantly in this area although there is a distinct concentration
in square 6 with other materials in peripheral squares 1-5. Based on
the survey and excavated samples, it is suggested that one area of
flint working is represented as a concentration in the area of squares
9, ll and 12, and that the materials collected from the east area and
the core-biface cluster in square 6 represent materials discarded
beyond or at the edge of the primary knapping area.
Eight concentrations of lithic debris and tools mark the locations
of separate activity areas within the limits of the Pirate site. Based
on the number and high percentage of primary and secondary cortex
flakes , of initially trimmed and discarded cores and bifaces, the few
tools and general absence of domestic tools, it is suggested that the
site was occupietl primarily for the purpose of removing cortex from
cobbles and th e preparation of roughly trimmed bifaces. The relative
importance of this basic activity can be inferred from Figure 46 which
shows where lithic debris is concentrated and the amounts present.
The ratio of amount to area provides a measurement of this intensity.
Areas F and G are not included within the high intensity area, although flint knapping was done there. Area C is an anomaly in that
lithic debris occurs over the entire area but is concentrated only
in one square. This apparent anomaly may be due to the fact that
additional activities food preparation and comsumption (as indicated
by mussel shells and a mano), are represented in Area C. Notches,
gravers and retouched pieces occur together in almost every area
and in similar ratios, although varying numbers. They increase in
numbers with an increase in amounts of debris. It is suggested
that they represent a tool kit used in the collection or preparation of
wooden shafts and that this activity is associated with cobble cortex
removal at the same time and place.
ARTIFACT AssEMBLAGE

Stone artifacts comprise over 99.9% of the assemblage; artifact
provenience is listed by excavation area in Table 7. The relative

246

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

proportion of assemblage from each of the areas is shown in Figure
47. Areas A, B, C and H constitute relatively equal amounts and
contribute well over three fourths of the artifact sample. Areas D and

0

700

~

700

~

61

r

~
1000

1500

D
Areas of 125 +Pieces
of Debris

PIRATE

SITE

Fig. 46. Plan map showing excavated squares which contain more than
125 pieces of debris. N umber indicates amount of lithic debris rounded
to neares t hundred.

ti
1:'1

TABLE 7. ARTIFACT PROVENIENCE, PIRATE SITE (X41HD36,54).

(')

0

EXCAVATION AREAS

FLAKES
Primary
Secondary
Interior
Lipped
CHIPS
Primary
Secondary
Interior
CORES
CORE FRAGS.
BIFACE STAGE
A
B

c

D
E
DART POINTS
ARROW PREFORMS
ARROW POINTS
SCRAPERS
NOTCHES
GRAVERS
DRILLS
RETOUCHED PIECES
HAMMERSTONES
MANOS
SHELL
TOTAL

~

A

B

c

D

E

F

G

H

59
391
133
5

63
322
92
7

77
372
90
12

18
142
45
4

28
126
64
4

7
22
7
1

4
49
10
2

159
254
84
40

415
1678
525
75

28
504
282
23
19

47
383
185
22
15

24
429
238
32
26

5
291
168
4
9

5
300
179
3
5

15
42
16
2
1

l

47
18

97
615
527
30
10

222
2611
1613
116
89

----

1
11
1
1

1
8
1
1
3
2
2
------23
12
---162
12
1
4

----

1
----

----

---2
2
1

2
5
5
1

1
1
1

----

----

10
2

10
3

1
1

34

46
1

16
3

4
35
9
5
7
4
10
4
7
109
36
1
593
41
1
4

6
---4
---2
---3
17
6
---136
19
----

1
2
41
11
----

171
2

----

1637

1378

1531

1I
1

1

----

4

TOTAL

----

----

-------

-------

1
-------

8
----

1
4
2
2
6
1
1
20
4

----

737

766

----

----

139

145

1871

8213

ti

0

,..<:
t;j

1:'1

zti

t-0

H>o.
--1

248

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

AREA
B

AREA
A

AREA

c

AREA
H

AREA

F

47. Relative contribution of separate excava t ion areas to artifact assemblage, Pirate site.

FIG.

E constitute about the same amount and Areas F and G make up
the remainder.
As discussed previously, similar activities, biface preparation and
shaft preparation are represented in the excavated areas, although
there is a variation in intensity of activity reRected by the disproportionate composition of the site assemblage. Therefore, the artifacts are treated as a unit rather than by excavation area or by excavation units (squares or collection area).
Chipped stone artifacts constitute 99.6% of the assemblage and of
this category, unutilized Rakes and chips make up 86.8%; cores and
bifaces 3.2%; utilized Rakes/chips 7.2% and chipped stone tools and
preforms 2.2% (Fig. 48). Hammerstones, a mano and parts of three
fresh water mussels make up the remaining 0.6% of the assemblage.
DEBRIS

A total of 7,139 Rakes and chips of Rint were collected from the
various areas of the site. Over 37% of this number are Rakes ; the

249

DE CORDOVA BEND

PRIMARY

CHIPS

2.7 %

- - - - - - - - 2 1 f "___

PRIMARY FLAKES

5. 1 % - - - - - - - /

CORES I

3. 2 % - - - - - 7

Bl FACES

CHIPPED STONE TOOLS
AND PREFORMS
2.2 % - - UTILIZED FLAKES
7 . 2 % - -----1
HAMMERSTONES
AND OTHERS
0 . 6 %-----..J

%TOTAL= 99. 8%
n = 8213

0.9%

Frc. 48. Composition of the artifact assemblage at the Pirate site.

remainder are chips. One percent of the flakes are lipped and all
of these are interior flakes. Secondary debris constitutes 60% of the
deb1is, 9% is primary, and interior debris is 31%. Based on the predominance of primary and secondary flakes, it appears that cortex
removal is the main activity indicated by the flake debris.
Two hundred and sixty-five cores and bifaces were recovered.
Natural cortex platforms and prepared platform cores are the most
frequent and generally, flakes were removed from around the circumference of a cobble either on one face or on both faces. Many
of the unifacially flaked cobbles have natural cortex over one face
and had b een flaked around the circumference after the cobble h ad
b een split in half as the first step of cobble reduction. This work
was done using a hard hammer and resulted in the production of
almost all the flake debris represented in the collection.
Unaltered cobbles were not recovered during excavation and consequently, the exact dimensions of cobbles were not recorded. However, note was made of the reliability of weights with regard to
the amount of cortex removed and it is felt that the weights of
those cores considered to b e close to the original represent the weight
range although b eing slightly low. Core weights range from 27 to
2050 grams and the mean weight is 93.5 grams if the 2050 gram
sp~cimen is excluded.
Bifaces are represented by only 60 specimens and over half of
these are Stage B bifaces. Stage F is not represented and the examples
of Stages C, D , and E are fragmentary. The bifaces do not represent
a good biface sequence and therefore it is suggested that usable
blanks were transported elsewhere for further reduction. The high

250

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

percentage of cortex :Hakes and chips and the small number of lipped
biface thinning :Hakes support the idea that bifaces were roughly
trimmed at the Pirate site but generally were not made into tools here.
DART POINTS

Four stemmed points of which only 1 is complete, were collected
at the site. The complete specimen (Fig. 49 b) is a Yarbrough point
(Suhm and Jelks 1962: 261) . The stem edges are ground smooth and
the edges have been alternately retouched in order to sharpen the
point. This retouching procedure resulted in numerous steep hinge
scars along one edge near the tip. This may be the reason for its
having been discarded.
The base of a dart point found in Area C has a wide, straight
stem and a convex base. A projectile point broken in manufacture is
represented by a roughly shaped straight stemmed base. Both projectile points are unidentified as to type.
An almost complete point (Fig. 49 a) was collected from the
surface just west of Area H. The tip is missing and may have been
broken by impact as indicated by the lipped break (see Shiner 1970:
30-31). The stem expands near the base and the base is straight.
All stem edges are ground smooth. The body is steeply alternately
beveled and the original shape of the point is uncertain. The projectile point does not conform to any type description.
Dimensions of the projectile points are listed below:
L
4.6
2.9+
4.6+

W
2.4
2.4
2.4
1.9

Th
0.5
0.5
()1.6

0.7

SW
l.l
1.7
1.3
1.3

Wt
6.7
6.1+
6.0+

A1'ea

c

c
D
H

ARROWPOINTS

Arrowpoints are made on :Hakes; all but one specimen were made
on interior :Hakes. As discussed earlier, the presence of a relatively
smooth :Hake scar on the ventral surface of the :Hake enables the
roughing out of points on flakes by unifacial retouch of the dorsal
surface using the edge of the ventral surface as a platform. The
arrowpoints represented in this collection include bases, tips and
mid-sections of preforms and the bases of finished points.
Fragments of three different shaped arrowhead preforms are represented. There are two examples of the first form which has a rectangular shaped base and no stem. The second form conforms to the
description of a Cliffton point ( Suhm and Jelks 1962: 269-270) except
that this specimen (Fig. 49 c) is a preform that was broken in

251

DE CORDOVA BEND

e

d

c

f

b

0

k

g

h

m

p

q

n

0

2

0

em.

s

u

49. Pirate site tools. a-b, dart points; c-f, arrowpoints; g-1, gravers;
m, drill; n-q, u, notches; r-t, scrapers.

FIG.

252

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

manufacture. The edges of the preform were roughly thinned and
the base had not been retouched. A more pronounced contracting
stem form (Perdiz?) is represented by two bases (Fig. 49 d). Both
have been worked on only the dorsal surface as the ventral surface
is a smooth flake scar. Other unfinished points are represented by
two tips and three mid-sections.
Four completed arrowpoints are identifiable from the form of
their bases. One side-notched point, Harrell (Fig. 49 e) has had
the tip broken by impact. A corner-notched Scallorn (Fig. 49 f)
is also lacking the tip as well as a barb. A Perdiz point is lacking
the base and the tip. The fourth point is represented by a contracting
stem which may be from a Perdiz point. Measurements are inadequate for description but in no case would these points have weighed
more than 1.5 grams when complete.
The presence of unfinished points indicates that arrowpoints were
being manufactured at the site, probably to replace points which
were broken and are evidenced by the four bases mentioned.
SCRAPERS

Tools within this category included end-scrapers ( 5) , a side scraper
and a shouldered scraper. The fragmentary bit of one end-scraper
appears to be on a blade while all the other specimens are on secondary flakes. All of the end-scrapers fall into a weight class between
4.3 and 8.5 grams while the shouldered and the side scrapers weigh
36.9 and 27.4 grams respectively. All specimens except for the endscraper bit are complete and have the general appearance of having
been made with as little care as possible.
The four complete end-scrapers on secondary flakes have shallow
retouch which is continuous along the distal edge but which was
done in a manner that left an irregular edge. One specimen was
resharpened by three hard blows along the edge which resulted in
a sinuous edge and shallow hinge fractures on the face of the edge.
One shouldered scraper (Fig. 49 s) on a secondary flake was
recovered from Area B. A notch on the left edge of the flake created the shouldered effect. Obverse edge retouch occurs around
the entire circumference of the flake and is shallow and not steep.
A side-scraper on a secondary flake (Fig. 49 r) is from Area H
(Squares 11-12). Retouch is along the left edge, is obverse and
shallow. Except for retouch on the edges of both scrapers, there is
no other modification such as bulb removal.
NOTCHES

A total 109 notches were collected from the site, about a third

DE CORDOVA BEND

253

are from surface collection, the remainder were recovered by excavation. Notches were made on the flake edges by retouching (Fig.
49 n) or by a single hard blow which was not retouched (Fig. 49 o).
Inverse retouch or blows are present on 22 of the specimens. Notches
are present on primary flakes ( 13.7%), secondary flakes ( 45.8%),
and interior chips ( 3.7%). Notch width ranges from 3-20 mm. but
clusters between 6-10 mm. Depth ranges from 1-3 mm. with a single
specimen from Area H (Fig. 49 u) having a depth of 7 mm. The
latter specimen appears to be of heavier duty than the remainder.
Variation in linear dimensions was too wide to allow comparison
without complicated statistical manipulation and tool weights were
plotted in order to compare samples. Weights range from 1.2 grams
to 30.0 grams and the mean weight is 8.12 grams. However, hvo
weight groups were recognized as meaningful in terms of tool size.
One group ( 98 specimens) ranges in weight from 1-2 to 17.5 grams
and average 6.36 grams. The second group ( 11 specimens) ranges
from 19.2 to 30.0 grams and averages 23.85 grams. Five of the
heavier specimens, including the one mentioned above, are from
Area H and it is suggested that some type of heavy working which
required larger and more massive notches was carried out at this
location. Broken notches were not found and it appears that these
tools did not undergo heavy wear and also were discarded after
they were used.
GRAVERS

Gravers were made on secondary flakes ( 19) and chips ( 10); this
constitutes the largest group ( 80.5%) of gravers. Three gravers are
on primary flakes, 3 on interior flakes and 1 on a p1imary chip. Half
of the gravers were made by using the sharp corners of the debris
as the graver tip and retouching a notch on either side of this natural
projection (Fig. 49 i). The graver points created in this manner
range from 1-6 mm. in length and tend to be longer than notches
retouched along the center of a lateral or distal edge. Gravers on
retouched edges (Fig. 49 j) constitute the other half of this tool
category. Length of the point on edge gravers ranges from 1-2 and
4 mm. long but 13 of the 18 in this category have graver tips 1 mm.
in length. Thirty-two of the specimens are complete and the points
were present on all but two of the gravers on sharp corners. Gravers
weights range from 1.2 to 34.6 grams. Corner gravers range from
2.0 to 34.6 and their mean weight is 9.2 grams. Edge gravers are
smaller with weights ranging from 1.2 to 16.8 grams and a mean
average of 5.4 grams.

254

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

DRILL

The base of a drill was recovered from Square 15 of Area H.
A broad drill point, 7 x 3m. at the base had been bifacially retouched
on the distal end of this snapped interior chip of flint. The length of
the drill is uncertain but it appears to have snapped off due to
pressure. There is no modification to the bulb of the flake.
RETOUCHED PIECES

Primary ( 27) , secondary ( 425) and interior ( 141 ) flakes and chips
have irregular retouched pressure flakes removed from the lateral
or distal edges. No patterns of location were noted. Retouch is
generally obverse but rarely are flakes regularly retouched along
one edge. About 80% ( 469) of the collection is from Areas A, B,
and C and the ratio of debris to utilized flakes as illustrated in Area
H suggests that activity or activities with which these tools were
associated were not carried out or were carried out to a minimum in
Area H . The relative percentages of primary ( 4.5%) to secondary
( 71.7%) to interior ( 23.8%) flaking debris is similar to that of the
unutilized flakes /chips from the site and it is suggested that there
was no selection for or manufacture of a particular type of flake for
use as retouched pieces, rather that the available flakes were utilized.
HAMJVIERSTONES

Cobbles of quartzite ( 34) , granular flint ( 6) and sandstone ( 1 )
are represented in the collections. Twenty-three of the 41 cobbles
are represented by flakes which were broken off of the cobble hammerstone. Of the 23 flakes , 17 are quartzite, 5 are flint and 1 is sandstone. The one complete flint cobble weighs 471 grams. W eight of
the quartzite cobbles ranges from 84 to 236 grams and averages
156 grams. Based on the predominance of quartzite, it is suggested
that this material was selected for use as a hard hammer b ecause
of its internal structure; moreover, cobbles were selected with regard
to weight as well as material and quartzite cobbles collected were
selected to be used in cortex removal because of their weights.
MANO

This specimen is made of sandstone and is rectangular in plan
shape. The longitudinal cross-section is rectangular as is the transverse cross-section. Both faces of the mana are ground and the edges
are pecked. Grinding was in a back and forth manner which resulted
in an even wear pattern on both faces. The shape of the resource
material is undetermined. The present size of the mana is 14.2 x
8.3 x 5.0 em. and weight is 720.0 grams.

255

DE CORDOVA BEND
SHELL

The right valves of two small fresh water mussels and the right
and left valves of a large fresh water mussel, were collected from
the surface of Area C. The shells are unaltered and the presence
of other shells was not recorded in the deposit of Area C nor in any
of the other excavated areas.
The artifact assemblage from the Pirate site consists primarily of
residue, in the form of Hakes, chips, cores, bifaces, etc., which resulted in the removal of cortex from Hint cobbles. A tool kit composed
of notches, gravers and retouched pieces was recovered from every
area, except Area G where no graver was found. It is suggested
that the activity associated with the tool kit was carried out by the
same peoples who were trimming Hint cobbles and at the same time.
Projectile points from the Pirate site are dated to the period
500 B.C. to A.D. 1500 (Suhm and Jelks 1962). Dart points occur in
Areas C, D and H and represent a core tool technique of manufacture. Arrowpoints and preforms are present in Areas A, B, C, D,
E and H with the largest number in Area H. In contrast to the dart
points, arrowpoints are made on Hakes, although no evidence of
a Hake technology, based on Hake cores, was recognized. These two
technologies may reflect different periods of occupation but this can
not be demonstrated by their horizontal distribution at the Pirate site.
SUMMARY

Collection and excavation of 8 separate occupation areas at the
Pirate site has provided information on the activities at the site, the
tool kits associated with the various activities, the intensity of occupation and on the occupation or reoccupation of the site areas by
people with different technological methods of working stone.
The manufacture of roughly shaped bifaces was the principle
activity carried out at the site. Cobbles were not quarried in the site
area and limited testing of the limestone/ claystone exposures on the
slope west of the site, in the site area and upslope to the north did
not reveal any possible source for the Hint cobbles. However, it is
possible that the cobbles represent the remains of a conglomerate
zone which was in the limestone and from which the matrix was
weathered away. The cobbles were then deflated onto the present
surface and were used as a source of material over a period which
appears not to have exceeded 2000 years. After the completion of
cortex removal and biface preparation, the bifaces were taken elsewhere for further modification.

256

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The activity of collection and preparation of wooden shafts is inferred based on the notch, graver, retouched piece tool kit. Because
the number of pieces of the tool kit covaries directly with the
amount of lithic deb1is in any particular area, that is the number of
tools increases with an increase in the amount of lithic debris, it is
suggested that cobble reduction and wooden shaft preparation were
carried out at the same time by the same p eople, either by members
of a work party or by one individual.
Intensity of activity within the excavation areas can be measured
by the relative amounts of lithic debris represented. Thus, it can be
stated that activity was intense in Areas A, B, D , E and H. However,
we have no data to suggest that these areas w ere used once or
repeatedly nor to infer the size of the work groups represented.
Based on the chronological placements of the various projectile points,
it is suggested that several of the areas were revisited at different
times by peoples having a flake tool technology.
Excavation of the Pirate site has shown that the survey sample
was representative of the main activity carried out there, that of the
removal of cortex from flint cobbles and the making of roughly
shaped bifaces. Other activities represented include wooden shaft
preparation, inferred from the notch/ graver/ retouch ed piece tool
kit, and food preparation and consumption, suggested by the shells
and mano in Area C. Occupation of the site occurred dming a p eriod
of 2000 years with the principle occupation attributed to a group or
groups of people using a core tool technology. A later reoccupation
of the site is evidenced by scattered tools and preforms made by
people with a flake tool technology.
SUMMARY
ARCHAEOLOGICAL METHODOLO GY IN CENTRAL T E XAS

Although workers dealing with the archaeology of central Texas
have b een aware of the presence of contemporaneous and functionally
distinct prehistoric sites within the area ( Suhm 1960 ), the general
trend has been to look at aboriginal sites as useful for the establishm ent and discussion of chronological sequences and not to relate
them in a functional way within an area of study. In part, due to
limitations imposed by insufficient funding, the emphasis is derived
out of "culture-area" theory where a b asic concern is with inter-area
chronological comparisons ( Sorrow, Shafer and Ross 1967; Johnson,
Suhm and Tunnell 1962 ) and area-wide comparisons of site types
(for example, Greer 1965 ) rather than at intra-area comparison of

257

DE CORDOVA BEND

activity through time and space. We now have relative chronological
control based on carbon 14 dates and on vertical stratigraphy at the
Smith, Williams, Collins and McCann sites and at sites in Stillhouse
Hollow Reservoir, Canyon Reservoir, and Whitney Reservoir, and
can shift emphasis to the anaylsis of prehistoric settlement and subsistence systems. Studies of this nature are being carried out at
Robert Lee Reservoir (Shafer 1969) and at Lake Palestine Reservoir
(Anderson 1971).
A brief review of the literature shows variation in the explanation
of inter-site differences in both functional and temporal terms. In a
de£nition of the Edwards Plateau Aspect (Archaic Stage) of central
Texas, it is suggested that " ... the sites (large and seemingly sedentary) were not inhabited the year round, but that each small band
wandered over the surrounding area in search of plant and animal
food, returning to the central location for part of the year ( Suhm,
Krieger and Jelks 1954: 103 )". In a symposium, the following year,
Edwards Plateau Aspect groups were included as examples of a "central-based wandering community (Beardsley and others 1956: 139)".
The population dynamics of the central-based wanderer community in seasonal or activity sub-division and regrouping are illustrated in £gure 50. The figure reads from left to right. Families which
have resided at Community Base A, a base camp, disperse to separate
family camps during a specific season or for a specific maintenance
activity. Families will subsequently regroup at base camps; this
regrouping may involve one or all of the recombinations shown.
They may return to their original base (A), may move to a new
base at which all the families from Community Base A live (B) or
Family

Community Base
A.

~.,~~~
~·.:~:·~

~

Commun ity Base - - - - - - - - - F a m i ly _ _ _ _ _ _ _

Oo••""'"""'
B.

Community Base

c.

Camp

FrG. 50. Model showing the subdivisions of Community Base A families into
separate camps and then the possible regrouping at original base (A) or
all at a new base (B) or a joining of one or all families with new families
at Base C.

258

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

some of the families may move to third base (C) where they will
have to be integrated into a new social unit (village).
If we apply this model to central Texas, we should then expect
to find at least two different size living sites, the larger one being
the central base which was inhabited by many families and the
smaller ones having been occupied by nuclear or extended families
on a seasonal or activity specific basis. All these sites would be
within an area recognized as their own by the peoples.
In a general summary of central Texas archaeology, it is stated
that habitation sites are the most important type of site, although
not the only type present ( Suhm 1960: 72). Such habitation sites
" ... are considered to be of a more or less temporary nature, as
opposed to the village sites of sedentary groups ( Suhm 1955: 51)",
but I have been unable to find a discussion of the different habitation sites which would fit the central-based wanderer model. Although a distinction is made between burnt-rock middens and other
sites on the alluvial teuaces, both are considered to be habitation
sites. The temporary nature of the Central Texas Aspect is explained
as due to the fact that the " ... campsites seem to have been occupied by hunting-gathering, semi-nomadic bands that moved frequently in order best to exploit the available food supply ... (Jelks
1962: 92 )". Jelks ( 1962: 92) points out that at this same period, there
are several relatively large open sites in central Texas which he
suggests may mark the locations of sedentary villages, these include
the Chupek and the Ubantke sites. This conclusion is based on the
presence of Caddoan pottery and rich, extensive middens; occupation
intensity is attributed to reliance upon agriculture. Although the
two types of sites (large/extensive and temporary/ephemeral) have
the same types of artifacts, including pottery, the inter-site differences
are explained as representing different means of adapting to the
environment rather than cases which serve to illustrate the centralbased wanderer model as proposed by Krieger. Another view of the
Central Texas Aspect suggests that new ethnic groups displaced
but did not replace the earlier Edwards Plateau Aspect peoples
(Kelley 1959: 281) and that the groups who relied on agricultme
were the former while the nomadic groups were the hanging-on
Archaic peoples. However, this would not explain the occurrence of
identical tool collections. Moreover, evidence for farming is minimal
prior to the ethnohistoric period. Most authors agree that there is
good evidence for a cultural continuity from the Archaic to the
Neo-American and that there was no invasion ( Suhm 1955: 50; Suhm
1960: 85; Jelks 1962: 91; Long 1961: 249; Stephenson 1970: 245, 276).

DE CORDOVA BEND

259

Therefore, the concept of contemporaneous but ethnically different
peoples living side by side is not supported and there is little evidence
to argue that the site variation is due to the differences between
hunting/ gathering vs. hunting/ gathering/marginal agriculture subsistence bases. This is not to deny the possibility of agriculture but
as the above authors argue, the same soIt of hunting/ gathering subsistence practices continue from the late Archaic into the Neo-American period. Thus, it is argued here that the two types of habitation
sites are examples of a central-based wanderer pattern which is
present during the entire time period (Archaic and Neo-American);
it is further suggested that inter-site variation can be explained as
due to differential use of the natural resources, variations in length
of occupation period, group composition, and activity structure.
Suhm ( 1960: 72) points out that the other site types include
quarry stations, isolated burials, pictographs and mortar holes. Quarry
or chipping station sites have generally not received much attention
since the 1940's. Workshops have been described for Dallas County
( Hatzenbuehler 1942) and in Hamilton, Comanche, Bosque, Coryell
and Nolan Counties (Kirkland 1938, 1940; Kirkland and Kirkland 1941;
Runkles 1936) . Kirkland has noted that such sites often have a high
number of spokeshaves (herein called notches), that blanks or crude
blades ( bifaces) are common and that there is no evidence of camping nearby. Hatzenbuehler's ( 1942: 30) interpretation is that " . . .
these sites were workshops where the Indians found the desired
material, broke it in convenient sizes, and carried it to their camps
to make the finished artifacts." Emphasis has not been placed upon
the excavation of such workshop sites because they are shallow in
depth and are rarely stratified vertically, rarely yield large tool
samples and in some cases are beyond the limit of a reservoir flood
pool. Nevertheless, they hold the key to an important part of the
prehistoric lifeway and need to be studied along with other activity
specific, seasonal, or multiple activity settlements.
The problem of functionally different sites in central Texas is
beginning to be studied more rigorously. Archaeological salvage
work at Robert Lee Reservoir (Shafer 1969) has resulted in a concern with intra-site activity areas and inter-area site variation. Although due in part to the absence of deep stratified deposits, the
initial results show the potential of clearing large areas and excavating
shallow in situ deposits. Suhm ( 1959) delineates different occupations through the use of intra-site horizontal stratigraphy at the
Williams site. The High Bluff site (Flinn and Flinn 1968) is an
illustration of a shallow and intermittently occupied hunting/ gather-

260

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ing camp. The Britton site ( Story and Shafer 1965: 76-135) with a
combination of rapid deposition and relatively light occupation, provides a glimpse of an aboriginal camp. The composition of base camps
has not been discussed by most authors but it is suggested that some
of the extensive burned rock middens and alluvial terrace sites may
have served in this capacity. It is suggested that the Oblate Site
at Canyon Reservoir is a base camp. This suggestion is based on the
number of projectile point bases, the number of manos, the number
and d ensity of other flint tools (scrapers, gravers, drills, etc.), the
faunal remains and by comparison with the other excavated sites at
Canyon Reservoir. However, this conclusion is suspect because sufficient settlement data, based on an analysis of prehistoric activity
in the area, are not available.
It is suggested here that intra-site and inter-site differences through
time reflect change and continuity of activity, settlement and subsistence. By using the total artifact assemblage rather than relying
upon tools, particularly projectile point style changes, we can describe
the prehistoric utilization of a study area.
METHODOLOGY OF ARTIFACT ANALYSIS

Analysis of the artifacts recovered from the survey and excavations
was don e in a relatively traditional manner with regard to most tool
classes. Considerable emphasis has been placed upon lithic debris,
unutilized flakes, chips, cores and bifaces as evidence of the specific
stages or steps in stone tool manufacture at any site.
A shift in analytical emphasis from projectiles to other tools and
debris has recently been emphasized by workers in T exas who have
a background in the analysis of Old World stone artifacts ( Honea
1965, 1966; Epstein 1963, 1964; Shiner 1969 ). These authors have
made certain modifications of the typological schemes of Bordes
( 1962 ) and Tixier ( 1963 ) in order to adapt the typology to New
World materials. Other authors Johnson ( 1967; Johnson, Suhm and
Tunnell 1962), Shafer ( 1969) and Tunnell and Jensen ( 1969) , have
further altered Old World systems in attempts to develop b etter descriptive categories for Texas remains. The followers of several of
these workers use these new categories as refined slots, i.e., more
"scientific" pigeonholes, rather than arriving at a synthetic, processual
description of stone working based on their analysis. The development
of new schemes is in line with a statement made a quarter of a century ago by J. 0. Brew ( 1946) who stated that we need more, not
fewer classifications in order to solve different problems.
Such problems go beyond pure description, although the impor-

DE CORDOVA BEND

261

tance of description should not be minimized, and it is for the purpose of arriving at a description of flint working that the classificatory
scheme used in this report was developed . Additional parameters of
flake size, either using metric or weight measurements, platform type
and frequency of whole vs. fragmentary flakes would b e useful but
were not elicited due to a limitation of time. It is also suggested
that weight of tools should b e used in conjunction with linear dimensions in order to allow for inter-site comparison of projectile points
and other artifacts. This method was proposed by F enenga ( 1953 )
and, although occasionally employed ( Suhm 1959; Johnson, Suhm
and Tunnell 1962; Stephenson 1970 ) for descriptive purposes, has not
b een widely accepted.
Various approaches will continue to b e used and will result in
problems of inter-site comparison until the problems to b e dealt with
have b een decided upon. However, I do not envision the day when
everyone is willing to accept a set of "universal categories" or a "handbook" which will answer all possible questions. A single classificatory
scheme cannot serve to provide the solution of every problem.
Su;vrMARY oF D E CoRDOVA B END ARCHAEOLOGY

The archaeological survey of the D e Cordova Bend H.eservoir
recorded 51 prehistoric sites, 5 of which were subsequently excavated
prior to filling of the reservoir. From the survey data, 5 microenvironments were recognized and are described . Sites occurred in only 3 of
these zones. On the basis of tool kits, lithic d ebris, site size and
associated microenvironment, it was suggested that 3 typ es of settlements w ere represented and that the activity at each settlement could
b e directly related to the present-day resource potentials of the zone.
The activities represented in the sites suggested that a complete yearly
cycle of maintenance activities of a hunting/ gathering subsistenceb ased society is represented. Based on these assumptions, the settlement classes were defined as including a base camp or settlement,
seasonal hunting/ gathering camps and chipping stations.
Prehistoric occupation within the D e Cordova Bend H.eservoir
area spans the period from Paleo-Indian as represented by a Clovis
fluted point ( Skinner and Hash 1969 ) and by late Paleo-Indian materials from the Acton Site (Blaine, Crook, Harris and Shiner 1969)
through the Archaic and Neo-American periods. A shorter time
p eriod is represented by the surveyed sites and the excavated sites.
This time period, as indicated by the more promin ent projectile
point types, Darl and Yarbrough, may b egin as early as 500 B.C.
based on work elsewhere in central Texas ( Sorrow, Shafer and H.oss

262

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1967; Johnson 1967; Johnson, Suhm and Tunnell 1962), and termed
Late to Transitional Archaic. A date of ca. A.D. 1500 is the end date
attributed to projectile types Perdiz and Cliffton. As discussed earlier,
the most easily recognized changes during this period of 2000 years
are in projectile point technology and style. It is during this period
that the bow and arrow were introduced and we observe a shift from
a core to a flake technology. Evidence of the co-occurrence of dart and
arrowpoints at the Kyle site and other sites in central Texas suggests
that the adoption of the bow and loss of the atlatl did not occur
simultaneously.
From the survey data, examples of each of the settlement types
were selected for excavation. The base camp settlement is represented by the Lowden site and those other sites located on the alluvial
terrace of the Brazos River. Seasonal/hunting/gathering sites include
the Bluebonnet site, the Aiken site and other sites situated adjacent
to tributmy streams. Chipping stations are represented by the Pirate
site and the Zweifel site, as well as those sites located on the limestone
bluff. It is not suggested that these were the only activities carried
out in these respective areas but that these site types do represent
modal tendencies which taken together represent the macro-structure
(Chang 1968: 7) during the period of occupation represented. Moreover, we do not control for the prehistoric utilization of the upland
area beyond the reservoir limits except to note that there are "base
settlements" located at the upper end of intermittent tributaries where
permanent springs do occur.
The excavation and analysis of materials from 5 prehistoric sites
located within the area of the De Cordova Bend Reservoir has shown
that the size of occupation areas and their architectural features differ
from site to site. Analysis of the artifactual materials shows that
several different sets of tools are represented at each site and that
these sets, or tool kits, relate to the activities carried out there.
The Lowden site is a semi-permanent habitation site and there
are such sites in the immediate area (see Fig. 5). Settlement size
is the largest of the 3 classes of sites and a more intense occupation
is represented by the deep and extensive midden. Architectural remains include a hearth and an occupation area. The occupation area
covered ca. 38.5 square meters and was centered around a hearth.
The development of a heavily charcoal stained midden within definite
limits and of a large artifact sample are attributed to a long-term
occupation of this restricted area. In addition, it is suggested that the
work force consisted of men and women as the activities represented
include hunting, tool making, food processing and food consumption.

DE CORDOVA BEND

263

Seasonal hunting/ gathering camps include the Aiken and Bluebonnet sites. Both sites show evidence of intermittent re-occupation
by small work groups likely composed of men and women. Activity
at both sites was centered around limestone hearths, but artifactual
materials are not heavily concentrated in these areas as they are in
the case of the longer occupied living area at the Lowden site. In
contrast, materials are scattered widely( at Bluebonnet) or are scattered and concentrated (as at Aiken). Hunting and mussel gathering
were practiced at both sites while plant gathering, as evidenced by
grinding tools is only well represented at the Aiken site. The complete
process of projectile making was carried out at the Aiken site but
core trimming was the primmy lithic activity at the Bluebonnet site.
The Pirate and Zweifel sites are examples of chipping stations.
Eight lithic concentrations at the Pirate site mark the locations of flint
working areas. Two overlapping concentrations of lithic debris occur
at the Zweifel site. Flint knapping is the main activity at these sites
and it involved the roughing out of bifaces by the removal of cortex.
It has been suggested that the tool kit composed of notches, gravers
and retouched pieces, represent wooden shaft preparation as an
ancillary activity to biface preparation. Food preparation is evidenced
only in Area C of the Pirate site although the presence of projectile
point bases and preforms suggests hunting. The hunting, however,
is attributed to re-occupation of the sites.
Prehistoric sites in the De Cordova Bend Reservoir occm in 3 different locations, herein termed microenvironments, and the activities at
these locations is related to the potential natural resomces. These
involve availability and diversity of foodstuffs, presence and reliability
of water, suitable living conditions and material resomces. Availability and use of these resources relates directly to the size and
composition of the social unit present and to the activities practiced.
Survey and excavation support the interpretation that sites on the
alluvial terrace were semi-permanent settlements occupied over a long
span of time and for most of any single year. Sites situated adjacent
to tributaries represent short-term camps, occupied and re-occupied
in order to gather and hunt. Chipping stations on the bluff were
visited intermittently by small work groups (Fig. 51). It seems likely
that other types of sites, e.g., fishing, kill/butchering, bmial, were
utilized by the prehistoric inhabitants of the area, nevertheless, we
have no data on these activities and will not propose a model based
on negative evidence. It is suggested that the sum total of activities
represented includes the majority of activities needed to maintain a
social unit, probably a band. This is not to say that these sites were

264

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Chipping
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Station
Hunting I Gothering
Comp

Hunting /Gathering - - - - - - - - - Camp

Chipping.
Station

FrG. 51. Diagram showing the suggested relationships between sites, activity

and location. Arrows indicate direction of movement between sites.

all used by the same group of people, rather that the inhabitants of
the area recognized these various activities as necessary pmts of a
maintenance cycle. The duration of the cycle may represent one or
more seasons, possibly a complete annual cycle. Based on the potential resources, on the site situations within the reservoir, and on the
archaeological sites located outside of the study area, we suggest
that this maintenance cycle reflects a full year, however, this will
have to be tested by future work.
In conclusion, it has been suggested that the prehistoric inhabitants
of the De Cordova Bend area utilized different areas and resources
for the various activities needed to maintain their society. This utilization resulted in the patterned occurrence of activity-speci£c sites in
microenvironments where available resources maximized the completion of certain activities. These sites are termed chipping stations,
seasonal hunting/ gathering camps and base settlements. They have
been correlated with microenvironments, limestone bluff, tributary
stream, and alluvial terrace, respectively. By viewing archaeological
remains as evidence of the processual steps involved in tool making
and of activities carried out by work groups of different composition,
an explanation of the technology and nature of activities has been
proposed.
The use of a clearly de£ned model seems to be implicit in much
of the archaeological literature on central Texas and the model varies
from "restricted wanderer" to "central-based wanderer." It is argued

265

DE CORDOVA BEND

here that the evidence on hand from the area of several reservoirs in
central Texas is suggestive of both patterns. Sites within Canyon
Reservoir (Johnson, Suhm and Tunnell 1962) are differentiated on
the basis of three variables. These are: 1) location and site type
(burned rock midden, alluvial ten-ace midden and rock shelter) , 2)
midden extent and style of deposition and 3) artifact assemblage. As
discussed earlier, it is suggested that the Oblate site is a base camp
and that the Footbridge and Wunderlick sites are intermittent activityspecific sites, probably primarily hunting camps as suggested by
Johnson. In the area of Whitney Reservoir, during the period of the
Central Texas Aspect, at least 3 site types occur, "sedentary" villages,
rockshelters and open campsites at various locations (Jelks 1962: 92).
It is suggested here that the sedentary villages were base camps
occupied by the indigenous peoples and that the use of rockshelters
and small open campsites was on an intermittent short-term basis
and that they were re-occupied during a certain part or parts of
the year. A similar pattern can be seen in the Waco Reservoir (Story
and Shafer 1965; Watt 1967) where the sites: Baylor, Britton and
Lookout Point are seen as reflecting intermittent short-term occupations. Although no base camp is reported by these authors, its presence
is suggested by the absence of grinding tools and the short occupations
suggested for the sites mentioned. Archaeological work at Robert
Lee Reservoir (Shafer 1967; 1969) suggests that different maintenance
activities are related to specific resource areas, as reflected by locations, tool assemblages and flake types, but that there is little evidence
to single out a specific location or site type to be deemed a base camp.
On this basis, it is suggested that this may be evidence of a "restricted
wanderer" community pattern which contrasts with the "centralbased wandering" model herein described. In summary, it has b een
suggested that a model based on the concept of "central-based wanderer" is applicable in the areas of the Canyon, Whitney, Waco and
De Cordova Bend Reservoirs and that a "restricted wanderer" model
may be more applicable at Robert Lee Reservoir in west central Texas.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Anderson, Keith M.
1971 Archaeological Survey of Lake Palestine Reservoir. Manuscript in
preparation.
Beardsley, Richard K. , Pres ton Holder, Alex D. Krieger, Betty J. Meggers, John
B. Rinaldo, and Paul Kutschie
1956 Functional and Evolutionary Implications of Community Patterning.
In "Seminars in Archaeology: 1955" edited by Robert Wauchope,
pp. 129-157, Memoi1·s of the Society for American Archaeology,
No. 11.

266

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Bell, Robert E.
1958 Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile
Points. Oklahoma Anth1'0pological Society, Special Bulletin No. l.
Belo Corporation, A. H .
1970 TexM Almanac and State Industrial Guide, 1970-1971. A. H. Belo
Corporation.
Blaine, Jay C., R. K. Harris, Wilson W. Crook, Jr. and Joel L. Shiner
1968 The Acton Site: Hood County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 39, pp. 45-94.
Blair, W. Frank
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 2,
No. 1, pp. 93-117.
Bordes, F.
1961 Typoligie du Paleolithique Ancien et Moyen. Publications de
l'Institut de Prehistoim de l'Universite de Bordeaux, Memoire No. l.
Brew, John Otis
1946 The Use and Abuse of Taxonomy. In "The Archaeology of Alkali
Ridge, Southeastern Utah." Papers of the Peabody M11Settrn of
American Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, Vol. 21,
pp. 44-66.
Carter W. T.
1931 The Soils of Texas. Texas Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin,
No. 431.
Chang, K. C.
1968 Toward a Science of Prehistoric Society. In Settlement Archaeology,
pp. 1-9, National Press Books, Palo Alto.
Coe, Michael D. and Kent V. Flannery
1964 Microenvironments and Mesoamerican Prehistory. Science, Vol. 143,
No. 3607, pp. 650-654.
Crook, W. W., Jr., and R. K. Harris
1952 Trinity Aspect of the Archaic Horizon: The Carrollton and Elam Foci.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol.
23, pp. 7-38.
Epstein, J. F.
1963 Centipede and Camp Caves: Excavations in Val Verde County,
Texas, 1958. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 33,
pp. 1-129.
1964 Towards the Systematic Description of Chipped Stone. Congreso
Internacional de American·istas, Mexico , 1962, Aetas y Memorias,
No. 1, pp. 155-169.
Fenenga, Franklin
1953 The Weights of Chipped Stone Points : A Clue to Their Functions.
Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, Vol. 9, No. 3, pp. 309-323.
Flirm, Richard and Judy Flinn
1968 The High Bluff Site on the Clear Fork of the Brazos River. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 38, pp. 93-125.
Gould, F. W.
1962 Texas Plants-A Checklist and Ecological Summary. Texas Agricultural Experirnent Station, MP-585.
Greer, John W.
1965 A Typology of Midden Circles and Mescal Pits. Southwestern Lore,
Vol. 31, No. 3, pp. 41-55.
Gwin, Thomas B.
1941 An Interesting Type of Indian Artifact from Dallas and Ellis County.
The Record, Vol. 2, No. 9, pp. 41-43.

DE CORDOVA BEND

267

Hatzenbuehler, Robert
1942 Some Interesting Indian Workshops in Dallas County. The Record,
Vol. 3, No. 5, pp. 28-31.
H endricks, Leo
1957 Geology of Parker County, Texas. The University of Texas Publications, No. 5724.
Honea, Kenneth
1965 A Morphology of Scrapers and Their Methods of Production. Sotlthwestern Lore, Vol. 31, No. 2, pp. 25-40.
1966 Prehistoric Flaking Technologies in Texas. VI Congresso Internazionale delle Scienze Preistoriche e Protostoriche, pp. 260-267.
Jelks, Edward B.
1954 Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of De Cordova Bend,
Inspiration Point, and Turkey Creek Reservoirs. Report prepared by
the River Basin Surveys, National Park Service.
1962 The Kyle Site, A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County,
Texas. The University of Texas, Department of Anthropology, Archaeology Series, No. 5.
Johnson, Leroy, Jr.
1967 Toward a Statistical Overview of the Archaic Cultures of Central
and Southwestern Texas. Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin, No. 12.
Johnson, Leroy, Jr., Dee Ann Suhm and Curtis D. Tunnell
1962 Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir: The Wunderlich, Footbridge and Oblate Sites. Texas Museum Bulletin, No. 5.
Kelley, J. Charles
1959 The Desert Cultures and the Balcones Phase: Archaic Manifestations
in the Southwest and Texas. American Antiquity, Vol. 24, No. 3,
pp. 276-288.
Kirkland, Forrest
1938 An Archaeological Survey of the Cranfills Gap Area. Central T exas
ATcheologist, No. 4, pp. 71-84.
1940 An Interesting Indian Workshop in Coryell County, Texas . The Record, Vol. 2, No.3, pp. 15-17.
Kirkland, Forrest and Lula Kirkland
1941 Clear Fork Culture Artifacts from an Extensive Workshop in Nolan
County, Texas. The Record, Vol. 3, No. 2, pp. 6-11.
Long, Joseph K., III
1961 Three Central Texas Aspect Sites in Hill County, Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 30, pp. 223-252.
Lorrain, Dessamae H.
1967 Notes on Archeological Survey of the De Cordova Bend Reservoir.
Manuscript on Ble at Southern Methodist University.
Lorrain, Dessamae and Norma Hoffrichter
1968 Archeological Survey and Excavation at Pat Mayse Reservoir, Texas.
Report submitted to the National Park Service.
Mason, Johnson and Associates
1963 Geology, Foundation and Soils Investigation, De Cordova Bend Dam
and Hydroelectric Plant Sites, Brazos River, Hood County, T exas .
Report submitted to the Brazos River Authority.
Nunley, Parker
1969 Systematic Typology as a Tool in Interpretation of Archeological
Material. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Texas Archeological Society.

268

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Redman, Charles L. and Patty Jo Watson
1970 Systematic, Intensive Surface Collection, American Antiquity, Vol.
35, No. 3, pp. 279-291.
Runkles, Frank A.
1936 Indian Artifacts of Comanche County, Texas. Bulletin of the Central
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 2, pp. 70-73.
Sellards, E. H ., W. S. Adkins and F. B. Plummer
1932 The Geology of Texas, Vol. 1, Stratigraphy. Th e University of Texas
Bt~lletin, No. 3232.
Shafer, H arry J.
1967 An Archeological Survey of Robert Lee Reservoir, Coke County,
Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Proiect Smvey Reports, No. 4.
1969 Archeological Investigations in the Robert Lee Reservoir Basin, West
Central Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Proiect
No. 17.
Shiner, Joel L.
1969 Component Analysis for Archaic Sites. Bt~lletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 40, pp. 215-229.
1970 Activity Analysis of a Prehistoric Site. B,ulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 41, pp. 25-35.
Skinner, S. Alan
1968 An Archaeological Survey of the De Cordova Bend Reservoir, Hood
County, Texas. Report submitted to the National Park Service.
Skinner, S. Alan and Randle Rash
1969 A Clovis Fluted Point from Hood County, T exas. Bt~lletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 40, pp. 1-2.
SorTow, William M., Harry J. Shafer and Richard E. Ross
1967 Excavations at Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir. Papers of the Texas
ATcheological Salvage Pmiect, No. 11.
Stephenson, Robert L.
1970 Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir Area, Central
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 41, pp.
37-257.
Story, D ee Ann and Harry J . Shafer
1965 1964 Excavations at Waco Reservoir, McLennan County, Texas:
The Baylor and Britton Sites. Texas ATcheological Salvage Proiect,
Miscellaneotls Papers, No. 6.
Struever, Stuart
1967 Problems, Methods and Organization: A Disparity in the Growth of
Archeology. In Anthropological Archeology in the Americas, edited
by Betty J. Meggers, pp. 13 1-151, Anthropological Society of Washington.
Stricklin, Freel L ., Jr.
1961 Degradational Stream Deposits of the Brazos River, Central Texas.
Geological Society of AmeTica, Bt~lletin Vol. 72, pp . 19-36.
Suhm, D ee Ann
1955 Excavations at the Collins Site, Travis County, Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas ATcheological Society, Vol. 26, pp. 7-54.
1957 Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis County, T exas. Texas
journal of Science, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 26-58.
1959 The Williams Site and Central Texas Archeology. Th e Texas ]oumal
of Science, Vol. 11, No. 2, pp. 218-250.
1960 A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 29, pp. 63-107.

DE CORDOVA BEND

269

Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology : Type Descriptions. T exas Archeological Society, Special Publication No. 1 and T exas M emorial
Mt1 seum, Bulletin No. 4.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Kreiger and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Inh·oductory H andbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the
T exas Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Tixier, J.
1963 Typologie de I Epipaleolithique du Maghreb . M emoires du Centre
de Recherches Anthropologiques Prehistoriques et Ethnographiques,
Vol. II.
Tunnell, Curtis D . and H arald P. Jensen, Jr.
1969 Archeological Excavations in Lyndon B. Johnson State Park, Summer,
1968. T exas State Building Commission, Archeological Program,
Report No. 17.
Watt, Frank H.
1967 Lookout Point, Lake \V'aco. Central T exas Archeologist, Number 8,
pp. 27-39.
Southern Methodist University
Dallas, T exas

The Dunlap Complex in Western Central
Crockett County, Texas
JAMES

H.

WoRD

ABSTRACT
The 1966 Texas Archeological Society Field School was h eld in western
central Crockett County Jun e 18th through June 26th. Two middens designated as Midden No. 1 and Midden No. 2 and the Reel Mill Shelter comprise the Dunlap Complex.
Middens No. 1 and 1\o. 2 are located on the alluvial valley below the Reel
Mill Shelter. Features consisting of slab-lined basins and bedrock mortars
were found. Diagnostic artifacts were few and indicate a late Archaic to
Neo-American occupation. Radio carbon dates suggest an occupation principally in the 14th century.
The Red Mill Shelter gave indication of occupation from mid-Archaic to
Neo-American. Unfortunately much of the deposits were despoiled by "pothunters." Features consisted of a large roof spall with awl sharpening
grooves, bedrock mortars, and a large fire hearth.
There is an indication of an affinity with the Trans Pecos Region and the
Archaic period possibl y extending into the 14th century.

INTRODUCTION
The Texas Archeological Society holds its annual field school during
the summer. In 1966 the field school committee was inshucted to locate a site in the vicinity of Crockett County that would fulfill the
varied and distinctive requirement of an archeological exercise in
demonsh·ation and pmticipation. Among the several requirements were
a variety of archeological problems as well as space for approximately
150 persons to work and facilities for reasonably comfortable camping.
The Dunlap Complex consisting of a rock shelter and two open
middens appeared to fit the requirements. Because it was later discovered that "pothunting" had caused considerable disturbance in the
rock shelter, some of the field data lost a certain amount of significance
in regard to their sh·atigraphic position.
Any field school is to an extent a compromise, but it should never
result in the sacrifice of proper scientific controls in order to facilitate
the teaching of techniques. At the Dunlap Complex quite the opposite
occurred. Vertical and horizontal conh·ols and careful recording of
specimens was maintained even though it was clear that particular
portions of the deposits had b een disturbed. The result was not a loss
of data but actually an accumulation of "facts" which are of dubious

272

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

significance. In the following report, many of the questionable data
have been omitted. They are however, available in the form of tables
of distribution retained by the Author. Thus, controls were not relaxed
to facilitate teaching, they were instead maintained beyond normal
field practice.
The committee in charge of the initial survey consisted of Mr. and
Mrs. James Word of Floydada, Mr. Cecil Calhoun of Port Lavaca, Mr.
Burney McClurkan of Austin, Mrs. Anne Fox of San Antonio, Mr.
Francis Stickney of Midland, and Mr. Dalton King of Midland. Mr.
Gene Williams, Mr. "Cap" West and Sheriff Billy Mills, all of Crockett
County, acted as guides.
A number of committees and individuals made outstanding contributions to the organization and operation of the three main phases of
the school, namely, the teaching, the camp and the recording of the
data. The school is indebted to the following persons:
Burney and Nancy McClurken for organization of field parties, archeological savoir faire;
Cecil Calhoun, Dessamae Lorrain and James Word for supervision
of the three geographical areas of work;
Norma Hoffrichter for her work on mapping among other things;
Kathleen Gilmore for the thankless task of cleaning and cataloguing
artifacts;
Anne Fox for keeping records and helping communications;
E. Mott Davis for advice and h elp when it was needed;
Louis Fullen for the survey of the two shelters on the Owens property;
Mr. Basil Dunlap of Ozona and Mr. Jeff Owens of Iraan, owners of
the two properties, are due a special thanks for permitting the school
to work there;
The hospitality of all of the people of Crockett County is to be
commended;
Sheriff Billy Mills, Gene and Byron Williamson and "Cap" West
particularly evoke pleasant memories of barbecued goat and frijoli
beans;
Gerald K. Humphrys, Southern Methodist University, for the artifact
photography.
Last, but not least, appreciation is given to the dedicated members
of the Society who tolerated hot suns and gusty winds in order to
improve their own techniques and contribute to the knowledge of
Crockett County prehistory.

273

DUNLAP COMPLEX

ENVIRONMENT OF THE DUNLAP COMPLEX
The Dunlap Complex is located north of U. S. Highway 290 and
about 25 miles west of Ozona, Texas. More specifically the site is situated in the west central portion of the Edwards Plateau and just to the
northeast of the Stockton Plateau.
Cretaceous limestone of the Comanchean Series (Texas Almanac,
1959:139) is the prominent geological featme of this area.
The central western portion of the Edwards Plateau is disected by
numerous steep-walled canyons. Many shelters are found in the canyon
walls. Of the shelters observed in Crockett County, most do not exceed
fifty feet across the mouth and from the edge of the overhang to the
rear-most portion they have a depth seldom exceeding thirty-five feet.
Smface water is scarce with the Pecos River and Live Oak Creek
(a tributary of the Pecos River) on the western edge of Crockett
County providing most of the live water. Most of the canyons are dry
and carry water only during periods of rain, but the larger and deeper
potholes contain water for sometime after periods of excessive rainfall.
The Texas Almanac ( 1959:549) states that Crockett County is semiarid with an average rainfall of 19.5 inches annually. The temperature
averages 48° in January and 81 o in July with an annual average of
65°. Crockett County has a valiation in elevation from 1500 feet to
2800 feet.
Vegetation (Fig. 1) is a composite of the Sotol Country (Gould,
1962:12). The fauna is in general associated with the Edwards Plateau
Region.
SITE DESCRIPTIONS
This report will deal with each portion of the Dunlap Complex
(Midden No. 1, Midden No. 2, and the Red Mill Shelter) and an addendum will include the two shelters surveyed (Owens No. 1 and
Owens No. 2).
No.1
Midden No.1 of the Dunlap Complex is located (Fig. 2) on a low
terrace just to the northeast of a short, rapidly expanding deep sided
draw. In the upper reaches of the draw the walls are steep but as the
valley widens the walls become more sloping. The floor of this valley
is bisected by a dry wash which is a part of the Live Oak Creek
drainage. The widening of the draw results in the creation of a relatively flat valley floor. The soil is composed of alluvial material which
was washed from the sides of the bordering slopes and from up stream.
There is scant surface evidence of Midden No. 1. Only on the northMIDDEN

274

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Frc. 1. Dunlap Complex.

ern or lower edge of the site is evidence of the buried midden noted
where two irregular semicircles of fire fractured rocks are exposed. A
Cursory examination of the site did not reveal the depth or nature of
the midden. It was hoped that by excavating one of the middens its
structure could be determined and also if any relationship existed between the midden and the Red Mill Shelter. Later excavation revealed
the midden to be of Greer's Type IA (Greer, 1965:43-44).
The surface of the area was carefully searched prior to excavation
for occupational material and was kept separately.
A datum stake was placed on the southern edge of the area of exposed fire cracked rocks and given a designation of S-100 and W-100.
From this point a north-south line was established 10 feet to the south
and 40 feet to the north. Parallel lines were established 5 feet from the
base line establishing an area to be h·enched. This area was divided
into 5 feet squares. Additional five feet squares were added when and
where it was deemed expedient. Two post holes were sunk S-150 and
S-160 on the W-100 line to test the depth and content of the southern
extremity of the site.
The entire test area was dug in arbitrary half foot levels. All the

275

DUNLAP COMPLEX

excavated material was passed through a screen of Y2" mesh. The cultural material and artifacts were placed in paper sacks labeled by
square and level.
It was found that three zones were present with one of these showing evidence of human occupation.

·~

~~

Mortar Holes

~-

:

·~~~
DUNLAP
~

COMPLEX
4/CX5

J

1~
,,, i
'I

''\~

......

.

:~~

IJ

~
~:-...

~

J/jl /}

MIDDEN N0.2

jl

-. .; : : : : : : : : . =--=::-7?

.

/1

·~.....__
~

/

(.
i

f(

Jl

II

/J

/

If

if

(

\

MIDDEN NO.I

)
/
(

DUNLAP SHELTER

I

-~
/
=

County Road

--Fence
~Bluff

===

Ranch Road
Dry Creek Bed

0

25

50

100 Feet

IIIII

Area

FIG. 2. Dunlap Complex showing location of excavations.

Excavated

276

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Zone No. 1 is the base on which the occupational material was deposited. It consists of a sterile alluvium of approximately 50% limestone gravel. The line of demarcation between Zone No. 1 and Zone
No. 2 is distinct.
Zone No. 2 is in general a thick cultural zone varying from .5 feet
to 1.9 feet in thickness. Zone No. 2 varies from one location in the site
to another. In general sub-zonal variations are noted by varying concentrations of fire fractured rock, ash, and charcoal.
Zone No. 2A consists of a dark gray, ashy material impregnated with
charcoal flecks with an occasional fire cracked limestone fragment.
Infrequently in Zone No. 2A are found lenses of ash and clay mixed
with limestone gravel from Zone No. 1. It is possible that this mixture
was the result of 'aboriginal construction of hearths. Later action of
elements and humans filled and scattered the excavated material.
The separation between Zones No. 2A and No. 2B is not as prominent as between Zones No. 1 and No. 2A. Zone No. 2B consists of a
dark gray ash and charcoal matrix with many small to medium sized
limestone gravels, varying from .5 inch to 2.0 inches in maximum size.
Zone No. 2B is lighter in color and contains lessor amounts of limestone fragments in the upper part of Zone 2B. The content of charcoal
and ash diminishes resulting in a lighter color. Thus the concentration
of ash, charcoal, and fire fractured rock gradually diminishes from the
lower portion of Zone 2B to its upper parts.
Zone No. 3 consists of a light tan mixture of clay and humus. This
zone forms the surface of the site.
Throughout Zone No.2 was found occasional charred and uncharred
bone most of which had been fractured. A few fragments of fresh
water bivalves were found. Flint chips were the most commonly found
evidence of human occupation excepting ash and charcoal. Tools were
uncommon.
The depth of the deposits vary from one location in the site to another. It appears that originally the area was a natural irregular
shallow depression. Small fire pits were dug into the sterile alluvium
and the excavated material thrown about the edges of the pits. The
action of the elements tended to level the excavated material. Subsequent use of the site continued to build the midden. Throughout this
time the construction of cooking pits tended to mix the matrix. Animals
bmrowing in the midden fmther displaced the soil. After the site was
no longer in use rain and wind action covered the site with a thin
mantle of alluvium.

277

DUNLAP COMPLEX

MIDDEN NO. I
DUNLAP COMPLEX

(). """'
10

FIG .

20 Fee t

3. Plan of Midden No. I, Dunlap Complex.

FEATURES

Nine features were exposed during excavation (Fig. 3). All of the
features were slab lined hea1ths. Since there is a similarity between
all of them, only two will be described and illustrated. Unlined hearths
were probably present and not recognized by the excavators. Notations
of ash and charcoal concentrations in the field notes tend to substantiate this possibility; however, none are defined in the profiles.
The first (Fig. 4) is a hearth or cooking pit found in square S-105
to llO and W-95 to 100. It was nearly centrally located in this square.
The outer edge was discovered at a depth of approximately 1.35 feet
below the surface. It is nearly circular in outline (Fig. 4). The outer
edge is the highest part of the cooking pit with a depressed center
approximately 2.45 feet below the surface ( 1.1 feet lower than the
outer edge) . Limestone slabs were placed in a previously dug shallow
pit. The slabs appear to have been fractured from the intense heat of
fires built to preheat the cooking pit. Consequently the original slab
size is indeterminable. The nearest tabular limestone is located in the
adjacent hillside so it is assumed that the builders of the cooking pit
availed themselves of this supply.
Three weeks after the Field School a party returned to the site for
the specific purpose of gathering charcoal for a Carbon 14 sample.
Three carbon samples were taken hom the hearth area (Fig. 4) and

278

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the following data was provided by the University of Texas Radiocarbon Laboratory (University of Texas Radiocarbon Dates VI). Tx310 taken from among rocks in the north west fourth of the large slab

PLAN OF HEARTH NO. I,
MIDDEN NO.I
2
Ob-==..!.-===-' Feet

D

HEARTH

~

HEARTH "a" SLAB

'A"

SLAB

•

FIG.

PROBABLE

4. Plan of Hearth No. 1.

HEARTH "B" SLAB

279

DUNLAP COMPLEX

lined basin gave a date of 940 ± 120, A.D. 1010. Tx-357 taken from
among stones in another part of the basin gave a date of 630 ± 90,
A.D. 1320. Tx-358 taken from dark stratum just above the north east
rim of the basin gave a date of 540 -+- 80, A.D. 1410.
In the process of securing the sample it was discovered that there
was a slightly larger hearth or cooking pit directly below (Fig. 4). The
lower or older hearth seems to have been about two feet greater in
diameter. The upper hearth was not removed, so the contour of the
lower heartl1 remains undetem1ined.
The second was discovered in the profile of the west wall of the
trench along a north-south axis of S-95 to S-105 and W -95 (Fig. 5).
This feature is a series of cooking pits. The hearths were given alphabetical designation in the order it appears that they were constructed.
Hearth "A" was built first. It is saucer shaped in cross section with
the lowest part resting on sterile alluvium (Zone No. 1). This hearth
is two feet in diameter, but was probably larger when in use. It is .2
feet lower in the center than at the outer edge. Hearth "A" was abandoned and at a later date Hearth "B" was constructed. In the process
of constructing Hearth "B" the southem edge of Hearth "A" was
destroyed. Hearth "B" was constructed by digging down through occupational material to the sterile alluvium. Hearth "B" is 2.8 feet in
diameter and is depressed .5 feet in the center. Hemth "C" is nearly

1'11·1

,,

Hearth B
~

0 o~eorth C

Willi~
MIDDEN NO.I
CROSS SECTION OF HEARTHS

=
~Surface

FIG.

c=Joccupalional Zone

~ Steriltt Alluvium

5. Cross section of Hearth, Midden No. 1.

280

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

superimposed on Hearth "B" but is slightly off-center to the south by
.1 feet. It is saucer shaped in cross section and is .3 feet lower in the
center. There is a separation b etween H ealth "B" and H earth "C"
varying from .2 feet at the edges of the healihs to as much as .3 feet
in the center.
Thus, it is assumed that H earth "A" was constructed first and at a
later date H earth "B" was built and slightly overlapped H earth "A".
After H earth "B" had been abandoned for an undetermined time
H earth "C" was built in the occupational debris and nearly directly
over H earth "B".
Two carbon samples were taken from the fill between H earths "B"
and "C" ( Fig. 5 ). Analysis was done by the Radiocarbon Laboratory
at the University of Texas, Austin ( University of Texas at Austin Radiocarbon Dates VI). Tx-351 dating 670 -+- 80, A.D. 1280 and Tx-359
dating 570 ± 100, A.D. 1.380 were the results.
Ross ( 1965:21) briefly mentions a slab lined hearth in Eagle Cave.
No detailed description or illustration is provided , so no comparison
is possible. Greer ( 1965 :49 ) described conical slab lined mortared
hearths from the Hohokam area of six to eight feet in diameter and
up to eight feet deep. However, Greer ( p ersonal communication )
states "The midden could b e Type IA midden circle in the center of
which was a series of slab-lined basin hemths. As the rocks from the
hearths fractured from the excessive heat, they were thrown back in
a circle away from the cooking area. This would leave the stones in a
ring and the ash in the depressed central portion of the midden. This
midden could also b e the result of a number of sub-surface cooking
pits ... . Originally a shallow pit was scooped out of the silt-caliche
and lined with limestone slabs. The pit was scooped out, depositing the
used stone material around the h earth area. For tl1e next cooking, a
new pit was scooped out ( this time partially from the remaining ash)
and again lined with stone slabs. The process continued, with pits dug
in places other than original location. The result would b e a midden
with a stone ring surrounding an ashy central area."
MrnnEN No.2
Midden No. 2 of the Dunlap Complex is located approximately 200
yards to the west of Midden No. 1 and at the base of the northern
slope of the hill containing the Red Mill Shelter ( Fig. 2 ). As the slope
levels out a flat bench is formed. The foundation of this b ench is a
limestone outcropping overlaid by an alluvial gravel. It is on this b ench
that the midden is located. There is an erosional break in the b ench to

DUN LAP COMPLEX

281

the north, east and west which terminates the midden. The midden
extends 45 feet east-west and 40 feet north-south.
The surface of the midden was recognized by the exposure of occasional fire cracked limestone fragments, flint chips, and a dark discoloration of the soil. To the north northwest are two bedrock mortar holes.
The surface of Midden No. 2 was carefully searched for artifacts
and sacked separately.
The midden was staked out in such a manner that the area to be
initially excavated would fall in the northeast quadrant. This area is
bounded on the south by the line N-125 and on the west by the line
W-100. Initially five squares were excavated in this quadrant and
later additional squares were added . Before the excavations ceased
only the n01thwest quadrant remained untested.
The site was excavated in arbitrary six inch levels. Not all material
was screened . However, sufficient screening was done to secure an
adequate sample of the materials from the midden.
It was found that three zones made up the site with two of them
occupational zones. The site was laid on limestone bedrock and is not
considered as a zone.
Zone No. 1 was not consistent throughout the site. It was recognizable by the decaying limestone resulting from extreme heat. This zone
rested on the bedrock.
Zone No. 2 was the major occupational zone varying in thickness
from .1 feet at W-75 to a maximum thickness of 2.5 feet at W-102.5.
This zone was very heavily impregnated with fire cracked limestone
intersticed by a dark charcoal stained soil. Zone No. 2 contained all the
artifacts found in the Midden No. 2 deposits. Lenses of caliche, probably from nearby deposits, were found within this zone.
Zone No. 3 made up the surface of the site. It overlaid the midden
and consisted of alluvial gravel and humus. Occasionally fire cracked
rock from Zone No. 2 was observed in Zone No. 3 probably the result
of successive periods of erosion followed by periods when alluvial deposits w ere laid over the site. Such action would result in some occupational ma terial b eing deposited downslope from the southern edges of
the site and b ecoming mixed with the surface material. This would
also expose to a slight degree the deposits in erosional areas of the site.
There is no distinct separation between Zones No. 1 and No. 2, but
Zone No. 2 has a fairly distinct separation from Zone No. 3.
While no record was made of features within Midden No. 2, it is
probable that two features were contained in the midden. Both were
of such a massive nature that they were not recognized at the time of
excavation. Neither was excavated completely. Both are probably the

282

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

remnants of massive fire hearths. The largest is located in the center
of the midden. The central area of this feature was probably subjected
to intense heat and is characterized by an area of decomposed limestone which is fairly free of fire cracked rock. This area is surrounded
by a larger area of undetermined size with a high concentration of fire
cracked rock. A greater concenb·ation of ash is found in the central
part of the hearth. A heavy concentration of fire spalled bedrock was
found on the bedrock. The area of decomposed limestone is approximately 7.5 feet in diameter. The area of concentrated fire cracked rock
covers an area approximately fifteen feet wide to the south. A lesser
concentration of hearth material is located to the east and west for a
distance of approximately five feet. Greer ( 1966, 65-67) excavated the
Louden Site in southeastern Colorado which is a site of a similar nature. In the Louden Site a natural pit in the bedrock was utilized. No
such feature was recognized in Midden No. 2.
A second area with similar characteristics was observed in the notes
of the northeast quadrant of the site (N-125- N-135 and W-75- W -85).
However, not enough of this area was excavated to determine the size
of the hearth.
It is surmized that edible plants were placed on the bedrock and
covered with plant trimmings and stones. A fire was built over the
mass. Assuming that the outer edges cooled first, this portion was
opened first. Consequently, the center, which was opened last, would
be more free of hearth stones.
Northwest of Midden No. 2, two elliptical bedrock mortars were
found. Both were outside the midden area proper but since they were
only 54 feet and 62 feet respectively northwest of the N-125 and
W-115 stake it is assumed that they are associated with Midden No.
2. Mortar No. 1 is slightly elliptical and measures .65 feet by .82 feet
in diameter. Mortar No. 2 measures .51 feet by .57 feet.
RED MILL SHELTER

The Red Mill Shelter is located near the top of a steep hillside facing
in an easterly direction. Midden No. 1 is located about 900 feet east
northeast and Midden No. 2 is located about 600 feet north.
The long axis of the shelter is 55° west of magnetic north. It has a
length of 62.5 feet about one third back from the overhang. The opening of the shelter is 51.65 feet long. Thus, the shelter is slightly bell
shaped. From the overhang to the most extreme back the shelter has
a depth of 45.83 feet.
The surface of the shelter shows evidence of occupation by the
presence of flint chips, fibrous material, and occasional bits of char-

DUNLAP COMPLEX

283

coal. The most common characteristic is great quantities of sheep and
goat dung and roof spall varying from less than an inch in size to as
large as six feet. The roof of the shelter is from seven to eight feet high
at the mouth of the shelter and tapers downward toward the back of
the shelter where the roof meets the rising floor. The rearmost portion
of the floor is exposed from eighteen to thirty-six inches. The surface
of the deposits rises only three feet from the point of the overhang to
the back (Fig. 6). Just inside the overhang there is a rise of approximately one foot which appears to be the result of screenings of pot
hunters.
When the Red Mill Shelter was first observed, three pot hunters'
holes were evident.
Prior to laying out a grid system the entire surface was cleared of
all loose material with the exception of the larger roof spalls. All of
this mate1ial was screened and all the occupational material such as
obvious artifacts, seeds, fibrous matter, and flint chips were placed in
bags marked "surface".
A base line was set up on a line parallel to the long axis of the
shelter with a designation of N-5. Steel stakes were driven into the
deposits at five foot intervals. At 90° angles a series of steel stakes were
set at five foot intervals which intersected the base line. Thus, the entire surface of the shelter was marked into a grid of five foot squares.
It appeared that an undisturbed area fairly free of large roof spalls
was located at S-10 to S-15 and W-5 to W-30. This area was selected
as trench No. 1. It was hoped that this b·ench would reveal the stratigraphy existing and subsequent trenches could be dug by occupational
levels. Trench No. 1 was dug in arbitrary six inch levels in order to
accomplish this purpose. Two squares were begun and stratigraphy
was noted (Fig. 6).
Trench No. 2 was then located in the southern part of the shelter.
Digging by strata was abandoned when no similarity was noted in the
strata of trench No. 1 and trench No. 2. The remainder of this trench
was dug by arbitrary six inch levels.
The discovery of recent historic disturbances such as vertical bedding
of plant remains, firecrackers, tin can wrappers, paper towels, cigarette
butts, and broken shovel handles precluded the establishment of any
natural stratigraphy. Therefore, descriptions of soils are irrelevant and
are omitted.
There were four interesting phenomena found in the Red Mill
Shelter. The first of these was found in the cenb·al rear pmtion of the
shelter and consists of a large, triangular roof spall with five awl
sharpening grooves on its upward facing surface. It appears that, either

284

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c:::::J ZONE I

EZ::ZJ ZONE

2

E=::JzoN£ 3
C==:JzoNE 4

RED MIL L SHELTER
PROFILE OF NORTH
TRENCH NO. I

WA LL

OF

~BOULDE RS

m:s::sJ LI MESTONE
•

R ODENT HOLE

FIG. 6.

Profile of Trench No.

1

from Red Mill Shelter.

prior to prehistoric occupation or during the time the shelter was occupied, a roof spall fell to the surface of the shelter. The upward surface faced the mouth of the shelter.
Groove "A" is a shallow and "v" shaped with a length of 3.0 inches.
Groove "B" is 1.6 inches long. It is faint and apparently was little
used. It is a shallow "v" in cross section.
Groove "C" is 3.8 inches long. It is .32 inches wide and .19 inches
deep. It shows a high polish along the sides of the "v".
Groove "D" is 3.2 inches long and is a shallow "u" in cross section.
It is .25 inches wide.
Groove "E" is faint and thus it is presumed that it had just been
started. It is 1.6 inches long.
The second consists of two small, shallow mortars found in a large
roof spall at the north end of the shelter near the overhang. Both are
circular with diameters of 4.5 inches. They have a depth of only .75
inches .
The fourtl1 is a large fire hearth. It was not recognized as a feature
at the time it was exposed ... it was noted when the wind swept the
profile clean and in the recording of the profile of the north wall of
Trench No. 1 (Fig. 6) the last day of the dig. The fire pit is 6.2 feet
long. Its width is undertermined. The contents of the pit consists of
a very high percentage of ash and fine charcoal. Bone and snail shells

285

DUNLAP COMPLEX

were abundant. Percolation of moisture from the floor of the shelter
caused decomposition of most of the fiber content of the feature, however, some fragments of decomposed fibers of either sotol or lechugilla
were noted.
Greer ( 1965:45) described the various kinds of mescal pits and this
feature conforms to his type IV. Greer further states that this type is
found in the mouths or just inside the mouths of shelters. Feature No.
4 conforms to the location and description of Greer's typology of this
type of cooking pit.
ARTIFACTS
Artifacts will be divided into catagories as follows: chipped stone,
rubbed to ground stone, ceramics, shell and bone, and vegetal.
Unless otherwise noted chipped stone tools are made from native
cherts. The projectile point typology and nomenclature use in this report is that outlined in "An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology" ( Sumn, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954). In some instances it is difficult to separate one type from another as they tend to grade into each
other. In instances such as these the final decision is based on the
judgment of the author.
MIDDEN

No. 1

BIFACES

Ten fragmentary and complete bifaces were found either on the surface or in the course of excavation. Of this number four are sufficiently
complete for identification and all of these are classed as projectile
points. One is classified as a d1ill, and the remaining five are of such
fragmentary nature that it can not be determined if they are portions
of projectile points or other bifaces.
ARROW POINTS
PERDIZ. One incomplete arrow point was found in the course of
excavating the midden. It has an estimated length of 2.8 em. with a
width of 2.3 em. The finely serrated edges are concave and flare widely at the shoulders. The concave stem was fashioned by chipping in
from the corners and the base is pointed. At the Doss Site (Nunley,
Duffield, and Jelks, 1965:30) tl1ree points with similar characteristics
were found and given the designation "Provisional Type A". This
arrow point was found in the 1.0 feet to 1.5 feet level.
DART POINTS
ENSOR. A broken Ensor point of light gray chert is of particular interest. The tip of the point and one corner of the base are missing. The

286

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

complete point was approximately 5.0 em. long and 2.5 em. wide at the
base. The edges ar e nearly straight. Open notches near the bas e are
typical of this type, and the base is slightly concave. At Centipede and
Damp Caves, Epstein ( 1963 :45-46 ) subdivided the Ensor type into
three sub-typ es. Type "C" is described by Epstein as having notching
that is shallow and tends to be confluent with the base of the point.
This point fits this classification quite well. It was found in the
.0 feet to .5 feet level. Perhaps the most interesting feature of this point
is that the broken basal corner was rechipped to fom1 a gouge-like
edge.
The proximal half of a point tentatively identified as Ensor was found
in tl1e .5 feet to 1.0 feet level. There is not enough of the projectile
point remaining to give an estimated length, but it is widest at the
shoulders where it is 2.6 em. Notching is from the side and is prominent. The notching produces a strongly exp anding stem. The base of
the stem is slightly concave. While the classic Ensor is widest at the
base, this point does not have this characteristic. It has a faint resemblance to the Martindale but the Martindale is most commonly barbed
by notching from the corner rather than from the side. As previously
noted Epstein has subdivided the Ensor and this specimen appears to
be Type "A" which Epstein describes as follows: "comparatively broad
triangular point having deep side-notching above the base. This point
is often widest at the shoulder."
"zoRRA". A surface specimen with one side and the tip broken was
found . The edges are strongly convex, the weak shoulders are fom1ed
by open notches producing an expanding stem, and the base is concave. The complete specimen was approximately 5.0 em. to 5.3 em.
long and 2.4 em. wide. No similar type is shown by Suhm, Jelks and
Krieger (1954) but Johnson ( 1964:45, Fig. No. 13 ) reports a similar
type at the Devils Mouth Site which he has given a tentative type
name of "Zorra". This point is similar to the Pandale point except that
it does not have the typical twisting of the stem and body.
DRILL

A surface find is classed as a drill. It is 4.8 em. long with a width of
1.9 em. The widest point is 2.2 em. from the base. The 'bit" is gently
concave on one edge and is relatively straight on the other edge. From
the widest point the stem reduces convexly to form a rounding base.
Thus, we have a lozenge shaped artifact in outline with the 'bit" end
of the drill slightly longer than the basal portion. The bit of the drill
has been rechipped and is diamond shaped in cross section. There is
slight evidence of smoothing along the edges probably from use. The

DUNLAP COMPLEX

2B7

tip is blunt which suggests that this tool was used as a reamer more
than as a drill. This artifact could have been made from an Abasolo
point.
Several drills of this type have been reported. Epstein reports one
similar from Centipede Cave ( 1963:58, Fig. No. 9 I) which he states is
made from an Abasolo point. Nunley, Duffield and Jelks reported one
very similar at Coon tail Spin Site ( 1965:77) . Seven were found at
Eagle Cave (Ross, 1965:92, Fig. No. 21) and it is speculated that the
broad base might have been used for hafting.
The single drill found in Midden No. 1 is more massive than most
of the specimens found in the D evil's River and Pecos River area. The
authors do not mention the smoothing along the bit of these drills, but
there is a strong resemblance.
uNIF ACES ( 39

specimens )
The category of unifaces includes a number of diverse artifacts.
Within it are four real tools and a number of flakes that were used in
the manner of tools without previous preparation.
sCRAPERS ( 2)

A single specimen was complete and is a large discoid
scraper 8.5 em. long and 6.5 em. wide. Scraper edges were formed by
percussion and smoothed with fine retouch so that the edge angles
range from 50° to 70° . The bulb has not been thinned and there is no
evidence of hafting.
A second scraper is represented by a small fragment of what may be
the working edge of an end scraper. What remains of the cutting edge
is similar to that of the previous specimen.
1) The distal end of a large flake has been chipped to
form a toothed edge which is slightly convex. This tool is 3.3 em. long
and 4.7 em. wide. The bulb has not been thinned, there is no evidence
of hafting and the chipping seems to have been accomplished considerably later than the production of the flake. A darker patina on
both flake surfaces was penetrated by the chips that formed the working edge.

DENTICULATES (

1) A small ( 0.7 em. diameter) notch was placed toward the
distal end of a small flake. This sort of tool has been referred to as a
"spokeshave" but no supporting evidence has been offered.
NOTCHES (

35)
A number of flakes show evidence of use in the form of small irregularly placed nicks along one or more edges. This group can be characterized by a general lack of uniformity of size and shape. There is,
however, the constant of each flake having one or more edges that are

USE RETOUCH (

288

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

thin and sharp. These edges bear the brunt of the use retouch. Thirtyfive artifacts with use retouch were catalogued from midden #1.
CORES ( 3)

The three specimens are so "used up" that it is difficult to detennine
any typological information from them. Just about every flat surface
was used as a platform and considerable battering was done after the
last flake had been removed. These edges cannot be mistaken for
choppers since the batte1ing scars are on only one face of each edge.
MANO

A mano was found in the .0' to .5' level. It is circular with a diameter
of 13.3 em. and a thickness of 2.3 em. and is made from a fine grained
sandstone. The grinding surface is nearly flat with a very slightly convex surface. There is no indication of the manner the mano was used,
but the slightly convex surface indicates that it was pushed and pulled
across a metate in a slight rocking motion with no preference for being
held in any one position. Consequently, no faceted surface was formed
but the edges were worn slightly more than the center which produced
the slightly thickened middle portion. The mano was used on one surface only. The side opposite the grinding surface shows the naturally
eroded surface of the parent piece from which it was taken.
PITTED STONE

A fragment of native limestone has three pits of various depths on
one smface which may have served some functional purpose. The
fragment appears to represent about one third of the complete artifact.
It was probably shaped in its complete form as it is pecked about the
edges indicating that it was fom1ed in this fashion. The size of the
complete artifact can not be determined but it has a thickness of 4.4
em. There is one pit with a depth of 1.1 em. that appears to have been
pecked into the surface. Another pit is only .3 em. deep and is worn
quite smooth. A third pit was started by pecking and appears to be
unused. The purpose of these pits is unknown but Johnson (1964:70)
hints that manos with this feature may have been used for bipolar
flaking. Honea ( 1965:264) suggests that pitting provides a firm base
for cores in striking off flakes.
In the Fate Bell Shelter ( 1965:58) Parsons reports a fragmentary
metate with a pecked depression. Ross ( 1965:98) reports waterwom
cobbles with shallow pecked depressions from Eagle Cave. Pitted
manos were reported at Centipede and Damp Caves (Epstein, 1963:
77-78). Nunley, Duffield, and Jelks report manos at Coontail Spin Site
( 1965:85) with pecked depressions.

289

DUNLAP COMPLEX

METATE
Several large fragm ents of what appear to b e a metate w ere found
in the deposits of Midden No. 1. There is the indication that a large,
thick limestone slab was used in unaltered fmm as a metate. A naturally form ed and flat area has a smoothed surface with microscopic
striations. This grinding surface is slightly depressed.
CERAMICS
One small sherd 1.4 em. by 1.7 em. in size was found on the surface
of Midden No. 1. The sherd is heavily tempered with angular fragments of quartz. The outer surfaces have a reddish hue. The core of
the sherd is black. The quartz tempering material is evident on both
outer surfaces as erosion h as removed the major portion of any slip
that might have b een present. Greer ( 1965:41 ) in his report on Midden
Circles and Mescal Pits mentions that sh erds are frequently found on
sites of this type.
The sherd is friable and h as the gen eral appearance of one of the
Brownwares found to the west and southwest.
SHELL AND BONE ARTIFACTS
Several fragm ents of shell probably from fresh water mussels were
found in the midden deposit. Only one exhibited any use. This one
specimen has a smoothed edge. There are reports of similar specimens
b y Nunley, Duffield, and Jelks ( 1965:105 ) at Coontail Spin Site.
No bone artifacts were found.
MmDEN No. 2
BIFACES
Twenty- ei~ht fragm entary and complete bifaces were found on the
surface and during excavation of Midden No. 2. Of this total fifteen
are either complete or sufficiently complete for identification .

ARROW POINTS
ALBA. One nearly complete arrow point was found ( Fig. 7 a ) in
Midden No. 2. The identification as Alba is only tentative. It is approximately 2.7 em. in length and 2.3 em. wide at the shoulders . The
outline is trian~ul ar with one side slightly concave and the other
slightly convex. It is not barbed but is strongly shouldered. The stem
expands slightly and the b ase of the stem is rounded so that it h as a
slight bulbous appearance. This point was found in the .0' to .5' level.
DART POINTS
ABASOLO. Two Abasolo points w ere found in the deposits and one
was found on the surface. The two excavated specimens were found in

290

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

a
c

b

g

e

f
0

2

3

4

5

CM .

FIG. 7. Artifacts from Midden No. 2, a, Alba; b. Ensor; c. Langtry; d. Fairland; e. Side-scraper; f. Oblique side-scraper; g. Graver; h. Raclette; i. Sidescraper-notch.

the .0' to .5' level and the third specimen was excavated but the
records are not consistent about its provenience. These points vary in
length from 4.0 em. to an estimated 5.5 em. They are triangular in
form with convex edges and bases. They are not beveled.
ENSOR. Ensor points (Fig. 7 b) were the most frequently found point.
Two were found on the surface and one was found in the .0' to .5'
level and the fourth was found in the .5' to 1.0' level. Only one specimen is sufficiently complete to give an approximate size. It is appar-

DUNLAP COMPLEX

291

ently 5 em. in length and 2.5 em. in width and the widest part is the
base. All are notched from the side with bases that are slightly concave. The side notches on two are shallow while the notching is more
prominent in the other two. Epstein ( 1963:47) subdivides the Ensor
type into two types on the form of the base and the depth of the
notches. Three appear to fall into Epstein's Type B (shallow notches
and straight or slightly concave base) and one is Type A (deep side
notches).
LANGTRY. The Langtry type has been a "catch-all" type for the Trans
Pecos area for some time. Schuetz ( 1956:138) suggests that the Langtry type should be subdivided. Epstein ( 1963:36-38) refined division
of this point type to a greater extent. The single specimen of Langtry
found in Midden No. 2 appears to fit into Epstein's Type D ( 1963:37,
Fig. No. 8), however, the specimen found is smaller than those
described by Epstein. This specimen (Fig. 7 c) is approximately 4.0
em. long and 2.4 em. wide at the shoulders. The shoulders are not
strong and are formed by a contracting stem that expands slightly from
the lowest portion of the base to the blade. The stem is slightly concave. Its exact provenience is unknown.
MARSHALL. Two Marshall points were found on the surface of Midden No. 2. The stems are short and broad, and the base of the stem is
straight. The barbs are broken so it can not be determined how strongly
barbed the points were. The edges are convex and one specimen appears to be resharpened.
FAIRLAND. One of this type (Fig. 7 d) was found on the surface and
the other was found in the .0' to .5' level. Both are small for the type
in general, but they retain the proper configuration. The edges are
slightly convex, and are weakly notched close to the base which is the
widest part of the point. The central indentation of the base is formed
by two convex arcs from the sides to the center. The larger specimen
is 3.5 em. long and is 2.2 em. wide at the base.

This fragmentary point was found in Midden No. 2 but
of unknown provenience. It does not fit any described type. No length
can be given but it is 1.8 em. wide at the shoulders. Its weak shoulders
and wide, short, concave stem make it an unusual specimen. The base
of the stem is concave. The edges that remain appear to be nearly
straight or very slightly convex.
A large, crudely made biface was found in the deepest portion of
Midden No. 2. It is percussion flaked with some retouching along the
stem. It has weak shoulders and the stem contracts sharply. The edges

UNCLASSIFIED.

292

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

are strongly convex. Although the tip is broken, this specimen measures
approximately 8.0 em. long and 5.0 em. wide at the shoulders. The
proximal portion of the stem bears evidence of the original cortex.
This point almost fits into the Almagre catagory. In all probability, this
specimen is really an early step in the process of manufacture.
UNIFACES

The artifacts from Midden No. 2 are no more numerous than those
from Midden No. 1 but the finished tools are more frequent and more
varied in forms .
SCRAPERS ( 7 )

Four specimens are side-scrapers as they are usually conceived; steep retouch along one edge more or less parallel to the main
axis of the flake. One specimen has retouch on both edges ( Fig. 7 e).
Another is an oblique side-scraper ( Fig. 7 f ) with an adjacent edge
retouched to a raclette while another combination has a side-scraper
on one edge and a notch (Fig. 7 i ) on the other.
RACLETTES ( 8)

These tools are characterized by flat retouch on thin,
acute angle edges ( Fig. 7 h ). One of the eight specimens has a notch
on an adjacent edge, but the others are essentially single retouched
edges of various shaped flakes.

( 4) While these tools appear to be deliberately retouched, there is no evidence that the makers went to much trouble in
selecting the very best flakes , nor did they strive for even spacing of
the "teeth". One of the specimens had the bulb removed by steep
truncation, possibly to permit hafting. The latter is symmetrical and
shows good workmanship.

DENTICULATES

NOTCHES ( 2 ) These tools are simple semi-circular notches made by
removing several small chips from a thin edge of a flake. They are all
close to 0.7 em. in diameter, one specimen has a single notch, one specimen has two notches on the same edge.
GHA VERS ( 5) Gravers ( Fig. 7 g) from all portions of the site were made
by chipping the equivalent of two intersecting notches along a convex
edge.

BURINS ( 1 ) A single burin was created by the distal truncation of a
flake, followed by striking a spall from that platform parallel to the
ma jor axis of the flake.
USE RETOUCH ( 21 )

If we interpret these correctly, none of them are real typological
tools. The retouch appears to be irregular and weak, the result of use

293

DUNLAP COMPLEX

rather than of prior intent. Patterns were not discerned since many
kinds of motion on any number of materials might produce this wear.
TECHNOLOGICAL ATTRIBUTES
CORES ( 6) One specimen has prepared (faceted) platforms at opposite
ends of the flint pebble. It, like the other examples, had been practically "used up", and thus it is difficult to study the flaking processes.
BIFACE THINNING FLAKES ( 1) The single specimen has all of the attributes of a flake removed from a partially formed biface by a soft
hammer.
RUBBED OR GROUND STOKE ARTIFACTS
Of the six ground stone artifacts found in Midden No. 2 all came
from the deposits and were fairly evenly distributed throughout. All
appear to have been made from a large limestone cobble. The grinding
surfaces are not distinct, but in one specimen it seems that a slightly
depressed area was produced. Without microscopic examination the
grinding motion used can not be determined, but in the single specimen with the depressed grinding surface it appears that a circular
motion was probably used.
RED MILL SHELTER
BIFACES
One hundred fifty-four bifacial tools were found on the talus slope,
on the surface, and in the deposits of the Red Mill Shelter.
ARROW POINTS
CLIFTON. Only one specimen of this type was found (Fig. 8 a) and
it appeared while screening surface material. It has an approximate
length of 3.0 em. and a width of 2.1 em. The greatest width is located
at the shoulders. The stem is .5 em. in width. One of the senated edges
is slightly convex and the other concave.
FRESNO. A single specimen of the Fresno type was found in screening
the surface material. It is complete except for one corner of the base.
It is 2.9 em. in length and 1.4 em. in width. The widest point is at the
base and the edges are slightly convex.
HARRELL. A single Harrell point was found on the talus slope in front
of the shelter (Fig. 8 b). The outline is triangular with lateral notches
on each side. The notches are rounding "v's" located just below the
midsection of the point. Below the notches the stem is vertical. The
base is straight. This point has an overall length of 2.0 em. and a
width of 1.4 em. at the base of the triangle.

b

a

e

d

c

f

h

g

2

0

5

3
C l•i.

m

k

n

0

Frc. 8. Projectiles from Red Mill Shelter: a.
fied; d. Perdiz; e. Livermore; f. Shumla;
Martindale; k. Montell; I. Pedernales; m.
straight base; o. Langtry; p. Val Verde; q.

p

q

Clifton; b. Harrell; c. Unclassig. Uvalde; h. Ellis; i. Dar!; j.
Ensor, concave base; n. Ensor,
Paisano.

DUNLAP COMPLEX

295

LIVERMORE. Of the three Livermore points (Fig. 8 e) found in the
Red Mill Shelter, one was found while cleaning a pot-hunter hole. The
other two were found in the deposits in the .0' to .05' level. None are
complete. The edges are slightly concave to extremely concave. The
concave edges result in a flaring of the lower portion. One is slightly
barbed and the other two are shouldered as opposed to barbed. Only
one has a complete base and it has a bulbar stem. The other two would
seem to have more pointed bases. Two are asymetrical. These points
vary in length from 2.5 em. to 2.8 em. with a width variation of 1.1
em. to 2.1 em. The edges are all serrated.
PERDIZ. This type is the most common arrow point found in the Red
Mill Shelter (Fig. 8 d). There is a great variation in this group. The
Perdiz has a tliangular body with edges usually quite straight but
sometimes slightly convex or concave. Shoulders are sometimes at right
angles to the stem but usually they are well barbed. Stems contracted
often quite sharply at the base, but may be somewhat rounded. There
is more variation in size and proportions than in most arrow point
types in Texas. These examples are similar to the single specimens
found in Midden No. 1. Three of the specimens were found in the
cleaning of pot-hunters holes. Four were found in the deposits. The
ones complete enough to provide a size range indicate a length varying from 2.2 em. and 1.4 em. to 1.9 em. in width.
UNCLASSIFIED GROUP 1. These points were the second most frequently
found. They have a similarity to the Scallorn point and the Scallorn
eddy variant (Jelks, 1962: Fig. No. 13 M-R) in particular. They have
moderately expanding stems, triangular bodies, and are barbed. One
(Fig. 8 c) has serrated edges. They vary in length from 2.8 em. to 3.5
em. They are widest at the lowest part of the barbs varying from 1.5
em. to 2.0 em.
UNCLASSIFIED GROUP n. A single arrow point that does not fall into
any known type was found. It is 3.2 em. long and 1.6 em. wide at the
shoulders. It has a triangular body with one side slightly convex and
the other straight. Shoulders and the stem are formed by wide, shallow
side notching. The base is rounding. It is flaked primarily on only one
surface from a thick flake.
DART POINTS
ABASOLO. The Abasolo point is one of the dominant point types
found in the Red Mill Shelter. They are all leaf shaped with convex
edges. The bases are rounding from slightly convex to nearly a semicircle. Five of the specimens are well made showing care in the chip-

296

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ping with secondary flaking along the edges. The other two are formed
by percussion flaking with no secondary flaking. These last two are
arbitrarily classed as Abasolo points. The ones sufficiently complete to
determine size fall well within the size range. None are beveled. Two
were found in the cleaning of pot-hunter holes and the balance were
found as single specimens in the deposits.
CATAN. Only two of this type were found. They are leaf shaped with
rounding bases and formed by percussion with secondary chipping
along the edges which are not beveled. One specimen was found on
the talus slope and the other while cleaning a pot-hunters hole. They
fall within the range of size for the type varying from an estimated
3.7 em. to 4.1 em. in length and 2.2 em. in width.
DARL. The Darl point is described as having a long triangular body.
Beveling is not found on the edges but is present on the stems, alternately, on the right side when the point is orientated with the base
toward the viewer (Fig. 8 i). The two specimens complete enough to
give a size range are 4.4 em. and 4.7 em. in length and are widest at
the shoulders with a width of 2.0 em. The stems expand ve1y slightly
and the shoulders are formed by notching from the side to fon11 a
ve1y open "U" shaped notch. One has a slightly concave base and the
other two have slightly convex bases.
ELLIS. This type (Fig. 8 h) is characterized by having a shmt, triangular body which is straight to slightly convex. The stem expands toward the base and is formed by notching from the basal comer. The
bases are straight with one exception and it is slightly convex. The two
larger ones are broken and can not be measured. The size range of the
remaining four varies from 3.4 em. to 4.0 em. in length. The Ellis point
was fairly evenly distributed in the deposits.
ENSOR, concave base. This group (Fig. 8 m) is separated from the
rest of the Ensors because all have a decidedly concave base. Several
are small enough to be classed as large arrow points. This sub-class is
the second most commonly found point with a representation of
twelve specimens. The smallest is 3.1 em. in length and the largest
complete enough for measurement is 4.8 em. They vary in width from
2.0 em. to 3.0 em. However, one represented by only a basal fragment
is without question larger. The notches range from very slight to prominent. Those with deeply concave bases and prominent notches approach the Frio Point in outline. Five were found on the talus slope,
surface or while cleaning out pot-hunter holes.

DUNLAP COMPLEX

297

ENSOR, sh·aight base. These points are the classic Ensor (Fig. 8 n).
They have h·iangular bodies with side notching varying from slight to
quite prominent. All are widest at the base except for one specimen
which is slightly wider at the shoulders. One is small for the type as
it is only 2.5 em. in length. However, this small specimen is thick for
its length and was possibly resharpened from a broken point. The
longest is an estimated 5.7 em. and the width vmies from 1.8 to 2.5
em. Seven are very slightly concave at the base and the remaining
fifteen have straight bases. They fall within the size range of the type
except for the small specimen noted above. They are also fairly evenly
dish·ibuted tl1roughout the deposit.
FRIO. This point type grades into the Ensor, concave base and the
division is arbih·ary. Of the four found only two were found in the
deposit with one in the .5' to 1.0' level and the other in the 1.0' to 1.5'
level. They have slightly convex, h·iangular bodies. The notching is
done from varying angles from the corner. This produces a strongly
expanding stem. The notches on some of the bases are more prominent
than on others. All the Frio points found in the Red Mill Shelter are
small for the type and varying from 3.0 em. to 3.8 em. in length. In all
instances the bases are as wide or wider than the shoulders.

LANGE. No length can be given for this type found in the Red Mill
Shelter since all are fragmentary. They all appear to have had large
bodies. The identification was made primarily from the basal portions.
Their stems were formed by notching more from the base than the
corner which results in a sh·aight stem. The barbed shoulders are not
prominent. The stems are concave to a slight degree. One was found
in the .0' to .5' level and the other two were found in tl1e 1.5' to 2.0'
level.
LANGTRY. Three Langtq points were found on the talus slope or
while cleaning out pot-hunters holes. The other five were found in the
deposit. There is such a diversity in tl1is type that we have used Epstein's classification ( 1963: 36-38) as outlined in the subdivision of this
type from the Centipede and Damp Caves. Langtry points have
straight, concave, convex to recurved edges. Shoulders are generally
prominent but unbarbed and the stems usually contract.
LANGTRY (Type A). Epstein described this sub-type as having a
"comparatively long and narrow conh·acting stem and a straight base."
Two of tl1is type were found in the Red Mill Shelter (Fig. 8 o).
LANGTRY (Type B). One specimen of tl1is variation by Epstein was
found. They are characterized by having a broader conh·acting stem

298

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

with a slightly concave base. Length can not be estimated but its width
is 2.7 em. at the shoulders.
LANGTRY (Type D). This type is described by Epstein as having
"contracting stems with convex to pointed bases." Two of this variety
were found. Only one is sufficiently complete to determine its length
and it is approximately 6.0 em. long. Width varies from 2.7 em. to
3.7 em.
LANGTRY (Type E). Epstein described this Langtry variation as
having short stems and straight bases. Two of this classillcation were
found in the Red Mill Shelter. The single fairly complete specimen is
4.6 em. long but tl1e width can not be determined since one side is
broken from the shoulder toward the distal tip.
VAL VERDE. A distinctive va1iation of the Langtr·y is the Val Verde
(Fig. 8 p) which was first described by Schuetz ( 1956:141). Schuetz
described this point as follows: "stems of this group are flared at the
base tips and, in addition, are beveled, usually on the right side." The
single specimen found in the Red Mill Shelter has a shorter stem than
the classic Val Verde variation but the stem is expanding and is beveled
on the right side. It is 4.8 em. long and 2.0 em. wide.
MARTINDALE. This point (Fig. 8 j) is described as having a triangular
body usually convex with prominent to well barbed shoulders. The
stems expand. The base is formed by two convex curves meeting in
the center producing a "fish-tail" appearance. Four of this type were
found but only two are complete enough to give a size range. The
smaller is 4.0 em. long and 2.6 em. wide at the barbs. The other is
approximately 5.6 em . long and 3.2 em. wide at the barbs which fits
well within the size range for this type.
MATAMOROS. Only two of this type were found. They are triangular
in outline and the edges are slightly convex. They are 3.3 em. and 3.8
em. long respectively.
MONTELL. The Montell point (Fig. 8 k) has a slightly convex triangular body. It varies from shouldered and unbarbed to barbed. The
stem may vary from straight to expanding. The most prominent feature is the "v" shaped notch in the center of the base. The most complete specimen is stubby for the type and was probably resharpened.
All three seem to have been percussion Raked with retouching along
the edges. The "v" notch in the center of the base appears to have
been formed by notching upward from the center of the base. None
have the deep basal notch of the classic Montell.

DUNLAP COMPLEX

299

PAISANO. The separation of the Ensor types and the Paisano (Fig.
8 q) is arbitrary and based on the judgment of the author. The characteristics of the Paisano point are convex edges often serrated and
shallow side notches with a concave to deeply indented base. The
notches vary from fairly prominent to barely discernable. There is a
considerable size range in the ones found in the Red Mill Shelter. The
smallest is 2.5 em. long and the largest is 4.5 em. in length. The smallest is below the size range normally associated with the type, but it
fits the overall characteristics. This is the third most frequently found
point and only the Ensor group is more commonly found.
PEDERNALES. The single specimen (Fig. 8 1) was badly burned and
broken to a degree that size can not be given. It has a single, small
barb. The stem is straight and the base has the typical open "U" shaped
notch in the center.
SHUMLA. Only one of this type (Fig. 8 f) was found in the Red Mill
Shelter. Approxin1ately one-third of the distal portion of the body is
broken. An estimated length of 4.0 em. and a width of 2.9 em. at the
barbs is judged to be the approximate size. It is gently concave and is
barbed but not as strongly as some examples of tllis type and is flaked
from the corner to form a wide, open notch. The stem is short and
parallel with a rounding base.
TORTUGAS. These points are triangular and stemless. The edges vary
from straight to convex. The bases vary from straight to slightly concave but none are beveled. All are smaller than the nonn given for the
Tortugas but are large for the Matamores. The lack of beveling appears to be a trait of this point in the Trans Pecos area. All are generally well made with secondary flaking along the edges. With one
exception all the bases are thinned. The length varies from 3.6 em. to
4.5 em. and the width varies from 1.7 em. to 2.4 em.
TRAVIS. The single Travis point is small for the type. It is only 4.0
em. long and 2.0 em. wide at the shoulders. One edge is straight and
the other edge and base are slightly concave. In general it has the
configuration of this type.
TRINITY. Trinity points are biangular with edges varying from
straight to convex. They have wide stems and the bases are strongly
convex. They are within the size range given for tills point but more
on the small side. The three found vary from 3.4 em. to 4.5 em. in
length and are 2.3 em. wide.
UVALDE.

Two of this type were found in the Red Mill Shelter (Fig.

300

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

8 g) and only one is sufficiently complete to detennine its size. It is
4.3 em. long and 1.7 em. wide. The second specimen was identified
from the basal fragment. This specimen is triangular with slightly convex edges. The shoulders are prominent on the fragmentary specimen
but not on the other. Both are corner notched to form an expanding
stem with the base as wide as the body. The bases are strongly concave, forming an outline that is Uillilistakenly Uvalde.
UNCLASSIFIED. This point has a short, stubby body and expanding
stem which is longer than the body giving the impression that it was
resharpened after it was broken. The edges are concave. The stem is
formed by notching more from the base than from the corner and it
has distinctive pointed barbs. The base is straight and is 2.6 em. long
and 1.8 em. wide at the barbs. The stem is approximately 60% of the
entire length of tl1e point. It is thick in cross section adding to the
impression that it was resharpened.
INCOMPLETE BIFACES ( 27) This group of artifacts are those which represent the stages of manufacture of unfinished tools which were
abandoned for one reason or another. Three are simply initial biface
preparation on a pebble. Five of the fragments appear to have broken
at the thinning stage. Twelve appear to have broken at the percussion
stage.
DRILLS ( 2)

Two artifacts are classified as drills. The first conforms to
what others have called a drill in that it is bifacially flaked and pointed.
The second, appears to have at one time been an old patinated biface,
perhaps even a point. It has been retouched at the distal end to produce a tip which could be characterized as "drill-like".
UNIFACES
SCRAPERS ( 8) Of the eight scrapers, one (Fig. 9 e) is an apparent endscraper with considerable flat retouch which cuts through the patina.
The purpose of the recent retouch is not known.
Another is a transverse side-scraper (Fig. 9 f) on a cortex flake.
Note that the scraper edge is on the proximal end of the flake.
Three are multiple edge scrapers, two sides and one end. One of
these (Fig. 9 g) has had the bulb reduced by flat retouch. Another
(Fig. 9 i) has been made from a flat pebble. The third, not pictured,
shows heavy use polish on the end.
Three are side-scrapers ( Fig. 9 h) and all have had the bulb reduced by flat retouch. One has been fire broken and the distal end is
missing. All three have scraper edges on two sides.
RACLETTES (

2) One of the two raclettes (Fig. 9 d) shows inverse re-

c

b

a

d

e

f
0

2

3

4

s

g

CM .

FIG. 9. Stone Artifacts from Red Mill Shelter: a. D enticulate; b. Multiple
mixed burin; c. Raclette; d. End-scraper; e. Multiple burin, transverse; f.
Transverse side-scraper; g, i, Multiple-edge scraper; h. Side-scraper; j. Gouge.

302

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

touch on its characte1istically acute cutting edge, and the bulb has
been reduced by flat retouch. The second has a thinned bulb and was
made on an older flake.
DENTICULATES ( 2)

The £rst of the denticulates (Fig. 9 a) has two
straight edges and one concave. The bulb has been reduced by flat
retouch. The second also is two sided. The distal end shows heavy
battering. Here again the flake used is much older than the retouch
since the retouch cuts through the patina.
GOUGE ( l) The one gouge from the Red Mill Shelter (Fig. 9 j) shows
rows of tiny hinge scars on the end and two sides suggesting use like
that of a scraper. The bulb has been reduced by flat retouch.
VARIA ( l) This single specimen has one edge that is a raclette and one
edge that shows flat retouch.

BUlliNS ( 5)

Two of the burins were transverse. One of these (Fig. 9 b)
was multiple. Another multiple burin (Fig. 9 c) was made on a truncation. One bmin was made on a snapped flake, and the flake shows
some bifacial retouch. Also, on the same flake, the maker attempted a
burin on b·uncation at right angles to the successful burin blow. The
£nal one is a single blow burin.
Description of this group of flakes is difficult because the intent of the maker can not be known. Three of the group
show only use retouch.
One, a cortex flake, has steep retouch on two edges. The distal end
is broken off and this fracture resembles that made by a burin blow.
It may be a broken end-scraper.
Another looks as if it had been taken from a beveled preform. It is
possible the maker was attempting to produce a biface.
One retouched flake was seriously £re-packed. The remnant could
have been the beginning of a point or a series of graver tips.
Another badly £re-packed flake appears to be what is left of an endscraper. The bulb was reduced by a burin-like blow.

RETOUCHED FLAKES.

l)
One chopper made from a cobble was found and it shows considerable batte1ing.
CHOPPER (

HAMMERSTONES ( 2)

The two specimens are bifacially chipped. The edges are blunt and
are heavily battered. Possibly, the chipping resulted from use as hammers.

DUNLAP COMPLEX

303

(3)
Of the three recognizable cores, one has a single platform. The
others are reduced to small remnants.
CORES

MANOS AND METATES

These tools are lumped together because one will not function without the other. It would appear that these artifacts were pecked in
shaping. The single complete metate and mano are a matched set found
in situ. The mano was found on one end of the metate. The entire
surface of both have been pecked. The metate is an elongated stone
38.6 em. long, 20.4 em. wide and 5.9 em. thick. Only one face has been
slightly used. The matching mano is 15.8 em. long, 11.0 em. wide, and
3.4 em. thick. It is oval in outline and only one surface was used. The
grinding smface is perfectly flat and the opposite side is half of an
ellipse. The material is sandstone.
Four fragments of shaped manos were found. Two are of native
limestone and the other two are native sandstone. Two of the fragments
are too small to give any indication of size, shape, or the manner in
which they were used. One, ovate in outline, has been used on only
one face. The back of this fragment is pecked as are the sides. Both
surfaces appear to have been extensively used. It can not be determined if this fragment was wedge or diamond shaped in cross section.
The portion at hand is thin on the end and thicker toward the midsection.
Only one fragment of an unshaped mano was found. No size or
shape can be given but it appears that a handy, unshaped limestone
cobble was used. The remaining five fragments represent portions of
metates. Three are of very fine grained sandstone. Actually it is difficult to determine with certainty whether these are from shaped metates
or not, but the fragments at hand do not have the typical pecking that
shaped metates have. Two have worked surfaces on both faces and one
has a grinding surface on only one face. The fourth and fifth fragments are of native limestone. The grinding surfaces are not as prominent as in the sandstone specimens. It would appear that a piece of
tabular limestone was used but only to the degree that the naturally
rough surface was slightly smoothed.
AWL SHARPENING STONE

A fragment of limestone with two "v" shaped grooves was found in
the Red Mill Shelter. One groove is wider and deeper than the other.
This groove is 1.3 em. wide at the widest point and .3 em. deep. The
entire length of the grooves cannot be determined but the larger
groove is 5.4 em. long and the smaller is 2.5 em. long.

304

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

PIGMENT

Five fragments of pigment were found fairly evenly distributed
throughout the deposits. Two are lumps of pigment consisting of a
sandy or gritty material without facets or indication that they had been
used. The other three pieces of pigment are of finer consistency and
are faceted indicating that they may have been rubbed or ground,
probably to produce a powder. Of the three of finer consistency one
has scratch marks on one face in addition to the faceted surface.
The writer is not familiar with the chemical composition of the pigment. It varies from a yellow-orange to a brown-red. The red-brown
color could have been produced from exposure to heat and these fragments appear to be burned.
The specimens were submitted to Dr. William R. Muehlberger of
the Geology Depa1tment, The University of Texas. Dr. Muelberger
(personal communication) stated that two of the fragments of pigment
appear to be an iron cement-limonitic or hematitic (these are the
gritty, non-faceted specimens). The three smaller faceted specimens
appear to be a soapstone cemented with a limonitic cement. Dr. Muehlberger does not suggest a source of these materials.
BONE ARTIFACTS

The only utilized bone material found in the Red Mill Shelter appears to be awls. No beads were found. One complete awl and
eighteen fragments were found.
The complete awl (Fig. 10 d) is the splint bone of a deer. The
naturally pointed end opposite the articulated or joint end provided a
point that needed no alternation to become a useful tool. Word ( 1970:
92-93) found a similar artifact in the Baker Shelter in Val Verde
County. There is a slight polish from use. This awl is 2.8 em. long.
The eighteen fragments are four butts or bases, five working ends,
and nine mid-sections.
The bases are of hvo vmieties. One is seemingly a fragment of a
splinter awl. Splinter awls are seldom found in the shelter deposits
of the Trans Pecos Region. It is split lengthwise as well as broken
2.7 em. below the base. The base is rounded. The second variety is
typical of the Trans Pecos Region and they were made from split
long bones with the joint end smoothed to a slight degree.
The tips of points appear to be from the second variety of awl which
is the type that is made from the long bones being split lengthwise
(Fig. 10 g). The cancellous or inner portion of the bone has been removed. These fragments vary from 1.8 em. to 5.9 em. in length.
In all but two midsections it is apparent that these fragments are

305

DUNLAP COMPLEX

portions of awls made from split long bones with the inner cell structure removed. The two exceptions appear to have been made from a
large bone of a bird and of a small animal. Johnson ( 1964:73) mentions an awl made from a small animal bone from the Devil's Mouth
Site.

~
b
· 0

f
g

d

h

Q__ ____2~-3~·-~4_ _5
Ct-1.

FrG. 10. Bone and Perishables from Red Mill Shelter.

306

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Eleven of the fragments have fine striations or scratched marks running the length of the bone. The other eight do not exhibit this characteristic. Perhaps a different function was performed which results in
the difference.
SHELL ARTIFACTS

No shell artifacts were found in the Red Mill Shelter; however, the
refuse from the manufacture of shell articles was found. Seven fragments of shell were found. All appear to be from large fresh water
bi-valves. The author has broken fresh water bi-valve shells to observe
the cleavage characteristics. When broken across the growth rings, the
fracture is inegular and tends to shatter on the surface opposite the
point of pressure. Broken along the axis of the growth rings, the fracture tends to follow the arc of the growth ring. In any event the fresh
water bi-valve shells broken by the author do not fracture in a straight
line. Two fragments have straight and unshattered edges indicating
that the shell was sawed. The other five fragments are shattered on all
edges.
PERISHABLES
CUT STICKS. Two examples of cut sticks were found in the deposits. One
is a fragment of a Sotol flower stalk. It was girded by cutting to a
depth of .15 em. and then snapped off. The other end is burned and it
can not be detennined if this is a portion of an artifact or the waste
material from the manufacture of an artifact. The second example is a
fragment of wood that has been chopped to a depth of .5 em. and
then broken.
CUT LEAVES. Fragments of cut leaves of the Sacahuisti and Lechugilla
and Sotol were found. They are cut at an angle across the leaf probably in harvesting. All the specin1ens of cut leaves were found in
Zones 3 and 4.

A fragment of a sandal insufficient in size to give a clue to its
type (Fig. 10 h). It is made from the split leaves of the Lechugilla.

SANDAL.

Nine small pieces of string were found and they vary in length
from 2.2 em. to 6.5 em. and in thickness from .1 em. to .3 em. Two are
single "Z" twisted yarn while the other seven are of two yarns. Six of
the seven two yarn strings are "Z" twisted of "S" twisted string. One of
the strings is actually two short strings tied together with a sheet bend.
This specimen is possibly a fragment of netting. Nets have been found
that were formed by tieing with sheet bends. Schuetz ( 1963: 137-139)
describes nets made by securing the mesh by the larkshead knot, however, personal examination of such a bag displayed in the Witte MuSTRING.

DUNLAP COMPLEX

307

semn reveals that it was tied with the sheet bend and not the larkshead knot.
MATTING. The umaveled fragments of a fragment of matting were
found in the Red Mill Shelter. Sotol leaves were split into strands of
.3 em. to .6 em. then woven into a checker pattern mat.

Eleven knots tied from split Sotol and Lechugilla are represented in the collection of artifacts from the Red Mill Shelter. All are
of such fragmentary nature that the use of these knots can not be determined. Seven square knots, three overhand knots, and one sheet
bend (in addition to the sheet bend found joining the two pieces of
string) are the total representation of knotted leaves.

KNOTS.

LEATHER. One leather thong 17.8 em. in length was recovered. It is
irregular along the edges varying in width from .4 em. to .6 em. It is
surprisingly soft and pliable. It has the appearance of tanned buckskin.
QUIDS. There are two varieties of quids found. Type I is a wad of
fibrous mate1ial similar to the discarded tobacco quid of modern man.
These were the most common type found. Type II are chewed on only
one end with little evidence of the other end being chewed. All are in
such a state of decay that the plant chewed to form the quids can not
be detennined for a cmtainty. However, Type II appears to be chewed
Sotol leaves. Nunley, Duffield and Jelks ( 1965 :120-121 ) stated that a
majority of the heavily masticated quids were of Lechugilla and those
with only the ends chewed were primarily the tender, lower portions
of Sotol.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Based on projectile points it would appear Midden No. 1 was utilized
late in the Archaic Period to Mid-Neo-American. Midden No. 2 was
constructed from Mid-Archaic to early Neo-American. The Red Mill
Shelter on the other hand appears to have been occupied for a longer
period time and overlapped the occupation of Midden No. 1 and Midden No. 2. Whether there is a direct association between the middens
and the shelter is moot, but it is felt that there is a strong probability
that a relationship exists.
It would appear that the occupants of the Red Mill Shelter and the
builders of the middens were primarily food gatherers of edible plants
and supplemented their diet by the products of the hunter. There is
no way of dete1mining the number of people the shelter could accommodate, but ten to fifteen individuals could have comf01tably occupied
the shelter at one time.
It would seem probable that cooking quantities of food for a group

308

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of ten to fifteen people would tend to cause crowding in a shelter the
size of the Red Mill Shelter. Cooking elsewhere during favorable
weather conditions would facilitate normal activities and functions of
the family group occupying the shelter. On this b asis it is assumed that
there is an association between the middens and the shelter.
It is interesting to note that the two middens give evidence of two
methods of cooking. Midden No. 1 produced slab lined h earths and
Midden No. 2 utilized a natural ( limestone ledge) base for the hearth.
This suggests either a change of cooking technique or that the site
was occupied by at least two p eoples simultaneously with different
methods of cooking. Either or both possibilities could be correct. Unfortunately no Carbon 14 samples were taken from Midden No. 2 to
determine if it was used simultaneously or earlier or later.
From the point assemblage little can be gained to prove a theory.
However, Midden No. 1 produced only late Archaic to Neo-American
point types ( Ensor, Perdiz and the Zorra which was a surface find) and
the Carbon 14 dates of 630 ± 90, 670 ± 80 and 570-+- 100 before present
suggests a late occupation for Midden No. 1. Johnson's Zorra type is
not established in time well enough to be diagnostic.
Midden No. 2 produced a greater quantity of points, therefore an
approximation of the p eriod the midden was used can b e d etermined
with a greater d egree of confidence. The occurrence of the Alba point
indicates a possibility of an earlier Neo-American occupation than that
producing the Perdiz point in Midden No. 1.
There were fourteen identifiable dart point found on the surface or
in the deposits in Midden No. 2. There is a greater time span indicated. Abasolo, Marshall, and Langtry types indicate a fairly early
Archaic occupation, and the Ensor points indicate a later Archaic occupation perhaps overlapping the earliest p eriod of Midden No. 1.
It is assumed that Midden No. 2 was constructed out of the cooking
efforts of the earlier occupants of the site. The presence of a limestone
ledge provided a natural and convenient base for an oven. L arge quantities of Lechugilla and Sotol were placed on the rock base and covered
with leaves or trimmings from these plants. Rock was next added and
a large fire was built on top of the mound. When the mass cooled , the
cover was removed by throwing the covering rocks away from the
cooked food. The intense heat produced a highly bmned area in the
bedrock and the uncovering of the cooked food produced an area
fairly free of fractured rock.
In the early stages of the construction of Midden No. 1 there is a
possibility that shallow basins were scooped out in the alluvial deposits forming the base of the midden. Subsequent activities of a sim-

309

DUNLAP COMPLEX

ilar nature tended to obscme these earlier cooking basins. Later, pits
were dug in the rubble of earlier hearths and lined with slabs of native limestone. It is possible that the lining of the pits with slabs could
have served a dual pmpose. A more effective oven could have resulted
and the production of food containing lesser amounts of trash could
be the second possibility.
Cultmally, the western-central portion of Crockett County indicates
a sb:ong affinity with the Trans Pecos Region dming Archaic times.
Sandals, matting, and cordage accompanied by broad bone awls are
strikingly similar to the lower Pecos-Devils River areas. The presence
of the Langtry point variations included in the Pecos Series of Ross
(1965:34-39); the Shumla of the Devils Series of Ross (1965:41-42);
and the Rio Bravo Series (Ross, 1965:45-48) consisting of Ensor,
Paisano, and Frio points corroborates this cultural affiliation.
The Paisano point is more common in the western portion of the
Trans Pecos Region as is the Livermore point. Kelly and Smith ( 1963:
171-187) and Kelly (1963:203-205) found these two types to be predominant in Reagan Canyon and Roark Cave. The Perdiz points found
in Midden No. 1 and the Red Mill Shelter are similar to the PerdizLivermore point of Kelly and Smith (ibid). Thus, there is an indication of an influence from this area but to a lessor degree.
The presence of Clifton and Harrell arrow points; Darl, Ellis, Lange,
Martindale, Montell, Pedernales, Travis, Trinity, and Uvalde dart
points suggest an eastern influence.
Thus, it appears that the strongest influence is from the lower PecosDevils River area with lesser influences from the areas to the southwest, east, and southeast.
This particular area should be extensively surveyed and tested in
order to clarify cultural affiliations. This archeological area is rapidly
being despoiled by unknowledgeable amatems and pot hunters, so it
is hoped this area will be smveyed and tested as quickly as possible.
REFERENCES CITED
Epstein, Jeremiah F.
1963. Centipede and Damp Caves: Excavations in Val Verde County, Texas,
1958. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 33 (for 1962):
1-129.
Gould, F. W.
1962. Texas Plants ancl Ecological Summary. The Agricultural and Mechanical
College of Texas. Texas Agricultural Experin1ent Station.
Greer, Jolm W.
1965. A Typology of Midden Circles and Mescal Pits. Southwestern Lore, Vol.
31, No. 3: 41-55.

310

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The Louden Site (CO-l ) , Los Animas County, Colorado. Southwestern
Lore, Vol. 32, No. 3: 57-65.
Honea, Kenneth H.
1965. The Bipolar Flaking Technique in Texas and New Mexico. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 36: 259-267.
Jelks, Edward B.
1962. The Kyle Site, A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County,
Texas. The University of Texas, Department of Anthropology; Archaeological Series No. 5.
Johnson, Leroy, Jr.
1964. The Devil's Mouth Site. A Stratified Campsite at Amistad Reservoir,
Val Verde County, Texas. Department of Anthropology, Archaeology
Series, No. 6.
Kelly, Thomas C.
1963. Archeological Investigations at Roark Cave, Brewster County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society. Vol. 33: 191-227.
Kelly, Thomas C. and Harvey P. Smith, Jr.
1963. An Investigation of Archeological Sites in Reagan Canyon, Brewster
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 33:
167-190.
Nunley, John P., Lathe! F. Duffield and Edward B. Jelks
1965. Excavations at Amistad Reservoh·: 1962 Season. Miscellaneous Papers,
No. 3. Texas Archeological Salvage Project.
Parson, Mark L.
1965. Test Excavations at Fate Bell Shelter. Miscellaneous Papers, No. 4.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project.
Ross, Richard E.
1965. The Archeology of Eagle Cave. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No. 7.
Schuetz, Mardith K.
1956. An Analysis of Val Verde County Cave Material. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 27: 129-160.
1963. An Analysis of Val Verde County Cave Material: Part III. Bulletin of
the Texas A1·cheological Society, Vol. 33 (For 1962): 131-165.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society. Vol. 25.
Texas Almanac
1958-1959. A. H. Belo Corporation.
Word, James H. and Charles L. Douglas
1970. Excavations at Baker Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Bulletin No. 16:
Texas Memorial Museum, University of Texas, Austin.
1966.

SURVEYS OF OWENS NO. 1 ( 41CX-6) AND
OWENS NO.2 ( 41CX-7)

In order to accommodate the large number of Field School participants it was decided to organize two survey parties. The survey crews
were in charge of Lou Fullen.

DUNLAP COMPLEX

311

OWENS No. 1 ( 41CX-6)
The Owens No. 1 Site (Fig. 1) is located approximately 2.5 miles
west northwest of the Dunlap Complex in Crockett County, Texas.
More specifically, it is located in the south face of a steep hillside
adjacent to an abandoned oil well. Two shelters comprise this site.
Only the larger of the two was tested. The smaller shelter is west of
the larger one. The tested shelter is approximately 20 feet wide and has
a maximum depth of 10.5 feet from the overhang to the rear wall. It
has a maximum height of seven feet about midway of the shelter from
the overhang to the rear wall. From this maximum height the shelter
slopes down in a gentle arc to the sides.
Below the shelter is a prominent talus slope consisting of fire fractmed rock, charocal stained soil, flint debris, and an occasional tool.
On the right wall is found red stains that probably represent cmde
pictographs. These stains are faint and no form or shape can be determined. Similar red stains are also noted in the small shelter to the
west of the larger shelter.
In the back of the tested shelter on a shelf is a bed rock mortar. This
mortar is slightly elliptical. It has a maximum diameter of ten inches.
It is 18 inches deep with inward sloping walls to form a rounding
bottom. A "notch" is noted on the lip of the mortar toward the front
of the shelter. No mention is made in the notes whether the notch was
broken out or pecked.
Directly above the mortar hole is a large crack that extends through
the roof of tl1e shelter. It was smmised that the location of the mortar
hole could have served as a catch basin for water dripping or mnning
through the crack. Such an identification is tenuous.
The floor of Owens No. 1 was covered with sheep and goat dung.
Vegetal material consisting of fragments of fiber and flint chips were
observed.
The talus slope and smface of the shelter were searched for artifacts
and all artifactual material was bagged in appropliately marked sacks.
The western portion of the shelter appeared to be undisturbed (Fig.
2), so this area was selected for a test trench. A datum point was established on the rear wall and a line was extended south 15 feet and
approximately 3.5 feet past the overhang. A parallel line was laid three
feet east of the base line. At intervals of three feet, stakes were set
forming three foot squares. The rearn1ost square was dug first and
successive squares were dug toward the mouth of the shelter until a
trench was formed from the rear to front of the shelter.
Three zones were distinguishable. The surface zone (Zone A) varies
from .75 foot to .9 foot thickness (Fig. 2). This zone extends from the

312

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

'\

\

I
I

"" \
''

'\

\
MN

0
.5

0

\

'

\

\
\

\'

LO

2.0

1.5

MILES (APPROXIMATE)
COUNTY ROAD
RANCH ROAD
INTERMITTENT STREAM
___.___

LIVE WATER STREAM

•

ARCHEOLOGICAL SITE

LOCATION OF 41CX6 AND 4\CX?
RELATION

,'

THE

IN

DUNLAP COMPLEX

/

~ ,, ,,,,/-'

,/

[//
_. ..---....

V

,. ~
,-

_,.,.----------- ......,_,__~,

./
_..r- - - - - -

~---;:-

----------

'\

4 1CX6

I

OWENSNO.I

""-TO

u.s. 29o-

)

• ''

41CX5 )
DUNLAP

CCMPLEX

~

\
FIG.

1. Relation of the Owens Sites to the Dunlap Complex.

DUNLAP COMPLEX

313

rear of the shelter for a distance of ten feet toward the overhang
where it feathers out. Zone A consists of goat and sheep dung, and soil
impregnated with pulverized dung, rock, and ash.
Zone B (Fig. 2) underlies Zone A and consists of rock, charcoal
stained soil, and ash. This zone is deepest at the edge of the overhang
where it is three feet thick. It is thinnest at the rear wall where it
gradually thickens from zero thickness to 2.5 feet in thickness toward
the mouth of the shelter. Zone B rests on the floor of the shelter 12.5
feet from the back of the shelter. At this point the floor dips perceptively and rests on Zone C.
Zone C rests on the floor of the shelter from 12.5 feet from the rear
of the shelter to 18.5 feet from the back. This zone consists of rock and
charcoal stained soil and is darker in color. It has a maximum depth of
1.75 feet at the extreme northern edge of the test trench.
A lens beginning at South 11' and continuing to South 14.5 is marked
by heavily bmned soil and is quite easily outlined in the profile. No
note was made whether this burned area or lens is the remnant of a
pot hole or an aboriginal feature. It is probably not a part of Zone A
but constitutes a portion of Zone B. In profile it has the appearance of
a pot hole. This lens is bowl shaped in cross section with a maximum
depth of 1.12' at the center.
ARTIFACTS

Artifacts from Owens No. 1 Site consist of chipped stone, ground
stone, and bone. No shell or fiber artifactual material was found.
There were 119 artifacts recovered. Sixty-fom (54%) were found on
the surface of the shelter or on the talus slope. Diagnostic artifacts
such as projectile points were scarce in the deposits and represent only
.33% of the total assemblage. While the deposits appear to have been
disturbed to a slight degree, there was no major disturbance and additional testing should reveal cultural sequences.
Abasolo, Ensor, Paisano, and Pandale points were the only projectile point types found.
The most frequent artifact recovered was the scraper. Fifty scrapers
were found with 24 recovered in the deposits.
Utilized flakes were frequently found. Twelve were found scattered
through the deposits. The total count of this artifact is 25.
Concave scrapers (spokeshaves), a denticulated flake (saw?),
graver, cores and choppers represented the balance of the chipped
stone artifacts.
In contrast to the chipped stone artifacts a majority of the ground
stone artifacts were recovered from the deposits. Sixty-two percent of

314

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

MN

TEST
TRENCH

--~ER~~------ ----- 0

2

3

4

5

SCALE IN FEET

FLOOR

~
~
~

PLAN OF OWENS

BURNED AREA
ZONE A

SHELTER NO. ONE

[]JJ]][Iill
~

ZONE C

0

2

3

4

SCALE IN FEET
BEDROCK

ZONE 8

CROSS SECTION OF WEST WALL OF TEST TRENCH.
OWENS

SHELTER NO. ONE

FIG. 2. Owens Shelter No. One, Floor Plan and Trench Cross Section.

5

315

DUNLAP COMPLEX

the total were found in the deposits. Of the eight artifacts of smoothed
stone from the Owens No. 1 Site, six represent fragments of metates
and manos. One artifact of smoothed stone bears particular mention.
This artifact is made from a metallic gray slate-like material. It is 4.2:
em. long, 1.8 em. wide and .6 em. in thickness with one edge smoothed.
It was a surface find and no guess can be made regarding its use.
TABLE NO. I
Provenience of Artifacts From Owens No. 1 ( 41CX-6)

Type of
Artifact
Points
Abasolo
Ensor
Paisa no
Pandale
Frags.
Knives
Scrapers
Ut. Flake
Notch
Denticu.
Graver
Cores
Chopper
Mano
Metate
Sm. Stone
Sm. Edge
Bone Art.

Surface
& Talus

0" to
6"

6" to 12" to 18" to 24" to 30" to 36" to Total
12" 18"
24"
30"
36"
60"
2
2

1

1
1
1

1

l
l

1
5
2
26
13
2

1
1
1

11

6

1
3
1

1
2
1

1
l
l
l

6
2
l

1
l

1
1
5
4

1
l

1
2

l

2
l

1
2

6
6
50
25
3

6
5
2
4
l
l

2

Two fragments of polished bone were found. The fragments are insufficient in size to give an indication of the use of the original artifact.
In summary it would appear that Owens No. 1 Site represents an
Archaic occupation. It is surmised that this period is represented from
Mid-Archaic to Late Archaic.
Cultural affiliation is difficult to assign with any certainty, but there
appears to be an affinity with the Trans Pecos Region.
It is hoped that additional testing of this shelter will be performed
in the future. The depth of the deposits promises rewarding information.
OWENS No.2 ( 41CX-7)
Owens Site No. 2 is located about 6.0 miles north of the Dunlap
Complex. It is situated near the top of a steep hill on the southern
extremity of a hill. A dry, unnamed tributary of Live Oak Creek lies

316

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

to the east of the shelter. The shelter faces in a southwesterly direction. It is approximately 37 feet wide and from the overhang to the
rear wall has a depth of some 20 feet. The ceiling is only five feet
above the deposits at the mouth. The shelter roof declines toward the
rear of the shelter and as a consequence the open space between the
roof and the deposits lessens considerably as one progresses to the rear
of the shelter. A large rock obsh·ucts a portion of the mouth of the
shelter. This rock is in reality a large roof spall that fell from the original ceiling. In the eastern portion of the shelter a shallow pot hole
(Fig. No. 3) is in evidence. It is inegular in outline with a long axis
of approximately 22.5 feet and 10 feet on the short axis.
A prominent talus slope below the shelter bears evidence that the
shelter was occupied extensively. It consists of fire fractured rock,
charcoal impregnated soil, and Hint debris.
The floor of the shelter was sparsely covered with sheep and goat
manure. Twigs and plant remains of a fibrous nature were noted.
Small roof spalls were scattered about on the surface. Occupational
debris was common on the surface of the shelter.
Prior to excavation the surface of the shelter and the talus slope was
surveyed for occupational material and artifacts were sacked in properly marked bags.
A datum point was set in the western portion of the shelter in tl1e
left wall as one faces the back of the shelter. A line was run at right
angles to tl1e long axis of the shelter ten feet in a southerly direction

FLOOR

PLAN OF OWE NS

SHELTER NO. TW O·

FIG. 3. Floor Plan of Owens Shelter No. Two.

317

DUNLAP COMPLEX

and eight feet in a northerly direction resulting in an 18 foot line
(Fig. No. 3). Paralleling this line at a distance of three feet another
line was set. This three foot trench was divided into four foot sections
for testing. The southernmost two feet was under the previously mentioned large roof spall.
A second test area consisting of two four foot squares was placed in
the eastern portion of the shelter and intersected the shallow pot hole
previously mentioned (Fig. No. 3).
Time did not permit a cross sectional drawing of either of the tested
areas. The deposits were more productive · in relation to Owens Site
No. 1 and reached a maximum depth of 5.5 feet. The soil comprising
the deposits were not noted in any detail so soil descriptions can not
be given. It was noted, however, that the soil consisted primarily of
a dark, charcoal stained soil that was dry in the upper portions and
damp in the lower portions.
ARTIFACTS

A greater variety of artifactual material was found , some of it of
perishable materials. The following is a list of the artifacts recovered.
Points
Harrell ---------------------------------Livennore ----------------------------Abasolo ---------------------------------Ellis ---------------------------------------Ensor -----------------------------------Frio ---------------------------------------Langtry ---------------------------------Marshall -----------------------------Nolan -------------------------------------Paisano ---------------------------------Pandale -------------------------------Tortugas ------------------------------Travis -----------------------------------Fragments ---------------------------

1
2
2
1
6
2
6
1
1
1
2
2
1
16

Bifaces ---------------------------------------- 13
Choppers ------------------------------------ 2
Sera pers --------------------------------------118
Graver --------------------------------------- 1
Notch ----------------------------------------- 1
Utilized Flake __________________________ 11
Mano ----------------------------------------- 6
Meta te ---------------------------------------- 1
Shell ------------------------------------------- 3

Aw Is -------------------------------------------- 3
Square Knot ----------------------------- 1
String ---------------------------------------- 1
Pendant -------------------------------------- 1

In contrast to Owens No. 1, arrow points such as Harrell and Livermore were recovered. Dart points constituted the majority of the projectile points found. Ensor and Langtry points were the most frequent
with a representation of six each. Two each of Abasolo, Frio, Pandale,
and Tortugas were found, and the least frequent dart points were
Ellis, Marshall, Nolan, Paisano, and Travis. Fragments of twelve hifaces and one complete biface were found. Scrapers were the most

318

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

numerous artifact with 118 complete and fragmentary specimens noted.
Utilized Hakes were relatively scarce with a representation of only
eleven specimens. The scarcity of utilized Hakes could possibly be the
result of the survey crew's failure to recognize this minutely flaked
artifact. One notch and one graver was found.
Two core tools classed as choppers were noted among the assemblage.
Artifacts of smoothed stone consisted of six mano fragments and
one metate and a fragment of a possible pendant.
Three shell scrapers formed from fresh water mussels are present.
All have battered and chipped edges. Two fragmentary awls and one
complete awl constitute the total of the bone artifacts. The complete
awl was made by splitting the long bone of a large animal, possibly a
leg bone of a deer. The joint end has been smoothed and the opposite
end has been ground to form a blunt point. Its entire smface is highly
polished. This specimen is 11.0 em. in length. It is wide and similar to
awls found in the Trans Pecos Region.
Perishables consisted of a fragment of string and a knotted fragment
of a split Lechugilla leaf.
The presence of perishable material and the wide assmtment of
point types warrants fwther excavation if possible. Shallow potting
presents a problem but not of a significant nature. The depth of the
deposits, at least for shelters in this area, adds to the impmtance of
this site.
In summary it can be stated that Owens No. 2 in spite of the shallow
disturbance was quite productive of cultural material. The presence
of arrow points as well as dart points could indicate a fairly long
period of occupation. It would appear that the occupation extended
from the Archaic to the Neo-American.
Based on artifacts, Owens Site No. 2 shows a strong cultural similarity with the Red Mill Shelter.
108 W. Missomi
Floydada, Tx.

Notes on the Archeology of the Happy Patch Site,
San Saba County, Texas
L. M.

GREEN

ABSTRACT
An open occupation site on the Colorado River, San Saba County,
Texas, is reported. A number of shell accumulations were recorded at the
site. The artifact assemblage includes specimens of chipped and ground stone.
It is suggested that the site was occupied intermittently during Middle and
Late Archaic, and Neo-American times.

INTRODUCTION
There are few published accounts of archeological sites along the
middle and upper portions of the Colorado River. A. T. Jackson ( 1938)
reported on some sites in southeastern San Saba County, while in
1969 the investigations in the Robert Lee Reservoir area (Shafer,
1969) were published. The writer has been unable to find any published material concerning site investigations along the middle and
upper Colorado River between those areas studied by Jackson and
Shafer.
The present paper reports a te!Tace site in northwestern San Saba
County, central Texas (Fig. 1). It is based primarily on surface investigations. The site has been badly disturbed by earth moving machinery and much of the evidence of prehistoric occupation is scattered and destroyed.
Artifacts recovered were exposed either by the plow or other emth
moving equipment. The artifact inventory from the site includes arrow points, dart points, thin bifaces, thick bifaces, scrapers, gravers,
blades, manos, and a perforator fragment. Several small concentrations
of burnt rock fragments were exposed but were so badly scattered by
the machinery that no data concerning them could be recovered.
Numerous small concentrations of shells were unearthed and spread
about. Two were left relatively intact. The size and depth of these
were determined by digging test holes through the accumulations at
approximately two-foot intervals. One bone accumulation was unearthed and scattered. The fragments were too poorly preserved to
allow identification.
THE ENVIRONMENT
In the vicinity of the H appy Patch Site, three distinct microenvironments are present. The first is essentially riverine in character

Brown

Co.
Mills Co.

FrG. 1. Location of the Happy Patch Site. Map shows northwestern San Saba
County. Colorado River and major tributaries are indicated.

HAPPY PATCH SITE

321

(Fig. 2 ); it consists of the Colorado River and a narrow sb.·ip along
both sides of the channel. Vegetation includes pecan, liveoak, elm,
willow, and mesquite. The river supports catfish, sunfish, bass, freshwater drum, turtle, water snakes of several kinds, mussel, and cray£sh. In tl1e winter, migratory waterfowl visit the stream; occasional
colonies of beaver can also b e seen. The second microenvironment is
that of the "valley" ( Fig. 2 ), and includes the Colorado River floodplain and low terraces (including the area in which the Happy Patch
Site is situated). Where uncultivated this microenvironment supports
a growth of native grasses, brush, cacti, and several varieties of oaks,
mesquite and a few elm. Soil types in the "valley" are mainly of the
Norwood-Miller series ( Soil Conservation Service, 1961). Dams and
other flood-control structures have ended the serious flooding which
occured in this microenvironment in the past; the last major flood was
in 1938 ( personal communication with area residents). The upl ands
constitute the third microenvironment distinguished in the site area
( Fig. 2). Common fauna in this microenvironment, as well as in the
"valley", include whitetail deer, red squirrel, cottontail rabbit, jackrabbit, raccoon, fox, wild turkey, quail, dove, hawk, owl and a variety
of small birds. The western diamond back rattlesnake is the best
known of several species of snakes in the vicinity. The upland soils are
chiefly Owens-Renfrow-Darnell (Soil Conservation Service, 1961).
Much of th e uplands is stony ( primarily sandstone). Cobbles and pebbles of dense limestone, flint and quartzite abound. Upland vegetation
is similar to that described by Blair ( 1950: 112); common varieties of
grasses are mesquite, three awn, bluestem, and windmill.
Each of the microenvironments had certain resources which b ene£ted the area's prehistmic inhabitants. The major concentrations of
wildlife and vegetational resources were in the riverine and "valley"
microenvironments. The uplands could be used for hunting and as a
source of raw materials for flint-knapping. The Happy Patch Site is
situated so that its inhabitants could best exploit all three of these
microenvironments. Today, farming is practiced in the valley area, and
stock-grazing predominates in the uplands.
THE SITE
Happy Patch Site (Fig. 2 ), is located in the northwestern part of
San Saba County, 12 miles north of the town of Richland Springs, on
the property of Mrs. John Harrison. Access to the site was provided
by Mr. E. M. (Malcolm) Mask. The main body of the site lies along
the edge of a terrace in a bend of the river. In places it extends some
60-100 yards into an adjoining field. The relatively level t errace does

lllilill
\

/-

''"

fllll//1111 \\11\ 1111 '

\Ill\I

11111\
\il\\111\1
\II II

I

/'0~
\
. I

I

I

I

I

6

01

I

.

I

'es

/

I

/
I
4
1. I
I ,...) I
/I.:J
t
I
1

10 2
\

I
\

\

\

\
I

N

\
\
l

\
l

I ,\
10,
,_

JHE HAPPY PATCH SITE
0

1320

'-----:-:ft-.- - - - 1

,/site area
0
111'' uplands

.intact
0 scattered

-uplands--~

· ·
- - -'valley'- - - - - -rtvel'me-

FrG. 2 . The Happy Patch Site. Upper portion of figure is a sketch map of
·site, with intact and scattered shell accumulations indicated . A schematic
cross section of the site area (looking downstream) is shown below. Extent
of the three recognized microenvironments is indicated.

HAPPY PATCH SITE

323

not directly follow the curve of the river, but runs in a general northsouth direction for perhaps .8 miles before veering to an east-west
direction. Most of the evidence of prehistoric occupation occurs along
the north-south distance of the terrace.
To the east and south, a row of hills, ( tl1e uplands) rise up at the
back of the terrace. Upstream, rocky brush-covered hills come down
to the edge of the terrace, closing it off in that direction. Across the
river, to the west and north, the flatlands narrow and the hills rise up
abruptly near the stream (Fig. 2).
Characteristics of the site include eight shell accumulations (Fig.
2), a scarcity of lithic debris and a1tifacts, and the absence of any
sizeable burnt rock accumulations. Even though the sometimes steep
terrace face was cut down as much as three feet in places, investigations to date have revealed no burnt rock middens. The tenace has
been plowed, but formerly supported large trees. Today, oats, vetch
and clover grow on all of the surfaces, including the middens.
THE SHELL ACCUMULATIONS (Fig. 2)
In all cases, the shells are so dense in the soil that the extent of each
midden can easily be seen. They are not, however, "packed" together.
No. 1 is near the south end of the site. It is a small accumulation of
mussel shells which have been scattered by the plow. No flint or other
stone artifacts were found in the vicinity of this accumulation. Probing
revealed no underground concentration of shells.
No. 2, another scattered shell accumulation, lies about .4 miles north
of accumulation #1. Only surface material was found. No artifacts of
stone were recovered here.
No. 3 is situated about .1 mile north of accumulation #2. Here
again the shells were scattered. Most artifacts recovered from the site
to date, (see below) were found in the vicinity of this shell accumulation.
No. 4 is a short distance north of #3. It is a shallow shell midden
where only about one inch of the surface accumulation was removed
by machinery. This shell concentration is approximately six inches in
depth at the center, becoming shallower toward the edges. It is oval
in outline and measures approximately 12' by 18'. A few Hint chips
and blades (Fig. 7, B-C) were recovered in the vicinity of this midden.
No. 5 is a small shell midden similar to accumulation #4, but smaller
in size, measuring approximately 6' by 12'. A few flint chips were
found in the area of this midden but no finished stone artifacts were
recovered.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

324

No. 6, another shell concentration, lies in the field where the shells
have been strewn about by the plow. The field is covered with a heavy
growth of wheat and thorough investigation was impossible. However, one flint arrow point, (Fig. 3D) was recovered from among the
shells here.
No. 7 is located on the slope of the terrace. Here the bulldozer uneaithed some shells and a concentration of bone fragments which were
scattered up and down the slope. A small concentration of burnt stone
fragments, (possibly a hearth) was unearthed and strewn about. The
basal portion of a large, thin biface was also recovered here.
No. 8 is in the field some .4 miles east of the previously desciibed
accumulations. Here the shells were turned up by deep plowing of the
field. The shells are scattered about on the surface. No testing was attempted to determine the depth of the accumulation since this feature
is covered by a growing crop.
THE ARTIFACTS
Only lithic artifacts were found (Fig. 3-7). None of the shells showed
any recognizable modification. An interesting feature of the flint artifacts is their color. All are made of light to dark shades of brown, tan
or gray local flints. Projectile point classification is based on the work
of Suhm and Jelks (1962). Measurements are given in centimeters
and the following abbreviations are used: L-Maximum length, WMaximum width, T -Maximum thickness. In the artifact illustrations
(Fig. 3-7) projectile points are oriented with the stem downward, hifaces with the base downward, and scrapers and blades with the bulbar end downward. On broken artifacts the measurements are estimated. These measurements are followed by an astelisk ( "').
BIFACES

ARROW POINTS (Fig. 3 A-D). None of these specimens is complete.
Their outstanding characteristic is their overall thinness and good
workmanship. Specimens A, B, and C have strong barbs while D is
barbless. Specimens A and C were made from thin flakes and still retain the original flake scar on one surface. Both have been trimmed
along the lateral edges and at the distal tip. B and C are thinned on
both faces.
L

w

T

2.9"'
3.2
3.3"'
3.7

1.9
2.3
2.0
2.5"'

.3
.3
.3
.5

Type

Scallorn
Unknown
Unknown
Fresno

Fig.
3A
3B
3C
3D

325

HAPPY PATCH SITE

A

E

c

B

F

D

G

K

J

H

L

4

0
em.

FIG. 3. Projectile Points from Happy Patch Site. A, Scallorn; B, C, unclassified; D, Fresno; E, Frio; F, Marcos; G, Frio; H-J, Yarbrough; K, unclassified; L, Pedernales.

326

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

DART POINTS ( Fig. 3 E-I). The dart points are small to medium in size.
All have essentially triangular bodies with the exception of K which is
leaf-shaped. Edges are straight to slightly convex. Five specimens
(E, G-J) are steeply beveled on the right edge of both faces. All specimens with exception of J and K have barbs, with F being strongly
barbed. Stems are strongly to slightly expanding with exception of L
which has a rectangular stem. The distal tip is missing on specimens
F and L.

L

w

T

5.7
5.8"
4.7
4.6
5.0
4.2
6.8
6.4

2.3
3.8
2.1
2.1
2.8
1.75
2.6
3.0

.6
.5
.6

.5
.6
.5
.8
.9

Fig.

Type

3E
3F
3G
3H
3I
3J
3K
3L

Frio
Marcos
Frio
Yarbrough
Yarbrough
Yarbrough
Unclassified
Pedernales

(Fig. 4 A-F). These bifaces are triangular to trianguloid
with the exception of specimens B' and D which are hi-pointed. All
specimens show some pressure flake trimming along lateral edges.
Edges are slightly to strongly convex. Specimen A has a stmight base
while specimens C, E, F, have slightly convex bases. Specimen B is
strongly beveled on the left edge of both faces on the distal portion
and slightly beveled on the right edge of both faces on the proximal
end.

THIN BIF ACES

L

9 .1
12.3
7.8
10.1
7.7
8.8

w

T

3.7
4.0
4.7
4.3
4.4
4.5"

.8
1.0
.9
l.l

.8
1.0

Fig.
4A
4B
4C
4D
4E
4F

THICK BIFACES (Fig. 5 A-D, F). All of these specimens were fashioned
from flint by percussion flaking. Specimens B and F show a bit of trimming along the lateral edges. Specimen A is trianguloid in shape. B
and F are asymmetrical, C triangular, and D ovate. Specimen B shows
extensive use-wear dulling along one lateral edge. Two graver beaks
have been trimmed out on one lateral edge. One is near the basal
corner and the other near the distal tip. Specimen C has one basal
corner missing.

327

HAPPY PATCH SITE

L

8.2
8.1
10.S
11.6
9.3

w

T

S.9
4.4
S.8"
6.8
4.3

1.8
1.2
1.7
1.6
1.7

Fig.

SA
5B

SC
SD
SF

c
A
3

0
em.

B

D

E

FIG. 4. Bifaces from Happy Patch Site. A-F, thin bifaces.

F

328

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

PERFORATOR (Fig. 5 E). The shaft of this perforator is broken. It has
a diamond-shaped cross-section. The oval-shaped base is h·immed
around the edges, and edges on both faces are steeply beveled. The
base measures 4 x 2.6 em. At the point of breakage the shaft is .5 em.
thick Estimated total length is 7.4 em.
UNIFACES
SCRAPERS (Fig. 6 C, D). These t\>.10 multiple-edged scrapers were both
trimmed along the lateral edges of the dorsal surfaces. Specimen C
has a long h·ansverse scar across the width of the convex distal end
which thinned that portion of the tool. This specimen retains the bulb
of percussion while on specimen D the bulb has been trimmed away.
On specimen D the distal tip has been trimmed to a point. The broadest portion of this scraper is at the proximal end. A long flake scar is
present on the dorsal surface.
L

w

T

8.4
5.9

6.9
2.9

1.2
.8

Fig.

6C
6D

BLADES (Fig. 7 B-D). Specimens B and D were struck from the interior of cores. Specimen C retains a patch of cortex at the distal tip.
Each of the specimens has one or more dorsal ridges extending almost
the length of the dorsal surface. A few flakes were removed at the
proximal end of each, probably prior to being struck from the cores.
The bulb of percussion on specimen B is intact while the bulbs on
specimens C and D have been trimmed. Specimen B has been h·immed
along a portion of one lateral edge and at the distal tip.
L

w

T

7.6
7.7
6.8

1.4
2.2
1.9

1.7
.7
.45

Fig.

7B
7C
7D

GRAvER ( Fig. 7 A). This small graver was made on a flint flake. The
dorsal surface was thinned by the removal of four relatively large
flakes, and the proximal end was trimmed by pressure flaking. The
graver beak was formed at the distal end. Total length is 3.4 em. long.
GROUND STOJ\TE AHTIF ACTS
MANOS (Fig. 6 A, B). The t\>.To manos are elliptical in shape and both
are manufactured from dense limestone containing tiny flecks of mica.
Specimen A is faceted on both faces and shows more wear than speci-

329

HAPPY PATCH SITE

F

E

D

4

0
em.

FrG. 5. Bifaces from Happy Patch Site. A-D, F, thick bifaces (arrow indicates graver beaks on B); E, perforator.

330

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

B

D

c
4

0
em.

FIG. 6 Artifacts from Happy Patch Site. A, B, manos (not to scale); C, D,
scrapers.

331

HAPPY PATCH SITE

A

B

3

0
em.

c
FIG.

D

7. Unifaces from Happy Patch Site. A, graver; B-D, blades.

332

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

men B. Specimen B shows the beginning of two grinding facets on one
face while there is one on the opposite. Both specimens show pecking.
Peck marks on specimen B are deeper and more numerous than those
on specimen A. A small portion of one end is broken from specimen A.
L

11.1°
11.6

w

T

Weight

Fig.

8.5
7.5

3.8

5.5

HI lb.
Bf lb.

6A
6B

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This paper has presented data salvaged at the Happy Patch Archeological Site, on the Colorado River, San Saba County, Texas. Much
of the archeological material at the site has been scattered and/or
destroyed by recent extensive earth moving operations. Only two of
the mussel shell concentrations described earlier remain essentially
intact. Despite the disturbed condition, enough evidence of prehistoric
occupation remains to make the site study feasible. Several aspects of
the site set it apart from most sites in the area, Green ( 1970:1). Notable are the mussel shell concentrations, the absence of burnt rock
middens, and the scarcity of chipped and ground stone artifacts and
other lithic debris (abundant flint and other stone are available in the
nearby hills ) .
Any conclusions arrived at from a surface investigation of the Happy
Patch Site would, of necessity, be somewhat speculative. According to
residents of the area, the terrace on which the site is located has been
flooded several times during this century. Alluvial deposition probably
covered the prehistoric cultural remains from time to time, never permitting the building of thick midden deposits. Flood water could have
also scattered and washed materials downstream.
The artifact collections from the site includes classifiable arrow
points ( Scallorn, Fresno) and dart points ( Pedernales, Marcos, Ensor,
Frio, and Yarbrough). Based on projectile point data presented by
Johnson, Suhm, and Tunnell ( 1962: Fig. 45) and Sorrow, Shafer and
Ross (1967:Fig. 72), it appears that use of the site began during the
Middle and Late Archaic periods, and continued into the NeoAmerican (late prehistoric) era.
Data gathered by the investigations at the site suggest that small
groups of people camped there on an intermittent basis. It is possible
that people from neighboring sites a short distance upstream, where
a number of midden accumulations are present (personal investigations by the author), camped at the Happy Patch Site during the warm
summer months. The site area may have been a brief stop for local

333

HAPPY PATCH SITE

aboriginal groups practicing a roving pattern of hunting and gathering.
At the Happy Patch Site, the accumulations of mussel shell suggest
that exploitation of the Colorado River might have been the primary
activity carried out there. The position of the site is such that the resources of any of the three recognized microenvironments could be
readily utilized. Manos at the site indicate food -gathering and milling
operations, while the projectile points and bone fragments suggest
that hunting was also done by the occupants.
This paper is intended only as a beginning study of sites of this sort.
Mussel shell accumulations such as those at Happy Patch undoubtedly
result from short-term activities, perhaps representing a few meals of
a small group. Scienti£cally controlled investigations at simliar, but
undisturbed, sites would be ideal for the study of single component
(local group) occupations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The author wishes to express his gratitude to Mr. E. M. (Malcolm)
Mask of Richland Springs. He informed me of the Happy Patch Site,
granted me free access to it, and permitted me to use all artifacts
which he had recovered from it. Without his assistance, investigation
of the site would have been impossible. Also, I want to give special
thanks to Mr. Thomas Roy Hester of The University of California at
Berkeley, for his help in the preparation of this paper.
REFERENCES CITED

Blair, W. Frank
1950. The Biotic Provinces of Texas. T exas ]oumal of Science, Vol. 2, No.
1:93-116.
Green, L . M.
1970. South Plains Archeological Society Bulletin No. l.
Jackson, A. T.
1938. The Fall Creek Sites. UniveTsity of T exas Pttblications, No. 3802.
Johnson, Leroy Jr., Dee Ann Suhm, and Curtis Tunnell
1962. Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir: The Wunderlich, Footbridge,
and Oblate Sites . Texas Memorial Mttsettm Bulletin No. 5.
Shafer, Hany J .
1969. Archeological Investigations in the Robert Lee Reservoir Basin . Papers
of the Texas Archeological Salvage Proiect, No. 17.
Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks
1962. Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. T exas Archeoological
Society Special Publication No. 1, and Th e T exas Memorial Mttseum
Bttlletin No. 4.
Soil Conservation Service
1961. Generalized Soil Map of San Saba County. ( U. S. D ept. of Agriculture)
and Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
Box 84
Richland Springs, Texas

The Fullen Site, 41 HR 82
MICHAEL O'BRIEN
with an appendix
Quaternary Geologic History of the Clear Lake Area
DR. RoBERT LANKFORD
ABSTRACT
The excavation of a small coastal shell midden raises questions concerning relationship of technology and economy to the environmental setting.

INTRODUCTION
The Fullen Site, 41 HR 82, is about 1.5 miles northeast of El Lago,
Texas in Harris County on the east bank of Middle Bayou one-half
mile north of Nasa Road 1 (Fig. 1, 2). Middle Bayou starts eighteen
miles to the nmth of the site at the approximate location of Pasadena
Blvd. in Pasadena, and flows a meandering course almost due south
to its junction with Horsepen Bayou and Big Island Slough, just south
of Bay Area Blvd. Galveston Bay tides and sh·ong coastal winds greatly affect the level of the bayou. The water, though polluted, varies
from fresh to saline depending on the rainfall. A full description of
the Quaternary Geology of the area by Dr. Robert Lankford, is appended to this report.
The site was originally found by Lou Fullen, Dick Gramley and
Jay Sharp while surveying the Middle Bayou-Mud Lake area. They
made a surface collection and Louis and Margie Fullen and Jay Sharp
briefly tested the site. In January of 1969, the site was turned over to
Mary McCutcheon, a student at Rice University, through the courtesy
of the Houston Archeological Society and Friendswood Development
Company. Mr. George Meriwether III, District Manager for Friendswood insured the site against vandalism and took an active interest in
digging.
Miss McCutcheon along with Drs. Robert Eisenberg and Robert
Lankford, of the Rice Faculty made the excavation a class project in
Gulf Coast Archeology, a course that they had jointly organized. This
was a college course sponsored by Brown College of Rice University,
outside the normal departmental offerings, and open to all students
as a "free elective." Thirteen students took part in the excavation and

336

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

G)

l

Houoton

J>

G)

~
(11
en

..,

z

c
r

..,

~

0

BAY
::tl

0
J>
0

FIG. I. Location of Fullen Site- Harris County, Texas.

FULLEN SITE

337

FIG. 2. View of Fullen Site, looking north.

preliminary analysis of the artifacts but the author of this report took
charge of the final analysis and writing.
EXCAVATION
The limited excavation was begun in January of 1969 and continued
until mid-Ap1il of the same year. A datum point, designated ON-OE
(zero north, zero east), was established in approximately the middle
of the mound. A grid composed of five foot squares was extended in
the four cardinal directions from the central datum. Before laying the
grid, cores were taken to delineate the lateral extremes of the midden,
thereby limiting the number of squares to 181 (Fig. 3).
All squares were dug in three inch levels, except for the first twelve
inches of square 1S-l W, which was dug in six inch levels. Each artifact was marked with the exact depth at which it was found, starting
from ground zero.
Owing to limits of time and personnel, a complete excavation could
not be accomplished; therefore a set of squares was chosen which
would expose as much of the surface of the site as possible. In all, 11
squares were worked and 275 square feet of occupation area were
uncovered.
No sh·atigraphic zones were found that ran throughout the midden,
although each square revealed lenses of clam and oyster shells that

338

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

--C ontour lnl erva l I fool
Arbitra r y Datum
-- App r o:dmote Edge o f Midden

.EKco va ted Squares

I

(

•o

FIG. 3. Map of Fullen Site showing contours and plan of excavation .

.,___!!<__ ):,_ ---- -"'--- -- -•-

_]L

MOKimum concentrations of sherd s

Maximum concentrations of sh e rds

Lo wer

1m1

Lower lim i t of sherds/

o s er s

Bottom of shell..)'

Bottom of shell/

Steri l e Cloy

Sterile

Cloy

Depth
in

inches

90%
15-181------

De lam

-

----,--,--,
100%

.Oyster

FIG. 4. a, Stratigraphy of grid 3S2E, north profile; b, Stratigraphy of grid
ON 6E, west profile; c, Average accumulation of shell over site by level.

339

FULLEN SITE

varied in thickness and compactness from square to square. No correlation could be made of these lenses because they pinched out before
they reached the next pro£le. In general, however, the stratigraphy
showed an upper zone of sterile top soil followed by zones of shell and
pottery directly followed by an artifact-void zone consisting primarily
of Ragia shell (Fig. 4 c). Underlying the cultural layers is a bed of
sterile Pleistocene Beaumont Clay.
ARTIFACTS

A total of 2,078 a1iifacts were catalogued from the Fullen Site, including artifacts found by the Fullens and Sharp in their test pits
( 1S-1W and 00). Of these, 2,044 were pottery sherds (Table 1). Over
5,000 pieces of pottery were excavated and washed, but any piece that
was smaller than 2.5 centimeters in maximum dimension was not
classified. Artifacts were sorted into three main groups- pottery, objects of stone and objects of bone. Within these general groups, a
number of functional categories (bone awls, arrowpoints, etc.) were
recognized which were further subdivided into stylistic varieties and
types.
TABLE

1

Distribution of Sherds by Square and Level
Depth
in
lnches

0-0

0-6
6-12
12-18
18-24

68

Totals

68

ON- lN
6E 3E

3N 3N 5N lS
lE 2W 4E lW

424 107 78 48
305 211 20 4
86 23
815

341

6

94
88
23
2

98 52 6 207

3S
2E

2S 3N
3W 7E

273 24
16

119
14

Unk.

Total

11

1252
658
132
2

289

24

133

11

2044

POTTERY ANALYSIS

The pottery was divided into three main groups on the basis of
tempering material: sand, sherd, and vegetable. These categories were
further broken down into incised or plain ware. Bases of vessels were
separated into noded, flat, rounded or concave categories. Each sherd
was given a fresh break and then examined by eye. Any piece in
which the tempering agent was doubtful was examined under lOX
magni£cation. The examination was done completely by the author so
as to insure consistency.
It was evident from the outset of the project that the classi£cation
of pottery could be approached from several different angles; how-

340

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ever, it seemed doubtful that it would be worthwhile to spend much
time examining differences in temper, especially sand, because other
work in the area shows that sand tempering has a long temporal span
(Wheat, 1953:244; Suhm, Krieger and Jelks, 1962:55). Nevertheless,
the pottery from the Fullen Site was separated into different tempering
groups because it was felt that the information nright be of assistance
to those who prefer to work with tempering agents. The sherd count
on the basis of temper is shown in Table 2.
Since 1954, the pottery of this area has been divided into Goose
Creek Plain and Goose Creek Incised, but it is becoming evident that
this division is not refined enough to accommodate all of the pottery
assigned to it. Following R. B. Worthington's suggeston, Lawrence
Aten has defined the new types, San Jacinto Plain and San Jacinto
Incised; types which are tempered with pieces of crushed sherd
( Aten: 1966 ms.). In view of the confusion over the defining attributes
of types and their spatial and temporal distributions in the Gulf Coast
area, the pottery identified in this report will only be described by its
atb·ibutes, type names will be used only when referring to other reports where the type Goose Creek is used for sand tempered pottery
and San Jacinto for sherd tempered pottery.
Examination of the distribution of sherds (Table 2) revealed that
no rim sherds of sherd-tempered pottery occurred although there
were 164 body sherds of this ware. This raised the question of whether
vessels were actually consb·ucted solely of sherd-tempered paste. In
view of the construction techniques which involved coiling and probably building sections of the body separately over a period of some
days, it seemed possible that different mixes of clay were used at different times during the construction of one vessel and perhaps even
that the makers found it useful habitually to make different parts of
the same vessels with different tempering materials. Without a much
larger series of sherds than are available from this excavation we can
only speculate about such possibilities; however, it is possible to run
a simple statistical test (Students t-test) to determine whether the
lack of rim sherds of sherd-tempered paste was statistically significant.
The results are shown in Table 3. The t-test thus shows that in less
than one time out of twenty would we expect to have found no rim
sherds of sherd-tempered pottery if sampling variability were the only
factor operating. In other words, the test shows results that are significant at a .05 level of confidence. We tentatively conclude therefore
that some cultural factors , rather than sampling error might account
for the lack of sherd-tempered rims. It must be mentioned in this

TABLE

2

Distribution of Sherds by Level
Percentage of Each Type to Total in Level is Shown
D epth in inches
0-6
6-12
12- 18
Sand Tempered
Plain body
Plain rim
Incised body
Incised rim
Puncta ted
Round hasp,
Flat base
N oded base
Concave base
Total
Sherd Tempered
Plain body
Plain rim
Incised body
Incised rim
Puncta ted
Round base
Flat base
Noded base
Concave base
Total
Other
Vegetable tempered
plain body
Unknown
Total
Grand Total

"1

c

t-<

18 -24

T otal

2 (1 00%)

1734
63
18
31
5
1

z~

en
H

1036
42
3
10

( 94.0%)
( 4.0%)
( .3% )
( .9%)
1 ( .1%)
1 ( .1%)

4 (

.4%)

573
13
15
20
4

(92.0%)
( 2.0%)
( 2.0%)
( 1.4%)
( .6%)

4 (
4 (
1 (

.6%)
.6%)
.2%)

123 (92.0%)
8 ( 6.0%)
1 (

.8%)

1 (

.8%)

4
9
1

1097 ( 99.8%)

6.34 (99.4%)

122 (98 ..3%)

42 (97.7%)

164

1 ( 2.3%)

1

1.33 (99.6%)

2 (100%)

2 ( 1.6%)
124 (100%)

1866

2
43 (100%)

167

2 (84.6%)
l l ( 15.4%)

2
ll

13 (100%)

13

1234

~

677

133

2

2046

~

f-'

342

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

regard, however, that At en ( 1967) reports finding a few sherd-tempered rim sherds at the Jamison Site.
TABLE

3

A t-test of the distribution of sand and sherd tempered sherds shows that by
chance we should expect to find no new sherds of sherd tempered ware only one
time out of 20.
SAND TEMPERED

rim
Sherds

Level
0-6
6-12
12-18

total
Sherds

63
22
8

rim
total (xi)

1112
618
132

2
rim
total-x

.06
.035

.155
n

2

.00006R89
.00027900
.00006889

.0083
.0167
.0083

.06

~

( rim
)
total -x

.00041678
n-1

~

X,= .0517

S1

2

= .00020839

SHERD TEMPERED

rim
Sherds

Level
0-6
6-12
12-18

rim
total (xi)

total
Sherds

0
0
0

122
42
0

.00
.00
.00

~~
X = .oo
2

rim
2
total-x

( rim
) 2
totaL-x
.00
.00
.00

.00
.00
.00

~

0
n-1

S/

=0

~xi

x=

n

52=

~

(xi--;) 2
n-1
x1

t=

v

-

x2

(n-1) s1 2 + (n-1)
n, + n 2 - 2

s2 2

= 6.21

No true bone or shell-tempered sherds were found, and only two
sherds tempered with vegetable matter were identified. These have the

343

FUlLEN SITE

characteristic tiny voids in the paste where the organic matter was
burned out. Quite a few other sherds were found with charred remains in the inner wall of the sherd, but these are probably the result
of scraping the vessel with a handful of grass. There is no reason to
assume that this indicates vegetable tempering.
DESCRIPTION OF POTTERY

Almost all of the sherds examined show
coiling in that the vessels broke along coil junctures. As Ambler has
mentioned ( 1967:32-33), the coil junctures slope downward from the
exterior to the interior, indicating, a lapping process. The sherds also
exhibited smoothing on the inside, probably as a result of having been
scraped by coarse grass or twigs. The uneven finish and scratching on
the exterior of some sherds suggests that the sherds were given their
final form and surface texture by use of the paddle and anvil followed
by rough smoothing.

MANUFACI"URING TECHNIQUES:

FORM:

Four vessels were sufficiently restored to show what the vessel

,

\

, . _ , ' ,.,.,,
;'

\

B

A

D

E
FIG. 5. Base shapes of vessels from Fullen Site. a, b, d, convex, noded bases;
c concave base; e, flat base.

344

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

looked like. Two are what Ambler (1967:33) calls deep bowls, with
much greater rim diameters in relation to body height. The other two
resemble what he calls jars, ·with deep bodies compared to rim
diameter. Some of the sherds in the collection are probably from shallower bowls, but no positive proof is available other than the sloping
appearance of some of the rim sherds. Most of the rims are rather flat
and have nicks on them, but they may be sharp, scalloped or outturned.
The bases are usually thickened, accounting for the node. Other
bases are flat, rounded, and one is concave (Table 4); the concave
base is unique (Fig. 5 c). This sherd has sand temper and is light tan
in color, with a maximum concavity of about .5 em. Considering that
no other concave-base vessels have been reported from Galveston Bay
area sites, it is possible that this sherd is from a vessel that was h·aded
into the region.
TABLE 4
0-6

Sand Tempered
Flat based
Round based
Concave based
Noded based
Total
Sherd Tempered
Flat based
Round based
Concave based
Noded based
Total
Grand Total

Depth in Inches
6-12
12-18
4

1
4
- 5-

3
- 7-

1
1
2
- 3-

1

Total
18-24

4

1
1

1
8
13

13

1
1
2
4

4
17

DECORATION: Of 96 rim sherds recovered, 43 were decorated with incisions or punctations (Table 5). This total includes three or four
pieces that did not actually have a rim connected but appeared to
have come from the rim area. This number does not include any
nicked, unincised rims and includes only designs which extend down
the body wall. This is in keeping with the requirements set up by
Suhm, Krieger and Jelks ( 1962:57) where they state that Goose Creek
Plain (sand-tempered ware) may or may not have lip notching, because it is known to occur on both plain and incised vessels. The

345

FULLEN SITE

notches usually go completely across the lip and are on an average 2
to 4 mm. apart. They may b e at right angles to the wall of the vessel
or may b e diagonal nicks encircling the lip. The incising usually consists of a series of more or less equally spaced horizontal lines. Other
d esign motifs include pendants, triangles and hatching.
TABLE

5

Distribution of Design Elements on Sherds b y Level

Depth
in
inches

HO RIZONTAL

n II B

0-6
6-12

I

2

LINES

PUNCTATI ONS

F==H===Hi M

2

2

2

6

3

I

7

5

L~

II

I

>

1 01 ~

I
I

I

I

I

12LADDERING

TRIANG LE S AND PENDANTS

d n~ llvvq H

N 1\1 M1 N 1M~

0-6
6 - 12
12-

WAVY LIN ES

I
2

I

2

I

3

I

4

I

I

I

Because of the variety of designs and incisions on pot sherds it may
b e possible to establish a time sequence based on different styles of
design. In published reports, it is apparent that the different designs
follow a common pattern. The same pattern of design elements ( or
slightly altered ones ) recurs on different vessels at different sites. Suhm
and Jelks state:
In all known cases, the decoration is confined to the rim zone. T he mos t common design consists of from one to six parallel horizontal lines just below the
lip, beneath which a single row of punctations occasionally occurs. Pendant
triangles filled with diagonal lines or punctations may occur below the bottom
line. Other elements include diagonal ladders, tickin g on border lines,
crossed diagonals and di amonds filled with crosshatchin g. ( Suhm et al.
1962:55 ).

The designs found at the Fullen Site conform to the usual p atterns .
In general, horizontal lines make up the ma jority of designs, w ith
three, four or five lines being most popular.

346

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Meeting these horizontal lines may be one to £ve parallel lines radiating downward at approximately 45 degrees. In at least two cases
these slanting lines are not well lined-up and are not really parallel
(Fig. 6 a). In Figure 8 f, the small, angled hatched lines are well
drawn and are evenly spaced. In one specimen, eight lines are drawn
with intricate care, each one equidistant from the adjacent two lines
(Fig. 6 f). This is true with two other sherds (Fig. 6 d, 7 a) which
show that care was taken in making the incisions. The cordmarking
technique was employed on three specimens; on one it was used on
all the lines (Fig. 6 g) whereas on another, cordmarking was used on
two of the four lines (Fig. 7 b). Both specimens have wavy banding;
Figure 8 b is completely wavy, and Figure 6 g has alternating wavy
and straight lines. On another sherd, (Fig. 7 c) a dual banding of
cordmarking is found.
The use of linear decoration may or may not be related to time and
clearly not all vessels at any one time were decorated. The use of
cordmarking was probably a later innovation, coming in well after the
introduction of incising.
Comparing our samples with those gathered by others, a pattern of
re-occurring designs is evident. Again, this may or may not be related
to time; but it is clearly evident that the same design motifs were used
at different sites. Plate 28 in the Handbook shows a selected sampling
of Goose Creek Incised pottery from various coastal collections. Patterns, B, D, F, K, M, P, R, S, occur at The Fullen Site. The ones that
do not occur are mainly those types that exhibit punctations below or
in between the horizontal bands. Only £ve pieces of punctated pottery
were recovered from the Fullen Site (Table 2). The majority of the
patterns that do occur and which are illustrated in the Handbook are
those with two or more horizontally spaced lines. Many of these Goose
Creek designs appear on other pottery types, such as those of the Coles
Creek and Plaquemine Periods. Aten and Bollich ( 1969:245) report
the presence of a sherd in the Sabine Lake area that highly resembles
Harrison Bayou Incised (Plaquemine Period). This sherd, as they
state, may be a "stylistic innovation" that later became a part of Goose
Creek style. They also recognize that many of the Goose Creek Incised designs, while still belonging to the Coles Creek-Plaquemine
h·adition, combine design elements into styles not common to the
Coles Creek and Plaquemine Periods.
PROJECTILE POINTS

The points were subdivided in the usual manner: large ( unstemmed)
points, dart points and arrow points.

347

FULLEN SITE

B

A

D

G

E

H

FIG. 6. Design elements on rim and body sherds.

348

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

B

A

c

D

E

G
F'
Frc. 7. Design elements on rim sherds .

349

FULLEN SITE

A
B

D

E

c

F

H
FIG. 8. Design elements on rim and body sherds.

G

350

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

LARGE UNSTEMMED POINT (Fig. 9 a), This point whose workmanship
is unusually good, is from square 3N 2W where it was found four
inches below the surface. Its appearance was a total surprise; nothing
like it had been found previously and nothing else like it was found
later. The point is of a gray banded flint with deep red and white
stripes and speckles in it; similar to flint found at the Alibates quarry
in the Texas Panhandle. The point, 12 em. long and 2.5 em. wide at
the base, somewhat resembles an Angostura point from Baytown (Ambler 1967:63); however it is not an Angostura. It has a semi-flute on
one side, which has been caused by the removal of a large flake. The
thinness of the point and the basal grinding made the proximal section almost translucent. Secondary chipping makes the edges slightly
serrated.
DART POINTS
KENT (Fig. 10 a-c). Three points were classified as Kent ( Suhm,
Krieger and Jelks plate 100). On two of these crude points the bases
were not finished. Sizes range from 3.25 to 5 em. in length and from
2 to 2.5 em. in width. One point is made of tan petrified wood and the
other two are made of chert- one orange in color, the other dull pink.
CATAN (Fig. 10 d, e). Only two specimens were found which could
fit this category. The more slender of the two seems to also fit the type
Nodena, but since the distribution of the latter type is confined mainly
to the Arkansas-Missowi area (Bell 1958:69), it was thought best to
include the specimen in the Catan category ( Suhm, Krieger and Jelks
1962:Plate 88). The thicker, cruder specimen is 4.25 em. long and 2.5
em. wide and is made of yellow chert. Half of one side is unchipped;
the cortex still remains on the point. It is possible that this is a preform. The other specimen is 4.5 em. long and 2 em. wide and made of
tan chert.
ARROW POINTS
PERDIZ (Fig. 10 f-h). Three points fit this category ( Suhm, Krieger
and Jelks, 1962:Plate 142). The sizes range from 2 to 2.5 em. in length
and 1.5 to 2 em. in width. Two of the specimens have wide flaring and
small, stubby bases formed by contracting stems. The third specimen
has small, downpointing shoulders and a wider stem. All three points
are made of tan chert. It is interesting to note that Perdiz points are
used in the Central Texas Aspect to define the Toyah Focus. The significance of the preceding statement will become evident below.
SCALLORN (Fig. 10 i, j). Two Scallom points were found, one 2 em.
long and 1.25 em. wide and made of white chert ( Suhm, Krieger and

351

FULLEN SITE

A

B

Frc. 9. A. Large unstemmed point; B. Bone awl or socketed projectile point.

Jelks, 1962:Plate 143); the other broken and made of pink chert. In
the Galveston Bay areas, Scallom points have only been reported
previously at the Addicks Dam site (Wheat, 1953:Plate 34) where ten
were described (five under the Eddy category). In Central Texas,
Scallom points are characteristic of the Austin Focus (Kelley, 1947a,
Suhm 1958). As mentioned above, the Toyah Focus, which is more
recent than the Austin Focus, has only Perdiz points ( Sollberger 1967).
It is interesting to note that the two Scallom points were both excavated by the author at a depth of ten inches. The three Perdiz points

352

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

\

B

c

F

G

D

A

H

E

J

0

K

p

L

Q

f

M

N

R

s

FrG. 10. Projectile points: a-c, Kent; d, e, Catan; f-h, Perdiz; i, j, Scallorn;
k-m, Alba; n, Bassett; o, Sinner; p, Bonham; q, Catahoula; r, s, Unidentified.

FULLEN SITE

353

all came from the eight inch level. This finding seems to generally suppmt the Central Texas findings. However, at Addicks, Wheat found
the Scallorn and Eddy to occur stratigraphically later than the Perdiz
(Wheat, 1953:202).
ALBA (Fig. 10 k-m). Three points designated as Alba ( Suhm, Kiieger and Jelks, 1962:Plate 132) were excavated. The longest specimen
was broken on the stem but intact it would have measured about 3
em. long and 1.25 em. wide. It is made of light tan chert. The other
two are each 1.5 em. long and approximately 1.25 em. wide. One is
made of deep red chert and the other is tan chert.
BASSETI (Fig. 10 n). Only one Bassett point ( Suhm, Krieger and
Jelks, 1962:Plate 133) was found. It is made of brown chert, measures
1.75 em. long and 1.25 em. wide and is chipped only on one side.
BONHAM (Fig. 10 p). The single example of a Bonham point is made
of white chert and measures 2 em . long and 1 em. wide ( Suhm,
K1ieger and Jelks, 1962:Plate 134). Like the Bassett point, it too is
chipped on only one face.
CATAHOULA (Fig. 10 q). Only one example of a Catahoula point
was found. This brown chert point is broken on the blade, but would
have measured approximately 2.5 em. long had it been whole. This
type is described by Bell ( 1960:Plate 8) and was named by C. H.
Webb from examples found near Catahoula Lake, Louisiana. Bell
mentions that the age of the Catahoula point is uncertain but that it
appears to be associated with Plaquemine materials in Louisiana,
which may indicate an age of 1200-1600 A. D. as compared with the
span of 1000-1500 A. D. for the Perdiz point ( Suhm, Krieger and
Jelks, 1962:283).
SINNER (Fig. 10 o). One crude point was found which may be a
Sinner, a type first proposed by Gregory and Webb and discussed by
Webb in his Resch Site Report (Webb et al., 1969:52). The specimen
is of red and yellow chert and is 3 em. long and 1.25 em. wide. The
two notches are on the strong-shouldered side. The stem is slightly
contracting and the base is slightly thinned.
UNIDENTIFIED (Fig. 10 r, s). Two small points, both having contracting stems and slight, unifacial chipping, could not be typed. Both are
of tan chert; one measures 2.25 em. by 1 em. and the other 2.25 em.
by 1.25 em.
OTHER STONE TOOLS

There are many problems encountered when setting up a classifi-

354

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

cation of chipped stone tools; however, it was thought best to use the
conventional method of classifying them on the basis of size and shape.
UTILIZED FLAKE (Fig. 11 b). One pointed flake of tan chert, perhaps a
projectile point, measured 3.5 by 2 em., and appeared at the 12-15
inch level.

(Fig. 11 C). A long unifacially chipped knife or
scraper, measuring 7.25 em. long, 2.25 em. wide and .75 em. thick, has
a quarter twist to it and was formed by the removal of flakes from
both sides of a steep medial ridge on its back. This piece is made of
olive chert and still has the original cortex on its distal end. It and the
following two specimens were found in the 6-12 inch level.
ELONGATE KNIFE

(Fig. 11 d). One small knife or scraper, measuring
2 by 2.25 em., is made of tan chert and has a thinned base.

STEMMED SCRAPER

(Fig. 11 e). This small rectangular object of mottled
gray chert measured 3 by 2 em. and is 1.25 em. thick at its widest end.
The other end is thinned down to a fine edge by the removal of large
wedge-shaped chips.
SMALL BIFACE

NET SINKER (Fig. 11 a). A piece strongly resembling a fish net sinker
has been ground and has a semi-circle of pecked holes around its midsection. A hole near the tapered end has been added to facilitate
tying. It is made of a gray sandstone and is 7.5 em. long and 3.5 em.
wide.
OBJECTS OF BONE

Two large awls were recovered along v.rith seven other pieces of
worked bone. One (Fig. 9 b) tapers to a sharp point, having been
polished along its entire length. The other (Fig. 12 ee') is smaller and
exhibits the same general workmanship. The two artifacts ru·e labelled
bone awls; however, they may have served as socketed projectile
points. No trace of asphaltum was found on them. Both were made
from deer metapodials. One ulna awl was found with the distal end
ground to a blunt point (Fig. 12 a).
MISCELLANEOUS OCCUPATIONAL REFUSE
DEER BONES. A total of over 200 deer teeth and mandible fragments
were found scattered throughout the occupational level. Many teeth
were still in place in the jaw and included incisors and molars.
In addition to the teeth and jaw fragments , excavations recovered
over 10,000 fragments of recognizable mammal bone-most of which
are assumed to be deer bones. The bones seem to have been cracked
open for marrow, apparently by pounding, since they are badly splin-

355

FULLEN SITE

B

c

A

D
E

G

F

H

FIG. 11. Tools: a, Weight; b, Utilized flake; c, Elongate knife; d, Stemmed

scraper; e, Small biface; f-i, Broken projectile points.

356

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

B

F
D

E

H
FIG. 12 . Artifacts of Bone: a, Ulna awl; b-f, Awls or socketed projectile
points; g, h, Worked antler tines.

FULLEN SITE

357

tered. Sixteen pieces exhibit cutting and scratching, presumably by
flint knives and scrapers.
TURTLE CARAPACE. Several hundred fragments of h1rtle carapace (probably land terrapin) were found. The species has not yet been identified.
RODENT BONES. Several rodent bones were recovered, including an intact mouse jaw-bone and teeth.
GAR SCALES. Four hundred and eight gar scales were collected ( estimate), the size ranging from .5 to 3 em. in length. The exact species
( speces ) is not known.
BISON BONES. What appears to be an astragalus from a bison was
found along with a large tooth. The astragalus was from the 0-6 inch
level while the tooth's provenience is not known.
CuLTRAL STRATIGRAPHY
Because the lower part of the shell midden contains no artifacts it
suggests a pre-pottery occupation. Only two small sherds were found
below the fifteen inch level and these may have worked down among
the shells or may have been buried. Every point was found on levels
with pottery, except for one Kent, which was found sixteen inches
deep. The five dart points found were from twelve to sixteen inches
deep along with some amount of pottery. The deepest tool found was
a long, ridged scraper (see Fig. 11 c) which was taken from square
ON 6E at a depth of ten inches.
If dates from the earliest pottery horizon at Wallisville ( Aten, 1967)
can be applied here, the lowest level in which pottery occurs somewhat regularly should be about the second century A.D. Anything
below this level must ante-date that period.
The use of incised pottery seems to begin somewhere in the middle of the sequence. Table 2 bears this out. The lowest level in which
incised pieces occur is twelve inches (except for one piece found at
thirteen inches). Most of it occurs in the 0-6 inch level. Dates at
Wallisville have shown that from 150 A.D., pottery is undecorated
and flat based. At the Wright Site (Ambler, 1967:75) decorated pottery occurs as deeply as any pottery, so the earliest pottery making
period as found at Wallisville is not found there. It must be remembered that decorated pottery as described in Ambler's report may or
may not include lip-notching. Ambler points out that at the Wright
Site "lip nicking, incised decorations, and noded bases are present
in the earliest pottery assemblage and that these attributes precede

358

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the use of crushed sherds as a tempering agent" (Ambler, 1967:75).
In the Fullen Site noded bases occurred at the beginning of the
pottery phase and continued throughout (Table 4). Flat bases appear
to come in later in the sequence and were fairly short-lived. It should
be noted, however that the paucity of bases from the lower pottery
levels makes this assessment inconclusive. The small number of round
bases come in about the same time as flat-based vessels and continue
up through the sequence. The one concave based specimen was from
the upper level; it appears along with noded bases.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The Fullen Site is a small campsite which has yielded 2,000 pieces
of pottery, 10,000 pieces of bone and a handful of tools. It has strong
suggestions of stratigraphy of pottery, both sand and sherd-tempered
and plain and incised vessels. This may be its biggest asset. It in some
ways matches other Rangia middens dug in the area while at the
same time it does not match others.
The stratigraphic sequence is:
1. At the bottom of the midden there is a suggestion of a pre-pottery
horizon that contains bone and shell and dart points. Shell here ranges
from 100% Rangia cuneata at twenty-four inches to 100% Crassostrea
virginica at twenty-one inches (Grid IS IW). Figure 4 c gives the
general percents of shell over the site. A few potsherds were found
here, probably as a result of having worked their way down through
the soil.
2. The next nahrral level is about sixteen inches (a little lower in
some grids) where the actual pottery horizon starts. In this level only
one incised sherd was found and no sherd-tempered pieces were recovered. The one base from this level was noded. Shell in this level is
mostly Rangia. Three dart points were the only projectiles found.
3. The third level starts at about thirteen inches and is almost completely Rangia. With this level comes the introduction of worked bone
and arrow points, though dart points are still present. Sherd-tempered
pottery starts here as does incised ware. The bases range from rounded
to flat to noded. The flat bases, not seen in the previous level, give out
near the six inch mark while the noded bases seem to gain strength
over the one found in the previous level.
4. In the uppermost level, the three arrow points were the only
projectiles found, there were no dart points. Rangia is still the predominant shellfish and vessels ( sherd and sand-tempered) have noded
bases. Rounded bases are still rare and there is one occunence of a
concave-type base.

359

FULLEN SITE

As a unit, the artifacts and bone which comprise the non-shell part
of the midden strongly suggest an economy of hunting.
The major source of food for the inhabitants of the site seems to
have been clams ( Rangia cuneata) and oysters ( Crassostrea virginica). Rangia prefer low salinity while oysters prefer higher salinity
and probably lived further off-shore than the clams did. These two
shellfish are indicative of their environment although some overlap
may be found. Fluctuation in rainfall then, would cause the rise and
decline of populations of clams and oyster.
Not only were fish and shellfish easily obtainable, but the land
resources were also plentiful. Looking at the collection of bones extracted from the midden, it is obvious that deer and many other animals were eaten. The environment, thus, was similar to todays for
deer, rabbits, squirrels, rats, raccoons, turtles and snakes are still seen
along with occasional garfish and bobcats.
While investigating this site, the two questions that occurred and
re-occuned in everyone's mind were-"what kind of encampment was
this," and "why were there apparent changes in the technology of the
inl1abitants and in the environment which resulted in stratigraphic
changes in the midden?" Was this a summer camp where the Indians
might have come to collect shellfish? Was it a permanent encampment? If so, why do we find sporadic piles of refuse placed here and
there? It is almost as if the Indians camped on one spot of the midden
for awhile, left, came back and lived on another part of the midden
for a while. This is probably why one finds discontinuous piles of
garbage on sites such as this one. After looking at this midden and at
shell middens in general, one gets the idea that they were not too well
protected from the elements. They are usually situated on points of
land, barren of trees and vegetation and are usually the highest elevation around. It stands to reason that the inhabitants would not stay
here and battle the cold, when, by moving up the bayous into what
is now the Houston area, they were afforded better protection from
the elements. This pattern of seasonal movements seems to explain
the discontinuous stratigraphy and also the fact that similar pottmy
and stratigraphic sequences are found quite far away from one another.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The course offered in Gulf Coast Archeology was originally organized by Miss Mary McCutcheon with the assistance of Drs. Robert
Eisenberg and Robert Lankford, both of Rice University. The original
group of excavators included Ted Henderson, Mike Pewitt, Bonnie
Laird, Allison Hill. Phyllis Schwethelm, Larry Flournoy, Carolyn

360

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Tallent, Jim Eakins, Jim Wickberg, John Caldwell, Rick Suggs, Ginger
Young, Mary McCutcheon and Mike O'Brien.
Dr. Lankford supplied the data on the geology of the area and its
effect on the surrounding ecology.
The author would like to thank Mr. and Mrs. W. L. Fullen of Deer
Park, Texas, for obtaining the site from Friendswood Development
Co., through the Houston Archeological Society. Mr. George Meriwether III, of Friendswood Development has the author's deep appreciation for his interest and protection of the site. Finally a debt of
gratitude is owed to Dr. Frank Hole, also of Rice, who gave advice
on the preparation of this report.
H.EFERENCES CITED

Ambler, J. Richard
1967. Three Prehistoric Sites near Cedar Bayou, Galveston Bay Area. State
Bt1ilding Commission, Archaeology Program, Report No. 8.
Aten, Lawrence E.
1966. Pottery Types of the Lower Trinity River Area, Texas. Mimeographed
manuscript.
1967. Excavations at the jamison S-ite ( 41LB2) Liberty County, Texas. Report
No. 1 of the Houston Archeological Society.
Aten, Lawrence E. and Charles N. Bollich
1969. A Preliminary Report on the Development of a Ceramic Chronology for
the Sabine L ake Area of Texas and Louisiana, Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 40.
Bell, Robert E.
1960. Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points.
Special Bulletin No. 2, Oklahoma Anthropological Society.
Kelley, J. Charles
1947a The Lehmann Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the Toyah, Uvalde and
Round Rock Foci. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleo ntology
Society, Vol. 18.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1958. A Review of Central T exas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 29.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D . Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1962. Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Archeological
Society Special Publication, No. 1 and Texas Memori al Museum Bulletin
No.4.
Sollberger, J. B.
1967. A New Type of Arrow Point with Speculation as to its Origin. The
Record. Vol. 23, D allas, Texas.
W ebb, Clarence H., Forrest E. Murphy, W esley G. Ellis and H . Roland Green
1969. The Resch Site 41 HS 16, Harrison County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 40.

361

FULLEN SITE

Wheat, Joe Ben
1953. An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin, Southeast Texas.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 154.
Rice University
Houston, Texas

Appendix
QUATERNARY GEOLOGIC HISTORY OF THE
CLEAR LAKE AREA
The study area is located near the westside of Galveston Bay and
approximately twenty-five miles inland from the Gulf of Mexico shoreline at Galveston, Texas. The regional topography is a nearly featureless coastal plain which slopes gently toward the Gulf with an average
dip of about 1.2 feet per mile. In the study area, the coastal plain is
fom1ed by the smface of the Beaumont formation, the youngest of the
sedimentary subdivisions of the Pleistocene recognized in the upper
Texas coast (Bernard and LeBlanc, 1965).
The Beaumont formation is composed of a laterally variable complex of poorly-consolidated sediments-gravels, sands, silts and claysdeposited in a variety of tenestrial and nearshore environments as
sea level was lowered during the last (Wisconsin) glaciation ( Bernard, 1950; Henry, 1956). During lowered sea level, the sediments of
the Beaumont formation were extensively altered by subareal weathering and soil forming processes. Surficial soil characteristics today
include evidence of dehydration, leaching and oxidation phenomena
and the accumulation of pedocal soil layers with a dark, humic A
Zone and, significantly, the precipitation of nodular caliche (calcium
carbonate) in the light colored B Zone. The caliche identifies the soil
as a pedocal and as having been formed in an arid climate in which
evaporation exceeded precipitation. Today, precipitation exceeds evaporation in the study area. Soils actively forming in the present humid
climatic environment are defined as pedalfers characterized by the
presence of fenuginous nodules and a brown-to-red B Zone. Such iron
nodules are relatively common, although rather small ( 1 to 4 mm. in
diameter) , within the thin soil of the midden and indicate that essential modem climatic conditions existed when the site was occupied.
In addition to the soil characteristics, other factors of the geology
bear directly on the archeological interpretations. The local topography
is secondarily developed on the gently dipping coastal plain surface
described above. The glacially controlled lower sea level resulted in
stream erosion of the previously deposited Beaumont formation and
the creation of incised river and stream valleys (Fig. 1). The major

362

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

T OPOGRAPHY OF T HE
BEAUMONT (PLEISTOCENE!
SURFAC E
Contour Interval

= 10

feet

N

I

20~
FIG. 1. Inferred topography of the surface of the Beaumont formation (Late

Pleistocene) showing depth of stream valley erosion. Surface data are from
U.S. Geological Survey, topographic map, League City, Texas quadrangle.
Subsurface data are extrapolated from core hole and seismic information in
Galveston Bay (Rehkemper, 1969).

drainage system in the Houston-Galveston area was the Trinity River
and its tributaries, including Clear Creek and its feeder streams. The
rise of sea level following the wane of Wisconsin glaciation resulted
in the inundation of the incised valleys. Today Galveston and Trinity
bays are the flooded remnants of the ancient Trinity valley. Locally
Clear Lake, Mud Lake and Taylor Lake are flooded tributary and
feeder valleys west of the main drainage system.
Significant modifications have occurred in these various estuaries
since sea level reached its present stand about 4000 years ago ( Rehkemper, 1969). Within the last 4000 years, locally derived sediments
have infilled much of Clear Lake, Mud Lake and Taylor Lake and it
would appear that the process of sedimentation has continued to· the
present. In addition, the mouths of Mud Lake and Taylor Lake areal-

FULLEN SITE

363

most completely barred from Clear Lake and Clear Lake itself now has
only very restricted communication with Galveston Bay (Fig. 1). The
formation of bars or barriers across the mouths of embayments such
as Clear Lake or Mud Lake is a result of longshore transportation
and the trapping of sediments by fringing marshes. Like sedimentation
infilling, this also is a process which has continued to the present.
The combined effects of initial flooding of the valleys followed by
sedimentation infilling and barring of the embayments has resulted in
a continuous change in the environmental characteristics of the Clear
Lake area and consequently a change in its Rangia and Crassostrea
faunas. Extrapolating from data and conclusions given by Rehkemper
( 1969) from adjacent Galveston Bay, the following is a proposed history of environmental change for the Clear Lake area:
1. Saline waters accompanying the last rise of sea level first
entered the lower Clear Lake estuary about 6500 years ago. The
initial intermixing of salt water and discharge from Clear Creek
would have produced a weakly brackish water environment similar
to that occurring in modem upper Trinity Bay adjacent to the Trinity River delta. The pelecypod, Rangia, would have flourished in
Clear Lake.

STAGE

2. Sea level rapidly rose about twenty feet and attained approximately its present level during the next 2500 years thus forming
a relatively deep and more saline embayment than had previously
existed. Increased salinity shifted the Rangia environment toward
the head ends of the Clear Lake estuary and locally the oyster,
Crassostrea, colonized the higher salinity areas.

STAGE

3. Once rising sea level stabilized and attained its present
stand about 4000 years ago, the processes of sedimentation infilling
and barring of the embayments resulted in restricted communication
with Galveston Bay and a decrease in salinity tlll'oughout the Clear
Lake area. As a consequence, the Crassostrea reefs would have
gradually diminished to be replaced by extensive Rangia beds.

STAGE

According to T. E. Pulley (personal communication), the presentday Clear Lake area is predominantly a Rangia environment. There
are, however, intermittant occurrences of Crassostrea geographically
restricted to a small area near the inlet which connects Clear Lake
with Galveston Bay. During prolonged periods ( 2 .to 3 years or more)
of decreased rainfall, the bottom water salinity near the inlet will increase and small oyster reefs will grow until the drought ends and
salinity declines.

364

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
SUMMARY

The geologic history of the area has direct bearing on the type,
quantity and proximity of shellfish, principally Rangia and Crassostrea,
available to the Indian inhabitants. Since these two pelecypods have
separate ecologic requirements and the ecology of the area has changed
with time, it is possible to relate the midden shell stratigraphy to the
environmental history and thus fix the period of occupation.
The vertical succession of shell debris in the midden changes tlu·ough
successive layers from a basal unit of pure Rangia to a surface unit
consisting of 75% Rangia- 25% Crassostrea. This sequence quite possibly documents a period of increasing salinity in the Clear Lake area.
The geologic history outlined above has two periods in which the
salinity increased: 1) the period shortly after initial flooding of the
estuary (Stage 1), 2) the modern period which contains an unknown
number of salinity increases due to drought (Stage 3).
The fresh appearance and relatively unleached nature of the midden shell essentially precludes the first and older possibility, i.e., that
the site is from 5000 to 6500 years old. It seems more likely that Stage
3 events would satisfactorily explain the midden shell succession.
In an attempt to set limiting dates for the occupation during Stage
3, the following is proposed: The basal midden unit consisting of 100%
Rangia would document a weakly brackish environment which would
post-date the formation of the barrier across the mouth of Clear Lake.
The barrier could not have been initiated until after sea level reached
its present stand about 4000 years ago; the Rangia environment most
likely was not created until the barrier formation was completed. With
admittedly all too few data on barrier growth rates, it is estimated
that the Clear Lake barrier required from 1500 to 2000 years to fonn
and consequently the Rangia environment is not older than about 2500
years. The subsequent occurrences of Crassostrea most likely represent short-term, drought-induced occurrences of higher salinities and,
as yet, cannot be fixed in time.
REFERENCES CITED

Bernard, H. A., and Le Blanc, R. J.
1965. "Resume of the Quaternary Geology of the Northwestern Gulf of Mexico," in Wright, H. E. Jr., and D. G. Frey, eds. The Quaternary of the
United States, Princeton University Press, p. 137-186.
Henry, V. J.
1956. "Investigation of Shoreline-like Features in the Galveston Bay Region,
Texas." Texas Agr. & Mech. Coli., Dept. Oceanography, Tech. Rept.,
Proj. 24, 76p.

FuLLEN SrTE

365

Rehkemper, L. J.
1969. "Sedimentology of Holocene Estuarine Deposits, Galveston Bay". in
Holocene Geology of the Galveston Bay Area, compiled by Lankford,
R. R. and J. J. W. Rogers, Houston Geological Society, p. 12-52.
Rice University
Houston, Texas

An "Eolith" From Lower Pleistocene
Deposits of Southern Texas
THOMAS

RoY

HESTER

ABSTRACT
A flint object was found in association with Pleistocene fauna in Duval
County, Texas (Fig. l ) in 1888. It has been referred to as an artifact in at
least two publications. Recent studies of the piece have established that it is
not the result of human manufacture.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank Dr. Clifford Evans of the U.S. ational Museum of Natural Hist01y (Smithsonian Institution) for making the
specimen available for study and for granting permission to publish
this note. Thanks are also due to Drs. Robert F. Heizer and J. Desmond Clark ( Deparhnent of Anthropology, University of California,
Berkeley ) for examining the specimen.
INTRODUCTION
In the Annual Report of the United States National Museum for
1888, the following statement by Thomas Wilson ( 1890) appears:
"Another accession (21181, Catalogue No. 139817) which may prove
of importance is a flint implement of the rudest type, being merely
chipped to a point, or with an edge not more than an inch in width,
which was discovered by Mr. William Taylor, of San Diego, Texas,
in San Diego Creek, one-half mile from the town of San Diego. It
was found by him 3 or 4 or more feet under the surface in undisturbed layers. Mr. Taylor has found several other implements of the
same kind, showing that this was not a solitary or isolated case. This
implement becomes important from the fact that it was found near
the top of the equus beds of that district, which have become celebrated in the palentology and geology of our count1y. The Mylodon,
Glypdoton, Elephas and three species of Equus, all extinct animals,
have been found fossilized in these beds, and it seems agreed among
scientist that these beds belonged to the Tertiary geologic period"
(Wilson, 1890:116-127).
This report received no attention until a number of years later when
it was cited by E. H. Sellards during his studies in the Beeville area:

368

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TEXAS

FIG.

1. Location of the San Diego Locality, Duval County, Texas.

" ... it is known that a William Taylor lived in San Diego, Duval
County, Texas, and made a collection of fossils on San Diego Creek
about 1888. It is believed, therefore, that the type locality of Equus
giganteus is on San Diego Creek, Duval County, Texas, which is
only about 70 miles from the Beeville locality. It is noteworthy that
Taylor reports artifacts associated with the fossils collected by him
near San Diego" (Sellards, 1940:1633).
Thus in the papers of Wilson ( 1890) and Sellards ( 1940), it assumed
that the lithic materials collected by Taylor on San Diego Creek were
indeed man-made, and in association with extinct mammals. The
"equus beds" mentioned by Taylor are now included in the Lissie
formation ( Duessen, 1914;1924: 108). The Lissie is attributed to the
lower, or early, Pleistocene (Doering, 1956: 1822). Both Dues sen and
Weeks ( 1933:460-461) have noted the paleontological remains of the
Lissie; in addition, they have commented on the presence of flint, chert,

369

EOLITH

quartz, orthoclase, limestone and other gravels in the formation. These
gravels are often small, from 1/4 to 3 inches in diameter, though larger
cobbles do occur. Duessen (1924:108) notes: "They are generally wellrounded and watenvorn, giving evidence of transportation for considerable distance".
THE SPECIMEN
After examining the Wilson ( 1890) and Sellards ( 1940) references,
I felt that it would be worthwhile to re-study the specimen collected
by Taylor some 82 years ago. The possibility of an artifact occurring
in lower Pleistocene deposits was quite intriguing. The study was made
possible through a loan of the specimen from the U. S. National Museum of Natural History.
The specimen (Fig. 2 A-B') is a pointed, ovoid piece of flint. Recent
breaks at one end reveal that the flint is gray, although it now bears
a uniform patina 1 mm. thick. The longitudinal cross section is tabular;
the distal tip is wedge-shaped, and the basal edge is flat. Length is
107 mm., maximum width is 55 mm., and maximum thickness is 40 mm.
The piece is badly pitted on both faces and along the lateral edges.
Both faces and the lateral edges are heavily battered and dulled, with
the whole specimen having an extremely worn appearance, and the
flake scars almost totally obliterated. The flake scars are randomly
placed, usually emanating from the edges and exhibiting flat, diffuse
negative bulbs of percussion. From my examination, and that of Drs.
Robert F. Heizer and J. Desmond Clark (University of California,
Berkeley) , it is felt that the specimen is not an artifact. Dr. Clark has
suggested (personal communication) that the piece was flaked by
fortuitous concussion while in a scree and was subsequently streamrolled (see also Barnes, 1939: 106-107).
CONCLUSION
Though this specimen from San Diego Creek, Duval County, Texas,
has been previously asc1ibed to artifact status, it can now be stated
that it is definitely not the result of human manufacture. The specimen is a flint gravel flaked by natural forces; only by chance was it
associated with fossil fauna in the Lissie formation of southern Texas.
The piece is reminiscent of European "eoliths", lithic objects once
thought to be of great antiquity, but which have been demonstrated
to be the result of various natural agencies (Barnes, 1939; Oakley,
1964:9-19).

370

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

0

50

mm.

FIG. 2. Flint Object from Lower Pleistocene Deposits, Duval County, Texas.
A,A', B,B', views of both surfaces and of the sides.

371

EO LITH

REFERENCES CITED
Barnes, Alfred S.
1939. The Difference Between Natural and Human Flaking on Prehistoric
Fint Implements . American Anthropologist, Vol. 41, No. l, pp. 99-112.
Doering, John A.
1956. Review of Quatern ary Surface Fom1ations of Gulf Coast Region. Bulletin, American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Vol. 40, No. 8, pp.
1816-1862.
Duessen, Alexander
1914. Geology and Underground W aters of the Southeastern Part of the T exas
Coastal Plain. U.S .G.S. Water Supply Papers, No. 335.
1924. Geology of the Coastal Plain of Texas West of Brazos River . U.S.G.S.
Professional Papers, No. 126.
Oakley, K. P.
1964. Man the Tool-Maker. Phoenix Books. University of Chicago Press.
Sellards, E. H .
1940. Pleistocene Artifacts and Associated Fossils from Bee County, T exas.
Bulletin, Geological Society of America, Vol. 51, pp. 1627-1657.
W eeks, Albert W.
1933. Lissie, Reynosa and Upland Terrace Deposits of the Coastal Plain of
T exas Between Brazos River and Rio Grande. Bulletin, American Association of Petroleum Geologists, Vol. 17, No. 5, pp. 453-487.
Wilson, Thomas
1890. Report on the Department of Prehistoric Anthropology in the United
States National Museum. Report, United States National Museum, for
1888, pp. 126-127.
Department of Anthropology
Univ. of California, Berkeley

Book Review
Lithic Analysis and Cultural Inference: A Pal.eo-Indian Case. Edwin
N. Wilmsen. Anthropological Papers of the University of Arizona,
No. 16, University of Arizona Press, Tucson, 1970. xi + 87 pp., 31
figs. 26 tables. $6.00
This monograph presents a formalized system for analyzing lithic
artifacts and defining artifact classes on the basis of statistically significant attribute covariation. It is assumed that artifact types are
real and that after their discovery, comparisons will allow the identification of cross-cultural regularities in lithic inventories. Parts of the
report, which was Wilmsen's dissertation, are available in three separate articles published in 1968 ( Paleo-Indian Site Utilization. In
"Anthropological Archeology in the Americas"; Functional Analysis of
Flaked Stone Artifacts. American Antiquity, Vol. 33, No. 2, pp. 156161; Lithic Analysis and Paleoanthropology. Science, Vol. 161, No.
3845, pp. 982-987 ). The complete dissertation presents data relevant
to the articles and substantiates the conclusions presented in them.
This report exemplified a theoretical shift which was operationalized
during the sixties; the shift as pointed out by Wilmsen is away from
purely taxonomic devices and time/space considerations to what has
been called "Anthropological Archaeology". Since about 1960, studies
have been oriented toward an understanding of the environmental
adaptation of Early Man. Notable among such articles are those by
Wendorf and Hester (1962), Fitting, Visscher and Wahla (1966),
Wheat ( 1967), Binford ( 1968 ) and several others. It is the general
concensus of these authors that the elicitation of cultural processes,
be they tool making, subsistence activities, integrative mechanisms,
etc., is important and can be coupled with the earlier emphasis upon
culture histOiy.
Another significant breakthrough is that Wilmsen has shown that
data which were collected under a culture history framework can be
used for more than simply taxonomic studies. In a sense, this is a form
of salvage archaeology as Wilmsen attempts to recover information
on Paleo-Indians by restudying materials from Paleo-Indian sites
which include Lindenmeier, Blackwater Draw, Homer, Levi, Shoop,
Williamson and Quad. Use of these sites, however, has lead to the
necessity of a broad definition for the term Paleo-Indian.
Wilmsen argues for a holistic theory of culture which must be gen-

374

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

eral and formal and must recognize the systematic sb·ucture of culture.
A culture is viewed as " ... a speci£c subset of adaptive mechanisms
that are demonstrably distinct from other such subsets that are articulated by a particular social unit ( p. 2 )". After selecting several PaleoIndian stage sites for analysis, the collections were sampled and a
large body of observations, measurements and angles were collected
for each specimen and recorded on punch cards. These data were
presented in proportional frequency diagrams and compared through
the use of intersite correlations. The observable patterns are interpreted and tool types established. The intersite variations in lithic
technology and function are discussed and inferences made about site
activities and the structure of Paleo-Indian culture.
The selected sites cover a wide area of time and space and are
assumed to be relatable to a primary subsistence activity of big game
hunting. There was an attempt not to select a better de£ned time
period, e.g., Clovis or Folsom, or to limit the study of a locale or
region (Dawson and Judge 1969). It would appear to be the unformulated hypothesis of the study that the Paleo-Indian stage does, in fact,
represent a culture and that the formal variation between sites is a
reflection of intersite activity differences regardless of the time/space
variation represented by the sites. However, this is an explanatory
model or hypothesis which best explains the data but did not serve
as the basis for its collection.
The basis for site selection is unclear in several respects. Elida, a
Folsom site in New Mexico (Warnica 1961) was rejected because the
number of specimens in the collection was too few (Hester 1962,
describes 573 artifacts from the site), but Blackwater ( 224 artifacts
from the. Clovis level) and Horner ( 610 artifacts) were used. Two
spatially separated components were detected at the Vernon site
(Longacre 1963), one of which was a Folsom occupation, the other a
Concho Complex occupation. The Concho occupation is dated about
1550 B.C. (Martin and others 1964: 222). Wilmsen selected his artifact sample from the southern part of the site which is where the
Concho materials are localized according to Longacre. Martin and
others consider the Concho Complex to represent a food collector
adaptation which is not temporally equivalent to the Folsom occupation. It is also hard to accept the interpretation that Zone IV at the
Levi site in central Texas represents a single, brief occupation or a few
reoccupations over a short period of time.
Selection of the variables which make up the attribute set design
was not completed until after the Elida and Blackwater samples were
studied ( pg. 11). Reasons are not given as to why speci£c variables

BOOK REVIEW

375

were chosen and it is suggested here that the inductive selection of
parameters is not methodologically different from previous approaches,
although these parameters do lend themselves to more sophisticated
statistical manipulations.
The interpretive section of the report includes a discussion of artifact production in terms of technological and functional variation.
These variations are integrated with data from the specific sites and
a synthesis of site activities is proposed. The report concludes with a
summary of the structure in Paleo-Indian culture. A discussion of
localization of groups (presumed to be bands) and of the variation in
maintenance activities is similar to that of Wendorf and Hester ( 1962),
but more thoroughly worked out. However, this reviewer finds it very
unlikely to accept the concept that there is a single Paleo-Indian cultural systems ( p.83) rather, it seems that Wilmsen has articulated
functionally distinct parts of several temporally and spatially separated
cultural system into a model which may be similar for a large area
and time, but is composed of parts which do not in reality articulate.
It is suggested that a similar study might be done using sites occupied
during the Archaic stage but that the Archaic culture which might be
defined would reflect a level of socio-cultural integration operationalized by many separate social groups.
In summary, the report presents a systematic approach to lithic
description and analysis which allows for the evaluation of intersite
similarities. Although the deductive logic behind the system is not discussed in detail, this paper is an example of an anthropological approach to archaeology which is concerned with an explanation of
intersite variation in lithic technology, activity and social integration.
S. Alan Skinner
Southern Methodist University

377

BOOK REVIEW

A Comparison of Formative Cultures in the Americas, Diffusion or the
Psychic Unity of Man. James A. Ford. Smithsonian Contributions to
Anthropology, Vol. 11, Washington, 1969. xvi
211 pp., 32 illustra-

+

tions, 13 tables, 22 charts.

$7.75.

In a monumental volume, the late James A. Ford has compiled and
integrated an overwhelming corpus of data bearing on the historical
development of Formative cultures in the Americas. Working from
first-hand knowledge of most of the geographic areas, h e has outlined
15 chronological sequences from Ohio, Illinois, Georgia, Florida, Alabama, Louisiana, Veracruz, Valley of Mexico, T ehuacan, Chipas,
Colombia, Ecuador, and Peru by selecting the "best" dates from over
400 radiocarbon assays. Ford was cognizant of the possibility that the
liberties he was taking with the data would: "... set the teeth of the
area specialists on edge." ( p. 9 ) . I rather strongly doubt that such
alignments will disturb too many specialists; for, although they w ere
fabricated in support of Ford's major thesis, they do appear to comprise the most appropriate selection in terms of materials dated, corroborating runs, and other critical criteria.
The major part of the work is then d evoted to a d etailed exposition
on the chronological and geographical distribution of traits which Ford
considers important in defining the Formative; items such as core and
blade industry, lapidary industry, reamers, axes and celts, grinding
stones, earspools, mirrors, finger rings, combs, figurines, pipes, stamps,
bark b eaters, vessel form , vessel decorations and community and
settlement patterns. This list is done in typical Fordian style, as anyone who has had occasion to sit through its oral presentation at the
Natchitoches and Avery Island conferences will testify. Its m agnitude
is simply overpowering, leaving one almost excited with the awareness
of a few data that Ford somehow missed. Even then, one has the
distinct impression that these are simply things that Ford has forgotten
or has deemed unimportant.
Ford then proceeds to discuss and compare the Forn1ative "phases"
of the Americas, almost entirely in terms of their ceramics. Surely, this
will meet with some criticism, as have most of his earlier works centering on pottery ("Measurements of Some Prehistoric Design D evelopments in the Southeastern States", Anthro. Papers, Am. Mus. Nat. Hist.,
Vol. 44, Pt. 3, 1952; "Greenhouse, A. Troyville-Coles Creek Period Site
in Avoyelles Parish , Louisiana", Anthro. Papers, Am. Mus. Nat. Hist.,
Vol. 44, Pt. 1, 1951. ) There are however numerous statements in defense of this emphasis and strong criticism will not com e from this
corner. The pottery complexes figured h ere include Valdivia and

378

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Machalilla of coastal Ecuador; Pue1to Hormiga of coastal Colombia;
Monagrillo and Sarigua of Panama; San Juan, Negritos, Paita and
Guafiape of coastal Peru and Kotosh of highland Peru; Stallings Island
of coastal Georgia, Orange of coastal Florida, Bayou La Batre of
coastal Alabama, Poverty Point of Louisiana, and Fourche Maline of
Oklahoma. The only protest that I can raise is that the accompanying
illustrations would have been more useful if the potsherds to be compared had been horizontally aligned. If they have been been horizontally aligned, then let me apologize to the artist and admit to the fact
that, in some cases, I simply cannot see the resemblances. Admittedly,
the failure to visualize some of the correspondences is due to an odd
habit of mine, that of simultaneously looking at both design motif and
technique of application and not exclusively at one or the other. Figures 22-32 do, however, match up very well using both of these criteria.
Let me hasten to add that I wholeheartedly concur with Ford's statement in the introduction ( p. 6) that: " . . . archaeologists have not
agreed upon a quantitative [nor a qualitative] criterion by which one
may judge whether the evidence is sufficient. . . ." Since criticisms
generated on this level of analysis are generally evaluated on the basis
of the strength and character of the personality making the assertions
( R. Thompson, "The Subjective Element in Archaeological Inference,"
Southwest. Jour. Anthro., Vol. 12, No.3, pp. 327-32, 1956), I prefer not
to be drawn into such an unequal match.
Emergent from these comparisons is Ford's bold theme of Formative
diffusion in the Americas. Ford sees this diffusion as emanating initially
from the Valdivia and Machalilla phases of coastal Ecuador by a series
of relayed voyages of sea-faring peoples. The earlier ventures ( 30001500 B.C.) were, according to Ford, for the purpose of establishing
colonies in remote coastal areas and were ". . . not only intentional,
but ... were repeated and ... continued" ( p. 151). In each of the
colonies, only a selection of the original range of ceramic styles was
present, presumably because the initial boatloads of migrants were
acquainted with only a portion of the total spectrum of design motifs
and techniques in the donor complex. Why this should be so is guessed
by Ford to be due to family specialization. A few other general suppositions have been made on these pioneering settlements. One is that
there was a gradual decline in esthetic and technological quality of
ceramics and correspondingly an attempt on the part of neighboring
peoples to copy the new art from colonists but who, for some unexplicated reason, made only rudimentary plainwares. Secondly, the
colonial ceramic complexes appear to have incorporated vessel forms
foreign to the original complex and Ford, quite out of line with his

BOOK REVIEW

379

thesis, suggests that these represent pottery duplicates of stone or
wooden containers. This momenta1y logical slip by Ford would appear
to have still left a crack in the door leading to the independent invention of ceramics in the New World; a crack which I am sure will be
filled shoulder-to-shoulder by anti-diffusionists whose "missed-theboat" crys for "absolute proof" have recently appeared in pages of
American Antiquity (J. Rowe, "Diffusion and Archaeology," Vol. 31,
No.3, Pt. 1, pp. 334-7, 1966; P. O'Brian, "Doctrinaire Diffusionism and
Acts of Faith," Vol. 33, No. 3, pp. 386-8, 1968). Into this din of
polemics, I would like to inject a personal observational stance on this
controversy in particular and on archaeology in general. The quest for
origins that has so dominated traditional archaeography has yet to
provide results commensurate with the actual and mental labor expended in its behalf. Neither diffusion nor independent invention are
capable of supplying answers to questions of this nature, because both
fall into the realm of historical "explanation" and can be validated
only by objective observation of the linked events. Since our discipline
has not properly phrased its methodology to evaluate such problems,
I would suggest that archaeologists, in order to become more useful
students of man, ought to turn their attention onto more fruitful avenues of endeavor. At least one of these profitable courses lies in generating scientific explanations for cultural variability.
With the tone of this review set thusly, I would like to beg off
retracing Ford's detailed outline of Colonial Formative diffusion under
the excuse that the cursory treahnent required here would do grave
injustice to his grandiose reconstruction. I hope the reader will pardon
this deviation from normal review procedure and will instead gorge
himself on the food for thought in Ford's chapters on Colonial Formativ.e Diffusion in the Americas, The Theocratic Formative and A
Historical Reconstruction ( pp. 150-194).
Before turning our attention to examining the anthropological import of some of Ford's ideas, perhaps a word on the unfinished chapter on The Theocratic Formative might be appropriate. In this section,
Ford was to have considered some of the major archaeological
"enigmas" in the Americas-Poverty Point, Olmec, Chavin, and Hopewell; but, unfortunately, was able to complete only the discussion on
Poverty Point ceramics. Ford employed the classificatory device,
"Theocratic Formative", to describe the initial, widely-separated appearances ( 1500-200 B.C. ) of cultural systems which seem to have
had at their bases a religio-political integrative mechanism, quite different than those of the preceding egalatarian colonial era. It is out of
these systems that "suddenly" emerged, ". . . monumental mound

380

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

structures, large stone carvings, a lapidary industry for personal adornment, and the distinctive art styles . . ." ( p. 180). Quite in keeping
with the diffusionist tone, the rise of these units is considered to be
interconnected with Olmec providing the initial spark.
To attack Ford's thesis on empirical grounds would be analogous
to excavating the gigantic Poverty Point mound one grain at a time
with a microscopic trowel. Never has there been in American archaeology an equal accounting in tenns of the number of data being controlled-surely a lasting testimony to the mental powers of one of
America's premier archaeologists.
To attack Ford's thesis from the same, but opposite-ended conceptual plane (anti-diffusion position) would constructively accomplish
nothing. It would only serve to broaden the already wide chasm between the two rival intellectual camps who, b ecause of professional
color-blindness, have only been able to distinguish black and white
or, at best, various shades of gray. Worst of all, this position would
throw the burden of "proof" into the lap of the audience whose mental
decision to accept or reject the assertion would be synonymous with
"proof."
Nevertheless, there is a weak link in Ford's chain of defense. That
weak spot is the confusion of historical "explanation" and scienti£c
"explanation." This same problem has received the brunt of recent
verbal attacks by Binford ("Some Comments on HistOiical Versus
Processual Archaeology," Southwest. ]our. Anthro., Vol. 24, No. 3, pp.
W7-75, 1968) on Sabloff and .Willeys' invasion hypothesis of Maya
decline, and by Flmmery ("Culture History V. Cultural Process: A
Debate in American Archaeology," Sci. Amer. Vo. 217, pp. 119-22,
1967) in a review of Willey's, An Introduction to American Archaeology. Their arguments can be marshalled in support of the present
one. The setting forth of taxonomic units or historical events in sequential order is not the same as explaining the units or events. Ford, however, has gone a bit further and has hypothetically outlined a linkage
or regularity among Formative ceramic packages. The linkage is
colonial diffusion of a rather speci£c nature (boatloads of migrants).
The main anthropological concepts behind Ford's model appear to
be Wissler's "age-area" and Steward's "levels of socio-cultural integration." These concepts have provided suggestions as to the direction
of movement of speci£c traits. When coupled with Ford's Whiteian
conceptualization of culture as a flow of ideas that is both quanti£able
and predictable, little room is left for speci£able hypotheses about the
underlying socio-cultural milieu in which environment, material culture, and processual and historical factors all play important roles.

BOOK REVIEW

381

Archaeology would do well to throw off some of these leg irons that
have held back its intellectual strides for three or more decades. To
sum up this rather divergent critique is to say that Ford has not successfully demonstrated the relationship of the archaeological record to
the cultural matrix which produced it and has certainly not explained
it: But then I'm not sure he intended to.
There is little doubt in my mind that Ford has not presented us
with a truly messianic insight into the movements of peoples, ideas,
and things in the three millennia p1ior to the Christian era. There is
even less doubt that one day, we will be able to objectively evaluate
Ford's model in terms of the roles that diffusion has played in cultural
development in the Americas. And there is no doubt whatsoever that
A Comparison of Formative Cultures in The Americas will stand for
many years as one of the most significant contributions ever to emerge
from traditional American archaeography.
Jon L. Gibson
Department of Social Studies
University of Southwestern Louisiana
Lafayette, Louisiana
March, 1970

Letter to the Editor
This letter is in reply to the book review of Louisiana's Ancients of
Man, A Study of Changing Characteristics of Louisiana Indian Cultures, published in the Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
Volume 41, 1970.
The book reviewer referred to statements in the book about Poverty
Point as an example of the author not checking sources to catch rather
"gross misinterpretations." The statement used by the author was taken
directly from an article by Dr. Clarence H. Webb, as stated in the
footnote. The reviewer was criticizing the use of certain terms and
descriptions applying to Poverty Point by Dr. Webb. If the reviewer
had read on further, he would have seen the use of the terms he preferred, in some respect, in a reference taken from Ford and Webb
( 1956). The author took the reference to house patterns from Dr.
Webb's work, which was also used as the basis for the "Poverty Point
Indian Village Diorama" in the Louisiana State Exhibit Museum,
Shreveport, La., a picture of which is shown on page 125 in the book.
The book reviewer continued by stating that the author "also manages, with traditional southeastern zeal, to bind him (the archeologist )
to potsherds and history" ( p. 146). This statement is taken from Haag,
concerning the value of potsherds when they occur at a site, as a
means of identifying the group of people of a particular time and
place. Similar statements made by Ford and Gagliano were referred
to on the same page. The book reviewer went on to state, " ... one
wonders that (the author) managed to mention the aceramic manifestations in Louisiana ... " Prior to the above statement quoted, the
author quoted Ford ( p. 92) by saying: "Ford continues to say that
Northwestern Louisiana (sites) are generally found on the tops of
fairly high, red, sandy ridges overlooking small streams or on lakes
that connect with Red River." Then, afterwards the following statement was made, "However, as was pointed out earlier by Gagliano
and Gregory, most Paleo-Indian projectile point finds have come from
this northwestern hill area." On page 100 the author states: "The foreign material in the Clovis series indicates strong occupation of
Louisiana, possibly seasonal, by these early pole [should read Paleo]
hunters, states Gagliano and Gregory." An entire section of the book,
referred to earlier, dealt with the Paleo-Indian and Archaic Periods,
including references to North Louisiana pre-ceramic occupation.
The book reviewer is also critical of the author's "narrow view" of

384

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

archeology in general. He quotes a statement on page 80 as though
it were the only viewpoint expressed by the author. The author tried
to use as many sources as available for definitions of each term. There
was no attempt to evaluate these definitions. It was left to the reader
and student to evaluate these for themselves, without comment from
the author.
In the book review the criticism was made that the author is "tying
the archaeologist to prehistoric sites" by not including more references
to historic site archeology and the historic complexes of Louisiana
Indians. Discussion of the historic cultures in the book covered pages
179 through 187 and pages 215 through 218. Listed in the bibliography
were 45 reference sources dealing with histmic cultures. On the pages
covering the historic cultures were 25 footnotes.
The reviewer was critical of the number of primary references used
by the author, and his acquaintance with these sources. It was not the
author's intention to make the book a professional depth study of all
the works of these authorities, but to present to the student those
sources most widely available and which have provided a background
for an overview of the study of Louisiana Indians. However, in response to the question about the author's acquaintance with the work
of Ford ( 1936) it will be noted that there are 18 footnotes used for
references to this work. In addition an entire section from the book
by Phillips, Ford and Griffin ( 1951) was used.
The reviewer seemed to criticize the references in the bibliography.
The author used 656 footnotes from references in the bibliography.
All bibliographic references were not used in the book, but were provided for students to use for further information.
The statement made by the reviewer that the author " ... heartily
advises his (sic.) the use of his book as a text for teaching of Louisiana archaeology" is a misstatement of fact. What was stated on p.
226 was: "It is recommended that this study be used to train and encourage students to make a further study of Louisiana Indians as a
basis for learning about and understanding other cultures of mankind."
If there is any "misinformation" contained in the book, it is not
intentional, since the author followed closely the writings of the authorities used for references.
The author has only made a beginning to interest young people in
the Indian heritage of Louisiana by furnishing them with information
from the best authorities in the state. If professional archeologists are
going to set the standards for writing in this field, for public school
use, let them write their books and state their ideas. Their works will

BooK

REVIEW

385

speak for themselves. History and the users will judge the merits of
the books and the authors.
J. Ashley Sibley, Jr.
Baton Rouge, Louisiana

Information and Contributors
The Bulletin af the Texas Archeological Society publishes original papers in the
field of American archeology. Emphasis is placed on Texas and adjoining areas in
the United States and Mexico, but papers on other areas are also acceptable.
Manuscripts should be typed on 8lf by 11 inch sheets of white paper, and ALL
MATERIAL should be double spaced. Footnotes should be avoided or kept to a
minimum.
Reference to publish literature, by author, date, and page or figure number
should be placed within parentheses in the body of the text, with full bibliographic
citations listed at the end. See this issue of the Bulletin for models.
The proportions of full-page illustrations (picture or drawing plus caption)
should be suitable for reduction to the effective Bulletin page size of 4 5/16 x 7
inches. Plates may be printed either horizontally or vertically, but be sure to
allow for the caption to be printed the same direction as the plate. Captions for
illustrations should be listed in numerical order and placed behind the list of
references cited.
Each paper must be accompanied by an abstract (one or two paragraphs summarizing the main points of the paper). The abstract should be submitted as the
first part of your paper.
Manuscripts should be sent to David Dibble, Balcones Research Center, Route
4 Box 189, Austin, Texas 78757.

